THE CHURCH HISTORY OF BRITTANY FROM THE BEGINNING OF CHRISTIANITY TO THE
NORMAN CONQUEST under ROMAN GOVERNOVRS. BRITISH KINGS. The ENGLISH-SAXON
HEPTARCHY. The ENGLISH-SAXON (and DANISH) MONARCHY,


CONTAINING I. The Lives of all our Saints assigned to the proper ages wherein
they lived. II. The erections of Episcopal See's, and Succession of Bishops.
III. The celebration of Synods, National, Provincial and Diocesan. IV. The
Foundations of Monasteries, Nunnerie, and Churches. V. And a sufficient account
of the Successions of our Kings, and of the Civil affairs of this Kingdom.


From all which is evidently demonstrated: That the present Roman Catholic
Religion has from the Beginning, without interruption or change been professed
in this our Island, etc.

By R. F. S. CRESSY of the Holy Order of S. BENEDICT.

Thus says the Lord: Stand upon the ways, and behold and enquire concerning
the ancient paths, which as the good way, and walk in it, and ye shall find
rest for your souls. But they said. We will not walk in it.

Ierem. vi.16. Printed in the year. 1668.

Permissu Superiorum, and Approbatione Doctorum.

TO THE QVEEN.
MADAME,
YOUR MAJESTY, Will, I hope, graciously be pleased to permit we to make my
present Address with the sincere Confession of a fault, and most humbly beggin
pardon for it.

It was not from mine own presumptuous ambition, but because I thought it
necessary to the good of many Readers of the following History, that, with
leave, YOUR MAJESTY'S name should be seen at the first opening of it: But till
now I durst not declare why I thought so, being apprehensive least, not so much
YOUR GREATNESS, as scrupulous HVMILITY should forbid it.

The Design which I had in compiling and publishing this Work was to represent,
as on a Theater, to the view of our Nation the more then Heroical Gests
(especially) of our Ancient Kings and Princes, now by your, to us happy,
Marriage, become YOUR MAJESTY'S ANCESTOVRS; Such Gests I mean of theirs as
regarded Heaven and Religion: How humbly and joyfully they entertained it, how
by their Sanctity they adorned it, and with what industry and magnificence they
advanced it, being the very same Religion, which, though in this last age
defamed and persecuted, we still with joy profess.

The same Theater will likewise represent this Religion with at least equal
advantage and splendor in the Lives and actions of very many glorious Queens
and Princesses, to the eyes of whose minds Almighty God having discovered the
more then celestial Beauty and Glory with which it adorns pure and humble
souls sincerely embracing it, they suddenly found themselves deprived of all
Taste of perishing Delights, and all esteem of wordly Eminence, insomuch as
their own Greatness and the Affluence of all Temporal contentments became a
Burden to them: Yea many of them conceived such a loathing aversenes against
them, that not being able to endure even their presence and sight, they made
have to hide themselves from them in Deserts, or perpetual Prisons of
Monasteries: And others not so nice, or perhaps wanting opportunity, lived in
the sight of them on purpose to show their contempt of them. And their State
obliging them to abundance and delicacies of Meats, to costly Magnificence in
Apparel, and to a necessity of admitting ceremonious honors and Veneration
from others, they would for these things be revenged on their innocent selves
by many stoll'n Fastings, by secret tormenting Chains and Cilices, by humbling
themselves in spirit under the meanest of their Subjects, and by prolonged
retreats in Prayer and conversation with God alone. By these and many other
such Artifices the Divine Spirit taught them to use this world as if they used
it not, to crucify the Flesh and all the appetites of it, and to live to and
with God alone, whilst the world thought they belonged to it.

Now such a Life as this being altogether unfashionable and even hydeous in the
eyes of the late Reforming age, wherein Poverty, want of sensual contentments,
solitude and continual attendance in Spirit to God are esteemed extremest
Miseries, and a willing embracing and seeking such Mortifications to Nature,
Madness: Hence it comes to pass that the frequent Stories of the like, which
will be afforded in the following Book, will no doubt by many be resolved to
have been fabulous inventions, such Practices impossible, and whenever
pretended, Hypocritical.

Foreseeing this, I judged it necessary, by the best means I could, to prevent
such like prejudices or incredulity of my Readers. And no expedient could I
imagine more proper and efficacious for this purpose, then a restoring, as it
were, to life again those glorious Examples of Piety, whose seemingly
inimitable Virtues my desire was they might see are visibly quickened among us
in YOUR MAJESTY, a Daughter of those glorious Princes, a far greater QVEEN, yet
no less ambitiously aspiring to their Humility, contempt of worldly Glory,
affection to Mortifications, and unwearied attendance to God, both in the same
Public Ordinances delivered by Him to his Ca^holick Church, and the same
private Recollections, and amorous Whisperings to his Divine Heart.

MADAME, for fear of obstructing YOUR MAJESTY'S hoped for pardon I dare not
enlarge my self upon this Argument, which contains my Fault. Neither indeed is
it needful: For it will be a sufficient advantage not only to my present
Design, but also to recommend our Catholic Faith it self, if the Maligners of
it can be persuaded, only to reflect on the blessed Fruits of it in YOUR
MAJESTY'S mind and conversation: Fruits which they daily see and acknowledge.
If they would do this seriously, they would, no doubt, wonder by what fatal
Constellation that Religion should be so persecuted, the Effects of which even
the Persecutours themselves do love and admire.

As touching this Work it self, the which (first humbly again begging leave) I
lay at YOUR MAJESTY'S feet, if only the Names of Persons and Places were
changed, it relates in effect the same Story which all Catholics read in the
Records of their own respective countries. It is the very same Faith which is
reported to have been preached both here and there: and the same success
attends the preaching of it. At first it is derided, hated and persecuted: the
Professors of it in the mean time patiently suffering whatsoever its Enemies
will think good to inflict: But in time it begins to be hearkened to: and then
it never fayles to ingratiate it self with its most bitter Adversaries, and
without the terror of Secular arms, without any seditious conspiracies, being
armed only with its own beauty and gracefullnes, and recommended from Heaven by
healthful Miracles, it subdues and captivates the hearts of Nations, the most
Savage and barbarous.

Such has been the constant Method by which CATHOLIC RELIGION, and it alone,
has triumphed over Idolatry and Atheism. As on the contrary by a Method
directly opposed to this, but yet constant likewise and Uniform, other
Vncatholick Sects, wheresoever intruding themselves, have prevayled. For surely
it was not by Miracles, it was not by patient suffering, it was not by the zeal
of unarmed Preachers that the Professors of Calvinism in France, Scotland and
Holland, and of Lutheranism in Germany and the Northern Regions became
possessours of Churches not built by their own Ancestors, for they had no
Ancestors at all. Truly if for the space of above a thousand years, which the
following History comprehends, I could have discovered any Province or City by
such unchristian arts made Christian and Catholic, or but one Catholic Writer
pretending to such a Method of propagating his Religion, I should not have
passed it over with a desingenuous silence.

For the general substance therefore of this History, YOUR MAJESTY already
knows it before you cast your eyes on the Book. Yet I may take leave to say,
That one Advantage this History may boast of, beyond that of any other
Catholic Nation: For which therefore it may invite even YOUR MAJESTY'S
curiosity. As it embraces a greater variety of Revolutions happening in our
Island (the Scene of it) then any other country: So in all those Revolutions
it affords many great and extraordinary Rarities. Never any Nation was so
plentiful and overflowing in Benedictions to other Countries, by sending
forth an incredible number of Apostolic Bishops and Priests which converted to
the FAITH almost all our confining Nations. Never any Nation was blessed with
so many glorious Saints adorned with Crowns and Purple. Yea it may be affirmed
that the Annalls of the whole CATHOLIC CHVRCH do scarce record in all other
Countries so many Kings and Princes, who have relinquished their Thrones to
change their Scepters for Crosses, their Treasures for Poverty, their
magnificent numerous Courts for bare, solitary Cells, and their awefull Power
for Subjection. This was a change which none could work, but only the right
hand of THE MOST HIGH.

And yet the like Change wrought by the same ALMIGHTY HAND in the souls of a
far greater number of our Queens and Princesses was more admirable, in as much
as their imbecility, delicacy of education and natural timidity were greater.
For the space of several Ages the Daughters of our Monarks seemed as if they
thought themselves born in a country none of their own, a Country of
Strangers, or rather Enemies: the destruction of whose race they sought to
procure, by refusing their concurrence to continue it. And therefore as if they
had been ashamed to acknowledge their Native country, and afraid to converse
with the inhabitants of it, they made have to hide themselves from them, that
they might freely entertain their far more Noble and aspiring thoughts and
desires of A BRIDEGROOM worthy of their Love, and a Crown answerable to their
holy ambition. Or if such Retreats were denied them, they were taught by A
HEAVENLY INSTRVCTOVR to erect solitary Monasteries, or Bride-chambers for their
CELESTIAL SPOUSE in their own hearts: Where they could live undisturbed even
among Crowds of Visitants or Flatterers: they could macerate themselves with
Fastings at the most luxurious Feasts, and with painful Hayrcloathes under
their softest and most gorgeous Vestments. They knew no use of worldly Riches
but to supply the necessities of the poor, or to adorn the Altars of their
CELESTIAL SPOUSE: from a continual entertainment of whom nothing could
distract them, even in sleep their hearts waked to him.

A great well-orderd Army of such glorious Saints of your own Sex will the
following History discover to YOUR MAJESTY, and this of all states, Wives,
Widows and Virgins, and which was wonderful, some of them all these, both
Wives, Widows and yet Virgins. So that here YOU may set before your eyes a
numerous Variety of Heavenly Patterns of YOUR own rank, by conversing with whom
YOU may yet more richly adorn YOUR, soul. Each of them will present YOUR
MAJESTY with a Gemme sparkling with a peculiar different luster, all of them
both like and unlike in beauty and glory. Now may a Heavenly Crown besett with
such more then Starlike Jewels attend YOUR MAJESTY, whenever Death shall
ease YOU of that YOU now wear. This is the argument of the daily Prayers of

YOUR SACRED MAJESTY'S, Most humbly devoted Subject, and Servant in our LORD,
Br. S. CRESSY.

Permissio A. R. P. Praesidis Generalis.
EGO Fr. Augustinus Hungate Congregationis Anglo-Benedictinae Praeses
Generalis, Librum, cui Titulus, The Church History of Brittany, a R. P. Sereno
Cressy, nostrae Congregationis Monacho compositum, and a S. Theologiae
Doctoribus ad id deputatis, approbatum, typis mandari lubens permitro. Datum
2^. Maij stilo Vet. 1668.

Fr. AVGVSTINVS qui supra.

Approbationes Doctorum.
LIBER hic cui Titulus, Historia Ecclesiae, etc. nihil continet sanae Doctrinae
aut bonis moribus dissonum: Antiquorum acta, doctrinam, mores clare and
succincte tradit: and dum Historiae veritatem felici essequitur indagine, Fidem
veram contra quo^cunque Novatores mirifice confirmat: quare reipublicae
Christianae hunc Librum vtilissimum fore iudico: Datum Londini Maij 12. stilo
Veteri. 1668.

Fr. BENEDICTVS STAPYLTON, Ord. S. Ben. Sac. Theol. Doctor.

EGO subsignatus Doctor Facultatis Theologiae Cadomensis legi librum Anglico
idiomate scriptum cui Titulus, The Church History of Brittany (sive, Historia
Ecclesiastica Brittanniae) a R. P. Sereno de Cressy Religioso Anglo Ordinis S.
Benedicti compositum, in quo plurima scitu digna, omnia Fidei Catholicae
consona, and bonis moribus nihil absonum deprehendi. Quare ad Catholicorum
utilitatem and Hereticorum convictionem praelo debere mandari censui. Actum
Rothomagi die 20. Augusti, annoque Domini 1667.

THOMAS DE SIMON.

EGO infra scriptus in Alma Facultate Parisiensi Sacrae Theologicae Doctor,
fidem facio me accurate perlegisse librum Anglicano idiomate consc^iptum, cui
Titulus, The Church History of Brittany, composed by the R. Father F. Serenus
Cressy, Religious of the holy Order of S. Bennet. In quo quidem nihil
deprehendi quod Catholicae, Apostolicae and Romanae fidei, aut bonis moribus
adversetur. Quin imo hanc ipsam fidem, quam hodie Romano-Catholici in Anglia
profitentur, validissimis argumentis demonstrat omnino consonam esse illi, quam
primitus viri Apostolici in Britannia propagarunt, quam Christus Dominus
Apostolos docuit, quamque Ecclesia Catholica suggerente Spiritu Sancto perpetuo
retinuit. Datum Parisiis Kal. Aprilis. 1668.

FRANCISCVS GAGE.

EGO infra scriptus, Sacrae Facultatis Parisiensis Doctor Theologus, testor me
legisse Librum Anglice conscriptum, cui Titulus, The Church History of
Brittany, composed by the R Father F. Serenus Cressy, Religious of the holy
Order of S. Bennet: Et nihil in eo invenisse, quod Fidei Orthodoxae, aut bonis
moribus repugnet. Datum Parisijs prima die mensis Aprilis. Ann. Dom. 1668.

GVILIELMVS PHELAN.

UPON THE ENGLISH Ecclesiastical History written by his honored friend F.
SERENVS CRESSY.
STILL lovely in thy beautie's ruins, look,
ENGLAND, thy face in this reflecting Book.
Start not at Scarrs, or wrinckles: this smooth glass
Shows but thy Primitive and youth-full face.
Read with delight and joy: this breathing Story
Sets out to life thy death-surviving Glory.
But if thy curious glance must prye too far
Beyond these leaves, what now thy features are,
Blame not his Penn, who (not t'endanger Truth)
Shadows thine Age, and only paints thy Youth.
Nor will we blame thy blush, nor yet thy Tear,
If thou will needs thy time with this compare.
So blushed, so wept the Worlds great Empress, when
In lively Mirror of her Livie's penn
Her faded honor she with sigh's recalls,
And mourns her buried Virtues funerals.
When she her Curij, her Fabr^cij mourns,
Bathing her Regulus, her Decij, Vrnes,
Those Heathen-Saints, whom had our ages seen,
Had Catholic as well as Roman been.
How she disdaind herself, though she could now
Her Great Augustus boast, as well as Thou,
Yet was't' expiring Fame so seem alive,
Though only in effigy some Reprive:
Whose very sight Idea's might create
For proud Posterity to imitate.
And thou in this Serener Glass may see
If still thy looks dare own themselves and Thee.
Be thine own Judge: And who can better know,
Then thine own self, if Thou be Thou, or no?
No bitter Satyrs here, no nettling Wit,
No Passion strutting in Zeale's Counterfeit.
No crooked Mood, no Crosse-dilemma here:
Deny not but thy self, the cause is clear.
Ears are slow Judges, much by Rumor dulled,
By tickling flattery too as often Gulled.
What Plea, then this, can surer Proof dispense,
When thine own Eyes bring their own evidence?
In no false dress disguised see hete thy face,
No patched Reform here foyles thy Native Grace.
Here view thy Pietie's forgotten look
So lively drawn in this reviving Books
Thy Unity, by Sects and Schisms rear*
Restored in this E^ernall Monument:
Thy ruined Sepulchers, and buried Shrines
Repaird and raised in these Immortal lines:
Thy banished Saints recalled by Saint like men,
Thy Bid restored in CRESSIES life and Penn.
Ed. Thymelby Pr. S. Gaugerici Cameraci.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
1. IT will no doubt be expedient, with the Christian Readers leave, to
entertain him a while in the porch and Entrance of this history, there to
inform him touching certain general matters relating to it, the knowledge of
which will not be unusefull to him: and those are principally three; 1. the
Motive inducing the Author to compose it. 2. the disposition and order
observed in it, 3. the most considerable Wriitters from whom materials have
been furnished for the fabric of it. As touching the Motive to the end it may
appear not irrational, I must give this account of my self to my Readers:

2. I have not been able of late to prevent or expel a deep ressentment of
grief, mixed with some indignation, to see the cause of God and his Church too
ordinarily defended, and in a manner always opposed with so much unbeseeming
passion and violence, so as that often times on the one side the merit of
defending truth is lost by extreme prejudice don to Christian Charity and
humility: and on the other side the guilt of opposing truth is heightened by
proceedings full of fury and revenge in the enemies of it.

3. A sad consideration hereof has produced in my mind a great averseness from
Controversies. For though I am not much suspicious of my self but that through
the assistance of Divine grace I may hope to manage a dispute how weakily
soever, yet without an arrogant incivility or mingling therein contemptuous
reflections on the adversaries persons: yet perceiving that even candor and
modesty, though excess in proceeding from the penn of a Catholic disputant,
like oil increases the flame of a Sectaries passion: there sore a
compassionate solicitude in behalf of our Adversaries themselves, least by my
occasion they should be plunged yet more deeply and inreparably in the hatred
of Divine Truth and Christian peace, has induced one almost to a resolution (as
far as I may dispose of my self not to continue, much less to renew Debates
and controversies, except it shall appear with sufficient evidence to me, that
God shall require it of me.

4. Indeed it was to me at first an astonishment to see how the violence of our
Anticatholick Writers in England has been increased against those who have
assisted them; and their calmnesse eqaully increased toward those who had not
long since almost, and they know intend still to destroy their Church, and
Monarchy with it. But this astonishment quickly ceased asson as I perceived
that for the most part the new Defenders of the Church of England against Rome
were arrant Sectaries, some of them notoriously stigmatized* and who not long
before had been the loudest Trompets of war against the same Church: such are
the Champions who of late have intruded themselves into this Controversy,
knowing how much thereby they can ingratiate themselves with the people whom
they have made thirsty after blood: and likewise how in mannaging of it, they
can covertly pursue their old desing the English Church her self. For this
purpose they speak favorably of the tender consciences of their own seditious
party, and treacherously commend the Church of England by telling the people
how unlike it is to the Roman Church which challenges a supreme obliging
authority, whereas according to them the English Bishops have no Jurisdiction
at all, no not even my Lord of Canterbury himself, but every ones private
reason and conscience exempted from all humane authority is to be his only
Guide. Thus they defend the Church of England by making it no Church at all.

5. Upon the sight of this, I again wondered that so manifest, so traitorous a
prevarication should be connived at by the heads and Governors of the
English-Protestant Church. But this wonder did not long continue after I had
upon reflection considered, that from the very beginning of the breach of
England from Rome, the Bishops themselves have been the underminers of their
own Church. For there have never wanted in that number at least three, or four
who in Episcopacy loved only the manors and revenues, being otherwise in
their Judgments and affections poisoned and embittered with the very Gall of
Calvinism. Now ordinary experience has showed that among more than twenty
moderate Protestants, if there be found three or four genuine Calvinists, they
do infallibly make the mayor part, by the advantage of their furious zeal,
restless activity, and interest in popular favor.

6. These masked Prelates then are they whose Faith consists in disbeleiving the
Doctrines of the Catholic Church, and their charity in hating and persecuting
the Professors of such Doctrines. Whence it comes to pass that the seditious
preaching party conforming themselves to this unbeleiving belief, and
uncharitable charity, have right enough to their affections and favor: so that
out of a liking to their unchristian zeal against Catholic unity they easily
pardon and excuse in them the like zeal against both Episcopacy and Monarky it
self. These are they who having first asserted the furious doctrines of Calvin
touching absolute Reprobation, predestination to sin, impossibility of loosing
grace, etc. as opposed to the Roman faith, have thereby given the Presbyterians
advantage to brand all moderate Protestants with the unpardonnable crime of
Popery. These are who, though they will not, or dare not themselves undervalue
the Challenge made by the Church of England of a legitimate succession of
Ordinations, yet have rendered such succession useless to them, and indeed
ridiculous, by giving the right hands of fellowship to Calvinisticall
Congregations abroad, In which those who call themselves Ministers of Gods word
and dispensers of his Sacraments, have no more right to such titles than their
wives or daughters have. Lastly these Prelates have been the persons who not
only favoring, but by their own writings promoting the Fanatic position,
That the Pope is Antichrist, have hereby put a sword into the hands of
Presbyterian Gladiators by which they can cut, mangle, and destroy every way,
whom soever they please, as easily as they think they can Catholics
themselves. Bishops they can destroy with it, as being proud Prelates who by
their own confession have received their character and Jurisdiction from
Antichrist. And kings they can with a safe conscience destroy, in case they
will not deliver up unto them Antichristian Bishops, Antichristian Litanies,
sober prayers or Ceremonies, yea and Antichristian Lord-ships or mannners too.
Indeed so advantageous has this Engine of Popish Anti-christianisme been to
every Sect which would destroy another, that we have seen even the
Presbyterians themselves wounded almost to death with it by the Independents,
Anabaptists, etc. who confidently charged their Classes and Synods with
Antichristian tyranny.

7. Ecclesiastical matters being reduced to these terms in England, can any
one esteem it a wonder if malicious and unquiet Sectaries, being shadowed
under such Rochets, are so securely busy both to increase their esteem and
credit amonst the ignorant multitudes by their zeal against Popery, and
withal at the same time closely pursue their old designs upon Church livings,
and for that end make use of such credit to pluck down that Church, which now
they would seem to support? Whilst they snarle and grin against Catholics,
they bite, and hope shortly to devour Prelatical Protestants, and whatsoever
Power shall maintain them.

8. Such being the present state of Controversie-writings: To what purpose
should any Catholic interesse himself in confuting books, in which if there
be any thing material, it is the undermining of that Church which in the
frontis-peice is pretended to be asserted? for generally it is agreed on by the
late Authors that the English Church has no authority to oblige any one in
conscience to believe doctrines proposed by her. From whence follows
necessarily that no man can be obliged to be a member of it, and therefore that
she can not justly excommunicate or otherwise punish any one for not yiedling
obedience to her, or for deserting her and choosing another communion. And yet
less are we concerned in what is written by them directly against us, and the
faith which we profess: since not a word of sober reasoning can be found, but
what the last age had heard a hundred times objected and refuted. If there may
be any thing new, it is a Texture of new invented calumnies and phrases of
foul language: And what a folly, and pity likewise, is it by contesting, to
open yet wider such noysom Floodgates.

9. Yet notwithstanding all this, the Cause of Gods Church must not be
deserted. Therefore far be it from me in so miserable a distraction of
Judgments and affections to entertain any resolution of surceasing endeavors
to promote Catholic unity and Peace. And (our Lord be blessed) it seems to
me that this desirable and never more than at this time seasonable duty may
be performed without any quarrelling controversy at all. And one healthful
mean for this purpose I have here made use of, which is a sincere and simple
relation, uncontested by any, of the state of our Brittishs Churches since from
the Primitive times, both as to the Doctrines of faith received by them, and
external practices in use among them. For I suppose that any sober and
rational Christian will not unwillingly grant, That that Church which in these
times shall appear most conformable to those Primitive Apostolical doctrines
and practices, ought unquestionably to be esteemed most safe and Orthodoxe. Now
for a Trial of this there will be no use of sylloziging or disputing: The
simplest Readers eyes will resolve him that those very points of faith and
discipline for which the Roman Catholic Church is so cruelly assaulted on all
sides by Sectaries are the very same which Apostolic Doctors at first taught
our forefathers, and which by their Successors have been so carefully
transmitted to us, that during the space of more than a thousand years
comprehended in this History, not any congregation at all, nor any persons,
except a few dispersed known Heretics, did ever appear to contradict what we
still believe and practice; nor did ever teach any of those opinions, which now
constitute any of our later English Sects.

10. Now this way and Method of arguing implicitly, without disputing, seems
to me of force inexpugnable, as being not obnoxious to the peevish Cavils of
quarrelsom spirits, and efficacious to extort the assent of such as are truly
desirous to find the truth. For though among all our Sectaries (as anciently
among professed Heretics) the pretense of each one be to admit no other Rule
of faith, but only his own sense of Scripture, the chime whereof seems to
every one of them to accord to the tune framed by himself, though each of them
has a tune utterly discordant from all the rest: Yet surely that man must
renounce his reason, forgett his Creed, yea he must covertly blaspheme Christ
himself, who shall continue to impute most horrible superstitions and
Idolatries to the Catholic Church, after that he shall have discovered plainly
that she teaches the very same Doctrines and Observances which were at first
delivered by Apostolic Preachers. For since there never was anciently any
other Church in Brittany (and the like may be said of other Countries) but that
which taught the same doctrines, such blasphemers of Gods Church must
consequently affirm, That so many Holy Apostolical Doctors have taught, so
many glorious Martyrs have shed their blood, and so many Blessed Saints have
wrought most stupendous Miracles for confirming most damnable superstitions
and Idolatries.

11. Now what other consequence can flow from hence but this most execrable*
yet by them unavoydable one, that Jesus Christ was not the true Messiah: for
how can they esteem him the Messiah who it seems failed in the principal End
for which the Messiah was sent which was by shedding his blood to redeem, and
by the effusion of his spirit to sanctify a Church, and such an one as is
prophetically described to be a spiritual kingdom which should never be
destroyed: Dan 11.44. Ephesians. iv.11. Esa 11 c 2. Math. v.15. Psalm cxx^.3. Esa.
xlix.23. Io. xiv.12.
a Church in which God would place Pastors till the Consummation of the
saints: A Church into which all nations should flow: Esa. 2.
A Church or city built upon a hill so that it cannot be hidden, and which is
always at unity in it self: a Church unto which Kings shall be
Nursing-fathers and Queens nursing-Mothers. Esa. 49.
Lastly a Church in which Christ's people should do the miracles which he did,
and greater yet then they were (which last Character is referred to the whole
body of the Church in whom this virtue does shine for ever, as is observed in
the margin of the English Bible.

12. This being so, let those defamers of Gods Church be demanded, Where is the
Church that is promised, and thus described, to be found? We can show them such
an one, not one of these marks wanting to it: but let them show the like to us.
They abhor all supposition that the Catholic Church, staind, as they accuse
her, with horrible superstitions, and Idolatries, should be it, for what would
they then be? Where then would they have us to look for it? Tr^ly if they be
our directours we may look long enough to little purpose. We may search all
corners with candles and torches, and all in vain: And this our adversaries
acknowledge: For not any one of them pretends to show a Church distinct from
the Catholic and qualified as the ancient Prophecies require On the contrary
they content themselves with the fancy of a Church invisible and hidden in
some unknown desert presently after the Apostles times, during the whole space
contained in this history: so that no wonder if they can give no account of it:
which is to say in plain language, Christ could not or would not, and certainly
did not make good the many promises of his Father.

13. O the miserably sandy and miry foundation on which these men do build all
their pretentions of belonging to Christ, and expectation of eternal
happiness from him, since it relies upon this blasphemous supposition, That
all the Saints acknowledged hitherto by Gods Church, and justified to be such
by innumerable stupendous miracles, all the famous Doctors and Converters of
Nations, all the Glorious Martyrs, all the immaculate Virgins, and in a word,
all those who have and do acknowledge themselves members of this one Catholic
Church have been estranged from Christ, and excluded from that happiness by
criminal Antichristian superstitions and Idolatries.

14. Now I must confess that this way of arguing does take its force from
another supposition (which whether it be made good or no the prudent Readers
eyes may judge) which is this, That by the following History is evinced, that
the present Catholic Church teaches the very same doctrines which from the
infancy of Christianity were taught and received in our Nation. The truth of
which Assertion I do not well know or imagine by what course or method it can
rationally be expugned or considerably weakened: and much less can I conceive
how upon supposition that it is true, it can be slighted by any.

15. Yet I assure my self this book will fall into the hands of some, who
without examining particulars, will think with one puff of their breath to blow
down the whole fabric of this by professing confidently, That they have no
obligation at all to believe one word written in it, being withal certain that
all is false whatsoever it is which may be pretended advantageous to
Catholics: The Scripture, the Scripture, and nothing but the Scripture can
challenge belief from them: as for all other writers, and especially such as
these out of whom this history was collected, who were generally Monks or
little better, John Fox has taught to make their stories no part of their Creed.

16. But as for these men they seem not unlike an honest Northern tenant of the
late Earl of Cumberland, very zealous for the honor of his Lords family, who
when another his companion had in discourse imputed treason to some of the said
Lords Ancestors, replied: I am sure that is false: for I have read all the
Books of histories both in the old and new Testament, and I defy any man to
show me that ever any Clifford has been a Traitor.

17. Others there will be who will read this History with very great
indifference whether the things related be true or not, yea and whether the
inference even now drawn from thence be valid or not. A preassumed assurance,
as they conceive, that the now Catholic Church is such an Antichristian
Congregation as they read described in the Apocalypse, fortifies their stomach
to swallow down and digest any consequences whatsoever, though Christianity it
self should be endangered by them.

18. To such Readers as these I have nothing more to say, but that I am sorry
since they want the skill of Judging like rational creatures, that they have
the misfortune not to want the faculty of reading; or at least that it is not
in my power to prevent their unproffitable expenses of money and time upon such
a book as this.

19. But as touching more sober Protestant readers, who notwithstanding out of
a prejudice against Catholic Doctrines, and some times out of a fear of the
worldly incommodities of being convinced by writings which assert them, are
ordinarily too negligent in examining the weight of Testimonies produced in
th^r^ behalf. In case this History fall in to the hands of such, the Author
(having first besought almighty God to give them a more perfect discernment
between temporal and spiritual things) desires them seriously to consider in
general the degrees of credibility, which occurr in Histories, and Records:
and how far they do respectively require our assent to them as a duty of
obligation.

20. God our heavenly creator as he has given us an internal light of reason
to judge of the nature of objects occurring to our senses, by a frequent
Experience of effects flowing from them: So for as much as concerns other
objects which can come no other way to our knowledge but by the testimony of
men (such as are actions or events which have hapened before our days, the
same God, who is pure reason it self, has instituted another light or guide
which is authority, to direct our reason in judging of them: that is, in
affording our assent proportionably to the merit and weight of such authority:
Therefore obstinately to refuse our assent to the testimony of witnesses, who
can be justified to have been persons of learning, Judgment, diligence,
fidelity, and piety, and especially in matters the truth of which it highly
concerns us to know, is to oppose ones self to the most wise ordonnance of
God, and not only to renounce our reason, but the most necessary care of
eternity. Upon which ground S. Augustine says, it is some unhappines to be
mis-lead by authority, but it is a far greater unhappines not to be moved by
it. The reason is, because the former only argues the imbecility of human
reason: but the latter, an absolute contradiction to it, as if our souls were
fit to judge of nothing but the present objects of sense, as beasts do.
Therefore Calvin himself affirms, that to deny our assent to witnesses many
in number and of authentic credit, is an act not of diffidence, but of
depraved furious obstinacy. Which Censure is most Just, since thereby all use
of humane conversation is destroyed: For all public judgments, tenures of
land, rights of privileges, etc. depend on the testimony of records and
witnesses.

21. Now for application of this to the subject in hand, which is the
credibility of the principal Writers from whom this history has been
collected, how exempted they are from the least suspicion of a will or
intention to deceive posterity, how Judicious they were and consequently not
much obnoxious to be deluded by others; how diligent they were in searching
authenthick reports for matters past, and the testimony of the most pious and
grave persons for actions or events which themselves saw not; It will not be
necessary by a particular enumeration of proofs to weary my Readers, who if
they please may for satisfaction herein consult the preface to the Flores
Historiarum written by the late most venerable and learned Bishop of Chalcedon,
who has there made a Collection of the El^gies and honorable Characters given
by the most learned amongst Protestants writers to our ancient Catholic
Historians, S. Aldelm, S. Beda, S. Alcuin: Ethelwerd, Florentius Bravonius,
William of Malmbury, Mathews of Westminster, Henry of Huntingdon, Hove^en,
Marianus Scotus, Ingulfus, Osbern the Monk, etc. and to these we may adioyn
testimonies yet more unquestionable from letters of Popes, Princes and Prelates,
authentic Records of Churches and Monasteries, Charters of Kings, Acts and
Decrees of Councils, all these still extant, unquestionably legitimate, and
evidently confirming the Catholic Religion now professed. To derogate
therefore from all these, and at the same time not to doubt of the fidelity of
Polybius, Livy, Tacitus, Dio, etc. pagan Historians, cannot be an act of reason
but only wilful passion.

22. When therefore, for example, we shall read that before the coming of the
Saxons a holy Bishop of the Picts ( S. Kentigern) having a scruple of some
irregularitie in his Ordination, to quiet his conscience had recourse not to
any Metropolitan his neighbor in Brittany or France; but the Pope only (who
alone could dispense in the Common Law of the Church) and to his disposal
submitted his miter, had all defects supplied, and acquiesced in his judgment.
Again when we shall read both in the Records of the British and Saxon
Churches, that no Metropolitan durst presume to exercise his spiritual
jurisdiction till enabled there to by a Pall received from the Pope: that Popes
have threatened excommunication against Saxon Kings and Prelates for disorders in
Ecclesiastical discipline, for not supplying Episcopal Sees, too long vacant,
etc. that they have sent Legates into England with authority acknowledged and
submitted to, to call Synods, to visit and reform abuses, etc. that they have
required an account of the Faith of our Bishops; accepted and judged appeals
of Bishops oppressed, not any one English Prince or Bishop protesting against
such authority: That they have communicated ( pro tempore) a jurisdiction to
one Metropolitan to visit and reform the Province of another not subject to
him (not to insist upon privileges and exemp^ions conferred by Popes on
Churches and Monasteries, etc.) I say, when any one shall have read all this
and more, yet shall continue to deny that Popes have anciently exercised any
spiritual Jurisdiction in our Island, or shall pretend that Brittany was of it
self a kind of Patriarchat absolute, and independent, whereas to this day our
Metropolitans have nothing to show for their Power or places, but what they
have received from Popes: this is not diffidence, but well deserves that foul
title which Calvin even now gave it: And especially when we shall see the
authority and credit of a roaguy Welsh paper preferred before all such
irrefragable Witnesses.

23. The like may be applied to any one who shall doubt whether the veneration
and invocation of Saints was anciently in practice among the Saxons in England,
yea and approoved by our Lord himself, after he shall have read (besides many
other passages in this our History) recorded in the authentic acts and
subscriptions of a National Synod, how an Archbishop, several Bishops and
Nobles did with loud praises to God openly acknowledge, that by the merits and
intercession of poor S. Guthlac they in the same moment in which they were
deliberating about contributions to his decayed Monastery, did find themselves
miraculously freed from a painful Palsy which not an hour before had
tormented them: and thereupon made Vows devoutly to visit his sepulcher and
relickes.

24. It may suffice for a taste to have instanced in these two points of
Catholic Doctrine, vehemently contested and charged with noveltie by
Protestants. As much may be said for the rest, as the Sacrifice of the M^sse,
veneration of Relics, Prayer for the dead, a Belief of Purgatory, etc.
Concerning all which I will not forestall the Readers enquiry and judgment.

25. Now I conceive it cannot reasonably be esteemed a prejudice to my
pretention of demonstrating a continued succession of Catholic belief in our
Island, though a Protestant reader should chance not unprobably to discredit
it some particular Stories contained in this book, touching V^sions,
Revelations, Miracles, etc. For surely it cannot be expected ha^ I should be
caution for every story in it: Q. Curtius who writes the gests of King
Alexander, did not esteem it a disparagement to his history, when he plainly
tells his readers ( Plura equidem transcribo quam credo, Curt. l. 9.
etc.) that is, I do verily transcribe into this my history more things then
I my self do endoubtedly believe: For I neither dare confidently assert such
things as I doubt of: Neither can I think it fit to suppress such things as I
have by tradition received.

26. In a work of this nature concerning matters which have happened many ages
since* of which no new information can be had, the modern Historian being only
a Transcriber, ought not to make his own particular sentiments to become a
rule for others. The virtue requisite in him is fidelity in transcribing; yet
with discretion in the Choice of Authors; not equall^ng obscure legendaries
with Writers of approved learning and probitie: Nor the narrations of those
touching matters received upon hearsay, with such of which they profess
themselves Eyewitnesses, or to have received from persons of Eminent gravitie
and authority.

27. Though it should be true therefore, that for example, S. Beda, or S.
Aldelm, or any other of our ancient Classical writers have been somewhat too
credulous in Stories told them of Miracles, Revelations, Visions, or what you
will, as long as there are upon record great multitudes of other passages
confirming doctrines to which such stories have regard* and which cannot with
any reason be suspected, it will follow that in case among a hundred there were
but one miracle truly related, or but one vision truly divine, the doctrines
would remain unquestionable.

28. Yea I may add further: In case that, upon an impossible supposition, all
such stories could be demonstrated to have been false, they would
notwithstanding prove such doctrines to be true. For such a world of Miracles
having been pretended (call it so) by several persons in all ages, to have
been frequently and publicly performed and believed* without any censure of
them upon the ground of inconsistence with the received faith of the Church, it
must necessarly follow, that the Church held such Doctrines as points of her
common belief, what ever becomes of the stories or Miracles themselves.

29. For my part therefore I cannot conceive any possible way left for any of
our present Sectaries to invalidate the general result of this History,
unless each Sect dissenting from all the rest, as well as from Catholic
faith, could luckily find out some old books or records of more authority then
these, out of which to frame for each of them a Church History to show that not
the Roman Catholic, but their peculiar tenants have been the belief of Gods
Church from the beginning, confirmed in Councils, attested by Miracles,
Martyrdoms, etc. And indeed it would be a pleasant entertainment to read a
Presbyterian Church History compiled by such a flowing pen as M. Prinnes,
with large Margins full charged yet hundreds of quotations, and according to
his custom, not one of them pertinent, ages confidently pretending to prove by
Presbyterian Councils, Fathers, Miracles, etc. that the Church of God has been
always governed by Lay Elders, and has rejected Episcopacy as Antichristian:
Or an Independent Church History in like manner demonstrating, that there was
anciently no subordination of Congregations either to Bishops or to Classes of
Presbyters, etc.

30. Now such an impossible task as this they are in reason obliged to
undertake, if they will hope to make any judicious considering person, who has
no design upon Church Lands, to believe against the pretention of this
History, that besides the Roman Church our Lord had always from the beginning
another Glorious Church of a quite contrary belief, set aloft upon a hill, to
which all nations flowed. For it is not here as in Doctrinall controversies in
which after that Catholics have heaped together a world of texts out of the
Fathers to justify their belief, their adversaries will think to escape either
by devising forced interpretations of those Texts, or by opposing a few obscure
passages out of the same Fathers which they hope some will imagine not
unfavourable to them. Whereas here in Narrations concerning matters of fact
and external practices a thousand times renewed, and never censured, the wits
and inventions of our Sectaries must needs be miserably at a loss, they having
no matter upon which to exercise their subtilty, in framing disadvantageous
senses, and being utterly unprovided of Authors or Records to tell stories
favorable to their pretentions.

31. Indeed what will be the fate of Church Histories written by Vncatholick
Authors, we have seen in the voluminous work of four not unlearned Primitive
Lutherans called the Centuriators of Magdeburg, who conspired together with
infinite labors to frame an Historical Collection of the Doctrines professed,
and Rites practiced in each age out of all ancient Fathers, Councils, and
Ecclesiastical Writers. For the bulk of it, it is not an unusefull work, for
there we read disposed in common places the substance of what the fathers
taught in every Century of years, touching the propagation of the Church (not
the Lutherans Church I assure you) notwithstanding its persecutions, the manner
of its Government, Rites, Synodes, Principal Doctors, as likewise the
Heresies opposing and contaminating it, etc. In all which there is found little
pertinent to their quarrels with the Catholic Church: therefore in each
Century there is moreover assigned a peculiar Chapter for that purpose, the
title whereof is this, A DECLINING OF DOCTRINE: containing the peculiar and
incommodious opinions, the stubble and Errors of Doctors (in each age:) which
errors have been openly delivered by them in their writings. Now what
incommodious opinions and errors were these, it is very commodious that we
should briefly declare.

32. In the very first Century and in the writings of the Apostles themselves
these Germans find opinions very incommodious to them: For not to insist upon
many disgraceful phrases applied by them to S. Peter, Magdeburg. Cent. 1 l. 2.
c. 4 Ib. c. 10. f 596
imputing unto him great imbecillities, ignorances, Errors, etc. Touching S.
Paul they say, It was certainly no small sliding in him that he yielded to S.
James to be purified in the Temple: for therein he showed that he had not a
right understanding (or made not a Just account) of the abrogations of Moses
his law. And again treating of the Epistle of S. James, Ib. c. 4. f. 54.
they fear not to write thus, The Epistle of James does not in a small measure
swerve from the Analogy of Apostolic Doctrine, whilst it ascribes
Justification not to faith alone (as our master Luther teaches us) but to
works. Moreover it styles the law, a law of liberty: whereas it is a testament
which generates to servitude. Neither does the author of that Epistle observe
an Apostolical manner in teaching, etc. Let us not wonder at the choler of
these men against this holy Apostle, for it cannot be denied but his opinions
are very incommodious to them and to their new fanaticall Doctrine of
Justification.

33. In the second Centurie we have but few monuments left of those Apostolic
Fathers; only a few Epistles and short treatises of those Glorious Martyrs,
Id. Cent. 2. c. 10. f. 167.
S. Ignatius, S. Irenaeus, and S. Justin: yet not any of these in the
Centuriatours judgment have wanted their Errors, that is, incommodious
opinions condemning both the teaching and life of their Patriarck Luther. In
the Epistles of S. Ignatius (say they) there are certain passages, which seem
to decline to foul blemishes. For he speaks incomm^diously touching
Virginity. Yea moreover out of his Epistles it appears that generally in that
age Christians began some what more earnestly to love and esteem the care of
preserving Virginity. These are foul blemishes indeed but yet these are not
all: For besides these there are other passages which are dangerous, and as it
were seeds of Errors: for he talks of a Christian sacrifice, as if he were a
very Papist. Next touching S. Ireneus we may perceive by his writings (say
they) that he had several incommodious opinions and those of no small moment,
Ib. f. 58.64.
for he admitts Free Will even in spiritual things. Likewise that passage
savours of Novelty which we find in the published Copies, where speaking of the
Roman Church he says, To this Church by reason of its more potent principality
it is necessary that every other Church, that is, all beleivers whosoever
they are should have recourse, in as much as the tradition which came from the
Apostle has been entirely preserved in it. Lastly touching S. Justin the
Martyr, among the stains and Errors of his writings they reckon these: Ib. c.
10. f. 207
That he seems to maintain the liberty of man's will: And that the law is
possible: for he says, it is no impossible thing for men who have a good will,
to love God above themselves and their neighbors as themselves. Yea moreover
he denies concupiscence to be sin. Lastly in general they write that the
doctrine of Justification was delivered by the Doctors of this age too
negligently and obscurely, Ib. c. 4. f. 45.
that is, much otherwise than Luther delivered it.

34. In the third Century they find yet more things to displease them. The
Doctors of this age (say they) for the greatest part admit free will. Ib.
Cent. 3. c. 4. f. 77. ^b. f. 80.
Thus Tertullian, Origin, Cyprian and Methodius. Again, the most sublime
article of Justification is for the most part obscured by Origin and Methodius.
And as for the doctrine touching Good works, the Doctors of this age did yet
more decline from the true Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles (and Luther)
then those of the former. For they invented and inculcated many voluntary
observances. Thus Tertullian does immoderatly extol chastity and continence.
Origin attributes to good works that they are a preparation to salvation and
consequently a cause. And with the like error was Cyprian misled, who ascribes
to good works that they are the Guardians of hope, the stay of Faith and cause
us to abide continually in Christ, to live in God, and to attain to heavenly
promises and Rewards. Ib. f. 8^.
Then for Penance, the doctrine thereof has been wonderfully depraved by the
Writers of this age: They impute remissions of sins to Contrition. Cyprian
expressly affirms that sins are redeemed and washed away by penitential
satisfaction. Moreover the same Cyprian speaks dangerously and not according
to the Tradition of Christ and the Apostles concerning unction in Baptism,
saying it is necessary that the person baptized should be anointed with
Chrisme, that thereby he may become the anointed of God and have the grace of
Christ in him. And concerning the Eucharist, Ib. f. 83.
Cyprian does superstitiously feign that some virtue accrews thereto from the
person administering it: for he says the Eucharist sanctified on the altar: And
again: The Priest does execute the office of Christ and offers sacrifice to God
the Father. Which phrase of offering sacrifice is used also by Tertullian. Ib.
f. 84.
You may moreover (say they) observe in the writings of the Doctors of this
age, Origin and Cyprian, not obscure signs of Invocation of Saints. And lastly
touching the Primacy of the Bishop of Rome Cyprian affirms expressly and
without any foundation of holy scripture, that the Roman Church ought to be
acknowledged by all for the mother and root of the Catholic Church. Likewise
Origin says, that Peter by virtue of Christ's promise deserved to be made the
foundation of the Church. The foresaid Cyprian has moreover on this subject
other dangerous opinions, as where he ties and limits the Pastoral office to
ordinary succession: And for bids (inferiors) to judge Bishops and prelates of
the Church.

35. It is pity to proceed any further, in producing out of the following
Centuries the sometimes sad, but most often angry complaints and
acknowledgments made by these honest German Writers, how generally their
Patriark Luthers Doctrines have been preiudged and condemned by the fathers and
Doctors of Gods Church, and the Faith of the present Roman Church asserted.
The further they proceed in their collection, a greater number of yet more
Severe Judges they discover, till in short time they cannot find one to speak
a good word for them. And this, like a conscionable Jury, they attest: In so
much as one would be tempted almost to suspect that they had been secretly
bribed by the Pope to publish their own condemnation.

36. These things considered, I cannot fore see any probability of a Debate
likely to ensue touching this History, I mean for as much as concerns the
doctrinall part of it; nor any considerable arguments to prove (against the
result of it) that the points of Catholic faith have not been taught through
all the ages comprised within its limits. And as for the ages following, that
is, since the Conquest by the Normans, it is out of all dispute that our
forefathers have been Romans, in a deeper degree perhaps then we their
children are now.

37. But I must acknowledge I am not secure against quarrels for as much as
concerns the Christian practices of piety and virtue commended in the Saints
whose Gests are here related: and the reason is because our modern sectaries
have a quite different notion of virtue and piety, from that which Catholics
from the beginning to this age have entertained. Therefore such Readers missing
in this book stories of Exploits performed in old times, such as they magnify
in their primitive red-lettred saints of their new fashioned Calendars, and
finding practices here exalted for virtues, which with their good will they
would renounce in their Baptism, as works and pompes of Satan: I shall not
want adversaries good store, of all ages and sexes.

38. For I confess that among the hundreds of Saints commemorated in this book
(of whom not a few are acknowledged for Saints even by the Protestants, and
which is more, for Workers of stupendous Miracles) not one can be found of
their new Mode. Not one can be found magnified as Inventours of new Doctrines
opposite to the Common faith of the Church: Not one who to spread abroad such
Doctrines armed subjects against their Princes, demolished altars, burnt
Churches, violated Holy Virgins, or invaded the possessions of God: Not one who
thought his Christian liberty could justify sacrilegious lusts, in breaking
vows of Chastity and soliciting others to do the like. Here we shall not read
of so much as one Good-wife of the city or country, not one chambermaid,
Prentice, or Groom disputing with Doctors and Bishops, and confuting all the
Fathers and Councils of Gods Church, etc. So that if for want of such
qualifications as these all our ancient Holy Bishops, Martyrs, Doctors and
Virgins must be unsainted, there remains for us no remedy but the old
uncomfortable one Patience.

39. Yet perhaps this defect or want of heroical perfections will not so
confidently, at least in public be objected against our Worthies, as the
virtues for which we commend them. A continual macerating of the flesh with
abstinences, fastings, Watchings, Haire-cloathes, lying on the cold hard ground
and the like, these austerities our modern spiritualists will mock at, as
useless us voluntary self-afflictions, concerning which they assure, God will
say, Who has required these things at your hands? And they will be yet more
angry, and do hope that God will be so too, against consecrating ones self to
perpetual Virginity or continence in Marriage, against secluding ones self
from all conversation with the world; against almost all use of the tongue
except speaking to God; against an entire submission of the will to the
Direction of another. and specially against renouncing riches, honors,
Pleasures, etc.

40. But such zealous Apologists for concupiscence show that they can scarce
frame to themselves an intelligible notion of the force of that fundamental
verity of Christianity, that nothing ought to be the object of our love, but
God alone: Neither can they penetrate into the incomprehensible depravation of
our souls by Original sin. What a poor superficial conception have those men
of the sense of those precepts, Love not the world, nor, etc. And, Mortify
your members which are upon the earth: Or of those practices of S. Paul, I
chastise my body, and bring it into servitude least, etc. And the world is
crucified unto me, and I unto the world!

14 Neither ought we to wonder hereat: for none but perfect souls, know how
imperfect they are. None but such have eyes to see the Rebellious obstinacy and
rage of Corrupt Nature, when it is constantly and vigorously contradicted; or
to discover its pernicious arts and subtilties to intrude it self, its own
seekings and interests in all, even our best actions, so persuading unwarie
souls that it is only the divine love which moves them to perform many, yea
most of their actions, when his love has the least share in them. If they did
rightly comprehend these things, they would cease to wonder at, and censure
happy souls which being moved by God to aspire to his perfect love, show such
severitie and rigor against the inclinations of Nature. These Patrons of
sensuality would then understand that such austerities of theirs, considering
their divine vocation, are not in them merely voluntary oblations, but that by
an Internal light, and inward impulse of Gods spirit God requires them from
them, since without such violence exercised against nature and sensuality they
would fail in their only necessary design of attaining to his perfect love.

42. Another, and which is the most noble exercise of these perfect souls is
so little understood by such Censurers, that they resolve it to be a mere
fiction. This is their uncessan^ practice of pure spiritual prayer, or a quiet
repose of Contemplation without any interruption, even scarcely in sleep. Now a
Disbeleif of this Divine Gift is more excusable, and a man may say, more
rational, in these Enemies of Gods Church, because it being a Grace which
never was found but in the Catholic Church, and there also only in choice and
perfectly retired souls, all aliens are incapable of the practice of it, since
it requires an entire submission of the soul to God and Superiors or
directours appointed by him, and consequently being not able to practice it,
they can have no true conception of the nature of it.

43. The most perfect manner of prayer in esteem with them is such a tedious,
loud, impetuous, and uncivil conversation with God, as they see practiced by
their Preachers: which is no better than a mere artificial slight and
facility easily obtained by custom, and a quick imagination, and may be in
perfection practiced by persons full of all inordinate, sensual, revenge full
and immortified passions. Neither can this prayer possibly be un-interrupted,
since it is little better than a corporal exercise, employing the sensible
faculties principally. Whereas the Prayer of Contemplation conferred by
Almighty God on his most favored Saints excludes all Images of the fancy, yea
and intime all perceptible actuations of the understanding, and is exercised in
simple Elevations of the Will, without any force at all, yet with admirable
efficacy: And thereby it may in time become continual, so as in virtue thereof
all other actions may be performed. Now to dispose a soul for such prayer,
there is previously required an entire calmnesse, and even death of the
Passions, a perfect purity in the spiritual affections of the will, and an
entire abstraction from all creatures. And such only as have attaind to this
divine exercise of Prayer, do perfectly understand and accomplish what our
Savior and his Apostles command, saying: Pray continually: Pray without
ceasing.

44. Upon these grounds it is that, S. Hierome says, The lives of Gods Saints
are a (perfect) interpretation of Scripture. For we have seen, how both the
Precepts of Mortification, divine love, and Prayer (under which all
Evangelicall duties are comprehended) have in and by the practices of Gods
Saints been explained unto us in a sense sublime, Seraphicall and Divine.
Whereas proud sinful souls for fear of excluding and condemning themselves,
are forced to apply unto them a meaning base, unworthy, terrestrial, and
complying with their own imperfections. And not content with this, they
presume to censure and calumniate those upon whom God has bestowed a clearer
light to see his heavenly will, and a more potent grace to perform it.

45. Hitherto I have acquainted my Readers with the motive inducing me, to
employ my thoughts and labors in a work of this nature, which being a simple
narration of Actions and Events, is not probably obnoxious to quarelling or
controversy, yet no less efficacious to produce that which should be the End,
but seldom is the effect of Controversy, unity in Judgment, Peace and
obedience. I will in the next place declare the Order and method observed in
this following history.

46. All though for as much as concerns the contexture of it, it little
differs from the form of Annalls, for it proceeds consequently and orderly from
year to year, except when our ancient Monuments furnish nothing at all, Yet I
thought most commodious, not to frame it one entire piece, without any
separation, except of years, as Ecclesiastical Annals use to be composed: but
following the method observed by the ancient Greek Historians, Eusebius,
Theodoret, Socrates, etc. to divide it into books and Chapters, with the
Arguments of each premised. For I conceaved that by such frequent pauses, the
Readers mind would receive some refreshment, and his memory a considerable
benefit, when he shall find the occurrents of times and actions of persons not
too often interrupted and delivered peecemeale, that is, no more of them at
once then belongs precisely to each year.

47. The History consisting of thirty five Books comprehends such occurrents,
principally regarding Gods Church, as happened in our Island during four great
revolutions: and it is therefore divided in to four parts. The first part (in
eight books) comprehends the time in which this our Country, having been first
discovered and after wards conquered by the Romans, was governed by them as a
Province of that Empire. And it begins more than fifty years before our Lords
coming, and continues till the four hundred and one and twentieth after his
Incarnation. The second part (in four books) comprehends the time in which
Brittany having been deserted by the Romans was governed by its own native
Kings the space of a hundred seaventy five years, till the year of Grace five
hundred ninety six. The third part in thirteen books relates Ecclesiastical
affairs after that the Saxons having invaded Brittany chased out the ancient
inhabitants, and settled in it seven Principalities, called the Saxon
Heptarchie: which lasted more then two hundred years, that is, till the year
of our Lord eight hundred. And the last part in ten books pursues the same
subject after that the West Saxon Kings having subdued the rest brought England
into a Monarchy: In which state it continued governed by Saxon (or Danish)
Kings till the year of Grace one thousand sixty six, in which the Saxon race
ended in Harold, who was slain, and the King-dom entirely conquered by the
Normans.

48. Moreover for the Readers ease and benefit, there is placed at the head of
every page the name of the Governor or Prince during whose Reign the
occurrents there related, happened. And thereto is added the year of our Lords
Incarnation, to the end the Reader with one glance may see where he is, and
with the people of what age he then converses.

49. In the last place, gratitude and even Justice requires from me an
acknowledgement, that the following History as to far the greatest part of it,
is collected out of the three former volumes of Ecclesiastical Annal^ not long
since written by the late Reverend and Learned father, F. Michael Alford (alias
Grifiith) of the Society of Jesus. True it is by the occasion of several
monuments and books more lately published, as the Monasticon, The ten
historical Writers, The Flores Historiae Ecclesiasticae gathered with great
diligence by the late most illustrious and Learned Bishop of Chalcedon, to
which may be joined several volumes of Manuscripts, which I found in the
Library of our RR. FF. of the order of S. Benedict at Doway: I say by the help
of these I have been enabled to make considerable additions through the whole
work, and to correct several passages, as related by the foresaid reverend and
learned Father: Yet all this hinders not but that the general fabric of the
work is to be ascribed unto him.

50. Yea moreover I must profess that though I have a long time had in my
thoughts and desires a good inclination to supply a great defect, by doing
right to our Religion in furnishing our Country with a History in our own
tongue, like this, yet partly by reason of other avocations, and principally a
want of courage and patience, necessary to one who should search into so vast
and confused a Mass of ancient Monuments requisite thereto, I found no great
difficulty to excuse my self. But when I save this discouragement removed by
so able a hand, and could have no assurance, that any other had the same
intention, I then conceived it my Duty to effect what before I only wished or
but faintly purposed.

51. In consideration therefore of the obligation which not my self only, but
all Catholics, yea our whole Nation, has to the foresaid Venerable father for
his unwearied labors in restoring, and with such advantage representing to the
world as on a magnificent Threater, all the Worthies of our Nation once more,
as it were, repeating their glorious Gests; I would it were in my power to
raise to his memory a Pyramide answering his merits. But that task I must leave
to a more skilful hand, who shall hereafter record to Posterity the occurrents
of this present age, of which no doubt he will be esteemed a principal
ornament. I must therefore content my self with preparing, as I have been able,
these few materials, for his monument.

52. R. Father Michael Alford had certainly in an eminent degree the two
endowments which constitute an excellent Historian, Learning and fidelity: The
former was the fruit of his wonderful industry, which manifestly appears to
whosoever shall read his Annalls: and the latter had a more Divine original,
the grace of Gods holy spirit obtained by his constant prayers and devotions.

53. His Philosophy he heard at Sevill in Spain, and his divinity at L^vain
in Brabant. From whence he was sent to Naples where he spent two years in
doing all offices of kindness to our English Gentry and Merchants which
frequented that port. After this, five years more he past with great and
general approbation in the Penitenciariae at Rome. Where also he was admitted
to his Profession of four Vows. From Rome he was sent to Liege, to be
Companion and assistant to the master of Novices: and thence to be superior at
Ga^^t. That employment ended, he was directed Missioner into England, at a
season when the rumor of the Bishop of Chalcedons coming thither caused a
strict watch to be appointed in the Ports. So that at Dover he was upon that
suspicion examined by the magistrate, and by his order conveyed to London. But
his person not answering the description given of the other by the Queens
intercession he was set at liberty, and afterward settled in a worthy family
in Leichestershire. There he constantly lived, employing his time in assisting
his Catholic Neighbors, and what could be spared from that, in writing his
Ecclesiastical Annals. In the year of Grace 1652. he went beyond seas with
design of perfecting his History: Where coming to Saint Omar, a lingering
fever seized on him being then near seaventy years of age, which undermined
and at last consumed his decayed natural strength.

54. Great abilities and learning will perpetuate ones memory on earth, but if
unaccompanied with Piety, it will be apt to swell the person with Pride which
can find no place in heaven. This venerable Father knew this well, and
therefore made it his chiefest care and study to adorn his soul with Piety
and virtue. As he carried the name, so did he also a tender devotion to the
glorious Archangell Saint Michael: of which he left a memorial diverse years
before his death, by a devout prayer and Picture devised by him, which he
caused to be cut at Antwerp, and dispersed to the honor of the Saint, not
only as his Patron, but also the Standard Bearer of the Church against
rebellious Heresy, which he also endeavored to quell both by word and writing.
For the space of two and twenty years before his death a part of his daily
devotion was to lodge his soul every day in one of the sacred wounds of our
blessed Savior. And his infirmity increasing upon him, he desired, four days
before his death, to be put in mind if he chanced to forget his pious exercise.
The last day lodged him in the heart, there he dyed in the house of (...) to
live for ever in heaven, and there to enjoy the happy reward of all his pious
labors.

55. Having now (together with the forementioned monuments) named this reverend
father Alford as the principal fountain from which the following History is
derived: I have in him named all manner of Authors requisite therein, for not
any have escaped his search. And having a well grounded assurance of his
fidelity in his allegations from them, I have for the most part quoted them out
of his books, yet not abridging mine own liberty of adding more then he has
made use of or sometimes making other inferences from them then he has done.

56. And whereas among our Historians, frequent, occasion has been given to
allege in the following book several of our Protestant Authors, I have some
ground to suspect that I shall displease some men, by a fault called Civility,
in not changing the titles which they give themselves, and are so styled by the
whole nation. For whereas I have generally written Bishop Parker, Bishop Usher,
Bishop Godwin, etc. I am told I ought to have annexed some phrase of
disparagement as Pseudo-Episcop^s, or Qui se dicunt Episcop^s, etc.

57. But for my excuse or defense I must take leave to say. 1. that herein I
follow not only the example of the ancient best fathers in their disputes even
against Arians, Photinians, Novatians, etc. but of the most learned Author of
the Protestants Apology. 2. I am assured that if my Accusers were personally to
converse with these Protestant Prelates they would not after such a manner
change their titles. Now I see no reason why an obligation should be imposed on
any to be uncivil with his pen, and not with his tongue. 3. I do not find
thatever any Protestant esteemed such civilitie an advantage to them in the
debate concerning their Ordinations: for to instance in a case in just reason
far less disputable then that, yet not long ago actually and terribly
disputed: If during the late Rebellion a faithful subject of the King should
have petitioned for a Pass to go through the Rebels quarters, no man would
have suspected him of disloyalty because in his Petition to Fairfax, Cromwell,
or Waller he styled them Lords Generals. Has not the King himself in addresses
to the unlawful Parliament done the like? Yet all this surely without
engagement to acknowledge their authority to be legitimate.

58. Particularly as touching the forementioned Writers, it cannot be denied
but that we are much obliged to their diligence in the search of public
Records, and their sincerity in delivering what they found. True it is that B.
Parker according to the Impulse of a Calvinisticall spirit often inserts
malicious invectives against the Catholic Church, as being indeed the
Patriarck of Calvinisticall Prelacy. B. Godwin is less choleric and may be
excused if now and then he seek some advantage, particularly upon the account
of married Prelates. But as for B. Usher his admirable abilities in
Chronologicall and Historical erudition, as also his faithfulness and ingenuous
sincerity in delivering without any provoking reflections, what with great
labors he has observed, ought certainly at least to exempt him from being
treated by any one rudely and contemptuously, especially by me, who am
moreover always obliged to preserve a just resentment of very many kind
effects of freind-ship received from him.

59. And thus at last I conclude the subject about which my desire was to
entertain my Readers, before they enter upon the following History: If this
discourse be too tedious, they cannot in reason refuse their pardon, since we
both know that I cannot detain them against their will, nor any longer then
they have a mind to it. God almighty pardon whatsoever defects are in this
Book* and give that good success to it which I only desire and intend, that
his holy Name may be glorified, and the Christian Readers soul advanced in a
love of truth and peace. Amen.

ERRATA.
The Reader will be pleased to consider, that this Book having been printed in
a Country where not one of the composers understood the least word of English,
it may be esteemed a pardonable fault, if many Errors have been committed. The
principal among which are here rectified: as for unconsiderable ones which
have happened by mistake at single Letters resembling one the other, and which
will not stopp an intelligent Reader, he himself is desired to be the
Correctour.

Page. 4. Col. a. Lin. 63. Oresius or Read, Oresius delivers, or. p. 37. col.
b. l. 52. then to be designed from. R. then have been designed for p. 81. col.
a. l. 11. a freeidly R. a freindly p. 84. col. b l. 28 same tho Cap. R. the
same Cup. p. 85 col. a l. 20. He his R. He is. p. 93 col. a l. 5 have dome R.
have done. l. 52 Numbers Franks R. numbers of Franks. p. 98 c. b l. 6 Acts S.
Albanus R. Acts of S. Albanus p. 107. c. b l. 41. Rudbur near R. Rudburns near.
p. 110 c. a l. 52 he began R. begun. p. 113 c. b l. 7 Constanti^s R.
Constantin's. p. ^50 c. a l. 20 the fame R. the same p. ^57 c. a l. 35
Governor however R. of Governors, however. p. 180. c. a l. 1 man a a R. man
of a p. 195 c. b l. 2^ for more R. far more. p. 197 c. a l. 11 but only R.
being only. p. 209 c. a l. 46 Kings last R. Kings lust. p. 225 c. a l. 2
writer R. writes p. 232 c. a l. 41 part reaches of Brattany which from R. part
of Brittany which reaches from. p. 234 c. b l. 39 memory the R. memory of the.
p. 249 c. b l. 59 by own order R. by his own order. p. 263 c. b l. 13 last R.
lust p. 264 c. a l. 17 came of R. came out of. l. 28 (Dele) and more. p. 274 c.
b l. 25 more the R. more then the. l. 64 (after Protestant (Dele) the 2.
following lines.) p. 292 c. b l. 45 thom R. whom. p. 293 c. a l. 63 was freed
his pain R. was freed from his pain. p. ^39 c. b l. 35 letters the King R.
letters to the King. p. 383 c. a l. 57 fasting R. fastening. p. 385 c. a l. 62
in our Church R. in her Church. p. ^95 c. a l. 32 inheited R. inherited. p. 401
c. a l. 22 accessours R. Assessours. p. 423 c. a l. 51 month (of March) R. Moon
(of March.) p. 427 c. a l. ^6 our ways R. your ways. p. 429 c. a l. ^5
Ethelbert R. Ethelred. p. 430 c. a l. 20 Kord R. Lord. p. 434 c. a l. 9 wast
sums R. vast sums. p. 441 c. a l. 9 the Rome Synod R. the Roman Synod. p.
447 c. b l. 8 at Shepey R. at Selesey. p. 473 c. b l. 33 an within ( Dele) an.
p. 483 c. a l. penult. Catholic and R. Catholic Faith and p. 501 c. a l. 55
making mercy R. making merry. l. 52 Narratio and R. Narration. and. page 512 c.
b lin. 11 Earn* Island R. Earn Island. p. 524 c. a l. 21 hand R. and. p. 525 c.
a l. 46 will make R. will I make. p. 527 c. b l. 54 drive violently R. drive
him violently. p. 536 c. b l. 18 of an age R. of an ague. p. 571 c. b l. 32
elft R. left. p. 598 c. b l. 10 of hu R. of his. l. 31 charging its R. changing
its. l. 60 own of name, and seven R. own name, and of seven. p. 679 c. a l.
38 were complied R. were compiled. l. 64 his longing R. his lodging. p. 716 c.
b l. 22 all vast R. all wast. p. 720 c. a l. 16 West Saxon Kings R. West Saxon
Kingdoms. p. 728 c. a l. 10 his vours to him R. his favors to him. p. 719 c. a
l. 1 return meant back R. returned back. l. 8 sent for he R. he sent for. p. 743
c. b l. 65 his age R. of his age. p. 798 c. a l. 30 at a so that place R. at a
place. p. 830 c. a l. 5 his New R. his Nephew. p. 836 c. a l. 16 acts piety R.
acts of piety. p. 861 c. b l. 40 as Dorchester R. at Dorchester. l. 51 grates
R. gates. p. ^79 c. b l. 43 curied R. cured. p. 902 c. a l. 34 of S. Dunstan R.
of S. Cuthbert. p. 907 c. b l. 62 no man determine R. no man can determine. p.
935 c. a l. 23 slain King Edmund R. slain by King Edmund. p. 940 c. b l. 20
Cromton R. Bromton. p. 948 c. a l. a of whole R. of the Whole.

THE CHVRCH-HISTORY OF BRITTANY UNDER ROMAN GOVERNOVRS I. PART.
I. CHAP.
I. CHAP.
1. A general view of the Government and Religion of Brittany when first
discovered. 2. etc. A proof of Gods mercy and Grace to our Nation.

1. HAVING an intention, through the Divine assistance, to compile a plain
orderly Narration of Church-affaires touching the infancy and growth of
Christian Religion in this our Island of Brittany; it will be expedient in
preparation thereto, to give the Reader a prospect of the State both of its
ancient Civil Government and Religion also, or rather most horribly impious
Superstitions and Ceremonies: by a due consideration of both which we may
clearly see, and ought thankfully to acknowledge the wonderfully blessed
effects of the Divine Providence and Grace toward this our Native Country
more plentifully then to any other.

2. For though the Civil State here was in those times injuriously invaded and
usurped by the Romans: yet by Gods most wise, holy and merciful* Direction,
the injuries and oppressions sustained by our Ancestors proved an occasion of
their greatest Happiness, since by means of the correspondence and intercourse
then intervening between this Island, formerly unknown, and the rest of the
Roman Empire, to which it became subject, a passage was opened for a free
admittance of the Divine Light of saving Christian Verities, the victory of
which over the Britains Souls did abundantly recompense the servitude induced
by the Romans over their Bodies and Estates.

3. And moreover the Omnipotence of Divine Grace was illustriously commended by
its triumphing over a far greater opposition raised against it by the Devil in
this, more then almost any other Nation. For here especially was anciently
erected the Shop and School of most impious and inhumane Superstitions. The
abominable Art of Magical and Diabolical Divinations, the most barbarous
Mysteries of Sacrifising to the Devil with humane blood, and, in a word,
whatsoever impieties Hell could suggest, were here invented and practiced: the
Inhabitants of this Island by the miserable advantage of their solitude and
separation from the rest of mankind being at more leisure to entertain, and
withal better enabled by Nature with Study to promote and increase those
execrable Rites: For (as Tacitus relates from Julius Agricola's observation,
Lacit. in vit. Agricolae.
who had sufficient experience to make a judgment) the Britains were naturally
endowed with quicker and sharper wits then their Neighbors the Gauls, etc. And
it was chiefly in the inventing of impious Superstitions that they gained a
wretched reputation and authority among the adjacent Nations, who therefore
sent their Youth into Brittany to be instructed in the Arts and delusions of
Satan, Caesar. l. 5. comment.
as Caesar testifies. Such advantageous enablements, and withal such
persuasive invitations had they to be more wicked, and greater enemies of God
and true Piety, then any of their Neighbors.

4. But within a few Ages we shall see Satan like lightning fall from heaven:
We shall see this our Nation and Country become the School of Holiness and
Virtue, the Nursery of Saints, the Refuge of persecuted Christians, and a
fruitful Mother of Apostles to plant our Holy Faith in most of our confining
Regions. This was a change of the right hand of the most High. But before we
can be spectatours of the manner how this wonderful Change was made, we are
first to take a view of the ancient primitive State of this our Island, by whom
it was peopled, and how governed both in affairs Civil, and such as pertained
to Religion.

II. CHAP.
II. CHAP.
1.2. The ancient Inhabitants of Brittany: 3.4 etc. Conquered by C. Julius
Caesar: yet with great difficulty. 5. His Motives for the invasion. 6. A small
part only subdued.

1. IT is a great Proof against the ancient Philosophers, and our Modern
Atheistical seeming-Christians that the world was not from eternity, because
all the parts and Regions of the Earth have been successively inhabited by
Nations spreading themselves by little and little from the East where man was
created. Thus was this Island of Brittany first possessed by colonies of the
neighboring Belgic Gauls, etc. as appears by the names severally given by
them to the places where they respectively settled themselves, as the
Atrebates, Morini, Belga, and several other, situate especially on the
Southern coasts: which argues these to have been later Plantations, though
preceding the Age in which this our Country was first discovered to the civil
part of the world.

2. Now though the ancient inhabitants coming from several quarters were
divided in names and regions, yet they were all joined in one common Title of
Britains, and one common language, the same with that of the Gauls. To fetch
the name of Britains from Brutus a supposed son of Silvius and great
grandchild of Aeneas, savours of the doting fancies of our old Bards and
Druids: more probable it is that they were called so from the ancient Gallick
word Brith, which signifies colored or painted, for so Caesar describes them
to have been in his days. And for the same reason the Romans in following
times called the Northern people of this Island, that is, such as had not been
subdued by them, and accustomed to their Civil Education and clothing, by the
name of Picts, because they retained their old fashion of coloring their
Bodies, as beleiving that made them appear more agreeable to one another, and
more terrible to their Enemies. So^m. in Gloss.
Or rather, as Mr. Somner observes, the name of Brittany seems to be derived
from the old British word Brydio, which signifies to boil with rage: fitly
applied to all the British Islands, as being encompassed with a Sea esteemed
by the Ancients almost unna^igable, by reason of the swelling furious waves
with which it is most frequently agitated.

3. The first that discovered this our Island to the remoter parts of the
civilis'd world, was Caius Julius Caesar, who toward the latter end of his ten
years war in Gaul transported his Legions hither more then once. Two several
attempts he made in vain to conquer that part of the Island which he invaded:
but at the third by means of the mis-intelligence between the several petty
Princes reigning here, he forced them to yield and submit themselves to
Tribute. Those who opposed him were only a few several states in the Southern
parts of the Island, who made choice of Cassibelin King of a few Provinces
about London to be General in the war: ^io. lib. 59.
For as for the Northern and Midland Countries of Brittany they were not at
all engaged, nor suffered any prejudice by his conquest. Notwithstanding that
small purchase which he made, and which he paints forth much to his own
advantage, was so highly esteemed by himself and the Roman Senate, that they
ordained no less then twenty days of public thanksgiving to their Gods for so
great a victory: as beleiving that they had discovered a new world, Lucan. l.
whose bounds were unknown to them: For till the next Age it was not known to
be an Island.

4. Caesar in his description of this Attempt omits several passages which
were not for his advantage: but other Roman Historians of those times take
notice of them: and particularly Lucan affirms that his affrighted soldiers
turned their backs to the Britains in search of whom they made so many
voyages. And all the fruit of his victory accrewing either to himself or the
City of Rome was very inconsiderable, besides the glory of having been an
invader, Dio. ubi supr. Tacit. in vit. Agric.
says Dio. Insomuch as Tacitus confesses that though by one prosperous combat
he terrified the inhabitants, and got some possession of the Sea coasts, yet he
might be said rather to have discovered the Country to posterity, then to have
given them the possession.

5. The Motives of his passing the Ocean thither in that warlike manner,
besides his natural ambition and thirst of Glory, which was boundles, was a
desire of revenge against the Britains, who sent succors to the Gauls
against him, and thereby gave some stop and delay to his victories over them.
Sueton. in Caesar. c. 47.
Suctonius adds another Motive of Covetousnes, for says he, Caesar had a great
hope of enriching himself with British Pearls, the largenes of which he did
much admire.

6. This first conquest in Brittany, such an one as it was, happened about five
and fifty years before the Birth of our Savior. And the effect of it was only
obtaining a verbal dependence of some few Southern Princes of the Island on
Rome, testified by an inconsiderable Tribute: The Country in the mean time
being altogether governed as before: for there were as yet no Garrisons left
there to keep them in awe: the petty Kings reigning still, enjoyed their former
dominion over their subjects: which by acquaintance with the Romans became more
Civil, and in that regard were indeed gainers by being conquered.

III. CHAP.
III. CHAP.
1.2. The Birth of Christ in the three and fortieth year of Augustus, when
Cynobelin was King in Brittany. 3 4 His three children. 5. Adminius the eldest
is banished: and Togodumnus succeeds in the Kingdom: who denies Tribute. 6.
The affairs of Brittany neglected by Augustus and Tiberius. 7.8. Caligula's
fanaticall attempt against it. 9. etc. Claudius his invasion and conquest:
continued by his General Plautius, who after Togodumnus his death overcomes
Caractacus, and sends him prisoner to Rome. 16. His Successors victories.
17.18. Of Cartismandua Queen of the Brigantes. 19. Suetonius Paulinus subdues
the Isle of Mona. 20. etc. The Iceni under Queen Boudicea rebel: and destroy
eighty thousand Romans: but are defeated by Paulinus. 24. Peace succeds.

Caes. Comment. l. 5.
1. CAesar relates as one occasion or pretense for his invasion of Brittany,
that Mandubratius a son of Immanuentius late King of the Trinobantes, (that is,
Middlesex and Essex) who had been slain by Cassibelin, fled over into France
and there demanded Caesar's Protection, who brought him with him into Brittany,
and restored him to his Principality. This Mandubratius seems to have been the
same that Beda, Eutropius, etc. called Androgeus, a title probably given him by
the Britains for betraying the liberty of his Country: for in that name
according to the ancient British language, is imported one that is a
criminal, Bed. l. 1. c. 2.
facinorous person. This Androgeus or Mandubratius seems afterward to have been
again expelled: For in Augustus his days ( Caesar's adopted son,) we find
Cynobelin a son of Cassibelin to have reigned in Brittany, and continued the
payment of the Tribute imposed by Caesar, as appears by ancient Coyns which
were the Numismata Census.

2. It was in the time of this Cynobelin (usually by British Historians called
Kimbelin,) and in the forty third year of Augustus his reign that the Sun of
righteousness arose, a light unto the Gentiles, and the glory of his people
Israel: for then our Lord Jesus Christ the only eternal Son of God was born of
a pure Virgin in Bethlem the City of David.

3. The Seat of this King, as likewise of his Predecessors was Camulodunum
(now called Maldon in Essex, Camb. l. Brit. Dio. lib. 60.
) as Dio witnesses. Which Town received its name from Camulus, in an ancient
inscription called the Holy and most powerful God, answering to the Roman and
Grecian God Mars.

4. According to the ancient British Chronicles this Cynobelin had two sons,
Guiderius and Arviragus, who reigned successively after him. But in the Roman
Histories we find that Cynobelin had three sons, of quite different names, to
wit, Adminius, Togodumnus and Catarecus or Caractacus. It is hard to devine
whence this so great diversity of relations should proceed, whether the same
persons had several names, or whether these were several persons, and Princes
of several dominions in Brittany. Neither indeed is it much important in it
self, and much less for our present design, that this ambiguity should be
cleared.

5. It may suffice us to be informed from the Roman Story, Sueton. in Calig.
cap. 44.
that in the reign of the Emperor Tiberius who succeeded Augustus, the eldest
son of Cynobelin, called Adminius, was for some great crime banished by his
Father: who dying presently after, his second son called by the Britains,
Guiderius and by the Romans Togodumnus, succeeded in the Kingdom, and had the
confidence to be the first who denied to pay the Tribute to the Romans imposed
on his Ancestors.

6. That which gave him this confidence may seem to have been the neglect which
Augustus had of preserving his interest in this Island. For though toward the
middle of his reign, upon some provocations he had had an intention to
transport an Army hither, which was diverted by other occurrents of greater
importance: yet growing old he changed his mind, being so far from an ambition
to extend his Empire, that he straightened the bounds of it, Tacit. Hist. l. 1.
confining it with the River Euphrates on the East, and the Ocean on the West
and North: by which this our Island was in a sort excluded from the Roman
Empire. And this design which was an effect of Augustus his wisdom, was
through sluggishnes and an attendance to sensual pleasures continued by
Tiberius, who for the space of the first two years never went out of his
Palace, Suet. in Tiber. cap. 38.
and during the succeeding twenty years of his his reign never made progress
further then a few Cities neighboring to Rome, the remotest of which was
Antium.

7. This slothful disposition in Tiberius seems to have been the cause that
our banished Prince Adminius either did not address himself to him for his
restitution, or was neglected by him. But a more active nature in Tiberius his
Successor, Dio lib. 59.
Caius Caligula, encouraged Adminius to implore his protection. This he did
when Caligula by his frantic lusts had emptied his Treasure, and having by his
extortions empoverish'd all Italy, went with an Army into Gaul, merely upon
pretense of commotions in Germany to pillage that and the rest of the adjacent
Countries. Afterward he made a show as if he would pass over into Brittany,
and continued his march to the Ocean, where he stayed making no further
attempts at all, yea being enraged against any of his Officers, whenever they
executed any warlike design.

8. Here it was that Adminius submitted himself and all the right which he
pretended to his Kingdom to Caligula: which so puffed up the mind of the vain
Emperor that, Sueton. in Calig.
as if the whole Island had been effectually delivered up to him, he wrote
boasting letters to Rome: but was so far from restoring that banished Prince,
that all he did was to range his Army in battle on the Sea coasts over against
Brittany, planting his Engines, etc. no man imagining what he intended: when
upon the sudden he commanded all his soldiers to fill their helmets and
bosoms with cockles and other fish-shells, calling this a conquest of the
Ocean: and with those spoils returned in triumph to Rome.

9. But Caligula's next Successor Claudius pursued his design against Brittany
more seriously. Several Motives he might have to renew an invasion,
VVestmonasteriensis. Ann. D. 44. Oros. lib. 7. c. 6. Beda lib. 1. c. 3.

Sueton. in Cloud. c. 17. Dio. lib. 60


either for Guiderius his neglect of continuing his Tribute, as Mathaus
Westmonasteriensis, or to show himself a Prince useful to the Commonwealth,
as Paulus Orosius, or because of fresh tumults in the Island. However in the
second year of his reign one Bericus a British Nobleman being for sedition
banished out of Brittany, as Adminius had been in the reign of Caligula,
solicited likewise Claudius to make an invasion to recover his rights there:
Whereupon order was given to Aulus Plautius the Emperors General in Gaul to
transport his Army into Brittany, which though with great difficulty, by reason
of the soldiers unwillingnes, he performed. His army landed in several
places: and particularly Vespasian his Lievtenant-Generall, in the Isle of
Wight, which he subdued. The Britains not expecting an invasion, were
unprovided and dispersed: so that the Romans had much ado to find and draw
them out of their woods and fast-nesses. But at last they in several battles
overcame first Caractacus, then Togodumnus (or Guiderius) sons of Cynobelin,
who after the defeat of their Armies, escaping, retired to the place where the
River of Thames disburdens it self into the Sea. There likewise by means of
the German soldiers in the Roman Army, which were accoustumed to swim armed
over the most rapid Rivers, the Britains were again defeated, and Togodumnus
slain.

10. After whose death, when the Britains were so far from being discouraged
with it, that they more earnestly and unanimously renewed the war, inflamed
with a desire to revenge that and their former losses, Aulus Plautius out of
fear pursued the war no further, but repaired to the Emperor, as he had been
commanded in case any extraordinary difficulty intervened. Hereupon Claudius
himself in the fourth year of his reign resolved to make an expedition: for
which purpose renforcing his Army, and making great provisions for the war,
among which were Elephants also, he went down to Oslia, from whence sailing to
Marseilles, and performing the rest of the journey partly by Land, and partly
by Sea, he arrived at his Army, expecting him on the Banks of Thames: Maldon in
Essex.
which River having passed over, he faught the Enemy and had an entire Victory,
insomuch as he possessed himself of Camulodunum, the Palace of the King: and
shortly after he subdued many by force, and received others by a voluntary
surrendry. Whereupon he suddenly returned to triumph in Rome, having spent in
all these exploits only sixteen days in Brittany, the Government of which he
left to Plautius. All these particulars are recorded by Dio,

11. Plautius after the Emperors departure, pursued the war vigorously: so
much to the Emperors satisfaction that he granted him the honor of an
inferior sort of Triumph, called Ovation, in the procession whereof he graced
him so far as to attend him himself on foot, walking by his side both in his
going to the Capitol and returing thence. And so highly did he esteem this
Conquest of Brittany, that he accepted among his own Titles, and gave to his
only son the name of Britannicus.

12. In the tenth year of Claudius his reign there was sent into Brittany, as
Successor of Plautius in the Government of the Army Publius Ostorius, who
finding great troubles and tumults in the Country by his diligence and courage
quickly pacified them, disarming the Britains, fortifying with Garrisons all
the Provinces between the Rivers Antona (which seems to have given the name to
South-hampton) and Severn. Thence advancing to the Eastern parts of the Island
inhabited by the Iceni (that is, those of Suffolk, Norfolk, Cambridge and
Huntingdon) whom he found willing to enter into an association, but utterly
refusing to admit Garrisons. Whereupon he subdued them by force, though
several other Provinces, and some which had formerly submitted, joined
themselves with them. And to strengthen the Romans possession, he placed in
Camulodunum a colony of the fourth Legion called Victrix.

Vid. Tacit. lib.
13. From thence he turned his arms Westward, against the Silures, inhabiting
Herefordshire and the Southern part of Wales. Here he found terrible
resistance: for besides that these Silures were a feirce Nation, they put great
confidence in Caractacus, who eight years before having been driven from the
Trin^bantes had his refuge among them, and became their General: A man by many
heroical exploits courageously performed, and by his admirable patience in
sufferings become highly renouned, both among the Britains and Romans.
Notwithstanding by the advantage which the Romans had in their arms (for the
poor Britains were wholly unprovided of such as were defensive) Ostorius
gained a memorable Victory, by which he became seized of the wife, daughter and
brethren of Caractacus. As for himself he escaped by flight, and repairing to
Cartismandua Queen of the Brigantes (or Yorkshire,) he was by her perfidiously
delivered up to the Romans, and sent prisoner to Rome, being for the fame of
his courage a spectacle of wonder to all the Cities of Italy through which he
passed. All these particulars together with his magnanimous behavior before
the Emperor Claudius may be seen elegantly celebrated by Tacitus. Tacit. Ann.
lib. 12.
For as for the dreaming fables of Mathaeus Westmonasteriensis, VVestmon. A. D.
44.
concerning a marriage formerly made between Caractacus (whom he confounds with
Arviragus) and a daughter of Claudius called Genuisa, (never heard of among the
Romans, Ibid. A. D. 52.
etc.) they deserve not to be taken notice of.

14. Yet probable it is that which the same Author relates that Caractacus
having been restored by Claudius, both to his liberty and Kingdom, spent the
remainder of his life in peace, showing much love and respect to the Roman
Empire, and exercising great justice and liberality to others, by which his
glory was increased through all Europe. Now what were the names and fortunes of
his Brethren is uncertain. Probable it is that one of them was that Cogidunus
mentioned by Tacitus, Tacit. in Agri^.
to whom the Roman Emperor gave several Cities, with the Title of King: who
(says that Author) remained even to the days of Vespasian entirely faithful
to the Romans, and induced others to the like fidelity: ^acit Annal. l. ^2.
Such being the received ancient coustome of that Empire to make use of Kings
as instruments of servitude.

15. During the absence of Caractacus, the Silures began new tumults, and with
great multitudes encompassed the Roman Cohorts busy in building forts for
Garrisons in their Country. In that combat the Prefec^ of the Camp, eight
Centurions, and several Companies fell: and had not the rest been releived by
neighboring Garrisons and quarters, they had all been destroyed. And afterward
when the Romans went to forage they were again set upon by the Britains, they
together with several troops, and such Cohorts as were ready, were put to
flight: But Ostorius opposing his Legions to the flyers and pursuers, turned
the fortune of the day, and defeated the Britains.

16. Ostorius dying presently after, Claudius sent in his place Aulus Didius,
who arriving in Brittany, found that since Ostorius his death, the Legion under
the command of Ma^lius Valens had received a loss in a battle against the
Silures, whose insultings he repressed. But presently after in the Northern
parts of the Isle, a discord happening between a Queen and her husband,
occasioned a meeting of several States adjoining, called severally to assist
each party, ^d. ibid. and lib. 3. H^st.
and opened a way to the Romans to enlarge their Dominion.

17. For artismandua Queen of the Brigantes ( Yorkshire) having married
Venusius a Nobleman of the same Province, after she had obliged the Romans by
giving up to them Caractacus* and by that correspondence increased her wealth
and luxury, began to despise her husband, and took into the society of her bed
and throne his servant and Armor-bearer (Armigerum) Vellocatus. This caused
great seditions in the Kingdom, the greatest part of the Province assisting
Venusius, by whose help the Queen was brought into great straits, and forced to
demand assistance from the Romans, who sent several Cohorts and Wings of
Horses, which after several combats at last freed the Queen from danger, A. D.
60.
but withal restored Venusius to the Kingdom again.

18. Didius afterward dying in the fourth year of Nero the Successor of
Claudius in the Empire: Verannius was next sent Praeto^ into Brittany, who made
a few excursions into the woods, wasting the enemies Country, but was hindered
from making any progress by death happening to him within one years space.
Tacit. in Agric.


19. In his place was sent Suetonius Paulinus, who passed the two first years
of his Government very prosperously, subduing several Provinces, and
strengthening the Roman Garrisons. And afterward having a design to take from
the Britains the Isle of Mona (or Anglesey) which was a refuge for fugitives,
he passed over his Army thither, which was astonished to see the horrible
aspect of the Enemies forces, among which women ran up and down with torches
in their hands, having their hair dischevelled, and garments fashioned on
purpose to excite horror. The Druids likewise, whose principal ^eat that
Island was, made processions with their hands lift up, and their tongues
uttring dire curses and prayers: But the Romans, encouraged by their General,
changing their astonishment into contempt of such a fanatic multitude,
charging among them quickly dispersed them: and afterward settling Garrisons,
cut down their Groves consecrated to most savage and execrable Superstitions.

20. But whilst Paulinus was exulting for the Conquest made by him in the
Western parts of the Island, the Iceni inhabiting in ( Norfolk, etc.) the
Eastern Provinces, rebelling against the Romans, brought a terrible destruction
upon them fore-signified by wonderful Prodigies: Dio. lib. 62. Tacit. Annal.
l. 14. Curia.
For says Dio and Tacitus likewise, there were heard in the Counsell-Chamber
of the Romans a noise and murmur as of barbarous people laughing and rejoicing,
and in the Theater a houling and weeping of multitudes: Moreover there were
seen houses floating on the Thames, and the Sea between Gaul and Brittany had
the resemblance of Blood, etc.

21. The causes of that insurrection and rebellion Dio ascribes to the
oppression and covetousnes of the Emperors Procurator, Decianus Catus, who
would renew the forfeytures of Estates though formerly remitted by Claudius.
But Tacitus relates a more likely and far more incensing provocation, Ibid.
which was this. Prasutagus King of the Iceni dying very rich, in his last
Testament made the Emperor joynt-heire with his two daughters: thinking thereby
to secure his Kingdom and family fsom all injuries. But it fell out quite
contrary: insomuch as his Kingdom was invaded and wasted by the Officers of
the Army, and his family by the Emperors servants. Yea the Widow Queen could
not secure her self from stripes, nor her daughters from ravishment: the
Nobility was spoiled of their estates, the Princes of blood were used like
slaves, and the whole Kingdom reduced into the form of a Roman Province.
Hereupon they take arms, solicit the Trinobantes and other States not yet
accustomed to slavery: being hereto chiefly encouraged by the absence of
Paulinus the Roman General.

22. An army being suddenly raised consisting of about one hundred thousand,
Queen Boudicea, a Lady of high courage, would her self be the General: and
lead them so courageously and prosperously, that she beseiged and took two of
the firmest Colonies that the Romans had, Camulodonum and Verulamium,
destroying all, and exercising most barbarous cruelties even upon the women,
hanging them on gallowses naked, with their breasts cut off and sowed to their
mouths, etc. There are reckoned no fewer then fourscore thousand Romans
destroyed in this insurrection.

23. News of so fearful a Tragedy being brought to Paulinus in Anglesey, he
presently marched confidently through the midst of the Enemies till he came to
London, a colony, rather rich with merchandise, then fortified against a Seige.
Therefore notwithstanding the supplications and tears of the inhabitants, he
quits it, choosing to secure the whole Roman State with the loss of one Town,
which was presently destroyed by the Enemy. He had with him not above ten
thousand soldiers: notwithstanding making choice of a convenient place, backed
with a wood, and having a narrow entrance which freed him from danger of
surprise, he resolved to fight the Britains camped in a plain before him. And
so much had a desire of revenge inflamed the courage of the Romans, that
marching in a close order, after they had spent their darts and piles, they
peirced through the vast body of the Enemies, entirely routing them: and
neglecting spoils, they spared none, not even women, nor cattle, but added
them to the heaps of the slain. That which most exposed the Britains to so
great a slaughter (for no less then seaventy thousand were slain in this
battle) was that they had closed their own Army behind with their Cariages, in
which besides their goods were placed their wives and children, so confident
they were of Victory. After this defeat the Queen Boudicea ended her life by
poison: Gildas de E^c^d.
called by Gildas, a crafty Lioness, for her cruelty and perfidiousnes in
managing the former war.

24. After this so signal a Victory, the Britains during the whole reign of
Nero, never attempted any revenge, but quietly submitted themselves to the
Romans. If there were any tumults, they were caused by the Romans themselves.
To Suetonius Paulinus succeeded Turpilianus, who ingratiated himself with the
Britains by the softnes of his Government, more acceptable, because compared
with his Predecessors severity. After three years Trebellius Maximus was sent
Praetor, who being naturally slothful, and unacquainted with the arts of
managing a camp, and moreover sordidly avaritious, became hated and despised
by the soldiers. Which hatred was increased by Roscius Coelius Legate of the
twentieth Legion, a man formerly of a cross seditious nature. The discord
between these two grew to such a height, Coelius objecting to the General his
defrauding the soldiers of their pay, and Trebellius charging Coelius with
sedition, and confounding the order of discipline, that most of the soldiers
both Roman and Auxiliaries siding with Coelius, Trebellius was forced, being
deserted of all, to fly to Vitellius then General to the Legions in Germany.

IV. CHAP.
IV. CHAP.
1. A particular description of the Superstition of ancient Britains.

2.3.4. Of their Priests, or Druids. 5.6. Of their Bards.

7.8. etc. Of their Idols, Belinus, Diana, Belatucadrus, etc.

11. Claudius the Emperor worshipped as a God. 12.13. etc. Their inhumain
Rites: forbidden by the Romans: 16. But not extirpated till Christianity came
in.

1. HItherto we have given a brief of the State of Brittany from the time of
its first discovery and conquest by Julius Caesar to the end of Nero the sixth
Roman Emperor and last of the family of the Caesar's. In which compass of time
occurs some, though not much matter to furnish our History. But before we
mention any particulars of it, it will be expedient to declare what was the
Religion of the ancient Britains, to the end that the horror of that
spiritual darkness which clowded this Island may give a greater luster to the
celestial light which through Gods infinite mercy began to shine here.

2. For this purpose consulting former Writers, we find that among the Ancient
Britains, and Gauls likewise, there were two sorts of people of greatest
authority, whose employment regarded their Religion: Those were 1. the Druids,
and 2. the Bards: the former were, as it were their Priests: the other their
Prophets.

Druids. Plin. Hist. nature. lib 16. cap. 44. Lucan. lib. 1. Caes. l. 6. de
^^ll. Gall. Isa. 1.29.
3. The Druids were so called, if we believe Pliny, from the Greek word (...),
which signifies an Oak: because, as Lucan and Caesar affirm, their dwelling
was in Groves, and there they performed their Superstitious ceremonies: a
practice of Idolatry anciently condemned in the Jews, and taught them by their
neighboring Heathens. But the signal Oak which the Druids made choice of for
their veneration, was such a one on which Misletoe did grow: by which privy
token, as they conceived, God marked it out, as of sovereign virtue for his
service. Under this tree on the sixth day of the Moon (whereon they began their
year) they invocated their Idols, and offered two white Bulls, filleted on the
horns, with many other ceremonies. To this Greek Etymology of the name of
Druids subscribe many learned Authors, as Beckmanus, Fungerus, Casau^on,
Camden* etc.

4. Notwithstanding the Advice of Strabo deserves well to be embraced, who
rejects the searching of Greek derivations, of appellations in use among
Barbarous Nations. And indeed it is strange that so learned a Writer as
Cambden, should herein follow Plinies conceit, since himself acknowledges that
an Ancient Writer Alfricus testifies that among the Saxons the word Dry (from
whence doubles the Druids were named) signifies a Magician: The Druids being to
the Britains the same that the Magi were to the Persians, Diog. Laert. in
Proem.
the Chaldeans to the Assyrians the Gymnosophists to the Indians, etc. as
Diogenes Laertius observes. No man certainly will doubt but that the name of
Druids proceeds from the same fountain from whence the Discipline came, Caesar.
Hist. Gall. lib. 6. Tacit. Ann l. 14. Plin. Hist. nature. lib. 30 c. 1.
and that, according to the testimony of Caesar and Tacitus, was invented in
Brittany, and from thence derived to other Nations: insomuch as Pliny conceives
that even the Persians themselves might seem to have learnt their Magic from
the Britains. The name of Druids therefore comes not from the Grecians but the
Britains, among whom never was mention made of any Grecian Colony: whereas
both the forementioned Writers attest that Caledonia, which is now called
Scotland, was anciently planted by the Germans, and that the Belga removed out
of the Northern parts of France into this Island.

5. Next the Druids, Bards. Ammian. Marc. lib. 15
the Bards were in high esteem: who were the Prophets, Poets and Historians to
the Britttains: For, says Ammian^us, Marcellinus, their office was to compose
in ^eroick verses the famous exploits of their Ancestors, which they sung to
the people to the delightful Music of their Harpes. And this confirms the
saying of Fes^us, that the word Bardus in the G^llick or Britti^h tongue
signifies a Singer: as to this day the Welsh call such an one a Bard. Now the
word Bard, a learned Modern Ph^lologer derives from the Ancient Teutonick term
Bardo or Wardo, Abr. Vandermyl. in Glos.
signifying to see or observe: so that they may seem to be called in the same
not on that the Prophets among the Jews were called Seers ((...).) Another
late Writer conceives the term Bard to come from the German Waerde, signifying
still with us a Word and a Song, as the Greek term (...) does: so that a Bard
is (...), a Song-maker. This was the chief employment of the Bards: though
besides this their task was likewise to conserve in memory the Genealogies and
Descents of families.

6. A great influence they had on the minds of the Britains to encourage them
to contemn death by making the argument of their Songs to be the Immortality
of the soul by transanimation, conceiving that the souls of dying men passed
afterward into other Bodies; being either preferred to better, or condemned to
worse, according to their former good or ill behavior. So that the esteemed
most happy Death, was to dye valiantly for their Country and Superstition.
These two Orders therefore of Druids and Bards were (as it were) the Ancient
Clergy of our Idolatrous Britains, the Inventers and Propagators of that which
they called Religion: the Dogme's and Rites whereof they never committed to
Writing, by which policy it became more venerable, because more Mysterious, to
the Vulgar.

Cambden. Godvvin.
7. It is certainly a great mistake in some learned Writers, who affirm that
the Druids did instruct the Ancient Britains in the knowledge and worship of
one only God: Gildas de Excid. Britan.
whereas Gildas the most ancient of our British Historiographers, relates that
they had (Portenta Diabolica pene numero Aegyptiaca vincentia) Idols of a
monstrous Diabolical figure and those in so great a number that they almost
exceeded the multitude even of the Egyptian Deities: whose Pictures remained
to his days drawn with deformed faces within and without the walls of their
decayed Cities.

8. The principal among the British Gods, at least those which remain upon
record, were 1. Belinus, by whom they meant Apollo o^ the Sun: 2. Diana, that
is, the Moon. And 3. Camulus, the God of war, answering to Mars: An
inscription to whose honor we mentioned before. From him Camalodunum (or
Maldon) received its name. 4. The name of Belinus seems derived from Baal or
Bell, the Deity soveraignly worshipped in Assyria and other Countries of the
East, and which signifies the Supreme Lord. Out of a special veneration to
this Deity as anciently the Eastern Princes took their names, as Belshazzar or
Balthazar, Ierubbaal, Meribbaal, and in other Countries Asdrubal, Hannibal,
etc. so in Brittany likewise Belenus or Belinus; which we find a part of the
names of King Cassibelin and Cynobelin.

9. And as for Diana, a particular proof of the great devotion born to her by
our Ancestors appears by a Monument near S. Paul's in London, Cambd. in
Middlesex.
called in old Records Diana's Chamber, where in the days of King Edward the
first, thousands of the heads of Oxen were dug up, which men skilled in
Antiquity well understood to be proper Sacrifices to Diana, whose great Temple
was built thereabout.

10. Besides these we find other Deities, perhaps of an inferior degree,
adored by the Britains. Thus an ancient Inscription me^tions a certain unknown
God called Belatucadru^, worshipped in the Northern parts about Yorkshire and
Cumberland. The name seems to import this to be some Offspring or of affinity
to Belinus. Moreover there is found another Goddess called Andate whose
special virtue and employment no man knows. Some learned Writers are of
opinion that this is the same with Adraste the Goddess of Revenge, Dio. lib.
62.
in vain invoked by Boudicea in her last battle against the Romans, as Dio
relates. It is further probable that the Gallick Deities, Hesus figured in the
shape of a Dog (like Anubis,) Taranis the God of Thunder, answering to Jupiter,
and Teutates, the Guide of travelers and inventer of Arts, like Mercury, were
adored likewise in Brittany, it being the fountain of Idolatrous Theology.

11. After the conquest made by Claudius, the Emperor, of the Southern parts
of this Island, Caractacus (by some Writers conceived to be the same with
Ar^iragus) in gratitude for his release from captivity and restitution to his
throne, introduced a new fashioned Religion into his Kingdom, consecrating an
Altar to the Emperors worship, Tacit. in Senec. de morte Claudij.
with this Inscription, The Altar of eternal Domination, which he placed in a
Temple at Camulodunum, erected to this Mortal Deity, whose Religious service
was every Month solemnly performed by Priests called Augus^ales, Pontic.
Virunn. lib. 4.
or Imperial Priests, peculiarly appointed thereto. And indeed it cannot be
denied but that Caractacus had far greater obligations to this his visible
Deity then to any of his Ancient false Gods. However, this vainly pretended
Prophetical Inscription proved unsuccesfull, for in his next Successors days
both the Temple and Religion were demolished by Queen Boudicea when she ruined
the Colony where it stood.

12. As touching the special Rites of the Ancient British Superstition,
Caesar. comment. lib. 6.
we find in Caesar that their Priests or Druids had the sole authority in
ordring both the Public and private Sacrifices: yea moreover that they
determined all both public and private Controversies. If any dispute happened
about possessions of Lands, if any facinorous Act, as murder or the like, had
been committed, the Druids appointed the punishment, as likewise rewards in
case of any honorable exploit. And their Decrees in all cases were so
indispensably obliging, that if any private person or community refused to
submit to them, the highest penalty could be inflicted was Excommunication, or
forbidding their presence at the Sacrifices. Which Censure, upon whomsoever it
was denounced, rendered them in the esteem of all men, as impious and detestable
wicked persons, whose conversation and presence all would avoid, as thinking
them contagious.

13. Mention was made before of their superstitious veneration of Mistletoe
growing on Oaks, which they esteem to be a special gift of God. A. D. 44.
The rite of gathering which is thus discribed by Pliny. Plin. Hist. Not. lib.
16. c. 44.
Having after diligent search found where the Misleto grows, they prepare
Sacrifices and Banquets, and two white Bulls they bring under the Tree, whose
horns they there first bind with fillets of linen. Then the Druid or Priest
clothed with a pure white garment mounts the Oak, and with a golden Sickle
reaps the Misleto, which is received into a white vestment. And this being done
they offer their Sacrifices, with Songs, as Ovid says, and Prayers that God
would make his Gift prosperous to them: For they ascribe great virtue to it,
imagining that by drinking it ^leep'd in water their barren cattle become
fruitful, and that it is a remedy against all poisons.

14. But these Rites argue only vanity and folly: others they had which were
barbarous and execrable. For as Tacitus relates, they made their Altars flow
with the blood of Captives taken in the war, Tacit.
yea for want of Captives they spared not their own brethren: and consulted
their Gods by searching into the entrails of men. Which custom of theirs is
thus described by Diodorus Siculus, When the Druids, Diod. Sic. l. 6.
says he, do consult about matters of great importance, they observe a
wonderful custom, and for the horriblenes of it incredible, which is this:
Having mortally wounded a man with a sword, they divine future events by the
manner of his fall, by the tearing of his members, and the flowing of his
blood. This skill they attained by long observation.

15. These more then inhumane Diabolical practices, which ought to have
rendered the Britains an object of hatred to all mankind, found nevertheless
not only excuse, but approbation from other Nations. Insomuch as our Barbarous
Contrymen were considered as persons of exemplary Devotion to their Gods,
yea as Masters and Doctors of sublime Mysteries, skillful in a hidden
Theology: so that their neighbors the Gauls, Celtes, etc. repaired to
Brittany as the Academy wherein a Religion was taught that had the virtue to
save men by murder, and honor God by destroying the perfectest of his
creatures. Yea even the Romans themselves, though otherwise trayn'd up in a
moral civility beyond other Nations, yet out of a pestilent curiosity
ingrafted in our corrupt nature, became many of them Disciples of the British
Druids, and practisers of these execrable Superstitions. Insomuch as the
Emperor Claudius was forced by rigorous Edicts to forbid the whole Religion of
these Druids. Augustus had formerly interdicted the exercise of it to his own
Citizens: But Claudius extirpated it not out of Italy only, but the whole
Nation of the Gauls. However his Laws extended not their force into Brittany,
for we find, as has heretofore been related, these Druids with their horrid
Superstitions in their Army in Anglesey (the peculiar school of that Religion)
when they fought against, and were subdued by Ostorius Scapula during the reign
of Nero, A. D. 46.
who succeed Claudius.

16. But what the Roman Emperors with all their authority could not, Almighty
God by degrees effected, sending a new celestial Light to dissipate the more
then Egyptian darkness wherein our Country had been involved. What special
servants and Ministers in those primitive times God employed to work so happy
and wonderful a change, it is now seasonable to declare, with as much
perspicuity as the subject will bear. For considering how in those holy times
men did busy themselves far more with leading devout lives, and exercising an
Apostolical charity to save their own and other men's souls, then with writing
Books, or raising Monuments to acquaint posterity with the history of their
actions: And moreover those few Writings and Monuments which were then extant,
afterward by strange revolutions of times, and almost total extirpation of the
Britains by Heathenish Saxons, etc. were lost and defaced, some few relics of
them remaining only in the memories of the Natives, and by a Traditionary
succession delivered and recorded by Writers of the following Ages: These
things considered, it is not to be expected that we should give an exact
Narration of matters so obscurely and imperfectly transmitted to us. However
since most of the Testimonies to be produced are drawn from Authors not
contemptible, many of them having no interest at all which might move them to
be inventers of fables, and without any gain to themselves, yea with danger to
their own souls to become seducers of posterity, the following History, even
of the most ancient, and therefore least clearly delivered affairs touching
the Primitive Christianity of our Island, may reasonably exact belief in the
Readers minds: especially considering that those Modern Writers among us, since
the late change of Religion, who voluntarily deride and contradict what shall
be here delivered, do not so much as pretend to any Monuments anciently
exhibiting a contrary Narration, but resolutly conclude that to be certainly
false, which cannot approve it self to be in all points and circumstances
evidently true. But their disbeleife can be no prejudice to any one who judges
by reason, and who will proportion the degree of his assent to the merits of
the proofs and allegations: the rather because it is manifest that those
deriders of our ancient Monuments are thereto incited by interest and
partiality, because by them they see their own Novelties discovered and
exploded.

V. CHAP.
1. Christian Religion very early entered into Brittany: even in the time of
Tiberius Emperor.

2. S. James is said to have preached in Brittany.

3 Saint Peter's coming from Antioch to Rome, a cause of the early spreading the
Gospel in Brittany.

4. Saint Leo's testimony concerning Gods design in bringing Saint Peter to
Rome.

6. The Captivity of King Caractacus another cause.

7.8. etc. Of Claudia Ruffina a Chri^stian Lady: married to Pudens a Roman
Senator.

11. Of Pomponia Gracina a Roman Lady, accused for Christianity.

12.13.14. Of Saint Mansuetus, a Disciple of Saint Peter, a Britain.

15. Of S. Beatus a Britain, a Disciple also of S. Peter.

1. THis our Island of Brittany, though called by the Romans another world, as
being divided from the whole then discovered habitable Earth, yet by the riches
of Divine mercy received the beams of the Sun of righteousness, before many
other Countries nearer approaching to the place where he first rose. Yet we
cannot hastily assent to our ancient Historiographer Gildas, who seems to
testify that immediately after our Saviors Ascension in the reign of the
Emperor Tiberius, the Gospel was published in this Island: His words are
these, In the mean time Christ that true Sun, from the supreme everlasting
Tower of Heaven, Gild. de Excid. Brit.
and not this visible firmament afforded his beams, that is, the knowledge of
his Precepts, to this Island stiff-frozen with cold, separated at a great
distance from the visible Sun: This, we know, he did toward the latter end of
the reign of Tiberius Caesar: at which time his Religion was freely and without
any impediment propagated to mankind. There is no doubt but that the Light of
the Gospel even in those days extended it self beyond the Confines of
Iudaea, and the Mystery formerly hidden, that all Gentiles without exception
might be admitted to the participation of Grace and salvation by our Lord Jesus
Christ, was then discovered to the Apostles, who, together with other
Disciples, did accordingly congregate several Churches among the Heathen
Idolaters: And that perhaps is all that Gildas intended in this passage,
signifying that many zealous Apostolical persons were then, as it were, in
their way to Brittany, whither in effect they arrived not till several years
after.

2. Again Flavius Dexter (if the Chronicle lately published under his name, be
indeed his) affirms that the Western parts of the world, and this Island by
name was within eight years after our Saviors Resurrection illustrated by the
Faith of the Gospel: For says he, In the one and fortieth year of Christ
(being the third of Caligula's reign) Saint James returning out of Spain
visited Gaul, Flav. Dext. ad Ann. D. 41.
Brittany and the Towns of the Venetians, where he preached the Gospel: and so
came back to Jerusalem to consult with the Blessed Virgin and Peter about
matters of very great weight and importance. And he is therein seconded by
Freculphus Lexoviensis, Frecul. tom. 2. l. 2. cap. 4.
who affirms that the same Apostle enlightened the people of Spain, and other
Regions of the West with the Beams of Christ's Gospel.

3. These Testimonies considered, without offering any violence to reason, a man
may believe that within the space of eight or nine years after our Saviors
Ascension the zeal of the Primitive Christians might have carried some of them
so as to make them Messengers even as far as to Brittany, of the blessed News
of Salvation, which was now to be preached indifferently to all Nations: though
who those, certainly most welcome persons, were, and what special effects
their preaching might have had, be now unknown. However during the reign of the
Emperor Claudius, who by his victory over the Britains opened more freely a
passage for strangers into this Island, there are extant more particular and
evident proofs, that Christianity entered here among us. For promoting of which
we may observe two great advantages: the first was the coming of S: Peter at
that time from Antioch to Rome: and the second was the leading captives thither
Caractacus a famous British King, with his Queen, Brethren, and, no doubt, a
great multitude of attendants.

4. As touching the former, the ancient Fathers (says Baronius) do generally
agree to what Eusebius (a Grecian Ecclesiastical Historian, not at all
partial for Rome) delivers in this passage of his Chronicle, Eusebius. Chron. An.
D. 44.
saying, In the second year of Claudius (which was the four and fortieth of
our Saviors Nativity) the Apostle S. Peter, having founded and settled the
Church of Antioch, went to Rome: where preaching the Gospel he continued
Bishop of that City the space of five and twenty years, that is, says S.
Hierom, till the last year of Nero. The particular affair obliging the
Apostle to that voyage, Hierom. de Script. Eccl. in Petro. Arnob c^nt. Gent.
lib. 2
as the same Father after Arnobius, etc. affirms, was the pursuing Simon Magus
the Prince of all blaspheming Heretics, against whom this Prince of the
Apostles was from the beginning matched in combat: whose impieties he
discovered, and by true miracles rendered ineffectuall the others Sorceries,
till in the end, during the reign of Nero, by his Prayers he dissipated the
fiery Chariot carried by Devils in the air into which the Magician was
mounted, and in the sight of all Rome tumbled him down, all broken, into a
precipice lower then the Earth it self.

5. But besides this, the Divine Providence had a more illustrious and
universal design in disposing this journey of S. Peter to Rome: whch cannot
better be expressed then in this discourse of S. Leo the Great his most worthy
Successor, whose words are these: When the twelve Apostles after having
received by the Holy Ghost the power of speaking all Tongues, Leo M. Sermon. 1.
^atal. A^postol.
had undertaken the Employment of communicating the Gospel to the whole world,
for which purpose they by common consent distributed the several parts of it
among themselves: The most blessed S. Peter, the Prince of the Apostolical
Order was designed to the principal Tower of the Roman Empire, to the end that
the light of Divine Truth, revealed for the salvation of all Nations, might
more efficaciously spread it self from the head to all the other members of
the Body. For what Nation was there, some of whose inhabitants were not at
Rome: or what Region could be ignorant of what passed in that City? Here the
opinions of humane Philosophy were to be trampled under foot: Here the vanities
of earthly wisdom were to be dissipared: Here the abominable worship of Devils
was to be confuted: here the impiety of all Sacrileges was to be destroyed: For
in this one City, by a most superstitious diligence was heaped together in one
mass whatsoever had been in any other parts of the world, instituted by the
vain errors of men. To this City therefore thou, O most blessed Apostle S.
Peter, wast not afraid to come, and having the Apostle S. Paul afterward a
companion of thy Glory, (who as yet was busied in the ordering of other
Churches) thou courageously entredst into this forest replenished with raging
beasts, and this Ocean, horrible both for its depth and tempestuousnes of its
waves: yet thou entredst it with a far greater resolution then when formerly at
our Lords command thou did walk upon the Sea: Neither did thou fear Rome
it self, Mistress of the world, who before in Caiphas his house wast frighted
by the Priests Maid servant: And yet was not the Emperor Claudius his power,
and Nero's cruelty far more formidable then Pilats Tribunal, or the Jews
violence? It was therefore a (new) Power of Divine Love in thy soul that was
victorious over all inducements to fear: neither did thou esteem any terror
could deserve to be apprehended, when thou were employed in procuring the
eternal salvation of those who were committed to thy Love. A. D. 46.
Thus S. Leo: and thus do many other Fathers expound the Economy of Divine
Wisdom in sendig S. Peter to Rome: Many effects of whose Pastoral solicitude
in sending from that Metropolis of the world into all other Western Regions
diligent laborers in Gods Vineyard, and some particularly into Brittany, we
shall presently mention from the authority of ancient Records.

6. A second not inefficacious Expedient furthering the effusion of
Evangelicall Light into Brittany was, as has been said, the captivity of the
British King Caractacus and his family, whose magnanimous behavior there,
together with the Emperor Claudius his favorable treating, and, as it is
believed, restoring him to his Principality, we have already related out of
Tacitus.

7. Among other attendants of this Captive Prince, ancient Ecclesiastical
Monu^ments celebrate the memory of Claudia Ruffina, a British Virgin, and, as
learned Writers probably judge, one of the Daughters of King Caractacus, who by
her virtue and Christian Piety, being a Disciple of S. Peter, became a more
illustrious Ornament to our Country, then Caractacus was by his heroical
magnanimity. She seems to have received a change of her British name into
Claudia, from the Emperor whose captive she was, for such was the Roman
custom: to which was added Ruffina, from her husband Rufus. Martial. l. 4.
Epigr. 13. and lib. 11. Epigr. ^4.
This is the same Claudia Ruffina which the Poet Martial afterward so highly
commended for her illustrious birth, beauty and exquisite perfection both in
the Grecian and Roman literature, expressly declaring that she was a Britain.
This the Epigrammatist writes in a short Epithalamium composed upon her
marriage with Pudens a Roman Senator.

8. Now who this Pudens was, is not evident in Antiquity. Several learned
Writers of our own Nation, and some Externs likewise, do confidently pronounce
that this was that famous Senator Aulus Pudens concerning whom Baronius thus
writes, Baron. in No^. ad Martyrol.
It is delivered by a firm Tradition of Antiquity that the house of Pudens at
Rome was the place of the first entertainment of S. Peter Prince of the
Apostles: and that there new converted Christians began their assemblies to
celebrate Divine Mysteries: Which house was erected into a Church, by the most
ancient Title of Pudens. The Church it self yet remains. wherein is extant
this antique Inscription, In this holy and most ancient Church dedicated by the
Holy Pope Pius, by the Title of Pastor, heretofore the house of Saint Pudens a
Senator, and the Hospice of the Holy Apostles, there rest the bodies of three
thousand Martyrs, which the Holy Virgins of Christ, Pudentiana and Praxedes,
buried with their own hands.

9. If this was the same Pudens mentioned by Martial as husband to our Claudia
Ruffina, our Country has yet greater reason to glory in the title we have to
her. And that he was the same, that passage of S. Paul's second Epistle to
Timothy affords a not contemptible proof, where among the salutations sent to
Timothy from Rome, the Apostle in the same short verse joins together Pudens
and Claudia, 2. Tim. 4.21
saying, Eubulus and Pudens and Linus and Claudia, and all the Brethren salute
thee. Notwithstanding it cannot be denied, but that the difficulties opposed to
this are considerable: because that Pudens who first entertained S. Peter, and
was the happy father of four illustrious Saints, Saint Timotheus, Saint
Novatus, Saint Pudentiana and Saint Praxedes, has in ancient Ecclesiastical
Monuments, a wife of another name assigned to him, namely Priscilla:
Notwithstanding this being the name of Pudens his Mother, it is not unprobable
that Claudia in succeeding times might for her husbands sake assume his Mothers
name. However matters in this point stood, it can not be denied that our
Country has a great Obligation to a late Noble and Learned Writer, Francis
Moncaeus Lord of a Signory called the Cold Valley, Fr. Moncaeus.
who has published a Discourse full of ancient literature entitled, Ecclesiae
Christianae veteris Britannicae incunabula Regia: in which he confidently
pretends out of Antiquity to demonstrate this our Claudia Ruffina to have
descended from the Royal blood of Brittany, and to have been the Wife and
Mother of Saints far more glorious. And moreover this one proof hereto may be
added, that our Ancient Histories report that Timotheus the eldest son of
Pudens came into Brittany, Na^cler. in Legend. S. Timoth.
where he conver^ted very many to the Faith, and at least disposed King Lucius
to his succeeding Conversion. Now it is very likely that it was out of regard
to his Mother a British Lady, that this Apostolical Saint made so particular
a choice of Brittany, to be the Province in which he desired to exercise his
Christian zeal and charity.

10. It only remains to be spoken of this Claudia Ruffina what we find in the
Martyrologe of England* upon the seventh of August, where we read these words,
A Commemoration of S. Claudia, Martyrol. Anglic. 7. Aug.
a British woman, who was carried to Rome during the Reign of the Emperor
Claudius, and afterward in the year of our Lord one hundred and ten, dyell at
Sabinum a City of Vmbria..

11. It is an ambition scarce excusable, upon groundless suspicions to lay
claim to Saints and Patrons, as some modern writers would entitle the Wife of
Plautius, who in Claudius his time (as has been said) triumphed for Victories
over Brittany, to an Apostolical office of converting many in this Island when
she was here with her Husband. Her name was Pomponia Graecina: and according to
Tacitus his relation, ^he was accused of a strange Religion (externae
Superstitionis) forbidden by the Roman Laws: Tacit. Annal. l. 13.
the cognizance of which pretended crime was by the Senate permitted to her
husband, who according to an ancient Institut in force at Rome, in the presence
of her kindred sat as Judge of the fame and life of his Lady, and in
conclusion pronounced her innocent. This Account given of her by Tacitus has
induced learned Writers to believe that this extern Superstition laid to
Pomponia Graecina's Charge was no other then the Profession of the Christian
Faith, the fruits of which in her practice being perfect humility, obedience,
chastity and all other celestial virtues, it is no wonder that her husband
should so easily absolve her. But that she should be a companion of Plautius
when he was sent General into Brittany, was against the Roman Laws and Custom,
as the same Tacitus elsewhere declares. ^acit. Annal. l. 3.
Probable it is that staying at Rome, in regard of her husbands authority in
Brittany, she might be visited by Claudia Ruffina, and other new converted
Britains, and by such means be made partaker of Evangelicall light, and become
a Disciple of S. Peter.

12. But a more unquestionable Disciple of S. Peter we find in ancient
Ecclesiastical Monuments, by birth a Britain, by name Mansuetus, and by
office an Apostolical converter and Patron to the City of Toul in Lorrain,
being the Metropolis of a people called Leuci. ^sengren. ^ent. 1. par. 1. did.
3. A. Mirman. in ^hea^r. conf.
Concerning whom Isengrenius, as likewise Arnoldus Mirmannus out of old Records
gives this Testimony, that he was by Nation a Scot, born of a Noble family, a
Disciple of Simon Bariona (that is, S. Peter) Chief of the Apostles, companion
of S. Clement Bishop of Metz, and consecrated by S. Peter the first Bishop of
Toul, a City of the Leuci, in the forty ninth year of Christ, and in the
reign of Tiberius Claudius Caesar.

13. Now whereas he is called a Scot, this is to be understood, as King Lucius
in Ancient Records is called a King of England, that is, of that Country which
was afterward called England: For as Mr. Cambden well observes after most
diligent disquisition, the name of Scots is not to be found in any Ancient
Writer till the Age of Constantin the Great, about which time they are supposed
to have settled themselves in the Northern parts of Brittany. So that it may
confidently be affirmed that S. Mansuetus was a Northern Caledonian Britain,
who either in the company of Adminius a British Prince, or Bericus a Noble man
of the same Country, or as an Attendant of Caractacus went to Rome, where he
was converted by S. Peter, and as has been said, designed by him the
Apostolical Bishop of Toul, probably at the request of some Proselytes of that
Country.

14. A yet more authentic Testimony both of the life and death of this Holy
Bishop is extant in the ancient Gallican Martyrologe on the third of September,
where we read this passage: Martyrol. Gall. ad 3. September.
At Toul a City of the Leuci, there is on this day a commemoration of S.
Mansuetus a Bishop: who was of Noble birth, by Original a Scot, and one of the
first Disciples of S. Peter: by whom being baptized, he divested himself of his
former Heathenish name, and assumed the Title of Mansuetus (or Meek) from the
Meeknes of the Lamb of God, which he imitated: He by the same S. Peter was sent
to enlighten this City with Evangelicall verities. At his first entrance
whereinto, he found it so wholly given up to abominable Idolatry, that his
preaching and exhortations would have produced little fruit, had not Divine
power promoted his endea^vours by a wonderful Miracle: by whose assistance
this Preacher of salvation restored to life and health a son of the Governor
of this City, who from a high Tower beholding certain horsetroops exercising
themselves, fell down to the ground all bruised and torn. Upon occasion of this
Miracle the Governor with his whole family and a great number of the Citizens
joined themselves to the flock of Christ, and were signed with the saving
Character of Baptism. After which the word of God had a free course, and great
multitudes, not only of the Inhabitants of this City, but also of the Country
adjoining were established in the knowledge of salvation. Thus S. Mansuetus
enjoying a firm peace, erected and consecrated a Church to the Holy Trinity,
under the Patronage of S. Steven the first Martyr. He likewise ordained here
Ecclesiastical Ministers, and having instructed the people generally in the
knowledge and practice of all manner of Piety, in the fortieth year after he
had begun the exercise of his Apostolical Office he quietly closed his eyes in
the sleep of death, A. D. 89.
and so attained to the fruition of eternal rewards with Christ, whom he
always only thirsted after.

15. A third holy British Disciple, though not Convert, of S. Peter's
Antiquity records, to wit, one both in Title and reality Beatus (or Blessed.
Mers^^s l. de Sanctis. Guilleman. lib. 1. rerum Helve^. c. 15. Pa^^al. de vir.
illustr. p. 1.
) Of this Saint mention is made by several Writers, some of them averse from
Catholic Religion: Yet none of them speak of him without admiration. The sum
of his Acts recorded by them is, as follows. He became a Christian in
Brittany, converted by some unknown Primitive Beleiver. Before his Conversion
his name was Suetonius, being born of noble parents. Out of Brittany he under
took a voyage to Rome, moved thereto by other devout Christians, to be
instructed more perfectly in the holy Faith by the Blessed Apostle S. Peter: by
whom being baptized, as a testimony of his present happiness, and hopes of a
future accomplishment of it, he was called Beatus. After he was sufficiently
instructed, he was esteemed worthy to be employed in the Apostolical office of
instructing others. In his return toward his Country passing through Helvetia
(now called Suizzerland) he neglected not to disperse the good seed with which
he had been furnished at Rome, A. D. 60.
and perceiving that very many in that Country cheerfully embraced the true
Faith, he rested there, pursuing his journey no further. Thus he became the
Apostle of the Helvetians, illustrious for his Piety, holiness and miracles. In
his declining age, having distributed all his substance to the poor, he
retired himself to the exercises of a contemplative life, choosing for his
habitation nere a village called Vrbigenum, (Vnderseven) a Grotte, in a
Mountain, out of which with the sign of the Cross he expelled a dangerous and
cruel serpent. It is not certain in what place he dyed. Bed. Martyrol. 9 Maij
Martyrol. R^man. 9. Maij.
S. Bid makes only this mention of him, At Rome is the commemoration of S.
Beatus a Confessor, on the ninth of May. But the Roman Martyrologe thus, In
the Town Vindecinum (or Vendosme) is celebrated the deposition of S. Beatus a
Confessor. But the Ecclesiastical Writers of Germany, the Annals of the
Helvetians and Monuments of the Church of Constantia do unanimously agree that
he dyed in his solitude near Vnderseven in Helvetia in the hundred and tenth
year of our Lord, A. D. 110.
when the Emperor Traian reigned.

VI. CHAP. VI. CHAP.

1. Testimonies of S. Peter's preaching in Brittany.

2. Proved by the Catal^gue of the Provinces of the several Apostles.

3. And by the testimony of Pope Innocentius the first.

4. S. Paul said to have preached in Brittany.

5.6.7. Simon Zelotes reported by Nicephorus to have preached in Britta^ny: but
disproved by C. Baronius.

8.9. The time of S. Peter's coming in to this Island, uncertain: as likewise
his Gests.

1. IT was no doubt a great mercy which God extended to this our Island that he
was pleased so early to enlighten it with his Divine Truth, A. D. 60.
and moreover to transform its barbarous inhabitants into Apostles and
Messengers of salvation to other Countries also: But a far greater blessing yet
did God bestow on it by directing hither his Apostle, him who was the Prime of
the whole order, S. Peter himself, whose access to this Island is attested by
Ancient Monuments, and by Writers who had no interest at all to induce them to
partiality. Those who formerly had preached the Gospel here were persons
though of great holiness and zeal, A. D. 60.
yet such as for want of an Apostolical and Episcopal Character could only
preach unto and baptize those with whom they conversed: But wheresoever any of
the Apostles themselves came, or persons sufficiently qualified by them, they
provided for posterity also: The former could only beget children, but the
other could beget both children and Fathers, establishing in the places where
they preached a constant order and Government, which might last to the worlds
end.

2. When the Apostles before their separation divided by lot among themselves
the several Regions of the world, Nic^ph. hist. lib. 1. cap. 1.
the West became the portion of Saint Peter, as Eusebius quoted by Metaphrastes
testifies, saying, S. Peter spent twelve years in the East, Metaphrast. 29.
Iun.
and twenty he passed at Rome, in Brittany and other cities in the West. Which
passage though it be not extant in any Books of Eusebius now remaining, this
does not prejudice the validity of this authority, since as S. Hierom writes in
his Catalogue, Hierom. in Catal.
Eusebius published an infinite number of volumes, and among others an
Universal History, together with an Epitome of it, several Books likewise of
Martyrs, and other works. Of which a great number are by the injury of time
perished. And in some of those we may and ought reasonably to judge that those
words were found, rather then to imagine that such a Writer as Simeon would
voluntarily feign such things from his own brain, since he had no interest in
the glory of Brittany, and besides was one who for his Sanctity is venerated in
the Greek Church.

Id. Ibid.
3. The same Author out of ancient Monuments adds furcher, S. Peter (says he)
out of the East came to Rome: from whence he went to Millan, and Photice, which
are Cities in the continent. In which places having constituted Bishops and
Priests, he passed into Brittany: In which Island having made a long abode, and
converted to the Faith of Christ several Nations of unknown names, he had a
Vision of Angels, which said to him, Peter, the time of thy dissolution is at
hand, and it is necessary that thou go to Rome, where thou must suffer the
death of the Cross, and so receive the reward of righteousness. Having received
this Revelation he glorified God, giving thanks for the same, and continuing
certain days among the Britains, during which he enlightened many more with
the word of Grace, having constituted Churches, and ordained Bishops, Priests
and Deacons, in the twelfth year of the Emperor Nero he returned to Rome. To
this revelation made to him in Brittany the Apostle has regard in his second
Epistle, 2. Pet. 1.14.
saying, I know that shortly I must put off my Tabernacle, even as our Lord
Jesus Christ has showed me.

4. Hereto we may add an important testimony of S. Innocent the first Pope of
that name, who writing to Decentius Bishop of Eugubium has this passage, Who
can be ignorant, or not observe that that which has been delivered to the
Roman Church by Peter Prince of the Apostles, Innocent. P. Epist. ad Decen^.
and is there observed to this day, ought to be obediently kept by all, and
that nothing ought to be introduced or super-added by any which does not come
from the same authority, or seems to be practiced in imitation of any other?
Especially since it is manifest that through all Italy, Gauls, Spain, Africa
and Sicily, as likewise the interiacent Islands, none ever instituted any
Churches, but only such as the Venerable Apostle S. Peter or his Successors
did ordain Priests (and Bishops.) If any would contradict this, let them
produce Records testifying that any other of the Apostles can be found or heard
to have taught in those Provinces. Therefore if no such Records can be produced,
they must be obliged to submitt to the observation of that which the Roman
Church teaches and practices, from which without doubt they received their
Original: This they must do, least while* they affect strange observances,
they may seem to divide from the Head of Ecclesiastical Institutions.

5. This positive Assertion of so ancient, learned and Holy a Pope, to wit,
that none of the Apostles besides S. Peter, and his successors, did constitute
any Churches in the West, may seem to receive an attaint from that which S.
Paul says, his intention was to preach the Gospel in Spain, which that he did
effectually execute, the ancient Tradition of that country, together with the
assertions of several Authors do testify: And most certain it is that he
taught many years in Rome: yea there are not wanting ancient Monuments
witnessing that he came into Brittany likewise, teaching and ordaining here.

6. Notwithstanding if we consider the extraordinary condition of S. Paul's
Apostleship, we will see that nothing here alleged will prejudice the
forecited testimony of S. Innocentius: For S. Paul being a Supernumerary
Apostle adjoined to the twelve, had no special Province assignd to him, but
was at liberty to exercise his office through all Provinces, yet so as that he
left not any particular Church denominated from him: for though he was in a
particular manner Bishop of Rome, yet the Chair of Rome was always called by
Posterity the Chair of S. Peter only, and all the Churches constituted in the
West, even where S. Paul preached, yet regarded S. Peter as their Head and
chief Patriark.

7. Therefore though Nicephorus relates that Brittany was the lot of Simon
Zelotes, and the Greek Menology adds that he was here crucified by Infidells,
Baron.
yet saich Baronius, this they affirm without any testimony of the Ancients: A.
D. 44.
who witness that this Simon the Cananite preached the Gospel in Mesopotamia,
and from thence went into Persia, where he received Martyrdom. So that the
Greek Menology, and Nicephorus seem to have transcribed that passage out of an
Apocryphal Author, Dorotheus.

8. S. Innocentius his testimony therefore remains untouched, That the whole
Western part of the world was S. Peter's peculiar Province: This he says is
manifest: and the same is confirmed by the consent of many Provinces and
kingdoms. Several Roman Bishops his Successors likewise do expressly attest
the same, and particularly as touching our Britain Churches. Vid. Malmesb^^. l
3. d^ Pontif. Chor.
To this purpose Pope John the fifth, almost a thousand years since, writing to
Ethelred and Alfred Saxon Princes here, says, We do rejoice hearing of the
increase of your Religion through the cooperation of Divine Grace, and
perceiving the fervor of your Faith: Which Faith you first received by the
preaching of the Prince of the Apostles, God graciously illuminating your
minds, and the same Faith you still effectually hold fast. The same has
generally been acknowledged by our British and Saxon, Kings: Hence Kenulphus,
King of the Mercians in the year of Grace seven hundred ninety Six, Baron.
Ann. D. 769.
writing to Pope Leo the third says, From the same root that the Apostolic
dignity was derived to thee, the truth of Christian Faith came likewise to us.
Therefore we think it expedient humbly to incline our ear and obedience to thy
holy commands, and with our utmost endeavor to execute what soever thy Piety
shall think fit to enioyn us. Yea King James himself did not doubt in a
public Audience to affirm, that Rome was the Mother of all Churches: And
again, That if a contestation were once more renewed between the East and West
about the Prerogative of place and Seat, he would stand for Rome and the West.
Lastly hereto we may add S. Peter's own testimony in a Vision happening in the
days of S. Edward the Confessor, wherein himself professed that he had
preached the Gospel in Brittany.

9. Now in what particular year it was that S. Peter left Rome, and passing
through several Provinces came at last into Brittany, it is not easy
positively to affirm. Whether he left Rome upon the Emperor Claudius his Edict
banishing all Jews from thence, or afterward in the beginning of Nero's reign,
as Baronius inclines to believe, is doubtful. But that he was absent thence
when S. Paul wrote his Epistle to the Romans, seems unquestionable, since S.
Peter is omitted in the Catalogue of his salutations.

10. The particular Acts of S. Peter during his long abode in Brittany, though
in those days illustrious, are now swallowed up in the darkness of oblivion:
all ancient Monuments of this Nation by so many revolutions having been
consumed. Certain it is that a far freer scope was allowd for the publishing of
Divine Verities in Brittany then almost any other part of the Western World,
because Nero's persecution of Christianity did not extend hither, so that this
Island was a Sanctuary for all those who either to avoid the cruelty of
Magistrates, or to find an opportunity of a quiet solitude for Contemplation,
would repair hither. And this may be attributed, partly to the limited power
of the Romans here; likewise to the Clemency and Civility of the British
Princes then living, particularly taken notice of by historians, and lastly to
the great distance of this Country from the other parts of the Empire. Such
advantages had Truth and Piety to settle themselves here in Brittany, more then
in any other place: and a proof most remarkable hereof we have in the quiet
uninterrupted Solitude of Glastonbury, where, within a few years after this,
was erected the first School of Contemplation, which continued the glorious
habitation of a world of Saints in all Ages from the beginning of Christianity
till almost our unhappy times.

VII. CHAP. VII. CHAPTER

1. etc. Further Testimonies of S Peter and S. Paul's preaching in Brittany,
from Isengrenius and some ancient Fathers.

1. ISengrenius a learned Chronologist mentioning the affairs of Brittany in
his first Century, I^^ngren. cent. 1. p 7. did. 8.
and in the year of our Lord Sixty five, fitly expressed them thus: the
exaltation of the British Church under Nero: adding withal, that many
Churches were built through this Island by S. Peter, the prime of the Apostles.

2. Indeed Gods good Providence so disposed for our good, A. D. 67.
that Nero, the most abominable Emperor, yea person, that ever lived, though
he was a plague and malediction to Rome, Italy, Greece and most other
Provinces, yet was an occasion of wonderful blessings to Brittany: For a
tedious impatience to see his horrible actions almost forced S. Paul also to
quit Rome, and disperse the precious seed of the Gospel among other Western
nations even as far as Brittany. This is attested by witnesses of great
antiquity and authority, and seems agreeable to the design of the Holy Ghost
when by his command S. Paul and Barnabas were separated unto him for the work
unto which he had called them: Act. 13. 2. ^. 47.
Which was to carry the light of the Gospel to the utmost ends of the earth.

3. Now that S. Paul, the Doctor of the Gentiles, made good that title even to
the Britains, we find acknowledged by Protestant Writers also, with an
intention thereby to exclude S. Peter. But how inconsequently they argue, has
been already declared: and the Britains themselves though anciently they gave
to both these prime Apostles a most high veneration, yet they never called their
Church the seat of S. Paul, but only S. Peter. Hence our ancient Historian and
Satyrist Gildas in veighing sharply against the dissolutnes of the British
Clergy in his time, Gildas in Clerum.
says that many of them did usurp the Chair of S. Peter with defiled feet:
thereby showing that the whole Ecclesiastical Order here did receive their
Original and Priest hood with a right of succession from S. Peter, the
Ordinary Supreme Pastor in a special regard of the Western parts of the
world, and who likewise prevented S. Paul's coming hither several years.

4. Particular Witnesses in Antiquity of S. Paul's preaching the Gospel in this
Island are Theodoret, S. Hierome and others. The former of these Writing on the
hundred and sixteenth Psalm, says, Blessed S. Paul briefly teaches us to what
Nations he had preached saving Truth, Theodoret. in Psalm. 116.
saying, From Jerusalem round about unto Illyricum he filled all nations with
the Gospel of Christ. And after this he came into Italy, and continued his
journey even to Spain: Moreover he brought salvation to the Islands also lying
in the Sea. Hieron. in Isa.
S. Hierom likewise mentioning the travells of S. Paul says, He went (out of
the East) as far as Spain: and from the Red sea, that is, the Southern Ocean to
the Western Ocean. But more expressly Venantius Fortunatus in his Poem of the
life of S. Martin, speaking of S. Paul, Ven. Fortunat. de vit. S. Mart.
says, He passed the Ocean, and through all Regions and accessible Islands,
those which are inhabited by the Britains and the utmost Thule, his Trumpet
proclaimed the Gospel.

5. For this reason our English Martyrologe does deservedly reckon S. Paul
among the Apostles of Brittany, in that regard professing a particular
acknowledgment and veneration to him.

VIII. CHAPTER
VIII. CHAP.
1.2. etc. Testimonies of the Acts of S. Aristobulus a Disciple of S. Peter,
and an Apostle to the Britains.

1. THere is moreover still extant in Ecclesiastical Records the Memory of an
illustrious Disciple of S. Peter or S. Paul, who probably accompanied one of
them into Brittany, and who after many years labor in our Lords vineyard was
consummated here: and that is the Blessed Apostolical Saint Aristobulus.
Concerning whom we read this passage in the Greek Menology: Aristobulus was one
of the Seaventy Disciples, who was a follower of S. Paul, Menolog Graec. 15.
Martij.
preaching the Gospel, and ministering to him in all places where he traveled:
By whom likewise he was ordaind a Bishop for the Region of the Britains. But
in another Edition of the same Menology, translated formerly by one William a
Cardinal, and inserted by Canisius in his second Volume of Antiquities, we read
that this S. Aristobulus was ordained not by S. Paul, Menol. Graec. ubi supra.
but S. Barnabas: for this is the tenor of that Passage: The commemoration of
S. Aristobulus a Bishop of Brittany, and Brother of the Blessed Apostle S.
Barnabas, by whom being ordained a Bishop he was sent into Brittany, and there
preaching the Faith of Christ, and constituting a Church, he attaind the glory
of Martyrdom.

2. Moreover a Fragment published lately by B. Usher under the name of Haleca
B. of Caesar Augusta (Sarragoce) S. Aristobulus is declared to be the Disciple
of S. Peter: Vsser. Antiq. Brit. fol. 9*
These are the words, Among the Britains is celebrated the Memory of many
Martyrs, and principally of S. Aristobulus one of the seaventy Disciples, who
was also called Zebedaeus, the Father of James and John, Husband of Maria
Salome: who together with S. Peter went to Rome: And there leaving his family,
he was sent a Bishop into England, where he dyed a Martyr, in the second year
of the reign of the most cruel Emperor Nero.

3. Now whereas S. Aristobulus is every where named Bishop of the Britains,
without any particular City assigned for his Sea^, this does argue that in
those times of zeal and simplicity, Apostolical men did not confine
themselves to any determinate place, but like clouds hoverd up and down, being
in a sort present to all, and dispensing showers seasonably every where. Thus
S. Augustine our Apostle, at first was ordaind Bishop of the English Nation, as Bede calls him, till more Provinces being converted, Bed. hist. l. 1. c. 27.
he confind himself to a particular Seat.

4. Arnoldus Mirmannus, A. Mirman.
with other Authors likewise, extend the life of this British Apostle to the
ninety ninth year of our Lord: affirming that he dyed in Brittany. And whereas
both in the Greek Menology, and the Fragment of Haleca, as likewise in the
Roman Martyrologe he is said, Martyr. Romans 15. Mart.
after performing the course of his preaching to have been consummated by
Martyrdom: this is to be interpreted according to the expression of the
Primitive times, in which those were called Martyrs, who for the propagation of
the Gospel went into foreign parts, there exp^^^ng themselves to all dangers,
and dying in such an Employment: though their death was not violent.

5. And such was the condition of S. Aristobulus, concerning whom this is
further added in the Greek Menology: Menol. Graec. ubi supra.
Aristobulus having been ordained Bishop by S. Paul, was sent into Brittany, a
region of most cruel and savage men: By whom he was sometimes tormented with
stripes, and sometimes also dragged up and down the common Marketplace. He
persuaded many to adioyn themselves to Christ. And having constituted Churches,
and ordaind Priests and Deacons there, he happily ended his life.

6. In the English Martyrologe this is added, That he dyed at Glastonbury, a
place far enough removed from the Trinobantes, Mart. Angl. 15. Mart.
where the Romans exercised their power. Probable it is, that having spent so
many years in the laborious exercise of his Apostolic Office, he in his old
age retired himself into that place of solitude and Recollection, there quietly
disposing himself for his leaving the world. This was indeed a practice very
familiar to like Saints. For thus in the following Age Fugatius and Damianus
sent hither by Pope Eleutherius to convert King Lucius and his subjects,
retired at last to the same place. And afterward the like was done by S.
Patrick, who being a Native of Brittany, after having spent many years in
propagating the Gospel in Ireland, at last returned back, and took up his
final rest at Glastenbury.

7. This is that Aristobulus mentioned by S. Paul in his Epistle to the Romans,
saying, Salute those which are of the household of Aristobulus. Romans 16.10.
And the reason why he did not salute him by name, doubtless was the same for
which he omitted the saluting of S. Peter: because he was at this time departed
from Rome into, or toward Brittany.

8. Thus far did the Gospel make a progress in Brittany in the very infancy
of Christianity before the death of S. Peter and S. Paul, as may be gathered
out of the few Relics of Ecclesiastical Records not wholly extinguished. A
great access to which felicity of this Island accrew'd by the coming hither of
S. Joseph of Arimathea and his companions: which though happening toward the end
of Nero's reign, yet because most of the occurents pertaining to their Gests
belong to the times of several Emperors succeeding, we will refer them to the
following Book: And for the present it will suffice that we have demonstrated
that some of the Apostles penetrated as far as into Brittany to plant the
Gospel here. Vsser. in Primord. fol. 1053. Theodor. G^aecar. affect. lib. 9.
A Truth testified expressly by Theodoret, as B. Usher has well observed: For
he comparing the Apostles of Christ with the most famous of the Grecian and
Roman Lawgivers, shows how much they were to be preferred. For all that those
Heathen Lawgivers could do was to induce some particular Provinces or
Commonweales to accept of their Laws, which all other Countries rejected:
Whereas, says he, our Galilaean fishermen, Publicans and Tent makers carried
the Evangelicall Law to all Nations: inducing not the Romans only, or those
which lived under their Empire to accept the Laws of our crucified Lord, but
the Scythians also, and Sarmatians, Indians, Ethiopians and Persians, together
with the Seres, Hyrcanians, Britains, Cimmerians and Germans. And this they
did not making use of arms or armies, but by persuasion of w^rds, and
demonstrating the great utility of the Laws which they preached: and for the
preaching of them exposed themselves to great danger.

Finis Libri primi.
THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CHVRCH-HISTORY OF BRITTANY.
I. CHAP.
1.2. S. Joseph of Arimathea and his Companions principal Apostles of Brittany.

3.4.5. etc. This confirmed out of Authentic Records by English Ambassadors
in the Councils of Pisa, Siena and Constance, etc.

9. Likewise by an Ancient Charter of King Henry the second.

1. UPON that precious foundation of Faith and Piety which had been laid by the
Holy Apostles in Brittany, their Disciples and Successors raised up a Temple
to our Lord, a Temple though of no such amplitude as we find in the following
age, yet not so unconsiderable, but that the fame thereof reached into foreign
Countries, as Arnobius who wrote above thirteen hundred years since, Arnob.
lib. 2. cont. Gent. Tertull. Apol.
and Tertullian likewise observe.

2. Now the most eminent of the Primitive Disciples, and who contributed most
to this heavenly building, was S. Joseph of Arimathea, and eleaven of his
companions with him, among whom is reckoned his Son, of his own name. These
toward the latter end of Nero's reign, and before S. Peter and S. Paul were
consummated by a glorious Martyrdom, are by the Testimony of ancient Records
said to have entered this Island, as a place for the retirednes of it, the
benignity of the British Princes, and the freedom from Roman Tyranny, more
opportune, and better prepared for entertaining the Gospel of Peace, then
almost any Country under the Romans.

3. But before we enquire into the occasion of the arrival of these Sons of
Light, or relate any of their particular Gests, the prejudice which in these
later times has possessed many minds against Tradition, obliges me in
preparation to the History following, firmly to assert this Truth in general;
that such Apostolical persons did indeed by their zeal and industry cultivate
this barbarous Island, and this with better success then perhaps any other
Nation addicted to Idolatry.

4. Now a more efficacious Proof hereof cannot reasonably be desired then the
testimony of a person eminently conversant in our Ecclesiastical Monuments,
and whose aversion from the Roman Church will clear him from all suspicion of
partiality: And this is the late Protestant Archbishop of Armagh, Doctor
Usher, who in a Collection of Antiquities regarding the Primitive Churches of
Brittany, treating of this very argument has this passage: 5. Vsser. de
Primord. Eccl. Britt. page 22.
We must not omit to take notice that in the General Synods assembled by our
Europaans, whenever the Controversy was agitated touching the dignity and
preeminence of the British Kingdom in opposition to the French and Spaniards,
A. D. 63.
the Orators of the English Nation did usually appeal to this Tradition
concerning S. Joseph of Arimathea. This question was discussed first in the
year one thousand four hundred and nine in the Council of Pisa: and again
eight years after in the Council of Constance: out of which there is an
extract of a most famous Disputation concerning the dignity and magnitude of
the Kingdoms of Brittany and France, between the Ambassadors of both in the
Council; which was printed at Lovain in the year one thousand five hundred
and seaventeen. The said Extract taken out of Original Acts of that Council,
and preserved in the City of Constance, was published by the care of Sir
Robert Wingfeild Knight and Ambassador from King Henry the eighth to the
Emperor Maximilian: and which is still extant in two Manuscripts of the same
Council. It was in the thirtieth Session that this Question was moved, Whether
it be agreeable to reason and justice that the Kingdom of England should enjoy
equal Privileges with that of France? And for the dignity of the English
Church, it was among other things alleged, that presently after the suffering
of our Savior, Joseph of Arimathea an honorable Counselor, who took down
from the Cross Christ's body, together with twelve companions, betimes in the
morning entered into our Lords Vineyard, to wit, England, and converted the
inhabitants to the Faith: To whom the King then reigning assigned for their
sustenance twelve Hides of Land in the Diocese of Bath: All which twelve
Preachers, as ancient Records witness, were buried in the Monastery of
Glastenbury, situate in the same Diocese. And with those twelve Hides of Land
before mentioned, the said Monastery was anciently endowed and founded. This was
alleged by the English Orators for their Kingdom: Whereas France received
not the Faith till the time of S. Dionysius, by whose Ministry it was
converted.

Alph. Garzias.
6. Likewise in the Council of Siena, in the year one thousand four hundred
twenty four, the same Allegations were proposed by Richard Fleming Bishop of
Lincoln, and founder of Lincoln-Colledge in Oxford, when this Controversy was
renewed by the English in the presence of Pope Martin the fifth, against the
Spaniards, Scots and French. But principally in the Council of Basile, in the
year one thousand four hundred thirty four, this contention came to great heat.
For then the Ambassadors of the King of England, as well in the public
Council before the Bishops, a^ in the Congregation deputed for Reformation,
protested that they were to be preferred by reason of their more ancient
reception of the Christian Faith: for they affirmed, that the Noble Counselor
Joseph of Arimathea together with others, in the fifteenth year after the
Assumption of the glorious Virgin Mary came into England, and converted a great
part of it to the Faith of Christ. And no long time after the Passion of our
Lord Pope Eleutherius converted the whole Kingdom entirely to the Faith. This
account gives Alphonsus Garzias who was Advocat for the right of Spain in that
Council.



7. And though he endeavors to enervate the reasons alleged by the English
Orators, yet his objections are so weak, that they rather establish them. For
all that he opposes to the story of S. Joseph is an old trifling Legend
reporting, that when Titus entered Jerusalem, he saw a certain very thick wall,
which he commanded to be peirced through: and within they found a certain old
man who called himself Joseph of Arimathea, and said that he was closed up
there by the Jews, because he had buried Christ: and that till that time he had
been nourished with heavenly food.

8. But common reason will show how little force such a particular ungrounded
story ought to have against the Tradition of a whole Nation: Vsser. ib page 25.
Therefore the English Orators in opposition hereto gave full assurance that
in our most Ancient Books and Archives, especially in the Records of the most
famous Abbey of Glastonbury, it is expressly declared that Joseph with his
companions, being persecuted either by Herod or the Roman President, were
brought into this Island: where he preached the things which he had seen and
heard of Christ, and by his preaching converted many. who being converted
bestowed on him a world of rich gifts: all which he left to the Church erected
by him in the honor of Christ. The which Church built by S. Joseph was
afterward transferred into a Religious Monastery and Abbatiall dignity: and by
that famous Monastery the praises of our Lord have been continued to that
present day.

9. Thus publicly, and with so great Authority was this Tradition concerning
S. Ioseph's preaching and converting the Britains, confirmed in several
General Councils. And more particularly as touching the Ancient Records
testifying the Truth of this story, we find them with great advantage mentioned
in an illustrious Charter extant to this day, Vid. Harpsfeld. in saec. 1 cap. 2.
which was given by our King Henry the second at westminster to the Abbay of
Glastonbury: In which Charter the said King signifying his intention to rebuild
that Monastery not long before consumed by fire: And to renew all the
Privileges conferred on it by his Predecessors, King william the first, and
second, and his Grandfather King Henry the first: as likewise by more Ancient
Kings, S. Edgar the Father of S. Edward, King Edmond and his Father Edward, and
his Grandfather King Alfred, King Bringwalth, Hentwyn, Baldred, Ina, the famous
King Arthur, Candred, and many other Christian Kings: yea, moreover by
Kenewalla in former times a Pagan King of Brittany: For this purpose he affirms
that he caused a diligent inquisition to be made of the said Privileges and
Charters, which were presented and read in his presence: all which he confirmed
and rene'wd to the same Church anciently called by some the Mother of Saints,
and by others the Tomb of Saints: because it had been built by the very
immediate Disciples of our Lord, and in the beginning dedicated by our Lord
himself, as Venerable Antiquity does testify. This testimony is given by King
Henry the Second in his said Charter. All which considered, to deny so great a
blessing conferd on our Nation, as the arrival here of S. Joseph, can only be
an act of passion and unexcusable partiality.

II. CHAP.
II. CHAP.
1.2.3. The time and occasion of S. Joseph's coming into Brittany not cleared by
ancient Writers.

4.5.6. Bishop Godwins mistake, wrongfully grounded on Freculphus.

7. The Holy Graal, an old senceles Legend.

1. HAd it not been for that visible lasting Monument of Glastonbury, perhaps
posterity had never been acquainted with the name of so illustrious a Patron of
our Nation as S. Joseph, since no Books of that Age, if any were written, are
now extant, and the wonderful changes in the very constitution of this Island,
by a succession of several new Nations, would problably extinguish all ancient
Traditions.

2. These things considered, it will be difficult to give any rational or
satisfactory Account of the precise time and occasion of S. Joseph's arrival in
Brittany: and much less of the particular Acts of himself and his companions,
during the space of so many years as intervened between their first coming and
deaths.

3. Those Modern Writers which have most studiously searchd into Antiquity, and
with greatest candor and sincerity rejected several fabulous inventions of
some of our Authors who wrote not many Ages since, do agree that S. Joseph
first entered Brittany in the reign of Nero, when Suctonius Paulinus was Pret^r
here: at which time great opportunity was afforded for such a Voyage, by reason
of several Troops and companies of soldiers sent out of Gaul to reinforce
the Roman Army, as likewise the coming hither of Nero's freed servant and
favorite Policletus with a great retinue, etc.

4. But what particular occasion or Motive might induce S. Joseph to undertake
such a journey and employment, is altogether uncertain. Our late Protestant
Historians to exclude any relation, dependence or obligation that our Country
might have to S. Peter, are willing it should be believed that he was
commissiond from S. Philip the Apostle, then preaching in Gaul. Godvvin in
Convers. Brit.
To this effect Doctor Godwin late Bishop of Hereford writes thus; Freculphus
Lexoviensis, says he, gives the reason why S. Joseph passed over into
Brittany. For when S. Philip the Apostle (or, as others rather think, the
Evangelist, for the Acts of these two are much confounded and mingled in
history) preached the Gospel in Gaul, he had much con^estat on with the
Druids, the chief Doctors of whose superstition lived in Brittany. Therefore
being informed that our Island was by a very narrow sea divided from the
continent of Gaul, he thought it very expedient to send hither twelve
Preachers, the Chief and President of which was S. Joseph, who in the sixty
third year of Christ began their employment of converting the Britains. Thus
writes the Bishop, pretending Freculphus for his warrant.

5. Where as Freculphus treating of S. Philip neither mentions S. Joseph nor the
Druid's, Freculphus.
nor Brittany: all that he writes being only this, S. Philip preached Christ
to the Gauls: and moreover brought to the light of knowledge and secure Haven
of Faith certain barbarous Nations, neighboring to darkness, and joined to them
by the swelling Ocean. Afterward in Hierapolis a City of Phrygia he suffered
death by crucifying and stoning. This passage Freculpus extraited out of
Isidor, and consequently it is to be interpreted according to Isidors mind, who
by the Gauls (or Galatae) understood that Nation then inhabiting Asia, not
Europe: and by the barbarous Nations neighboring to ( Northern) darkness, the
Scythians, divided from the Galatians by the Euxin Sea. Besides, according to
the consent of Antiquity S. Philips Martyrdom happened many years before the time
mentioned by the Bishop.

6. Let the Apostles name therefore, who sent S. Joseph and his companions into
Brittany, remain in obscurity to Protestants: though the forecited Text of S.
Innocent first Pope of that name expressly affims that none converted any of
these Western and Northern Nations but only S. Peter or his Successors, or
such as were delegated by them. His coming cannot be questiond, nor that he
came with the authority of a Spiritual Pastor and Apostolic Preacher.

7. As for his six hundred companions which a senceles Legend upon the
authority of a more senceles old Book called the Holy Graal, says came along
with him, some men and some women: as l^kewise the arrival of a certain Prince
of Media called Nacianus, whom S. Joseph had formerly baptized in a City
called Saram, and who was sent by our Lord with an army to deliver S. Joseph
out of prison, into which a wicked King of Northwales had cast him: which King
is said to be mentiond in a Book found by the Emperor Theodosius in Pilats
palace at Jerusalem: Such foolish dreams as these, as they are not with out
scorn to be recited, so neither ought they to be made use of for the disgracing
or discrediting sober History prudently grounded on Tradition.

III. CHAPTER
III. CHAP.
1. S. Joseph first addresses himself to the British King.

2.3. etc. The Kings name was Arviragus: whether he and Caractacus were the
same person.

7. He is said to be the Founder of the University of Oxford, by the advice of
Olenus Calenus, an Hetrurian Augur.

1. THis Tradition informs us that S. Joseph at his first abord in the Western
parts of this Island with his companions, assumed the confidence to repair to
the British Kings presence reigning there: to whom he gave an account of the
design of his journey, which was to bring the happy news, and to offer the
only assured means of eternal happiness to all that would embrace it. It is not
to be doubted but this Message gravely and modestly delivered by one filled
with the spirit of God, and also of a venerable presence, one that renounced
all worldly designs of power or riches, Professor of a Religion sufficiently
recommended in that it deserved the hatred of Nero, a Prince then infamous
beyond any ever mentioned in former Histories, such a message, I say, could not
but at least be hearkened to without displeasure, if not with favor, at least
by such a King as this is described by our ancient Annals.

2. His name was Arviragus: (the same no doubt who in an ancient coin is called
Arivog:) but from what Ancestors he was descended, is not clearly enough
reported in History: Alford, from Plorileg.
Certain Modern Writers will needs make him the same with Caractacus before
spoken of, supposed likewise by them to be the same with Cogidunus the youngest
son of Cunobelin: from whom also they are willing to deduce King Lucius in a
direct line, who reigned in the following Age: By which art they indeed give
some grace to their Histories, by a distinct sorting of actions and occurrents
to the precise years of Kings then supposed to reign in this Island.

3. It cannot truly be denied but that the Character given by Historians to
Caractacus and Arviragus is very much agreeing in resemblance: For as
Caractacus is described by Tacitus and Dio to be a Prince of great courage,
magnanimity and Beneficence, and moreover a friend to the Romans: so likewise
is Arviragus represented by others. For thus does a Writer learned in Antiquity
describe him: Pitsius de Scriptor. in Arvirago.
Arviragus, says he, was well acquainted with those arts which adorn and
dispose the mind to humanity. Neither did he alone himself love learning, but
was also a singular favourer of those who were learned, etc. He was valiant and
courageous in war, mild and clement in peace. He was in his conversation
affable and cheerfully pleasant, liberal in bestowing gifts, and always most
dear to his subjects.

4. But the resemblance of their Characters is not a proof sufficient to render
their persons one and the same, unless we must be obliged to believe that
Brittany was a soil too barren to produce more then one brave and commendable
Prince. And there are in ancient Records several grounds of more then a
suspicion that they were distinct Kings, reigning in several parts of this
Island, and in several times also.

5. It cannot be denied that in Brittany there were very many petty Kings and
Princes, independent of one another, some of them subject to the Romans, and
others free. In Caesar's time there were in Kent no fewer then three. As for
Cynobelin and his family, their Dominions, for ought appears, were confind to
the Trinobantes, that is Essex and Middlesex, whereas Arviragus reigned in the
Western parts upon the Confines of the Belgae, in the Provinces of Dorsetshire
and Somersetshire: Which argues that he was of a different race.

6. But moreover this King Arviragus seems to have reigned much later then
Caractacus, who after his captivity by the Emperor Claudius is supposed to
have been sent back to his Kingdom, though no Roman Writers speak of his
restitution. Whereas the Roman Satyrist mentions Arviragus as a Prince of great
renown in the days of Domitian, the seventh Emperor after Claudius: ^^venal
Sat.
and as an enemy very formidable to the Romans, which certainly Caractacus
never was: For upon occasion of an enormously great fish, a Mullet, presented
to Domitian, he brings in, a flatterer making that Present an Omen of some
great conquest to follow, Thou shall take captive some great King, says he, or
the famous Arviragus shall be ^umbled down from his British chariot, etc. By
which expression it seems more then probable that Arviragus, though bred up in
the Roman civility and literature, yet upon advantage of the great factions
succeeding in the Empire after Nero's death, shook off his chains, and
renounced his dependence on the Romans. Certain it is, so great and famous a
King he was, that without any wrong to Caractacus he might be mistaken for him.

7. Among other illustrious Monuments of his affection to literature, and
munificence for promoting it, this is recorded, that he was the Founder of the
famous University of Oxford: For thus writes a modern learned Author: Pits.
de Scriptern. Academ. Oxon.
It is the opinion of some that in the seaventieth year after the Nativity of
our Lord the City of Oxford was built, during the reign of King Arviragus. And
that then there came into Brittany a certain Hetrurian Prophet, or Augur, named
Olenus Calenus, concerning whom Pliny in his natural History Writes: and that
this man laid the foundations, Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 28.
yea and perfected the building of it, from his own name calling it Calena:
which name was continued to it till the entrance of the Saxons into Brittany:
after which is was called Oxenford.

IV. CHAP.
IV. CHAP.
1. etc. Arviragus, though not converted, affords to S. Joseph, etc the Isle of
Glastonbury for a place of retreat: and twelve Hydes of Land for their
nourishment.

1. TO this renowned King Arviragus S. Joseph and his Companions addressed
themselves, and expounded their Message. The success hereof was, though not a
Conversion of the King himself, yet a free leave to publish their Doctrine
among his Subjects. And herein we ought withtrembling to adore the most holy,
but with all most secret judgments of God. It is probable that there could not
be found a mind in all this Island at that time better disposed, as far as
nature and human education could dispose a soul, for the entertaining of
Saving Truch, then in King Arviragus: Yet though by his kindness to the
Professors of it, he tacitly showed his approbation thereof, he did not receive
from heaven the Gift of Divine Faith to submitt thereto: So unhappily prevalent
is worldly Power and Riches against the Spirit of Christianity, which teaches
Humility and a contempt of such transitory vanities.

2. The King not content only to give permission to these Apostolic Preachers
to convert and save his subjects, was pleased moreover to extend his liberality
to them so far as to afford them a place of retreat, commodious for their quiet
and holy Devotions, and sufficient for their sustenance, that so without
distraction and solicitude they might attend to the worship of the true God,
and the instruction of all those that were willing to seek it. Yet we cannot
without injury to the zeal and charity of these our Primitive Fathers imagine
that they were willing to spare their labor and travells to make Christ known
to many which enquired not after him. No doubt they behaved themselves as all
other holy Missioners did in those days, through all places (...) to fly from
the wrath to come: and made use of that Retreat, allowd them by (...) King,
only as a place of repose after they had been spent with toyling in Gods
harvest, in which place being separated from worldly conversation they might
purify themselves before their deaths, that so they might be admitted into Gods
presence to receive the Crown of all their labors.

3. The Seat assignd by King Arviragus to S. Joseph and his Companions was an
Island, rude and uncultivated, called by the Britons for the color of it
Iniswytrin, that is, the glassy Island, compassed by the River Bry, and
situated in Somersetshire. In succeeding time being cleard from briars, draynd
and cultiuated, it was by the inhabitants named Avallonia, for the plenty of
apples and other fruit growing there. But in after ages when the Saxons had
possessed themselves of those parts they resumed the former Title and called it
in their own language Glaston or Glascon, whence the famous Monastery of
Glastonbury, begun after a homely fashion by S. Joseph, but in future times
with a prodigious magnificence enlarged, took its name.

4. In the same place there was by King Arviragus and his Son Marius allotted a
certain proportion of ground for the nourishment of these twelve strangers,
containing, according to their ancient measure, twelve Hydes of Land. Now this
term Hyde is by our Writers sometime called a Manse (Mansa, Manentium) sometime
a Family: by others it is called a Plough, containing as much as one Plough and
Oxen could cultivate in one year, or as could nourish a small Family. And
within this proportion seems to have been contained a certain fenny, but rich
piece of ground which the Saxons afterward called Godney, Cambden in Somerset.
that is, Gods Island, as being the first portion of ground which in the
Christian Church was consecrated to Gods service.

V. CHAP. V. CHAP.

1. S. Joseph at Glastonbury build's a Church.

2.3.4. etc. This confirmed by ancient Testimonies, as an Epistle of S.
Patrick, here produced.

11.12. Observations from that Epistle.

13, 14. An Objection answered.

1. THe first thing that our New blessed Inhabitants did in their new
Habitation was to build and consecrate to the worship of the only true God a
Temple or Church, in which so great was the fervor and piety of our Primitive
Christians, that is was deservedly called the Mother of Saints.

2. This Church erected by S. Joseph, moved thereto by Divine Revelation, as
our Ancient Records testify, was also dedicated to the honor of the most
blessed Virgin Mary: and moreover was immediately consecrated by our Lord
himself. Of these things the Testimonies are so ancient and of such authority,
that several Protestant Writers refuse not their assent to them. We will here
produce the attestation of Authors and Monuments, which cannot reasonably be
excepted against.

3. The first is of S. Patrick, the so illustrious Apostle of Ireland. He after
many years Labors spent in his Apostolical Office there, thirsting after a
quiet retired life of Contemplation, in the year four hundred thirty nine
returning into his native Country Brittany, made choice of Glastonbury, a then
famous school of Sanctity, for his abode, where he spent his last thirty years
in Prayers, Fasting, Watching and all other Penitential austerities. Now
having by Tradition been informed that in that place many Primitive Saints had
been enterr'd, desirous to find out and honor their Relics, he caused the
ground to be broken in several places, and thought fit to give an account to
posterity of what he found there: This he did in Writing, preserved hitherto
with great care, and approved not only by ancient and modern Catholic
Authors, but by learned Protestants also. The tenor of it is as follows:
Antiquit. Glaston. A. D. 430.
4. In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. I Patrick the poor humble servant of
God in the four hundred twenty fifth year of the Incarnation of our Lord being
sent by the most holy Pope Celestin into Ireland, by the assistance of divine
Grace I converted the Irish people to the way of Truth. And having established
them in the Catholic Faith, I at last am returned into Brittany: where as I
believe, by a special conduct of God, who is the life and the way, I arrived
at the Island Ynswitrin: Where I found a holy ancient place chosen and
sanctified by God to the honor of the immaculate Virgin Mary the Mother of
God. There also I met with certain Brethren of holy Conversation, instructed in
the rudiments of Catholic Faith, who were the Successors of the Disciples of
the holy Saints Phaganus and Diruvianus, whose names, considering the merits of
their lives, I assuredly believe are written in heaven. And because the Just
shall be had in perpetual memory, out of the tender affection which I bore to
the said Brethren, I resolved to commemorate their Names in this my Writing:
the which are Brumban, Hiregaan, Bremwal, Wentreth, Bantomeweny, Adelwolred,
Loyot, Wellias, Breden, Swelwes, Hinloernus, and another called Hin. These being
born of Noble parentage, and desirous to adorn their Nobility with works of
Christian Faith, made choice of an Eremiticall life. And because I found them
of humble and quiet spirits, I chose rather to live with them as an abject in
the worlds esteem, then to dwell in Courts of Princes. Moreover being all of us
of one heart and one soul, we thought it best for us to live, eat and drink in
Community, and to sleep in the same habitation: and thus, though much against
my will they would needs make me their Superior, who was not worthy to untye
the latchets of their shoes.

5. Whilst we thus lead a Monastical life together according to the Rules of
Ancient approved Fathers, the foresaid Brethren showed me certain Writings of S.
Phaganus and Diruvianus, wherein was declared that twelve Disciples of the Holy
Apostles Philip and Jacob built the said ancient Church to the honor of the
foresaid Blessed Virgin, by the appointment of the blessed Archangel Gabriel*
And moreover that our Lord himself from heaven dedicated the said Church to
the honor of his Mother: as likewise that three Pagan Kings (to wit,
Arviragus, Marius and Coellus) bestowed upon them twelve portions of Land. I
found also in other Writings of a later date, that the holy Saints Phaganus and
Diruvianus obtained of Eleutherius, who sent them into Brittany, thirty years
of Indulgence: As I my self likewise obtained from Pope Celestin of pious
memory, twelve years.

6. A long time after this, being accompanied with my Brother Wellias, we with
great difficulty ascended to the top of a Mountain situated in the said Island:
And being come thither, we found an Oratory very ancient, and almost wholly
ruined: which yet seemed to me very commodious, and chosen of God, for the
exercise of Christian devetion: Into which being entered, we were refreshed with
so wonderfully sweet a savor, that we thought our selves in Paradise. After
this we went out and returned again into the Oratory, searching with great
diligence all places: and at last we found a Volume of a Book in which were
written the Acts of the Apostles, together with the Gests of Saint Phaganus and
S. Diruvianus: which volume was much perished. Notwithstanding at the end
thereof we found a Writing, which imported how the foresaid S. Phaganus and
Diruvianus, being thereto moved by a revelation of our Lord Jesus Christ, had
built the said Oratory to the honor of S. Michael the Archangel: to the end
that he in that place should receive honor from men, who by Gods command was
to lead men into everlasting and heavenly honors. Being much delighted with
this writing, we endeavored to read it to the very conclusion: and there we
found that those venerable Saints Phaganus and Diruvianus had remained in the
said place the space of nine years, and had obtained thirty years of Indulgence
for all faithful Christians who with a pious affection should visit that place
in honor of Saint Michael.

7. Having found so rich a Treasure of the Divine goodness, I and my Brother
Wellias spent three months in fasting, prayers and watching, and obtained a
power over Devils and wild beast. And on a certain night being asleep there
appeared to me our Lord Jesus, in a vision saying to me, My servant Patrick,
know that I have chosen this place for the Honor of my Name, and that men here
may reverently invoke the assistance of my Archangel Michael. And this shall be
a sign to thee and thy Brethren, to the end they may yield belief to what I
have told thee: Thy lef^ arm shall be withered, till thou have declare^ the
Vision to thy Brethren which dwell in the Cells below, and shall return hither
again: And so it came to pass.

8. From that time forward we appointe^ that two Brethren should reside in that
place for ever: except succeeding Prelates in future time should for some just
reason ordain otherwise.

9. This present Writing I committed to the custody of my two Brethren Arnalph
and Ogma^ who were Irishmen, and came with me out of that Country: This I did,
because upon my ex^hortation they were content humbly to remain in the said
Oratory. Another Copy of it I laid up in the Chest of the Blessed Virgin Mary,
for a monument to posterity. I Brother Patrick also with the advice of my
Brethren do grant a hundred days of Indulgence to all those who out of a pious
intention shall with Axes and other in^struments clear the passages of the
foresaid Mountain on all sides from bushes and trees, that devout Christians
may have a freer entrance piously to visit the Church of the most Blessed and
ever Virgin Mary, and the foresaid Oratory.



10. This is the Epistle or Writing left by S. Patrick as a Monument of the
goodness of God toward this our Nation so early in the very beginning of
Christianity. Some part of which Epistle is quoted almost three hundred years
since by Capgravius in the life of S. Patrick: And it is entirely extant i^ the
famous Library of Sir John Cotton, in two several Manuscripts, one of the
Antiquities of William of Malmsbury; and another of a Monk called John, who
made extrait out of the same William, and a certain Writer called Adam
Domerham. And concerning this Epistle thus writes Gerardus Vossiu^, Voss. de
Hist. lat. vid. M. Biblio^hec. (...). 5. p. 3. sol. 793. vid. Cambden. Britan.
in Glaston^. Somerset.
This Epistle of the Legation of S. Patrick we found some years since amongst
the Manuscript Collections of Marianus Victorius Bishop of Reate of pious
memory, who faithfully transcribed (...) out of a very ancient Manuscript
belonging to Glastonbury, many years before, when he atten^ded Cardinal Pole
sent Legate into England. In which Epistle some passages are very agreeable to
Protestant Writers: and others very offensive.

11. It pleases them much to read that S. Joseph and his companions were
Disciples of the Apostles S. Philip and Jacob: because that may quit them of
any special obligation to S. Peter. But they may consider that though these
Saints were indeed Disciples of those holy Apostles, adhering to them in their
peregrinations, yet it will not follow thence that they received a Mission from
them to plant the Gospel in Brittany. Since it is apparent by an unquestioned
Tradition of both the Eastern and Western Churches, that those two Apostles
suffered Martyrdom several years before their coming into this Island: so that
if they were sent by any Apostles hither, it could be done only by S. Peter or
S. Paul, to whom the Western Empire owes the blessing of Christian Doctrine, as
S. Innocent, before mentioned, testifies.

12. But whereas in this Epistle mention is made of a power of conferring
Indulgences for a certain number of years, granted by S. Eleutherius Pope to S.
Phaganus and Diruvianus* and by S. Celestin Pope to S. Patrick, this much
offends some of our Modern-Protestant Controvertists. Notwithstanding it is
certain that the Church has a power to dispense and relaxe the severity of
Ecclesiastical Censures: Which Power though in some inferior degree residing
in every Bishop, yet by a tacit consent seems by a more extended Privilege to
be devolved on the Supreme Pastor, who may communicate that Power on others,
in whose Piety and prudence he may place some confidence.

13. A late Pr^testant Historian imagins he has an objection unanswerable
against this Epistle and the authenticknes of it, D. Fuller. Ob.
taken from the Names of such solitary Monks as Saint Patrick affirms that he
found there: several of which, says he, seem to be German or Saxon, and not
British names, and consequently improperly assigned to times so ancient, and
so many ages anticipating the arrival of the Saxons here.

14. But, Sol.
in case it be granted that any of these Names be properly German, it is well
known that several Belgic Gauls of a German extraction peopled a great part
of our Island, and since they gave the Names and Titles to many of our
Provinces, it needs not to be esteemed a wonder if they left to posterity some
Names likewise o^ their persons.

VI. CHAP. VI. CHAP.

1.2.3 Saint Joseph's building a Church at Glastonbury confirmed by S. David,
and a Miracle.

1. A Second Witness of the Sanctity of this Mother Church of Christianity built
by S. Joseph at Glastonbury in honor of our Blessed Lady, as likewise of the
wonderful Privilege conferred on it by our Lord himself, who was pleased
personally to consecrate it, is the Illustrious Bishop of Menevia, S. David,
the extirpatour of Pelagianism in Brittany. His testimony is extant in the
Antiquities of Glastonbury collected by William of Malmsbury, in these words:
2. Saint David with seven other Bishops, of whom he was Primate, Antiquit.
Glaston.
came to Glastonbury, invited thereto by the Sanctity of the place; place: and
had a resolution solemnly to consecrate an ancient Church there erected to the
honor of the Blessed Virgin Mother of our Lord. Having therefore provided all
things requisite for the performance of that sacred Ceremony; on the night
immediately preceding the intended Dedication he, as nature required, yielded to
sleep: in which our Lord Jesus appeard to him, and mildly demanded of him the
cause of his coming thither. This without delay S. David declared unto him: But
our Lord presently turned him from his resolution of dedicating the Church,
saying to him, That must not be done. And taking the Bishops hand, he told him,
that many years since he himself had dedicated it to the honor of his Mother:
therefore that holy Ceremony ought not to be profaned by any man's repeating it.
And having said this, with his finger he peirced through the Bishops hand:
Telling him that this should be a sign that that ought not to be again renewed,
which himself had formerly anticipated: And withal he promised him that the
next day when in reciting the Canon of the Mass he was to pronounce those
Words [ Per ipsum, and cum ipso and in ipsum By him and with him and to him be
all honor and glory to thee, O God the Father, in the Unity of the Holy
Ghost,] he should have restord the integrity and soundnes of his hand. The
terror of this Vision quickly drove sleep from the Bishops eyes: whereupon
with great earnestnes he examined whether that were indeed real which our Lord
seemed to have done to him: And having found it so, he wondered at it, and
expected what would be the issue. The next day all that were present with
admiration saw and touched the prodig^ous wound. Hereupon all the Preparation
for a ^onsecration came to nothing: and the miracle divinely wrought being made
known publicly to all the Hearers, increased the admiration. And in
conclusion, when Mass was celebrated the Bishops hand was restord to its
former soundnes.



3. This miracle is not forgotten nor contemned even by some Protestant
Writers: though in repeating it, they willingly omit the name of Mass, which
having banished from their own Churches, they are loath it should appear of so
great Antiquity, and which is more considerable, dignified by our Lords
mentioning it, and working a wonderful miracle during the celebration of it.

VII. CHAP
VII. CHAP.
1.2. A third witness is our H. Apostle S. Augustine the Monk. The fashion and
homelines of that Church.

1. A Third Witness of equal authority, though later date, is S. Augustine the
Apostle of our Nation, who in an Epistle to S. Gregory the Great mentions the
sum of what has been hitherto related, as a Tradition received in those
days. A part of this Epistle is recited by three Protestant Bishops, as a firm
argument of the Primitive antiquity of Christian Religion in our Island.
Antiquit. Br. God vvin in Catalog. Episcop. Ang. Vsserij Primord. Eccles.
Britann.
The words of S. Augustine are these: In the confines of western Brittany there
is a Royal Island, by an ancient Name called Glascon: It is largely extended,
being encompassed with waters abounding with fish, and rivers in many places
standing in pooles, commodious for many uses of human life, and (which is most
considerable) it has been dedicated to the exercises of Sacred Duties. For
there the first Professors of Christian Religion found (as the report is) a
Church not built by the skill of men, but prepared by God an^ fitted for human
salvation. The which Church was afterward by many miracles, and many mysterious
operations demonstrated to have been consecrated by our Lord the Creator of
the world, to his own glory, and the honor of his most Blessed Mother the
Virgin Mary. To this Church was afterward added an Oratory built of stone,
which was dedicated to Christ and his holy Apostle S. Peter.

2. And hereto agrees that which we read in the life of S. Joseph: ^p. Capgrav.
in vita S. Iosephi.
The foresaid Saints conversing together in that Solitude, after a little time
were admonished in a Vision by the holy Archangel Gabriel, to build unto the
honor of the holy Mother of God and perpetual Virgin Mary, a Church, in a
place showed from heaven to them. Whereupon they in obedience to those Divine
admonitions finished the building of a Chapel, the walls whereof on all sides
were made of rods warled or interwoven. This was done in the one and thirtieth
year after the Passion of our Lord, and in the fifteenth after the Assumption
of the glorious Virgin Mary. Here we may see, says D. Fuller, D. Fuller.
the simplicity of Primitive Devotion, and the native fashion of British
buildings in that age, and some hundred years after. For we find that Hoel Dha
King of Wales An. D. 940. made himself a Palace of Hurdleworke called Tyguyn,
or the White house, because to advance it above other houses, the rods, whereof
it was made, were unbark'd, having the rind stripped off: Which was then counted
gay and glorious. This homely building however, suiting with the simplicity of
the builders souls, did deserve, and was indeed preferred in the veneration of
all succeeding times, before the magnificent structures of squared stones and
marble, adorned and enriched with gold and precious stones, which in following
ages by the Devotion, though perhaps mixed with some vanity of less perfect
Christians, were splendidly erected.

VIII. CHAPTER
VIII. CHAP.
1.2. A fourth Testimony of ehe Building a Church at Glastonbury by S. Joseph,
from an Ancient Inscription at Glastonbury, here produced.

3.4. etc. Sir Henry Spelmans Exceptions against that Inscription, answered.

1. THe last Testimony justifying most of the particulars before mentioned
touching this Primitive Church built by S. Joseph of Arimathea is taken from a
very ancient Inscription cut in brass, and heretofore fastened to a Pillar in
Glastonbury Church. Which Inscription Bishop Godwin therefore rehearses that he
may demonstrate that S. Joseph indeed came into Brittany: and after him Sir
Henry Spelman caused it to be entirely transcribed, and put into his Collection
of our British and English Councills. The tenor of it is as follows: 2. In
the one and thirtieth year after the Passion of our Lord twelve Holy men,
Spelman Council. Britan.
among whom Joseph of Arimathea was Chief, came to this place: and here built
the first Church of this Kingdom: Which Christ, in the honor of his Mother,
himself dedicated, together with a place for their burial: as S. David Bishop
of Menevia testified, who having an intention to consecrate it, our Lord
appearing in a vision by night to him, forbad him: And moreover for a sign that
our Lord himself had formerly dedicated the Church together with the
Churchyard, he with his finger bored through the Bishops hand, which was next
day seen by many persons so peirced. Afterward the same Bishop by Divine
Revelation, and upon occasion of the increasing number of Holy persons there,
added a Chapel to the East Side of this Church, and consecrated it in honor
of the Blessed Virgin: the Altar of which he adorned with a Saphir of
inestimable value, for a perpetual Memory hereof. And least the place or
quantity of the former Church by such Additions should come to be forgotten,
this Pillar was erected in a line drawn by the two Eastern angles of the said
Church southward, which line divides the foresaid Chapel from it. Now the
Length of it from the said line toward the West was sixty feet, the Breadth
twenty six: And the distance of the Center of the said Pillar from the middle
point between the foresaid angles contained forty eight feet.



3. This ancient Inscription carefully recorded by Sir Henry Spelman in his
Collection of Councils, is notwithstanding censured by him as a thing borrowd
from fabulous Legends: by which he condemn's his own superfluous curiosity to
preserve it. And whereas he endeavors by several reasons to make good his
Censure, they being prudently examined will appear insufficient.

4. For first of all he doubts whether any Christian Churches at all were
erected so early. Ob.
And indeed if by Churches he means such magnificent Structures as were made
when the Christian Faith ceased to be persecuted, Sol.
it is certain there were formerly no such. But that there were even at Rome it
self places assigned for the meeting of Christians to exercise the Duties and
Rites of their Religion, this is attested by all Ecclesiastical Histories.

5. Again he positively affirms that if there were any Churches, Ob.
yet that they were not encompassed with ground for burial: no mention
occurring of any such before the time of S. Cuthbert: and the Roman laws
forbidding burial within Cities. But the former allegation is a manifest
mistake: Sol.
for long before S. Cuthberts days, King Ethelbert our first Converted King,
and S. Augustine our first Apostle were buried in the Church of S. Peter and S.
Paul: And Constantin the first Christian Emperor was buried among the Relics
and and bones of the Apostles and Martyrs. Hereupon S. Augustine and S. Maximus
Taurinensis show that it was usually the desire of ancient Christians to join
their Sepulchers to those of Saints and Martyrs, Aug. lib. de cura pro mart cap
18: Maxim. Tour. Homil. d. Martyr.
as expecting great security to their souls thereby. And as for the old Roman
Law forbidding burial within Cities, it was long before this antiquated. And
however, Glastonbury in those days was far from being a City, or even a
Village: it was rather a mere desert and solitude. Therefore without any breach
of the Roman Law, our Lord might provide for S. Joseph a place of burial, who
had before lent him his own Sepulcher.

6. But besid's this, Ob.
he excepts against the Rite of Consecrating Churches mentioned in this
Inscription, which he thinks to be of a far later date. Sol.
And no doubt many ceremonies and solemnities were by the Church added to that
Rite in following Ages: But that generally the houses in which Christians in
the Primitive times met for the exercise of their Religion were by some
Ceremonies dedicated to that use, as by Erecting a Title, fixing a Cross etc,
the most ancient Records of the Church do testify.

7. Lastly that which most displeases Sir Henry Spelman is the Dedication of
this Church to the Honor of the Blessed Virgin: Abb.
a Devotion he thinks not in use till several ages following. Sol.
Notwithstanding, that even in this very age this was not the only Example of
such a Veneration exhibited to the most Holy Virgin Mother of our Lord, the
ancient Churches of Spain will assure us, which by a Tradition universally
received among them, attested in all their Liturgies and several of their
Councils, relate that there were even from the first entrance of Christianity
into that Kingdom several Churches erected to her honor: Among which the most
famous is that Temple at Saragoca called del Pilar, Caesar Augusta.
or of the Pillar, celebrated above a thousand years since by S. Maximus Bishop
of that City, who composed several Hymns to celebrate that most venerable
house, called Angelical, because the Pillar on which her statue was fixed was
brought thither by the ministry Angels.

8. The foresaid Inscription therefore, containing little more then what has
been justified by Witnesses of great authority, S. Patrick and S. David, ought
to enjoy its title to our belief, the substance of it not having been
questiond for above a thousand years, but on the contrary admitted in
Councills, confirmed by ancient Records and Charters, esteemed by the whole
state of this Kingdom so authentic, that to honor that most venerable Church,
and in gratitude to our common Patron the Founder of it, possessions, Gifts and
ornaments of inestimable value have in all Ages been offered.

IX. CHAP.
IX. CHAP.
1. King Marius succeed's Arviragus.

2.3. etc. In his time is the first mention of the Picts. who they were: and
why so called.

A. D. 73
1. ABout ten years after S. Ioseph's entrance into Brittany, King Arviragus
dying, his son Marius succeeded him in the Kingdom, resembling his Father, as
in courage and other Princely virtues, so likewise in his kindness to these Holy
strangers, for he not only confirmed Arviragus his liberality to them, but
moreover extended his own, as we read in Capgrave.

2. In this Kings time we first find any mention made of the Picts: as if they
were a Nation in the Northern parts of Brittany, distinct from the Britains.
Florileg. ad Anu. D. 73.
Matthew a Monk of Westminster surnamed Florilegus, thus writes of them, In the
seaventy fifth year of Grace, says he, Roderick King of the Picts coming out
of Scythia landed in the Northern coast of Brittany, and began to wast that
Province. But Marius King of the Britains meeting him in warlike manner, slew
him* And afterward gave unto the conquered people which remained alive, that
part of Albany which is called Catenes a desert uninhabited countey. A. D. 73.


3. In like manner S. Beda thus relates the coming of the Picts into Brittany.
Bed. Hist. l. 1. cap. 1.
In the beginning, says he, this Island was inhabited only by the Britains,
from whom it took its name. And they enjoying the possession of the greatest
part of the Island, beginning from the Southern parts, it happened that a certain
Nation called Picts, as the report is, coming out of Scythia, adventured to Sea
in long boats, not many in number, and being tossed by tempests beyond the
coasts of Brittany, came into Ireland, entering into the Northern parts of it:
and finding in inhabited by a Nation called Scots, desired of them permission
to plant themselves there: but were refused. Now Ireland is of all Islands next
to Brittany the largest, being placed Westward from Brittany, not reaching so
far Northward as it, but extended further toward the South over against the
Northern parts of Spain, yet so as that a vast Ocean divides them. The Picts
therefore, as we said, arriving in that Island by Sea, made their request to
have a Seat granted them there. But the Scots answered, that the Island could
not nourish them both: Notwithstanding, said they, we can give you proffitable
counsel what to do. We know that Eastward from us there is another Island,
which upon clear days we can discover with our eyes. If you will go thither,
you may gain possessions for your selves there: or if you find resistance, we
will afford you succors. Hereupon the Picts sailing into Brittany possessed
themselves of the Northern parts: For the Britains were seized of all more
Southernly. Now the Picts being destitute of wives, requested the Scots to
bestow some on them: whereto they yielded, but upon this condition: that
whenever the title to the Principality among them was questionable, they
should prefer the Descendants by the femal sex, before the males: Which is a
custom to this day observed among the Picts. And in process of time after the
Britain and Picts, this Island received a third Nation of Scots, in the
Northern parts possessed by the Picts.

4. The authority of S. Beda deserves certainly to be esteemed of great weight:
and were it not for that, our Modern learned Writers would not doubt to affirm,
that the Nation which about these times began to be called Picts, was no other
then the Native Britains inhabiting the Northern parts of this Island.
Anciently all Britains were indeed Picts, that is a people which delighted to
paint themselves with woad, figuring upon their bodies the shapes of several
wild beasts, as beleiving that would render them more formidable to their
Enemies. Thus Caesar, and other more ancient Roman Authors describe them. But
when all the Southern parts of the Island were either possessed by the Romans,
or became dependent on them, the inhabitants left their barbarous custom of
painting, and conformed themselves to the Roman fashion. Those Britains
therefore inhabiting the Northern parts continuing in hostility with the Romans,
A. D. 75.
and constant to their old customs of painting, begun to be considered as a new
distinct Nation, divided in saction from the civilis'd Britains, and for that
reason had the new name of Picts appropriated to them: being indeed Britains,
Cambden de Pictis.
as Mr. Cambden would willingly conjecture, were he not discouraged by S. Bedes
authority. And this conjecture he fortifies by several arguments: especially
because all the names of places, and other things among the Picts are purely
British. And such Roman Historians as mention the Picts seated in Caledonia, a
part of Scotland, yet call the Caledonians, Britains.

5. But this is more then sufficient to be written on a subject which is not
our business: but only so far as may give light to Ecclesiastical affairs of
those times. For which reason we shall in the progress of this story speak
likewise of the Scots, another Nation, which e're long entered into the
Provinces possessed by the Picts, and gave name to the whole Country.

X. CHAP.
X. CHAP.
1.2. A Monument of King Marius his victory over the Picts. The mistake of
Malmsburiensis, etc. touching King Marius.

3. Berwick, whence called.

G. (...).
1. KIng Marius having slain Roderick King of the Picts, or Northern Britains,
erected a stone, or Pillar, as a Mark of his Triumph, in the Province which was
afterward called by his name Westmaria, or Westmerland The Title inscribed in
which Pillar, says Geffrey of Monmouth, continued the memory of that victory
to the present day. Vsser. Primord. Brit. f. 581.
Yea, says B. V^her, before the British History was by Geffrey translated out
of the British into the Latin tongue, a much graver Author, William of
Malmsbury in the Prologue of his third Book touching the Gests of British
Bishops, makes mention of the same in this manner; Malmsb in Prolog. l. 3.
Pontific.
In the City Lugubalia, commonly called Carlisle, there is a room or parlour
built of stone, and vaulted over, so firm that neither any injury of weather,
nor fire purposely kindled with wood, could destroy or weaken it. The Province
is called Cumberland, and the Inhabitants Cumbrians. In the front of the said
Parlour this Inscription may be read, To the Victory of Marius. Though Mr.
Camden affirms that in some Copies it is, To Mars the Conqueror.

2. But it is a great mistake of the same Author, applying the foresaid
Victory of Marius, to the Roman Consul Marius, as if these Cumbrians were the
Cimbrians driven out of Italy by Marius, A. D. 82.
and in their flight resting in that Province. It seems he had not read the
ancient British History translated by Geffrey of Monmouth; Polychron lib. 4.
cap. 9.
which expressly attributes it to the British King Marius, as says Ranulphus
Cestrensis in his Polychronicon.

3. When Roderick King of the Picts was slain, I^. Rossus VV^rvvic. ap. Vsser.
f. 581.
his soldiers, being only nine hundred which remained alive, chose another
for their Captain, called Berench, from whom the Town of Berwick received its
name, says John Rosse of Warwick. But others more probably refuse this
Etymology, Cambden in Ostadin.
affirming truly that the Country and people called Ottadin^, where Berwick is
seated, were at this time under the Romans Dominion. Besides the word Berwick
signifies a Village which is an Appendix to some other place of note, Ingulph.
Histor.
whence Ingulphus calls that Town only a Manor or Farm:

XI. CHAP. XI. CHAP.

1.2.3. A brief of Roman affairs from the end of Nero to Vespasian.

4.5. Trebellius Maximus Pr^pretour in Brittany: after whom succeeded Vectius
Bolanus.

6. Then Petilius Cerealis. 7. Next Julius Frontinus.

8. After whom Julius Agricola.

1. IT was in the days of Coellus the Son o^ this King Marius that S. Joseph
acco^^ding to ancient Tradition ended his labors and mortality, A. D. 82.
in the eighty second year of our Lord, concurring with the second year of
the Emperor Titus son of Vespasian. Now before we treat of the particulars
touching this our Holy Patriark's death, it will be convenient that we first
give a brief account of Roman affairs in this Island occurring between the end
of Nero and that time.

2. Nero by self-murder having revenged upon himself all the execrable crimes
committed, especially toward the latter end of his reign, as the killing of his
Mother, the burning of Rome, and imputing that most facinorous act to the
innocent Christians, against whom he raged with a most savage cruelty, a
cruelty extending even to the extinguishing of the two most glorious Lights
then shining in the world, S. Peter and S. Paul: the family of the Caesar's
ending in him, there followed in the Roman Empire most terrible seditions, no
fewer then four Emperors within the space of two years having been chosen by
several Armies, to wit, Galba, Otho, Vitellius and Vespasian, by whose
contentions against one another the Roman world was all torn in pieces, and
Italy especially was almost drowned with the blood of several armies meeting
there, and without any consideration of their affinity mutually butchering one
another: Till in the end Vespasian being the conqueror, Peace was at last
restored.

3. Now during these furious contentions, only in Brittany the Roman armies
were uninteressed, and consequently free from either doing or suffering
mischeifs. Tacit histor. lib. 1.
And the reasons given by Tacitus hereof were partly their distance from the
chief Scene of these Tragedies: and partly because having been exercised with
several expeditions against the unquiet Britains, they were taught to direct
their hatred rather against their enemies, then any party among the Romans.

4. Trebellius Maximus who had been sent Propretor into Brittany, by particular
factions in the army was forced to fly out of the Country, and had recourse to
Vitellius newly proclaimed Emperor. In his place succeeded Vectius Bolanus, Id
in vita agris.
who says Tacitus, governed with more mildnes then was fitting in a Province
so feirce and apt for commotions.

5. As Soon as Vespasian was declared a pretender to the Empire, the Roman Army
in Brittany quickly expressed great favor toward him, as one who had been
made Leader of the Second Legion there by the Emperor Claudius, and performed
several exploits with great reputation.

6. After three years spent by Vectius Bolanus in a quiet government of
Brittany, there was by Vespasian, who had then been three years Emperor, d.
ibid.
sent to succeed him Petilius Cerealis: who presently, upon what provocation it
does not appear, assailed the Nation called Brigantes, took their chief City
York the most populous then of all Brittany, as Tacitus affirms: and fought
many battles, some of them very bloody, conquering a great part of rhat
Province, and engaged the Romans in a war with the rest.

7. In the sixth year of Vespasians reign Julius Frontinus was sent in the
place of Cerealis, during whose government the Silures inhabiting the Western
parts of Brittany rebelled against the Romans: whose Country he with great
courage invaded, and though partly by their valor, but principally by
difficulties of passages they brought him to great extremities, yet in the end
with wonderful constancy he conquered all opposition, and entirely subdued
them. And to restrain them from future commotions, he fortified in their
Province the City called Isca, placing one of his Legions there: from whence
it took the name of Caer-Leon, or the City of the Legion.

8. After Frontinus the Government of the Roman Army was committed to Julius
Agricola in the ninth, which was the last year of the reign of Vespasian. Whose
worthy exploits and signal virtues both in war and peace have been most nobly
described by his son in law Cornelius Tacitus, in a Book purposely written of
his life. Which exploits because they were performed after the death of St.
Joseph and his companions, we will delay the giving a brief account of them to
the next Book: and we will conclude this with relating some considerable
circumstances attending the death and burial of those Apostolic Saints and
Patrons of our Nation.

XII. CHAP. XII. CHAPTER

1. S. Joseph dyed and was buried at Glastonbury: This not contradicted by the
Ro-Martyrologe.

2.3. S. Joseph an example both of a Pastoral and Monastical life.

4.5 The particular place where S. Joseph was buried unknown.

6. One John Blome upon a supposed inspiration, petitioned that he might search
it.

7. His action censured.

1. IT is a received general Tradition in this Island that S. Joseph ended his
days in his solitude of Avallonia, or Glastonbury, and this on the twenty
seventh of July, in the eighty second year of our Lords Incarnation.
Notwithstanding in the Roman Martyrologe on the seaventeenth of March we read
thus, Martyrolog. Romans 17. Mart.
At Jerusalem is the commemoration of S Joseph a noble Counselor of Arimathea,
and a Disciple of our Lord, who took down his Body from the Cross, and buried
it in his own new Sepulcher. But hereby is evinced neither that he dyed then,
nor at Jerusalem: but only that on that day his memory was celebrated there: as
in the same Martyrologe there are several examples of the like.

2. Now though this holy Saint dyed at Glastonbury, we are not to imagine that
he spent his days there: since the design which brought him to Brittany was to
preach the Gospel, and convert souls. Bishop Godwin without any authority
would inform us, Godvvin in ^atal. cap. 3.
that he and his companions perceiving that their preaching had little or no
effect among the rude Britains, and despairing of doing any good, gave
themselves at last to a Monastical contemplative life. But we should wrong
their charity and Apostolic zeal if we should think they would so soon faint,
and be weary of their holy employment. It is more then probable that they would
frequently retire into this their solitude, to the end by undistracted Prayers
to renew their courage and patience in their Apostolic employment, as likewise
to repose after their labors: so we read in the Gospel that the Apostles
after their Mission performed, M^r. 6.30.
returned to our Savior, who for their refreshment was pleased to withdraw
them from a common conversation into a desert, there to repose.

3. We may likewise prudently judge that it was the special design of the
Divine Providence to make choice of these particular Saints to be not only
Preachers of his word, but examples also of a Monastical Conversation, in an
Island so commodious for it. Excepting S. Mark in the deserts of Egypt, we do
not find any other of the Primitive Disciples which seemed to have had such a
design. There wanted not indeed from the beginning many who relinquished their
worldly employments, and gave their riches to the poor, that without any
impediments they might wholly give themselves to God, and being freed from all
distractions practice the exercises of Divine Contemplation: But this they did
apart, in their own houses, and not in Community, as S. Joseph and his
Companions did, wherein they were imitated by their Successors. So that
Brittany was the almost only place in the world where the Christian Faith began
with a Monastical Profession. And we see also that when that Profession by
persecution ceased, the same Faith likewise was banished.

4. That S. Joseph and his companions also were buried at Glastonbury in, or
near the Church built by him, we are informed by the Great Table of Glastonbury
mentioned by Bishop Usher, Vsser de Primord. Eccl. Brit. fol. 29.
where it is said, In this Church do repose the bodies of the twelve Disciples
of our Lord, of whom S. Joseph of Arimathea, who buried our Lord, was the Chief
and Superior. Many Pagans also converted to the Faith of Christ, and baptized
by them, do rest there likewise, the multitude of whom is for their number so
great, that they cannot be reckoned. Ibid. f^l. ^72.
The same likewise is affirmed by the Author of Eulogium.

5. As for the particular place in which the Tomb of our Saint was seated, most
probable it is that it was in a Cave under ground in a Chapel afterward built
and dedicated to his honor: as this Epitaph imports, Ad Britones veni postquam
Christum sepelivi:
Docui, requievi.
That is, After I had buried Christ, I came to the Britains:
Here I taught them, and here I was buried.


6. Notwithstanding his Relics could not be discovered: insomuch as some
anciently doubted whether he was indeed buried at Glastonbury. To clear which
doubt a certain devout Catholic in the days of King Edward the third presented
a supplication to the King, A. D. 1345. Vid. Vsser. Primord. Eccl. ^rit. p 29.
and obtained leave to search after it. The Kings Patents for that purpose are
still extent: wherein it is said, A Supplication has been made to us by John
Blome of London, that whereas, as he affirms, he has received a command from
Heaven diligently to seek till he could find the venerable Body of the Noble
Counselor Joseph of Arimathea, which reposes in Christ, being buried within
the limits of the Monastery of Glastonbury, and which for the Saints honor and
edification of many, is to be discovered in these times. And whereas also in
ancient Records it is contained that his Body was there buried: We in case it
be so, being desirous to bestow due honors to the Monument and Venerable
Relics of him, who expressed so great piety and charity to our Redeemer
dying, that he took his Body from the Cross, and placed it in a new Monument
which he had built for himself: and hoping that by the revealing of his holy
Relics, greater grace and favor shall be showed by God to us and our whole
Kingdom: We thereforefore have given and granted permission, as much as lies
in us, to the said John ^lome, to digg wheresoever he shall find expedient
within the precincts of the said Monastery, in order to the searching out of
the said precious Relics, according to the iniunction and Revelation made to
him: Provided notwithstanding that he shall do nothing which may damnify our
Beloved in Christ the Abbot and Convent of the said Monastery, or endanger
ruin to the Church. For which purpose he is to desire and obtain the
permission and assent of the said Abbot and Convent for whatsoever he shall
there do. Witness the King at Westminster the eighth day of June.

7. What effect this search had, does not appear by History. Which is a sign
and presumption strong enough, that John Blome mistook a dream for a
Revelation. His devotion and good will may deserve at least pardon, if not
commendation: but Christian prudence required that he should have committed to
the examination and judgment of Superiors or Spiritual persons, his pretended
Revelation before the publication of it, and much more before he did presume to
engage the King in the execution of his imaginations.

XIII. CHAPTER
XIII. CHAP.
1.2.3. S. Joseph brought with him two vessels filled with the blood of our
Savior.

4. The like reported of the Master of St. John's in Jerusalem.

5 6. etc. The truth thereof asserted by Bishop Grosthead.

8.9. Why S. Joseph would have those vessels buried with his body.

1. THE same Monuments which inform us of the life, death and burial of S.
Joseph at Glastonbury (a Tradition unquestioned in all ages by Britains,
Saxons, Danes and Normans:) the same do likewise testify that S. Joseph
brought with him into Brittany two silver vessels filled with the blood of our
Savior Jesus Christ, as we read in Capgrave: which most precious Vessels by
his order were buried with him in his Tomb. Thus among others writes the
Author of Eulogium cited by B. Usher. Vsser. Primord Eccl. Brit. p. 575.
And the same in public Tables has been transmitted to posterity by the
Monastery of Glast^nbury for a perpetual memory of so rich a treasure.

2. Several proofs hereof were extant even to the days of Queen Elizabeth,
which the foresaid learned Bishop Usher has collected: And among others he
recounts this: Id. ib. p. 28.
Add hereunto, says he, the narration of William Good a Jesuit: who during
the reign of King Henry the eighth was born, and in his childhood bred up at
Glastonbury. Who affirms that at Glastonbury there were extant in his time
brasse-plates engraven for perpetuating the memory of these things, likewise
Chapels, Grottes, Crosses, Arms, and the observation of the Festival of S.
Joseph on the sixth of the Calends of August. All these remained as long as the
Monks enjoyed the most firm Charters of Kings: but now they are all buried in
the ruins of the place. Yet never did any Monk know the certain place of the
Sepulcher of this Saint. They said that it was hid extremely deep under ground,
or in some place of the Mountain neighboring to the sharp-mountain called
Hamden-hill: And that in future times when the Body should be found; the whole
world would repair thither in devotion, being invited with the multitude and
greatness of the miracles that should be wrought. And among other things, said
he, I remember that I saw in a Stone-crosse, which in the reign of Queen
Elizabeth was demolished, a plate of brass, in which was written, That in the
thirtieth year after the Passion of our Lord, Joseph of Arimathea with eleaven
or twelve companions came into Brittany, and that permission was given them by
King Arviragus to abide at Glaston, then called Avallonia, like simple solitary
men: And that he brought with him two silver Vessels of no great capacity, in
which were contained a portion of the blood and most sacred water which flowed
out of Christ's side after he was dead. And that a Cross was erected there many
years before, to show the length of the Chapel which the same S. Joseph built
of rods wa^led, to the honor of the most Holy Virgin: the which length is
measured by a line drawn from the middle of that Cross unto the side of a
Chapel afterward built of squared stones. And on the outside of the wall of
this Chapel erected to the honor of the most blessed Virgin were engraven in
a stone in most ancient Characters these two words, JESUS, MARIA. These things
are likewise confirmed by the ancient Arms of the same Monastery, which are a
white Scutcheon upon which is erected straight downwards the stock of a Cross,
green and knotted: and from side to side are the arms of the Cross of the same
color: There are likewise sprinkled all over the field drops of blood: and on
both sides of the stock under the wings of the cross are placed two viols
gilded. These were always called the Badges of St. Joseph, who is piously
believed to have dwelt, and peradventure been buried there.

3. Now that S. Joseph together with Nicodemus did indeed out of respect and
veneration gather the Blood of our Lord, and that for diverse ages the same
blood was piously worshipped by devout Christians both in the East and West,
ancient Histories and Martyrologies do testify.

4. And on this occasion we must not omit what is related by Matthew Paris,
Math. Paris. A. D. 1247.
in the one thousand two hundred forty and seventh year of our Lord: Then the
Master of the Temple and Hospital of S. John of Jerusalem sent a certain
portion of the blood of our Lord shed on the Cross for the salvation of the
world, in a certain most beautiful crystall-glasse by a Brother of the Temple
well known: The which present was confirmed by the testimony of several
Persons, to wit, of the Patriark of Jerusalem, of Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots
and other Prelates together with Noblemen dwelling in the holy Land. Thus writes
that Historian: and consequently declares at large with what honor and
reverence King Henry the third, together with the whole Clergy and Nobility
entertained the said holy treasure.

5. Moreover whereas doubts and scruples were by some spread among the people
concerning the reality and truth of that blood: Robert Grosthead Bishop of
Lincoln, the glory of that age and of our Kingdom for Piety and Learning, gave
full satisfaction to doubting minds by a narration of the Fact, which that
Historian himself being present heard, and committed to writing, to this
effect: Joseph of Arimathea, Ib. in Addition. fol. 161.
(said the Bishop) a noble Counselor, being one of the hearers of Jesus, or
rather a Disciple who bore special affection to him, out of tender compassion
was very sol^icaton^ how his most venerable body might be preserved from the
rage and fury of the Jews. For he was a most (...) of him, as Nicodemus
likewise was. But these and other rich men had ^^era^d their affection to him
for fear of the Jews, least being accused they should loose their essa^s, and
inc^rre the hatred of their ^^^^treymen: such a (...) of ^^^^itude does
accompany riches.

6. When Jesus therefore was crucified and dead, Joseph went boldly to Pilat
(which shows him to be a person of consideration) and begd the body of Jesus:
which was granted him. He then notwithstanding the murmuring of the Jews, with
all honor and reverence took down the most holy body from the Cross, which
was all over in several mann^^s mangled and bloody. And having a linen Cl^^^^
very fine hanging ^own behind (...) neck over his shoulders, least he might
irreverently touch that most holy Body with his naked hands, he carefully and
devoutly wiped with it the sacred wound^ (...) yet (...) and distilling.
Moreover making (...) of the said (...) instead of a sponge, having drawn the
nails out of the wounds which were all dyed with blood, he wiped and cleansed
them as the Cross it self.

7. Now when the said Joseph had carried the Body of Christ not far from
Golgotha, or Calvary (where he had been crucified) to the place where his
sepulcher is now worshipped, there he laid it in a New tomb, where never any
body had been laid, which had been decently cut out of a rock, and where
himself intended to have been buried. But before he buried it, he washed the
holy Body which, at has been said, was many ways wounded and covered with
blood: L^. 22.44.
and this first in regard of his bloody sweat, of which we read, His swear was
like great drops of blood falling down to the ground. Again by reason of his
whipping, for he was scourged most cruelly, so as not only to leave marks in
his body, but to make the blood run down: Besides this, his Crown of thorns
which the Jews violently pressed upon his head, with a great number of pricks
did not only ^^ing his head and forehead, but deeply wounded and severed it
with blood: Moreover the ^ayles made wide holes through his hands and feet: And
lastly the soldiers spear did not only wound, but opened a wide passage into
his side, being thrust into it, at least once, if not several times. For these
reasons the foresaid venerable Counselor Joseph carefully washed his body.
Besides that such was the custom of the Jews before their burialls: as it is
still, when persons of any consideration are to be buried, particularly
Religious men. He washed it therefore, because it was moreover to be embalmed.
He washed it, because he had an intention and religious design to appropriate
the same blood to his own devout use, and to reserve it as a treasure and most
precious Medecin for his soul. And moreover he neglected not the water become
red with a tincture of blood, he would not cast it away, but kep^ it in a clean
vessel. But far more reverently did he reserve the pure blood distilling from
the wounds of his hands an^ feet. And above all he did with wonderful
reverence and holy fear receive into a most precious vessel the blood mix^
with water which he carefully pressed out of his right side, which he judged to
^ssue from the vessels adjoining to his heart: this he esteemed a treasure
unvaluable, and in a special manner to be reserved for himself and his
Successors. Such was the discourse of that Venerable Prelat, copied by the
Historian his Auditour.

8. It may perhaps seem a wonder; why S. Joseph would ordain that such a
precious Treasure should be buried with his Body. For surely natural Reason
and the practice of all Ages does dictate to us, that it is an argument of our
affection and respect to a dead friend to be willing to reserve any thing of
value belonging to him, to esteem it because of such a relation, and for
rendering him In a sort always-present to us: especially when by special
deserts we are obliged to be mindful of him; and without our own great danger
cannot neglect to commemorate his benefits: All which considerations and many
more have place in this example. So that to find fault with, and condemn the
primitive Devotion in paying a respect and Veneration to the Relics of Saints,
and above all, of this Saint of Saints, is to renounce human reason, yea to
range one's self in the society of Evil Spirits, which only abominated and
durst not approach near unto them. But why then did S. Joseph take order that
such most precious adorable Relics should be buried with him, and hid from
mankind?

9. The true reasons hereof may be, first because if in such times, before
Christianity had been established in this Island, they had been consigned to
any particular persons, either a loosing of profanation of them could scarce
have been avoided. Whereas a certainty that they were reserved in that place
would be an occasion to stir up the Devotion of present and succeeding
Christians to frequent it, and reap benefit by the virtue of them. And again S.
Joseph had no doubt the same design herein, that the Emperor Constantin
afterward expressed, as Eusebius informs us, who with great care made a
collection of the Relics of the Apostles, which he richly adorned, and
commanded they should be laid up in his Tomb, Eusebius. in vit. Constantin. l. 4
c. 60.
to the end that being dead he might be made partaker of the prayers which
there in honor of the Apostles should be offered to God.

XIV. CHAPTER
XIV. CHAP.
1. S. Phagan (...) to S. Joseph (...).

2. Such a succession (...) Lucius: afterward the plate was (...) and (...).

3. The memory of S. Joseph renewed there in after ages.

1. WHen S. Joseph was dead, the^e succeeded in the prefecture of that holy
place S. Phagan, who is said to have con^^^^ed there the space of thirty years.
For (...) did not end in Brittany with S. Joseph: On the contrary the (...)
Kings favoring, and the people applauding the piety and devotion of those
primitive Saints, such a solitary contemplative life was in high esteem among
them: so that after the decease of S. Joseph and his companions, others
succeeded both to the right of the possession bestowd on S. Joseph, and the
imitation of his manner of life.

^. Such a succession continued till the (...): At which time a free and (...)
of the Gospel being (...) couraged, it is (...) of that (...) by charity (...)
(...) and without (...) (...) care of perfectionating their (...) both their
Devotions and (...) in converting and saving the souls of others. For about
that time (...) we find related in the life of S. Joseph, that place was become
a den of wild beasts, which was before the habitation of Saints.

^. Howbeit in succeeding ages, when there was no such necessity of so great a
number of laborers in Gods vineyard, by reason of the extension and
fruitfullnes of it* the Memory of S. Joseph was renewd, and devout Christians
with great fervor visited the Church dedicated to the honor of the most
Blessed Virgin: Then their liberality was plentifully enlarged to adorn that
place, which they esteemed the fountain and Original of Christian Religion in
Brittany, as we find it called in our Kings ancient Charters.

THE THIRD BOOK OF THE CHVRCH-HISTORY OF BRITTANY.
I. CHAP.
I. CHAP.
1.2.3. etc. About the time of S. Joseph's death Julius Agricola came to be
Governor of Brittany. His gests and Victories.

Tacit. in vit. Agricolae.
1. THE death of S. Joseph happened little after the time that Julius Agricola was
sent Praetor into Brittany, in the last year of the reign or the Emperor
Vespasian. At his first entrance he was entertained with seditions in the Army,
and commotions in the Country. The former he by his prudence and authority
easily quieted: and the other by his courage and diligence.

Id. Ibid.
2. It was the Province of the Ordovices (or Inhabitants of Northwales) that
taking example from their neighbors the Silures, endeavored to shake off the
Roman yoke. The first Act of their Rebellion was to invade and utterly rout
certain Troops of horse quarterd amongst them. Hereupon Agricola, though then
newly arrived, and the Winter already beginning, yet assembled the Legions, and
marched into their country. Which diligence of his so discouraged them, that
they durst not oppose him with an Army: inso much as he freely wasted and
destroyed almost the whole Province.

Id. 16.
3. That which made his conquest entire, was an impression which he made into
the Isle of Mona (or Anglesey:) from the possession whereof Suetonius Paulinus
had been recalled by the rebellion of Boudicea Queen of the Trinobantes. The
Ordovices thought themselves secure in this Island, because Agricola was
unprovided of boats to pass his army. But this defect he supplied by his
wisdom and constancy: For choosing among his Auxiliaries such as were most
skillfull in swimming, and in the water could both carry their arm's and direct
their horses, he made them pass over into the Island. Hereby the Enemies were
so astonished, that they humbly begged peace, and delivered up the Island to
him.

4. After this victory Agricola's care was to govern the Province peaceably:
Id. 16.
for which purpose he restrained the avarice of the Roman soldiers, and
defended the Natives from their injuries. Yea moreover having terrified them
with marches through all the difficult passages in the Island, he by his
courtesy and civility invited them to take pleasure in living peaceably. For
which purpose he encouraged them to conform themselves to the Roman fashion of
life, by building houses, Temples and Marketplaces. Yea he allured them to
imitate even the vices of their Conquerours, in magnificent banquets, baths and
other instruments of Luxury. He likewise caused the children of the British
Nobility to be instructed in literature, preferring their wits and natural
endowments beyond the capacities of the Gauls: A. D. 87.
By which means not only the Roman tongue became familiar to the Britains,
from which formerly they had a great aversion, but they aspired also to learn
and practice Eloquence.

Id. ibid.
5. Such was the employment of the two first years of Agricola's government. In
the third he marched Northward, there discovering new Nations and Provinces,
whose country he wasted as far as the river Taus (or Tweed.) And the summer
following he continued his conquests as far as Bodotria (or Edinborow-frith)
Eastward, and Glotta (or the Frith of Dunbritton) Westward: and the narrow
space of land between them he strengthened with forts and garrisons, so that the
only Enemies remaining unconquered, which were the Caledonian Britains, were
driven beyond those Northern limits. In the foresaid streits near a town
called by Ptolomy Coria (now Abercurven) there is to this day extant an ancient
Structure of squard stones, called by the Inhabitants Julius Hot, fancied by
them to have been built by Julius Caesar, who yet never came near this
Province: but in all probability raised by Julius Agricola, as a Monument of
his Conquests.

6. In the fifth year of his Expedition he subdued the Northwest Provinces of
Brittany looking toward Ireland: Id. ibid.
into which parts he drew most of his forces, as if he had had some thoughts of
invading that Island: from whence a petty Prince, expelled by a Sedition of his
Subjects, repaired to him: whom with a show of freindship he detaind, intending
when an opportunity offered it self, to make use of him in a design upon that
Island.

Id. ibid.
7. The following year he spent in a march northward from Bodotria (or
Edinborough) on purpose to find out the limits of the country: for hitherto it
was not known to the Romans whether Brittany was an Island, or no. And both to
secure his march and carry provisions, he caused his Navy to keep pace with his
land Army: a spectacle of great terror to the poor Britains. Who thereupon
united all their counsels and forces to endeavor by this last attempt to free
themselves from danger by the Romans.

Id. ibid.
8. Their first exploit was to assault the camp of the ninth Legion, separated
from the rest. But the watchful General came upon them when they were ready
to break into the Camp, and at last, though with great difficulty, dispersed
them.

9. The Caledonian Britains failing in this, resolved to decide the whole
controversy by a general Combat. Id. ibid.
Whereupon they assembled all their forces on a Mountain, called Grampius, which
divides the whole country (since called Scotland) into the Northern and
Southern Provinces. Their General, A. D. 94.
specially elected for this war, was called Galgacus, eminent both for his
Nobility and courage, who omitted no arguments which might inflame his soldiers
valor: especially insisting on this, That the Romans by their shipping having
discovered that Brittany was an Island, they had nothing behind them but the
Sea and rocks, to which by flying they might have recourse.

10. Agricola on the other side having brought his Army in sight of the enemy,
raised their courage by showing that they were now come to an end of all their
labors and dangers: that this Victory would bring them all manner of security
and plenty: And however, that in case they should be overcome, it would not be
inglorious to their memory, that they dyed in the utmost bounds of the Earth
and Nature.

11. The battle was fought with valor on both sides proportionable to the
necessity: but at last the Britains were entirely defeated, and though in the
chase through woods and fast places their rage made them turn upon their
pursuers, and kill not a few of them, yet they were so wholly broken, that for
many years after their impotency made them quiet.

12. This combat was fought in the eighth and last year of Agricola's
Government: For in the beginning of the year following, which was the fifth of
Domitians reign, he returned to Rome: having triumphall ornaments decreed him
by the Senate: and though in appearance he was honored by the Emperor, yet his
glory and virtues rendered him the object of the Tyrants Envy and hatred, and
within a few years the sacrifice of his cruelty.

II. CHAP. II. CHAP.

1.2. Of the Successors of Agricola in the Government of Brittany.

3. Roman Legions continued in Brittany.

1. AFter Agricola's departure out of Brittany it does not evidently appear in
History who succeeded him. And no wonder, since so entire a conquest of the
Nation had been gained by Agricola, that whosoever followed him could not
afford any considerable exploits to furnish a History.

2. Some Writers say that Cneus Trebellius was the next who succeeded in the
Government during Domitians reign: Others, that it was Salustius Lucullus
mentioned by Suetonius in these words, Domitian, says he, put to death
Salustius Lucullus, who had been General of the Roman Army in Brittany, A. D.
100.
for this only crime, because he had suffered lances of a new fashion contrived
by himself to be called Lucullean Lances.

3. This is all that any of the Roman Historians mention touching Brittany,
during not only the remainder of Domitians reign, but also the two Emperors,
Nerva and Traian, which succeeded him. The Roman Legions continued still in the
Country, though all their employment was only to prevent any insurrections
among the Britains. Josephus the Jewish Historian gives us an account of the
number of those Legions, writing thus, ^oseph. apud Camden.
Brittany is compassed with the Ocean, being a new discovered world, little
less then ours. The Romans now inhabiting there have reduced it to the
obedience of their Empire: and four Legions are sufficient to overawe and keep
in order the Island, though abounding with great multitudes of inhabitants.

III. CHAPTER
III. CHAP.
1.2. S. Clement Pope: He sends Bishops into Gaul.

3.4. Of S. Taurinus Bishop (Ebroicensium) of Eureux: not (Eboracensium) of
York.

5. The Legation of Brittany to Saint Clement.

1. ANcient Ecclesiastical Monuments do suggest little or nothing to History
relating to Christian Religion in Brittany, during the space of time between
the end of Nero, and the death of Domitian, containing twenty eight years, from
the seaventieth year of Christ to the ninety eighth.

2. Toward the latter end of that time S. Clement, sitting in the Chair of S.
Peter, expressed his general care over the Church, both toward the East and
West: for by a most divine Epistle to the Church of Corinth he prevented a
schism threatening its ruin, Ire^. lib. 3. cap. 3.
and, as Irenaeus says, he repaired their Faith much decayed, by declaring to
them the Tradition, which he freshly had received from the Apostles.

3. Moreover he supplied these Northwest Regions, principally the Gauls, with
Pastors and Bishops, sending S. Nicasius to Rouen, Martyr^log. Romans 11. August.
S. Eutropius to Xaintes, S. Lucian to Beauvais, and S. Taurinus to Eureux.
Concerning this last we read thus in the Roman Martyrologe, Among the
inhabitants of Eureux in Gaul there is on the eleaventh of August a
commemoration of S. Taurinus Bishop, who having been ordained Bishop of that
City by Saint Clement Pope, by his preaching the Gospel propagated the
Christian Faith in those Regions, and being illustrious by the Glory of his
Miracles, after many labors sustained for the Truth, A. D. 110.
he slept peaceably in our Lord.

4. Particular notice is to be taken by us of this Saint, because of a mistake
of certain modern Historians, who from a resemblance of the words Ebroicenses
and Eboracenses, affirm this S. Taurinus to have been Bishop of York. Cent.
Magdeb. 2. cap. 10. f. 222.
For thus do the Centurists of Magdeburg write, S. Taurinus was Bishop of York
and dyed a Martyr under the Emperor Adrian, Licinius being then Prefect of the
Country: Yea moreover not only Bishop Godwin, but S. Antoninus likewise affirm
that S. Taurinus, and S. Nicasius also, passed over into Brittany. Neither
indeed is it altogether without example that Bishops in those days, out of a
common zeal to men's salvation, should change their Seats, and remove their
residence whither greater necessities and want of spiritual Light did call
them. Broughton hist. l. 1. c. 36. n. 5.
And if any credit may be given to the assertion of a Modern Historian, that S.
Clement formerly accompanying S. Peter preached the Gospel in Brittany, it is
not to be doubted but that his care was to promote the good work begun by
himself.

5. Yea I find an ancient Manuscript quoted by the R. F. Alford, Alford. vol.
1. p. 95.
wherein is contained, how the Church of Brittany in the year of Grace one
hundred, sent a Legation to S. Clement, desiring him to communicate to them the
Order and Rites of celebrating Divine Service. Baron. ad A. D. 102.
And Baronius affirms it to be an ancient Tradition that S. Clement set down in
Writing the Order of offering Sacrifice instituted by S. Peter, which was
afterward in use through the whole Western Church. Isid. l. 2. de offic.
And long before him S. Isidore affirms the same. True it is that in following
times it was lengthned, by additions made to it.

IV. CHAP. IV. CHAP.

1. Britains said to have been divided into Ecclesiastical Provinces by Pope
Anacletus in the reign of Trajanus.

2. Such a Division much later.

1. IN the reign of the Emperor Traian, S. Anacletus the Successor of S.
Clement in the Chair of S. Peter is said to have divided Brittany into five
Provinces and Metropoles, ordaining Bishops and Primats in each: and hereto we
find our Protestant Archbishop Parker to have given his asassent. Antiquit.
Britan. s. 24.
The ground whereof is a certain Decretall Epistle long since published under
the name of the said Pope, in which a division of Provinces is indeed
mentioned, yet without any application to Brittany. But the authority of that
Epistle being much suspected, yea renounced by several, not only Protestant
but Catholic Authors, little credit is to be given to that relation grounded
by some upon it touching the said Division: Girald. Cambr. de Menev. Eccl. jure
lib. 2.
though Giraldus our Welsh Historian undertake to set down the particular names
of the Provinces: calling one Britannia prima, which is the Western part of the
Island: the second he names Britannia secunda, containing the Province of Kent:
the third Flavia, which is the middle part of Brittany, which after the
entrance of the Saxons was called Mercia: The fourth Maximia, containing
Yorkshire: and the last Valentia, under which were comprehended all the
Northern Provinces beyond the Brigantes.

2. But certain it is that these Titles were not assigned, Vid. Ammian. Marcel.
lib. 28. cap. 18.
nor this Division made till several ages afterward, under the reign of the
Emperors Valentinian and Valens. As for the present age of Traian, Brittany
was then divided only into two Provinces called the First and the Second, or as
Ptolomy names them, the Greater and the less, and Dio, the Upper and Lower
Brittany: The former of these contained the Southern parts as far as the River
Thamisis, first possessed by the Romans: and the other, the Western Provinces
of Cornwall, Wales, etc.

V. CHAP.
V. CHAP.
1. Tumults in Brittany: neglected by Trajan.

2 3. Of King Coellus reigning there: his Character.

4. The Emperor Hadrian quiets Brittany: as his Coyns testify.

5. This he did, not in person, but by his Officers.

1. TOward the latter end of Traians reign, Spartian. in Hadrian. c. 5.
among other Nations which rebelled against the Roman Empire, Brittany is
reckoned for one by Spartianus: But the Emperor finding a greater necessity to
turn his arms against the Africans and Sarmatians, neglected the Britains.

2. Now what particular Provinces in Brittany those were which at this time
attempted to shake off the Roman Yoke, it does not appear. Coellus was yet
alive, who is by our Historiographers called King of the Britains, not as if
he were the only King in the Island, but because he was the most considerable
in power and wealth, to whom the rest yielded both honor, and some kind of
subjection, as in Caesar's time we read the several British Princes then
reigning in their respective Dominions did to Cassibelin: and afterward in the
Saxon Heptarchy, he that was called [ Rex Anglorum] King of the English, had a
supereminence over the rest.

3. Now as touching King Coellus, A. D. 120.
he is described by our Histories to be a Prince of so benign and peaceable a
nature, and withal so affectionat to the Romans, having had his breeding at
Rome it self, Polid. Virg. Hist. Lib. 2.
where, as Polidor Virgil says, he spent his younger years in the discipline of
war and civil literature, and during his reign he showed all respectfull
submission to the Majesty of that Imperial City, restraining his Subjects
from all designs and attempts against it: So that it cannot be conceived that
he joined in the said Rebellion.

4. Now though Traian by greater concernments was hindered from reducing the
tumultuous Britains to obedience, A. D. 120.
yet his Successor Adrian in the beginning of his reign neglected them not:
For there are yet extant ancient Coyns made by a Decree of the Roman Senate,
wherein is imprinted the British Army with the figures of three Roman soldiers
on one side, and on the other the Emperor Adrians face, denoting likewise his
third Consulship, which fell in the first year of his reign. Such Coyns were
framed and dispersed among the Soldiers as a gratuity, to conciliate their
affections to the Emperor: And the figures of the three soldiers imported the
three Legions then guarding this Island: the Titles of which were the Second
called Augusta, the fourteenth called Victrix, and the Twentieth Legion called
also Victrix and Britannica.

5. Notwithstanding these Coyns are no proof either of the Emperors coming
then into Brittany, or of any battle or Victory gained then upon the
Britains: being only a ceremony of Adrians assumption to the Empire, partly to
oblige the Roman soldiers to him, and likewise to admonish the Britains, that
the New Emperor was mindful of their disorders, which if they continued, he
would, as he effectually did three years after, come himself to chastise them.

VI. CHAP. VI. CHAP.

1. Julius Severus Governor of Brittany.

2. The Emperor Hadrians progress through the Empire.

3.4. A wall made by him in Brittany, to exclude the Caledonian Britains.

5. Hadrian returns out of Brittany.

1. IVlius Severus was the Praetor who at this time administered the Province,
and governed the Roman Army in Brittany, who, for ought appears in story, stood
only upon his defense, and made no expedition against the rebellious Britains
in the Northern parts of the Island, A. D. 82.
as appears by the following exploits of the Emperor Hadrian. By which it is
manifest that King Coellus, whose Dominions lay southward, had no engagement in
those commotions.

2. In the third year of his reign the Emperor began a progress through all
the Regions of the Empire, to compose seditions, to rectify disorders, and
restore discipline through all his armies. He began with Germany, and from
thence took a view of France, and the year following passed over into Brittany:
A general view of whose actions in these Countries is afforded us by Dio. Dio.
lib. 69.


3. We will here only mention one memorable exploit in Brittany, which was the
separating of the peaceable subjects of the Roman Empire from the rest who
refused to submit to its yoke. Now whereas Julius Agricola had formerly driven
the ruder Britains into the Northern parts of Scotland, and had built forts in
the narrow Isthmus between Edinborough frith, and that of Dunbritton, to hinder
them from making inroads into the Provinces subject to the Romans, it seems the
Britains had broke through that enclosure, and subdued much of the Country
beyond it.

A. D. 1^3. (...) in Hadrian.
4. Hereupon Hadrian not esteeming it worth his care, or endangering his Army to
repel them within their former bounds, contented himself to raise a wall or
rampire more Southern then the former, which he continued the space of
fourscore miles between Solway frith on the West, and Tinmouth on the East side
of the Isle. Which wall made of Turfs, and strengthened with Timber, was
afterward repaired by the Emperor Severus, and again changed into a stone wall
by Theod^sius Father of the famous Emperor of that name. This was in
succeeding times called the The Picts Wall, by reason that those Northern
Britains beyond it became as a distinct Nation, taking their name from their
continuing the old barbarous custom of painting themselves, which the civil
inhabitants had relinquished.

5. Hadrian the year following was called out of Brittany to compose a sedition
raised at Alexandria in Egypt: A. D. 124.
Therefore he passed back into Gaul, and from thence into Spain where he
wintred. Out of Spain the next year he sayld into Egypt, where having quieted
the Country, he returned to Rome.

VII. CHAP. A. D. 126.

VII. CHAPTER



1.2 Persecution raised by Hadrian against Christians: and the occasion of it.

3. He profanes the holy places at Jerusalem

4. They remain desolate till S. Helena's time.

5. Modern Sectaries imitate the rage of Heathens against the Cross of Christ.

1. THis laborious circuit made by the Emperor, A. D. 126.
though it was very beneficial to the Regions through which he passed, that
is, almost the whole Empire, yet it was the cause of great sufferings to the
Christians every where; but especially in Palestina, where they were most
numerous, that Country being the source of our Religion: and also by reason of
the Devotion which all of them bore to those holy places consecrated by the
actions and sufferings of our Savior: to celebrate the memory of which there
was continually a confluence of Beleivers from all the quarters of the world.

2. This moved envy in the minds of the Jews and Gentiles likewise, upon whose
complaints the Emperor not only renewed the persecution of them begun by his
Predecessor, but as Sulpitius Severus affirms, imagining that he could destroy
Christian Religion it self by injurious defacing the place where it began,
Sulpit. Sever. hist. l. 2.
he erected in the most sacred place of our our Lords Passion the Idols of
Devils. And because Christians were generally esteemed an offspring of Jews, be
ordained a Coh^rt of soldiers to keep cont^nuall watch to forbid all Jews an
access into Jerusalem.

3. S. Paulinus more particularly says, Paulin. Epist 11. Hieron. Epist. ad
Paulin.
that on Mount Calvary where our Lord suffered, Hadrian placed the Idol of
Jupiter: (S. Hierom adds, that on the Rock where the Cross had been placed, he
erected a marble-statue consecrated to Venus) and profaned Bethleem, the place
of our Saviors Birth, with the Temple of Adonis. This he did, as conceiving
that the Root as it were, and foundation of the Church would be destroyed, if
Idols were worshipped in those places in which Christ was born that he might
suffer; and suffered that he might rise again; and r^se that he might reign;
being judged by men, that he might be Judge of mankind.

4. In this desolation did those Holy places lie, Soz^^ Histor. lib. 2. ap. 1.
till Helena the Mother of the Emperor Constantin out of a pious affection to
Christian Religion, thought it worth her pains and industry to search out the
Venerable Cross. But neither that, nor the divine Sepulcher of our Lord were
easily to be found. For the ancient Gentiles, persecutors of the Church,
laboring with their utmost endeavors to oppress and destroy Christ^an
Religion then newly strung forth, A. D. 128.
overwhelmed that place by heaping on it a great bank of earth. And more^ver
encompassing the whole place both of the Sepulcher whence Christ rose, and
Mount Calvary where he was crucified, with a great wall in all sides, ^^hy
afterward profaned it by ornaments of their own heathenish fashion. For first
they paved it with stones, and then raised up a Temple of Venus, and in
conclusion placed in it the Idol of that impure Goddess: This they did, to the
end that if any would adore Christ in that place, they might seem to worship
Venus; and consequently to process of time the true cause (...) m^n had that
place in Veneration, would be utterly forgotten.

5. We see here who they were to whom the Ensigns of our Lords Passion, his
Cross and Sepulcher, as likewise the place of his Nativity were venerable, to
wit, the ancient Primitive Christians, our British Saint Helena, etc. and to
whom they were odious; to envious Jews and persecuting Heathens. And yet the
abolishing of those sacred Monuments, the scornful reproaches and blasphemies
cast on the Cross of our Lord are of late made the proofs of Primitive
Reformation. The Cross, Lactant. I^^^it. c. 27.
says Lactantius, was frequently to wicked Princes a principal Motive of
persecuting Christians. And the reason is given by S. Athanasius, Athanas. in
vita sancti Amo^^^.
because by the preaching of the ignominy of the Cross, Idolatry was
confounded, and the golden Temple of the Heathens fell to the ground.

VIII. CHAPTER
VIII. CHAP.
1. Persecution against Christians mitigated: why.

2.3 etc. Several rebellions of Jews and their destruction.

1. THis persecution raised by Hadrian was shortly after mitigated, upon
occasion of a suggestion made to him by Gr^vianus Pr^c^nsul of Asia, A. D. 128.
that it was against all law and equity, that persons in all other respects
innocent, should only for the name and and Title of a Sect be exposed to the
fury of impious multitudes. And moreover there wanted not among the Christians
themselves persons of eminence and learning, who employed their pens to write
Apologies in justification of the piety and innocence of the Christian
Profession: such were Quadratus a Disciple of the Apostles, and Aristides
Bishop of Athens. By such means the eyes of many were opened, and men began to
consider Christianity, not by the erroneous judgments and rumors of the
Vulgar, or the malicious suggestions of Jews, but by the sober account given
of it by prudent men, and the untainted lives and constant deaths of the
Professors of it. These things moved many to approve and embrace it, and the
Emperor Hadrian himself to publish an Edict, prohibiting the punishment of
any for their Belief, if otherwise they were free from crimes.

2. What effect this mitigation of the persecution probably wrought in Brittany
we shall presently show. But first we will observe Gods just severity against
the most inveterate hatred of the Jews, always active and restless to incite
and inflame persecutions against innocent Christians.

3. The Jews had raised a rebellion in the beginning of Hadrians reign: and
with much ado were at last subdued: insomuch as they were forbidden to enter
into, or so much as from a far to look upon their City Jerusalem: The name of
which was by the Emperor likewise changed into Aelia Capitolina, and in it a
Temple was built to Jupiter. Yea moreover the Jews were by a Law forbidden to
practice circumcision, thereby to distinguish themselves from others.

4. Upon these provocations a second Rebellion far more violent and largely
spread then the former, A. D. 135. Dio in Hadrian.
was raised by them, by which, says Dio, the whole world was shaken and
disordered. To oppose them, after that the Emperors first General, Tinius
Rufus, had been unsuccesfull, Julius Severus was commanded out of Brittany,
which he had governed several years: and in his place was sent L^cini^s
Priscus, favored by the Emperor for service formerly done against the Jews
in their first sedition. Concerning whom nothing remains of any exploits done
by him: for all his employment was to guard the Wall or Rampire lately raised
to restrain the inroads of the rude Northern Britains. Only there is still
extant an ancient Inscription signifying this his promotion, and the cause of
it, which Monument was raised by one of his Officers, Q: Cassius Domitius
Palumbus.

5. As for the particulars touching the prosecution of the Jewish war, the
savage cruelties exercised by them, and the great hazards sustained by the
Romans, which yet ended in almost an utter extirpation of the Jewish Nation,
these things not pertaining to our present design, are to be enquired into
among the Histories of that Age. We will now return to the Ecclesiastical
affairs of Brittany happening in this time, which though of small moment, are not
therefore to be omitted.

A. D. 124.

IX. CHAPTER


IX. CHAP.
1.2. The death of the British King Coellus: to whom succeeds his Son Lucius,
a child. The reason of his name.

3. A message sent from the Britains to Pope Evaristus.

4. An answer given by his Successor Pope Alexander.

5. Many Baptized in Brittany at Granta, or Cambridge.

A. D. 124.
1. TOward the beginning of the Emperor Hadrian's reign dyed the British King
Coellus. Leaving for his successor his Son Lucius, a child then of ten years
old, who imitating the acts of his Father, possessed the affections of his
subjects, being esteemed as a second Coellus. Westmonasteri^^s. ad an. ^. 115.
The reverence and love which his Father bore to the Romans seems to have been
the cause that he gave him a Roman name, which being derived from Lux (Light)
hence the Britains called him Lever Maur, or a great Brightness, by reason of
the joy he brought to his Father, being born to him in his old age, in the
thirty seventh year of his reign, as likewise to the whole Kingdom which
esteemd it a great happiness to enjoy a successor to their most beloved King.

2. But Divine Providence seems to have had another design in the appointment
of this Kings name, intending it for an Omen of that heavenly Light, which in
this Princes time and by his procurement was communicated to the whole Kingdom.
But this most signal blessing arrived not suddenly. Though King Lucius,
imitating his Fathers benignity, expressed much kindness to the Christians, yet
he quitted not the superstition of his Forefathers till after many Vocations
sent him from God, and many invitations and preparations which by Divine
Providence occurring in his time, disposed him by little and little to submit
his neck to the easy and most happy Yoke of Christ. What those preparations
were, we shall set down in their due place.

3. Our British Historians, Gildas and Nennius, mention a message sent to the
Britains by Pope Evaristus in the latter end of Traians reign, exhorting them
to the embracing of Christian Faith. An occasion and advantage for such a
message may seem to have been taken from Traians mitigating the persecution
formerly raised by him against the Christians, A. D. 141.
for which purpose he sent his Edicts into all Provinces. No wonder therefore if
that Holy Bishop laid hold of this opportunity to recommend that Religion,
whose innocence was approved by its greatest persecuters.

4. Yea moreover Albertus Krantzius a late German Writer, Krantzius.
from what Monuments it does not appear, affirms that King Lucius obtained
from Pope Alexander the successor of Evaristus, that the Christian Faith
should be preached in this Isle. Which if it be true, we may reasonably impute
the occasion of it to the Emperor Hadrians Edict published for the ceasing of
persecutions against the Christians. Now that this Holy Bishop did readily
comply with so desirable a request, and consequently send Apostolical men to
propagate the sacred Verities of our Christian Faith, Broughton. cent. 2 cap. 3.
some Writers do hence collect, because about these times our Ecclesiastical
Annalls do take notice of the coming of S. Timotheus and S. Marcellus with
others into Brittany, concerning whom we shall treat shortly.

5. Moreover in the most ancient Monuments of Burton Abbey we find, A. D. 141.
that in the year of our Lord a hundred forty and one there were baptized in
Granta (afterward called Cambridge) nine Doctors and scholars. Now whether
this so memorable and publicka Ceremony was performed by any of the Preachers
sent by Pope Alexander, is not mentioned in these Monuments. However this is
confidently ave^^ed by Gildas, Gild. de Excid.
That the Christian Faith did from the beginning entirely remain in Brittany
till Diocletians persecution. Which saying of Gildas, as Bishop Usher well
observes, was seasonably recorded by him, Vsser. Primord. fol. 52.
least any one should think that before the conversion of King Lucius,
Christian Religion brought into Brittany by the Apostles and their Disciples,
had been utterly extinguished.

A. D. 147.

X. CHAP.


X. CHAP.
1. Antoninus Pius succeeds to Hadrian in the Empire: who sent Lollius Vrbicus
to repress the rebellious Caledonians in Brittany.

2.3. The Brigantes in Brittany rebel: and are pacified: For which the
Emperor is styled Britannicus.

1. TO the Emperor Hadrian succeeded Antoninus Pius adopted by him: A. D. 142
Capitol. in Antonin. c. ^.
In the beginning of whose reign the Northern rude Britains took the boldness
to break through the wall raised by Hadrian for their restraint, and after a
hostile manner made in roads into the Roman Provinces. For the repressing of
whom Lollius Vrbicus was by the New ^mperour sent into Brittany to govern the
Roman Army: who easily quietted those commotions, and moreover drove back the
Britains within their former bounds, at Edinborough, where he raised a new
Wall, in the same narrow space between the Eastern and Western seas, where
formerly Julius Agricola had for the same purpose built several forts at
convenient distances. From which wall the Emperor Antoninus in his Itinerary
reckons the utmost limits of the Empire.

A. D. 147.
2. A few years after, the Brigantes (in Yorkshire) upon what provocations it is
uncertain, began ^umults, and both by Sea and land invaded the Ordovices (in
Northwales) a Roman Province. Which injury the others likewise repayd in the
like manner. Hereupon Lollius Vrbicus the Roman Praetor, least this flame of
dissension should spread further, timely put both his army and Navy in
readiness. Himself lead his Army by land, and Seius Saturninus commanded at
Sea: Thus in a short time all differences were composed, and the Brigantes, who
first began the sedition, received condign punishment.

3. Though these two Tumults in Brittany are by the Writers of those times only
slightly and summarily described, yet it seems they were full of danger and
hazard to the Romans, otherwise the Emperor Antoninus by whose directions and
authority the war was managed, would not have assumed the Title of Britannicus,
as a conqueror of Brittany, which Title notwithstanding we find ascribed to
him.

XI. CHAP. A. D. 160.

XI. CHAP.



1. Succession of Popes: Pope Pius establishes the observation of Easter: to
whom the Britains conform.

2 3 4. Of S. Marcellus a Britain: Bishop of Tiers and the first Brittich
Martyr: he suffered out of Brittany.

1. IN the nineteenth year of the Emperor Antoninus, A. D. 158.
being the one hundred fifty eighth year of our Lord, Pope Pius the first of
that name succeeded Higinus, the Successor of Pope Alexander. He was the first
who by a Decree established the observation of Easter, or the Feast of our
Lord's Resurrection on a Sunday, in opposition to the Iudaizing Christians in
the East, who pretending a Tradition from S. John the Evangelist, kepd it
precisely on the fourteenth day of the first Moon in March. This* we mention
here because some Modern Protestants pretending that our ancient British
Christians conformed themselves to the Eastern, not Roman custom, do therefore
infer that this Island received the Christian Faith, not from Rome, but the
East: Which controversy shall be examined in due place.

2. Our Ancient Ecclesiastical Monuments make mention about this time of S.
Marcellus a Britain born, and a zealous Apost^licall Preacher of the Faith in
Brittany. Martyr. Ang. 4. September.
Concerning whom our English Martyrologe testifies that he gathered into a
flock the remainders of those who had been converted by S. Joseph of Arimathea
and his companions, confirming them in the same Faith.

3. This S. Marcellus was afterward ordained Bishop of Tongres and Triers.
Miraeus in ^ast. Bolg. 7. Iunij. Catalog. Epis. Tre^irens.
For before Constantins time, says Miraeus, those two Cities were governed by
one Bishop. In the Annals of which Church we read, that Saint Lucius King of
Brittany was made a Christian, and baptized by this Marcellus a Teacher of the
inhabitants of Triers. Indeed it is not unprobable that King Lucius might have
been instructed in the verities of Christian Religion^, and well disposed to
the Profession of it by this Saint: but there are far more authentik
testimonies demonstrating that he was baptized by Fugatius and Damianus sent
from Rome by Pope Eleutherius, as shall be demonstrated herafter.

A. D. 161.
4. This holy Bishop was the first Britain which suffered Martyrdom, out of the
Island, as S. Alban was the first that suffered within it. Mart. Angl. 4. Sept.
He is commemorated in our Martyrologe on the fourth of September, and in the
Gallican Martyrologe he is celebrated with an illustrious Elogy. This his
Martyrdom happened many years after this time, in a great persecution raised
against Christians during the reign of Antoninus his Successor, Marcus
Aurelius, when he was absent from Rome, and gone into the Eastern parts then in
commotion after he had finished the German war.

XII. CHAPTER
XII. CHAP.
1.2. S. Timothy the son of Pudens preaches in Brittany.

3. Of his Sister S. Pudentiana.

4. Who Priscilla was.

1. TOgether with S. Marcellus there came from Rome another illustrious Saint
of Noble Birth and plentiful fortunes, all which notwithstanding he despised
and relinquished that with more freedom he might preach Christ crucified: This
was S. Timotheus, the son of Pudens a Roman Senator, and of his wife, supposed
by many to have been the famous S. Claudia, the British Lady, concerning whom
we have already treated. He was Brother to Novatus and to S. Pudentiana and S.
Pr^xedes, whose memories are anniversarily celebrated by the Catholic Church.

2. The coming of S. Timotheus is a considerable proof that his Mother was a
Britain: and for that reason the whole family may justly challenge a place in
this History. And because he survived the rest, we will briefly set down what
we find in the Ecclesiastical Office touching the two Holy Sisters.

Bre^. Roman. 19. Ma^j. A. D. 161.
3. Pudentiana a Virgin, daughter of Pudens a Roman (Senator) with admirable
piety practicing the duties of Christian Religion, together with her sister
Praxedes, sold her patrimony, and distributed to the poor the mon^y arising
from thence: giving her self wholly ^o fasting and prayer. By her endeavors
and zeal her whole family, consisting of ninety six persons, was converted to
the Faith, and baptized by Pope Pius. And whereas by an Edict of the Emperor
Antoninus public Sacrifices of Christians were forbidden, the Holy Pope
celebrated the Divine Mysteries together with other Christians in the house of
Pudentian^: who kindly entertained them all, affording them all things
necessary for their sustenan^e. Thus continually employing herself in these
offices of Piety she departed out of this life, A. D. 162.
and on the fourteenth of the Calends of June (in the year of our Lord one
hundred sixty and one) she was buried in the Sepulcher of her Father in the
Coemitory of Priscilla situated in the Salarian way.

4. Priscilla here mentioned, by whom a Coemitory or common place of burial
for Christians had been bestowed, was the Mother of Pudens and Grandmother of
this holy Virgin. From her probably it was that her Mother Claudia, took her
name. For as she being a Captive attending King Caractacus when he was taken
prisoner by Ostorius, she changed her British name into Claudia, out of regard
to Emperor Claudius: so being married to Pudens she it seems once more changed
it for another, peculiar to her husbands family.

XIII. CHAP. XIII. CHAPTER

1.2. The death of Novatus Brother of S Timothy and S* Pudentiana, signified in
a l^tter from the Holy Priest Pastor* S. Timothy in Brittany.

3. S. Timothy's Answer: who leaves to the disposal of his Sister S. Praxedes
the state left by their Brother.

4 5. She dedicats the Bathes of Novatus or Timothy, into a Church where
Christians assembled.

6. Why Churches in Rome called Tituli.

1. THe next year followed the death of Pudentiana's Brother Novatus. A. D.
162.
Concerning which the ancient Ecclesiastical Monuments have still preserved a
letter written by the Holy Priest called Pastor, directed to S. Timotheus then
absent from Rome, and employed in the Apostolic Office in Brittany: the tenor
of the Letter is as follows: 2. Pastor a Priest to his follow Priest Timotheus,
^he Letter of Pastor to S. Timotheus.
health in our Lord. The Venerable Virgin Praxedes was in great affliction for
the death of her Sister Pudentiana. Whereupon many honorable Christians
together with our Holy Pope Pius came to her to comfort her. There came
likewise to her for the same purpose Novatus your Brother, who is also our
Brother in our Lord, and gave her much consolation: and moreover by his
liberality he greatly refreshed many poor Christians, ministering to them
plentifully of his wealth. Being with his Sister, he earnestly desired that by
her prayers he might obtain mercy from our Lord. He likewise, together with our
most blessed Bishop Pius, does frequently commemorate you at the Altar of our
Lord. About a month and twenty eight days days after he was departed from the
Virgin Praxedes, he fell sick Now our Bishop Pius together with the Virgin
Praxedes having a solicitude for all Christians, they enquired where the Man of
God Novatus was, since he appeared not in the Congregation: And they were
informed that he was detained thence by sickness: then were all very sorrowful.
Hereupon the Blessed Virgin Praxedes said to our Bishop Pius, If it be your
Holiness pleasure let us go to him: for by your visitation and prayers I do
assure my self our Lord will save him. Upon this her proposal it was resolved
accordingly: and at night we together with our Bishop Pius, and the Virgin of
our lord Praxedes, went to the Man of our Lord Novatus. And when this Holy man
heard that this assembly was come to see him, he gave thanks to our Lord for
the comfort he received by the Visitation of the Holy Bishop Pius, together
with the Virgin of our Lord, and all the rest of us. Thus we remained in his
house eight days and nights. And during the time we were with him, he expressed
his Will and pleasure to be, to bequeath to your self and the Blessed-Virgin
Praxedes all his estate: and on the thirteenth day following he departed to our
Lord. Of these things we together with holy Pius Bishop of the Apostolic See
and the Virgin Praxedes, thought meet to give you an account by these our
letters, to the end you might acquaint us with your pleasure, how you would
have the estate of your Brother Novatus disposed, that your appointment may in
all things be observed. Sent by Eusebius a Subdeacon of the holy Roman Church.



3. To this Letter S. Timotheus his Answer follows, though short, yet full of
piety and perfumed with the simplicity and Christian Charity of that age.
Timotheus to his Brother and fellow priest Pastor, and to his most holy Sister
Praxedes, health. We being desirous in all things without delay to express our
service, beseech your holiness to recommend us to the Memory, and intercession
of the Holy Apostles, the holy Bishop Pius, Prelat of the holy Apostolic See,
and all the saints. I your humble servant perusing the letter you were pleased
to direct to me, am more abundantly filled with joy: For my soul always was,
and still continues resigned to yours. Wherefore your Holiness may take notice,
that the same is pleasing to us your servant, which was agreeable to our Brother
Novatus, namely that what he bequeathed to me, should be at the disposition of
the holy Virgin Praxedes: and therefore hereby you have full power to employ
the said legacy which way soever shall be thought good by you and the said holy
Virgin.

4. Now what was the success of this holy negotiation appears in the ancient
Acts of the same Pastor in these words, Act. Pastor.
Having therefore received this Epistle, we were filled with joy, and presented
it to the Holy Bishop Pius, to be read by him. Then the blessed Bishop Pius
gave thanks to God the Father Almighty. At the same time the holy Virgin of our
Lord Praxedes, having received such power (from her Brother Timotheus) humbly
besought the Blessed Bishop Pius that he would dedicate a Church in the Baths
of Novatus, at that time not frequented: because in them there was a large and
spacious Edifice. To this request Bishop Pius willingly yielded, and dedicated
a Church in the Baths of Novatus at Rome in the street called The Bricklayers
street, where likewise he constituted a Roman Title, and consecrated a Font for
Baptism on the fourth of the Ides of May.

5. These Bathes here named from Novatus, have elsewhere their title from S.
Timotheus, being situated on the Mountain at Rome called Viminal. To this place
it was, before a Church was solemnly consecrated, that Christians usually
repaired, but privately, for the celebration of holy Christian Mysteries: as we
find in the Acts of S. Justin the Philosopher and Martyr: For being examined by
the Prefect of Rome concerning the place in which the Christians made their
Assemblies, his answer was, I have hitherto had my abode near the house of one
Martius, at the Bath named The Timothin-bath. For which Assemblies, Act.
Justin. ap. Bar. A. D. 165.
having been forbid by the Emperor, the same Justin four years after suffered
Martyrdom.

6. Now Whereas in this relation made by the holy Priest Pastor, there is
mention of a Roman Title constituted by Pope Pius; we may observe that in the
first infancy of the Church, those who were ordained Priests to celebrate
Divine Mysteries, were not confined to any fixed residence, but exercised their
function in several places, as occasion presented it self: But about the year
of our Lord one hundred and twelve S. Evaristus Pope assigned to each Priest a
peculiar Cure and Parish in Rome, which were called Tituli, or Titles, so named
from the Ensigns or Marks set on the places where they assembled: which in the
ancient Churches were Crosses, erected to signify that such buildings were
appropriated to Christian Worship.

A. D. 166.

XIV. CHAPTER


XIV. CHAP.
1. The death of Antoninus Emperor, to whom succeed Marcus Aurelius and Lucius
Verus.

2. The death of S. Praxedes.

3. Persecution raised by M. Aurelius at the instigation of Philosophers.

1. THE same year with S. Novatus, did the Emperor Antoninus likewise end his
life: A. D. 163.
to whom succeeded Marcus Aurelius, called the Philosopher, and Lucius Verus:
so that the Roman Empire was jointly governed by two persons, with equal
authority.

A. D. 164.
2. In the second year of the reign of these Emperors dyed the holy Virgin
Praxedes. Concerning whom thus the Holy Priest Pastor continues to write: Two
years and eighteen days after this Church was dedicated, there was a great
persecution raised against Christians, to the end to force them to worship
Idols: and many were crowned with Martyrdom. Now the holy Virgin of our Lord
Praxedes, being fervent in the Holy Ghost, secretly concealed many Christians
in the said Title, or Church: whose bodies she strengthened with food, and their
minds with exhortations proceeding from Gods spirit. Then information was given
to Antoninus (that is, M. Aurelius) that Christian assemblies were made in the
house of Praxedes. Who sent Officers and laid hold on many, among which was
Symitrius a Priest, with twenty two more: All which he commanded to be put to
death in the same Title, without any examination. Whose bodies the blessed
Virgin Praxedes took by night, and buried them in the Coemitery of Priscilla on
the seventh day of the Ides of June. After this the Holy Virgin became much
afflicted in mind, and with many groans prayed unto our Lord that she might
pass out of this life; whose prayers and tears found access unto our Lord
Jesus Christ. For on the thirty fourth day after the Martyrdom of the foresaid
Saints the consecrated Virgin went unto our Lord, on the twelfth of the Calends
of August. Whose body I Pastor a Priest buried next to her Father in the
Coemitery of Priscilla in the Salarian way: where at this day the Prayers, and
devotions of Saints are frequently exercised.

3. This persecution was begun chiefly at the instigation of Heathen
Philosophers, especially the inhuman, beastly Sect of the Cynicks. For by
reason of the Emperors studiousnes and profession of Stoicall Philosophy, such
persons had easy admittance to him. Among whom Tatianus a learned Christian in
that time takes notice of one infamous Cynick called Crescens, whose vanity,
luxury, cruelty and profanenes is well described by him: and S. Justin Martyr
in his Oration publicly pronounced before the Senate, mentions the same Cynick
with contempt and indignation: as it were prophesying his Martyrdom following,
and procured by those Sycophants.

XV. CHAP. XV. CHAPTER

1.2. Of S. Timotheus: his death by Martyrdom at Rome.

3. A Letter of Pope Pius signifying this, etc.

4. His universal care over the Church.

5.6. A second Letter of the same Holy Pope.

7. Great care of Christians touching the Sacred bodies of Martyrs.

1. THus we have the sum of what is in Ecclesiastical Monuments delivered
touching three holy children of Pudens a Roman Senator, and his wife Claudia
Priscilla: in the Acts of whom our Nation has an interest, partly in regard of
their Mother a British Lady, as likewise their Brother S. Timotheus, who
besides his general Apostolical Office exercised in this Island, had no doubt
a great influence in disposing King Lucius to the embracing of our Christian
Faith.

2. Now besides this general Character of this our Saint, there is little
extant touching S. Timotheus, but only that the year after his devout Sister
Praxedes death, he returned to Rome, where also he became a happy prey to those
sensual savage Philosophers, and in the following year gloriously ended his
life by Martyrdom, together with another worthy companion called Marcus. Romans
Mart. 24. Mar.
This appears both in the ancient Roman Martyrologe on the twenty fourth of
March, as likewise an Epistle written by the Holy Pope Pius to Iustus Bishop of
Vienna in France.

3. The Copy of which Epistle is as follows: Epistle of P. Pius.
Pius Bishop of Rome to his Brother Iustus Bishop. Before thou did depart
from Rome, our Sister Euprepia, if thou do well remember, assigned the Title
of her house for maintaining the poor: where we abiding with our poor
brethren do celebrate Masses. Now we are desirous to be informed concerning
thy affairs, most happy Brother, since thou tookst thy journey to that
Senatoriall City of Vienna: as likewise with what success thou have spread
abroad the seed of the Gospel. Those Priests which had their first education
from the Apostles, and have continued to our days, with whom also we divided
the care of preaching the word of Faith, having been called by our Lord, do
now repose in their eternal mansions. Saint Timotheus and Marcus have ended
their days by a happy conflict. Take care, dear Brother, that thou follow them
by imitating their zeal, and freeing thy self from the chains of this world.
Make have to obtain with the Holy Apostles the everlasting palm of victory:
that palm which S. Paul attained by a world of suffering; and S. Peter also,
from whom the Cross it self could not take the love of Christ. Soter and
Eleutherius, worthy Priests salute thee. Salute the Brethren who live with thee
in our Lord. Cherinthus, Satan's prime Minister, seduces many from the Faith.
May the Grace of Christ dwell for ever in thy heart.

4. In this Epistle we see what a general care this holy Bishop expresses, and
how his solicitude for the salvation of souls is not confined to Rome or Italy
only. As likewise how he professes that he divided the care of propagating the
Gospel to Priests subordinate to him. So that it cannot be doubted but that S.
Timotheus his employment in our Lords Vineyard in Brittany proceeded from his
care, and was accompanied with his benediction. A further proof whereof is
afforded us in another letter of his to the same Iustus Bishop of Vienna, which
we here set down.

A second Letter.
5. Pius Bishop of Rome, to his Brother Iustus Bishop, health. Attalus is
arrived here, bringing with him the Epistles of the Martyrs there: whereby he
has filled our hearts with inestimable joy for their triumphs. He acquainted u^
that our holy Colleague Verus has victoriously triumphed also over the Prince of
this world: and that thou art seated in his place in the Senatoriall City of
Vienna, being clothed with Episcopal Vestments. Be careful therefore
faithfully to discharge in our Lord the Ministry which thou have received. Let
not thy diligence be wanting decently and reverently to bury the bodies of the
Martyrs, as the members of Christ: for the Apostles treated S. Steven. Visit
the prisons of the Saints, and take care that none of them loose the fervor of
their Faith. Approve holy Martyrdoms by the light of the Holy Spirit in thee.
Encourage and encite them to continue constant in the Faith. Let the Priests
and Deacons observe thee, not as a Master, but as a Minister of Christ. Let thy
piety and holiness be a protection to the whole congregation under thee. Our
brethren, whose names Attalus will acquaint thee with, are freed from the
Tyrants cruelty, and now rest in our Lord. Pastor the Priest has built a Title
(or Church,) and is happily dead in our Lord. Know, O most blessed Brother,
that it has been revealed to me, that the end of my life approaches shortly.
One thing I earnestly beg of thee, that in the holy Communion thou will not be
unmindfull of me. This poor Senate of Christ at Rome salutes thee. I salute the
whole assembly of Brethren with thee in our Lord.

6. That which this holy Pope mentions of his approaching death, A. D. 161.
was by the event proved to have been a Divine revelation, for the year
following he was crowned with Martyrdom, after he had sat ten years: And
Anicetus a Syrian succeeded him. A. D. 170.


7. As touching that advice concerning the Bodies of Martyrs, several examples
of those Primitive times demonstrate, that what he there advises, was no
superstitious invention of his own, as our Modern Separatists do call it, but
a duty received from the Apostles. Such reverence did the Church of Smyrna
express to the Relics of S. Polycarpus, who was martyrd two years after S.
Pius: as appears in their Epistle relating the circumstances of his blessed
death. The malicious Jews would have persuaded the Roman President to have
refused the holy Martyrs body to the Christians of Smyrna, least, said they,
Eusebius. Histor. lib. 4. ^ap. 14.
they should forsake their crucifica God, and worship Polycarpus for a God: for
these miscreants could not distinguish a sacred Veneration due to holy Relics,
from that Supreme adoration, which belongs only to God: But those holy
Primitive Christians were better instructed, Ib.
for thus they write; We (say they) have reposed the bones of Polycarpus, more
valuable to us then precious stones, and purer then gold, in such a place as is
decent and becoming: Where being all of us assembled, God will give us the
grace to celebrate with all possible joy and exaltation the day of his
Martyrdom, as being indeed the day of his more happy Nativity.

XVI. CHAP. XVI. CHAPTER

1. Commotions in Brittany: pacified by Calphurnius Agricola.

2.3. Long and dangerous war in Germany. A victory miraculously obtained by the
Prayers of Christians.

4. Successions of Popes. Touching King Lucius.

1. IN the eighth year of the reign of M. Aurelius and L. Verus, A. D. 170.
the Northern part of the Empire, especially in Germany and Brittany, was
cruelly agitated with tempests of seditions and wars. Capitoliu. in Aurelio.
In Brittany the Northern Province of the Ottadini (about Berwick) broke out
into open rebellion: for reducing of whom Calphurnius Agricola was sent into
the Island, upon whose approach the rebels quickly submitted. And all that
remains besides to keep alive his Memory, is an Inscription upon a Pillar
raised by A. Licinius, wherein Calphurnius Agricola's name is engraved: Which
Pillar is dedicated to the Syrian Goddess ( Dea Syria,) worshipped, it seems,
by the Romans in that place. Seld. de D^s Sir. 2. cap 2.
Concerning which Goddess the reader may consult our learned Mr. Seldom in his
Treatise of that argument.

2. But the German war was more lasting and doubtful: which not belonging to
our present design, A. D. 180.
the relation of it must be sought for in the Roman Historians of this age. Yet
one circumstance in it, conducing much to the glory of Christian Religion, must
not be omitted. Which was the saving of the Emperor and the whole Roman Army,
not only from a certain destruction by the German Nations, A. D. 176.
(the Marcomanni, Catti, etc.) by whom they were enclosed, but from a more
irresistible enemy, extremity of thirst: All this obtained by the Prayers of
Christian soldiers, not only interrupted all persecution of them, but obliged
the Emperor by his public Letters sent into all Provinces to profess his
gratitude for so eminent a deliverance.

3. The particular circumstances hereof we shall refer to the following Book,
the argument whereof will be the happy and glorious conversion of our British
King Lucius to the Christian Faith: To effect which, this so wonderful,
public and unquestionable a miracle, no doubt much conduced. Now this
conversion having been perfected in the beginning of the reign of the Emperor
Commodus, who succeeded his Father M. Aurelius, which was four years after this
stupendous deliverance of the Romans, our Ecclesiastical Monuments afford us
little for the furnishing that space of time. Therefore we will only add, for
a distinct clearing of Chronology, the succession of the Bishops of Rome since
the last mentioned Pope Pius the first of that name.

4. To Pope Pius therefore, having sat somewhat more then nine years, and
dying in the year of our Lord one hundred sixty six, succeeded S. Anicetus, to
whom after nine years succeeded S. Soter^, who having for the space of five
years filled the Chair of S. Peter, had for his next Successor S. Eleutherius
in the year of our Lord one hundred and eighty: in the third year after whose
assumption to the Apostolic dignity King Lucius, A. D. 180.
then an old man, for he had reigned fifty eight years, by Gods mercy and
grace, had his youth renewed like an Eagle, being born again by Baptism, and
made an heyr of an everlasting Kingdom.

THE FOVRTH BOOK OF THE CHVRCH-HISTORY OF BRITTANY.
I. CHAP.
I. CHAP.
1. The Conversion of the British King Lucius in his old Age.

2.3. Several Motives thereto.

4. Edicts of former Emperors in favor of Christians.

5. An example of the Emperor Antoninus his Edict.

1 KING Lucius had now governed the Britains almost threescore years, having
begun his reign in the tenth year of his age, when Almighty God at last subdued
his heart to the belief and obedience of his Gospel. It may perhaps seem
strange he should hold out so long against the Truth: but yet if we consider
the tenaciousnes of humane nature to inveterate customs, especially such as are
agreeable to flesh and blood, and likewise the horrible scandals and prejudices
which then were cast on Christian Religion, which even without such prejudices,
is extremely contrary to our natural inclinations, it is to be esteemed no
less then miraculous, that a great King in such times as those were, should
have the courage to be the first example, and this in his old age, of
submitting a Scepter and Crown to the spiritual Scepter of Christ's Kingdom.

2. Besides his so long experience of the innocence, humility, patience and
peaceable dispositions of his Christian subjects, we may suppose the principal
Motives inducing him to yield at last to the exhortations of many Apostolic
Preachers, such as were S. Aristobulus, S. Marcellus, S. Timotheus, etc. to
have been two; First the Testimonies that the Emperors themselves, though
otherwise Enemies to the Christian Faith, gave to the Professors of it: Next
the wonderful testimony that God gave thereto by rescuing the then reigning
Emperor from unavoydable destruction by the prayers of his Christian soldiers.

3. As touching the former Testimonies of Emperors, they are the more weighty,
because given not out of any worldly respects, but purely out of a conviction
of the innocence of poor persecuted Christians, after all severity, rigor and
cruelty had been used toward them to force them to renounce their Profession.
Moreover these Emperors were not such as Nero, Vitellius or Domitian, whose
favor to Christianity would have been a disgrace and prejudice to it: But
Princes venerable to the world for their prudence, courage, and zeal likewise
to their own superstition; Such were Nerva, Trajan, Hadrian, Antoninus Pius,
and Marcus Aurelius.

A. D. 181.
4. We will here insert only one Edict of the Emperor Antoninus, by which we
may gather the tenor of the others. It is extracted out of the Writings of S.
Justin the Philosopher and Martyr, who then flourished. The form thereof is as
follows.

5. The Emperor Caesar Titus Aelius Hadrianus Antoninus Pius Augustus, Highest
Priest, this fifteenth time possessed of the Tribunitiall Power, and this third
time Consul, Father of his Country. To the people of Asia, Health. I am
assured that the Gods will not permit those men to lie hid in obscurity, who
refuse to pay due honor and worship to them: for they themselves will far more
severely punish such, then you can. And you do not consider that by molesting
and tormenting those men whom you call impious, and charge as enemies to the
Gods, you thereby do the more confirm and increase their Religion. For to them
it is a thing more desirable to be accused as criminal, and to lay down their
lives for their God, then to enjoy the present life with worldly contentment.
Hence it comes to pass that by exposing their lives in this manner they obtain
over you a more illustrious Victory, then if they should perform whatsoever you
require of them. Now as concerning the Earthquakes which both in late times,
and at this present also do happen, I judge very reasonable to give you some
admonition. Whenever such calamities befall you, you are presently
disheartened and in despair, and you impute to their Religion, as if it alone
was the cause of all misfortunes happening to you. On the other side, whenever
any such accident befalls them, they are thereby incited to a more constant and
firm trust in God: Whereas all that while you either loose all knowledge of
God, and utterly despise all sacred duties, not only refusing to pay the
worship and service due unto the Deity, but greivously vexing, and to the death
pursuing those who do observe and reverence him. Now several Magistrates and
Governors of our Provinces have heretofore written letters in the behalf of
those innocent men to our most holy and deified Father Hadrian. To whom his
Answer and Rescript was, That no further trouble or molestation should be given
to those men, except they should otherwise be found guilty of any crime, or
that they had a design prejudicial to the Roman Empire. Many have likewise
written to me in their favor, to whom my Answer was, That I assented to the
Ordinance and Will of my late Father, And my pleasure is, That if any shall
hereafter offer any injury or vexation to any Christian, upon this account that
he is a Christian, the person so persecuted, though he be found to be indeed a
Christian, shall be presently acquitted: and his accuser shall undergo a just
and due punishment.

6. This Edict though in this Copy directed only to the Eastern Provinces,
where the malice and petulancy both of Jews and Gentiles, Enemies to
Christianity, was more violent, yet no doubt had its effect in all other places
also: For besides that the cause of Christians was every where the same; Edicts
of this nature were sent over the whole Empire, as we shall see in another of
the same nature published by M. Aurelius, and presently to be produced. And
however, all Christians no doubt would be zealous to make use of the advantage
that such Edicts gave them to justify their Religion, and clear it from all
prejudices cast upon it: For what could the most learned among the Christian
Writers in their Apologies invent more honorable and more advantageous to
recommend the Christian Faith, then this Heathen Emperor here published to all
the world? It cannot therefore be doubted, but that such Testimonies from
Enemies of such Authority had great influence on the minds of all considering
moderate Heathens, though otherwise less disposed to embrace the Truth then
King Lucius was, who from his Ancestors inherited a spirit not only of
civility and courtesy to all, but likewise of a particular kindness and
liberality to Christians.

II. CHAP. II. CHAP.

1.2. etc. The Wonderful deliverance of the Emperor Aurelius and his Army by
the prayers of Christians: particularly related out of Dio, etc.

4.5. Dio wrongfully ascribes this Victory to a Magician.

6.7. The Emperors own true relation of it.

8.9. This an occasion of the Conversion of many* particularly of King Lucius.

10. Mistake of the Centuriators of Magdeburg.

11.12. Eusebius his testimony of the Conversion of many (in Brittany.)

1. BUT another far more powerful and efficacious Testimony to the Truth did
Almighty God himself at this time give to all mankind, by delivering not the
Emperor alone, but his whole Army, yea in a manner the Empire it self, upon
the prayers of his Christian servants, from destruction otherwise inevitable.

2. The state of the then present affairs and danger is thus described by Dio a
Roman Historian living in those times, Dio in Marc^. lib. 71.
and a bitter enemy to Christians; The Emperor Marcus (says he) after many
and great battles fought in Germany, and no small dangers undergone, at last
subdued the Marc^manni and Iazyges. After which arose a new and sharp war
against a Nation called Quadi: From which war ensued a Victory to the Romans,
happy beyond their hope, being indeed obtained by a miraculous favor of God:
For the Romans in the midst of the battle being brought into extreme danger,
were saved after a wonderful manner, and merely by a special Divine
assistance. For being narrowly enclosed on all sides by the Quadi, though,
where the places were commodious, they fought valiantly* yet the Barbarous
Enemy delayed the deciding the business by a general battle, hoping, without the
hazard of a combat, to see them be destroyed by the extremity of heat and
thirst: For by the advantage of their multitudes having seized on all passages,
they had so shutt them in, that they could not come to any water. Now the
Romans being brought into these extreme difficulties, and tormented both with
diseases, wounds, a burning heat of the Sun and intolerable thirst, so that
they could neither fight, nor draw off from the place, but were forced to stand
still in their arms exposed to the fiery beams of the Sun: On a sudden there
was a gathering together of many clouds, from which descended wonderful great
showers of rain refreshing the Romans, which could be imputed to no other
cause, but a special immediate favor of God.

Ibid.
3. Thus writes Dio: and hereto adds, that the Romans being encouraged by so
unexpected an assistance of heaven, valiantly set upon their enemies astonished
at such a miracle, who immediately fled, and in their flight as many were
killed by lightning, thunderbolts and stones falling from heaven, as with their
enemies swords. So that it was notorious to all the world that this so great
deliverance and victory was the work not of men, but God only.

4. Now though evidence hereof extorted from Dio a free confession of Divine
goodness, yet his malice and envy against the Christians incited him to
attribute this Miracle rather to Magic more powerful then his God Mercury,
then to the true God of the Christians. For to the forecited account, he adds
this conclusion: Dio ibid.
The report is (says he) that a certain Egyptian Magician called Arnuphis, who
was then attending on the Emperor Marcus, did by Magical arts invocate
Mercury, especially that Deity which rules in the air, and other Demons, and
by their assistance forcibly procured such showers. But X^philin the abridger
of his History, evidently convinces this imposture, Xiphilin. ibid.
by showing first that the Emperor was never addicted to the delusions of
Magic, or affected with the society of the Professors of such arts: And
afterward declaring the true circumstances of the matter, to this effect:
Marcus, says he, having in his army one Legion consisting of soldiers which
came from Melitine (in Armenia) and were all of them worshippers of Christ:
There came to him, being in great fear what would bec^me of his Army, and at a
loss what course to take, the Pre^ect of his Pretorian ^ands, who told him,
That there was nothing so difficult but those which were called Christians
could obtain from God: of which Profession there was then present in the Army
one entire Legion. Marcus being thus informed, desired the Christians to make
supplication to their God in behalf of the Army. Which as soon as they had done,
God immediately granted their prayers, and with the same showers destroyed the
Enemies, and refreshed the Romans. Hereupon Marcus wonderfully astonished with
these things, by a public Edict honored the Christians, and called that
Legion the Thundering Legion. And to this effect an Epistle written by the
Emperor himself is extant to this day.

5. This was the true Narration of this wonderful deliverance, which is
confirmed by the Testimonies of several learned Christians in their public
Apologies for their Religion immediately after that time, such were
Apollinaris* Bishop of Hierapolis cited by Eusebius, and S. Gregory Nissenus,
Eusebius. hist. G^rg. Niss. in oration. in 40. Martyr. Tertull. Apol. c. 5. ad
Scapul c. 4.
and likewise Tertullian in his works still extant. Which is a proof undeniable
of the Truth of these things: because otherwise their alleging of so famous an
accident in the times when if their allegations had been false, they might
evidently have been convinced of most impudent forgery, this would instead of
pacifying, have more enraged their persecutors against them.

6. But a Witness beyond exception is the Emperor Marcu^ himself, though a
Heathen, who testifies, not by report or hearsay, but what his eyes had seen:
This he does in a public Letter or Edict in favor of Christians, which he
commanded to be sent through all the Provinces of the Empire. This is that
Epistle mentioned by Xiphilin: the tenor whereof is this: 7. The Emperor
Caesar Marcus Aurelius Augustus Antoninus, The Epistle an^ Edict of the
Empero^r M. Aurelius in favor of Christians.
Germanicus, Parthicus, Sarmaticus, High Priest, in the twenty eighth year of
our Tribunitiall Power, and our third Consulship, Father of our Country,
Proconsul, To the Senate and People of Rome, sends health. I have given you
information touching the greatness of our present design and resolution, and all
the occurrents which successively happened to me in Germany, both in our combats
and Seiges. Truly when I was at Carnutum, our Scouts informed us that there
approached within the space of nine miles no fewer then seaventy four Ensigns
of our Enemies. And the same thing did Pompeianus our General declare to us,
which our selves likewise saw. Now having in our Army only four Legions, the
First, the Tenth, the Twinn-Legion, and that of the Ferentarij, and there being
in our Enemies Camp no fewer then nine hundred seaventy seven thousand, when I
compared our small forces with the vast multitudes of our Barbarous Foes, I
addressed my prayers and vows to our Roman Gods: But when I saw that I was
neglected by them, and that the Enemy began to overcharge us, considering the
small number of our own forces, I sent to call the Christians, which were not a
few in our Army, whom I both by prayers and threats also urged to assist us:
But threats were neither needful, nor indeed seemly, as I perceived afterward,
when I found how powerful they were. For they undertaking our defense, did not
set themselves to provide themselves of weapons, or to make use of arms or
Trumpets: For to put their trust in such things is not acceptable to that God,
whose name, cause and honor they always carry in their hearts. Therefore it is
just that we should acknowledge those to be safely protected by God whom
formerly we esteemed to be impious and enemies to him. For having cast
themselves prostrate on the ground, they offered their prayers not only for me,
but for the whole Army, that some remedy might be sent us to assuage the hunger
and thirst with which we were tormented: For, for the space of five days we had
not drunk any water, there being none best among us, nor any means to procure
any, we being closed round about with Mountains in the very heart of Germany.
Now as soon as these Christians had cast themselves on the ground; and addressed
their Prayers to that God of whom I was ignorant, immediately there fell from
heaven abundance of rain, which to us was cool and refreshing, but to the
Enemies of the Romans it was accompanied with hail in the likeness of fire, and
with thunderbolts. Thus that God who cannot be overcome or resisted, was in a
wonderful manner readily propitious to their prayers and supplications. For
this reason let us freely permit such as these to be, what they profess,
Christians, least we force them by their prayers to obtain such weapons from
heaven against us. My judgment and sentence therefore is, That none be
questioned or called into judgment upon this charge that he is a Christian. So
that if any one shall be found to lay this as a crime to any one, that he is a
Christian, let it be made known to the person accused for being a Christian, in
case no other crime be objected to him, that he is to be presently dismissed
and acquitted: and let him that accused such a Christian, be burnt alive.
Whosoever therefore professes himself a Christian is hereby freed from any
danger in that regard threatened against him. Neither let the Magistrate who
governs the Province, endeavor to make him renounce his Profession, or any way
abridge his liberty. And my Sentence moreover is, That this Edict be further
established by a Decree of the Senate, and publicly exposed in the common place
of Trajan, that any one may read it. Let Vetrasius Pollio likewise Prefect of
the City take order that this Constitution be sent into all Provinces: Neither
let any one who has a mind to take a copy and make any use of it, be prohibited
so to do. Fare ye well.



8. The Emperor not content with celebrating so advantageously the wonderful
power and goodness of the true God by Edicts and Writings published to the whole
world, proceeded to a yet more illustrious expression of his gratitude: And
because Edicts were only in force for the present age, he to eternise the
memory of so great a deliverance, raised up in a spacious place at Rome a vast
Pillar, on which was graved the whole History, to be read by all future times.

9. Now such a Confession of the impotency of the Roman Deities, and the
Omnipotency of the true God worshipped only by Christians, a Confession made by
the most wise, learned and virtuous Emperor that ever assumed the Title of
Caesar, this, no doubt, had a strange influence on the minds of a world of
persons in all the Provinces of the Empire, to incline them to conform
themselves to the Emperors judgment, though worldly interests made his
practice contradict his judgment. Hence it came to pass that the numbers of
Christians wonderfully increased at this time, and those not only of the vulgar
rank, but persons of honor and esteem in the world: as we read in Tertullian,
a Christian Writer of the next Age: Tertull. Aprlog. cap. 37.
We, says he, who are counted Externs by you, do yet fill all your places,
your Cities, Isles, Castles, Free Towns, Camps, Tribes, Corporations, Palaces,
Senats and places of Judicature, etc.

10. No wonder then if our British King Lucius, so well prepared before,
having been informed (as our Historian Bale writes) by the Emperors principal
Officers Trebellius and Pertinax, Bal. cent. 1. cap. 19.
sent by him into Brittany, not only of the late miraculous deliverance, but
how a great number of the Roman Nobility and Senators had thereupon given
their names to Christ: No wonder, I say, if he being convinced in judgment, and
not deterd by the Roman Civil power, at last submitted his neck to the same
easy yoke. Magdeburgens. cent. 2. c. 2.
But whereas the Centuriators of Magdeburg mistaking this passage of Bale, do
affirm that Pertinax and Trebellius were themselves converted to the Christian
Faith, and thereby an occasion of King Lucius his conversion, this evidently
contradicts the current of the Roman History. Eor Pertinax who in these times
was sent the Emperors Lieutenant into Brittany, he after the death of Commodus
who succeeded M. Aurelius his father, was chosen Emperor, and not the least
intimation is given by any Historian, that he was affected to Christian
Religion. As for Trebellius a person unknown in the History of these times, for
he could neither be that Trebellius Maximus, who governed Brittany in the year
of our Lord sixty seven, nor probably that Cneus Trebellius the Emperors
Lieutenant here in the year one hundred and eighteen, concerning whom we find
in no Monuments any ground of suspicion, that either of them became Christians.

11. For this reason we cannot afford him a place among those illustrious
persons, concerning whom Eusebius thus writes, Eusebius. hist. lib. 5. c. 20.
At the same time when Commodus governed the Roman Empire, our Religion was
brought to a quiet and peaceable state, through all the Churches in the world.
Yea moreover the Word of salvation did then so attract the minds of all sorts
of men to the holy Religion which teaches the worship of the only true
omnipotent God, Creator of all things, that at Rome it self (and in the Roman
Empire) very many persons illustrious for their birth, and flowing with wealth,
embraced that Truth which brought salvation to them, and moreover drew to the
same Holy Profession their whole families and kindred. A. D. 182.


12. By which expression the Historian seems in the opinion of Baronius, Bayon.
A. D. 183. n. 3.
to have principally pointed at this famous Conversion of Brittany: For, having
with all diligence searched into Ecclesiastical monuments he professes he
could could not find out any to whom that passage in Eusebius could be applied,
except our British King Lucius, whose name is commemorated in the ancient
Martyrologes usually read in Churches. Neither is it any wonder that Eusebius
should either be ignorant, or silent concerning the particular affairs of
Brittany, concerning which, as may be showed by many Examples, he treats very
negligently. But enough has been said touching the motives probably inducing
King Lucius at this time publicly to embrace the Christian Faith: We will
consequently declare the manner and order of the said Kings conversion,
accompanied with that not only of his family, but generally his whole Kingdom.

III. CHAP.
III. CHAP.
1. A History of the Conversion of Brittany anciently written by Elvanus
Avallonius, lost.

2. The Relation of Bale and the Magdeburgenses concerning it.

3.4.5. etc. King Lucius being unsatisfied in his old Religion, demands
instruction of Pope Eleutherius: And why he has recourse to him.

A. D. 182. Rad. N^ger in Chronic. A. D. 179.. 17. Bal^.
1. IF the Ancient History of Elvanus called Avallonius (that is, of
Glastonbury) mentioned by Radulphus Niger in his Chronicle, and ^ale, who is
said to have lived in these very times of Antoninus the Philosopher, Commodus
his son, and Pope Eleutherius, and to have written a Book of the Original of
the British Church, if this History, I say, were still extant, we might with
more assurance proceed in the relation of the particulars touching this most
happy conversion of our Country: Whereas now we must content our selves with
gleaning out of less ancient Writers such parcell's as they will afford us to
make up the following Narration. Notwithstanding since we cannot charge them
with delivering to posterity their own inventions, we ought to receive their
scattred Records as the Relics of ancient Tradition, extracted out of
Primitive Histories, now swallowd in the gulf of time.

2. Now in our Narration, that we may approve our sincerity, we will not
neglect the judgment and testimonies of such Modern Writers as have searched
into Antiquity, Bale. cent. 1. cap. 19.
though otherwise averse from Catholic Religion. Among which thus writs Bale,
King Lucius, says he, was it seems, scandalis'd at the meannesse and Poverty of
Christ, as the Jews formerly were. For though Christian Religion had for the
space of more then a hundred years been propagated through Brittany, yet it
seemed to him deprived of its due splendor, because it had hitherto been
administered by simple, poor and contemptible persons: and however, it wanted
the Imperial Authority of Rome to support it. Therefore as soon as he was
informed by Trebellius and Pertinax, the Emperors Lievtenants, that upon the
ceasing of persecution, several illustrious Romans had embraced it, he then
began to entertain a more worthy conceit of it. And to the same effect write
the Centuriators of Magdeburg, Centur. Magdeb^rg.
though with some mistake, as has been observed.

3. This stone of offense, to wit, Poverty and want of worldly splendor and
advantages being thus removed, King Lucius now seriously comparing the
Christian Faith with what he had been taught by his Druids, the simplicity and
sanctity of the one, with the unclean and inhuman Superstitions of the other,
but especially considering the inestimable Promises of eternal Glory and
Happiness not only proposed, but by evident demonstrations established, in the
Gospel, to which his own Priests never pretended any claim at all; No wonder
if he grew unsatisfied and weary of his former Errors, and willing to admit a
further illustration of those verities, with a few beams whereof he had formerly
been enlightened.

4. Now, it seems, there not being then in Brittany, or not known to the King,
any Ecclesiastical persons of authority sufficient to establish a new Church,
though there wanted not such as had skill enough to persuade and satisfy him in
the Truth of Christian Religion, the principal of which were the forementioned
Elvanus of Avallonia, and Medwinus of the Province inhabited by the Belgae:
Hence it came to pass that King Lucius, no doubt, by the advice of these holy
persons, was obliged to seek for a more perfect instruction, and to implore a
greater authority for settling the common affairs of Christianity, from abroad.

5. For which purpose though in the neighboring Kingdom of Gaul there were at
that time living and famous many holy Bishops, eminent for Piety and learning,
the most illustrious among which was S. Irenaeus Bishop of Lions, and shortly
after a most glorious Martyr: Yet to none of these had King Lucius recourse
either for counsel or assistance: But ordring his Messengers, to pass through
that Nation, he directed them beyond it to Rome, the fountain of all
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and to S. Eleutherius a worthy Successor of S.
Peter in the Apostolic Chair.

6. Indeed if he had at that time consulted S. Irenaeus, ^ren. l. 3. c. 3.
he would have told him what himself had taught the world in his Book against
Heresies, That to this Roman Church by reason of its more powerful
principality it is necessary that every other Church should have recourse, that
is, all faithful Christians wheresoever dispersed: Because in that Church the
Tradition derived from the Apostles was safely conserved. Tertullian likewise
an Eminent Priest then alive would have given him the same advice, Tertull. in
Praescript. cap. 36.
Whosoever thou art, says he, that would better employ thy curiosity in the
business of thy salvation, take a view of the principal Churches founded by the
Apostles, etc. If Italy be nearest thee, thou may repair to Rome, from
whence our authority (in Africa) is likewise derived: A Church it is happy in
its constitution, to which the (chief) Apostles together with their blood shed
forth the whole doctrine of Christianity. Lastly the security of making that
Church the Rule both of doctrine and discipline would have been excellently
declared by the foresaid glorious Saint Irenaeus, Iren. ^bi sup.
saying, By making known the Faith of that chiefest, most ancient and through
all the world most renouned Church of Rome, founded and constituted by the most
glorious Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul, and by an uninterrupted succession of
Bishops derived to our times, we confound all those who any way, either by an
unlawful self-love, vainglory, blindness, or or perversenes of opinion do
make separated congregation^ professing other Doctrines. And in consequence, d.
ibid.
the same holy Father adioyns a Catalogue of the Names of all the Bishops of
Rome from S. Peter's days, the twelfth and last whereof living in his time was
this S. Eleutherius, to whom King Lucius addressed himself for a more perfect
information in Christian verities, and to obtain Ordinances and laws necessary
for the constitution of a well ordered Church in his Kingdom.

IV. CHA.
IV. CHAP.
1.2. Bishop Vshers judgment of King Lucius his Message to the Pope.

3. Instructions given by the King to Messengers.

4.5 Pope Eleutherius his Answer.

6. Other particulars of the said Answer.

Vsser in Primord. Eccles. Brit. fol. 4^.
1. COncerning the message sent by King Lucius to Pope Eleutherius, thus writes
Bishop Usher, I do not find among our more ancient Writers what was the
principal Motive inducing King Lucius to procure and send for from Rome
Doctors and Teachers of the Christian Faith. A. D. 183.
Only in a Book belonging to the Monastery of Abingdon I read, That the said
King having heard the fame of the Sanctity of Preachers at that time living in
that City, sent his Messengers with public Letters in great expedition, most
devoutly and earnestly beseeching the Venerable Pope Eleutherius that by his
order and will he might be made a Christian. Now no man can be ignorant of the
strict alliance and frequent commerce which in those times intervened between
the Britains living within the Province subject to the Romans, and that
Imperial City: So that here there is no necessity that we should recurr to
the Primacy of the Roman Bishop.

2. Notwithstanding although this last clause was added on purpose to make the
readers believe that this Kingdom had no dependence at all on Rome in
Ecclesiastical affairs, contrary to the forementioned assertion of Pope
Innocent the First, and the Traditionary practice of so many ages: we see the
testimonies of S. Irenaeus and Tertullian do evince the contrary: which
likewise is more evidently demonstrated in the pursuit of this History.

3. Now as touching the particular Instruction given by King Lucius to his
Messengers, Antiq. Brit. fol. 4.
the Protestant Author of the British Antiquities thus declares, King Lucius,
says he, resolved to be inaugurated and solemnly initiated in the Christian
Faith by Eleutherius the then Roman Bishop. For which purpose be dispatched
with Letters and commands unto him two illustrious and eloquent men, Elvanus of
(Glastonbury or) Auallonia, and Medwinus of the Province of the Belgae: By whom
he requested the Roman Bishop that he would please to direct his Messengers and
Legates with order to baptize him, being already imbued with Christian Doctrine.
He moreover desired that they might bring with them the Roman Laws, according
to which he might order and establish both the Ecclesiastical and Civil state
in his Kingdom. But the pious Bishop Eleutherius being much more zealous to
propagate the Divine doctrine, then to illustrate his own fame, signified to him
his inexpressibile joy for gaining of so great a King to the obedience of
Christ, but for the civil ordering of his Kingdom, that his interessing
himself therein was to no purpose. Those Laws were not necessary for the
constitution of a Christian Commonwealth, and that in them many things were
established which ought not to be observed by th^se who profess the Christian
Faith, etc.

4. S. Beda having mentioned these requests of King Lucius to Pope Eleutherius,
Bed. hist. l 1. cap. 4.
add's presently, that he obtained the effect of his pious Petition: that is,
for as much as concerned his further instruction and initiation in Christian
Religion, etc. This will appear by the Answer said to be sent by the said Pope
in Writing, to this day preserved by our Historian Matthew of Westminster,* the
Tenor whereof is as follweth; 5. Your request to us is, that we would transmit
to you a Copy of the Roman and Imperial Laws, The Epistle of P. Eleutherius to
King Lucius: out of Matthew of Westminst.
which, it seems, you desire to make use of in your kingdom of Brittany. But
you must be informed, that the Roman Laws and such as are enacted by the
Emperor, are not of such obligation, but they may any time be rejected, which
the Law of God in no case must be. Now by the Divine mercy you have of late
submitted your self in your Kingdom of Brittany to the Law and Faith of
Christ: so that you have already with you both the Old and New Testament: Out
of them therefore by Gods inspiration and with the common counsel of your
Kingdom collect and frame a Law, and by it through the Divine assistance govern
your Kingdom of Brittany. You are Gods Deputy in your Kingdom, according as the
Kingly Prophet says, the Earth is our Lords, and the fullnes of it, the round
world, and all that dwell in it. And again the same Kingly Prophet says, Thou
have loved righteousness and hated inquity: therefore thy God has anointed thee
with the oil of gladness above thy fellows. And again, O God, give thy judgment
to the King, and thy justice etc. He says, Thy judgment; not the judgment and
justice of Caesar. For the Christian Nations and people of your kingdom who
live under your peaceable protection, are the children of God, under his care,
who according to the Gospel, protects them as a Hen gathering her chickens
under her wings, etc. The Nations therefore of your Kingdom of Brittany are your
people, which being hitherto divided, you ought to gather into one unanimous
congregation to the obedience of the Faith and Law of Christ, constituting of
them one Church, which you must cherish, maintain, protect and govern, that so
you may reign with Christ for ever, whose Deputy you are in the foresaid
Kingdom.



6. Thus far does the said Historian relate the tenor of this Epistle, 1. Fox
l. 2 fol. 107. l. Speed. hist. in Aurelio. cap. 19. ^. 3.
adding withal by way of Preface, that this was the entire form of it:
Notwithstanding some Modern Writers further adioyn thereto these following
passages: Woe to the Kingdom whose King is a child, and whose Princes eat early
in the morning. A King is here called a child, not for his want of growth and
age, but for his folly, injustice and madness: since according to the Kingly
Prophet, Bloody and deceitful men shall not live out half their days, etc.
Now by eating in the morning we are to understand gluttony and Luxury: for by
Luxury come all perverse and filthy things according to King Salomons speech,
Into a malevolent soul wisdom will not enter, nordwell in a body subject to
sin. A King has his title from governing, not having, a Kingdom. You will be a
King as long as you rule well: which if you cease to do the name of a King
will remain in you no longer, but you will leave to be a King, which God
forbid. Almighty God give you his grace so to govern your kingdom of Brittany,
that you may for ever reign with him, whose Deputy you are in the foresaid
Kingdom. This Epistle, says Cambden, was dated in the year when L. Aurelius
Commodus a second time, Spelman. ad A. D. 185. D. Duck de Vsu. I^ris Civil. l.
2. p. 344.
and Vespronius were Consuls: agreeing with the one hundred eighty third year
of our Lord.

7. I was unwilling to forbear transcribing this Epistle though I cannot but
acknowledge that the reasons proving it suppositious seem to me very
concluding, as containing words tasting of the Norman Latin and English Law:
besides there are in it alleged Texts of Scripture according to S. Hieroms
Translation, who lived two hundred years after Eleutherius: Again Eleutherius
speaks to King Lucius in the plural Number, according to a modern style, not
then in use, when he says, Vos estis Vicarius Dei: And lastly not any of our
more Ancient Historians, as Geffrey of Monmouth, Hoveden, etc. do mention it.
But what ever becoms of this Epistle, certain it is that the story of King
Lucius his conversion, etc. does not depend on it, but is confirmed by most
Authentic Records, and unquestioned Tradition.

V. CHAP. V. CHAP.

1.2. Fugatius and Damianus sent back with King Lucius his Messengers.

3. Concerning Elvanus, one of the Kings Messengers.

1. THis Epistle, if indeed genuine, was brought back by the same Messengers
whom King Lucius had sent to Rome, Elvanus and Medwinus: and together with them
there came two other Holy Men commissioned by Pope Eleutherius not only to
instruct and baptize the King, and those who imitating the Kings good Example,
embraced the Christian Faith; but also to order and establish all
Ecclesiastical affairs in the Kingdom. The names of those two strangers were
Fugatius and Damianus.

2. The Employment about which these men were sent, argues them to have been
sufficiently qualified thereto: And hence it is that our more Modern
Historians, both Catholics and Protestants, Pont. Virunn. l. 4. Godvvin de
Epist. Win*
do not doubt to style them Prelates (Antistites) and Bishops. For indeed
without such a Character and Authority how could they erect Bishoprics,
consecrate Churches, dispense Orders, etc?

3. It is not likewise without probability what other Writers say concerning
our British Messenger Elvanus, that he was consecrated a Bishop at Rome by
Pope Eleutherius. And whereas others contradict this upon a supposition that
when he with his companion went to Rome, they were only Cathecumens, not
baptized before that time: the contrary seems to appear, in that they were
formerly Preachers of the Christian Faith both to King Lucius and others: And
besides, their Education sufficiently shows their capacity: Pits. ^at. 2.
For, as a late Writer out of ancient Monuments asserts, they were of the
number, of S. Joseph of Arimathea's Disciples, full of zeal to Gods glory
according to knowledge, bred up in a contemplative life of Prayer, and
Mortification at Glastonbury, where according to the Testimony of Adam
Domerham, and John a Monk, Authors of the Antiquities of Glastonbury, The
twelve holy men companions of S. Joseph, Antiq. Glaston.
and their Successors in the same number did for a long time lead an
Eremiticall life there, and converted great multituds of Pagans to the Faith of
Christ. It is therefore very credible that so well a qualified person as
Elvanus, was, as Tradition delivers, consecrated a Bishop at Rome, since no
prejudice thereby was done to the Apostolic Canons forbidding Neophyts to be
assumed to so sublime a degree. As for his Companion Medwinus, the same
Tradition informs us, that being endued with eloquence and fluency of speech,
he was qualified there also with the Office of a Preacher and Doctor of the
Christian Faith.

VI. CHA.
VI. CHAP.
1.2. King Lucius, with his Queen, etc. baptized.

3.4.5. etc. Rites of ancient Baptism, signing with the Cross, Unction,
Benediction of the water, Exorcismes, etc.

11.12.13. These come by Tradition: confirmed by S. Basile.

14. The Centuriators blaspemies against them.

1. FVgatius and Damianus being admitted to King Lucius his presence,
acquainted him with the great joy caused at Rome by his happy conversion, and
how in compliance with his desire, they were sent by the Holy Pope Eleutherius
to administer the Rites of Christianity. And hereupon both the King and his
whole family with many others received Baptism according to the course and
ceremony of the Roman Church. Thus we read in the Ancient Roman Martyrologe,
Martyr. Romans 26. Maij.
Pope Eleutherius brought to the profession of Christian Faith many of the
Roman Nobility: And moreover sent into Brittany S. Fugatius and S. Damianus,
who baptized King Lucius together with his Wife, and almost all his people.

2. The Name of King Lucius his Queen baptized with him, is lost: but in
ancient Records the memory of his Sister, called Emerita, is still preserved,
who for her Holiness and constant suffering Martyrdom for Christ, has worthily
obtained a place among the Saints. More shall be said of her hereafter.

3. Now since all Ancient Histories agree that King Lucius was baptized solemny
according to the Roman rite: it will be expedient to declare the order and form
thereof, as may be collected out of the Monuments and Writings of this Primitive
age, which was no doubt conformable to the Ordinances of the Apostles, as S.
Justin Martyr, S. Irenaeus and Tertullian, living in these times, do
confidently affirm against all Heretics and innovatours, challenging them all
to show wherein any of the Apostolic Churches, and principally that of Rome,
have deserted the ancient Faith and Discipline established by the Apostles.

4. Now though to the essence and substance of the Sacrament of Baptis'm there
be necessarily required no more besides the due Matter, which is Water, the due
Form of Words to be pronounced, and a right Intention of him who conferrs it:
Yet that besides these there were even in those Primitive times adjoined
several other Sacred and ceremonious rites, very effectual to apply and
imprint the sense and virtue of that Sacrament in the minds of all those who
received it, is most evident from ancient Tradition and the Writings of those
times: Which additionary Ceremonies were commanded to be used in Solemn
baptisms through the whole Church by S. Clement, S. Hyginus, S. Pius and other
Primitive Popes, by a prescription, no doubt, from the Apostles, though
probably not used every where with due reverence.

5. But though those Ceremonies had not been expressly enioynd by the Apostles,
who can justly deny but that the Church and her Governors, (concerning whom
our Lord says, He that hears (or obeys) you, hears me) had sufficient
authority to render the administration of the Sacraments more solemn and
august, by ordaining external Rites in the celebration of them, as long as
they do not command our belief of the absolut necessity of them in themselves?

6. Of the said Additionary Rites the principal are these, 1. The arming of
the person to be Baptized with the sign of the Cross. 2. The anointing him on
the head with holy Oil: 3. and likewise with Chrism. 4. The solemn blessing of
the Water designed for Baptism. 5. The using of Exorcisms and holy Prayers for
the driving away the Enemy of mankind. Of all these Ceremonies, at this day
banished from all Congregations, but only the Roman and Greek Churches, and in
regard of the first and last, the English Protestant Church, there are evident
proofs that they were in use at this time when our King Lucius was baptized.

7. First touching signing with the Cross, Tertullian is so express, even by
confession of Protestants, and that not only in Baptism, but a world of other
occasions, that it is to no purpose to quote him. This was the Character which
distinguishd true Beleivers in that age from Infidells. And particularly with
regard to King Lucius, there is to this day extant an ancient Coin stampd with
the Image of this King, his Name LVC. and the sign of the Cross, thereby showing
him then to have been a Christian, Vsser. in Prim^rd. Ec. Brit. fol. 40.
as Bishop Usher acknowledges. The Medall remains still reserved in that
Treasure of Antiquities, the Library of Sir John Cotton.

8. Next concerning the ceremony of holy Unction of the person baptized,
Tertullian gives an express Testimony in his Book concerning Baptism, where he
also shows it to have been an ancient Tradition, Saying, Being baptized and
come out of the Water, Tert^ll. de (...). cap. 7.
we are anointed with consecrated Unction, in imitation of the ancient
Discipline of the Jews, according to which men were anointed with oil out of a
hor^ in order to be thereby consecrated Priests. By this Ceremony therefore was
showed that all Christians are by baptism made in a sort Kings and Priests, that
is, in a special manner consecrated to the service of God, Apocalyp. 1.^. and
5.20.
as S. John says.

9. Thirdly touching the Benediction of the Water deputed for Baptism, the
Lutheran Centuriators of Magdeburg do relate how S. Pius the first Pope of
that name did consecrate a Baptisterium (or Font) in the Bath^ of N^va^us and
S. Timothy mentioned before.

10. Lastly for as much as concerns Exorcisms, or appointed forms of Prayer
effectual to expel the Devil, not only Baptism (before the receiving of
which all the children of men are detained under his power, and from which they
are freed by this Sacrament only) but also on other occasions, when by Gods
most wise and most holy permission sinners, yea and sometimes even holy men are
given up to be afflicted and possessed by him. Of such Form^ of Exorcisms we
have a world of witnesses in Antiquity, Tertull. de (...). Cypryan. Ep. 76.
O^at. lib. 4.
as besides Tertullian, in S. Cyprian, Optatus, the fourth Council of Carthage
can. 7. etc.

11. These Rites were practisd with much reverence in the Primitive Church,
neither was it any prejudice or hindrance to the said practice, that they were
not commanded in Scripture being commended by the same authority of Tradition
that Scripture was. Hence S. Basile who lived in the second age after this,
most copiously and elegantly discourses touching these Rites of Baptism against
the Heretics of his time, true patterns of their Modern successors, who would
reject all things not expressly contained in Scripture. One passage of his
pertinent to the present purpose we will here transcribe. Basil. de Spi^ritu
Sancto cap. 27.28.


12. Among the Doctrins (says he) which are taught in the Church, some we have
delivered in Writing, and again some others we have received in a Mystery,
that is; secretly derived unto us by Tradition from the Apostles. And both
these have an equal force and virtue to produce Piety in our minds. Neither
does any one that has any small experience in Ecclesiastical Laws, contradict
these Traditions. For if we shall once presume to reject the Customs of the
Church not delivered in Scripture, as if they were matters of small
concernment, we shall on the same ground, though unawares, condemn likewise
those things which are written in the Gospel, and esteemd necessary to our
salvation. Or rather we shall endanger to make the whole Doctrine of Faith pass
for a mere Name and show, as if it had no Truth and reality in it.

13. Among those things which come to us by Tradition, without express
Scripture, we will in the first place take notice of a practice most commonly
known to all, and that is the signing with the Cross those who have professed
to place their hope in our Lord. Now which of the Apostles has taught this in
writing? Again what passage in Scripture instructs us in our Prayers to turn
our selves toward the East? Likewise as touching the words and Form of
Invocation or consecration, when we show the Bread of the Eucharist and Chalice
of benediction to the people, which of the Saints has left them to us in
Writing? For we do not content our selves with the words rehearsed by the
Apostle, o^ in the Gospel, but besides them we at that time pronounce many
others both before and after consecration, which without scripture we have
received by Tradition, and which we esteem of great moment for consummation of
that Mystery. Moreover we consecrate the Water of Baptism, as also the holy
Oil of Unction, yea and the person himself who receives Baptism: Now from
what Writings do we all this? Is it not only from a secret and Tacit
Tradition? Again several other Rites practisd in Baptism, as the Renunciation
of Satan and his Angels, from what Scripture do We derive them? Do not we
observe all these things by instruction silently communicated to us by our
Forefathers, on purpose that idle and curious persons should not know them? And
this way of delivering such Mysterious things was with great wisdom ordained
by our Predecessors, who knew very well that by such silence and reservednes
there was maintained in the people's minds a reverence and Veneration of these
Sacred Mysteries. Besides all this, since those who are not yet initiated by
Baptism into the Profession of Christianity, are forbidden the sight of these
Mysteries, what could be more unfitting then that such things should be
publishd in writing?

A. D. 184.
14. This Testimony of S. Basile touching the Mysterious Rites of Baptism, not
invented in his Age, but derived from ancient Tradition, being so express;
instead of submission of judgment to so venerable an Authority, the Lutheran
Centuriators of Magdeburg vomit forth their blasphemies against the then
certanliy immaculate Spouse of Christ, for thus they write, If all these things
( touching the benediction of the Water and use of Oil and Chrism in Baptism,
Magdeburg. cent. 2. f. 111.
etc.) be true, say they, what can be more certain then that in those times the
Mystery of iniquity did work in the Roman Church, polluting the simple Form of
Baptism? They might have as well added, in the Greek, in the African, in the
Asiatick Churches, for in all these the same Rites were used.

VII. CH
VII. CHAP.
1.2. Fugatius and Damianus destroy Idolatry: Erect Bishoprics, etc.

3. How this is to be understood.

4.5. In place of Arch-flamens and Flamens are appointed Archbishops and
Bishops.

6. Among the D^uids there was a subordination.

1. AFter the administration of Baptism to the King, those holy Men Fugatius
and Damianus, together with Elvanus and Medwinus, wholly employed themselves in
Preaching the Gospel of Christ through all the Provinces of the Kingdom, in
disputing against the Superstition of the Druids, and demonstrating the vanity
of their Idols, and the abominablenes of their horrible Sacrifices. And being
attended with the Kings authority and zeal, they broke in pieces those Idols,
and easily persuaded the Britains to renounce their ancient Superstitions: So
that in a short space the Christian Faith and Worship of the only true God came
generally to be had in honor and admiration.

2. Hereto Matthew of Westminster adds, that those blessed Teachers,
Westm^n^ster. A. D.
having defaced Idolatry in a manner through all Brittany, they dedicated to
the honor of one God and his Saints those Temples which had been founded to
the worship of many false Gods, filling them with assemblies of lawful
Pastors. Adding withal, That they constituted in diverse Cities of the
Kingdom twenty eight Bishops, which were in subjection to three Archbishops
and Metropolitan Sees. The Prime See was London, to which Loegria and Cornwall
was subject, to wit, all the Provinces on the South of Severn, and Wales. The
second was Yorck, to which was submitted Deira and Albania, divided from
Loegria by the River Humber. The Third was the City of Legions, which had
Dominion over Cambria or Wales, separated from Loegria by the River Severn.
This City was anciently seated on the River Osca in Glamorganshire, as the old
walls and buildings there do show.

3. Thus that Historian: herein following a more ancient Writer, Geffrey of
Monmouth: with whom accord several others mentioned by Bishop Usher. And
though he, as likewise Bishop Godwin, call this a vain invention and Dream: as
truly they may justly, if by that passage of our Historian were to be
understood, that immediately upon the first Conversion of the Britains so many
Bishops and Archbishops were established in the Kingdom. Notwithstanding we
may reasonably interpret the meaning to be, That in ordring the Ecclesiastical
Policy of the New Christian Church they, according to the pattern given, not
only by the Roman, but all Eastern Churches, designed a distinction of Dioceses
and Provinces according to the number and splendor of the respective Cities:
So that there being then in Brittany twenty eight Cities, Bed. hist. l. 1.
cap. 1.
as S. Bid says, compassed with walls, and fortified with Towers and Gates,
they ordained, that in future times, when the number of Pastors was
multiplied, each City and Territory belonging to it should be governed by a
particular Bishop: Whereas in the beginning those who were consecrated Bishops,
did not confine themselves to one place, but according to occasions and
emergent necessities transferred their solicituds and exercise of their
Pastoral duties from one City and Province to another, till in future times
the Harvest increasing and laborers proportionably multiplying, every Bishop
and Pastor in his Iuridiction was limited to his peculiar flock, with a
prohibition to exceed his limits.

4. This sense of the forecited Historians seems to be given by the Author of
the ancient Book belonging to the Monastery of Abingdon, Liber Abingdon. ap.
Vsser. in Primord. Eccl. Brit. fol. 88.
quoted by Bishop Usher, where we read this passage, The Venerable man Pope
Eleutherius sent to the illustrious King Lucius his Messengers Faganus and
Divianus, religious persons, and sufficiently instructed in the Christian
Faith. These holy men did with great devotion baptize both the King himself
and his people, who unanimously embraced the Christian Faith: and withal
destroyed Idols, and built Churches to the worship of God. In a word, these two
men in all things seeking the glory of God, and the propagation of Christian
Religion, decreed that there should be appointed in all places particular
Ministers of the Omnipotent God, and that in those Cities where formerly
resided Arch-flamens according to the Superstition of the Pagans, in their
place should be established Archbishops, and likewise to the ordinary simple
Flamens should succeed Bishops. Now at that time there were in the three most
famous places, to wit, London, York and the City of Legions, ordained three
Arch-Prelats, that is, Arch-flamens of the Pagan Superstition.

5. This distinction and subordination of Arch-flamens and Flamens* though we
do not find mentioned by Roman Writers to have been settled among the
Idolatrous British Priests under those Titles: Yet that the Druids had an
Order and Degree among them, Caesar. Comment. lib. 3.
and that there was one Principal person who enjoyed a Domination over their
whole Body, Caesar an eye-witnes of their customs does acquaint us: From whence
necessarily follows, that since one single person could not alone have an
inspection over so many subjects so widely dispersed, it necessarily follows
that he must have subordinate Ministers to govern in several places, and to
give him an account of the state of their affairs. And indeed without such a
subordination it was impossible they should subsist in one Body: insomuch as
these blind Heathens have showed greater effects of reason and natural
prudence in composing their Congregation, then our Modern Sects, withal their
pretended light of Scriptures, have done.

6. These Druid-Preists have the Title of Arch-flamens and Flamens given them,
not by themselves, but by our Historians writing of them, in imitation of the
Romans, among whom those Titles were in use, so called from the Flamen, or
flame-colourd Hat wherewith their heads were always coverd These Flamines among
the Romans were of several orders according to the Deities whom they served,
as Jupiter, Mars, etc. And each order had a distinct Chief, and all these
cheifs were subject to the Pontifex Maximus, a Title assumed by the Emperors
themselves.

VIII. CHAPTER
VIII. CHAP.
1.2. etc. Of twenty eight Cities anciently in Brittany: The names of them out
of ancient Authors.

7. In what sense Archbishops are sa^d to have been in those times.

1 NOw whereas mention has been made of twenty eight Cities in Brittany,
suitably to what our ancient Gildas has written, Gildas.
that this Island was strengthened with twice ten and twice four Cities; it
will not be a vain Curiosity to enquire what those Cities were which were
designed for the Sees of so many Bishops.

2. To give a full satisfaction to such an enquiry will be no easy matter,
considering so great and frequent Vicissitudes of inhabitants; tongues,
governments and wars, which since these times have succeeded in this our
Country* from all which must needs follow great confusion of names and
destruction of places.

3. Our Ancient Historians have scattringly mentioned several of them: and
particularly, Nennius a Monk of Bangor, and the Archdeacon of Huntingdon, have
made a collection of them. But the most exact Catalogue of them is afforded us
by the late learned Bishop Usher* described out of two very ancient Manuscripts
extant in Sir John Cottons Library, which he says he co^par'd with nine
Written Copies more in which the old British names were se^ down* together
with an interpretation of them, Vsserin Primord* Eccl Brit. f. ^9.
as follows.

4. These are the Names of all Cities in Brittany, in number twenty eight. I.
Cair Guintguic, which perhaps is Norwich, called by the Britains Cair Guntins:
Or rather it is Winwick in Lancashire. The old Glossary of Nennius interprets
it Winchester. II. Ca^r Mincip, or Municip, erroneously written in Henry of
Huntingdon, Mercipit. This is Verolam a Town near S. Albans, which, as we read
in Tacitus, was anciently a Free-town, enjoying the Privilege of the City of
Rome. III. Cair Liqualid, or Legevit, or Lualid: This is Luguballia, called by
Huntingdon Cair Leil, now Carlisle. IV. Cair Meguaid, or Meig^od, at this day
Meivod in the Province of Montgomery. It was anciently called by Ptolomy and
Antoninus, Mediolanum. V. Cair Colun or Colon, which Geffrey of Monmouth and
Huntingdon call Colchester, situated on the River Coln, and it is in Antoninus
his Itinerary called Colonia. VI. Cair Ebranc, by others Cair branc, it is
York. VII. Ca^r Custeint. This City was formerly called Seiont, near
Caernarvont, being the same which Antoninus calls Seguntium. But it changed its
name into Cair Custein^, because Constantius the Father of Constantin was
buried there* Whose body, says Matthew of Westminster, was found at Caernarvon
near Snowdon in the time of King Edward the first after the Conquest, and by
his command honorably buried in the Church. VIII. Cair Caratauc, Math.
Westmonast. ad A. D. 1283.
or Cair Caradoc, in the borders of Shropshire between the Rivers Temdus and
Colunus, Where King Caractacus raised against the Roman General Ostorius a
great Rampire, but was there defeated by him. There a City being afterward
raised, was from his Name called Cair Caradoc. So that Geffrey of Monmouth and
Huntingdon are much mistaken, who interpret this City to be Salisbury. IX.
Cair Grant, or Granteceaster, or Grantbridge, now Cambridge: taking its name
from the River Grant or Gront. X. Cair Maunguid or Manchguid, supposed to be
the same Which by Antoninus is called Mancunium, or Manchester in Lancashire:
others conceive it to be Manduessedum, or Manchester in Warwickshire. XI. Cair
Lundein, by others Cair Lud, now London. XII. Cair Guorthigirn, a City
situated in Radnorshire, and called from King Vortigern, who conceild himself
there, being afraid of punishment for his horrible crimes, but was found out by
Divine Justice, and by Lightning burnt together with his City* What the prime
name of this City was in King Lucius his days, does not appear. XIII. Cair
Ceint, or Kent: now called Canterbury: formerly Dorobernia. XIV. Cair Guiragon
or Guorangon, that is Wigornia: The Welsh call it Caer Wrangon, the English
Worcester. Antoninus calls it Branonium, and Ptolomy Branogenium. XV. Cair
Per^s, otherwise Portcester, from the commodiousnes of the Haven: It is now
called Portsmouth. XVI. Cair Daun, named by Antoninus Danus: now Doncaster in
Yorkshire. XVII. Cair-Legio^, taking its name from the the twentieth Legion by
Julius Agricola's appointment quartering there. It is at this day called
Chester, or Westchester. XVIII. Cair Guricon or Guoricon, or as Cambden writes
it Cair Guaruinc, now warwick, so called because it was a Garrison of the
Romans, which in the British Language is called Guarth. XIX. Cair Segeint, or
the City of the Segontiaci, which were the people who first surrendered
themselves to Caesar: It is now called Silcester in Hampshire. XX. Cair Leon or
Vsk, so called because the second British Legion brought over by Vespasian was
quartered here. It was seated in Monmouthshire: but is now quite demolished.
XXI. Cair Guent, called by the Romans Venta Belgarum (to distinguish it from
several other places called Ventae:) being in the Province of the Belgae, a
people which came out of lower Germany, and seated themselves in Hampshire; it
is now called Winchester. XXII. Cair Brito, a City placed between the Rivers
Avon and Foam: it is now called Bristol. XXIII. Cair Lerion: by the Saxons
afterward called Legecestria: now Leicester. XXIV. Cair Draiton: the situation
whereof is now uncertain, there being many places of that name. Bishop Usher
thinks it is the same now called Dragton in Shropshire. XXV. Cair Pentavelcoit,
seated on the River Ivel in Somershire, now called Ivelcester, or Ilchester.
The same learned Bishop writes it Cair Pensavelcoit, supposing it to be Pentsey
in Sussex, where William the Conqueror first landed. XXVI. Cair Vrvac, called
by Antoninus Vriconium, and by the Saxons Wrekenceaster, at this day Wroxcester
in Shropshire. XXVII. Cair Calemion, or as Mr. Cambden reads it, Cair Calion,
which he thinks to be Camelet in Somersetshire, where remains the footsteps of
an ancient Roman Camp; and where many Roman Coyns are frequently found. XXVIII.
Cair Luitcoit, or rather Lindcoit; by Antoninus and Ptolomy called Lindum: by
the Saxons Lindecollinum, at this day Lincoln.

5. These are the twenty eight Cities of Brittany: all which cannot yet be
asserted to have been extant, at least under those names, in the days of King
Lucius: since among them there are several which took their Title from persons
living in after-ages, as Cair Vortigern, Cair Casteint, etc. And Cair Draiton
seems to have been a Saxon building.

6. Henry of Huntington in the account of them varies somewhat from this, and
in the place of some of these omitted by him, substitutes others, as Cair Glou,
that is, Gloucester: Cair Cei, or Chichester: Cair Ceri, that is Cirencester:
Cair Dorm, called by Antoninus Durobrivae, at this day Dornford in
Huntingdonshire: Cair Dauri, or Cair Dorin, now Dorcester: And Cair Merdin,
still remaining with the same name, from whence a Province in Wales takes its
title. These are the Cities designed to be the Residences of Archbishops and
Bishops, when the number of Pastors should be so increased as to supply them.

7. Now whereas here is mentioned the Title of Archbishops, we are to take
notice that that Title was not in use as yet in the Church, in the days of
King Luci^s: but yet the same latitude of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction was from
the beginning under the name of Metropolitan Bishops. For the Policy of the
Church being squared according to the Civil: as the Governors of Cities
which were Metropoles, exercised an Authority over other Cities also depending
on them, so did the Bishops likewise of those Cities over the whole Provinces.

IX. CHAP. IX. CHAP.

1.2.3. Of Saint Theanus first Bishop of London.

4.5. Elvanus his Successor.

1. HOw many of those twenty eight Cities were in those days supplied with
Bishops, is uncertain. A. D. 185.
Besides Elvanus consecrated Bishop at Rome, our Ecclesiastical Records
mention only one British Bishop more, called Theanus, the first Metropolitan
Bishop of London, where our devout King Lucius built a Church consecrated to S.
Peter, and seated in the place called Cornhill.

2. The truth of this is testified by an ancient Table belonging to the same
Church, wherein was this Inscription, In the year of our Lord one hundred
seaventy nine, Lucius the first Christian King of this Land founded the first
Church at London, namely the Church of Saint Peter in Cornhill. He established
likewise there an Archiepiscopall See, and the prime Church of the Kingdom: and
so it continued for the space of four hundred years, till the coming of S.
Augustine the Apostle of England, etc. A. D. 186.
Thus the Inscription.

3. But Iocelinus a Monk of Furnes testifying this holy Prelat Theanus to have
been the first Archbishop of this new erected See of London, makes him to be
the Founder of this Church, for thus he writes, Thean or Theanus is said in the
time of King Lucius to have built the Church of S. Peter on Cornhill in London,
Iocelin. Furn.
being assisted therein by Ciranus the Kings Chief Cupp-bearer.

4. After Theanus his decease, the time of whose government in that See is
uncertain, there succeeded him therein S. Elvanus, who generally is
acknowledged the second Metro^politan of London. But whether in those times
there was in Brittany any Jurisdiction properly Metropoliticall, which must
presuppose an erection of several subordinate Dioceses, cannot by any of our
ancient Ecclesiastical Monuments be asserted. Upon which grounds
Malmsburiensis says, Malmsburiens.
There is no certainty in what place was seated the Archiepiscopall
Jurisdiction in the time of the Britains, before the entry of the Saxons.

X. CHAP.
X. CHAP.
1.2. S. Fugatius and Damianus return to Rome to obtain a Confirmation of their
Acts.

3.4. Recourse to the Sea Apostolic, ancient.

5 6. At their return they bring a blessed Crown, and a Letter to King Lucius.

7. The extent of King Lucius his Dominions

8. Of Archflamens and Flamens.

1. AFter three years succesfull labors in this new Vineyard of our Lord, A.
D. 186.
these two Holy Apostolic Preachers Fugatius and Dam^anus returned to Rome to
give an account to S. Eleutherius of the affairs of Brittany. This is testified
by our ancient Historians, Geffrey of Monmouth, Roger Wendover, the compiler of
the History of Rochester, as likewise a British ancient Poet, taking the name
of Gildas, and quoted by Bishop Usher.

2. But most expressly by Matthew of Westminster, whose words are these: Westman.
In the year of Grace one hundred eighty six, the Blessed Prelates Fugatius and
Damianus returned to Rome, and obtained from the holy Pope Eleutherius a
Confirmation of all they had done in Brittany. And having performed this, the
foresaid Doctors came back into Brittany, accompanied with many others; By
whose inctructions the Nation of the Britains being confirmed in tho Faith of
Christ became illustrious. The names and Acts of these men are found in the
Book which our Historian Gildas wrote of the Victory of Aurelius Ambrosius.

3. That it was the practice of Christian Churches, especially in the West,
upon several occasions to have recourse to the Chair of S. Peter, many
examples occur in the Ecclesiastical History, and this even from the
beginning of Christianity. We mentioned formerly a Message sent from the
Christians of Brittany by S. Beatus to Rome for a more perfect instruction in
the Christian Faith. Sup. lib. 1. c. 5.
And about this time of King Lucius, Hieron. de Script. Eccles. in Irenaeo.
the Church of Lions in France sent S. Irenaeus to this Holy Pope Eleutherius
for resolving certain Questions about Ecclesiastical affairs, says S. Jerome.

4. This they did partly to show their dependence and subordination to the
supreme Tribunal of the Church, as likewise for the preservation of Unity, of
which the Chair of S. Peter was always acknowledged the Center. But the present
Church of Brittany having been constituted a Church by the zeal and authority
of this blessed Pope Eleutherius, there was a greater necessity and obligation
of recourse to him for the confirmation of those Ordinances which had been made
by his Delegats.

5. Among other memorable passages touching the Answer sent by Pope Eleutherius
to this Message of King Lucius, this is one, That Fugatius and Damianus
presented the King from him with a Crown blessed by him. This is asserted by a
late learned Protestant Lawyer, William Lambard, Lambard. inter ^^ges R.
Edward.
who professes that in his search among the Ancient Laws of England, for many
ages hid in darkness, he produced this: adding withal that besides a Crown
blessed by this Holy Pope, he likewise ordained the limits of the British
Kingdom, and withal prescribed the Duty and Right of a Christian King, saying
thus, A King being the Minister and Delegat of the Supreme King, is appointed
by God for this end that he might govern this earthly Kingdom and people of our
Lord, and above all that he should venerate and govern his Church, defending it
from all who would injure it: that he should root out of it and utterly destroy
all evil doers.

6. Roger Hoveden four hundred years before M. Lambard, transcribing the same
passage out of the Ancient Laws of King Edward, only differs from him in this,
That where mention is made of a Kings Office toward the Church, he leaves out
the word, Regat.

7. As touching the limits of King Lucius his Kingdom, which this Author says
was prescribed by Pope Eleutherius, whether from thence it came that all the
Northern Provinces of the Island (afterward called Scotland, and governed by a
King of their own Nation) were subject to the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction of
the Metropolitan Church of York, cannot now be determined. A. D. 188.
Polydor Virgil out of ancient Scottish Records affirms that this subjection
was (a principio) from the very beginning of Christianity, Polyd. Vergil lib 9.
and l. 13.
and that the Bishop of Glasco was to receive his consecration from the
Archbishop of York (More Maiorum) by an immemoriall custom of their Ancestors.
But of this hereafter.

8. One passage more relating to this Answer of Pope Eleutherius, is recorded
by Martinus Polonus, Martin. Polon. a^ A. D. ^88.
who writes thus, The foresaid Holy men Fugatius and Damianus by an
Apostolical Mandat of the Pope ordained that Bishops should be placed in those
Cities where formerly there were Flamens, and Archbishops, where
Arch-flamens, Whereby he signifies that the Pope confirmed the Ordonances
formerly made by these his Legates.

XI. CHAPTER
XI. CHAP.
1. Several Churches built by King Lucius.

2.3. As Westminster, deputed for the burial of Princes.

4. A second at York: then the Chief City.

5. A third at Cae^r-leon in Wales.

6.7. It is questioned whether that was a Metropolitan See.

8. A Church built at Dover.

9. An Episcopal See said to be erected at Kungresbury in Somersetshire: bu^
that is doubtful.

1. IT has already been declared that King Lucius, presently after his
Baptism, or Theanus consecrated first Bishop of London, built a Cathedral
Church to the honor of S. Peter on Cornhill in London. Now after the return of
Fugatius and Damianus there were several other Churches erected: The names of
many of which are still extant upon ancient Records.

2. The first of these was the Church of Westminster: concerning the first
foundation whereof Sulcardus a Monk wrote a Book which he dedicated to Vitalis
constituted Abbot there by King William the Conqueror: Sulcard. ap. Camdenum
in T^in^bant.
From whence some have collected, that in the same place had been formerly
erected an Idol-temple consecrated to Apollo, which by an Earthquake in the
reign of Antoninus Pius was cast to the ground.

3. Another Author called John Fleet, who wrote in the year of our Lord one
thousand four hundred forty three, adds in consequence to Sulcardus, out of an
Ancient Chronicle written in the Saxon tongue, that this place was from the
days of King Lucius destined for the burying place of our Kings, as we see to
this day. His words quoted by Bishop Usher are these, ^o. Fletusapud Vsserium
de Primord. fol. 129.
From the Primitive age of Christian Faith among the Britains, that is from
the days of Lucius their King, who in the year of Grace one hundred eighty four
is said to have received the Divine Law of Christ, and together with it the
Baptism of holy Regeneration, this place of Westminster was founded and
consecrated to the honor of God, and specially deputed for the burial of
Kings, and a Treasury or Repository of their Royal Ornaments. To the same
effect writes Radolphus Niger^, Rad. Nig. A. mund^ 53^8.
affirming that it was built in the last year of (Marcus Aurelius) Antoninus:
but that afterward the said Abbey was destroyed: which was again repaired by S.
Edward the Confessor, and richly endowed. In which testimony is implied that
from the beginning there were placed in it a Convent of Monks: Concerning whose
Rule and Institute, we shall treat hereafter.

4. A Second Metropolitan Church at this time was erected at the City of York,
which a learned Writer, Philip Berterius, quoted by Bishop Usher, esteems in
that age the prime City and Church of Brittany: Phil. Bert. apud Vsser. de
Primord. f. 9^.
Whose opinion the Bishop seems to approve, saying, Though as this day London
be the most noble City of the whole British Kingdom: and though it has been
in former ages celebrated by Ammianus Marcellinus, as an ancient Town, and by
Cornelius Tacitus as famous for Merchandise and abord of strangers:
Nowithstanding the most learned Berterius positively affirms, that York was
much rather the ancient Metropolis of the Diocese of Brittany, not only as
being a Colony of the Romans, but because there was placed the Emperors Palace
and Courts of Judgment. And hence it is that Spartianus in the life of the
Emperor Severus calls it by way of preeminence, The City. The same thing is
likewise further proved by this, That in the Synod of Arles assembled under
Constantin the Great, among the subscriptions the name of Eborius Bishop of
York precedes Restitutus Bishop of London: Though I am not ignorant that in the
ordring of such subscriptions regard was had rather to the antiquity of the
persons, then dignity of their Sees.

5. As for the third Metropolitan City of Cair-leon upon Vsk, Huntingdon.
Henry of Huntingdon thus writes of it, In Cair-legion there was an Arch
bishopric in the times of the Britains: but at this day one can scarce
discern any remainders of its walls, except a little where the River Vsk falls
into Severn. Girald.
And Giraldus Cambrensis adds, that in the same City there were in ancient
times three Noble Churches: One bearing the Title of the holy Martyr Julius,
which was beautified with a Monastery of Virgins consecrated to God: A second
founded by the Name of his companion S. Aaron, ennobled with an illustrious
Quire of Canons: And the Third famous for being the Metropolitan See of all
Cambria.

6. Notwithstanding however this City of Cair-leon, being in the times of King
Lucius the Civil Metropolis of those parts, might then to be designed from an
Archiepiscopall See: A. D. 187.
yet we do not find in History any ancient Bishops with that Title. Yea the
Church of Landaff seems to have enjoyed that Title before Cair-Leon. Concerning
which Church thus writes Bishop Godwin, The Cathedral Church of Landaff,
Godvvin in Landav.
as some report, was first built by King Lucius, about the year of Grace one
hundred and eighty. Notwithstanding I do not find any Bishop there before
Dubritius: (who was consecrated Bishop there by S. German Bishop of Auxerre)
and was by the King and whole Province elected Archbishop over all the Welsh
Britains, says the Author of his life extant in Capgrave.

7. Upon these grounds it was that in succeeding times the Bishops of Landaff
refused Canonical obedience to the Metropolitans of Menevia, or S. David's, as
appears by a Protestation made by Bishop Vrbanus in the Council of Rhemes
before Calixtus second Pope of that name: part whereof is cited by Bishop Usher
out of the Register of that Church, Vid. Vsser. Pri^^^d. fol. 65.
as follows: From the time of our ancient Fathers, as appears by the
handwriting of our Holy Patron Teiliavus, this Church of Landaff was first
founded in honor of S. Peter, and in dignity and all other Privileges was the
Mistress of all other Churches. Thus it remained till by reason of intestin
seditions and foreign war, in the days of my Predecessor Herwold, it became
weakened, and almost deprived of a Pastor, by the cruelty of the inhabitants,
and invasion of the Normans. Yet there always remained in it Religious men
attending to Divine service. After this, partly by reason of the neighborhood
of the English, from whom we differed nothing in matters touching
Ecclesiastical Ministry, as having been bred and instructed together; and
likewise because from most ancient times, that is, from the time of Pope
Eleutherius, there has always been a Bishop of this place (subject to none:)
After the coming of S. Augustine into Brittany, the Bishop of Landaff has always
been subject and obedient both to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and also the
King of England. Thus argued the said Bishop Vrbanus, but what proofs he had
does not appear. Certain it is that in all Records at this day extant, there is
no mention of any Bishop actually sitting at Landaff before Dubritius: Whence
it is that the erecting of that See is attributed to S. Germanus by Mr. Camden,
C^mden. in (...).
saying, Germanus and Lupus French Bishops, having repressed the Pelagian
Heresy largely spread in Brittany, erected Landaff into a Cathedral Church,
preferring thereto the most holy man Dubritius to be the first Bishop, to wit,
in the year of our Lord four hundred thirty and six.

8. Besides these the same King built a Church at Dover: concerning which
Bishop Usher writes in this manner, Vsser. de Primord. fol. 130.
That in the time of King Lucius there was a Chapel erected in the Castle of
Dover, and dedicated to the honor of our Savior, is related by Leland, out of
the Annals of the same City, venerable for their great antiquity. The same
thing we likewise read in a Commentary touching the first beginning of the said
Castle, where it is said, That in the one hundred sixty and one year of our
Lord King Lucius built a Temple to Christ on the height of Dover-Castle, for
the maintaining of which he assigned the Tribute of that Haven. And whereas in
a later Chronicle of Dover we read, That among other liberalities besto'wd by
King Lucius on God and his Church, Ibid.
one was the building of a Church in the Castle of Dover to the honor of S.
Mary the glorious Mother of God, where both the King and his people, as
likewise their Catholic Successors, received the Sacraments and Holy Rites of
Christian Religion: This does not prejudice the foregoing Record: for all
Churches are primarily erected to the honor of Christ, and in consequence
thereof to the honor of his Saints.

9. There are several other sacred places and Churches, which in old Records
pretend to King Lucius, as their Founder, but whose pretentions cannot in
reason and prudence be admitted. Thus the Author of the Chronicle of
Glastonbury, Chron. Gla^ton. ap. Vsser. in Primord. fol 6^
written about four hundred years since, relates, That in the one hundred
eighty seventh year of our Lords Incarnation, the Bishopric of Somerset took
its beginning, being erected by the Holy men Fugatius and Damianus: and for a
long time the Episcopal See was placed at Kungresbury: in which very many
Bishops sat successively till the days of Ina King of the West Saxons: the
number, gests and times of which Bishops can no where be found. But in the time
of the foresaid King Ina Daniel, who as we have received by Tradition, was the
last* who sat in the Chair of Kungresbury, transferred that See, which had
continued six hundred years or more at Kungresbury, to a Town, then called
Tethescine, but now Wells, which was given by King Ina, who also consented to
the Translation. The said Daniel was the last of the Britains who sat in that
Bishopric.

10. This Story, at least for as much as concerns the antiquity of the
Episcopal See of Kungresbury, seems to want a solid foundation. For that Town
took its name about the year of our Lord seven hundred and eleaven, from a
holy man called Cungar, a son of a Constantinopolitan Prince, who coming into
Brittany, and desirous to live a retired life, was kindly received by King Ina,
who bestowed on him that portion of Land, called afterward by his name, and
withal built for him a Mansion and Oratory there. As for the Church of Wells,
it was then built by King Ina, and endowed with Lands by Kenulphus the
Successor of King Ina in the year seven hundred and sixty six: But says
Bishop Godwin, it was then not a Cathedral, but Collegiat or Monastical
Church: and was erected into an Episcopal See in the year nine hundred and
five: in which the first Bishop was Adelmus.

A. D. 189.

XII. CHAPTER


XII. CHAP.
1.2. King Lucius richly endows Churches with possessions.

3.4. Privilege of Sanctuary: long continued in Brittany.

1. KIng Lucius as he was very zealous and munificent in building Churches to
the Glory of God, he was no less in liberal endowments and Privileges
bestowed on them. Math. Westmonast. ^d A. D. 187.
To this purpose Matthew of Westminster, called Florilegus, writes thus, In the
year of Grace one hundred eighty seven, Lucius the glorious King of the
Britains having seen the true Worship of God largely spread in his Kingdom,
liberally bestowed possessions and territories on Churches and Ecclesiastical
persons, and also firmly established them with Charters and immunities. Such
liberties he gave to Churches and their Precincts, that if any Malefactor made
his refuge to them, he became safe from all injuries of any man whosoever. Thus
living happily in the love of God and his Neighbor, he governed his Kingdom in
great peace. A Modern Historian Richard White adds, That this King having
destroyed all the Idols and worship of false Gods, Richard. Vitus in Hist. l. ^.
transferred all their possessions on Christian Churches, which he further
enriched with more Lands, and greater immunities: as knowing very well that
greater honor is due ^o the houses of the true God.

2. We may from hence in some degree compute this King Munificence to Gods
Church: for since he judged that the Worship of the true God ought to be more
splendid and sumptuous then that of their profane Idols had been, by searching
into ancient Monuments we shall find, that the former British Idolatry had
been very costly, and consequently the true worship much more. To this purpose
Geffrey of Monmouth, and after him Ponticus Virunnius thus writes, At London
the Pagan Flamens sacrificed (yearly) forty thousand cowes, Galfrid. Mon. hist.
l. 4. c. 1.
a hundred thousand sheep, and foul of all kinds so many as could scarce be
numbered: And besides all these they offered thirty thousand savage cattle, stags
and other beasts bred in the woods.

3. As for the Privilege of Sanctuary granted by King Lucius to Churches, he
seems therein to have been a pattern to the Emperour-Constantin and other
Christian Princes in future Ages, who by their Laws gave unto the Church the
like prerogative. Hence the Fathers of the Council of Orleans above eleaven
hundred years since, made this Canon to renew the use of former Canons and
Laws, Concerning Manslayers, adulterers, 1. Conc. Aurelian. can. 3. etc.
and thieves who shall seek refuge in a Church, we now ordain that that shall
be observed which the Ecclesiastical Canons have decreed, and the Roman Law
appointed: to wit, that it shall not be lawful for any man by force to draw
them from the Courts of Churches or houses of Bishops.

4. This respect and reverence which King Lucius showed to the Church and
Churchmen was for many ages continued in Brittany, more then in any Christian
Nation besides: Girald. ^amb. in d^script. Cambriae cap. 18.
These Privileges of Sanctuaries were extended not only to Churches and
Churchyards, but much further, according to limits and bounds determined by
Bishops: Insomuch, says Giraldus Cambrensis, that by the indemnity of such
immunity, far exceeding the indulgence allowed by the Canons of the Church
(which grant security only to the body and members of offenders) many were
induced to commit great outrages, and from such places of Refuge did greivously
molest both their Country, and even their Princes themselves. Whence appears
with what religion the Ordinances of King Lucius were received and practiced by
posterity.

XIII. CHAP. XIII. CHAPTER

1.2. etc. A famous Church and Monastery erected by King Lucius at Winchester:
with Possessions and Privileges: which continued till the reign of Diocletia^.

6.7. Of what Institute the Monk^ in those days were.

9. Several decays and restitutions of that Monastery.

1. A. D. 189.
THE Piety of King Lucius in the sixth year after his conversion did more
gloriously show it self in the foundation and plentiful endowment of a Church
and Monastery at Winchester, then called Ventae Belgarum: Which Church, says
Bishop Godwin, was consecrated by Fugatius and Damianus on the twenty ninth of
October, in the year one hundred eighty nine.

2. Moratius a very ancient Author, quoted by Thomas Radburn, Ap. Vsser. de
Primord. fol. 1055.
Harpsfe^ld, Bishop Usher, etc. gives us a perfect description of this Church
and Monastery: And first as touching the dimensions and bounds of it, he writes
thus, as he is quoted by Thomas Radburn Bishop of S. David's, The measure of the
Church founded by King Lucius (according to Moratius in his first Book and
second Chapter) was in length two hundred and nine paces: in breadth fourscore
paces, and in height ninety two paces. From one corner cross the Church to
the opposite corner were one hundred and thirty paces. The situation of the
Monastery on the East side of the Church toward the Temple of Concord, was one
hundred paces in length, and in breadth toward the New Temple of Apollo,
^orty. On the Northpart it was one hundred and sixty paces in length, and
ninety eight in breadth. On the West side of the Church there were in length
one hundred and ninety, in breadth one hundred. On the south coast there were
in length four hundred and fifty paces, and in breadth five hundred and eighty.
On this side was seated the Episcopal Palace, as likewise the habitation of
the Monks.

3. In the next place the same Author Moratius describes the large possessions
wherewith this Church and Monastery were endowed by King Lucius, Ap.
Harpsfeild. hist. c. ^. f. 6.
saying, The limits of their possessions were extended twelve miles round about
the City of Winchester, reaching so far on every side: In which space there
were on each quarter seated eight wealthy Villages. Now if one Church possessed
so large 2 Territory, we may collect how richly all the Churches of Brittany
were endowed even in those Primitive times.

4. The forementiond Thomas Rudborn in the greater Chronicle of the Church of
Winchester further shows the special affection that King Lucius bore to that
Church, Ap. Vsser. in Pri^^^d. f. 126.
and the Immunities which he bestowd on it, The glorious and most Christian
King Lucius (says he) perceiving how by the two holy men, Fugatius and
Duvianus, his Kingdom did wonderfully increase in the Worship of God taught by
true Faith, and being therefore replenishd with great joy, he converted to a
better use the possessions and territories formerly possessed by the Temples of
the Flamens, transferring them to the Churches of the Faithful: and he not
only added more and larger Manors and lands, but advanced them likewise with
all sorts of Privileges. And particularly touching the Church of Winchester,
which in his affection he in a special manner preferred before others, he raisd
it from the very foundations. And before he had perfected the whole work, he
built a little habitation, an Oratory, Dormitory and Refectory for the Monks
designed by him to dwell there. Having finishd the entire building in the fifth
year after his Conversion, the foresaid Prelates and Monks, Fugatius and
Duvianus, dedicated it to the honor of our holy Savior on the fourth of the
Calends of November, l^gt it.
in the year of Grace one hundred Sixty nine, and filld it with Monks, who
devoutly served our Lord there: constituting the Abbot of the place a certain
Monk called Den^tus. The same excellent Prince likewise resolved to conferr on
the Bishop and Monks of that Church of Winchester all the possessions and farms
which anciently belonged to the Flamens of the same City, together with all
their Privileges and Immunities.

5. What those Privileges were, the same Author a little after thus declares,
ibid. f.
saying, The foresaid most Christian King Lucius bestowed on the said Church
newly founded by him the Suburbs of the City of Winchester, together with the
Privilege of Dunwallo Molmutius. Which Dunwallo (as Moratius, Gildas and
Geffrey of Monmouth also testify) was the sixteenth King of the Britains: And
being extremely zealous in his Heathenish Superstition, he enacted Laws,
famous till the days of King William* the Conqueror under the Title of
Molmutian Laws; by which he ordained; That the Cities and Temples of their
Idoll-Gods, as likewise the high ways leading to them, together with the Farms
of their Tenants and husbandmen should enjoy the immunity of Sanctuary:
Insomuch as if any Malefactor should seek refuge there, he might safely
depart, though his adversary were present. Now by means of such endowments and
Privileges the Church of Winchester enjoyed its possessions in all
tranquillity, daily singing the praises of God the space of one hundred and two
years, to wit, from the first year of the most Christian King Lucius (his
Conversion) to the second year of the Tyrant Diocletian. Thus writes this
Author: though he fail somewhat in his Chronology: Which defect is rectified
by the ancient Author of the Book of Antiquities of the Church of Winchester,
Ap. Vsser. in Primord* f. 128.
who numbers exactly one hundred years from King Lucius his Conversion to the
first year of Diocletian, during which time the said Monks quietly served God
in their Monastery.

6. If any one have the curiosity to enquire what the Rule and Institut of
these ancient Monks were, the foresaid Thomas Rudburn will satisfy him,
presently adding, That S. Faganus and Duvianus filld that Church with Monks
devoutly serving and praising God, and professed according to the Rule
delivered by S. Mark the Evangelist.

7. Now the order and manner of the Rule prescribed by S. Mark is thus declared
by Cassianus an ancient Writer of the Church: Cassian de Cocnob. Instit. lib.
2. c. 5.
In the beginning of the Christian Faith (says he) a very few, and those of
approved sanctity, were dignified with the Title of Monks. Which men as they
received their Rule of living from S. Mark the Evangelist, first Bishop of
Alexandria of blessed Memory, they did not content themselves with retaining
the order of living practiced by the Primitive Christians, concerning which we
read in the Acts of the Apostles, Act. 4.
That all the multitude of beleivers were of one soul: Neither did any one
esteem that which he possessed to be his own: but they had all things common.
For those who were possessors of lands or houses, sold them, and brought the
price, laying it at the Apostles feet: Which was divided to every one according
to their need. But besides this, the ancient Monks aspired to other practices
more sublime. For retiring themselves into the most secret places of the
suburbs, there they lead a life so austere and with such rigorous abstinence,
that even those who were strangers to Christian Religion were astonished at it:
For with so wonderful fervor they attended day and night to the reading of
holy Scripture, prayer and laboring with their hands, that neither the
appetite, nor so much as thought of meat, did interrupt their abstinence,
except every second or third day: and then they received food, not to satisfy
their desire, but mere necessity: And neither did they this till after Sunset:
so dividing their time, as to make the Light accompany the exercise of their
spiritual Meditations, and darkness the care of their Bodies. These, and
besides these, many other more perfect and sublime were the practices of the
Ancient Monks. Thus Cassianus.

8. Such were the Monks who first possessed the Church of Winchester: and in
such holy exercises they continued till the Tempest of the persecution raised
by the Tyrant Diocletian dissipated them. After which in a short time they were
restored, and the Church consecrated by Constantius Bishop of Winchester, in
the year of Grace three hundred and nine, taking its new name from S.
Amphibalus, who together with Saint Alban was crow'nd with Martyrdom: at which
time the Abbot was named Deodatus. Hence it is that Gildas, the most ancient of
all our Historians, mentions it under that Title, where he relates how the sons
of Mordred to avoid the cruelty of Constantin fled thither: But in vain: For
the Tyrant not regarding the Sanctity and Privilege of the place, took the
sons of Mordred, Math. Westminster. A. D. 543.
and murdered one of them before the Altar of the Church of S. Amphibalus at
Winchester, whither he had fled for Sanctuary.

9. The same Church afterward suffered another Eclipse, when the barbarous
Infidell-Saxons profaned and laid wast all the sacred places of this Island.
But not long after, the same Saxons, having by Gods mercy embraced that Faith
which they formerly persecuted, repaired with advantage all the ruins they had
made: And particularly this Church and Monastery of Winchester (called
afterward de Hida) was restored with far greater splendor and magnificence,
then ever before. And thus it, with the rest, continued for many Ages,
fortified with the Charters of Kings, increased by the Devotion of the people,
secured by the Bulls of Popes, and the Curses of Prelates against all tyrannous
usurpations, till by the schism, avarice, lust and fury of King Henry the
eighth, more fatal to the Church then the savage cruelty of heathenish Danes
or Saxons, they were all swallowed up at once in a common destruction. Thus the
Prophecy of our blessed King Edward the Confessor was fulfilled, Vid.
Monasticon. page 61.2.
who in a Charter by him bestowed on the Monastery of Westminster, concludes it
with this clause, ( Haec Charta in sua liberate permanebit, quam diu
Christiani nominis timor and amor in hac nostra gente perseveraverit) that is,
This our Charter shall remain in its full force and liberty, as long as the
fear or love of the very name of Christianity shall continue in this our Nation.

XIV. CHAP. XIV. CHAPTER

1.2. etc. Seminaries and Schools of Learning instituted by King Lucius: the
principal of which was Bangor: both a School and Monastery.

5. Of the pretention of Cambridge hereto.

1. OUR devout King Lucius, being also wise in his devotion, was not content
with a wonderful bounty to build and endow Churches and Monasteries, in which
Almighty God might be zealously worshipped, and the people plentifully
instructed in Christian saving Verities: but moreover extending his providence
to posterity: he provided Seminaries of Learning and Piety, for the institution
and education of those who were afterward to succeed in the Office of
administering Divine Mysteries, and teaching the people.

2. Among these the most famous was the Monastery and School of Bangor in
Northwales, in which, as S. Beda says, at the coming of S. Augustine into
England there were more then two thousand Monks. Concerning which our
Countreyman Bale thus writes, Bale. cent. ii. cap. 53.
Bangor was first a College of Christian Philosophers: which having as such
continued from the time of King Lucius, for about the space of three hundred
and fifty years, Congellus changed it into a Convent of Monks, under the Title
of the Order Apostolic, and having been the Prefect of the said College,
became the first Abbot of the New Monastery there, in the year of Christ five
hundred and thirty.

3. That Bangor was in King Lucius his time designed for a place of literature,
may be proved by other ancient Records: But whereas this Author says that
Congellus changed it into a Monastery, is certainly a mistake, wherein John
Pits follows him: The ground of which mistake is, the confounding of this
Monastery of Bangor in Wales, with another of the like name in Vlster a
Province of Ireland, in which lived this Congellus, or as the Irish Writers
call him, Comgallus, and from which issued the famous Bishop S. Malachias,
whose life is elegantly written by Saint Bernard, who there likewise mentions
this Comgallus. Now true it is that about the year five hundred and thirty, the
said Irish Monastery of Benchor became an Episcopal See, into which one called
Daniel was first consecrated: which seemed to be a second ground of Bales
mistake touching the change made in our British Bangor.

A. D. 190.
4. Most probable it is therefore that our Bangor was in King Lucius his time,
and afterward, both a Monastery and School of Learning: and that as anciently
the Druids were, according to Pliny, great lovers of literature, flourishing in
all kinds of knowledge, so likewise the Christian solitary Religious men who
succeeded them, spent some part of their time in learning and charitably
teaching others. So that to them especially may be attributed the propagation
of the Christian Faith in Brittany, Antiquit. Brit. fol. 8.
which, as the Protestant Author of our British Antiquities says, being
preached here in the first times of the Apostles, was not only firmly retained,
but became in every age more increased and dilated. He might as well have
added, That as the true Faith was principally conserved by Monasteries, so with
the decay and ruin of Monasteries, our holy Faith likewise was extinguished.

5. Our famous University of Cambridge therefore will not take it ill, if an
alumnus of her Sister suspend his assent to her pretention of being founded an
University by King Lucius. K. Arthur^ Dipl^^a.
And as for the Charter of our famous British King Arthur, in which there is a
Grant of Exemption from Taxes and other civil burdens, to the end that the
Doctors and Scholars there might peaceably and without distraction apply
themselves to their Studies, as the glorious King of Brittany Lucius decreed,
who embraced the Christian Faith by the preaching of the Doctors of Cambridge:
This Charter is obnoxious to so many exceptions, that without injustice it may
be attributed to the Author of the other Heroical Gests of the same King
Arthur.

XV. CHAPTER
XV. CHAP.
1.2. Silence of Historians touching the Gests of King Lucius during his last
ten years.

3.4.5. German Records affirm King Lucius to have been the Apostle of Bavaria,
Rhetium, etc.

6.7 Three persons called by the same name of Lucius.

8.9. Of a supposed son of Constantius called Lucius or Lucion: which is
manifestly disproved.

10.11. It was only our King Lucius who converted several Regions in Germany.

1. HAving collected a Narration of the glorious Actions of our illustrious
King Lucius (as they lie scattred in several Authors and Monuments) for the
space of seven years after his Conversion, A. D. 190.
that is, to the year of Grace one hundred and ninety, coincident with the
ninth year of the reign of the Emperor Commodus: though our Records of good
credit do testify that he prolonged his life ten years further, yet there is
no mention at all in them of any of his actions either public or private; and
excepting one Author, Galfrid. Monum. l. 5. c. 1. Claudi^costriae.
Geffrey of Monmouth, not any of them declare where he was buried. And as for
the said Geffrey, who tells us that he ended his life at Gloucester, and was
honorably buried in the Church of the prime See: his pen does so abundantly
flow in matters that regard the glory of his Nation, (as in the Acts of King
Arthur, etc.) that his Authority in domestical affairs is of no great moment.

2. This silence therefore of our own Writers may be an argument inducing us to
attend to the Testimonies of forraigners, who will acquaint us with the
succeeding actions of King Lucius, not inferior, yea far more glorious then
any hitherto related, though performed by him, not in the quality of a King,
but a private person employing himself in communicating to other Nations those
celestial blessings which himself, and by his assistance, his own people
formerly enjoyed. Now what such foreign Authors testify concerning him, will
no doubt seem at least incredible, if not ridiculous to those worldly minds,
which setting too great a value on the present temporal vanity of human glory
and wealth, judge of Primitive Christians, whether Princes or private persons,
by the dispositions of after Ages, and because in these times, wherein
sensuality, avarice and a contempt of spiritual things do reign, no such
examples can be found, they therefore conclude all relations in ancient
Monuments touching Princes who have preferred the poverty of Christ, and the
gaining of souls to him before temporal abundance, and the satisfaction of
nature, to have been the fabulous inventions of men.

3. Notwithstanding, men's incredulity shall not deter me from relating what
is extant in the ancient Monuments of several Churches touching this matter.
Generally all Authors which have written of the Ecclesiastical affairs of
Bavaria, Rhetia, Vindelicia and the Cantons of the Swizzars do agree in this,
that a certain holy person called Lucius preached the Gospel of Christ in
Bavaria, and some other parts in Germany, from whence he proceeded to Rhaetia,
in which Country he dyed and was buried in the City of Curia, or Chur,
situated in the Country of the Helvetians or Grisons. Gasp. Busch. apud Rader.
in Bavaria Sancta.
This, says Gaspar Buschius quoted by Raderus, is certain: But who this Lucius
was, of what family or nation, cannot certainly be determined. He adds, that
this Lucius, who ever he was, having preached among the Bohemians and other
Regions bordering on the River Danubius, was banished from thence, and came
into Rhaetia, where he built for himself a poor narrow cottage, etc.

4. Aegidius Tscudus writing of the Ancient Rhaetia, denotes the precise time
when this Holy Apostolical man came into those Countries, saying, that about
the year of Christ one hundred seaventy six, Eleutherius being Bishop of Rome,
Lucius, out of a zeal to plant the Christian Faith is said to have come into
Bavaria, which he converted to the Faith, and afterward retired into Rhaetia,
Rader. in Bavonia Sancta.
etc. But Andreas Presbyter, as Raderus testifies, determins this to have
happened more lately: For says he, about the year of our Lord one hundred eighty
two, Eleutherius the twelfth after S. Peter, being Pope, and in the reign of
the Emperor Commodus, Lucius being poor, naked, and therefore less encombred,
undertook a voyage into foreign Nations; and by his preaching and Miracles is
believed to have converted to the Faith of Christ the parts about Bavaria, and
the whole Country of Rhetia situated among the Alps. Aubertus Miraeus agrees
in the same Chronology: Miraeus in Fastis Belg. 21. December. Alfled. in Chronol.
c 27.
and lastly Alfledius most accuratly referrs this to the year of our Lord one
hundred and ninety.

5. Such a concurrence of Testimonies, to which may be added the ancient
Records of those Nations and Churches, together with the Ecclesiastical Office
of the Cathedral Church of Curia (or Chur:) all these leave the matter
unquestionable, at least thus far, that those Nations were about that time
converted by one called Lucius. Which Nations being seated not far from the
place where, about that time, was performed the forementioned Miracle of the
saving the Emperor Marcus with the whole Roman Army from almost inevitable
destruction, by the prayers of his Christian soldiers, no doubt they were
thereby powerfully inclined to the embracing of the Christian Faith.

6. But now who this Lucius was, and out of what Country he came, is a dispute
among learned Authors, who produce three only of that Name: 1. Lucius of
Cyrene, mentioned in the Acts of the Apostles, and probably in the Epistle to
the Romans too. Act. 13.1. Romans 16.21.
2. Our British King Lucius. 3. Lucius, or Lucion a pretended son of
Constantius Chlorus and Helena. And to each of these the Conversion of those
Nations is by some Writers ascribed.

7. As touching the first of these, namely Lucius of Cyrene a Prophet and
teacher at Antioch in the time of the Apostles, that he could not be the
Apostolic Converter of those German Nations seems unquestionable, both from
the ancient Martyrologes, Eastern and Western, affirming him to have lived and
dyed in the East: and likewise from the ancient Records of those Churches in
Bavaria and Rhaetia, which do not pretend to such an Antiquity of the
Profession of Christianity. M. Velserrerum. August. lib. 6.
So that the learned and Noble Author, Marcus Velserus thus confidently writes
concerning him, The trifling assertions of those who confound Lucius of Cyrene
with the British Lucius, deserve not to be answered: since they do not
consider how vast a space there is between their times.

8. And whereas our Hollingshead, Hollingshead in Descript. of Britt.
out of I know not what Apocryphal Writings, would entitle to the Conversion
of those Nations another British Prince, Lucius or Lucion, pretended to be the
second son of Constantius by our British Lady Helena, who is said to have been
banished by his Father for killing his elder Brother, and after his banishment
to have repented, and embraced the Christian Faith, which he afterward preached
in Germany, etc. the fabulousnes of this report discovers it self, not only by
the silence of all Ancient Historians living in, and after the times of
Constantius, not any one of which make the least mention of such a Prince, but
on the contrary expressly affirm that Constantin was the only son born to
Constantius by Helena. Thus writes Eusebius, Eusebius. vit. Constable. lib. 1. cap. 15.
familiarly acquainted with Constantin, in the first Book of his Life: To the
same effect writes the Panegyrist Eumenius in his Oration pronounced to
Constantin: as likewise Liveneius descanting on another Panegyric of an
uncertain Author, spoken to the Emperors Maximian and Constantin. And lastly
Baronius, who confidently affirms, Baron. A. D. 306. n. 21.
That Constantius begot of Helena any other son or daughter besides Constantin,
cannot be found recorded any where.

9. To this unanswerable Proof against the assertion of Hollingshead, followed
herein by Broughton, Brought. cen. 3. cap. 2. and 12.
may be added the general consent of the ancient Monuments and Writers of
Germany and Rhaetia, agreeing in this, that the Conversion of those Nations was
effected above one whole century of years before the age of Constantin.

10. The first Lucius being therefore excluded for his too great antiquity, and
the third, as living, if at all, much too late for such a work: it remains that
the Conversion of those Nations must be ascribed only to the second Lucius, our
first Pious Christian King.

11. And indeed him only do the most Ancient Monuments and Writers of those
Churches and Regions acknowledge for their Prime Apostle: Insomuch as Raderus a
learned Author, and very diligent in the search of old Records, Rader in
Bavaria Sancta.
confidently pronounces, That the Belief is most certain* grounded upon the
Testimonies of Authors most ancient and of prime Note, that it was our
British King Lucius who converted those Nations. The same is with the like
confidence asserted by Aegidius Tscudus in his Treatise concerning Ancient
Rhetia, by Andreas Presbyter, by Petrus Mersaeus, by Hertmannus Schedel,
Stumfius, Aubertus Miraeus, Nauclerus, Notkerus Balbulus in his Martyrologe and
Baronius. To these may be added a Testimony of yet greater authority taken from
the Church of Curia (or Chur) in whose Ecclesiastical Office King Lucius is
commemorated as the first Doctor and Apostle of that Country, the place of
whose burial is there venerated, though his Relics have been dispersed
through several places in Germany. And in the last place, the same is
confirmed by that Treasury of the Records of all Churches, the Roman
Martyrologe, out of which every year on the third of December is chanted, Mart.
Romans 3. December.
The Commemoration of S. Lucius King of the Britains, at Curia a City of
Germany, who was the first among Kings which received the Faith of Christ, in
the time of Pope Eleutherius.

XVI. CHAPTER
XVI. CHAP.
1.2.3. Of the journey and Gests of S. Lucius in his Apostolic Office.

4.5. His death and burial in the City of Curia, or Chur.

6. Of S. Emerita, a sister of King Lucius, who accompanied him: her Martyrdom.

7. Demps^ers ridiculous pretention that King Lucius as buried in Scotland.

1. HAving from authorities of great weight asserted the Apostleship of this
our Pious King, in pursuance thereof we will collect out of ancient Writers some
of his particular Gests and sufferings in the discharge of the said Office.

2. He having resolved to consecrate the remainder of his old age to the
service of Christ, passed first into France, landing at Bol^ign a City of the
M^rini, where, says Malbranque, Malbranc. de Ma^i^i^.
he first began his office of preaching the Faith of Christ: and from thence
made his progress through the Region of the Nervians (the Country of Liege)
to Triers in Germany. After which the next place blessed by his presence and
Charity was Ausburg ( Augusta Vindelicorum) where he converted to the Faith a
Noble Citizen called Campestrius, with his whole family. But there the Devil
raised against him a great persecution: for, says Nauelerus, the people out of
a hatred to a Religion formerly unknown by them, Naucler. (...) 2. genesis 7.
pursued the preacher of it with stones, and afterward cast him into a pit: Out
of which he was secretly drawn by some Christians there, and conducted to the
City of Curia, where he ended his life by Martyrdom.

3. From Ausburg S. Lucius went to Reginoburgum (or Ratisbon) where he
efficaciously spread the seed of the Gospel. And having spent almost all his
strength in such works of Charity to others, he desired to end his life in
solitude, quietness and prayer. A. D. 196.
For which purpose he retired himself into the mountainous country of Rhetia:
and, says Tscudus, having passed over the hill, Tscudus de pris^a ^^hae^^^.
under which is situated the Castle called Gutenberg, which to this day retains
the name of S. Lucius his Cliff, he came into the Region where now the City
Curia (or Chur) is placed, together with his devout sister S. Emerita, who
presently after for preaching the Christian Faith suffered Martyrdom at Trimas
or Trimontium, distant from Curia the space of two or three miles. But S.
Lucius reposed himself in a certain Grot in the Mountain above the City
Curia, where he taught the Faith of Christ. The place where he built a little
Oratory does still testify his Sanctity and abode there: for in memory thereof
there was afterward founded a Monastery of Norbertins (Praemonstratenses) which
took its name from S. Lucius, as Aubertus Miraeus and Raderus do affirm.

4. As touching the manner of S. Lucius his death, the same Aegidius Tscudus
writes thus, Idem. ibid.
At last Lucius was slain near to Curia in the Castle called Martiola, by the
infidel inhabitants and the Prefect of that Region. Notwithstanding other
Authors affirm that he died in peace: though the honor and Title of a Martyr
cannot be denied him, since anciently, as Baronius says, it was communicated
not only to such as by a violent death for Christ's honor were snatchd out of
this world, Baron. A. D. 194.
but likewise to those who for the confession of the Faith suffered any
torments, though they did not consummate Martyrdom by death.

5. The precise year of the death of this glorious King is by Florilegus
determined to be the year of Christ two hundred and one: Florilegus A. D. 201
which was the seaventy eighth year of his Reign, and the eighty eighth of his
life. Whereto the learned Chronologist, Bishop Usher likewise accords. His words
are these, In so great a debate among Writers, Vsser in Primord.
my judgment does incline to believe that King Lucius ended his life in the
first year of the third Century after Christ. And the grounds of this
persuasion are, because I observe that not only the Annals of the Church of
Salisbury, and the Chronicle of the Britains abbreviated, as likewise the
London Tables, but also Roger Wendover, Matthew Paris, and Matthew of
Westminster, together with the History of Rochester, do agree that he dyed in
the year of our Lord two hundred and one.

6. His sacred Relics have been dispersed in several places of Germany: Rader
in Bavaria Sancta.
and to this day says Raderus, are venerated in a Church of the Franciscans
and another of the Jesuits at Ausburg. Which argues that he dyed not in
Brittany, but Germany. Therefore although our Cities of Gloucester and
Winchester have boasted themselves to have been the Repositories of some parts
of the body of this Pious King, it is more likely that, considering their near
relation to him, they should procure them from the Church of Curia, A. D. 191.
then that the German Churches should obtain them out of Brittany.

7. Now whereas in the Passage cited out of Aegidius Tscudus mention was made of
Saint Emerita, the devout Sister of King Lucius, and companion of all his
travails and dangers, and how in the Country of the Helvetians she added the
Crown of Martyrdom to the garland of Virginity: our British Martyrologe thus
commemorats her, At Trimas in the territory of Curia this day, Martyr. Aug. 4.
December.
being the fourth of December, is celebrated the Feast of S. Emerita Virgin and
Martyr, the Sister of Lucius King of the Britains, who together with her
Brother went into Germany, A. D. 193.
and for confession of the Christian Faith being persecuted by the infidells of
that country, consummated her glorious Martyrdom by fire, about the year of
our Lord one hundred ninety three. The entire history of her life may be read
in the Breviary of the Church of Curia. Mention is made of this holy Virgin and
Martyr by Isengrenius, and Hermannus Schedelius in his Chronicle.

8. But Philippus Ferrarius in his Catalogue of Saints omitted in the Roman
Martyrologe, Phil. Ferrar. in Catal. Sanct. Vsser in Primord. fol. 137.
being mislead by Dempster, a Writer most ridiculously partial for his
Scottish Nation, as Bishop Vscher observes, assigns a place in the Western
parts of Scotland called Trimontium, and now Attetish, for the place of this
Virgins Martyrdom, and in the Scottish Calander her commemoration is appointed
on the twenty sixth of May. Which assertion is so evidently contradicted by
many authentic Records of several Churches, and by Authors of such
unquestioned integrity, that it deserves not a serious confutation.

XVII. CHAPTER
XVII. CHAP.
1.2. S. Fugatius and Damianus preach the the Gospel in Brittany.

3.4.5. They retire to Glastonbury: and rebuild it: establishing a succession
of Monks. They find there the Holy Cross, etc.

6. The place of their burial, uncertain.

1. HAving thas largely set down the Gests of our Holy King Lucius, the first
among all Christian Kings, we will adioyn hereto such particulars as our
ancient Monuments furnish us with all touching the two Holy Legates Fugatius (
or Phaganus,) and Damianus ( or Diruvianus) sent by the Venerable Pope
Eleutherius to baptize the said King, and to settle the affairs of the New
British Church.

Malmsbur. in Antiq. Glast.
2. Now concerning these two glorious Saints thus writes Malmsburiensis out of
the Ancient Records of Glastonbury, Phaganus and Dervianus came into Brittany
to preach the Gospel, who traveled over the whole Island, teaching and
baptising the inhabitants.

3. Moreover in the same Records we find how these two Saints having been
informed that about a hundred years before, S. Joseph of Arimathea and eleaven
of his companions had in some measure spread the seed of Christian Faith in
Brittany, and at last retired themselves to Glastonbury, where they died:
hereupon they visited that sacred place, called the Isle of Avallonia, which,
says Cap-grave, was then become a covert for wild beasts, Cap-grav. in Ioseph^.
that formerly had been a habitation of Saints: till it pleased the Blessed
Virgin to reduce to the memory of Christians her Oratory erected there.

4. These two holy men therefore penetrating into this solitary Isle, Antiq.
Glast.
as Moses the Lawgiver of the Jews did into the inmost parts of the desert, by
the divine conduct they found there an ancient Church built by the hands of the
Disciples of our Lord, which the Supreme Creator of heaven declared by many
Miraculo^ signs that himself had consecrated it to his own glory, and to the
honor of his most Blessed Mother. The foresaid holy men having found this
Oratory, were filled with unspeakeable joy: and there they continued the space
of nine years, employing all that time in the praises of God. And searching
diligently that sacred place, they found ( the Holy Cross) the figure of our
Redemption, together with several other signs declaring that that place had
been formerly the habitation of Christians. Afterward being admonished by a
Divine Oracle, they considered that our Lord had made choice of that place
above all others in Brittany, wherein the intercession of the most Blessed
Virgin should be implored in all necessities. A perfect relation of all which
things they found in ancient Writings there: to wit, How when the Apostles were
dispersed through the world, S. Philip with many Disciples came into France,
and sent twelve of them to preach the Faith in Brittany: the which being
admonished by a Revelation of an Angel, built the foresaid Oratory, which
afterward the Son of God dedicated to the honor of his Mother: And likewise
how three Kings though Pagans, had given them twelve portions of land for their
sustenance. Thus we read in the Antiquities of Glastonbury.

5. The same Records do further testify, how these two Holy men added another
Oratory built of stone, Ibid.
and dedicated to the honor of our Lord and his Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul:
and on the top of the Mountain raised a Chapel to the honor of S. Michael the
Archangell. Moreover to continue the service of God there which had been
interrupted, they established a succession of twelve devout persons in memory
of the first twelve companions of S. Joseph: Which number continued till the
coming of S. Patrick, the Apostle of Ireland, into that place, etc.

6. Now whether these two Apostolical men dyed at Glastonbury, Ibid.
or no, is not certain, says the Author of those Records: though that they
continued there the space of nine years, is delivered by certain Tradition.
Most probable it is that they dyed and were buried there, considering that the
space of nine years contains almost the whole time of their abode in this
Island: so that it seems to have been a place of retirement chosen by them from
their first coming, to which they usually had recourse for a refreshment from
their labors, and where by the exercise of Prayer and Contemplation they
obtained a greater measure of the Divine Spirit to enable them more perfectly
to discharge their Apostolical Office. Martyr. Ang. 24. Maij. A. D. 191.
In due gratitude to whose Charity the British Church has made an anniversary
commemoration of them on the twenty fourth of May: consigning their death to
the year of our Lord one hundred ninety and one.

XVIII. C.
XVIII. CHAP.
1.2.3. After King Lucius his death, the Romans permit not any of his family to
succeed: and why.

4.5.6.7. Commotions in Brittany: composed by Vlpius Marcellus: to whom
Pertinax succeeded, who was Emperor next after Commodus*

1. AFter King Lucius his death, which happened in the seventh year of the
Emperor Severus, we do not find any of his family, or indeed of the British
blood to have succeeded him. Hence it is that John Fordon a Scottish
Chronologist thus writes, I^. Ford^^^ Ch^^^. Sc^^. l. 2. c. 31.
Lucius King of the Britains being dead (or as he says elsewhere, Not
appearing) the Royal offspring ceased to reign in that Kingdom, Tribuns being
there placed by the Romans to govern the Island: by Tribuns understanding the
Emperors Legates commanding the Roman army.

2. Hector Boethius likewise a French Historian having recounted how King
Lucius, as being a favourer of the Romans, had been permitted by the Emperors
benevolence to rule: H. ^^tth. hist. ^ib. 5.
he adds, That after his death the Romans considering that the British Kings
had been Authors of many seditions among themselves, and rebellions against
the Romans: therefore by a public Decree they prohibited any of the British
blood for the future to enjoy the Title and dignity of a King.

3. Now though not any of the Roman Historians mention such a Decree, A D. 201.
yet that King Lucius had no Successors of his blood is certain. Probably he
had not children: Or if he had, their exclusion from the crown might be caused
by his Profession of Christianity. However in our following Narration we shall
be obliged to refer occurrents to the reign of the respective Roman Emperors
then living.

4. And as for the Roman or British civil affairs during the Reign of
Commodus, lasting thirteen years, in the beginning whereof King Lucius became a
Christian, the Roman Historians afford us little to furnish this our History.
Some few particulars shall here briefly be mentioned.

5. In the fifth year of Commodus his reign (says Dio, Dio. hist. l. 71. In
Commodo.
who lived in those times) the Caledonian Britains, having made an eruption
through the wall which divided them from the more southern Provinces, wasted
all the country before them, and slew the Roman General together with all his
soldiers. Wherewith Commodus being terrified, sent against them Vlpius
Marcellus, a man of admirable virtue and courage: who returned upon those
barbarous people their injuries with advantage, and heaped on them most
grievous calamities and losses. For which good service through the Emperors
envy he scarce escaped being killed. Notwithstanding for that victory Commodus
assumed the surname of Britannicus among his other Titles, as appears by
ancient Medalls, mentioned by Camden and Speed.

6. Two years after, Ibid.
Helvius Pertinax who succeeded Commodus in the Empire (though he reigned but a
few months) was sent into Brittany, whither he brought back five hundred
soldiers sent by the Army there to Rome to complain of the injuries offered them
by Perennius the Emperors favorite, whom they boldly killd in his presence.

7. Pertinax having with much ado quietted the British Legions, Capitol. in
Pertinace. Id. in Albino.
made it his suit to the Emperor, to be eased of the government, alleging for
his principal reason* that the Army hated him for his care to preserve
military discipline. Whereupon Commodus in the eleaventh year of his reign sent
him a Successor Clodius Albinus, upon whom likewise he conferred the Title of
Caesar. Whose abode in Brittany was but short: for presently after, Iunius
Severus was sent General thither: and Commodus used all his endeavors to kill
Albinus. But dying shortly after, Pertinax who succeeded him, sent back once
more Albinus into Brittany.

THE FIFTH BOOK OF THE CHVRCH-HISTORY OF BRITTANY.
I. CHAP.
I. CHAP.
1. The Conversion of Brittany celebrated by Origin.

2. The Picts and Caledonian Britains follow their Example.

3. Their King Donaldus, etc. brought to the Faith by Fulgenius a Britain

4.5. etc. Dempsters fabulous narration.

1. THE Conversion of Brittany was so famous in the Church of God, Orige^. in
Ezech.
that Origin who flourished in Egypt not long after these times, in his
commentary on Ezechiel, thus celebrates it: When did the Country of Brittany
before the coming of Christ consent in the Worship of the only true God? But
now the whole Earth does with joy glorify our Lord for the Churches there
erected in the utmost bounds of the world, so that in all its limits it does
aspire to celestial happiness: And in another place, The power of the Divine
Grace of our Lord and Savior is present likewise, Id. hom. 6. in Luc.
both to those Nations in Brittany which are divided from our world, and
likewise those in Mauritania, yea with all People under the Sun, which have
believed in his name.

2. And as the fame thereof was largely spread among Churches far remote from
Brittany, so the Example also had a happy influence on the neighboring
Nations. For in the Northern regions of Brittany divided from the civilis'd
part by the Emperor Hadrians wall, A. D. 20^.
and which always lived in hostility with the Romans, the Faith of Christ,
within two years after the death o^ King Lucius, was not only preached, but
effectually subdued the minds both of the Princes, and generally of their
subjects: which gave occasion to Tertullian, Ter^^ll. (...) Iudaeos. c. 7.
who lived in these times, to say that those Provinces of Britains to which
the Roman Armies could not gain access, were yet conquered by our Savior,
submitting themselves to his Faith.

3 Concerning this Conversion thus writes Hector Boethius, Boeth. histor. lib.
5.
The like mind did Christ our Lord, the Prince and Author of peace, give to
King Donaldus, insomuch as rejecting the worship of Devils, he addicted
himself to solid Piety. For when Severus was Emperor of the Romans, the said
King obtained of Pope Victor, the fifteenth after S. Peter, to whom he sent his
Ambassadors, that several men illustrious for learning and Religion should be
sent into Scotland to baptize himself, together with his wife and children,
who professed the name of Christ. The Scottish Nobility following their Kings
example, renounced their former impiety, and embracing the Religion of Christ
were likewise purified by Baptism. The year wherein the Scots by the mercy of
Almighty God were called and received the light of true Piety, was the two
hundred and third after the incarnation of our Lord. A. D. 203.
To same purpose write Duraeus, Duraeus cont. Whittac. fol. 412. Gord. A. D.
2^0. Dempst. in Apparat. l. 1. cap. 6.
Gordonus and generally all the Scottish Authors.

4. As touching the manner of this Conversion, Dempster citing an Ancient
Scottish Historian, Fordonus, says, That is was effected by Paschasius a
Sicilian sent into Scotland by Pope Victor, who instructed the Nation in the
rudiments of Christianity. And the same, says he, he proves out of an ancient
Book of the Church of Lismore, which is the most ancient among the Scottish
Records. The same Author adds, that never any people was with less trouble
converted to Christ: for so great a concourse there was unto those Holy
Teachers, that there were not Priests enough to baptize them. Moreover the said
Fordonus delivers, that this Paschasius leaving behind him his Companions to
instruct that rude people more diligently in the Mysteries of Christianity,
returned back to Rome, to give thanks to that most holy Pope in King Donaldus
his name, for so singular a blessing conferred on his Nation. But before he
arrived there, Victor was departed this life, whose Successor was Zephirinus.
Whence it manifestly appears, that Scotland was converted to the Faith in the
last year of Pope Victor. Notwithstanding in the Scottish Menology published by
the same Dempster, this Paschasius is said not to have been sent into Scotland
by Pope Victor, but to have been Donaldus his Messenger to the Pope, as Elvanus
and Medwinus were sent by King Lucius to Pope Eleutherius, for there it is thus
written, Dempst. in Menol. Scot. 12. Dec.
At Dorn in Southerland, on the twelfth of December is celebrated the memory of
Paschasius who was sent a Messenger to the Holy Pope Victor by King Donald, and
obtained of him Christian Teachers to instruct the Nation.

5. This is the account given by Dempster, as he pretends out of Fordonus. But
so little to the satisfaction of the learned Bishop Usher, that he professes,
Vsser. Primor^ f. 13.
In those Copies of John Fordon which I have perused, not any of these things
related by Dempster are extant: so that I begin to suspect the truth of them,
as well as of the rest which he quotes out of a namelesse Book of Lismore, and I
know not what other Manuscripts.

6. The person, to whom Dempster ascrib's the glory of having first inclined
the mind of King Donaldus to embrace Christianity, was one called Fulgentius or
Fulgenius, Dempst. hist. l. 6. n. 547.
whom he will have to be the Author of a Book entitled, of the Faith of
Christ: which Book, says he, if it were now extant, Scotland would be furnished
with a Monument to declare the Antiquity and fervor of its Primitive Faith,
wherein it would yield the preeminence to few Kingdoms in Europe, and would be
superior to many. This Fulgentius, says he, was surnamed the Bold, and in the
reign of Septimius Se^erus dyed at York in England. He it was whose faithful
assistance King Donaldus made use of, being the first King who stamped his Coin
in brass, gold and silver with the sign of the Cross.

II. CHAP. II. CHAP.

1.2.3. Confutation of Dempster.

4. Who Fulgenius was.

5. A Message sent by King Donaldus to Pope Victor.

6. More concerning Fulgenius.

1. THIS relation made by Dempster, though for the substance of it it be
agreeable to ancient Records, yet to embellish it he employs so much of his own
inve^tion, moved thereto by a partial affection to his own country, that to a
Reader not altogether ignorant he rather disgraces the whole story, and renders
Truth it self suspected, then gains belief to his own impudent additions.

2. And first, whereas he makes Donaldus to be a King of the Scotts, and
Fulgentius to be of the same Nation, he cannot allege for this the least
ground in any ancient Authors who wrote of these times. The Name of Scots was
not yet heard of any where: much less in Brittany. The Roman Historians
acknowledge no other inhabitants in this Island, but only Britains: That is
the Common name, though in the several Provinces they be distinguished by
several Titles. And particularly touching those Northern Britains by Hadrians
wall separated from those which were under the Romans dominion, Dio an
Historian of these times, though he curiously prosecutes the progress of the
Emperor Severus through these countries, finds only two Nations in these parts
against whom he fought, the Maeares and the Caledonians, to which, says he all
other names are referred (as the Vecturiones, and Deucalidonians, etc.) the
former neighboring to that wall, and the other possessing the remainder of the
Island to the Northern Sea. As for the name of Scots, there is as yet no
mention of them, either in him, or any other ancient Writer. Where as if there
had been any such distinct Nation here, Severus who was most ambitious to
multiply his Titles, would not have faild to have inserted Scoticus among them.
We shall ere long determine when that Nation entered those parts, and when they
changed the Name of those Provinces.

3. It is without question true that such a Prince there was in those times as
Donaldus, Rosier t^m. 6. in Stem, ^o tha^.
who by Rosierius is said to be the Brother of Ethodius: but whether he was a
King of that whole Country of Brittany not yet conquered by the Romans, or
only a Prince of some one Province there, cannot certainly be determined. A
Tradition likewise sufficiently grounded approves the Conversion of that
Prince, with his Family and subjects, about two years after the Death of King
Lucius. Which is evidently confirmed by the forecited testimony of Tertullian
in a Book written not above seven years after it happned.

4. As for Fulgentius, or as the Britains called him, Fulgenius, he was a
Southern Britain, not only a Subject of King Lucius, Boeth. lib. 5.
but of the same Royal family: descended, says Boethius, from the ancient
blood of the British Kings, and who together with his King and kinsman
embraced the Christian Faith. He was not a Writer of Books, as Dempster fains:
but a Prince of high Spirits and courage. And being such an one, no marvel if
after so great an injury done to his family, which was excluded from the
Succession by the Romans, he refused to continue their subject, and fled to
their professed Enemies the Caledonian Britains beyond the wall.

5. Fulgenius therefore was doubtless the first who instilled into the mind of
Donaldus a love of Christian verities, and suggested to him the same way and
means to obtain a more perfect instruction, which his Kinsman King Lucius had
lately made use of, which was, to direct Messengers to the Bishop of Rome, Pope
Victor, with a request that he would send authorized Teachers to instruct that
Nation, and establish a Church there. This the King performed, and accordingly
Paschasius with other his companions were sent into those Northern Provinces,
who by the Divine assistance converted to the Faith such infinite numbers of
the Inhabitants, that there were not Priests enough to baptize them.

6. It seems the reputation of Fulgenius his courage and conduit was so great,
that King Donaldus made him General of the forces with which he broke into the
Roman Provinces, causing a terrible desolation there: And being opposed by the
Roman General, he defeated his Army, and killed both him and in a manner all
that followed him. So great a calamity hence followed through all the Southern
pa^ts of the Island, that the Emperor Severus himself thought his own
presence and authority necessary to secure the Province. Hereupon he brought
with him an Army so formidable, that the Maeates and Caledonians made an offer
to surrender themselves. But the Emperor ambitious of fame by a conquest of
them, entered their country, where his chief difficulty was to find his
enemies; for by reason of the vast mountains, woods and marshes, (all the
passages whereof were known to the Britains) the Romans became often entangled in
their march, and sometimes received considerable defeats: Notwithstanding by
their constancy and advantage in numbers the Roman Army did not interrupt their
progress, till they had peirced to the utmost bounds of the Island confining
on the Northern Sea. There was no decisive battle at all fought between them:
Notwithstanding the Emperor esteemed his exploit of marching through the whole
country, which never any Enemy before had done, to be so illustrious, that he
therefore assumed among his other Titles that of Britannicus: Which likewise was
communicated to his two Sons Bassianus and Geta, his Successors in the Empire:
though only Bassianus accompanied him in the invasion, Geta being left in the
Southern parts to compose Civil affairs.

7. As for the Noble and pious Britain Fulgenius, he is said shortly after to
have ended his life at York, then the Imperial City. It is doubtful whether
he returned thither as a Prisoner, or upon composition. For some of the Princes
and Provinces yielded themselves to the Emperor: though the greatest part
avoiding any encounter with the Romans, remained still in their former
hostility. ^itsius in Fulgen^io. A. D. 202. Brough^on Cent. 3. c. 5. 3.
That therefore which is related by a Modern Writer touching Fulgenius is very
uncertain, namely that in a battle against Septimius Severus he was mortally
wounded, and died at York in the year of Grace two hundred and twelve, being
the eighteenth and last year of Severus his Reign. And other stories of him
though confidently reported by some, as that he was the Brother of Martia the
first wife of Severus, and that by him Severus him self was slain, are mere
inventions contrived to adorn a Fable rather then a History.

III. CHAP. III. CHAP.

1.2. How far Severus the Emperor subdued the Caledonian Britains: And of the
wall built by him.

3.4. Severus his ominous retreat to York: and his death there: And
Consecration by the Romans.

5. His Sons left Successors in the Empire: but Bassianus the Elder murders
his Brother Geta.

6. A sharp reply of a British Lady to the Empress Iulia.

7. A Description of the Caledonian Picts by Herodian.

1. SEverus though he took the Title of Britannicus, and coined Medalls
inscribed with Britannica Victoria, was far from subduing those Northern
Britains. He wrote indeed to Rome, that the Caledonians by covenant had
yielded up a part of the country formerly possessed by them: Notwithstanding
if we consider the situation of the Wall or Rampire renewd by him to exclude
those Nations from commerce with the civilized Provinces, we shall find that
the Romans rather yielded to the Britains a considerable space of ground which
had formerly been subdued and gaind by Julius Agricola and Lollius Vrbicus.

2. Our famous Historian S. Beda indeed is of opinion that this Wall, Bed.
hist. l. 1. c. 12.
or rather Rampire of earth, was raised by Severus in the same place where
Agricola in the former Age had made his enclosure, to wit, between the two
bays of Edinborough and Dunbritton. But certain it is that this Rampire was
placed much more to the Southward, where the Emperor Hadrian afterward had
raised his Wall, now utterly demolished, between the Mouth of the River Tine
and the bay of Eden (Ituna) in Cumberland. Oros. hist. l. 7. cap. 17. Hieron.
in Chron. Cassiod. in F^st. Consul. Spartianus in Severo. c. 18.
The length of which Rampire was not as Orosius relates, as likewise S. Hierom
and Cassiodorus, one hundred thirty two miles, but only fourscore, as
Spartianus truly measures it, calling this work the greatest ornament of his
Empire, from whence he took the Title of Britannicus.

3. Having finished this vast work, with frequent towrs and a most deep and
spacious Trench, Spart. ibid.
Severus retired with his Army to York, and being superstitious, he busied his
thoughts in the way with an expectation of some good omen that might portend an
establishment of his future happiness. But was much daunted seeing an Aethiopan
soldier coal black, and crowned with Cypress, who came to meet him. And when
he commanded him to be taken away, he being a noted Ieaster said thus to him,
Thou have been all, thou have overcome all: Now be a God. The apprehension
which so portentous a sign wrought in his mind was much increased when entering
into York he was by a rusticall S^^thsayer conducted to the Temple of Bellona:
and afterward when the beasts brought for sacrifice were all black, and
through the negligence of his servants, followd him all the way to the entrance
into his Palace. Idem. ib.
These says Spartianus were the presages of his death, which followd presently
after in the same City. Idem. ibid.
His last words were these, When I received the Government I found the
commonwealth every where in troubles: I leave it peaceable even to the
Britains. Though I be an old man, unable to walk, I leave to my children
Antonin^, if they be good, an Empire firm and secure, but if they be ill, they
will find it weak and tottring.

4. Being dead, he was with all most exquisite solemnity consecrated and made a
God: Her^dian. h. l. 4.
the Ceremonies whereof are exactly described by Herodian. His ashes were
gathered into a precious box with costly odours, and by his two sons with
great veneration carried to Rome, to be laid up in the sacred Monuments of their
Princes.

5. Now though these two sons, Bassianus or Antoninus, and Geta, were left by
their Father with equal power Governors of the Empire, yet presently after
their coming to Rome the Elder son, Bassianus, most barbarously murdered the
Younger together with all that had adhered to him, and after his death reigned
alone four years.

6. Before we quit this subject in hand, it will not be impertinent to relate
from Dio a story touching a quarrel between Severus his Empress Iulia, and a
British Lady, by which we may observe the sprightfullnes of the Britains.
When the Emperor had entered into a league with the Caledonian Britains, A. D.
216.
whilst he was sitting on his Tribunal, his wife Iulia intending an affront to
the British women, said publicly that they conversed impudently with men.
Whereto the Wife of Argentocox^s a Caledonian Prince, thus pleasantly answered,
We do much more honorably satisfy out natural passions, then you Roman
Ladies: For we converse indeed freely with men, but they are such as are of the
best and Noblest rank: Whereas you Roman women prestitute your selves secretly
to the basest of men. This Reply proved the more sharp; because Iulia was
infamous for her adulteries: which it seems, the British Lady was not ignorant
of, and had courage enough to let her know it. Shortly after the Empress
became the object of the utmost infamy, by marying publicly her own son
Bassianus, to whose lusts she most impudently offered her self.

7. We will conclude the present argument with an observation out of Herodian
an Historian living in these times, Herod. hist. lib. 4.
who describing the fashions of those Northern Britains, says, That they used
no garments at all: that about their Necks and breasts they were swords,
esteeming that to be a principal ornament, and argument of their wealth.
Moreover that they in several colors marked their bodies with the pictures
and figures of all sorts of beasts: and this being their chief bravery, they
therefore refused to wear any garments, because they would have those pictures
exposed to men's eyes. Hence it is that in Roman Authors of this and the
succeeding ages we find, not the Britains in general, but only these
Northern, Caledonian Britains styled, Sky-colourd Britains, and sky-colourd
Brigantes: Aus^nius the Poet particularly ascribes such painting to the
Caledonian Britains. So that no doubt it was from hence that those utmost
northern Britains came to be called Picts, or a Painted people.

IV. CHAP. IV. CHAP.

1. Of the Actions and death of Donaldus the first Christian King of the
Caledonians.

2. The Ancient Scottish Christianity how different from the Modern.

3. Of a Monument erected to the Dui, or God of the Brigantes.

1. IN the fourth year of Antoninus Bassianus his Reign, dyed Donaldus the
first Christian Prince among the Caledonians. H. Boeth. hist. lib. 5.
Concerning whom thus writes Hector Boethius, Donaldus was the first of all the
Scottish Kings (as our ancient Annals inform us) which coined silver and gold,
marking it on one side with the figure of the Saving Cross, and on the other
with his own face: Which coyns may propagate to posterity the Memory of the
Christian Faith being first embraced by him among all the Kings of that Nation.
A. D. 213.
He at last dyed in the one and twentieth year of his reign, famous both for
his religious and Civil actions. Being dead, he, by the persuasion of such
Priests as among the Scots administered the sacred Mysteries of Christianity,
was with Christian ceremonies and solemnity buried in a field, which with many
pious accustomed Prayers had been consecrated for the burial of Christians.

2. In this relation made by Boethius, extracted out of ancient Records, the
present inhabitants of Scotland may observe how great the difference is between
the Christianity of the first King who professed it in their country, and that
which they have lately chosen in stead of it. This King refused to be buried
among his heathen Ancestors, choosing rather to mingle his bones with those of
common beleivers, then to have them proudly entombed with Heathen Princes. He
would not rest after death but in a place consecrated by the Devotions of holy
Priests, who likewise celebrated his Obsequies according to the Primitive
Christian manner, Cyprian. Ep. ^6.
by making oblations for him, and offering the most Holy Sacrifice for the
refreshment of his soul, as S. Cyprian, who lived not long after, describes
the manner of ancient Christian burial. The same holy Father likewise, as if
he intended not only to justify, but commend this last act of King Donaldus his
devotion, among other crimes with which he charges one of his Bishops called
Mar^ialis, ^d. Epist. 5^.
adds this, that he buried his children in the profane Sepulchers of the
Heathen. Among other ceremonies peculiar to Christian burialls in those ancient
times, this was one, that a Cross was raised upon their Monuments, as shall be
showed hereafter.

3. Having thus related the actions and death of this second Christian Prince
Donaldus, as fully as ancient Records inform us, it will not be amiss to add
here a Monument yet remaining, which in those very days was erected nere the
River Calder in Yorkshire by Titus Aurelius a Roman officer: on the one side
whereof were inscribed these words, A. D. 212.
Antoninus and Geta the third time Consuls: and on another was a votive
dedication to the Dui, or God of the Brigantes. Who this God was is uncertain:
only it appears that every Province, and perhaps every city and Town in
Brittany had their peculiar De^^y, such an one was Belatucadrus, Andates, etc.
Now the Roman Superstition was such, as that they worshipped all the Idols of
the Nations conquered by them, and such an one probably was this ( Dui, or) God
of the Brigantes. Yet considering the late conversion both of the Southern and
Northern Britains, why may not this God of the Brigantes be the only true God
worshipped by these New Converts, and honored with an Inscription by this
unbeleiving Roman, A. D. 221.
as one among the crowd of profane Deities superstitiously adored by them?

V. CHAP. V. CHAP.

1.2. S. Amphibalus a Young Christian Britain, and afterward the Converter of
S. Albanus, accompanies the two young Emperors to Rome.

1. AMong other Britains which now attended the two young Emperors in their
return to Rome, A. D. 213.
being moved thereto either out of respect to them, or a curiosity of traveling
into foraign countries, one young man is particularly taken notice of in our
ancient Annalls, which after some years do celebrate his Memory, as a glorious
ornament of our Nation, in being the Instructour of our first Martyr S. Alban
in the Christian Faith, and a companion of his Martyrdom. This was young
Amphibalus, born at Cair-leon upon Vsk ( Isca) in the County of Monmouth:
Concerning whom our Writers give this Character, Pits in Amphibalo.
That he was from his ^ender years bred up in good literature, and withal
instructed in Christian Religion whilst he lived in Brittany: that he learnt
both the Greek and Latin tongues, and was likewise instituted in Eloquence.
Afterward he traveled to Rome with a resolution there to betake himself to
higher studies, where he spent his time principally in reading and
understanding Holy Scripture and the Doctrine of Christian Religion, till the
beginning of the cruel persecution raised by Diocletian.

2. Two voyages of his to Rome are commemorated: and it was in the Second that
he made his continuance there, in which he gave himself to these serious and
sacred studies, and was ordained a Priest, and sent back by the Pope into
Brittany, where says Boethius and Bale, he became Bishop of the Isle of Man.
Mart. Angl. 25. Iunij.
In this his first voyage thither he was an Auditour of the Holy Pope Zephirin
who interpreted the Christian Law, as our Martyrologe testifies. But concerning
Amphibalus more shall be spoken hereafter.

VI. CHAP.
VI. CHAP.
1.2.3. A long silence touching British affairs: And fictions of Geffrey of
Monmouth touching Caransius.

4. Succession of Popes.

1. FOR the space of almost threescore years after the death of Severus, the
Writers of Roman affairs make no mention at all of Brittany: which silence of
theirs has given occasion to some of our ancient Historians to insert fictions
of their own, or to relate true occurrents without any regard to time and order.

Galfr Monu^et. A. D 218. Hollingsh. h. fol. 81.
2. Thus Geffrey of Monmouth, and some Modern Writers, mislead by him, affirm
that a certain British Prince called Carausius having killed the Emperor
Antoninus Bassianus, surnamed Caracalla, in a battle, in the year of our Lord
two hundred and eighteen, thereupon invaded the Kingdom of Brittany. Whereas it
is certain that at this time Antoninus was in the Eastern parts, where with
giving hopes of a Marriage with the daughter of King Artabanus, he treachorously
killd great numbers of the Parthians: and presently after was himself murdered
by Macrinus Prefect of the Pretorian bands: who succeeding in the Empire was in
less then a years space likewise killed by Heliogabal^s* To whom afterward
succeeded Alexander Severus.

3. As for Carausius, certain it is that he took the Title of Emperor in
Brittany, but that happened sixty eight years after this time assigned by Geffrey
of Monmouth and his followers: so that being not yet born, he could neither
reign nor kill Antoninus. A. D. 221.
We shall speak of him in his due place and season.

4. In the year of Grace two hundred twenty and one Pope Zephirin died, having
sat eighteen years: and Calistus succeeded him. In whose time our ancient
Records mention one Cadorus Bishop of London, after whose death Obinus followd,
the fourth Bishop of that See: Of whom nothing remains recorded but only their
Names.

VII. CHAP. A. D. 237.

VII. CHA.



1. The Emperor Alexander Severus murdered by Maximinus: who succeeds in the
Empire.

1. THE Emperor Alexander Severus a virtuous Prince, A. D. 2^7.
no enemy to Christianity, which some conceive to have been professed by his
Mother Mammaea, was in the fourteenth year of his reign slain by the treason of
Julius Maximinus who succeeded in his place. We mention this here, that we may
take notice of the mistake of some Writers who affirm that he was slain in
Brittany, R. Vit^^ in l 5. no^. ^8. Victor in Caesaribus. Lamprid. in Alexand.
Herod. hi. l. 6. Capitali^. in Maximi^. Eusebius. in Chron. On^phr. P. l. 1.
Roman. Princip. Platin. in Pontian.
in a town called Sicila. This is evident, says Richard White, and that town
took its name from Sicilius a Son of King Guintelin. True it is that Victor
resolutly says that it was at Sicila a Village of Brittany, that Alexander was
slain: and Lampridius affirms that it was in Brittany, or as other Writers will
have it, in Gaul: But Herodian, Capitolinus and generally other Historians
confidently pronounce, that it was in a Village near Mogontiacum (or Mentz)
called Sicila: wherein they are followed by Eusobius, Onuphrius Panvinius,
Platina, Baronius, etc. And this no doubt is the truth, since there are no
ancient Monuments testifying that Alexander, or his Successor and Murderer
Maximinus, ever were in Brittany.

VIII. CHAP. VIII. CHAPTER

i. etc. Of Chrathlintus a Christian King of the Caledonian Britains taught by
S. Amphibalus. Sacred Rites of those days. And who this S. Amphibalus was?

1. IN these times when Maximinus began his reign, A. D. 237.
Christian Religion flourished in Brittany, both in the Southern parts under
the Romans dominion, and among the Caledonians also, where reigned Chrathlintus
a Christian Prince successor of Donaldus. This Chrath^int^s is said to have
been directed in matters of Religion by Amphibalus, who is supposed to have
returned from Rome about this time, and become a Teacher of the Caledonians.

2. Now what Sacred Rites he taught them is thus declared by Hector Boethius,
King Chrathlintus, says he, H. Boeth. ^. l. 6.
adorned the Sacred Temple built by the Holy Bishop Amphibalus (in the Isle of
Man) with very Noble gifts, as Chalices, Patens, Candlesticks and such like
sacred Vessels, all made of silver and gold: likewise with an Altar enclosed
with Copper and brass. He assigned moreover for the maintenance of the said
Church revenews out of the lands adjoining thereto. That was the first Church
among the Scots consecrated according to Christian Rites, Idem. ibid.
and wherein the Prime Bishop and Ecclesiastical Prelate had his See. The same
Author hereto adds, That this Church was called Sadorensis (or rather as at
this day, Sodorensis:) the reason of which name, as has befal^n to many other
things and places, is by the great antiquity concealed from posterity. Some
Writers imagine that it was called Sodorensis, because it was by Amphibalus
dedicated to our Savior, called in Greek ((...)) Soter.

3. This Narration, for as much as concerns Amphibalus, if this be the British
Martyr Amphibalus, seems to be of doubtful credit: since he could scarce be so
timely a Bishop: For almost fifty years must yet pass before we introduce him
ascending the Episcopal throne, and offering himself a Champion and Sacrifice
for the Christian Faith.

IX. CHAP.
IX. CHAP.
1. The Sixth Persecution raised by the Emperor Maximinus. Martyrdom of Pope
Pontianus.

2. Of Cyriacus a Britain, falsely supposed to be the Successor of Pope
Pontianus.

3.4.5. The Martyrdom of S. Vrsula and the eleaven thousand Virgins falsely
referred to this age. Fictions concerning them.

1. AT this time S. Pontianus Bishop of Rome governed the Church of God, whose
Predecessor was S. Urban, who succeeded S. Calistus. Now the Tyrant Maximinus
raising the sixth Persecution, sharpened it especially against Bishops and
Teachers of the Christian Flock. By his command therefore S. Pontianus, who by
the Emperor Alexander had been banished into Sardinia, was crowned with
Martyrdom, being beaten to death with clubbs. To him succeeded S. Anterus, by
Nation a Grecian, who the year following was likewise put to death by the same
Tyrant.

2. Hence it appears that those Writers are manifestly disprooved who after S.
Pontianus place in the Chair of S. Peter a person unknown to Antiquity, called
Cyriacus. The Patrons of this Error are the Author of the ^asciculus
temporum, Bergomensis, Nauclerus, etc. Hereto some Modern Writers add, that
Cyriacus was by birth a Britain, and appointed by S. Pontianus, going into
banishment, his Vicar at Rome, to exercise there in his absence the Papal
offices: A. D. 238.
for which cause he was by some called Pope.

3. A yet greater Error is that by which certain Authors refer the Martyrdom
of S. Vrsula and many thousand Virgins her companions to these times.
Concerning whose particular Gests things are reported beyond all bounds of
probability or even possibility. Hermanus Crombachius, Herm. Crombach. in
Vrsula Vindicuta.
who has written a book of the Martyrdom of those Virgins, pretends that S.
Vrsula was the daughter of a certain Prince in Ireland, a Christian called
Dionethus, or Dionothus: and that all her companions came out of the same
Country. These holy Virgins, says he, the Emperor Maximinus beseeging and
winning by assault Colonia, most barbarously murdered. Whereas it is most certain
both by Tradition and all ancient Monuments, that before S. Patricks time (the
first Apostle of Ireland) there was in that Island no Prince that was
Christian, and much less could it afford eleaven thousand Christian Virgins.
Which by what miracle they should in those times be brought to Colen, no man
can rationally imagine.

4. A yet more absurd fancy is entertained by some others concerning these
Virgins, Cap-grav. etc.
who affirm that they in devotion undertook a pilgrimage to Rome accompanied by
several Princes, and in their retinue the forementioned Cyriacus: and
returning by Colen were there martyred. Indeed a proper time is found by these
Writers for a Pilgrimage to be performed by such an Army of Virgins, etc. when
the persecuting Tyrant Maximinus so cruelly raged against Christians.
Notwithstanding besid's pretended Revelations, there is produced an eye-witnes
of all this, a certain companion of S. Vrsula, called Vetena, who it seems
escaped the slaughter, that she might acquaint posterity with the story of her
Fellows. Vid. V^^er. in Prim. f. 623.
The tale reported by her is as follows: When we were at Rome there were at
that time two wicked Princes, whose names were Maximinus and Africanus. (Yet
Maximinus though then Consul with Africanus, never was at Rome:) who seeing our
great multituds, and how many Romans associated themselves to us, conceived
great indignation against us, fearing least by our means Christian Religion
might increase and gather strength. Hereupon having by their Spies learnt out
what way we intended to ^ourney, they sent with great have messengers to a
certain kinsman of theirs, called Julius, who was Prince of the Nation of the
Hunns, exhorting him to bring forth his Army to persecute and destroy us. Who
readily complying with their desire, rushed violently upon us when we were at
Colen, and there shed our blood.

5. Such dreams as these, (the inventions of vain and idle wits, which gain no
belief to themselves, and disgrace Truth reported by others) deserve not to be
confuted, but with indignation to be rejected and conte^^'d, See ix. Book. 26.
Chap.
And as for the true Story of S. Vrsula's Martyrdom with her companions we
shall herafter in due time and place, A. D. 249.
about the middle of the fifth Century, give a sober and rational account of
it, showing that she was indeed the daughter of one Dionothus, a petty
Christian Prince, not in Ireland, but Cornwall: and that those holy Virgins
being destined for spouses to great multituds of Britains not long before
placed in Gallia Armorica, from them named lesser Brittany, they were on the
Sea surprised by a Navy of Hunns, and by them led captives up the Rhine to
C^len, where they received a glorious Martyrdom.

X. CHAP.
X. CHAP.
1. Maximinus the Emperor slain by his Army: His Successors.

2. Of Pope Fabianus: and his pretended Bull to confirm the Privileges of
Cambridge.

3. Peace of Gods Church: and many Churches built.

4. An Ancient Monument touching the Emperor Gordianus and his Wife.

1. MAximinus having reigned not full four years, was slain by his own soldiers
at Aquileia, to whom succeeded Maximus and Balbinus chosen by the Roman Senate
to oppose Maximinus: who after a few months were likewise slain by the
Soldiers: and in their place they advanced to the Empire Gordianus the
grandchild of a former Gordianus who in a sedition against Maximinus had been
proclaimed Emperor in Africa, and approved by the Senate and people of Rome: but
presently after was deprived both of his Empire and life.

2. During the Reign of Maximinus, as likewise of the Younger Gordianus, A. D.
238.
the Holy Pope Fabianus sat in the Chair of S. Peter, being the Successor of
Pontianus. There is produced by Caius the Advocat of the University of
Cambridge a Bull of Pope Honorius dated the six hundred twenty fourth year of
our Lord, in which this Pope Fabianus is said to have approved and confirmed
the said University. In case the said Bull be authentic, it shall not here be
inquired what Proofs those who obtained it from Pope Honorius could allege for
their pretending to such a Confirmation by S. Fabianus. This is however
certain, that this Holy Pope was not only watchful over the affairs of the
whole Church, but a favourer of learning and learned men. Eusebius. hist. l. 6.
cap. 29.
To him did the famous Origin give account in an Epistle of the orthodoxe
soundnes of his doctrine, as Eusebius testifies.

3. At this time the Christian Church enjoyed great tranquillity, Baron. A. D.
245.
says Baronius: Of which occasion many Bishops making good use, not only
propagated the Faith, A. D. 246.
but likewise illustrated it by building many Churches. This is affirmed by S.
Gregory Nyssen, who says that in those days many Churches, and Altars were
erected every where. And particularly the holy Pope Fabianus commanded Churches
to be built over the vaults where the bodies of the holy Martyrs had been
buried: which Churches were much frequented by the devotion of Christians. No
wonder then if in Brittany, as yet free from all persecution, there be so many
testimonies of Churches, Altars and Sacrifices. Neither can it be doubted but
that among others Obinus Bishop of London, as likewise Conanus his next
Successor about these times, were careful to imitate the zeal of other
Bishops.

4. We will not here omit the taking notice of a Monument or Inscription found
among the Brigantes, Tabula Votiva.
being a Votive Table, For the safety of M. Antonius Gordianus the Son of
Publius, the invincible Emperor, and of Sabina Furia Tranquilla his Wife, and
their whole sacred Family: Which Table was erected by the Emperors Wing of
horse, for their courage called Gordia: the Prefect whereof was Aemilius
Crispinus a Gentleman of Rome, born at Tuidrus (or Thisdrus) in the Province of
Africa: under the command of Nonnius Philippus the Emperors Lieutenant,
Propretor (of Brittany,) Atticus and Pratextatus being Consuls. A. D. 244.


5. In which Table we learn two particulars, no where else to be found, The
first is, That Nonnius Philippus, was at this time Governor of Brittany: And
the other, That the Daughter of Misitheus whom the Emperor married, was called
Sabin^ Furia Tranquilla, though Paulus Diaconus calls her Tranquillina.

XI. CHAP. XI. CHAP.

1. The Emperor Gordianus slain by Philippus, who succeeded.

2.3. The Emperor Philippus and his Son become Christians: The occasion of
their Conversion.

4. After seven years reign they are slain by their soldiers: and Decius
succeeded in the Empire.

1. IN the sixth year of his reign was the Emperor Gordianus slain by the
treason of M. Julius Philippus, A. D. 246.
who succeeded him, and within a few years gave a proof how instable Kingdoms
are which are unlawfully purchased, for by the like, though less unjust
treason, he was deprived both of his Empire and life by his own Guards. Yet
thi^ advantage did Philip enjoy above any of his Predecessors, Oros. hist.
Vincent. Lirin. Cassiodorus.
that Almighty God gave him the Grace to wash away his sins by Baptism and
Penance.

2. The occasion of whose conversion to Christianity is thus declared in the
Acts of S. Pontius the Martyr: Ap. Surium. tom. 7.14.
Pontius a person advanced to a high dignity, was known and a particular friend
of the two Philips, the Father and the son, who were Emperors. Now in the year
one thousand after the foundation of Rome, they said to Pontius, Let us go,
and beg the favor of the Gods, which have brought us to this thousandth year
of the Roman City. But Pontius used many excuses to avoid this: however they in
a freeidly manner endeavored to compel him to the Sacrifice. Whereupon he
conceiving this to be a good opportunity given him by God to advance his truth,
said to them, O most pious Emperors, since it is the only true God which has
bestowed on you the Supreme dominion over men, why do you not rather adore Him
by whom such power and majesty has been conser'd on you? The Emperor Philip
answered him, For that cause it is that I desire to sacrifice to the great God
Jupiter. But Pontius smiling, Be not deceived, O Emperor (said he:) It is that
Omnipotent God, whose throne is in heaven, who created all things by his Word,
and by his Spirit gave life to them, which made you Emperor. In a word, by
these and other like speeches and persuasions the Emperors received the Faith
of Christ, and were baptized by the holy Pope Fabianus.

3. The two Emperor being thus persuaded of the Truth of Christianity, gave a
worthy example of Christian modesty and humility when they came to be baptized,
as Eusebius relates it, Eusebius. hist. lib. 6. c. 27.
The report is, says he, that Philip, who was then converted to the Christian
Faith, on the last Vigils before Easter coming to the Church with a desire to
be partaker of the Prayer together with the Congregation, was not permitted by
the Bishop then presiding over the Church, to enter till he had confessed his
sins, and placed himself among those who were yet unabsolved, and therefore
were separated from the rest in a rank appointed for Penitents: For the Bishop
told him plainly, that considering the many crimes publicly known to have been
committed by him, he could not upon any other condition receive him into the
Church. Whereupon the Emperor with a willing and cheerful mind submitted
himself to the Bishops injunction, thereby declaring an ingenuous modesty,
together with a Religious and pious affection proceeding from a reverent fear
of God.

4. These two Emperors reigned full seven years: and at the end were slain by
their own soldiers. The time and manner of their death is signified by an
ancient Inscription and Monument at Verona, where the Elder Philip was killed.
The Words of the Inscription are these, In the two hundred fifty and third year
of Christ the Emperor Philip the Elder was slain at Verona: and the Younger at
Rome by their own Guards, incited thereto by Decius, who succeeded in the
Empire.

XII. CHAP. A. D. 247.

XII. CHA.



1. The birth of Helena, Mother of Constantin.

2.3. A Controversy about the Place of her birth, etc.

1. THE Reign of the two Philips is rendered to us more illustrious by the
Mother of Constantin the Great. She was the daughter of a British Prince
called Coellus or Coelus, who exercised a Dominion among the Trinobantes, the
Regni and the Iceni, that is, Essex, Middlesex, Surrey, Sussex, Norfolk etc.
For though after the death of King Lucius not any Britain was allowed the name
of King, yet certain it is there were several Princes of the British blood
which under an inferior Title exercised a kingly Jurisdiction in their
respective Provinces.

2. There is a controversy among Writers in which of these Provinces S. Helena
was born. The more common opinion is that it was among the Trinobantes, in
Essex: and particularly in Colchester, Cambden. in Essex.
which says M. Camden, was in those days the prime City of that Province, as
a world of ancient Coyns there daily dug up do testify. And that she was
indeed born there, the same Author prooves by an argument of some weight, for
says he, The inhabitants of Colchester do confidently affirm that Flavia Iulia
Helena, the Mother of Constantin the Great, Idem. ibid.
and daughter of King Co^llus, was born in their City. And therefore in memory
of the Holy Cross found by her, they bear for their Arms in a Scutcheon a
knotty Cross placed between four Crowns.

3. Notwithstanding several Historians of the Greek Church do challenge S.
Helena to themselves, affirming that she was born in Bithynia, in a town raised
by her son Constantin to the dignity of a City, and from her called
Helenopolis. Moreover that she was a person of no good fame, and that from a
Pagan she became a Jew, etc. But all these fictions we shall in due place
disprove, and demonstrate that she was from her infancy a perfectly virtuous
Christian, bred up in that Religion by her Father, who was a Christian too:
that she was married to Constantius at his first coming into Brittany, whom
though perhaps she did not persuade to be a Christian, yet she induced him to
be a favourer of them, etc. But of these things hereafter.

A. D. 253.

XIII. CHAPTER


XIII. CHAP.
1. A persecution raised against the Church by the Emperor Decius.

2. Libellatici, who.

3. The Novatian Heresy: and occasion of it.

1. DEcius after the death of the two Philips, extended his rage to the
Religion professed by them: and, as S. Gregory Nyssen says, thinking with his
cruelty to resist the divine omnipotence by repressing the preaching of Gods
word, sent his Edicts to the Presidents of Provinces threatening them with
terrible punishments unless they heaped all manner of disgraces, injuries and
torments upon all those who adored the Name of Christ. By which terrors
threatened by the Emperor, and executed by inferior Magistrates,, those who
were firm in the Faith approved themselves to be pure wheat of Gods floor:
such were S. Fabianus Bishop of Rome, S. Alexander Bishop of Jerusalem, and S.
Babylas of Antioch, which made a glorious Confession of Christ before many
Witnesses, and sealed it with their blood.

2. But on the other side the same Tempest scattered the chafe out of Gods
barn: for then began the name of the Libellatici in the Church: Libellatici.
A title given to those tepide worldly-minded Christians, which by money
redeemed themselves from the obligation to be assistant at the Pagan
Sacrifices, and privately obtained from the Roman Magistrates Libells, or
Testimonies in writing, falsely declaring that they had sacrifised. Which
Hypocrisy was severely condemned by all Christian Churches, but principally
that of Rome, where S. Cornelius succeeded S. Fabianus, and of Carthage,
Cyprian. l. de ^^psis.
in which the glorious Martyr S. Cyprian sat. For no better title did these
Saints afford such dissembling Christians, then that of Lapsi, or Apostats.

3. Whilst S. Cornelius possessed S. Peter's chair, there arose in Gods Church
a great scandal, which was the Novatian Heresy. For Novatus having for his
turbulency been driven out of Africa, came to Rome, where finding Novatianus
swelling with envy and rage at the Election of S. Cornelius, he easily drew him
to be a favourer of his Schism and Heresy, by which he excluded from all hope
of pardon and reconciliation those which were called Libellatici, or which had
been guilty of any great crime, although they had submitted themselves to due
Penance. ^ild. in Exci^^o.
This Novatus is by our Gildas called a black ^wine, who trodd under foot our
Lords pearl, and cast violent hands on the Church, more worthy to be consumed
by the fearful flames of hell, then to be made a Sacrifice on Gods altar. A.
D. 257.
And concerning his followers thus writes Saint Augustine, Let us take heed of
harkening to those who deny that the Church of God has authority to forgive all
sins whatsoever. August. de Agone Christ. cap. 31.
Those wretches whilst they will not understand how in S. Peter God has
established a Rock: and will not believe that the Keys of the kingdom of
heaven have been given to the Church, they let the same keys fall out of their
own hands. These are they which boast themselves to be (Cathari) more pure then
the Apostles doctrine requires, etc.

XIV. CHAP. XIV. CHAPTER

1. Decius betrayed by Gallus* and slain: He succeding is slain by his solders,
together with his Son Volusianus: and the Empire comes to Valerianus and
Gallienus.

2. Of S. Stephanus Pope: who baptises many.

3.4. etc. Among others, S. Mello, a British Saint.

1. THE Persecution raised by Decius though extremely violent, was yet short,
for himself having reigned little more then two years, he was by the treachery
of Trebonianus Gallus deserted in a battle fought against the Scythians, where
he lost his life being swallowed in a fenn: In whose place the same Gallus
together with his Son Volusianus succeeded, by whose cruelty S. Lucius who
followed S. Cornelius in the Roman See, was crowned with Martyrdom. Immediately
after which they themselves were slain by their soldiers: who cast the
Imperial Purple on Aemilianus: which having worn but one months space, he also
was killd by them, and Valerianus formerly chosen by another Army succeeded in
the Empire, who assumed as his Colleague therein his son Gallienus.

2. In the beginning of whose reign Stephanus the Successor of S. Lucius in
the Apostolic See instructed, baptized, and ordained among others a glorious
ornament of our British Nation, Vsser. in Primord. f. 145.
S. Mello, otherwhere called S. Mallo, S. Melanius and S. Meloninus, sending
him to govern the Church of Rouen in France.

This Mello being yet a Pagan was sent out of Brittany to Rome to pay the
Tribut to the Emperor Valerian: Cap grav* in vita S. Mellonis. Petr. de
Natalibus. Vincent. in Speculo.
where according to the custom he with his companions was lead to the Temple
of Mars to sacrifice.

4. But presently after, by divine Providence being admitted to the
acquaintance of the Holy Pope Stephanus, he became one among his hearers whilst
he expounded to a few Christians the doctrines of the Gospel of Christ: and
being very attentive to his words, he believed: and at his own earnest request
received Baptism

5. In the ancient Acts of this holy Bishop S. Stephanus, approved by Baronius
to be Authentic, we read of great numbers baptized by him, Baron. A. D. 259. ^
22.
to gether with the order and Form of the administration of that Mystery, when
Nemesius and his daughter together with many other Gentiles were baptized by
him, among whom probably this our S. Mello might have been one. The words of
the Acts are as follows.

Id. ibid.
6. S. Stephanus gave order that Nemesius should be conducted to the (Church,
or) Title of S. Pastor. Where after he had catechized him and his daughter
according to the Christian custom, and appointed a Fast to be observed till the
evening: when even was come, he blessed the Font in the same Title, and causing
Nemesius to descend into the water, he said, I baptize thee in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Which having done, turning
himself to the daughter of Nemesius, he said, Do thou believe in God the
Father Almighty? She answered, I believe. He added, And do thou believe in
Jesus Christ our Lord? She answered, I believe. Do thou believe the
Remission of all sins? I believe. Do thou believe the Resurrection of the
Flesh? She answered, I believe etc. Then began many others to cast themselves
at S. Stephanus his feet, with tears beseeching him to baptize them. So that in
that day he baptized of both sexes to the number of sixty two. And after this
many other Gentiles of good rank in the world came to S. Stephanus desiring to
be baptized by him. Moreover t^is blessed Bishop being replenished With the
Grace of the holy Ghost, celebrated frequently Masses and Synods in vaults
where the Bodies of holy Martyrs rested.

Vsser. in Primord. f. 146 ^ap. grav. in Mello^^.
7. After S. Mello's Baptism, S. Stephanus ere long promoted him by all the
several Ecclesiastical degrees to the sublime Order of a Bishop: for S. Mello
continually adhered to him Now by how stupendous a Miracle he was designed to
be the Bishop of (Rhotomagum, or) Rouen, we find in his life collected out of
ancient Ecclesiastical Records, in this manner.

8 S. Stephanus together with S. Mello persever'd in Fastings and watching. Now
on a certain day whilst the Holy Bishop S. Stephanus was celebrating Mass,
both himself and S. Mello saw an Angel standing at the right side of the
Altar. Mass therefore being finished, he gave to him a Pastoral Croster or
staff, which the Angel held in his hand, saying, Receive this staff, with
which thou shall govern the inhabitants of the City of Rousen in the Province
of Neustria. And though the labors of away and course of life hitherto
unexperienced by thee, may prove burdensome, notwithstanding do not fear to
undertake it, for our Lord Jesus Christ will protect thee under the shadow of
his wings, Thus having received a benediction from the holy Pope he betook
himself to his journey. And when he was come to (Altissiodorum, or) Auxerre in
Gaul, having in his hand the staff which he had received from the Angel, he
by his prayer restored to health a man who had his foot cut in two pieces by an
axe.

9. The learned Molanus calls S. Mello the first Bishop of Rouen, and seems to
prove it by an Ancient Distick of that Church importing as much. But a former
more authentic Tradition described out of the ancient Catalogue of Bishops of
that Church by Democharus declares that S. Nicasius preceded S. Mello in that
Bishopric. However, says Ordericus Vitalis, The Ancient Pagan Superstition
after the Martyrdom of S. Nicasius possessed the said City, filling it with
innumerable pollutions of Idolatry till the time that S. Mello was Bishop there.

XV. CHAP.
1.2. etc A prosecution of the Gests of S. Mello, Bishop of Rouen.

5. Dempster impudently challenges him to be a Scott.

1. BEcause we would not interrupt this story of S. Mello, it will be
convenient here to prosecute his life and Gests unto his death, which happened
almost two and twenty years after his Ordination. Thus therefore the Gallican
Martyrologe relates concerning him: 2. S. Mello unwilling to delay the
execution of the Mission imposed on him by the Holy Ghost, Martyrolog. Gallican
21. October.
departed from Auxerre, and went straight to Rouen: Where courageously setting
upon his divine employment, he began to preach to the inhabitants the name of
Christ, with such efficacy of speech and power of miracles, to which the
admirable Sanctity of his life added a greater virtue, that in short time he
brought almost the whole City to the obedience of Faith. This great change
began especially when on a certain day the people were busy in attending to an
abominable sacrifice offered to a certain false Deity of theirs. For S. Mello
coming there suddenly upon them, and inflamed with a heavenly zeal, sharply
reproved that frantic people for their blindness, which worshipped a senceles
stock, as if it were a God: And presently calling on the Name of Christ, and
making the triumphant Sign of the Cross, he immediately tumbled down the Idol,
and with the word of his mouth alone, in the sight of them all, broke it into
small peices-Hereupon the people being astonished with this sight, willingly
attended to his admonitions: who taught them the knowledge of the true God, and
the hope of immortal life to be attaind by his pure Worship. By this means a
great multitude of the Citizens became imbued with the Doctrines of our holy
Faith, and purified by the water of Sacred Baptism: And S. Mello in the same
place from which he had expelled the Devil, erected the first Trophey to our
Lord, building there a Church under the Title of the Supreme most Holy Trinity.
In which Church the people being assembled every Sunday were instructed more
perfectly by him in the Worship of God: there he offered the unbloody Sacrifice,
and communicated to his flock the means and helps by which they might attain
salvation.

3. Thus the flock of Christ increasing plentifully every day, Idem. ibid.
certain Merchants of other countries negotiating there became attentive and
obedient to the Divine Word: for whose commodity the Holy Bishop built another
Church in an Island, where they might more conveniently assemble themselves: to
which he gave the Title of S. Clement. He added moreover a third Church to the
end he might comply with the fervor of the multitudes flowing together to see
the Wonders wrought by him: This he consecrated to the veneration of the most
holy Virgin the Mother of God: and placed there a College of Priests, thereby
designing it for an Episcopal See.

Id. ib.
4. Having thus persisted the space of many years in the discharge of his
Apostolical Office, and by the seed of the Divine Word having begotten many
thousand souls to Christ, this Blessed man, a veteran Soldier in our Lords
warfare, at last (in the year of Grace two hundred and eighty) departed to his
eternal rest, there receiving from his heavenly General, whom he had served
with great courage, perseverance and glory, an inestimable Do^^tive and reward.
He was buried in a vault in the suburbs, over which afterward was erected a
Church dedicated to S. Gervasius a glorious Monument worthy of him. From whence
notwithstanding afterward when the Danish armies raged in France, his sacred
Body was removed into parts more remote from the Sea, and reverently laid at a
Castle called Pontoise, where to this day it reposes in a Church which from him
takes its Title, where the memory of so illustrious a Champion of Christ lives
with great glory and splendor.



5. This account gives the Gallican Martyrologe of our Blessed British Saint
Mello, or Melanius Probus, as Possevin calls him. Whom yet in opposition to the
universal consent of all Writers and Records, Dempst. in Menolog. ^cot. 22.
Octo.
agreeing that he was a Britain, Dempster most impudently in his Scottish
Menology will needs call a Scott, falsely affirming that Possevin acknowledges
him for such. Whereas to this time there is not mention in any ancient Writers
of such a Nation as Scotts, in this Island. Or if there had been, certain it is
that their country never having been subdued by the Romans, there was no
Tribut sent from thence to Rome, which yet we see was the occasion of S.
Mello's first going thither. But it is Dempsters constant practice,
ridiculously to adopt into a Scottish family all persons whatsoever which in
these Primitive times are called Britains. If this were granted, Ireland would
have a better title to this Saint, then Scotland; for in this age that Island
was the only country of the Nation called Scots, which afterward transplanted
themselves into the Northern parts of the Caledonian Britains. A. D. 262.
But this controversy is well determined by the learned Bishop Usher, though an
Irishman, Vsser in Primord. f. 146.
who says, Dempster is the first and only Writer that ever dreamt that
Melanius was a Scott.

XVI. CHAP. XVI. CHAPTER

1. The Emperor Valerianus first favors, afterward persecutes Christians.

2. He is taken Captive by the King of Persia.

3. Many Tyrants and Usurpers in the Empire.

4. Gallienus Son to Valerianus slain.

5.6. Claudius a Worthy Emperor succeeds: His reign short: but his posterity
in the following age possesses the Empire.

VAlerian in the beginning of his reign showd not any disfavour to Christians,
A. D. 260.
but in his fifth year he raised a furious persecution (which was the eighth)
against them: A. D. 260.
in which the holy Pope Stephanus was crowned with Martyrdom: to whom succeeded
S. Sixtus, the second of that Name: who the same year tasted of same the Cup.
And in his place sat S. Dionysius. To the same Emperors cruelty the glorious
Martyr S. Cyprian became a Sacrifice: and at Rome S. Laurence though inferior
in degree, yet excelling all other Martyrs in his magnanimously suffering with
contempt most exquisite torments.

2. But almight God speedily and heavily visited all this precious blood upon
the Emperor Valerian, A. D. 262.
who being taken prisoner in a battle against Sapore^ King of the Persians,
lived many years in a most miserable slavery, being made that Kings footstool
when he mounted his horse: and at last his body was excoriated and salted with
salt to be an eternal monument of the instability of human glory, Neither was
it a small aggravation to his unhappines, that his Son Gallienus left sole
Emperor, never attempted either by treaty or war to redeem him.

3. Notwithstanding though Gallienus was by just title Sole Emperor, yet never
was there in so few years so many Usurpers of the Empire as during his reign:
for in several Provinces of the Roman world no fewer then thirty Tyrants
assumed the Title of Emperors* Among which, those who had the Government of
Gaul, as Posthumous, Tetricus, etc. were always favored and assisted by the
Armies in Brittany, A. D. 271.
which was a portion of that Prefecture. This is testified by a world of
ancient Medalls inscribed by their names and faces, which have been diggd up in
several places in this Island.

4. At last after more then five years luxuriously and sluggishly spent, A. D.
269.
Gallienus was by the treachery of Claudius, his next Successor, slain,
together with his Brother and children.

5. Within less then three years Claudius dyed: A. D. 271.
an Emperor highly esteemed by the Romans for his courage wisdom and moral
virtues: but yet he was a persecutour of Christians. After his death his
Brother Quintillus took the Name of Emperor, but within seaventeen days was
slain by his own soldiers, either for his austerity, or because they had heard
that Aurelianus was chosen Emperor by the Eastern Armies: who therefore in
history is esteemed the immediate Successor of Claudius.

6. Notwithstanding the family of Claudius, which was Flavian, was sufficiently
recompensed for the misfortune of his Brother Quintillus, in that a daughter of
his other Brother Crispus, called Claudia, being married to Eutropius an eminent
person of the Dardanian Nation, bore to him Constantius Chlorus, who
established the Empire in his family for several generations.

XVII. CHAPTER
XVII. CHAP.
1. Aurelianus the Successor of Claudius overcomes Zenobia, and leads her
Captive.

2. He marches against the Tyrant Tetricus.

3.4. He his accompanied by Constantius, who makes himself illustrious.

5 6.7. The Emperor Aurelianus his just Sentence in a controversy among
Christians.

1. AMong all the late Usurpers of the Empire there remained only two in the
beginning of Aurelianus his reign, Zenobia, in the East, Queen of Palmyrene,
and Tetricus in the West. Against these two therefore the Emperor turned his
Arms: beginning first with Zenobia, a Lady of most masculin courage, whom at
last notwithstanding he with much difficulty subdued, and lead with him in
triumph to Rome, where she and her off spring lived in a private but splendid
fortune.

2. After this Aurelianus marched against Tetricus who had several years acted
the Emperor in Gaul, A. D. 274.
with whom likewise conspired the British Army. But not dating to oppose the
Emperor in battle, he retired into Catalonia, whither being pursued, he
voluntarily surrendered himself to him, and was permitted not only to live, but
to live in esteem with him, being trusted with the government of a Province in
Italy.

3. In this expedition Aurelianus was accompanied by Constantius Chlorus, who
here laid the foundations of bringing the Empire into his own family. For
behaving himself with admirable courage and conduit in freeing the City called
Augusta Vindelicorum (or Ausburg) from a streit seige with which the barbarous
Germans had surrounded it, and afterward defeating the Enemies forces in a
battle near the said City, he gained so great a share in the Emperors favor
and opinion, that he made choice of him to be trusted with a Army into
Brittany, a Province then unquiet and ill affected.

4. In this voyage of Constantius were laid the grounds of strange revolutions,
not only in regard of his own family, but of the whole Church of God: For now
it was that he married the so famous British Lady S. Helena, of whose birth we
have already spoken: Now it was that the glorious Emperor Constantin the Great
was born, and educated by his holy Mother in at least a love, if not a
Profession of Christian Religion: by whom in a few years the Catholic Church
was not only freed from the most heavy persecution it ever had groand under,
but made to triumph over Hell it self, and the Kingdom of Hell, Pagan
Idolatry. But a more full account of these things, deserving our most exact
inquiry, we will refer to the following Book.

5. And we will conclude this with relating a memorable passage out of
Eusebius, touching a most just and impartial judgment given by the Emperor
Aurelianus, alhough a Heathen, in a controversy among Christians, by which he
acknowleged the authority and dignity of the Bishop of Rome, contradicted and
despised by Modern Sectaries. The business in debate was this

6. Paulus Samosatenus having broached a most execrable Heresy, by which he
denied the Divinity of the Son of God, was in a Synod of Eastern Bishops
reduced from his Error: But upon his relapse, he was by them excommunicated
and deposed from his Bishopric of Antioch. But the obstinate Arch. heretic
refused to relinquish either his opinion or his See. Hereupon the said Bishops
gave an account both of their judgment and his perversenes to Dionysius Bishop
of Rome and other Bishops in the West. Now this controversy coming to the
Notice of secular Magistrates, the Emperor himself was desired to pronounce
sentence therein, which he performed in a manner that might have become a good
Christian Prince, related thus by Eusebius: 7. When Paulus, says he, refused
to depart out of the house belonging to that Church of Antioch, Eusebius. hi. l.
7. cap. 24.
the Emperor Aurelian being desired to give his judgment on the matter, made a
most holy and religious Decree: For he commanded that the Episcopal house
should be given to those to whom the Christians of Italy and Bishops of the
City of Rome should by their letters assign it. And thus at last Paulus to his
great shame and infamy, was by the authority of the Secular supreme Power
entirely expelled from his Church.



THE SIXTH BOOK OF THE CHVRCH-HISTORY OF BRITTANY.
I. CHAP.
I. CHAP.
1.2. Constantius his first Expedition into Brittany.

3. He was then only a Roman Senator.

4. He is received peaceably by the Britains.

5.6. etc. He associates himself with Coelus a British Prince, and marries his
daughter Helena.

1. THERE are mentioned in Story two Voyages of Constantius Chlorus into
Brittany: The first was now in the year of Grace two hundred seaventy four, and
the fourth of Aurelianus his reign, presently after Tetricus had submitted to
him in Spain: The other was almost twenty years after, when Carausius in
Brittany took on him the Title of Emperor, against whom he was sent. Now for
want of distinguishing these two Voyages, great confusion has been brought into
the History of Constantius and his Son Constantin by Grecian Writers, as shall
hereafter appear.

Baron. ad A. D 306. ^. 16
2. Concerning this first Expedition, Baronius in a discourse proving his son
Constantin to have been born in Brittany, thus writes, This happened in the time
of the Emperor Aurelianus, by whom Constantius, illisstrious for the fresh
memory of the Emperor Claudius to whom he was allied, was sent with an Army
into Brittany, to the end he might contain that Nation frequently accustomed to
tumults, in their duty and fidelity to the Emperor.

3. Suitably hereto we read in the life of S. Helena, Cap grav. in vita S.
H^^lenae.
That the Romans taking into consideration the damage they had received by the
loss of the Kingdom of Brittany (which always adhered to the interests of such
Tyrants in Gaul as had usurped the Title of Emperors: such were Posihumius,
Tetricus, etc) sent thither the Senator Constantius with authority, who had
lately subdued Spain unto them, a man wise, courageous, and beyond any other
zealous to enlarge the Majesty of the Empire. Constantius therefore at his first
arrival into Brittany was not Emperor, nor so much as Caesar, that is,
deputed to succeed in the Empire, but simply a Patritian and Senator. This not
being observed by certain Authors, has occasioned great obscurity in history,
and given advantage to some Greekish Writers to entitle other Provinces to the
Birth of Constantin.

4. Constantius being arrived in Brittany, was beyond expectation with all
quietness and submission received as the Emperors Lieutenant, both by the
Britains and Romans. That which may be supposed to have been the principal
cause of such compliance in the Britains, A. D. 274
was the Religion professed by them, which taught them as to yield Faith and
worship to Christ, so also their duty and obedience to Caesar, that is, to
Aurelianus universally acknowledged the only lawful Emperor. The Romans
likewise in Brittany being but few, and withal having among them no General
Officer: ( For Tetricus whom they formerly obeyed, had newly deposed himself)
they had but small encouragement to resist a General so famous as Constantius,
guarded by an Army lately victorious.

5. To such a quiet reception of him, the many virtuous qualities of
Constantius, no doubt, much contributed: The which we find celebrated by
Eumenius a Rhetorician of these times in a Panegyricall oration pronounced to
his son Constantin: By considering the passages whereof we may be better
directed to a view of the state of these times, then by almost any succeeding
Historians. The clause therein referring to our present subject is this. What
shall I speak (says he) concerning your Fathers recovery of Brittany? ^umen.
Panegyric. 9.
The sea was so calm when he passd it, as if being astonished at the burden it
carried, it had lost all its motions: And when he aborded the Island, victory
did rather expect him there, then accompany him thither. What shall I say of
his clemency and mercy, by which he forbore to insult over those whom he had
conquered? What of his justice, by which he restored all damages to those
which had been pillaged? What of his Providence, by which having strengthened
him self with associations, he so behaved himself in the exercise of his
jurisdiction, that those who had formerly been treated as slaves, were made
happy by a liberty restored to them: and those who had been guilty of crimes,
were by forbearing of punishment moved to repentance?

6. Now whereas the Orator here mentions associations made by Constantius with
the Britains, it is most probable that he reflected on the freindship and
affinity contracted by him which such Princes as were then of power in the
Island: among which the most eminent was Coellus Prince of the Trinobantes and
Iceni, of whom we spoke before. To him therefore did he in a particular manner
apply himself, and not only induced him to submit to Aurelianus, and renew his
former tribute: but moreover to make the league more inviolable, and to endear
the minds and affections of the Britains to himself, he demanded affinity of
that Prince: and espoused his only daughter, S. Helena, then a Virgin. All this
is confirmed by an ancient Poet, Vsser. in Primord. f. 989.
whose verses the learned Bishop Usher cites from Ioannes de Garlandia.

Cap. grav. in vita S. Helenae.
7. The same likewise is recorded in the life of S. Helena extant in Cap-grave,
to this effect, A. D. 275.
Moreover Coel King of the Brittans and Father of Helena, as soon as he was
informed of Constantius his arrival, fearing to make war with a person so
famous for many noble victories, he directed Ambassadors to him to demand
peace, and to promise subjection upon those terms that he should still enjoy
the possession of his Principality, paying the accustomed tribut. To these
conditions Constantius agreed, and having demanded hostages, confirmed a peace
With him. Not long after a grievous sickness seized on Coel, of which in a short
time he dyed: After whose death Constantius having married the beautiful
Princess Helena, took possession of his Principality.

8. To this effect do our ancient Records relate Constantius his first
expedition into Brittany, and the consequences of it. And hereto do subscribe
the most learned Historians of the Western Church, in opposition to the fables,
grounded on manifest mistakes, which some Writers of the Greek Church have
published: which shall shortly be examined and refuted.

II. CHAP. II. CHAP.

1.2. The Birth of Constantin in Brittany.

3.4 5. A Controversy about the place of his birth.

1. THE year after the happy marriage between Constantius, then only a Roman
Senator, and Helena in Brittany was born Constantin, afterward worthily
surnamed the Great; not only for his Victories over several Tyrants, and
reducing the Roman Empire to a peaceable and flourishing state: but principally
for destroying the Empire of Satan and advancing the Kingdom af God over
Idolatry and all kinds of impious superstitions. At this time there sat in the
Chair of S. Peter Eutychianus the successor of Pope Foelix, who immediately
followed S. Dionysius: And in this year were Consuls, Aurelianus and Bassus.

2, That Constantin was born this year appears evidently out of Eusebius, an
Author familiarly known to him, Eusebius. de vit. Constant. l. 1. c. 1.
who in the first Book of Constantin's life says: That God continued his reign
the space of more then thirty years: that is, thirty two years and a few
months, Id. ibid. l. 4. c. 53.
as he says in another Book: and that the said number being doubled was the
measure of the years of his life. Now the common opinion of Chronologists
being, that he dyed in the year of Grace three hundred thirty seven, since
Eusebius allows to his age little above sixty two years: it will follow that
his birth was in this year.

3. The special relation we have to this glorious Prince will deserve our
inquiry into the place likewise of his birth: concerning which there is some
disagreement among Historians: For besides Authors of of good esteem, Ferreol.
in Chron. Bozius de signis Eccl. l. 24. c. 5. Vid. Vsser. in Pri^^rd. f. 990.
as Ferreolus Locrius and Thomas Bozi^s, the public Orators sent from our
Kings to the Councills of Constance and Basil positively affirm that he was
born at York in a place called Pertenna, which B. Usher interprets to be the
College of Vicars attending the Quire, at this day called Bederne, which
heretofore was a part of the Emperors Palace. And certain it is that in
following times Constantius had his chief residence there, where at last he
also dyed.

4. Others there are which assign London for the place of his birth, as William
Stevenson in his Description of London: grounding their opinion probably on
this, for that afterward at the request of his Mother Helena he caused London
to be compassed about with a wall of stone and brick, Camden. in Tri^^bant.
as Camden affirms. Whereas Henry of Huntingdon and Simon of Durham report
Saint Helena her self to be author of that work: which says B. Usher, Vsser.
in Primord. f. 176.
is confirmed by a great number of Medalls stamped with her image, which have
frrequently been found under the said walls. But all this is no proof at all
that Constantin was born there.

5. It is most probable that he was born, as his Mother before had been, at
C^l^qestor, H. Huntingd.
about which also she built a wall: For this was the City where her Father
usually resided, and where Constantius his affairs at this time chiefly lay:
For in the Northern parts there were as yet no troubles at all: it will be
almost twenty years before Constantius toward the end of his life be called
into those Provinces upon occasion of sedition among the Caled^nian Britains.

III. CHAP.
III. CHAP.
1.2. etc. The relation of Nicephorus, etc. touching Constantins birth in
Bithynia, conf^ted.

1. WHatsoever has been hitherto written out of approved Authors either
touching Saint Helena's quality, birth or country, or Constantins original,
is contradicted, especially by some Greek Historians, particularly Cedrenus and
Nicephorus, to whose authority, though of no moment, considering both their
manifest fabulousnes in other matters, their contradicting one another in this,
and the latenes of their writing, yet some learned Authors of our Age do
deferr, particularly Lipsius, a person eminently skilled in all Antiquities.

2. The relation given by Nicephorus touching the marriage of Constantius with
Helena is this, Niceph. hist. Eccl. l 7, c 17.
The Roman Empire (says he) having been cruelly wasted by the Persians,
Parthians, Sarmatians and other bordering Nations, Diocletian and Maximianus
then Emperors sent Constantius (called by him Constans) as their Ambassador
to the Persian King to pacify him with kind speeches and gifts. Constantius in
his way thither putt in at a haven called Drepanum in Bithynia in the bay of
Nicomedia. Where to satisfy his lust his host prostituted his own daughter, a
maid of great beauty; to whom Constantius gave for reward his royal vesture
embroydered with purple. The same night upon occasion of a wonderful vision
Constantius gave a strict ch^^ge to the maids father that he should not permit
her to be touchd by any other, and that he should with all care see the child
well educated, because, said he, in my sleep, I saw a sun against nature rising
from the westhern sea. Having then performed his Embassy he returned to Rome
another way, where he was presently created Caesar together with Galerius: and
not long after they were both of them Emperors, etc.

3. This story of Nicephorus, says the Illustrious Cardinal Baronius, Baron.
ad A. D. 306. n. 12.
may by many unanswerable arguments be confuted, being evidently contrary to
certain Chronology. For if Constantin was born when his father was created
Caesar, which was in the year of Grace two hundred ninety two, it will
necessarily follow that he was but fourteen years old when he was proclaimed
Emperor: whereas by Eusebius his account, who was inwardly known to him, he was
at least seaventeen years old when his Father was first designed Caesar, and
above thirty at the beginning of his own reign. It is very probable therefore
that Nicephorus mistook Bithynia for Brittany, and because afterward the Town
called Drepanum was beautified by Constantin, and from his Mother called
Helenepolis, therefore he fancied it to be the place of her birth. Whereas
besides many Authors of good credit, the Gallican Orator who pronounced a
solemn Panegyric at the marriage of Constantin and Fausta the daughter of
Maximian, says in express words that he ennobled Brittany with his birth.

4, Notwithstanding in confirmation of Nicephorus his relation (at least for as
much as concerns the exclusion of Brittany from being the place of Constantins
birth) the learned Lipsius adioyns a testimony of Julius Firmicus Maternus a
writer of those very times, whose words are, Our Lord, Augustus, Emperor of
the whole world, the Pious, happy and wise Prince Constantin the greatest, the
Son of late Deified Constantin, of most happy and venerable memory, who by the
propitious favor of God was elected to free the world from tyrannical
excesses, and domestical seditions, that so the deformity of slavery being
taken away, we might enjoy the blessing of a secure liberty, and shake from our
weary necks the yoke of captivity: a Prince who whilst he fought for our
freedom was never deserted by fortune, though otherwise most instable in
affairs of War: He was born at Naisus (a City of Illyricum) and from his
almost infant years managed the stern of the Commonwealth, which authority
having fortunatly obtained, he with wholesome moderation governs the Roman
world. This noble Character Lipsius will needs apply to Constantin the Great,
and consequently affirms that he was born, far from Brittany, at Naisus a City
of Illiricum, or Dardania confining to Thrace.

5. But, as M. Camden in an Epistle to Lipsius declares (which is further
strongly confirmed by the R. F. Michael Alford a learned Jesuit of our Nation)
it is evident that Firmicus published his Book during the reign of Constantius
Son of Constantin the Great, as appears by his dedicating it to Mavortius
Lollianus by the Title of Proconsul, who was Consul in the eighteenth year of
Constantius. So that the Constantin mentioned by him as then alive, could not
be the first of that name Who was then the Constantin so highly extolled by
Firmicus? Surely no other then his Son Constantius, who most frequently in his
Edicts called himself Constantin: And being ambitious of Titles, as Historians
observe, he usually annexed the word Magnus and Maximus to his name. And that
Constantius alone was intended by that Author in this glorious Character
appears by that clause, That from the first step of his age he managed the
stern of the Commonwealth, for he was created Caesar being only eight years
old, whereas his Father was above thirty before he governed the Empire.

6. Now whereas Firmicus extolls his Constantin for freeing the world from
tyrannical excesses and domestical seditions; this does exactly fit
Constantius, who as Aurelius Victor, Eutropius and Ammianus Marcellinus
observe, was very fortunate in civil wars, as he was unprosperous in extern:
for he depressed these Tyrants, Magnentius, Decentius, Potentianus, Vetranio,
Silvanus, Chonodomarius, Badomarius, etc.

Ob.
7. There remains one only difficulty, in a heathenish Prayer which Firmicus
makes to the Sun, Mercury and Venus to continue for ever the reign of
Constantin and his children, Lords and Ceasars, etc. for it is certain that
Constantius had no children. Sol.
Notwithstanding such a Prayer might properly enough be made, in hope that the
Emperor might have children afterward. And besides, though Constantius had no
children born to him, yet he had children by adoption, to wit, Gallus and
Iulianus, both of them created Cesars by him: Now the Form of adoption was
this, I do affirm that this man is my Son: and I have bought him with this
money. So that Firmicus his prayer applied to Constantius might be very proper
and seasonable.

8. Now of Constantius the Son of Constantin, Julian. Orat. 1.
it is certain that be was born at Naisus a City of Illyricum: this is
expressly affirmed by Iulianus his Nephew in an Oration made in his praise.
This City indeed was the Native soil of the whole family: Julius Constantius
the Father of Constantin was there born, as likewise Diocletian and both the
Maximians. And whereas Licinius had possessed himself of this country,
Constantin in the twelfth year of his reign overcame him here: after which
victory he continued several years in those parts, and Naisus being the
Metropolis of the region, he adorned it much with buildings, and from thence
published many Rescripts. Here then it was that his second son by Fausta,
Constantius was born: For at Arles in France she brought forth her first son
Constantin, five years before this. So that it is apparent that the Testimony
of Julius Firmicus does nothing at all avayle Lipsius his pretention against
Constantins being born in Brittany.

9 To conclude this controversy, a witness of great authority may be produced
for ours, and against Lipsius his assertion, which if he had well considered,
doubtless he would not have preferred so highly the authority of so
inconsiderable an Author as Nicephorus. This is our glorious Bishop S. Aldelm,
who lived not much more then three hundred years after this time. He in his
excellent Treatise of Virginity expressly affirms that S. Helena was a British
Lady. And this Treatise having been with high commendation mentioned by S.
Beda, an advantage is added to our assertion, by his testimony involved in the
other: And one considerable argument thereby is wanting to our adversaries, who
make Saint Beda's silence touching S. Helena and Constantins birth in Brittany,
a strong proof that they were born in the Eastern parts.

IV. CHAP.
IV. CHAP.
1.2. etc. The honor and reputation of Helena Mother of Constantin cleared
from aspersions laid on her by Nicephorus and other Grecian Writers.

1. HAving thus cleared the title which Brittany has to the birth of
Constantin: justice requires that we should be as diligent in clearing the
reputation of his Mother Helena, who has indeed been most rudely treated by the
penns of many Writers. We have seen how Nicephorus has published her for a vile
prostituted harlot: S. Ambrose upon report calls her Stabulariam, Ambr. Orat.
fane^. de obit. Theodo^.
a common hostess (Stabulariam hanc primo fuisse asserunt, sic cognitam
Constantio Seniori) Some affirm, says he, that she was a public hostess, and
as such was first known to the Elder Constantius. Bed. hist. l. 1. cap. 8.
S. Beda gives her a little better title, writing thus, Constantius left his
Son Constantin, begot of Helena his Concubin, Emperor of the Gauls.

2. Now whilst Christian Writers thus disgracefully set her forth, we will not
wonder to find Zosimus a Heathen, and professed enemy both to Constantin and his
Mother, Zosim. hist. l. 2.
reporting that Constantin was born ((...)) of a dishonorable Mother ((...))
and one who against law cohabited with Constantius. Id ib.


3. These imputations, though in propriety of language they were indeed
injurious, Yet it cannot be denied but there was some shadow of truth in them:
For by the Roman Laws it was enacted, That if any Prefect of a Cohort, L.
Praefectus ff de vita Nuptiarum.
or Troop of horse, or any Tribune should against the Prohibition of Law marry
a Wife in the Province in which he bore Office, that Matrimony should be null.
Now this was the very case of Constantius with Helena, who married her when he
was sent by Aurelian the Emperor with authority into Brittany.

4. Notwithstanding this Roman Law did not so indispensably condemn such
Marriages, L. Etos. ff. de vit^ Nuptiarum.
but that they might afterward be rendered lawful; for the famous Lawyer Paulus
thus states the matter, If after such an office is deposed, the person shall
persevere in the same will to acknowledge her his wife, then such a marriage
becomes just and lawful. Now it is certain that several years after
Constantius had quitted the government of Brittany, he constantly cohabited
with Helena. It was therefore a slanderous speech of Zosimus to say that
Constantin was born by one nights meeting of them two, since it is evident that
they continued together a very long space as in a lawful and chaste marriage.

5. Moreover Constantins succession in the Empire, without any contestation
declares him a legitimate Son of Constantius. Which is further confirmed by
several passages in the Orations of Rhetoricians in those days: Eumen. Panegyr.
among whom Eumenius commends Constantin for the Noblenes of his Extraction,
saying that by his birth he deserved the Empire: Panegyr incerti Authorit.
and that his Father on his death bed being demanded, to whom he would leave
the Empire, answered as became a Prince truly Pious. And another French
Rhetorician in an Oration pronounced at the Marriage of Constantin with Fausia,
among other Virtues of his Father imitated by his Son, insists much on the
special virtue of Continence. Now it had been ridiculous and most uncivil to
commend the Fathers continence before a son who was a bastard. But so far was
Constantin from being esteemed the issue of an unlawful bed, A. D. 292.
that when afterward his Father upon reason of state and policy was obliged to
marry Theodora the daughter of Maximianus, before this second marriage was
executed he was forced to repudiate his former wife Helena, which proves her to
have been esteemed his legitimate wife. Baron. ad A. D. 306.


6. Upon consideration of which grounds we may conclude with Cardinal
Baronius, We are of necessity compelled to say, That Helena was the lawful
wife of Constantius. And indeed so honorable an esteem had she with
posterity, that her memory is celebrated by diverse Authors with many
illustrious Elogies. Collat. 14. Constit. 28. Quod pulchro.
Particularly the Emperor Justinian in her honor made a Decree: That the Name
of the Sea formerly called Polemaicum, should in future times be called
Heleno-pontus: Which name, says he, was by the most Pious Emperor Constantin
formerly imposed by the occasion of his most honorable Mother Helena, a woman
of eminent Piety, who likewise found out for us the Holy Cross venerated by
all Christians.

V. CHAP.
V. CHAP.
1.2. etc. The Faith of Helena vindicated: who by the Grecians is affirmed to
have been a Pagan, and a Jew.

1. THE imputations against S. Helena do not end here. Not only the ingenuity
of her birth, and lawfullnes of her marriage are questioned, but her Faith
likewise and Religion are by several Modern Authors, most greivously
blackned. For besides Vincentius Beluacensis and others, S. Antoninus thus
writes of her, Am^on. 2. p. c. 1. tit. 9.. 3.
When Helena the Mother of the Emperor Constantin, then residing in Bethania
(or as other copies read, Bithynia) heard that her son was become a Christian
and baptized by Silvester Bishop of Rome, she in her letters commended him that
he had renounced Idols, but most horribly reprehended him, because neglecting
the God of the Jews, he worshipped a man who had been crucified, as a God.

2. This unworthy imputation received its first ground from the ancient Acts of
Pope Silvester, which doubtless require correction in several passages. Acta
Silvestri.
In those Acts is declared how Helena being in the Eastern parts together with
her Grand Children Constantius and Constans Emperors, and being yet a Pagan,
she was circumvented by the Jews: and thereupon was angry with her Son
Constantin for embracing the Christian Faith: desiring him by her letters
rather to ioyn himself to the Jews, then Christians: Whereupon he called
together an assembly of Jews at Rome, to the end that by a disputation between
them and the Christians, it might be determined which belief was most to be
approved. These things, say the Acts, befell in the year when Constantin and
Licinius were fourth time Consuls.

3. But if there were nothing else to disprove this Relation, the date of these
Acts would be sufficient: for in the year when Constantin and Licinius were the
fourth time Consulls, his two Sons Constantius and Constans were but infants,
and not as yet created Caesar's, much less Emperors. Again it would from
thence follow that Helena was above seaventy years old before she was a
Christian: which is contradicted by the general consent of Historians.

7. On the contrary that Helena from her infancy was brought up in Christian
Religion is by many poofs confirmed by Cardinal Baronius, Baron. hic.
Helena her self, says he, did instruct Constantin her son from his child hood
in piety. I speak this upon the authority of S. Pantinus, who was in this very
age a famous Senator of Rome: for he writing to Severus says thus, The
impious Idolatry of the former age remained to the times of Constantin
immediately before ours: Who received the happiness of being a Christian Prince
and to have Christians his suceessours, not so much by his own, Ambr. de obitu
Theodos.
as the faith of his Mother Helena. S. Ambrose likewise affirms, That Helena
conferred more on her Son Constantin, then she received from him. Likewise S,
Gregory in an Epistle to Aldiberga Wife to Ethelbert king of Kent exhorts her
to dispose her husband to embrace the Christian Faith, Gregor. l. 9. Epist. 59.
and uses this inducement, For, says he, as God was pleased to kindle the
hearts of the Romans to a love of Christian Religion by the persuasions of the
renouned Lady Helena, Mother to the most pious Emperor Constantin: so we trust
that by your Majesty's endeavors his mercy and grace will be operative on the
English Nation.

5. Neither is this an assertion peculiar to the Latins, for the Grecians
likewise confess that Constantin received the first rudiments of his Faith
from Brittany. Sozom.
It is clearly agreed on by all, says Sozomen, that Constantin was first
imbued with Christian Religion among the Britains, and other inhabitants of
those coasts. And Theodoret, speaking of Constantins letters commanding that
the Church at Jerusalem should be built, says, No other but the Emperors own
Mother undertook the bringing of these letters, whose praise is celebrated by
the tongues of all that have any piety. She it was who brought forth this
glorious Light of the world, and ministered also the nourishment of piety to him,

6. I will here adioyn that which seems to have been the occasion of the Error
of S. Antoninus mentioned in the beginning of this Chapter: And that is a false
copied passage of Marianus Scotus in his Chronicle at the year of Christ three
hundred twenty and one: Marian. Sect. in Chron. ad A. D. 321.
Where in most of the printed Copies are found these words: When Constantin was
baptized by Pope Silvester, his Mother Helena wrote to him out of Brittany,
that he should deny Christ and follow the Jews. Which passage out of
Florentius Vigorniensis (whom Pitfius and Bale call the Abbreuiatour of
Marianus) ought to be corrected thus, Constantin being baptized by Pope
Silvester, his Mother wrote to him out of Brittany, that he should persecute
the Jews who denied Christ.

7. Certain it is out of Ecclesiastical History that upon the Conversion of
Constantin, the Jews were enraged with envy and malice, and exercised all
manner of contumelies against Christian Religion, especially against those of
their own sect which became Christians: which might incite this pious Lady to
suggest thus to her Son. For at the very same time Constantin published a most
severe Edict against the Jews, the Tenor whereof follows: 8. The Emperor
Constantin to Evagrius. It is our Will that intimation be given to the Jews,
their Magistrates and Patriarcks, that if after this law any of them shall
presume (as we are informed they have dome) to persecute with stones or any
other way any one who shall forsake their damnable Sect, and have recourse to
the true worship of God, he together with all his partakers shall be adjudg'd
to be burnt with fire. And if any one among the Christians shall adjoyn
himself to their abominable Sect and conventicles, he shall suffer the same
punishment. Given from Margillum the fifteenth of the Calends of November: the
Emperor Constantin and Licinius being fourth time Consulls.



VI. CHAP.
VI. CHAP.
1.2. Aurelianus a great Persecutour.

3. He is slain by his soldiers.

4. Tacitus succeeds him: and afterward Probus.

5.6. Bonosuus a Britain, Vsurps the Title of Emperor.

7. He his slain by his friend Victorinus.

8. The Emperor Probus is slain by his Army: to whom succeeds Carus: and after
him his Sons Carinus and Numerianus. To whom, being slain, Diocletian succeds
in the Empire.

1. THE marriage of the Senator Constantius with a pious Christian Lady, and
the birth of Constantin, though they were the seeds of infinite blessings to
Gods Church, yet they were seeds as yet hid in the earth: for Christian
Religion and the Professors of it were never more cruelly persecuted, then
during the time between Constantins birth and the beginning of his reign.

2. The Emperor Aurelianus, who sent Constantius into Brittany was one of the
most inhuman adversaries of Gods truth, as the Churches Martyrologe in a world
of places does witness. Apud Eusebius. in Orat. ad Sanctorum cae^^^. c. ^4.
And this, Constantin when he had obtained the Empire exprobrated to his
Memory, in an Oration which he made to an Assembly of Bishops, Thou likewise, O
Aurelianus, says he, were the incentive of all mischief. But when thou with
horrible fury marched'st through Thrace, thou wast slain in the midst of thy
journey, and filled'st the tracts of the high way with thy impious blood. He
was the Author of the Ninth Persecution, and both the Eastern and Western
Church groaned under his cruelty. Only Brittany was free from violence,
enjoying great tranquillity by the moderate government of Constantius, now
become not averse from Christianity. A. D. 281.


3. But after seven years reign God revenged his own cause upon Aurelian, who
was slain by his own soldiers between Byzantium and Heraclea. In whose place
the Roman Senate chose Tacitus, famous for nothing more then his moderation, A.
D. 278.
and refusing to continue the Empire hereditary in his family.

4. Tacitus after six months concluded both his Empire and life, to whom
succeeded Probus, a person of so great renown for his military virtues, says
Vopiscus, that the Senate wished him, the Army chose him, and the people with
acclamations approved the Election.

5. In the third year of Probus his reign, A. D. 281.
after an admirable Victory gained by him in Gaul, where he slew four hundred
thousand of his Enemies by his own testimony in a letter to the Senate, Vopic^.
in Elorian. Vopisc. in Probe. Id. in Bonoso
a certain man called Bonosus, by original a Britain, whom the Emperor had
left Admiral of the Roman fleet upon the Rhene, fearing his anger because most
of the ships by some casualty had been set on fire, in his absence took on him
the Purple and Title of Emperor, and continued his dominion over Brittany,
Spain and a part of Gaul, a longer time then he deserved, says Vopiscus: But
in the end his army with great difficulty being defeated by the Emperor, he
was forced to hang himself.

6. This man's rebellion no doubt caused great disquiet in Brittany, from the
government of which Constantius had been removed, and returning to Rome had
been made Prefect of Dalmatia.

7. After Bonosus his death troubles were renewed in Brittany by him who
administered that Province, supposed by M. Camden to be Cl. Cornelius Laelianus,
recommended to that Government by a frein'd of the Emperors called Victorinus
of Mauritania. For Laelianus invaded the Tyranny, upon which Victorinus fearing
the Emperors indignation, went presently into Brittany and by subtilty
procured the death of the Usurper: which restored peace to the Province. The
security of which, Zosim. hist. lib. 1.
says Zosimus, was much confirmed by the sending thither great numbers Franks
then of taken prisoners in a battle by Probus, which in following seditions
were proffitable to the Emperor.

8. After five years reign Probus was also slain by his own army, and in his
place Carus Manlius Aurelius was chosen Emperor, who created his two sons
Carinus and Numerianus, Caesar's. But Carus the next year being killed by
lightning, and Numerianus by the treason of his father in law Aper, and Carinus
by one of his Tribuns whose Wife he had abused, Diocletian was by the general
acclamation of the Army pronounced Emperor, Diocletian the Author of the
last, A. D. 286.
most dire, and most prolonged persecution that ever the Church of God suffered.

VII. CHA.
VII. CHAP.
1. Diocletian styled Britannicus.

2. He makes Maximianus his partner in the Empire.

3 4 5. A most furious Persecution raised by them against the Christian Church.
British Martyrs.

1. THere is extant an ancient Inscription, recited by Baronius, and dated the
second year of Diocletians reign, A. D. 285.
wherein among other Titles he is styled Britannicus, which imports some victory
gained by him, or his Lieutenant in the Island. Certain it is that though
Carinus was not slain till the year following, yet at this time Brittany and
the Western regions of the Empire, following the example of Rome, had submitted
to Diocletian, deserting Carinus.

2. Who being slain the year following at Murgum, A. D. 286.
Diocletian assumed as Companion to himself in the Empire M. Valerius
Maximianus, committing to him the government of Gaul, Brittany, etc. These two
Emperors, of which Diocletian from Jupiter took the Surname of Ioviu^, as
Maximianus from Hercules did that of Herculius, at the beginning of their reign
conspired in a resolution to be the Defende^s of their Pagan Gods, and profes'd
enemies of Christ, whose Religion they intended wholly to extirpate out of the
World.

3. Certainly there was never given a stronger proof that Gods Church is built
upon a Rock, impossible to be shaken by human force, then the unsuccesfullnes
of the rage of these two Emperors against it. They had the whole power of the
world in their hands, they were Princes of eminent valor, wisdom and policy,
above twenty years they governed the Empire, and employed all that time,
without any relaxation, in executing their rage against Christ and his truth,
they omitted no manner of tentations, by favors and terrors, to withdraw his
servants from their Worship of him, all men's wits were exercised in devising
the most exquisite torments against them, not only magistrates, but private
persons were armed to destroy them, they were not only executed and tortured
singly one by one, but whole armies of them were butchered together, and the
most effectual means to obtain the Emperors favor or pardon for the greatest
crimes, was the heaping of all disgraces and unjust violences upon poor
Christians. Yet with all this, Christian Religion was so far from being
destroyed, that the Emperors cruelty and injustice gained more souls to
Christ, then the Sermons and exhortations of devout Preachers could do in time
of peace: insomuch as these two Princes, though vainglorious and ambitious
beyond any of their predecessors, seeing all their endeavors against Christ
to prove fruitles, out of rage and despair voluntarily deposed themselves from
the government of the world, which they had undertaken principally in design
against Christ.

5. One notable proof of the supereminent cruelty of these two Emperors
against the Professors of the name of Christ was this, that the Isle of
Brittany divided from the Roman world, which in former persecuting Emperors
times had been exempted from participating with the sufferings of other Nations,
was now made a scene of blood: Yea it may truly be affirmed that Brittany was
the first Province dignified by our Savior to become the Theater on which
those glorious Champions S. Albanus, S. Amphibalus, S. Julius, S. Aaron and
their Associats afforded to other Christians a blessed example of conquering
the world and hell it self by Faith and patience: Of whose Gests and sufferings,
the proper subject of this History, we shall consequently treat: premising
notwithstanding sufficient proofs, that these holy Martyrs were the first who
in the beginning of Diocletian and Maximian's reign, dedicated their cruelty.

VIII. CHAP. VIII. CHAPTER

1.2. etc. That the Martyrdom of S. Albanus, etc. in Brittany happened in the
beginning of Diocletians reign: contrary to the assertion of several writers.

1. IN relating the Martyrdom of S. Albanus and the rest, our Historians, both
ancient and Modern, do much vary among themselves concerning the precise time
of it, many of them consigning it to the latter end of these Emperors reign,
in which their cruelty was arrived to its height, others to the middle time,
and but few to the beginning. Yet upon a serious consideration of several
circumstances concerning it, it may be made appear that these holy Martyrs
sufferings cannot well and conveniently be assigned to any but the third year of
Diocletians reign, which was the first of his Companion Maximianus, being the
year of Grace two hundred eighty six: And therefore that William of Malmsbury,
Radulphus, David Powell, etc who refer it to the two hundred ninety thir'd year
of our Lord, place it too late: and much more is the computation of Baronius,
Harpsfeild and Matthew of Westminster, who assign it to the third year of the
following century,

2. It will be sufficient to discover the Error of their account, if we take
notice in what year it was that Constantius was remanded into Brittany: For
certain it is that in his government there was no persecution, as being, Eusebius.
hist. lib. 8. cap. vit.
according to the testimony of Eusebius, and all historians, a Prince of
wonderful meeknes, humanity and benignity, who never was partaker of the
persecution raised against Christians: on the contrary he was careful to
preserve all those who lived under his Dominion free frrom all injury and
oppression: Neither did he ever demolish any of their Churches, etc.

3. Now by agreement of all Chronologists, Constantius was sent into Brittany
the second time in the year of Grace two hundred ninety two, which preceded the
time assigned by any of the forementioned Authors. Whereupon it is that David
Powell in his Annotations on Giraldus Cambrensis his Itinerary was not ashamed
to affirm, Ap. Girald. Cambr. Itin. lib. ^.^.5.
that the Martyrdom of S. Albanus and the rest was consummated in the year of
our Lord two hundred ninety two, when Constantius Chlorus reigned in Brittany:
thus wrongfully charging a virtuous innocent Prince with their blood.

4. But though this be sufficient to disprove the said Writers account, we must
search other authorities which may warrant us to affixe their Martyrdom to this
present third year of Diocletians reign, when he assumed Maximian to partake of
the Empire. And such authorities do freely offer themselves; for the most
ancient Writer of S. Albanus his life in Capgrave says expressly, Ap. Capgrav.
in S. Alba^^^.
The glorious Martyr S. Albanus suffered on the tenth of the Calends of July in
the year of our Lord two hundred eighty six. The same is proved by those
Authors who commemorate the invention of the Holy Martyrs body in the days of
King Offa, in the year of our Lord seven hundred ninety four, which, says
Matthew of Westminster, Westm^^^st. ad A. D. ^94.
was the five hundred and seventh year after his Passion. To this account
subscribes likewise Matthew Paris, who recording another opening of the Holy
Martyrs Sepulcher in the year of Grace one thousand two hundred fifty seven,
adds these words, M. Paris. ad A. D. 1257.
We may take notice, says he, that from the Passion of the Martyr to this time
had passed nine hundred and seaventy years, that is, one thousand wanting
thirty.

5. We will conclude this with the weighty testimony of S. Beda, as it is to be
found in a most ancient Manuscript, for the Printed Copies are imperfect. There
in the first Book of his History and seventh Chapter is found this passage,
Bed. M.S. histor. lib. 1. c. 7.
Finally at that time Brittany was glorified by several men's Confessions of
the Faith of Christ: for in the same two hundred eighty and sixth year of our
Lords Incarnation S. Albanus suffered Martyrdom there. By which speech he
confirms what he had before written, Id. ibi. l. cap.
That the Britains preserved unto the reign of Diocletian the Faith entire and
inviolate, which they received at first: implying that till then nothing had
hindered its grouth and flourishing.

6. Now having thus determined the precise time of the Martyrdom of S. Albanus
and the rest which immediately followed him, we will proceed to a distinct
relation of the particulars concerning it.

IX. CHAP. IX. CHAP

1. The Emperors Edicts against Christians in Brittany.

2.3. etc. Of S. Amphibalus his return into Brittany who he was: and whence he
came.

9. Of S. Albanus: and his Title of Oeconomus Britanniae.

1. THE New Emperor Maximianus, chosen by Diocletian not so much for his
propinquity in blood, as resemblance in cruelty and hatred to Christians, was
not slow in publishing his Edicts every where against them: Some he sent into
Brittany, a Province subject to him, as being a part of the Western Empire.
This was the first time that such Edicts had been published there: and therefore
it may be supposed that they caused great terror among the poor Christians.

2. Upon this occasion most probably it was that Amphibalus, Sup. lib. 5. chapter 5.
if he be the same of whom we treated before, returned into the parts of
Brittany which were subject to the Romans, to the end he might confirm his
countrymen in the Faith which they had been taught. The Scottish writers will
needs have him their Bishop, V^id Brought. cent. 3. cap. 18. n. 2.
placed in the Isle of Man, and favorably received by their King Chrathlintus:
that both by preaching and writing he had demonstrated the vanity of Heathenish
superstitions, and propagated the Christian Faith among the Scots and Picts,
and that in his old age returning into the Southern parts of Brittany, he ended
his life by a glorious Martyrdom.

3. That Amphibalus preached the Faith in those Northern Provinces, may be
granted: but no histories or other Monuments do as yet mention the names
either of Scotts or Picts there. Therefore omitting this Controversy, we will
out of the life of S. Albanus written by an unknown Author in very ancient
times, before Beda, relate the success of S. Amphibalus his last voyage into
Brittany, how he happily brought S. Albanus to relinquish the Roman Idolatry,
and embrace the Christian Faith, and how that blessed Disciple of his, though a
Neophyte, scarce perfectly instructed in Christian Religion, prevented his
Master in confessing of Christ, and suffering for him.

4. But first shall be premised certain observations tou^^ing the persons and
qualities of these two ^^^nts, which being collected from other Authors and
records may render the following Narration more perspicuous.

5. And concerning Amphibalus some Writers do not without some reason doubt
whether Amphibalus the Teacher of the Caledonians be the same with him who
taught S. Albanus: Because both the regard of time, and quality of their
persons seem to pronounce them to be several. He who taught the Caledonians is
in ancient Writings said to have been forty years before a Bishop of the Prime
See in the North under King Crathlintus: whereas this Amphibalus the Converter
of S. Albanus to the Faith is by our Historians simply called a Clark, some
times a Priest, or a Monk: Ap Brought. cen^. ^. cap. 19. number. 2.
for so we read in the Annalls of Winchester, S. Amphibalus a Monk and Doctor
in the Church of Caermardin, otherwise called the City of Melin in wales.

6. But as touching the time, it does not necessarily prove his age to have
been so excessively long, but that he might have lived to this time: and those
who describe his Martyrdom affirm him to have been very old.

7. Again considering his Titles, it is well known that the name of Sacerdos
(Priest) and Bishop, were in those ancient days used promiscuously. And
moreover Amphibalus having had his Mission from the Bishop of Rome to preach
the Gospel in Brittany, no doubt was qualified for Episcopal functions. Then
whereas he is styled a Monk, it was the usual practice among those Primitive
Apostolical Missioners to spend much of their time in solitary retirements, to
exercise prayer and Mortification. And Cairmardin being not far distant from
Cair Leon, the place of S. Amphibalus his Nativity, might probably be chosen by
him for such a retreit.

8. But it will be more difficult to determine the place from whence he last
came into the Southern parts of Brittany: for if we believe the Scottish
Historians, we must say that he came from the Caledonians: though indeed they
declare that their Amphibalus dyed quietly without any violence or persecution:
Whereas our writers profess that he came from the Western provinces of the
Silure: or Dimetae, now South Wales. But according to the more Authentic
Narration of S. Albanus his life, he seems to have come into Brittany from Rome
and through France, for he is said to have passed through regions of Heathens,
or such as professed the Pagan Idolatry of the Romans.

9. Next for as much as concerns S. Albanus, in our English Martyrologe he is
styled the Chief Procuratour (Oeconomus) of Brittany: Martyrolog. Anglican 22.
Iulij.
from whence we may collect that he was the Emperors Quaestor or Treasurer, to
gather his rents and Tributs. For such Officers were usually sent into the
Provinces, which were not Consular. And these Procurators were some times
Gentlemen of Rome, of which rank S. Albanus his family seems to have been: Some
times likewise they were the Emperors ( liberti, or) freed servants, Dio.
hist. l. 53.
as Dio informs as.

10. Having premised these remarks touching the two holy Martyrs, we now
proceed to the Narration of their Gests, according to the ancient authentic
relation preserved by Capgrave.

X. CHAP. X. CHAP.

1.2. etc. The Ancient authentic Acts of S. Albanus: his wonderful Conversion
by S. Amphibalus, etc.

1. THis then is the tenor of the Acts of the holy Proto-martyr of Brittany
Saint Albanus: thus they begin: Act. S. Albani apud Capgrav.
when the persecution under the Emperor Diocletian moved against Christians
began to rage through the whole Empire, a certain man named Amphibalus
illustrious for his virtues, and learning, having passed (the Sea) into
Brittany, came through the divine conduct, to Verolam. And having entered the
City, he resorted to the house of Albanus, desiring to be entertained as a
stranger. Now this Albanus was a Citizen of Verolam, eminent for his quality,
being descended from an illustrious Roman family. He received the holy man with
great kindness and liberality. And having withdrawn him from the noise of the
servants into a private room, he asked him secretly, How could you, being a
Christian, pass without danger through the regions inhabited by Gentiles, and
arrive safely (...) his City?

2. This question was seasonably indeed made, considering the subtle means
employed by Diocletian for the discovery of Christians: for as we read in the
Acts of Martyrs cited by Baronius, it was not permitted to any one either to
buy or sell, Acts Mart. ap. Baronis ad A. D. 2^6.
till he had offered incense to certain little Idols set up in the Markets: And
moreover about all streets, passages and fountains were placed Officers with
order to compel all that would draw water or have their corn ground, to
sacrifice first to such Idols. To this question therefore S. Amphibalus thus
answered: 3. My Lord Jesus Christ, the son of the living God, said he,
preserved me safe among all dangers, and sent me into this Province for the
salvation of many, to the end that by preachin^ his holy Faith I may prepare a
people acceptable to him. But who is this Son of God, replied Albanus? Can God
be said to be born? These are strange speeches, such as I never heard before. I
desire therefore to be informed what opinion you Christians have of these
matters. Then the Holy man answered thus, Our Faith teaches us to acknowledge
the Father to be God, and the Son likewise to be God. Which Son of God in
infinite mercy vouchsafed to take our flesh upon him for the salvation of
mankind, that he might redeem us by suffering death. And discoursing at large of
the Birth, Passion, Resurrection and Ascension of Christ, he added, If you, O
Albanus, will believe these things to be true, you will receive power, by
calling on the name of Christ, to restore to health any infirm sick persons.
And the truth is, I an come into this City on purpose to preach to you the
healthful Doctrine of our Lords Passion: because our merciful God will reward
your kind offices of humanity and hospitality, to which you frequently addict
your self, with the inestimable recompense of eternal happiness. Then Albanus
asked him, What honor and worship must I exhibit to Christ, in case I embrace
his Faith. The other answered, Believe this, that our Lord Jesus, together with
the Father and the Holy Ghost is one God, and thou will have performed a work
of high esteem in his sight. But Albanus said, what is all this? Sure thou art
mad, thou know not what thou say: No human understanding or reason can
comprehend these things. But be sure of this, that if the inhabitants here of
this City came to know that thou make such discourses of Christ, without
delay they would put thee to a cruel death. For mine own part I am very
solicitous in thy behalf, for fear some mischief befall thee before thou
departest from hence. Having said this, be arose and went his way much
disturbed. As for Amphibalus he spent the whole night alone in watching and
prayer.

4. The same night whilst Albanus was sleeping on the topp of the house,
wonderful visions from heaven were presented to him: With which being much
affrighted, he rose presently from his bed and went down to the lower rooms,
where coming to his guest, he said thus to him, Friend, If those things which
thou told'st me lately concerning Christ be true, I beseech thee to declare to
me freely and without any fear the meaning of my dream. Me thought I saw a
certain man come down from heaven: and presently an innumerable multitude of
men laid hold on him, and tormented him all the ways they could devise: they
bound his hands with chains, they tore his flesh most greivously with whips,
they hung him on a tree, stretching his hands a cross. The man thus tormented
was quite naked, not having so much as shoes on his feet. His hands and feet
were fastened to the wood with nails, and his side was peirced through with a
spear, and from his wound, as it seemed to me, there flowd both blood and
water On his right hand they set a reed, and upon his head they put a crown of
thorns.

5. And when they had exercised all that human cruelty could devise, they began
to insult on him with despightfull speeches, Saying to him, Hayle, King of the
Jews: if thou art the Son of God, come down from the Cross and we will
believe in thee. And when they had continued a good while thus reviling him,
the Young man answered them not a word. To conclude, after they had said what so
ever they thought good to him, at last he cried out with a loud voice, and
said, Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit: and having said this, he
expired. His livelesse body was afterward taken down from the Cross, out of
which the blood still flowd abundantly. They then laid it in a sepulcher of
stone, sealing the monument, and setting guards to watch it. But then followd a
wonderful thing: for this bloodlesse carkeys returned to life, and resuming
its former strength, came out of the sepulcher which remaind sealed as before. I
my self with mine own eyes saw how he rose again. Then came from heaven
certain men clothed with Vestments white as snow, and taking the man with
them, returned from whence they came, and were attended by an infinite number
of others in white garments, which all the way ceased not to sing praise,
incessantly blessing the Father (I know not who he was) together with his Son,
saying, Blessed be God the Father, together with his only begotten Son. They
expressed such wonderful joy, as nothing could be compared to it. These things
I saw, and besides these many other, which I neither will nor ought to declare.
I beseech thee now tell me what is signified by these things which were
represented to me in Vision: Do not fear any danger to your self at all, but
speak freely.

6. The holy man Amphibalus having heard all this, sensibly felt his heart
visited by our Lord with incredible joy. And presently taking out a Crucifix
which he had born secretly, he said to Albanus, Behold, in this figure and
image thou may manifestly perceive the meaning and importance of thy last
nights Vision. For the man who came from heaven is this Jesus Christ my Lord,
Who refused not to undergo the punishment of the Cross, to the end that by
his blood He might free us from the guilt which we had contracted by the
transgression of our first Father Adam. Now those men which laid violent hands
upon him, and afflicted him by diverse sorts of torments, were his own people
the Jews. For though they had a promise from God that he would send unto them
from heaven his own Son, yet when he, whom they so much and so long a time
expected, was come, they did not acknowledge him to be the Author of their
salvation, but contradicted him in every thing and returned to him evil for
good, and hatred for his love: and in conclusion being agitated with extreme
envy and malice against him, they broke forth to such horrible impiety, that
they laid hold on him, crucified and murdered him. Thus it was that our
merciful Lord redeemed us with the price of his own blood: thus by dying he
became victorious over death, and being raised upon the Cross, he drew all to
him: For descending voluntarily to the enclosures of Hell, he freed from
Captivity his own servants detained there, and binding the Devil in
everlasting chains, he cast him into the utmost places of darkness.

7. Then Albanus being filled with wonder at these speeches, broke forth into
these words, All that thou have said of Christ is most true, and can not be
charged with any falsity. For this last night I evidently perceived, and with
mine own eyes saw how Christ overcame the Devil, how he bound him and thrust
him down into the bottom of Hell, where that abominable wretch lies fast tied
with chains: So that hereby knowing that all things told by thee are true,
from this moment I do profess that I will be thy most obedient Disciple. Tell
me therefore, I beseech thee, for I know thou art ignorant of nothing: how must
I behave my self to the Father and the Holy Ghost, now that I profess my self
a servant of the Son?

8. Amphibalus at this question with great joy said, I give thanks to my Lord
Jesus Christ for that thou of thine own self have had the knowledge to
pronounce these three adorable Names. Believe therefore firmly, and profess
faithfully that the three Persons expressed by thee with their proper names,
are one only God. Albanus answered, I believe, said he, and from hence forward
my firm Faith is, that there is no other God besides my Lord Jesus Christ, who
for the salvation of mankind took our nature, and suffered death on the Cross:
He together with the Father and the Holy Spirit is one only God, and besides
him there is no other.

9. Having said this, he often times cast himself prostrate before the Crucifix,
and as if he had seen our Lord Jesus himself hanging on the Cross, this happy
Penitent earnestly begged pardon for his sins. Such affectionate kisses he
often pressed on his feet, and places of his wounds, as if he had lie^
prostrate as the feet of his Redeemer whom he had seen crucified. Tears mixed
with blood flowd abundantly from his eyes upon the Venerable Cross, which he
accompanied with these words, I renounce the Devil, said he, and I detest all
the enemies of our Lord, in whom only I believe and resign my self to him,
who, as thou affirmest, rose the third day from the dead.

10. Then Amphibalus said to him, Be of good courage, our Lord is with thee,
and his Grace will never be wanting to thee. That saving Faith, which other men
attain to by ministry of men, thou have learnt not of men, nor by men, but by
the revelation of Jesus Christ himself. Therefore being assured of thy
constancy, my purpose is to leave thee and to travel further, that I may show
the way of Truth to other Gentiles also. By no means, said Albanus, Stay at
least one week longer with me, that I may be more perfectly instructed in the
Faith by thee: To which request of his Amphibalus condescended.



11. This exact Relation of the wonderful manner of the Conversion of S.
Albanus by the Ministry of S. Amphibalus we receive from a Nameles Author of
great Anquity, concerning whose authority and credibility we shall speak
hereafter. We will now proceed to the Narration of his sufferings and glorious
Martyrdom, which followed presently after.

XI. CHAP. XI. CHAPTER

1.2. A prosecution of the Acts S. Albanus: who dismisses S. Amphibalus,
changing garments with him.

3.4. The change of S. Albanus his life.

5.6. etc. He is accused: apprehended, and brought before the Roman Magistrate:
examined and cast in prison.

10.11. A miraculous drought, testifying the Martyrs innocence.

1. ALbanus having been thus instructed, baptized and confirmed in Faith by
Amphibalus, A. D. 287.
was at last content to be separated from (...) The manner (...) ^hus related
by Matthew of Westminste^, ^^banus, Florileg. ad. A. D. 29^.
says he, exhorts Amphibalus to take care of his own safety and depart the
City (of Verolam.) And to disguise him he gave him his own military vestment,
woven with gold, that so he might be more safe from the soldiers. And in
exchange he takes for himself his Masters, (called Caracalla:) being assured
that his raging enemies would look upon it with envious and malicious eyes.
Amphibalus therefore in compliance with Albanus his request early in the morning
before day began his flight northward from the City, being conducted in his
way by Albanus as far as they judged expedient. When they were to part and take
their last leave of one another, who can without tears call to mind the bitter
sorrow and tears shed by them both? Thus Amphibalus hastens to Wales, there
expecting his Martyrdom. And Albanus clothes himself with his Masters
vestment, thinking to divert hereby the rage of the Heathen Romans against
himself only.

2. Concerning this vestment of Amphibalus, Baronius thus writes, We will not
omit, says he, to declare that the robe called Caracalla was anciently worn
by Eccles^asticall persons: for being a long vestment descending to the
anckles, it gave a comely gravity to those who wore it. And hence it is that
Beda from the ancient Acts of Saint Albanus affirms that the same Saint
clothed himself with an Ecclesiastical habit, to wit* a Caracalla belonging
to Amphibalus a Clark, whom in his flight he had entertained at his house. Now
this Vestment though for the length of it is was incommodious in a journey, Yet
for all that Amphibalus would not change it. From this garment Antoninus the
Son of Severus had the Surname of Caracalla because, Spartian. in Antonin.
Caracalla.
says Spartianus, he bestowed on the Roman people vestments of that fashion.

Harpsf. 6. Sac. c. 8.
3. S. Albanus now left alone made great have in his journey to immortality.
All the enticements of the world became odious to him, says Harpsfeild, and he
found no pleasure but in tears and prayers at the foot of our Lords Cross: he
burns with a desire to requite the love of Christ by dying for him.

4. His domestics and neighbors observing the wonderful change in his manner
of life, began to suspect and quickly found out the true cause of it. So that
in a short time he is publicly known to be a dese^^our of Heathenish
Superstition, for which he is complained of and convened before the Roman
Magistrate. How he behaved himself in so glorious a Trial we will relate out
of the authentic Acts of his Martyrdom which Baronius affirms to be very
ancient, and which S. Beda follows in his history concerning him.

Ap. Capgr^^. in S. Alba^^.
5. In those acts the Author thus writes concerning S. Albans apprehension. A
certain Gentile went to the Judge and discovered to him all that had passed
between S. Albanus and S. Amphibalus. At which the Judge being highly incensed
gave command that S. Albanus and his Master should be brought before him. But
Amphibalus being privily departed, a great number of soldiers, horse and foot,
which were sent by the Judge found the illustrious S. Albanus in a strange
habit, and with naked feet before the Cross of our Lord devoutly attending to
his prayers.

6. The Soldiers rushing in upon him in troops, asked him where the Clark was,
whom he had entertained. His answer was, That holy man is under the protection
of God, and fears not the threats of men. When they heard this, they laid hands
on him, bound him with chains, and violently drew him away, some laying hold on
his garments, and some on his hair. Now he had still kepd the Vestment of his
Master, knowing well that the sight of it was odious to his enemies. Being
clothed with this garment, be carried continually in his hand our Lords Image
that thereby he might openly show to all that he was a Servant of the Cross.

7. Being come before the Judge, he was examined in many particulars, but all
his answer was that his name was Albanus, and that he was a Christian: this he
with great courage and liberty of speech professed. At last the Judge said to
him, O Albanus, what is become of that Clark who was lately sent hither by one
called Christ, I know not who he is, and (...) ^^^vily into this City to
illude and seduce the inhabitants? If he had not had a guilty conscience, A. D.
287.
and been distrustful of his own cause, this worthy Master of yours would have
freely presented himself before us, to defend both himself and his Disciple.
But by his own carriage he makes known the falsnes and fraudulence of his
doctrine, since he deserts and is cowardly run away from thee, whom if his
cause had been good, he ought to have justified though with hazard of his life.
By which behavior of his, i^ I be not deceived, thou now perceivest how silly
a fellow he was who seduced thee into Error, and by whose suggestion thou art
fal^ into such a frenzy, as not only to renounce all worldly advantages, but to
contemn even the immortal Gods. The injury aginst whom since we ought not to
leave unpunished, my resolution was to have revenged it by the death of the
profane delinquent. But since such is our humane infirmity, that there is none
but is obnoxious to error, thou may yet by repentance escape their
indignation, and again make them propitious to thee, if thou will now renounce
that abominable Sect.

8. Hereto Albanus answered. It is a very easy matter to declare how vain and
impertinen^ this long discourse of yours is. For if it had either seemed good,
or proffitable, or agreeable to each of us, that holy Clark would not have
failed to come to this audience. But I confess his stay here could not be
pleasing to me, knowing how pr^ne to mischief this people allways has been.
The Doctrine taught by that good man I confess I have heartily embraced:
neither can I therefore repent me of it. For the Faith which I profess will be
proved to be holy and divine by the testimony of infirm sick people who by
virtue thereof shall receive their health. I will not sacrifise to your Gods:
Neither do I fear your threatenings or torments, being secure under the
protection of my God.

9. When he had said this, the throng of Officers which stood about him, at the
Judges command, began cruelly to scourge him for refusing to sacrifice: and
during that torment, lifting up his eyes to our Lord, he with a cheerful
countenance said, O Lord Jesus Christ, I beseech thee keep this mind and good
resolution which thou have given me firm and stable. My desire is, O my God,
to offer my soul a whole burnt sacrifice to thy glory, and with my blood to
seal thy truth. Now when the Officers hands were become weary with tormenting
him, the holy man was thrust into a deep dungeon, where he continued the space
of six months.

10. But presently after, all the elements gave testimony of the injury and
injustice done to him. For from the time of his apprehending to his death,
neither rain nor dew refreshed the earth: the winds were silent, and the region
thereabout was continually parched with excessive heat of the Sun: in the night
time likewise the ^^^fling heat was intolerable. Neither feilds nor trees
produced any fruit: so that the world it self fought in the just man's quarrel
against his impious enemies.

11. That which this devout Author writes of the excessive heat and drought
which God sent on Brittany as a just judgment for their cruelty against this
holy Martyr, and impiety against God, is taken notice of by the Heathen Orator
in a Panegyric which this very year he pronounced before the Emperor
Maximian, then preparing an Expedition against the Tyrant Carausius, who had
possessed himself of Brittany: but as became an impudent flatterer, he ascribed
the intolerable heat and want of rain to the favor of their false Gods to the
Emperor, saying, During the space of that whole year almost, Mamert in
Panegyr. 2.
in which a clear untempestu^s season was necessary for thy design of building
ships, hewing of timber and beams, encouraging the minds of thy soldiers to
labor, there was scarce one foul rainy day: The winter it self imitated the
warm temper of the spring. We thought now that we were not in a cold Northern
Climat, but as if there had been a translation both of heaven and earth, we
felt the heat of the Southern Sun, etc. Of this expedition of Maximian against
Carausius we shall treat as soon as we shall have finished the glorious
Martyrdom of S. Albanus.

XII. CHA.
XII. CHAP.
1.2. S Albanus his devotion: and Prayer against Idolatry.

3 Yet he venerates the Holy Cross.

4.5. S. Albanus restores a Sick man to health.

6.7. Being condemned and lead to his death, he converts his Executioner.

8. By his prayer he obtains a fountain of water.

9. Another Executioner having cut off the Martyrs head, looses his eyes.

1. THE Infidel Judge expected that by a tedious and painful prison the Holy
Martyrs Constancy should be broken and spent: but on the contrary having an
opportunity in that solitude to unite himself to God by Prayer, his courage and
strength was much increased. The ordinary subject of his daily Spiritual
meditations and entertainment with God, and the effect they had, is by the
devout Writer of his life comprehended in this Prayer etc.

Vit. S. Albani apud Capgrav.
2. O Lord Jesus Christ, do not permit the Devils malice so much to prevail,
as by his cunning machinations and this peoples relenting, my suffering for thee
may be hindered. And being come out of prison to suffer, addressing his speech
to the unbeleiving people which flocked to see him, Know all of you for a
truth, said he, that I am an irreconciliable enemy of your false Gods. Can any
one judge them to be worthy of any honor which manifestly have no divinity in
them, being the work of men's hands? You your selves can testify that they
neither see, hear nor understand any thing. O detestable vanity, to expect
life from them which have no life themselves to offer up prayers to those who
never could hear* to expect safety or happiness from those, which are not
sensible of the least good to themselves! Therefore I confidently protest that
whosoever exhibits any honor to such dead Idols, is utterly void of all
reason. For tell me I pray you, what can be more desperately miserable then
that man who suffers himself to be enslaved by puppets of his own fashioning?
We therefore to Idols, and a greater (...) to those who adore them.

3. Here the discreet Reader may observe with how vehement a sharpnes this holy
man contends against Idolatry, whilst himself at the same time with great
fervor and devotion venerates the Cross of our Lord. From whence will
necessarily follow, that those who in our times impute Idolatry to Catholics
who give due honor to Sacred things, are mere strangers to S. Albanus his
Religion. In those ancient times the Pagans usually called Christians
(Crucicolas) Worshippers of the Cross: Magdeburg. Centur. 3. fol. 121.
and the Centuriators of Magdeburg, though Protestants, acknowledge that
Tertullian in his Apology testifies how the Christians at that time had all
Idols and the ornaments about them in horrible detestation: Whence proceeded
their vehement and bitter invectives against them: Yet the same Author in the
same book seems to declare that those Christians usually had the Image of the
Cross which they set up either in the places of their public meetings, or in
their private houses. For which reason the Heathens oftimes objected to them,
that they religiously adored the Cross. Thus were Christians from the
beginning treated by Pagans: and in the very same manner are Catholics at this
day treated by Sectaries: Whence evidently appears that Modern Sectaries are in
their hatred to the Church and the Venerable Cross of Christ the Successors
of Pagans, as Catholics are of the Primitive Christians. But we will proceed
in the Acts of S. Albanus.

4. When these words spoken by S. Albanus in detestation of Pagan Idolatry were
heard by the Judge and the rest who were present, Acta S. Alb. ap. Cap* grav*
with unanimous consent they pronounced sentence of death against him, and lead
him to execution to a certain place called Holmhirst. Which place is described
by S. Beda to be a very agreeable plain, Bedae hist. lib. cap. 7.
clothed with all sorts of flowers, and about five hundred paces broad, a fit
Theater for so glorious a Martyr. The same Author adds, that S. Albanus being
lead to his death, Id. Ibid.
came to the river, which with a swift torrent ran between a wall on one side,
and a sandy shore on the other, where the holy Martyr was to be beheaded: where
he saw great multitudes of all conditions, ages and sexes, which, no doubt, by
divine instinct were assembled to honor his death: and they so choked the
passage of the bridge, that before night they could not all have passed over.
As for the Judge he had no intention to show any respect to the Martyr, but
staid behind in the City. S. Albanus therefore inflamed with a devout desire of
a speedy Martyrdom, approached near the river, and lifting up his eyes with
prayer to God, the river became presently dry, and the water gave free way to
the passengers. Thus S. Beda.

5. The manner how this Miracle was wrought, is more expressly declared in the
foresaid authentic Acts of S. Albanus, from whence S. Beda borrowed his
Narration: For there it is said, Act 8. Alb. vbi sup.
that when he was come to the river side, he fell on his knees, and prayed
saying: O Lord Jesus Christ, from whose most holy side I my self (in a vision)
saw both water and blood to flow, I beseech thee that thou would cause these
waters to be diminished, and the floods to return back, to the end that this
people may without any danger or inconvenience be present at my Suffering. O
wonder full! he had us sooner bowd his knees, but the channel was immediately
dry. The tears flowing from Saint Albanus his eyes left no water in the river.
The power of his Prayer emptied the torrent, and cleared a passage for the
people between the floods on both sides.

6. Then the Officer who conducted Saint Albanus to his death by the merits of
the holy Martyr obtaind his own eternal happiness. For when he saw these
miracles, he threw away his sword, and casting himself at the holy man's feet,
begged pardon of him. Which when the people saw, they laid hold on the man,
beat out his teeth, tore his sacred mouth, and in a manner broke all his bones.

7. S. Beda thus relates this passage: The soldier, Beda Hist. l. 1. c 7.
says he, fell down at S. Albanus his feet, instantly desiring that himself
might rather be slain with, or for the Martyr, whom he had been commanded to
putt to death. Now whilst he of a persecutour was changed into a companion of
the true Faith, and, the sword lying on the ground, the other officers were at
a stand what they should do, the most venerable Confessor ascended the hill
together with the multitudes.

8. The Acts further declare, as likewise S. Beda, that when the people being
come to the top of the hill were tormented with extremity of thirst: Act ^ Alb.
S. Albanus kneeling down, thus prayed to God, O God who did create man of
the clay of the earth, suffer not, I beseech thee, any of thy creatures to
receive any harm by my occasion. After which words there presently broke forth
a fountain before his feet, which with a rapide course flowed down the hill: so
that the people being refreshd with those waters, escaped all danger by their
thirst.

9. In the mean time another Executioner was chosen from among the people, into
whose hands the sword was delivered: who to his own great unhappines discharged
that impious office. For, says Matthew of Westminster, ^orileg. ad A. D. 303.
while the holy Martyr kneeling offered his prayers to God, and frequently with
great fervor kissed the Crucifix which he held in his hands, the Executioner
drawing his sword, cut of his head: and immediately by a wonderful miracle
Almighty God by the loss of the Executioners eyes gave testimony to the
Martyrs innocence. For, as S. Beda relates, he who stretched forth his impious
hand to cut the pious Martyrs neck, B^d. hist. l. 1. c 7.
was not permitted to insult over him being dead, for together with the blessed
Martyrs head the Executioners eyes also fell to the ground. This Miracle is
confirmed not only by the forecited Acts, but many other Authors, of foreign
Nations: and particularly by Hiericus a French man, who seven hundred years
since wrote the life of S. Germanus.

XIII. CHAP. XIII. CHAPTER

1.2. The Martyrdom of the Converted Soldier, his name, etc.

3. The glorious assumption of S. Albanus his soul into heaven.

1. SAint Albanus had a companion in his death, the Soldier who was designed to
be his executioner. Concerning whom S. Beda thus writes. There was beheaded
with him likewise the foresaid Soldier, Bed. hist. l. 1. c. 7.
who being moved by a divine instinct refused to kill the Holy Confessor of
our Lord. Concerning whom this may without all doubt be affirmed, that though
he was not outwardly cleansed with the water of Baptism, yet being washed in
the Laver of his own blood, he became worthy to be admitted into the kingdom of
heaven.

2. The Acts of S. Alban do affor'd us a more exact relation both of this
Soldiers name, Act. S. Alb.
and occasion of his Martydom: Where we read how the said Soldier, by name
Heraclius, who, as hah been declared, was left half dead by the people,
afterward creeping on his hands and feet as he could, followed them up the
Mountain. To whom one of the Judges then present said in scorn, Go to now,
address thy prayers to thy Patron Albanus even now executed, that he would
restore soundnes to thy bruised bones and limbs. Run, make have, ioyn his head
to his body, and no doubt thou will not fail to obtain perfect health: why
do thou stay? bury the dead carkeise, and thou may be assured that whilst
it is in thy hands, it will bestow an entire cure on thee. The Soldier
answered, I do most firmly believe that this Blessed Saint Albanus by his
merits can restore unto me my perfect health for that which you speak in
derision, may in earnest be fullfill'd in me. And having said this, he
embraced the head, and adjoining it to the body, he became immediately as sound
as before. When the Infidells saw this, they were filld with envy and malice,
and said, what shall we do? Sure no sword can kill this man. We have broken
all his bones, and yet now his former strength is restored him. Then laying
hold on him, they bound him fast with chains, and tore his body with several
sorts of tortures, and in the end with a sword cut off his head.

3. Now how acceptable to Almighty God the Martyrdom of this glorious S.
Albanus was, was presently after declared from heaven in a wonderful manner,
for thus we read in his Acts, Ibid.
Behold, the night immediately following his suffering, a pillar of light was
seen to raise it self from the sepulcher of S. Albanus up to heaven, by which
Angels descended and ascended, spending the whole night in Hymns and praises
of God, frequently also repeating these words, The illustrious Albanus is now a
glorious Martyr of Christ. And hereto the ancient Christian Poet Venantius
Fortunatus had regard, Ven. Fortun. l. 8 de Virg. c. 4.
when in a Poem of his among other Saints celebrating the memory of S. Albanus
and his companion suffering in Brittany, he says, that Quires of Angels from
heaven did with songs wellcom them at their entrance into glory, and the
glorified Saints enriched with the Cross and blood of Christ did make have to
ioyn in Hymns to God for them.

XIV. CHAPTER
XIV. CHAP.
1.2.3. Of the Author of the ancient Acts of S. Albanus.

4.5. His Relation confirmed by the testimony of Gildas.

6.7. John Fox his unfaithfullnes.

1. HAving thus with as much fidelity and exactnes as we could, given an
account of the Gests of our first most glorious British Martyr S. Albanus, in
which we have principally followed the Author of his life, being a precious
Monument of Antiquity preserved by our Countryman Capgrave: The faithfullnes
of whose relation is, we see, attested by other Historians also of good note
and Authority, as S. Beda, Matthew of Westminster, etc. It will become us to say
some thing of the said Author himself: and all that can be said is the
Testimony that he gives concerning himself, in these words full of Christian
Modesty and Humility; Author ap. Capgrav. in v^t^ S. Alba.
2. Least posterity says he, be solicitous to know my name, let them be
contented to be informed, that if they will give me my true name, they will
call me the miserable wretch, worst of all sinners. I am undertaking a journey
to Rome, intending there to renounce the Error of Paganism, and by the Laver
of Regeneration to obtain the pardon of all my sins. This Book also I will
present to the examination of the Romans, to the end that if therein any thing
should be found written otherwise then becomes a good Christian, it would
please our Lord Jesus Christ by their correction to amend it. By which it
appears that this Author was at the writing of his Book as yet only a
Catechumen, newly converted from Heathenish superstition. What became of him in
his voyage to Rome is known only to God, who doubtless rewarded him highly for
his piety and zeal to communicate to posterity the Gests of our glorious
Martyr.



3. This is he whom the learned Ecclesiastical Historian Harpsfeild calls the
nameles Author, Harpsf. in 6. primis saec. c. ^. in marg.
whose Book was found in the Monastery of S. Albanus, and who was more ancient
then S. Beda. And this Author is frequently quoted by the Illustrious
Cardinal Baronius, who follows him likewise in his Narration touching this our
glorious Martyr. And to fortify the credit of his Authority in several points
before related touching the Martyrdom of S. Albanus, we will here adioyn a
memorable passage out of our ancient famous Historian Gildas, who writing
concerning this Persecution raised in Brittany by Diocletian, says as
follows: 4. Almighty God who is willing that all men should be saved, Gildas
de Excidio.
and who calls as well sinners as those who esteem themselves just, has
magnified his mercy to us; for in the foresaid persecution, least our country
of Brittany should be obscured by a dark night of ignorance, he in his free
bounty enlightened us by the bright shining Lamps of his holy Martyrs, the
places of whose Martyrdom, and sepulchers of whose bodies would even now also
imprint in our minds a great ardour of Divine love, were it not that by the
woeful aversion of barbarous Enemies and our own manifold crimes an access to
those holy places is denied us: Those places, I mean, where repose the bodies
of S. Albanus at Verolam, and S. Aaron and Julian at Caer-le^n, and many others
of both sexes in several quarters, all which with great magnanimity have stood
up courageously in our Lords army. Of which the first, S. Albanus I mean, after
he had, with much charity, in imitation of Christ who laid down his life for
his sheep, entertained in his house, and disguised with exchanging his own
garments with him the holy Confessor of our Lord Amphibalus, who was pursued
by the Enemies of Christ, and even ready to be apprehended, moreover willingly
offered himself in his foresaid brothers vestments to the persecutours. Thus
rendering himself acceptable to God, he was during his holy Confession (till he
shed his blood in the presence of his impious Enemies who with a horrible pomp
produced all the sorts of Roman tortures) wonderfully adorned and glorified by
God with many admirable miracles: insomuch as by his fervent prayer, in
imitation of the passage of the Israelites with the Ark of the Testament
through the waters of Jordan, he with thousands following him went with dry
feet over the Channel of the Noble river of Thames, whilst on both sides the
floods stood still like steep rocks: By which miracle he converted the first
Soldier deputed to be his executioner, from being a wolf into a lamb, and gave
him the courage both vehemently to desire and valiantly receive the triumphant
palm of Martyrdom.



5. We here see the exact agreement between the ancient British Historian
Gildas and the foresaid Author of the Acts of S. Albanus. But our Modern
Protestant Historians in relating this glorious combat and Victory of our first
Martyr, cut of what they think good, and decry or accuse of forgery whatsoever
agrees not to their own faction, without so much as pretending to any Antiquity
to justify their partiality.

Fox in Acts and Monuments f. 88.
6. Particularly John Fox in his new fashioned Martyrologe, though he commends
Saint Albanus and vouchsafes to call him a Martyr, yet several particulars
mentioned by the forecited Author of Saint Albanus his Acts in S. Beda and
Gildas, he superciliously censures or despises, saying that he saw neither any
necessity nor convenience why they should be recited by him. For this reason he
passes over with silence all mention of the Cross, with tears and great
reverence honored by Saint Alban, and retained till the last moment of his
life. And as for the miracles performed by him, the iubilation of Angels after
his death and the like, he confidently pronounces to be contrary to the truth
of history. And why? Surely because he could not parallel such Miracles in the
Gests of his new Protestant Martyrs: no Angels, God knows, rejoiced or praised
God at their Executions.

Id. ibid.
7. One observation of his, full either of ignorance or malice, must not be
omitted. That is where he says, That the History of Saint Albanus his Martyrdom
reports how the holy Martyrs head when it was cut and separated from the body
spoke some thing. But this, says he, is like a Monkish fiction: As if that
namelesse Author had been a Monk, who was not so much as admitted into the
Church by Baptism. But neither he, nor any ancient or Modern Catholic Author
speaks of any such thing: So that it seems he mistook the relation, ascribing
the Angels hymns to the Martyrs tongue.

XV. CHAP. XV. CHAPTER

1. The Pious devotion of Ancient Christians to the Relics of Holy Martyrs.

2.3. Confirmed by the Acts of S. Sebastian, etc.

4. The Manicheans contemners of such Relics.

5.6.7. Temples built by Britains to the honow of S. Albanus, etc.

8.9. Protestants wrongfully ascribe this Veneration of Relics to S. Gregory.

10. S. Albanus venerated at Mentz by the name of S. Albinus. And why.

11 12 The Controversy about the Body of S. Albanus between the Monks of Ely
and S. Albans, decided*

13. S. Gregory Nazianzens testimony of the Veneration of Relics.

1. BEfore we quitt this argument, we will show with what piety and reverence
the devout Christians in that and the following ages behaved themselves toward
the ashes and sacred Relics of our Holy Martyr. This we may collect from the
practice of those times in other Provinces: For the persecuting Infidells
knowing well with what solicitude Christians gathered the bodies and members of
dead Martyrs, and with what devotion they venerated them, used all manner of
despite to them, and endeavored either to hide or consume them with fire and
cast the ashes before the wind.

2. Thus in the Acts of S. Sebastian, Ap. ^aron. A. D. 286.
who suffered the same or next year to S. Albanus, we read, That they took the
Body of Sebastian by night, and cast it into a common sink, saying, Least
perhaps the Christians make him their Martyr. And again three years after we
find in the Authentic Acts of S. Tharacus this passage, Id. ib. A. D. 290.
The President said to him, Do not think thou shall be dispatched at once: I
will make an end of thee by piece meal, and the remainders of they carkeise
shall be devoured by beasts. Tharacus answered him, what thou have a mind to
do do quickly: do not delay me by promises. The President said, Thou
think, villain, that after thy death silly women shall have thy body and
embalme it with unguents and spices, etc. And afterward, The President said,
Do thou not think that I will thus destroy thee and thy relics? least
foolish women should enwrapp it in clean linen, and honor it with unguents
and odours. And concerning the Martyr Andronicus, The President said, Consume
him to ashes, and disperse them before the wind, least some of his impious
Consorts, or foolish women should gather up any of them, and preserve them, as
if they were some precious holy thing.

3. Now how acceptable to God this devout reverence of Christians to the
Relics of Martyrs was, was often declared by the miraculous ways which God
showed in discovering the said holy Relics, when they were either concealed,
or their members mixed and confounded with those of impious malefactors putt
to death with them. Thus we read in the said Acts of S. Tharacus, Id. ibid. n.
31.
S. Andronicus and another Christian martyred with them, how when some devout
Christians adventured to search them out by night, three bright torches, like
stars, appeard over their bodies, and afterward went before them conducting
them to the other side of the Mountain, where they secretly buried them.

4. This practice was so general among the Primitive Christians, that the
Manicheans only were observed to be contemners of it, as if there were in it
some Idolatrous Superstition But their folly and profaneness is excellently
confuted by S. Augustine, Aug cont. Faust^ Man l. 20. c. 21. and ^.32. c. 11.
who distinguishes the Veneration due to Saints and their holy Relics, which
he calls Dulian, from the Supreme degree of adoration due only to God, which he
terms Latrian.

5. Now that such reverence was expressed to the Body of S. Alban, is not to be
doubted. Which that it may appear, a passage in our ancient British Historian
Gildas will sufficiently confirm it. Who after he had treated of the Martyrdom
of this Holy Martyr, as we declared before, consequently shows the great change
in Brittany nine years after this tempest raised by Diocletian: His words are
as follows: Gildas in ^xcidio.
6. The space of two lustres (that is, ten years) after the foresaid storm
being not entirely fullfilld, when the violence of those bloody Edicts against
Christians abated, all the devout Soldiers of Christ with joyful eyes beheld
and received the lightsomnesse and temper following so tedious a winters night:
Then they began to restore Churches formerly demolishd, they founded new sacred
Temples consecrated to the honor of Holy Martyrs, these they erect, accomplish
and adorn, celebrating public Festivities, and Sacrifices with pure hearts and
mouths, as manifest signs and tropheys after their victory.



7. This happy change happened when the Tyrants Carausius and Allectus were
vanquished and expelled by Constantius, who in the year of Grace two hundred
ninety two being created Caesar, received the government and administration of
Brittany. By which calculation of Gildas evidently appears, that S. Albanus
suffered Martyrdom in the beginning of Diocletians reign, nine years before
Constantius the second time governed Brittany.

8* Likewise by this Testimony of Gildas is reproved the assertion of
Protestant writers, who attribute to S. Gregory the Great the bringing into
Brittany the custom of dedicating Churches to the honor of Martyrs, in the
time of the Saxons. Whereas besides this authority of Gildas, the said assertion
is manifestly confuted by the story of S. Germanus of Auxerre, and S. Lupus of
Troyes, French Bishops, who came into Brittany before the entrance of the
Saxons, to root out thence the Pelagian Heresy* For thus we read in the
Galliean Martyrologe, The Memory of S. Albanus shined gloriously in Brittany,
Martyrolog. ^allican. 22. ^un.
to whose honor a famous Church was erected in the place whereby shedding his
blood he had triumphed. The which Church was by S. Germanus visited with great
devotion, to the end he might there pay his thanks to God for his victory
against the Pelagian Heretics. There opening the holy Martyrs Sepulcher, to
honor him he reposed in it several Relics of Apostles, and Martyrs which he
had brought out of France. And because he would not depart thence without the
protection of the Holy Martyr, from the place where the Martyrs blood had been
shed, he took a lump of earth, which at his return he carried to his own See.
And from this action of S. Germanus the Veneration of S. Albanus the Britain
was spread through almost all the Churches of France, being consigned in all
the Ecclesiastical Tables of most Episcopal Churches there: particularly of
Bourges, Sens, Orleans, Austun, S. Malo, Constantia, etc. The same story
concerning S. Germanus is related likewise by S. Beda. Beda Hist. l. 1. cap. 18
^upplem. Martyrolog. Gallic. 16. ^pril.


9. Hence may be argued the mistake in the supplement to the French
Martyrologe, where it is said that Otho, the second Emperor of that name,
translated to Colen the Body of S. Albanus which S. Germanus had brought out of
Brittany into France. For certain is is that, not his body, but only a portion
of earth dyed with the Holy Martyrs blood, was transferd by Saint Germanus, as
S. Beda expressly affirms, and as the following Annalls of Brittany confirm,
where we read how Off a King of the Mercians translated the sacred Body, and
built over his Monument a most magnificent Church.

10. It is here to be observed that S. Albanus is venerated at Ments in Germany
under the name of S. Albinus. The occasion whereof was this: Ap. Crombach. in
V^sula vir. dic. p. 110.
Theophania wife to the Emperor Otho the second having obtained at Rome a
portion of the Relics of S. Albanus, carried them with her into Germany,
intending to place them at Colen in the Monastery of S. Pantaleon. In her way
she passed through Mentz, in which City was celebrated with great devotion the
Memory of another S. Albanus, a Martyr also. Hereupon Wiltegecus Bishop of
Mentz, deeply apprehending least the Memory of our British Albanus should
obscure the glory of their Special Patron Albanus, by reason of agreement in
name, together with the Imperial Authority, which probably would promote his
veneration, made it his most humble and earnest suit unto the Empress that our
British Saint should afterward in those countries be called Albinus, for
distinctions sake: which humble request by the assistance of the Nobility about
her and her Counsel, he at last obtained. Thus Hermannus Cromback relates the
matter out of an ancient Manuscript belonging to the Monastery of S. Pantaleon
in Colen: who adds, that this Translation befell in the year of Grace nine
hundred eighty four.

11. To conclude this subject, and to demonstrate with what devotion our whole
nation has always celebrated the memory of this our first British Martyr,
shall be here annexed out of Thomas Walsingham a brief narration how the
Controversy was ended between the two Monasteries of S. Alban and Ely, both
which earnestly and confidently pretended that S. Albanus his body reposed
among them.

The Wals^^gham in ^b^^d. 2. A. D. 1313.
12. For King Edward the second celebrating Easter in the Monastery of Ely
employed his authority to procure that the Tomb, in which the Monks affirmed
that the Body of S. Albanus lay among them, should be opened. Which at last,
though with great reluctance of the Monks, being performed, there was nothing
at all found in it but only a course hairy garment, in the upper part whereof
was seen sprinkled in several places thick congeald blood, as fresh as if it
had been shed a few days before: which garment was without all question the
Caracalla which S. Albanus received from his Master Saint Amphibalus, and
wherein he suffered Martyrdom. And by this discovery the Monks of S. Alban to
their great joy, gained their cause.

13. Neither let any one wonder that the same Veneration should be paid to a
Martyrs Vestment sprinkled with his blood, which would be given to his whole
body: for by many miracles God has testified that this is acceptable to him. A
more authentic witness hereof cannot be required then the Holy and learned
Father S. Gregory Nazianzen, Gregor. Nazianz. ^amb. 18. de vi^^^s.
whose words are these, A little portion of dust, a particle of bones, a little
hair, part of the Vestment, or the marks of the blood of a Martyr sprinkled
ought to have as much veneration as the whole body. Nay I have known where
only the name of a Martyr attributed to a place, has produced the same virtue
that the Martyrs whole body would have done. O wonderful! the memory alone of
Martyrs is sufficient, in my opinion, to conferr health.

XVI. CHAP. XVI. CHAPTER

1.2 etc. The ancient Acts of S. Amphibalus.

3. Great multituds present at the death of S. Albanus, converted.

4.5. S. Amphibalus venerates the Cross.

6.7.8. A thousand British Christians martyrd in the presence of S. Amphibalus.

9. The place of their Martyrdom, Lichfeild.

1. THE first that followed S. Albanus by the way of Martyrdom to heaven, was
his Master Amphibalus, who first showed him the way thither. Concerning who^
thus we read in his Life extant likewise in Capgrave, but written by a less
ancient Author, as appears by the context of it, for he mentions some
Provinces by names, which were not given them till some ages after these times,
as wallia (Wales) etc.

2. When S. Amphibalus had by his preaching and exhortation, Vit. S. Amphib.
ap. Cap* grav.
through the operation of the Holy Ghost converted the glorious Martyr S.
Albanus to the Fatih, his Venerable Disciple earnestly persuaded him to depart
that City of Verolam, and withal gave him his own Soldiers garment richly
woven with gold, that so he might travel more safely from his enemies. To
whose request Amphibalus condescending, began his flight early in the morning,
directing his journey northward, with an intention to preach the word of God to
the Gentiles in Wales.

3. After whose departure followd the Martyrdom of S. Albanus: and when the
multitudes which accompanied him to his death saw the pillar of light which
from his tomb raised it self up to heaven, and the Angels descending and
asscending with praises to God all the night, they were amazed at that unusual
lig^t, which they ascribed to the miraculous power of God. Whereupon one of
the^, seeing the rest astonishd, thus spoke to them, It is manifest that it is
Christ the Son of God who has wrought these wonderful things. The Gods which
we have hitherto worshipped are rather Monsters then Deities, having no power
nor Divinity in them, so that we have spent our days in their worship, without
any proffit at all. See how the nights darkness gives way to celestial
splendours: See how the heavenly Citizens come and go, celebrating the
Sanctity of Albanus. Let us therefore forsake our former Errors, and be
converted from lies to truth, from infidelity to Faith. Let us go and enquire
out the man of God, who, as you know, converted by his preaching Albanus to the
Faith. This man having with these and other like speeches exhorted the rest,
they all with one accord presently professed a detestation of their former
Heathenish Errors, and exalted the Faith of Christ.

4. Thus with great have they directed their iouney into wales, where the
servant of God Amphibalus was supposed to remain. To whom when they were come,
they found him preaching the word of life to the people of that Region: and
told him the cause of their coming: withal presenting to him the Cross which
himself had before bestowed on his Disciple Albanus, and which was sprinckall
over with fresh blood, thereby exhibiting manifes^ ^igns of the Blessed man's
Martyrdom.

Florileg. ad A. D. 303.
5. As touching this Cross thus Matthew of westminster writes, The Cross, says
he, which the holy Martyr Albanus was wont almost continually to carry in his
hands, at his death being sprinkled with his blessed blood, fell upon the
grass: which a certain Christian privily took up, and concealed it from the
Pagans.

Id. ibid.
6. The same Author pursuing this Story, adds, That S. Amphibalus having heard
and seen these things, gave thanks to Almighty God, and made a Sermon of
Christian Religion to these his new Auditors, who were in number about a
thousand. To whose doctrine they all immediately professed their consent and
belief, and thereupon cheerfully received from his sacred hands the Seal of
Faith which is in Christ, to wit, his holy Baptism.

7. In the mean time the conversion and departure of such great multitudes
caused great trouble among the Pagan Citizens of Verolam: whereupon the
Ministers of the persecution raised against Christians there resolved to pursue
with all cruelty the holy man Amphibalus, who had been the cause of so great a
change: and in order thereto they with armed forces marched the same way which
their companions had taken, intending to find out this public and professed
Enemy of their Superstition. In conclusion they easily found him who sought not
to escape from them: and they found him employed in his usual office of
preaching the word of God to his new Converts.

Vit. S. Amphibal. ap. ^ap. grav.
8. Then ( according to the relation of the Acts of this holy Martyr) rushing
with violence upon him: O seducing wretch, said they, how dare thou with thy
fallacious inventions deceive this simple people, and teach them to trample
under ^^^t the Imperial Laws, and contemn our Gods? They said no more, but
mad with rage presently without any distinction, or regard of age or affinity
mercilesly without any resistance putt to the sword all their thousand
countrymen for the Faith of Christ, neighbors murdring neighbors, friends
friends, and kinsmen kinsmen, As for the holy man Amphibalus, who was reserved
to a more cruel death, being compassed above with the livelesse bodies of
these holy Martyrs, he with joy commended their happy souls to God.

9. As touching the place where so cruel and inhuman a butchery was made, it
is not agreed by Historians, some affirm it to have been among the Silures, in
the Province of Monmouth: and hereto the Author of Amphibalus his life seems
to accord: but others more probably say that these holy Martyrs suffered among
the Cornavij ( in Warwick shire) Camden. in Cornav.
where their persecutours overtook them in their way toward Wales, at
Lichfeild, which City seems to have taken its name from this slaughter of so
many Martyrs, for as John Rosse of warwick interprets the word, it signifies
the field of dead bodies, which are also to this day the Arms of the City.

XVII. CHAP. XVII. CHAPTER

1.2. S. Amphibalus lead prisoner toward Verolam: in the way miraculously
cures a sick person.

3. He is barbarously tormented: his gutts wrapped about a stake.

4. During his torments he enveighs against Idolatry.

5. His Executioner is converted.

6. A voice from heaven testifies S. Amphibalus his Sanctity: He dies: and his
Body is privately buried.

1. AFter the offering made of so many immaculate Victimes to God, Florilig. ad
A. D. 303.
S. Amphibalus, says Matthew of westminster, became the sole object against
whom these bloody Executioners powrd forth all their rage: for binding his arms
with sharp and streit cords, they so drove him with naked feet before their
horses toward the City of Verolam: who the nearer he approached to his beloved
Disciple S. Albanus, the less was he sensible of the roughnes of the ways and
toil of the journey: Moreover in the way Amphibalus fast bound as he was, had
yet the virtue to unloose a sick person from the bonds of his infirmity,

2. This miracle is thus related in the life of S. Amphibalus: Act. S. Am^phib.
ap. Cap. grav.
In the way as they passed, a certain infirm person began to cry out: O
servant of the High God, help me, that by thy intercession I may be freed from
this my grievous infirmity: for I believe that by calling on the name of Christ
over me, thou may speedily restore my health. Whereupon immediately in the
sight of them all the sick person arose cheerful and perfectly recoered. This
miracle finds credit generally among all, ^. Fox. in Acts and M. in perscent. 10
except John Fox, who says there was no cause which might move almighty God to
show his power: As if there were neither infidells to be converted, nor
beleivers to be confirmed, nor such malicious Sectaries as himself to be
preiudged.

3. But to proceed in the sufferings of this glorious Martyr, Act S. Amphib.
as they are related in his Acts to have been inflicted on him at the end of
his long journey, when he was entered into the confines belonging to the City
of Verolam. There the foresaid Inhabitants of Verolam barbarously stripped him
of his garments: and fastening a stake into the ground, they with a sword ripp'd
up his belly, and tying the end of his gutts about the stake with cruel
whipping thy forced him to walk about it, so inwrapping it with his bowels:
And not content thus, they with knives and lances tore the rest of his body, as
if he had been a mark set on purpose to exercise their weapons upon. All this
while the man of God stood with a cheerful countenance, as if he had suffered
nothing, being every moment more constant, though there was not left any part
of his body in which there were not imprinted marks of his Martyrdom: insomuch
as it seemd a prodigious thing, that after so many tortures and sorts of death,
he could have any life remaining in him.

4. The same moment, diverse who were there present and saw the constancy of
the holy Martyr, renounced their Idols, and submitted themselves to the Faith
of Christ, beseeching the Blessed man to pray to God for them that they might
partake eternal Happiness, for the obtaining of which they were ready to lay
down their lives. Which when it was known, the Chief Magistrate calling the
Officers gave them command to kill all those who had cast off the worship and
reverence of Heathen Gods, and embraced the Doctrine of the Christian Preacher.
Immediately they executed this horrible Edict, and putt to death a thousand
persons, whilst Blessed Amphibalus looked on, and commended their souls to our
Lord.

5. Then one of the bystanders, ruder then the rest, thus spoke to the man of
God, O p^ttilesse wretch, way have thou deceived these simple people with thy
frudulent speeches, withdrawing them from the worship of the Gods? By thy
cunning persuasions we have utterly lost our parents and friends.
Notwithstanding though hereby thou have above measure incensed both Gods and
men, yet even now at last by thy repentance thou may recover their pardon and
favor. And this will be a proof and sign of thy repentance, if thou will
renounce the impious Sect, which hitherto thou have followed, and begin to
adore the omnipotent Gods, which perhaps out of ignorance thou have offended.
If thou will do this, then the same all-powerfull Gods will restore again to
life those whom thou have murdered.

6. To whom the Holy man thus answered, O Infidel, whilst thou endeavourest
with thy false praises to ex^^ll thy Gods, be assured that thou have offended
the true God by thy speeches. For it is Jesus Christ my Lord who alone has the
power to raise and give life to the dead. As for those whom ye worship as
Gods, and think them to be powerful in heaven, they do now suffer most
horrible torments in hell. And partakers in the fellowship of those torments
shall be all injust persons, adulterers, slanderers and such as by their
reprobate actions whilst they lived here, rendered themselves like to Devils.
And for thy part, O Pagan, and all who like thee worship Idols, except you
quickly renounce your heathenish Superstition, and convert your selves to the
Faith of Christ, you shall all incurr the same punishments in hell. Do not
despair, for the mercy of God is great. Break off your evil ways, and make
have to be partakers of the Grace of Baptism. By Baptism all sins are forgiven;
Heaven is opened to men, who thereby become as it were new creatures, having
divested themselves of their old wicked inclinations. For those who before
Baptism, by their sins were Children of the Devil, become afterward Sons of
God. Run therefore for refuge to this Grace, that you may escape everlasting
torments.

7. When the impious Pagans heard these speeches, they were kindled with rage,
and with all their forces labored to deprive him of life. But the holy Martyr,
though he was on all sides bruised with a great multitude of stones, which were
thrown at him, yet he remained immovable in prayer, not stirring any way from
the place where he stood.

8. But when at last the hour was come in which he was to surrender to God his
victorious spirit, lifting up his eyes to heaven, he saw our Lord Jesus
standing at the right hand of the Father, and heard an harmonious co^cert of
Angels in heaven, amongst whom he saw his beloved Disciple S. Albanus whom he
presently invoked to his help, saying, O Holy Albanus, pray to our Lord that he
would send his good Angel to meet and protect me, that the accursed fiend and
his associats may not binder my passage into life Immediately after which
Prayer, there appeared two Angels, gloriously shining with celestial
splendor, which came to him: And a voice from heaven was heard saying, Verily
I say unto thee, thou shall presently be in Paradise with thy Disciple.

9. When the Pagans heard this celestial voice, they stood amazed. But the
holy Angels took with them the Blessed man's soul, shining with a brightness
white as snow, and with hymns and praises carried it into heaven. In the mean
time the Pagans ceased not to overwhelm with stones the livelesse body, bound
as it was with cords. But afterward, a certain Christian privily took away the
Body, and with a diligent care buried it. This is the sum of the Life and
Martyrdom of S. Amphibalus, recorded by an ancient Bri^tish Author, H^rpsf in
6. ^aecul. cap. ^^
who, says Harpsfeild, lived before the time of S. Beda,

XXIII. CHAP. XXII. CHAP

1.2. S. Amphibalus martyrd, or buried at Rudburn near Verolam: and his
Sepulcher miraculously discovered by S. Albanus

3. His Body translated to S Albons.

4 The day of his Translation.

5. His Tomb venerated for miracles, etc.

1. IN the foregoing relation there is no particular mention either of the
precise time or place where S. Amphibalus was martyrd. But touching the place
Harpsfeild, says, Harpsfeild. vbi sup.
that the Holy man of God was putt to death in a village called Rudburn,
distant from Verolam three miles, where, as Thomas Rudburn relates, there were
reserved to his time two great knives with which he was killd: Which Thomas
lived about the year one thousand four hundred and eighty. And indeed in the
same village there seem to remain to this day some marks of his Martyrdom: for
in the way between Rudburn and Verolam there is shown a certain Tree, of late
enclosd within walls, where it is beleiod was fixd the post to which the holy
Martyr was tied, and where his bowels were forn out.

2. Or rather probably there was the place of his burial: which was performed
with such secrecy, as has been said, that till the year of Grace one thousand
one hundred seaventy and eight the sacred Body could never be discovered. But
in that year, says Matthew of Westminster, Westminster. ad A. D. 1178.
the Blessed Martyr S. Albanus was seen visibly to go out of the Church
dedicated to him, and to come to a certain man inhabiting in the town of S.
Albons, to whom he said, Follow me. Who seeing him shining gloriously like the
Sun, was afraid: yet in obedience followd him Northward: and the high way
shone with his brightness. As they walked, the man said to the Holy man, Sir who
are you? Who answered, I am Albanus the first Martyr of Brittany, and I now
lead thee to the Sepulcher of S. Amphibalus, by whose preaching I was converted
to our Lord, and became a Martyr; that his bones may be discovered and
reverently removed to a more decent place. Thus they talked together familiarly
like two friends: and in the end he showed him the place: which the man
diligently observed, setting certain stones in order there to be a mark for the
finding it again. Math. Paris A. D. 1178.
Thus writes that Author: and the same is related more diffusedly by Matthew
Paris.

3. Then it was that the Sacred Body was translated to the Church of S. Albans,
where (...) ^any Miracles were wrought by his intercession, that the year
following Lewis King of France, who came into England in devotion to visit the
Shrine of S. Thomas of Canterbury, was desirous to continue his voyage likewise
to S. Albans, but was dissuaded by his Nobles accompanying him, Westminster. ad A. D.
1179.
as the same Author reports.

4. As touching the time time of this Holy Martyrs death, though the year be
well-enough known, to wit, the two hundred eighty seventh year of our Lord:
yet for the day, it is not particularly designed in any History or Monument.
For whereas in the English Martyrologe his passion is celebrated on the
twenty-fifth of June, three days after that of S. Albanus: yet surely then was
commemorated not his death, but the Translation of his sacred ashes to Verolam
where they were reposed in the Church of S. Albanus built by King Offa.
Harpsfeild in 6* svve. cap. ^0.
This day it is which Harpsfeild meant* when he wrote thus, Verolam never saw
any day more joyful and beneficial. A Martyr meets a Martyr, the scholar
meets his Master, the Host meets his Guest, and one Citizen of heaven meets
another. Albanus now openly and honorably entertains that guest at his return,
whom before he had secretly dismis'd, least he should fall into his Enemies
hands: He now leads him into a magnificent Temple, to whom before he could give
no security in a cottage. These things happned in the year one thousand one
hundred seaventy eight, on the five and twentieth day of June.

5. But though the Britains had been formerly ignorant of the place where S.
Amphibalus his Body lay, yet that was no hindrance to their Veneration of him
from the beginning. For as may be gathered out of a forecited passage of
Gildas, within ten years after his Martyrdom a Church was erected to his
honor: And in the year of our Lord three hundred and nine another Church at
Winchester was consecrated to S. Amphibalus, which the Saxons afterward
rebuilding dedicated to S. Peter.

XIX. CHAP. XIX. CHAPTER

1. Several companions with S. Amphibalus in his Martyrdom: whose names are
not known.

2.3.4. Martyrdon of S. Julius and S. Aaron at Caer-leon.

5 6* Churches built to their memory: long before the Saxons entrance.

7. S Stephanus and S. Socrates British Martyrs.

1. BEsides S. Albanus and S. Amphibalus, Brittany at this time was glorified
with several other Martyrs. Capgrave writes that when S. Amphibalus his Body
was found, there were discovered likewise with it two other Bodies of Martyrs:
A namelesse Author quoted by Bishop V^her reckons three: to which Matthew Paris
adds five more, so that says he, N. Paris. A. D. 1178.
Blessed Amphibalus was reckoned the tenth. And Thomas Rudburn, as also the
brief History of the Church of Winchester affirm that the bodies of S.
Amphibalus and eight of his companions were discovered: Which in all
probability were the Relics of these Martyrs which together with him suffered
for the profession of the Christian Faith: their names are only known in heaven.

2. But that part of Brittany from whence S. Amphibalus drew his original has
more carefully preserved the Memory of their fellow citizens and Martyrs which
suffered there: Among whom the most illustrious are S. Aaron and S. Julius, who
in this persecution of Diocletian and Maximianus consummated a most glorious
Martyrdom there.

3. Concerning whom our Countryman Bal^, Balaus in Catalog.
though, as became an Apostat, a bitter Enemy of the Roman Catholic Church,
writes thus: Julius and Aaron Noble Citizens of the famous City of Caer-Leon
(for so Isca of the Silures is called from two Legions garrisond there) and
Disciples in Christ of the holy Martyr Amphibalus, were most illustrious
ornaments of piety to our Country of Brittany. These two addicted themselves
with much diligence to the study of learning, not only in their own country,
but also undertook a Voyage into foreign Nations for the attaining skill in
good arts: for history informs us that they studied at Rome especially: and
therefore celebrates them much for their Learning.

4. John Fox likewise commends these two holy men: but mistakes when he calls
them Citizens of Verolam, whom Gildas and S. Beda positively affirm to have
been inhabitants of Caer-Leon. The words of S. Beda are these; At the same time
(during the persecution of Diocletian) Aaron and Julius Citizens of Caer-Leon,
together with very many others in diverse places of both sexes suffered
Martyrdom: Who after the suffering of several tortures, had their members torn
asunder by unheard of cruelty, and at last consummating a glorious Martyrdom
they sent up their souls to the ioys of the heavenly City. The same
expression is used concerning them in the Roman Martyrologe on the first of
July, Martyrolog. Angl. 1. Iul^j
when the Martyrdom of Aaron and Julius is commemorated. And both the said
Martyrologe and S. Beda have borrowed the phrase describing the manner of their
death from our most ancient Historian Gildas.

5. And the devout Britains of those times after the same manner honored the
Memory of these two Holy Martyrs, as they had done that of S. Albanus and S.
Amphibalus, by erecting Altars and Churches to their honor. Girald. Cambre^s.
^^ine^a^
Thus Giraldus Cambrensis in his Itinerary of Wales, treating of the famous
City of Caer-Leon writes: Here lie the bodies of two Noble Christians, and
next to S. Albanus and S. Amphibalus the most illustrious Protomartyrs of
Brittany, who were here crowned with Martyrdom: I mean Julius and Aaron: each
of which had a famous Church erected to his honor in this City. For there
were in ancient times in the said City three magnificent Churches. One of the
Martyr S Julius, adornd with a Quire and Convent of Religious Virgins. A second
dedicated to the honor of his Companion S. Aaron, and graced with a Noble
Quire of Canons. The third was the Metropolitan Church of all Cambria This last
Church was afterward translated by the holy Bishop S. David to Menevia, the
authority of Dubritius Legate of the Bishop of Rome concurring thereto.

6. It is observable that all these Churches were built by Britains, long
before the Saxons entered into this Island. So that there is no need of
expecting S Gregory the Great or S. Augustine the Monk to him who would find
arguments to prove the Antiquity of the Roman Faith touching the Veneration of
Saints, in Brittany.

7. Besides these we find celebrated in ancient Martyrologes the memory of two
Noble British Christians, the Disciples of S. Amphibalus, who were crowned with
Martyadom in the same persecution of Diocletian: their names are Stephanus and
Socrates. Mention is made of them likewise by S. Beda, Vsuardus, Ado and
others: whereto also several ancient Manuscripts do accord. We find no
particular Gests of theirs: only in the English Martyrologe it is said that in
the Province of the Silures, Churches were built to their honor. Now whether
this Stephanus was Bishop of London, it is a doubt. A Bishop of that name is
said to have governed that See in this age: though Authors place him somewhat
later. To this time likewise is referd the murdring of all the Monks in the
Monastery of Winchester, built by King Lucius. Of which we shall speak in the
next year but one.

8. Whilst the Romans thus raged in Brittany, very many Christians, not having
the courage to keep their ranks, and expose themselves to their Enemies
Violence; yet resolving not to betray their Faith, withdrew themselves from the
fury of men, least by the immanity of torments they should be compelled to
renounce it. Thus Gildas writes of the remainder of Christians in those days,
Those persecuted Christians, Gildas de Excidio.
says he, which were left, hid themselves in woods, defarts and caves of
rocks, expecting from God the just Judge of all when he would please to execute
his judgments on their persecutours, and restore safety and liberty to their
own souls.

9. This Christian prudence and caution of theirs was suitable to the advice
given the year before by the holy Pope and Ma^tyr Caius at Rome, when the
persecution first began: For he in an Assembly of beleivers meeting together on
that occasion, thus spoke to them, Ap. Baron. A. D. 286. n. 5.
Our Lord Jesus Christ, who perfectly foresees and knows the frailty of
mankind, has ordained two ranks and degrees of Beleivers, namely Confession
and Martyrdom: to the end that those who have not strength or courage enough to
sustain the weight of Martyrdom, may at least hold fast the Grace of
Confession. Let such yield up the glory of Martyrdom to the valiant soldiers of
Christ which are resolved to co^bat for him, and take a sollicitous care of
their own souls. Let them therefore who are so disposed, depart out of this
field of battle whither they please, together with our dear children Chromatia
and Tiburtius: and for the rest who are more courageously resolved, let them
remain still here in the City with me.

10. This flight of Christians in Brittany, suitable to the Roman practice,
gave occasion to Persecutours to extend their rage upon Churches and
Monasteries, all which by this tempest were so uterly destroyed that, Gildas de
Excid.
as Gildas says, in several Provinces of this Island there remained no marks
at all of Christian Religion. This desolation continued about seven years,
till the happy return of Constantius, as soon as he was created Caesar, by
whose clemency the Christian Faith and worship again flourishd in Brittany, and
this much sooner then in any other parts of the Roman Empire. Which mercy of
God seems to have been extended in a special manner toward the Britains,
because, as S. Beda says, Bed. hist. L. 1. c. 4.
they only preserved among them their primitive Faith, received in the days of
King Lucius, entire and inviolate till the Reign of Diocletian.

XX. CHA.
XX. CHAP.
1.2.3 Carausius the Admiral of the Emperors Navy: his rapines: and
rebellion: he takes possession of Brittany.

4.5. Maximianus his preparations against him: without effect.

6. The Tyrant left in quiet possession of Brittany; subdues the Caledonian
Britains, A monument of his Victory.

1. THIS Tyranny of the Roman Emperors against Christian Religion God was
pleased to revenge, by permitting another Tyrant to raise himself against them
in Brittany. V^ct. de Caesar c. 39.
This was Carausius, who, says Victor, drew his Original from Menapia, a
Belgic Province in Gaul, confining on the Rhine. He is described by the Roman
Historians to have been a man vigilant and active both in counsel and
execution: and was employed by the Emperor at Boloign in Gaul to have care of
the Navy appointed to free the Seas on the coasts of Gaul and Brittany from
the infestation of the Franks and Saxons, Oross. hist. l. 7. c. 25. Bed. hist.
l. 1. c. 6 Eu^rop. la.
who most violently exercised Piracy in those quarters.

2. This Employment Carausius discharged more to the destruction then
advanceme^t of the Roman Commonwealth. For though he often vanquished and took
prisoners many of those barbarous Pirates, yet all the spoil he kep'd to
himself, neither restoring it to its former owners, nor consigning it the
Emperors treasure.

3. Such behavior rendered Carausius suspected of some ill design against the
Empire, as if he had on purpose permitted the said Pirates to range freely, to
the end he might either partake, or intercept them returning with their
spoils: with which he had raised to himself an immense wealth. Hereupon the
Emperor Maximianus gave command that he should be put to death Which to avoid,
he assumed the Imperial purple, and possessed himself of Brittany. A great
encouragement and help to which design was afforded by a sedition and rebellion
at the same time raised in Gaul by Amandus and Aelianus two Roman Generals;
Who notwithstanding were quickly subdued by Maximianus: but after their defeat
he was called by Diocletian into Italy, because another rebellion was then
^egan in Africa.

4. But Maximianus was presently after recalled into the West to oppose
Carausius. For which purpose he made great preparation, especially of Shipping,
to pursue the Tyrant into Brittany. Which gave occasion to the forementioned
Orat^ur Mamertinu^ to procounce before him his Panegyric, wherein whith many
flowers of Rhetoric he magnifies both the greatness of the preparation, and the
wonderful favor of their heathenish Gods in affording the Emperor so
miraculous a calmnes and warmth of weather unusual in so Northern a climat.

5. And though the Orators flattery promised a happy success to that
expedition: yet it seems it fell out otherwise. For Eutropius expressly
declares that several attempts by war had been in vain undertaken against
Carausius, a man very skillfull in military affairs: so that in the end they
were forced to make a peace, leaving him the possession of Brittany. A proof
whereof is afforded us by Camden, who produces a Coin, in the one side whereof
was this Inscription, C. Carausius Emperor: and on the other, The peace of
Augustus.

6. It seems Carausius being left in quiet possession of the Island employed
well the power allowed him, for he drove the Northern Caledonian Britains
beyond the wall raised by the Emperors Hadrianus and Severus: and raised a new
rampire to enclose them, more Northward then any had been before. Nennius.
For thus writes Nennius the Disciple of Elvodugus, Carausius, says he, built
a wall between the mouths of the two rivers Cladus and Carunus, and fortified
it with seven Castles, adding withal a round house built of polished stones
upon the bank of the River Carun: he likewise erected an Arch triumphall, on
which he imposed his own Name, in memory of his Victory. This building remains
to this day, vulgarly called Julius Hof, as if Julius Agricola had been the
Author of it.

XXI. CHAP. XXI. CHAPTER

1. Carausius his Tyranny lasted seven years.

2. Persecution ceases in Brittany*

3. Yet Monasteries and Churches are demolished* particularly Winchester

4 The Church of Westminster converted into a Temple of Apollo.

5. Helena not in Brittany at this time.

1. THE Tyranny of Carausius continued the space of seven years, for he began
his piracy in the year of Christ two hundred eighty six, and about two years
after assumed the Title of Emperor, invading and possessing Brittany, which he
quietly governed till the year two hundred ninety three, when Constantius made
his expedition against him. So that during the said two first years Brittany
was under the government of Diocletian and Maximianus, to whom must be
attributed the Martyrdom of S. Albanus, Amphibalus, etc.

2. Now though by Carausius his invasion of the Government the persecution
ceased; at least so far as that no Edicts were published against them, nor any
search after them ordained, nor Tribunalls erected: Notwithstanding the
soldiers of Carausius having been bred up in rapines, spoiled and destroyed all
Churches, and Monasteries remaining.

3. Among other places the ruins of the Monasteries of Winchester and
Westminster are by Historians celebrated: both which had just a hundred years
before been built by King Lucius. Concerning the former, thus we read in an
ancient Manuscript of the Church of Winchester, Hist. Ven^ana M^.
Christian Religion remained the space of a hundred years, from the first year
of King Lucius, the first Christian King of the Britains. And so long did the
Monks quietly serve God in that ancient Monastery. But they were all slain in
the Church of Winchester, which was also destroyed by the Ministers of the
persecuting Emperor Diocletian in the second year of his reign. To which year
also we before referred the killing of the Monks, as we do the ruining of the
Monastery to this present year two hundred eighty nine.

4. As for the Church of Westminster how it was at this time profaned and
converted to a Temple of Apollo, thus John Fleet an ancient Historian declares,
Whilst the most grievous persecution raised by the Emperor Diocletian raged in
Brittany, Ap. Vsser. in Prim. f. 9 l 5.
among other Churches this of Westminster was destroyed, and afterward by the
sacrilegious power of Magistrates changed into a profane temple of Apollo, in
which were exercised the superstitious Rites of the Gentiles. By which it came
to pass that in the same place where God had been devoutly worshipped in his
own Church, there Idolatrous abominations were afterward performed. That place
loosing the memory of its former Christian inhabitants, became the Head and
principal seat where Pagans exercised their execrable Superstitions.

5. During all these cruelties against Christians, and devastation of Churches
there is no mention of S. Helena the Wife of Constantius. Most probable it is
therefore that she was before this time departed out of Brittany with her
husband, who now governed Dalmatia or Illyricum: Aur. Vict. de Caesar. c. 40.
and with them both lived likewise their Son Constantin, now fifteen years old,
who from his child, hood, says Victor, showed an aspiring mind, inflamed with a
desire of rule.

XXII. CHAP. A. D. 292.

XXII. C.



1.2. By reason of distractions in the Empire, two new Caesar's elected,
Galerius and Constantius.

3. Constantius marries Theodora daughter in law to Maximianus.

4 5. Helena divorced and seated at Triers: Of which many proofs.

6 Constantin left in Diocletians Court, as a pledge.

1. IN these days there was a great concussion of the Roman Empire on all
sides, both by open invasions and civil dissentions. A. D. 290.
For the Persians in the East, and the Sarmatians in the North made furious
irruptions into the Provinces adjoining: likewise besides Brittany possessed by
Carausius, Achilleas vexed Egypt, and Iulianus, together with the Nations
called Quinquegentana, Africa.

2. These distractions occasioned the Election of two New Caesar's, A. D. 291.
that so the Empire might rest more securely upon more pillars. Constantius was
chosen by Maximianus, and Galerius, surnamed Armentarius, by Diocletian.
Notwithstanding the supreme authority and Majesty of the Empire resided in
Diocletian, to whom the other three imputed their advancement, and were his
hands and instruments to fight and overcome for him.

3. Moreover it was prudently advised among them to streiten their Society by
the bond of affinity. A. D. 292.
Whereupon Diocletian gave his daughter Valeria a wife to Galerius, and
Maximianus his wifes daughter Theodora to Constantius: before which marriage he
was compelled to a divorce from his beloved Wife Helena, who after this was
esteemed his Concubine, or at least a wife in the second and inferior place.
Which divorce notwithstanding brought no prejudice to their Son Constantin who
was born in marriage before, and enjoyed his right of Primogeniture, and
succeeded his Father in the Empire, notwithstanding other Sons born to
Constantius by Theodora.

4. What became of Helena after this new marriage, Malbranc. l. 2. c. 15.
will deserve our enquiry. Malbranque a French Historian affirms tha she lived
at Quantia a Town in the Province of Belgic Gaul, where now Hesdin is
situated. But more probable it is that Constantius fixd her habitation at
Triers where he built her a sumptuous Palace, says the Abbot Berengosius,
Berengos. l. 3. de invent. cru. cap. 2.
who styles her an inhabitant of the City of Triers (Trevirorum:) adding this
passage, The ancient magnificence of her Palace at Triers argues the Nobility
of Helena's race: where the Pavement strow'd with marble of several sorts
declares how much that house excelled all other. The walls also enriched with
gold and purple do gracefully testify the marks of their Mistrisses high
extraction. Besides all this, the great number of possessions conferred by her
on Gods Churches loudly speak the ancient Nobility of her stock. Lupold. l. de
zelo Princ. Germ. c. 5.
From hence it is says Lupoldus Bebenburgius, that many Authors (as Otto
Frisingensis and Godefridus Viterbiensis) do affirm that S. Helena the Mother
of Constantin had her original from Triers.

5. Certain it is that there are many marks which testify her affection to that
City, which a little while after this, to declare its relation to S. Helena
and to eternise her name, caused Medalls to be coined with this Inscription on
the one side, FLAVIA HELENA AUGUSTA: and on the other, SECVRITAS REIPVBLICAE:
whereto was adjoined underneath, S. TR. importing that it was Signed (or
Coined) at Triers. Which Inscription evidently declaring Helena to have been
adopted into the Imperial Flavian family, and honored with the Title of
Augusta or Empress, sufficiently evict that Helena was not the daughter of a
mean host, nor cast off by Constantius after his marriage with Theodora.

6. As for her Son Constantin, he was at this time received into the family of
Diocletian at Rome, there to remain as it were a pledge of his Fathers
fidelity. Eusebius. in vit. Constantin. l. 1. c. 8.
Where (says Eusebius) being then but a youth, though his conversation was
among persons full of all impiety, yet he was not infected by them: For his
natural good disposition directed by an instinct of Gods holy Spirit, drew him
from their vicious customs to a course of life acceptable to God, and exemplary
for piety. Besides this, an earnest desire to imitate his Fathers virtues
invited him powerfully to conform his practices to the good examples given him
by those who were pious and good. Thus writes Eusebius, who professes that
himself was an eye-witnes of all this in a progres of the Court through
Palestina, Id. ib. c. 13.
and how he saw the great esteem that Diocletian had of him when he was but
very young; at whose right hand he commonly stood, highly graced by the
Emperor, and acceptable to all that saw him, for his beauty, grace fullnes and
modesty. But leaving young Constantin at Rome, or perhaps in the East, we must
return to his Father Constantius.

XXIII. CHAP. A. D. 294.

XXIII. C.



1. Constantius his expedition against Carausius into Gaul.

2. He win^ Gessoriacum, or Boloign. He subdues the Franks in Batavia.

3. Caransius slain by Allectus in Brittany: who succeeds in the Tyranny.

4 Constantius passes into Brittany.

5. Allectus defeated and slain by Constantius his General.

6. Constantius saves London from ruin: and makes the Franks captives and
slaves to the Britains.

7. The joy of the Britains at the reception of Constantius.

8. Constantin accompanies Diocletian into the East: his virtues.

1. COnstantius being created Caesar, immediately made an expedition into Gaul
with an intention to pass over into Brittany against the Tyrant Carausius. A.
D. 293.
Being in Gaul he by admirable art and industry took the Sea-town Gessoriacum,
now called Boloign, which Carausius had for his own safety and use strongly
fortified. Which exploit of Constantius is elegantly celebrated by the Orator
Eumenius in his Panegyric pronounced before him. Eumen. Panegyr. 10.


2. There likewise we read how Constantius, not to be idle during the time that
a fleet was preparing for his expedition into Brittany, Ibid.
subdued Batavia, Carausius his own country, then possessed by several
Princes of the Franks, who were a German Nation, great numbers of whom had
transplanted themselves thither.

3. Now whilst Constantius thus employed himself on the other side of the Sea,
Carausius in Brittany was murdered by C. Allectus, A^rel. Vict.
whom he had made General of his forces, and who for diverse flagitious acts
done by him feared his just revenge. After which the Traitor thinking that the
better way to secure himself, assumed also the Title of Emperor, as is
declared by his Coyns yet extant bearing the said Title.

4. Against this new Tyrant, Constantius the year following sailed into
Brittany. Allectus then had a strong fleet in the Isle of Wight, to oppose his
Enemies coming. But such was Constantius his felicity, that by reason of
tempestuous weather his fleet passed undiscovered by Allectus his Ships, and
landed without opposition in Brittany: where being arrived, Constantius in
excess of courage set on fire all his own ships, to let his soldiers know,
that they must either over com, or be slaves. All this we learn from the
forementioned Orator.

5. After this, says the same Author, Constantius marching against the Tyrant
divided his Army, one part he lead himself, and the other he committed to the
conduct of Asclepi^do^us Prefect of his Praetorian bands. Allectus avoiding
the opposing himself against Constantius, chose to try his fortune against
Asclepiodotus, by whom without any loss of the Romans side, he was utterly
defeated, and notwithstanding his design to disguise himself by casting off his
Imperial Purple, he was found out and slain.

6. But a great part of his Army, consisting of strangers, Franks and
Batavians, seeing their Prince and Tyrant dead, fled diligently toward London,
with an intention to take the spoils of that rich City, abounding with
merchandise. When on the sudden Constantius happily appeard unawares, and cut
them in pieces, so freeing that City from ruin. Those who escaped the
slaughter he gave for captives to the Britains, who affectionatly joined with
him. But afterward he thought it more secure to remove those barbarous
strangers into Gaul where he dispersed them into several Provinces, as
Amiens, Beauvais, Troyes and Langres.

7. After this Victory it is incredible with what universal joy Constantius
was received by the Britains, who for the space of almost nine years had been
oppressed by Tyrants, suffering all manner of indignities in the violation of
their wives and daughters, the slavery of their sons and loss of all their
subsistence: and at last by this Victory were restored to the Roman Government,
now most acceptable to them under Constantius, not only a Prince of great
moderation and Clemency, but allied to them by his marriage with Helena, and
affording them a Prince of their own blood.

8. Which young Prince Constantin at this time accompanied Diocletian into
Egypt, where he gave egregious proofs of his excellent disposition. For thus
writes Paulus Diaconus of him, P. Diaco^. l. 10 l. 42.
There was with Diocletian in Egypt Constantin the Son of Constantius: who
being then a very young man showed illustrious marks of his courage in battles:
and in his heart also favored the Christians. Whose progress in all
endowments of mind and body Diocletian with envy observed: and foreseeing that
he would prove the ruin of his Tyranny, and a destroyer of his Pagan Errors,
he had a design by subtilty to take away his life. But Almighty God beyond all
expectation saved him from the others cruelty, and restored him to his Father.
The Tyrant, no doubt, knew that he had been from his infancy nourished with
Christian milk: and could not but observe that he lookd on his cruelties
against poor Christians, with unwilling eyes: therefore he detained him under
strict guards intending probably greater mischief to him.

9. It is not here to be omitted that this young Constantin at this time took
to wife Minervina, of whom he begott his eldest Son Crispus, who was twelve
years old when his Father married his second wife Fausta. Zosimus according to
his costum slanderously calls Minervina Constantius ((...)) strumpet or
concubine: whereas both Eusebius and the Author of the Panegyric pronounced
at his second marriage highly commend him for his chastity, Panegyr. 5.
in that, says he, imitating the continence of his Father, he would not admit
into his unstained breast any wandering lusts, nor so much as those pleasures
which custom allows to youth, but was a new miracle, a young man uxorious.
Which encomium could not without extreme and most ridiculous impudence have
been spoken at such a time in such an assembly, if either Helena had been his
Fathers Concubine, or Minervina his own.

XXIV. CHAP. XXIV. CHAP.

1.2. Persecution ceases in Brittany by Constantius his clemency: contrary to
the the assertion of Lesley and Hector Boethius.

3. S. Nicholas a British Bishop and Martyr.

4. No Scots yet in Brittany.

1. WHat a happy change the oppressed Christians in Brittany found in their
condition after this Victory of Constantius over the Tyrant Allectus, A. D. 295.
is further declared from the testimony of our ancient British Historian
Gildas, Gildas de xcid.
who says that nine years of persecution being ended, they began to repair
Churches demolished, and to build new ones to the honor of Martyrs, that they
publicly celebrated divine Mysteries and solemn Festivities etc. The which is
confirmed by Eusebius, Eusebius. in vita Constant. l. 1. c. 9.
who says, That whereas there were four persons joined in the government of the
Roman world, Constantius only, having entered, as it were, into a covenant of
freindship with God the supreme Governor, was utterly averse from the
practices of the other three: For whereas they wasted the Churches of God, and
defiled their Provinces with the blood of innocent Christians shed with utmost
cruelty: Constantius on the contrary was Author of most perfect tranquillity
to his subjects, like an indulgent father allowing them a free pover of
exercising the duties of the true Christian Religion, without any molestation.

2. Leslaeu^ l. 3. in Rege 34. H. Boeth. hist l. 6.
Which Testimonies so ancient and authentic do manifestly disprove the
assertion of Lesley the Scottish Historian and Hector Boethius who uniustly
impute cruelty against Christians to Constantius. A. D. 299.
For thus Hector writes concerning him. The fame of Constantius, though
otherwise a worthy Prince, was much tainted with posterity, because he
imitating Diocletian, endeavored the ruin of Christian Religion. Upon which
occasion great numbers of pious British Christians flying the rage of
persecutours, came to the Scots and Picts. The King Crathlintus received them
with great kindness, permitting them to reside in the Isle of Man: where having
overthrown the Temples of Pagans, and exterminated the profane Rites of the
Druids, which till this time had continued there, he built for the re^ug'd
Christians at his own cost a Church, called by the name of our Savior, etc.

A. D. 296.
3. The Scottish Writers likewise, about this time, to wit, in the year of Grace
two hundred ninety six, do place the Martyrdom of a famous British Bishop
called S. Nicholas, and for his piety styled Culdeus, or a worshipper of God.
Of whom Dempster thus writes, S. Nicholas Culdeus one of the first Bishops of
the Scottish Church, during the rage of persecution raised by Maximianus in
Brittany was crowned with Martyrdom: The holy Relics of his Body cut in
pieces were put into an Vrn of Stone and together with a venerable Cross were
buried in the earth: Afterward being dug up, they were found with this
Inscription, Of S. Nicolas Bishop. To whose honor in succeeding time King
Alexander the third at the request of the Bishop of Glasco built a sumptuous
Church at Pebles, which whilst Catholic Religion flourished among us became
illustrious for the grace of Miracles, and was freque^ted with great concourse
of devout Christians. He suffered Martyrdom in the year two hundred ninety six:
and his Sacred body was found, known by the inscription, and together with the
Cross exalted on the seventh of the Ides of May, in the year of our Lord one
thousand two hundred sixty two.

4. These three Writers do confidently mention the Scotts as inhabitants of
those Nothern Provinces: Where as not any ancient Authors do as yet take
Notice of their name. Eumen. Paneg^r. 10.
Indeed Eumenius the forecited Panegyrist says that the Britains in those
times were molested with two people their Enemies, the Picts and the Irish: and
he is the first Writer who calls the Caledonian Britains by the name of Picts,
because their arms and legs, which were naked, were usually painted with the
figures of beasts: by which may be collected that that Name was given them
about the time of Constantius. And as for the Irish, who also were termed
Scots, though probably at this time many of them came over to assist the Picts
or Caledonian Britains, yet that they took possession of any part of the
Country, or however that the Name of Scotts was given thus early to the whole
country, cannot out of any approved Authors be demonstrated.

XXV. CHAP. A. D. 302.

XXV. CHAPTER



1. Constantius goes into Gaul against the Alamanni.

2. He is accompanied by Britains who build towns there.

3. He overcomes the Germans at Langres.

1. AFTER three years abode in Brittany, Constantius was obliged to pass over
into Gaul to oppose a German Nation called by some Carpi, A. D. 299.
by others Alamanni, by others Marcomanni, which grievously infested that
Country: and in his absence he left Asclepiodotus Governor in Brittany.

2. It seems great numbers of Britains attended Constantius in this
Expedition, Adol. Meker. l. de Vet. pronunc. l. Gr. c. ^0.
if the conjecture of Adolphus Mekerchus be true that the Town of Bretta in
Germany was at this time built by Britains who followed Constantius. The same
Author fancies likewise that the town of Heidelsheim was named by them from
Helena the wife of Constantius, whose name was most acceptable and precious to
the Britains. But leaving conjectures, let us pursue the more certain story of
Constantius his Expedition, thus related by Eutropius:

3. At the same time, says he, Eutrop. l. 9.
Constantius Caesar fought against the Germans in Gaul near the City of
Langres, where in one day he had experience both of very great good and ill
fortune. For he was obliged upon a suddein and violent assault of the Enemies
to retire into the City, with so great have and danger, that they were forced
to shut the gates, and draw him up with ropes: and a few hours after upon the
approach of his army, he set upon the Germans, and killed near sixty thousand
of them. The same Victory at Langres is likewise celebrated by the Orator
Eumenius, who adds, Eumen. Panegyr. 9.
who adds, that in that combat Constantius received a wound. After which
Victory, he dispersed the remaining Germans into several vacant places of
Gaul.

XXVI. CHAP. XXVI. C.

1. Stephanus Bishop of London; how a Martyr.

2. Constantius returns into Brittany.

3.4.5. Memorable examples of his Virtues. His moderation. For which he is
tenderly affection'd by his subjects, and master of their wealth. How he tried
the Constancy of his Christian servants.

6. British Guards.

7. Constantius and his family, Christians.

8. Hereto S. Helena contributed much.

1. THE quietness which Brittany happily enjoyed under Constantius is the cause
that for some few years it affords little matter to furnish History. A. D. 300.
Only in the year three hundred Stephanus Bishop of London, highly commended
for his s^^ctity is said to have ended his life by Martyrdom. Not that any were
then putt to death for Christian Religion, but he is called a Martyr, according
to the phrase of that Age, for the persecution he had suffered formerly during
the rage of Diocletian and Maximianus. He is in the English Martyrologe styled
the eighth Bishop of that See: whereas more truly he should have been called the
seventh: for S. Augulus, of whom shortly, is by Historians named the eighth.

A. D. 302.
2. In the year of Grace three hundred and two upon occasion of the death of
Asclepiodotus whom he had left President here, Constantius seems to have
returned into Brittany, establishing peace in that Church which himself had
begun: whilst in all other Provinces of the Empire whole rivers of Christian
blood were shed with all imaginable cruelty and immanity.

Zosim. l. 2.
3 Now Brittany being the country where, as Zosimus says, Constantius made his
longest abode ((...),) and where for diverse respects he both expressed and
received the greatest proofs of affection, it is most probable that in
Brittany, and about these times were performed by him those memorable actions
of bounty, clemency and piety recorded by Historians, which rendered him admired
and beloved through the whole Empire.

4. An illustrious Example of the prudent moderation of his Government, of his
liberality, and of the mutual affection between him and his subjects, Eusebius.
in vit. Constantin. l. 1. c. 9.
was, as Eusebius, records, declared on this occasion. The Emperor Diocletian
being informed that Constantius by his too profuse liberality and negligence
had utterly impoverished his Treasure, by messengers sent on purpose sharply
reproved him for it. Constantius, having desired the messengers to expect a few
days for his answer, in the mean space sent notice through his whole dominions
to all his subjects, especially such as abounded with wealth, that he stood in
great need of money, and that a more fit opportunity could never be offered
them to testify their duty and affection to him. Hereupon without any delay,
and with extreme chearfullnes and ardour each contended with other who should
send most, so that in a short time his Treasure was filld with innumerable
sums of money. This being performed, Constantius invited the Messengers to be
spectatours of his wealth, desiring them to testify to the Emperor what they
had seem Telling them withal that all, those riches had been deposited by him
in the owners hands, as the most safe guardians. The Messengers seeing the
wonderful aflection showed to Constantius by his subjects, were astonishd at
it. When they were gone, the kind and bountiful Emperor restored all that
ma^se of treasure to the owners, expressing withal an affectionat resentment
of their duty and good will to him.

3. Another worthy action of the same Prince, denoting both the sharpnes of his
judgment, and religious disposition, is to this effect related by the same
Author: Bring desirous to order his family and Court distracted into factions
by persons of various Sects and Religions, Id. ib.
he published an Edict, That whosoever would continue in his office, should
conform himself to the Roman Idolatry: for he was resolved that no other should
remain in his Court. As for others, they should be permitted to enjoy the
liberty, and possession of what they had, but they must avoid his presence.
This Ordinance caused great trouble in the minds of such Christians as
ambitiously affected worldly honor and wealth, who therefore preferring Mammon
before God, relinquishd their profession to conform themselves to Caesar's
Religion. But several other sincere and genuine Disciples of Christ, showed
themselves willing rather to forsake their Princes service then Gods. Which
being observed by Constantius, he chased from his Court all those fainthearted,
hypocritical dissemblers, saying, they would never preserve their fidelity to
him, which had basely betrayed their Faith to God. And those who continued
constant, he preferred to dignities, committing the care of his safety to them.

6. From hence it came that the Britains, who generally were Christians,
became Guards both to him and other Emperors. This is affirmed by Nicetas
Choniates, who therefore calls them ((...)) British Guards which always
encompassed the Emperor, being armed with long halberts.

7. Such piety and constancy of British Christians being observed by
Constantius, might probably be one strong motive inducing him to forsake
Idolatry: For so much is implied by Eusebius, Eusebius. vbi sup
saying, Constantius having for a long space showed forth illustrious signs of
virtues becoming a Prince, at last he wholly renounced the impious Idolatry and
worship of many Gods, willingly acknowledging the only true God, Governor of
all the world, and firmly establsshd his Court by the Prayers and assistance of
holy men. Thus with great glory he passed the remainder of his life in
tranquillity, being free from all trouble.

8. To this happy change it is not to be doubted but S. Helena his wife did
much contribute, whose presence with him at this time the same Eusebius seems
to imply in the words following: ^d. ib.
Thus did he through all the remaining time of his reign procure a constant
peaceable state to his children and wife, together with his whole family, all
which he consecrated to God the supreme king, insomuch as his Court seemed
little to differ from the form of a Church: in which the Ministers and servants
of God offre^ continually Prayers and Sacrifices for him: whereas in the other
Princes courts and countries the very name of the true Gods worshippers could
not without utmost danger be pronounced. Thus writes he of Constantius his
family. Now if inquiry be made which was that wife mentioned by him, it cannot
be supposed to be Theodora the daughter in law of Maximianus, for w^ no where
read that she ever entered Brittany, A. D. 305.
and much less that she was addicted to Christian Religion: so that it can be
no other but S. Helena, a British Lady and a Christian, who doubtless was
always attended by Priests daily praying for Caesar.

XXVII. CHAP.
XXVII. CHAP.
1. Diocletian and Maximianus depose themselves: to whom Galerius and
Constantius succeed Constantius his moderation.

2. The persecution continues at Rome. S. Agnes Martyr.

3 Constantius courage against the Sarmatians. His Duel.

4 S. Augulus Bishop of London: and Martyr: in what sense.

5. Ilutus, or Restitutus succeeds in that Bishopric.

A. D. 304.
1. IN the year of Grace three hundred and four the two Emperors Diocletian and
Maximianus after twenty years reign together, weary of the fruitlesnes of their
cruelty, voluntarily deposed themselves from the Empire, Diocletian at
Nicomedia and Maximianus at Milan in Italy. In Diocletians place Galerius
succeeded in the Government of the Eastern Empire, and in Maximianus his room
Constantius governed the western. Yea so moderat was he in his ambition that,
as Eutropius says, (...).
contenting himself with the Title of Augustus, or Emperor, he refused to
unde^take the solicitude of administering Italy and Africa: (esteeming France
and Brittany sufficient) where all his care was to enrich his subjects, not
affecting at all to heap up treasure.

2. Constantius his absence from Rome was the cause that the former Edicts of
Diocletian against Christians were still in force: For not only Pope
Marcellinus was crowned at this time with Martyrdom, but the blessed Virgin
Saint Agnes triumphed also most gloriously over the New Emperor Galerius his
cruelty.

A. D. 305. Zonariann. 2.
3. Zonaras reports that in the year three hundred and five young Constantin
accompanied Galerius in his war against the Sarmatians, where he was by the
Emperor exposed to a single combat with their Chief leader: whom by Divine
help having overcome, he lead him prisoner to the Emperor: so reaping great
glory by that which was intended for his destruction. The same is likewise
confirmed by Eumenius the Orator in his Panegyric to him, Eumen. Paneg.
where he says, Although fortune had already placed thee in a condition, wherein
glory could not be wanting to thee, yet thou would increase it by warfare:
and combatting in thine own person with the Enemy, yea entering into a single
appointed combat, thou made thy self more known then before, when thou
could not be more noble.

4, This year out English Martyrologe celebrates the Martyrdom of S. Augustus
Bishop of London. S. Beda likewise, Martyrol. Anglican. 7. ^ebr.
Ado Viennensis, Vsuardus and others make mention of him. Now whereas he is
called a Martyr, it is to be understood that in the late persecution he suffered
many things for Christ's cause, and this year received the reward of his
Confession. He is said to have dyed at Augusta in Brittany, which City, says
Ammianus Marcellinus was anciently called Londinium. He is called by some
Authors Augulinus, and Augurius. And concerning him Bishop Usher thus writes,
Vsser. in Primord^ f. 169.
we find a commemoration of the same Bishop not only in the Martyrologes of
Ado, Ricemarchus, and Beda: but also of Vsuardus, Rabanus, Wandelbertus and
that of Rome: moreover in the Manuscript Martyrologes of the Churches of
Salisbury, Evesham and Winchester. Geneb^ard in his Chronology wrongfully calls
him an Irish Bishop: and Dempster according to his custom will needs have him a
Scott.

5. To him succeeded in the Bishopric of London Iltutus: whom Iocelinus omitts
in his Catalogue of the Bishops of London. But since he omitts likewise the
name of Restitutus, who a few years after this is known to have assisted at the
first Council, to which his name with the Title of his Bishopric is found
subscribed, it may probably be conjectured that Iltutus and Restitutus were the
same person.

XXVIII. CHAP. XXVIII. CHAP.

1.2. Constantius wars against the Picts: and returning to York falls sick.

3. He is troubled for the absence of Constantin.

4. He is warned by an Angel to leave the Empire to Constantin.

5.6. Constantin escapes wonderfully.

7 His affectionate wellcom.

8. Constantius dies, and is Christianly buried by his Son: and by the Romans
consecrated.

9. He is buried at York: not at Caernarvon.

1. THE year of Grace three hundred and six was notable for the death of the
Emperor Constantius, A. D. 306.
and the succession of his eldest Son Constantin. Constantius was at this time
in Brittany, where some commotion among the Picts or Caledonian Britains drew
him into the Northern parts: where having removed those unquiet enemies beyond
the limits prescribed them, he returned to York, and there being old, was
assaulted by his last sickness: in which how piously he disposed himself for
death may be collected from the Character before mentioned which was given him
by Eusebius

2. And moreover the same Author treating particularly of his death adds:
Eusebius.
It may easily be conceived by any one who shall seriously observe the nature
and condition of the actions performd by the Emperors Diocletian, A. D. 306.
Maximianus and Constantius, how happy a death this Emperor obtained from God,
whom he served with such zeal and piety, far unlike in his manners and life to
those who were partakers of the same Empire with him.

3. Only one thing was now wanting to his full contentment, which was the
presence of his Son Constantin, who at this time was at Rome, there detained,
as a pledge or hostage by Galerius. This was a great affliction to Constantius,
who though he had with him other Sons born to him by Theodora, received small
satisfaction from them, considering their want of spirit and courage.

4. Zonaras reports that at this time whilst Constantius was sick, Zonar. l. 2.
A^al.
and afflicted in mind by reason of the unfitnes of his other children to
succeed him, an Angel appeard to him, commanding him to leave the Empire to
Constantin. Eusebius likewise more then once affirms that it was by Divine
counsel and ordinance that Constantin succeeded his Father in the Empire. And
hereto the Orator Eumenius though a Pagan, Eumen. Ponegyr. 9.
may seem to allude, where speaking to Constantin he says, But why should we
flatteringly commend thy Fathers private affection to thee? Thy Succession in
the Empire was the Decree of all the Gods, first prescribed by their authority,
and afterward confirmed by mature counsel of men. At that time thou wast
called to be a saving guardian of the Empire by celestial signs and divine
suffrages.

5. This affliction of Constantius for the absence and dangerous condition of
his beloved Son, did not long continue: for God was pleased in an extraordinary
manner to restore him to him before his death. This is thus expressed by
Eusebius, Eusebius. in vit. Constant. l. 1. cap. 14.
Those Princes, says he, which then governed the Empire, with envy and fear
looked upon Constantin, observing him to be a generous, valiant, tall young
man, of a noble and erected mind. Whereupon they watchfully sought an
opportunity to do some notable mischief to him. This the young man perceiving
(for by a Divine instinct their private designs against him were several times
discovered) he at last sought to secure himself by flight: therein imitating
well the example of the great Prophet Moses. Now Almighty God graciously
disposed all things for his safety and advancement, wisely ordaining that he
should opportunely be present to succeed his dying Father.

6. Aurelius Victor adds an Act of Constantins, full of prudence and subtilty,
Victor de Caesaribus. c. 40.
by which he secured his flight from all danger of pursuers, to elude whom, he
through all his long journey from Rome to Brittany gave command that all the
public Posthorses should be killd: Eumen. Panegyr. 9.
by which means, says the Orator, he arrived in Brittany with so prosperous a
voyage, that he seemed to have been brought thither not riding by the ordinary
Post, but mounted and flying in a heavenly Chariot.

7. Now with what joy and affection he was received by his Father, Eusebius. in
vit. Constable. l. 1 cap. 15.
Eusebius thus describes, As Soon as Constantius saw his Son beyond his
expectation arrived, he leaping from his bed with a tender affection embraced
him, saying that now his min'd was freed from the only trouble remaining in it,
which was his Sons absence: for which he offered his Prayers and thanksgiving to
God with great devotion. Now he esteemed death almost as wellcom to him as
immortality. Presently after this he disposed of his family and all worldly
affairs in good order: and placing himself in the midst of his Sons and
daughters, which like a Quire encompassed him lying in his royal Palace and
bed, he bequeathed the inheritance of the Empire, according to the common Law
of Nature, to that Son which in age went before the rest, and so departed out
of this life.

8. When Constantius was dead, his funerals were celebrated by his Son with
all pomp and solemnity, Id. ib. c. 16.
infinite numbers of people assisting, and with joyful acclamations and sweet
harmony of Hymns celebrating his happiness, says the same Eusebius. Moreover
that he was according to the Roman Heathenish manner consecrated and referred
among their Gods ancient coyns do testify, in which he is inscribed with the
Title of Divus, or a person Deified, and on the other side is represented a
Temple and two Eagles, over which are the words Happy Memory: all which are
manifest signs of Consecration, as it is described by Herodian.

9. He was buried in the City of York: Camden. in Brigant.
For, says Camden, men of good credit have reported to us that when the houses
of Monks there were in the memory of our Fathers demolished, there was found a
lamp burning in a little vaulted Chapel, in which the Tradition was that
Constantius had been buried. For Lazius a learned writer relates that the
Ancients had the art to maintain a flame burning for many ages, by the means of
gold dissolved into a kind of liquid oil. Floril^g. ad A. D. 1282*
So that Matthew of Westminster is mistaken when he reports that at
Caer-custenith near Snoudon hills was found the body of the glorious Emperor
(Constantius,) Father of the Noble Emperor Constantin, and by the Kings
command removed, and honorably placed in the Church of Caernarvon. That body
questionles belonged to some other of the same name: for all Historians agree
that this Constantius dyed and was buried at York.

THE SEVENTH BOOK OF THE CHVRCH-HISTORY OF BRITTANY.
I. CHAP.
I. CHAP.
1.2. Constantin succeeds his Father.

3. etc. At first refuses the Title of Emperor.

1. CONSTANTIVS dying left behind him several children of both sexes: for
besides his eldest son Constantin born to him by Helena, he had by Theodora
daughter in Law to the Emperor Maximianus Herculius three Sons, Constantius
(the Father of Gallus and Julian) Dalmatius and Annibalius; to whom some add a
second Constantin; and two daughters, Constantia married to Licinius, and
Eutropia.

2. Notwithstanding Constantius at his death, passing by all these his sons,
though born to him by a Wife of the Imperial family and then present with him,
he left the Empire to his eldest son Constantin only. Which is an undoubted
argument that he acknowledged him for his legitimate Son. Eusebius. in vit. Constable.
l. ^ cap. 16.
Whence it is that Eusebius writes, that Constantius at his death did by the
common Law of Nature leave the inheritance of the Empire to that Son who in age
went before the rest: and that this disposal was ratified by the suffrages and
acclamations of the Army.

3. Notwithstanding Constantin not so much out of moderation, as prudent
caution contented himself with the Title of Caesar, refusing that of Augustus
or Emperor: in so much says the Panegyrist, Eumen. Paneg.
as when the soldiers with great affection and ardour would have cast on him
the Imperial Purple, he set spurs to his horse and fled from them.

4. There may be supposed more then one Motive to induce Constantin to this
modest refusal. For Diocletian and Maximianus, though they had relinqush'd the
administration of the Empire, were yet alive, and by their counsels and
authority had a great influence on the state, by whom Galerius Maximinus and
Severus were chosen Caesar's and Successors, who had the possession of the
Eastern Empire and Italy. Therefore Constantin being young and at so great a
distance from the Imperial City, had reason to think it dangerous without
their consent to assume the Supreme Authority. Wherefore his first attempt was
to gain the affection and consent of Maximianus Herculeus, from whom his Father
Constantius had received the Purple robe, and who having then a daughter
mariageable, called Fausta, Constantin demanded her for his wife, presuming the
Empire should be her dowry.

5. That such was the mind and intention of Constantin, Panegyr.
a Panegyrist of that time has well expressed, Such was thy prudent moderation
(says he) O Constantin, that whereas thy Father had bequeathed the Empire to
thee, thou thoughtst fit to content thy self with the Title of Caesar, A. D.
307.
expecting till the same Maximianus who had before declared thy Father
Emperor, should do the same to thee: for thou esteemedst it more glorious by
thy virtues to deserve the Empire as a reward, then to enjoy it as an
inheritance by succession. Neither was it to be doubted but that he would
conferr on thee supreme Power, who had destind thee for his Son in Law, before
thou could request it.

6. Hence appears the mistake of those Writers who affirm that Constantin was
created Emperor in Brittany immediately after the death of his Father. For it
certainly appears that he took not that Title till the year after, when he
passed out of Brittany unto Gaul. In the mean time he finished his Fathers
Victories in Brittany aganist the Picts and Caledonians who rebelled, and were
repulsed by him beyond the Wall. In which expedition he was assisted by a
barbarous King of the Alamanni, called Erocus: by whose counsel likewise and
endeavors he assumed the Title of Emperor the year following, as Aurelius
Victor testifies.

II. CHAP.
II. CHAP.
1. Constantius overcoms two German Princes.

2 Treats with Maxentius, and is refused.

3. Marries Maximians daughter, Fausta, and receives the Title of Emperor.

4 etc. Maximians treachery, and punishment.

1. THough Constantin at first refused the Title of Emperor, yet he kepd a
resolution to aspire to it either by agreement or force: For which purpose he
passed over with a great army into France: Where his first exploit was to
repress two barbarous Princes, Nazar. paneg 7. Eumen. Panegyr. 9.
who filled the Country with factions, inciting the Gauls to rebellion. Their
names were Ascaricus and Gaisus, or Regaisus, called his Comes: Whom having
overcome in battle, for a terror to others, he exposed them to be devoured by
wild beasts. This Victory of Constantin is celebrated by Eusebius in general
terms, Eusebius. l. 1. c. 61.
but with a notable error in Chronology, being placed by him before his voyage
into Brittany.

2. A firm peace being hereby restored to Gaul, Constantin began to treat a
league with Maxentius, who the year before having been informed of the death of
Constantius, had possessed himself of Rome, and usurped the Title of Emperor,
being assisted by the Pretorian soldiers, and hoping that Maximianus Herculius
whose daughter he had married, A. D. 308
would favor him in his ambition. With which success being puffed up* he
rejected the motion of concord offered by Constantin, whom he would not admit
into fellowship in the Empire.

3. But Maximianus Herculius having heard the late glorious victory obtained by
Constantin over the forementioned barbarous Princes, voluntarily bestowed on
him his daughter Fausta, and with her the Imperial Purple. This is testified
by a nameles Panegyrist of those times, Incer^i Pan^g. 5.
who expressly affirms that at this marriage the name of Emperor was given him,
and added to that of Caesar.

4. But presently after this marriage was celebrated, Maximianus began to
discover his treacherous mind and intention, again to possess himself of the
Empire, which he had voluntarily resigned, and bound himself by a Solemn oath
in the Capitol never to resume it. This intention he had made known to his
daughter Fausta before the marriage: Eumen. Paneg. 9.
and for the execution of it he sent letters to solicit the armies, and with
promises of great rewards attempted the fidelity of the soldiers. All these
designs Fausta (bearing a greater affection to her husband, then her Father)
discovered to Constantin, informing him that the Marriage was intended only to
make him secure, and that her Fathers purpose was to deprive him of the Empire
and perhaps his life too.

5. Hereupon Constantin found it necessary to prevent such treacherous designs
of his Father in Law: who presently after publicly resumed the Name and
Authority of Emperor at Arles: from whence retiring himself to Marseilles, he
was there beseiged by Constantin, and afterward made prisoner. Whereupon he
executed on himself the just vengeance of his perjury and treason by the most
ignominious kind of death, strangling himself with a halter. Such a deserved
end had this Tyrant, who defiled the Western Empire with the blood of so many
Christians: Thus did Constantin a British Emperor expiate the death of those
glorious Martyrs S. Albanus and his companions who suffered in Brittany. Eumen.
ibid.
In which action Eumenius the Orator, though a Heathen, elegantly frees him
from all suspicion of cruelty.

6. Constantin having composed affairs in Gaul, prosecuted after ward his
Victories into Germany, into which he passed his army upon a bridge which he
built over the Rhene about Triers. There he subdued several Nations,
especially the Bructeri which rebelled. The Belgic Historians write that in
Constantins army were many noble Britains, among which they name three Uncles
of his Mother Helena, Iohelin, Traer, and Marius: Which gave occasion to the
Panegyrist Eumenius to expatiate upon the praises of Brittany, Id ib.
which he concludes thus, O fortunate Brittany, now happy beyond all other
countries, inasmuch as thou wast the first which did see Constantin Caesar!
A. D. 310.
Nature did deservedly enrich thee with all the blessings of heaven and earth,
etc.

III. CHAP.
III. CHAP.
1.2.3 Monasteries buil^ in Brittany: Namely Winchester and Abingdon.

1. THough Constantin himself was not yet a Christian, as appears by the
Orations of Panegyrists to him, A. D. 309. Eumen. Paneg. 9.
in which he is extolled for his devotion to heathen Gods, Mars, Victoria and
especially Apollo, whose temples he visited to give them thanks for his
Victories, presenting there most magnificent Gifts and offerings:
Notwithstanding Christians enjoyed the same peace and security through all his
dominions, and particularly in Brittany, which had formerly been granted them
by his Father Constantius.

2. Hence it is that our ancient Records mention the rebuilding and
replenishing several Monasteries in this our Island. Among which the most
famous were the Monasteries of Winchester and Abingdon. Concerning the former,
Bishop Godwin out of ancient Monuments testifies that it was begun and
perfected with such admirable devotion and zeal that within the space of one
year and thirty days both the Church, Go^^in. in W^^^.
the lodgings of the Monks and all other Offices and buildings for their
several uses were entirely finished: And at the request of Deodatus the first
Abbot of this New Monastery, A. D. 310.
it was by Constans Bishop of Winchester consecrated to the memory of S.
Amphibalus Martyr. In which state it continued more then the space of two
hundred years, till Cerdic^s the first King of the Western Saxons driving away
and killing some of the Monks, turned it into a Temple of Idolatry. The same
account of it is given by Thomas Rudburn (quoted by Bishop Usher) from Giraldus
Cornubiensis and Vigilantius, ancient Writers: though he err much in his
Chronology, Vid. Vsse^. Antiq. Brit. f. 194.
placing this restitution in the year of our Lord two hundred ninety and three.

3. As for the Monastery of Abingdon, if the Chronicle of that place may be
credited, Constantin himself in his younger days had his education there: And
thereto belonged no fewer then five hundred Monks, which lived by the labor of
their hands in Woods and deserts, and every Sunday and Sabbath day resorted to
the Monastery to perform their devotions: Besides which five hundred, there
remained constantly sixty Monks attending to daily reciting of Psalms and holy
Christian Sacrifices.

IV. CHAP. A. D. 312.

IV. CHAP.



1. Miserable death of the persecutour Galerius* and peace of the Church.

2. Four persons assuming the Title of Emperor.

1. ABout this time Galerius Maximianus, surnamed Armentarius, A. D. 311.
felt the just avenging hand of God, who visited upon him all the innocent
blood of Christians most cruelly shed by him: for he dyed miserably consumed by
peece-meale, an incurable rottennes corrupting all his members with intolerable
torments and stench. Neither could the wrath of God be pacified toward him,
though he acknowledged his justice, and wrote Edicts in favor of Christians,
imposing an end to the long and furious persecution raised by Diocletian.

3. There yet remained in the Roman Empire four persons who supremely and
independently administered their several respective Provinces; Constantin in
Gaul and Brittany, Maxentius in Italy and Africa Maximinus in the East, and
Licinius in the Pannonies, Greece, Illyrium and Thrace: All which Provinces in
a short time became united under the Monarchy of Constantin.

V. CHAP. V. CHAP.

1.2. etc. Constantins attempt against Maxentius.

4. He prays to the true God.

5.6. etc. Wonderful appearance of the Cross.

11.12. The Veneration of it increased.

1. NOW follows the three hundred and twelfth year of Christ in all respects
prosperous to the Church of God: A. D. 312.
for, says Baronius, then it was that a New persecution begun by Maximinus in
the East was interrupted by many calamities sent from God: And in the West the
Tyrant Maxentius by the divine Virtue of the Holy Cross was conquered and
slain.

2. But omitting Eastern affairs, not pertinent to our present History,
designed to show the succession of our Christian Faith in Brittany: I will the
more copiously prosecute the Exploits of this glorious British Prince the
Emperor Constantin in the West, his prosperous expedition against the Tyrant
Maxentius, and miraculous Victory over him, the consequent whereof was the
establishing of Christian Religion, and its victory over all other Professions
of Divine Worship.

A. D. 313.
3. It was a great happiness to Christians that Maxentius refused those
conditions of agreement offered him by Constantin: for had he accepted them the
Christian Faith had much more late become the public Faith of the Roman
Empire, and Constantins invasion of him had wanted a considerable part of its
justice. Whereas Concord being denied, and all Italy, Eus^b. in Vit. Constable. l.
8. c. 16.
especially Rome, groaning under the Tyranny of Maxentius, exercised all manner
of ways, by infinite Murders, oppressions, adulteries, Violations of Virgins,
and all manner of abominable Vices, it was not only a necessary care of his own
safety, but a duty which he owd to mankind that moved Constantin to free the
world of such a Monster, odious not to Christians only, but Pagans also, Vid.
Incerti Pan^gyr. 6.
who employed their tongues and penns to give a fitting Character of his
detestable life. Hence it is that Constantin himself in an Epistle written by
him afterward to his Subjects in Palestina, Eusebius. ib. l 2 1.28.
professes that he was called and incited by God himself to free the world not
only from Idolatry, but innumerable calamities with which it was oppressed
under the Tyranny of its Pagan Governors.

4. Constantin concluding a war against Maxentius to be both most perfectly
just and necessary, his next thoughts were busied how to prosecute it. He had
an Adversary far stronger then himself, his own forces when he passed the
Aspes, Incert Panegyr. c. 6.
as the Orator testifies, being little more then a fourth part of the others.
In this exigence, as Eusebius reports from Constantins own information, Eusebius
i. Vit Constable. lib. 1. c. 21.
he had recourse to Divine assistance: and a multitude of Gods being then
worshipped in the world, he was uncertain to which of them he should address
himself. After a long sad consideration, calling to mind how the former
Emperors had been abused to their own ruin by false Oracles, incantations,
and inhumane Sacrifices offered to their Heathen Gods, he resolves to put his
confidence in that only true God worshipped all her life long by his Mother
Helena, and by his Father Constantius toward his end. And he offered zealous
and devout prayers unto him, that he would discover to him who he was, and how
he would be worshipped, and that he would protect him in the dangerous condition
he then was.

5. This devotion of Constantin was not without a signal reward, for by a
wonderful and stupendous miracle in the sight of the whole Army Almighty God
declared how acceptable it was to him. The relation is recorded by Eusebius
from Constantins own mouth, Eusebius. in Vit. Constable. l. 1. c. ^2.
and attestation of his oath, after this manner: The Sun having passed his
Meridian, and beginning to decline, He saw manifestly the sign of the Cross
over the Sun in heaven figured by a resplendent light, together with these
words inscribed ((...),) By this be Victorious. Which spectacle caused great
admiration both to himself and his whole army then attending him.

6. Among other Spectatours of this prodigy, was one Artemius, a man of great
quality, being afterward Prefect of Egypt: who gave this account of it to
Julian the Apostate, Constantin, Act. S. Artem. apud Metaphr. 10 October.
said he, forsaking Pagan Idolatry converted himself to Christ, being divinely
called thereto when he waged a dangerous war and full of difficulty against
Maxentius. For at that time about noon there appeared to him the Sign of the
Cross, more bright then the Sunbeams, together with golden letters
signifying his Victory in that war. For we also being engaged in the same
war beheld it, and read that Inscription. Moreover the whole Army saw it, and
there are yet alive in thine own army many witnesses of the same.

7. Sozomen relating this Story, Sozom. hist. 1. c. ^.
adds, that together with the apparition of the Cross, there were seen many
holy Angels, who to encourage Constantin stupefied with the sight, said to
him, O Constantin, by this thou shall overcome. And Zonaras affirms that
Constantin saw a Horseman armed, Zonar. ^. 3.
who bore in his hands the Sign of the Cross as an Ensign.

8. This celestial Vision though it was well understood by the Christians
there present, and gave unspeakable comfort to them: Yet the Cross, being a
thing most detestable to the Idolatrous Pagans, was looked upon by them as a
fatal and ominous sign. And hereapon the Orators of those times, though after
the Victory they rightly interpreted this Vision of heavenly armies seen in the
air, Nazar. Paneg. 7.
as ranged in order to assist Constantin, Yet they conceal not the effect
which they wrought then in the minds of the Pagans, for says one of them,
Incerti Paneg. 6.
What God was it who when all thy Captains and Nobles did not only silently
murmr, but openly declared their fear of that ill-boding Prodigy, yet thou of
thine own self against the counsels of thy friends and warnings of the Sooth
sayers, did perceive that that apparition signified the time was come of
delivering the City of Rome from servitude?

9. At the first indeed Constantin, not yet a perfect Christian, was astonishd
and affrighted at this Vision, as well as the other Pagans: But by what means
he arrived at a right understanding of it, is thus from his own relation
declared by Eusebius: Eusebius. l. 3. Vit. Constable. c. 23.
Constantin, says he was distracted and disquieted with great doubts and
fears what this wonderful Vision should portend. In which solicitude of
thoughts the night overtooke him. And when he was asleep our Lord appeard to
him bearing the same sign which had been shown him from heaven, and commanded
him to cause a draught and Copy representing the same sign which had appeard to
him, to be framed: and that he should make use of that as a firm guard and
protection whenever he was to committ battle with his enemies.

10. The Historian adds: Id. ibid.
as soon as the day appeared he rose from his bed, and declared to his friends
this mysterious vision. And afterward calling together the most cunning
artificers, skillfull in gold and precious stones, he placed himself in the
midst among them, and by words described to them the form and pattern of the
Sign which had appeared from heaven: Commanding them to imitate the form thereof
in gold and precious stones. (And the said Author giving a description of the
Labarum or Banner carried always in Constantins Army, thus proceeds) The
Emperor, Ibid.
says he, did always after make use of this Saving Sign of the Cross as a
sure defense against all hostile violence and danger: the express
representations whereof he commanded to be made, and perpetually be carried
before his Army.

11. The devotion of this pious Emperor increasing more and more to the Sacred
Cross, moved him to cause innumerable representations of it to be placed in
several places both public and private. To this purpose writes the same
Eusebius, So great and so divine was that love wherewith the Emperor embraced
our Lord, (...)
that he took care that the Ensign of his saving Passion should in a fair
Table, adorned with much gold and precious stones of all kinds, he fixed in the
Entrance of his Palace, in the principal room, in the middle of his house and
in the gilded roof thereof. That seemed to the most holy Emperor to be a firm
bullwark of his Empire.

12. No wonder then if the veneration of the Holy Cross became yet more
increased among Christians. We have showed in the life of S. Albanus that it was
even from the beginning practiced: Which practice sems now to have been
authorized by our Lord himself from heaven; And that the devout Christians of
these times understood it so, appears by the general zeal they showed in
honoring this mark of our Salvation: which that it was acceptable to God was
demonstrated by innumerable Miracles wrought thereby. But to return to
Constantin.

VI. CHAPTER
VI. CHAP.
1.2. Constantius victorious march to Rome.

3.4. He fights with Maxentius, and overcomes him: who is drowned in the Tiber,
to the infinite joy of the Romans, etc.

7.8. etc. Constantin venerates the Cross. D. whittacres mistake.

1. COnstantin being encouraged with this so glorious a testimony of Divine
assistance, armed with the Cross both on his helmet and forehead, and
conducting an army, before which was carried the same triumphant Ensign, pursued
his expedition into Italy: and approaching to the Alps subdued the Segusians
presuming to resist him: And having passed those Mountains, conquered the
Taurini, and after them the City of Verona, which trusting in the multitude of
its garrison had the boldness to shutt the gates against him. Aequileia, Mutina
and all other Cities on this side the P^ followed the fortune of Verona.

2. Thus having cleared all the Provinces behind him of Enemies, he marched
courageously to Rome it self, where the Tyrant for more then six years had
exercised all manner of crimes: He had not the courage all that time to issue
once out of the City, or to oppose Constantins progress, partly being
stupefied with his lusts, and affrighted with prodigies and divinations of his
Soothsayers.

3. But as soon as Constantin approached to the City, Maxentius was enforced to
draw out his army consisting of one hundred and seaventy thousand foot, and
eighteen thousand horse: all these numerous forces he raged beyond the Milvian
bridge, so that they were shut out of the City by the river. To the strength
of his army the Tyrant added the subtilty of a stratagem, for he had caused the
bridge so to be framed, that at his pleasure he might for his advantage easily
dissolve it.

4. On the other side Constantin having ranged his army, himself with great
courage gave the onset, by which he immediately broke his enemies ranks, so that
little resistance was made except by the Pretorian soldiers, who, expecting no
pardon, because they only had created Maxentius Emperor, covered the ground
with their dead bodies.

5. The enemies being thus put to flight, found their flight unsucces'full,
because the straitnes of the bridge hindered them: so that the slaughter was
excessively great, and there being no other mean to avoid the sword but by
entering the River, great multitudes were swallowed by it. As for the Tyrant, he
to conceal himself had cast off all marks of his authority, and adventured
into the Tiber, but not being able to ascend the steep banks, was hurried down
the stream and drowned. His body was cast upon the shore below* which the Roman
people having found, they cut off his head, which fastening on the topp of a
spear, they carried it up and down the City with great joy and triumph.

6. Since Rome was built, Nazer. Paneg. 7.
says the Panegyrist, never shone a day celebrated with greater and a more
universal joy, or that deserved to be so celebrated, then that of Constantins
triumph after this Victory. His triumphall chariot was attended not with
conquered Princes or Generals, but with the Roman Nobility freed from dungeons
and chains: Rome did not enrich herself with spoils of enemies, but herself
ceased to be the Spoil of an inhuman Tyrant, etc.

7. This common joy, acclamations and applauses the pious Emperor would have
to be asscribed, not to himself, but God only and the virtue of his holy
Cross, to whom he gave the praises and acknowledgment of his Victory, as
Eusebius testifies. Eusebius. in vit. Constant. l. 1. c. 12. Prudent. l. 1. cont.
Sym^^^d.
And Prudentius adds, that Constantin at his triumphall entrance into the City
commanded the Cross to be carried before his army, to the end Rome might see by
what arms she had been freed from slavery: and moreover that he enjoined both
the people and Senate of Rome to prostrate themselves before the Cross, and
adore the name of Christ.

Whitak. cont. Campian.
8. It is a great mistake therefore in some Protestant Writers, by name Whitaker,
who affirms that Constantin indeed did use the sign of the Cross which appeard
to him from heaven, for an Ensign: but that no proof can be given that the
Cross was honored or venerated by him. Whereas the passage now cited out of
Prudentius evinces the contrary: and Sozomen expressly affirms that Constantin
gave great honor to the holy Cross, Sozom. hist. l. 1. c. 2.
both for the aid afforded him by its virtue in his war against his enemies,
and likewise for the Divine apparition of it to him. Hereto may be added an
argument invincible, in that he built a Church dedicated to the honor of the
holy Cross: Prudent in Apotheosi.
Yea and Prudensius in another place says, Vexillumque Crucis summus Dominator
adorat.

that is, The Supreme Governor of the Empire adores the Ensign of the Cross.



9. This honor was not only acknowledged by Constantin himself to be due to
this Sign of our Salvation, but he signified his will that all the world should
do the same: This he did by raising his Statue in Rome, holding the Cross in
the right hand with this inscription, Eusebius in vit. constable. l. ^. c. 5^^
By this saving sign, the true Emblem of fortitude I delivered your City from
the Yoke of Tyranny: And having given perfect liberty to the Senate and people
of Rome, I restored them to their ancient greatness and splendor.

10. All these things are farther confirmed by another Inscription which
according to a Decree of the Roman Senate was engraven in stone, To the Emperor
Flavius Constantinus the great, the Senate and people of Rome. For that by
instinct of the Divinity and his own magnanimous courage he at once with his
army avenged the commonwealth of the Tyrant and his whole faction, therefore we
have dedicated to him this triumphall Arch. In which Inscription the Victory is
ascribed, contrary to the Roman custom, to one true God, and not to those many
Gods adored there.

XII. CHAP. A. D. 313.

XII. CHA.



1.2 3. Constantin procures from Licinius and Maximinus a cessation of
persecution.

4. Three of his Mothers Uncles chosen Senators.

1. AFter this so signal a Victory Constantin to confirm peace in the Empire
sent for Licinius the Emperor to Milan, where he gave him to wife his Sister
Constantia, Eusebius. hist. l. 10. c. 5.
and obtained of him to subscribe to an Edict in which free liberty was given
to all to make profession of Christian Religion, and moreover all Churches
belonging to them, which had been seized on, were restored. The form of which
Edict is recorded by Eusebius: By which is manifest that even in the times of
persecuting Emperors the Christian Churches enjoyed lands and possessions: So
that what has been formerly written touching the endowing our British
Churches by King Lucius, etc. may more justly challenge belief.

2 And to make this grace universal, he persuaded the same Licinius to ioyn
with him in a letter to Maximinus Emperor of the Eastern Provinces, to grant
the same freedom to Christians within his dominions: To which request
Maximinus, though with great unwillingnes and repugnancy, yielded. The absence
of Diocletian, who, though invited, refused to meet Constantin at Milan, was a
great cause that these Privileges were more easily granted to Christians.

3. It is affirmed by Matthew of Westminster, Florileg. ad A. D. 313.
who styles himself Florilegus, that at this time Constantin chose into the
Senate, among other strangers, the three Uncles of his Mother Helena, Traherius
or Traernus, Marius and Leolinus. And this perhaps might give occasion to
Julian the Apostat, as Marcellinus writes, to endeavor to blacken the memory
of Constantin as an innovatour and perverter of the ancient Roman L^wes:
Ammian. Marcelli^. hist. l. 21.
for he expressly accuses him for being the first Emperor who adorned
barbarous strangers with Senatoriall and Consular robes.

A. D. 314.

VIII. CHAPTER


VIII. CHAP.
1. Benediction of Bread, not unleavened, instituted by Pope Silvester.

2. Troubles in Brittany, by Octavius.

3 4. A new frame of Government in the Empire.

6. A Synod assembled at Arles.

A. D. 314.
1. IN the beginning of the year of Grace three hundred and fourteen the Holy
Pope Silvester succeeded Melchiades: concerning whom the ancient Book of Roman
Bishops records, A^ Baron. A. D. 314. (...) ^^
that he ordained that of the oblations offered by the people in the Church the
Bishop or Priest should bless or consecrate loaves of bread cut into small
particles, and kep'd in a pure and convenient vessel: to the end that after the
solemnity of Mass such as had not communicated, should partake of them on all
Sundays and Festes. These morsells of bread thus blessed were called Eulogiae,
and were intended to be Symbols of Unity in Faith and Charity among Christians.
Which holy custom continues to this day in the Church: notwithstanding some
have s^erved and degenerated from the first institution, by giving this
Benediction on unleavened bread: whereas in the Constitution of S. Melchiades it
is expressly called Formentum, or common bread.

2. This year whilst Constantin made an expedition into France where he fought
prosperously against the Germans, there was raised a sedition in the western
parts of Brittany, where a certain King of the Gevissi called Octavius, (...)
A. D. 314.
made an insurrection against the Pro-Consul entrusted by Constantin with the
Government of the country: who having advice thereof, sent Traherius or
Tra^rnus, his Mothers Uncle with three Legions: who landing at Ka^rperis or
Portcestria, (now called Portsmouth) took the town within two days. Which
Octavius hearing, came against him with strong forces, and in a battle putt
Traernus to flight: who retiring into Albania began to wast the Provinces.
After which a second battle was fought in Westmerland where Octavius was
utterly vanquished and deprived of his crown, being forced to fly into Norway
to beg aid of King Humbert or Gunbert, as some call him. This relation is
given by Florilegas, with whom Simeon of Durham and others agree.

3. That which probably gave an occasion to these troubles in Brittany, was the
change in the Government thereof now introduced by Constantin, Zosim. hist. l. 2.
who is accused by Zosimus, for disordring the former well constituted frame of
the Empire; though it cannot be denied that in the alterations made by him he
imitated the ordonnances of the Emperor Hadrian.

4. In this manner rhen was the Empire now administered. He divided it into four
Prefectures, governed by so many Praetorian Praefects: The first was called the
Prefect of the East, to whom was subject all Eastern Provinces as far as
Mesopotamia, the Cilicians, Cappadocians, Armenians with many other Provinces
in those countries: and likewise Egypt together with Pentapolis of Lybia. The
second was the Pretorian Prefect of Illiricum, who governed that country, and
with it Macedonia, Thessalia, Epirus, all Greece with the Island of Creta and
other Islands adjacent. The third was the Prefect of Italy, to whose
jurisdiction was subject Sicily with all the Islands near, and likewise Africa.
The fourth was the Prefect of Gaul and all other Transalpin Provinces, as
Spain, Germany, Brittany, etc.

5. By which new frame of Government Brittany being no longer administered
immediately by the Emperors Lieutenant, Vid. Cambden. Britann. in Roman.
but by a Vicar of the Prefect of Gaul, by which means it was esteemed as an
accessory Province of Gaul, no wonder if this new yoke of servitude was
displeasing to the Britains, who upon that occasion might easily be moved to
sedition by their Prince Octavius or any other ambitious and discontented
persons: the ill success whereof we have before declared.

6 Concerning which the relation of Scottish writers scarce deserve to be taken
into examination. Who tell us that Octavius being vanquished by Traernus fled
to Fincomark King of Scotland, who refused to yield him up at the request of
Traernus: on the contrary in his quarrel he raised an army, fought and
vanquished Traernus in the Province of Westmerland, which, say they, since
Carausius his times belonged to Scotland. All which story seems an invention on
purpose to illustrate the name of Scotland and its pretended Kings: of which no
mention as yet can be found in any approved Authors.

7. At this time Constantin made his abode in Gaul, afterward called France:
where he was much distracted and disquietted: and more by the factions of
Schismatics among Christians, then any commotions of confining barbarous
Nations. Upon which occasion he was compelled to command a General Assembly or
Synod of the Western Empire to meet at Arles for composing the seditions raised
by the Donatists. To which Synod since the British Bishops were by name
called, it is requisite we should make some stay to declare the proceedings of
it.

IX. CHAP.
IX. CHAP.
1.2. etc. Schism of the Donatists, and its occasion.

3. etc The Donatists after several condemnations, still appeal.

1. THE Enemy of Truth and Peace having lost the advantage of opposing
Christian Religion by the violence and rage of his instruments, the Heathen
persecuting Emperors, did not for all that cease from his malice, which was
heightened by Envy against it, but rather executed another way with more
success, by suggesting matter of seditions and divisions among Christians
themselves. The first public infamous Scene of which scandalls was Carthage in
Africa: And the occasion, was this.

2. Caecilianus Archdeacon to Mensurius Bishop of Carthage had reprehended a
Spanish woman called Lucilla then living in that City, because before
receiving the holy Sacrament she had with veneration kissed the head of a
certain person esteemed by her a Martyr, yet not acknowledged for such by the
Bishop. Lucilla being a woman of great power and wealth, upon this reprehension
conceived an implacable rage and fury against Cacilianus, earnestly expecting
all occasions of revenge.

3. This was afforded her not long after, in the year of Christ three hundred
and six, when upon the death of Mensurius, Caecilianus was chosen Bishop of
that City. For he requiring a restitution of certain vessels of silver and
gold belonging to his Church, which in the late time of persecution had by his
Predecessor been recommended to the fidelity of certain Elders of that City,
they to avoy'^ the necessity of restoring them, joined themselves to the
faction of Botrus and Celesius, who had ambitiously sought after the same
Bishopric and were rejected: the resentment of which repulse incited them to
question the Election of Caecilianus. Lucilla earnestly joined herself to this
faction of unjust discontented persons, who publicly withdrew themselves from
the Communion of their Bishop, by which means there was raised in Africa a most
horrible and irreconcilable Schism* the flame whereof could not for many ages
be extinguished.

4. These factious persons to strengthen their party invited to Carthage a
number of African Bishops who formerly in a public Council at Cirtha had been
convicted Traditores, that is, such as for fear of persecution had delivered
up to Heathen Magistrates the Holy Vessels and Books belonging to the Church,
among whom the principal was Secundus Bishop of T^gisis and Primat of Numidia.
These Bishops, seaventeen in number, kept their Assemblies at Carthage
separated from Caecilianus, in opposition to whom they presumed sacrilegiously
to ordain another counterfeit Bishop of Carthage called Maiorinus, one who had
been Lector to Caecilianus when he was Archdeacon, and was now a Domestic of
Lucilla.

5. Moreover to justify their Schism, these Bishops, who were most manifest
Traditors themselves, alleged that Caecilianus his Ordination was illegal,
because he had received imposition of hands from Felix Bishop of Aptungis and
others, whom they falsely accused of their own crime. They likewise wrongfully
charged Caecilianus, that he had forbidden necessary provision to be
administered to certain Martyrs in prison during the last persecution. All which
calumnies they by letters spread through the whole country of Africa:
Caecilianus in the mean time being acknowledged lawful Bishop by Marcellus
Bishop of Rome, and all other Bishops through the Catholic Church, before whom
he confidently offered himself to a legal trial. This relation is given by S.
Optatus and Saint Augustine.

6. Now though this Schism was chiefly forged by Botrus and Celesius, (...). l.
1. c^^t. Para* august l. 1 c^^. Pa^^.
together with the forementioned Elders and Lucilla, and increased by Secundus
and other Traditors Bishops, yet it first took its name and Title from Donatus
Bishop of a place called Casae nigrae (or, Black Cottages) in Numidia, who
first at the instigation of Lucilla, withdrew himself from the communion of
Caecilianus, whilst he was Deacon. Aug. in B^^. vi^.
But the Donatists being ashamed to take their appellation from one who had
been condemned by Pope Melchiades, chose rather to call themselves Donatists
from another Donatus, who succeeded Majorinus in the Schism, and whom they
esteemed a person of great eminence both for learning and Sanctity.

7. This unhappy Schism received such strength in a short space, that within
three years, joining themselves with Traditors Bishops, and drawing into their
sacrilegious Communion all the Numidians, Aug. Ep. 4^. ad Vinc^^^^.
they assembled a Council of no fewer then two hundred and seaventy Bishops,
which continuing together seaventy five days, and repeating all their former
Constitutions, made a Decree that all those who were guilty of the horrible
crime of Tradition, if they refused to be rebaptised, should notwithstanding be
admitted into Communion as if they were innocent.

8. When Constantin had overcome Maxentius, Aug. Epist. 68
the Donatists obtained of Anulinus Governor of Africa to send his letters,
full of calumnious accusations against Caecilianus, unto the Emperor who was
then in Gaul: and some of the same Schismatic Bishops made a voyage to him,
earnestly requesting him to appoint Judges of their cause. The Emperor
himself, says Optatus, with great indignation answered the^, You require a
secular judgment from me, who my self expect the judgment of Christ. Yet with
extreme importunity they at last wrested from him for their Judges, Maternus
Bishop of Colonia Agrippina, Rheticius Bishop of Austun, and Marius of Arles.

9. But presently after this, Constantin con^idering of what weight and
necessity the authority of the Roman Bishop was in such a cause, he commanded
the Donatists Bishops, together with Caecilianus, and as many other of his
Communion to attend these three Judges at Rome, to debate and conclude the
cause before the holy Pope Melchiades in a Roman Synod: Eusebius. l. 20. cap. 5.
To whom likewise the pious Emperor wrote a letter, in which he tells the Pope
that he thought fit to send these contending Bishops, before him, to the end
they might receive judgment from him and the other Judges, as you know, says
he, the most holy law of God requires.

10. A Synod therefore being assembled at Rome, the result thereof after a
diligent examination of the parties and witnesses, was a condemnation of
Donatus Bishop of Casaenigrae by the Sentence of all the Judges, for by his own
Confession he had rebaptised some who joined in Communion with him, and imposed
his hands on Bishops, who in persecution had renounced the Faith. On the other
side, Caecilianus was pronounced innocent, because the witnesses brought to
accuse him protested that they could say no crime at all to his charge.

11. But notwithstanding this Judgment, the Donatists without any consideration
of justice or truth most impudently appeald from these Judges to the Emperor
himself: Op^^^ l. ^.
who upon the first hearing mention of such an Appeal, cried out, O the rabide
impudence of these men's fury! They have presumed to interpose an Appeal, as
the custom is among Heathens in secular causes. Yet after all this, the
Donatists were so shameless as to boast that Constantin had adjuged the cause to
Donatus and condemned Caecilianus. And moreover to extenuate the judgment of
Pope Melchiades against them, they endeavored to defame his memory by imputing
to him that he had been a Traditor.

12. The Donatists still continuing their tumults in Africa, and directing
their malice principally against Felix Bishop of Aptungis the Ordainer of
Caecilianus, whom they accused to have been a Traditor, Constantin gave
commission to Aelianus Proconsul of Africa to determine that cause who in the
examination detecting many lies and frauds of the Donatists, pronounced in a
legal manner the innocence of Felix. But once more they appealed from his
judgment to the Emperor, to whose Court likewise many of their Bishops
repaired, Aug. Epist. 162.
protesting that many of their allegations of greatest weight had not been
taken into consideration in the former judgments. Whereupon Constantin, not
daring (as S. Augustine says) to become a Judge of the judgment given by
Bishops at Rome, referred the matter to a Synod of all the Western Bishops,
appointed to meet in the City of Arles, because his abode was then in Gaul.
And for that purpose he directed his letters to the Metropolitans to send their
Bishops, and to the Proconsull of Africa, Ablavius, and other Magistrates to
defray the charges of such Bishops of both parties as took their iourneys to
the Council: Examples of which letters are still extant in Eusebius, etc.

X. CHAP. X. CHAP.

1.2. Council of Arles: condemns the Donatists.

3 4.5. Several Canons there of.

6. The names of British Bishops in it.

1. IN the Council of Arles there met^ above two hundred Bishops, from all
parts of the Western Provinces as far as Brittany: who in the first place
examining again the cause of Felix Bishop of Aptungis the Ordainer of
Caecilianus, declared him innocent of the crime of Tradition imposed on him by
the Donatists, so confirming the judgment formerly given in Africa.

2. This cause being concluded, it seemed good to the Fathers to frame certain
Canons touching Ecclesiastical Discipline to be uniformly observed through the
whole Church. And first they ordained that the solemn Feast of Easter should be
celebrated the same day through all Churches: This they did in opposition to
the Quartadecimani, who observed it according to the Jewish custom on the
fourteenth day of the first Moon in March, which practice began now more and
more to prevayl in the East. To this Canon the British Bishops in this
Council subscribed, so that the controversy afterward arising about its
observation in Brittany, was not whether the Eastern practice should be kept
here, but only whether in case the fourteenth day of the first Moon should fall
on a Sunday, Easter should then be observed, or no: The Scottish Prelates
affirming, and the others denying.

3. Another Canon of this Council, which is the thirteenth, deserves our
particular consideration, in which it is ordained, that all those should be
removed from the Order of the Clergy who in time of persecution had delivered
up to Pagans the holy Scriptures, or (Vasa Dominica) our Lords Vessels: which
Vessels that they were deputed for the Christian Sacrifice appears in the
twentieth Canon, which commands that a place to offer Sacrifice should be
afforded to a stranger Bishop. Restitutus therefore our then British Bishop
subscribing to this Council, did offer Sacrifice, and could not be denied that
privilege in a strange country, which now would be refused him in his own,
with death if he performed it.

4. Some Protestants do much boast of a pretended Canon in this Council
prescribing, that if Deacons at their Ordination shall protest their resolution
to marry, it might be lawful for them to do so, and yet remain in the
Ministry. But Sir Henry Spelman ingenuously observes that in ancient Copies he
could not find this Canon among the rest. And however if such a Privilege had
then been allowed to Deacons, since Priests are not mentioned, it argues that
they were forbidden marriage.

5. At the conclusion of the Synod, Marinus Bishop of Arles in the name of the
whole Assembly wrote a letter, yet extant, to Pope Silvester, whereto he annexed
a Copy of the Canons ordained there, desiring that by his care and diligence
the said Decrees should be observed in all Churches. Here we find likewise
among the rest our British Bishop Restitutus professing the Unity of our Holy
Mother the Catholic Church with the most Religion Pope Silvester, whom with due
reverence they all salute: They judge likewise all those who reject Tradition,
to be persons of an unbrideled mind, burdensome and pernici^us to our Christian
Law. Lastly they profess their acknowledgment that the Apostles S. Peter and
S. Paul not only sat Bishops at Rome, but likewise do without intermission
still glorify God by their blood shed there. Such Professions as these made by
our Primitive British Bishops do much vary from the modern style. Let the
Readers conscience judge to whether party it is most safe to adioyn himself.

6. It is observed by persons learned in Ecclesiastical Antiquities that
through the negligence or mistake of Transcribers, the Names of the Bishops
present and subscribing to this Council are wrongfully transferred to the End of
the Second Synod assembled some years after at the same City of Arles. Among
whom those Bishops which came from Brittany, and for whose sake it was our
obligation to insist on this Synod, were according to the most corrected Copies
these which follow, Vid. Sirmond in Council. Gllai^^
and according to this Order:

The first among the British Subscribers was Eborius, Bishop of the City of
York in the Province of Brittany. The Second was Restitutus Bishop of the City
of London in the same Province. Concerning whom the Protestant Centurists of
Magdeburg give this testimony, Magdeb. C^nt. 4. c. 10.
that he was a man, considering the age wherein he lived, many ways learned,
and most modest in his conversation: who among other things wrote one Book to
his own Countrymen touching this Council of Arles, and several Epistles to
Hilary Bishop of Poi^tiers. He was famous in the year of Grace three hundred
and fifty. The third British Bishop was Adelfius styled Bishop of the City
called, The Colony of the Londoners: Which no doubt is an Error, arising from
the mistake of ignorant transcribers, who instead of Colon. Camalodun (that is
Maldon in Essex, anciently a famous City) wrote Colon. Londinens: the City of
London being better known to them then that of Camalodunum. A. D. 315.


8. Now though the Donatists were utterly condemned by this so great a
Council, yet they rested not: but most impudently interiected a third Appeal
from the Council to the Emperor. The success whereof does not concern our
present design to inquire into. Therefore we remitt the Reader to other
Historians who purposely write of such matters.

XI. CHAP. XI. CHA.

1. Disputation at Rome with Jews.

2. Acts of Pope Silvester depraved.

3. Jews rebel.

4. Of Helena's piety.

1. THe year following in a Synod assembled at Rome by Pope Silvester a public
disputation was held before the Emperor and his Mother Helena between certain
Christian Bishops, A. D. 315.
of whom the Pope was Chief, and twelve principal Jewish Scribes, as we find
related by Pope Adrium in an Epistle to Charles the Great, in these words, In
the very beginning when Christian Religion was first publicly professed,
Adrian. P. Epist. 3. ad Carol. M. ap Baron. ad
the Emperor Constantin being newly converted, his Mother Helena came to him
to Rome accompanied with twelve Scribes and Pharisees, who were principal
Masters among the Jews. And she together with her Son Constantin the Emperor
thought sit that an assembly and meeting should be appointed between the Jews
and Christians: In which the holy Pope Silvester presiding, with many holy
Bishops did much enlarge the authority of the Christian Faith, as well by
Scripture as miracles, and so by Gods protection obtained the Victory. Thus
wrote Pope Adrian out of the ancient Acts of Pope Silvester.

2. Which Acts being much depraved, gave occasion to several Writers to impute
to S. Helena that she was an Enemy to the Christian Faith, from which she would
have averted her Son, that she was a Jew, or as others say, a Pagan. Whereas if
the said Acts were truly restored, it would appear that she incited her Son to
repress the insolency and malice of the Jews: Which this very years the
Emperor did, vid. Baron. ibid.
as has been declared, by a most severe Edict sent to his Prefect Euagrius
against then.

3. S. Chrysostom likewise testifies that the Jews seeing the favor born by
Constantin* Chrysostom. Oral. 2. cont. Iudaeos.
to Christians, rebelled against him: and being suppressed, the Emperor caused
their ears to be cut off, and a mark of their rebellion to be imprinted on
their bodies, and thus carried them up and down like stigmatized slaves and
fugitives, with their members maimed, that all men every where might be
witnesses of their crime, and to deterr the rest from like attempts afterward.

A. D. 318.
4. Eusebius indeed relates, that whereas Helena before Constantins conversion
was little imbued with piety, Eusebius. in Vit. Constable. lib. 3. c. 4.6.
her Son by his example and exhortations rendered her so pious, as if from her
infancy she had been instructed and directed by the mouth of our Savior
himself. From which some collect, that Helena was not a Christian till after
her Sons Conversion: Not observing, that Eusebius speaks not of the Faith of
Helena, but her piety: which upon occasion of the apparition of the holy Cross
to her son, was kindled into a great flame, as she showed by her following
actions.

XII. CHA.
XII. CHAP.
1.2. Lici^ius wars, and is overcome.

3.4. Constantius several Laws for Christians.

7.8. He prescribes a Form of Prayer. etc.

1.11.12. His faut in conssulting Aug^rs, and the consequents of it.

A. D. 317.
1. IN the year three hundred and seaventeen Licinius forgetful of his Covenant
with Constantin, began a persecution against Christians, and a war against
Constantin himself: to strengthen himself wherein he had recourse to his Augurs
and lying Oracles: but Constantin with the Sign of the Cross alone overthrew
him in two battles. Eusebius. l. 2. c. ^^.
And the protection afforded by this sacred Ensign was so notorious, that
Licinius himself gave command to his soldiers not to go against it, id. ib. c.
9.
yea not so much as to look toward it; says Eusebius: For it was observed
that whosoever bore that Ensign could never be wounded, for the darts cast by
the Enemy met continually and remaind fixed in the staff that supported the
Cross: this the same Author relates from Constantins own mouth.

2. Constantins moderation was such after his double Victory, A. D. 328.
that he was contented to renew a league with Licinius, assigning him all the
Eastern Provinces together with Thrace. But Licinius renewing the war, was
slain the year following: Whereby a firm peace was given to the Christian
Churches all the world over.

3. Then began Constantins to employ himself in enriching and adorning the
Church, and granting great immanities to Ecclesiastical persons: Cod. Theodo^.
lib. 2. de Episc. and Cler.
for which purpose he published this Law, Let all those who employ their
Ministry in the Divine Worship, that is, all who are called Clarks, or
Clergymen, be entirely excused from all manner of Civil offices or duties: to
the end that they be not by the envious malice of any withdrawn from the
Service of God. Sozom. lib. 1. c. 9.
Sozomen adds that he decreed, that if any Clergy men were called into judgment
by Civil Magistrates, they might appeal from them to the judgment of Bishops,
A. D. 312.
whose Sentence was to be ratified, as if it had been pronounced by the
Emperor himself. To which effect there is still extant a kescript of his
directed to Ablavius one of his Pretorian Prefects.

4. Moreover whereas the ancient Roman Laws were extremely severe against
Celibacy, Eusebius. in vit. Constant. l. 4. c. 26.
insomuch as unmarried persons were excluded from succession in inheritances:
Constantin considering how prejudicial this was to Christian Religion, in
which many professed Virginity and single lives, not out of an unwillingnes to
leave an offspring behind them, but because as Eusebius says, they preferred
the love of Christian Philosophy and perfection before the sensual pleasures
of Matrimony, and therefore consecrated themselves entirely both souls and
bodies to the Service of God in a pure chaste life: For this reason he utterly
abolished the foresaid Roman Laws: showing withal great honor and admiration
to Convents of Consecrated Virgins* Yea this extraordinary Privilege he
granted to them, says Sozomen, Sozom. l. 1. c. 9.
that all persons male or female consecrating themselves to Virginity, though
they were under age should have the power of disposing their estates by will,
contrary to the custom prevayling among the Romans. Theodoret. l. 1. c 11.
Moreover, says Theodoret, he ordained that a certain measure of wheat should
yearly be given to all Widows and those who observed a Virgin life. Of which
proportion the impious Apostat Julian took away two third parts, the third
remaining to the times of the Historian.

5. To these pious Laws we will add some few others of the like Nature, A. D
321. Cod. Theod l. 1. de Feriis.
to the end we may show the state of Christian Religion in those days: For it
is not to be doubted but what was practiced in other parts of the Empire, was
observed likewise in Bittany.

6. This devout Emperor therefore instituted a Law, That all Judges, and all
people living in Cities, together with all trades should rest on the Venerable
day of our Lord. But as for those (Pagans) who lived in the Country free
license was given them to employ themselves in cultivating the grounds: Because
it often happens that no other day is more commodious for plowing or digging
the Vines. Care therefore ought to be taken that an opportunity of a common good
granted by divine Providence should not be lost.

7. Yea so admirable was Constantins piety, that he thought fit to prescribe a
Form of Prayer to be recited on all Sundays both by Christians in Cities,
Eusebius in vit. Constable. l. 4. c. 19 20.
and Pagans in Villages, and specially by Soldiers, in these words, We
acknowledge thee the only God: we profess thee our Sovereign King: We invoke
thee our Helper: By thee we obtain Victories: by thee we have vanquished our
Enemies: We acknowledge that from thee we have obtained present felicity, and
hope we shall obtain future also. We are all of us thy Suppliants: We
beseech to preserve many years safe and victorious Constantin our Emperor, A.
D. 324.
together with his pious children.

Sozom. l. 1. c. 8.
8. Yea moreover as Sozomen relates, in honor of our Saviors Cross and
Passion he ordained a vacancy of judgments and Trades likewise on Fridayes and
that some time should be spent then in Prayers and supplications to God.

9. Lastly he not only by his own magnificence enriched the Church, but by a
Law opened as it were the purses of all men to endow it: For he gave a general
license to all persons without exceptions to bequeath what proportion of their
goods they thought fit to the most holy Congregation of the Catholic (Church.
Ap. Cuspinian. de ^oss. A. D. 322.
)

10. Yet one action this time Constantin did by which he stained the purity of
his Faith. Being at Sardica he was informed from Rome that his Palace had been
struck with lightning: Which was an ominous sign to the Pagan Romans, and
according to their ancient Laws to be averted by many superstitious lustrations
and purgations. Whereupon in condescendence to their request, he gave order to
the Magistrates to consult the Sooth sayers, what was portended thereby: only he
commanded them to abstain from domestical Sacrifices.

11. But this unlawful condescendence of the Emperor wrought an effect to the
prejudice of Christians which he did not expect: For upon this occasion the
Heathen Roman Magistrates, at the instigation of the Aruspices, or Soothsayers
would compel the Christians to ioyn in the public expiatory Sacrifices. But
they refusing to do it, chose rather to leave the City: Which doubtless was
the cause of the voluntary Exile of the Holy Pope Silvester.

A. D. 323.
12. Hereupon Constantin being informed of this was forced to publish a Severe
Law commanding, That if any one should endeavor to compel any Ecclesiastical
persons, or any other professing the most holy Law of the Catholic Sect, to
celebrate the Rites of Heathenish lustrations, if he were a mean person he
should be publicly beaten with clubs: if otherwise, he should have a grievous
fine imposed on him.

XIII. HAP. XIII. CHAPTER

1.2 Constantin baptized at Rome: and the occasion of it. Error of Eusebius.

6.7. etc. His Great acts of Piety after his Baptism.

1. HItherto Constantin had deferd his Baptism according to the Custom of many
in that Age, A. D. 324.
who being taught that that Holy Sacrament is a certain purgation of all Sins,
and gives to the persons an immediate and undoubted right to heaven, frequently
delayed the receiving it till their declining age, or when death was ready to
seize on them. But in this year many sad misfortunes proceeding from heinous
sins enforced Constantin now to have recourse to that saving remedy.

2. True it is that Eusebius and other Greek Authors mislead by him, affirm
that he was not baptized till near his death, and then received that Sacrament
from the Sacrilegious hands of Eusebius Bishop of Nicomediae, a principal
pillar of the Arian Heresy. Thus wrote the other Eusebius Bishop of Caesarea of
the same faction, to please Constantius, his Son, seduced by them. But the
constant Tradition of the Western Church, confirmed by many proofs, as the
authentic Acts of Artemius etc. does positively inform us that this year being
the three hundred twenty fourth after the Incarnation of our Savior,
Constantin received Baptism at Rome by the hands of Pope Silvester, upon this
occasion:

3. The younger Licinius his Sisters Son was falsely accused to him of a design
to rebel against him, whereupon Constantin commanded him to be slain.
Immediately after this he putt to death his own eldest Son Crispus born to him
by Minervina, a young Prince already famous for many Victories, and adorned
with many virtues, and principally with chastity: The crime laid to his charge
was an attempt to violate his Mother in Law Fausta, Constantins wife. In
conclusion it being too late discovered that this accusation was falsely
invented by Fausta, because the young man would not yield to her lust,
Constantin caused his wife to be stifled in a hot bath.

4. After these calamities and crimes, as we read in the Acts of Pope
Silvester, and find asserted by Pope Hadrian and the Fathers of the Second
General Council of Nicaea etc. Almighty God struck Constantin with a Leprosy:
who being anxious to find a remedy, he was informed by the Soothsayers that the
only way to restore him was by a bath of infants blood: Which detestable
Medecin being abhorred by Constantin, God was pleased by a Vision in Sleep,
wherein the Apostles S. Peter and Paul appeared to him, to instruct him that the
only certain Remedy would be to receive Baptism at the hands of the Holy Pope
Silvester. Which was accordingly with great solemnity performed.

5. Hereof an evident and Visible proof to this day is the magnificent Chapel
built by Constantin himself in the same place where he was baptized: Anastas.
Bibl. in 2. Tom^ Council. in Silvestr.
in which according to the description eight hundred years ago taken by
Anastasius Bibliothecarius out of a most ancient Manuscript, there was a font
(Baptisterium) built of Porphyry, and covered within and without with three
thousand pound weight of pure silver: and over it hung a Phiale weighing fifty
pounds, of pure gold, in which yearly two hundred pounds of Balsom did burn. On
the brink of the Font was placed a Lamb of pure gold which powered forth water,
and weighed thirty pounds. At the right hand of the Lamb stood the Statue of
our Savior of pure Silver weighing one hundred and seaventy pounds. And ^n the
left hand was placed S. John Baptist of silver weighing one hundred pounds,
holding a scroll wherein was written, Behold the Lamb of God: Behold him wh^
takes away the sins of the world, etc.

6. After his Baptism, the Emperor according to the Churches Custom being for
seven days clothed in White; consecrated every day with some signal act of
Piety: In the first he published as a Law, that Christ is the true Lord who
cleansed him from his Leprosy: and whom he commanded to be adored through the
whole Empire. On the Second he decreed severe punishments on those who by word
or deed should dishonor him. On the third he decreed like penalties against
those who should persecute or molest any Christians. Afterward he conferred on
the Roman Churches Imperial Privileges. On the fifth day he granted
immunities to all other Churches. On the Sixth and seventh days he added many
other Gifts to Ecclesiastical persons: And on the Octave, as we read in the
Acts of S. Silvester, Constantin appeared in public perfectly cleansed both
from his sins and Leprosy: And coming to the Confession of S. Peter, he took
the Diadem from his head, and putting off his Imperial robes, he taking a
spade in his hands opened the earth for a foundation of a New Church, and in
honor of the twelve Apostles he carried out on his shoulder twelve baskets
full of Earth: and then with great joy receiving the Bishop into his Chariot,
be returned to his Palace.

Eusebius. de vit. Constable. l. 2. c. 44* 45.
3. After this the Pious Emperor extended his munificence to Gods Church all
the Empire over: For as Eusebius testifies, he sent letters to all the Eastern
Bishops encouraging them to build Churches, for which he supplied them out of
his public Treasure. Many of which Churches (both at Rome and elsewhere) were
consecrated to the honor of the Apostles and Martyrs, A. D. 325.
as Laurentius, Hippolitus etc. Whose solemn Feasts he commanded to be observed
even by the Pagans with honor ad Veneration. id. ibid. l. 4. c. 2^.


4. To these Churches devout Christians repaired with great zeal, and as
suppliants here demanded their intercession. This was the practice, not of the
meaner sort only, but persons of the highest rank: Chrysostom. hom. 86. ad Pop.
Antioch.
For thus S. Chrysostom instructs his people of Antioch, He who wears the
Imperial Purple, says he, comes hither: he embraces the Sepulchers of
Martyrs, and laying aside all haughtines and Pride, he stands before them in
the posture of a suppliant, beseeching them to intercede unto God in his behalf.

XIV. CHAP. XIV. CHA

1.2. Constantin goes into the East: and why

3.4. First Council of Nicea against Arians.

5.6. Its Decree about Easter.

7.8. etc. Error of the Britains about it, whence derived.

1. THIS so public and zealous Profession of a New Religion rendered Constantin
odious to the Roman Senate, who could not with patience support the decay of
their ancient Superstition. Which was the cause that he grew weary of Rome, and
made a progress into the Eastern Provinces: where he intended to establish a
new seat of the Empire: which he afterward executed at Bizantium, called from
his own name Constantinople.

2. Another cause there was obliging him to repair into the East, which was to
compose the Seditions and tumults caused by the blasphemous Heresy of Arius:
Who denied the Divinity of the Son of God, affirming that time was when he was
not, though he was the first of all Creatures. In which Heresy not a few
Bishops joined with him, which occasioned great disputes and divisions in the
Church to the scandal of Christianity.

3. Constantin therefore being much disquietted with these tumults, endeavored
first by his own exhortations and letters written to Arius himself, and to
Alexander Bishop of Alexandriae who first reprehended Arius for his Heresy, and
upon his obstinacy excommunicated him etc. to compose their differences: But
finding that means ineffectuall, A. D. 325.
caused a Council of the whole Church to be assembled at Nicaea in Bithinia
consisting of three hundred and eighteen Bishops, who decided that Controversy,
determining from Scripture and Tradition, That the Son was Consubstantiall
((...)) to the Father.

4. The Acts and Decrees of which Council not being our present business, and
being at large declared by ancient and modern Ecclesiastical Writers, we will
here omit. There also we may read with what meeknes, respectfulnes and
Charity the pious Emperor behav^d himself to the Bishops, how he refused to be
a Judge of the criminations and mutual accusations of one another; How he
fortified the determination of the Synod by his Imperial authority, commanding
all to submitt unto it; how he banished the Archheretick Arius etc.

5. Only one particular Decision must not be omitted, because our ancient
British Church was particularly concerned in it, and that was the order made
for the universal observation of Easter, or Feast of the Resurrection, in
opposition to the Eastern Jewish custom of the Quartodecimani. This Feast
therefore was indispensably to be observed on the first Sunday (or Lords day)
following the fourteenth day of the first moon after the Vernall Equinoxe:
accordingly as the late Synod of Arles and several Popes had before ordained.

6. Now because some skill in Astronomy was requisite to find out exactly the
time of the Vernall Equinoxe and age of the Moon, therefore the Council thought
fit to recommend this care to the Patriark of Alexandria, because in Egypt by
reason of the evennesse of the region and purity of the air this skill most
flourished. The said Patriark therefore, as S. Leo says, Leo Epist. 64.
was obliged every year to give notice to the Bishop of Rome of the day whereon
Easter was to be observed, to the end that by his letters information should be
given to all other remoter Churches. By this means a perfect knowledge of the
Feast being communicated to all Provinces, the order was, that during Mass on
the Epiphany or Twelfth day after the Nativity a Deacon with a clear loud voice
enunciated to the Congregation the day of Easter following: by which was
regulated the beginning of Lent and all other Feasts called Moveable.

7. Hence it is apparent that all Western Churches, and particularly Brittany,
observed Easter conformably to the Determination of this holy Council, as
Paschall Letters could safely and conveniently be sent into Brittany.

8. The said custom of requiring notice of the time of Easter from the Church
of Alexandria continued as long as that Church remained in Communion with the
Roman. But a breach being made between them upon occasion of the Eutychian
Heresy prevayling in Egypt, the following Popes would no longer admit such
Letters, but undertook themselves the same care: for which purpose they
consulted the judgment of other Bishops, as S. Ambrose testifies touching
himself, Ambros. Epist. 83.
that his advice was expected about that matter.

9. An uniformity therefore was still observed through the Catholic Church in
the Observation of Easter. But terrible wars and tumults happening in Brittany
not long after, by which a free commerce with the Roman Church was interrupted,
especially after the Infidel Saxons had possessed themselves of the
Seacoasts, and driven the poor Britains into the inward mountainous
Provinces, no wonder if they, wanting information from Rome, began to vary in
that observation and Rite.

10. It is therefore a great mistake of several of the more learned among
Protestant Writers, who grounding their suspicion on a sharp Controversy not
long after ensuing in Brittany about the Observation of Easter between the
Northern and Southern Inhabitants, do affirm that the ancient Britains
followed the Eastern Rite of the Quartodecimani: from whence they infer that
the Gospel was not communicated to this Island from Rome, but certain Eastern
Apostolical Missioners.

11. But the contrary is most evident. For First it is certain that they
received the order about Easter, from Pope Eleutherius: Again as certain it is
that Restitutus Bishop of London carried into Brittany the Decrees of the
Council of Arles. Thirdly we find expressly in the Letter written by
Constantin to all Churches, Eusebius. l. 3. c. 14.
that among other Provinces which observed the order prescribed by the Council
of Nic^a after that of Arles, Brittany was one.

12. The Error therefore which in succeeding times crept among the Baittains
was not the Oriental Jewish way of observing Easter (as in the Law of the
Passover) exactly on the fourteenth day of the Moon, as the Quatodecimani did,
whether that day were Sunday, or not: But only this, that when it fell upon a
Sunday, they did not, as all other Catholic Churches did, delay the
celebration of it till the Sunday following, on purpose to declare their
opposition to the Jews: but they kepd it on that day in which the Jews kepd
it. So that once in seven years, they varied from other Christian Churches.
The only cause of which Error doubtless was the calamity of those times when
all commerce between the Britains and Rome was intercluded.

A. D. 326.

XV. CHAP.


XV. CHAP.
1.2. etc. S. Helenas journey of Devotion to Jerusalem: and Churches built by
her.

4.5. etc. The Invention of the Holy Cross.

1. PResently after the dissolution of this famous Council, Helena the Mother
of Constantin, being near fourscore years old, had the courage and fervor to
undertake a pilgrimage to Jerusalem, there to visit the holy places sanctified
by our Lords actions and sufferings, and to adore his footsteps, For Surely,
Hieron. Ep. 154.
says S. Hierom, to adore the place where our Lords feet stood, is a part of
Faith. So that it was not Superstition, Magdeb. Centur. 4* f. 457. Eusebius. l. 3.
c. 41. Socrat. l. 1. c. 13.
as the Lutheran Centuriators calumniously impute to her, but an act of
singular counsel and wisdom, as Eusebius, yea by divine admonition received
in her sleep, as Socrates says, that she was incited to this journey.

2. The place which she most ardently desired to visit and adorn was the
Sepulcher of our Lord, Eusebius. 16. c. ^4.
which the flagitious impiety of former Pagans had endeavored to blott out of
the memory of man kind, foolishly thinking hereby to hide and make divine Truth
undiscoverable, says Eusebius. So that it cost incredible labor to remove
that vast heap of earth with which it had been covered, on the top of which had
been raised a Temple to Venus, solemnised with all manner of impurity.

Id. ib. c 39.
3. The place being cleansed, there was by Constantins order erected upon it a
most magnificent Temple, the structure and ornaments whereof are particularly
described by the same Historian. And besides this, the same devout Empress
began the building of two other sumptuous Churches, the one at Bethlehem where
our Lord was born, and the other on Mount Olivet, whence our Lord ascended into
heaven: Which after her death, shortly succeeding, were finished by her Son.
Id. ib. c. 41.
In this last place was yet extant the impression of our Lords feet, which she
honored with due veneration: Concerning which the Prophet Zacharias long
before prophesied saying: Zachar 1^.4.
And in that day his feet shall stand upon the Mount Olivet, over against
Jerusalem to the East. Hieron. de locu Heb. Act. Apost.
S. Hierom testifies that the same footsteps of our Lord imprinted on the
ground, were showed in his time: And though the Earth was continually taken away
by the devotion of Christians, yet those holy footsteps did immediately receive
their former state.

4. Hereto we may not omit to adioyn a stupendous Miracle related by
Sulpitius Severus in these words, Sulpit. Sever. hist. Sact. l. 2.
That was a wonderful thing, says he, that place on which at his Ascension
our Lords feet last stood, could not be continued to the rest of the pavement
about. For whenever marble was laid on it, the earth refused to receive it,
casting the stones oftentimes upward to the faces of those who applied them:
And moreover the footsteps of our Lord there seen are a lasting Monument that
the dust there had been trod on by our Savior* S. Bid adds another Miracle,
Bed. de locis Sanct c. 7.
that whereas the Temple built over the place consisted of three stories or
concamerations, the two uppermost whereof were vaulted with Arches, that which
was the lowest and most inward could by no art or labor be closed with a vault.

5. But whilst these magnificent structures were preparing, there yet wanted
that which the devout Empress most of all desired to find, which was the Holy
Cross on which our Lord perfected the Redemption of mankind, and by the
apparition of which her Son had lately been drawn to Faith and Baptism. A
rumor there was that it was still extant, hid in some of those holy places:
but where to find it, was the difficulty. Cammand therefore was given that all
places there about should be dug, Ruffin. Eccl. Hist. l. 10. c. 7.8.
but in vain. At last, says Ruffinus, the Religious Lady was by a celestial
admonition informed where it lay. Whereupon causing all the rubbish to be
removed, she found deep under ground three Crosses in a confused order. So that
her joy was much diminished by the uncertainty which of them was the true one.
There was found likewise with them the Title which had been written by Pilat in
Greek Latin and Hebrew letters: But yet that being separated, did not give any
signs whereby to discern which was our Lord* Cross. In this uncertainty the
only remedy was to beg by Prayer a Divine testimony It hapne^ that at the
same time there was in the City a certain woman of quality who lay sick of a
grievous disease, ready to expire. Macarius therefore who was then Bishop of
Jerusalem seeing the Empress and all about her solicitous to discover the
(...) Cross, commanded saying, Let all three be brought, and God will be
pleased to show us that which bore our Lord. Entering therefore together with the
Empress and many of the people into the sick woman's house, he kneeled on the
ground, and in this manner prayed, O Lord, who by thy only begotten Son have
vouchsafed to bring salvation to mankind through his suffering on the Cross,
and have lately inspired into the heart of thy Handmaid here present a desire
to find the Cross on which our salvation did hang, Be pleased to show unto us
evidently which of these three Crosses was employed to glorify our Lord, and
which for the servile punishment of malefactors: and let this be the mark:
that this woman who lies here half dead, as soon as she touches the saving
Cross of thy Son, may be recalled to life from the gates of death. Having said
this, he applied first one of the Crosses, which availed nothing: then the
second, yet without any effect. But as soon as he had applied the third Cross
unto her, immediately the woman opened her eyes, rose up in perfect health, and
with greater alacrity then ever before, she went up and down her house
glorifying the Power of God. Thus was the Empress satisfied in that which she
so earnestly desired.

6. The substance of this relation given by Ruffinus, Vid. Zose^. l. 2. c. 1.
Socrat. l. 1. c. 13. Ambr. de obit. Theodos. Theodor^t. l. 1. c. 18. Sulpit.
Sever. Hist. l. 2. Niciph. l. 8 c. 29. Eusebius. de laudib. Censtant^ni.
is attested by the consent of several other ancient Ecclesiastical writers,
so that to doubt of it, or impudently to deny the truth of it, as the Lutheran
Centuriators do, can be no other but an undeniable effect of malice against
the Truth, testified hereby to their confusion.

7. The Pious Lady to declare her thankfullnes to God for so signal a favor,
was not content to build a magnificent Church to the Memory of our Saviors
Passion, but added another which was dedicated to the saving sign of the
Cross, as Eusebius writes.

Theodoret. hist. l. 1. c. 18.
8. And as touching the Cross it self, she took care that part of it should be
sent to the Emperor, and honorably laid up in his Palace: the remainder she
enclosed in a Box of silver, and gave it to the Bishop of Jerusalem, exhorting
him that it might be there reserved as a Monument of our Salvation: Thus
Theodoret: To which S. Paulinus adds, Paulin. Ep. 11
That every year on the day of our Lords Resurrection it is produced by the
Bishop, and exposed to the peoples veneration: the Bishop himself first
performing that honor to it.

9. Socrates further relates that Constantin, as soon as he had received part of
the Cross, beleiving that the City in which it was kept, should be preserved
in safety from all danger, enclosed it in a statue of his own, which was placed
in the Market place of Constantinople on a mighty Pillar of Porphyry. This,
says Eusebius, seemed to the most holy Emperor a firm bulwark of his Kingdom.

10. Besides the Cross there were found other Ensigns of our Saviors Passion,
which were not neglected by Helena: to wit, the Nails which had not only
touched our Lords Body, as the Cross did, but peirced into his sacred flesh
and sinews, being bathed in his blood. Part of which nails, Theodoret. l. ^.
c. 18. Ambros. de obit. Theod.
says Theodoret and S. Ambrose, she took care should be artificially enclosed
within the Emperors helmet, that thereby his head might be preserved safe from
his enemies weapons: and part she mingled with the Iron of his horses bitt:
thereby both to give a safe protection to him, and likewise to fulfill an
ancient Prophecy of Zacharias saying, Zachar. 14. 20
That which is on the horses bitt, shall be holy to the Lord Omnipotent. And a
third nail she cast into the Adriatic Sea, Gregor. Turon. de glor. Martyr. l.
1. c. 6.
during a horrible tempest: by which means she saved her self and company from
shipwreck: Thus writes Gregory Bishop of Tours.

XVI. CHAP. XVI. CHAPTER

1.2. Of S. Helenas piety to Religious Virgins.

3. etc. To Martyrs, S. Lucianus, the Magi, etc.

7.8. etc. Place of her death, Rome: where a Church is built to the H. Cross.

12.13. etc. Constantins piety to his Mother, Augusta.

15.16. etc. Her Memory celebrated in several places. Churches built to her
honor in England.

1. WITH such Acts of Piety, devotion and liberality did Helena adorn her
latter days: a particular account of which belongs to the design of this
History, she being a British Princess. For which reason we will prosecute the
course of her life which seems to have ended the same year, or in the beginning
of the following.

2. An example of her humility and devout respect to Virgins consecrated to
Gods service by a profession of Chastity, Ruffin. hist. l. 10. c. 8.
is related by Ruffinus in this manner. The holy Virgins, says he, which she
found at Jerusalem, she invited to dinner and entertained them with so great
devotion and respect, that she thought it a misbecoming thing that her Maids
should attend on the^. Therefore she herself, being girt after the manner of a
waiting maid, set meat on the Table, gave them cupps to drink, and powered
water on their hands. Thus she who was Empress of the world, and Mother of the
Emperor esteemed her self no better then a servant of the hand maids of Christ.

3. Eusebius likewise celebrates her wonderful manificence showed through all
her progress in the Eastern Provinces: For whither so ever she came she gave
innumerable gifts both to whole cities and particular persons of all
professions. The poor she munificently supplied with all necessaries: those who
were condemned to working in mines, or perpetual imprisonment she set at
liberty; the oppressed she delivered from fraud and injury; and those which
were banished she restored to their own country.

4. At her return out of Palestina into Greece, Vid. Act. S. Luciani ap. Surium
7. Ian.
she passed by Drepanum a Town of Bithynia, where reposed the Body of the
glorious Martyr S. Lucianus: As Soon as she saw these holy Relics lying so
neglected, without any mark of honor or reverence, she in zeal to the honor
of God and his Martyr caused a sumptuous Church to be built over them, and
moreover enlarged the same place into a City, which she compassed with walls
and bullwarks. Which City her Son afterward called by his Mothers name
Helenopolis: and to make her name yet more celebrated by posterity, the Sea
there adjoining was called Helenopontus: not because she was born there, but
because by her care and liberality the region there about formerly obscure,
became illustrious.

5. We read moreover in several ancient, Monuments how this holy Empress in
her progress through the East having been informed of the place where the
Bodies of the three Magi or Wisemen which came to Bethlehem to adore our
Savior new born, reposed, brought them with her to her Son Constantin, who
reverently laid them in a Church of his new City, from whence they were
^ranslated to Milan, and afterward to Colen, where now they are with great
veneration celebrated.

6. A more particular relation hereof we read in the Supplement of the Gallican
Martyrologe made by Andrew de Saussay, in these words, Vid. Supplem. Martyrol.
Gallican. 6. Ian.
At Colonia Agrippina in the Gallick Soil is celebrated the Memory of the
three holy Kings, who on this day (the Sixth of January) adored our Lord in his
cradle at Bethlehem. The Bodies of these Saints were by the care and devotion
of the Holy Empress Helena brought out of the East to Constantinople, where in
the Temple of S. Sophia (afterward more magnificently repaired by Justinian)
they remained to the times of the Emperor Emanuel: who bearing a great
affection to Eustorgius Bishop of Milan, by birth a Grecian, at his earnest
prayers bestowd on him those Sacred pledges. Eustorgius presently conveyed them
to Milan, placing them in a Church of Religious Virgins. But in the year
eleaven hundred Sixty and f^wer the Emperor Frederick having by force reduced
Milan to his obedience, granted to his Chancellor Reynaldus Archbishop of
Colen, at his most earnest suit, the same three Sacred Bodies, which he
transferred to Colen, were he reposed them in the principal Church: in which
place they are to this day celebrated with great veneration.

7. In such pious works did the Holy Empress conclude her worldly pilgrimage
The place of her death is thus obscurely described by Eusebius: Eusebius. l. 3. c.
46.
The Tabernacle of her Body, says he, was honored with splendid funerals: For
it was conducted with a great train of Guards to the principal place of the
Empire: and there buried in a Royal Sepulcher. From which expression some
collect that she was entombed at Constantinople. Socret. l. 1. c. 13. Niceph.
l. 8. c. 13.
Thus writes Socrates. But Nicephorus better understood the sense of Eusebius,
writing thus, when the end of Helenas life approached, she deceased at Rome,
being fourscore years old, wanting one: where her Memory is most celebrious.

8. Most probable therefore it is that after her Eastern pilgrimage she stayed
not in Greece, but with her Son, or before him, took her journey to Rome, to
visit the Sepulchers of the two Chief Apostles: a devout practice frequented by
former Christians, but much more afterward, and particularly by many of our
Princes, as will hereafter appear.

9. In which last voyage of hers, that seems to have happened which was related
out of Gregory of Tours concerning her casting away into the Sea one of the
Sacred Nails belonging to the Holy Cross, by which means she was delivered
from imminent danger of Shipwreck by a Tempest.

10. We read in her life anciently written and conserved by Capgrave, Capgrav.
in Helena.
that she brought with her to Rome a part of the Holy Cross, which with great
honor and veneration was placed in a Church, at her request built by her Son,
and dedicated to the honor, and called by the Title of the Holy Cross.

11. There likewise is related with what fervor and devotion she spent her
last days: Ibid.
and how approaching to her death, after receiving the Sacraments of the
Church, she was comforted with a vision of our Lord Jesus encompassed with a
multitude of Angels, and holding his Cross, shining with inexpressible
brightness.

12. Eusebius moreover testifies how her Son Constantin was present at her
death, Eusebius. l. 3. c. 45.
and with a diligent and humble respect attended and ministered to her in her
sickness: in whose presence accompanied with his Sons and Grandchildren she
declared her last will. Theodoret. l. 1. c. 18.
And Theodoret adds, That she gave him many exhortations to Piety, and
bestowing on him such Benedictions as Parents usually at their death give to
their children, she departed this world to eternal Happiness.

13. The same Eusebius worthily extolls Constantin for his wonderful piety and
respect to his Holy Mother: which was so great that he made her partner of the
Empire, giving her the Title of Empress or Augusta, and causing golden Coyns
to be made and stamped with her Image: An Example of one such is afforded by
Baronius, and another by Camden, in one side of which is written Fl. Helena
Augusta: and on the other Securitas Provinciae. S.T.R. Whereby it appears that
she was transferred by Adoption into the Flavian family. And hence we find that
Sulpitius Severus wrote with truth, that Helena Mother of the Emperor
Constantin reigned as Empress together with her Son.

14. After her death Constantin, as Anastasius relates, built unto her honor a
magnificent Sepulcher ( Mausolaeum,) where in a Tomb of Porphyry he laid the
Body of the most blessed Empress his Mother. Which Mausolaeum was situated in
the High Way called Lavicana between the two Laurel trees. Nicephorus affirms
that after two years he carried her Body to Constantinople: But constant
Tradition assures us that, at least the greatest part of it, remained in the
west: Concerning the translation and venera^ion of which, together with a brief
recapitulation of her whole story we read thus in the Gallican Martyrologe.

15. At Rhemes and Orleans this day the eighteenth of August is celebrated the
Memory of Saint Helena Empress, Martyrolog. Gallican. 18. August.
Mother of Constantin, who having been confirmed in the Faith by the Holy Pope
Silvester, enjoyed so great a happiness, that by a singular Grace of God she saw
her Son enlightened with true Piety to become the first Emperor who openly
professed and courageously maintained our most Holy Religion. A. D. 321.
By his assistance and wonderful munificence she performed illustrious works
to promote the Worship of Christ. For incited by piety she took a journey to
Jerusalem, where miraculously she found the Cross of our Lord together with
the nails: She cleansed the sacred places from the filth of Heathenish and
Jewish superstitions, and adorned them with splendid buildings and Gifts.
Moreover out of a zeal to emulate the virtue of Humility so acceptable to
Christ, she would needs her self attend, serve and minister to the Sacred
Virgins whom she intertain'd at a Feast. Afterward at Rome she built the
Church of the Holy Cross, which she enriched with a portion of the said saving
Cross. And out of the same religious propension to adorn Gaul also, she built
at Orleans the principal Church, in veneration of Christ crucified. Whose
seamlesse Garment likewise, together with many other monuments of our
Redemption she sent to Triers, there to be devoutly venerated. At last after so
many illustrious works of Piety performed all the world over, she quietly
slep'd in Christ whose glory she had with such fervent zeal exalted, and was
buried in a sepulcher of Porphyry at Rome, under the patronage of S. Peter and
S. Marcellinus. In after times being illustrious by many Miracles, and some of
which she had performed in her life time, her Sacred Body was translated into
France by Theogisus a Monk and placed in the Monastery called Hauteville, where
it has been illustrated by great numbers of Miracles: and there it still
continues in great veneration: Excepting some particles thereof which were sent
to the principal Church at Orleans, a great ornament and safeguard thereto:
where they are kep'd with becoming honor.

16. There is extant at Rome, in the Church of the Holy Cross which was
anciently called also the Church of S. Helena, Inscriptions.
an illustrious Memorial of her: For at the Basis of her statue there is this
Inscription: To our Lady Flavia Iulia Helena, the most pious Empress, Mother
of our Lord Constantin the Great, most clement Victor and always Augustus, and
Grandmother of Constantin and Constans most blessed and flourishing Caesar's:
Julius Maximianus Count and Senator always most devoted to her Piety, has
made this monument. And another Inscription almost parallel is to be seen at
Naples, erected anciently by the Senate and people there.

17. It is not to be doubted but that our Island of Brittany was at least as
much devoted to her honor and memory as any other countries. But all Monuments
raised in the times of the ancient Britains have been consumed by age, and
miserable vicissitudes succeeding. However in following ages the Saxons, as soon
as they became Converts to Christianity, in several places expressed their
devotion to this most Pious Empress. For both among the Trinobantes and in the
North, and likewise in Berkshire there is a Town called Helenstow from a Church
there dedicated to her Memory. A. D. 324.
And at Bedford an illustrious Lady called Judith built a Monastery for
Religious Virgins, which she consecrated to S. Helena. One William Basing
likewise is said to have built a Church consecrated to S. Helena at London.

XVII. CHAP. XVII. CHAPTER

1.2. Constantins zeal against Paganism and Heresy.

3. etc. He is seduced by his Sister to favor Arius, etc. but repents.

5.6. He adorns his New City Constantinople.

7.8. Miracles by the Holy Cross.

9. Other acts of Constantins piety.

1. AFter S. Helena's death Constantin returned into the East, E^^ap. de vit.
Philsopb. i^ Ae^. sim* Col. ^ he^^. l. 2. de Pagan.
where he expressed his zeal against Pagan Idolatry: For Eunapius a Pagan
writer complains, Through the whole world the most celebrated Temples were
overthrown by Constantin. He made severe Laws against Heathenish Sacrifices,
mentioned in Theodosius his Code.

2. Neither was he wanting to establish the Churches Peace and Unity by
publishing rigorous Edicts against Heretics, Eus^b. l. (...) 62.
Novatians, Valentinians, Marcionists, Paulians, Montanists, etc. forbidding
all Assemblies among them, both public and private: and withal exhorting them
to return to the Communion of the Catholic Church, that so they might be
rendered partakers of its Sanctity: and so attain to Truth. Thus writes
Eusebius, adding that hereupon many of them did acknowledge their errors, and
at last joined themselfves to the Churches Communion.

3. Notwithstanding being seduced by the Craft of Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia
the Pillar of the Arian faction, A. D. 327.
he began a persecution against S. Athanasius, then Bishop of Alexandria. This
Eusebius had cunningly insinuated himself into the affections of Constantiae
the Emperors Sister, by whom at her death he was recommended to Constantin, in
whose mind a scruple likewise was injected by certain speeches of hers,
threatening a severe punishment to him after death for his severity against so
many innocents, so she called the Arians. Whereupon he commanded that Arius
himself should return and be received at Alexandria: For which purpose he wrote
threatening letters to S. Athanasius, that he should be deposed in case he
refused him. Notwithstanding being informed by Athanasius, that Arius did not
repent of his Heresy, but was still a professed Enemy of the Council of
Nicaea, A. D. 330.
Consta^tin desisted from urging his reception.

A. D. 329. Athanas. Apolog. 2.
4. Afterward the Meletians accused Saint Athanasius of many crimes: but
Constantin upon examination finding his innocence, quickly absolved and
dimiss'd him. Yea moreover the pious Emperor turned his anger against him who
was the chief Architect of all machinations against S. Athanasius, to wit,
Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia, as appears by his letters written to the people
of that City and recited by Theodoret, Theodor. l. i. c. 20.
in which he complains how himself had been deluded by his forgeries and lies.
And on that occasion he proceeds to pronounce Sentence against the whole
faction of the Arians, banishing Eusebius and several other Bishops from their
Sees.

A. D. 330.
5. But the year following, by occasion of the inauguration of his New City
Constantinople, among other Examples of his Clemency, he restored them. Niceph.
l. 8. c. 26.
Nicephorus writes that the City was consecrated to our Lord and his
immaculate Mother with offering the unbloody Sacrifice and prayers. Adding that
Constantins Statue was erected in a public place upon a pillar of Porphyry
having in his right hand a golden Apple, on which was placed the Holy Cross,
with this Inscription, To thee, O Christ our God, I commend this City.

Eusebius. l. 4. c. 47.
6. Eusebius describing the Magnificence of Constantin in adorning this City
with many Churches consecrated to the Holy Martyrs, says, The Emperor
intending to illustrate after an extraordinary manner the City called by his
own name, adorned it with many magnificent Churches, partly in the Suburbs, and
partly in the City it self: by which he both celebrated the Memories of the
Holy Martyrs, and consecrated the City it self to the God of Martyrs. The
principal of those Martyrs are recorded to have been S. Mocius, S.
Agathonicus, S. Mennas and S. Acacius.

Sozom. l. 2. c. 2.
7. Sozomen likewise, an eye witness, especially celebrats a Church built in a
place formerly dedicated to Vesta, which was afterward named Michaelium, from
an apparition of that Holy Archangell. In which many Miracles had been wrought
by virtue of the Holy Cross there erected: of which virtue the Author
acknowledges that himself had been partaker. Among which one special Miracle
must not be omitted; which he relates after this manner: Id. ibid.
8. I have been informed, says he, that a Soldier of the Emperors Guards
called Probianus being afflicted with grievous torments in his feet, not only
received ease in that place, but was also honored with a wonderful and divine
vision. For he having been formerly a Pagan and converted to Christianity,
though he were satisfied of the truth of all other instituts of our Religion,
yet he would never be persuaded that the Holy Cross could be the cause of
mankinds salvation. Being thus affected there was offered to him a Divine
Vision, which set before his eyes the Image of the Cross, which usually was
set on the Altar of that Church: and the same Vision declared to him
manifestly that whatsoever thngs had been performed either by Angels or Holy
men for the public or private proffit of men since the time that Christ was
crucified, were not rightly performed but by the virtue of the saving Cross.

9. Besides these sacred Ornaments, Eusebius. l. 4. c. 36.
Constantin added much wealth to endow the holy Churches built by him: He
likewise caused a world of Copies of the Holy Scriptures to be curiously
written in parchments richly adorned, which he dispersed through several
Churches in the City. Cod. Theodos. de Medicis and Profess.
He gave likewise great privileges to Physicions, Grammarians and Professors
of other Arts, by which means learning much flourished there. In a word he
endeavored to make it equal in all respects to Old Rome, placing there a
Senate with the same honors and authority: into which many Christians were
elected, as Baronius declares.

XVIII. CHAP. XVIII. CH

1.2. S. Athanasius persecuted by Arians.

3.4.5. He is banished into the west: for his safety.

6.7. Arius convened before Constantin.

8.9. etc. His fearful death.

10. Pope Julius.

1. BUT the restless malice of the Arians against S. Athanasius, A. D. 355.
the principal defender of the Faith declared by the Nicene Council, urged
them to invent and forge new accusations against him, of breaking a Chalice, of
murdering a man and using enchantments with his dead hand, of committing
adultery by violence, etc. With these crimes they charged him before the
Emperor importuning him that he might be condemned and deposed.

2. Hereupon a Synod of Bishops being assembled at Tire, Athanasius his cause
was there examined, and though in all particulars his innocence was evidently
declared, ye^ he was condemned by them. Which manifest injustice astonished
Constantin, as appears by a Letter of his recorded by Saint Athanasius in his
Apology. Athanas. Apol. 2. A. D. 3* 6.


3. Notwithstanding these impious Bishps after they had consecrated at
Jerusalem a magnificent Church built by Constantin, repairing to Constantinople
there renewed their accusations, and probably by the favor of the Emperors
Son Constantius infected with their Heresy, did so beseige Constantins ears,
that S. Athanasius could scarce get access to prove his own innocence.
Insomuch as by their importunity the Emperor was even enforced to banish him
into the West.

4. This certainly unjust Sentence Saint Athanasius himself excuses in a letter
written by him to the Egyptian Hermits, where we read this passage, Constantin
upon the calumnious accusation of the Eusebians removed for a time Athanasius
into Gaul, Athanas. Ep. ad solitar.
that so he might be delivered from their cruelty who sought all opportunities
treacherously to destroy him. For thus wrote his Son Constans of blessed
Memory, as appears by his letters yet extant.

5. And the same charitable interpretation did his other Son Constantin who
succeeded him in the western Empire, make of his Fathers action: For writing to
the people of Alexandria, Ap. T^^od. l. 2 c. 2.
he says: To elude the Savage cruelty of the Arians, whose jaws were opened
to swallow him, Athanasius was ordered to withdraw himself: being commanded to
live under my government. Thus he made his abode in this City of Triers, where
nothing necessary is wanting to him. So that no just suspicion can be imputed
to the Emperor, as if he wavered, or had deserted the Orthodoxe Faith.

6. This was further confirmed by a memorable accident happening this year at
Constantinople. For the Emperor perceiving that Arius, though avoided by all
Catholics, was defended as Orthodoxe by many others, commanded him to repair
to his presence in that City: Socrat. l. ^^ c. ^5.
Whither being arrived, Constantin himself asked him, whether he did approve
the Decrees of the Nicen Council? He presently with a cheerful countenance
answered, That he approved them. The Emperor not content with his affirmation
and subscription, urged him to confirm this by oath: in which likewise he
complied. But all this was mere craft and impious subtilty. For whilst be made
this Profession and oath, he held in his bosom a Paper containing his heresy,
and swore that from his heart he believed as he had written Notwithstanding the
Emperor being ignorant of his fallacy, believed him Orthodoxe: and thereupon
commanded Alexander then Bishop of Constantinople to receive him into Communion.

Ath^n. ad Serapio ^.
7. S. Athanasius to this relation adds, That Constantin having heard what Arius
professed and swore, said thus to him, If thy Faith be true and Orthodoxe, thou
have sworn well: But if it be impious, and yet thou have thus sworn, may God
condemn thee for thy perjury. Which imprecation wanted nor an effect, for
presently God miraculously showed the impiety of Arius, and true Faith of
Constantin, in this manner: Socrat. l. ^. c. 5.
8. Alexander Bishop of Constantinople being unwilling to admit the
Arch-heretick into his Communion, was threatened by Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia
that if he refused, he would presently cause him to be deposed. But Alexander
being much more solicitous for the true Faith, then his Bishopric, had his
recourse to Gods only assistance, and several days and nights lying
prostrate before his Altar in presence of his Sacraments, prayed in this
manner, O God, I beseech thee to grant that if the opinion of Arius be true I
may dye before the day of disputation come: But if the Faith which I profess
be true, Let Arius the Author of all these calamities, suffer just punishment
for his impiety.



9. What was the fearful success of these fervent prayers, Athan. ad.
S^rapu^^.
is thus related by S. Athanasius: When the Bishop had thus ended his Prayers,
he went away full of anxious cogitations: and presently a wonderful and
incredible thing happened. The Eusebians threaten, the good Bishop prays. As for
Arius confiding in the power of the Eusebians, in his way to the Church he used
many vain and boasting bablings: when on a sudden he was forced to retire into
a common privy to exonerate nature: where suddenly, as it was written of Judas,
he ^ell on his face to the ground and burst asunder in the middle: Thus was he
deprived both of life and Communion.

10. The consequents of this fearful judgment Socrates thus further
prosecutes, This being done, says he, the Eusebian faction was struck with a
wonderful ^errour and consternation: and the fame thereof was spread not
through the City only, but the whole world almost. By this mean the Emperor
likewise adhered still more firmly to the Catholic Faith: affirming that the
Nicene Faith was now also visibly confirmed by Divine authority: and for this
reason he much rejoiced at the end of the Heretic Arius.

11. This same year dyed the Holy Pope Marcus the Successor of S. Silvester,
after he had sat only one year: in whose place succeeded Pope Julius: whose
first year is accounted the last of the Emperor Constantin: the circumstances
of whose death are now to be related.

XIX. CHAP. XIX. CHAPTER

1.2.3 etc. Constantins pious preparation to death.

6. Whether he was baptized by Eusebius the Arian.

7. etc. Manner of his death: And prayers for him after.

10. His Memory celebrated among Saints.

1. ONE of the last Acts of Constantins zeal and devotion was, the building at
Constantinople a most magnificent Temple, dedicated to the honor of all the
Apostles. The sumptuousnes of its structure is particularly described by
Eusebius, who adds* That all these things the Emperor dedicated, Eusebius. l. 4.
c. 29.
to the end he might eternise the Memory of our Saviors Apostles among all
nations.

2. In this Temple, says he, he placed twelve ((...)) honorary repositories,
Id. ibid. c. 60.
which should be as twelve Pillars for the honor and Memory of the twelve
Apostles: And in the midst of them he caused his own Tomb to be placed,
enclosed on each side by six of them: Wisely forethinking that the Tabernacle
of his dead body would decently and worthily rest there. And having long before
framed in his mind this cogitation, he dedicated the Church to the Apostles,
having an opinion and belief, that their Memory would procure very much proffit
to his soul. A. D. 337.


3. Now wherein this proffit did consist, the same Author thus further
explains: Id. ibid.
He by a provident dispensation designed this place opportunely for the day of
his death approaching: by an incredible propension of his Faith foreseeing that
when his Body after death should participate with the Apostles the same common
appellation, that then he being dead, should also be made partaker of the
Prayers which there should be offered in honor of the Apostles. And with this
mind did many of our British and Saxon Kings and Nobles erect so many
magnificent Churches and Monasteries, for a remedy and redemption of their
souls, as they frequently express in their Charters of Foundations.

4. Other more immediate preparations to a happy death made by the same pious
Emperor are thus related by the same Writer: Id. ibid. c. ^5.
The Emperor, says he, enjoyed his faculties and strength of reason in such a
perfection that till the extremity of his age he continued to write Orations,
to make discourses with his friends, and to minister to his hearers advices
well beseeming a good Christian. He likewise diligently published Laws, both
touching Civil and Military affairs: for he had an understanding so dilated,
that he could comprehend what soever was necessary or expedient for humane
life* Now this one particular is worthy of eternal memory, that immediately
before his last day he recited a funeral Oration in the place accustomed,
wherein by a continued discourse he spoke of the immortality of souls, of the
rewards which God had prepared for those who lived piously in this world and on
the contrary of the miserable end of those who lead ungodly lives. Which
discourses pronounced with gravity and constancy and so affect some of his
domestical servants, that one of them (a Pagan Idolater,) who pretended to
wisdom, being asked What his opinion was of the Emperors Oration, answered
though with some unwillingnes, that the things spoken by him seemed to him to
be true: and particularly that he could not but highly commend his discourse
against a multitude of Gods. Such entertainments as those the pious Emperor
had among his familiar friends a little before his death by which he seemed to
make the way to a better life more easy and eaven.

5. Eutropius relates that there appeared in heaven at that time a Comet of an
unusual biggnes, portending his death. After which he fell into some
distemper: which increasing, forced him to make use of hott bathes in the
City: Id. ib. c. 61.
From whence, says Eusebius, he was removed to his Mothers City, Helenopolis
in Bithynia, where for a long time continuing in the Church consecrated to the
Holy Martyr S. Lucianus he offered his Prayers and public vows to God.

6. The same Author in another place pretends that Constantin was at this time
baptized by the Arian Bishop of Nicomedia, near that City. But the general
Tradition of the Western Church refutes him, as has been showed. Therefore what
was done by Constantin, was not receiving Baptism, but Penance, Id. ib.
which, the same Eusebius relating it, calls an imitation of saving Baptism.
For thus he writes, when the consideration, of his last day came into
Constantins mind, he judging this an opportune time for him to be cleansed of
his sins which as a mortal man, he had committed, and beleiving that by the
efficacy of Divine Mysteries and an imitation of the saving laver of Baptism,
his soul would be purged, he, I say, considering these things, fell humbly on
his knees in the Church of Martyrs at Helenopolis, and there confessing his
sins, he offered himself a suppliant to God for the pardon of them. And then it
was that he first became worthy to receive absolution by imposition of hands
and prayer.

7. In the last place touching his death, the same Author thus prosecutes his
Narration: Id. ib. 62.
As Soon as all holy Mysteries were performed, he was clothed with Kingly robes
shining brighter then light, and was laid in a bed of a most pure whiteness:
for his Imperial Purple he rejected, and would never make use of it afterward*
Then with a clear distinct voice he prayed and gave thanks to God, adding words
to this purpose, Now I am assured of happiness, and immortal life, now I am
made partaker of Divine light. Withal he with detestation bewayld the state of
miserable Pagans, whom be affirmed most unhappy in that they were deprived of
such divine blessings.

8. And when the Centurions and other Superior Officers were admitted, and
deplored with mournful voices their unhappines in the loss of such an
Emperor, wishing him a longer life: To these he answered, that now he had
attained true life indeed; and that himself only understood his own happiness;
for which reason his desire was to hasten his departure to God. After this he
disposed his will in which he gave honorable pensions to such Romans as
inhabited the Royal City new built by him. As for his Empire he left it as a
Patrimony to his children. Thus dyed Constantin during the solemnity of
Pentecost.

9. As for the Universal mourning, the clamours of the people, Vid. Eusebius. l.
4. c. 71.
the tearing of garments and prostration of bodies on the ground practiced by
the Soldiers to testify their inconsolable sorrow for so great a loss,
together with the glorious solemnization of his funerals, at which was only of
all his Sons Constantius, present; all these things may be read at large in the
same Author. This one passage in him must not be omitted, where he writes
thus, Id. ib.
Great multitudes of people together with the Priests did not cease with tears
and much groaning to power forth Prayers unto God for the soul of the
Emperor. wherein they performed an Office very acceptable and desired by the
pious Prince himself: And likewise God thereby showed his singular goodness to
his servant, both in that after his death his Empire descended to his own dear
children, and that himself obtained repose in the place, so affected by him,
wherein the Memory of the Apostles was ioy^tly celebrated.

10. That the Church did not doubt of the happiness and glory of this pious
Emperor after his death, Martyrol. Gall etc. 22. May.
the Martyrologes of the Greek, the Gallican and British Churches are assured
testimonies: in which on the one and twentieth of May his Memory is
anniversarily solemnised. And particularly in Brittany Temples were built and
dedicated to his honor. One of which still remains in the Province of the
Ordovices, or Northwales, called at this day by his name, which was erected by
the Britains when they Were driven by the Saxons into those quarters.

THE EIGHTH BOOK OF THE CHVRCH-HISTORY OF BRITTANY.
I. CHAP.
I. CHAP.
1.2. Constantin divides the Empire among his three Sons.

3. Brittany under Constantin the younger.

4. His kindness to S. Athanasius.

5. He is slain by his Brothers soldiers.

A. D. 337.
1.THE Emperor Constantin at his death divided the Roman Empire among his three
Sons, so as that his eldest Son Constantin enjoyed for his portion the
Provinces of Gaul, Spain, Brittany and all other conquered countries on this
side the Alps: Constantius the Second Son, being only present at his Fathers
death, took possession of the Eastern Regions, together with Egypt, and the
youngest son Constans had the government of Italy and Africa.

2. Now the Gests of these and several succeeding Emperors we will leave to
such Historians as have written of the general affairs of the Church and
Empire. For having confined our selves to matters which concern the
Ecclesiastical state of Brittany, our purpose is to treat no further of such
Emperors, then as they are necessary for Chronology, or shall concern our own
country.

3. As touching therefore the Second Constantin, within whose Jurisdiction
Brittany was comprised, his Reign was short, not lasting entirely four years.
And all that we can record of him is, that he was constant in the Profession of
the Catholic Faith established in the Great Council of Nicaea: wherein he was
imitated likewise by his Youngest Brother Constans: So that by these two
Emperors means all the Western Churches were secured from the infection of
Heresy, which miserably defaced the Eastern parts, by reason that Constantius
reigning there suffered himself to be perverted by Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia
and other Arian Heretics.

4. Now an illustrious proof which the younger Constantin gave of his zeal to
the Orthodox Faith, A. D. 338.
was his restoring S. Athanasius to his See of Alexandria after his two years
and four months banishment, during which time he abode at Triers in Germany,
where he was entertained with all honor and liberality by Constantin. This
restitution of S. Athanasius was performed in consequence to the last Will of
his Father the late Emperor Constantin, Theodores, h. l. 2. c. 1.
as appears by his Sons letter to the Church of Alexandria recited by S.
Athanasius in his second Apology: Wherein he further writes, that it was not out
of disaffection, but rather a tenderness of S. Athanasius his safety that
Constantin sent him into the West to his son, that so he might elude the
treacherous malice of his Enemies the Arian Bishops, who left no means
unattempted to destroy him.

A. D. 340
5. It does not appear that this younger Constantin ever came into Brittany,
which he governed by a Deputy, himself making his residence in Gaul. But in
the fourth year of his reign he passed over into Italy, with what design it is
uncertain, whether out of ambition to invade the portion of his Brother
Constans, or for some other intention. However he was there traitorously slain
at Aquileia, by his Brothers soldiers, and as Zosimus says, by his order. By
his death the whole Western Empire became the Dominion of Constans: Who placed
in Brittany, as his Liev^tenant Vetranio, one who a few years after usurped the
Title of Emperor.

II. CHAP.
II. CHAP.
1 2.3 Of S. Gudwal: His Gests.

4 The place where he lived.

5.6. etc. Of Mevorus a Prince: and his Son S. Simeon.

1. ABout this time in Brittany there flourished a famous holy Bishop called S.
Gudwal, commemorated by several Martyrologes and Ecclesiastical Writers,
(...). 6. Iunij Haraeus. 16 Malbranc. in Chron. Mart. Angl. 2^. Feb Cap grav.
in G^^vvalo.
the sum of whose Gests is as follows.

2. He was born in Brittany of Noble parents: and as soon as his age rendered him
capable, he was made Deacon, and afterward a Priest. At which time he largely
communicated to others those treasures of spiritual Wisdom which he had been
gathering from his youth. Insomuch as by his instructions many were so
enlightened that they were enabled to inflame others with divine Love. After
this being exalted to the Supreme degree of Episcopacy, he so much the more
dilated the odor of his holy conversation, Gods Spirit declaring in him the
operations of divine Grace, to the great joy of all, both Clergy and people. He
received by Succession from his Parents a very ample patrimony: but despising
worldly riches and having lost the taste of fading pleasures, he freely gave all
his possessions to the Church.

3. Moreover seeing that his Pastoral Office obliged him to worldly cares and
solicitudes, he used his utmost diligence to disburden and unchain himself
from it. Therefore recommending his Church to a worthy Successor, he retired
himself into a certain Monastery in his own Diocese, where he led a perfect
Monastical, or rather Angelical life. Now this Monastery was placed near the
Sea, in a bay whereof the holy man observing a certain vast rock or Promontory
shooting forth, he retired himself thither to the end he might without
interruption attend to God only: in which place he gathered to him the number
of one hundred and eighty disciples. But the place being too strait for so
great a multitude, the blessed man having recourse to God alone, in whose Power
and goodness he placed his only confidence, when the Sea at low Ebb had left
dry a great space of the shore, he with a r^d which he carried in his hands
made impressions in several places of the Sand, and commanded the waves in the
Name of Christ, that they should not pass those bounds. At which command
pronounced by the holy man one might observe the Sea naturally raging to
restrain its violence and swelling: and effectually to this very day it never
presumed to transgress the limits prescribed unto it. Thus this holy man bid
adieu to the world, to to all his friends in it, all things which it could
deprive him of, to all which vanities he was crucified, perfectly hating his
own soul and sensual desires. And yet contented not himself with this, but
continually meditated how to aspire to more sublime perfection. In order
whereto, having communicated his resolution to his Disciples, he determined
utterly to quitt his native country, and to pass over into foreign parts. For
which purpose having provided seven ships, he, accompanied with his Brethren,
entered into them and began his voyage, and with a prosperous gale this little
army of Saints took land in a strange country.

4. Now though in the ancient Monuments relating his life and Gests, the land
where he aborded be not named, notwithstanding there being mention made in them
of a certain Prince called Mevorus who enjoyed possessions in that place,
anciently belonging to his Ancestors: Which Mevorus professing Christianity,
and for that cause receiving great vexations from the inhabitants who were
Infidels, he transferred his dwelling to a place called Corminia, and at this
day Cormon, near a town in Gaul called Monstrueil: we may upon the authority
of Malbranc a learned French Antiquary conclude that S. Gudwal took land in the
Province of Belgic Gaul inhabited by a People called Morini, among whom he
preached the Christian Faith, and instructed many in the perfection of a more
holy life. For thus we read in the ancient narration of his life: 5. Mevorus as
soon as he had notice that the Holy Father S. Gudwal was entered into his
confines, Cap-grav. etc.
gave great thanks to God for it: and out of his Treasury richly endowed a
Church which this famous Bishop, devout Hermit and worthy Superior of Monks
founded in a strange country: where he gave illustrious examples of all
Christian virtues to the present age, and left a fragrant odor of his fame to
posterity.



6. But before the said Church and Monastery were perfectly endowed, we find a
relation of a wonderful fact of S. Gudwal. For Mevorus together with his wife
being much stricken in years, had no children at all: When behold about
midnight S. Gudwal appeared in a dream to the Matron, promising her that she
should have a Son, which himself, as another parent to him in regard of
education, would call by the name of Simeon. And Mevorus being informed of this
made a promise, that the said son who was to be born, should both in his own
person and with all his hereditary possessions be transcribed to the Monastery.
A. D. 347.
The event succeeded answerably to all their desires: for a son is born to
Mevorus, he is called Simeon, brought up in learning, and made a Monk: And then
it was that the Princes possessions were confered on the Monastery. It is very
probable that this Monastery was seated in a confining part of Flanders near
Ipre, where his memory to this day is with great devotion celebrated, and where
a village called Ghelwelt seems to afford marks of S. Gudwal's name.

7. How long the Holy man lived there, is not expressed by the Writers of his
life. Yet our Martyrologe relates on the sixth of June, Martyr. Angli^. 6.
Iunij.
that he rested in our Lord with great Sanctity about the year of Christ four
hundred and three: and the visions and wonders preceding his death are thus
related by those who have written his life: 8. An Angel of our Lord from heaven
appeared to him with a pleasant countenance, saying, O worthy soldier of God,
may the joy of our Lord always increase in thee, and his peace continually
remain with thee. Be ready prepared, for e're long God will call thee out of
this world, and thou shall meet thy heavenly King with a palm of Victory. This
celestial Messenger of God stayed with him a good space, and filled his soul
with a spiritual sweetness known only to God. A second time another Angel
appeared unto him, and said, I am Michael the Archangel, sent to thee from our
Lord, by whose command I am to acquaint thee with what shall shortly befall.
Behold I declare unto thee the hour of thy departure: for after ten days thou
shall joyfully issue out of thy prison of flesh, and escape out of the dungeon
of this world. With inestimable gladness thou shall meet thy heavenly King into
whose presence we will bear thee, and he will receive thee with glory,
enrolling thee among the Citizens and Courtiers of his kingdom.



9. It is said that his Mother and sisters were present and assisting at his
death, being invited thither by the fame of his miracles: And after his
departure, it seems they carried his body back with them into Brittany. But
afterward when the Pagan Saxons demolished the Christian Sepulchers in our
Island, it was transported again into Flanders: for thus we read in his life:
10. The Holy man dyed the eighth day before the Ides of June: and his Body was
buried in the Isle of Plet, or Plecit: where it remained many years,
illustrious by many miracles: But barbarous people afterward invading the
Country forced the Britains to fly into foreign regions, at which time the
Brethren of the foresaid Monastery took up the sacred Body, and carried it with
them over the Sea which divides Brittany from Gaul; And traveling with this
sacred pledge, at last they arrived at his own Monastery, where they reposed
it. Where because it was not entertained with due honor, a certain Noble
Marquis called Arnulphus appointed by God to be the instrument of the safety of
many men, A. D. 346.
removed it to the Monastery of Blandinium in Gaunt, together with the precious
Relics of the famous Confessor Bertulpus, Which Translation was made on the
third day before the Nones of December, when Clotharius reigned in France. On
which day yearly to this time the sacred Body is carried in a solemn
Procession. And what miracles were wrought several times during such
Processions Cap-grave relates.



III. CHAP. III. CHA.

1. Constans quiets Gaul and comes into Brittany.

2 3. A Synod at Sardica: where British Bishops come.

4. Gests of the Synod.

5.6. etc. Of Appeals to Rome, etc.

12.13. etc. S. Athanasius restored: and again banished.

15.16. Constans his death.

1. IN the year three hundred forty two, as Paulus Diaconus writes, A. D. 342.
P. D^ac. l. 11. c. 18.
great commotions began in the Roman Empire. For the Nation of the Franks
settling themselves in Gaul used all hostility against the Romans. But this
trouble was quickly appeased by the Emperor Constans, who coming out of
Illyricum ^ought with and subdued them. After which he passed over into
Brittany, which usually followed the motions of Gaul. This appears from Julius
Firmicus, who in a Book dedicated to the same Emperor recounts this journey
performed during the tempestuous season of Winter, Iul. Firmic. de Err^r
profan. Relig. c. 29.
telling him that the Britains at the unlooked for sight of him were
affrighted into obedience.

2. Four yearts after this, upon occasion of great combustions especially in
the Eastern Empire, A. D. 346.
the two Emperors joined to call a Council intended to be Oecumenicall. For
the Eastern Bishops of the faction of Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia Cheif-Pillar
of the Arians, had condemned S. Athanasius in two Synods, at Tire and Antioch.
On the contrary Julius Bishop of Rome in a Synod of Italian Bishops received
him into his Communion, notwithstanding the intercession of the Orientals, who
sent to Rome their Decree of the condemnation of S. Athanasius. Whereupon a
Schism between the Eastern and Western Churches being likely to break forth,
^heod^ret. h. l. 2. c. 5.
to prevent it the Orthodox Emperor Constans earnestly solicited his brother
Constantius to join with him in calling a General Council, thereby to preserve
inviolate the heritage of their Fathers piety, by which he had established the
Empire, destroyed Tyrants, and reduced to his obedience many barbarous Nations.

A. D. 347.
3. Hereupon a Synod was assembled the year following at Sardica in Illyrium;
Sozom. l. b. 3. c. 11.
to which there came out of the Western Empire about three hundred Bishops: and
out of the East only seaventy six. Now among the Western Bishops some there
were who came out of Brittany, Athanas. Apol 2.
as S. Athanasius, in whose cause especially the Synod met, expressly affirms,
naming one of them, to wit, Restitutus Bishop of London, who twenty years
before had been at the Council of Nicea to establish the Faith of the
Consubstantiality of the Son of God. In which regard to treat more particularly
of this Synods affairs appertains to our present History, for thereby will
appear the conformity of the British Churches in those days to the Faith and
Discipline of the Catholic Church.

Vid. Epist. Syn. Sardic. op. Athanas. Apol. 2.
4. For as much therefore as concerns the Acts of this Synod, the principal was
a confirmation of Faith established in the Council of Nicea: Next the declaring
the innocence of S. Athanasius, Marcellus, Asclepas and other Orthodox Bishops
persecuted and chased from their Sees by the Arian faction, together with the
deposition and excommunication of their adversaries. Then succeeded a
condemnation of those Eastern Bishops which deserted the Synod, and made a
Schismatic Assembly at Philippopolis near Sardica, where they likewise
published Decrees and Canons in contradiction to the lawful Synod.

5. Then touching matters of Discipline established in this holy Synod, the most
considerable was the confirming by an express Canon the lawfullnes of
Appeals, that is, Petitions for Revisions of Episcopal causes From all other
Churches both Eastern and Western to the Sea Apostolic of Rome. The form of
which Canon is as follows: 6. Osius Bishop said: This must likewise
necessarily be added, C^nc. Sardic. Can. 3.
That it may not be lawful for Bishops to pass out of their own Province into
another Province in which there are Bishops, unless peradventure they be
invited by their Brethren, least they should seem to shut the door of Charity.
But if it happen that in any Province a Bishop have a contention against his
Brother Bishop, one of the two may call out of another Province a Bishop to
judge the cause. But if any Bishop shall be judged (and condemned) in any
cause, yet thinks his cause to be good: In this case to the end the Council
may again be renewed, if you please let us honor the memory of S. Peter the
Apostle, that those who have examined the cause may write to Julius Bishop of
Rome, and if his sentence be that judgment ought to be renewed, let it be
renewed, and let him appoint Judges. But if he shall approve the cause to be
such as that those things which have been acted in it shall not be again
reiterated, what he decrees herin shall be confirmed, if such be all your
pleasures. The Synod answered, This pleases us.



Ib. Can. 4.
7. In pursuance of which, there was added this following Canon: Gaudentius
Bishop said: If you please, let this be added to this Decree which thou have
pronounced full of Sanctity: That when any Bishop shall be deposed by the
judgment of neighboring Bishops, and shall publicly declare that his
intention is to plead his cause in the City of Rome: after such an Appeal of
a Bishop who seems to be deposed, let not another Bishop be ordained in his
chair, till his cause be determined in the judgment of the Bishop of Rome.

8. Moreover to provide against tedious delays of causes, Ib. Can. 7.
and incommodities of transporting witnesses to Rome with excessive charges,
etc. the Holy Synod thought fit to adjoyn another Decree in this form: Osius
Bishop said, It is the pleasure (of the Synod) that if a Bishop be accused, and
that the Bishops of that Region assembled together shall give judgment against
him, and depose him from his Degree; in case he who is deposed shall appeal,
and have recourse to the Bishop of the Roman Church, with a desire to be heard
before him: if the said Roman Bishop shall think it just to have the
examination of the cause renewed, let him be pleased to write to those Bishops
which are in a neighbor and confining Province, signifying that they should
diligently examine the matter, and determine the cause according to truth and
justice. But if the Bishop who desires his cause may again be heard, shall by
Petition move the Roman Bishop, to send from his own presence (e latere suo) a
Priest to hear and judge the cause, it shall be in the power and liberty of
the Roman Bishop to do as he pleases and thinks most convenient. And if he
shall resolve to send persons, having his authority from whom they are sent, to
be present in judgment with other Bishops, this shall be left to his own
pleasure. But if he think sufficient that the Bishops (of the said Provinces)
put an end to the controversy, let him do what in his most wise counsel he
shall judge most expedient.

9. Thus was the matter of Appeals or Revisions regulated in this holy Synod:
at which were present no fewer then thirty African Bishops, named by S.
Athanasius in his Apology. So that it may seem wonderful how the same cause of
Appeals could afterward in the next age be questioned by their successors.
But the true ground hereof was, that the Donatists had by their subtilty and
malicious diligence abolished all the Copies and true Acts of the Council of
Sardica through Africa, in the place of them substituting the Acts of the
Anti-Synod celebrated by a few Eastern Bishop at Philippopolis, under the title
of the Synod of Sardica: And their motive was, because in the Epistle of that
false Council the Arian Bishops made mention of Donatus the Donatist Bishop of
Carthage. This appears by comparing several testimonies of S. Augustine,
August. Epist. 163.
as where in a certain Epistle he says, Fortunius the Donatist showed me a
certain Book, out of which he pretended to demonstrate that the Council of
Sardica had written to the Bishops of Africa of the Communion of Donatus. A. D.
353.
And ^ little afterward he says; Ibid.
Then having taken the Book, and considering the Decrees of the said Council,
I found that S. Athanasius and other Catholic Bishops, yea and Julius Bishop
of Rome no less Catholic then they, had been condemned by that Council of
Sardica: hereby I was assured that it was a Council of Arians.

10. These Decrees touching the Supereminent authority of the Bishop of Rome,
though they were not presently received in the East, by reason of the
discession of the Eastern Arian Bishops, yet afterward in the Council of
Constantinople in Trullo, called Quino-Sextum, they were expressly admitted.
And no show of doubt can be made but that the British Bishops carried back with
them these Decrees into Brittany: by which their subordination to the Roman See
was evidently declared.

11. A f^urth Canon was likewise there established to restrain the frequent
repair of Deacons sent by their Bishops to the Emperors Court (ad Comitatum*
Conciae. Sardicius can. 10.
) in the regulating whereof a particular honor was attributed to the Bishop of
Rome: for thus runs the Canon, If any such come to Rome, as has been said, Let
them present their Petitions to our most holy Brother and fellow-bishop of the
Roman Church, that he may first examine whether they be honest and just, and
consequently afford his diligence and care that they may be carried to Court.
All the Bishops said, that this pleased them well, and that the counsel was
honest Then Alypius Bishop said, If such men undertake the incommodities of a
long voyage for the causes of pupills, widows and such as are unjustly
oppressed, they will have just reason to do so: But now they repair thither to
make Requests for things which without casting an odious envy on us, and which
deserve reprehension, can not be granted, therefore there is no reason that such
should be permitted to go to the Court.

A. D. 34^.
12. The Synod being dissolved, the Emperor Constans employed his utmost
diligence and authority in the execution of its Decrees. And whereas the
chiefest difficulty was concerning the restitution of S. Athanasius to his See,
for the Eastern factious Bishops who had made a discession from the Council,
had used means to obstruct his return: Hereupon Constans wrote to his Brother
for his restitution, Socrat. ^ist. Eccles. l. 2. c. 18.
adding withal by way of menacing, that if he should refuse to effect it, he
must know for certain, that himself would come thither, and in despite of him,
restore the Banished Bishops to their Sees. Thus writes Socrates out of the
Emperors letter.

13. Now what effect this intercession of the Emperor Constans had, the same
Historian thus continues to relate: Id. ibid.
As Soon as the Eastern Emperor understood these things he conceived in his
mind no small grief. Whereupon assembling many Eastern Bishops he declared to
them how difficult a choice was offered to him: and asked their counsel what he
should do. Their answer was, That it was much better to allow Athanasius the
administration of his Church, then to hazard a Civil war. Hence it came to
pass that the Emperor constrained by mere necessity sent for Athanasius to
come to him.

14. The year following therefore Athanasius returned into the East, A. D. 349.
being recommended to the Emperor by letters written in his behalf by Pope
Julius. He was at first received with some kindness by the Emperor Constantius:
and at last permitted to return to his See at Alexandria.

15. But his abode there was very short: A. D. 350.
for the next year he was again expelled by the practices of his implacable
enemies the Arian Bishops, whose power became in a manner boundles by the death
of the Orthodox Emperor Constans: Who by the conspiracy of Magnentius,
Chrestius and Marcellinus, principal Officers of his, Aur. Victor.
was slain at Helena a town of France near the Pyrenean mountains, whither he
fled having been informed that Magnentius had taken on him the Imperial
Purple. There was a common report that Constans had received a Prediction, that
he should dye in his Grand-mothers bosom: which was fuffill'd by his murder in
a town called by her name*

6. His death was deservedly much bewayld by S. Athanasius, Athanas. Apolog.
not so much for the Protection, and favors showed to himself, as for the
grievous calamity which by his loss befell the Orthodox Faith, in danger to be
oppressed by the Arian Emperor Constantius, who remained sole Governor of the
Roman Empire: though before he could quietly enjoy it* two Tyrants were to be
oppressed. The one was Vetrannio, who had formerly governed Brittany and
afterward Illyricum, where being Prefect he was proclaimed Emperor by his
soldiers: but within a few days was deposed by Constantius, who not only spared
his life, but allowed him in his old age a retreat full of abundance ad
pleasure. The other was Magnentius, who took the Title of Emperor at Austun
(Augustodunum) in France, A. D. 355.
and held it three years, till by the loss of a battle he was forced to kill
himself.

IV. CHAP. IV. CHAP.

1. Constantius his Pride: he persecutes the Faith. A false Council at Arles.

2.3. Pope Liberius his constancy.

4.5. His fall: and rising. Of Felix an Antipope.

1. COnstantius after this Victory would be called Emperor of the whole world,
and as if he had bee^ exalted to a degree above human mortality, he assumed the
impious title of his eternity: And which was yet worse, all this Pride and
power he exte^ded to the oppression of the Catholic Faith, A. D. 355
and establishing of the Arian Heresy. For which purpose he used his utmost
endeavor to pollute therewith the Western Churches also. For commanding a
Council to be assembled at Arles in France, A. D. 353.
he by violence extorted the suffrages of the Bishops to favor his Heresy and
condemn S. Athanasius, drawing into the same impiety also the Legates of Pope
Liberius, who newly had succeeded Julius. So that unless Liberius had
expressly protested against their Sentence, he would deservedly have incurred
the same suspicion.

A. D. 354*
2. On the contrary whilst Constantius remained in France, Liberius more then
once solicited him by Legates and Epistles in the behalf of S. Athanasius,
complaining that the suffrages of Bishops were mercinarily sold according to
the Princes inclination. He wrote likewise to S. Eusebius the famous Bishop of
Vercelles, exhorting him to courage in maintaining the Catholic Faith, and
opposing himself to the violence of adversaries.

A. D. 355.
3. Whereupon Constantius, perceiving that Pope Liberius his defending of S.
Athanasius rendered unproffitable the Sentences of his Synods packed against
him, used all possible endeavors to win him by promises and favors to his
party. Athanas. ad solitar.
But these allurements proving uneffectuall, he sent for him: and Liberius
being come to his presence, used great liberty of speech to him, as S.
Athanasius relates: protesting his readiness to suffer all things, rather then
from being a Christian to become an Arian. At which the Emperor being highly
offended, sent him into banishment to Beraea a City of Thrace. Theodoret.
hist. l. 2. c 16
Whereto he cheerfully submitted, and would not accept five hundred crowns,
which the Emperor sent for his maintenance. Into whose place was substituted a
certain Roman Priest called Felix, one who though in judgment a Catholic, yet
condescended to communicate with the Arians.

A. D. 357.
4. Liberius continued in his exile little above two years, but returned with as
much infamy as he had submitted to it with glory. For wanting constancy to
support the tedious delay of his banishment, he yielded at last to the
condemnation of S. Athanasius, and subscribed likewise to a Confession of Faith
framed in a Synod at Sirmium, in which though there was nothing heretical, yet
the word of Consubstantiality not being expressed in it, his subscription was
sc^ndalous, arguing an unlawful compliance with the Arians.

5. But being returned to Rome, he broke off all commerce with the Arians,
rejoined himself to S. Athanasius his Communion, and to demonstrate the
Orthodoxnes of his Faith, in an Epistle to him recorded by S. Athanasius
himself, ^p. Athanas. post epist. ad ^pictet.
he wrote thus, Our Confession, most beloved Athanasius, is that the Word is
the Son of God, being according to his Nature begotten of God his Father, not
created, he is God his Fathers colleague in his Empire, and obtains an endless
kingdom for infinite ages. Amen.

V. CHAP. V. CHAP.

1. Gratian Propretor of Brittany: deprived.

2.3 etc. His Successor Martinus, a just man: Cruelty of Paul the Notary.
Martinus kills himself.

1. WHilst Constantius in the west thus afflicted the Catholic Church and
Faith, A. D. 355.
the Propretor of Brittany was Gratian, Father of Valentinian who was afterward
Emperor. He was raised from a vile original to that high degree for his
courage and virtue. He was called by a mock-name Funarius the Rope-man: because
in his younger age having been a seller of ropes, Aur. Victor. in Valentinian^.
he was of such strength that five soldiers could not with their joint forces
wrest a rope out of his hands. This Gratian having incurred Constantius his
displeasure by favoring the faction of Magnentius, was deprived of his Office
and Estate.

2. There succeeded him in the Government of Brittany Martinus: a Propretor who
governed this Island with great justice and kindness to the Britains. But his
Government and life lasted not long, being interrupted upon this occasion.

3. The Emperor Constantius being a Prince extremely suspicious, A^m.
Macellin. l. 14. c. 12.
employed several Officers to search out all such as were guilty of any
practices against him. Among these there was one called Paul a Notary, very
acceptable to him for his malicious diligence and sagacity in exploring such
matters: who was therefore sent into Brittany to bring over in chains such
soldiers as had intermedled in the conspiracy of Magnentius. This employment
the Notary executed, with such horrible cruelty and injustice, that the Praetor
Martinus not able to continue a spectatour of it, first by way of entreaty
endeavored to avert the miseries of a world of innocents: and this being
unsuccessfull, he protested he would leave the Province. Paul being extremly
incensed hereat, out of a fear least if he should surcease his cruelty, the
Emperor would impute it to want of zeal in him, he by his subtilty (for which
he had the Surname of Catena, or a Chain, given him) involved the Praetor
himself also in a suspicion of the same guilt and treason. And being very
earnest to seize upon him and putt him in fetters with the rest, Martinus in
his own defense set upon Paul with his sword, and wounded him, yet with so
remiss a blow, that the wound did not prove mortal: whereupon he turned his
sword upon his own breast: A. D. 359.
and thus dyed this most just and merciful Praetor for endavouring to divert
the calamities of a multitude of miserable innocent persons.

VI. CHAP.
VI. CHAP.
1.2.3.4. Council of Ariminum. Wherein were British Bishops: poor but generous.

5 6 etc. The Council at first constant and Orthodox.

10. It is tyrannised over.

A. D. 359.
1. THE year of our Lord three hundred fifty nine was blackned with a public
scandal, the greatest that ever exposed the Church both to danger and infamy:
and that was the great Council of Ariminum, assembled by the authority of the
Arian Emperor Constantius, with design to abolish the Faith of the
Consubstantiality of the Son of God. Concerning which Council, Sulpitius
Severus gives this relation: S^lp. Sever. Hist. lib. 2.
2. Constantius, says he, commanded a Council to be assembled at Ariminum a
City of Italy: and withal laid this injunction on the Prefect Taurus, that
when the Bishops were met together, he should not permit them to depart till
they had all consented in one Faith: promising him the Consulship if he
effected this. Sending therefore his Officers through Illyricum, Italy, Africa,
Spain and the Gauls ( under which was comprehended, Brittany, as being
governed by the same Prefect:) they summoned and drew together out of the
Western Empire to Ariminum more then four hundred Bishops.

3. To all these the Emperor commanded that allowance for provisions and
lodging should be given. But that seemed an unseemly thing to our Bishops of
Aquitain, Gaul and Brittany: and therefore refusing the public allowance they
chose rather to maintain themselves at their own costs. Only three Bishops
which came out of Brittany, being destitute of subsistence from their own Sees,
were content to make use of the Emperors liberality, for they refused the
contribution which the rest of the Bishops offered to them, esteeming it more
becoming their dignity and Sanctity to be a charge to the public Treasure,
then to particular persons.

4. This passage (says the Author) I my self heard related by our Bishop
Gavidius and he told it by way of reprehension and diminution of them. But I am
quite of another opinion, and esteem those British Bishops to deserve great
commendation, first for that they had divested themselves of all propriety: and
next that they chose rather to be obliged to the Emperors Exchequour, then
their Brethren for their maintenance: In both which regards they left an
example worthy to be praised and imitated.



5. When the Bishops were assembled, the Emperors letters were in the first
place publicly read, by which he took on him to prescribe Laws unto the Synod
what they should do, and what they should forbear. Ap. Hilar. in fragm. lib.
2.
For, says Saint Hilary, he severely enjoined them to determine nothing which
might touch the Eastern Bishops, but only themselves: And in case they should
transgress this his order, he declared a Nullility in their proceedings. He
commanded them withal that having finished their Decrees* they should send
them to Court by ten Bishops ch^sen by common consent. In the Inscription of
which Letter it is observable that he writes himself by the Name of Constantin,
not Constantius.

6. But notwithstanding these threats the Holy Bishops courageously performed
their Duty. For, as the same Holy Father relates, Id ibid.
they confirmed the Nicene Creed, forbidding any addition or diminution
thereof: Protesting that they would never depart from the Faith which they had
received from God the Father by the Prophets, and our Lord Jesus Christ, which
the Holy Spirit taught in the Gospells and writings of the Apostles, according
as was delivered by Tradition of the Fathers succeeding the Apostles to the
times wherein the Controversy was debated at Nicea against a Heresy which then
arose. To this Definition all the Catholic ^ishops in the Synod unanimously
agreed.

7. In which Definition it is observable, that though it was grounded on the
Holy Scriptures, yet those Scriptures are interpreted by the successive
Tradition of the Church. Whereas on the contrary the faction of a few Arian
Bishops separatedly framed a Decree, which according to the almost uniform
practice of Heretics, was pretended to agree with the simple words of
Scripture, interpreted by themselves. For thus writes Saint Athanasius:
Athanas* l d^ Synod.
In a Creed made by them they professed the Son of God to be like to the Father
who begott him: whose generation according to the Scriptures no man knows but
the Father only. As for the word Substance, it being simply set down by the
Fathers, not understood by the people, and occasioning great scandal, in a
much as it is not expressly contained in Scriptures, they decreed that it
should be quit abolished, and that for the future no mention should be made of
the Substance of God, because the Holy Scriptures have never mentioned the
Substance of the Father and the Son. But we say that the Son is in all things
like to the Father, as the Holy Scriptures do say and teach.

8. The same Father adds, that when these Arian Bishops, of which Valens and
Vrsacius were chief, saw that they could not impose upon the Western Bishops,
they then said, We came to this Meeting, not because we stand in need of a
Faith: For we have a faith sound and orthodox* Id. ibid.
but that we might confound those who contradict the Truth, and would introduce
Novelties into the Church. And thereupon they separated themselves from the
rest of the Council: which with unanimous suffrages pronounced Valens,
Vrsacius, Germinius, Auxentius, Caius and Demophilus to be Heretics, and
excluded from the Communion of the Church.

Id. ib.
9. Which done, the Council by a common Letter informed the Emperor of all
these things: In which Letter there is this memorable passage: that whereas the
Arian Bishops, to induce the Catholics to comply with them, used this
argument, That Unity and peace would be restored to the Church, in case they
would relinquish that one word, Substance: the Catholic Bishops there wrote,
It is not, as Vrsacius and Valens affirm, that peace will ^ollow by the
Subversion of things which are just and true. For how can those men behave
themselves peaceably, who quite take away peace? On the contrary more
contentions and disturbances will spring up both in other Cities, and
particularly at Rome. And in conclusion they begged leave of the Emperor that
the Council might be dissolved, considering the poverty, age and infirmity of
many of the Bishops in it.

10. Constantius perceiving how unsuccess'full his Design was of introducing
his Arian Misbeleif into the Western Churches, broke forth into open tyranny:
some of the Catholic Bishops he caused to be shut up in prison, others he
afflicted with famine and all manner of opprobrious usage, not suffering any to
depart, till he had compelled them to subscribe to a Form of Belief, wherein
though nothing Heretical was expressed, yet the true Faith was at least
dissembled, and consequently the Arian faction prevailed in power through the
whole Empire.

VI. CHAP.
VI. CHAP.
1. Julian made Caesar.

2.3. Lupicinus Governor of Brittany recalled Gumoharius succeeds him.

4 The Scotts invade Brittany: Now first named.

1. COnstantius to disburden himself of some part of the cares of the Empire
did in the year of Christ three hundred fifty one create Gallus the Son of his
Uncle Annilalianus Caesar, and gave him to wife his sister Constantina, sending
him into the Eastern parts to govern there: But three years after, for his
cruelty and other enormous crimes he caused him to be emprison'd, and his head
to be cut off. And the year following he assumed into the same dignity of
Caesar and Successor in the Empire Julian younger Brother to Gallus, D. A. 361.
afterward called the Apostat, whom he sent with an army into Gaul, to
repress the irruptions of the Franks and other German Nations.

2. In the fourth year of his Government troubles arising in Brittany, A. D.
360.
he sent over Lupicinus to compose them. These troubles were caused by the
excursions of the barbarous Nations, Am. Marcellin. l. 20 c 1.
the Picts and Scotts, says Marcellinus, which wasted with all cruelty the
Northern Provinces bordring on them. Lupicinus therefore strengthening his Army
with auxiliary companies of the Heruli, Batavians and Maesians, in the midst of
Winter took shipping at Bulloign (Bononia) in Gaul, and landed at Richborow
(Rutupiae) a Sea-town on the other side: from whence he marched to London,
there intending to advise how to proceed.

3. But he was not permitted to perform any considerable exploit against the
enemies, by reason that Julian proclaimed Emperor by his Army was jealous of
him, least if he shoud be informed of his rebellion against Constantius, he
should practice his Army against him. Whereupon stopping all passages from
Gaul into Brittany, he recalled Lupicinus and in his place sent for General
of the British Army, Gumoharius.

4. But neither did he do any thing worthy of memory, for notwithstanding any
opposition of his the Scots, a people which came out of Ireland, rooted
themselves so firmly in the Northern parts of this Isle, that daily increasing,
they in after ages established a Ki^^dom there to them selves and posterity to
this day. Hereto pertains that passage of Giraldus Cambrensis, Giral. Cambr.
Top^gr. H. b. did. 8. c ^6.
It must be observed, says he, that when Nele obtained the Monarchy of
Ireland, the six sons of Mured King of Vlster passing over in a considerable
fleet, possessed themselves of the Northern parts of Brittany. Whence a people
descending from them, called by a peculiar name, Scotts, do inhabit that
co^^er to these times. Now this Prince called Nele, the Monark of Ireland,
reigned in the days of the Emperor Constantius, as Bishop Usher collects from
the nameles Author of the Life of S. Patrick. Which if it be true, then it is
probable that the irruption of the Scotts and Picts mentioned by Marcellinus,
was the same which Giraldus speaks of. And it is very likely that among the six
sons of Mured, the eldest was that Reuda of whom S. Beda writes, saying, In
process of time Brittany, after the Britains and Picts, received a third
Nation of Scotts, Bed. hist. l. i. c. 1.
who seated themselves in the country of the Picts. These coming out of
Ireland under the command of their Captain Reuda, partly by freindship, and
partly by the sword possessed themselves of those seats, which they hold to
this day. And from this their Captain Reuda, they are called Dalreudini.

5. This is the first time that mention is made of the Nation of the Scotts by
any ancient Author: Which argues that in this age they first came into
Brittany. Yet, says Camden, Camden. in Scotis.
it was a good space of time before they enlarged their Seats beyond the corner
of which they first, took possession. But afterward they invaded the Picts,
and in many battles almost wholly consumed them, about the time that the
Kingdom of Northumberland, by the incursions of the Danes, and civil
contentions was in a manner utterly ruind. And after that time, all the
Northern part of Brittany took the name of Scotland.

VII. CHA.
VII. CHAP.
1.2. British Bishops Orthodox: S. Hilaries Epistle to them.

3.4. Of Restitutus Bishop of London.

G^ld in Excid. Brit. Bed. hist. l. 1. c. 8.
1. THough our ancient Historian Gildas, and after him S. Beda do relate that
Catholic peace and Unity remained in the British Churches from the time of
Diocletians persecution till the age in which the Arian impiety raged, whereby
it may seem that they began to be infected not long after the Council of
Ariminum: Yet that this infection did not spread much in this Isle in those
days, appears by a Letter of S. Hilary about the year of Christ three hundred
sixty one to the German, A. D. 361.
Gallick and British Bishops in answer to one sent from them to him during his
tedious Exile caused by the Arian Bishop of Arles, Saturninus, who circumvented
the Emperor Constantius by false suggestions against this holy Bishop, and
induced him to banish him out of Gaul into Phrigia and other Eastern countries.

2. In which letter he congratulats with this Island for its freedom from the
poison of Arianism, Hilar. in fr^gm.
for their refusing to accept an Heretical Profession sent from the Council of
Sirmium, which they moreover courageously condemned, notwithstanding all the
practices and threatenings of their neighbor Saturninus to intimidate them.
Which constancy of theirs was so famous almost all the Empire over, that their
example induced some even of the Eastern Bishops to be ashamed of their Heresy.
Moreover in the same letter he satisfies their enquiry touching the opposition
of the Arians against the Catholic Faith, declaring the principal grounds and
arguments on which they built their impiety: and testifies his great joy for
that they professed their Communion with him though a banished man, which they
refused to the Arian Bishops of Gaul.

3. Among these Orthodox British Bishops to whom S. Hilary wrote, several
Authors mention the name of the old Bishop Restitutus, Bishop of London, who
about forty six years before had been present at the first Council of Arles.
Neither is it at all incredible that he should be alive at this time: Since we
find Osius of Corduba who presided in the Council of Nic^a, Sardica, and
Sirmium, to have lived above a hundred years, though Spain his country
generally produces not so long-lived persons as Brittany. To this Restitutus
the Centuriators of Magdeburg from Bale attribute the Writing of Several
Epistles to S. Hilary: and Pitsaeus reckons him among the Illustriou^ British
Writers, affirming that he left behind him one Book of Epistles to the same
Father.

4. It was about this time that the said Restitutus dyed: Magdeb. Cent^r. 4. f.
1294.
whose Successor in the Bishopric of London was Theodowin, renound in History
by his name only, and See.

VIII. CHAP. VIII. CHAPTER

1.2. Of S. Kebius taught by S. Hilary.

3.4. Made Bishop of Anglesey etc.

5.6. Goes into Ireland: baptizes S. Albeus etc. and returns.

1. ANother illustrious proof of the purity of the Faith of the British Church
was S. Kebius, A. D. 361.
sirnamd Cor^nius, Son of Solomon Duke of Cornwall: who is reported to have
undertaken a journey into Gaul to S. Hilary newly returned from Exile, to be
more perfectly instructed by him in the Catholic Faith: Which journey Pitseus
says was occasioned by the unhappy springing upp of the Arian Heresy in
Brittany.

2. Capgrave in the Life of S. Kebius says, that he abode several years with
S. Hilary, ^apgrav. in Kebio.
improving himself in learning and Sanctity: whereto God gave testimony by
conferring on him the Grace of Miracles, so that he gave sight to the blind,
cleansed the Leprous, and healed those who were dumb, sick of the palsy and
possessed with Devils.

3. The same Author, together with our other Historians Leland, Pitsaeus,
Spelman etc. affirm that after some years the Holy man was admonished by an
Angel to return into his own country whereupon being consecrated a Bishop by
S. Hilary, he placed his See in the Isle of Anglesey (or Mona:) and by his holy
example and sound Doctrine instructed the Venedotae and Monudes, northern people
of Wales. It is said likewise that being arrived in Brittany, he was requested
to come and undertake the Principality of Cornwall: but utterly refused to
accept any worldly authority or power.

4. After these things, says Capgrave, Kebius with ten of his Disciples, Ap.
Capgrav. ibid.
who were Monks, descended into the meadow of King Ethelic, pitching his tent
there. Whereupon the King sent to enquire who they were that durst presume to
enter into his meadow. The Messenger returning told him that they were Monks.
Whereupon the King presently arose with all his family, intending to cast those
Monks out of his country: but in the way he fell from his horse which dyed,
and the King with all his followers were struck with blindness. Then did the
King prostrate himself on his face before S. Kebius, devoting himself entirely
to God and his servant Kebius: and immediately by the holy man's prayer they were
all healed. After this the King gave to the man of God two Churches: who having
given the King his benediction retired to Menevia (afterward called S. David's:)
from whence he sailed over into Ireland, where having built a Church in a
certain Island, he remained there four years.

In vit. S. Albei ap. Vsserium in Primord. 81.
5. Very probable it is that this S. Kebius was the fame British Priest who
baptized the Irish S. Albeus: For in the Life of that Saint recorded by Bishop
Usher we read this passage; Lachanus gave the Holy Child to certain Britains,
who brought him upp with great cure, giving him the Name of Albeus, because he
was found alive under a rock, and the Grace of God was with him. After these
things there came thither a certain British Priest, sent by the Sea Apostolic
into Ireland, many years before S. Patrick, to sow the Faith of Christ there.
But the Irishmen being Pagans, would not receive him, nor believe his Doctrine,
except a very few. He came then to the Inhabitants of Munster, where he found
the Holy child Albeus praying in the open air with his eyes raised up to
heaven, that the true Faith might be revealed to him, and saying, My desire is
to know the Creator of all things, and to believe in him who made heaven and
earth and all creatures in them: For I know that the Elements were not made
without a skillfull Workman, neither could any man produce these things. When
the holy child had thus prayed, the said Priest who overheard him, saluted him
and according to his hearts desire instructed him in all things: which having
done he baptized him, continuing the same name of Albeus to him.

6. Besides S. Albeus, the Ecclesiastical Monuments of Ireland record several
other persons converted and baptized by the same Holy British Priest, as
Meclarus and Kiaxanus, persons eminent in Sanctity, and illustrious for the
number of their Disciples: All which moreover were exalted to Episcopal
dignity before S. Patricks arrival there. Which they esteem no disparagement
to his Apostleship, which began in the year four hundred and thirty.

7. After some years abode in Ireland, the Holy Bishop Kebius returned to his
See in Anglesey, where he dyed in the year of Grace three hundred and seaventy.
The place of his burial seems to have been among the Ordovices, in
Denbighshire. For in the Story of S. Winefred written by Robert Abbot of
Shrewsbury we read that the Holy Virgin was buried near to the Sepulchers of
Chebaeus and Senanus at a place called Gwethern ( Witheriacum) in the western
part of Denbigh-shire. Which S. Chebaus, was no doubt the same with this our S.
Kebius, An illustrious Monument of whose Memory is still remaning in Anglesey,
where, says Camden, the Holy Promontory looking toward Ireland, Camden. Mona
insol^
Vulgarly called Holy-head, is by the Natives named Caer-Gubi, from Kebius a
Holy man and Disciple of S. Hilary Bishop of Poictiers. Neither is S. Hilary
himself forgotten there, his memory being preserved by another Promontory
called Hilary-point.

IX. CHAP. IX. CHA.

1.2. etc. Of S. Patrick: the place and time of his Birth: His Parents etc.

1. THE same year in which S. Hylary retun'd into Gaul from banishment (at
which time S. Kebius repaired to him) was illustrious likewise for the Birth of
the great Apostle of Ireland S. Patrick. A. D. 361.
True it is that among our Ecclesiastical Historians there is great Variety as
in the number of the years of his life, so consequently in fixing the year of
his Nativity. But the series of his Life and Gests seems to be more exactly
computed by William of Malmsbury, Adam of Domerham and John a Monk, Gul.
Malmesbur Adam (...).
who have written his life more accuratly then any, out of the Ancient Records
of Glastenbury, and Probus who wrote the same presently after his death. And by
their account, ascribing to S. Patricks life one hundred and eleaven years, and
fixing his death in the year of our Lord four hundred seaventy two, his birth
must fall on this year three hundred sixty one.

2. Now though some Historians, and among the rest Matthew of Westminster, and
Baronius likewise, do affirm that he was born in Ireland, yet the greater
number, and those externs also, do acknowledge him a Britain: neither is this
denied even by the Irish Writers themselves.

3. But there seems some difficulty in assigning the particular Province in
Brittany where he was born* Bishop Usher is of opinion that the place of his
Nativity was a Town called Kirck-patrick situated between the Castle of
Dunbritton and Glasco, Vsser. in Primord. f. 8.9.
where the Romans anciently cast up a rampire to exclude the barbarous
Caledonians and Picts. And hereto he adds this observation, At this day (says
he) the ancient limits of the Provinces being changed, so as that the Castle of
Dunbritton does not now, as formerly, belong to the region of the Britains,
but Scotts: hence probably it has happened that some have affirmed S. Patrick to
have been a Scott.

4. This conjecture of so learned a Writer, though it confirms our position
that S. Patrick was by birth a Britain, yet mistakes in the particular
Province. For it was not in the Northern parts of Brittany that he was born,
but in the South-west coast among the Dimetae dwelling in the Province called
Penbrockshire, as besides Stanihurst a learned Irish Antiquary, it is asserted
by our Learned Camden. The words of Stanihurst are these, Stanihurst. ap.
Harae^^. 17. Mart.
In the year of our Redemption three hundred sixty one a certain honorable and
virtuous person called Calphurnius, or Calphurinus had by his equally virtuous
wife, whose name was Conchessa, a Son, who at his Baptism was called Suchar or
Socher; which name afterward was by S. German Bishop changed into Magonius: and
in conclusion by Pope Celestin he was named Patrick. Now Patrick was born in a
territory of Brittany lying by the Sea, which anciently was named Triburnia, or
Eiburnia. This is a place of the Dimetae in Penbrockshire, called by Ptolomy
the Promontory of the Octopitae, and at this day S. David's or Menevia (Menew.
Girald. ^tin. ^^mbr. l. 2. c. 1.
) A country this is stony and barren (says Giraldus Cambrensis) neither
clothed with woods, nor divided with rivers, nor adorned with meadows: but ^n
all sides exposed to winds and tempests. Notwithstanding this rude unfruitful
place, Camden in Dimetis, or Penbrokshire
as Camden relates, was the ^etreat and dwelling of persons eminent in
sanctity. For Calphurnius a British Priest, as we find in our Ecclesiastical
Records, in a valley of this country called Rosina had by his Wife Concha the
Sister of S. Martin Bishop of Tours a Son called Patrick the Apostle of
Ireland: And also David a most Religious Bishop removed his Archiepiscopall See
from Caer-leon (Isca Legionum) in Monmouthshire to Menew, which is the remotest
corner of this Region.

5. In these testimonies we find not only the place of S. Patricks birth, but
the names of his parents also. All which though with some variety is confirmed
by S. Beda, Bed. 3 tom. in vit. S. Pat^icij.
who writes thus: S. Patrick, who was also called Sochet, was by Nation a
Britain: Where after great tribulations suffered in his youth, he became an
instrument of salvation to his nation and country. He was begotten in Brittany
by his Father Calphurnius a Deaton, who was the Son of Potitus a Priest: and
his Mothers name was Concha. The place of his birth was a village called
Bannava in the Region of Triburnia, not far distant from the Western Sea. Which
village we find was unquestionably situated in the Province of Neustria, where
anciently Giants are said to have dwelt. Thus writes S. Beda from Probus the
first Describer of S. Patrick Gests.

6. Now whereas Calphurnius the Father of S. Patrick is said by some to have
been a Priest, or more truly by S. Beda, a Deacon: we are to understand that
according to the Ecclesiastical Laws and custom of that age, his Father after
receiving holy Orders professed continency, as S. Hilary of Poictiers and S.
Restitutus Bishop of London likewise did.

7. And as for S. Patricks Mother, called Conches or Conchessa, she was Sister,
or rather, as Bishop Usher judges, daughter to the Sister of the famous S.
Martin Bishop of Tours, Vsser. in Primord. fol. 8^2.
who flourished gloriously in this age; and who according to Sulpitius Severus
his computation was at this time in the forty fifth year of his age. Sulp.
Sever. in vit. S. Martini c. 1.
He came out of Pannonia (Hungary:) descended from parents, says the same
Author, according to worldly dignity of no mean degree. Thus much of the
Birth, country and Parents of this glorious S. Patrick: of whose wonderful
Gests we shall in prosecution of this History have frequent occasion to treat.

X. CHAP. X. CHAP.

1.2.3.4. etc. Julian succeeds Constantius: Becomes an Apostate and Persecutour.

7. etc. Is slain: to whom Iovian succeeds: and restores Christianity.

10. Iovian dying, Valentinian is chosen Emperor.

1. COnstantius in the five and twentieth year after his Father Constantins
death, and in the eleaventh after the death of his Brother Constans, dyed of a
fever at Mopsuestia in Cilicia, to whom Julian formerly created Caesar by him,
succeeded in the Empire, which he polluted by his infamous Apostasy.

2. He had from his infancy not only been bred in the Profession of
Christianity, but was likewise inscribed in an inferior Ecclesiastical Degree
of Lector: but being of an inconstant curious disposition, and unfortunatly
falling into the acquaintance and freindship of certain Pagan Philosophers and
Magicians, he was perverted by them: And though during Constantius his life he
dissembled his change, yet being possessed of the Empire he publicly professed
not only a defection from the Christian Faith, but an implacable hatred of it,
and resolution to employ all the power of Earth and Hell to destroy it.

3. The first proof hereof he gave, as S. Gregory Nazianzen witnesses, Greg.
Naz. in Orat. 1. cont. Julian.
in taking away that famous Labarum, or Imperial Ensign of the Cross, which
in Constantins and Constantius his times leading their Armies had given them
assured victories: in place whereof he restored the Images of the Heathen Gods
and Devils, together with the representations of Eagles, Dragons, Wolves,
Minotaurs, etc. which the soldiers were commanded to adore.

4. Moreover, Suid verb. (...).
says Suidas, he endeavored to abolish all other monuments of the Holy
Cross: insomuch as he caused to be dug out of the-Earth a representation of
the City of Constantinople on the top whereof Constantin had caused the Cross
to be fixed, A. D. 364.
to denote the felicity of that New City. And his custom was both in words
and Writing to object to Christians, by way of ignominy, their Veneration of
the Holy Cross. For this speech of his is quoted by S. Cyrill of Alexandria, O
wretched Christians, Cyrill. Alex. l. 6. c^nt. Julian.
said he, you have left off to adore and worship those sheilds (Ancilia) which
the great God Jupiter Father of Mars let fall from heaven, to be a real, not
verbal pledge of his perpetual protection to our City, and which are still
kepd in it: Instead of which you adore the wood of the Cross, painting images
of it on your foreheads and before your doors. Thus Julian censures the Rite of
the Ancient Church, and of all the faithful in his time, who on all occasions
expressed their Veneration of that blessed sign and instrument of our
Redemption.

5. With the same malignity he sought to abolish all other Sacred images and
Statues erected in several places to preserve the memory of past Divine
benefits, as likewise the Relics of former Saints and Martyrs. Thus Sozomen
relates how he caused to be thrown down the miraculous Statue of our Savior,
Sozom. hist. l. 5. c. 10.
which the devout woman, who had been curd by him of an issue of blood, had
raised at Caesarea Philippi: in the place whereof the impious Apostat erected
his own. But immediately fire from heaven divided his Satue in the midst,
throwing to the ground the upper half, which remained till the Historians days
all black, as things struck with lightning use to be.

Id. l. 5. c. 12.
5. The same Author likewise recounts how the same Impious Emperor consulting
a certain Oracle at Daphne near Antioch, and the Devil which used to speak in
it remaining mute, only being able to signify that the Body of the holy Martyr
Babylas hindered his speech: Julian caused the Sacred body to be removed from
thence into the City: which the Christians performed with great solemnity,
singing Psalms all the way, specially those wherein Idolatry is derided, to the
infinite indignation of the Emperor, who thereupon caused many of them to be
tortured, but by the intercession of the Holy Martyr their torments were
miraculously converted into pleasure. Chrysostom. orat. 5 ^ont. Gentil^s.
The same Story is confirmed likewise by S. Chrysostom.

7. But a war against the Persians interrupted his rage against Christians, A.
D. 363.
who at his first setting forth threatened that when that Expedition was
finished, he would destroy all who professed the name of Christi: A threatening
very acceptable to the Pagans, but grievous to the afflicted Christians. Whilst
he was busy in the prosecution of this war, Libanius a Heathen Sophister, in
derision of Christ asked a certain Christian, What the Carpenters Son was then
doing? Who answered, He is preparing a Coffin for Julian. And the event made
these words prophetical, A. D. 365.
for the wicked Emperor received from an unknown hand a wound mortal to him
self, Gr. Naz. Orat. 2. in Julian.
but healthful to all the world beside.

8. In his place the Army chose Iovian Emperor, Theodoret. hist. Eccl l. 4. c.
1.
though he refused that honor, professing that being a Christian he neither
would nor could govern an Army poysond with heathenish Idolatry. Whereupon all
the soldiers cried out that they also were Christians: those who were ancient
among them having been trained up in the piety of Constantin, and the younger
imbued with the precepts of Constantius. So that the two years reign of Julian
could not extirpate the good seeds sown in their hearts.

9. Iovian thus chosen, restored the Christian Faith, ^heodoret. ^b* l. 4. c. 4.
reducing the Church to its former splendor. He also published a Law by which
in all Cities a certain proportion of Wheat was contributed to Sacred Virgins
by vow consecrated to God: Lib. Cod. de Epist. and Clericis.
And another which inflicted death on any who should ravish, or but attempt
their Chastity. He likewise ordained that all Catholic Bishops who had been
formerly banished should return to their Sees. There is extant an Epistle of S.
Athanasius in answer to one from the Emperor, who had desired to be informed
by him who among the divided Sects of Christians, retained the Orthodox Faith.
Which Epistle challenges a mention in this History, because among the several
Nations constantly persevering in the Faith of our Saviors Divinity,
established in the Council of Nicea, he expressly names Brittany. Whence
appears that hitherto the British Churches were pure in their Faith, however
some particular persons there might have been infected.

10. This pious Emperor lived but one year: A. D. 364.
to whom succeeded Valentinian a Prince equally Orthodox: But who unhappily
made partner in his Empire his Brother Valens, infected with the Arian Heresy,
and impiously zealous in the promoting of it.

XI. CHAP. XI. CHAP.

1.2.3. Picts, Scotts and Attacotti infest the Britains. Who these last were.

4.5. etc. Theodosius Governor of Brittany: His Victories there.

8. Brittany divided into five Provinces.

9. Theodosius recalled.

1. IN Brittany during Iulians reign the Prefect was Alipius, the Successor of
Gumoharius. Where quietness continuing, the Picts and Scotts securely
multiplied, both in numbers and strength: Of which presently after they showd
terrible proofs. For as Marcellinus relates, A. D. 364. Am. Marcell. hist. l.
26. c. 10.
in the first year of Valentinians reign the barbarous Nations on all sides of
the Roman Empire, as if universally excited by a trumpet, broke their limits,
and made furious incursions into the Roman Provinces. The Alamanni wasted Gaul
and Rhetia: The Sarmatians and Quadi made irruptions into Pannonia, and the
Picts, Saxons, Scotts and Attacotti vexed the Britains with incessant
calamities.

2. By which appears that the Enemies of Brittany were multiplied. For to the
Picts and Scotts, here is an addition of the Saxons and the Attacotti, never
mentioned before in Story with relation to Brittany. As for the Saxons a Germa^
Nation who now first made themselves known by their cruelty to the Britains,
within a few years they will be too well known, not by their piracies on the
Seacoasts, as at this time; but by an invasion of the whole Island, so
successful to them, that they got almost an entire possession of it, leaving
only a barren mountainous corner to the fearful Britains.

3. But who were the Attacotti S. Hierom will tell us. Hier. lib. 2. cont.
Iovinian.
What shall I say of the immanity of other Nations? I my self in my youth saw
in Gaul the Attacotti, a British Nation who nourished themselves with human
flesh: These men in the forests meeting with herds of beeves sheep and swine,
neglected them, and cut off the hanches of the Pastors, and breasts of the
women, and fed upon them, accounting these to be their principal delicacies.
It seems therefore that these Attacotti were a Savage people in the Northern
mountains of Scottland, living without all Law or Government, who likewise had
promiscuous wives, Id. Epist. 83.
ad common children. This rude multitude were invited by the Picts and Scotts
ioyn with them in the invasion of the Civil Britains.

A. D. 365.
4. Upon this occasion the Emperor Valentinian leaving his Brother Valens to
govern the East, made an expedition into Gaul, where he composed the troubles
raised by the Alamanni: Amm. Marcellin. hist. 27. c. 17.
This being done as he was in a hasty march from the Province of the Ambiani
(or Amiens) toward Triers, he was stopped by an astonishing message out of
Brittany, which informed him how by a conspiracy of several barbarous Nations
the Britains were reduced to the utmost extremity: How Nectaridius Admiral
(Comes) of the Sea coasts had been slain by the Enemies, and Bulchobaudes the
General circumvented by their ambushes. Upon which horrible reports the
Emperor dispatched into Brittany Severus one of his chief Officers, to remedy
those disorders. But shortly after recalling him, he sent Iovinus thither,
making a sudden provision of ammunition and store, and preparing strong armies
to assist him, according to the instant urgent necessities. In conclusion
fresher and more horrible rumors increasing, he made choice of Theodosius to
go General thither, a man famous for many martial exploits happily achieved:
who being attended with courageous Legions and cohorts, made up of lusty youth,
prosecuted the expedition with a noble confidence.

5. At the same time the Franks and Saxons had infested the coasts both of
Gaul and Brittany: and into this latter they had made an impression as far as
London, A. D. 367.
where they drove all the country about. To remedy which injuries the vigilant
General Theodosius took shipping at Boloyn in Gaul, Id ib. c. 18.
and passing the Sea landed at Rutupiae (Richborough in Kent near Sandwich.)
Which is a secure Station for ships. Whither as Soon as his Cohorts called
Herculij, Iovij, Victores, Fidentes, etc. aborded, he marched from thence
straight to London, an ancient town, afterward called Augusta: and dividing his
Army into several squadrons, he set on the straggling Enemies laden with
spoils: and dispersing them he quickly rescued the prisoners, together with
the cattle and other prey: Which he restored to the miserable natives,
excepting a small part bestowed on his weary Soldiers: And so entered into the
City in triumph, joyfully received by the people lately plunged in extreme
misery, and in a moment recovered by his valor. There he made some stay, with
an intention to attempt greater matters, yet without putting the army to
hazard. For by captives and spies he was informed that the sudden excursions of
so many feirce nations could no other way be repressed, but by subtilty.
Hereupon to divide them he published Edicts promising impunity to all who would
submitt. And those which came in he dispersed into other quarters severally,
allowing them provisions: Which gave an invitation to many more to submitt
likewise. After this he desired the Emperor to send over to him as his Deputy
Governor in Brittany Civilis, a man of a more then ordinarily sharp judgment
in such affairs, and withal of great integrity: At likewise for his Lieutenant
in martial affairs, Dulcitius, very skillfull therein. And thus passed the
affairs in Brittany that year.

6. Two years after he marched with his army from London northward, A. D. 367.
where he putt to flight several Nations, which formerly had the insolence to
invade the Roman provinces. Thus he restored to their former security and
plenty many Cities and castles, which had been vexed with many calamities. But
whilst he was busy in these matters, he had like to have been circumvented by
the treason of one Valentinus a Pannonian, who for some great crimes had been
banished into Brittany. For this man being of an ambitious turbulent Spirit,
had solicited many of the Soldiers to conspire with him against Theodosius: But
the design being discovered, he contented himself with the execution of
Valentinus and a few of his nearest associats: for he would not by tortures
search further into the conspiracy, least by dispersing a fear among his
soldiers, he should incite them to pursue the like attempts.

7. Having escaped this danger he successfully prosecuted the war, putting
strong garrisons into Cities and limitany castles, and in a short time
recovered the Province from the Enemies, in which he placed a Governor.

7. So that now that part of Brittany which was under the Romans dominion was
divided into five Provinces. A. D. 372.
The first called Britannia prima contained all the southern parts between the
Sea and the Rivers of Thames and Severn. The second called Britannia Secunda
comprehended the Silures, Dimetae and Ordovices, that is, all Wales. The third
called Flavia Caesariensis (probably from this Theodosius his Son afterward
Emperor of the Flavian family) embraced all the Regions between Thames and
Humber. The fourth called Maxima Caesariensis reached from Humber to the River
Tine. And lastly Theodosius having expelled the Picts and Scotts out of all the
Province beyond Tine as far as between Dunbritton and Edinborough, called this
fifth Province Valentia: In which was the wintring camp of a Roman Legion, to
repress the incursions of the Scotts.

A. D. 370.
9. Theodosius having thus happily settled Brittany, was two years after called
by the Emperor to Court, where he was made General of the Horse in Iovinus
his place, and by the Senate honored with a Statue of brass. But the most
illustrious effect of his martial exploits was the recommending of his Son by
the brightness of them to the Empire.

XII. CHA.
XII. CHAP.
1.2. etc. Of S. Ninianus Birth and education*

3. Of S. Moses Apostle of the Saracens: said to have been a Britain.

A. D. 372.
1. THE year after Theodosius his departure out of Brittany, our Ecclesiastical
Monuments commemorate S. Ninianus (called by S. Beda, S. Ninias) his journey to
Rome, to be there instructed in the true Orthodox Faith, which he afterward
with great efficacy communicated to his own country. So that it is probable he
attended Theodosius in that voyage.

Capgrav.
2. Concerning whose birth we read thus in his life. He was born in great
Brittany, of a Princely Stock* in that Region where the Western Ocean as it
were stretching forth its arm, and on each side making two angles, divides the
Provinces of the Scots and English, as at this day they are separated. Which
country even to the times of the Saxons enjoyed their own King, as we are
assured not only from the credit of History, but even the memory of some yet
alive. His Father was Prince of that country (Cumberland,) by Religion a
Christian, and truly happy in the blessing of such a Son. Whilst Ninian was yet
a child he showed great devotion to Churches, and wonderful love to his
associats. He was sober in his diet, sparing of his tongue, diligent in
reading, grave in conversation, averse from lightness, and always careful to
subject the flesh to the spirit.

3. At last by a forcible instinct of Gods holy spirit the Noble youth
undertook a pilgrimage, despising wordly riches and carnal affections.
Therefore passing over Sea into Gaul, and taking his way through the Alps he
entered Italy, and with a prosperous journey came to Rome. Where being arrived,
he went to the Chief Bishop (Pope Damasus,) to whom he declared the cause of
his journey. Whereupon the Holy Bishop commending his devotion, received him
with the tenderness of a Father, and appointed him Teachers to instruct him in
the Disciplines of Truth and Orthodox Faith, as likewise in the wholesome sense
of Scriptures.

4. By this relation it appears that S. Ninian was of the Nation of the
Southern Picts. And whereas he is called Son of a King: that Title in the
liberal style of our ancient Legendaries signifies no more then a person of
Power and riches in his country. Though as Bishop Usher observes, Vsser. i^
Primord. f^ 64.
in the ancient English Annalls there is frequent mention of the Kingdom of the
Cumbri (Cumberland) whereto the Southern Picts belong. The Author of his life
thus proceeds.

5. Young Ninianus therefore with wonderful avidity studying Gods word,
Capgrav^^.
like a diligent Be composed for his own use as from many flowers out of
several Sentences of holy Doctors, honey-combs of spiritual wisdom: which
being laid upp in the hive of his bosom: he preserved them for his own
interior refection, in due time likewise to be poured forth for the
consolation of many others Thus being chaste in body, prudent in mind, provident
in counsels, circumspect both in actions and words, he was commended by all,
and every day more favored by the supreme Bishop.

6. Now it is no wonder that this holy Young man should make choice of Rome for
education, considering what special care the Emperor Valentinian took for the
promoting of learning there, and the privileges co^fer'd by him on strangers
which came thither to perfect themselves in Studies of literature, L. 1. de
Stud. lib. V^b. Ro^. in ^od. ^he^dos.
as appears by his Law still extant in the Theodosian Code. And Pope Damasus
likewise being himself learned, was a great favourer thereof.

7. Now how S. Ninianus after little more then twenty years was consecrated
Bishop by S. Siricius Successor to Pope Damasus, and sent back into his own
country to preach the Gospel to the Picts, shall be showed in due place.

8. There are not wanting besides our own, some foreign Authors also, who
affirm that the famous Bishop Moses, the Apostle of the Saracens was born in
Brittany: by name Notgerus Bishop of Liege, and Henry Fitz-Simon a learned
Irish Jesuit. Certain it is that he was in a special manner commemorated, and
his Festival observed in the British Martyrologe composed by S. Beda, where
we read these words: Martyrolog. Bed. 7. Febr.
In Brittany in the City Augusta (London) is on the seventh of February
celebrated the memory of S. Augulus Bishop and Martyr. Likewise of the
Venerable Bishop S. Moses: Who first of all leading a solitary life in the
desert, became famous for many miracles. He was afterward by his illustrious
merits, virtues and glorious miracles made Bishop of the Saracens, at the
request of Mauvia their Queen. He preserved the Communion of the Catholic
Faith without blemish: A. D. 376
and after he had converted to the Faith of Christ the greatest part of that
Nation, he rested in peace. A larger narration of his Gests may be read in
Theodoret, Theodoret. l. 4. c. 21. Socr. l. 4 c. 29. Ruffin. l. 2 c. 6.
Socrates and Ruffinus: which are omitted by reason of the uncertainty whether
they pertain to our present History.

XIII. CHAPTER
XIII. CHAP.
1. Fraomarius a Tribune in Brittany.

2. Gratianus succeeds Valentinian.

A. D. 379. Amm. Marcell. l. 29. c. 21
1. VAlentinian the year before his death sent over into Brittany a certain
German King of the Bucinonantes called Fraomarius, to exercise the Office of
Tribune over the Alemanni, a powerful sqadron of the British army. And the
reason was because the little territory ( pagus) of which he was King, lying
near to Moguntiacum (Mentz) had been wasted and impoverished by occasion of his
Predecessor Macrianu^ his rebellion, says Marcellinus. Where we may observe
how in those times the Title of King was attributed to such as governed a very
small Territory. So that our Legendaries are not much to be blamed, when they
so frequently bestow that Title on petty Princes. A. D. 375.


2. To Valentinian succeeded his Son Gratianus, who nine years before had been
named Augustus, or Emperor by his Father. And six days after, his younger
Brother Valentinian also was saluted Emperor by the Soldiers, which election
Gratianus meekly approved.

XIV. CHAPTER
XIV. CHAP.
1.2. etc. S. Patrick in his childhood made a Captive. His wonderful piety,
etc.

5. He is freed.

A. D. 376.
1. THE Picts, Scots and other Enemies of the Britains, though they had been
repressed by Theodosius the Emperor Valentinians General, yet were not so
enfeebled but that they made frequent incursion^ into the Roman Provinces
there: And particularly in one of them they led captive with them the child of
Calphurnius, Socher, called afterward Patrick, Antiq. Glaston^in Patricio.
H^rv^as in Patricio.
in the sixteenth year of his age, whom they sold to a Noble man in the
Northern parts of Ireland, called by Florilegus, Nulcu, by Capgrave Miluch, or
rather as Malmsburiensis reads the name, Milchu, who employed the holy youth in
keeping his swine.

Iocelin. in vit. S. Patricij c. 13.
2. Iocelinus the most exact writer of his life thus relates the matter:
Inasmuch, says he, as according to Scripture, gold is tried in the furnace,
and a just man by tribulation: S. Patrick that he might be better fitted to
receive a crown of glory, was first exercised with tentations. For the
illustrious child entering into his sixteenth year was snatched away captive by
Pirates which wasted that country, and was carried by the^ into Ireland. There
he was sold a slave to a certain Pagan Prince called Milcho whose territory lay
in the Northern parts. And herein his condition was parallel to that of the
Holy Patriark Joseph, who at the same age was sold into Egypt. And as Joseph
after his humiliation was exalted to the Government of all Egypt; so likewise
did S. Patrick after his captivity obtain a spiritual principality over
Ireland. Again as Joseph by his providence nourished the Egyptians with corn
during a long famine; so S. Patrick in process of time fed the Irishmen ready
to perish by their Idolatry, with the saving nourishment of Christian Faith. So
that on both of them affliction was brought for the advancement of their souls
in piety: for affliction had the same effect on them that the flaile has on
corn, the furnace on Gold, the file on iron, the wine press on grapes, and the
Olive-presse on Olives. Now Saint Patrick by the command of the foresaid Prince
was deputed to the keeping his hoggs.

3. Six whole years the devout youth spent in this slavery: during which time
what wonderful miracles God wrought by him, are at large recited by the same
Author, as likewise by Capgrave, Bishop ^sher, etc. to whom I refer the
curious reader for as much as a particular account of all the Gests or Saints
would swell enormously our present History. And in selecting their principal
actions, it seems more proffitable to recount their virtues, which may and
ought to be imitated by all, then their Miracles, which exceed the power of
nature, and some times of belief.

4. S. Patricks employmens therefore withdrawing him from the conversation of
men, afforded him space enough to attend to God, Insomuch as Iocelinus
testifies that a hundred times a day, Iocelin. ib.
and as often in the night he addressed his prayers to God. And to Prayer he
added Fasting for the mortification of his Senses: So that with these two Wings
he mounted to such perfection, as he enjoyed a frequent conversation with
Angels. And particularly in Capgrave we read how an Angel calle^ Victor
frequently visited him, ^apgrav. ib.
and said to him, Thou do very well to fast: Ere long tho^ shall return to
thy country. Now the Reader needs not wonder at the unusual Name of this
Angel: Gregor. M. hom ^4. in Evangel.
For as S. Gregory observes, Angels are therefore designed by particular names,
that they may signify their special virtues and operations. Therefore S.
Patrick who was to conquer first his own tribulations, and afterward the power
of the Devil in that Idolatrous Nation, was properly visited by an Angel named
Victor, or Conqueror.

5. The Piety, devotion, Fasting, patience in labors and other heavenly
virtues of this holy young man at last moved the divine Goodness miraculously to
free him, as he had the Israelites, out of his captivity: For as Malmsburiensis
relates, A. D. 379.
after six years slavery S. Patrick by the admonition of an Angel found under a
certain ^urf a Sum of Gold, In Antiquit. Glaston. in Patricio.
which he gave to his Lord, and so was delivered from captivity, and returned
to his parents and country, which he gloriously illustrated with the admirable
sanctity of his life. The prosecution of his Gests we remit to the following
age.

XV. CHA.
XV. CHAP.
1 Valens the Emp. burnt.

2 Theodosius made partner of the Empire.

3 4. etc. Maximus Governor of Brittany: Caries all the forces out: whence
came the Destruction of the Island.

10. Mistake of those who place the Martyrdom of S. Vrsula, etc. here.

A. D. 3*8.
1. ABout this time the Arian Emperor Valens suffered a severe but just
punishment for his persecution of the Professors of the Orthodox Faith. For
the Goths together with the Hunns and Alans, feirce northern Nations entering
in a hostile manner into Thrace, put the Eastern Empire in great danger.
whereupon Valens sent to Gratian for assistance: Which he with great care
prepared: whose army, says S. Ambrose, was conducted not by profane military
Eagles, but the name and worship of the true God, meaning the Holy Cross the
principal Ensign of his forces. But Valens not expecting his coming, and out
of envy least he should partake the glory of the Victory which he foolishly
promised himself, would needs hazard battle alone with the Barbarians: by whom
his army was discomfited, and himself being wounded with a dart among the
multitude, with many of his chief Officers flying into a certain house, the
rude enemies not willing to loose time in forcing an entrance, set it on fire,
with which the Emperor and all his company were consumed.

2. In his place the Emperors Gratian and Valentinian, A. D. 379.
unwilling to leave the West, assumed Theodosius (a worthy son of that Famous
Theodosius who had settled Brittany and repressed its Enemies) into a part of
the Empire, committing to him the care of defending the Eastern Regions against
the insulting Goths.

3. At this time, and probably upon this occasion of the Election of
Theodosius, one man's envy brought irreparable misery upon Brittany. That was
Flavius Clemens Maximus Governor of the Island. Sigebert. in Chron. A. D. 383.
Sigebertus says he was descended of the Imperial family of Constantin, upon
which Title he challenged part in the Empire. And that making himself King of
Brittany, he then began to exercise Tyranny against the Roman Empire. And
indeed that he was so descended his name Flavius may probably argue.

4. Zosimus affirms that he was a Spaniard. But other ancient Authors Greeks
too, Socr. l. 5. c. 11.
positively say he was a Britain, born in Brittany. Whereto no doubt Ausonius
had regard, when in hatred to Maximus who slew the Emperor Gratian his
scholar, Auson. de clar. Vrb. b^^.
he calls him (Rhu^upinum Latronem) the Rutupian pyrat or robber. And our
Gildas names him a sprigg of the British plantation.

5. From what stock or country soever he came, he was a Prince of admirable
valor and conduit: which gave occasion to the ancient Britains to forge a
Roman^ of his story: M. West^^^. A. D. ^75.
From whom our Matthew of Westminster relates, how there was a certain King of
the Britains called Octavius who dying left behind him an only daughter.
Which caused great dissensions among the Nobles, who could not agree on the
person to whom they should give the Princess with the Kingdom in marriage. At
last they thought fit to send Ambassadors to Rome to invite a Senator called
Maximian (so they named Maximus) to espouse the Lady. For this Maximians Father
was a Britain, the Son of Leolinus Uncle of Constantin: but his Mother was a
Roman. Maximian having been acquainted with the cause of their journey,
consented to their proposal, the rather because he was disfavoured by the
Emperors Gratianus and Valentinian. He therefore undertook a journey into
Brittany, and in the way overthrew the Cities of the Franks, where he heaped a
vast treasure of Gold and Silver. But as soon as he was landed in the haven of
Hamon, there met him Conanus a British Prince with all the youth of the
Kingdom, with an intention to combat him, for he was earnestly ambitious of
the Crown. But the Britains generally favoring Maximian, Conanus was
expelled, and the Princess married to Maximian. But Conanus conceiving great
indignation, fled into Scotland, where he gathered another army. And then with
all his forces passing over the Trent, he began to wast the Provinces. But
Maximian coming upon him, overcame him again in a battle: Yet at last by the
mediation of friends an agreement was made between them.

6. But the more sober authentic Writers of these times take no notice of
Octavius or any other King of the Britains: and it is without question certain
that Maximus was at this time Governor of the Island under the Emperor. A. D.
3^9. F^rdon. ap. Vsser. in Pri^^^d. fol. 592.
And even the Scotch Historians acknowledge that he fought successfully against
the Scotts, slew their King Eugenius and expelled the whole Nation out of the
Island: That their Kings Brother Ethach, with his Son Earth and many others
retired into Ireland: Some went into Norway: and a few lurked in the small
Islands near Brittany. They add that the I^ish also were not exempted from
Maximus his power: but were compelled humbly to beg for a peace, Id. ibid.
which was hardly granted them, and with this expostulation, A. D. 383.
That they had sent auxiliary forces to the Enemies of the Romans and their
confederats: an injury the less pardonable, because Ireland alone of all other
Kingdoms had never been attempted by Roman armies.

A. D. 3^2. Zosim. l. 4.
7. The same Maximus likewise subdued entirely the nation of the Picts: by which
victories having received great glory: and being vexed at the promotion of the
younger Theodosius to the Empire, under whose Father Maximus had been a Soldier
in Brittany, as Zosimus relates, whereas himself had not by the Emperor been
promoted to any great honor, he began to incense the Soldiers against the
Emperor: and in fine had the confidence not to refuse the Imperial Purple
offered him by his soldiers. Concerning whom Orosius thus writes: P. Oros. l. 7.
c 34.
Maximus was a courageous and just Prince, and worthy to have been Emperor, if
he had not against his Oath and fidelity attained that Title. He was almost
against his Will proclaimed Emperor by his army in Brittany: from whence he
passed over into Gaul.

4. The passage of Maximus out of Brittany into Gaul was the principal, A. D.
28^.
if not only cause of the destruction of this Island: because to strengthen
himself against the Emperors, he transported out of Brittany all the forces of
the kingdom, and not only the Roma narmy which guarded it, but the flower also
of the British youth, which never returned again. This calamity our Historian
Gildas thus bewayles, Gildas in Excidi^.
From that time Brittany being despoyld of all military forces, Governor
however cruel yet necessary, and a vast multitude of its youth, which
accompanied the Tyrant in that unhappy expedition and never saw their country
again: the Island it self being utterly unacquainted with martial affairs,
was expo^'d to be trodden underfoot by those fierce Northern transmarin
Nations, the Scotts and the Picts, which misery she suffered and bewayld many
years.

9. Maximus being attended with so great a force quickly subdued Gaul and
Spain likewise: and by a treasonable stratagem flew the Emperor Gratian at
Lions in Gaul. Which having done, his next design was to march into Italy
against the Emperor Valentinian.

10. Many learned Historians refer to this time the Erection of the Kingdom of
Armorica, or Little Brittany in Gaul, supposed to have been possessed by
Maximus his British soldiers. And consequently they place here likewise the
Story of the Martyrdom of S. Vrsula and the eleaven thousand Virgins her
companions, sent out of Brittany to be married to these New conquerours of
Armorica. But besides the improbability that Maximus would deprive himself of
so great forces, necessary to the prosecution of his vast designs, we shall
hereafter demonstrate that these two Stories belong to a later age: and that
the mistake of those Writers which referr them to this time, is grounded on an
erroneous confusion of the names of Valentinian the Emperor and Maximus the
General: For it was in the days of Valentinian the third, and by the conduct
of another Maximus that the foresaid New British Kingdom was erected in Gaul,
and then it was that the Martyrdom of those Virgins happened.

XVI. CHAP. XVI. CHAPTER

1.2.3. etc. Of the Heresy of Priscillian: examined before the Emp. and
Priscillian put to death.

5. Brittany infected: how.

1. IT seems that now was the time when Brittany became infected with Heresy,
when, as Gildas says, all manner of beasts fixing their venomous teeth on this
poor country delighting in novelties and constant to no doctrines, instilled
she deadly poison of every kind of Heresy into it.

2. The occasion hereof was probably from the severe proceedings of Maximus in
Gaul against the Arch heretic Priscillian and his companions Instantius and
Tiberianus, etc. Vid. Sulp. S^v^r hist. l. 2. ad finem.
This Priscillian had composed a New Heresy out of the impure dreggs of the
ancient Gnostics and Manichees: into which as into a sink the filth of
several other Heresies also did flow. With this Heresy he had infected Spain,
and endeavoring the like in Italy, he was rejected by Pope Damasus at Rome,
and by Saint Ambrose at Milan. From thence therefore he descended into Gaul:
the Bishops whereof having notice that the infection began to spread, petitioned
Maximus to use his authority to prevent so mortal a disease. There were also
two Spanish Bishops, Idacius and Ithacius, who with great zeal pursued the
Heretics: These coming to Maximus whose abode was at Triers in Germany,
vehemently accused Priscillian and Instantius, charging them with many heinous
crimes. Whereupon the Emperor commanded the Prefect of Gaul and Vicar of
Spain to cause all who were infected with that Heresy to be brought before a
Synod assembled at Bourdeaux There Instantius a Bishop infected by Priscillian,
not being able to say anything in his own defense, was judged unworthy of his
Bishopric.

3. But Priscillian unwilling to plead his cause before the Bishops, appeald to
the Emperor, which was permitted him through the timide inconstancy of the
Catholic Bishops Thus all parties involved in the cause, were brought to
Triers, and were attended by their too zealous accusers Idacius and Ithacius
Bishops of Spain. But S. Martin, who then was at Triers earnestly urged
Ithacius to desist from his accusation before a Secular Tribunal: A. D. 386.
and humbly requested the Emperor to abstain from shedding the blood of those
wretched Heretics, saying it would be sufficient* if by a sentence of Bishops
they were expelled the Churches. This holy Bishop thus, interposing, the
hearing of the cause was deferred: and being afterward to depart, he got a
promise from Maximus, that their punishment should not extend to blood.

4. But he being gone, the Emperor was drawn from this mild intention by two
Bishops, Magnus and Rufus. Whereupon he committed the hearing and judging of the
cause to his Prefect Euodius, a stern severe man. Before whom Priscillian being
convicted of magic and many filthy doctrins and practices, as praying naked in
a meeting of women by night etc. he was by him pronounced guilty, imprisond and
and for farther punishment reserved to the Emperors judgment. Who appointed
that Priscillian and his associats Felicissimus and Armentius Ecclesiastical
persons should loose their heads, their cause having been once more heard by
Patricius the Emperors treasurer. The same punishment was also inflicted on
Latronianus and Euthrocia, Asarinus and Aurelius a Deacon. As for Instantius
formerly condemned by the Bishops, he was banished into the Isle of Silly
(Silina) near Brittany, together with Tiberianus.

5. By this means that impure Heresy being made public, and the principal
Teachers of it brought so near Brittany, no wonder if Doctrins favoring the
vile inclinations of corrupt nature, did quickly insinuate themselves into
unwary minds, affected withal to Novelties. For the scandalously severe
judgment, hitherto unpracticed in the Church, against Priscillian and his
companions, was so far from cutting off the Heresy, Sulp. Sever. 16.
that it received strength from thence: for his followers which before honored
him as a holy man, afterward began to worship him as a Martyr.

XVII. CHAPTER
XVII. CHAP.
1.2. etc. Maximus and his wife honor S. Martin.

5.6. Theodosius overcomes Maximus.

1. THE Emperor Maximus, for that Title Theodosius allowed him after the death
of Gratianus, A. D. 386. Id. 16.
was zealous in defense of the Catholic Faith. Insomuch as he wrote an
efficacious letter in behalf of S. Ambrose Bishop of Milan to the Emperor
Valentinian, who instigated by his Mother Iustina an Arian, Theodoret. l. ^. c.
14.
persecuted him. In which Letter likewise, says Theodoret, he denounced war
against him in case he would not desist from his injustice against the holy
Bishop. A. D. 388.


2. Sulp. sever. l. 2.
Sulpitius Severus likewise at large declares what great honor and respect the
same Maximus showed to the Blessed Bishop S. Martin of Tours; And particularly
the Emperors Wife did most officiously reverence him. For having with great
earnestnes obtained his presence at a private Feast prepared for him in her own
chamber, she would not permit any servants to attend, but she her self with
all humility ministered to him, and with great devotion laid up the fragments,
which she valewd above all her Imperial delicacies

3. Who this Lady was, and from what country or family, it does not appear in
ancient Story. The same Author comparing her with the Queen of Saba, and
saying that she also came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of
another Solomon, argues her very probably to have been a British Lady: though
we can scarce allow her to have been the daughter and heyr of an unheard of
King of Brittany called Octavius.

4. Maximus after this, A. D. 3^^ (...) 5. c. 14.
not content with so large a portion of the Empire as Gaul, Spain, and
Brittany, marched with his Army into Italy. At whose approach the Emperor
Valentinian fled into Illyricum, having now learnt by experience, says
Theodoret, how unhappy he had been in following his Mothers counsels against
the Holy Bishop S. Ambrose.

5. There is extant a Letter which Maximus wrote in answer to Pope Siricius,
who lately had succeeded S. Damasus: in which he professes the Orthodox Faith,
which he learnt in Brittany: where likewise he was baptized, and immediately
after his baptism was proclaimed Emperor. In the same letter he likewise gives
him account of the abominable doctrines and crimes of the Priscillianists,
which he calls Manichees, known not by uncertain suspicions, but their own
public confessions in judgment. Crimes so enormous and obscene, that out of
modesty he could not relate them, and therefore sent him a Copy of the Process.

6. Now the Emperor Theodosius solicited by Valentiniam, A. D. 388.
whose Sister Galla he had married, came with an Army into the West. To which
war he prepared himself by earnest prayer and fasting. August. de Civit. ^.
lib. 5. c. 26.
And having understood, says S. Augustine, that in the Desert of Egypt there
was a certain Monk, a great servant of God who had the Spirit of prophecy,
Theodosius sent to him, and received a most certain message of Victory.

7. Thus armed he readily and quickly obtained a Victory against Maximus, who
only wanted a good cause. After the discomfiture of his Army, Maximus being
taken prisoner was brought before Theodosius, who was inclined to take pity of
him. At which his soldiers conceiving great indignation, removed him from his
presence and killed him. Our Historian Gildas mentions both his death, and the
place of it, saying, At Aquileia a City of Italy that abominable head was cut
off, Gildas de Excidio.
Which had almost cast out of the throne the most illustrious heads of the
world. And thus was the blood of the innocent Emperor Gratian expiated. After
his death followd likewise that of his Son Victor, who says Zosimus, had been
made Caesar, or rather Emperor, as Paulus Diaconus, and some ancient coins
declare.

XVIII. C.
XVIII. CHAP.
1.2. etc. The Relics of S. Gervasius etc. miraculously discovered to S.
Ambrose. The miracles wrought by them: The Veneration of them attested.

1. IT will not be amiss though it pertain not to our History of Brittany, yet
because it will afford us a prospect of the judgment and practice of the
ancient Church, to declare the almost visible assistance which Almighty God
afforded to his servant S. Ambrose at the time when the Arian Empress Iustina
used her son Valentinians power to persecute him. August. Confess. l. 9. c. 7.
For then it was (to use the words of S. Augustine directed to God in a prayer)
that by a vision thou, O God, did discover to thy Bishop Ambrose the place
wherein the Bodies of thy Martyrs Protasius and Gervasius reposed, which thou
for so many years had preserved incorrupt in thy secret treasure, from whence
thy intention was to bring them forth for the restraining the rage of a woman,
yet no ordinary woman, being an Empress. For when being discovered and dug
up, they were translated with due honor to the Ambrosian Church, not only
those who were vexed with unclean Spirits, the same Devils confessing, were
healed: but a certain Citizen of Milan who had been blind many years, well
known in the town, when he had inquired and was informed of the occasion of so
great a noise and assembly of the people, he leaped up, and desired one present
to guide him to the said Church: Whither being come he obtained leave with his
hand kercheif to touch the Coffin of those Martyrs whose death was precious in
thy sight. Which having done, and applying it to his eyes, they were immediately
opened, so that he saw clearly. The fame hereof presently was spread abroad,
and praises given to thee with great fervor: insomuch as the mind of thy
Enemy, the Empress Iustina, though it was not heald of her Spiritual
blindness, yet it was repressed from the fury of persecuting the Holy Bishop.

2. The same holy Father repeats the substance of the same narration in
several other places, Id. de Civit. D. l. 22. c. 8. Et sermon. 39.
in one whereof he professes himself to have been an eye-witnes of these
Miracles, saying, my self was a witness of the great glory of these Martyrs: for
being then at Milan, A. D. 389.
I had certain knowledge of the miracles wrought etc. This happened two years
before S. Augustine having been converted and baptized by S. Ambrose, returned
from thence toward his own country Africa, and by the way at Ostia lost his
Blessed Mother Monica, concerning whom in his Confessions he thus Writes: A. D.
389. Id. Conf^ss. l. 9. c. 10.
When the day of her dissolution was at hand, she did not busy her thoughts
about a Sumptuous burial etc. but made this her only request, that a
commemoration of her should be made at thy Altar, at which every day she had
not failed to attend, and from whence she knew that holy Sacrifice and Victime
was dispensed, by which the Handwriting which was contrary to u^ was blotted
out, by which our Enemy the Devil was triumphed over etc.

3. So authentic a Testimony of the Veneration of the Relics of holy Martyrs
performed by the ancient Church of God, approved by unquestioned divine
Miracles, as likewise of Prayers for the Dead at the most holy Sacrifice, needs
not be further confirmed. Ambros. ^pist. 85.
Therefore we will omit the transcribing a large Narration of the foresaid
Miracles composed by S. Ambrose himself, and sent in an Epistle to his devout
sister, wherein he repeats the miracle of the blind man restored to sight, and
how very many had been dispossessed of Devils, and by only touching with their
hands the Vestment of the Saints many others were healed of diverse
infirmities: How many hand kercheifs, says he, were cast, how many garments
sent to be laid on the most holy Relics, to the end that by touching of them
they might receive a medicinal virtue?

4. There were notwithstanding in those times some who denied that those were
bodies of Martyrs, that they could torment the Devil, or free any one
possessed by him. But these, Id. Epist. 91.
says S. Ambrose, were the blasphemies of Arian Heretics: refuted by the
confessions of the Devils themselves who with loud clamours acknowledged their
torments: and the great benefitts proceeding from the Martyrs intercession were
publicly testified by the blind and other sick people cured of their
infirmities. The blind man's name was Severus, by trade a butcher, well known to
all the City, who was forced to give over his profession, as soon as that
incommodity of blindness befell him. This man says he, calls for witnesses of
the miracle all his former customers, by whom he had been maintained in his
trade: He is desirous those should now testify the recovery of his sight, who
formerly had seen that he was blind.

A. D. 390.

XIX. CHAPTER


XIX. CHAP.
1. Valentinian the second, Emperor.

2.3. etc. The Heresy of Iovinian against Virginity etc. Condemned by Pope
Siricius and the H. Fathers.

A. D. 3^9.
1. AFter Maximus his death Theodosius left Valentinian Emperor of the West,
adding to his Government Gaul Brittany and Spain, possessed by the Tyrant. But
before he was entrusted with this great charge, ^^id. in Verb. Valentinia (...)
Junior.
the pious Emperor Theodosius instructed him in the Orthodox Faith, earnestly
exhorting him to persevere in it. These Instructions wanted not a good effect,
the rather because his Mother Iustina, the great Patroness of Artanism; was
lately dead.

A. D. 390.
2. The year following broke forth a Heresy, which in our last age taught Luther
to renounce his Monastical Profession, to allow scope to his carnal
appetites, and to draw out of her Cloister a Consecrated Nun to his
incestuous embraces. The Author of it was Iovinianus formerly a Monk, but
weary of his vowed austerities: who this year was publicly declared a Heretic
by Pope Siricius. Whereupon most of the learned Fathers of those times
earnestly wrote against him, particularly S. Hierom, S. Ambrose and S. Augustine.

Hi^rom. cont. Iovin. l. 2.
3. Concerning his special Heretical Doctrines S. Hierosme thus declares them.
I will briefly set down, says he, our Adversaries opinions, and out of his
obscure books, as out of dark denns draw out the Serpents, neither will I
suffer him to cover his venomous head with the foldings of his spotted body.
Let his poysonnous doctrines be brought to light, that so we may see to tread
and bruise them under our feet. He affirms that Virgins, Widows and married
women, being once baptized, are of the same merit, in case they differ not in
other works. Again he undertakes to prove that those who with a complete Faith
have been regenerated by Baptism, cannot afterward be subverted by the Devil.
And in the third place he professes that there is no difference, in regard of
merit, between fasting from meats, and the receiving of them with thanksgiving.

Siric. P. Ep. ad Eccles. Mediolan.
4. Pope Siricius likewise in his Epistle concerning him to the Church of Milan,
gives this character of Iovinian, that he was an imitatour of the Devil, being
an Enemy of Chastity, a Teacher of luxury, nourished with gluttonous crudities,
punished by abstinence; he hates fasting, telling his Ministers that such
things are superfluous etc. In opposition whereto a Synod assembled by the same
Holy Pope catholickly professes, We do not undervalew or disparage the Vows
of marriage, at which we oftimes are present: D. A. 392.
but we attribute greater honor to the spiritual marriage of Virgins. Calling
therefore a Synod, it appeard that Iovinians assertions are contrary to our
doctrine, that is, to the Christian Law. Therefore since these men teach contrary
to what we have learnt by Tradition, We the whole Clergy of Rome, with the
Priests and Deacons, following the Precept of the Apostle, do unanimously
pronounce this sentente, That Iovinian, Auxentius, Genialis, Germinator, Felix,
Frontinus, Martianus, Ianuarius and Ingeniosus who have been found zealous
teachers of this New Heresy and blasphemy, be by Divine sentence and our
judgment condemned and cast out of the Church. Which sentence our hope is that
your Holiness will likewise confirm.

5. Conformably hereto the Church of Milan in a Synodicall answer penned by S.
Ambrose, Ambros. Epist. 81.
after high commendation of the Popes zeal, tells him, That the said Heretics
therefore fled to Milan, that they might find no place in which they should not
be condemned. All that saw them avoided them, as if they had been infected with
the plague: and that being condemned with an universal execration, they were
thrust our of the City of Milan, like vagabonds.

6. To conclude, S. Augustine reciting the Positions of his Heresy, concludes
with these words, August. Re^ruct. l. 2. c. 11 Id. de Hereseb. c. 82.
The Holy Church did most fruitfully and most courageously resist this Monster.
And in another place, This Heresy, says he, was quickly extinguished, neither
could it ever make such progress as to seduce any Priests: though some ancient
Virgins at Rome being persuaded by lovinian, were reported thereupon to have
taken husbands. No sign appears that it ever entered into Brittany in those
times, so precious and venerable was Virginity then, so great a Multitude of
Seminaries there of Chastity, and such frequency of abstinence and fasting. So
that it seems a more powerful Devil attended Luther and Calvin, then Iovinian.

XX. CHAP. XX. CHAP.

1. Valentinian murdered.

2. Eugenius a Tyrant: Slain by Theodosius.

3. A Roman Legion left in Brittany.

1. AFter four years reign, the young Emperor Valentinian who with great
bloodshed had recovered his Empire, A. D. 392. Hieron. Epist. 3.
from which he had been forced to fly into banishment, was slain near the same
City of Lions which had been a witness of his Brothers murder: and his dead
body was dishonored with hanging, says S. Hierom. This was done by the
treason of his Count Arbogastes. He had desired Baptism from S. Ambrose, but
was slain before it could be administered.

A. D. 394.
2. In his place the Tyrant Eugenius invaded the Empire of the West, in show a
Christian, but indeed addicted to Heathenish superstition. Who was the next
year slain by Theodosius, Ruffin. l. 2. c. 3^.
who, says Ruffinus, prepared himself to the war, not so much with help of
arms as fasting and prayer: He fortified himself with night-watchings rather in
Churches then camps, and made Processions through all places devoted to Prayer,
being accompanied with the Priests and people: He lay prostrate before the
Monuments of the Apostles and Martyrs, coverd with sackcloth, and begged
divine assistance by a confident hope of the intercession of Gods Saints.

A. D. 394.
3. The General employed Theodosius in this war was Stilico, called out of
Brittany for that purpose: Where he had settled the country by repressing the
incursions of the Picts and Scotts, whom he overcame in several incounters:
and when he left the Island, he placed for its defense against those restless
enemies a Roman Legion at the Northern borders.

XXI. CHAPTER
XXI. CHAP.
1.2.3. etc. S. Ninian made Bishop of the Southern Picts.

6. etc. His Episcopal See, Candida Casa.

1. THE Holy young man S. Ninian (of whose birth and country, as likewise his
voyage to Rome to be instructed in the Catholic Faith we have heretofore
treated,) this year, wherein Theodosius slew the Tyrant Eugenius, showed forth
the glorious fruits of his pious education under the Holy Popes Damasus and
Siricius: For now was he consecrated Bishop, and sent back into his own
country to preach the saving Truths of Christ's Gospel to the rude nation of
the Southern Picts. For thus we read in his Life extant in Capgrave:

Ap. Capgrav. in Niniano.
2. The Roman Bishop (Siricius) having heard that a Nation in the Western parts
of Brittany had not yet received the Faith of Christ, exalted S. Ninianus to
the Episcopal degree, and giving him his Apostolical benediction destined him
to become the Apostle of the foresaid Nation.

3. That which is here called a Western Nation in Brittany, is the same which
S. Beda calls Southern Picts; situated between Cumberland and the Bay of Glotta
or Cluide (Dunbritton.) For the Northern Picts inhabiting beyond that Bay
received not the light of the Gospel till many years after.

4. Let us now prosecute S. Ninianus his Voyage, Id. ibid.
as we find in the same Author of his Life, who tells us, That the man of God
in his return from the City of Rome, was moved with an earnest desire to visit
the glorious Bishop S. Martin at Tours (whom some Writers affirm to have been
his Uncle:) whereupon he diverted from his journey to that City. S. Martin
honorably received him: by inspiration knowing that he was extraordinarily
sanctified by God, and that he would be a happy instrument of the salvation of
many.

5. Being dismissed by S. Martin, the holy man pursuing his journey, Id. Ibid.
came at last to the place whither he was destined: And there he found a great
concourse of people (who it seems had notice of his return.) There was
expressed wonderful joy and devotion, and the praises of Christ sounded every
where: because they all esteemd him as a Prophet. Then began he with great
diligence to root up their ill planted superstitions, to disperse their long
gathered wicked customs, and to demolish their impious Idolatries. Having thus
purged their minds from errors, he instructed them in all duties belonging to
good Christians, and by his works and example showed them a pattern of all
virtues and piety, all which he confirmed by frequent miracles.

6. He chose for his place of Episcopal residence an habitation, Id. ibid.
afterward called Wite-hern, seated near the Sea, by which it is almost
encompassed: to which there was only one passage toward the North. This place
is seated, says Camden, in the Province of the Novantes, Camdne. in Scotis.
now called Galloway. By the Latin Writers it is named Candida casa, from the
color of it, and by the Saxons Wite-hern or white house: Here it was that in
the days of the younger Theodosius Ninianus erected his Episcopal See. And
here it is that Ptolomy places the Promontory called by him Leucopibia, which
seems to have been an erroneous transcribing of (...), or white houses.

7. The sum of what has been written, is thus delivered by S. Beda, Bed.
hist. l. 3. c. 4.
The Southern Picts, says he, forsaking the Error of their Idolatry, received
the true Faith by the preaching (...) most holy man, and most reverend Bishop
Ninias, (Ninianus) who was by Nation a Britain, and had been regularly
instructed in the Mysteries of the true Faith at Rome.

8. Many years he spent in his Apostolical Office, for his death ensued not
till thirty eight years after his first entrance. He consecrated Bishops,
ordained Priests, and divided the the whole country into certain Parishes, as
the Author of his Life declares. There remains more to be written of him,
which we will reserve till the time of his death. And whereas his See was
established in the Province of Galloway, which may seem to imply that he was a
Scott: we shall in due place demonstrate that in those days that Province was
belonging to the Jurisdiction of the Britains, not Scotts.

A. D. 395.

XXII. CHAP.


XXII. CHAP.
1. etc. S. Regulus comes into the Pictish kingdom out of Greece, with the
Relics of S. Andrew, etc.

6. etc. Of the Culdei, or Coli-Dei.

1. THE Labors of S. Ninianus were no doubt much lightened by the arrival
thither of another Saint, A. D. 395.
to wit, S. Regulus, who the year following by divine Inspiration came out of
Achaia into the same country, bringing with him the precious Relics of the
Apostle S. Andrew. Whose story is thus set down by Hector Boctius out of
ancient Monuments: 2. The holy man Regulus, says he, as one night he watched
at the Sacred monument of S. Andrew, Hict. Bo^^. l. 6.
was admonished from heaven to take the bone of the holy Apostles arm, three
fingers and as many ioints of one of his feet, and laying them up decently in a
vessel to carry them to the Island Albion (or Brittany) seated in the utmost
confines of the world: because that in future times there would live a people,
which should give great veneration to the Apostle S. Andrew, and by his
intercession receive great graces and benefitts, both earthly and heavenly
through the Divine goodness.



3. In compliance with which admonition the holy man undertook that tedious
journey, and was joyfully received there: for as it follows in the Narration,
Id. ibid.
The report of his arrival with that sacred Treasure being spread through the
Regions of the Picts, inflamed the minds of many to see and venerate the holy
Relics of the glorious Apostle. The people therefore flowd together from all
quarters, bringing gifts and Offerings to the holy Apostle. There came likewise
Hirgustus (others call him Hungus) their King, being invited by the same of
these things. The Holy man Regulus received him with a Soline Procession, in
which Priests and Monks sung Hymns and praises to God. The King falling
prostrate on the ground with great veneration kissed the Sacred Relics: And
when all Holy Rites were performed after the Christian manner, of which the
King was very observant, he freely bestowd his Royal Palace to the honor of
S. Andrew, on Regulus and the Priests who were there to perform Divine service:
and not far from them built another Church dedicated to the same Apostle.

4. This is the place where in following ages the Scottish Archbishops and
Primats established their Archiepiscopall See. Which place, says Camden, the
Ancients called Regimont, or Regulus his Mount: where Vngus King of the Picts
erected the principal Church of his Kingdom, to this day called S. Andrews.

5. Some modern Writers, perhaps out of an aversion to Sacred Relics do
profess a doubt of this Narration. Yet it is certain that Pope Boniface the
Eighth in an Epistle of his to King Edward the first writes in this manner,
Your Royal Highness may please to understand that the Kingdom of Scotland was
converted to the Unity of the Catholic Faith by the Venerable Relics of S.
Andrew the Apostle, Ap. M. Westmonast. A. D. 1^0^.
such was the great goodness of Almighty God.

6. The forecited Hector Boethius describing the ornaments with which the pious
King Hirgustus enriched his New built Church, Hect. Boet. l. 6.
says he adorned it with munificent gifts, Patens, Copes, Chalices, Basins,
Lavers etc. framed of silver and gold, and likewise with other precious
furniture proper for Sacreduses, placing in the same Priests to perform Divine
service there.

7. These Priests dedicated to Gods worship are the same which the Picts called
Culdei, or Colidei, that is, worshippers of God. Some of these came with S.
Regulus into Brittany, For he living in Achaia was a Father and Teacher of many
who were addicted to true piety: Buchan. (...). Scot. l. 4. i^ (...).
And to those others from among the Picts and Britains joined themselves,
leading a solitary life with such a fame of their Sanctity, says Buchanan,
that being dead their Cells were converted into Churches. And from hence was
derived the succeeding custom among the Scotts, to call Temples Cells. This
sort of Monks was anciently called Culde^* and their Name and Institut remained
till a later kind of Monks expelled them. But this last clause he writes with
the spirit of a factious Presbyterian: For not a later sort of Monks, but such
Apostats as himself, enemies to the Divine Sacrifice celebrated by these,
contemners of Gods Saints, were those who out of Scottland expelled the Culdees
or Religious servants of God.

8. Notwithstanding, if we speak of the prime original of these Culdei, we
have already showed that they began long before, when by reason of the furious
persecution raised by Diocletian, a world of Christians retired themselves into
deserts, there with safety and vacancy to attend to God by Prayer and Religious
austerities: who therefore were called Colidei, and corruptly Culdei.

9. This digression we make upon occasion of the Gests of S. Regulus, Martyrol.
Angl 21. August.
whom the English Martyrologe celebrates among the Saints on the twenty eighth
of August: where notwithstanding there is a mistake in placing his death in the
year of Christ three hundred and eighty.

A. D. 395.

XXIII. C.


XXIII. CHAP.
1. Honorius Emperor of the West.

2. etc. Pelagius the Heretic appears etc.

5. The Roman Legion called our of Brittany.

6.7. Alaricus invading Italy, is twice vanquished.

8. Innocentius Pope.

A. D. 395. Ambros. de obis. Theodos^^.
1. IN the year of Grace three hundred and ninety five the glorious Emperor
Theodosius dyed, for whose soul S. Ambrose devoutly prayed, the Prince Honorius
assisting at the Holy Altar. He left his Empire between his two Sons,
committing the Eastern Regions to the Elder son Arcadius, and the Western to
the younger, Honorius: who being of tender years was left under the tuition of
Stilico, whose daughter he married. Yet Stilico afterward, not satisfied with
this honor, attempted to establish his own son, to effect which he called, or
at least permitted barbarous Nations to enter and wast the Empire, who in
conclusion were the destruction of it.

2. In the fourth year of Honorius his reign Pope Siricius dyed, A. D. 398.
to whom succeeded Anastasius, a man says S. Hierom, of rich poverty and
Apostolic solicitude: which he expressed in opposing the Error of Origin,
which Ruffinus and his Disciple Melania now brought into Rome. The same Holy
Pope likewise first repressed the Heresy of Pelagius, which first appeared
under him: Of which for the relation which that Arch-heretick had to Brittany
from whence he came, we shall presently treat more largely.

A. D. 399.
3. The year following, the same Emperor published an Edict which Iacobus
Gothofredus conceives to have been directed to the Vicar of Brittany. The From
of Which Edict was this: As we utterly forbid the offering of Pagan Sacrifices;
l. 15. de Paga^is. Co^. Theod.
so our pleasure is that the Ornaments of public Works (though representing
Pagan Superstitions) should be preserved. And to the end those who presume to
demolish them, pretend not any authority for so doing, we hereby command, that
if any ancient Inscription or Law be found, such papers be taken out of their
hands, and brought to us. Thus Wrote the Emperor to Proclianus Vicar of the
five Provinces: Into which number Brittany was lately divided, as has been
showed.

4. This Island seems at this time to have enjoyed repose, A. D. 400.
being freed from the violence of their Northern Enemies by a Roman Legion
quartered in the confines. It was governed by a Roman General, called Marcus,
whom Honorius sent hither. Claudian. Panegyr. ad Stilicon.
Of this peaceable State of Brittany the Poet Claudian gives testimony, in his
Panegyric inscribed to Stilico, who was Consul in the year of Christ four
hundred. A. D. 403


5. But this calm lasted but a little space: for troubles happening in Italy, all
the forces which defended Brittany being called away, this poor Island was
left miserably exposed to her barbarous enemies. Those Troubles were caused by
an invasion of the Goths under their King Alaricus, A. D. 401.
who out of Pannonia by the Norick Alps descended to Trent, from thence
driving a Garrison of Honorius: and so peircing into Rhetia was there stopped by
Stilico, who made great preparations against him.

6. The following year a battle was fought between Alaricus and Stilico: A. D.
402.
wherein the Goths were vanquished, and might have been utterly destroyed, had
not Stilico permitted them to retire back into Pannonia: This he did to the end
his ambitious designs might more securely proceed during troubles, by means of
which he continued in possession of the Empires forces.

7. Alaricus by pact with Stilico, A. D. 403.
returned toward Italy with a more numerous army. And presuming to subdue the
Country, was again fought with by Stilico at Pollentia, Vsser. in Primord f
595. Claudian. de ^el. Gerico. Id. de 6. Honory consulatu.
and once more overcome. To this Battle, the Roman Legion, which was the only
defense of Brittany, was sent for, as Bishop Usher from Claudian the Poet well
observes. But such frequent invasions by barbarous Nations obliged the Romans
to strengthen their City with new walls and Towers, as the same Claudian
elegantly relates.

8. In these times Pope Anastasius dying: A. D. 402.
there succeeded him in the Apostolic See Innocentius first of that name:
concerning the integrity of whose Faith thus writes S. Hierom to Demetrias a
Virgin in Africa, Hieron. Epist. 8.
Because I fear, (says he) yea have been credibly informed, that the venomous
spriggs of Heresy (he means Pelagianism) do still budd forth in Africa, I
thought my self obliged out of a pious affection of charity to admonish thee,
firmly to hold the Faith of the Holy Pope Innocentius, who in the Apostolic
chair is now Successor and Son to Anastasius: and take heed of entertaining
any strange Doctrins, what ever esteem thou may have of thine own wit and
skill.

XXIV. CHAP. XXIV. CHAP.

1.2. Of Pelagius the British Heretic.

3.4. etc The special Points of his Heresies: condemned by several Popes*
Synods etc.

11. Brittany infected.

12. Of Vigilantius his Heresies.

1. HEre it will be seasonable to treat of the New blasphemous Heresy of
Pelagianism, which now began to infect the world. The Author of it was
Pelagius, by birth a Britain, A. D. 404.
for which cause S. Augustine styles him Pelagius by Surname Brito: August.
Epist. 106. Prosp. carm. de Ingra^.
and S. Prosper more expressly calls him the British Serpent. And hereto
consent S. Beda, Polidor Virg^ll and generally Modern Historians. But whether
his original came from the Roman Provinces in Brittany or the Scottish, some
doubt may be made, Hieron. in Praefat. ad l. 3. coat. Pelag.
considering S. Hierom in several places mentioning him calls him a Scott,
descended from the Scottish Nation bordering on Brittany: and elsewhere, he
says that he the most stupide of men, was stuffed with Scottish pulse. Ap.
Capgrav. in Albano. I^. ^inmutheus.
Not withstanding the Author of S. Albanus his life in Capgrave affirms that
he was Abbot of that famous Monastery of Bangor, where two thousand and one
hundred Monks under the Discipline of one Abbot did get their living by the
labor of their hands.

2. Certain it is that he was a Monk, for by that title he is called for the
most part by the Bishops in the Council of Diospolis, because he had no
Ecclesiastical degree. And S. Augustine says, August. de Gest. Pelagy cap. 35.
After many ancient Heresies, a New one is lately risen, not invented by any
Bishops or Priests, no nor so much as inferior Clarks, but by a sort of Monks,
which dispute against the Grace of God. Isi^. Pelas. l. 3. Epist. 314.
Isidor the Pelusiot adds that he was a vain straggling Monk, incorrigible, one
who wandered from Monastery to Monastery smelling out feasts, and fawning on
Magistrates for their good cheer etc. observing withal that it was in his old
age that he fell into this Heresy, whereas before he had lived, according to S.
Augustins testimony, in repute for his sanctity and Christian life of no
ordinary perfection. Aug. l. 3. de peccat mer. c. 1. Sigeber^. A. D. 404.


3. The special Points of his Heresy are thus set down by Sigebertus: In
Brittany, says he, Pelagius endeavored to defile the Church of Christ with
his execrable doctrines: Teaching that man may be saved by his merits without
Grace: That every one is directed by his own natural Free will to the
attaining of justice: That infants are born without Original sin, being as
innocent as Adam was before his Transgression: That they are baptized, not to
the end they should be free from sin, but that they may by Adoption be
admitted into the Kingdom of God: And though they were not baptized, yet they
should enjoy an eternal and happy life, though excluded from the Kingdom of
God.

4. These Heresies began to appear in public about the year four hundred and
four or five: and being taken notice of by Pope Innocentius, Pelagius composed
a Letter of Purgation, which was presented to his successor Pope Zozimus.
After which he went into Palestina, not daring to come to Rome to clear
himself. And his Doctrines being reproved by S. Hierom in the East, and by S.
Augustine in the West, Pelagius appeald to the judgment of a lawful Synod:
which was assembled at Diospolis (or Lydda) in Palestina, and his accusors
Heroes and Lazarus, two Bishops from Gaul, by reason of the sickness of one by
the way, not being able to appear in the Synod, Pelagius gave such captious
answers to the interrogations proposed to him by the Bishops present, that he
escaped a censure, and was acknowledged an Orthodox Catholic.

5. About the same time his prime Disciple Caeletius was condemned for his
Heresies in a Synod at Carthage, from which he appeald to the Roman See, yet
not daring to pursue his Appeal, he fled into Asia, and there by fraud
obtained the degree of a Priest. After which another Synod of Numidia at
Milevis again condemned the same Errors. A Copy of both which condemnations
being sent to Pope Innocentius, he approved them, and excommunicated both
Pelagius and Celestius, yet with a condition, that upon their revocation of
their Errors they should be restored to Catholic Communion.

6. Their Heresies notwithstanding spreading abroad, the African Bishops of
both Councils deputed S. Augustine by common consent to confute them: And with
what diligence and efficacy he performed this charge, his glorious labors do
to this day admirably testify.

7. S. Innocentius being dead, his Successor Zosimus received an Appeal from
the judgment given by another Council of Carthage against Celestius, who came
to Rome, and presenting to the Pope a Discourse touching his Doctrine, which he
professed to submitt to the Sea Apostolic: pretending likewise to subscribe to
the Letters written by Pope Innocentius to the two African Councils, in which
his Heresy, by which he denied Original sin, was principally condemned:
Hereupon Pope Zosimus favorably interpreted his Libell or Discourse, and
delayed his absolution only two months, till he could receive an answer from the
Africain Bishops.

8. Pelagius likewise using the same arts, endeavored to surprise Pope
Innocentius, by a Book of his Doctrine written with such ambiguity of words,
that his Heretical senses could not be discovered but by readers of a more
then ordinarily sharp sight and judgment. This Book was likewise presented to
Pope Zosimus: To which was added a Symbol of his Faith directed to the Pope and
composed so artificially, that it has been printed as a Sermon of S. Augustins
(the one hundred ninety first in number) by changing the beginning and end of
it, instead of Beatissime Pater, saying Dilectissimi Fratres. At the arrival
of which Treatises at Rome, there was great joy, as if the Heretics had been
converted. Of which Pope Zosimus informing the African Bishops, they again
assembled at Carthage, and carefully pondering these things, they wrote back to
Pope Zosimus, signifying to him, that it was not sufficient that Celestius
should in gross subscribe to Pope Innocentius his letters, but that he should
also anathematize expressly the words impiously set down in his own Libell.
They likewise detected the fraud by which Pelagius in his Libell had vayled his
heretical sense.

9. Hereupon Celestius being urged by Pope Zosimus to pronounce anathema
against the Doctrins objected to him by Paulinus a Deacon, and which himself
had manifestly inserted in his own Book, privately withdrew himself from his
trial: thereby showing that his submission to be corrected by the Sea
Apostolic, was false and hypocritical. At the same time several Writings of
Pelagius likewise were discovered, in which his Heresies manifestly appeared.

10. Pope Zosimus therefore without any further delay, imitating his
Predecessor Innocentius, says S Augustine, did a second time with the like
authority condemn their Doctrins and excommunicate their persons. Which
Sentence of Condemnation was solemnly first of all in a Synod pronounced by
Sixtus a Roman Priest, afterward Pope, whom the Pelagians had esteemed, but
injustly, a principal Patron of their Heresy. Which Heresy having been
proscribed by so many Synods, and more then once by the Roman See, the Emperor
Honorius also published an Imperial Sanction, by which he not only banished
Celestius and Pelagius out of Rome, but ordained that whosoever should teach
the same Doctrins, being thereof convicted in judgment by whomsoever, should
have the same punishment of Exile inflicted on them. Which Decree he commanded
to be published through the whole Empire. These were the Acts of many years,
which to avoid interruptions are summed up together.

11. Notwithstanding all this care of all Sorts of Magistrates, both
Ecclesiastical and Temporal, to extirpate this execrable Heresy out of the
world, yet by reason it directly favored the corruption of Nature, human Pride
and sensuality, it continued in most countries, and particularly in Brittany it
made so general a progress that the neighboring Churches of Gaul thought
necessary to send into this Island two of their most eminent Bishops, and this
two several times, to repress it: Which how they gloriously performed, shall
shorly be showed in due place.

A. D. 406.
12. At the same time, as Pelagius infected Brittany, so did another infamous
Heretic infect Gaul likewise. That was Vigilantius, concerning whom S.
Hierome thus writes, Gaul alone was a country that produced no monsters of
Heresies in former times. Hiero^. Ep. ad Ripar.
But on a sudden there arose one Vigilantius, who may more justly be called
Dormitantius, who being full of an unclean Spirit entered combat against the
Spirit of Christ, and denied that the Sepulchers of Martyrs ought to be
venerated, condemning likewise the devout Vigils celebrated before the
Festivalls of Gods Saints. Which Errors of his are detested by the whole
Catholic world. He also imitating Iovinian, A. D. 407.
at feasts declamed against Fasting, preferred riches before voluntary*
proverty, and Marriage before Virginity.

XXV. CHAP. XXV. CHAPTER

1.2.3. After Marcus, and Gratianus, Constantin is proclaimed Emperor in
Brittany.

4.5. etc. Geffrey Monmouths fable of him disproved.

7. etc. Constantins successes in Gaul, etc.

11. Gerontius rebels against him: and is slain.

12. etc. Constantin overcome by Constantius: and slain: And Rome is sacked by
the Vandals.

1. IN the year of Grace four hundred and six, A. D. 406.
Gaul was overrun by the Vandals, Sueves and Alans. Which opportunity being
observed by the Picts and Scots, they likewise breaking out of their limits,
wasted the confining Provinces of Brittany. The Governor of the Island at that
time was Marcus, whom on a sudden the Army saluted by the Title of Emperor,
imagining that under the conduct of so sublime a name, they might better resist
the Enemy. But the unconstant soldiers finding his incapacity, as suddenly
deposed him, and in his place chose Gratianus, born in the same Island.

2. But within four months, they slew likewise Gratianus, A. D. 407.
for his insupportable cruelty. Which being divulged in the countries abroad,
their old Enemies out of Ireland returned, and being attended by the Scots,
Norvegians and Daci, they marched cross the Island from sea to sea, wasting
all with fire and sword.

3. In this extremity the British Army proclaimed Emperor a Soldier called
Constantin, Ped. l. 1. c. 1.
not for any merit of his courage, says S. Beda, but only for the hope they
fancied in his name: as if the present ruins could not be repaired but by
another Constantin.

4. Concerning this man's Election, Geffrey of Monmouth, Galfrid. Monument.
Florileg. A. D. 435.
followed by Florilegus and others, frames this story: How Wichelin (commonly
called Guithelin) Arch Bishop of London seeing the calamity of Brittany, and
weakness of the Romans, passed over Sea into lesser Brittany (formerly called
Armorica) where Aldroenus reigned, the fourth from Conanus, whom Maximus had
first constituted King there. To him the Bishop made his humble petition that
he would out of commiseration to the country from which himself was descended
undertake the Government of it. A. D. 411.
The King refused this offer as to himself, but was content that his Brother
Constantin should accept that Title, whom he furnished with Soldiers and a
Navy, and sent them into Brittany: When presently the Britains generally
flocked to him out of their caverns and lurking places, and under his conduct
marching against the Enemies, obtained an illustrious Victory. This being done,
they set the Crown on his head at Chichester, and gave him to wife a Noble
Roman Lady, who had been brought up by the same Bishop Guithelin. By her he had
three Sons; the Eldest was Constans, whom he made a Monk at Winchester in the
Church of S. Amphibalus: The other two were Aurelius Ambrosius and
Vterpendragon, whom he committed to the education of the same Archbishop.

5. But these are fictions either invented or credulously embraced by Geffrey
of Monmouth, a man whose end in writing a history was not to propagate Truth,
but to exalt his own nation. For first, it is certain that when Constantin was
proclaimed Emperor in Brittany, the Archbishop of London was not Wichelin, but
Fastidius Priscus, who dyed about the year four hundred and twenty: whose
Successor was Voadinus; and after him Guithelin in the year four hundred fifty
six.

6. Again that this Constantin was so far from being Brother of a King, that
his original was base and unknown, we have the testimony of the most ancient
and authentic Historians. S. Beda says he was chosen (Ex infima militia) out
of the lowest rank in the Army, and this not for any merit, but merely a
fortunat presage of his name. The place where he was chosen Emperor was
Caer-Segont near Caer-narvon, afterward called Caer-custenith, perhaps from
this Constantins election there. Being chosen, he directed Messengers to the
Emperor Honorius to excuse himself, Zosim. l. 5.
as being by violence compelled by the soldiers to accept that Title: thus
writes Zosimus; which alone destroys Geffreys fable.

7. The same year Constantin passed over into Gaul, where gathering an army he
subdued all the regions on this side the Cottian Alps dividing Gaul from
Italy: Zosim. ib. Sozom. l. 9. c. 11.
and then, says the same Zosimus, he accounted his possession of the Empire
secure. He likewise drew out of his Monastical Solitude his Son Constans, whom
he created Caesar: This is testified by Orosius and Marcellinus Comes. Oros.
hist. ^. Marcell. com. chron.


8. The seat of his Empire he placed at Arles: he constituted firm guards upon
the River Rhine, to hinder the excursions of the Germans: and utterly broke the
forces of the Vandalls, Sueves and Alans, which had wasted all the Provinces
between the river Seine and the Rhine.

9. Afterward he sent his Son Constans into Spain, who by many successful
combats subdued the country. A. D. 408.
And whereas two Noble Brethren, Didymus and Verenianus having collected an
army of Spaniards faithful to the Roman Empire, had seized on the streit
passages, through the Pyrenean mountains, Constans courageously broke through
them. Which having done, he committed the care of defending those passages to
foreign Soldiers, to the great displeasure of the Spaniards, who thereupon
entered into league with the Vandals and Goths against him. For these good
successes Constans by his Father was pronounced Emperor: to whom he repaired,
leaving Gerontius in his place General in Spain.

10. But the year following he was sent back into Spain, A. D. 409. Zosim. l. 6.
attended by Iustus a famous Captain. Whereat (says Zosimus) Gerontius was so
offended, that he procured the barbarous Soldiers in Gaul to revolt: so that
Constantin having sent a considerable part of his army into Spain, and not
being able to repress them, several Provinces both in Gaul and Brittany
forsook their dependence on Rome, casting out the Roman Magistrates, and
governed themselves by their own will and laws. Notwithstanding the same
Author afterward insinuats, that the Emperor Honorius himself freed the
Britains from their dependence, Id. ibid.
writing letters to them wherein he exhorted them to provide for themselves.

11. Gerontius not content with this, assumed to himself the Title of Emperor,
Sozom. l. 9. c. 13.
and investing with the same purple Maximus whom he left in Spain, he with an
army marched against Constantin, whom he beseiged in Arles. But an Army from
Honorius under the conduct of Constantius a Roman approaching, Gerontius his
soldiers forsook him: and the Spaniards remaining, out of contempt of him
attempted to kill him: and encompassing the house into which he retired, they
set it on fire: So that Gerontius having first killd his wife, at last killd
himself also. A. D. 411. Id. ib. c. ^5.
This is Sozomens relation.

12. As for Constantin he was again beseiged at Arles by the Roman General
Constantius: and being informed that Ebodicus whom he had sent into Germany to
collect aid from the Franks and Alemanni, was intercepted in his return, he
divested himself of his Imperial Purple, and flying for refuge into a Church,
was there consecrated a Priest. Whereupon the Soldiers in the Town, having
pardon offered them, opened the gates. Constantin with his Son Julian, was sent
into Italy, but by the way was slain.

13. The year before Constantins unhappy death was deplorable to the whole
world, by the destruction of Rome, overcome and sacked by Alaricus King of the
Goths. Then not only the immense wealth of the City for so many years heaped
together, but the ornaments of Churches became the prey of barbarous Soldiers,
who were astonished to see the munificent vessels with which Constantin the
Great had enriched them.

XXVI. C.
XXVI. CHAP.
1.2. etc. The Martyrdom of S. Melorus a young British Prinie.

A. D. 411. Martyrolog. Anglic. 3. L^^var.
1. OUR Martyrologe the same year wherein the Usurper Constantin was slain
commemorats a more happy death, called a Martyrdom of a young British Prince,
whose name was Melorus ( or Meliorus.) Of whom mention is made in the Monuments
of Cornwall: Capgrav. in Mel^^^.
from whence Capgrave has extracted the following Narration.

2. In the primitive times of Christianity, the Apostles Doctrine being
dispersed through all the regions of the world, Brittany was likewise converted
from Paganism to Christianity: and of that Nation many beleiving in our Lord,
and in their lives conforming themselves to the Apostles precepts, shined
gloriously by many miracles. Of which number we are confidently assured that
Blessed Melorus was. He was descended from a Noble family of the Britains: for
his Father, called Melianus, enjoyd the Dukedom of Cornwall. In the seventh
year of whose Rule an Assembly of the nobility being mets to consult about the
general affairs of the Province, Rinaldus brother to the Duke coming with
force upon him slew him, and invaded the Dukedom.

3. Now Melianus had then a young Son, a child of seven years old, named
Melorus. Him also after his Fathers death his Tyrannous Uncle sought to kill,
fearing least being come to man's estate, he should deprive him of the
Principality. With this deliberation he brought the child with him into
Cornwall: Where at the same time was assembled a Synod of Bishops: Who all
interceded for the life of the child: so that the Tyrant contented himself with
cutting off his right hand and left foot: in place whereof there was framed for
the child a hand of silver, and a foot of brass. After this Melorus was
educated in a certain Monastery of Cornwall till he was fourteen years old,
spending his time in the reading Holy Scripture, every day growing in
innocence, virtue and piety.

4. But then Rinoldus by many gifts and promises of large possessions tempted,
and obtained from Cerialtanus, to whose care the child was committed, an
assurance of his death: Which he impiously accomplished by cutting off his
head, which he sent to Rinoldus, challenging his promised reward. The person
employed for carrying the Martyrs head was a Son of Cerialtanus, who by a just
judgment of God fell from the Castle wall with the head in his hands, and broke
his neck.

5. After this the Holy child's Nurse came to the house where the Body lay: and
there she saw a Vision of Heavenly Angels, and lights gloriously shining. And
having buried the Body in a decent place, the day following they saw it laid
above ground. Three several times they buried it, and still the same accident
arrived. By common advice therefore they laid the Sacred Body upon a Cart, to
which were tied two young Bulls never used to the Yoke: These they permitted to
go at liberty without any leader, whither Gods Providence should direct them.
The Bulls then on a sudden becoming tame, carried it to a certain place, where
being arrived they stood still. But the company attending the Cart, not liking
the place, which they thought unfitt for his burial, employed their hands,
arms and shoulders against the wheels, to force them to roll forward. But
they found the Cart by divine virtue so fixed, that by no strength or art it
could be moved. After diverse attempts made to no purpose, at last giving
thanks to God they buried the Sacred Body with great solemnity in the same
place. There many devout people repairing, and imploring the Martyrs help and
intercession in their afflictions and infirmities, frequently with joy obtained
their desired remedy.

6. The Head of the Martyr was carried to the Tyrant Rinoldus, which he having
touched, died miserably three days after. After whose death the Bishops and
Clergy carried the Head, and buried it together with his Body. Several days
after this certain Preachers, not of British blood took the Coffer wherein the
Sacred Relics reposed which they carried in Procession through many places, and
at last according as they were enjoined, they arrived at Ambrisburg, where they
laid the Holy Relics upon an Altar. Thus find we related the Gests of S.
Melorus in Capgrave.

7. Now Ambrisburg is a well known town among the Belgae ( in Wiltshire) in the
Territory of Winchester: so called from Ambrose the Son of Constantinus, the
late mentioned Usurper of the Empire, concerning whom we shall hereafter treat.
M Camden adds out of an ancient Book, Camden. in Belgis.
called Eulogium, that there was erected a Monastery of three hundred Monks,
which afterward was pillaged by a certain barbarous Tyrant called Gurmundus.
Moreover that at Ambrisburg S. Melorus and his Sacred Relics were in a
special manner venerated, Vsser. in Primord.
Bishop Usher affirms, saying, The solemnity of the celebrating the Relics of
S. Melorus by the inhabitants of Ambrisburg obscured in time the memory of
Ambrius or Ambrosius.

A. D. 420.

XXVII. CHAP.


XXVII. CHAP.
1. Victorinus Governor in Brittany: recalled.

2.3 etc. Brittany poisoned with Pelagianism by Agricola a Bishop.

4. Several Archbishops of London.

A. D. 412.
1. AFter Constantins death several other Tyrants arose in France, as Maximus,
Iovinus and Sebastian: but by the courage of Constantius they were quickly
subdued. As for Brittany, it again returned to the Obedience of the Roman
Empire. Constantius therefore sent Victorinus Governor thither, A. D. 414.
a man grateful to the Britains, and formidable to the Picts and Scotts,
whose violences he easily repressed as the Poet Rutilius testifies. Rutil.
Itinerar.
But being too soon recalled by Honorius, and the Roman Legion with him, the
Britains in a short time became miserably and i^remediably exposed to their
barbarous cruelties.

A. D. 414.
2. Pope Innocentius dying after he had the space of fifteen years governed the
Roman Church, Zosimus succeeded him, who with the like care endeavored to
preserve the Church from the infection of Pelagianism: In whose place after two
years was chosen Pope Bonifacius, A. D 4^9. Pr^sp. advers. Collator.
who, says Prosper, made use not only of Apostolic, but also Imperial Edicts
against the same Enemies of Divine Grace.

3. In his time this Island of Brittany became poisoned with their presumptuous
Doctrines. The unhappy instrument of which calamity was one Agricola, the Son
of a Bishop called Severianus. Bale cent. 10.
Bale is mistaken, when he affirms this Agricola to have been a Britain, a
Monk of Bangor and companion of Pelagius: for he was by Nation a Gaul. And the
same Author with the like Error confounds Agricola with Leporius, who
infected Gaul with the same Heresy: But afterward going into Africa, was there
rectified in his judgment by S. Augustine.

A. D. 420.
4. In Brittany there were at this time several Bishops full of piety and
learning, who opposed themselves against this Heresy. Among whom the most
celebrated was Fastidius Priscus Archbishop of London, highly commended by
Gennadius and Trithemius as a man skillfull in Holy Scripture and a Zealous
Preacher of Divine Truth: moreover illustrious in holy conversation and famous
for his sharpnes of judgment and elocution. Bale adds, that he left behind him
a Book entitled Pious Admonitions, which probably contained an Antidot against
the contagion of that Heresy. It is uncertain what year he dyed, and
consequently when it was that Voadinus succeeded him in that Bishopric.

XXVIII. CHAP. A. D. 421.

XXVIII. CHAP.



1.2. etc. The Britains beg help of the Romans: a Legion is sent: and called
back, etc. And the Romans take their last leave of Brittany.

1. WHilst Brittany was thus infested with suggestions of Heretics, Florileg.
A. D. 420.
the Scotts, Picts and Norvegians, says Florilegus, miserably vexed it with
their incursions. In which necessity, Gildas in Excid.
as Gildas writes, the Britains sent messengers to Rome with humble and
earnest Petitions for assistance, vowing their eternal subjection to the Roman
Empire, in case their cruel enemies might be repelled.

2. In compliance with which request, says the same Author, a Legion was sent
into the Island, sufficiently furnished with arms, and which had not been
partaker of the former defeat given to the Romans. This army coming to a
conflict with those barbarous Nations, A. D. 421.
slew great multitudes of them, and drove all the rest out of the borders, so
freeing the poor Britains from horrible vexations and imminent slavery.

3. Who the Roman General was under whose conduct this Victory was obtained,
is not mentioned in story Probable it is that it was Chrysanthus the Son of
Marcianus, who afterward was chosen Bishop of Constantinople: For concerning
him Socrates thus writes: Socrat. l. 7. c. 12.
In the reign of the Great Theodosius this Chrysanthus was by him designed
Prefect of Italy. Afterward he was constituted the Emperors Vicegerent in
Brittany: in the administration whereof he attained great commendation.

4. Who ever was the General, he together with his Legion was presently sent
for back. Gillas in Excid.
But before their departure, says Gildas, they gave order to the Britains
once more to raise a wall between the two Seas (Glotta and Bodotria) to
restrain the Enemies and be a defense to the Britains. But this wall being
made by a rude multitude destitute of a Governor, and framed for the most part
of turfes, availed little or nothing at all. The bounds of this wall S. Beda
thus describes: Bed. l. i. c. ^2.
It began toward the West about two miles distance from a Monastery called
Aebercurnig; in a place named in the Picts language Penvahel, but in English
Penveltun: and going Eastward it ended near the City Acluith. Now from the
Name in the Pictish tongue Penvahel, a British word, M. Camden iudiciously
infers that the Picts were a British Northern Nation, for in Welsh at this day
Pengual signifies the Head of a Rampire (caput valli.)

5. So useles was this ill-built wall, that it was scarce finished, but the
Scotts and Picts again broke in, for according to Gildas his relation, Gild. in
Exbid.
As Soon as the Legion with great triumph and joy was gone homeward, those
former Enemies, like ravennous wolves (Ambrones lupi) enraged with excessive
hunger, on all sides encompassing the sheepfold in the absence of the
shepherd, so they with ^ares and full-blown sails invaded the Island, broke
into the borders, and laid wast all things in their way, mowing down and
treading underfoot the Britains, like ripe corn.

Id. ib.
6. Hereupon the afflicted Britains again sent Messengers after a most
deplorable manner, with rent garments and their heads covered with dust, to
implore aid from the Romans, endeavoring like fearful chickens to shrowed
themselves under their Mothers wings. They earnestly begged them to prevent the
utter miserable ruin of their country, and that the Roman name might not be
rendered contemptible to foreign Nations.

7. This woeful Petition was addressed to the famous Roman General Aetius
Prefect of Gaul, under whom Brittany was also subject. He therefore moved to
pity with so tragical a relation, sent forces under the conduct of Gallio a
Citizen of Ravenna, who once more vanquished the Enemies. But having done this
he declared to them the Emperors pleasure, That for the future Brittany must
rely on its own strength, and not expect any assistance at all from Rome, Id.
ib.
which at so great a distance, and amid'st so many distractions could not
attend to so remote a Province. He advised them therefore to exercise themselves
in military affairs, to build fortifications in places convenient, especially
toward the Sea, to strengthen their Cities with walls, etc. And having thus
counseled and encouraged the Britains, the Romans took their last leave of
them: never returning more. Yet before they went, they once more joined with
the Britains to repair the Wall, which they made far more strong then
formerly, contributing thereto both public and private charges.

THE CHVRCH-HISTORY OF BRITTANY UNDER BRITISH KINGS II. PART.
THE NINTH BOOK.
I. CHAP.
I. CHAPTER.
1.2. etc. Kingdoms of the Picts and Scotts established in Brittany.

A. D. 421.
1. THE Romans having taken their farewell of this Island, it is from that
Epoch that we may reckon the institution of two Kingdoms here, the Picts and
the Scotts. For though heretofore there has been mention made of several
Princes and Kings of each Nation, yet they seem to have been Kings rather by
election, and in the nature of Generall's for present expeditions, then as
enjoying an established Principality.

2. For as much as concerns the Picts, though they always had their habitation
in the Northern parts of Brittany, yet they were often forced to change and
contract their Seats: But now enjoying peace and security by the Romans
absence, they became established in their ancient Territory. Which Territory
they in a few years enlarged making an irruption through the Wall of
separation, and possessing themselves of the Province more Southerly.

3. And as for the Scotts, they being hitherto as auxiliaries of the Picts,
mingled among them in all their invasions, and o^t compelled by the Romans to
return to their habitation in Ireland and other Northern Regions: Yet now they
fixed their habitation in the Northern coasts of Brittany, under Fergusius
their King.

4. Of these two Nations and Kingdoms, the principal in this age was that o^
the Picts: And if we enquire into their peculiar Seats, the Picts seem to have
possessed the Provinces about Edinborough confining to the Wall, which
therefore was anciently called the Picts-wall: A. D. 423.
And the Scots inhabited the Northern and Western Provinces lying nearest to
Ireland, from whence they came. But in the following age they turned their arms
against the Picts, whose numbers and power they by degrees diminished, and at
last utterly destroyed their kingdom and name, and gave to the whole country
the new appellation of Scotland.

II. CHAP.
II. CHAP.
1. Death of Honorius: to whom succeeds Valentinian the third.

2 etc. A three fold Mission by Pope Celestin into Brittany and Ireland.

6 7 S. Patricks Divine vocation.

1. IN the year of Grace four hundred twenty three the Emperor Honorius dyed,
in whose place succeeded Valentinian the third of that name, Son of
Constantius, who had been created Caesar, and immediately before his death
Augustus. In the Eastern Empire there reigned the younger Theodosius.

2. The same year dyed also Pope Bonifacius, and after him was chosen Pope
Celestinus, to whom our Islands of Brittany and Ireland have an eternal
obligation: for by him they were either preserved from error, or converted to
the Christian Faith. By him S. Palladins was sent to the Scotts, who freed them
from their barbarous Idolatry. By him S. Patrick was directed an Apostolic
Teacher into Ireland, where he wrought the like effect with greater fruit And
by him S. Germanus and S. Lupus, two holy and learned Bishops of Gaul, were
employed to cure Brittany of the pestilent infection of Pelagianism, spread
there by the impious diligence of Agricola; in which execrable employment he
was assisted by the often times excommunicated Heretic Celestius, prime Disciple
of Pelagius, if the testimony of one single modern Author, Claudius Menardus,
may be taken.

3. Now the circumstances touching the execution of this threefold Mission we
intend consequently to declare. And though the Ecclesiastical affairs of
Ireland be not comprehended directly within our present Design, yet since the
great Apostle of that Country, as has been showed, was a Britain, both
beginning and ending his days in Brittany, it will either be no excursion, or
one very excusable, if not commendable, to insert here some of his principal
Gests.

4. He did not begin the execution of his Apostolical Office till after the
time that S. Germanus and Lupus came into Brittany to expugne the Pelagian
Heresy: For by them he was encouraged thereto. Till which time, he conversed
here in Brittany, A. D. 249.
by his holy example inviting his contrymen to the imitation of his virtues
and piety.

5. The ancient Author of his life extant in Capgrave, Ap. Cap. gr* in S.
Patric. A. D. 425.
relates many admirable deeds performed by him, before he had addicted himself
to the discipline and instruction of S. Germanus. One of which we will recite
in this place, and probably happening about this time: by which will be
discovered how wonderfully he was called to the Apostleship of Ireland.

6. On a certain day S. Patrick in his sleep saw a man coming to him as out of
Ireland, having many letters in his hand, one of which he gave to the holy man,
who read it. Now this was the beginning of the Letter: This is the voice of the
Inhabitants of Ireland. As Soon as he had read those words, the same instant he
heard the voices of a world of infants crying to him out of their Mothers wombs
in many Provinces of Ireland, and saying, We beseech thee, Holy Father, to come
and converse among us. Having heard this, S. Patrick immediately felt great
compunction in his heart, and could read no more of the Letter. And as soon as
he awaked, he gave thanks to God for this heavenly Vision, being assured that
our Lord had called him to be an instrument of the salvation of those who had
cried unto him.

7. Hereto Iocelinus another Writer of his life adds, Iocelin. in vit. S.
Patricij.
That S Patrick hereupon asked counsel of our Lord the Angel of the great
council, touching this affair, and by the mean of the Angel Victor received
this Divine Oracle, That forsaking his parents and country he should pass
over into Gaul, there to be more perfectly instructed in the Doctrine of
Christian Faith and Ecclesiastical Discipline.

III. CHAP. III. CHAP.

1.2.3 etc. Of S. Palladius Apostle of the Scotts in Brittany.

8.9. His Disciples Servanus and Tervanus.

10. etc. Of S. Palladius his death.

1. OF the foresaid three Missions the first that was put in execution was that
of S. Palladius into Brittany. A, D. 429.
This S. Palladius was a Deacon of the Roman Church, a man no doubt of great
prudence, learning and sanctity, since he alone was made choice of, though as
yet in an inferior Ecclesiastical degree, to free the whole Island of
Brittany from Heresy and Infidelity. Twice was he sent as Legate of Pope
Celestinus into our country. Concerning the first Legation thus writes
Baronius, In the four hundred twenty ninth year of our Lord, Baron. hic.
says he, during the Consulship of Florentius and Dionysius, Pope Celestin by
a Legation of the Deacon Palladius delivered Brittany infected with the
Pelagian Heresy. A. D. 431.


2. Being come into Brittany, as soon as he had informed himself of the state of
the Island, how the Civiller part formerly under the Roman Jurisdiction was
defiled by Heresy, and the Northern Regions, now possessed by the Scotts,
wholly buried in the mists of Paganism: He gave notice hereof to Pope
Celestinus, who recalled him to Rome, to advise with him about a remedy against
both these mischeifs.

A. D. 431.
3. Upon serious consultation therefore, it was thought fit to divide these two
employments, and to commit them to several persons. Hereupon in opposition to
the ^elagian Heresy by which the Roman Island, as S. Prosper calls it, that is,
the Provinces heretofore subject to the Empire, were miserably infected, two
Holy Bishops of Gaul S. Germanus and S. Lupus, were directed into Brittany,
whose labors, with the happy success of them, shall be presently declared.
Again out of an Apostolic solicitude to rescue the barbarous Northern Regions
from Paganism, the same Palladius after he was exalted to an Episcopal Degree,
was by Pope Celestinus, as his Legate again sent to be the Apostle and converter
of the Scottish Nation.

4. This double Mission is thus recorded by S. Prosper, Prosp. advers. (...).
in (...).
a Holy and learned Father, living at the same time: Pope Celestinus, says he,
of venerable memory, upon whom our Lord had conferred many gifts of his Grace
for the defense of the Catholic Church; knowing that to the Pelagians already
condemned no new examination was to be allowed, but only the remedy of
Penance, commanded that Celestius, who impudently demanded a new audience, as
if his Heresy had not been discussed, should be excluded out of the confines of
Italy. For his resolution and judgment was that the Statuts of his
Predecessors, and former Synodall Decrees ought to be inviolably observed by
himself, and that he should not admit to a new retractation those doctrins
which already had deserved and suffered condemnation.

5. Neither did he extend a less zealous care toward Brittany, Id. ib.
which he likewise freed from the same contagious discease of Heresy: for by
his order (and the labors of S. Germanus and S. Lupus) he excluded from that
secret retirement, divided by the Ocean from the rest of the world, certain
Enemies of Divine Grace, which had seized upon that Island, which by producing
the Arch-hereticks Pelagius and Celestius, had given an original to their
Heresy. Moreover the same Holy Pope ordained (Palladius) a Bishop to the
Scottish Pagan Nation: and by these means whilst he studiously endeavored to
preserve the Roman Island Catholic, he made the barbarous part of the Island,
Christian.

6. Now here the Ancient and Later Scotts, that is, the Irish and the people
now only called Scotts, do earnestly contend which should appropriat to
themselves S. Palladius for their Apostle, with exclusion of the other. But the
controversy may be compounded by allowing each of them a share in him. For no
doubt his Legation extended to the Scottish Nation in general, both in
Brittany and beyond the Sea. And during the short time that he lived he
attempted the conversion of Ireland, but in vain. So that he was effectually
the Apostle only of the British Scotts.

7. Hereof we have a proof in the life of S. Patrick written by the ancient
Author Probus: Probus in vit. S. Patric.
Palladius, says he, being ordained Bishop by Pope Celestinus, was directed to
the conversion of this Northern Island of Ireland. But Almighty God did not
give Success to his preaching: Neither can any man receive any thing on earth,
unles it be given him from heaven. For the savage and brutish inhabitants of
this country would by no means receive his doctrine. Therefore he would not
spend much time in a land not his own: but returned to him that sent him. And
having passed the sea, he arrived at the confines of the Picts, where he
remained till his death.

8. Moreover that the principal care of S. Palladius was exercised toward the
British Scotts appears in this, that his two Disciples Servanus and Tervanus
are reckoned among the learned Teachers of Brittany. Of which the former was
sent to instruct the inhabitants of the Orcades, and the other to the Picts.
Concerning Servanus the Centuriators of Magdeburg write in this manner: When
Palladius was sent into Scotland, Magdebur. cent. 5. c. 10. f. 1430.
Servanus adjoined himself to him, and together with him promoted the Gospel
and propagated the Doctrine of it. He was afterward sent by the same Palladius,
after experience had of his learning and Sanctity, to be an Apostle of the
Isles of Orkney, and to teach the inhabitants there true Religious Christian
worship This he performed with great diligence and zeal: and thereby obtained
the Title of the First Apostle of those Islands. Dempster indeed, a Scottish
Writer, attribut^ that Title to another called Serfus, who, says he, preached
there before S. Servanus* and was Bishop of those Isles chosen from among the
Culdees, or Colidei. But most probable it is that Ser^us and Servanus were one
and the same person.

9. And touching Tervanus likewise the other Disciple of S. Palladius, ^slaeus
de reb. gest. Scotor. l. 4.
another Scottish Historiographer thus writes, Palladius having promoted
Servanus to the degree of Bishop sent him to the Orcades, to imbue that rude
and barbarous Nation with the Faith of Christ. He likewise created Tervanus
Archbishop of the Picts. In which places these two holy men performed the
Office of their Mission so diligently, by advancing piety and religion among
them, as likewise by rooting out the poison of the Pelagian heresy out of the
minds of many, that the one worthily deserved to be called the Apostle of the
Orcades, Magdebur. Cent. 5. c. 10.
and the other of the Picts. The forementioned Centuriators add, That Tervanus
was sent to the Picts to water our Lords vineyard planted among them by S.
Ninianus: So that he seems to have been Ninianus his Successor. A. D. 429.
And indeed this agrees exactly to the account formerly given touching the Gests
and death of S. Ninianus Bishop of Wite-hern (or Candida casa) for in the year
following this that Blessed Saint dyed.

10. Little more is found recorded in ancient Ecclesiastical Monuments
touching the Gests of S. Palladius. And no wonder, his life not continuing much
more then a year after he was made Bishop, Bed. hist. l. 1. c. 13.
as S. Beda declares, who says that he dyed in the eighth year of the younger
Theodosius. Which eighth year is to be reckoned from the death of his Uncle the
Emperor Honorius, and not of his Father Arcadius: For at that time Theodosius
was but eight years old, and under the tuition of Isdegerdes King of Persia.
This if Cardinal Baronius had considered, he would not have thought fit to
correct S. Beda's Chronology.

11. Certain modern Writers by mistake conceiving this Palladius to have been
an Asiatick, do impute to him the implanting of the Eastern rites in the
celebration of Easter among the Britains. And Trithemius likewise erroneously
confounds him with Palladius familiar friend of John of Jerusalem, who was
Bishop of Helenopolis, infected with the Errors of Origin, and a great
defender of Pelagius. Whereas this Palladius was a Roman Deacon, who in the
time of Pope Zosimus wrote the life of S. John Chrysostom, and was a zealous
opposer of Pelagius and Celestius, against whom he composed a Book. Martyrolog.
Angli^. 27 Ianuar.
His memory is celebrated in our English Martyrologe on the twenty seventh of
January.

IV. CHAP.
IV. CHAP.
1.2. etc. The Mission o^ S. Germanus and S. Lupus into Brittany.

4. etc. Gests of S. Germanus before his Mission.

8. etc. And of S. Lupus.

10. etc. Their voyage into Brittany, and Miracles.

1. PResently after Saint Palladius his first voyage into Brittany, upon his
information sent to Pope Celestinus, were deputed the two holy Bishops S.
Germanus and S. Lupus to defend the Catholic Faith against the Enemies of
Grace who had perverted many in this Island. B^d. hist. l. 1. cap. ^7.
The occasion of whose journey hither is thus described by S. Beda: The
Britains, says he, being neither willing to receive the perverse Doctrins of
those who blasphemed the Grace of Christ, nor also being able by disputes to
refute their subtilties who endeavored to introduce that impious persuasion;
agreed at last upon a discreet and happy advice, which was to demand assistance
in this spiritual war from the Gallican Bishops. Whereupon a Great Synod was
assembled (not in Brittany, as Camden and Spelman suppose, but in Gaul, as
appears by the relation of Constantius the Ancient Author of S. Germanus his
life:) In which Synod a serious consultation was had who should be sent thither
to defend the Catholic Faith. And at last by a general and unanimous consent,
S. Germanus Bishop of Auxe^re (Altisiodorensis) and S. Lupus Bishop of Troyes
(Tricassinae civitatis) were made choice of to go into Brittany to confirm the
Faith of Celestial Grace.

2. Now though in this Narration of S. Beda no mention be made of Pope
Celestins interposing in the business, yet S. Prosper in the passage cited in
the foregoing Chapter shows that the whole business was managed by his orders:
and more expressly in his Chronicon he says, Pope Celestin sent Germanus
Bishop of Auxerre, in his place and with his authority (Vice sua) to drive the
Pelagian Heretics out of Brittany, and to establish the inhabitants of that
Island in the Catholic Faith.

3. Before we attend these two Holy Bishops in their journey to Brittany, the
relation and obligations we have to them require a particular information
concerning their persons, qualities and former education Besides this, we shall
be able to judge of the Religion and state of the British Churches in those
times by observing their actions and behavior, who are now become the Teachers
and Reformers of our Country. So that any indifferent Reader will be able to
perceive whether that Religion which S. Augustine the Monk taught the Saxons
about a hundred and seaventy years after, was changed from that which these
holy Bishops professed, as some Modern Protestants pretend it was.

4. First then touching S. Germanus, he was born at Auxerre in Gaul, Vid.
^i^pel^. 31. ^ul^j.
descended from illustrious parents. From his infancy he was brought up in
literature, wherein by reason of his natural capacity he so advanced himself,
that he became a great ornament to his country. And to the end that nothing
might be wanting to render him consummate in learning, after several years
frequenting the Gallican Schools where he was taught the liberal Sciences, he
went to Rome, and there he enriched his mind with a perfect knowledge of the
Imperial Laws. At his return he was made Governor of the City and Territory
of Auxerre, the place of his Nativity.

5. But not to dilate upon the occurrents of his Life during his secular state,
we will, from the Relation of Constantius a pious and learned Priest of the
same age who wrote his life, declare by how strange a Providence he was assumed
into the Ecclesiastical Profession and promoted to the sublime degree of a
Bishop.

6 Whilst he was Governor of Auxerre, the Bishop of that City was a holy man
called Amator. This good Bishop being in the Church, and whilst he was
preparing himself to perform his Office, Id. Ibid.
perceiving among others Germanus Prefect of the City entering with a body and
mind composed to modesty and piety, he commanded immediately that the doors
should be safe locked. And then being accompanied with many persons of the
Clergy and Nobility, he laid hold on Germanus, and devoutly calling on the name
of our Lord, he cut off his hair, and devesting him of his secular ornaments,
he very respectfully clothed him with a Religious habit: Which having done he
said thus to him, Now, most dear Brother, it is our duty to be diligent in
preserving this honor committed to thee without stain: For as soon as I am
dead, Almighty God committs to thee the Pastoral charge of this City.

7. Amator shortly after died, in whose place Germanus succeeded, about the
year of Grace four hundred and eighteen, as Bishop Usher reckons. Id. ibid.
And being Bishop, the austerity of his life is thus described by the same
Author: From the first day in which he undertook the Episcopal Office to the
end of his life, he never used Wine, vinegar, oil nor so much as salt to give
a savoury taste to his meat. At his Refections he first took ashes into his
mouth, and after that barley bread: and this so slender and ungratfull diet he
never used till toward sunset. Sometimes he would pass half a week, yea
seven whole days without any satisfaction given to his craving stomach. His
bed was hard boards coverd over with ashes: and to prevent any profoun'd sleep,
he would admit no pillow under his head. Why do I speak of sleep? When as he
spent whole nights in continual sighing, and incessantly waterd his hard couch
with his tears. He was a zealous observer of hospitality, and whenever any
poor or strangers came to him, he would prepare for them a plentiful feast,
whilst himself fasted. Yea with his own hands he would wash their feet, kissing
them and sometimes bedewing them with showrs of tears. Withal to the end he
might cleanse himself from the stains which by familiar conversation with men
could not be avoided, he built a Monastery, into which he often retired himself,
feeding and refreshing his mind there with the wonderful sweetness of
celestial contemplation. Thus qualified was S. Germanus before he exercised
his Apostolical Office in Brittany, imposed on him by Pope Celestinus.

Hara^s in Lup^. 19. Iulij.
8. Next as touching his companion S. Lupus: he was born at Toul a City of the
Leuci, of a Noble family: his Fathers name was Epirochius. After whose death,
he was sent to school, and there imbued in the study of Rhetoric. He was
married to Pimeniola Sister to S. Hilarious Bishop of Arles, a Lady from her
youth inflamed with a love of Chastity. And hence it came to pass, that after
seven years spent in marriage, by divine inspiration both of them mutually
exhorted one another to a state of Conversion. And Lupus himself by a strong
impulse from heaven was moved to visit the Blessed S. Honoratus first Abbot of
the famous Monastery of Lerins. To whom being come, he humbly submitted himself
to his Discipline, with meek shoulders undergoing the yoke of our Lords
service, and mortifying himself with continual watchings and fastings. After
he had spent a year there, in a great fervor of faith he returned to the City
of Mascon, with an intention to sell his possessions there and distribute the
money to the poor. When Lo on a sudden he was unexpectedly snatched away, and
compelled to undertake the administration of the Bishopric of Troyes. His
admirable sanctity is celebrated by the writers of those times: and
particularly Sidonius Apollinaris in an Epistle written to him after he had
been forty five years Bishop, Sidon Apollin. l. ^. Epi. 1.
styles him Father of Fathers, Bishop of Bishops, and a second Jacob of his age.

9. Such were the Apostolic Reformers of the ancient British Churches: their
humility and austerity of Life had a proper and specificall virtue to oppose
the Pride and sensuality of Pelagian Heretics. Such Missioners as these were
indeed worthy Delegats of the Apostolic See: whose particular Gests before
they came to Sea, we leave to French Ecclesiastical Annalists: as how S.
Germanus consecrated with a Religious Veyle the holy Virgin S. Genoveufe: how
he bestowd on her as a memorial, a certain coin casually found, imprinted with
the sign of the Cross. But the accidents befalling them at Sea must not be
omitted, which are thus related by the forenam'd Constantius.

10. These two holy men, says he, under the conduct and direction of our Lord
took shipping, and were by him safely protected and tried in and by many
dangers. At first the Ship was carried with favorable winds from the Gallick
shore, till they came into the midst of the Sea, where no land could be
discovered. But presently after this the fury of a whole Legion of Devils,
envying their voyage designed for the salvation of a world of souls, assailed
them. These oppose dangers, raise storms, darken the heavens, and make darkness
more horrible by adding thereto fearful swellings of the sea and ragings of the
air. The sails are no longer able to sustain the fury of winds, nor the boat
to resist mountains of waves dashing against it. So that the ship was (...)
forward rather by the prayers then skill or force of the mariners: And it so
fell out that the prime Pilot, the Holy Bishop Germanus was then securely
composed in sleep. That advantage the tempest took to increase in horror,
since he who only could resist it was in a sort absent: So that the ship
overset with waves was ready to sink. Then at last S. Lupus and all the rest in
great trouble and fear awaked the old man, who only was able to withstand the
fury of the elements. He not at all astonished at the danger, addresses his
prayers to our Lord, and his threats to those of the Ocean, and to the raging
storms he opposes the cause of Religion which invited them to that voyage. And
presently after taking a small quantity of oil which he blessed in the Name of
the holy Trinity, and Sprinkling it on the raging waves, immediately quelled
their fury. Then he admonished his Colleague, and encouraged all the rest: So
with one breath and clamor prayers were powered forth to our Lord. Immediately
the Divine virtue showed it self present, the infernal Enemies were dissipated,
a calm tranquillity ensued, the winds are turned and become favorable to their
voyage, the waves serviceably drive on the ship, so that in a short time having
dispatched a vast space they safely arrived in a quiet and secure haven.

11. This Oil made use of by S. Germanus, was not that Sacramental oil
consecrated for the spiritual comfort of the Sick: but ordinary Oil which we
frequently read to have been used by holy men upon the like occasions, and by
their benediction of it to have produced the like effects, in several
exigences. Of the former fort of Sacramental Oil S. James in his Epistle
speaks: and of this latter, S. Mark in the sixth Chapter of his Gospel, Baron.
ad. A. D. 425. Sozom. lib. 6. c. 2. ibid. c. 29
says Baronius. Several examples of the like may be read in Sozomen, as where
S. Anthony by anointing a lame man with oil cured him: and another holy Monk
called Benjamin by the like means cured several diseases. And Ruffinus
testifies that in his presence and sight several miracles were after the same
manner wrought by religious Hermits.

V. CHA.
V. CHAP.
1.2. etc. S. Germanus his Disputation against the Pelagians, and Miracle.

10. etc. A victory over the Scotts, by his Prayers.

1. THese two Holy men ( says the same Constantius) being landed, a great
mul^itude from several quarters me^t to receive them, Constan^. l. 1. c. 19.
of whose coming they had been informed by the predictions of wicked Spirits
which were sore affrighted thereat. For these being by the power of Priests
cast out of those whom they had possessed, did openly declare the furiousnes of
the tempest, and the dangers which themselves had opposed to their voyage, and
how by the command and sanctity of those holy men they had been vanquished.
Afterward these venerable Bishops with their fame, preaching and miracles
filled the whole Island of Brittany, the greatest of all others. And being
ouerpress'd with the multitudes of those who resorted to them, they preached
Gods word not only in Churches, but in lanes and high ways: whereby Catholics
were confirmed in their faith, and those who had been depraved were reduced to
the Church. They were received as if they had been indeed Apostles, considering
the authority which their holiness gave them, the eminency of their learning and
the wonderful miracles wrought by them. A. D. 431.
Divine Truth therefore being declared by persons so qualified, generally the
whole Island submitted to their doctrine. The authors of the contrary perverse
persuasion lurked in dark holes, being, as the wicked Spirits also were, vexed
to see the people freed from their snares. But at last, after long study and
meditation they presumed to enter into dispute with these Apostolic men.

2. The place made choice of, as most proper, H. Boet. hist. S^^tor. l. ^.
for this disputation, was ( not London, as Hector Boethius imagins, but)
Verolam, then a famous City near S. Albans, where the Body of the glorious
Martyr Saint Alban reposed. Now what passed in that solemn conflict is thus
related by Constantius.

3. The Pelagians came pompously attended by their flattering disciples, in
glittring and costly raiment: Constant. ^bi. Supr.
and they rather chose to run the hazard of a conflict, then by their silence
to confess they had an ill cause. Infinite numbers of people were assembled
there, with their wives and children. The disputants stood on each side, very
unlike in their condition. For on one side was placed divine authority; on the
other, human presumption: Here was Orthodox Faith; there perfidious Error:
Here Christ was acknowledged the author: there, Pelagius. At the first
entrance the Holy Bishops gave free scope of disputing to the Pelagians, who
vainly spent the time and tired the auditory with empty, verbal discourses.
But after them the Venerable Bishops poured forth the torrents of their
eloquence accompanied with Evangelicall and Apostolical thunder. They mingled
with their own discourses, texts of divine Scripture, and their assertions were
attended with testimonies of Gods word. Thus vanity was convinced, and
perfidiousnes confuted: insomuch as the Pelagians by their inhability to reply
confessing their own guilt, the people standing by as judges, could scarce
contain their hands frrom violence to them, and with clamours acknowledged the
Victory.

4. Immediately after this a certain person of authority, being a Tribune of the
army, coming with his wife into the midst of the Assembly, leading in his hand
his young daughter about ten years old, which was blind: Her he presented to
the ^oly Bishops, desiring their help for her cure. But they bid him first to
offer her to the Adversaries. Who being deterred by an ill conscience, joined
their entreaties with her parents prayers to the Venerable Prelates: Whereupon
perceiving the expectation of the people, and their adversaries conviction,
they addressed themselves to God by a short prayer. And then S. Germanus full
of the Holy Ghost invoked the Blessed Trinity, and taking from his neck a
little box full of Holy Relics, in the sight of the whole multitude he
applied it to the eyes of the young maid, which immediately loosing their former
darkness were filld with a new light from heaven. At this so apparent miracle
the parents exult, and the people tremble. And after this day all men's minds
were so clearly purged from their former impious heresy that with thirsting
desires they received the doctrine of these Holy Bishops.

5. The truth of this narration is acknowledged by several Protestant Writers,
as Archbishop Parker, S. Henry Spellman and others: Antiquit. Brittan. f. 7.
and 46. Spelman. A. D. 446.
who highly exalt the learning, Sanctity and Orthodox Faith of these two
Apostolic Bishops: but withal they purposely conceal the miracle and manner
how it was performed: fearing to commend that in S. Germanus which they resolve
to reprehend in the Holy Monk S. Augustine, calling his devotion to Gods Saints,
superstitions, and his bringing into Brittany holy Relics, trivial fopperies,
affirming him to have been a Teacher rather of superstition then Faith. But let
us proceed in the Narration of Constantius.

(...). vii ^upr^.
6. Perverse Heresy being thus repressed ( says he) and the Authors of it
confuted, so that all men's minds were illustrated with the purity of Faith, the
holy Bishops repaired to the Sepulcher of the glorious Martyr Saint Alban, with
an intention to give thanks to Almighty God by his intercession. There S.
German having with him Relics of all the Apostles and diverse Martyrs, after
Prayer made he commanded the Sacred Sepulcher to be opened, because he would
there lay up these precious Gifts: For he thought it convenient that the same
Repository should contain the members of many Saints out of diverse regions,
whom Heaven had received and crowned for the equality of their merits. Having
then with great reverence deposed and joynd together so many Sacred Relics, he
dug up from the place where the Blessed Martyr S. Alban had shed his blood,
a mass of dry earth, which he meant to take along with him, in which were yet
extant marks of the Martyrs death, and palenes of his Persecutour. These things
being thus performed, an innumerable multitude was that day converted to our
Lord.

7. What became of this Box with the new Relics of S. Albanus in it, after S.
Germanus his death, the same Author will acquaint us, saying, The holy Bishop
being dead, Id. ibid.
his inheritance was afterward divided: The Emperor first took his portion,
and after him next the Bishops. The like contention followd about dividing his
poverty, which usually befalls after the death of rich men when every one
strives to get some thing, and all cannot be satisfied. The Empress (Galla
Placidia Mother of Valentinian) being heir only of his Benediction, had for
her share his little Box of Sacred Relics.

8. The occurrents happening after this disputation and miracle are thus further
described by the same Writer, At their return from this meeting the treacherous
Enemy of mankind preparing snares for the Holy Bishop, Id. ibid.
by a casual fall S. Germanus putt his foot out of joint. This affliction the
Devil procured, being ignorant that after the example of Blessed Job, his
merits would be advanced by his sufferings. Now during the time that by this
infirmity he was constraind to abide in a certain lodging, it happened that a
fire took in some houses not far off, which being covered with straw and sedges
were quickly devoured by it, so that the fire driven forward by wind quickly
approached to his lodging. Whereupon a great concourse of people came to the
Venerable Bishop in a great fright, intending to take him in their arms, and
carry him out of danger. But he reprehended them, and utterly refused to remove,
having a firm Faith that no harm should happen to him. The multitude then
despairing of his safety, endeavored all they could to stopp the progres of
the flames. But Almighty God the more to show his Power and his servants Faith,
so ordained that whatsoever the people endeavored to preserve, was consumed:
and that place only where the sick person lay, was preserved. For the flames,
as if afraid to touch the Holy Bishops lodging flew quite over it, though they
raged violently on both sides of it: So that among the rolling flames the house
wherein he lay was only untouched. The multitude seeing this miracle exulted,
rejoicing that their labors and endeavors had been conquered by divine power.

9 Whilst he lay there, a numberless multitude continually attended and
watched at the door of this holy poor man: some seeking health for their
souls, and some for their bodies. The wonderful virtues and miracles which
our Lord wrougth by his servant, can scarce be related, they were so many. He
being infirm himself gave strenght and health to others; Neither would he
permit any one to apply any remedy to his infirmity. But on a certain night he
saw standing before him a certain person in white garments, who stretching
forth his hand seemd to raise him up from his couch, commanding him to stand
firmly. After which, all his pain passed away, and his strength was so
restored, that the day following he confidently undertook to pursue his journey.

10. After this followd a general benefitt to the whole British Nation
procured by this holy Bishops merits and prayer: Id. ibid.
which the same Author thus relates. In the mean time the Saxons and the Picts
with joint forces made war upon the Britains, who therefore were drawn
together into a body. But being distrustful of their ability to resist such
powerful enemies, they humbly implored the assistance of these Holy Bishops,
which they cheerfully promised, and hastening their journey to the British
camp, they so increased the courage and resolution of the Britains, as if a
new Army had been joined to them. Thus our Lord himself by the ministry of
these his Captains seemd to be General of the Army. Then was the holy time of
Lent, which the presence of these Venerable Bishops caused to be observed with
greater devotion: Insomuch as by their daily preaching great multitudes flockd
to receive Baptism: for the greatest part of the army desired to be partaker
of that blessed Sacrament. Hereupon a Church was prepared against the solemnity
of Easter, and though the place was open feilds, yet it was ordered as if it
had been in a City. Thus the Army went in Procession, moistened with the water
of Baptism, and being inflamed with the fervor of holy Faith they contemned
the guard of outward weapons, expecting more sure protection from heaven. This
order and posture of the British army was come to the Enemies knowledge, who
not doubting a Victory against unarmed people, with great chearfullnes hastened
to set upon them. The Britains in the mean time were acquainted with their
march: and as soon as the Solemn Feast of our Lords Resurrection was past, the
greater part of the Army being newly baptized, took to their arms and prepared
themselves for a battle: S. Germanus himself being their General. He maks
choice of a band of light armed soldiers, and takes a view of the country
round about: and observing a valley compassed with mountains lying directly in
the Enemies way, he there places a new army, of a part of which himself would
be Captain. Now the feirce Enemies approached, and were discovered by such as
had been placed in ambush. Then on a sudden S. Germanus their Leader gave order
to all his soldiers that with loud clamours they should repeat the words
pronounced by him: and immediately while the Enemies thought to fall on,
presuming that they had not been discovered, the Holy Bishops three times cried
out aloud ALLELVIAH, whereupon the whole Army with one voice thundered out
likewise ALLELVIAH, which noise was terribly multiplied, and increased by the
Eccho's from the mountains round about.

11. The sound alone of this sacred word suffised to terrify the Enemies Army,
which fell a trembling, as if not the rocks only, but heaven it self had falln
on their heads: insomuch as they all betook themselves to a general flight,
vexed that their legs could not carry them away fast enough. They run all
ways, every where they cast away their arms, glad to escape with their naked
bodies. Great numbers of them in their headlong flight were swallowed up by a
river through which a little before they had marched with confidence and
leisure enough. All this while the British Army without striking a stroke was
spectatour of the vengeance which Heaven took on their Enemies. Afterward they
gather the spoils and prey exposed to them, with great devotion acknowledging
the Victory due only to God. The Holy Bishops then triumph indeed to see the
Enemies defeated without bloodshed: they triumph for a Victory gaind not by
arms, but Faith alone. And thus having every ways settled this rich Island in
security both from their spiritual and carnal Enemies, after so glorious a
Victory over the Pelagians and Saxons, they prepared themselves for their
return, to the great grief of the whole Nation.

12. This wonderful Victory is believed to have been obtained near a town
called Mold in Flintshire: for there is a large field which still retains the
name of S. Germanus, being called in the British language Maes-garm^n. There
also runs the River Alen, in which probably the Picts and Saxons were many of
them drowned. And besides this, the place being situated near the Sea, lay
fittly for the abord of the Enemies Navy and armies. This Victory likewise
seems to be celebrated by S. Gregory the Great, who expounding those words of
Job, A. D. 430.
(Cardines quoque mari^ operiet.) He covers the bottom, Gregor. M. l. 27.
Moral. c. 6.
or roots of the Sea; makes mention of Alleluiah sung by the Britains, and the
great virtue thereby obtained over the Ocean and all their Enemies. S. Beda
indeed applies this passage to the times of S. Augustine and conversion of the
Saxons: Whereas that Book was written before Saint Augustins arrival in
Brittany: and therefore more properly belongs to the present story.

13. The great blessings conferred by these Venerable Bishops on our Island were
in some degree recompensed by the prosperous voyage which at their return they
acknowledged from the intercession of the Tutelary Saint of Brittany, the
glorious Martyr S. Albanus: For so writes the fore mentioned Author
Constantius, Constan^. (...) supra.
saying, Their own merits and the intercession of the Martyr S. Albanus
obtained for them a calm voyage by Sea, so that their prosperous ship rendered
them safe to the desires of their friends at home: From whom they had been
absent little more then the space of a year, during which short time so many
wonderful things were wrought by them, never to be forgotten, nor without
great veneration mentioned by us. This was S. Germanus his first voyage into
Brittany. Within six years he will be obliged to return once more, and make a
longer abode here.

VI. CHAP. VI. CHAP.

1.2. etc. S. Patrick a Disciple of S. Germanus: receives his Mission from P.
Celestinus.

7.8. His companions in his Mission.

9.10. Irish Magicians give warning of his coming.

11. etc. Of the Staff of Jesus.

1. DVring the time that S. Germanus remained in Brittany, A. D. 429.
S. Patrick being then sixty eight years old, inseparably adhered to him, from
him he learnt many instructions in Christian Doctrine and Discipline, and
received many examples of virtue and piety for his imitation. By him likewise
he was encouraged to undertake the Conversion of the Irish Nation: but withal
admonished to expect from the Apostolic see of Rome a commission and authority
to execute that Apostolical Office. A. D. 430.


2. For which purpose he accompanied S. Germanus into Gaul, from whence the
year following he went to Rome, Iocolin. c. 24.
being desirous, says Iocelinus, to have his actions and journey into Ireland
confirmed by the authority of Pope Celestinus. He had appointed by Saint
Germanus, A. D. 431.
for his companion to Rome, to be a comfort in his travel and a witness of his
holy conversation a certain Priest named Sergecius, a devout servant of our
Lord. When he was arrived at Rome he committed himself to the Prebends of the
Roman Church to be more perfectly instructed in their instituts.

A. D. 431. Stanihurst. in vit. S. Patric.
3. Afterward he repaired to the Holy Pope Celestinus, and humbly casting
himself at his feet earnestly besought him to employ his care for the
conversion of the Pagan Irish Nation. Which Petition of his being very
acceptable to the Holy Pope, he a while after sent for him, and changing his
name from Magonius to Patricius, as prophesying that he should be a spiritual
Father of many souls, he promoted him to the Episcopal dignity, and so
directed him to his voyage into Ireland. Thus writes Stanihurst in the Life of
our Saint. Other Authors affirm that he was ordained Bishop by S. Amator, or
by an Archbishop called Matthew: But all generally agree that he received his
Mission only from Pope Celestinus.

4. And hereof S. Patrick himself is a most authentic witness, as may appear in
an Epistle which he wrote of his Legation, which begins thus, In the name of
our Lord Jesus Christ. I Patricius a poor humble servant of our Lord, in the
four hundred and thirtieth year of his Incarnation was sent Legate by the most
holy Pope Celestinus into Ireland, the inhabitants whereof by the Divine Grace
I converted to the Faith of Christ, etc.

5. This Epistle is extant in Capgrave, and also in the fifth Tome of the Great
Bibliotheque of the Fathers: Biblioth. Patron. (...). part. 3. f. 793.
Where is added this Observation of the learned Gerardus Vossius, This Epistle
of the Legation of S. Patricius we found some years since among the Manuscript
Collections of Marianus Victorius of pious memory Bishop of Reate, who received
it transcribed faithfully out of a most ancient Copy of Glastenbury Abbey, at
the time when he attended Cardinal Poole sent by the Pope Legate into England.
So that the authority of it seems not fit to be rejected. The whole tenor of
this Epistle has been already produced in the fifth Chapter of the second Book
of this History, Vid. supra l. 2. c. 5.
upon occasion of treating concerning the first foundation of the Abbey of
Glastenbury by S Joseph of Arimathea and his disciples.

6. In the same Epistle S. Patrick also testifies that together with the
Episcopal Degree S. Celestinus bestowd on him twelve years of Indulgence. His
words are, I found in Writings of a later date that S. Phaganus and Diruvianus
obtained from the Holy Pope Eleutherius who sent them, ten years of Indulgence.
And I brother Patricius received of Pope Celestin of happy memory twelve years.
Florileg. A. D. 491.
Hence it is, that Florilegus says, That S. Patrick took his journey to
Ireland, enriched with spiritual treasures.

Iocelin. c. 26.
7. He was accompanied in his Legation, says Iocelinus, with twenty persons
eminent for their wisdom and holy conversation: Which were assigned to him for
his assistance by Pope Celestinus. In his journey he diverted to S. Germanus
his instructour: from whose liberality he received chalices, Preistly
vestments, and store of Books, together with many other things proper for
Ecclesiastical Ministry.

8. One of his principal companions was the same Sergetius, or Segetius, who
by S. Germanus his order had attended him in his journey to Rome, being a pious
and virtuous Priest. There are mentioned in Ecclesiastical monuments two,
whose names were Auxilius and Isserninus ( named by some Servinus:) their names
are found subscribed in a Synod assembled afterward by S. Patrick in Ireland.
Others there were of inferior Ecclesiastical Orders, Vsser in Primord. f. 8^2.
says Bishop Usher, who under S. Patrick ministered to our Lord.

9 Warning of S. Patricks coming into Ireland was given several years before
by the Magicians and Pagan Prophets there, Ap. Capgrav. in S. Patricio.
as we read in his Life extant in Capgrave. For they said, A man will come
hither with his wood, whose Table shall be placed on the Eastern side of his
house, and some persons standing behind, together with others from the Table
will sing, and the Congregation will answer them, saying, Amen. When this man
comes he will destroy our Gods, subvert our Temples, destroy Princes which
resist him, and his Doctrine shall remain and prevail here for ever:

10. With such words as these, Probus in S. Patricio.
says Probus, the Magicians incensed both the Prince and all the people to
hate the Blessed Bishop S. Patricius. For two or three years they composed a
certain Rhythme, which according to the obscure idiome of their rude language
imported thus much. A head of art and skill, with his crook-headed staff will
come: From that hour every house shall be bored through at the top. He will
chant an abomination from his Table at the fore part of the house, and his
whole family will answer, So be it, So be it. This in our tongue and sense
means thus much, The Master of all wisdom will come with his sign of the
Cross, by which the hearts of all men will feel compunction: And from the
Altar of the holy Mysteries he will convert souls unto Christ: and all the
Christian people will answer, Amen. When these things come to pass, then our
Pagan kingdom shall fall. And all this was afterward really fullfilld.

11. Hereby appears that the piece of wood which those Magicians foretold
should be brought by S. Patrick, is interpreted by Probus to be a wooden
Cross: Whereas others affirm that by it is signified a certain wonderful
Staff which S Patrick before his journey received from a Holy Hermit, and
which was called, The staff of Jesus. The strange story how this Staff was
first received, and what wonders it afterward wrought, I wlil here set down
from Iocelinus the Author of S. Patricks life, yet without interposing my
credit for the truth of it.

12. S. Patrick, Iocelin. in v^t S. Patricij c 26.
says he, by Divine revelation passed over to a certain Solitary Hermit living
in an Island of the Tyrrhen Sea, whose name was Iustus, which he made good by
his actions; being a man a a holy life, great fame, and much merit. After
devout salutations and good discourse, the same man of God gave to S. Patrick a
staff, which he seriously affirmed had been bestowed on him immediately by the
hand of our Lord Jesus himself, who had appeared to him.

13. Now there were in the same Island at some distance other men also who
lived solitary lives: Of which some seemed very fresh and youthful, and others
were decrepit old men. S. Patrick after some conversation with them, was
informed that those very old men were children to those who appeared so
youthful. At which being astonished, and enquiring the occasion of so great a
miracle, they thus aquainted him, saying, We from our childhood by Divine Grace
have been much addicted to works of Mercy, so that our doors were always open
to all travellors which demanded mea^ or lodging. On a certain night it happened
that a stranger having a staff in his hand was entertained by us, whom we used
with all the courtesy we could. On the morning after he gave us his
benediction, and said, I am Jesus Christ: My members you have hitherto often
ministered to, and this night entertained me in my own person. After this he
gave the staff which he had in his hand to a man of God, our Father both
spiritually and carnally, commanding him to keep it, till in succeeding times a
certain stranger named Patrick should come to visit him: and to him he should
give it. Having said this, he presently ascended into heaven. And from that day
we have remained in the same state of Youthful comelines and vigor to this
hour. Whereas our ^hildren who then were little infants, are now as you see
become decrepite old men.

14. Now what fortune soever so stupendous a story may fined in the minds of
the Readers: certain it is that a staff believed to have belongd to S. Patrick,
and named the staff of Jesus, Bernard. in vi^. S. Malachi^^.
was for many ages in great veneration among the Irish. For thus S. Bernard in
the life of S. Malachias an Irish Bishop written by him relates, Nigellus,
says he, seeing that he must be compelled to fly, took with him some precious
ornaments of the Sea of Armagh, namely a copy of the Holy Gospells which had
formerly been S. Patricks, and a staff covered with gold and adorned with
precious stones, which they call the staff of Jesus, because, as the report is,
our Lord himself held and formed it with his own hands. This was of high Esteem
and veneration in that Nation, and well known by the people, whose reverence to
it was so great, that whosoever was seen to have it in his hands, they
foolishly showed the same respect and veneration to him, as if he had been
their Bishop. And Giraldus Cambrensis in his Topography of Ireland writes also
thus, Girald. Cambrens. in topograph. c. 34.
In the Vulgar opinion with this staff S. Patrick cast out of the Island all
venomous beasts. Of which staff the Original is as uncertain as the virtue
most certain.

VII. CHAP. D. A. 432.

VII. CHA.



1. When S. Patrick entered Ireland.

2.3.4. His first Converts.

SAint Patrick seems to have entered into Ireland in the year four hundred
thirty two, as Bishop Usher computes. The inhabitants of the country, says
Stanihurst, having advice of his landing flocked to him from all parts:
Stanihurst. in vit. S. Patric.
For though some among them attempted to drive the Holy Bishop from their
coasts, yet the greater part of the common people came joyfully to him, as if
he had been of their own Nation. For in S. Patrick there were many qualities
which invited them to express great goodwill and familiarity toward him. He
was a comely personage, very civil in conversation, and though extremely
grave, yet without morosity. Besides this he spoke the Irish language
perfectly, and from his youth had informed himself concerning their natural
dispositions: by which means he became presently as one of them. But God
himself was the principal cause of conciliating their affections to him: by
whose special Grace in a short time great multitudes yielded their assent and
obedience to Christian doctrines preached by him. S. Patrick therefore, as
became a good Shephear'd, with great care watched over his new flock, by daily
admonitions informing the new-converted Christians in all duties of Piety,
convincing the Errors of the Pagans, and confounding the Magicians which
opposed him.

2. Especial notice is taken in Ecclesiastical Monuments of the conversion of
one Irish man, whose name was Dicon, through whose land S. Patrick passing,
gaind him to our Lord, after a wonderful manner, and from a wolf changed him
into a Lamb. Of him Probus thus writes: Prob. in vit. S. Patric.
Dicon coming suddenly with weapons, intended to kill S. Patrick and his
companions. But as soon as he saw the Holy Bishops face, he felt compunction in
his heart. For our Lord immediately turned his thoughts, insomuch as he lead him
meekly to his house: Where the holy Bishop rested some time, preaching to him
the Faith of Christ: So that this man first of all the Island believed, with
all his family.

3. Notwithstanding another ancient Author, cited by Bishop Usher, Ap. Vsser.
in Pelmord. cap. 17. f. 846.
recites the conversion of one called Sinel, as the first of all. His words
are, S Patrick sent by Pope Celestinus into Ireland, landed there at the mouth
of the River Dee. But an impious Count, called Nathi, who formerly had resisted
S. Palladius, contradicted S. Patrick and his Doctrine. However Sinel the Son of
Finchado by the preaching of S. Patrick believed in Almighty God: and he was
the first among the Irish-Scotts, who was baptized by the Holy Bishop: Upon
whom and his seed S. Patrick bestowed his Benediction.

4. By this testimony it appears that S. Patrick first landed in the Province
of Lenster: from whence he directed his journey into Vlster, where having
converted Dicon* he obtained a field called Sabh^l, two miles distant from the
City of Down. His particular journeys, pious actions, laborious preaching and
admirable miracles are copiously related by Ecclesiastical Writers of Ireland;
to whom the Reader is referred for information, since these matters are not
specially pertaining to our History.

VIII. CHAPTER
VIII. CHAP.
1.2 3. Of S. Carantac, or Cernac, a Britain, and Disciple of S. Patrick.

4.5. Of S. Luman, another Disciple.

1. WE must not here omit what is related of a Disciple and attendant of S.
Patrick called Carantacus, a Britain, concerning whom the Author of his Life
writes, That thirty years before the Birth of S. David he began to labor in
preaching the Gospel in Ireland.

2. He was, as has been said, by descent and country a Britain, ^. (...).
op. Capgrav. in (...).
Son of Keredic Prince of the Province of Cardigan (Cereticae Regionis:) This
is acknowledged by the Irish Historians. The sum of his Gests is thus
extracted out of his life written by John of Tinmouth, extant in Capgrave. A
certain Prince named Keredic had many children: among which one was called
Carantac, a child of a good disposition, who began early to do those things
which he thought pleasing to God. Now in those days the Scotts did greivously
vex Brittany, so that his Father unable to sustain the weight and troubles of
Government, would have resigned the Province to Carantac. But he who loved the
celestial King far more then an earthly kingdom, fled away: and having bought
of a poor man a wallet and staff, by Gods conduct was brought to a certain
pleasant place, where he reposing built an Oratory, and there spent his time in
the praises of God: From his child hood he embraced purity and innocence. At
last he passed over into Ireland, invited by his affection to S. Patrick.
Whither being come, by common advice they determined to separate themselves,
and that one of them should travel in preaching the Gospel toward the right
hand, the other toward the left. In their company there were many
Ecclesiastical persons attending them: and they agreed once every year to meet
together at an appointed place. Whither soever this holy man went, an Angel of
our Lord in the likeness of a Dove accompanied him, who changed his name from
Carantac into Cernach, which was an Irish appellation. All along his voyage he
wrought great miracles for the confirmation of the Faith preached by him, and
heald many thousands of their diseases.

3. The wonderful Gests of this holy man Cernach or Carantac, are to be read
in Irish Historians, and how the Grace at first given to the Apostles was
plentifully given to him. He was an admirable soldier and champion of Christ, a
spiritual and devout Abbot, and a patient Teacher, not refusing to preach
saving Truth to every one. During many years spent by him in that Island he
brought an incredible number to wash away their sins by Penance: and both day
and night he offered innumerable Prayers to God. After he had converted much
people to our Lord, who wrought very many miracles by him, he at last returned
to his own native country in Brittany, where he retired to his former Cave,
accompanied by many disciples. There having built a Church he determined to
abide. But not long after being again admonished by a voice from heaven he
returned into Ireland, where in a good old age, and full of holy works he
rested in peace on the seaventeenth of the Calends of June: and was buried in
his own City, which from him was called Chernach.

4 Hereto we will adjoyn the brief narration of the Gests of another British
Saint and compa^ion of S. Patrick into Ireland, called Luman, who was Son to
Gollitus a Britain, and Nephew to S. Patrick by his Sister Tigridia. He was
the Founder of the Church or Trim in Ireland: The occasion and manner whereof
is thus related by Bishop Usher from Iocelinus and Tirachanus.

5. S. Luman came to the ford of Truim, Ap. Vsser. in Prim^rd. c. 17 f. 853.
which runs before the Castle of Fiedilmed Son of Loigu^r. And early in the
morning Fo^rt hern son of Fiedilmed found him preaching the Gospel of Christ:
who wondering at the Doctrine taught by him, presently believed, and was baptized
in Christ by Luman at a fountain arising in the same place. With him he
remained till his Mother, who ^ought after him, came to the place. She was
overioy'd at the sight of the Holy man, because she also came out of Brittany,
and being instructed by him she likewise believed and returning to her house
told her husband all things that had happened to her self and her son. Fiedilmed
was much joy'd at the arrival of Luman, because his Mother called Schot-noesa
had been a daughter of a British Prince. Fiedilmed therefore went to him, and
saluted him in the British language, questioning him particularly touching his
descent and doctrine: Who thus answered him, My name is Luman, I am a Britain,
a Christian and Disciple of the Holy Bishop Patrick, who was sent by God to
convert the inhabitants of this country to the Faith of Christ, and baptize
them: He sent me hither according to the will of God. Fiedilmed immediately
believed with his whole family: and offered to him and S. Patrick his whole
Territory: all this he offered together with his Son Froitchern for ever till
the day of Judgment. Now Fiedilmed himself removed his habitation beyond the
River Boindeo: but Luman with Foirtchern stayed at the Ford of Truim till S.
Patrick came thither, where they jointly erected a Church, two and twenty (or
rather, twelve) years before the Church of Armagh (Altimachae) was founded. For
the Annals of Vlster refer the beginning of that Archiepiscopall Church to the
year of Grace four hundred forty four.

IX. CHAPTER
IX. CHAP.
1.2. Of S. Benignus, a Disciple of S. Patricks.

3.4. Of the Holy Fire at Easter: and the Irish Magicians Prophecy.

1. BEfore we interrupt the story of S. Patrick, we will out of the Antiquities
of Glastonbury and Malmsburiensis relate the Conversion of another eminent
Saint, who also was afterward his Disciple and Successor in the
Archiepiscopall See of Armagh, and called by him Benignus.

2. The Venerable Bishop S. Patrick preaching the Gospel through several
Provinces of Ireland came to a plain called Brey (or Breg: Antiquit. Glaston.
in Patricio. Malmsbur.
) which was very spacious and beautiful. With which being delighted, he
determined there to celebrate the Feast of Easter then at hand. His first
acquaintance and familiarity in that Province was with a certain man, who
having heard his Doctrine presently believed, and receiving the Sacrament of
Baptism was changed into a new man. With him S. Patrick lodged. This man had a
young child called Beonna, who b^re a tender affection to S. Patrick, so that
he would often play with him, and embrace him, sometimes kissing his foot, which
he would press to his breast. When the holy man retired to rest, the child
would weep, and say he would not sleep unles he might lie with him. Whereupon
S. Patrick with a Prophetical eye perceiving the great Graces which the Divine
bounty would conferr upon the Child, vouchsafed to take him to his bed, and
gave him the name Benignus. A while after when the Holy Bishop was ready to
take his journey, the child with pitiful cries begd that he would not forsake
him, saying that if he forsook him he would dye. He was therefore forced to
receive him into his wagon, and withal prophesied that he should be his heyr
and successor in the Bishopric: which accordingly came to pass.

3. This was the first solemnity of Easter which the Holy Bishop celebrated in
Ireland, says Probus: Probus in vit S. Patric.
And he celebrated it by imitating the Son of God, who at his last supper with
his Disciples consecrated his Body and Blood for the redemption of mankind.

4. The day before this great Feast of our Lords Resurrection S. Patrick (
observing the Ecclesiastical Rite still in use) kindled the Holy Fire, Id.
ibid. Iocelin. in vit. S. Patricij.
the flame whereof shone brightly about the place. Now according to the custom
of that country it was unlawful for any one to light a fire, before it was
kindled in the Kings palace. Hereupon the King, whose name was Logorius,
perceiving the brightness of the flame, in great indignation threatened death to
whosoever he was that had presumed to infringe that custom in his kingdom. The
Magicians who were present said to the King, O King, live for ever: And know
for a certain, that this fire which against Law has been thus kindled, unless
it be presently extinguished, will never cease to the worlds end. Moreover it
will obscure all the fires which according to our customs we kindle, and the
man who lighted it will be the destruction of thy Kingdom.

X. CHAP. X. CHAP.

1.2. etc. Of S. Winwaloc, his Gests and death.

6. etc. Of his Deacon S. Ethbin.

^ WHilst S. Patrick labored in the Gospel with so great success, Brittany
was illustrated with the glory of another great Saint: who notwithstanding by
reason of the calamities afterward happening, was forced to leave his Native
country, and pass over into Armorica in Gaul. This was S. Winwaloc the son
of a certain Noble person called Fracan cousin german to a British Prince
named Coton, as we read in the Gallican Martyrologe. Malbranc. de (...). l. 2.
c. 26. and 32.


2. Malbranc a French Antiquary affirms that his Mothers name was Alba, and
surname Trimavis, citing for his authority the ancient Manuscript Monuments of
Monstrueil. And the said Martyrologe gives this Character of him, Martyrolog.
Gallican. 3. Mars.
Winwaloc from his childhood was inflamed with an earnest desire of celestial
things to despise worldly allurements, and live to God only. Wherefore he
earnestly begged of his parents that ^e might be commended to the care of a
certain Religious man, to be imbued by him in the knowledge of Holy Scripture
and the documents of piety. Having obtained his request, he made wonderful
progres in Holiness and virtue under his discipline: insomuch that when he was
but seven years old, he became an example of all piety and goodness. In
process of time having undertaken a Monastical Profession, Divine Graces
shone more brightly in him, being withal enriched with the Gift of Prophecy.
Many miracles almighty God wrought by him, in performing which, having a firm
Faith, he made use only of the Sign of the Cross and oil which had been
blessed. Among which miracles the most stupendous was his raising a young man
to life. Haraeus ex Surio 13. Mar^ij.


3. At the same time, says Haraeus from Surius, the most holy Prelat S.
Patricks glory was famous in Gods Church, who like a bright starr illustrated
Ireland. The report of whose admirable virtues kindled so great an affection to
him in S. Winwaloc, that he used all endeavors to go to him, and be subject
to his direction in piety. But whilst he busied his thoughts with this design,
S. Patrick in a vision presented himself to him with an Angelical brightness,
and having a golden Diadem on his head: he thus spoke to him: Behold I am the
same Patrick, whom thou so earnestly desire to visit: But to prevent so
tedious a journey by sea and land, our Lord has sent me to thee to fulfill
thy desire, and that thou may enjoy both my sight and conversation. Besides
this he foretold him that he should be a Guide and Directour of many in
spiritual warfare: for which end he gave him many wholesome instructions:
Exhorting him withal to desire from his Master some companions: and that with
them he should remove to another place. As Soon as this Vision vanished, S.
Winwaloc went to the Cell in which the Father of the Monastery was attending to
Divine Meditation and contemplation. To whom as soon as he had declared his
Vision, he with a joyful countenance said to him, My son, thou have been
honored with a Divine visitation and revelation. And without delay, as if he
had received a precept from heaven, he assigned to him eleaven Disciples, such
as were most fervent in Gods service etc.

4. The same Author adds that with these companions he passed over into a
certain Island, where for the space of three years they lead an Heremiticall
life. But the place being both exposed to violent tempests, and also
incommodious by reason of its barrennes, S. Winwaloc humbly begged of God that
he would direct them to a more convenient habitation. Our Lord heard his
servants prayers, and showed him a place further removed in the Sea. But wanting
a ship he renewd his Prayers to God: and having done this he said to his
Brethren* Be courageous and firm in a strong Faith, and as you see me lead
this Brother by the hand, so do every one of you take his next fellows hand,
and follow one another. Then invoking the name of our Lord, with his Pastoral
Staff he struck the Sea, upon which God renewd once more the ancient Miracle of
the Red sea, for it opened a passage for them: so that taking one another by
the hand, and himself marching in the front, they walked securely over the dry
sands, the waters on both sides standing like walls, and as they went they sang
to our Lord a Hymn of praise and joyfulnes.

5. Concerning his austerities, we read thus in Capgrave, Capgrav. i^ S.
Winvvaloc^.
From the twentieth year of his age to his death S. winwaloc was never seen to
sit in the Church. He never exceeded moderation in any thing: Never was he
dejected with sadness, nor dissolute in mirth; never angry or turbulent, but
kind and affable to all, Every day he repeated the hundred and fifty Psalms,
sometimes standing with his arms stretched forth in the figure of a Cross,
sometimes ^alln on his knees. From the day that he began to build his
habitation, he never used any garment of wool or linen, but made use only of
goat skins. Neither on his bed had he either feathers or clothes: but instead
of feathers he strowd under him Nuttshells, and instead of blankets sand
mingled with pebles: and two great stones he putt under his head. He used the
same garments day and night. He never eat wheaten bread, and but a small
proportion of bread made of barley, with which was mingled an equal measure of
ashes. He took his refection once only in two, and sometimes three days. His
other diet was a mixture of meal and cabbage, without any fatt at all Upon
saturdays and sundays he would add a little cheese sodd in water, and at Easter
a few small fishes.

3. It was his usual custom daily to visit a Church about a mile distant from
his Monastery, attended by a Deacon named Egbin: and there to offer Sacrifices
to God both for the living and dead. And such was his diligence and devotion at
the Holy Altar, that he merited there to receive his reward of eternal
happiness: For as it follows in the same Author, One day an Angel appeard to
him and said, Reverend Father, the heavenly Citizens desire thee for their
companion: and soon shall thou be delivered from thy painful exercises. After
this he presently called his Brethren together and said to them, Prepare your
selves to day, for as soon as I have sung Mass, and communicated the Body and
Blood of our Lord, at the sixth hour of the day our Lord will receive me out
of this mortal body. Having therefore celebrated Mass as he stood at the
Altar between two Monks which sustained him on each side, and was singing with
his Brethren, he rendered his soul to God, as untouched by corporal sickness,
as it was free from any carnal stains.

4. The same happy manner of his death is likewise recorded in the Gallican
Martyrologe: Martyrolog. Gallican. 3. Mar^.
and the day signd by it is the third of March. Where is further declared, that
in the times when the Normans wasted France, his sacred Body was translated
(from his Monas^ery at Tauriacum) to the Provinces further removed from sea,
and thence carried into Flanders, and laid in the Blandin Monastery at Gaunt,
where the Feast of his Memory is celebrated on the first of August, the day of
his Translation. Notwithstanding Malbranc earnestly contends that his sacred
Relics repose at Monstrueil, Iac. Mal branc. de Morinis.
where they show likewise his Chasuble, Albe and stole: and there is a Church
dedicated to his memory, in French called S. Wal^y.

5. Now though S. Winwaloc dyed out of Brittany, yet there were not wanting the
monuments of his memory and Sanctity. A town in Shropshire, called even in the
Saxons time Wenlock, as Malmsburiensis testifies, (which seems a contraction of
Winwaloc) from him took its denomination. There it was that the Holy Virgin
Milburga founded a Monastery of Religious Virgins, as shall in due place be
declared.

6. And whereas in the Gests of S. Winwalo^ mention has been made of his
attendant and Deacon called Egbin, or as others write it Ethbin; the memory of
his Sanctity also is particularly preserved in the Gallican Martyrologe, where
we read that he overliv'd his Master, Martyrolog. Gallican. 19 October.
went over into Ireland, there in a Wood called Neeten built a Monastery, where
with great sanctity he lived, and dyed on the nineteenth of October. Several
other particulars are there related of him, which considering he was a stranger
to this Island do not require a place in this History. Only one passage in
which S. Winwaloc is also concerned, shall be here produced, viz: 7. Ethbin by
his merits and piety being Deacon, was chosen to be the daily attendant and
assistant to the Holy Priest Winwaloc. Now it was S. Winwalocs custom to repair
daily to a a little private Church separated from noise and abode of people*
about a mile distant from his Monastery, that he might more quietly and without
distraction offer the Divine Sacrifice for the Living and the Dead. Going
thither one day, accompanied by his Deacon Ethbin, there met him one vayld in
the figure of a miserable Leaper, with a lamentable voice begging assistance.
Ethbin moved with great compassion and charity embraced and kissed the Leaper,
and the same also at his monition did S. Winwaloc. Our Lord accepted their
office of charity with great kindness: for he loves to be cherished in his poor
members: and therefore he was pleased to give each of them a present reward of
their unfeigned Charity. For flying from their embraces our Lord immediately
appeared in a cloud in great glory and with gracious words assured them that
their names were already written in the Book of Life, and that they should with
his Saints be partakers of his kingdom. This most happy assurance of their
future blessedness Ethbin out of a vile esteem of himself ascribed to the merits
of S. Winwaloc: And he on the other side moved with the same Humility and
charity cast the merit on Ethbin.



XI. CHAP. XI. CHAP.

1. S. Ninianus death.

2.3. etc. The Centuriatours testimony of him.

6.7. His Miracles.

8. Of Casa Candida.

9. Alcuinus his Epistle touching him.

1. THE same year four hundred thirty two is marked with the happy death of S.
Ninianus, A. D. 432. Vid. sup. l. 1. c 21. Ap. Capgrav. in Ninian^.
whose Gests have been formerly related. This Holy man, says the Author of
his Life, wonderfully shining with miracles, and illustrious for many virtues
at last approch'd to the happy day in which God graciously called him out of
this mortal life. Thus being perfect in Grace and piety, mature in age, on the
sixteenth of the Calends of October, he happily mounted to heaven. His Body was
buried in the Church dedicated to S. Martin, which himself had built from the
foundation. Hence may be disproved the assertion of an Irish Writer, Vsser. in
Primord. f. 1059.
extant in Bishop Vshers Antiquities of the British Churches, concerning S.
Ninianus his going into Ireland and dying there.

2. The Lutheran Centuriators of Magdeburg likewise confirm what is here
delivered of his dying in Brittany, and moreover add some things deserving our
observation: Their words are these, Magdeb. cent. 5. f. 1429.
Ninianus a Venedotian was a Teacher of Christian verities of a desert more
then ordinary: He to his old age did largely communicate the Talent wherewith
God had entrusted him, among the Britains, Scotts and Southern Picts. He was a
man assiduous in the reading of Holy Scripture, merciful to orphans, widows
and poor: illustrious in miracles and sanctity. By his pious industry the
Nation of the Picts first of all relinquishing their Idolatry, embraced the
true Faith of Christ. He dyed among the Picts in the Province of Galloway, in
the year of Grace four hundred thirty two having been the first Bishop of
Candida casa.

3. Here the Reader may observe, that this Bishop was, by the confession of
these Lutheran Protestants, famous for his Sanctity and miracles, and withal
one who daily studied the Holy Scriptures: Yet he was very devout in giving
respect and Veneration to Gods Saints, to whose honor he likewise built
Churches: S. Martin dyed not above thirty years before S. Ninianus ended his
life, and yet we find a Church built by S. Ninianus, and dedicated to S.
Martin. Yet the same Protestants make sharp invectives against the Roman Church
for imitating these Saints magnified by themselves.

4. The Example of S. Ninianus was imitated by the British Church near the
same age, for when S. Augustine the Monk came into Brittany to convert the
Saxons, he found says S. Beda, in the City of Canterbury a Church dedicated
to the honor of S. Martin, which had been anciently built in the times when
the Romans inhabited this Island.

5. S. Ninianus before he dyed divided the Provinces of the Picts into
Parishes, he ordained Priests there, and consecrated Bishops. This he did by
the authority of the Roman Bishop, from whom, as has been related, he received
his M^ssion.

6. As touching the Miracles which God wrought by his servant S. Ninianus,
although my intention be to be spating in relating such things, yet since the
forementioned Lutheran Writers acknowledge this Saint to have been famous for
them: it may be expedient in this place to record one, as follows: Ap.
Capgrav. in Ninian^.
7. In the Region of the Picts, says the Author of S. Ninianus life, there
was a certain Prince named Tudwal, a proud, high-spirited man, who contemning
the admonitions of this man of God, and derogating from his doctrine and life,
resisted him openly. On a certain day having been more then ordinarily
troublesome and rude to him, God the Supreme heavenly Judge would not suffer
any longer the injuries offered to his holy Servant to pass unrevenged, but
struck this proud man with an intolerable pain in his head, by the violence of
which those lofty eyes of his became utterly blind. So that he which had before
impugn'd the Light of Divine Truth, deservedly lost the light of this world.
But upon be^ter consideration he sent a message to the holy Bishop, humbly
beseeching him in imitation of our Lords benignity, to return to him good for
ill, and love for hatred. The Venerable Bishop hereupon first sharply reproved
the Prince, and then touching him, imprinted on his eyes the sign of the
Cross; when immediately his pains ceased, his blindness was dissipated, and
afterward the Prince highly honored the Holy Bishop, and readily granted
whatsoever he asked of him.



8. As touching the place of his Burial and Episcopal See called Candida
casa, and by the Saxons Wit-hern, Malmsb. de (...). l. 3.
Malmsburiensis thus writes of it: Candida casa is the name of a place in the
confines of England and Scotland, where is the sepulcher of the Blessed
Confessor Ninias; by nation a Britain, who there first preached the Gospel of
Christ. That name was given to the place by occasion of a Church which the holy
Bishop there built of hew'n stone, which to the rude Britains seemd a wonder.
This Holy man Ninias is celebrated by Antiquity for his many miracles.

Vss^r. in Prim^^d. f. 669.
9. There is extant in Bishop Vshers British Antiquities an Epistle of our
Learned Countreyman Alcuinus, not printed among his works, wherein he testifies
the great fame of the Sanctity and Miracles of this Blessed Bishop: A. D. 435.
It is directed to the Religious Priests then living at Candida Casa. And
Paschasius Radbertus recounst a Miracle in the same age wherein Alcuinus who
attended on the Emperor Charles the Great, lived, which miracle happened to a
devout Priest celebrating Mass at the Saints monument, There was a certain
Religious Priest, Ratbert. l. de corp. etc. sanguine Christ. cap. 14.
says he, named Plegils, who frequently solemnis'd Mass at the Body of S.
Ninias Bishop and Confessor. Who living a virtuous and holy life, began
frequently to beseech our Lord that he would please to show visibly to him the
nature and verity of the Body and Blood of Christ in the most Blessed
Sacrament. This Prayer he made, not from want of Faith in the truth of the
Mystery, but merely out of an affection of devotion and piety. Consequently the
Author declares, how to his great consolation our Lord appeard to him in the
Sacrament in the form of a young child.

XII. CHAP. XII. CHAPTER

1.2. etc. S. Germanus his second coming into Brittany.

6.7.8* He Ordains Bishops here. Of Landaff.

10.11. He instituts the University of Oxford.

1. THree years after the death of S. Ninianus, A. D. 435.
S. Germanus Bishop of Auxerre was once more invited into Brittany to perfect
the good work which he had formerly begun, in rooting out the Pelagian Heresy
there spreading it self again. The relation we must borrow from the same
Author, the learned Priest Constantius, to whom Baronius gives this Character,
Baron. hic.
that he was a Writer of those times of most perfect integrity and sincerity in
all things.

2. In the mean time, Constant* in vita S. Germani l. 2. c. 1
says he, a Message from Brittany comes, declaring that the perversity of the
Pelagian Heresy by the impious diligence of a few Authors began to enlarge it
self there. Hereupon once more the prayers of all are again addressed to S.
Germanus, that he would maintain the cause of Divine Grace, which by his
diligence formerly prevayl'd. The Holy Bishop made no delay to comply with
their petition: for his delight was to labor and even spend his strength in
the service of Christ. The Devils envy began now to languish, as the Holy man's
virtues increased, neither durst he so much as tempt him whom by experience he
knew to be a friend of God.

3. There was adjoined to him for his companion Severus Bishop of Triers, a
person of consummate Sanctity, who had long preached the word of God to the
Nations of Germania Prima. In his way he passed by Paris, where he is received
with great joy and acclamations of the people, as the presence of so eminent a
Saint well deserved.

4. In the mean time infernal Spirits flying through the whole Island foretold
the return of Saint Germanus, being forced to do so against their wills.
Insomuch as that one named Elaphius, a principal person of the country,
without any notice given of the Holy Bishops journey came in have to meet them:
He brought with him his Son, upon whom from the flower of his youth a
lamentable infirmity had seized. For all his members were withred, and the hamm
of his legs so drawn together that by reason of the drynes of his thigh, he
could not set his foot to ground. Elaphius was attended by almost the whole
province, which assembled together, though no advice had been given them of the
Holy Bishops coming. By whom, as soon as they met together, an Episcopal
Benediction was conferred on the people, and the words of Truth preached to
them. S. Germanus perceives that the generality of the people persever'd
constant in the doctrine which he had left among them: and that the fault
adhered to a few busy persons: which are diligently sought out, and without
delay condemned.

5. As for Elaphius, he humbly kneeling kissed the Bishops hands, presenting to
him his lame Son: whose sad condition and necessity were sufficiently
recommended to the Bishops charity by his youth and debility, without his
fathers request. So miserable a spectacle moved compassion in all, but
especially in the holy Bishops mind; which compassion they interpreted to be a
sign of Gods clemency to cure him. Presently therefore Saint Germanus compelled
the young man to sit down: and then handled his hamm that was contracted, and
with his right hand strok'd over all the members weakened with that infirmity.
Immediately perfect health and strength attended that wholesome touch: the
withred members recovered their natural juice and humidity, and the sinews
their office and agility to move them. Thus in the sight of all the young man
was restored to his father as if he had been new made. All the people are
astonished at this miracle, by which means the Catholic Faith is perfectly
confirmed in their minds. The rest of the time was spent in preaching up and
down, which wanted not efficacy to convert and reform the hearers. So that by
an universal consent the Authors of the perverse Doctrine are brought before
the Holy Bishops, and then banished out of the Island. This holy work was with
such solidity performed then, that to this day the Orthodox Faith remains in
those places unstaind. Thus all things being well composed, the Blessed Bishops
returned, with a voyage as prosperous as they came. This is the summary
narration of Constantius, touching S. Germanus his second journey into
Brittany. Which Constantius lived about forty years after Saint Germanus his
death, and dedicated his Book to Patiens Bishop of Lions.

6. Notwithstanding our Ecclesiastical Monuments record many more particular
benefits which our Country received from the Holy Bishop Germanus during his
abode this second time in Brittany, which seems to have continued several
years, though how many, does not appear by any Chronologists: therefore we
must be excused if we cannot assign the particular actions of this Saint to
their determinate times.

7. By many deeds of the holy Bishop here, it may be concluded that he came
with Commission from the Sea Apostolic, Pope Sixtus then sitting in the Chair
of S. Peter. For Saint Germanus seeing many Churches deprived of Pastors, by
which means the people became wavering in their Faith called a Synod (which was
an act of Jurisdiction committed to him) and by common advice selected learned
and pious men, whom he ordained Bishops, placing them in several Churches.

8. Thus we read in the History of the Church of Landaff, Hist. Landavens.
How after the foresaid Bishops had rooted out the Pelagian Heresy, they
consecrated Bishops in several quarters of the land. And over all the
Britains toward che right hand side (that is, the Southern parts of Brittany)
they promoted the Blessed man Dubricius to be Archbishop, who was an eminent
Doctor, and was chosen both by the King Mouricus and whole Diocese. At Landaff
they constituted an Archiepiscopall See with the said Kings consent, where a
Church was built, and dedicated to the honor of the Prime Apostle Saint Peter.
These are the borders of it, etc. Now whereas Landaff is here called an
Archiepiscopall See, it is an Error either of the Author or Transcriber. True
it is that when that See was afterward transplanted to Caer-leon, an
Archiepiscopall See was established there.

9. As touching the Holy Bishop Dubricius we shall treat more of him separatly,
after an account given of S. Germanus his actions. And whereas it is said that
by the consent of King Mouricus an Episcopal See was erected at Landaff:
notice is to be taken that this Mouricus was Son to Theodoric Prince of
Glamorganshire (Morganniae) who, Godvvin. in Catalog. Episcop. in Landaff.
as Bishop Godwin relates, resigned his Principality: and embraced a
Monastical or Eremiticall life. But afterward when the Saxons invaded the
Island, he was drawn out of his Cell to be leader of an Army, and courageously
rushing among the enemies received a mortal wound: for which merit he was
enrolled in the number of Martyrs.

10. S. Germanus his next care after ordaining Bishops, was to visit the
Schools, the sources of Learning: For these two are the Pillars to sustain and
perpetuate Faith. Brian Twyne the Advocat of the University of Oxford affirms
positively that Saint Germanus studied in that University. Tvvynu. in Apol.
lib. 2^
But generally all Authors, ancient and Modern agree that he established good
order there: A. D. 439.
yea and probably to encourage both Teachers and Disciples, himself for some
time taught among them, and gathered many Auditors. Among whom one of the
principal which we find in Records was S. Iltutus, or Elcutus, of whom here
after, as likewise of another whose memory is celebrated in Lesser Brittany,
named S. Briocus.

11: Concerning S. Germanus his establishing the University of Oxfor'd, we have
an illustrious testimony of our learned countryman Asserius, who lived above
eight hundred years since: For treating of the Controversy between the Students
of Oxford and Grimbaldus whom King Alfred had called out of France to govern
that University, he introduces the Students thus pleading for themselves, in
opposing the change that Grimbaldus would make in their Instituts, Asser. ad A.
D. 8^6.
They the Scholars likewise (says he) proved by unquestionable testimonies of
ancient Annals, that the Orders and Instituts of that place had been
established by pious and learned men, as Gildas, Melkin, Nemri, Kentigern and
others, who all grew old in their studies there, and administered all things
happily in peace and concord. They showed moreover that Saint Germanus came to
Oxford and abode there half a year, approving wonderfully their said Orders and
Instituts. This was when he traveled through Brittany preaching against the
Heresies of the Pelagians. This Testimony is of great force in case that
passage be not an Addition of a later hand to Asserus, as is much to be
suspected.

XIII. CHAPTER
XIII. CHAP.
1.2. etc S. Germanus his Faith was Roman, the same with that of Saint Augustine
the Monk. This testified by Protestants.

6.7. Churches built to his honor by the ancient Britains.

1. AFter how long abode in Brittany S. Germanus returned home, is uncertain.
But the infinite obligations our Nation has to him are unquestionable. Among
which the greatest of all is his establishing the Catholic Faith here so
firmly that it continued inviolate many ages. Insomuch as even Protestant
Writers attribute to him the Title of Apostle of Brittany.

2. It will therefore be expedient that we conclude the Narration of his Gests
with declaring what Doctrines in Religion S. Germanus himself professed, for
the same, we may be sure, he left behind him in Brittany. This Enquiry seems
necessary, because it will give light for a resolution, whether in the
following age Saint Augustine the Monk sent by Saint Gregory the Great to
convert the Saxons, taught them a new Religion full of Superstitions, and quite
changed from that which Saint Germanus professed, as Protestants affirm: who
therefore magnify Saint Germanus for the purity of his Faith, and as much
derogate from S. Augustine.

3. Touching therefore Saint Germanus his Religion, particularly in the Points
now most controverted, and wherein Saint Augustine is charged to have been
faulty, we cannot more certainly, nor more ingenuously determine it, then by
seeking information from a person of eminent learning in Antiquity, a
Protestant, or however without question no Roman Catholic, to wit, M. Seldom:
Who in a Treatise by him called Analecta Anglo-Britannica has inserted one
Chapter exactly pertinent to our present purpose, The Title of which Chapter
is, Touching the practices of Ecclesiastical Discipline wherewith Germanus and
L^pus Bishops imbued the Britains. Which Enquiry he consequently satisfies in
the following Chapter, in the manner following.

4. Germanus Bishop of Auxerre and Lupus Bishop of Troyes in Gaul came into
Brittany to restore Christian Religion depraved by the Heresy of Pelagius and
Errors of Pagans. Sellen. An^lect. Anglo-Brittann. l. 2. c. 1. Girald. Cambr.
Descript. c. 18.
Their doctrines and documents taught by them, as the fame is, which also
Giraldus Cambrensis testifies to have continued to his days, were as
follows. 1. Of every loaf of Bread set before them, one corner they gave to
the poor. 3. They sat three together at dinner, in memory of the Blessed
Trinity. 4. If any one met in the way a Religious Monk or Clergyman, or any
one in a Religious habit, he would presently lay aside his weapons, and with a
low inclination of his head demand his Benediction. 5. Generally all the people
do earnestly demand Episcopal Confirmation and Inunction with Holy Chrism, by
which the Holy Ghost is conferred 6. They some times bestow the Tithe of all
their Substance, cattle and Sheep, namely either when they marry, or undertake
some long Pilgrimage, or by the Churches Order submitt to some extraordinary
Penance for their sins. This they call the great Tithe: and two parts of it
they bestow on the Church where they received Baptism, the third they give to
the Bishop of the Diocese. 7. Beyond all other external labors of
Mortification they are most devoted to Pilgrimages undertaken to Rome, to visit
the Monuments of the Apostles. 8 Beyond any other Nation they express a devout
reverence to Churches and Churchmen, likewise to Relics of Saints, to
portable Bells, Sacred Books and the Holy Cross. And this devotion has been
rewarded, with greater peace they any other Churches enjoyd. 9. For entire
security is observed in regard of Beasts feeding not only in Church yards but
much beyond them through all bounds enclosed with ditches which Bishops design
for observation of peace and indemnity. And greater Churches, A. D. 435.
to which antiquity always afforded greater reverence, have power to grant and
enjoin the observation of such peace and security for cattle, whilst at morn
they go, and at Even return from their pastures. This peace and security is
observed so inviolably, that if any one should incurr the mortal indignation
of his Prince, and afterward seek refuge in a Church, he may enjoy the fruit
of this Peace both for his person and goods. And indeed from such large
immunities, far beyond the ancient Canons (which in such cases allow safety
only to a man's life and body) occasion of great abuses have been taken: for by
reason of such impunity many do audaciously practice hostility, and from such
pl^ces of Re^uge do horribly infest the whole country about, and even the
Prince himself.

5. There is scarce any one of these Christian practices but was taught by S.
Augustine also: and yet Protestant Writers condemn S Augustine for them, and
absolve S. Germanus, yea magnify him, and glory in an opinion that they are
conformable to his Doctrine and Discipline. They allow to Saint Germanus the
glorious Title of Apostle of the Britains, who taught them no new Doctrins of
Christianity, but only confirmed them in what they had believed before: And the
same Title they with contempt refuse to S. Augustine, who withdrew the barbarous
Pagan Saxons from their Idolatry and Infidelity, and instilled first into their
minds the true knowledge and worship of God, Faith in the Redeemer of the
world, and Veneration to the Holy Cross the Sign of our Redemtion. Such
partiality the Spirit of Schism does naturally produce.

6. Our Ancestors in testimony of their gratitude to the Venera^le Bishop S.
Germanus, and the high esteem of his Sanctity approved by many Miracles, not
long after his death built Chappells and Churches to his honor. Particularly
concerning one of these Camden thus writes, In Cornwall near the River Liver
there is a village named from Saint German, Camden in Danmoniis.
to which, during the Danish tumults, the Episcopal see of that Province was
transferred, out of fear (it being a place more remote and secure:) There a
Church had been erected and consecrated to the honor of S. Germanus Bishop of
Auxerre, who extirpated the Pelagian Heresy that began to rise anew among the
Britains. In Yorkshire likewise a famous Monastery was consecrated to him, as
the same Author thus testifies, The River Ouse does water Selby a town well
peopled: Id. in Brigant.
there King William the First founded a Church in memory of S. Germanus, who
happily wounded to death the many-headed Hydra of Pelagianism, which was often
quelld, and often revived again. The Abbot of this Monastery and of S. Mar^es at
York were the only two Northern Abbots which had Seats in Parliament.

7. Among the Silures in Northwales the Memory of S. Germanus is much
celebrated: for from him a part of Radnorshire is called Guarthenion. For as
our ancient Historian Nennius relates, Vortimer the Son of Vortigern in
satisfaction for injuries done by his Father to Saint Germanus, Nennius up.
Camden in Silares.
dedicated that part of the country to him where he had been wronged. In memory
of which it took the name of Guartheny, which in the British language
signifies a calumny justly retorted. Besides these, many other Monuments
testifying the like veneration to the same Apostolic Bishop might be produced,
but these are sufficient, And this last Example proves this Devotion of the
Britains to him to have begun presently after his death.

XIII. CHAP. XIII. CHAPTER

1.2. etc. Vortigern chosen King of all Brittany: His Character, etc.

1. HItherto, A. D. 418.
since the time that the Romans had relinquished all care and protection of
Brittany, the several Provinces of the Island had been governed by petty
Princes independent on one another. But in the year four hundred thirty and
eight by reason of the frequent inroads of their cruel Enemies the Picts and
Scotts, by a common agreement of the several Provinces a General Captain of
the whole Nation was chosen, after the example of their Ancestors in the days
of Julius Caesar, and the Kingdom established in his line.

2. Which choice unhappily fell on Vortigern, a man born for the destruction of
his country, for he it is that by his slothful vices first weakened it, and
afterward calling in to his aid the barbarous warlick Saxons, prostituted it to
their rapines and tyranny. This Character we read of him in Malmsburiensis,
Malmsbur. l. 2. i. de Reg. c. 1.
At that time Vortigern was King of Brittany, a man void both of courage and
counsel: yea addicted wholly to carnal pleasure, and the slave of almost all
vices: particularly of avarice, pride and luxury. He, as we read in the Gests
of the Britains, solicited and with the hope of making her a Queen deflourd
his own daughter, and of her got a Son: Who notwithstanding his incestous
birth was, by a miracle of Divine Grace, a Saint, his name being S. Faustus.

3. His wife was a Lady equal to him in blood, but most unlike in disposition.
By her he had three Sons, Vortimer, Catigern and Pascentius. Whilst she lived,
he governed his Principality with moderation: but after her death he loosed the
rains to all vices. For which having been reproved by S. Germanus, and upon his
impenitence in a Synod excommunicated, M. Westmonast.
he revenged himself by inflicting the fore mentioned injuries and calumnies
upon the Holy Bishop. But in the end was severely punished by fire from heaven.
A. D. 438.


4. Before his Election to the Universal Government of Brittany, he was Prince
of the Danmonij, or as others write, Consul of the Gevisses inhabitants of the
South-western parts about Cornwall, or South Wales. Which Principality it seems
he had governed well enough, to be esteemd not unworthy to be preferred above
his formerly fellow Princes: though indeed that age, the men of which Gildas
calls (atramentum aetatis) the ink of their age, afforded it seems so little
choice, that a Prince not absolutely vicious deserved reputation. However this
unworthy King is recorded a restorer of the City of Oxford. We will awhile
suspend a relation of the Gests of this unhappy King, to the end we may
interpose some affairs touching the Churches of Brittany at this time occurring.

XIV. CHAPTER
XIV. CHAP.
1.2. etc S. Dubricius ordained Bishop of Landaff by S. Germanus: The place of
his Birth, etc.

1. AMong the actions beneficial to Brittany done by Saint Germanus, the
election and consecration of Saint Dubricius to the Bishopric of Landaff was
deservedly reckoned. This Dubricius (say the Centuriatours of Magdeburg)
surnamed Gainius Vagiensis, Magdes. ^entur. 5. in Dubrici^^.
from the place where he was born; was peradventure the Son of a Monk by
Euedila a Noble Virgin, and grew afterward famous among the English. Thus write
they without all authority from antiquity, desirous to faign one Example at
least, to be a president for their Master Luthers incest.

Put in Dubric^, Ba^e ibid. Povvel in annat. in Iti^^rat. Cambr. l. ^. c. ^.
Capgrav.
2. But from more authentic Testimonie^ it appears that Saint Dubricius was by
nation a Britain, born in the Province of the Dimeta, or West Wales: he was
surnamed Gainius from the River which runs by the place where he was born. His
Fathers name is not mentioned among Authors, his Mother was Euedila, a woman
of a clear fame for her virtues: Thus write Bale, Picts, Powel and the Author
of his life in Capgrave.

Ibid.
3. It is there moreover related how being a child care was taken to imbue his
mind with litterature. And having attained a few years more, he made such
proficiency in learning, that not the ignorant only, but such also as had
acquired a good degree in knowledge, repaired to him to increase their skill:
among whom were Saint Theliaus, Saint Sampson, Saint Aidanus and others. In the
soil of his Nativity near the River Vaga (from whence he was called Vagiensis)
he chose a fit seat for his own and his Disciples studies, and there he spent
many years in the charitable employment of communicating his learning to
others. Afterward having by command of an Angel built a Church there, he
preached and taught the people wholesome Christian Doctrine. Moreover by imposing
his hands he often cured many infirmities, insomuch as those which came to him
sad and unsound, returned joyful and in health. And therefore he was qualified
fit to be advanced by S. Germanus to the Degree of a Bishop.

4. The period of his life is uncertain. Yet certain it is that he lived to a
very old age: for many years after this he was transferred by Aurelius
Ambrosius then reigning to the Archbishopric of Caer-Leon in the Province of
Monmouth. So that he will once more occur in our History. As for his
Disciples Saint Theliaus, Saint I^tutus, etc. eminent Saints and Doctors,
which therefore could not likewise escape the calumnious pens of the Lutheran
Centuriators, we shall treat of them in the following age.

5. But here we must not omit what a learned French writer, Andrew Saussay in
his French Martyrologe relates of another famous Disciple of Saint Germanus
named Saint Briocus a Britain, who was afterward Bishop in Armorica or lesser
Brittany, so illustrious for his Sanctity, that the Sea of his Bishopric is to
this day from his name called S. Brieu, a suffragan Bishopric to Tours.

6. Saint Briocus, Sauss. in Martyrolog. Gallican., ^. April.
says he, was by country an Englishman (he should have said a Britain) of
the Province of Corticia, descended of a Noble Stock. He was by Saint Germanus
of Auxe^^e preaching the Orthodoxe Faith there, brought out of Brittany into
Gaul, and here by him instructed happily in the Discipline of Piety. After he
had enriched his mind with saving Doctrins, he returned into his Native
country, and there informed his parents in the true Faith, which he likewise
preached with great success in the country about. After this being desirous
to employ our Lords Talent yet more copiously, he came over into Armorica:
where having shed the beams of Evangelicall Light on the minds of his kinsman
Conanus Count of Trigu^er (Trecorensem) he afterward cleansed him with the
Laver of Baptism. Then assembling several devout persons aspiring to the
perfection of a Religious life, he built a Monastery, and there by the
liberality of the said Count he laid the foundations of an Episcopal See, and
being consecrated Bishop by the Archbishop of Tours, Metropolitan of that
country, he with an admirable splendor of virtue ad piety governed the said
Diocese the space of thirty years. Afterward making a journey to Angiers to
furnish himself with Ecclesiastical ornaments, he there breathed forth his
spotless soul. A. D. 439.
From thence his Body was carried back, and with great honor buried in the
Church which himself had built, where frequent miracles were wrought at his
Relics: Thus as he gave his name to the Monastery, Town and Mother Church of
that Diocese, so he likewise afforded continual protection to them.

7. Certain Irish Historians would challenge S. Briocus to their country, as
having been born in the Territory of Cork. But his having been a Disciple of
Saint Germanus, who had nothing to do with Ireland, proves him a Britain. And
whereas Bishop Other conjectures that the Master of Saint Briocus might have
been another Saint Germanus Bishop of Paris, who lived in the following age:
His living with Conanus and relation of kindred to him demonstrate him both a
Britain, and more ancient then the younger S. Germanus.

XV. CHAPTER
XV. CHAP.
1.2. etc. S. Patrick comes out of Ireland into Brittany: thence goes to Rome,
etc

4 etc. At his return: he retires to Glastenbury: His Chart: Relics of Saint
Steven, etc.

1. IN the year of Grace four hundred thirty nine, Saint Patrick having with
wonderful advantage labored in our Lords vineyard in Ireland the space of
eight years, returned into Brittany, where, says Malmsburiensis, he abode
thirty years in the Isle Avallonia, or Glastenbury, leading a most holy life.
Notwithstanding whether at that time he visited Glastenbury, is uncertain
Probably the motive of his leaving Ireland might be to take a journey to Rome,
and there give an account of his Apostleship: ^or this is affirmed by several
Authors, as Capgrave, Bishop-Vsher, etc.

Ca^grav in Patricio. Usher. c. 17. f. 810. Iocelin in Patricio.
2. Iocelinus adds that before his voyage he fixed his Episcopal chair in the
City of Armagh, resolving in his mind that the same should be the Prime
Metropolis and Mistress of the whole Island. And to the end that this design
might have an effect irrevocable, he determined to repair to the Sea
Apostolic, and thence obtain authentic Privileges to ratify this his
purpose. An Angel from our Lord approved his intention of undertaking that
^ourney, etc. Whereupon having ordained Bishops Priests, and other
Ecclesiastical Ministers, whom he placed in opportune residences, he gave them
his benediction, and took leave of them.

3 That in his way either to, or from Rome, he retired into a Monastery, to
enjoy for some time the peace of contemplation, is affirmed by our Historians,
and that Glastenbury was the place chosen by him, in which afterward also he
reposed himself, there happily ending his days. And herein he imitated the
holy practice of former Saints, as Saint Fugatius and Damianus, who after
laboring in their Apostolical Office, retired from worldly conversation, and
spent their last days in conversation with God alone.

4. What were the special exercises of S. Patrick in his retirement, is
related by ancient Writers,, viz. attending to Prayer, Fasting and purity of
Life: instituting rules for a Monastical Profession in Glastenbury, where he
found Religious men the Successors of S. Joseph of Arimathea and S. Fugatius
and S. Diruvianus: These S. Patrick reduced from an Eremiticall, to a
Coenobiticall course of life, gving them instituts which himself had received
from his glorious Uncle S. Martin of Tours, who long since had clothed him
with the Monastical habit. Which Habit, says Iocelin, was a White Cowle of
the naturall-colour of the wool, over his other garments, by which was denoted
purity and innocence. And this fashion was imitated by the I^ih Monks, as
likewise the Monks of Brittany, before Saint Augustins coming, who to
distinguish himself from them, assumed a Black Cowle, whence the New Monks his
Successors were usually styled ( Nigri Monachi) Black Monks.

5. In Glastenbury it was where S. Patrick wrote that famous Chart, The Epistle
or Chart of S. Patrick.
the whole tenor whereof has been already produced in the second Book of this
History, upon occasion of declaring the foundation of that most famous
Monastery. In which Chart the Holy Bishop particularly describes the Isle then
called Ynswitrin where was an ancient Chapel consecrated to the honor of the
most blessed Virgin: And how there he found twelve Hermites, Successors of the
Disciples of S. Phaganus and Diruvianus, by whom he was elected their Head.
There also he declares his happy invention of a Writing composed by the
foresaid Apostolical men Phaganus and Diruvianus, in which was contained that
they had received from Pope Eleutherius ten years of Indulgence: and that by a
revelation from our Lord they had built a Church to the honor of S. Michael
the Archangel: How likewise by a Vision it was signified to him that he was to
honor the same Blessed Archangell in the same place: for a testimony of the
certainty of which Vision his left arm withered, and was not restored till he
had acquainted the rest of his Brethren with what he had seen. This Chart S.
Patrick left with two devout Irish Monks, Arnulphus and Ogmar, his companions,
which resolved to remain attending on the said Chapel. In conclusion, the
Holy Bishop relates how he conferred an Indulgence of a hundred days on those
who by cutting down wood cleared a passage for the devout Visitants, of the
Chapel consecrated by our Lord himself to the honor of his most Blessed
Mother.

Ap. Capgrav. in S. Patricio.
6. At his return from Rome S. Patrick brought with him some Relics of the Holy
Apostles Saint Peter and Saint Paul, and likewise of Saint Stephen the Blessed
Deacon and Martyr: together with a linen cloth, on which was sprinkled of the
Blood of our Savior Jesus Christ, which holy Relics were reserved there
behind the Altar of Saint Patrick. This is the narration of the Author of S.
Patricks life in Capgrave.

7. That which is here delivered particularly concerning the Relics of S.
Stephen the Martyr seems confirmed by what Baronius out of Ancient Writers
reports, how this same year Eudocia wife of the Emperor Theodosius brought
from Jerusalem the said Relics, which were laid up in the Church of S.
Laurence the Martyr, and there piously venerated by devout Christians.

Iocelis. in Patricio.
8. Iocelinus who expressly affirms that it was in S. Patricks return from Rome
that he visited Brittany, further declares that during his abode in this his
Native country, he founded many Monasteries, filling them with Religious men,
who willingly submitted themselves to the observation of that form of a
Religious life which was prescribed by him: That he foretold with the tongue
and Spirit of Prophecy many unfortunate and many prosperous things which in
future times should befall Brittany: And moreover that he foresaw and foretold
the Sanctity of S. David then enclosed in his Mothers womb (who was born in the
year of Christ four-hundred sixty two) whereby is confirmed what in the
Antiquities of Glastenbury is asserted concerning S. Patricks long abode in
Brittany after his converting Ireland.

XVI. CHAPTER
XVI. CHAP.
1.2. Of Bachiarius Disciple to S. Patrick: His Pilgrimage: His Epistle to an
incestuous Priest, etc.

1. AMong the British Disciples of Saint Patrick the memory of Saint
Bachiarius, whom some affirm to be the same with Saint Maccaeus, or Mocthaeus,
is celebrated. He was, A. D. 443. Pits in Bachiario.
says Pits, by Nation a Britain, and Disciple of Saint Patrick: He addicted
himself to the study of litterature at Caer-leon. He was an excellent Poet, and
skillful Mathematician: for his younger years he entirely employed in such
studies. Gennad. in Catalog.
Gennadius in his Catalogue gives him the Character of a man excellently versed
in Christian Philosophy. Adding withal, that for conserving his integrity and
Chastity he forsook his country, and undertook a long Pilgrimage.

2. We were informed above from Girardus Cambrensis, that the Britains
instructed by S. Germanus accounted Pilgrimages, especially to Rome, among the
works of Piety. And many motives S. Bachiarius might have to absent himself
from his country, besides that mentioned by Gennadius: For it could not but
much afflict his soul to be a spectatour of the enormous vices reigning there:
and probably he had a foresight of the miseries which would shortly befall it.

3. Concerning this Pilgrimage, Pits vbi sup.
the forecited Author Pits thus writes; Bachiarius seeing his country
afflicted with daily calamities, out of compassion to it, and with an intention
to implore divine assistance, undertook very tedious and laborious Pilgrimages.
But there wanted not detractours and calumniatours in those times, who
therefore charged him with levity, inconstancy and vanity, if not worse.
Whereupon he was obliged to clear himself by writing an Apology, in which he
seriously protested that he undertook and performed those travells merely for
the love of God, the salvation of his soul, and comfort of his afflicted
country. And because it was impossible for him to purge himself to all his
detractours, he wrote his Defense to S. Leo the first Pope of that name, the
common Father of all Christians, as may be collected from Gennadius, Honorius
and Capgrave.

4. There is moreover extant in the Great Bibliotheque of the Fathers a learned
and elegant Epistle written on this occasion by the same S. Bachiarius.
Biblioth. PP.
He had heard that a certain Priest by the Devils suggestion had violated a
consecrated Virgin, for which he was cast out of the Church, without any hope
of being restored. The Holy man was deeply afflicted both for the enormity of
the Crime, and extreme rigor of the punishment. Whereupon he wrote an Epistle
replenished both with Divine learning and compassionate Charity. This Epistle
he gave to a Priest called Ianuarius, whom he humbly entreats, and strongly
evinces for the Restitution of the Offender, showing that in the most fruitful
field of Gods Church there grew herbs medecinall to every wound Then
addressing his speech to the guilty Priest, he powerfully aexhorts him to
Penance, in an enclosed Monastery, there to expiate his crime by fasting,
sackcloth and prayer, and to beg the Intercession of Gods Saints in his
behalf: And fearing least he should accumulate his sin by joining Marriage to
his incest, he terrifies him with showing the abominable excess of marying one
who was espoused and consecrated to our Lord, when she took the Veyle of her
Religious Profession. By which Epistle may be seen, as in a Mirror, the State
of the Ecclesiastical Discipline of those times, the inviolablenes of their
Religious Vows and Celibacy of Priests: So that we may easily judge what
censure the Prime Apostle of Reformation, Luther with his Catherine Bor, would
then have incurred.

A. D. 446.
5. Besides this Epistle, the same S. Bachiarius wrote many other Treatises
which are reckond up by the Centuriators of Magdeburg: who add that he lived
to a very old age, dying in the year four hundred and sixty. If he be the same
with him whom Bishop Usher calls Maccaeus, and the Annals of Vlster name Muchti
or Mochta, his death is prolonged much longer, till the year of Grace five
hundred thirty five.

XVII. CHAPTER
XVII. CHAP.
1.2. etc. The Britains lamentable demand of succors: in vain.

6. etc. They call in the Saxons, to their destruction.

A. D. 445.
1. IN these times the Vandals by their incursions and numerous Armies
greivously oppr^s'd the Roman Empire. Which opportunity being observed by the
Picts and Scotts, they likewise broke their limitts, and miserably wasted the
Provinces of Brittany which had been subject to the Romans. This happened in the
eighth year of Vortigerns reign.

A. D. 446.
2. The year following they continued their invasion with such extreme violence,
and were so weakly resisted by the Britains sortned with luxury, that after
much bloodshed, and horrible wasting of the country, their only refuge was to
the Romans, whom with the most humble and passionate Prayers they solicited to
afford them succor.

3. Their short, but lamentable Epistle directed to Aetius General of the
Roman forces is thus recorded by Gildas: Gildas. Beda l. 1. c. 13.
To Aetius third time Consul: The groans of the Britains. Our barbarous
enemies drive us to the Sea: the Sea beats us back upon our barbarous Enemies.
Between these two we are exposed either to be slain with the sword, or drowned:
and to avoid both we find no remedy.

4. But these letters avayld nothing: for the Romans with much ado being
scarce able to secure the heart of their Empire, could not defend the remote
bounds. So that the Britains wanting arms, and much more wanting hearts,
became daily a prey to their enemies. With this calamity another was joined much
more terrible, which was extremity of famine (says S. Beda) Bed. l. ^. c. 14.
which forced many of them to render themselves slaves to their Savage enemies:
Only a few being by these miseries taught the wisdom to seek aid from heaven,
retired into inaccessible mountains and caves, from whence they took the
courage often times with good success to set upon their Enemies, busy only in
heaping spoils, which they recovered from them, and drove them back into their
own quarters.

5. But this refreshment lasted but awhile, A. D. 450
because their Piety and recourse to Divine help presently vanished. For as the
same Author from Gildas declares, Id. ibid.
After the Hostile invasions of their enemies ceased, the Island began to
abound with all manner of fruits and provisions, beyond what any former age
could remember: And as their plenty abounded, so did their luxury: which was
quickly accompanied with all sorts of vices: especially cruelty to one another,
hatred of Divine Truth, etc.

6. Gods patience therefore being spent toward a people which grew worse both
by prosperity and adversity, he brought upon them Enemies far more Savage and
barbarous then either the Picts or Scotts: Or rather he so infatuated the
reprobat Britains, that they themselves invited from a remote country those
new Enemies to consume them. These were the Saxons, the Angli and Iutes,
Nations of Germany, terrible for their undaunted courage and agility, says
Paulus Diaconus: most formidable to the Roman^, Paul. Diac.
because most sudden and violent in their enterprises, A. Marcell.
says Marcellinus: Esteemd the most warlick Nations among the Germans for
strength of bodies, courage of minds, and patience to suffer all corporal
labors and incommodities, says Zosimus. Zosimus.


7. But before we particularly relate the last fatal Tragedy of the ruin of
the British Kingdom and State in this Island, some more special occurrents
happening at the same time, and relating to Ecclesiastical affairs, require
first to be dispatched, that they may not interrupt the contexture of that
dismal story.

XVIII. CHAP. XVIII. C.

1.2. etc. S. Patrick returns into Ireland Calls a Synod: The Decrees of it.

5.6 Of S. Albeus, etc. Disciples of S. Patrick.

7. Conversion of K. Engus.

8.9. etc. S. Benignus his Successor in Armagh: His retreat.

1. SAint Patrick, A. D. 450.
though for his particular consolation he had retired himself into the secure
repose of a Monastery, yet it was with this condition, that whenever any
emergent, pressing necessity of Gods Church, requiring his presence and care,
should intervene, he would quitt the Office of Mary sitting at our Lords feet,
and exchange it for that of Martha's ministry in attending and providing a
supply to his necessities in his members.

2. And some such cause occurred, some disorders in the new-founded Church of
Ireland happened, which after ten years quiet repose drew him out of his
solitude: Which though we cannot precisely determine what it was, yet no doubt
it is involved in some one or more of the Canons and Decrees of a Synod which
upon his return into that Island he assembled.

3. Which Decrees for many ages concealed, and by negligence exposed to rust
and mothes, have been of late days by the industry of S. Henry Spelman rescued
and restored to light, though in several places defaced. We will not here
trouble the Reader with the entire Transcript of them: since those who are more
curious may have recourse to the said S. Henry Spelmans first volume of
British and English Councils: Spelm. de Council. page
It will be sufficient to select from them some special Canons, which will
give us some light to discover the Ecclesiastical Discipline of those times.

4. It is there ordained, That if any Ecclesiastical person from the
Dore-keeper to the Priest, Synod. Hiber^ can. 6.
shall not for decency wear a Tunick, and have his hair cut after the Roman
manner: or shall permit his wife to go abroad unvayl'd, shall be separated
from the Communion. bid. c^^. 9.
Again, That a Monk and consecrated Virgin shall not abide in the same lodging,
nor travel in the same Chariot. ib. can. 10.
That if a Monk shall neglect the Divine Office, and wear long hair, he shall
be excommunicated. That the Alms of Excommunicated persons, ib. can. 12.13. ib.
14.15.
or Pagans shall not be received. That if any Christian shall be guilty of
manslaughter, fornication, or consulting Soothsayers, he shall perform Penance
for each crime, the space of a year: And he that is guilty of stealing, half a
year, of which, twenty days he shall eat bread only: But withal he must be
obliged to restitution. ib. can. 16.
That if any Christian shall believe Spirits may be represented in a Glass, he
shall be anathematized, ib. can. 17.
etc. That if any consecrated Virgin shall marry, she shall be excommunicated
till she be converted and forsake her adulteryes: which having done she shall
perform due Penance: After which they are forbidden to live in the same house
or town. ib. can. 23.
That if any Priest shall build a Church, he must not offer Sacrifice in it
before it be consecrated by the Bishop. That if a Clergyman be excommunicated,
ib. can. 28.
he must say his Prayers alone, and not in the same house with his Brethren:
Neither must he presume to offer or consecrate, till he be absolved. That a
Bishop may not ordain in another Bishops Diocese, ib. can. 30.
without his permission: Only upon Sundays he may offer Sacrifice. ib. can. 33.
That a Clark coming from the Britains into Ireland without Letters
testimonial, be not suffered to minister.

5. There is no mention made of this or any other Irish Synod in any Author,
except only in a general expression of Iocelinus, Prob. in vit. S. Patr. c. l
2.
and Probus who wrote S. Patricks life extant among S. Bedas works. And in him
we find this only passage, The most holy Bishop S. Patrick together with three
other Bishops and many Clercks came to a fountiain called Debach, which flows
from the side of Crochon toward the East; there to celebrate a Synod touching
Ecclesiastical affairs, and they sat near the fountain. When behold two
daughters of King Logaren came early in the morning to wash in the same
fountain, as women there usually did: and they found the Holy Synod with S.
Patrick near the fountain. Now the Bishops names were S. Patrick, Auxilius and
Issernininus: for this is the Inscription of this present Synod, Synod. Hib^rn
Inscriptio.
Thanks be given to God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost. Patricius, Auxilius and
Isserninus to the Priests, Deacons and whole Clergy Health. It is better we
should premonish those who are negligent, then blame things past for Solomon
says, It is better to reprove, then be angry. The tenor of our Definition is
here under written, and begins thus; If any captive, etc. Of these two Bishops
Auxilius and Isserninus mention has been made before.

6. Another Holy Bishop and Disciple of S. Patrick challenges once more a
commemoration in this History, Ap. Vsser. in Primord. f. 66.
to wit, S. Albeus, in whose life extant in Bishop Usher we read, That when he
heard that S. Patrick had converted to our Lord Engus King of Munster
(Momonensium) and was with him in his Royal City Cassel, he came to salute
them Now the King and S Patrick much rejoiced at the arrival of S. Albeus,
whose joy to see them also was great. There the Holy man reverently entertained
his Master S. Patrick, for he was very humble. After this King Engus and S.
Patrick ordaind that the Archiepiscopall See of all Munster should for ever be
placed in the City and chair of S. Albeus.

7. And as touching the Conversion of King Engus this passage also is extant in
the same learned Author, Ib. f. 865.
a little before, The glorious Bishop S. Patrick having sown the Faith of
Christ in the Regions of Lenster, prosecuted his way to the limits of Munster.
And the King of Munster, named Engus, hearing of the Holy Bishops coming, with
great joy met him, having an earnest de^sire to believe and be baptized. He
conducted therefore S. Patrick with much reverence and joy to his Royal City,
called Cassel: and there the King having been instructed, believed and received
Baptism.

8 It is probable that S. Patrick abode at this time several years in Ireland:
A. D. ^53.
For three years after this he consecrated S. Benignus Archbishop of Armagh.
And then quite devesting himself of all solicitude for others, he returned into
Brittany to his much desired solitude of Glastenbury, where he likewise ended
his days.

9. As for his Successor S. Benignus, A. D. 460.
he also after seven years spent in care of his Province, thirsting after
solitude, and willing to see again his most beloved Master, came to
Glastenbury, desirous to receive from him a most perfect Rule of Monastical
Profession. This he did, says Malmsburiensis, Malmsbur. Antiq. Glast.
by the admonition of an Angel. And being come thither he demanded of S.
Patrick what place he should make choice of to live in Union with God alone,
divided from human society.

10. The Answer given him by S Patrick, who encouraged him to persist in his
present purpose, A. D. 460.
is thus recorded by Adam of Domerham: Adam Domerham in Antiquit. Glaston.
Joan. Monachus.
Benignus, says he, discovered to S. Patrick the motives of his journey: who
exhorted him to pursue happily his well begun purpose, saying, Go, my beloved
Brother, taking only your staff with you. And when you shall be arrived at the
place appointed by God for your repose, wheresoever having fixed your staff in
the ground, you shall see it flourish and grow green, there know that you must
make your abode. Thus both of them being comforted in our Lord with mutual
discourses, Saint Benignus being accompanied only with a youth named Pincius,
begun his journey through woody and marish places. But as soon as he was
arrived in an Island where he saw a solitary place, which he judged fit for
his habitation, he presently fixed his staff in the ground, which without delay
wonderfully grew green, and brought forth fresh leaves. There therefore Saint
Benignus resolved to abide to his death in the service of God alone. And to
this day the same Tree, the witness and sign of his Sanctity, remains
flourishing with green boughs, near the Oratory of the blessed man, etc.

11. The same Author further proceeds to declare how by another miracle God
testified that the Holy man's watchings, fasting and prayers with other
austerityes were acceptable to him. Id. ibid.
Although, says he, that solitary place separated from wordly conversation was
very opportune and proper for attending to God and Divine things: Yet one
incommodity it had, that there was no water near: So that young Pincius was
compelled every day to fetch water almost three miles off. whence it came to
pass that partly through wearines, but principally through suggestions of
malignant Spirits he grew disheartened, which the Holy man perceiving oftimes
endeavored to comfort and encourage him. At last taking compassion of his
labors, he prostrating himself on the ground, humbly and heartily besought our
Lord to open for his servant a spring of water, which might sufficiently supply
his necessities. After which admonished by an Angelical vision he gave his
staff to young Pincius, commanding him to go to a certain place full of reeds,
and there striking the ground with his staff, he should without doubt find
water, so earnestly desired by them. The child obeyed, went to the place, and in
the name of the Blessed Trinity he struck the ground three times, making three
holes in it with the end of the staff: which he had no sooner done, but
immediately a fountain gushed forth: from whence to this day a brook, and that
no small one, is supplied, which is both good for fishing, and healthful
likewise for many infirmities: The same Narration is likewise to be found in
John the Monk, and the sum of it in Capgrave: Capgrav. in S Benigno.
who calls the Island in which S. Benignus lived, by the name of Ferramere.

22. Bishop Usher in confirmation of this relation made by our British
Historians, touching S. Benignus his coming into Brittany, collects likewise
from ancient Irish Writers that the same Holy Bishop four years before his
death relinquished his Archiepiscopall See of Armagh, and retired himself. So
that he is to be supposed to have ended his life about the year of Christ four
hundred fifty five. Six-hundred and thirty years after, his Sacred Body was
translated to Glastenbury, by the direction and care of Thurstin then Abbott:
The ceremonies and solemnity of which Translation are to be read in the
Antiquities of that famous Monastery. Antiquit. Glaston. f. 87.


XIX. CHAP. XIX. CHAPTER

1.2. etc. Many Irish Saints in Cornwall.

4.5. etc. Of S. Piran: and S. Cadocus there.

1. THE Example of S. Patrick and S. Benignus was imitated by many other Irish
Saints, which to enjoy a perfect vacancy from worldly affairs retired into
Brittany to consecrate themselves to God in a life of Austerity and
Contemplation. And in Brittany the Province whither they most frequently betook
themselves was Cornwall: Insomuch as Camden had just ground to say, Camden. in
Danmon. i^.
That the people of Cornwall have always born such a veneration to the Irish
Saints, vhich retired thither, that almost all the towns in that Province have
been consecrated to their memory. There is S. Buriens, dedicated to an Irish
Religious woman of that name: to the Church whereof King Ethelstan in the year
nine hundred thirty six gave the Privilege of Sanctuary. There is the town of
S. Iies, so called from S. Iia a woman of singular sanctity, which came thither
from Ireland. There is S. Colomb, named not from S. Columbanus, as some
Historians erroneously imagine, but from an Irish S. Colomba, as the same
Author assures us. There is S. Merven, S. Erben, S. Eval, S. Wenn, S. Enedor
and many other places, all which took their names from Irish Saints.

2. But one special Irish Saint is there venerated, to whom in a more
particular manner a place is here due. That is S. Piran, called by the Irish,
S. Kiaran. Concerning whom B. Usher out of an ancient Author thus writes,
Vss^r in Primord. c. 16. f. 718.
that he hearing that in Rome Christian Religion was most truly taught and
faithfally practiced, forsook Ireland and traveled thither. Where being
arrived he was instructed in Christian Faith and baptized. And there he remaind
twenty years, reading Divine Scriptures, many books of which he gathered
together, and learning Ecclesiastical Rules with all diligence.. He adds
further, that at Rome he was ordaind Bishop, and sent into Ireland thirty years
before S. Patrick: for which reason some Irish Writers call him (Sanctorum
Primogenitum) the firstborn of all their Saints. But it is scarce credibile
that four Bishops (as they pretend) should have been sent into that Island
before the days of S. Patrick, who yet is acknowledged the Prime and only
Apostle of that Country, A. D. 453.
and in the Roman Martyrologe is said to be the first which preached Christ in
Ireland M^rtyrol. Rom 7. Mart.


Ap. Capgrav. ^ S. Pirano.
3. More probably the Author of S. Pirans life in Capgrave affirms that he was
one of the first twelve Bishops consecrated by S. Patrick to propagate the
Faith which he first preached there. And after that by his labors the Gospel
had made g^d progress, by S. Patricks example S. Piran and many others
inflamed with the Divine Love, forsook all wordly things, and lead an
Eremiticall life, among whom was S. Bredan, etc.

4. But omitting others, let us see what the same Author writes concerning the
Motives inducing S. Piran to retire himself in his old age into Brittany: S.
Piran, says he, calling together his Disciples and the rest of the people thus
spoke to them, ^d. ibid.
My Brethren and beloved children, It is the Divine Will that I should forsake
Ireland and go into Cornwall in Brittany, there to expect the end of my days.
I cannot resist the Will of God etc. Having thus discoursed unto them, he
sailed into Cornwall, where he built a mansion for himself; and many miracles
God was pleased to work by him among the people. At last infirmity of body
having seized on him of which he languish'd, calling his Brethren together, and
copiously instructing them in things which concern the Kingdom of God, he
commanded his grave to be made ready, which being done he went down into it on
the third of the Nones of May, and there rendered up his soul to God, which
with great glory was received into heaven. His sacred Body reposes in Cornwall
toward the Northern (Severn) sea, fifteen miles from Petrock-stow (Padstow)
five and twenty from Mousehole.

5. The Memory of this holy man yet remains in the same place, which Camden in
his perambulation thus declares; Camden. in Danmos^^^.
A more spacious region hence runs East ward, the coast whereof winds nor
thward: where nothing occurs in the way, which has any note of antiquity, but
only a chapel dedicated to S. Piran, seated in a sandy place: who was a Holy
man which came from Ireland, and if we may believe the Legend, fedd ten Irish
Kings and their armies with his three cowes, raised to life dead piggs and dead
men: and in that place divested himself of his mortality.

6. We might adjoyn here the Gests of other Holy men, who began to be known
about this time, as S. Cadocus, surnamed Sophias, Abbot and Martyr: likewise S.
Gildas, not the Historian, though he also lived at the same times, and S. David
Bishop of Menevia, who was born in the year of Grace four hundred sixty two.
But because their principal actions were performed many years after in the
following Age, we will refer them thither.

XX. CHAP. A. D. 435

XX. CHAPTER



1.2. etc. Proofs that the story of S. Vrsula belongs to this time: And
Disproofs of all others pretentions.

1. DVring the reign of the infamous British King Vortigern, A. D. 453.
whilst the minds of the Britains effeminated with vice yielded almost
without resistance to the tyranny of their neighbors, and called in for more
barbarous enemies from a remote country to be Tyrants of their own: God raised
another British army to blott out the shame and cowardice of the former: an
army of Virgins conducted by a Royal and Saintly Virgin, the glorious S.
Vrsula. For that to this time their Martyrdom is to be referd, and not to any
former age, many circumstances in their Story, which cannot suit with former
times, do demonstrate strongly.

2. For those Authors which assign this Story the year of Grace two hundred
thirty eight are manifestly disproved, Chron. Coloniens. Harige^* Abb. in
Cataloy. Episcop. T^ngrens.
because the name of Hunns, who were their murderers, was not in those days
known in Italy or Germany: besides they mention a certain Pope named Cyriacus,
of whom there is no memory in the rank of Roman Bishops, says Baronius. Add
to this that no reason can be alleged why such numbers should then either fly,
or be sent out of their country.

3. Galfrid Monume^. Polyd Virgil. l. 3. ^o. Trith m. Hist. Franc. Baron.
Other Writers therefore more probably affirm that S. Vrsula and her companions
suffered when the Tyrant Mayimus in the year of Christ three hundred eighty
three lead with him into Gaul a great army of British soldiers, A. D. 383.
which he seated in Armorica: to whom these virgins are supposed to be destined
for wives. Marc. Vlferus.
This opinion is justified by Baronius from Galfridus and Polydor Virgil, to
whose authority may be added that of the Breviary of Sarum in the Lessons of
that Feast.

4. But the short time of Maximus his reign after his passing over into Gaul,
and his continual employment in war, could not permit him to attend to the
settling Colonies of inhabitants in Armorica, whither himself never went: for
as Zosimus writes, he presently marched to the banks of the Rhene. Zosimus. l.
Paul. A^milius.
Moreover the French Historians refer the erecting a Principality of Britains
in Armorica to a much later date, when Meroveus was King of the Francks, which
was in the year of Grace four hundred forty eight. Likewise Dionotus Prince of
Cornwall, who was Father to S. Vrsula, is acknowledged by our best Historians to
have lived long after the Emperor Gratianus his time, who was slain by
Maximus: so that S. Vrsula could not be alive, much less mariageable in those
days. Neither is there any mention among Historians of Hunns so early
infesting Germany, or exercising Piracy on the River Rhene or the Western Ocean.

Gotefrid. Vi^erb. Chron. par. 16.

Werner. ad A. D. 434.

Sabell. Ennead. 8. l. 2. Sigon^l. 23. Sigebert. ad A. D. 4^3. Herm. Eleim. ^n
vit. S. Vrsulae.


5. Those Historians therefore have best orderd their calculations who assign
the Martyrdom of these glorious Virgins to the present Age when Attila King of
the Hunns, truly sirnam'd Gods Scourge, wasted Italy and the Western Regions.
To demonstrate which, if we consult the Writers of those times, we shall find
that the Armies of Attila consisting of a mixture of many barbarous Nations, to
the number of seven hundred thousand soldiers, overran and destroyed a great
part of Germany and Gaul, and this both by Sea and land. Sidon. Apoll.
panegyr. de ^^vito.
For this we have the Testimonies of Writers either then alive, or within few
years after: Thus Sidonius Apollinaris elegantly describes in verse this
horrible invasio^ of Gaul by vast armies of those barbarous Nations, Greg.
Tur^n. hist. Franc. l. 2. c. 26.
in a Panegyric to Avitus, chosen Emperor in Gaul, written by him. And
Gregory Bishop of Tours relates their wasting of Germany, the burning of the
City of Metz, their massacring of Priests before the holy Altars, etc. And in
the life of S. Lupus we read how that holy Bishop was lead away captive by
Attila from the City of Troyes to the Rhene.

6. Now whereas in the Gests of these Holy Virgin-Martyrs frequent mention is
made of the Tyrant Maximus: for which cause principally Baronius and other
Writers do assign their Martyrdom to the time when Maximus who slew the
Emperor Gratianus, went out of Brittany into Gaul attended with a numerous
British Army: We shall in the Roman story find another Tyrant Maximus also,
descended from the stock of the other Maximus slain by the first Theodosius,
Procop. de bell. Va^dal. l. 1. A. D. 455. Sidon. Paneg. car. 7.
as Procopius relates: which younger Maximus in these times invaded the Empire
after the death of Valentinian: and of whom Sidonius makes mention at the same
time that he describes the wasting of Aremorica, whither these Holy Virgins
intended their voyage. And moreover the same Author in the same Panegyric
mentions the Piracy exercised by these barbarous people on the British Sea,
where he again repeats the name of the same Maximus, who appointed Avitus his
General to resist them. All these circumstances, and occurrents meeting at
this time strongly argue that now it was that S. Vrlusa and her holy Companions
so gloriously began and finished their voyage.

7. This will yet more clearly appear if we consider the present state of
Brittany. For now Vortigern having called in the Saxons to aid him against the
Picts, Hengistus and his Brother Horsa at first arriving with small but warlick
Troops, served the Britains successfully against their Enemies: But afterward
despising their friends for their vices and cowardlines, they sent for more
numerous forces, and together with them Hengistus caused his beautiful
daughter Rowena to be brought: with whose allurements the foolish King
Vortigern being ensnared, demanded her for his wife, and bought her of her
Father with the price of the whole Province of Kent. After which the Saxons
making peace with the Picts and Scotts, turned their arms only against their
Benefactours. At first they began complaints about pay and want of provisions,
theatning unless they might be satisfied, to lay the whole Island wast. Which
threats they presently after with all inhumanity executed, and in a dire manner
took revenge of all the crimes committed by the Britains against God and his
Religion, which they professed.

8. During these troubles and miseries tragically described by Huntingdon,
Huntingdon. l. 2.
a world of Britains of both sexes forsook their country, upon which a
malediction from God did so visibly lie, and fled into strange Regions, whilst
others submitted themselves to perpetual slavery under the Saxons. Gild. de
Excidio.
And before him Gildas affirms the same, saying expressly, That very many
passed over Sea into foreign countries with grievous howling and lamentation,
and in their voyage by Sea they jointly with mournful voices repeated those
sad words of the Psalmist, Thou have, o Lord, given us up as sheep to be
devoured, and have dispersed us among the Nations. This seems to be a
description most proper to the condition of the weaker sex: Which no doubt by
the provident care of their parents and friends was in the first place secured
from the violence of their barbarous Enemies. And those words, Thou have
dispersed us among the Nations, do most fittly suit to these Virgin-Martyrs,
whose Sacred Relics have been dispersed among all the Nations of Christendom.

XXI. CHAP. XXI. CHAPTER

1.2 etc. S. Vrsula and her Companions, Britains: not Irish-Scotts, as a late
Author dreams.

4.5. etc. Their Number, and cause of their voyage, etc.

1. HAving thus settled the time of the Martyrdom of S. Vrsula and her devout
companions, we will now proceed to a Narration touching the country out of
which they issued, their Names, as many as are recorded, and other particulars
relating to their voyage.

2. There is so general a consent of Ecclesiastical Writers constantly
affirming S. Vrsula and her companions to have been without all controversy
Britains, that a late Irish Author, calling himself Candidus Eblanius, who
upon the authority only of Petrus de Natalibus, challenges her for an Irish
woman, has, thereby exposed to the world his disingenuous ignorance only,
without hope of gaining belief from any. He fancies that they were sent over
Sea to the new British inhabitants of Armorica, presently after the Elder
Maximus his expedition. But how could Ireland at that time afford such an Army
of Christian Virgins, when S. Patrick had not yet entered it as an Apostolic
Missioner, but only a child carried thither Captive by Pirates?

Martyrolog. Gallican. 21. October.
3. But perhaps, says he, they were Irish Scotts newly seated in the Northern
parts of Brittany: among whom S. Daria the Mother of S. Vrsula according to the
Gallican Martyrologe is said to have lived. Indeed it is possible that to avoid
the violence and fury of the Saxons now wasting Brittany, S. Daria might at
this time seek refuge among the Irish-Scotts: But that the inhabitants of
Armorica, called by Sidonius Apollinaris, Britains seated along the River of
Loire, neglecting their neighbors and kindred, the Britains on the other side
of the Sea, should send so far as Scotland to their old and never reconciled
Enemies, ^den. Ap. l. 1. Epist. 7.
for wives, or that a country so unsettled should be able to spare so great a
multitude of Virgins, this is rather a sick man's dream, then the assertion of a
sober man.

4. In the next place touching the number and quality of the Virgins companions
of S. Vrsula, the constant opinion is that they were eleaven thousand. This is
the number extant in the ancient Prayers of the Church, so we read in the Book
called Hortulus animae, framed according to the old custom of the Roman Church:
and thus we read in the Hours of the Blessed Virgin according to the use of
Sarum. The Church of Colen likewise ( says Hermannus Heien) the faithful
Guardian of the Relics of S. Vrsula and her companions, Herm. Heien in vit. S.
Vrsula.
has without any contradiction accustomed to praise God, and celebrate their
memory with these following Antiphons, The jubilation of Divine praise does
continually sound in the Quire of the Saints, where the God of Gods is
glorified in Sion. Alleluia. Among whom eleaven thousand Virgins which follow
the Lamb without spot, do joyfully praise him with celestial Hymns for ever
Alleluia. These by Divine ordinance coming from the West, have here shed their
blood for the name of Christ, because by no persecution they could be withdrawn
from his Confession. Let us therefore with all creatures bless the Lord of
heaven who has adorned and dignified this place with so precious a Martyrdom.

5. The cause of the departure of such multitudes of Virgins, accompanied, no
doubt, by many more of both sexes, is thus declared by Trithemius: Trithem.
comp^nd. l. 1. art. 387.
though he mistake in assigning the time of the Elder Maximus. His words are
these: The number of soldiers which under their Captain Conanus went out of
Brittany into Armorica was thirty thousand fighting men, and a hundred thousand
plebeians to till the ground: All these by the command of Maximus were
transported out of Brittany into Armorica (then scarce inhabited.) Of those,
many were unmarried: and those which had wives, left them at home. Now Conanus
and those with him being Christians would by no means take to wives the
daughters of Idolatrous Pagans. Neither indeed would they have married Gaulish
women though they had been Christians, so great an aversion they had from them.
At that time there was in Brittany on the other side of the Sea opposite to
Armorica, a certain Prince named Dionatus, who succeeded his Brother Caradoc in
that Principality: to whom likewise the Emperor Maximus at his departure had
committed the care of the whole Island, as being a very prudent man. He had a
daughter named Vrsula, the most beautiful amongst all the Virgins of Brittany,
and withau^ very devout to our Lord. Conanus therefore the ninth Prince of
Armorica, who passionatly loved this Lady, by his Messengers and letters to
Dionatus Prince of Cornwall, begged earnestly of him to send her to be his wife,
and with her a certain number of Virgins signified in his letters, to be
married to his soldiers, according to their qualities, that is, Noble Virgins
for persons of quality, and plebeians for inferior soldiers. Dionatus
therefore desirous to comply with the desires of Conanus, gathered out of all
the Provinces of Brittany eleaven thousand maids of Noble blood: and of an
inferior rank threescore thousand women, partly maids and partly such as had
been married. All these he made to be assembled at London, and from all the
coasts of Brittany commanded ships to be brought, sufficient to transport so
great multitudes. Thus writes Trithemius.

6. Vsuardus will inform us how this femall Army was ordered, Vsuard. in Chron.
and distributed into ranks under their Leaders, reciting likewise the names of
the principal Ladies: for thus he writes, Of the eleaven thousand Virgins the
Queen and Captain General was S. Vrsula, daughter of Dion^tus a King of the
Britains, and espoused to Conanus Prince of Armorica, or lesser Brittany. All
these Virgins, together with innumerable more attending them, were crowned with
Martyrdom at Colen, etc. Now over the whole Army there were joined to S. Vrsula
four other Virgins having a general command, whose names were, Pinnosa,
Cordula, Eleutheria and Florentia. Under these she appointed eleaven others,
each of which was to govern a thousand* and the names of those eleaven we will
in the next Chapter set down, besides those of particular Virgins.

7 Most of those names, and many other besides are to be found in the
Martyrologes of Canisius, Mart. Angl. ^^. November
and of England: as likewise in the Offices of a world of particular Churches,
which celebrate their memory as shall be showed hereafter. And it must be
ascribed to a miraculous Providence, or Revelation that they have not utterly
perished. And thus having premised these general observations touching this
blessed Army of Saints, we will now prosecute their Voyage.

XXII. CHAPTER
XXII. CHAP.
1.2. etc. The story of the Martyrdom of S. Vrsula and the eleaven thousand
Virgins.

10.11. S. Cordula out of fear hides herself, but next day returns, and is
Martyred.

1. THE History of the Martyrdom of these glorious Virgins, though for the
substance of it attested by a world of particular Churches through all the
Regions of Christendom, yet has been so corrupted by the prodigious fictions of
vain Writers even in more ancient times, that some do question whether ever
there were any such persons at all, and doubt not but the Legend of their
Martyrdom is false. The rather, because the Writers of that age, of the age
immediately following, Gildas and S. Beda, do not in their Histories make any
express mention of them.

2. But as for Gildas, his design to bewail the general destruction of the
British state, and to declare the horrible crimes overspreading the Nation,
which provoked Almighty God to give them up to the fury of a barbarous people,
which though ignorant of Gods Law, yet was less stained with vices against the
Law of Nature and reason then the other: This considered, no wonder if tying
himself to his present subject, he did not in so short yet comprehensive a
narration involve occurrents happening abroad. Yet as has been declared, he has
expressions which seem intended to describe in a general way this particular
matter, deserving to be the sole argument of the Penn of a ready Writer.

3. And as for S. Beda, it is no wonder if his History, intended only to relate
the affairs of the Saxons, does not recount such particular occurrents of the
Britains. Notwithstanding in other Treatises he twice expressly mentions the
celebration of the Memory of eleaven thousand Virgin Martyrs suffering for their
Faith and Chastity at Colen: Bed. in Ephemer. id. in Martyrol. 21. October.
to wit, in his Martyrologe and in his Ephemeris. So that his authority and
testimony alone, living so near these times, and being so well versed in
Ecclesiastical Antiquities, does render the truth of their story, in gross
unquestionable.

4. The particular Narration of which shall here be nakedly set down according
to the consent of most of our Writers. For as for the pretended Revelations of
S. Elizabeth, wherein we are told of an unheard of Pope Cyriacus, of James a
Patriark of Antioch, of Seven Bishops and eleaven Kings, all these Britains,
and accompanying S. Vrsula in her voyage, as likewise of their wandering and
sporting three years upon the Sea, etc. These things, though formerly thrust
into the Lessons of the Roman Breviary, yet upon serious examination and
correction of it by three Popes, are now cast out as impertinent and uncertain
Tales; we following so great an authority, will likewise neglect them.

5. The plain and simple Narration of their Gests therefore is this. S. Vrsula
and her eleaven thousand chaste companions chosen out of all the Provinces of
Brittany, together with a great but uncertain number of attendants, partly to
avoy'd the fury of Barbarous Saxons wasting their country, and partly to go
to their designed Husbands expecting them in Armorica, in the year of our Lord
four hundred fifty three saild out of their port in Brittany, and pursuing
their voyage Westward and toward the South, by contrary winds and Tempests were
not only stopped in their course, but driven backward, and forced to shelter
themselves at the entrance of the Rhene into the Sea.

6. At this time infinite numbers of Hunns, Gepids, Russians and other barbarous
Nations of the North, both by land and Sea vexed Germany and Gaul, as the
Writers of that age unanimously testify. And by Gods special Providence, who
intended to match these Holy Virgins to a Spouse incomparably better, then
their parents had designed them to, in the same station where they took harbor
a great Navy of those savage Pirates lay floating, so that there was no
possibility for them to escape.

7. They are therefore seized upon by these Pirates, among whom were mingled
great numbers of the old Enemies of Brittany, the Picts, for the chief Captains
of this fleet are said to have been Gaunus a Hunn, and Melga a Pict. Being thus
become Captives, they are in boats conveyed up the Rhene as far as Colen, where
their general forces were encamped, and as some Writers affirm, had beseig'd
that City.

8. When they were arrived thither, and encompassed with innumerable multitudes
of Savages hating Christian Religion, and brutish in their sensual lusts, both
their Faith and chastity are at once assaulted, and no means, either by
allurements or threatenings are left unattempted to expugnate their chaste
breasts. In this extremity S. Vrsula with flaming words exhorts her companions
to contemn death, to sacrifice their chaste souls and bodies to their
celestial Bridegroom, and willingly to follow him who now calls them to
receive eternal crowns of glory. She tells them that in this conflict, though
their enemies be never so many, strong and cruel, yet that themselves were
unconquerable, unless they would willingly yield up the victory, etc.

9. With this Exhortation the minds of these holy Virgins become so full of
courage that they think their Executioners delay their death too long. Insomuch
as among so vast a multitude of tender maids not one single person was found
which either out of hope or fear yielded to the wills of the barbarous
soldiers. They all willingly offer their necks and breasts to the enemies
swords, which with unheard of cruelty are employed to exterminate from the
earth so many immaculate souls: not one of which by a miraculous care of
Almighty God suffered any violation in their bodies.

10. Only one there was among them, which though she did not yield to the
barbarous Enemies, yet out of a natural fear of death, sought by hiding her
self to delay it. Her name was Cordula. Yet she the next morning came to the
place where her companions bodies lay massacred, and condemning her former
cowardlines, willingly offered her self to her persecutours, professing
publicly her Faith and chastity: And thus though she came late to receive her
Crown with her companions, yet her courage seemed now greater, in that she
exposed her self single to the fury of an innumerable multitude of savage
enemies. Her memory is thus particularly celebrated in the Roman Martyrologe,
on the day following the Martyrdom of S. Vrsula and the rest: Martyr. Romans ^2.
October.
At Colen on the tenth of the Calends of November is solemni^'d the memory of
S. Cordula: who being one of the companions of S. Vrsula, after she had in a
fright to see their cruel massacre hid her self: afterward repenting, she
voluntarily came forth out of her hiding place, and last of them all received
the crown of Martyrdom.

11. Such a Sacrifice as this had never before, nor has been since offered to
Almighty God by his Church. We read of a S. Agnes, a S. Catherine, a S. Lucia
and a few other miraculous Examples of courage and chastity in tender Virgins:
but they were single persons, neither is it unusual with God to show the power
of his Grace in some particular favorites of his, to exalt the Faith and
confound Vnbeleivers. There have likewise been recorded illustrious Examples of
multitudes of men which have freely without resistance suffered Martyrdom, as
the Thebaean Legion, etc. But such courage in men, especially soldiers who
daily look death in the face, is not to be esteemed very extraordinary. Whereas
here we find a far more numerous Army, consisting of young, timorous, tender
Virgins, to whom ordinarily the sight of an Enemies look is insupportable,
offering themselves freely to innumerable swords: Among them all not one single
soul is found which yields to their flatteries or fury: and but one which
delays her suffering the space only of a single night, after which, she, as it
were animated with the united, Spirits, of all her Companions, next day
solicites the united fury of innumerable Enemies against her self alone, and
gloriously triumphing over the rage of men and Hell too, is joyfully received
among her blessed Companions.

XXIII. CHAP. XXIII. CH

1 2.3. etc. The Names of these Holy Virgins: Their Sacred Relics dispersed
all the world over. Names of Churches where they are Venerated.

1. THE fame of this Tragedy in which was displayed the extremity of savage
cruelty in men, and miraculous courage in Virgins, was no sooner spread abroad
in the world, but that all countries and Churches became suitours to be
enriched with a portion of their sacred Relics, which have been spread through
Germany, Gaul, Italy, Brittany yea Asia, Africa, and of late India it self: So
exactly was fullfill'd the Canticle of S. Vrsula and her Associats mentioned by
Gildas, Thou, O God, have given us as sheep to be devoured, and have dispersed
us among the Nations.

2. Not above ten years after this glorious Martyrdom, that is, about the year
of Grace four hundred sixty three (says Hermannus Fleien one of the Canons of
Colen) Solinus, named by others Aquilinus, Archbishop of that City (as we
find in our ancient Records) out of reverence to the Memory of these holy
Virgins, enclosed with walls the sacred place of their Martyrdom, in which was
erected a Church consecrated to their chief Captain S. Vrsula, which remains to
this day: by the access of which place the City of Colen was so much
enlarged. He also took out of the ground, as carefully as he could, their
sacred bones, which he reverently again buried in chests hewn out of stone.

3. Neither did Brittany long delay to testify her veneration to these her
blessed countrey-women. A witness whereof is a well known Town called
Maidenhead. For thus writes Camden: The Thames, says he, winds back to a
little town formerly called Southlington, Camden. in Atrebat.
but afterward Maidenhead, from the Superstitious reverence there given to the
head of I know not what holy Virgin, one of the eleaven thousand British
Martyrs, which under the conduct of S. Vrsula returning from Rome into their
country, were martyrd by Attila, called the Scourge of God, near Colen in
Germany. Thus he censures the piety of a world of devout Emperors, Kings,
Princes, Bishops and Doctors of Gods Church in all ages.

4. A volume might be written if we should ^eap up all testimonies which a
world of Churches have given of their veneration to these Holy Martyrs.
Therefore we will only here set down a Catalogue of such of their Names as
have escaped oblivion: And thereto adjoyn the Churches where many of them are
venerated, in regard their Holy Relics repose there.

5. S. Vrsula for orders sake divided that innocent Army into certain
Squadrons. First then she gave a general authority over all under her to these
Virgins, S. Cordula, S. Eleutheria, S. Florentia and S. Pinnosa. Next she
assigned the care and inspection of a thousand to each of these following, S.
Benedicta, S. Benigna, S. Carpophora, S. Celindes, S. Clementia, S. Columba, S.
Lata, S. Lucia, S. Odilia, S. Sapientia and S. Sybylla. After which these
particular Virgins names are recorded: Saint Agnes, S. Antonina, S. Areaphila,
S. Babcaria, S. Baldina, S. Candida, S. Caradumea, S. Christina, S. Columbina,
S. Corona, S Cunera, Saint Deodata, S. Flora, S. Florina, S. Florentina, S.
Grata, S. Honorata, S. Honoria, S. Hostia, S. Languida; S. Margarita, S.
Margaria, S. Oliva, S. Panpheta. S. Panefrides, S. Pavia, S. Paulina, S.
Pharanina, S. Pisona, S. Sambaria, S. Sancta, S. Semibaria, S. Terentia, S.
Valeria.

6. The Body of S. Vrsula her self is still preserved at Colen: but her Head
was translated to Paris: Martyrolog. Gallican. 22. October.
where the illustrious College of Sorbon acknowledges her their Patroness. At
S. Denis in France there is a commemoration of Panefredis, Secunda, Semibaria,
Florina and Valeria, companions of S. Vrsula, whose relics repose there. At
Huy in Germany is celebrated the Translation of S. Odilia, famous for frequent
mi^acles. In Flanders the Monastery of Marcian possesses some part of the Body
of S. Cordula. The Monastery of Good Hope belonging to the Premonstratenses
enjoy the Relics of S. Terentia, S. Marguarita, S. Baldina, S. Samburia and S.
Margaria, translated thither when Reinaldus was Archbishop of Colen. The
Monastery of S. Martin in Torn^y glories in the Bodies of S. Honorata and
Florina, and some part of the Relics of S. Vrsula. The Monastery of S. Amand
in Pabula preserves the Bodies of three of these Virgins, whose names are
unknown. At Andain in Arduenna repose the Bodies of S. Grata S. Hostia and S.
Areaphila. A Hospital in Tornay possesses S. Languida. At Arras the Bodies of
S. Beata and S. Sancta are said to repose in the Cathedral Church. Four of
these Holy Virgins are celebrated at the Monastery of S. Bertin in S. Aumar. At
the Church of S. Salvius the Relics of S. Pavia and S. Caradumea are
venerated. The Norbertins at Vicoine possess the Bodies of S. Corona, S.
Pharanina, S. Babcaria S. Margarita, another S. Margarita, S. Benedicta, S.
Cordula, S. Sambaria, S. Deodata, S. Panpheta and S. Christina. The Canons of
Tungres venerate the Heads of S. Pinnosa and S. Oliva. The Nuns of Mays
venerate the Relics of S. Paulina, S. Florentina and eight other Holy Virgins
companions of S. Vrsula. In the town of Rhenen in the Diocese of Vtrecht is
celebrated the memory of S. Cunera: which holy Virgin in our Martyrologe is
said to have been withdrawn from the slaughter by a certain noble Matron, in
whose house she was awhile concealed: but being discovered had her neck broken.
But the Belgic Writers say that she in compassion was by a certain Noble man
privately taken from the rest, and conveyed to his house: Where his Lady
conceiving a furious jealousy against her, with the help of her Maid murdered
her, and hid her body in the stable: into which the Lords horses at his return
would by no means enter: And hereby was discovered his Ladies crime. The Nuns
of Saint Belian honor the Body of S. Honoria, translated thither above three
hundred years since.

7. In Spain likewise at Pobletum in Catalonia rests the Body of S. Columbina:
And at Dertosa are venerated the Relics of S. Candida. Moreover as Mendoza
testifies, in all the Religious Houses of the Jesuits through all Portugal
some parts of the Bodies of these Virgin-Martyrs are reverently reposed: and
the Feast of S. Vrsula and her companions is after a particular manner
solemnis'd over all that Kingdom. Lastly a Father of the same Society named F.
Gomez, Hist. Societ. l. 5. ^. 19.
carried with him into the East Indies a Sacred Head of one of these Virgins: by
whose intercession the ship and passengers were freed from an otherwise
unavoydable danger.

8. We will conclude this Narration with a passage of the learned Thomas Bozius
who treating of the Martyrdom of S. Vrsula and her companions, Bosius design.
Eccles. l. 22. c. 3.
writes thus, How great a measure of Christian fortitude has been implanted in
the hearts of the women of that Northern Island since the time that S.
Eleutherius Bishop of Rome sent into Brittany S. Fugatius and S. Damianus
Romans; may be evidently seen from this one example: For from all antiquity of
the Church through the whole world cannot be produced an Example equalling the
virtue and courage of these Holy Virgin-Martyrs.

THE CHVRCH-HISTORY OF BRITTANY UNDER BRITISH KINGS THE TENTH BOOK.
1. CHAP.
I. CHAPTER.
1*2. etc. Of the Saxons. Angli and Iutes.

6 7. Their natural disposition: and employments.

8.9. Their Religion, Deities, etc.

10.11. Their Chastity.

1. THE Narration of the Gests and glorious Martyrdom of S. Vrsula and the
eleven thousand British Virgins has obliged us to transgress a little the
order of time in this History. For by that occasion we have inserted some
particular occurrents touching the actions and cruelty of the Saxons in
Brittany, whereas their first entrance into it, and the occasion thereof has
not yet been declared: Which therefore now are to be related in their order.

2. But in preparation hereto, enquiry is to be made who these Saxons were,
whence they came, and with what Associats, how they were qualified both in
regard of their natural disposition, and also their Civil policy and
Religion. In consequence whereto we will consider the present miserable
condition of Brittany, and the special crimes generally reigning in it, which
according to the judgment of prudent men then alive, provoked Almighty God to
root out the inhabitants, and in their room to place a strange, barbarous and
inhuman people.

3. There came into Brittany (says S. Beda) great numbers of three the most
robustious and courageous Nations of Germany, Bed. l. 1. c. 15
to wit, the Saxons, English (Angli) and Iutes. At the first the Saxons were
most numerous. For though in following ages Brittany took the name of England
(Anglia) from the Angli, so that the appellation of Saxons was quite
obliterated: Yet after their first invasion and possession of the Island, it
received a new name from the Saxons, and to distinguish it from its original
country of Saxony, it was called ( Transmarina Saxonia) Saxony beyond sea, as
appears in the Epistles of S. Bonifacius the Apostle of Germany, and else where.

4. The Saxons were a Nation derived from the Saca a powerful people in Asia,
Ethelwerd. Chron. l. 1.
which disburthening themselves by sending our colonies abroad, a great part of
them settled themselves on the Coasts of Germany toward the Northern Sea, A. D.
448.
from the Rhene as far as the City Donia, now called Denmarc, says Ethelwerd
an ancient and Trincely Writer, Grandchild to Ethelwolf a Saxon King in the
year nine hundred and fifty. So that their Territory comprehended anciently,
besides the now Duchy of Saxony, the country of Holsatia, and some other
adjoining Provinces.

4. The Angli, says the same Author, came out of a Region called Anglia, Id.
ibid.
situated between the Saxons and the Iutes (Giotos:) Their Capital City in
the Saxon tongue is called Sleswic, and by the Danes, Hattby. Therefore
Brittany is now called England, from these Conquerours: and from thence came
their first Captains Hengist and Horsa. So that the ancient precise seat of
these our Progenitors the Angli is a small Province in Denmark at this time
also called Angel.

5. The Iutes (called by Ethelwerd, Giots) whence soever they received their
appellation, were anciently seated on the Northern coast of the Cimbrian
Chersonesus, called by the Danes to this day Iutland. They were probably
derived from the Gutti, placed by Ptolomy in Scandia, Spartianus. Capitolinus.
Treb^llius Polli^.
and their seat is still called Gothland. Yet these are not to beesteem'd the
same Goths or Getes which with their victories anciently measured all Europe:
for their habitation was near the Euxin Sea beyond the River Ister or Danubius,
as the Roman Historians do unanimously affirm. Now in what special Provinces
of Brittany these Iutae seated themselves, it does not by any marks appear: for
we do not find any mention of any Principality of the Iutes in this Island, as
we do of the Saxons and Angli: So that perhaps they were mingled up and down,
as accessaries to the other two. Though in the opinion of some they were Iutes
which possessed themselves of the Kingdom of the South Saxons and the Isle of
Wight.

6. As touching the disposition of these three Nations, which are all
comprehended under the Title of Saxons, especially by Extern Writers, we have
already declared from Zosimus and others, that they were esteemed the most
valiant, of the most robustious bodies and most agile, of all the Germans;
terrible for their sudden and violent incursions, etc. Therefore Witichindus
the Monk treating of them says, Witichind. Monach.
That the Franks wondered to see such men of tall stature, of invincible
courage, of new habits, wearing their long hair spread over their shoulders
and arms: but especially they admired the undauntednes of their courage. They
were clothed in short coats, and armed with long lances, and their posture
was to lean upon their sheilds, having great daggers behind upon their reins.
Moreover so impatient they were of any scorn or dishonor, Symmoch. l. 2.
Epist. 46.
that when Symmachus being Consul at Rome had prepared great numbers of them to
fight as Gladiatours for the entertainment and delight of the people, the night
before they were to be produced into the Theater, twenty nine of them without
any ropes strangled themselves.

7. Their principal exercise and skill was in Piracy by sea: for which purpose
they contented themselves with small flat boats, ( My^parones) so agile and
manageble that they did so torment the coasts of Gaul, Spain and Brittany,
that the Romans were obliged to appoint for their guards in opportune places
all along those shores soldiers and Officers which they entitled ( Comites
littoris Saxonici per Britanniam, Galliam, etc.) Counts of the Saxon coasts
through Brittany, Gaul, etc.

8. Concerning their Religion, Adam Bremensis thus describes it: Adam. Brem.
In a Temple of theirs, called in their Native language Vbsola, adorned with
gold throughout, the people adore the Statues of three Gods: The most powerful
of them, called Thor, is placed in a Chapel in the midst, and on each side
are set the Statues of Wodan and Fricco. The signification of which Names is
this: Thor, say they, presides in the air, and sends thunder, lightning,
showers and calm seasons: so that he governs the fruits of the Earth. Then
Wodan, which signifies Valiant, disposes of wars, and administers courage to
them against their Enemies. And the third Fricco is the God which bestows peace
and pleasure on men, whose statue is framed with a huge Priapus. But Wodan they
carve in arms, as the Romans did Mars: And Thor with a Scepter, answering to
Jupiter.

9. From these three Deities they gave names to three days in the Week: For
from Wodan, whom others interpret to be Mercury, Wednesday took its
appellation: From Thor, Thursday: and from Fricco, or Frea supposed to be the
Wife of Woden, Friday, Tewsday had its name from Tuisco, the founder of the
German Nation, who thence are named Tuitsch, or Dutch. The month of April they
called Eoster-Monath, whence still remains the same Name for the Solemnity of
our Lords Resurrection, usually falling on that Month. Tacitus adds that
generally the Nations worshipped Herthus, Tacit. de mor. Germ.
as their common mother the Earth, for the same name is still in use with us,
whereas the Germans now call it Arden. To Wodan they usually offered human
sacrifices, chosen from among their captives.

10. Yet among all these abominations, there were in those ancient Saxons some
qualities very commendable, especially their Chastity. This was of old observed
by Tacitus, who says, Their Marriages are severe, and chastity exactly observed
among them. For they are almost the only Barbarians who content themselves with
single wives, Tacit. de^^ rib. German.
unless a few of their Nobles, who not for lust, but honor are sought to and
even wooed by several women, etc. Their wives are confined to their houses,
free from the sights of impure spectacles, and provocations of intemperate
Feasts, etc. And afterward Salvian gives this character of some barbarous
Nations in his time, The Alans, says he, are an unchaste Nation but not
perfidious: Salvian.
The Franks are liars, yet given to hospitality; The Saxons are savage in their
cruelty, but to be honored for their Chastity. And S. Bonifacius in times
succeeding writes thus, In old Saxony where is no knowledge of Christ, Bonifac.
Epist. 19.
if either a maid or wife be guilty of adultery, they force her to strangle her
self, and then burn her body: Or else after they have cut her garments to the
wast, the chaste Matrons whipp her out of their confines, and there fresh women
meet her with whips, or prick her with knives, and thus is she used till they
have killed her.

11. Upon this foundation of Chastity the Saxon Churches among us continued
stable for many ages. Hence were derived such numberles swarms of Virgins and
men consecrated to God in a Religious Profession, despising and trampling under
foot all carnal tentations and pleasures. In no other Nation or Church were
afforded such frequent Examples of Princes voluntarily and by vow abstaining
from lawful matrimonial delectations, of Virgins willingly exposing their
lives to preserve their purity, yea maiming and disfiguring themselves to
appear odious to those who otherwise would have violated their Chastity. But
now alas, it is called a Reformation of Gods Church, to forbid'd living in such
hatred of the flesh, a Reformation becoming the grand incestuous Patriark of
Reformers, Luther.

II. CHAP.
II. CHAP.
1.2. etc. Horrible crimes of the Britains.

5. Whether their Kings were anointed.

6.7. etc. Shameful depravation of the British Clergy: and generally through
all Europe.

10. Christians justly punished by Barbarous Nations: to the benefit of Gods
Church.

1. SVCH and so qualified were the Saxons, Angli and Iutes when they were first
called in to fight for the cowardly Britains: but destined by Almighty God to
root them from the Earth and possess their Provinces. In the next place
therefore let us take a view of the same Britains in that age, that it may
appear that God did not forsake them till they had filled up the measure of
their sins by all manner of crimes and impieties. And hereof a more convincing
witness cannot be found or desired then our British Historian Gildas, who lived
in that age, and seems to have had his penn directed by God on purpose to
write, like a second Ieremias, the miseries of his country, the heavy
judgments inflicted on it, and the more heavy crimes which exacted from heaven
those judgments.

2. The whole Nation generally is by him acknowledged guilty of all manner of
vices, Gildas de Excid.
joined with extreme ingratitude to God. For whereas after the incursions of
the Picts and Scotts there succeeded such wonderful plenty of all things, as
no former age could parallel, the Britains turned this mercy into wantonness,
abounding more then ever in all manner of uncleannes and luxury: which
filthiness was attended with a hatred of truth and the professors of it:
Insomuch as if any one in conversation showed any sign of a Christian life,
presently the general hatred of the Britains pursued and persecuted such an
one as a subverter of his country.

3. After this contempt of Divine benignity, God sought to reclaim them by his
scourges of pestilence and famine, by which such multitudes perished, as the
living were not able to bury the dead. Yet with this severity they were nothing
amended, for as Solomon says, The fool is scourged, and feels it not. God
called to mourning and baldnes and wearing of sackcloath: When behold killing
of calves and ramms; behold nothing but eating and blasphemously saying, Let us
eat and drink, for to morrow we shall dye.

4. Besides these enormous sins, the same Author describes a strange savage
nature in the Britains of those times, saying, Princes were anointed, but not
by our Lord: for those were made choice of to reign, who were most eminent for
their cruelty: And presently after they were murdered by those who had
anointed them: and in their places others more feirce and savage were elected.

5. From this testimony of Gildas it appears that even in those ancient times
of the British Government the solemn Ceremony of anointing Kings in Brittany
was in use. And this is confirmed by S. Gregory who lived in the following age,
Gregor M. in lib. Reg. l. 4. c. 5.
who discoursing on that passage in the first Book of Kings, Samuel took a
cruse of oil, and powered it on his head, says, The same thing is expressed by
this Unction which now in the Holy Church is materially exhibited: For what
soever Prince is raised to the supreme height of Regal Dignity, receives the
Sacrament of Unction. And the manner of administering this Unction in those
ancient times is still extant in the Book called Ordo Romanus. Seld. Titles of
Honor. p. 1. c. 7.
True it is that our learned Seldom will scarce allow this custom in Brittany
to have been of so great antiquity: and therefore interprets that passage in
Gildas, not literally, but metaphorically. However certain it is that the
succeeding Saxon Kings were anointed with Holy Oil, as all Writers testify of
the famous King Alfred. But to return to Gildas.

6. To show the universal depravednes of the British Nation, Gildas de Excid.
and an utter despair of amendment, he further charges the Ecclesiastics of
those times, which should have been the correctours of others, to have been yet
more corrupted then the Laity: For thus he writes, These enormous sins were not
only committed by secular men, but Gods own flock and the Pastors thereof. Those
who ought to have been examples of piety to the people, were most of them
dissolved with wine and all manner of excess: animosities, contentions, envy
against one another tore them into factions and partialities, neither did they
in their judgments discern between good and evil: So that according to the
expression of the Psalmist, Contention was powered forth on the Princes of the
Clergy, who made the people to wander out of the way.

7. So desperate were the disorders of the Ecclesiastics of that age that
besides the sharp invectives which Gildas makes against them in his historical
Discourse of the Destruction of Brittany, which he especially imputes to their
crimes, he compiled another Treatise purposely to reprove them, called The
Correction of the Clergy, which begins thus, Gildas in Correct. Cleri
Brittany has Priests, but many of them impudent: It has Clergymen, but great
numbers of them ravenous oppressors, deceitful Pastors, called indeed
Pastors, but who are rather wolves watchful to destroy the souls of their
flock having no regard to the Spiritual good of the people, but seeking only
to fill their own bellies: They possess the houses of the Church, but they
come to them only for lucres sake: If they teach the people, yet by the ill
example of their vicious lives they render their teaching fruitles. They
seldom Sacrifise, and more rarely approach to the Altars with pure hearts.
They have not the confidence to reprove the people for their sins, being more
guilty themselves etc.

8. Such a Character Gildas gives of the Clergy in his times, which he enlarges
by an addition in his Rhetorical way of almost all kinds of vices with which
he charges them, particularly most horrible and open Simony publicly
purchasing with money Ecclesiastical Cures and Bishoprics of the then ruling
Tyrants: Which having done they were notwithstanding ordained by other Bishops,
by which means Traitors like Judas were placed in S. Peter's chair, and impure
persons like Nicholas, were Successors of the Holy Martyr Steven etc.

9. Thus does Gildas expose to his own age and to posterity likewise, the
depraved condition of those times: Baron ad A. D. 2* 4.
Which Baronius having recited, elegantly and justly adds these words, Hence we
may perceive and even with our hands feel the just and equal judgment of God
upon the nation, why the inhabitants thereof for their crimes were delivered
over to the sword, and the barbarous nations which punished them, were for a
reward called to embracing of the Christian Faith.

10. Neither was Brittany alone thus punished: But almost all the Provinces of
Europe were overrun and desolated by innumerable Armies of Barbarous people
from the Northern parts. By which means though the Church of God was then
miserably afflicted, so that our Lord may seem to have cast off all care of his
flock: yet if we reflect on the future effects and consequents of this divine
judgment, we shall find that the Catholic Church did indeed receive thereby a
great increase both in numbers of Professors and zeal of Christian
Profession. For though those barbarous Nations for a while persecuted the
Truth: yet ere long our Lord subdued their minds thereto: and then those strong
natural passions of theirs were employed in advancing Gods Church: Insomuch as
the Apostles time and Primitive age could scarce afford such Heroical examples
of Christian zeal, magnanimity and contempt of the earth, as these barbarous
people once converted, manifested to the world: So healthful is the severity
of God toward his people.

III. CHAP. III. CHAPTER

1.2. etc. The Saxons invited by public consent, as Auxiliaries against the
Scotts, etc.

6. etc. They land in Kent: encouraged by a Saxon-Prophecy.

9.10. They sight prosperously against the Picts, etc.

11. Of Thong-Castle.

1. HAving showed how unworthy the Britains had rendered themselves of the
Divine protection, and how fit scourges the Saxons, Angli, and Iutes were to
punish such impieties, we will consequently declare briefly the occasion,
order and manner how those barbarous Nations first entered this Island, invited
by the Britains themselves as Auxiliaries, but shortly became the Tyrants and
invaders.

2. Many Historians accuse the cowardly sloth of King Vortigern, as if he
weary of the exercises of war against the Picts and Scotts, chose rather with
his money to hire stipendiary strangers, then to train up his own subjects to
resist them, and therefore invited the Saxons to fight for the Britains. But
S. Beda shows that this was done by the common advice of the Nation, Beda lib.
1. c. 1^.
saying, A Meeting was assembled in which it was consulted from whence they
should seek assistance and defense for the avoiding and repelling those so
frequent and cruel incursions of the Northern nations into Brittany. And it
was thought best by all, as well as by King Vortigern, to demand aid of the
Saxons, a nation seated beyond the Sea. Which resolution of theirs was doubtless
ordered by the Divine Providence, to the end that mischief should come against
the impious Britains, D. A. 449.
as the succeeding event of things did more evidently declare.

3. Gildas therefore reflecting on the madness of this consultation thus
exclames, Gild. de Excid.
O the profound blindness of the Britains minds! O the desperate stupidity of
their senses! Those Saxons at whose names they trembled even when they were
absent, are now by the foolish Princes of Zoan invited to live as it were in
their own houses: so senceles a counsel they gave to their King Pharao. But how
senceles soever this counsel was, it was approved by the Britains, says
Malmsburiensis, Malmsbur. de Reg. l. 1.
and thereupon Ambassadors were sent into Germany, men of the highest repute,
and such as might most worthily represent their country.

Wit^^hind. de reb. Saxon. l. ^.
4. Witichindus an ancient Saxon Writer does thus describe the order of this
Embassage: Fame loudly proclaming the prosperous victories of the Saxons, the
Britains sent an humble Embassy to beg their assistance: and the Messengers
being publicly admitted, thus spoke, O Noble Saxons, our miserable countrymen
the frequent incursions of their enemies, having heard of the glorious
victories gained by you, have sent us to you humbly to implore your aid; in
recompense of which they are ready to offer to you a Province spacious and
abounding with all things. We have hitherto lived happily under the protection
of the Romans: and after the Romans we know no nation better then your selves,
to whom we may have recourse. Therefore our desire is to harbor our selves
under the wings of your courage: And if by your assistance we can only be freed
from the rage of our ancient Enemies, we will be ready to submit our selves to
any service you shall impose on us.

5. It may be this Historian in favor of his own country has here putt into
the British Ambassadors mouths a more humble Oration then they ever
pronounced, for they were sent to hire the Saxons by promising a large stipend,
not by submitting their country to them. However the success of this Treaty
he thus declares, ^d. ibid.
The Saxon Senate, says he, gave this short answer to the Britains demands;
Be assured, O Britains that we Saxons will be faithful friends to you, ready
always to assist you in all your necessities, and to do you all freindly
kindness. With which answer the Ambassadors were much rejoiced, and presently
returned to make their countrymen more joyful with so desired a message.

A. D. 449.
6. This Message was sent and returned in the year of our Lord four hundred
forty eight, and in compliance with it the year following an army of Saxons
under their Chief Conductours Hengist and Horsa landed in Brittany. Whose
coming our Historian Gildas in his angry style thus celebrates, recording
withal a Prophecy concerning it among the Saxons: Gild. de Excid.
Then, says he, a drove of whelps rushing out of the barbarous Lyonnesses den
came hither in three ships with full sails and an ominous course, A. D. 450.
encouraged by a Prophecy certainly believed by them, that for the space of
three hundred years they should possess the country toward which they*
directed the prow's of their ships: and that half of that time they should
often times lay it waste. They first fastened their terrible nails, by order of
the unhappy Tyrant (Vortigern) on the Eastern part of the Island, with a
pretense indeed to defend the country, but with an intention really to subdue
it.

7. From whence soever this Prophecy came, there seems to be in it some shadow
of truth: For three hundred years the Saxons possessed the Island under the
Title of Saxony-beyond-Sea: but afterward the Nation of the Angli gave their
own name to it. And again after one hundred and fifty years, the half of that
time, by the coming of S. Augustine the Monk they became Christians, and being
more civilis'd began to surcease their rude and barbarous behavior.

8. And whereas the said Author adds that the Saxons aborded in the Eastern
part of the Island, he intends thereby the Isle of Thanet in Kent, where
Hengist and Horsa first took land: and where more happily after about one
hundred and fifty years Divine Truth by the ministry of S. Augustine first
visited this Island. The place of their landing, says Ethelwerd, Ethelvverd
was anciently called Hipwines-fle^t: And was afterward named Wipped-fleet,
from Wipped a Saxon-commander there slain.

9. The good service which the Saxons after their first arrival performed to
King Vortigern is thus declared by Matthew of Westminster, Florileg* A. D. 450.
In the year of Grace four hundred and fifty, says he, the Scotts together
with the Picts invaded Brittany out of the Northern parts with a mighty army,
wasting the Provinces through which they passed. Which being told to Vortigern,
he gathered his soldiers together, and marched beyond the River of Humber. When
they came to a battle there was little need that the Britains should fight,
for the Saxons then present combatted with such courage, that the Enemies,
heretofore accustomed to Victory, immediately turned their backs and fled.
Vortigern therefore having by their valor obtained the Victory, increased his
liberality to them, and gave to Hengist their captain great possessions in
Lindsey (a region of Lincolnshire) sufficient to maintain him and his soldiers.

10. Huntingdom writes that this battle was fought at Stanford in the Southern
parts of Lincolnshire, Huntingd.
for so far the Picts and Scotts had marched without opposition* adding that
they fought with darts and lances, but the Saxons with battell-axes and long
swords: the weight and force of which weapons they being not able to bear,
sought to save themselves by flight.

11. As touching the land given by Vortigern to Hengist in the same province
where the battle was fought: A. D. 451.
Our Annals, says Camden, relate it otherwise: for they declare that Hengist
the Saxon having subdued the Picts, Camden. in Corintan.
besides large possessions conferred on him in other places, requested
Vortigern to bestow on him in that Province so much ground as he could
encompasse with an oxes hide. Which having obtained, he cut it into things
extremely thinn, with which he encompassed a great Territory: in the midst of
which he built a Castle, which by the name (For it is called Thong-Castle)
perpetuates the memory hereof: and as Carthage remained many ages a witness of
Dido's fraud, who by the same slight obtained the seat where she built that
City, So does this Castle still putt us is mind of the simplicity of the
Britains, and cunning of the Saxons.

IV. CHAP.
IV. CHAP.
1.2. Hengist sends for more forces: and his daughter.

3 etc. King Vortigern's unlawful marriage with her: He gives Kent to the
Saxons.

7. The Saxons join with the Picts.

8. etc The Britains desert Vortigern: and set up his Son Vortimer.

1. BUT the ambition of Hengist was not satisfied with such a gift: his
intention was to be master of the whole Island without obligation to any.
Floril^g. A. D. 450.
In order to the effecting of which intention, being a subtle man, says
Matthew of Westminster, he presuming on the Kings freindship and easines thus
addressed himself to him, My Lord the King, you see how your enemies disquiet
you on all sides. If you please therefore we will send into our Country with
order to increase our numbers with new recruits. The King approving his design
commanded him to do so without delay, that so he might be freed from the fear
of his enemies. A. D. 451.
Hereupon H^ngist sending Messengers into Germany, they shortly returned
bringing with them eighteen ships laden with soldiers.

2. It had been happy for Brittany if Hengist had been strengthened by the
accession of New soldiers only. But they brought with them a fair Lady the
daughter of Hengist, whose beauty and flatteries so inveigled King Vortigern,
that to please her he betrayed both his faith and Kingdom too.

Malmsbur. d. Reg. l. ^. c. 1.
3. Malmsburiensis thus briefly relates this story: We have received from our
ancestors, says he, that at this second voyage of the Saxons they conducted
into Brittany a Virgin, the daughter of Hengist (called Rowena) for beauty a
miracle of Nature, admired by all that lookd on her. Hengist commands a
magnificent feast to be provided for the entertainment of his soldiers newly
arrived, to which the King was invited. He gave order likewise to his daughter
to perform the Office of Cup Bearer to the King, A. D. 453.
on purpose that he might feed his eyes with her beauty. Which design had the
effect which Hengist desired and expected. For the King naturally a slave to
beauty, was presently wounded with the gracefullnes of the maids looks, and
elegancy of her gestures: nourishing in his mind a hope to enjoy her. So that
without any delay he demanded her of her Father for his wife. Hengist though
inwardly more willing to bestow her then the King was to receive her, yet made
show of an unwillingnes, alleging that such a marriage was too mean for so
great a Prince. But at last after much importunity he condescended: and for a
reward or dowry to his daughter, he received in gift the whole Province of
Kent. And this was suitable to the practice of the German Nation observed by
Tacitus, Tacit. de Morib. German.
among whom, says he, it is the custom for the Husband to give a portion and
dowry to purchase his wife, and not the wife to the husband.

4. Other Historians add that this Feast and marriage was celebrated at
Thong-castle in Lincolnshire: and that the Virgin was instructed by he^ Father
to drink a health to Vortigern after the German manner. However certain it is
that besides the infinite damage to the Island by alienating so considerable a
member as Kent, and so opportune to the Saxons for pouring in new forces, this
marriage was in a high degree criminal, both because the King had already a
lawful wife living, and likewise for that being a Christian he joined himself
to a Pagan Idolatresse.

5. Presently after this unhappy marriage, to consummate which the King
repudiated his former wife, A. D. 452.
happened the sending oversea of S. Vrsula and her glorious Companions in
Virginity and Martyrdom: whose Heroical constancy related in the precedent
Book, was sufficient to obliterate the stain which the Kings lusts and
injustice had cast upon the Nation.

6. Hengist having thus prostituted his daughter to the King, who in recompense
prostituted his country to Hengist, the Saxon began to entertain thoughts of
ambition more vast then before, and knowing that generally the Nation of
Brittany highly disapproved their Kings marriage, for which and other vices his
subjects much diminished their affections and duty to him, he began to contemn
them, and sought occasions of quarrels with them.

7. The Archdeacon of Huntington thus describes the first breach between the
Saxons and Britains: Huntington. l. 2.
Hengist, says he, and his army seeking an occasion of war against the
Britains, A. D. 453.
ordained by God as a punishment of their crimes, boldly required of his Son in
law King Vortigern to supply them more plentifully with provisions: threatening
that otherwise they would renounce the league between them, and lay wast the
whole Island. Which threatenings were presently attended with dismal effects.
For the Saxons entering into a new league with the Picts, gathered an
innumerable army which without any resistance spoiled the whole country. A. D.
454.
Thus a flame kindled by the hands of those Pagans, consuming the Britains,
took a just revenge of the crimes of that Nation, which crimes were the less
pardonable, because the people which committed them professed themselves to be
the people of the true God. This flame raged like that which the Chaldeans
kindled about Jerusalem, which utterly consumed all the walls and buildings of
that City.

8. It was no wonder that the Saxons met not with any resistance from the
Britains, because by occasion of the Kings late marriage with an infidel Lady,
his divorce from his lawful Queen, and delivering up so considerable a part of
his Kingdom to strangers, high discontents arose among his subjects against
him. Whereupon by common consent persons were deputed to go to him and beseech
him to take pity of his country now ready to sink into ruin. Or if he had no
care of his Kingdom and subjects, yet that he should not neglect the Church of
God and his Faith in danger to be destroyed by ^eathen Miscreants. Which if it
should arrive by his fault, and that the Diabolical worship of Idols should
prevayle against Gods true Religion, so horrid a crime would be punished both
by his own and his peoples eternal misery.

9. But such remonstrances as these having made little or no impression in the
mind of this sensual King: The Bishops and other Clergy afterward repeated
with more earnestnes the like admonitions to him: Which likewise producing no
effect, King Vortigern was deserted generally by his subjects, (...) A. D. 454.
and the Nobility by unanimous consent raised into the throne his Son Vortimer,
says Florilegus.

10. There is not any of our Ancient Historians affirm that Vortigern was
deposed, but only deserted by his subjects, a Prince given up to his pleasures,
and therefore incapable to resist the ambitious designs of Hengist, against
whom they were resolved to join all their forces for the expelling him out of
the Kingdom. Therefore Malmsburiensis relates this change in a more moderate
style, saying, Malmsbur. de kagib. l. 1. c. 1.
Vortimer was an earnest incentour of the war against the Saxons, whose
ambition and boldness he was resolved to endure no longer: And for this reason
most of the Britains followed him. And from hence we may take notice of the
seditious and truly Calvinisticall spirit of a late Historian, Bishop Parker,
who thus expresses this passage of the Story: Antiquit. Britann. f 7.
That expostulation and complaint which with great vehemence the Britains u^'d
to their King Vortigern for his marriage with the daughter of Hengist a Pagan,
was a great argument of their perfect Faith in Christ. For which act of his the
Nobles were so incensed, that having deprived Vortigern of his Regal
authority, they created his son Vortimer King.

11. But in what manner soever this change was effected, it can not be doubted
but that it wrought great partialities and divisions in the kingdom. A. D. 455.
For Vortigern having the space of sixteen years enjoyed the quiet possession
of it, could not want many adherents, who would disapprove the exalting of his
Son without his consent. So that the Saxons received great advantage by such
disorders, which much facilitated the progress of their ambitious designs.

V. CHAP. V. CHAP.

1.2 etc Vortimer fights doubtfully with the Saxons: in which battle Horsa,
etc. are killed.

7. etc. Death of Vortimer: his virtues, etc.

10. A Battle between the Britains and Saxons, in which the Britains are
overcome.

1. VOrtimer being thus exalted either to an association with his Father in the
Throne, A. D. 455.
or to the Office of General of the British forces, hastened to give a proof
of the wisdom of his country men in their Election of him: Malmsbur. de Reg.
l. 1. c. 1.
For as Malmsburiensis writes, judging it unfit and dangerous any longer to
dissemble the taking notice of the ambitious designs of the Saxons, and how by
craft they had almost ruined the Kingdom, he bent his mind earnestly how to
drive them out of the Nation, vehemently urging his Father to attempt the same.
By his instigation therefore an army was raised etc. This says he, happened in
the seventh year after the first entrance of the Saxons into Brittany.

2. Great preparations there were on both sides, and at last they came to a
battle, which was fought, says Ethelwerd, in the field of Egelestirpe, now
called Alesford, a town in Kent washed by the River Medway. On the Britains
side were three Chief Captains, who lead each a third part of the Army:
Ambrosius Aurelianus lead the first division: Vortimer the second; and Catigern
a younger Brother of Vortimer lead the third. The Saxon army was conducted by
the two Brethren, Hengist and Horsa.

3. The order and success of this battle is thus described by Huntingdon,
Huntingdon. l. 2.
In the seventh year after the arrival of the Saxons in Brittany, a Battle
was fought at Alestrew. At the beginning whereof Horsa set upon the army of
Catigern with such Vigor, that it was dispersed like dust before the wind, and
Catigern the Kings son was slain. But his Brother Vortimer a Prince of
admirable courage, falling in sidewayes into Horsa's squadrons routed them, and
killed Horsa, the most valorous of the Saxons, the remainder of his forces fled
to Hengist, who then was fighting with invincible courage against Ambrosius. By
this means the whole Weight of the combat lay upon Hengist: D. A. 457
who being assalted and brought into great straits by the accession of
Vortimers forces, after he had a good while sustained the impression of the
whole British army, was at last overcome, and compelled to fly, which he had
never done before: Yet this victory cost the Britains very dear, for great
numbers of them were slain.

4. With this account given by Huntingdon agrees likewise Matthew of
Westminster. Yet Wigorniensis expressly affirms that Hengist, after the death
of his Brother Horsa, obtained the Victory. And with him Ethelwerd seems to
agree.

5. Horsa's body was buried in a place not much distant from that of the
battle, C^mden. in Cantio.
which to this day continues a Monument of his Memory, being from him called
H^rsted. As for Catigern the Son of Vertigern, his body is supposed to have
been buried at Aylsford, by the Saxons called Eglesford, by Henry of Huntingdom
Ellestre, and by the Britains Saissenaeg-haibail, because the Saxons were over
come there. To testify which victory there still remain four great stones
standing upright, over which others are crossewise laid, after the manner of
Stone-heng in Wiltshire, which from Catigern are vulgarly and imperfectly
called Keith-coty-house. Thus writes Camden.

A. D. 456.
6. Horsa being dead, the Saxons exalted Hengist to the Title of King of Kent,
says Matthew of Westminster. And the same year he is reported to have fought
three battles against the Britains. But being unable to resist the valor of
Vortimer, he was forced to retire himself into the Isle of Thanet: where
likewise he was daily assalted by the British ships. At last the Saxons
leaving their wives and children in that Island, returned into Germany, to call
in new and greater forces.

7. The year after Hengists return into Germany, dyed the glorious King
Vortimer, A. D. 457.
in the fourth year after he was assumed to a participation of the regal
authority. Some Writers affirm that he dyed a natural death, by a disease.
Others say he dyed by poison administered to him by the fraud of his late
Mother-in-law Rowena: Sigibert. A. D. 437.
to which effect thus writes Sigebert (with whom agree Geffrey of Monmouth,
Matthew Westminster, Richard White, etc.) The Devil envying the goodness of
Vortimer suggested to the mind of his Stepmother to cause poison to be given
him by one of his servants. Which he having drunk, and perceiving that death
approached, he divided his treasures among his soldiers, earnestly exhorting
them to fight courageously for their country. Moreover he commanded a Pyramid
of brass to be made, and placed in the Haven where the Saxons usually landed:
Upon which Pyramid his body was to be laid, to the end that the Enemies seeing
the Monument of so great and valorous a Prince, might be frighted back into
their own country.

8. But it is more probable that it was only his statue which he intended
should be so placed on the Pyramid. For being a Christian Prince, he was, no
doubt, buried after the Christian manner with decent solemnity. Moreover the
same Sigebert acknowledges that he was buried in the City of the Trinobantes,
Id ibid. Huntingd. l. 2.
now called London. And with him, says Henry Huntingdon, was buried the flower
and glory of the British Nation.

9. Besides Vortimers courage, he is celebrated by ancient Writers for his
Piety and other Virtues Chamber, a Writer formerly cited by Richard White,
affirms that in his war against the Saxons be bore in his Ensign the Image of
our Lord Jesus Christ, to which devotion of his we may impute his Victories. In
like manner a few years after, Ri^h. Vitus l. 7. ad (...). 21.
the famous King Arthur yet more prosperously bore against the same Enemies the
Image of our Blessed Lady. Sigebert likewise testifies of the same King
Vortimer, Sigebert. ^bi sup.
that he restored the Churches destroyed by the Saxons, and possessions wrested
by them from his Subjects.

10. The same year after Vortimers death Hengist returned out of Germany with
greater forces, and took a firmer possession of his Kingdom of Kent: and for
the better establishment of his family therein he joined in his regal power
his son Aescae. To oppose him therein the Britains invaded the country with a
great army: the success of which invasion is thus related by Henry of
Huntingdon: Huntingd. l. 2.
Hengist and his son Aesca having received auxiliary forces from their own
country, and being more confident of victory by reason of the death of the
Young Prince (Vortimer) prepared themselves for war at Creganford. The
Britains army consisted of four great Bodies conducted by four valiant
Captains. But when the conflict was begun, they found themselves too weak for
the Saxons, whose numbers were much more increased then formerly. For those
that came last were chosen robustious soldiers, who with their swords and
battle-axes did horribly cleave asunder the bodies of the Britains. Yet did
they not give ground till they saw their four Captains slain. But after that
they were so incredibly terrified, that they fled from the field of battle as
far as London: and from that time never had the courage to bring an army into
Kent again. So that Hengist and his son Aesca quietly enjoyed that Kingdom,
having their Palace fixed at Canterbury. Thus began this new Kingdom of Kent in
the eighth year after the coming of the Saxons into Brittany.

VI. CHA.
VI. CHAP.
1.2. Hengist persecutes Christians.

3 4 etc. The Martyrdom of Voadinus Archbishop of London.

1. IT is not probable that when Vortimer was raised to the throne of Brittany,
this was done by the deposition of his Father Vortigern: for we find that when
Vortimer was dead, his Father afterward continued King for some years: and for
a while gave proofs of his courage in endeavoring to repress the ambition and
violence of his Father in-law Hengist: though afterward he returned to his
former slothful licentious manner of living.

2. Now during the wars between the Britains and Saxons in the third year of
Vortimers reign, our Ecclesiastical monuments do record extreme cruelty
exercised by Hengist in all places where his armies came, principally in Kent,
against Priests and Holy Virgins especially, great numbers of which he caused
to be massacred: Altars he profaned every where and demolished Churches.

3 But among the Victimes of this barbarous Princes cruelty there only remains
the memory of one illustrious Bishop, Voadinus Archbishop of London who dyed a
glorious Martyr in this tempest. The names of all the rest are only written in
heaven.

4. Now concerning Saint Voadinus we read thus in our ancient English
Martyrologe: Martyrolog. Anglic. 3. I^^j.
On the third of July, at London is the commemoration of Saint Voadinus Martyr,
Archbishop of London; who being a man of great Sanctity reproved Vortigern
King of Brittany for repudiating his lawful wife, and marrying an ^nfidell.
For which cause Hengist King of Kent, the father of Vortigerns second
illegitimate wife, inflamed with fury, commanded the said Holy Bishop, together
with many other Priests and religious men to be stain. Whence may appear that
all good men did execrate the Kings last and adulterous marriage.

Rich. Vit. l. 7. in not. 16.
5. Chamber in the life of Vortigern (as Richard White relates) affirms that
Saint Voadinus his admonition to King Vortigern, had two heads: The first was
his unlawful disp^sall of part of the patrimony and crown of the Kingdom
without the consent of the Clergy, Nobility and people. The other was his
marrying a Pagan wife, his own being yet alive, against whom he could allege
no cause which might justify a divorce. This double reprehension did Hengist
revenge by the death of the holy Bishop. A. D. 461.
Now though both these grounds of reprehension were very just, yet it was the
latter, proceeding from a a reverence to the Sacrament of the Church vitiated
by the new Bride, which principally regarded a Bishop to censure, and which for
so doing, and suffering for his duty, gave him a sufficient title to Martyrdom.

6. Gildas and Saint Beda, though they mention not by name this Martyrdom of
Saint Voadinus, yet deliver general expressions of the cruel persecution
raised by Hengist especially against Ecclesiastical persons, that they afford
sufficient grounds to render it unquestionnable. For Gildas declares that great
numbers of Bishops and Priests were massacred by that Saxon-King. Gild. in
Excid. Beda l. 1. c 1.15.
And Saint Beda relates the same in these words: The impious King after his
Victory, (almighty God the just Judge so disposing,) laid wast the Cities and
provinces adjoining, and without any resistance continued the flame from the
Eastern to the Western sea, covering the whole surface of the miserable Island
with ruin. Both public and private buildings were demolished: And every where
the Prelates of the Church together with the people, without any regard to their
dignity, were consumed with sword and fire: neither were there any who took
care to bury their bodies after they were so cruelly slain.

VII. CHAP. VII. CHAPTER

1.2. etc. Hengist at a Feast perfidiously murders the British Nobles.

5. Stone-henge, a Monument of this.

6.7. Vortigern being a Prisoner, redeems himself with surrendering several
Provinces to the Saxons.

1. FOR two or three years we read nothing memorable performed between the
Britains and Saxons: A. D. 461.
but the year of Grace four hundred sixty one is noted with an act of most
horrible perfidious cruelty done by Hengist. For he having a resolution by any
means to enlarge his bounds in Brittany, and finding that by exercice of war
the British courages increased, turned his thoughts to invent some stratagem by
which without any hazard he might compass his end.

2. For this purpose insinuating himself into the minds of Vortigern and the
British Nobility, as if he were desirous of amity and peace which if they
would grant he would turn his arms against the Picts and Scotts, and drive them
quite out of the Island. He quickly obtained belief from the easy nature of
Vortigern, as if his intentions were sincere. Whereupon a Meeting is ordained
between the Britains and Saxons, with this caution, that each King should be
attended with only three hundred, and those unarmed: at which Meeting they were
to treat of the conditions of peace.

3. The place appointed for this fatal Assembl^ was a plain near Sorbiodunum
(or Old Salsbury) a City seated in the Province of the Belgae, in which still
remains a monument of a dismal Tragedy. For these being met on both sides, a
great Feast was prepared for the Britains, at which the articles of agreement
were to be ratified by mutual promises and oaths.

4. But toward the end of the Feast, when they were dissolved in wine, Hengist
on a sudden called aloud, To arms: which was the watchword agreed on among the
Saxons. Whereupon they immediately drew out short swords which they had
conceald under their clothes, ^^lfr. Monumet.
and quickly slew their unarmed guests the Britains. Yet in that Tragedy one
memorable example of courage was performed by a British Noble man, if Geffrey
of Monmouth may be believed. For Eldol the valiant Governor (Consul) of
Gloucester (Claudiocestriae) snatching up a stake by chance lying near, slew
seaventy of the Saxons with it.

5. A Monument, not long after raised by the Britains, continues to this day
the memory of this most barbarous and perfidious Tragedy. This is that which is
Vulgarly called Stone-henge on Salsbury plains, where in a space of ground
compassed with a ditch, are placed as in a threefold crown, stones of an
incredible vastnes, some of them twenty eight feet in height, and seven in
breadth, over many of which other great stones are placed a cross. The report
is, Camden. in Belgis.
says Camden, that Ambrosius Aurelianus, or his brother Other Pendragon by the
help and art of Merlin the famous Magician, raised this Monument in memory of
the Britains treacherously slain by the Saxons at a conference. Though others
deliver that this was a magnificent Sepulcher raised to Ambrosius Aurelianus
himself slain near this place: from whom likewise the town of Ambresbury, not
far distant, took its name.

6. In this slaughter the Saxons took Vortigern prisoner, Florileg. ad A. D.
462.
and the year following, says Matthew of Westminster, threatening him with death
they bound him in chains, and for his life required of him to deliver up
several of his Cities and munitions. Who quickly granted whatsoever they
demanded, so he might escape with his life. This being confirmed by oath, they
gave him his liberty: and first of all they seys'd on the City of London: then
Yorck and Lincoln, likewise Winchester: all which Provinces they wasted,
killing the miserable Britains like Sheep. They destroyed to the ground all
Churches and buildings belonging to Ecclesiastical persons: they killd the
Priests near the Altars: they burnt with fire all Books of Holy Scripture: and
heaped earth on the sepulchers of Martyrs. Such religious men as could escape
their fury repaired to deserts, woods and rocks, carrying with them the Relics
of Saints. Vortigern therefore seeing so horrible destruction, retired into the
parts ^f Wales (Cambria) and there enclosed himself in a town called Genorium.

7. But the three Provinces with which Vortigern redeemed his life, Malmsbur.
de Pontif. l. 2
are thus better set down by Mamlsburiensis, Of old time, says he, the
Eastern and Southern Saxons, and the Eastern Angli were subjects to the King of
Kent. For those Provinces Hengist who first reigned in Kent obtained of
Vortigern King of the Britains, not by open war but treachery. These
Provinces contain Essex, Sussex, Surrey, Norfolk and Suff^lk, inhabited by the
people which in the Romans time were called Trinobantes, Regni and Iceni.

VIII. CHAP. VIII. CHAPTER

1.2. etc. The Birth of the glorious Saint David: His Childhood etc,
Prophecies of his Sanctity by S. Patrick, and Gildas Badonicus.

1. THE same year in which Brittany was thus dismembered, A. D. 462.
God recompensed that loss to the British Church by the Birth of Saint David,
afterward Bishop of Menevia, one of the greatest lights that ever that Church
enjoyed, both in regard of the Sanctity of his life, the vigor of his
authority, and zeal in repressing Heresy, and exalting Ecclesiastical
Discipline.

2. His nativity was attended and prevented by several wonders denoting the
eminency of his future Sanctity. For Saint Patrick a little before his going
into Ireland, Capgrav. in S. David.
being in the Province of the Dimetae (or North-West wales, in a valley called
Rosina) meditating on his Mission thither, had a revelation by an Angel, that
after thirty yers a child should be born in that country, which should give a
great luster thereto. To which Prophecy regard was had in this Collect of the
ancient Church of Sarum repeated anniversarily on S. David's Feast, O God, who
by an Angel did foretell the Nativity of thy Blessed Confessor Saint David,
(...). Eccl. (...).
thirty years before he was born; Grant unto us, we beseech thee, that
celebrating his Memory, we may by his intercession attain to joys everlasting.

3. The manner of his Birth is thus consequently related by the Author of his
Life in Capgrave: Capgrav. ib.
Thirty years being finished after the foresaid prediction, says he, the King
of the region called Ceretica traveling to Demetia, met by the way a
Religious Virgin named Nonnita, of great beauty, which he lusting after, by
violence deflour'd her. Hereby she conceived a Son, and neither before nor
after ever had knowledge of any man: but persevering in chastity both of mind
and body, and sustaining her self only with bread and water from the time of
her Conception, she lead a most holy life. The King who was father to S. David,
is by our ancient Writers called Xanthus: and his Mother Nonnita is by some
named Melaria.

4. The eminent sanctity of this holy Child, the fruit of his holy Mothers
fasting, chastity and prayer, was by a new divine Oracle a little before his
birth, foretold: For when Gildas Albanius was from the pulpit teaching a great
congregation, on a sudden he became dumb and unable to speak. But afterward
broke forth into these words, related by Caradoc of Lancarvan, A holy woman
called Nonnita now present in this Church, is great with Child, and shall
shortly be brought in bed of a Son full replenished with Grace. It was with
regard to him that I was hindered from speaking by a divine Power restraining my
tongue. This child shall be of so eminent sanctity that name in these our parts
shall be comparable to him, I will surrender this Region to him: who will from
his infancy by degrees increase in Sanctity and Grace. An Angel Gods messager
has reveald this to me.

Pits. is David.
5. He was baptized, says Pits from Giraldus Cambrensis, by Relveus Bishop of
Menevia, in a place called ^ortcleis: Which Bishop by Divine Providence arrived
there the same hour. And during his childhood, he was educated in a place
called the Old Bush, by the Cambrians, Henmenen, and by the Latins, Menevia. He
grew every day more replenished with Grace, and being of a perspicacious wit
he made progress in the study of learning far beyond all other children of his
age. This is that S. David, afterward the most Holy Bishop of Menevia, (called
from him S. David's) for his learning, Sanctity and miracles so celebrated in
all future ages by the British Churches. His admirable Gests shall in their
due place be declared hereafter.

6. But whereas in this forecited passage out of Giraldus Cambrensis he is said
to have been baptized by an Irish Bishop called Relveus Bishop of Menevia: it is
certain there is an error in the Copy. For S. David himself was the first
Bishop of Menevia, A. D. 464
to which place he translated the Bishopric of Caerleon. Therefore instead of
Relveus Menevensium Episcopus it is not to be doubted but the Author wrote
Albeus Mumonensium Episcopus: and this is that S. Albeus Bishop of Munster, or
Cassel in Ireland, of whose Gests we treated in the foregoing Book of this
History, concerning whom we related from Bishop Usher, Vsser. in Primord. f. 789
that he went to Rome, and there was instructed in the knowledge of Holy
Scriptures by S. Hilary the famous Bishop of Poictiers.

7. As touching Gildas Albanius mentioned in this Chapter, who in a Sermon
foretold the Sanctity of S. David a little before his birth, and who was a holy
person distinct from the well known Historian Gildas, surnamed Badonicus, who
lived likewise in this same age, though younger then the other; Of both these
we shall hereafter treat in their due Season.

IX. CHAP. IX. CHAPTER

1.2. Vortigern fortifies himself in Wales.

3.4. etc. Aur. Ambrosius sent for to be General.

7. His terrible battle against Hengist.

1. A. D. 453.
WHilst Vortigern lurked ingloriouslly among the steep innaccessible Mountains
of the country now called Cambria and Walliae, busy in building a Castle for
his greater security, the middle Provinces of Brittany being left without any
Defender, were exposed to the fury of the Saxons.

2. The Castle built by Vortigern was called Genorium, and afterward
Caer-Guortigern. It is placed, Camden in Radnor.
says Camden, in a Vast solitude, fearful for the horror of mountains, and
narrow turnings of the passages to it. To that place, Vortigern, the plague of
his country, withdrew himself, to seek a refuge for his own person. And there,
says Richard White, R. Vilus hist l. 7.
he spent his time in consulting Soothsayers, and especially the Magician
Merlin.

3. Hereupon the Britains being deserted by their King, were compelled to seek
one abroad. And therefore, says Matthew of Westminster, Florileg. A. D. 464.
they directed messengers into lesser Britanny beyond sea to Aurelius Ambrosius
and his Brother Vter-pendragon, who for fear of Vortigern were retired
thither, beseeching them with all speed to quitt that country, and repair into
their own* to the end that expelling both the Saxons and their hated King
Vortigern, they might receive the crown of Brittany* They therefore being now
of ripe age prosecuted their journey, A. D. 465.
attended with ships and armed soldiers.

4. Concerning this Ambrosius, sometimes called Aurelius, sometimes Aurelianus,
and his extraction, Gilda^ and from him S. Beda speak briefly and in general
terms, that he was a modest prince, and who alone of the Roman race had
remained alive after so great a tempest of wars and changes, in which his
parents, who had worn the Royal Purple, were slain. Now though in these two
ancient Authors the name of his parents be not extant, it may be probably
affirmed that he was the Son of Constantin, who fifty years before had
pretended to the Roman Empire, and in the attempt was slain in Gaul. For that
Constantin, besides his Son Constans also slain, had other children, appears by
the expression of Sozomen, Sozom. l. 9. c. 11.
who calls the said Constans, surnamed also Iulianus, the Elder Son of
Constantin.

5. That he was born and bred up in Brittany seems to appear, because, as
several Writers affirm, in the competition for the Crown when Vortigern was
chosen, Ambrosius being a pretender, was compelled to quitt both his right and
the country, and to retire himself into lesser Brittany. From whence
notwithstanding, during the reign of the generous King Vortimer, he returned,
and assisted him courageously against the Saxons, as has been related: and, it
seems, after his death retired again to his former refuge.

6. The return of these two Princes was more formidable to Vortigern, then any
thing he could apprehend from the Saxons: who therefore fortified himself more
carefully in his new Castle. I will not here trouble the reader with any large
description of that prodigious omen of two dragons, Mat. Westminster. A. D. 463.
one red and the other white, which issuing out of a lake whilst Vortigern sat
on the bank, began a terrible combat, in which at last the White was
conqueror. By which two Dragons, according to Merlins interpretation, were
meant the Britains and Saxons: and the success of their fight was the flight
and destruction of the Britains. These seem to be inventions of the old Bards
easily composed after the event, and foolishly collected by Geffrey of
Monmouth, to signalize the expiring of the British Kingdom.

7. Hengist being informed of the coming of Aurelius Ambrosius with
considerable forces in aid of the Britains, endeavored to come to a battle
with him, before the uniting of their Armies: but was not able to effect his
intention. So that a main battle was fought by the two Nations in Kent near
the ancient famous port of Roch borow: Huntingd. l. 2.
which is thus described by Henry of Huntingdon: A while after that auxiliary
forces were come, King Hengist and his Son Esca gathered an invincible army, in
the seaventeenth year after the coming of the Saxons into Brittany, A. D. 466
which was the year of Grace four hundred sixty five. On the other side the
Britains uniting all their forces opposed them with an Army gallantly ranged
into twelve Bodies. The fight continued long, and with little advantage. But at
last Hengist having slain the twelve Leaders, and cast down their Ensigns,
forced the Britains to fly. He himself likewise lost great numbers of his
soldiers and principal Officers, and particularly a certain great Prince of
his Nation called Wipped: in whose memory the place of the battle was called
Wippeds-stede. So that this Victory was much bewayld by the Saxons themselves:
and therefore after that time neither did he take the confidence to enter into
the Britains Borders, nor the Britains into Kent.

X. CHAP. X. CHAP.

1. King Vortigern consumed by fire.

2.3. A. Ambrosius, King: his Character.

5.6.7. Death of S. Patrick and place of his burial.

1. THE year following was free from an extern war against the Saxons: A. D.
466.
which gave Aurelius Ambrosius an opportunity to convert his arms against the
principal Author of all the miseries of Brittany, the unhappy King Vortigern.
Therefore he marched to the Castle Genorium, which he beseiged, but found him
so strongly fortified there, that by no force or cunning he could expugn it* At
last by fire, whether cast by Ambrosius, or coming from heaven, is uncertain,
both the King and his Castle were consumed, Huntingd. l. 2.
so as, says Huntingdon, his body never appeared.

2. Vortigern being thus removed, the whole power and authority of the Kingdom
was devolved on Ambrosius, not after a tumultuary manner, or by the factious
suffrages of the Army: but by an unanimous Election of the Clergy, Nobility and
Commons of the Nation: For which purpose, says S. H. Spelman, Spelm. (...).
Council. D. D. 465.
a Council or Assembly was called in Cambria, about the Mountains of Erir in
the Province of the Ordovices, or Northwales, in which he was exalted to the
Regal Dignity: This he says was done in the year four hundred sixty five,
following the account of Matthew of Westminster: But other Historians, as Stow,
Speed, etc. more probably place this Election the year following, after the
death of Vortigern.

3. How happy an exchange the Britains made of their King, will appear from
this Character given to Aurelius Ambrosius by Matthew of Westminster, M. W^st^*
A. D. 465.
far unlike that which all writers ascribe to Vortigern: Ambrosius, says he,
as soon as he was placed on the throne of Brittany employed himself to the
utmost of his power in repairing Churches which had been ruind. A. D. 472.
He was a Prince magnificent in his gifts, sedulous in the worship of God,
modest, averse from flattery, a valiant soldier on foot, yet more valiant on
hors-back, and very skillful in conducting an army. For which virtues and
endowments his fame was spread through far distant regions.

4. Being so worthy a Prince, it is not altogether unlikely that this is the
same Ambrosius mentioned by Eugypius in the life of S. Severin, E^gip* in vita
S. Severini.
who writes thus. Odoacer King of the Erul^ having subdued Italy wrote kind and
familiar letters to S. Severin, desiring him to ask of him whatsoever he
pleased. This he did in consideration that the same holy Bishop had foretold
him that he should reign there. The Holy man encouraged with so kind an offer,
requested him to free from banishment a certain person called Ambrosius, who
had been thereto condemned by the said King. Which passage being cited by
Baronius, he thus adds, As concerning this Ambrosius, Baron. A. D. 476.
my opinion is that he is the same who afterward going into Brittany, with
great courage attempted, and in some degree effected the freeing of that Island
from the oppression of the barbarous Saxons. Thus writes the learned Cardinal,
though he erroneously places the beginning of Odoacers reign in Italy too late.

5. Several years passed, after the Election of Ambrosius, either in peace, or
not considerable war between the Britains and Saxons: The occurrents of which
time is thus described by S. Beda: Beda de (...) in (...).
The Britains, under the conduct of Ambrosius Aurelianus a modest Prince, and
who alone of the Roman race had remained after the slaughter made by the
Saxons, in which his parents who had worn the Regal Purple were slain,
provoking at last that Victorious Nation to combat, gave them an overthrow: And
from that time now the Britains, and now the Saxons got the better in small
encounters, till at last new forces of strangers arriving the Saxons got
possession of the whole Island.

A. D. 47^.
6. During this less disturbed time it was that S. Patrick, many years before
returned out of Ireland, dyed in his solitary retreat at Glastenbury, Lib. cap.
as already has been declared before the proper time, because we would not
too distractedly set down the Gests of that glorious Apostolical Saint.
Concerning whom thus we read in the antiquities of Glastenbury: Antiq.
Glasten. in Patrici^.
In these days after the death of Vor^igern, Aurelius Ambrosius reigned ^ver
the Britains: And the Saxons grew strong, multiplying exceedingly. Then it was
that S. Patrick the Apostle of Ireland, and first Abbot in the Isle Avallonia,
after he had sufficiently instructed the foresaid Brethren in Regular
Disciplines, and competently enriched that Monastery with possessions procured
from Kings and Princes, at last yielded to nature in the thirty ninth year
after his return to the said Island: And was buried in the Old Church on the
right hand of the Altar by direction of an Angel, A. D. 477.
a great flame likewise in the sight of all breaking forth in the same place.

7. The Irish Writers eagerly contend against this and other British
testimonies concerning S. Patrick's being buried in Brittany: confidently
affirming that his Body reposes in the Church of Downpatrick in Ireland: Whose
assertion likewise seems to be confirmed by S. Bernard* who in the life of S.
Malachias a Holy Irish Bishop writes that S. Patricks body rests in the Sea of
Armagh: accompanied with those of S. Colombanus and S. Brigide. But this
controversy may be commodiously enough composed, as many of the like nature
have been, by replying, that some considerable Relics of his Sacred Body have
been requested by the Irish from the Britains and deposited at Down: Which
Relics have after by mistake been reputed his entire Body: a world of examples
of the like error being exstant in Ecclesiastical History.

XI. CHAP. XI. CHAP.

1. Hengists victory.

2.3. etc. Ella a Saxon invades Sussex: where he erects the Kingdom of the
South Saxons.

6.7. etc. King Ambrosius marches Northward against Hengist: His pious vow: and
Victory.

10 11. etc. Hengist a Prisoner: sentenced to death by the cruel sentence of a
Bishop.

13. Hengists son Aesca succeeds in the Kingdom of Kent.

1. AFter some years cessation, A. D. 473.
or at least slight incursions occasionally exercised between the Britains
and Saxons, in the year four hundred seaventy three Hengist obtained an
important Victory against the Britains, Ethelvvard. l. 1.
for thus we read in Ethelwerd a Noble Saxon Writer: The space of eight years
being complete (after the Battle at Wippedflet) Hengist together with his son
Esca took up arms against the Britains once more: whose army they discomfited,
and carried away immense spoils. This Victory is not expressly mentioned by any
other Historians: but may be conceived to be in general words intended by
Gildas and S. Beda in this expression, From that time sometimes the Britains,
Beda l. 1. c. 16.
and sometimes their Enemies had the Victory, till the year wherein the Mountain
of Bath (Mons Badonicus) was beseig'd: which was ten years after this combat.

2. In the year of Christ four hundred seaventy seven, A. D. 477.
Hengist perceiving that with his present forces he could make no progres
against so valiant a Captain as Ambrosius, A. D. 487.
nor yet maintain the Provinces lately given him by Vortigern for his
redemption, sent for new and greater supplies out of Germany. Whereupon a
famous Saxon captain called Ella, with his three sons Cymen, Pleting and Cissa,
attended with a numerous army and strong fleet took sea, and by Hengists
directions bended their course to the Southern shore of Sussex.

3. The order and success of this expedition is thus described by Henry of
Huntingdon: Huntingd. l. 2.
The great Saxon Commander Elle with his Sons and navy furnished with a strong
and well orderd army landed in Brittany at a place called Cymen-shore (from the
name of Ella's eldest Son:) And while the Saxons were landing from their ships,
the Britains raised a loud cry, at which a world of people repaired to them
from the places adjacent: And straight a combat began. The Saxons men of high
stature and courage received them politickly, and the Britains most
imprudently set upon their enemies, for coming in loose companies, one after
another, they were easily slain by the Saxons who kep'd themselves together in
close bodies. Thus the Britains which still came in to aid their countrymen,
were suddenly discouraged by the noise they heard of the defeat of the former.
They were all therefore putt to flight as far as the next wood called
Andredesbeige. And the Saxons possessed themselves of the coasts of Sussex
lying toward the Sea, every day by little and little enlarging their limits,
till the ninth year after their coming.

Id. ibid. A. D. 485.
4. In which ninth year whilst Ella and his sons boldly entered further into the
country: The Princes and Nobles of the Britains met in arms together at a
place called Mercredeburn, and fought against the Saxons. The Victory was
doubtful: for on both sides the Armies were much empaired and broken: So that
each of them retired back to their own quarters.

5. Matthew of Westminster adds that Ella with his Sons were forced to forsake
the field. So that perceiving that he had not strength enough to make good his
present conquests, much less to enlarge them, he sent into Germany for new
supplies: till the coming of which he lay still upon the defensive. But after
their arrival he courageously continued his progress in gaining more
territories, till he established a new Kingdom of the South Saxons in those
parts.

6. Whilst King Ambrosius employed his forces to repress the Saxons in these
Southern regions, A. D. 487.
Hengist having well fortified his Kindom of Kent, took a journey into the
Northern Provinces: where joining himself with the Picts and Scots, he took
many Cities and towns, before the Britains could oppose him: and for the
security of his new Conquests he built many Castles and strong holds: and
wheresoever he came he demolished all Churches. Of which King Ambrosius being
informed, he with great courage, as in Gods cause, marched after him: And,
says Richard white, whilst he passed on his journey, R. Vitus l 7.
beholding the towns laid wast, the lamentable ruins of Churches, and miseries
of the poor people, he could not refrain weeping: Whereupon by Vow he promised
Almighty God, that if he would grant him the Victory over the impious Saxons,
he would restore and rebuild all the Churches destroyed.

7. How his pious Vow was approved by God the success demonstrates, M. Westminster.
A. D. 487.
thus related by Matthew of Westminster: In the year of Grace four hundred
eighty seven Aurelius Ambrosius having gathered a great Army of Britains
resolved to provoke the Saxons to a combat. Marching therefore with his army to
the North, he found Hengist with his forces beyond Humber. Who being informed
of his approaching, boldly went to meet him, with an intention to set upon his
army unawares, in a field called Maisbely through which Ambrosius was to pass,
whom he hoped to find unprovided. But the British King had notice of his
design, which hindered him to march to the same field. At last the two Armies
meeting in good military order, a feirce battle was begun, and much blood shed
on both sides. But at last Hengist perceiving his army to give ground, and that
the Britains began to prevayle, he presently fled to a town called Caer-conan,
now Cuningbury. But considering the weakness of the town to resist, he knew his
only safety consisted in the swords and spears of his followers. Ambrosius
pursued him, and by the way putt to the sword all the Saxons he found. Thus
having obtaind the Victory, he with great zeal and devotion gave praise to the
God of heaven.

8. As for Hengist, A. D. 488. Camden. in Brigant.
he fortified his camp as well as he could near the said town: But after a few
days, says Camden, he was forced to come to a battle before his camp, which
was fatal to him and his: for the greatest part of his army was cut in
pieces, and himself, being taken prisoner, was beheaded by the Britains.

9. This battle, Florileg. A. D. 489.
says Florilegus, was fought on the banks of the River Don. And the manner how
Hengist was taken prisoner was this: The valiant Eldot Duke or Consul of
Gloucester (Claudiocestriae) had an earnest desire to cope with Hengist.
Therefore with the forces under his command furiously peircing through the
Enemies squadrons, he at last found him: and laying hold on the fore part of
his helmet, with main force he drew him in among his own troops: saying, God at
last has fullfilld my desire: It is he who has given us the Victory.
Presently after this the Saxons fled, every one his own way: whom Ambrosius
pursuing, manfully slew. Octa the Son of Hengist with the greatest numbers fled
to York: But Esca and not a few with him betook themselves to another City
called Aclud. After this Victory Ambrosius took the City Caer-conan, which he
entered triumphantly, staying there only three days.

10. The same Author consequently relates the manner how Hengist was sentenced
and executed after the fight. After the, A D. 488.
says he, Ambrosius calling his Captains together, commanded them to decree
what should become of Hengist. I^. (...)
Whereupon Eldad Bishop of Gloucester, who was also Brother of Eldot, imposed
silence on them all: and gnashing his teeth for rage, he thus said, Though all
here present had a desire to set him free, I my self would cut him in pieces.
Why do you delay, O effeminat Britains? Did not Samuel a Prophet having taken
the King of Amalec prisoner in a battle, cut him in pieces, one limme after
another, saying, As thou have made many Mothers childles, so will I make thy
mother childles this day? Do you therefore deal in the same manner with this
barbarous King, who is another Agag, and has deprived a world of British
Mothers of their children. When he had thus said, Eldad drew his sword, and
leading him out of the City cut off his head, sending his soul into hell.

11. If this relation be true, Eldad showed himself an unmercifull man, and one
who forgott the duty of a Christian Bishop, who ought rather to have mitigated
the rigor of other men's sentences, then to pronounce so cruel a judgment,
whilst others, who were soldiers too, held their peace. He therefore little
deserves the commendation given him by Pits for his piety and prudence, Pits in
(...).
which he ^ill expressed when gnashing his teeth for rage, he extorted a
Captive Kings death from an Assembly of soldiers. Id. ibid.
The Book of Invective Orations for which the same Author likewise reckons him
among the ancient British Writers, probably proceeding from the same spirit,
deserved rather to be forgotten, then recorded as in honor of our Ancestors.

12. After this so signal a Victory Ambrosius mindful of his Vow, called
together workmen, Floril^g. vbi supra.
Masons and Carpenters, and took care to repair the Houses of God which had
been destroyed: and placing in them Priests and other Clergymen, he reduced
the Divine service to the pristine order. And wheresoever he found any Idols or
Temples of false Gods, he defaced them utterly out of the memory of men. He was
studious to observe justice and peace especially to Ecclesiastical persons:
and conferred on them liberal revenews, enjoining them all to pray for the
Kingdom and state of Gods Church.

13. Hengist being thus dead, his Son Aesca succeeded him in the Kingdom of
Kent. He is called Oisc by S. Beda, Beda l. 2. c. 5.
who adds that from him the succeeding Kings of Kent were called Oiskings. As
for his other Son Otta, in the former narration of Florilegus said to have fled
to York, nothing can be found of him among the Ancient Writers. So that small
credit is to be given to what Modern Historians relate concerning him, that
King Ambrosius bestowed on him the Province of Galloway in Scotland: since in
those days that Province was not in the disposal of the Britains.

XII. CHAP. A. D. 490.

XII. CHAPTER



1.2. S. Brigit comes out of Ireland into Brittany, for Relics: and returns.

1. THE same year in which Hengist was slain the Holy Virgin S. Brigit came out
of Ireland into Brittany, A. D. 488.
as we find recorded in the Antiquities of Glastonbury, Antiquit. Glasten.
and her business was to obtain some Relics of her most dear and honored
Patron S. Patrick: for she had been his Disciple, and a great admirer of his
sanctity, which she zealously imitated. Being in Brittany, she passed some
years in a certain small Island near Glastonbury, where there was an Oratory
consecrated to the honor of S. Mary Magdalen: The Island was called Bekery, or
the Little Island. Afterward, having left behind her scripp, chain, bell, and
other vestments of her own weaving, which for the memory of her Sanctity are
there exposed, she returned into Ireland, where not long after she rested in
our Lord, and was buried in the City of Down.

2. This is that famous Virgin for her Sanctity and miracles venerated by Gods
Church on the first day of February: On which day we read in the Martyrologes
of Rome, Martyrolog. Romans etc. 1. Febr.
S. Beda and Ado these words, This day is celebrated the Memory of S. Brigid a
Virgin, who in testimony of her virginity having touched the Wood of an Altar,
it became presently green. Her death is frequently assigned by writers to the
eighteenth year of the following Century. Usher. Promord. 884. and 901.
But truer Chronology, says Bishop Usher, makes her to out live S. Patrick,
only thirty years,

XIII. CHAP. XIII. CHAPTER

1.2. etc. S. Sophias a British Martyr, and Bishop of Beneventum.

1. IN our English Martyrologe on the four and twentieth of January there is a
commemoration of a British Saint and Martyr called S. Sophias: A. D. 498.
Martyrolog. Anglic. 24. Ianvar.
whose death is assigned to the four hundred and ninetieth year of our Lord.

2. This S. Sophias was the Son of Guilleicus Prince of the Ordovices, or
Northwales. He undertook a Monastical Profession in a Monastery built by
himself in the same Province. It is written of him that he had such devotion to
our Lords Passion, that he made three pilgrimages to Jerusalem to visit the
marks and footsteps of it. He had likewise a great Veneration to Rome, and
those places which had been consecrated by the blood and Martyrdom of the two
Princes of the Apostles.

3. At his being there S. Felix, or his Predecessor S. Simplicius sat in the
Apostles Chair: By whom he was consecrated Bishop of Beneventum. Which See he
governed with prudence and Sanctity, till at last he was slain by an impious
Pagan whilst he was at the holy Altar celebrating the Mystery of our Redemption.

4. This Saint Sophias, was by another name called Cadocus, Sup. l. c.
being the same who gave advice to Saint Iltutus to forsake a secular life, as
has been already declared. And he is to be distinguished from another Saint
Cadocus, who was an Abbot: concerning whom we shall treat in the year of Grace
five hundred.

XIV. CHAPTER
XIV. CHAP.
1.2. etc. Of Saint Keyna daugher of Braganus Prince of Brecknock: and of her
Brothers and sisters.

4. etc. The Gests of S. Keyna.

1. NO less famous at the same time was the Holy British Virgin Saint Keyna,
whose death in our Martyrologe is likewise placed in the same year four hundred
and Ninety. Illustrious she was for her Birth, being the Daughter of Braganus
Prince of that Province in Wales which from him was afterward called
Brecknockshire: but more illustrious for her zeal to preserve her Chastity,
for which reason she was called in the British language Keynvayre, that is,
Keyna the Virgin*

Antiquit. Glaston.
2. This Prince Braganus, or Brachanus, the Father of Saint Keyna is said to
have had twelve sons and twelve daughters by his Lady called Marcella daughter
of Theodoric son of Tethphalt Prince of Garthmatrin, the same region called
afterward Brecnock. Their first born Son was Saint Canoc, of whom we shall
speak ere long, And their eldest daughter was Gladus who was mother of Cadocus
by Saint Gunley a Holy King of the Southern Britons. The second daughter was
Melaria the Mother of the Holy Archbishop Saint David. Thus writes Capgrave,
neither does he mention any other of their children besides S. Keyna.

Girald. Cambr. l. 1. c. 2. D. Povvel in Annotat. ad Girald.
3. But in Giraldus Cambrensis another daughter is commemorated called Saint
Almedha, of whom more will be said presently. And David Powel makes mention of
a fifth named Tydva^l, who was the wife of ^ongen the Son of Cadel Prince of
Powis-land; and mother of Brochma^l surnamed Scithroc, who slew Ethelfred King
of the Northumbers.

4. Concerning the Holy Virgin Saint Keyna we find this Narration in the
Author of her life extant in Capgrave: Capgrav. in. S. Keyna
She was of Royal blood being daughter of Braganus Prince of Brecknockshire.
When she came to ripe years, many Noble persons sought her in marriage. But she
utterly refused that state, having consecrated her virginity to our Lord by a
perpetual vow. For which cause she was afterward by the Britains called
Keyn-w^ri, that is, Keyna the Virgin.

5. At length she determined to forsake her country, and find out some desert
place where she might attend to Contemplation. Therefore directing her journey
beyond Severn, and there meeting with certain woody places, she made her
request to the Prince of that country that she might be permitted to serve God
in that solitude. His answer was that he was very willing to grant her request:
but that the place did so swarm with serpents, that neither men nor beasts
could inhabit in it. But she constantly replied, that her firm trust was in
the name and assistance of Almighty God, to drive all that poysonnous brood out
of that region.

6. Hereupon the place was granted to the Holy Virgin: who presently
prostrating her self in fervent prayer to God, obtaind of him to change all the
serpents and vipers there into stones. And to this day the stones in that
Region do resemble the windings of Serpents through all the feilds and
villages, as if they had been framed so by the hand of the engraver.

7. Our learned Camden in his diligent search after Antiquities seems to have
visited this country, being a part of Somersetshire, though he is willing to
disparage the miracle: His words are, On the western bank of Avon is seen the
town of Cainsham. Camden. in Somerset.
Some are of opinion that it was named so from Keyna a most holy British
Virgin who according to the credulous persuasion of former ages is believed to
have turned serpents into stones: because such like miracles of sporting nature
are there sometimes found in the Quarries. I my self saw a stone brought from
thence representing a serpent rolled up into a spire: The head of it stuck out
in the outward surface, and the end of the tail terminated in the Center.

8. But let us prosecute the life of this Holy Virgin. Capgrav. vbi supra.
Many years being spent by her in this solitary place, and the fame of her
Sanctity every where divulged, and many Oratories built by her, her Nephew
Saint Cadoc performing a pilgrimage to the Mount of Saint Micha^l, met there
with his blessed Aunt Saint Keyna: at whose sight he was replenished with great
joy. And being desirous to bring her back to her own country, the inhabitants
of that region would not permit him. But afterward by the admonition of an
Angel the holy Maid returned to the place of her Nativity: Where on the topp of
a hillock seated at the foot of a high mountain she made a little habitation
for her self: and by her prayers to God obtaind a spring there to flow out of
the earth: which by the merits of the Holy Virgin afforded health to diverse
infirmities.

9. But when the time of her consummation approached, one night she by the
revelation of the holy Ghost saw in a vision, as it were a fiery pillar, the
base whereof was fixed on her bed: Now her bed was the pavement strow'd over
with a few branches of trees. And in this Vision two Angels appeared to her:
One of which approaching respectfully to her, seemed to take off the sack
cloth with which she was covered, and instead thereof to putt on her a smock
of fine linen, and over that a tunick of purple, and last of all a mantell all
woven with gold. Which having done, he thus said to her. Prepare your self to
come with us, that we may lead you into your heavenly Fathers Kingdom. Hereupon
she wept with excess of joy and endeavoring to follow the Angels she awaked,
and found her body inflamed with a fever, so that she perceived her end was
near.

10. Therefore sending for her Nephew Saint Cadocus, she said to him: This is
the place above all others beloved by me: Here my memory shall be perpetuated.
This place I will often visit in spirit if it may be permitted me: And I am
assured it shall be permitted me, because our Lord has granted me this place
as a certain inheritance. The time will come when this place shall be inhabited
by a sinful people, which notwithstanding I will violently root out of this
seat. My Tomb shall lie a long time unknown: till the coming of other people
whom by my prayers I shall bring hither: them will I protect and defend, and in
this place shall the name of our Lord be blessed for ever.

11. After this, her soul being ready to depart out of her body, she saw
standing before her a troop of heavenly Angels, ready joyfully to receive her
soul, and to transport it without any fear or danger from her spiritual
Enemies. Which having told to those who stood by, her blessed soul was freed
from the prison of her body on the eighth day before the Ides of October, In
her dissolution her face smiled, and was all of a rosy color: and so sweet a
fragrancy proceeded from her Sacred Virgin-body, that those who were present
thought themselves in the joy of Paradise. S. Cadocus buried her in her own
Oratory, where for many years she had lead a most holy mortified life, very
acceptable to God.

XV. CHAP. XV. CHA.

1.2. Of S. Almedha sister to S Keyna: and strange things happening on her
solemnity.

3. Of her Brother Saint Canoc: and his wreath.

4. Of Saint Clitanc King of Brecknock: and Martyr.

1. TO the Gests of this Holy Virgin Saint K^yna we will here adjoyn what
remains in ancient Monuments concerning her sister Saint Almedha, (...) her
Brother Saint Canocus. Girald. Camb^^^ ^tm. l. 1. c ^.
There are, says Giraldus Cambrensis, dispersed through several Provinces of
Cambria many Churches illustrated by the names of the Children of Braganu^* Of
these there is one seated on the top of a certain hill in the region of
Brecknock, not far distant from the principal Castle of Aberhodni; which is
called the Church of Saint Almedha: who rejecting the marriage of an Earthly
Prince, and espousing her self to the Eternal King consummated her life by a
triumphant Martyrdom. The day of her solemnity is every year celebrated in the
same place the first of August: Whereto great numbers of devout people from far
distant parts use to assemble, and by the merits of that Holy Virgin receive
their desired health from diverse infirmities.

2. One especial thing usually happening on the solemnity of this Blessed
Virgin, seems to me very remarkable. For you may oftimes see there young men
and maids sometimes in the Church, sometimes in the Churchyard, and sometimes
whilst they are dancing in an even ground encompassing it, to fall down on a
sudden to the ground at first they lie quiet, as if they were rapt in an
Ecstasy: but presently after they will leap up, as if possessed with a frenzy,
and both with their hands and feet before the people they will represent
whatsoever servile works they unlawfully performed upon Feast-dayes of the
Church. One will walk as if he was holding the plow: another as if he were
driving the Oxen with a goad, and both of them in the mean time singing some
rude tune, as if to ease their toyle^ One will act the trade of a Shoemaker,
another of a tanner, a third of one that were spinning. Here you may see a maid
busily weaving, and expressing all the postures usual in that work. After all
which being brought with Offerings unto the Altar, you would be astonished to
see how suddenly they will return to their senses again. Hereby, through Gods
mercy, who rejoices rather in the conversion then destruction of Sinners, it is
certain that very many have been corrected and induced to observe the Holy
Feasts with great devotion.

3. As touching their Brother Saint Canoc, the fame of his Sanctity was most
eminent among the Silu^es. (...). Angl. 11. Feb^.
His name is consigned in our English Martyrologe on the eleaventh o^ February:
A. D. 491.
where likewise he is said to have flourished in all virtues about the year of
Christ four hundred ninety two. To him most probably is to be referd that which
is reported of the Wreath (Torques) of S. Canauc ( for so he calls him:) Which
the inhabitants of that country esteem to be a precious Relick and of
wonderful virtue: insomuch as when any one is to give a testimony by Oath, if
that Wreath be placed in fight, he dares not presume to commit perjury.

4. Our Martyrologe also among other Saints of this time commemorates the death
and Martyrdom of a King of Brecknock in Southwales called Clitanc or Clintanc,
Martyrol. Angl. 19. Aug
on the nineteeth day of August, in the year of Grace four hundred ni^^ty two.
Concerning whom we read in Capgrave that he was a Prince very observant of
peace and justice among his Subjects: and that in the end he became a Martyr
adorned with a celestial crown for his virtues and merits, Ap. Capgr. in
Clitanc.
and particularly his Chastity and purity from carnal delectations. For he was
murdered by treason of a certain impious wretch, whose name is perished with him
But to return to the public affairs of these times between the Britains and
Saxons.

XVI. CHAPTER
XVI. CHAP.
1.2.3. The erection of the Kingdom of the South Saxons.

4. Of the City Anderida.

5. Two Metropolitans constituted.

A. D. 491.
1. IN the year of Grace four hundred ninety one is placed by our best
Historians the beginning of the Kingdom of the South Saxons: which as it began
on a sudden and more timely then the rest, so was it likewise the first that
failed, and the last which embraced the Christian Faith. The manner how this
New Kingdom was erected is thus described by Henry of Huntingdon: Huntingd. l. 2
2. Then began, says he, the Kingdom of Sussex, which Ella a long time held,
and administered with great power. He had received great recruits out of
Germany, so that being confident of his forces, he in the third year after the
death of Hengist, the Roman Emperor Anastasius then reigning, laid siege to
the Strong City of Andredecester. Whereupon the Britains were gatherd
together in infinite numbers to raise this siege, and both day and night vexed
the besiegers with ambushes and incursions. But they nothing discouraged, gave
continual assaults on the City, and in every assault the Britains set on
their backs, showr^ng arrows and darts upon them. So that they were forced to
give over the assault, and turn their forces against them. But the Britains
being more nimble, quickly ran into the woods: A. D. 493.
and when the Saxons returned to the walls, they followed them at their bac'ks.

3. By this means the Saxons were a long time extremely harassed, and great
slaughters were made of them: Till at last they were compelled to divide their
Army into two parts, that whilst one was employed in expugning the City, the
other part might be in a readiness to fight with the Brittons from without. Than
indeed the besieged being weakened with famine, could no longer resist the
Saxons, by whom they were all consumed with the sword, so that not one escaped.
And moreover in revenge of the great losses sustained by the Saxons during this
Siege, they demolished the City utterly, so that it was never built again.
Only the marks of the place where a most Noble City had been seated, might be
seen by passengers.



4. The City here called Andredecester was by the Romans called Anderida.
Guido Pancirolus discoursing on the Officers subordinate to the Count of the
Saxon-shore in Brittany makes mention of a Provost of a company of soldiers
called Abulci at Anderida, no doubt placed in this City near the Sea, to
defend the Coasts from the Saxon Pirates. But when the Romans who maintained
these garrisons, had quitted the Island, the shores were left unguarded, and so
exposed to the invasions of the Germans. There now only remains a great forest,
called by the Saxons Andraedswald, and by the Britains Coid Andred, which
continues the name of Anderida, anciently seated near it, says Camden.

5. Martyrolog. Aug. 19. Ang.
About this time King Ambrosius is said to have come to the Mount of Ambri near
Caer-carec (Now called Salisbury) where Hengist had treacherously slaughtered
so many Princes: Capgrav. i^ Clita^ce.
for whom he intended to raise a famous Monument. There also he is said to have
constituted two Metropolitans, Saint Sampson at Yorck, and Saint Dubricius at
Caer-leon.

XVII. CHAP. XVII. CHAPTER

1.2.3. A Victory of the Britains at the Hill Badonicus: Where that hill was
seated.

4.5.6. Prince Arthur was in this Battle: he confides in the protection of our
B. Lady.

1. THE second year after the erection of this New Kingdom of the South Saxons,
A. D. 493.
was illustrious for a great Victory obtained by the Britains against the
Saxons at the Hill called Badonicus. Concerning which Saint Beda thus writes:
^eda l. 1. c. ^6.
The Britains conducted by their famous King Ambrosius take courage, and
provoking the Victorious Saxons to combat, by the Divine favor obtaind a
Victory over them. After which sometimes the Britains, sometimes the Saxons
got the upper hand, till the year forty four after their arrival in Brittany,
in which the Saxons were beseig'd on the Mountain called Badonicus, and a great
slaughter made of them. This passage Saint Beda transcribes out of our British
Historian Gildas, Gildas de Excid.
who in the end of it adds these words, This was the year of my Nativity.

Polyd. Virg. l. 3.
2. This Mountain is by Polydor Virgil interpreted to be Blackmore, through
which the River Tese (Athesis) runs, between Yorkshire and the Bishopric of
Durham: Where the Saxons were assembled, expecting great supplies out of
Germany: But being encompassed by the Britains, by whom also the Seacoasts
were strongly guarded, the Saxons pressed with want of provisions were forced
to come to a battle, in which they were with great slaughter putt to flight.

Huntingd. l. 2.
3. Henry of Huntingdon acknowledges ingenuously that he was utterly ignorant
where this Mountain Badonicus was seated. Camden in Somersetshire.
But Camden with very great probability makes the territory of the ancient
City of Bath in Somersetshire the Scene of this battle and victory* which
City says he is by Ptolomy called ((...)) Hott Waters, by Antoninus (Aquae
Solis) Waters of the Sun, by the Britains Caer-Badon, by Stephanus Badiza, in
Latin Bathonia, and at this day by us Bathe. This City about the forty fourth
year after the coming of the Saxons was by them beseig'd. But the Warlick
Prince Arthur coming upon them, they were forced to retire to the Mountain
Badonicus, where after a long and desperate fight they were overcom, and great
numbers of them slain. This seems to be that Mountain which is now called
Bannes^own, at the foot whereof is seated a little village called Bathestone,
where to this day are seen rampires and trenches the Marks of a Camp.

4. We are not yet so to ascribe this victory to Arthur, as to exclude
Ambrosius from his share, to who^ S. Beda principally ascribes it. Kinz
Ambrosius was the Conductour in chief of the British Army, under whom Arthur
his Nephew, being Son to his Brother Vther-pendragon, was a Captain and
principal Officer. Malmsbur. d^ Regib. l. 1.
For thus writes Malmsbur^ensis of the present British affairs, King Vortimer
being fatally taken away, the strength of the Britains withred away, and their
hopes were diminis'hd. And they had assuredly falln to ruin had not Ambrosius
succeeded, who alone remaind of the Roman stock, and after Vortigern was Monark
of the Kingdom. He by the assistance of the warlick Prince Arthur repressed the
haughty Saxons swelling with pride of their conquests.

Id. ib.
5. This is that Arthur, says the same Author, concerning whom the Britains
to this day report and write so many trifling fables. A Prince surely worthy to
be magnified by true History, and not to be made the subject of idle dreamers:
since he alone by his admirable courage sustained his declining country, and
incited the minds of the Britains broken with many calamities, to resume new
courage.

6. One particular concerning this Prince, is related by the same Historian,
and most pertinent to the design of our History. In the seige of the Mountain
Badonicus, Prince Arthur, ^d. ib.
considing in the protection of our Blessed Lady, whose Image he car^ed sowed
in his arms putt to flight and slew no fewer then nine hundred Saxons. And that
it was his custom afterward to make use of these Spiritual arms is confirmed
by other ancient Writers; For Henry of Huntingdon testifies that in a combat
near the Castle Guinnion the same Prince car^ed the image of the Blessed Mary
Virgin Mother of our Lord on his shoulders: Huntingd. l* 2
and that whole day, by the power of our Lord Jesus Christ and his holy Mother
Mary, the Saxons were putt to flight, (...). A. D. 524.
and great numbers of them per^s^nd. Flortiegus likewise says that Prince
Arthurs shield, in which was painted the Image of our Lady, whom he often
called to mind, was named Fridwen. Lastly the same Writer adds, that in a
certain battle Arthur drawing forth his sword Caliburn, Id. ib.
^^voked the name of the Blessed Virgin; and with great violence peircing into
the midst of the Enemies troops, at one blow slew whomsoever he touched with
it: Neither did he give over till he had slain eight hundred and forty of his
enemies with his sword alone.

XVIII. CHAP. XVIII. C.

1. The Apparition of S Michael on Mount Garganus.

2 3 etc. Of S Richard the first converted Saxon: His voyage into Italy: where
he is made Bishop of Andria* His Gests: He was present at the Consecration of
the Church built to S Michael.

1. ABout this time there was a wonderful Apparition of the glorious Archangel
S. Michael on the Mountain Garganus in Calabria, A. D. 493.
the Memory whereof is celebrated anniversarily by the Catholic Church on the
eighth of May. The commemoration whereof challenges a place in this History,
because a Holy Bish^p born in Brittany was present at the consecration of a
Church built by occasion of the said Apparition. The name of this Saint was
Richard, Bishop of Andria a City of the same Region.

2. His name shows him not to have been a Britain, though born in this Island.
For he was descended of Saxon parents, having been the first of that Nation
recorded in our Ecclesiastical Monuments to have been gained to Christ, not
long after their entrance into Brittany, before, an open hostility broke forth
between the Nations.

3. Concerning him we read thus in the Ecclesiastical Office of his Solemnity
in the Church of Andria: Offic. Ecclesia* And^ in ^est. S. Richardi.
Richard, by Nation an Englishman, was born in that Island of illustrious
parents in the year of Grace four hundred fifty five, at which time S. Leo the
first governed the Church, and Marcian the Roman Empire, when Ateila infested
Italy. He is here improperly called an Englishman: for though the Angli were at
that time in Brittany, and probably S. Richard was descended of a family of
that particular Nation, yet many years passed before the Island received from
them the appellation of England.

4. The said Office further prosecutes the Narration of the piety and innocence
expressed by this Saint even in his tender years: how a verse he was from
wantonness and luxury incident to that age, wholly giving himself to reading of
Holy Scripture, conversing with men of learning and virtue, etc. insomuch as he
gained not only fervent love from his parents, but veneration from his
companions and strangers.

5 But because the following wars, and especially the Idolatrous Rites of his
countrymen the Saxons, furious enemies of the Religion to which our Lord had
called him, were a hindrance to his free progress in piety, there we further
read how he was miraculously invited to forsake his country, and to depart ino
Italy: For thus it follows in the said Office, Ibid.
Whilst the Blessed S. Richard was assiduously intent on his devotions and
prayers to God, there appeared to him in sleep the glorious Apostle S. Peter,
commanding him in the name of Almighty God to take a journey into Apulia, and
there to preach the word of God to the Andrians: That he should not apprehend
the length of the way, or the threatenings of Infidels, because our Lord would
be present to assist him. Having said this, the Apostle vanished. And S.
Richard being awaked from sleep immediately rose, and casting himself before a
Crucifix gave humble thanks to God and S. Peter for this Visitation. The day
following he forsook his Brethren, who were persons of power and eminence, and
taking leave of his dearest friends, began his journey notwithstanding their
importunity to detain him. Being arrived at Rome, he addressed himself to the
Holy Pape Gelasius, and declared what commands had been in a Vision imposed on
him by the Holy Apostle; thereupon beseeching him that with his permission and
blessing, he might go to Andria, there to fullfull the Ministry enjoined him.
Gelasius hearing this did greatly rejoice, and observing the venerable aspect
of S. Richard, together with his gravity, ordained him Bishop of the Church of
Andria, and commanded him that whither soever he went, he should preach the
Gospel of Christ: and this done, kissing the holy man, he gave him his
bene^iction.

6. Through the whole course of his journey S. Richard accordingly preached the
word of God, Ibid.
and by many miracles and cures wrought on the sick converted many to the Faith
and worship of the true God: till at length he arrived at Andria. There before
the gate of the City he saw a blind man, and a woman bowd and contracted
together, both which begged an Alms of him. Whereupon he began to expound to
them the Word of God, etc. and perceiving the blind man to be devoutly
attentive to his speeches, he said to him: If thou will believe in Jesus Christ
and be baptized, thou shall receive thy sight. Who answered, I believe in Jesus
Christ whom thou preachest, and I beg that I may be baptized. As Soon as this
was said, the Holy man with his hands making the sign of the Cross upon the
blind man's eyes, he immediately recovered his sight, and casting away the staves
which had helped him in walking, he gave due thanks to God and to S. Richard,
by whom he had been enlightened. As for the woman, when she saw this miracle,
she likewise was converted: and S. Richard seeing her Faith, took her by the
hand, whereupon she presently rose up straight, and walking cried with a loud
voice, There is only one most high God, who by his good servant has made me
whole. At these clamours of the woman the greatest part of the City met
together, and attending to the Holy Bisphops preaching were in a short time
converted, God working many other Miracles by him: and having broken down all
their Idols, were baptized by him.

7. Not long after this there followed the foresaid Apparition of S. Michael to
the people of Sipont^, Ibid.
who commanded them to erect a Chapel there to his name: This they signified
to their Bishop Laurentius, and he to Pope Gelasius, desiring his advice, what
was to be done. His answer was, that such being the will of the Blessed
Archangel, a Church should forthwith be built. And that this should be executed
by the Holy Bishops, Laurentius of Siponto, Sabinus of Carnusium, Pelagius of
Salapia, Roger of Cannae, and Richard of Andria.

8. Then follows a Narration how the two Holy Bishops Roger of Cannae, and
Richard of Andria performed their journey to Siponto on foot with daily
fasting, toylsome labor, and incommodity from the burning heat of the Sun.
Which incommodity on their prayers was miraculously remedied by the flying of a
mighty Eagle over their heads, which shadowed them during all their journey to
Siponto. At their arrival they executed what had been enjoined them, as we
read in the public Office of the Church. To conclude, no more do we find
recorded of this Holy Bishop, but his holy and happy death, Martyrolog. Angl 9.
apt.
commemorated in our Martyrologe on the Ninth of April.

A. D. 494.

XIX. CHAPTER


XIX. CHAP.
1.2.3. The coming of Cerdic the Saxon, founder of the West Saxon Kingdom.

1. IN the year of Grace four hundred ninety four a third Noble German called
Cerdic arrived in Brittany. For having heard how by the valor of the Saxons
two Kingdoms had been there erected, he resolved to pretend likewise for a
share in the spoils; being a man of high spirits, and noble descent, as having
proceeded from the stock of Woden, one of the German Gods.

2. His coming is thus described by Henry of Huntingdon: In the forty seventh
year after the first coming of the Angli, Huntingd. l. 2
Cerdic and his Son Cenric, attended with five ships, arrived in Brittany, and
landed at a place afterward called Cerdic-shore. The same day great multituds
of the Britains meeting, fought with them. The Saxons having ranged their
forces in order stood immovable before their ships. The Britains boldly set
on them, and then retired, but were not pursued by the enemy, who resolved not
to quit their place. Thus was continued the fight, the Britains sometimes
charging, and then retreating, till the nights darkness severed them. After
which the Britains having experience of the fei^cenes of these new-come
strangers, departed: so that neither side could boast of a Victory. Yet this
advantage the Saxons had, that they took possession of their enemies shore, and
by little and little enlarged their conquests along the Sea coasts.

3. Their landing was in the Province of the I^eus, comprehending Suffolk and
Norfolk: yet there they settled not. But marching through the Island, they came
into the Western parts, where in time they erected the New powerful Kingdom of
the West Saxons.

XX. CHAPTER
XX. CHAP.
1.2. etc. Pascentius a Son of K. Vortigern comes with forces into Brittany:
And contrives the murder of K. A. Ambrosius. But is slain by K. Other.

6. Other overcomes the Saxons.

1. THE Britains though they had seen their Island thus dismembered, and on all
sides oppressed by barbarous enemies, yet sustained a greater damage by civil
dissensions, raised by a Son of the late King Vortigern called Pascentius, who
in the end treacherously deprived them of their Noble King Ambrosius.

2. This Pascentius after the death of his Father Vortigern seeing the minds of
the Britains, A. D. 498.
out of hatred to his Father, inclined to Ambrosius, A. D. 496.
fled into Germany: where he remained several years endeavoring to gather
forces sufficient to place himself in the throne of his Ancestors. At length in
the year four hundred ninety six he came, says Florilegus, with a powerful
and well furnished Army, and landed in the Northern parts of the Island,
intending to revenge his own and his fathers injuries upon. Ambrosius. Who upon
news hereof gathered likewise an Army, and marched speedily to meet him.
Shortly they came to a battle: in which Pascentius was overcom and forced to
fly.

3. His refuge was into the country of the Scotts, A. D. 497.
where again recruiting his army, he returned to try his fortune once more
against the Britains. But hearing that Ambrosius lay sick in the City of
Winchester, he thought it best to work his revenge by treason, rather then open
force. Therefore by gifts and promises he hired a certain Saxon, called Eopa,
to fain himself a Physicion and a Britain, and by that means to attempt the
murder. Who under this feigned show, and with a pretense of great piety and
affection to the King being admitted, mingled poison in a potion administered to
him, of which Ambrosius presently dyed in the one and thirtieth year of his
reign.

4. But Pascentius did not long enjoy the fruit of his Treason: For
Vther-pendragon the Brother of Ambrosius, who during his Sickness was General
of the British forces, marching against Pascentius, in a battle slew him and
all his Captains that came along with him, over whom he obtained a signal
Victory.

5. The year following, A. D. 398. Florileg. hic.
says Florilegus, Other the Brother of the late King Ambrosius came with have
to Winchester, and calling an Assembly of the people and Clergy of the Kingdom,
took on him the Crown of Brittany, which is said to have been set on his head
by the Holy Bishop Dubritius. And calling to mind how the year before a Comet
had appeared of a wonderful magnitude, darting forth only one beam, at the
end whereof was seen a globe of fire shaped like a dragon, out of whose mouth
proceeded two beams, one reaching to Gaul, and the other shooting toward
Ireland, which ended in seven lesser beams: For this reason he commanded two
Dragons to be made of gold like to that which had appeared: One of them he gave
in oblation to the Church of Winchester: the other he carried with him, placing
it in every combat in his Ensign: And from that time he was called in the
British language Vther-pendragon. And hence it is that to this day our Kings
in their warlick expeditions carry the like Ensign.

6. But Other had no sooner put on his crown, but he was forced to exchange it
for a Head-peice: Id ibid.
for as the same Author relates, Eska the Successor of Hengist and his Son
Octa attended with a mighty army of Saxons invaded the Northern Provinces of
Brittany, A. D. 500.
and destroyed all the Munitions between Albany and York. At last when they
attempted the seige of a City called Alcluid, Vther-pendragon came upon them
with all the strength of the country, and entered battle against them. The
Saxons manfully resisted, and in the end compelled the Britains to fly as far
as to a mountain called Danet, which they seized upon, as a place of refuge,
being so dismayed, that they scarce knew what they did. But at last they
resolved upon a prudent exploit, which was to set courageously upon the
enemies by night. This design they executed prosperously. For the Saxons being
thus unexpectedly invaded, scarce rendered any combat at all, but were utterly
routed: and Octa and Eska were taken prisoners, whom the King carried with him
to London, where he caused them to be kept safe.

7. That which follows in Florilegus touching King Vthers love to Igerna wife
to Gorlo Duke of Cornwall, on whom he is said to have begott Arthur, with many
other Fables repugnant to all order of time, are not worth the exscribing: In
the narration of the Gests of Arthur we shall follow William of Malmsbury, a
far more authentic Guide then Geffrey of Monmouth. By him we are informed that
Arthur at this time was of a full ripe age, and by his assistance King
Ambrosius had repressed the Saxons.

XXI. CHAPTER
XXI. CHAP.
1.2. etc Of S. Gunleus, a British Prince and Hermit: and of his Son S.
Cadoc, and his Tutour S. Tathai.

9. Of S. Dogmael: and S. Bernach, British Saints.

10. Of S. Finguar, an Irish Saint in Cornwall.

1. THE year of Grace five hundred is in our Ecclesiastical monuments marked
with the death of S. Cadoc, not the Martyr surnamed Sophias, but the holy
Abbot, Son of Gunlaeus Prince of the Southern Britains, and of Gladus, or
Gundalus a daughter of Braghan who gave the name to the Province of Brecknock
of whom we have already treated.

2. His Father Gunleus by divine vocation, growing weary of the world, Capgrav.
in vit. S. ^^loci.
built a Church, says Capgrave, where he began to live in great abstinence and
purity of conversation. His clothing was sackcloth, his diet barley bread
mingled with ashes, and his drink water. He usually rose at midnight, and to
abate carnal desires, cast himself into cold water. He received nothing from
any, but sustained himself with the Labor of his hands.

3. This retirement of his Father begun during the childhood of S. Cadoc: who
when he came to years of understanding, chose rather to imitate his Fathers
devotion, then enjoying his Principality to be exposed to the tentations and
vicissitudes of the world.

4. He had for his Master and directour in the way of Piety a learned and holy
man, famous in that age, called Tathai, who lived a solitary life in all
austerity among the mountains in Southwales, till he was invited by Caradoc
Prince of that Province to live coenobitically, and to institure young men in
learning and piety, at a City called Venta Silurum in the Province of Monmouth:
Which Region, Camden. in Monumo^h.
says Camden, from that City Venta was by the Britains called Guent: And as
we read in the life of Tathai a British Saint, it was as an Academy,
dedicated to the studies of litterature, over which was President the said
Tathai, invited from his solitude to that employment by King Caradoc the Son of
Inirius. This Office Tathai executed with great commendation, and there built a
Church.

5. Under so worthy a Master S. Cadoc made wonderful progress in virtue and
piety: and himself became a Guide in a spiritual life and Father of Monks. For
which purpose he also built a Monastery, which was called Lancarvan, from an
admirable accident in the building of it, in which (says Harpsfeild) he
employed will Hearts, Harp^f. c. ^7. in 6. (...)
which became familiar, obedient and serviceable to him.

6. Thus both the Father and Son contemning the world, lived in it to God only,
and dyed happily, And as touching the death of S. Gunlaeus the Father, we read
thus in Capgrave: When the end of his days approch'd, Capgrav. in S. (...):.
he sent to S. Dubricius who had been Bishop of Landaff, (but now had
translated the Bishopric to another place) and to his Son Cadoc, desiring the
charity of a visit from them. Who came and comforted him: and after he had
received the Holy Communion for a Viaticum and defense of his soul, he
departed to our Lord the fourth day before the Calends of April. He was
honorably buried: and at his sepulcher Angels were often seen. Sick persons of
all infirmities coming thither, and imploring his intercession, were healed,
and glorified God in his Saint. The day of his consummation is celebrated in
our Martyrologe on the twenty ninth of March. Martyrol. Angl. 19. Mart. ^bid.


7. Concerning his Son S. Cadocus, it is further related there, That he daily
sustained a hundred Ecclesiastical persons, as many Widows, and as many other
poor people, besides strangers which frequently visited him. For though he was
an Abbot, and had many Monks under his Government, yet he reserved a portion of
his Fathers Principality, to be charitably distributed to such as had need. Now
we are not to judge that hereby this Holy Abbot did trangresse a Monastical
Profession, which forbids Propriety in temporal goods: for in the distribution
of them he only exercised a pious Procuration, as he did in other Goods of his
Monastery.

A. D. 501.
8. He dyed with a great opinion of Sanctity in the Province of the Ordovices,
and there was held in high veneration among the Britains. Harpsf. vbi sup. ^
For Harps^eild testifies that a Church was erected to his honor among the
Danmonij: at a place called Corinia which to this day conserves his memory. The
year wherein he dyed is uncertain: But since S. Dubritius is recorded to have
been present at it, it could not happen so late as Harpsfeild places it. In ^he
ancient English Martyrologe he is commemorated on the four and twentieth of
February. Martyrolog. Anglic. 24. Febr.


9. In the same Martyrologe are recorded the names of other British Saints who
dyed about the year of Grace five hundred: Among the rest is named S. Dogmael,
called also by the Britains, S. Tegwel, illustrious for his great virtues, his
Sanctity and Miracles. A famous Abbey in Penbrockshire took its name from him
His memory is celebrated on the four-teenth of June. Ib. 14. Iun.
There likewise on the seventh of the Ides of April is a commemoration of S.
Bernach Abbot, Ib.
a man of admirable San^^ity: Who in devotion made a journey to Rome, and from
thence returning into Brittany, filled all places with the fame of his piety
and miracles.

10. The same year likewise a famous Irish Saint and Martyr, called S. Finguar
is recorded to have dyed. He was the Son of Cli^on a Prince in Ireland: Who to
enjoy a commodious vacancy for contemplation, is said to have retired into
Cornwall, where together with many others he was slain by Theodorick a Prince
of that Country. His life is found written by S. Anselm Archbishop of
Canterbury.

XXIII. C.
XXIII. CHAP.
1. Aesca King of Kent, escapes out of prison

2. New forces arrive from Germany to Cerdic at Portsmouth.

3. The Scottish Kingdom of Albania erected.

1. Aesca the Son of Hengist who had been taken prisoner by Vther-pendragon,
was confind at London: Who yet shortly after escaped out of prison, and
returned to his kingdom of Kent: Where being not like his Father, of a stirring
spirit, he contented himself with what his Father had conquered, enjoying
quietly the fruits of his labors.

2. As for Cerdicius who landed in Northfolk, after some years stay in those
parts, he in the year five hundred sought a more commodious Seat in the Western
parts of Brittany. And being with his present forces unable to establish a
kingdom there, he sent into Germany for new supplies: A. D. 50^
so the year following there arrived a German captain called Port, A D. 58.
Westmonast. hic.
with his two sons Bleda and Magla in two great ships furnished with soldiers
who landed at a haven from him called Portsmouth, though Ptolomy affirms that
the ancient Name of it, was ((...)) the Great haven or port. Thus writes Matthew
of Westminster. And Henry of Huntingdon adds, Huntingd. l. 2
that this happened in the seventh year after Cerdicius his first coming.
Moreover that upon his landing, a great clamor filled the whole Province:
Insomuch as the British Governor and the whole multitude with great boldness,
but without order set upon the Saxons, and were presently dispersed by them.

3. This year likewise whilst the Saxons daily made a progress in the Southern
and more fertile Provinces of Brittany, the Scotts in the North laid a
foundation of their New kingdom at the foot of the Mountain Grampius, which was
called the Kingdom of Albany. ^p Vsser. in f. 6^0. am en. in Scot.
For so we read in the Annals of Tigernac an^ is Writer, cited by Bishop Usher,
where it is said, that Fergus the Son of Eric, with a Nation called Dalraids
(or Dalreudins) possessed themselves of a part of Brittany. And Camden likewise
writes, That Fergus the Son of Eric of the seed of Chonare was the first who
took on him the Title of King of Albany from Brun Albain to the Irish Sea. And
the following Kings of the Seed of Fergus to Alpin the Son of Eochal raign'^ in
Brun Albain. This Nation, says S. Beda, were called Dalreudini, from Reuda,
under whose conduct they first came out of Ireland.

XXIV. CHAP. XXIV. C.

1 2. etc Of S. Petroc: His Gests: And of S Coemgen.

8.9 Translation of the Relics of S. Petroc of S. Meven.

1. AS from Ireland many Holy men sought a retreat for their devotions in
Brittany: Vsser* in Indic. ^hron. ad A. D. 505.
so there were not wanting some who from the same motives were induced,
especially in these tumultuous times, to retire out of Brittany into Ireland.
Among which Bishop Usher exemplifies in S. Petroc, who being a stranger born in
Brittany lived in Ireland, where there was recommended to his care and
instruction a youth of seven years old called Co^mgen or Kegnius; to be by him
educated in learning and piety. Which Coemgen was afterward Abbot of Glindelac.

2. S, Petroc was by Nation a Cambrian ( not a Cimbrian, as by mistake is set
down in the Gallican Martyrologe.) He was born of Princely parentage in Wales:
and says the author of his life in Capgrave, from his infancy he did so well
imitate the Faith and virtues of Saint Peter the Prince of the Apostles, that
his name may seem to have been given him by Divine inspiration, A. D. 505.
as if God had destined him also to be a Rock (Petra) upon which Truth would
build the Church of Brittany. When the Prince his Father was dead, the Nobles
of the Country with the consent of the whole people were desirous he should
succeed in the Royalty. But he neglecting worldly pomp, assumed with him sixty
companions and with them entered into a Monastery, there undertaking a
Monastical Profession. After some years spent there, he went into Ireland,
where for the space of twenty years he addicted himself to the studies of
litterature and the holy Scriptures ( There and then it was that the foresaid
S. Coemgen was recommended by his parents to be instructed by him.)

3. Having in this space, Ap. Vss^r. f 564.
says Leland, heaped a great treasure of learning under the most perfect
Teachers of that Island, he returned into Brittany, and in the Province of
Corinia, or Cornwall intended to employ for the benefit of others also that
treasure. And to show that he had not all this while forgotten, much less
deserted his R^ligious profession, he built there a Monastery, not many miles
distant from the Severn shore near a town in those days called Loderic, and
Laffenac, and afterward from his name Petrocstow, at this day more
contractedly Padstow.

4. At this time the Saxons under Cerdic had possessed themselves of that
Province: And hence it is that the Narration of his gests follows thus in
Capgrave: As Soon as S. Petroc with his Disciplis had left their ship and were
landed there, Ca^grav. in P^roco.
certain Reapers then at work spoke rudely and bitterly to them: and among
other contumelious speeches required them that their conductour S. Petroc
should for the asswaging of their thirst cause a spring of fresh water to issue
out of a rock there adjoining. This they said either in derision of them being
strangers, or for a trial whether their sanctity was answerable to their
Profession. Hereupon S. Petroc, who never refused those that asked any thing in
his power, addressed his prayers to our Merciful Lord, and with his staff
smiting the rock, immediately there gushed forth a spring of clear sweet water,
which flows there to this day.

5. Those barbarous Pagans, utterly ignorant of Christian Religion, were
astonished at this Miracle. And when the Holy servant of God asked them whether
there were in that Province any one who professed the Christian Faith, they
directed him to a certain Holy man called Samson, concerning whom they
acquainted him, that he lead a solitary life, and exercised himself in
corporal labors, fasting, watching and Prayers: and that he sustained life
with no other thing but a small portion daily of barley bread. This it that
Samson who first succeeded S. David in the Sea of Mersevia, and afterward was
Bishop of Dole in Lesser Brittany: concerning whom we shall treat in due place.

Vsser ^. Int. Chronol. ad A. D. 542.
6. After thirty years abode in this solitude, in which he is said to have
instructed Credan, Medan and Dachant three of his principal Disciples
illustrious for their learning and piety, he left his Monastery of Lodoric, and
undertook a foreign pilgrimage, visiting Rome, and after that Jerusalem: From
whence he is said to have proceeded as far as India, and to have spent seven
years in the exercises of a contemplative life in a certain unknown Island of
the Eastern Ocean. From which tedious voyage he at last returned home: and with
twelve companions retired himself into a dry and barren solitude. The Prince of
that part of Cornwall was called Tendur, a man of a feirce and savage nature.

7. His death in our Ecclesiastical monuments is referred to the year of Grace
five hundred sixty four: And he was buried in the place now called Petrocstow
or Padstow. In which town anciently was placed an Episcopal See: which was
afterward translated to another town called Bodmin. The reason whereof seems to
have been because the Body of S. Petroc which had first been simply and meanly
buried at Padstow, was afterward transferred and honorably reposed at Bodnun.
To which purpose we find this passage in Matthew of Westminster, W. (...) 4.^.
905. Vss^r (...) Ha^pis^.c 27 (...)
The Bishops of Cornwall had their See at S. Petroc's of Bodmin (apud Sanctum
Petrocum de Bodmini) for so the words are to be corrected, says Bishop V^her
And the same place was meant by Harpsfeild thus writing: The Monument of S.
Petroc is in the City Bosuenna, the most noted town of Merchandise (Emporium)
of Cornwall.

8. But the Relics of S. Petroc did not always rest at Bodmin: for from thence
they were stolln, conveyed over sea into Lesser Brittany, and reverently placed
in the Monastery of S. Meven: but in the time of King Henry the second
restored. Thus writes Roger Hoveden: Martin a Canon Regular of the Church of
Bodmin by stealth took away the Body of S. Petroc, H^v^d A. (...)
and fled with it into Brittany to the Abbey of S. Meven. Which theft having
been discovered, Roger Priour of that Cathedral Church with the more ancient
Canons of the Chapter addressed themselves to King Henry the Father, (for at
that time he had made his son likewise King:) And from him they obtained a
strict command to the Abbot and Convent of Saint Meven that without delay they
should restore to Roger Priour of Bodmin the said Body of S. Petroc: Which if
they refused, the King gave order to Roland of Dinant the Governor of Brittany
to take away the sacred Body by force, and give it to the said Roger. As Soon as
the Abbot and Monks of S. Meven heard of these things, to prevent any damage
to their Church, they restored the said Body entire and without any diminution
to the foresaid Priour swearing withal upon the Holy Gospels and upon the
Relics of certain Saints there, that it was the very same Body, unchanged and
unempair'd.

9. The reason why the Convent of S. Meven in lesser Brittany were so desirous
of the Relics of S. Petroc, was because S. Meven himself the Patron of that
Monastery was born in our Brittany, A. D. 508.
as many other Saints besides from hence had fled thither, and were with great
veneration honored in the territory of S. Malo. Where likewise Iudicael Prince
of the Armorici ( or Lesser Brittany) who was descended from our Brittany,
built the said Monastery.

XXV. CHAPTER
XXV. CHAP.
1.2. etc. The battle between the Saxons and Britains: and death of King
Vtherpendragon, or Natanleod.

A D. 508.
1. THE five hundred and eighth year of our Lord was fatal to the Britains by
the death of their valiant King, slain in a battle against the West Saxons.
For thus writes the Noble Historian Ethelwerd, In the seventh year afteir
their arrival, Cerdic and his son Cenric slew Natan-leod King of the
Britains, and with him five thousand of his soldiers.

2. Matthew of Westminster relates the same somewhat more expressly, M. Westminster. A.
D. 508.
and withal signifies who this Natan-leod was: for thus he writer, In the year
of Grace five hundred and eight Cerdic and Kenric provoked the Britains to a
battle. At that time Other King of the Britains was sick in such extremity
that he could not turn himself from one side to another in his bed. Wherefore he
ordained Nathanlioth to be General of the British Army. Hence we may observe
that Natanleod whom Ethelwerd calls King of the Britains ( and Henry of
Huntingdon the great King ( maximum Regem) is by Matthew of Westminster styled a
General only, in the present exigency set over the Army.

3. In this uncertainty it seems most reasonable to prefer the authority of
Ethelwerd, a more ancient Historian, who lived near these times, before that of
Matthew of Westminster, grounded probably on the partiality of former British
Writers, who were loath that posterity should know that their valiant King was
slain by the Saxons, and therefore make him to overlive this battle eight
years, and then to have dyed by poison.

4. The Conjecture therefore of the learned Bishop Usher deserves to be
subscribed unto, who conceives this Natanleod to be no other then
Vther-pendragon: For thus he frames his discourse upon this subject: If in
clearing the perplexed accounts of these ancient times, Vsser in Primord. f.
466.
it may be permitted us to give our conjecture, since this Natanleod is by
Fabius, Ethelwerd, Florentius of Worcester and all the Saxon Annals styled a
King, it deserves to be considered whether any other can be meant here besides
the then King of the Britains Other: whose proper British name was Natanleod,
but afterward for his valiant exploits obtained the surname Other, which in the
British tongue signifies, terrible or admirable. In like manner in the
Annotations added to Niniu^ we read concerning his Son and successor Arthur
that he was called Mab-Vther, which signifies the son of the terrible Prince,
because from his childhood he was feirce and cruel. And the name Arthur being
out of the British language interpreted, imports a terrible Bear, or, an iron
mall, the which breaks the Lions jaws.

5. And herewith well agrees the narration given by Henry of Huntingdom of this
great battle: Huntingd. l. 2
which he thus describes: I am now to relate the battle sought by Nazaleod (so
he calls Natanleod) the greatest King of the Britains against Certic and
Cinric his son, in the sixtieth year after the first coming of the Saxons.
Nazaleod was a Prince of great fame, and withal of great pride: from whom that
Province was called Nazaleoli, which afterward had the name of Certichs-ford.
Nazaleod then gatherd an Army out of all Brittany: and Certic with his Son to
enable themselves to encounter him had in so great danger obtained aid from
Esca King of Kent, and Ella the potent King of the South Saxons, as likewise
from Port and his Son lately arrived: all which forces they divided into two
main bodies, one of which was lead by Certic, and the other by his son Cinric.

6. When the Armies were joined in battle, King Nazaleod perceiving that the
right wing of the Enemies army conducted by Certic was much stronger then the
other, he turned all his forces against it, conceiving it safest to destroy
that which was strongest. He set upon them therefore with such violence, that
he broke quite through them, threw down their Ensigns, forced Certic to fly,
and made a great slaughter of his army: all which was done in a very short
time. But Cinri^ who conducted the left wing, seeing his Fathers army routed,
rushed vehemently on the backs of the Britains whilst they pursued their
enemies flying. By this means the combat became furious, insomuch as King
Nazaleod was slain, and the Britains forced to fly, of whom there fell five
thousand: the rest saving themselves with their swiftnes. Thus the Saxons
obtained a great victory: so that for some years they were not disturbed by the
Britains: And moreover great multitudes of valiant soldiers came out of
Germany to join with them.

7. This famous battle, as it were by agreement, fought between the entire
forces of all the Saxons and Britains for the Mastery, had utterly ruined the
British state, had Natanleod or Vther-pendragon left behind him a Successor
of a courage less Heroical then his Son the famous King Arthur was: whose
glorious Exploits we shall successively relate. The place of this combat was in
the Province of the Belgae, now called Hampshire.

THE ELEAVENTH BOOK OF THE CHVRCH-HISTORY OF BRITTANY UNDER BRITISH KINGS.
I. CHAP.
I. CHAPTER.
1.2. etc. British fables of K. Arthur.

1. BEING to treat of the Successor of Nantaleod, or Vtherpendragon, such
mists are raised by the Writers of those times, A. D. 508.
such diversity of conjectures are found in succeeding Historians concerning
not the Gests only, but even the person of King Arthur, that I find my self
unable to deliver any thing touching him which may satisfy my self, much less
an intelligent and wary Reader. Now this difficulty and perplexity proceeds not
for want, but excess of matter recorded of him, but recorded by Writers so
impudently addicted to lying, and moved thereto out of a desire to perpetuate
his fame, that they have almost extinguished his memory, and obliged posterity
to consider him as a mere phantosime, created by the brainsick imaginations of
ignorant British Bards, who endeavored to recreate the minds of their
miserable countrymen with singing the exploits of their famous Ancestors, not
considering that those very Songs cast a lasting blot upon the Hearers, showing
the Britains of those times to have been of so mean and lost spirits, that
being conducted by such Heroes, they were yet unable to resist their Enemies.

2. That there was such a Prince as Arthur, cannot reasonably be questioned, as
neither that in defense of his country he became illustrious by many victories
against the Saxons: But as touching his Exploits pretended to be performed by
him out of Brittany, his conquering of Provinces and Kingdoms abroad, his Round
Table, and feigned Knights belonging to it, these and the like impossible
fables we leave to the dreaming Bards the inventours, and their credulous
believers the ignorant Britains.

3. But that this Arthur was not successor of Other, Malbranc. in Morin. l. ^.
c. 36.
a learned French Antiquary Malbranc confidently enough affirms, and from a
wrong transcribed passage of Gildas, will needs confound him with Aurelius
Ambrosius, whose Father, not Brother, according to him was Vther-pendragon.

4. Notwithstanding the consent of our ancient Historians, and those the most
prudent and faithful in their Narrations putts it out of question that Arthur
was the Son of Other, A. D. 508.
and Nephew of Ambrosius, and that after the death of his Father slain by the
Weste Saxons he succeeded his Father in the Throne of Brittany.

5. As touching his Birth and descent, some Writers report that his Father
Other falling in love with the Wife of Gorlois Duke of Cornwall called Igerna,
and by flatteries and subtilty having gaind her affection, for say they, by
Merlins Magical skill he was transformed into the shape of her husband, of her
he begot Arthur. But his virtues, piety and courage, wonderfully prosper'd by
Almighty God, are strong proofs that his birth was not so infamous.

6. A more sober account is given of him in the Antiquities of Glastonbury
written by John a Monk and Adam of Domerham, where we read this passage,
Vther-Pendragon the Brother of Ambrosius dying by poison in the tenth year
after the coming of Cerdic the West Saxon, Antiq. Gl^st.
his Son Arthur, a youth of fifteen years began to rule over the Britains. His
Mothers name was Igerna, and he was born in a Castle of Cornwall called
Tintagel. In which Narration we find no aspersion cast on his Birth: Though it
be not very credibile which follows in the same Antiquities that by his Mother
he was descended from a Nephew of Saint Joseph of Arimathea called He^anis. And
whereas he is savd to be no more then fifteen years of age when his Father
dyed, that suits not with what was before related from Malmsburiensis, That
Ambrosius repressed the insolence of the Saxons by the courageous exploits of
Warlick Prince Arthur. So that he could be no less then twenty years old at
the year of Grace four hundred ninety three: By which account since generally
our Writers assign twenty six years to his Reign, and agree that he dyed in the
year five hundred forty two, his death will happen when he was seaventy years
old.

II. CHAP.
II. CHAP.
1.2.3. Prince Arthur fights against the Picts: and kills Huel.

1. ARthur was not present in the Army when his Father Other was slain: For at
the same time he had employment enough to oppose the irruptions of the Picts in
the Northern parts of Brittany. And for this reason probably it is that in the
Annals of the Saxons there is no mention of him: the design of which Annals
being to relate the encounters between them and the Britains, and their own
almost uninterrupted conquests, they neglected the affairs intervening between
the Britains and Picts. A. D. 503.


2. Now at that time lived a King of the Picts, by some writers called Navu^,
by others Can, happy in a fruitful offspring, for he had four and twenty
children. Of which the Eldest was called Howel or Huel, a Prince of invincible
courage, who would by no means acknowledge any subjection to Brittany: into
which faction he drew all the rest of his Brethren, excepting only S. Gildas
sirnam'd Albanius, who was one of them, and bore a particular affection to
Prince Arthur.

3. The said Huel being of a restles spirit, Caradoc. in vit. S. Gilaae.
made frequent inroads into Brittany, as we read in the life of S. Gildas,
written by Caradoc a considerable British Historian: And so cruelly did he
wast the Country that the British King sent Prince Arthur with a numerous
Army, who began a most furious war against the bold young man: And after many
defeats given him, he never left pursuing him till at last compelling him to
fight in a certain Island called Mynau, he slew him.

III. CHAP. III. CHA.

1.2. etc. Of S. Gildas Albanius: and his Gests.

7.6. Melvas a British Prince steals away K. Arthurs wife.

1. HAving upon occasion of King Arthurs war against the Picts made mention of
S. Gildas Albanius, it will be seasonable in this place to relate briefly his
Gests, as we find them sprinkled in several ancient Monuments. We have
already signified that he is to be distinguished from another of that name,
called Gildas Sapiens, and Gildas Historicus, who was younger then he, though
contemporary to him, of whom we shall treat hereafter. Yet their agreement in
the same name, and in several good qualities has been the cause that in some
Writers they are confounded together, and the titles of Sapiens and Historicus
have been attributed also to this elder Saint Gildas, who likewise by the
testimony of Pits did write the life and Gests of S. German and S. Lupus, and
also a History of the British Kings, and other Treatises besides, which are
now lost.

2. This Elder S. Gildas, Capgr^v. in S. Gild.
as we read in his life conserved by Capgrave, was the Son of Can King of
Albania. In his childhood being of an excellent disposition, he was carefully
instructed in litterature, wherein he proffited wonderfully. Afterward he was
sent into Gaul, that there having greater advantages for increasing in
knowledge, he might attain to higher perfection. There he abode seven years,
after which he returned into Brittany, furnished not only with ^earning, A. D.
510.
but abundance of Books also, a ^^re treasure in his rude country. And the
report of his eminent learning being spread abroad, many flocked to him from
all quarters, to be instructed by him.

3. But he was more diligent to enrich himself with virtue and piety, then
knowledge: So that none could be found in all those regions comparable to him,
in assiduous prayers, mortifications, fasting and wearing sackcloth. He
wholly abstaind from flesh, contenting himself with barley bread and herbs,
with which he mixed ashes to abate the pleasure which his taste might take in
his food: and his drink was pure water from the fountain. He would ordinarily
at midnight plunge himself in the river for mortification, and spend the rest
of the night in Prayer. By these austerities he became so lean, that he looked
as if he had been in a fever. Whatsoever was bestowed on him by rich men, he
presently distributed to the poor.

4. Being thus qualified his Charity drew him out of his own country into
Ireland, where the Gospel of Christ was not so well settled. There he spent
many years in instructing that Nation. But being informed that in the more
Northern parts of his own country Gentilism was generally professed, and those
few Christians which lived there were poisoned with many Heresies, he returned
thither. And being thoroughly furnished with the Spiritual Armor of God, he
demonstrated to the Pagans that the supposed Deities worshipped by them were
nothing but the inventions of impious men: and to the Heretics, that what they
believed was contrary to Divine Truth revealed to Gods Church. By these means
he brought the Pagans to destroy their Idols and profane Temples, to receive
Baptism, and erect Churches to the Honor of the true God: and the Heretics he
reduced into the bosom of the Catholic Church* Now to make his preaching more
effectual, our Lord gave him a plentiful Grace to heal the sick, to give
light to the blind, to cure the deaf, to cleanse the leaprous and such as were
possessed by the Devil, and to make the lame to walk, etc. Thus by his
preaching confirmed with frequent miracles the true Faith was spread through
all those Provinces, to the unexpressible joy of S. Gildas, who ceased not to
give thanks to our Lord for his infinite mercies to those poor people.

5. The Author of his life in Capgrave relates how after this he traveled to
Rome. But such a journey not suiting with his old age, it is more probable that
it was undertaken in his younger years when he lived in Gaul. Others write
more reasonably that after this employment he was invited by the Holy Abbot
Saint Cadocus to take care and preside over the Studies of many young Scholars
in the Academy of Lancar-van, where he continued only one year, A. D. 512.
leaving there, says Bishop Usher, (...) Chronolog. A. D. 5^8.
a Book of the four Evangelists transcribed by himself.

6. Saint Gildas having ended the year of his President-ship, A D. 509. Id.
^bid. C^radocan vita. S. Cado.
when his Scholars also retired from their studies, withdrew himself into a
certain Island; as the Holy Abbot Cadocus likewise did into another: the
Islands names were Ronech and Echni. Whilst Saint Gildas there attended to
Prayer and Mortification, certain Pirates from the Isles of Orkney robbed him of
his Vtensiles, and carried captive away those which attended him. For which
cause in great affliction he passed over to Glastonbury.

7. At this time Melvas a British Prince reigned in the Province of Somerset
(in Aestiva regione) called by the Britains Glad-arhaf. A. D. 510.
This Melvas had stolln away Guinivera, wife to King Arthur, concealing her in
the Isle of Glastonbury, esteemed most secure, both for the fenny situation and
Religion also of the place. Hereupon King Arthur assembled a mighty army out of
Cornwall and Devonshire. (Dibuenum) and encompassed the Island. The two Kings
being ready to a battle, the Abbot of Glastonbury, attended by S. Gildas and
all the Clergy came between the two Armies, and by persuasions induced Melvas
to restore Queen Guinevera to her husband. Which being performed, peace ensued,
and both the Kings bestowed great immunities and possessions on the Monastery.

8. After this Saint Gildas, with the Abbots permission, retired again to an
Eremitical solitude on the bank of the River Axus, near Glastonbury, where he
built a Church, consecrating it to the Blessed Trinity, and there spent his
time in Prayer, Fasting and other austerities. Whose Sanctity was so exemplar,
that many came from the farthest parts of Brittany to visit him, and take
Spiritual counsel from him.

9. Two years being thus devoutly employed, A. D. 512. Ap. C^^grav. in S. Gild.
he fell into a sickness (says John of Tinmouth) and knowing that his death
approached, he called to him the Abbot of Glastonbury, and requesied of him
that his body might be buried in the Church of his Monastery. To which the
Abbot readily condescended* So the Holy man dying on the fourth day before the
Calends of February, many saw an Angelical splendor about his Sacred Body,
which yielded a most pleasant odor. And after a solemn recommendation of his
soul with many tears of the Religious, his Sacred body was carried with great
honor to the Church, and there buried in the midst of the pavement of the
ancient Church, in the year of Grace five hundred and twelve,

10. What is here related, agrees to the Ancient Monuments also of Glastonbury,
where he is styled Historicus neque insulsus neque infacetus, for the causes
before declared. And most of these particulars of his life are confirmed by a
large Character given of him in the Gallican Martyrologe: Where is declared
that being during his childhood sent into France, he was recommended to the
instructions of S. Iltutus, Martyr. Gal. ^9. Ianu.
a Disciple of S. German of Paris (or rather of Auxerre.) And again that his
voyage into Ireland was to root out many heresies sprung up among the late
converted Christians, and to reform many vices and unlawful customs. Also that
the Heresy opposed by him in the most Northern parts of Brittany was that of
Pelagianism especially. But whereas it is there added, that in his old age he
went over into Lesser Brittany, and dyed there in the territory of Ruy, and was
honorably buried in the Church of Vannes: this contradicts generally our
British Authors. Most probable it is, that when the Saxons infested our
Western Provinces, his Sacred Relics were translated into Lesser Brittany, and
reposed in the Great Church of the City of Vannes, where he is to this day
venerated as Patron of that City.

11. There seems to be an Error in our English Martyrologe, which on the same
day with that of the Gallican* commemorats S. Gildas Confessor and Abbot of
Bangor in North Wales: whose Character exactly agrees with the same here
described: and therefore probably by mistake is confounded with this S. Gildas
Albanius. But whereas that pretended Gildas Abbot of Bangor is said to have
dyed in the year of our Lord five-hundred eighty and one, which is likewise
affirmed of the younger Gildas the Historian, surnamed Badonicus; this argues a
second error and confusion. The like whereof is found in the Author of S.
Gildas his life, late published out of ancient Manuscripts belonging to the
Monastery of Fleury in France, by Ioannes a Bosco.

12. To conclude, out of the same ancient Manuscripts we may collect the
precise Territory in which S. Gildas Albanius was born. For as they are quoted
by Bishop Usher, we there read this passage, Blessed S. Gildas was born in the
most fruitful Region called Arecluta. His Father was named Caun, a most Noble
and Catholic person. From his very childhood he desired with the whole
affection of his mind to follow Christ. Now this Region Arecluta being a part
of Brittany, took its name from a certain River named Clut, by which the
greatest part of it is watered. By which description it appears that the Region
dignified with the birth of S. Gildas is the same which is called Argyle
(Argathelia,) and that the River Clut is that which anciently was called Glotta
and Cluida, which Northward was the bound of the British Provinces under the
Roman Jurisdiction, beyond which lived the Caledonians, etc.

IV. CHAP. A. D. 515.

IV. CHAP.



1. New supplies of Saxons: their Victory over the Britains.

2.3. Ella King of the South Saxons dying: his Son Cissa Succeeds: the founder
of Chichester, etc.

1. IN the sixth year after the battle, wherein Nazaleod, A. D. 514. Huntingd.
l. 2
or Other, was slain, says Henry of Huntingdon, new supplies out of Germany
came to the Saxons in Brittany, for Stuff and Whitgar Nephews of Cerdic, with
three ships landed at Certic-shore. And very early in the morning the Britains
ranged their armies in very good order against them. The Sun then arising cast
its beams upon their armor, and reflecting thence partly from the mountains,
and partly from below in the valleys, struck a great terror into the Saxons.
But when they came to fight, the Britains were quickly put to flight, be cause
God despised them. By this victory the Saxons gained a great extent of land,
and Cerdic became terrible to them, insomuch as he marched whithersoever he
pleased without control.

2. The year following Ella King of the South Saxons dying, A. D. 515.
his Son Cissa succeeded. Ella whilst he lived, though his territories were
narrow, yet was for his courage esteemed the most potent of all the Saxon
Princes, insomuch as according to Huntingdon, he held in his power all the
rights of the Angli: Id. ib.
and their Princes, Nobles and Military officers had a dependence on him. But
this lasted no long time, for it was shortly after transferred on Cerdic the
West Saxon, whose Kingdom though not yet begun, yet the foundations of it were
laid by his last Victory.

3. Cissa the Son of Ella, being of a milder spirit, contented himself with
enjoying his own little Kingdom, without extending his power abroad. He
employed his time in exercises of peace, especially building and fortifying of
Cities. In two of which he left the memory and footsteps of his own name,
Chichester and Cisbury in the Province of Sussex. Concerning which Camden thus
writes, Camden. in ^ussex.
Chichester is a large City compassed with walls by Cissa the second Saxon
Prince of that Province, who succeeded his Father Ella. From this Cissa it
takes its name. So likewise did another town called Cisbury. Now this Cissa
together with his Father Ella and Brother Cimen, landed in a port of that
Province called therefore Cimenshore.

A. D. 514.

V. CHAP.


V. CHAP.
1.2. etc. S. Kentigern, his Birth, etc.

A. D. 514.
1. THE same year in which Cerdic obtained an illustrious Victory against the
Britains, was yet more signalized with the Birth of the famous British Bishop
Saint Kentigern. Whose Nativity, admirable for the strangenes of it, since it
is celebrated by many ancient Writers, must not here be omitted. This year is
assigned thereto by Bishop Usher in his Chronologicall Index, Usher in Iud.
Chronolog.
where his Mother is said to have been Thenis the daughter of Loath King of
Pict-land, and of Anna the daughter of Other Pendragon: Whence it follows that
he was Nephew to King Arthur by his Sister. It is not known who was his Father:
yet some suppose Eugenius the third of that name King of the Scotts.

2. John of Tinmouth an Ancient Historian cited by Capgrave thus relates his
original. Ap. Capgrav. in vita K^n^^gern.
A certain King in the Northern parts of Brittany, who was a Pagan, begot of
his wife a very beautiful daughter. She having frequently been a hearer of
Sermons preached by the servants of God, obtained the Grace to believe his
Truth, and renounce the worshipping of Idols. And though she had not yet been
purified with the Sacrament of Baptism, yet she was diligent in observing Gods
commandments with an humble and devout mind, being much addicted to prayer and
Almsgiving and other Duties of Ecclesiastical Discipline, as much as the fear
of incensing her Father would permit. She bore so great devotion to the
fruitful Virginity and integrity of the Blessed Virgin Mary, that moved with a
womanish presumption she begged of our Lord that she might in some measure
imitate her in her Conception and birth. At length as she thought she obtained
her desire, for she found her self with child. Now it is not to be conceived
that this happened without the embrace: of a man: notwithstanding who that man
was, or in what manner and when this was done, she often protested, and with
oaths confirmed it that she was utterly ignorant.

3. Her Father perceiving this, and not being able either by fair speeches or
threatenings to wrest from her who was the Father of the Child, for she
seriously protested that she had never suffered the unlawful embraces of any
man: hereupon in a great rage he determined to execute upon her the law
established by his ancestors, by which it was enacted that whatsoever young
maid should be with child by fornication in her fathers house should be thrown
down headlong from the top of a high mountain, and the person corrupting her,
should loose his head.

4. In conformity therefore to this Law the young woman was placed on the
highest point of a Mountain in that country called Dunpelder, from thence to
be thrown down and torn in pieces. A. D. 515
She therefore with deep sighs, looking up to heaven implored the mercy and
help of her Redeemer, holding up her hands and shedding many tears. After this
she was cast down: but by the fall was neither bruised, nor received the least
harm: but sliding down easily and slowly came safe to the bottom.

5. The Pagans who were present ascribed this deliverance (...) magical
enchantments of Christians, and therefore with the Kings consent they carried
her several miles into the Sea, and there left her destitute of all human help
in a small Boat made of leather and without any oars. But he who commands the
winds and the Sea was her Protector: for by his power the Boat was carried
straight to a far distant haven with greater swiftnes, then either rowers or
sails could have driven her. Being arrived there, the young Lady went out of
the Boat, and presently after in a place called Collenros her throws of
childbirth coming upon her, she without the assistance of a Midwife was safely
delivered of a Son. Now the place here called Colenros is probably the same
which Saint Beda calls Coludi, and Ptolomy Colania in the Province of Laudon.
So that Pits, from I know not what Author, erroneously makes the place of S.
Kentigern's birth to have been S. Asaph's in Flintshire, formerly called Elqua.
The ground of which Error seems to have been, because afterward he was Bishop
and built a Monastery there, from whence he is by the Centuriators of Magdeburg
called Elicius.

6. But whatsoever his Surname was, his proper name was given him by S.
Servanus: For thus it follows in Tinmouths narration: The next morning Saint
Servanus came to the place, Ibid.
and seeing the desolate Mother with her infant, he said in his countries
language, Mochohe, Mochohe, that is, my beloved child, my beloved child,
Blessed art thou who art come in the name of our Lord. He took them therefore
into his care, nourished and baptized them, calling the Mother Thanen, and the
child Kient^ern, that is, Chief Lord. The child being of a towardly disposition
proffited much in learning and virtue, and was beloved by S. Servanus beyond
all his companions, insomuch as usually he called him Munghu, which signifies
one dearly beloved. By which name to this day, Usher in Primord. f. 684.
says Bishop Usher, the Scots call S. Kentigern. Thus far the Nativity and
Name of this Holy man. After five and twenty years, when he was consecrated
Bishop of Glasco, more will be said of him.

A. D. 516.

VI. CHAP.


VI. CHAP.
1. King Arthur crowned.

2.3. Of the Isle of Berdesey.

4.5. etc. Twelve Victories gained by K. Arthur.

1. THE continual troubles caused by the Saxons through all the quarters of
Brittany, would not allow King Arthur to solemnise his Coronation till eight
years after his Fathers death. Which Ceremony was magnificently performed in
the year of Grace five hundred and sixteen in a general Assembly of the
Bishops and Nobles at the City Ca^r-leon. And S. Dubricius Bishop of that
City set the Crown on his head.

2. After this the said Holy Bishop being very aged retired into a certain
Island in Northwales called by Ptolomy, Edri, by Pliny, Adros, Camden. de
^ns^^is Brit. in Berdsey.
by the Britains, Enhly, and by the English, Berdsey. Which Island, says
Camden, was inhabited by so many Saints, that besides Dubricius and Merlin the
Caledonian, no fewer then twenty thousand holy men were buried there, as
ancient Records inform us.

3. Concerning this Island we read in the Life of Aelgar, says Bishop Usher,
that it was called by the Britains the Rome of Brittany, Vsser. in Primo^d. f.
527.
for the distance of it, the difficulty of the passage, likewise the Sanctity
and security of it: the Sanctity, since twenty thousand bodies of Saints are
there venerated as Martyrs: And the security, it being on all sides compassed
with the Sea. Whence appears the esteem that the Britains had then of Rome,
which argues that between them there was an agreement in Religion.

4. The Exploits of King Arthur after his Coronation are thus recorded by
Florilegus: At that time, Floril^g ad A. D. 516.
says he, the Saxons invited more of their Countrymen out of Germany: And
under the Conduct of Colgrin they subdued all that part reaches of Brittany
which from Humber (^^ Mar^ Cantanensium) to the Sea of Cathanes. Whereof as
soon as King Arthur was informed he marched with an Army toward York, which was
then held by the Saxons. Colgrin as soon as he heard of King Arthurs approach
met him with a great multitude near the River Duglus (in Lancashire) and coming
to a battle, Colgrin was put to flight, and was pursued by King Arthur to
York. Now Baldulph the Brother of Colgrin at the same time lay with some forces
toward the Sea, expecting the coming of the Saxons. He intended to make an
irruption by night upon King Arthurs Army. But the King being admonished hereof
by Spies, sent Cador Duke of Cornwall with six hundred horse and three thousand
foot to intercept the Saxons: Who setting on them unexpectedly, killed great
numbers of them, and compelled the rest to fly.

5. Whilst King Arthur diligently pursued the siege of York, A. D. 5^8.
there arrived the next year in the Northern parts a famous German Captain
called Cheldric with seven hundred boats, Id^m. ^^ A. D. 517.
who landed in Albania. The Britains therefore were afraid to encounter such
great multitudes. Whereupon King Arthur was compelled to leave the Siege of
York, and retired with his army to London. Where taking counsel of his
friends, he sent messengers into Lesser brittany to King Hoel to inform him of
the calamity of this Island. Now Hoel was Nephew of King Arthur by his sister.
Therefore hearing of his Uncles danger, he commanded a great Army to be
gathered, and with fifteen thousand men, having a prosperous wind, he landed
safely in the haven of Hamon: where with great honor and joy he was received
by King Arthur.

6. With these new forces encouraged he gaind the next year two famous
victories against the Saxons. Huntingd. l 2
The former, says Huntingdon, near the River called Bassas: The latter in the
wood of Chelidon. Both these battles were fought in Lincolnshire, near to the
chei^ City whereof Ninius places the wood called Cathcoit Calidon. Westmon. l.
^^.
And Matthew of Westminster writing of this second victory, says that the
Britains made near Lincoln a great slaughter of the Saxons, of whom no fewer
then six thousand were slain: And the remainders flying to the forest of
Caledon were pursued by King Arthur, who commanded the trees to be hewd down,
and laid athwart to hinder their escape: By which means the Saxons being
enclosed, and reduced to extreme famine, begged leave to depart the Kingdom,
leaving all their spoils behind them. By this Exploit of King Arthur the
Saxons were expelled out of the middle Provinces of Brittany: Whereas in the
Western parts they grew more powerful, insomuch as the year following
Cerdicius framed there an established Kingdom.

7. Those Historians who relate the Heroical Gests of King Arthur, to equal
him with Hercules, mention principally twelve great Battles fought, and as
many victories gaind by him upon the Saxons: Of which these two last are
accounted the sixth and seventh. It suffices as to my present design, though I
be not curiously exact in adhering to that computation, and assigning the
proper time and manner of each in order.

8. Another Victory, called by Huntingdon the eighth, though the year be not
mentioned, was gaind against those barbarous Enemies near the Castle called
Guinnion. Huntingd. l. ^.
In that battle King Arthur carried upon his shoulders the Image of the Blessed
Virgin Mother of God: and all that day by the virtue and power of our Lord
Jesus Christ and S. Mary his Mother the Saxons were compelled to fly, and
perished with a great slaughter. The succeeding exploits of this famous King
shall briefly follow in their due place.

A. D. 516.

VII. CHAPTER


VII. CHAP.
1.2. etc. Of Saints in Wales: of S Daniel Bishop of Bangor.

1. WHilst most of the Provinces of that part of Brittany afterward called
England, were thus miserably disquietted, the Western parts, since called
Wales, enjoyd great repose, and were illustrated by far more glorious Exploits
of great numbers of Saints who flourished there: Such were S. Dubricius, S.
Sampson, S. David, S. Thelian, S. Kined, S. Paternus, S. Daniel, S. Justinian.
etc. Some of these have been already mentioned, and more of their Gests will
follow.

2. As touching S. Daniel he is reported by Bishop Usher from Bale to have
instituted a College or Monastery of the Apostolic order for the sacred
Exercices of learned and pious men. Vsser. in Ind. Chronol. A. D. 516.
The place where this College was founded was in Arvonia the country of the
Venedati, not far from the streit where men pass into the Isle of Anglesey out
of Wales: which College he called the Port or Haven. And the time of this new
Erection was the year of our Lord five hundred and Sixteen. In the same place
not long after Malgo Conan built a City, which for the beauty of its situation
he called Bancor, or Bangor, where likewise was the seat of a Bishop, in which
this S. Daniel was the first who sat. So that it is a mistake in B. Godwin
affirming that before the times of the Normans there had been no Bishop there.

3. This City of Bangor was a place distinct from the famous Monastery of that
name, though Malmsburiensis confounds them together. True it is that in both
places there was a Monastery: But this was seated in the Province called
Arvonia, now Caernarvon upon the River Menai dividing it from Anglesey: Whereas
the other was in Flintshire. Again this Monastery was first erected by S.
Daniel; whereas the other was extant even in the infancy of Christianity under
King Lucius, as has been shown. In both of them there lived Monks, called by
Bale (Apostolici ordinis viri) men of the Order Apostolical, because in
imitation of the Apostles they practiced self-abnegation and a renouncing of
temporal possessions.

4. This Holy man Daniel, says Pits from Leland, was joynd with S. Dubricius
and David in confuting and condemning the Pelagian Heresy, for which purpose he
was present at the Synod of Brevi. He dyed in the same year of Grace five
hundred forty four in which the holy Bishop S. David dyed. And he was buried in
the Isle of Berdesey, called the Rome of Brittany, for the multitude of Saints
there living and buried* in which regard, says B. Usher, it is still in the
Welsh language called Yr ugain mil Saint. Martyrol. Augl. 10. December.
He is commemorated in our ancient Martyrologe on the tenth of December. Who
succeeded him in that Bishopric it does not appear.

VIII. CHAP. VIII. CHAPTER

1. 2. etc. Of S. Justinian: his Gests*

1. THere were at this time two other Saints, which though by birth strangers,
yet challenge a place in this History, because they illustrated Brittany with
their miracles and Sanctity: those were S. Justinian, ad S. Pattern.

2. As touching S. Justinian, John of Tinmouth who wrote his life extant in
Capgrave, Ap. Capgrav. in Iustiniano.
relates that he took his Original from a Noble family in Lesser Brittany,
where having spent his youth in the study of Learning, he received the Order of
Preisthood: and by a divine Oracle was commanded to forsake his country.
Whereupon taking with him certain companions they adventured to sea in a boat
covered with leather, praying earnestly to God that he would so direct their
course that they might come to a solitude commodious for the Exercises of a
Spiritual life. At length they landed in a Province called Cormer: Where they
abode a certain time, during which many began to repair to the Holy man,
desirous to partake of his Instructions. Not long after he received a second
command from God to reliquish that place. Whereupon entering his boat and
committing himself to the Sea and winds, he landed in an Island then called
Lemeney, in which Honorious a devout son of King Thefriauc then lived a
mortified holy life, having preferred poverty, and a free attendance on God
before all worldly contentments. By him S. Justinian was received with great
benignity, who seeing the fervor of his piety, offered the same mansion to him,
to the end he might without any distraction be vigilant in gaining souls to
our Lord. But this offer S. Justinian would not accept, but upon this
condition, that S. Honorius his sister and a maid attending on her might no
longer abide in the same Island. This scrupulousnes of the holy man was derided
by certain unbeleivers there, but S. Honorius to enjoy his devout instructions
and conversation complied with his desire, and sent his Sister away into a
remote region.

3. After this very many repaird to him to be instructed in the Christian Faith
and piety, who returned sufficiently enlightened both to find the way of
salvation themselves, and to teach it to others. Now when the same of so great
a Saint came to the knowledge of S. David, he sent Messengers to him, earnestly
and humbly entreating him to come to him. To whom he condescended without
delay, and was with great honor received by him. Being come S. David chose him
for his Con^essour, and under God the chief directour of his soul: and withal
granted to him and the devout Brethren who lived with him the mansions which he
had chosen both in the Island and adjoining continent.

4. In consequence hereto the Author of his life relates at large the envy and
malice with which the Enemy of mankind impugn'd the devout and mortified life
of this Holy man seeking to interrupt it by several and frequent illusions,
and by suggesting scandalous lies concerning him. But in conclusion, says he,
when the Devil saw himself every way vanquished by the Holy man, and that
neither by violent assaults, nor malicious suggestions he could withdraw him
from the service of God: he attempted other arts and guilefull machinations:
For he infused the poison of his malice into the hearts of three of the Holy
man's servants. Insomuch as they having been reproved by him for their idleness
and mispending the time, they were ^^^sta^'d with fury against him, insomuch as
(...) upon him they threw him to the ground, and most cruelly cut off his
head. But in the place where the sacred Head fell to the ground a fountain of
pure water presently flowd, by drinking of which in following times many were
miraculously restore to health.

5 But M^racles greater then these immediately suceeded his death. For the Body
of the Blessed Martyr presently rose, and taking the head between the two arms,
went down to the sea^hore, and walking thence on the sea passed over to the
port called by his name: and being arrived in the place where a Church is now
built to his Memory, it fell down, and was there buried by Saint David with
spiritual Hymns and Canticles. In which Church our Lord vouchsafes frequently
to attest the sanctity of his servant by many miracles. Martyrol. Angl. 23. A^g.
His Commemoration is on the three and twentieth of August.

6. The Island in this Narration called Lemency is the same, Camden. in Insul.
Brita^^n
says Camden, which Pliny calls Silimnum, and Ptolomy Lim^s: and which in
English has obtained a new Name being called Ramsey. It lies opposite and in
sight of Menevia the Episcopal seat of Saint David: and it was in former ages
famous by the death of a Holy man called Justinian, who arriving there from
Lesser Brittany in this age abounding with Saints, lived many years a solitary
life continually united to God: but was at last murdered by his servants, and
inscribed in the Catalogue of Martyrs.

IX. CHAPTER
IX. CHAP.
1.2 etc. Of Saint Paternus, Abbot and Bishop.

A. D. 516.
1. THE sanctity of S. Dubricius and S. David, etc. drew into Brittany from
foreign parts also Saint Paternus a devout young man in the year of Grace five
hundred and sixteen, Vsser. in Ind Chronol. Ap. ^apgrav in S. Paterno.
says B. Usher, together with eight hundred forty seven Monks, which
accompanied him: These fixed themselves in a place called Mauritania: and there
S. Pattern built a Church and Monastery, in which he placed the Monks under an
Oeconomus a Provost and a Deane: A. D. 518
Thus we read in the life of S. Paternus extant in Capgrave.

2. But in what part of Brittany may we find a place called Mauritania? In all
probability that name proceeds from the Writers mistake, being putt for that
Church which in the Province of the Dimetae, or West Wales was dedicated to the
honor of Saint Paternus, and is called Llan Pattern Vaur, or as the Britains
pronounce it, Llan Pattern Maur, from which last word seems to be derived the
Name Mauritania.

3. The Monastery planted there by S. Paternus seems to have sent abroad many
Colonies of Religious men into the Province: for we read in Capgrave that S.
Paternus built Monasteries and Churches through all the Region called Ceretica,
now Cardigan-shire. As for the Church here called Mauritania, it was also an
Episcopal See, Ibid.
in which S. Paternus himself first sat, as we find in the life of S. Sulgen
born there* and described in verse, Ap. Vss^. in Primord ^ ^^ Ve^ant. ^^. l. 7
Epig. ^^ and l. ^.^ pig^ 52.
cited by B. Usher. Venantius Fortunatus likewise a famous Poet of this age
celebrates the memory of S. Paternus in both qualities, both as an Abbot and a
Bishop.

4. After one and twenty years spent by S. Paternus in governing the Sea
erected by himself, and from him named Paternensis, he was by Prince Caradoc
recalld into his own Native country of Lesser Brittany, where he was made
Bishop of the Church of Vannes, having left his Successor in his former
Bishopric one named Kinoc. There was also another Saint Paternus Bishop of
Auvranches in France (Abrincae Ecclesiae) many of whose Gests are by our
Historians ascribed to this S. Paternus. The Memory the former is celebrated in
the Gallican Martyrologe on the sixteenth of May: whereas that of our present
Saint is commemorated the day preceding. Some doubt may be made whether this
were the same Paternus who subscribed the Synod of Paris assembled in the year
of Grace five hundred fifty nine.

X. CHAP. X. CHAP.

1. etc. Of S. Darerca Sister to S. Patrick: And her children S. Rioch, S.
Menni, S. Sechnal, and S. Auxilius.

1. THE Irish Historians refer to the year of Grace five hundred and eighteen
the death of S. Darerca sister of S. Patrick, A. D. 518.
and born likewise in Brittany, from whence she repaired to her Brother in
Ireland. She was by another name called Monynni, and erroneously confounded by
some Writers with S. Moduenna a Holy Virgin, of whom hereafter.

2. S. Darerca was a married woman, and by two husbands enriched the Church with
a numerous and holy off spring. By her husband named Conis she is said to have
brought forth three children, Ap. Vsser. in Primor. ^. 525.
Mel, Rioch and Menni* all which accompanied S. Patrick in his journeys and
preaching: and in several places were exalted to the Episcopal function.

3. Concerning S. Rioch we read in Iocelin, that he was by Nation a Britain,
Iocelin. in vi^. S. Patricij.
near kinsman to the Holy Bishop S. Patrick: that he was a Deacon (when he
attended S. Patrick into Ireland) and that in beauty and come^ines of body he
excelled all others of that Nation. But the beauty of his soul was much more
valuable. He seems to have been ordained Bishop by S. Patrick, and to have
fixed his Seat in a small Island, Bed. l. 4. c. 4.
which according to S Beda's description is situated at some good distance from
the Western coasts of Ireland, and in the Scottish (that is, Irish) tongue is
called Inis-bounide, or The Isle of the White Calfe In this Island S Colman in
succeeding times b^ilt a Monastery, inhabited in common both by English and
Scotts and vainly sought for in modern Scotland by Dempster.

4. In the Ecclesiastical Annals of Ireland many things are related touching
other Sons of S. Darerca famous for their Sanctity But in this place we will
only take notice of two, more illustrious then the rest. The former is vulgarly
called Sechnallus, in Latin Secundinus: And he it was who wrote the
Alphabeticall Hymn in praise of S. Patrick. The others name was Auxilius, who
was by S. Patrick ordained Bishop of the Province of Leinster (Laginensium:)
and who* (as we read in the Tripartite Work quoted by B Usher) after many
miracles wrought by him, Ap. Vser. l. Primor. ^. 827.
ended his holy life in his own City, called Cealusalli, seated in the plains
of Leinster.

XI. CHAP.
XI. CHAP.
1.2. etc. A Welsh Synod: to which S. David is brought: who preaches.

5 etc. S David's Monasteries: his Monastical Instituts.

1. IN the year of Grace five hundred and nineteen there was assembled a
British Synod: the occasion and order whereof is thus described by Giraldus
Cambrensis in the life of Saint David: Ap. Vsser. in Prim. f. 474.
The detestable Heresy of the ^elagians which by S. Germanus Bishop of Auxerre
and Saint Lupus Bishop of Troyes had been extinguished, now again being revived
to the ruin of the Catholic Faith, gave occasion of collecting a general
Synod of all Cambria. An Assembly therefore being gathered at Brevy in the
Province of Cardigan (in Ceretica Regione) of Bishops, Abbots, and other
Religious men of several Orders, at which were present likewise diverse Noble
men and other Laypersons out of the whole country, A. D. 519.
many Exhortations and Sermons were made by several persons in the pullick
audience to con^ute the (...) Heresy. But the people were so deeply and
m^^i^ably poysond generally there with, that no reasons or persuasions could
reduce them to the right path of Catholic Faith. At length therefore Paulin a
Bishop, with whom S. David had in his youth studied the literal Sciences,
earnestly persuaded the Fathers there present that some persons should be sent
in the name of the Synod to the said ^aint David lately consecrated. Bishop by
the Patr^ark, a (...), discreet and eloquent man, to desire him to afford his
presence and assistance to Gods Church now in danger to be corrupted by Heresy.
Hereupon Messengers were sent accordingly, once and again: but could not
persuade him to come. For the Holy man was so (...) taken up with
Contemplation, that he could not attend to external or secular matters, unles
some very ^^gent necessity compelled him. At last therefore there were sent to
him two Holy men of greatest authority, to wit, Daniel and Dubricius.

2. By the entreaties or command of these two Holy Bishops S. David was at last
brought to the Synod: Ap. Capgrav. in vita ^. Da^vid
And what followed is thus related by Capgrave: When all the Fathers assembled
enjoined S. David to preach, he commanded a child which attended him and had
lately been restored to life by him, ^^^spread a Napkin under his feet: And
standing upon it, he began to expound the Gospel and the Law to the Auditory.
All the while that his oration continued, a snow-white Dove descending from
heaven sat upon his shoulders: and moreover the earth on which he stood raised
it self under him, till it became a hill, from whence his voice like a trumpet
was clearly ^eard and understood by all, both near and far off. On the top of
which (...) a Church was afterward built, which remains to this day.

3. Now what effect his Sermon, accompanied with these Miracles, had, ^^.
Vsser. ^b sup^a.
is thus declared by the forementioned Giraldus Cambiensis: When the Sermon was
finished, so powe^full was the Divine Grace cooperating, that ^he said Heresy
presently vanished and was extinguished. And the Holy Bishop David by the
general Ele^ction and acclamation both of the Clergy and people was exalted to
be the Archbishop of all Cambria.

4. It is much to be lamented that by reason of the m^series and confusions of
those times the Decrees of that and other Synods are lost: for by them we might
have been more perfectly informed of the then State of the Church in Brittany.
By reason of which defect, the sum of what may be j^dg'd of that age is
contained in these general words of the Author of S. David's life in Capgrave
Heresy being thus expelled, Ap. Capgrav* in S. David.
all the Churches of Brittany received their order and R^^e from the authority
of the Roman Church. Whence appears how great the Error of some late
Protestant Writers is, who will needs affirm that the British Churches before
the Conversion of the Saxons in their Faith and Discipline were framed
according to the Model of the Eastern Church.

5 Moreover to secure and establish the wholesome Roman Order settled by this
Synod ( which Spelman calls Pan-britannicam) the foresaid Author adds
immediately, Ibid.
Then were Monasteries built in several places, and the Holy Bishop David
became the chief Protector and Preacher, from whom all men received a rule and
form of holy living. This expedient the Holy Spirit suggested to the ancient
Fathers, whereby to fortify and promote the Catholic Faith once established,
namely to build Monasteries, out of which did proceed Lights to instruct
beleivers in Faith and Holiness of Life: And consequently we may judge what
Spirit it was that suggested to Diocletian, to the Infidel Saxons, and of late
to Luther and Calvin the destroying of Monasteries, as an assured means to
destroy true Faith also.

6. It will not be unproffitable to describe on this occasion the form of a
Monastic life instituted by S. David, Ibid.
as we find in the foresaid Author: S. David, says he, having built a
Monastery near Menevia in a place call the Rosey-valley (Vallis Rosina) gave
this strict rule of Monastical Profession: viz. That every Monk should labor
daily with his hands, for the common good of the Monastery, according to the
Apostles saying, He that does not labor, let him not eat. For those who spend
their time in idleness, debase their minds, which become un^table, and bring
forth impure thoughts, which restlesly disquiet them. The Monks there refused
all gifts or possessions offered by unjust men: they detested riches: they had
no care to ease their labors by the use of oxen or other Cattle; for every
one was instead of riches and oxen to him^e^f and his brethren. They never
conver^'d together by talkin^, but when necessity required: but each one
performed the labor enioyn'd him, ^oyning thereto prayer or Holy Meditations
on Divine things. And having finished their countrey-work, they returned to the
Monastery, where they spent the remainder of the day till even in reading or
Writing. At even, upon the sounding of a bell they all leave their work, and
immediately repair to the Church: where they remain till the Stars appear, and
go all together to their Resection, eating sparingly and not to satiety: For
any excess in eating, though it be only of bread, generates Luxury. Their fo^d
is bread together with roots or herbs seasond with salt: and their thirst they
quenched with a mixture of water and milk. Supper being ended, they continued
about three hours in watching, prayers and genu-flexions. As long as they were
in the Church it was not permitted to any either to slumber, or sneeze or cast
forth spittle. After this they went to rest: and at cock-crowing they rose and
continued at Prayers till day appeard. All their inward tentations and thoughts
they discovered to their Superior: and from him they demanded permission in
all things, even when they were urged to the necessities of Nature. Their
clothing was of skins of beasts. Whosoever was desirous to adioyn himself to
their holy conversation, he was obliged to remain ten days at the door of the
Monastery, as a reprobate, unworthy to be admitted to their society, and there
he was exposed to rude and opprobrious scorns. But if all that time he
patiently suffered all mortifications, he was received by the Religious Seniour
who had care of the gate, whom he served, and was by him instructed. In which
condition he remaind a long time, exercised in painful labors, and grievous
mortifications, and at last was admitted to the fellowship of the Brethren.

7. Our learned Camden makes mention of the foresaid Synod, Camden in Card^gav.
the place where it was celebrated, and the miracle wrought in it, saying
Lan-Devi Brevi ( that is, the Church of S David near the River Brevi) was built
to the memory of S. David Bishop of Menevia in the place where he, during the
sitting of a full Synod, confuted and repressed the Pelagian Heresy reviving in
Brittany, by the Holy scriptures and Miracles likewise, for, as the fame is,
the earth on which he preached, swelld up under his feet till it became a hill.
And from hence it appears that this Synod was celebrated, not in any house or
town, but in the open feilds: as after ward S. Augustine the Monk held a
Council in a place from thence called S. Augustins Oak: And anciently
Theophilus assembled a Synod in the cause of S. Anathasius, which for the like
reason was called (Ad quereum) At the Oak.

XII. CHAP. XII. CHAPTER

1.2. etc. Of S. Dubricius: his Gests.

Whereas in this Synod there were present many great Saints, and Holy Bishops,
the Lights of the British Churches, as S. Dubricius, S. Daniel, S. David, S.
Telia^, S Paulin and others: Of most of whom some mention has been already
made, and some of their actions related: It will be seasonable and expedient to
adioyn in this place and occasion a summary of their respective Gests. For if
they should be set down particularly and severally in the times when they
happened, they would be found so scattered and intermixed, that the Readers
memory would thereby be too much confounded, especially considering the
wonderful length of time that most of them lived.

2. Concerning S. Daniel we have already treated sufficiently. We will
therefore here begin with S. Dubricius. Of whom the Centuriators of Magdeburg
afford us this malicious Character, Magd^b. Centur. 5. in Dubri^io.
Dubricius Gainius of Vaga, so called from his Native soil, was the son
perhaps of a Monk by Euedila a Noble young maid: He became very famous among
the English. But the folly of these Historians is too apparent, for Luther had
not yet by writing and his example taught Monks to get children on young women.

3. More credit ought therefore to be given to our ancient Authors who
generally agree that S. Dubricius was a Britain taking his original in the
Province of the Demetae, or West-wales; and was surnamed Guainius from the
River Guain near which he was born. Pits in Dubricio. B. l. ib^d. D. Povvel in
Ann^^ in l. 2. c ^. I^i^. Cambr.
The name of his Father is not mentioned by our Writers, but his Mother was
called Euedyla, a woman of wonderful virtue and piety. Thus much is testified
by Pits, Bale, David Powel, and the Author of his life in Capgrave, from the
ancient British Monuments.

4. During his child hood he was committed to the care of Teachers to be
instructed in learning suitable to that age: Ap Capgrav. in Dubri^io.
and coming to a more ripe age he made such progress in science that very
many, not only among the ignorant, but more skillful also repaired to him to
receive instructions. Among which was S. Theliau, S. Sampson, S. Aidan and many
others. He made choice of a place in his own Country near the River Vaga
proper to receive the great Number of Scholars which came to him: and there
for several years he directed their studies. In the same place having built, a
Church by command of an Angel he there taught the people, and by imposing his
hands cured frequently the sick of diverse infirmities: so that those who came
to him feeble and full of anguish returned joyful and in perfect health*

5. The year of his birth is not declared by any: But he was taken from his
employment of Teaching by S. Germanus Bishop of Auxerre in his second voyage to
Brittany, and with the consent of King Mauricus, and all the Clergy consecrated
Bishop of Landaff (as has been said) in the year of Grace four hundred thirty
six: By which account since he out lived the time of the foresaid Synod of
Brevy, it is manifest that the length of his life was wonderful, for at that
time he had continued a Bishop more then fourscore years.

^^^ileg. A. D. 490.
6. Afterward in the year four hundred ninety two, says Florilegus, King
Aurelius Ambrosius coming to the mountain of Ambri, near to Caer-carec (now
called Salisbury) where the British Princes, treacherously murdered by Hengist,
lay, he there appointed Pastors over two Metropolitan Churches, granting York
to S. Sampson an illustrious person, and Caer-leon to Dubricius: Which last See
was now become vacant by the death of Threminius. G^lfrid. l. 9. c. 12.
Geffrey of Monmouth adds, That he was Primat of Brittany, and Legate of the
Apostolic See: which dignity it seems was annexed to that Church by S.
Germanus by virtue of the authority, in his Mission hither, received from Rome.

7. In the year five hundred and sixteen he solemnly crowned King Arthur: After
which, being very aged, he is said to have relinquished his See and retired
into the Isle of Enhly or Berdesy, there to attend to his Devotions, and more
perfectly to prepare himself for death. From which quiet repose and solitude
notwithstanding his zeal to the Catholic Faith drew him to the Synod of
Brevy, there to defend it against the renewd Heresy of the Pelagians, In which
Synod he obtained that S. David should be placed governor of the Church which
a little before he had relinquished.

8. At last three years after, full of sanctity and age he gave up his soul
into the hands of his Creator in the foresaid Isle of Berdsey, where among a
great multitude o^ Saints he chose his place of burial. And there his Sacred
Body reposed till the year o^ Grace one thousand one hundred and twenty:
Godvvin. in Episc. Monevens.
at which time it was translated from thence on the Nones of May, and on the
fourth before the Calends of June by Vrbanus Bishop of Landaff with great
honor buried in the Cathedral Church on the Northside of the Altar of our
Blessed Lady, says B* Godwin. At which time, says the Author of his life in
Capgrave, Ap. Ca^grav in Dub^icio.
the whole country of Glamorgan was afflicted with a great drouth, for for
many weeks before no rain had falln there: But at the time when these Sacred
Relics were transported great store of rain fell to the comfort of the
inhabitants.

XIII. CHAP. XIII CHAPTER

1.2. etc. Of S. Theliau: his Gests.

6. etc. Of S. Pauleus.

1. ONE of the most illustrious Disciples of S. Dubricius was S. Theliau,
called by the Centuriators of Magdeburg Thelesinus Helius, against whom they in
like manner vomit their poison, saying that he was (Anglicus Va^es ex genere
Baraorum) an English Soothsayer of the stock of the Bards: Whereas he neither
was an English man, nor Bard: but descended from a Noble British family, Ap.
Capgrav in Thelia^.
as the Author of his Life declares: Adding further, that from his infancy he
was addicted to Devotion, Prayer and contempt of secular pleasures. And being
come to a riper age he was for his piety and Wisdom by wise men Surnamed
Helios, because with his doctrine he enlightened the hearts of the faithful, as
the Sun does the world. He was instructed in holy scriptures by S. Dubricius,
till he was enabled to clear the most difficult places* therein. Then having
heard the fame of a certain wise man called Paulinus, he went to him, to confer
with him of the most abstruse Mysteries of Gods Word. There he contracted
freindship with S. David, a man of great Perfection in sanctity, insomuch as
their hearts were so firmly knitt together by charity and the Grace of Gods
holy Spirit, that in all things they had but one Will.

2. When S. Dubricius was translated from the Sea of Landaff to the
Metropolitan Church of Caer-leon, S. Theliau succeeded him in that of Landaff,
in which he sat very many years, and if the authority of the English
Martyrologe ^ayle not, he dyed not till the coming of S. Augustine the Monk into
Brittany, by whom his successor S. Oudoceus was consecrated.

3 When a certain plague called the Yellow plague infested Brittany, raging
both against men and beasts, by a divine admonition he departed into a far
remote country accompanied with man^ Disciples, where he abode till by the
same authority he was recalled. Neither did he cease by daily prayers and
fasting to pacify Gods wrath. At (...) gathering together all his devout
companions he returned, and all his life after exercised su^^eme jurisdiction
over all the Churches of Western Brittany. At last S. Theliau being replenished
with all virtues dyed in a good old age on the fifth day before the I^es of
February. Thus write* the Author of his life. Therefore it is difficult to
find out the grounds upon which in ou^ Martyrologe he is commemorated on the
twenty sixth of November by the Title of a Martyr, murdered by a certain
Britain named Gueddant: since all our ^r^te^s, Pits, Harpsfeild, Capgrave, B.
Godwin and ^. Usher make no mention that he dyed a violent death.

4. Many Miracles are recorded as done by him both before and after his death:
which I wi^^ingly omi^t. Only one, which B. Godwin thought good not to pass
over in si^ence* shall be n^re related, and the rather because, Godvvin. in
(...) ^p. (...).
as he says, there is mention of it in the Prayer inserted in the Liturgy of
his Feast: which was this* After he was dead the inhabitants of three several
places contended earnestly which of them should enjoy his Body: those of
Pe^nalum where his Ancestors had been buried; those of Lantelio-vaur, where he
dyed, and those of Landaff, among whom he had been Bishop. When therefore no
agreement could be made amongst them, there appeared presently three Bodies so
like to one another, that three egg^ could not more perfectly resemble. So each
of th^se people took one of them, and by that means the controversy ended. Thus
writes that Author, and in conclusion for his own Church of Landaff he adds.
That by frequent miracles at his Tomb it appeared that the inhabitants of
Landaff possessed the true Body.

5. Now whereas both in the life of S. Th^liau there is mention of Paulinus,
said to be i^, Instru^^^^r, and likewise in the Acts o^ the ^^nod of Brevy,
Paulinus was the man by whose exhortation Messengers were dep^rted by the Synod
to call thither S. David: it any deserve our inquiry who this Paulinus was, who
was a Bishop before S. David, conside^ing that in the Catalogue of our Bishops
none is found of that name before the ^ime* of the Holy Monk S. Augustine. Most
probable therefore it is that this is the same which in the life of S. David is
said to have been a Disciple of Saint Germanus Bishop of Auxerre, and is
sometimes said to have been S. David's Teacher, and elsewhere to have studied
together with him, and whose true name seems to have been Paulens.

6. Concerning this Paulens we find this passage related by the Author of S.
David's life in Capgrave: Ap. Capgrav. in v^^ S. David.
S. David as soon as he was promoted to Preisthood went to Paulens a Disciple of
S. Germanus, who in a certain Island lead a holy life acceptable to God. With
him S. David lived many years, and in his practice fullfilld the Instructions
which he met with in reading. Now it fell out that his Master Paulens with
extreme pains falling on his eyes lost the use of them. Hereupon calling his
Disciples together he desired that one after another they would look upon his
eyes, and say a prayer or benediction on them. When they had done this, and
that he received no ease or remedy, David said thus to him: Father, I pray you,
do not command me to look you in the face: for ten years are passed since I
studied the Scripture with you, and in all that time I never had the boldness to
look you in the face. Paulens admiring his humility, said, since it is so, it
will suffice if by touching my eyes thou pronounce a benediction on them.
Presently therefore as soon as he touched them, sight was restored to them.

XIV. CHAP. XIV. CHAPTER

1.2. The Westsaxon Kingdom founded.

3.4. Privileges given to Cornwall, etc.

5.6. A second combat at Mon^ Badonicus.

7. etc. Fables of King Arthurs conquests.

1. THE same year in which the Synod of Brevi was celebrated, A. D. ^19.
Hunting^. l. ^
Cerdic began the Kingdom of the West Saxons, that is, says Huntingdom, in the
seaventy first year after the first coming of the Saxons, and in the reign of
the Emperor Justin the Elder of that name. With him agrees Ethelwerd,
Malmsbury and others. Rudburn. l. ^ c. 1.
And Thomas Rudburn in his greater Chronicle adds, that he was crowned with
Pagan Ceremonies at Winchester, in the place which once had been the Church of
the true God, but which those barbarous heathens had changed into a Temple of
Dagon, having slain all the Monks who served God there.

2. The raising of this New Kingdom sufficiently disproves the Fables of
Geffrey of Monmouth, who reports great and frequent Victories of King Arthur in
these days. Whereas Huntingdon expressly declares that this year a terrible
battle was fought between Cerdic and the Britains, H^ntingd ib.
and that on both sides the Captains fought magnanimously till even, but then
the Saxons got the victory, which would have been more bloody to the
Britains, A. D. 5^0.
had not the darkness hindered the pursuit. After this the fame of Cerdic and his
son Kinric was largely spread through the whole land. For from that day began
the Kingdom of the West Saxons, which remains to our times, having swallowd all
the other Principalities. And Ranulp^us of Chester relates how after many
battles fought betweem King Arthur and Cerdic, wherein sometimes one, some
times the other had the better, at last King Arthur grew weary, and contenting
himself with an oath of fidelity received from Cerdic, he gave to him the
Provinces of Hampshire and Somerset.

Rudburn. l. 2. c. 1.
3. But Thomas Rudburn, taking no notice of any Oath of Fidelity, declares that
King Arthur growing weary of renewing war against Cerdic, entered into league
with him: by which Cerdic obliged himself to the inhabitants of Cornwall, to
permit them, paying an annual tribute, to enjoy the exercise of Christian
Religion. And that such a special indulgence was allowd to that Province,
appears by the great numbers of Saints which in these and the following times
flourished there, whereas scarce any were to be found in other parts of
Brittany subject to the Saxons. Now the ground of this Privilege afforded
particularly to them of Cornwall no doubt was, because great multitudes of
Britains flying from the Saxons into those most distant and more defensible
parts, as likewise into Wales, rendered them more capable to resist new Masters,
who therefore were forced to give them better conditions.

4. Notwithstanding we are not to suppose that the two Provinces of Hampshire
and Somerset, mentioned by Ranulphus, and Cornwall by Rudburn, were all the
Provinces which made up the new Kingdom of the West Saxons for besides them
Cerdic had subdued the Danmonij in Devonshire, the Durotriges in Dorsetshire,
the Atrebatij in Barkshire, and the Belgae in Wiltshire. And to these shortly
after was added the Isle of Wight, which he bestowd on his late arrived kinsmen
Stuffa and Whitgar, Camden in (...).
who, says Camden, utterly destroyed the British inhabitants there at
Whitgarn-burg, from Whitgar so called, but now more contractedly, Caresburg.

A. D. ^20. Westminst. ^ic.
5. Whilst Cerdic was busy establishing his new Kingdom, fresh enemies to the
Britains arrived: For, as Matthew of Westminster relates, in the year five
hundred and twenty the Saxon Captains Colgrin, Baldulf and Cheldric lately
subdued by King Arthur at York, and forced to abjure the Island, repented
themselves of the Covenants made: and returning took land at Totenes: from
whence passing through Cerdic's dominion, they came to the City of Bath, which
they besieged. The fame whereof coming to King Arthur, he caused the hostages
left by them to be hanged. And gathering a might army came to raise the siege:
Where the armies being joined, he calling on the name of the Blessed Virgin
Mary whose Image he were over his armor, he slew great numbers of them, and
among the rest Colgrin and his Brother Baldulph. Which Cheldric seeing, fled,
and by the Kings command was pur^^ed by Cador Duke of Cornwall, who rested not
^ill he overtook them in the Isle of Thane, where ^e slew Cheldric, and ^orced
the rest to yield.

6. Though some particulars in this N^r^ation may deserve to be excepted
against, is the place, which is said to have been the City o^ Bath, near which
is the Mountain called Badonicus, where Arthur before he was King is said to
have defeated the Saxons, long before the time mentioned by this Historian:
Besides, Bath being a part of Cerdics new Kingdom, how come the new arrived
Saxons to besiege it? Notwithstanding it may probably be answered, that there
might have been, and comparing our Writers, it is likely there were two battles
fought by Arthur at this Mount Badonicus. And again the City of Bath being
seated in the utmost extremity Westward of Cerdic's Pricipality, it might
perhaps at this time have been in the possession of the Britains.

7. As touching King Arthurs invoking our blessed Lady's assistance in the
fight, it was a devotion generally practiced by the Church in this age; For two
year, before this there having been assembled two Councils in the East, A. D.
5^8. Ap. Ba^^n.
one at Jerusalem and another at Constantinople: the Synod of Jerusalem thus
wrote to the Bishops of the other Council, O most holy Bishops, we beseech you
to pray with us to our Lord for these same things: for the necessities of all
Gods Priests ought to be common. Make your supplications likewise together with
us to the most holy and glorious Virgin Mary Mother of God, that she would
intercede for the peace of the holy Churches, and for the victory and long life
of our most pious and most Excellent Emperor. The like practice we find
elsewhere, of which many Examples may be given.

8. The year following King Arthur was called into the Northern parts to assist
Prince Howel, ^. D. 521. W^stmonaster. ^^.
who three years before was come out of Lesser Brittany to his aid, and was now
besieged by the (...) and Scots in the City called Acluid, in which he lay
sick. Upon King Arthurs approach, says Matthew of Westminster, the Enemies
retired to a place called Mureif, whither he pursued them. But they escaping by
night fled to a Lake named Lumonoy. Whereupon Arthur gathering many ships
together, encompassed the Island, and in fifteen days brought them to such
extreme famine, that many thousands of them perished. In which utmost danger
the Bishops of that Regio^ came barefoot to the King, with tears beseeching
him to take pity of that miserable people, and to give them some small portion
of that country to inhabit, under the Yoke of perpetual servitude. The King
mollified with the tears of the Bishops, both pardoned his Enemies, and
granted their request.

9. Here it is that some of our British and Sax^n Writers ground the
subjection of Scotland to the Crown of Brittany. A. D. 521.
Particularly Walsingham relates how King Arthur having subdued Scotland,
Walshing. hypodigm. Neustriae f. 492.
placed over it as King a certain person named Angulsel, who at a public Feast
in Caer-leon carried King Arthurs sword before him, and did homage to him for
his Kingdom. And that successively all the Kings of Scotland were subject to
the crown of Brittany. But it seems very improbable that King Arthur, at a time
when his own country was peecemeale renting from him, should be at leisure to
conquer foreign Nations. And however, if the Scots were indeed now subdued,
certain it is that they shortly shook off that yoke.

XV. CHAPTER
XV. CHAP.
1.2.3 Of the Holy Bishop Nennion: And of S. Finanus.

1. WHereas in the last recited exploit of King Arthur it is said, that certain
Pictish or Scottish Bishops were suppliants to him in behalf of their
distressed countrymen: our inquiry must be what Bishops those probably were.
That the Province of the Picts where the City of Acluid was seated, had many
years since received the Christian Faith by the preaching of S. Ninianus, has
been already demonstrated. But who were his Successors till this time, we can
only find by conjecture. In the Annals of Ireland there is mention of a certain
Bishop called Nennion, A. D. 520.
who is said to have flourished in Brittany about the year five hundred and
twenty, and to have had his seat in a place called the great Monastery. This
man probably was the Successor of S. Ninianus, and this Great Monastery the
same with Candida Casa, where was the Monument of that Apostolic Bishop, which
by reason of frequent miracles wrought there invited great numbers of devout
men to embrace a Coenobiticall Life, as has been showed from Alcuinus. Of this
Bishop Nennion we read in the life of S. Finanus this passage, That the said S.
Finanus having in his childhood been instructed by S. Colman a Bishop, was
afterward recommended to ^he care of Nennion: The words of Tinmouth extant in
Capgrave are these: Ap Capgrav. in S. Fina^^.
Behold certain ships out of Brittany entered the said haven in Ireland, in
which ships was the Holy Bishop Nennion and several others accompanying him.
These men being received with great joy and honor, Coelanus Abbot of Noendrum
(or as Iocelin writes, of Edrum) very diligently recommended young Finanus to
the Venerable Bishop. Thereupon Finanus presently after returned with him into
his country, and for several years learned from him the Rules of a
Monastical life at his ^ee called the great Monastery: Moreover with great
proficiency he studied the Holy Scriptures: and by invoking the name of Christ,
wrought many Miracles.

2. Concerning the same Finanus it is further added, A. D. 525.
Having been more then ordinarily instructed in Monastic institutions and holy
Scripture by S. Nennion, Ibid.
Finanus determined to take a journey to the Sea Apostolic, to the end he
might there supply whatsoever was defective in saving knowledge. At Rome
therefore he continued the space of seven years, daily studying and advancing
in Sacred science. And after that he ascended to the degree of Preisthood.

3. Thus much by the way concerning the holy Bishop Nennion, who probably was
one of those who interceded with King Arthur in behalf of their country. And
it was about this time that S. Finanus lived under his Discipline: (...)
Chronol^g. A. D. 520.
For thus B. Usher in his Chronologicall Index writes in the year five hundred
and twenty; Nennion Bishop of the Sea called The great Monastery flourished at
this time in Brittany.

XVI. CHAP. XVI. CHAPTER

1.2 Fables concerning King Arthur censured.

1. IN the year of Grace five hundred twenty three King Arthur, A. D. 523.
after the death of his wife Guenevera, married a Noble Lady called Guenhumara:
By occasion of which marriage his fame was spread through all countries.
Westmonaster. hic.
This is thus declared by Florilegus: In the forenamed year, says he, King
Arthur having reduced the Isle of Brittany to its former state, married a wife
named Guenhumara descended from the Noble stock of the Romans. She had been
brought up in the Court of the Duke of Cornwall, and in beauty excelled all the
women of Brittany. To this marriage he invited all Princes and Noble persons in
the Regions adjacent, and during the celebration of it such sports, and such
magnificence both in feasting and military exploits were shown by him, that
Nations far removed did admire and emulate him. By this means from some
transmarine Kings he gained love, and in others he imprinted a fear and terror.

2. Within little more then a year after this marriage he is said to have passed
into Ireland, A. D. 525. Id. hic.
and there to have taken Prisoners the King Gillamur and his Nobles, and
subdued the whole Island. From thence to have sailed into Holland, Gott-land
and the Isles of Orkney, all which Regions he brought under Tribute.

3. Such Fables as these, invented by idle and ignorant Bards, and with
addition published in a Latin style by Geffrey of Monmouth, have passed for
true stories not only among the Britains in succeeding times, who might be
pardond if in their poverty and miseries they recreated their minds with the
imagined past glory of their Ancestors: but they have imposed on foreign
Writers, and some of them otherwise not unlearned. Maibran de Morini^ l. 1. c.
14. ^^ib. l. 1. c. 42
Hence it is that Malbranque a diligent French Antiquary has been induced to
acknowledge that King Arthur after having forced Brittany from the Saxons,
subdued afterward that part of France which was inhabited by his own
countrymen the Morini.

4. Neither has the British Fables ended here: They have sent King Arthur
into Norway: and his exploits there are thus recorded by Matthew of Westminster:
Flor^l^g ad A. D. 53^.
In the year of Grace five hundred thirty three King Arthur having a design to
subdue all Europe, passed with a Navy into Norway. Where being arrived he found
Sichelin King of that country dead: who had bequeathed that Kingdom to Loath
sisters son to King Arthur: a Prince of great virtue and magnificence. The said
Loath had at that time a son called Walwan, a youth twelve years old, who was
recommended to Pope Vigilius to be by him brought up: from whom likewise he
received the Order of Knight hood. In the end King Arthur having conquered the
Norvegians, placed his Nephew Loath in the throne, and then with joy returned
into Brittany.

5. Acts of Chevalry yet more prodigious have been in a seeming sober manner
recounted especially by Geffrey of Monmouth, which in a general manner shall
be here set down in the expression, and with the Censure of Ranulphus of
Chester. Ranulf. l. 5. c. 6.
As touching this King Arthur, says he, among all Historians only thus
extolled by Geffrey of Monmouth, many do wonder how any one can believe those
things to be true which are reported of him. For if there were any probability
that he conquered thirty Kingdoms, if he subdued the King of the Franks, if he
slew Lucius the Emperors Governor in Italy, how comes it to pass that all
Historians, Romans, French, and Saxons should make no mention at all of such
Heroical Exploits of so great a Prince, whereas they have related far less
acts of persons much inferior? Geffrey tells us that his Arthur conquered
Frollo King of the Franks: whereas among the French Writers such a Name as
Frollo cannot be found. He says likewise that during the reign of the Emperor
Leo King Arthur killed Lucius an Italian General of the Empire: and yet
according to all the Roman Historians there was no Lucius Governor in Italy:
Neither did King Arthur reign, nor was so much as born in the time of Leo, but
of Justinian the fifth Emperor after Leo. To conclude, Greffrey says he much
wonders that Gildas and S. Beda should make no mention of King Arthur in their
Writings. Whereas we may much rather wonder that this Geffrey should so highly
extol a man whose actions have scarce been mentioned by any ancient Historians
of high esteem for their truth and sincerity. But perhaps this is the custom of
every nation to exalt some one of their Princes with excessive praises: as the
Grecians have enormously magnified their Alexander, the Romans their Octavian,
the English their Richard, the French their Charles: and in like manner the
Britains their Arthur. A. D. 527.
This often happens, says Josephus, either for the beautifying of their
Histories, or the delighting their Readers, or extolling their own blood.

6. That there was such a King of the Britains as Arthur, and that he was a
Prince of a most magnanimous and Heroical Spirit we are assured by Monuments of
such unquestio^ned authority, that Geffreys lies cannot disparage them. And had
it not been that Almighty God had given up the Britains to destruction, no
hand could have been more proper and able to rescue them then King Arthurs: and
no doubt it was to his valor that we ought to ascribe the security of the
remains of them among the Mountains of Wales. But as for his conquering so many
kingdoms, and driving the Saxons out of his own, these are inventions so
impudently false, that in the very same years to which these Victories are
assigned, our unquestioned Histories inform us that the Saxons made some
notable progress in their conquests, and some new kingdom of theirs became
established.

7. It may notwithstanding be allowd to Malbranque, since he will needs entitle
King Arthur to the subduing his Morini, that being weary of contending in vain
with the Saxons, and a surcease of arms being agreed between them, King Arthur
to avoid idleness might transport some forces over Sea into that Province of
France, and there settle in the Principality his kinsma^ Leodegarius, Malbran^.
vbi supra.
bestowing on him the Strong City of Bouloign (Bononia) with the territory
adjoining, with this condition that he and his Successors should hold it with
acknowledgment and dependence of the Blessed Virgin, to whom we have seen
before that King Arthur bore so particular devotion. All which, says that
Author, is extracted out of the ancient Archives of that City.

8. Thus much may be judged expedient to be said concerning King Arthur, of
whom nothing will remain more to be related for the space of many years till we
come to treat of his death: The intercurring time being to be supplied by a few
passages touching Ecclesiastical affairs occurring in Brittany.

XVII. CHAP. XVII. CHAPTER

1.2.3 The Kingdoms of the East Angles, and East Saxons erected.

4 The Isle of wight conquered: whence the name.

1. A. D. 527.
ABout the year of Grace five hundred twenty seven two new Kingdoms were
erected in Brittany without any disturbance from King Arthur. The seat of them
was in the Eastern parts of the Island. The Province of the Ice^^, containing
Norfolk, Suffolk and Cambridgshire, was possessed by the Angli, A. D. 528.
and made up the Kingdom of the East Angles: The Province of the Trinobantes,
containing Essex and Middlesex, were possessed by a Tribe of the Saxons and
made up the Kingdom of the East Saxons. But whether of these two kingdoms began
first is uncertain in our History, because the names of their first Kings are
for the unconsiderablenes of their actions not left recorded.

West monast. a^. A. D. 526.
2. Matthew of Westminster fixes their beginning in the same year five hundred
twenty six, when, says he, there came out of Germany certain Pagans who
seysed on the Eastern parts of Brittany, namely that Region which is called the
Kingdom of the East Angles. And some of the same Germans invading the Middle
Provinces of the Island, fought many battles against the Britains. But because
their Leaders were many, and not subordinate to one, their names are forgotten.
The same year the Kingdom of the East Saxons also took its Origi^nal, in these
days called Essex: the first King whereof, as is believed, was Erkenwin the Son
of Offa.

3. This Writer does not acquaint us with the name of the first King of the
East Angles: But that defect is supplied by Ranulphus of Chester, Ranulf*
C^str. in (...). l 5 c. 4.
though he assign the Original of that Kingdom much sooner: For thus he writes:
In the year of Grace four hundred ninety (...) the Kingdom of the East Angles
began under Vffa, from whom all the succeeding Kings were anciently called
Vffings, which since we call Ficans or Fikeys. Such is the uncertainty about
the beginning of these two Kingdoms: to discourse of which concerns not our
design.

A. D. 528.
4. The year following the Isle of Wight was invaded by King Cerdic and his Son
Kinric, as has been said But almost three years passed before they could quite
subdue it. For in the year five hundred and thirty, says Huntingdon, Certic
and his Son with a numerous army fought with the Britains in Witland (or the
Isle of Wight: Huntingd. l. 2
) and having overcome them took possession of the Island. In which battle they
made a wonderful slaughter of them at Whitgaresberg, in the thirteenth year of
their Reign. This Island, called in Latin V^cta, they gave four years after to
their Nephews ^^uffa and Witgar. The Britains call this Island Guith, which,
says Nennius, signifies a divorce or renting asunder: because is is divided
from Brittany by so narrow a sea intervening, that is seems to have been once
joined with it. The Saxons from the British word called it Witland, or Vitland.

XVIII. CHAP. A. D. 529.

XVIII. C.



1.2. A Synod assembled in Wales by Saint David.

3.4. Of S Kined.

5. S. David forbidden to consecrate again the Church of Glastonbury.

1. WHilst Cerdic was busy about the invasion of the Isle of Wight, A. D. 529.
that vigilant Pastor of souls Saint David Bishop of Menevia assembled a
Provincial Synod, called the Synod of Victory. Girald. in vit^ S. ^avid a^.
Usher. f. ^75.
In which, says Giraldus Cambrensis, the Clergy of all Cambria (or Wales) met
together, and confirmed the Decrees of the former Synod at Brevy, whereto they
added new ones for the Churches benefit. From these two Synods all the Churches
of Cambria received their rules and Ecclesiastical orders, which also were
confirmed by the authority of the Roman Church. The Decrees of them both, which
the Holy Prelat David had first published by speech, he committed also to
writing with his own hand, and left them to be reserved in his own Church, and
Copies of them to be communicated to other Churches in that Province. All which
together with many other Treasures of that Noble Library furni^^'d by him have
been lost partly by age, or negligence, and principally by the incursion^ of
Pirates which almost every Summer from the Isles of Orkney in long boats were
accustomed to wast the Sea coasts of Cambria.

2. The loss of this treasure deserves indeed to be deplored, since thereby we
might have been perfectly informed of the whole state of the British Churches.
However we are from this ancient Historian assured that those Churches were
regulated according to the Roman: So that by examining the Doctrine and
Discipline of the Roman Church in that age, we may be assured that the British
Churches believed and practiced the same: And consequently that S. Augustine
sent afterward to convert the Saxons, brought no Novelties hither with him, as
some Modern Protestants do accuse him, since S. Gregory who sent him, was
exalted to S. Peter's chair not above threescore years after this Synod.

3. We read in the life of S. Kined in Capgrave, Ap. Capgr. in S (...).
that when S. David had published his Edicts for the assembling this universal
Synod of Cambria, he took care humbly to invite thereto S. Kined. But his
answer was; That for his sins being become distorted and crooked in his body,
he was unfitt for any society, and much more to be adjoined to the company of
such holy men. Besides, that he had not natural strength sufficient to enable
him to undertake such a journey. After his the same Author relates a double
Miracle, how S. Kined having been restored to health and streightnes by the
Prayers of Saint David, by his own prayers was reduced again to his former
infirmity and crookednes.

4. But I take no pleasure in exscribing the multitude of Miracles with which
the following Writers of the middle age have rather obscured then illustrated
the lives of Saints. It shall suffice therefore in this place to declare that
this S. Kined in the time of S. David filled Brittany with the same of his
Sanctity. He lived a solitary Anachoreticall life in the Province now called
Glamorganshire, probably in the same place where yet remains a Chapel called
S. Keneth his Chapel, left as a monument of his Sanctity. Camden in Glamorgan.
Camden in his description of that Region writes thus, Western Gower is almost
an Island by reason that the Sea encompasses it every where except in one
narrow space in which it is joined to land. It de^erves, to be mentioned in
story not so much for the towns in it, as the fruits, and the memory of a
famous canonised Saint called S. Kined, who there lead a solitary devout life.

5. After the dissolution of the foresaid Synod S. David accompanied with
several other Bishops took a journey to the Monastery of Glastonbury, with an
intention to repair the ruins of it, and again to consecrate it. But how he
was deterred from such a design by our Lord appearing to him in sleep* and
forbidding him by a second Dedication to profane the Sacred Ceremony which
himself had many years before performed: in testimony whereof he with his
finger peirced a hole in the Bishops hand, which remaind open to the view of
all men till the end of the next days Mass: All this has already been largely
related in the beginning of this History: at the year of Grace sixty four,
where was treated of the first foundation of that famous and most ancient
Monastery of Glastonbury: to which place I refer the Reader.

XIX. CHAPTER
XIX. CHAP.
1.2. etc. S. David translates the Metropolitan See to Menevia.

7 He exercises his Pastoral Office in Ireland.

8 9.10. Of Irish Saints: Particularly of S. Aedan.

1. THE celebrating of this Synod is the last public action which we find
recorded of S. David. Therefore we will here adioyn what remains of his Gests
till his death, which followd fifteen years after, in the year of Grace five
hundred forty four.

2. Concerning his Birth and the Prophecies foregoing it, as likewise his
Education, and how in the year five hundred and nineteen in the Synod of Brevy
he was elected and consecrated Bishop, succeeding Saint Dubricius Archbishop
of Caer-leon and Metropolitan of Cambria: which See S. Dubricius three years
before had relinquished, retiring himself into solitude: All this has been
already declared.

3. Notwithstanding his Consecration, he would not accept of a Metropoliticall
Jurisdiction but upon this condition that he might transfer the Sea from
Ca^r-leon to Menevia, a place for the remotenes, solitude and neighborhood of
many Saints and Religious persons in the Islands and territory adjoining, most
acceptable to him. Which Translation was approved both by King Arthur and the
Synod then not dissolved.

4. This Menevia is seated in the Province of the Dimetae, now Penbrok-shire,
adjoining to the most remote Promontory of Brittany, called by Ptolomy the
Promontory of the Octopitae, where, Girald in l ^in. l. 2. c. 1.
says Giraldus, the soil is stony and barren, neither clothed with wood, nor
interlaced with rivers, nor adorned with meadows, but exposed to the Sun and
winds: Yet with this penury the ancient Saints and Bishops were best contented,
accounting the remotenes from worldly tumults and noise to recompense
sufficiently all such incommodities

5. This Merevia, or, as the Britains then called it, Menew, was in memory of
this holy Bishop named by the converted Saxons David-Minster, and by the
Britains Tuy-Dewy, that is, Dav^ds house, and at this day S. David's. The
Bishop whereof was for many ages the Metropolitan of Cambria, but at length
became subject to Canterbury. Notwithstanding the Inhabitants of Wales since
the Conquest of Brittany by the Normans entered into a (...) of Law against the
Archbishop of Can^terbury challenging their former right and privilege of
independance: but the cause was judged against them. How the Archiepiscopall
Pall by occasion of a Plague was carried over Sea into Little Brit^any, and left
in the Church of Dole shall be showed hereafter.

6. The Pastoral care and zeal of S David in maintaining the Catholic Faith
against Heresies, particularly Pelagianism, and Ecclesiastical Discipline
against vices and disorders is celebrated by all our Writers, and was signally
approved by him in the Synod of Victory assembled by him ten years after his
Consecration.

7. Neither was his Pastoral solicitude confined to his own Province: it
extended it self abroad also, and especially into Ireland: From wh^nce he was
often visited and consulted with by devout men. Girald. Cambr^^^ ^it. S. David.
Hence Giraldus Cambrensis speaking of this age, says, It was among the
Irishmen in those days a frequent custom to go in pilgrimage, and their
greatest devotion was to visit the monuments of the Apostles in Rome. Among the
rest one Barro an Abbot in the province of Cork went thither, and in his return
he passed by Menevia, where he stayed till he could find the commodity of a ship
and wind. For such was the usual practice of good devout Irishmen, that either
going or returning they would desire to enjoy the conversation of the Holy
Bishop David, whose name like a precious fragrant Ointment was spread all
abroad.

Vsser. in Fri^ora. ^. ^5^.
8. B. Usher has published a Catalogue of Irish Saints, sorted into several
Orders according to the times wherein they lived. The first Order was of such as
lived either contemporaries to S. Patrick, or presently after him. The Second
Order contained such Saints (...) about this age, such as were S. Fina^^^
ca^^^d by the Irish, Fin, and by the Britains Gain or Win. S. Brendan, etc. In
which (...) this observation is expressed, The Saints of the Second Order
received the Rite of (...) out of Brittany from holy men (...) ^^ere, such as
were S. David, S. Gildas and S. Doc.

9. Moreover S. David sent over some of his Di^ciples into Ireland, (...). ap.
Vsser ^ 9^^.
who grew famous there for their learning and sanctity. Among which one o^ the
most illustrious as was Saint Ae^an: concerning whom Giraldus thus w^ites, S.
A^^^n, called by the Irish S. Maidoc, f^mous for his virtues and learning in
Divine (...), having received permission from his (...). David and his
Brethren, with their ben^^^ (...) say^d into Ireland. Where after he had (...)
fame by his piety and miracles, at (...) he built a Monastery near the City of
(...), where having collected a good number of (...) Brethren he consecrated
himself to the Service of God, living according to the form and ^ule which he
had received from his Pious Father S. David at Menevia. Which Rule was the ^ame
that was observed by the Monks in Egypt, as we read in the Antiquities of
Glastonbury.

10. This S. Aedan was afterward Bishop of Fern^, and Metropolitain of
Leinster, whilst S. David was yet alive, whom he used to consult in affairs of
difficulty, as we read in the Nameles Author of the life of S. Lugid, called
also S. Moluca, in these terms, Saint Moedhog, named otherwise S Aedan the most
Holy Bishop of Leinster would needs go b^^ond Sea into Brittany to his Master
S. David Bishop there, to demand of h^^ whom he would recommend for his
Spiritual Father to hear his (...) in I^eland The life of this S. Aedan is
(...) in Capgrave: where notwithstanding he is ^tiled only Abbot, and not
Bishop.

XX. CHAP. XX. CHA.

1.2. etc. Of S. David's death, and burial: The Time, and Place: and of his
Successor.

1. AFter many years spent by the Holy Bishop David at Menevia in the exercise
of all Christian virtues, it pleased almighty God in love to him, and just
anger to the ungrateful Britains to translate this burning and shining Light
from earth to heaven, where it now shines most gloriously to all eternity.

2. As touching the year of his death, considering the great diversity in
Historians about his age, it must needs be involved in great uncertainty. For
Giraldus Cambrensis, and John of Tinmouth affirm S. David to have lived one
hundred forty seven years, having been bot^ in the year of Grace four hundred
sixty two, and dying in the year six hundred and nine, when S. Gregory the
Great was Pope. Pits. in S. David.
Pits likewise allows one hundred forty six years to his age, and places his
death in the year of Grace five hundred forty four: By which account his birth
would fall in the year of Christ three hundred ninety eight. But both these
assertions seem exorbitant: the former placing his Death much too late: and the
latter his Birth as much too early.

3. It is therefore more consonant to the order of British affairs and story,
Vsser.
says learned B. Usher, and better agrees with the Character of the time
assigned by Giraldus to affirm with Pits, that he dyed in the year of Grace
five hundred forty four, and that at his death he was fourscore and two years
old and no more: For in that year the Calends of March fell on the third Feria,
as Giraldus says they did when he dyed.

4. Let us now view what things are reported to have occurred before his death.
Ap. Capgrav. in vita S. David.
When the hour of his dissolution approached, says the Author of his life in
Capgrave, the Angel of our Lord appeared to him, and said, The day so much
desired by thee is now at hand: Prepare thy self, for on the Calends of March
our Lord Jesus Christ attended with a multitude of Angels will come to meet
thee. Whereupon he answered, O Lord, dismiss now thy servant in peace. The
Brethren who assisted him, having heard the sound of these words, but not well
understanding the sense, fell prostrate to the ground in great fear. Then the
Holy Bishop cried with a loud voice, Lord Jesus Christ, receive my Spirit.
Whereupon when the Brethren made loud complaints, he assuaged their sorrow with
mild and comfortable words, saying, My Brethren, be constant in your good
Profession, and bear unanimously to the end that yoke which you have
undergone: Observe and fulf^^ whatsoever things you have seen and heard from
me. And from that hour to the day of his death, the week following, he
remained in the Church exhorting and encouraging them.

5. When the hour of his departure was come, our Lord Jesus Christ vouch-safed
his presence, as he had promised by his Angel, to the infinite consolation of
our Holy Father. Who at the sight of him exulted wholly in Spirit, saying to
him, O my Lord, Take me after thee. And with these words in our Lords company
he gave up his Spirit to God, on the Calends of March, which being associated
to a Troop of Angels, with them mounted up to heaven, in the year of his age
one hundred forty seven.

Vit. S. Ken^^g^rn.
6. The same Author further adds, That this Holy Bishops death, by an Angel
divulging it, instantly was spread through all Brittany and Ireland. Suitable
whereto is this passage in the life of S. Kentigern: Whilst the servant of God
Kentigern one day continued his prayers with more then ordinary attention and
devotion, his face seemd as on fire: the sight whereof filled the by standers
with great amazement. When Prayers were ended, he began bitterly to lament: And
when his Disciples humbly asked him the reason of his sorrow, he sat a while
silent; at last he said, My dear children, know for certain that the Holy
Bishop David, the glory of Brittany, the Father of his country is this day
dead, he has escaped out of the prison of his body, and is flown to heaven.
Believe me, I my self have seen a multitude of Angels conducting him in to the
joy of his Lord: and our Lord himself at the entrance of Paradise has crowned
him with glory and honor. Know also that Brittany which is deprived of so
great a light, will a long time mourn the absence of so powerful a Patron. He
it was who opposed himself to the sword of our Lord which was half drawn out
for the destruction of that nation in revenge of their sins and impenitence.
Now will God deliver up Brittany to strange Nations which know him not, and
Pagans shall empty the Island of its inhabitants. Christian Religion shall be
utterly dissipated in it, till the time prefixed by God be ended: But after
that, it shall through the mercies of our Lord be restored to its former state,
yea to a far better and happier. How true this Prophecy of S. Kentigern was the
following Story will demonstrate.

7 S. David was buried in his own Church of Menevia, which, says Geffrey of
Monmouth, Galfrid. l. 11. cap 3.
he had loved above all other Monasteries of his Diocese because S. Patrick who
had prophesied of his Nativity, had been the founder of it. He adds, that it
was by the command of Malgo King of the Venedotae that he was there buried: And
that after five hundred years he was solemnly canonized by Pope Calixtus the
second of that name. The Church in which he was buried was dedicated to S.
Andrew, but in succeeding times took S. David for the Patron, by whose name it
and the whole Diocese was called S. David's.

8. The Memory of his Sanctity was so precious, that within a few years after
his death the visiting of his Church was a great devotion of those times.
G^rald. in ^escript. Cambr.
S. Oudoceus Successor of S. Theliau in the Bishopric of Landaff after a
Pilgrimage to visit the Monuments of the Holy Apost^es at Rome, made another to
the Church of S. David. And afterward when any one had a desire to go in
devotion to Rome and was hindered either by the difficulties or dangers of the
journey, he might equal the merit of such a pilgrimage by twice visiting the
Church of S. David's, as appears by a D^stick common in those times expressing
so much. Such was either the pious credulity of that age, or perhaps that
compensation was allowed by Popes.

9. The Successor of S. David in the Bishopric of Menevia was called Kinoc or
Cenac, who was translated thither from the Sea of S. Pattern. But his and many
of his Successors Gests have been buried in obscurity, for the Name of Saint
David did so fill the Church of Menevia for several ages, that the mention of
his successors has been omitted.

XXI. CHAP. XXI. CHAPTER

1.2.3. Death of King Otta, and K. Cerdic.

1. BEcause we would not discontinue the Gests of the famous Bishop S. David we
have pursued them several years beyond the date and season whereto we are
arrived in the General History of the Ecclesiastical state of Brittany. Which
disorder, hereafter also often to be committed, especially in the lives of
particular Saints, we expect will find pardon, because thereby a greater
disorder will be avoided of delivering their actions peece-meale and by shreds
to the Readers prejudice. We will therefore return to the place from which we
made this diversion.

2. In the year of Grace five hundred thirty two Otta King of Kent dyed, A. D.
5^2.
leaving his Son Irmeric Successor in his Kingdom: who was illustrious for
nothing more then in that he was Father to the glorious and happy King
Ethelhert the first Christian King among the Saxons.

3. Two years after dyed also Cerdic King of the West Saxons in the sixteenth
year of his Reign, A. D. 5^4.
to whom succeeded his Son Kenric in all his Dominions, except the Isle of
Wight, which he left to his Sisters Son Witgar, whom he dearly loved, both for
propinquity of blood and military skill.

A. D. 5^9

XXII. C.


XXII. CHAP.
1.2. etc Of S. John a British Saint, in France.

4.5 etc. Of S. Mochia a British Saint in Ireland.

1. IN our ancient English Martyrologe the death of a Holy British Priest is
assign^d to the year five hundred thirty ^eaven. His name was John: and his
fame was more celebrated in foreign Nations then his own. The great commotions
of Brittany and barbarous cruelty of the Saxons compelled great numbers to seek
means of serving God abroad, which they could not find at home. Among whom this
Holy Priest John was one who retired himself into France, and tho^g^ he spent
his li^e i^ solitude and prayer in the Province of Tours, yet it p^eas'd God by
a miracle after his death to (...) known his Sanctity Which Miracle I sh^^ld
scarce have mentioned in this History, were it not that I find it related by a
famous Bishop S. Gregory o^ Tours, in whose Prov^nce thi^ Holy Priest lived,
and who might himself have been an eye-witnes o^ it The relation given by him
is as follows: 2. Not far from this Church of Ca^on rests the sacred Holy of
a certain Priest named John. Greg. Turon de (...) Confessor. c. 2^.
He was by Nation a B^ittain, and living here with great devotion and piety,
our Lord was pleased by (...) miraculously to restore health to many. He the
better to attend to divine love, avoided the ^ight of men, confining himself to
a little Cell and Oratory over against the Church of Ca^on: ^here (...) a
little Orchard cultivated by himself he had planted a few lawrel-trees, which
now are ^o increased, that the boughs of them being drawn together arch-^ise
do afford a very pleasing ^hade. Under those laurels his custom was to sit,
reading or writing, as he thought fit. After his death among the said trees
whose wide-stretch'd branches made a very commodious shade, there was one which
through age was quite withered. Then he to whom the care of the place was
committed d^^g'd up the roots of the said dry tree, and of the body of it hewed
out a seat or bench, upon which when he was weary, or would seriously meditate
on business, he was used to sit. After he had made such use of the said seat
the space of two years or m^re, a thought of remorse came into his heart, I
believe by divine Inspiration, which forced him to say, Alas* Sinner that I am,
^hy do I for mine own convenience make use of a seat framed of the tree which
so holy a Priest planted with his o^n hand. Having said this, he presently took
a ^^ade and digging a de^p hole in the ground presently, he putt the seat into
it after he had cut off the ^eet which supported it: and then covered it with
earth Now behold a great wonder! The very next spring this dry bench, thus
buried as has been said, sprouted forth into green branches, as the other
treese did: which prosper'd so well that at this day there are proceeded from
it several young trees five or six feet high, and some higher, which every
year by our Lords blessing do more and more flourish.



3 The Centuriators of Magdeburg tak^ notice of this Saint and of the Orchard
planted by him, Magdeb. Ce^^ 6.
but conceal this Wonder. He is likewise commemorated in the Gall^can
Martyrologe on the seven and twentieth of June. Martyr^ l. Gall. c. 27. I^n.


4. And as the French Church does celebrate the memory of this holy British
P^eist John, so does the Irish that of S. M^cthas, who by B. Vshers supputation
dyed also this year He in the beginning of the Saxon troubles forsook his
country, and passed over into Ireland: And, according to the narration of of
Iocelinus, Iocelin. in vit Patri^. ^. ^34.
coming to a certain place near the sea called Lugh (or Louth) very pleas^^t and
delicious: there he resolved to repose himself. In the same place S. Patrick
had formerly had a resolution to build a Church: but was commanded by an Angel
to consign that place to a certain Britain named Mocthus, V^d (...) ^^mord. 8^^
or Mocchaeus, who would shortly come thither and end his days with great
sanctity: which he accordingly did. He was oftimes there visited by S. Patrick,
whose Disciple he became: and withal took the care of twelve leapers
recommended to him by S Patrick. He prophesied of the Holy man Columba. And was
afterward consecrated Bishop of Louth by S. Patrick. As touching the censure
inflicted on him by S. Patrick, Id. ibid f 87^
that because he waver'd in his Faith touching the long lives attributed to the
ancient Patriarks in Genesis, he himself should live three hundred years: so
long a delay of his happiness being to be his punishment; this is deservedly
rejected by the learned Bishop Usher: As likewise, that S. Patrick before his
death recommended to him the care of his See of Armagh. For Records of good
authority do leave it out of doubt that S. Benignus was designed by S. Patrick
in his lifetime his Successor in that See. The memory of S. Moctha is
celebrated in the Annals of Vlster on the thirteenth day before the Calends of
September.

A. D. 539.

XXIII. C.


XXIII. CHAP.
1.2. etc. S. Kentigern made Bishop, being only five and twenty years old.

5.6. etc. Certain defects in his Ordination: Dispensed with by S. Gregory the
Great.

A. D. 539.
1. IN the year five hundred thirty nine S. Kentigern being then no more then
five and twenty years old, was consecrated Bishop of Glasco. Concerning his
birth in the year of Grace five hundred and fourteen, and how his Mother in his
conception was deluded by some unknown person, insomuch as he was vulgarly
esteemd to have been the Son of a Virgin, as likewise how great severity was
used to her by her Father when she was known to be with child, how she was
first cast headlong from a high Mountain, and miraculously escaping that
danger, was exposed to the sea alone in a boat without Oars, and by a
wonderful Providence landed safely in the Northern parts among the Scotts, and
there immediately dilivered of her child, and lastly how both the Mother and
Infant were nourished by a Holy man called Servanus, has already been declared.

2. When he was capable of learning, the same S. Servanus took great care to
instruct him in knowledge and piety, wherein he proffited admirably, so that he
was beloved by his Master beyond all his companions: who ther^ore gave him the
Surname of Munghu, Vss^r. in Pri^^^. f. 6^4.
which signifies Dearly beloved: By which name the Scotts vulgarly call him to
this day, says B. Usher.

3. How he came afterward to be elected Bishop, Ap. Capgrav. in Ken^igern.
John of Tinmonth thus relates: When he was come to an age wherein he might
dispose his own actions, the man of God Kentigern went from his Master to a
place called Glashu, where he lived alone in great abstinence, until the King
and Clergy of that Region, called then Cumbria (now Galloway) together with the
other Christians, who were but few chose him for their Pastor and Bishop,
notwithstanding the utmost resistance he could make. And sending for one single
Bishop out of Ireland they caused him to be consecrated after the then usual
custom among the Britains and Scotts: For at that time a practice had got
footing to use no other Ceremonies in the Consecration of a Bishop, but only
the infusion of Sacred Chris^^ on their heads with invocation of the Holy
Spirit, benediction and imposition of hands. For those Islanders, removed as it
were out of the world, by means of their continual infestations by Pagans,
were become ignorant in the Ecclesiastical Canons. For which reason the Law of
the Church condescended to them, and admitted an excuse in this regard, so that
Ecclesiastical censures did not touch them. Notwithstanding S. Kentigern, as
we shall declare presently, did make full satisfaction for the defect and
error committed in his Consecration.

4. His Diocese extended it self according to the limits of the Kingdom of
Cumbria, from that famous Wall from Sea to Sea which had formerly been built to
hinder the Enemies incursions into the Provinces of the Britains, as far as to
the R^^er Ford, or Scottish Sea, Northerly. It was in the five and twentieth
year of his age that he was consecrated Bishop.

5. In this Episcopal Consecration there were more then one defect, and
transgression of the Canons: 1. First hi^ age, that he was made Bishop being no
more then five and twenty years old, whereas in the Council of Agde (Agathensi)
assembled not above three and thirty years before this time, and in which
probably several British Bishops were present, a Decree was made, Council Agath
That no Metropolitan should presume to ordain any one Bish^p before (...) was
arrived to thirty years, that is, the age of a perfect man: least by reason of
his youth he should, as it sometimes happens, incur some ^ault an^ error. 2.
Again the Fathers of the first Nicen^ Council orderd: ^oncil 1. N. ^en. c. 6.
That if any one were made a Bishop without the judgment and con^ent of the
Metropolitan, he was forbidden to exercise his Episcopal function. Now in this
Ordination of S. Kentigern there was no consent of any Metropolitan, nor so
much as concurrence of any Bishop of the neighboring Diocese. 3 Thirdly the
first Canon of the Apostle^, confirmed by many Councils, enjoynd that every
Bishop should be ordained by at least two or three Bishops: C^^^n. i. Apost.
Whereas S. Kentigern was consecrated by one single Bishop, and him a stranger
of a ^orr^i^ Nation. 4 Fourthly in the consecration of Bishops the Ancient
Fathers for the dignity o^ that Degree ordained many Rites to be observed,
besides such as belonged to the essence o^ that Sacrament: as anointing the
Head with Chrism with invocation of the Holy Spirit, signin^ the person with
the Sign of the Cross, imposition of hands, together with several other Rites
adjoined for the adorning the house of God, a defect whereof did not vitiate the
Sacrament, but person only.

6. Now in all these points some defects there were in the Ordination of S.
Kentigern, which defects when afterward he called them to mind, caused great
unquietnes and remorse in him. But whereas the foresaid Author says, That by a
custom introduced among the Britains this Sacrament of Ordination of Bishops
was practiced thus imperfectly: it appears that such a deficiency was crept in
among them, and this only since the Saxons entering caused so great disturbances
in the Island, that the Ecclesiastical Canons were either forgotten, or if
remembered, could hardly be practiced. Either there were no Metropolitans, or
they were so far distant, that in those dangerous times, no access could be
had to them: Most places wanted Bishops, and even inhabitants; so that it was a
wonder that even the Holy Chrism could be supplied, which no doubt was
furnished out of Ireland.

7. Hence it is manifest that these disorders and neglect of Ecclesiastical
Canons were an Error venial, because unavoydable: that in former peaceable
times the practice was otherwise, and the Canons were duly observed: So that
the purity of the Britains Faith was hereby nothing prejudiced. Therefore some
Protestant Controvertists do unreasonably collect from hence that the
Britains before S. Gregory's time did not in their Ordinations conform
themselves to the Roman Church, but received their Rites from I know not which
Eastern Churches: Whereas no Eastern Churches can be found which neglected any
of these Ceremonies: and as for the Roman, it is evident by what has been
formerly declared, that the Britains in their Discipline established by
Councils demanded a confirmation from the Sea Apostolic.

8. But a more Authentic proof of the respect and dependence which the
British Churches had of the Roman, cannot be imagined, then the behavior of
S. Kentigern himself. For being afterward afflicted in mind for the foresaid
defects in his Ordination, he did not seek for Counsel or remedy from any
Metropolitains in Brittany, Ireland or France, but only from Rome and the
Supreme Bishop thereof, to whom the Custody of Ecclesiastical Canons was by
the Church committed, and who had authority to enjoin the observation of them,
to punish the transgression, and to supply or dispense with the defects either
by negligence or necessity occurring in the execution of them.

Ap. Capgrav. in S. Kentigern.
9. This is expressly declared by the foresaid John of Tinmouth in his
prosecution of the Life of S. Kentigern: where he tells us, That the Man of God
went seven several times to Rome, where he simply and particularly laid open
his whole life, his Election, Consecration and all the accidents which had
befall^ him to S. Gregory the special Apostle of the English. Upon which the
Holy Pope perceiving that he was a sincere man of God and full of the Grace of
Gods holy Spirit, confirmed his Consecration, knowing that it came from God.
Moreover at his often and earnest request, yet with great unwillingnes, he
condescended to supply those small defects which were wanting in his
Consecration: and having done this, he dismissed him to the work of the
Ministry which was enjoined him by the Holy Ghost.

10. Hence appears that in the Ordination of S. Kentigern nothing was omitted
that was of any necessity, since it was only upon his importunity and for
satisfaction of his Scrupulosity that S. Gregory supplied the omissions of
certain Rites required by the Canons. The greatest fault that the Holy Bishop
could impute to himself was his being consecrated by one only Irish Bishop,
against the Express Canon of a General Council. A. D. 541.
But considering the unquietnes and danger of the times, and the want of
Bishops, though there was a transgression of the words of the Canon, yet there
was none of the mind of it, which certainly does not oblige to impossibilites.
And this was the resolution of the sense of it which the same S. Gregory gave
to S. Augustine, answering the like difficulty, in these words: In the Church of
the Angli, Greg. M.
wherein at present thou art the only Bishop, thou can not ordain any other
Bishop, but thy self alone without the concurrence of other Bishops.

XXIV. CHAP. XXIV. C.

1.2. S. Kentigern Virtues.

1. HOW S. Kentigern behaved himself in discharge of his Episcopal Office is
thus further declared by the same Author: After his Consecration, Ap. Capgrav.
in S. Kentigern.
during the whole course of his life his custom was to eat only every third
day, and sometims, fourth: and his food was bread, Milk, cheese and butter. For
he always abstained from flesh and wine, or any other drink which could
distemper. Next his skin he wore a very rough hayr-cloath, and over that a
garment made of goat-shins together with a close Cowle: and his uppermost
clathing was a white Albe. He always wore a Stole: and carried a Pastoral
staff or Crosier, not sphericall, nor gilded and set with precious stones,
but of simple wood, bowing back at the toop: and in his hand he ever held a
book. Thus he was always in a readiness to exercise his function, whenever
necessity or reason required, He lay in a stone-chest made hollow like a Biere:
under his head lay a stone: and under his body were cast cinders and a Cilice
of hayr: in which posture he with some unwillingnes admitted a short sleep:
after which he would plunge himself in cold water, and so recite the whole
Psalter. This customary practice neither snow nor rain did interrupt, nor any
thing but sickness or journeying: and then he would redeem a discontinuation of
these austerities with some spiritual exercise. Thus does that Author
describe S. Kentigerns private life, by many other arguments showing him to be
a man absolutely perfect in all virtues.

2. Id. ibid.
Consequently he relates other actions of his in order to the discharge of his
Episcopal Office, saying, He fixed his Episcopal See in the City of Glasco:
where likewise he ordained a great Congregation (of Religious men) who lived
according to the form of the Primitive Church, in community of all things. The
Infidels in his Diocese he converted to the Faith. Apostats and Heretics he by
his sound doctrine recalled to the b^som of our Holy Mother the Church. He every
where threw down Idols and Images of Devils, and built some Churches. He
distinguished Parishes by their certain bounds. A. D. 542.
He was always traveling to gain souls to God, never riding on hors-back, but
in imitation of the Apostles always going a foot. And because he would not eat
his bread in idleness, his custom was to labor with his hands in agriculture.
His other Gests we shall relate here after.

XXV. C.
XXV. CHAP.
1.2. etc. Mordred King Arthurs Nephew rebels: He is pursued by King Arthur:
and both slain.

7.8. King Arthur dyed, and was buried at Glastonbury.

9. His appearing again long expected by the Welsh.

10 11. etc. His Monument discovered in after ages.

A. D. 540.
1. ABout this time it was that our famous King Arthur found at last repose in
his grave, which he could never enjoy during life. The manner how he was
brought to his end is thus related by our Historians.

2. In an expedition which upon some unknown occasion he made abroad he left
the administration of his Kingdom to a Nephew by his Sister, Westmonast. hic.
Antiquit. Glaston.
and Son of Loath King of the Picts called Mordred. Who taking advantage of his
Uncles absence, invaded the throne upon a pretense that King Arthur, was a
bastard, as being born not in lawful marriage. And to this treason he added the
crime of incest, violently taking his Uncles wife Queen Guenhumara. Moreover to
strengthen him self, he entered into a Confederacy with the King of the
West Saxons, to whom he quietly yielded several Provinces.

A. D. 541.
3. These infamous crimes being come to the ears of King Arthur, he presently
returned into Brittany, inflamed with a rage and hatred unquencheable against
his abominable kinsman. Mordred was prepared to hinder his landing: at which
time a cruel batell was fought between them, in which Angus^lus King of
Albania, and Walwan another Nephew of King Arthur were slain. Notwithstanding
at last with infinite difficulty he landed: And renewing the fight he made a
great slaughter of his enemies, and compelled Mordred to fly to Winchester.
Whither he was with great fury pursued by King Arthur: where in a second batell
after much blood shed Mordred was again putt to flight, which he directed
toward Cornwall. But King Arthur not ceasing to follow, at last overtook him
near the River Camblan: in which place the controversy between them was ended,
but fatally to them both.

4. For Mordred having ranged his army, in a desperate fury rushed among his
enemies, resolved rather to dye then once more to show his back to them. In
this co^bat, which continued almost a whole day, after horrible bloodshed on
both sides, King Arthur with the courage and fury of a lion rushed into the
troop where he knew Mordred was: and making way with his sword, at last with
horrible slaughter dispersed his enemies. There fell the Traitor Mordred, and
with him several Saxon Commanders, Cheldric, Elaphius, Egbrith and Bruning,
and many thousands with them.

5. But this Victory cost King Arthur his life also: For in the combat he
received a mortal wound: Whereupon he was conveyed into the Isle Avallonia
(now Glastonbury) by the charity of a kinswoman of his, a noble Matron called
Morganis. This gave the foolish British Bards occasion to invent the story of
a Faery Goddess called Morganis which carried the Body of King Arthur by
Magical skill into Avallonia, with a promise that she would cure his wounds,
and that he should return with his former courage and strength to govern his
Britains: And for this reason during many years, yea ages, his return was
expected by them as foolshly as the coming of the Messiah is by the Jews.

6. When Queen Guenhumara heard of the return of her husband, and his war with
his Nephew, she fled in great have to the City Caer-leon, where she took the
Habit of Religion among the Nunns in the Monastery of S. Julius the Martyr.

7. The true reason why King Arthur would be carried to the Monastery of
Glastonbury doubtless was, partly to prepare himself more perfectly for death in
the company and by the assistance of the Holy Monks living there: and likewise
that after his death he might be buried among such a world of Saints as reposed
there from the beginning of Christianity. Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. l. 4. c. 60.
The like design we read of in Constantin, for he ordaind his burial in like
manner, to the end he might be partaker of the Suffrages of so many Saints, and
of the prayers of such as in succeeding times should come to visit their
Monuments.

8. King Arthur before his death gave unto the said Monastery Brent-march and
Poulden with other lands beside: Antiquit. Glaston.
Which the Pagan Angli took away, but afterward being converted to the Faith
restored with advantage. He appointed likewise for his Successor a kinsman of
his called Constantin: and having recommended himself to the Prayers of the
Monks, A. D. 542.
he dyed happily, and after a Christian manner, was buried with a Cross.

9. His conveyance to Glastonbury was, it seems by own order, done with great
secrecy: and by the same order his death and place of burial was studiously
co^ceald. The reason is given by Matthew of Westminster in these words:
Westmonast. hic.
The dying King was desirous to be hidden, least his enemies should insult, and
his friends be molested for so great a calamity. And hence it is that since our
Histories do relate nothing of his death and burial, the British Nation out
of their great affection to him, do contend that he is still alive. And on
this occasion was invented the Prophecy fathered on Merlin the Magician,
Malmsbur. de Regib. l. 3. f. 115.
that he should appear and reign once more. Lastly Malmsburiensis affirms that
in his time (who dyed in the year of Grace one thousand one hundred forty two)
the Sepulcher of King Arthur could no where be found: whereas the Monument of
his Heroical Nephew Walwin Prince of a Territory called Walwerth, had lately
been found in the time of King William, near the Seacoast, and that it was
fourteen foot long.

10. Notwithstanding a little while after in the reign of King Henry the
Second, by the pious industry of certain devout persons King Arthurs Monument
was at last found, and the expectation of his return utterly vanished among the
Welsh Nation. The manner how it was found together with the description of it,
we have in several of our Historians, Mat. Paris. A. D. 1561. Girald. ^ambr.
in spec Eccl ap. Vser. 119.
as Matthew Paris, and Giraldus Cambrensis, who affirms that the Abbot who found
it showed him the Cross which lay over King Arthurs body, the characters
whereof he curiously read, etc.

11. But the most authentic account hereof we may receive from the Great Table
of Glastonbury framed on purpose to continue the memory of the said Invention,
Tab. Mag. Glaston apud V^her in Primord. f. 117.
a copy whereof is preserved by B. Usher, in this tenor: In this Island
Avallonia, or rather this Tomb of Saints at Glastonbury, do rest King Arthur
the flower of the Kings of Brittany, and Guenhavera his Queen, who after their
decease were honorably buried near the old Church between two stone-Pyramids,
heretofore nobly engraven: And in the same place have their bodies rested for
many ages, to wit, six hundred twenty eight years, till the time of Henry de
Soili, who after the burning of the said Church was Abbot of the same place.
The which said Abbot after many admonitions by several persons commanded men
to digg between the said Piramids, to try whether they could find the Kings
body: but before they began to digg, the place was all encompassed with
cortains. They dug therefore exceeding deep, and at last found a very great
Biere of wood altogether shutt: which with their instruments they opened, and
within it discovered the Kings body, and a certain Cross of Lead, of which one
whole side was filled with this Inscription, Here lies buried the famous King
Arthur in the Island Avallonia. Then they opened the Tomb of the Queen, and the
hayrs of her head were spread over her body, and seemd as if she had been
lately buried: but as soon as they touched them, they fell all into dust. The
Abbot then and Convent with great joy and exceeding honor transferrd their
Bodies from thence, and placed them in a double Monument of stone nobly
engraven on the out side, in the great Church: to wit, the Kings body by it
self at the head of the Tomb: and the Queens on the East side.

11. As touching the two Pyramids between which King Arthurs Monument was first
placed, and the ancient, scarcely legible, inscriptions on them, which
Malmsburiensis has copied out, we gave our opinion of them when we treated of
the first foundation of the Monastery of Glastonbury, supposing that they were
the names of certain Holy persons there anciently buried, among which King
Arthur prudently desired to be placed, for the reasons before said. Yet since
among them there are found some names which savor of a Saxon Original, it may
therefore seem that some of those persons were buried, and their names
inscribed in after times: But withal, since the Southern parts of Brittany had
of ancient times been possessed by nations of a German original, as the Belga,
Arrebates, etc. why might not many of their names continue after their language
was changed?

XXVI. CHAP. XXVI. C.

1.2. Folly of those who deny that ever there had been such a King as Arthur.

3. The Cross a proof of his being a Christian.

1. THE foresaid testimonies and irrefragable Monuments do evidently declare
the unreasonablenes of some late Writers assertion, that King Arthur was
neither a King nor a Christian, yea that there never was any such man, but that
his actions and even his being were merely the creatures and fictions of idle
dreaming Bards.

2. Among such censorious Writers, Geneb^ard.
Genebrard thus positively presumes to write, Geffrey of Monmouth and Bale do
most vainly and falsely faign that their Great Arthur, who never had a being,
as may be understood from Saint Beda, Beda l. 1. c. 16.
did in the time of Clodoveus King of France destroy the Saxons, and performed
more wonderful Exploits through the whole world almost, then Alexander the
Great: That he was a Christian, etc. Indeed that many foolish stories pass
concerning him it cannot be denied. But that it may be collected from S. Beda
that there was never any such man is a mistake. Id. ibid.
All that he says is, That Ambrosius Aurelian a modest man was the only person
of the Roman stock who overlived the miseries of the Britains, at the time
when the Saxons first raised such Tragedies in the Island. He does not deny
that he had Sons and grandchildren: Gild. de Excid.
On the contrary Gildas expressly affirms that the Offspring of Ambrosius in
the times when he wrote did degenerate from the virtue of their Ancestors.

3. It cannot therefore be denied that such a Prince governed the Britains, as
King Arthur, that his reign continued the space of about three and thirty
years: that in the seaventieth year of his age he died, and was buried after
the Christian manner was sufficiently testified by the Cross over his Tomb. A.
D. 528.
Which Cross was from the beginning esteemed through the whole Church an
assured badge of Christianity, but in the beginning of the late Change, called
a Reformation of Christianity, the Cross which testified that King Arthur was
a Christian, was by a person of quality a Protestant thrown down to testify
that another sort of Christianity began then to arise. The first degree of
Apostasy declared by the Emperor Julian was the casting away the sign of the
Cross, which, says S. Cyrill, Cyrill. Ca^^^. 3. Athanas. in vit^. S. A^on.
is the prime and immovable foundation of the Faith professed by a Christian,
and which, according to the testimony of S. Athanasius, has in every age
triumphed over all Superstition and Idolatry: Wereas of late the Cross it self
is accounted at the best to be superstition, and our Veneration of it, Idolatry.

XXVII. C.
XXVII. CHAP.
1.2. etc. Of S. Iltutus.

4. His Vow of Chastity: blaspemed by the Centuriators, etc.

1. BEfore we apply our selves to the narration of the Gests, or indeed crimes,
of the degenerate Successors of King Arthur, it will be expedient to celebrate
the virtues and Sanctity of two Holy British Saints, famous in that age, S.
Iltutus and S. Sampson: the former, heretofore mentioned, dyed during that
Heroical Kings reign, but in what year is uncertain: the other flourished
then, though his life was continued several years after.

2. S. Iltutus ( in the Gallican Martyrologe called S. Hildutus, Ap. Capgra^ i^
^^ S. (...)
by others S. Elcutus) was the Son of a Noble Soldier named Rican. His mother
was called Rieneguilida, daughter to the Prince of Lesser Brittany. In his
childhood he was by his parents care instructed in learning: but being arrived
to more years he applied himself to Martial affairs. And hearing the report
of the magnificence of his kinsman King Arthur, he resolved to visit him, by
whom he was with great honor received. Afterward he went to the Prince of the
Province, now called Glamorgan, by whom he became so highly esteemed, that he
was advanced to the highest condition in that State, and next under him
governed the Court.

Ib.
3. After this he was counseled and persuaded by S. Cadocus, surnamed Sophias,
to forsake his secular habit and profession, and to consecrate the remainder of
his life to the service of God, that so he might more assuredly attain to
eternal happiness and rewards. Iltutus thereupon yiedling his assent and
submission to the words of the Holy man, relinquished the world, and retiring
himself to a commodious mansion lived there some time a solitary devout life.
He is said by Pits to have been a Disciple of S. German of Auxerre: A. D. 529
Afterward he had recourse to S. Dubricius then Bishop of Landaff, Pits in S.
Iltut.. Ap. Cap grav. ibid.
who gave him the Tonsure and Crown, badges of a Religious Profession, and so
dismissed him to his place.

4. Thus, Pits ibid.
says Pits, with the consent of his wife he vowed perpetual Chastity, which
was also by his wife observed. This his signal act of contempt of sensual
pleasures is so displeasing to the Centuriators of Magdeburg, Magdeburg. Cent.
6. c. 10
that although in the beginning of their Narration touching his actions they
had given this Character of him, That he was above all that lived in his Nation
most eminently skilld in the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, and
divine Philosophy: morever that he was adorned by Almighty God with the Spirit
of Prophecy and knowledge of future things: Notwithstanding in the pursuit
being to mention this Vow of Chastity, they not only contradict the former
Character, but invent a most blasphemous lie, adding these words, Illutus was
notoriously filld with the Spirit of Antichrist: Ibid.
insomuch as out of contempt of marriage, and in opposition to the Apostles
Doctrine, he repudiated his most chaste wife, and moreover plucked out her eyes.
Which most impudent lie, reported likewise by Bale an Apostate and
transgressour too of his Vow of Chastity, has not the least ground in our
ancient Records touching his Gests.

5. The Memory of his learning and sanctity is to this day preserved in
Glamorganshire, where there is a town and Church called Llan-lwit, contractedly
from Llan-iltut ( not far from Llan-carvan the habitation of S. Cadocus) where
S. Iltutus diligently preached Gods word, and moreover instituted a College of
Scholars, whom he instructed in learning and piety. Among whom the most
illustrious was S. Sampson, of whom we shall treat presently, and who by his
Masters directions embraced likewise a Religious Profession.

6. Several fables and unsavory Miracles reported in Capgrave touching S.
Iltutus, deserve to be omitted: Ap. Cap grav. ibid.
Neither seems there to be any just ground for this passage in the conclusion
of his life: That when his last end approached, he returned into lesser
Brittany, and there in the City of Orle, after many signs and miracles wrought
by him, he commended his body to the earth, and his Spirit to God, on the eight
day before the Ides of November. For doubtless if he had dyed in Lesser Brittany
the Gallican Martyrologe would not have been silent in that particular: Whereas
it mentions nothing of him but that he was a Disciple of S. Germanus of Auxerre
whilst he preached against the Pelagians in Brittany; Martyrolog. Gallican 7
November.
that he was the Instructour of S. Sampson Bishop of Dole and of many other
illustrious Monks: and lastly that he was eminent for the Spirit of Prophecy
and many Miracles. Which Martyrologe differs in one particular from ours, in
which he is said to have been the Disciple of S. Germanus Bishop of Paris, not
of Auxerre.

A. D. 540.

XXVIII. CHAP.


XXVIII. CHAP.
1.2. Of S. Sampson.

3.4 Of S. Piro.

5. S. Sampson an Archbishop in Brittany: and where.

6. etc He caries the Pall to Dole in Lesser Brittany: which Church therefore
pretended an exemption from Tours.

8. Of S. Conaid, or S. Mein.

1. AS touching S. Iltutus his Disciple, S. Sampson, he was born in Great
Brittany in the Province of the Dimetae or South Wales, now called
Glamorganshire: He descended from Noble parents: His Fathers name was Amon (as
we read in B. Usher) and his Mothers, Vsser in Primord. f. 531.
Anne, who was born in the next Province, called Venetica from the chief City
Caer-guent, Ap. Capgrav. in Sampson.
or Venta Silurum. His parents having lived many years childlesse, at last by
their frequent fasting, Alms and prayers obtained him of God.

Pit in Sampson.
2. In his younger years he became a worthy Disciple of S. Iltutus, says Pits
from Leland, from whom he learned human knovledge, integrity of life, and
Monastical institution in a Monastery which a little before he had founded by
the assistance of a Holy man called Piro.

3. Concerning this Holy man we read in Vincentius this testimony: Vincent. in
^^ec. hist. c. 21. c. 109.
There was, says he, a certain Island not far distant from the Monastery of S.
Iltutus in which another Monastery was built by a holy man named Piro. Thither
did S. Sampson hasten by Gods guidance and the advice of his Master S. Iltutus:
and there did he lead a perfect and Angelical life. He was in his conversation
a^iable, persevering in good works, and vigilant in prayer etc. Not long after,
Piro being prevented by Death, the Holy man Sampson was by the unanimous
suffrages of the Convent chosen Abbot. Vsser. in Ind. Chronol.
This Election by B. Vshers computation was made in the year of Grace five
hundred and thirteen. And eight years before, when S. Petroc, as has been
said, came into Cornwall, the rustic Pagans living there gave him notice of the
sanctity and austere life of this Holy man, who then lived not far from thence
a solitary life.

Id. ib. A. D. 516.
4. Four years after he had been chosen Abbot, says B. Usher, by the permission
of the Holy Bishop Dubricius, he went into Ireland in the company of certain
Scotts who in their return from Rome came thither. His stay in Ireland was not
long: for he was present at the Synod of Brevy in the year of our Lord five
hundred and nineteen.

5. He was afterward ordained and consecrated an Archbishop in Brittany: but
neither the time, nor place can assuredly be defined. But that S. Sampson a
British Archbishop went out of this Island into Lesser Brittany, and carried
over with him the Pall, which was the ensign of his dignity, is certain beyond
all controversy. A great debate there was in the time of Pope Innocent the
third whether the Pall was tranferd from York or from Menevia, Matthew Paris
declares his opinion that it was from York: Mat. Paris. A. D. 199 Girald Camb
de Eccl^s Menev. ^ist. 2
But Giraldus Cambrensis in his Dialogue concerning the Church of Menevia
relating this controversy, brings in Pope Innocent thus obiecting in the behalf
of the Church of York, Yea but this Sampson Bishop of Dole, as the tradition
is, had formerly been Archbishop of York. Whereto Giraldus thus answers, Saving
your Reverence, the case is otherwise: for the History of the Church of Dole
affirms him to be ours at Menevia, and to have relation to no other Church in
Brittany. Hence it is that in the Sequence sung in that Church on the Festivity
of S. Sampson it is expressly said, That the Prelate of Menevia was transferd
to the supreme Dignity of the Church of Dole. As for the Advocats in behalf of
the Church of York they are deceived by an equivocation of the Name, because in
their Records they find the name of an Archbishop Sampson. And another plea
which those of York had for their cause was a supposititious Prophecy of
Merlin: That the dignity of London should adorn Canterbury; And the seventh
Pastor of York should be honored in Lesser Brittany.

6. The debate therefore is generally concluded to the advantage of the Church
or Menevia, in which S. Sampson is supposed to have succeeded in the place of
Kinorus who was next to S. David. Now the Church o^ Menevia being a
Metropolitan Church, enjoying all the Privileges of the Church of Caer-leon,
the Archbishop thereof by consequence wore a Pall, the Ensign of that Dignity.
Which Pall was by S. Sampson carried over to Dole in ^esser Brittany in the year
of Grace five hundred sixty six, at which time the whole Province of Menevia
was almost depopulated by a raging pestilential disease, as has been observed
by Roger Hoveden, Harpsfeild, Sigebertus and others: Hapsf. c. 27. in 6 prim.
the Holy Bishop was unwilling to avoid the danger: But his friends being
urgent, he took ship and landed in Armorica.

7. Being arrived there he was admitted into great favor by Childebert then
King of France: Gallican. Mart. 28. Nouemb.
and with his license and contribution founded a Monastery: where he lead a
life wholly employed in Divine meditations: and by his most holy example and
admonitions directed many Disciples in the same way. Thus we read in the
Gallican Martyrologe.

8. S. Sampson in his voyage took with him a companion of suitable holiness
called S. Conaid, vulgarly by the French named S. Mein, who probably is the
same which otherwise is is styled S. Mevennius, whose life has been written by
Roland a Nova-Villa: by whom he is styled the son of a Noble man of Great
Brittany living in the Region of Venta (or Caer-guent) in Ca^bria ( S. Sampsons
country: Roland. in vit. S. Concid.
) That he received good education, having been by his parents recommended to S.
Sampson of Menevia. One special Miracle is recorded to have been wrought by
him, Martyrol. Gallic. 15. I^^.
which was that by his prayers a fountain sprung forth in a dry soil, very
effectual for curing several diseases, and specially the Scurvey (Psora)
which therefore is vulgarly called the Disease of S. Mein. This is related in
the Gallican Martyrologe on the fifteenth of June. He is supposed to have dyed
in the year of Grace five hundred and ninety. And he is commemorated likewise
in our English Martyrologe on the same day by the name of S. Main.

9. After that S. Sampson had spent some years in his Monastery of Dole, the
Bishop of that City dying he was elected in his place. And having in his
custody the Pall which he had worn formerly being Archbishop of Menevia, the
same he made use of in his Episcopal functions also at Dole. From whence his
Successors Bishops of Dole taking advantage, assumed likewise to themselvas
the honor of wearing a Pall, and consequently of challenging an
Archiepiscopall Jurisdiction and an exemption from the power of their former
Metropolitan the Archi-bishop of Tours. This they continued many ages, till the
days of Pope Innocent the third, notwithstanding many oppositions and
protestations of the said Archbishops. And all that time the Sea of Menevia,
or S. David's, though acknowledged the prime Church and Metropolis of Cambria,
yet abstained from the Pall. For which cause Pope Eugenius the third under our
King Henry the first subjected it to the Sea of Canterbury in the year of our
Lord eleaven hundred forty eight.

10. Thirty three years S. Sampson with admirable sanctity administered that
Bishopric, and in the year five hundred ninety nine received his eternal
Reward. Martyr. Gal. 28. Iulij.
His body by reason of the frequent incursions of the Danes and Normans, was
removed from Dole to Orleans: Where it was received with such reverence, that a
Church was built on purpose to keep it* which to this day is dedicated to his
honor, although destitute of that sacred pledge: which among many other Bodies
of Saints was impiously burnt by those professed Enemies of Sacred things the
Huguenots in the last age, who seized on that City. Thus we read in the
Gallican Martyrologe on the twenty eighth of July. Malmsbur. de Pontif. l. 2.
f. 251.
Some part of his Relics was with great veneration reposed in the Abbey of
Middleton in Dorsetshire, which was built by King Ethelstan in expiation of
being at least accessory to the murder of his brother Edwin in the year of
Grace nine hundred thirty four.

11 His Successor in the Sea of Dole was his kinsman, and companion of his
voyage, S. Maglore: concerning whom we shall treat in due place.

XXIX. CHAP. XXIX. C.

1.2. etc. Of S. Malo, or Mahutus.

1. ANother Kinsman of S. Sampson called S. Maclovius, A. D. 540.
or S. Malo, otherwise S. Mahutus, was famous at this time. He during the
tempest raised in Brittany by the treason of Mordred against his Uncle King
Arthur, and the bloody war following, left the kingdom and passed likewise into
Lesser Brittany, the common refuge of devout men in those times.

2. He was born in Brittany: His Fathers name was Went ( He is called Hano in
the Gallican Martyrologe) a Count and founder of the City by Historians called
Guincensis. His Mother was called Derwella, or Darwalla, and she being
threescore years old was delivered of him on the Vigile of Easter in the valley
of Llan-carvan in Glamorgan-shire.

3. In the same place at that time lived a Holy man called S. Brendan, Abbot of
the Monastery of Llan-carvan by whom this Infant so wonderfully born, was
baptized, and afterward educated in all virtue and piety. From his childhood
he is reported to have shined gloriously by innumerable Miracles, says,
Harpsfeild, which indeed accompanied him all his lifetime: Vincent. l. 21. c
9^. Anton. tit. 12. c. 8.
many of which are recorded by Vincentius and S. Antoninus, but resolutly
declared to be impostures by the Centuriators of Magdeburg; without any proof.

Camden. in Huntingd.
4. Our learned Camden affirms that the constant Tradition was that he was
afterward made Bishop of a City in the Province of the Iceni, now Huntingdon
shire, called by Antoninus Durosipons, because seated near the River Ouse, but
afterward the name was changed into Gormonchester, from Gormon, or Guthrum the
Dane to whom upon his becoming Christian King Aelfred gave those Provinces.
Notwithstanding it is rather probable that the said Tradition was grounded on
some mistake.

5. In succession of time upon occasion of the troubles before said, S. Malo, or
Mahutus went beyond sea into Lesser Brittany: where he lived in great sanctity.
But when the fame thereof was spread abroad ( as we read in the Gallican
Martyrologe) he, Martyr. Gal. 15. November.
out of a contempt of his own glory, retired himself privily into a certain
bordring Island, where in his Eremiticall manner of living he expressed an
Angelical purity. But the brightness of the divine splendor discovered this
light which endeavored to conceal it self. For when the Inhabitants of the
neighboring Island heard say that a certain stranger excelling in the gift of
preaching and power of Divine Miracles did hide himself there from the
conversation of men (this they were told by some who had received help from
him) they in a common assembly came, and drawing him by force out of his
solitude, chose him for their Pastor: and inviting the neighboring Bishops,
they placed him in the Pontifical chair of the City of Aleth, and partly by
entreaties, partly by mere force they compelled him to be their Bishop and
Ecclesiastical Governor.

6. S. Machutus being thus exalted to this dignity shed forth abundantly the
beams of that Divine Grace with which he was replenished, illustrating men's
souls with the true knowledge of God, inflaming them with his Love, and
affording both admonitions and examples of all virtues: to which likewise he
added a great efficacy by wonderful operations and miracles. Insomuch as since
the Apostles time we read not of any one who wrought greater wonders in the
name of Christ, then he: For with his word he calmed tempests; three dead
persons he restored to life; to the blind he gave sight; by the sprinckling of
Holy Water he expelled Devils; and quenched the poison of serpents.

7. Neither was it in regard of Miracles only that this Holy Bishop was like
unto those Princes of our Faith, but resembled them likewise in his patience
which was oftimes put to the trial: For he was assaulted by certain impious
persons, and suffered many calamities for justice and Religion, insomuch as in
the end he was violently thrust out of his Episcopal Throne and Diocese,
together with seven other devout persons whom he had chosen for his especial
companions, and who imitated him in purity of living: yet this so heavy a
Cross he bore after our Lord with a courageous mind, as the Apostles
heretofore did.

8. Attended with these holy men Saint Mahutus fled into Aquitain: and in the
City of Xaintes (Santonum) he was most kindly entertaind, and fatherly
assisted by Saint Leontius Archbishop of Bourdeaux, and Metropolitan of that
City: who there accommodated him with a convenient habitation for serving God.
For the Holy Archbishop Leontius bore a most tender affection to him, admiring
and reverencing the Divine Graces which he observed in him, whom he esteemd as
sent from heaven to assist him in his Pastoral charge. For which reason, in
all Visitations of his Diocese and Province he took him for his companion,
earnestly beseeching him to be his assistant by his wholesome counsels, by his
Prayers acceptable to God, and by the examples of his holy Life.

9. Moreover this Man of God, although so disgracefully and uniustly exild, was
not unmindfull of his flock: but forgetting all injuries, he daily invoked our
Lords clemency for the conversion of that stubborn people. The Divine Majesty
a^ last condescended to his Prayers, and by an Angel acquainted him that his
flock was now penitent, and earnestly desired the return and favor of their
Pastor: and that it was Gods will that he should repair to them, and restore to
health that Region which was greivously afflicted with the scourges of Divine
severity; that he should restore plenty to the barren earth, and bestow his
benediction on the inhabitants: And lastly having done this, that he should
again return to Xaintes, where he was to be divested of his corruptible flesh,
that his soul might freely ascend to partake eternal felicity. All these
things the Holy Bishop performed according as God had commanded: and when he
came back from Brittany S. Leontius received him with greater joy, and
expressed more respectfull Offices and kindness to him then formerly.

10. Shortly after this S. Mahutus ( or S. Maclovius ( dyed, full of days and
sanctity, and was buried by Leontius in Aquitain. Ibid.
And though the inhabitants of Aleth were deprived of the sacred Relics of
their prime Prelat, whom they had treated so injuriously: yet the Name of
Blessed Maclovius remains, never to be blotted out: which to this day both
adorns and defends that City with his glorious protection and celestial
benefits. Notwithstanding the Episcopal See does not now remain at Aleth, but
is removed to an Island two miles distant from thence, anciently called Aaron,
where a City new built, is in memory of their Holy Prelat and Patron called S.
Malo ( Vrbs Macloviensis.)

11. To this large relation in the Gallican Martyrologe, Ap. Capgrav. in S.
Mah^t^.
John of Tinmouth adds: That S. Mahutus with his seven Disciples in devotion
visited Rome, where he redeemd many Infidel Captives, and having instructed
them in the true Faith, baptized them. Moreover that after forty years
government having been iniustly and violently driven from his See at Aleth, he
cursed and excommunicated the people, and then retired to an Island in Aquitain
called Agenis, from whence he repaired to Leontius a Bishop there. Which
relation contradicts the Gallican Martyrologe, according to which S. Maclovius
was so far from cursing his flock, Magdeb. cent. 6. f. 753.
that he prayed daily for it. However the Centuriators of Magdeburg charitably
remember only his cursing and not his prayers: and most unskilfully write, that
he flourished under Leontius Bishop of the Saxons ( mistaking Saxonum for
Santonum:) and that he cursed the Britains, his own countrymen, from whom he
never received any injury. How long he lived appears not: but his death is in
our Martyrologe assigned to the year of Grace five hundred sixty four.

A. D. 542.

XXX. CHAPTER


XXX. CHAP.
1.2. Of S. Brendan.

3. Of S. Doc, and S. Canic.

1. SAint Brendan the spiritual Father and Instructour of S. Maclovius, though
by birth no Britain, is not be denied a place in this History: Concerning whom
we read in B. Usher that he came out of Ireland to visit the Holy man S. Gildas
Albanius in Brittany: Vsser. in Primord. f. 934.
where he built a Monastery and a Church. He was also Superior in the
Monastery of Lancarvan, where he baptized S. Maclovius. After that he returned
into Ireland, where he was Abbot of a Monastery called Birra, and in the year
of Grace five hundred seaventy one most happily ended his holy Life. Of whose
glory and Beatitude revealed to S. Columba, Ad^^^^. in vit. S. Columba. l. 3.
c. ^5.
the Author of that Saints life called Adamannus thus writes, where he
introduces S. Columba thus discoursing with his Minister Diormitius: Columba.
Go and quickly provide all things necessary for celebrating the Holy
Eucharist: for this is the day of the blessed death of S. Brendanus.
Diormitius. Why do you command that we should prepare so solemnly for Mass to
day; since no Messenger from Ireland (Scotia) has yet brought tidings of the
death of that Holy man. Columba. However go, and fail not to do as I have
commanded: for this last night I saw heaven on a sudden opened, and quires of
Angels descending to meet S. Brendans soul, by whose incomparable splendor
the whole world was that hour enlightened.

2. S. Brendan thus called to heaven, enjoyd on earth also an eternal Monument
of his name and Sanctity: for in the Isles of Orkney a town and Church were
built, and were called from his Name. The reason of which honor and devotion
was because his Sacred body was thither translated. The day of his death is
celebrated in our Martyrologe on the sixteenth of May: Martyr. Ang. 16. Maij
and 14. Iun.
and his Translation on the fourteenth of June.

3. We will here conclude with the Memory of a Holy British Abbot called S.
Doc, who flourished in this Age. Of whom the Irish Annals thus write in the
life of Saint Canic (from whom the Province of Kilkenny took its appellation,
importing the Church of Canic.) When S. Canic was grown to an age capable of
knowledge, Ap. Vsser. in Primord. f. 935.
he was desirous of instruction, and therefore passed over the Sea into
Brittany, to a Religious wise man naimed Doc: and under him he studied
diligently, and was taught both learning and piety. This S. Doc was one of the
three Holy Britains from whom the Irish learnd the form and Rites of
celebrating Mass, as has already been showed: the other two were S. David and
S. Gildas.

THE TWELTH BOOK OF THE CHVRCH-HISTORY OF BRITTANY.
I. CHAP.
I. CHAPTER.
1.2. etc. Constentin succeeds King Arthur. His Cruelly: Penance, and
undertaking a Religious life.

1. IT seems the Britains at the beginning had no such conceit of King Arthurs
returning, A. D. 542.
for surely they would have expepected awhile and not immediately have filled
his Throne with a succession of strange Princes. The Bards had not yet
contrived their fantastical Stories, which could find none in these times to
hearken to them.

2. Therefore after King Arthurs death Constantin, according to his
designation, succeeded him in the Government of Brittany. He was the Son of
Cador Duke of Cornwall, and kinsman to King Arthur. His sufficiency to
discharge that employment for the benefit of his country was enough approved
by his glorious Predecessors choice. But Almighty God having fixed a period to
the British Monarchy, permitted many factions to arise, and many pretendants
to the Principality, the opposing of whom hindered Constantin from advancing the
common proffit and safety of the Kingdom.

Gild. de Excid.
3. Yea moreover ambition and revenge had such power over him that they invited
him to commit crimes, which hastened the ruin of his country. Hence it is that
Gildas calls him the Tyrant of Danmonia: Tyrant by reason of his cruelty, and
Tyrant of one only Province, because several others at the same time had
invaded each one their several Principalities: and for the maintaining of
their unjustly usurped power filled the whole nation with all manner of crimes
and impiety.

4. This gave occasion to the same Gildas to write and publi'sh a passionate
Invective against the vices of the whole British Nation, Id. ibid.
which had universally depraved the inhabitants of all states and conditions
excepting a few, exceeding few, who seeing destruction unavoydably coming on the
Nation, sequestered themselves from public affairs, and in solitude deplored
the sins of others, and by great austerities and pennances procured indulgence
to their own souls.

5. In former times, says he, our Kings, public Officers, Id. ib.
private persons, Bishops and other Ecclesiastics, every one kept their order
and performed the duties belonging to them. But when they were dead (Such as
Ambrosius, Vther-pendragon, Arthur; and likewise Dubricius, David, etc.) there
succeeded a generation utterly ignorant of the former Virtues, among whom all
the rules of Truth and Justice were so shaken and subverted, that no
footsteps, nor so much as the least monument of those virtues appeard in any
of the foresaid orders and conditions, A. D. 543.
etc.

6. Constantin at his first ascending into his Throne bound himself by a solemn
Oath to govern justly, and to use his utmost endeavors to defend his subjects
from injuries and oppressions, and the common wealth from the violence of its
enemies. This appers, because the year following we find him accused of perjury
and violating his Faith given, for his barbarous cruelty, and sacrilegious
profanation of Gods house.

Weminist. A. D. 553
7. For two sons of Mordred, says Matthew of Westminster, rose in arms against
Constantin, being desirous to revenge their Fathers death (slain by King
Arthur, as has been said) These joining in a confederacy with the Saxons,
fought many battles with him. But at last being compelled to fly, Constantin
pursued them: and one he slew before the Altar of S. Amphibalus his Church in
Winchester: And the other who had hid himself in a certain Convent of Monks, he
condemned to a cruel death at London. Gild. de Excid.


8. For this Sacrilegious inhumanity, Gildas in his too free style calls
Constantin the tyrannical whelp of the Lyonnes of Danmonia, an infringer of
the dreadful Sacrament of an Oath by which he bound himself before God and all
his Saints to abstain from all injustice and treachery to his subjects;
notwithstanding which, in the very bosoms both of their carnal Mother, and the
common Spiritual Mother the Church, and nere unto the most Holy Altars he had
torn the bowels of two Royal Youths, though covered with the Vestment of a holy
Abbot (Sancti Abbatis amphibalo) whilst they stretched forth their hands, not
armed with swords to resist, but to implore help from God and his Altar:
notwithstanding all which, he most barbarously shed their blood, which with a
purple dye stained the Seat of the Ecclesiastical Sacrifice and the Sacred
palls which covered it. By which expression of Gildas it seems that these two
children, Sons of Mordred, had not been guilty of raising war against
Constantin: but without any offense done by them had been murdered contrary to
his ^ath.

Id. ibid.
9. In consequence to which Invective the same Author adioyns most pressing
exhortations to Constantin, that he would do suitable penance for these
horrible crimes, and implore the Divine Mercy, that if possible, he might avoid
the dark inextricable torrents of eternal fires, in which otherwise he must
for ever be rolled and roasted.

10. It is probable that this Zealous Writer, who flourished at this time, did
personally use the like exhortations to him, which he after recorded in his
Book: and that they wrought a good effect on him. A. D. 545.
For though some of our Historians write that he was slain by Conan who
succeeded in the Kingdom: A. ^oet. hist. l. 9.
Yet Hector Boethius relates how Constantin after a short reign having been
deprived of his wife and children, grew weary of his Kingdom, and privily
stealing from his friends, went into Ireland: And that there for the love of
Christ he labored unknown like a poor servant in a Mill. But afterward by
persuasion of a Monk, to whom he had discovered his condition, he was induced
to shave his head and consecrate himself to a Religious life in a Monastery:
where he lived with such piety and devotion that he became a pattern of all
virtues to the rest of the Monks. That at last he was by the Prelat of that
place sent in Mission to the Scotts to instruct that nation in the doctrine of
Christ, where he suffered Martyrdom by the hands of certain impious persons.
After some Ages he was venerated as a Saint, and by the authority of succeeding
Bishops Temples were dedicated to his honor, which yet remain in that Nation.

11. What is thus related by Boethius, Ap. Capgr. in vita S. Davidis.
receives a strong confirmation from the Author of S. David's life in Capgrave,
where we read, That when the fame of S. David's holiness was spread abroad,
several Princes forsaking their Kingdoms, retired to his Monastery. Likewise
Constantin King of the Cornishmen ( which is the same Title with Rex Danmoniae
in Gildas) forsaking his Throne, became a Monk there: and after some time spent
in the devout service of God, he at last went into a far distant country,
where he built a Monastery.

II. CHAP. II. CHAH.

1.2. etc. S. Kentigern forced to fly into Wales: where he founds a Monastery,
and Episcopal See: Of Malgo, a Prince who opposed him.

1. BEfore we proceed to the Gests of Conan Successor to Constantin in the
Kingdom of Brittany, it will be requisite that we relate a great affliction and
persecution which befell the famous and Holy Bishop Kentigern in the second
year of the reign of the said Constantin. His Birth, Education and consecration
to the Bishopric of Glasco, with the defects attending it, have been already
declared.

2. Now in pursuance of his succeding Gests, A. D. 543. Ap. Capg^. in vita S.
Kentigerni. Usher. in Chr.
John of Tinmouth thus writes: Certain Sons of Belial kinsmen to King Mark
rose against the Saint, conspiring his death. Whereupon being admonished by
Divine revelation, he departed directing his journey to Menevia, where the Holy
Bishop David flourished with all virtues. Near Caer-leon he converted many to
the Faith and built a Church. Being come to S. David, he abode with him some
time; and received from the Prince of that Region, Cathwallam a place
commodious for a Monastery: Which having erected at Egla (Elwy) he fixed there
an Episcopal See. Near that place there was a certain Noble man, which often
threatened and effectually endeavored to expel him from thence, whom God
therefore smote with blindness: But upon the holy Bishops prayers his sight was
restored: A. D. 545.
for which he became ever after his helper and protector.

3. There were assembled in that Monastery no fewer then nine hundred sixty
five Brethren, who all lived under Monastical Discipline, serving God with
great abstinence. Of which number three hundred who were illiterate, he
appointed to tilling of the ground and guard of the Cattle, out of the
Monastery. Other three hundred he assigned for preparing nourishment and
performing other necessary works within the Monastery: And three hundred sixty
five who were learned, he deputed to the celebrating Divine offices daily: Not
any of which without great necessity would he permit to go out of the
Monastery, but ordaind them to attend there continually as in Gods Sanctuary.

4. And this part of the Convent he divided so into troops and companies, that
when one had finished the service of God in the Church, another presently
entered and begun it again: which being ended, a third without any delay
entered. I^ this means Prayers were offered in that Church without any
intermission, and the praises of God were allways in their mouths.

5. Among these there was one, named Asaph, more especially illustrious for his
descent and form, who from his childhood shone brightly both with virtues and
miracles, and daily endeavored to imitate his Master in all Sanctity and
abstinence. To him the Man of God bore ever after a particular affection, and
committed the care of the Monastery to his prudence, and in conclusion
appointed him his Successor in the Bishopric.

Godwin. in catalog. in Episc. Asaph.
6. As touching the forementioned Nobleman who opposed this Holy Bishop, B.
Godwin thus writes in his Catalogue: Saint Kentigern at first built a Church of
wood and lime: but afterward he renewd it of stone, although he was therein
much hindered and molested by a certain Prince named Malgo or Maglocun, whose
dwelling was six miles from thence at Deg^nwy. But afterward being assuaged, he
permitted him to place there an Episcopal See: on which he bestowd both ample
possessions and privileges: Doing the same likewise to the Monastery. The Sea
is by some called Elguy, or Llanelwy, so named from the River Elwy near which
it was seated. And of that Church Saint Kentigern was the first Bishop. But in
succeeding times it was called Saint Asaphs, from his name who sat there
Bishop next after.

7. As touching this Prince Maglocunus or Malgo Conanus, Gild. in Excid.
he is mentioned by Gildas, but deeply accused by him to have been though an
expeller of many Tyrants, yet withal as he was greater then many in power, so
likewise in malice. Of him more hereafter.

III. CHAP. III. CHAPTER

1.2. etc. S. Kentigern wonderfully recalled to Glasco: where he destroys
Idolatry among the Picts.

8.9. S. Columba Visits him. Twenty Irish Saints called Columba.

1 SAint Kentigerns life was prolonged till after S. Augustine the Monks coming
into Brittany, Ap. Capgr. in vita S. Kentigern
for his death is by the best Historians assigned to the year of our Lord six
hundred and one. Yet because his following actions are not mixd, nor have any
considerable influence on the general affairs touching the British Churches,
we will in this place sum up the remainder of his life.

2. During S. Kentigerns abode in Cambria happened the blessed death of the Holy
Bishop S. David, whose glory was discovered to Saint Kentigern by revelation as
has been showed. In that country he remaind the space of seaventeen years,
exercising most perfectly the functions both of an Abbot, and afterward a
Bishop at Elwy, till in the end he was recalled to his first Bishopric at
Glasco: the admirable manner whereof we find related by John of Tinmouth to
this effect: 3. After that all the enemies of S. Kentigern in the Kingdom of
the Cumbrians had been consumed by diverse calamities and diseases, the
inhabitants of that region, by reason of the absence of Saint Kentigern who had
been so many years exild from thence, had forsaken the way of our Lord taught
by him, and were returned to Idolatry, like dogs unto their vomit. Which
Apostasy of theirs God punished with a grievous famine, the earth, sea and all
the elements refusing their accustomed aid and comfort to them.

4. But at length our Lord was pleased to raise up in that Region a good King
named Rederech, who had been baptized by some of the Disciples of S. Patrick,
and who was very desirous to restore the Faith of Christ in his Kingdom. For
which purpose he directed Messengers with letters to S. Kentigern, in which
having acquainted him that the men who sought his life were dead, he most
earnestly beseeched, and in the name of our Lord adjured him that he would no
longer be absent from his flock, for which he was obliged even to sacrifise his
own life, 5. S. Kentigern having received this Message, without delay prepared
for his return: and having by admonition from an Angel appointed Saint Asaph
his Successor in the Bishopric of Elwy, he being attended with six hundred
and sixty of his Brethren took his journey back to the Region of the Cumbrians:
at his entrance whereinto he was met by the devout King and very great numbers
of the people, giving thanks to God for his presence: Upon whom the holy man
pronounced a solemn benediction.



6. After that he cried with a loud voice, In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ
I command all those who do envy the salvation of men, and resist the preaching
of Gods word to depart presently from hence, that they be no hindrance to those
who shall believe. Having said this, immediately in the sight of all an
innumerable multitude of wicked Spirits, horrible to behold both for their
stature and shapes, fled away from the company: which caused a wonderful fear
and trembling in them. But the holy Man encouraged and comforted them, letting
them see visibly Who they were in whom they had believed, and by whom they had
been induced to adore dumb Idols, or the Elements, which were creatures
appointed by God for their use and service. And as for Woden whom (by the
seduction of the Saxons) they esteemd their Principal God, and to whose honor
they consecrated the fourth day of the Week, he showed that he was no better
then a mortal man who had been King of the Saxons, and Ancestour to several
nations: that his Body was then resolved into dust, and his soul tormented in
hellfire for ever.

7. When he had said thus, adding also many other speeches to explain the
Christian Faith, the ground on which he sat in a plain field called Holdelin,
swelld up under him in the sight of them all, so that it grew to a reasonable
high hill, and so remains to this day. And all the people seeing these wonders,
after they were instructed in the Faith, received Baptism. Thus by his doctrine
he freed the Nation of the Picts from Idolatry and Heresy. He converted
likewise the country of Albania: building many Churches and founding several
Monasteries. By which it appears that they were Picts, not Saxons to whom he
preached: and that they were such as had forsaken Christianity formerly
professed by them: but in his absence were returned to their Idolatry, and in
imitation of their Saxon neighbors had admitted the worship also of their
idols and false Gods.

8. Whilst S. Kentigern lived among the Picts, I^^ ibid.
S. Columba (called by the English, Columkill) hearing at his Monastery in the
Island of Hy the fame of this holy Bishop, came with a great troop of his
Disciples to visit him: and was met by him with a like multitude, which they
divided on both sides into three companies, the first of young men, the second
such as were of perfect age, and the third venerable old men: all which in the
way toward one another sung spiritual songs. And when S. Columba came in
sight of the Bishop, turning himself to his Disciples he said, I see a pillar
of fire as it were a golden crown in the third quire descending upon the Bishop
and casting a celestial splendor about him. Then the two Holy men approaching
to one another with great fervor of affection gave and received mutual kisses
and embraces.

Hect. B^^t. l. f. 163.9
9. Hector Boethius seems to signify that Brid King of the Picts was present at
this meeting: And that afterward S. Columba going to a Monastery joining to the
Castle of Caledonia built by Convallus, there instructed in the Faith the
Caledonians, the Horesti and other neighboring Nations: Likewise that in the
same place was afterward erected a Church dedicated to S. Columba, and
plentifully enriched by the following Kings of the Scotts: Which Church being
an Episcopal see was vulgarly called Dunkeld. But that Author seems in this
relation to mix and confound the actions of two different Saints, both called
Columba; for certain it is that Columba who was first Bishop at Dunkeld
flourished almost a hundred years after this time: Vsser in Prim^rd. f. 705.
for to him Saint Cuthbert being then a child was recommended. Which mistake is
very pardonable, because, as B. Usher observes there were in Ireland almost
twenty several men famous for virtue and piety, Ibid. f. 1034
all which had the same Name, Columba.



IV. CHAP. IV. CHA.

1.2. etc. S. Kentigerns journey to Rome: And the Great Controversy concerning
the Tria Capitula.

1. IN the year of Grace five hundred ninety three S. Kentigern out of
Brittany, Vsser in In^. Chron. ad A. D. 593.
and a Bishop call Alban out of Ireland went to Rome to visit Pope Gregory the
Great, says B. Usher from ancient Records. What special business might move
them to undertake that journey besides their devotion to the Monuments of the
Apostles there, does not appear in our Historians. Yet it may probably be
guessed at from a consideration of the state of the Church in those times.

2. A great Controversy was then agitated: the occasion whereof was this. The
famous Council of Chalcedon having condemned Eutyches and his doctrine, which
confounded the two natures in Christ, was rejected by a faction of the
Eutychians, called Acephali, upon this pretense, because it seemd to them to
favor the contrary Heresy formerly condemned, of the Nestorians who
acknowledged not only two natures, but two Persons in our Lord. The grounds on
which the Acephali charged the Council of Chalcedon with this imputation was,
first because it seemd to approve an Epistle of Ibas Bishop of Edessa, and also
the Writings of Theodorus Bishop of Mopsuestia full of blasphemous passages
savouring of Nestorianism, and thirdly had received into Communion Theodoret
Bishop of Cyrrhus who had written sharply against the twelve Capita of S.
Cyrill. Hereupon the Emperor Justinian being desirous to repress the Acephali
who had raised great commotions in Egypt and the East, by the advice of
Theodorus Bishop of Cesaerea in Cappadocia a secret favourer of the Acephali,
published a large Edict, called Tria Capitula, in which he proscribed the said
Ibas, Theodorus and Theodoret, procuring likewise a condemnation of them and
their writings as Heretical from the Bishops of the East. Notwithstanding
Menas Bishop of Constantinople in his subscription to the Emperors Decree
added this condition, If these things were approved by the Bishop of Rome.

3. Justinian therefore perceiving that without the sentence of the Pope his
attempts would be ineffectual, called Vigilius then Bishop of Rome from the
thence to Constantinople: Who at his departure was seriously admonished by the
Churches of Rome, Africa, Sardinia, Greece and Illyricum that he should by no
means consent to any novelty, nor suffer any prejudice to be cast on the
Council of Chalcedon. In compliance with whom by Letters written in his journey
to Menas Patriark of Constantinople he freely reprehended their condemnation of
the Three Bishops, desiring Justinian to recall his Decree. And when he was
come to Constantinople he suspended from his Communion the Bishops who had
subscribed to the said condemnation: for he judged that not any of the Gests of
the General Council of Chalcedon ought to be retracted, or called into dispute.

4. Notwithstanding five months afterward at the request of the Empress
Theodora he restored them to his Communion: and moreover though he would not
subscribe to the Emperors Decree, yet by his consent the whole Cause was
discussed in a Synod of seaventy Bishops at Constantinople: and when the
suffrages of the Bishops were brought to him, he wrote a Decree which he sent
to Menas, in which he also expressly confirmed the Tria Capitula.

5. But this condescendence of Vigilius to avoid a rent of the Eastern
Churches, was ill taken in the West, insomuch as the Bishops of Africa,
Illyricum and Dalmatia withdrew themselves from his Communion, and Facundus who
defended their cause, called him a Prevaricator. Whereupon Vigilius endeavored
to persuade the Emperor in the presence of Menas and the other Eastern Bishops
that whatsoever had passed on either side should be rescinded, and that a Synod
should be assembled, to which particularly the Affrican and Illyrian Bishops,
who had been scandalized, should be called. But they being unwilling to obey,
Vigilius was dealt withal that in case the Western Bishops would not comply,
he joining with the Greeks, should condemn the three Bishops. Which he utterly
refusing, the Emperors Decree was notwithstanding published. And when
Vigilius, together with Dacius Bishop of Milan, threatened the Grecian Bishops
with Excommunication, in case they consented to the Decree, the Emperor was so
incensed that Vigilius was forced to fly for refuge into S. Peter's Church: from
which Sanctuary when the Emperors Officer endeavored to draw him, he was
repelld by a tumult of the people. But many injuries being still offered to
Vigilius, he fled by night to Chalcedon into the Church of Saint Euphemia.

6. This constancy of Pope Vigilius procured this effect, that laying aside the
Imperial Edicts, the discussion of the whole cause should be reserved to a
Synod: which the Pope desired to have celebrated in Italy: But the Grecians
refusing, it was agreed that an equal number of Western Bishops should be
summoned to Constantinople: Which agreement notwithstanding, the Emperor
summond all the rest of the Eastern Patriarks.. Thus a Council of Eastern
Bishops only met on the fourth day before the Nones of May: at which Vigilius
refused to be present, not esteeming it Canonical, by reason of the absence of
the Western Bishops, who were most interessed in the affair.

7. However after twenty days respite obtained, Vigilius sent a Writing to the
Emperor, which he called a Constitutum, wherein he at large gave his judgment of
^he Tria Capitula, telling him that as touching the blasphemies of Theodorus,
he did abhor them: but in imitation of the Council of Ephesus would spare his
name. Again that it would be superfluous to cast any infamy on the Writings of
Theodoret against S. Cyrill, since S. Cyrill himself, and the Council of
Chalcedon had required no other satisfaction from him but only to pronounce
Anathema against Nestorius: which he did. And as touching the Epistle of Ibas,
no discussion should be made of it after the Council of Chalcedon.

8. This Constitutum the Emperor contrary to his promise reserved to himself:
but withal acquainting the Synod with Vigilius his mind touching the Tria
Capitula, which he had oftimes both by words and writing expressed, the Synod
proceeded to a condemnation of them, withal complaining that the Pope would
not afford his presence among them.

9. After this Definition of the Bishops in the Council, the Pope being in
extreme anguish because he saw how the Western Bishops would be offended, and
that this scandal would be the greater by reason that the Emperor had not sent
his Constitutum to the Council, utterly refused his consent and approbation of
their Definition; For which refusal, he was by the Emperor sent into
banishment with several other Bishops.

10. His banishment did not continue long, for six months after the Synods
Definition, Vigilius sent a Decretal Epistle to Eutychius the Successor of
Menas, in which he condemned the Tria Capitula, and professed Communion with
all those who embracing the Four Councils of the Church, had condemned the same
(meaning hereby the last Council, which he would not name.) This Decree of
Vigilius was by the Grecians referd among the Acts of the Council, by virtue
whereof it became acknowleged a lawful Oecumenicall Council.

11. This end being given to this unnecessary Controversy, all the Western
Churches, excepting only the Bishops of Istria, Venice and Liguria, consented
to it: But these Churches being under the dominion of the Longobardi, broke
into an open Schism, which continued till the time of S. Gregory the Great. And
besides them we do not find any other Churches unsatisfied excepting Ireland
only: to the Bishops whereof S. Gregory, in the year before S. Kentigerns
journey to Rome, Greg M. l. 2. Epist. 36. Indict. 10.
wrote an Epistle in answer to one of theirs which had charged the Roman See
for injuring the Council of Chalcedon by condemning the Tria Capitula. But S.
Gregory informed them that this Controversy did not at all touch the Faith of
the Church, but only the persons of two or three Bishops: That the authority of
the Council of Chalcedon was entire both with those who oppugn'd, and those who
defended the Tria Capitula: and therefore none could have just cause to make a
rent in the Church upon so trifling a quarrel. Which answer of the Holy Pope it
seems gave satisfaction to the Irish Bishops: Id. l. Ep. 62 Indict. 4.
for we read following Epistles from him to them as to unanimous Brethren,
instructing them touching Rites in Baptism and whether it was to be administered
to such as returned from the Nestorian Heresy, etc.

12. The state of this Controversy has been thus largely set down, because at
this very time it was hottly agitated when S. Kentigern went to Rome, and
probably was a principal motive of his journey. Which is the more likely
because an Irish Bishop called Albanus went thither at the same time likewise.
And though the British Churches are no where mentioned as partaking with those
who were divided from the Roman See, yet it might well become the zeal of so
holy a Bishop as S. Kentigern to inform himself truly of the state of the
present controversy, that so he might prevent a future breach.

V. CHAP.
V. CHAP.
1. S. Kentigerns death.

2. The manner of it.

3* His preparation thereto.

4. Of his Miracles.

1. SAint Kentigern eight years after this his voyage to Rome by a mature and
happy death rested from his labors, to wit, in the year of our Lord six
hundred and one, being then fourscore and five years old, according to the true
computation of Bishop Usher: though others mislead by Capgrave, add a hundred
years more to his age.

2. The manner of his death is thus related by John of Tinmouth: A. D. 547.
The man of God Saint Kentigern being worn away with age, Ap. Capgrav. in vit.
^. Kentigern.
had his nerves so dissolved that he was forced to sustain his jaws by tying a
linen ruban about his head, which came under his Chin: to the end he might be
enabled with less difficulty to pronounce his words. This dissolution of his
sinews may be ascribed to a promise a little before his death made him by an
Angel: Who told him, Since thy whole life in this world has been a continual
Martyrdom, it has pleased our Lord to grant thee a milder and easier end of
thy life, then other men ordinarily find.

3. And as touching his preparation to his death, Id. Ibid.
it thus follows in the same Author: At length calling together his Disciples,
he earnestly exhorted them to a continuance in observing the duties of their
holy Religion, to mutual charity, peace, hospitality and diligence in reading
and Prayer. Moreover he gave and bequeathed to them earnest and efficacious
precepts firmly to obey the Decrees of the Holy Fathers, and Constitutions of
the Holy Roman Church. After which Exhortation given, he departed to our Lord
on the Ides of January, in the sixtieth year after he was first consecrated
Bishop.

4. After his death the same of his Sanctity was every where spread by a world
of miracles; the particulars may be read in Capgrave, to whom the Reader is
referred. Concerning him thus writes Johannes Major, S. Kentigern was
contemporary and a singular friend of S. Columba. I^. Major d^ Gest. (...) 2.
c. 7.
He was illustrious for many miracles: and his body reposes at Glasgu: to whose
honor a Church was erected in that City, second to none in Scotland for
costly ornaments and rich endowments of Canonries. His Memory is celebrated in
our English Martyrologe on the thirteenth of January. Marty^^^^g l. 13. Ia^^ar.


VI. CHAP. VI. CHAP.

1.2. etc. The Kingdom of the Northumbers erected.

7. K. Conan dies: and Vortiper succeeds.

8. After whom Malgo Conan raigns.

9.10. Battles between the Britains and Saxons.

1. COnstantin the kinsman, and Successor of King Arthur being dead, A. D.
545. Westminster. hic^
or removed, Aurelius Conanus his Nephew a young man of extraordinary worth and
well deserving the Crown, says Westmonasteriensis, succeeded him: his only
fault was that he was a lover of Civil contentions. He cast into prison his
Uncle, to whom the Crown in right belonged: and murdered two of his Sons, who
stood in his way to the kingdom. Which ambition and cruelty was probably a
cause inducing some of our Historians to charge him with the murder of
Constantin his predecessor.

2. Gildas gives a Character of him much less favorable then Matthew of
Westminster: Gild. de Excid
for he accuses him of many parricides, adulteries, fornications, inflaming his
country with civil wars, and other crimes: for which without repentance he
denounces to him a short reign, and after it eternal miseries. And accordingly
it fell out, for though Matthew of Westminster allows him thirty years rule: Yet
it more suits with Chronology to assign only four to his reign.

3. In the third year whereof, whilst the British Provinces consumed
themselves with civil contentions, A. D. 547.
a new and powerful kingdom of the Saxons was established in the Northern
parts, called the Kingdom of the Northumbers: the manner and degrees by which
they arrived to such power is described by Malmsburiensis, to this effect.

(...). de Reg. l. ^. c. 3.
4. Hengist at the beginning of his reign in the kingdom of Kent sent into those
Northern parts his Brother Otha with his Son Ebusa, men of great courage,
experience and Nobility. For they derived their descent from Woden one of the
German Deities: Which Woden had three Sons Weldege, Withlege, and Beldege: From
the eldest son descended the Kings of Kent: from the second the Kings of the
Mercians: and from the third the Kings of the West Saxons and Northumbers:
whose first King Ida reckoned himself the tenth from Woden.

5. Now Otha and Ebusa the first Saxons which brought an army into those
Northern parts fought many battles with the British inhabitants, and having
conquered those who resisted them, received the rest into their protection,
suffering them to live in a quiet subjection. They and their successors also
notwithstanding contented themselves many years with the title of Governors or
Dukes, acknowledging a dependence and submission to the Kings of Kent. But in
the year ninety nine after their first arrival, they assumed the Title and
Dignity of Kings: Of which the first was called Ida, whether attaining that
supereminence by election or invasion, is not manifest in story.

6. Other Writers affirm that the whole Reg^^ possessed by these Northumbers
was divided into two parts: Of which that which was more Northern, extending it
self from the Bay of Edenborough to the Picts-wall was inhabited by the
Bernicians: and the other rea^^ing from the Picts-wall to the River of (...)
was held by the Deiri: So that the whole kingdom of the Northumbers anciently
containd the Provinces of the Picts, Laudon, North^^berland, Cumberland,
Westmorland, (...), York and Lancaster: This will appear by the lives of
several Saints said to have lived in the kingdom of the Northumbrians. The
same Authors add that the said Division of the Kingdom was made by Ida, A. D.
556.
who leaving his Son to govern the Deiri, himself fixed his habitation among
the Bernicians beyond the Picts-wall.

7. Aurelius Conanus dying in the fourth year of his Reign, A. D. 548. Gild. de
Ex bid.
Vortipor Prince of the Demetae succeeded him: who is by Gildas stild a Tyrant
who in his old age ascended the throne by civil discords, being a wicked son
of a good Prince: defild by many par^icids and adulteries: who having rid
himself of his lawful wife, wallowed in last with her impudent daughter.
Whereupon he exhorts him by a timely repentance to avert Gods judgments from
him.

8. His reign likewise lasting only four years, A. D. 551 Gild. ibid.
the throne was invaded by Malgo Conanus, or Maglocuus, a Prince no less
vicious then his Predecessors: For in the same Gildas his description he is
said to have murdered his Uncle (Prince of Venedotia called Catwallain) together
with the greatest part of his Nobility. (This is the same Maglocunus who
afforded to S. Kentigern a place for a Church and Monastery. And afterward
being tormented with remorse for his parricides, he relinquished the world, and
retired into a Monastery where he under took a Monastical Profession. But the
sparks of ambition thus coverd, broke forth again into a flame, so that
quitting his solitude, he returned to all his former crimes, and became an
Insular Dragon, depressing other Tyrants, and by strengthening himself with
their power becoming a far greater Tyrant himself.

9. In the second year of his Reign a great battle was fought between the
Britains and Kenric King of the West Saxons: A. D. 552. Ethelvverd. Huntingd.
l. 3
The place of the Combat was near Sorb^odunum, called afterward Salisbury. In
which combat after much blood shed the Britains were at last overcome and
forced to fly.

10. And four years after, the Britains thirsting to avenge them selves of
their former defect, A. D. 556. Huntingd. ib.
gathered together all their best forces: against whom Kenric with his son
Ceaulin marched. The armies met in the province of the Dobuni (Oxfordshire) at
Berambury. (now Bambury) The Britains divided their Army into Nine Bodies,
three of which they placed in the front, three in the midst, and three in the
rear. The Saxons though inferior in numbers, yet much ^^ceeded them in stature
and strength: and they fought all in one Body. The combat was bloody,
continuing till night: and it was doubtful which side had the better. After
this many other battles passed between them: but for the most part the victory
fell to the West Saxons.

VII. CHA.
VII. CHAP.
1. Bridius King of the Picts.

2. King Malgo-Conan dies: and Careticus succeeds.

3. Several Petty British Princes.

4. Alla King of the Northumbers.

A. D. 557.
1. WHilst the Britains and Saxons contended in the West, the Picts in the
North beyond the Frith of Edenborough made Bridius their King, who was Nephew
to Loath their former King, being his Brothers son. But whereas Hector Boethius
says that he reigned in the Province of London, H. Boet.
that is inconsistent with what was formerly related touching the limits of the
Kingdom of the Northumbrians. In the Ninth year of this King Bridius, S.
Columba came of Ireland into Brittany, as shall be shown. And this being
constantly affirmed by all our ancient Historians, to have happened in the five
hundred sixty and fifth year of Grace, B. Usher without cause questions the
placing the beginning of King Bridius his reign in the year five hundred fifty
seven.

A. D. 558.
2. In the year following dyed the Tyrant Maglocunus after whom Caretum took
upon him to sustain the state of Brittany every day more and more and more
falling to ruin. But in vain: for besides that God had fixed a period to it,
this Prince was no better then his Predecessors, being like them stained with
all vices. But determinatly to sent down either when he began his reign, or
when he ended it, is extremely difficult considering the small light which our
Records afford of those times. And as for the several Princes whose shameful
Characters are given us by Gildas, it is hard to say whether they were Monarks
of the Britains. On the contrary by his manner of writing, most of them se^m
to have lived in several Provinces, and there reigned at the same time.

3. Besides the fore named Prince the same Gildas directs the point of his
sharp style against one named C^neglas, Gild. de Excid.
by interpretation Yellow Lion, whom he accuses of all sorts of crimes, impiety
against God, and savage cruelty to his subjects: repudiating his lawful wife,
and violating her Sister, who after her widdow-hood had vowed chastity to God:
and lastly by many injuries afflicting holy men and Pre^^^ which ceased not to
offer up to God their sight and prayers for him. Whom he exhorts to change his
life that he might reap benefit by the Prayers of those who had power to bind
in heaven, when they had bound in this world, and to loose likewise such as
were penitent.

4. Now by a view of the impieties of all these last Princes of Brittany the
Reads will observe the justice of Gods severity against so wicked a Nation
from which he took the Spiritual Kingdom of Christ, A. D. 560.
and bestowd it on a people which few years after brought fruits worthy of it.
And again out of this dunghill of vices some pearls may be gathered, for here
we find the Wise Gildas commending a perpetual vow of Chastity, made not only
by Virgins, but Widows also, the infringing of which vow he bitterly inveighs
against. And again he acknowledges in Gods Priests a power of retaining and
absolving sinners, not by way of declaration, but authority and jurisdiction.

5. In the year five hundred fifty nine dyed Ida King of the Northumbrians, A.
D. 5^9.
to whom succeeded his Son Alla, whose Empire extended both over the Deiri and
Bernicians. This is that King Alla to whose name Pope Gregory alluded when he
said prophetically, that in the Province of King Alla there should be sung
Alleluia. But we must observe that though he had the authority paramount over
all the Kingdom of the Northumbrians, yet there were in some of the Provinces
British Princes with dependence on him which called themselves Kings: So we
mentioned lately M^^ken King of the Cumbrians. For these Northern Saxons having
obtaind their dominion not by absolute conquest, but in many Provinces by
Treaty, they left the Princes there still invested with their former authority,
yet with dependence and deference to them.

VIII. CHAP. VIII. CHAPTER

1.2. etc. Saint Theodoric a British Prince retires into solitude: And comes
out to fight with the Saxons: In which fight he is mortally wounded.

6.7. etc. His Son Monric censured by a Synod at Landaff.

1. THis Age afforded us more then one Example, A. D. 560.
both of the vigor of Episcopal Authority and zeal exercised by a Holy
Bishop Synodically, and likewise of submission to the said Spiritual Authority
by Princes, otherwise of little devotion, on the contrary staind with many
vices and crimes. But before we relate these particulars, we will first declare
who this Bishop and Princes were.

2. The Bishops name was S. Oudoceus, A. Capgrav. in Oudoc^o^
the Son of Anaumeda Sister to S. Theliau and Budic a Prince in Lesser
Brittany. S. Oudoceus from his infancy was addicted to piety. He was assidileus
in fasting, watching and prayer for an everlasting reward. In devotion he
visited the Monument of S. Peter at Rome: and at his return he went to the
place of S. David, and from thence he diverted to the Church of S. Theliau,
taking with him certain Relics which during his Pilgrimages he had obtaind.
Afterward he succeeded Saint Theliau the next Bishop of Landaff after Saint
Dubricius: and was an heyr not only of his dignity, but of his virtue, doctrine
and miracles. He is commemorated on the sixth day before the Nones of July.

4. Next as touching the Prince, his name was Mouric, Son of Theodoric Prince
of Glamorganshire in the Province of the Silures, who being weary of worldly
vanities, undertook a Monastical Profession, and served Almighty God in
solitude; having transferred his Pricipality on his son Mouric. Into which his
Son was no sooner entered, but the Saxons broke into his country, and began to
wast it. Whereupon the inhabitants had recourse to their former Prince
Theodoric, whom they even compelled to quitt his desert, and to be their
General in the war. He full of Divine courage encountered the infidel Enemies,
whom he putt to flight at Tintern nere the River Vaga. But having received a
dangerous wound in the combat, he returned homeward, and perceiving that it
would prove mortal, he gave charge to his Son Mouric, that in what place
soever he should end his life, he should there build a Church to God, and a
Sepulcher for himself. After this proceeding in his journey, he had not passed
above five miles, but at a place where the Rivers Vaga and Severn meet, he gave
up his Spirit.

5. There did his Son Mouric erect a Church in which he laid his Fathers body:
whom posterity venerated as a Saint, calling the place from his name
Merthir-Tendric, that is, The place of the Martyr-Theodoric: At this day it is
more contractedly called Merthirn. In the same place, Godvvin in Catalog in
(...). Epis^p.
says B. Godwin, is seated the house and possessions of the Bishops of
Landaff: adding, That Mouric first of his own accord gave to that Church a farm
called Mochros, lying on the banks of the River Vaga together with Portheassegg
and the Church of Gurvid. And afterward for exp^^^ion of a murder committed by
him on a person called Cynetu, contrary to a league by oath contracted between
them, he added other possessions, as Ringranauc, Nantana and Kansulvim, with
other lands besides. He had two Sons Arthruis and Frior: and by Arthruis, or
Athruis he had a grandchild called Morcant.

6. This is that Prince Mouric, and this the crime against which the Holy
Bishop Oudoceus exercised his spiritual authority: the order and manner we
read expressly declared in the Acts of a Synod of Landaff lately rescued from
darkness and worms by our diligent Antiquary Sir Henry Spelman: Spelman.
the tenor whereof is as follows: The Synod of Landaff assembled by Oudoceus
third Bishop of that Church about the year of Grace five hundred and sixty in
which Mouric King of Glamorgan for his perfidious murdring of Cynetu was
excommunicated, etc.

7. King Mouric and Cynetu met together at Landaff, and in the presence of
Oudoc^us Bishop swore before the Relics of Saints lying before them, that they
would observe a firm peace between them. Some space after this solemn Oath thus
made, King Mouric by treachery slew Cynetu. Whereupon Bishop Oudoceus called
together all Ecclesiastics from the mouth of Taratyrin-Guy to Tyvi, together
with three Abbots, Consen Abbot of the valley of Carban, Cargen Abbot of
Ildute, and Sulgen Abbot of Docquinni: and in a full Synod excommunicated King
Mouric for the murder by him committed, and for perjury in transgressing the
Covenant made in his presence, and on the Altar of S. Peter the Apostle and of
S. Dubricius and S. Theliau: moreover inclining the Crosses toward the ground,
he interdicted the country of Mouric, and so dismissed the King. The Christian
Communion also cursed the King with his progeny, the whole Synod confirming it
and saying, Let his days be few, his children Orphans and his wife a Widow. And
the King with his whole Region remaind the space of two years and more under
the same Excommunication.

8. After that the King seeing the perdition of his own soul and damnation of
his Kingdom, could no longer sustain an Excommunication of such continuance,
but humbly beggd pardon at Landaff of Bishop Oudoceus: Who thereupon in the
presence of three Abbots imposed on him the yoke of Penance proportionated to
the quality and heynousnes of his crimes, the King all the while humbly
inclining his head shedding tears abundantly: The Penance was, that he should
three ways, make satisfaction to God and the Church of Landaff, namely by
Fasting, Prayer and Alms.

9. King Mouric accepted this Yoke of Penance: And for the redemption of his
own soul, and for the soul of Cynetu he gave to the Church of Landaff, and
into the hand of Oudoceus Bishop and all his Successors, four villages with
their entire liberty, to be held free from all service for ever, and with
absolute enjoyment of Common through his country to the inhabitants abiding in
the said lands, in feilds, woods, pastures and Water. The first is called
Ringracnauc; the second Nantavo; the third, a village beyond Kadava where
Cynetu was slain; the fourth a village beyond Nadava, where the Kings Son
committed adultery: it reaches from the Fenn called Elleti to Nandava, and it
is called the village Gudberdh. These four villages contain four and twenty
Modij of Land.

10. Witnesses hereto, of Clergy men, were Oudoceus Bishop, Consen Abbot of the
vale of Carban, Carbam Abbot of Ildute, Sulgen Abbot of Docuni. And of Laics
were present King Mouric with his Son Frioc, and Morrant the Son of Arthruis,
etc. This is the form of the first Synod of Landaff, in which the discreet
Reader will observe several passages which will give light to see both the
Religion and Discipline of that age.

A. D. 545.

IX. CHAP.


IX. CHAP.
1.2. etc Several Welsh Synods, and the occasions of them.

6. S. Oudoceus his death.

1. THE Complaint of Gildas touching the Princes living in his time was very
just, that Brittany had Kings, but those Kings were bloody Tyrants, often times
swearing, and as often forswearing; ready enough to make vows and promises, but
presently breaking those promises, sanguinary, proud, parricids, etc. For
besides the forecited Synod, the same Bishop Oudoceus was obliged upon the
very like causes to collect two more, which are extant also in Sir H. Spelman:
Which, to avoid tediousnes, shall not here be set down at length, being both of
them parallel to the former. It will suffice therefore briefly and summarily to
set down the occasions of collecting the^, and the proceedings in them.

Spelman.
2. The occasion of the former of them was this: King Morcant and his Uncle
Frioc in the presence of S. Oudoceus Bishop and the three forenamed Abbots at
the (podium) Church of S. Ildutus took their oaths at the Holy Altar on which
were placed the Relics of Saints, that they would observe peace and amity
together without any guile: adding this convention, That if either of them
should kill or commit treachery against the other, he should not redeem his
crime by money or lands, but should be obliged to quit his kingdom, and spend
his whole life in pilgrimage in foreign countries. A good while after which
Covenant made, King Morcant by the Devils instigation slew his Uncle. After
which crime committed, he came to the Holy Bishop Oudoceus to Landaff, humbly
desiring pardon of those his two crimes of Homicide and perjury. The Bishop
thereupon assembled a Synod at the Monastery of the Vale of Carban whereto came
all the Clergy and forenam'd Abbots: as likewise King Morcant attended with the
principal persons of Morcannuc (or Glamorganshire.)

3. The Synod being assembled and consulting on this affair, gave their
judgment that to avoid the depriving the land of the protection of its natural
Lord, the King should be permitted to redeem a pilgrimage, by fasting, prayers
and Alms. Which Penance the King laying his hand on the four Gospells and the
Relics of Saints undertook to perform, promising moreover that for ever after
he would in all things mercifully execute justice. Which Penance being
finished accordingly, and Christian Communion restored to him, he proclaimed the
Churches of Catoc, Ildut and Docunni free from all Regal service discharging
likewise the Church of S. Ildutus of a bagg of Honey, and an iron-caldron which
formerly were to be presented to the King.

4. The Third Synod, which for affinity of the matter shall be adjoined here,
A. D. 547.
though it was celebrated probably many yerrs after, was assembled on this
occasion: A certain British Prince named Guidnerth in a contention for the
Principality slew his Brothe Merchien: Spelman. ib.
For which he was excommunicated by S. Oudoceus in a full Synod: in testimony
of which Excommunication the Crosses were taken down and laid on the ground,
and the Cimbals were turned. Thus he remained excluded from Christian Communion
the space of three years. At the end of which demanding pardon, he was sent
into Lesser Brittany to S. Sampson, Archbishop of Dole, from him to receive
judgment and suitable penance. This was done, partly because of the great
amity between those Bishops, but chiefly because the same language being spoken
in both countries he could more freely discover his fault, and require
indulgence from the said Archbishop. This voyage was undertaken by Guidnerth:
who having obtained absolution he returned with Letters sealed by S. Sampson
before the year was ended. But because he had not according to the injunction
given him, remained a whole year in Exile, the Bishop would not take off his
Excommunication. Presently after S. Oudoceus dyed, to whom Berthgiun succeeded
in the Bishopric of Landaff. To him King Morcant and Guednerth made an earnest
request to take off the Excommunication from Guednerth, and to raise again from
the earth the Crosses and Cimbals with the Holy Relics. Whereupon after a
promise made by him to make satisfaction for his crime by fasting, prayers and
alms, he was at last with great devotion, and many tears shed by him absolved
by the Bishop. After which the said Guednerth to testify his gratitude gave to
the Church of Landaff these Lands, Lann, Catgual and Tie, with all the woods,
Seacoasts, and liberties, etc. Witnesses whereof were these Clarks, etc.

5. B. Godwin affirms that this third Synod was celebrated not by S. Oudoceus
but by a Bishop of Landaff called Grecielus the seventh from S. Oudoceus,
Godvvin. in Catalog. in Episc. Landa^^
to whom Berthguin succeeded: and that the fratricide Guidnerth to show his
gratitude gave to the foresaid Bishop and his Successors, of his free
liberality Lancadwallader, now called Bishton or Bishopston: which, says he,
is the only Manor now left to that See.

6. As touching S. Oudoceus, the Author of his life in Capgrave relates that
he quitted his Pastoral Cure, Ap. Capgrav. in S. Oudoc^^.
and built a Monastery nere the River Weye (Vaga,) where assembling a great
multitude of Brethren he spent the remainder of his life, which lasted many
years, in wonderful abstinence and Sanctity. Whereby it is manifest that the
foresaid third Synod was not celebrated in his days: since it is scarce
possible that he being the third Bishop of that see, should live till the
fourteenth, which was Berthguin. He is celebrated in our Martyrologe on the
sixth day before Nones of July.

A. D. 562.

X. CHAP.


X. CHAP.
1.2 etc. The Gests of the younger S. Gildas: in Ireland: and Brittany: Of
Saint Columba: Of S. Brendan.

1. WE have often had occasion in this History to cite testimonies from our
famous Historian Gildas, surnamed Badonicus, and Sapiens, called also the
Younger Gildas to distinguish him from S. Gildas Albanius whose Gests have been
formerly related. Now because we are come beyond the times of those British
Princes which have been mentioned, and in their foul colors painted by him,
it will be requisite to afford him a place here also, and briefly to collect
what we find in other Authors concerning him.

2. By his own Testimony he was born in the year when the great battle was
fought at the Mountain called Badonicus between the Britains and Saxons in the
time of King Aurelius Ambrosius: to which Mountains the Saxons retiring were
besieged by the Britains, and afterward in a battle discomfited* This happened
in the year of Grace four hundred ninety three, being the forty fourth year
after the first entrance of the Saxons into Brittany.

3. The Author of his Life extant in the Monastery of Fleury in France, from
whence several Extraits are afforded us by B. Usher, though in some passages
thereof he mingle the Gests of the Ancient S. Gildas called Albanius with those
of this Gildas, yet in this which follows he reflects only on our present
Gildas Badonicus surnamed Sapiens, whom he affirms to have been a Disciple of
S. Iltutus, and after he had left him to have gone into Ireland: Ap. Vsser. in
Primord. f. 907.
The words are these, Gildas, having remained some years under the discipline
of S. Ildutus, by whom he was instructed perfectly, and as far as God had
enabled him to instruct him, as well in Secular learning, so much of it as was
expedient, as in the knowledge of Divine Scriptures; at length taking leave of
his pious Master, and much reverenced fellow-disciples, he went into Ireland
(Iren perrexit) there more exactly to learn the opinions and dictats of other
famous Scholars, both in Philosophical and Divine learning. Having therefore
passed through the Schools of many learned Teachers, and like a diligent Be
collected the juice of diverse flowers, he laid it up carefully in the Hive of
our Mother the Church, to the end he might in opportune season pour forth the
mellifluous words of the Gospel on his own countrymen, and thereby draw them
out of misery to eternal joys, and like a good servant restore unto his Lord
with advantage the Talent entrusted to him. This, which was his first journey
into Ireland, was in the year of Grace five hundred and forty.

4. Here this Author calls Ireland by the ancient true name given it by
Diodorus Siculus, by whom it is styled Ire, Diod. hic. l. 5.
and the inhabitants Iri and Irenses. In which Island, says Bishop Usher,
Vsser. ibid.
there flourished in this age the Schools of Armagh, wherein the Elder Gildas
had presided, when he labored piously in cultivating the minds of the Irish.
In which employment probably the younger Gildas also succeeded him. However
certain it is that in that country, he like a busy and careful Be did not
only collect sweet juice, but a sharp sting likewise, which he afterward darted
forth against the vices of his own country. But with the inhabitants of
Ireland he dealt more mildly, for as the forecited Author testifies, he
restored discipline in the Ecclesiastical Order, he gathered many
congregations of Monks, Id. ibid.
and likewise mercifully delivered from the slavery of Pagans many captives.

5 How long his abode in Ireland continued, does not appear in ancient Records:
but certain it is that he returned into Brittany, where, as we may judge by his
writings, he found small comfort and encouragement to porue forth the honey
which he had gathered in Ireland, such were the calamities, and confusions
reigning there, vices and miseries contending which should exceed the other. So
that his almost only employment was to bewayl the destruction of his country
hastening on and by publishing the crimes especially of the Rulers, both secular
and Ecclesiastical, to justi^y the severity of God to have been beneath their
demerits and provocations.

6. But in the year of our Lord five hundred sixty two he was by a double
message and invitation from Ireland interrupted in his sad thoughts, and
withdrawn from beholding such mournful spectacles, as every where in Brittany
offered themselves to his eyes. The first Message came from persons of quality
in Ireland, and is thus related by Adamannus in the life of S. Columba: Adaman.
in vit. S. Colu^b. Ap. Vsser f. 904.
The Seniours of Ireland by faithful messengers sent an Epistle to S. Gildas
by Nation a Saxon (we must read, a Britain) to the end to entertain a mutual
intercourse of charity between them. And when he had read over their letters,
and held in his hand an Epistle written to him from S. Columba, he presently
kissed it, adding these words, He who wrote this Epistle is a man replenished
with the Graces of Gods holy spirit. Thereupon one of the Messengers said: It
is true what you say: Yet notwithstanding this holy man has been censured by a
Synod in Ireland, because in extreme necessity and danger of death he commanded
his kindred and countrymen to resist by fighting a violence offered them. S.
Gildas having heard S. Columba thus reprehended, answered, What a foolish,
imprudent and ignorant people are your countrymen in Ireland!

7. Thus is the first message declared: in which that clause which concerns S.
Columba's action, unjustly censured by the Bishops of Ireland, shall shortly be
cleared, when we are to treat of that holy man's coming into Brittany, the cause
whereof was the said censure.

8. The second Message, joined with an invitation, which about the same time
came to Saint Gildas, was directed from a King in that country named Ammeric:
A^th. vit. Gildae in Flo^iaec. Bibl. c. 9.10.
And it is thus described by the Author of S. Gildas his life in the Library
of the Monastery of Fleury: At that time King Ammeric raignd over all Ireland.
He also sent messengers to Saint Gildas, requesting him to come to him; withal
promising that if he would undertake that journey and restore to good Order the
Ecclesiastics in his Kingdom, wherein generally the Catholic Faith it self was
decayed, both himself and his subjects should in all things be obedient to him.
When Gildas heard this, he, like a valiant soldier thoroughly furnished with
celestial arms, presently-went into Ireland, there to preach the Gospel of
Christ.

9. Being come thither, he was presented to the King by certain Noble persons
who had formerly been acquainted with him. As Soon as King Ammeric saw him he
gave him many gifts, and with many prayers entreated him to stay some time with
him, and, as he had signified in his Message, restore order to the Church in
that Region, because in a manner all the inhabitants had lost the Catholic
Faith. S. Gildas accordingly traveling through all the Provinces of Ireland
restored Churches, instructed the Clergy in the true Faith and worship of the
holy Trinity, cured those who had been poysond with Heresy, and expelled all
Teachers of Error. So that by his Zeal and diligence Truth began again to
flourish in the country.

10. After this the Holy man built many Monasteries in that Island, and
instructed the children of many of the Nobility in learning and piety. And to
win the greater number to the service of God, he himself became a Monk, and
brought to the same Profession very many as well of the Nobility as meaner
persons and orphans. He compassionatly freed likewise from the tyrannical
slavery of Infidels many poor Christians, etc.

11. Thus this holy man became as it were a second Apostle to Ireland,
repairing the ruins of that Faith which Saint Patrick first preached among
them. Now whereas Adamannus says, that the Epistle first sent him out of
Ireland was brought by Faithful men: If we enquire who these Faithful men
were, it will appear very probable that among them the Holy Abbot Komgall was
one, for the Writer of his life says, that at this time, namely in the
seventh year after the foundation of the Monastery of Beancher (which says B.
Usher was built in the year of Grace five hundred fifty five) that holy man
sayld into Brittany, out of a desire to visit some holy men, and to remain
there some time: A. D. 563.
where he built a Monastery in a certain village called Heth.

12. How long S. Gildas abode in Ireland is not manifest: though for so great a
work as he performed there, a short time would not suffice. But it is without
question that he returned into Brittany, where he also dyed in a good old age:
Pits in Gild.
For thus writes Pits of him, At last Gildas the glorious Confessor of Christ
being ninety years old ended his life in great holiness in the Monastery of
Banchor, where he was buried the fourth day before the Calends of February in
the year of Grace five hundred eighty three, when Maglocunus sustaind the
British Empire falling to ruin. And on the same day is celebrated in our
Martyrologe the memory also of the other Saint Gildas Albanius. Martyrolog.
Angl. 2^. ^an.
Now whereas it is said that Maglocunus was then King of Brittany: that may
possibly be true: for the succession of the British Princes during these
tumultuous times, for want of Writers, is very uncertain.

13. If we consider the great age in which he dyed, that may reasonably be
applied to him, Ap. Vsser is Primord. f. 9.55.
which B. Usher would rather referr- to the former S. Gildas, namely that S.
Brendan the Son of Finloga in the year of our Lord five hundred sixty two came
into Brittany to visit the holy old man Gildas dwelling there, who was famous
for his great wisdom: which passage is extracted out of an uncertain Author
of his Life. For at that time Gildas was more then threescore and ten years old.

XI. CHAP. XI. CHAP.

1. The Reign of King Ethelbert.

2.3. etc. Of S. Columba: His Contention with King Dermitius: whence followd a
Civil War: in which the King is miraculously overthrown.

6. S. Columba pennanced by S. Finian a Bishop.

7. And excommunicated by a Synod of Bishops.

1. IN the year of Grace five hundred sixty A. D. 561.
one Irmeric King of Kent after he had raignd thirty years, dyed; leaving
behind him a Son and a Daughter: His Son and Successors name was Ethelbert,
his daughters, Ricula. This is that happy and famous Ethelbert, who according
to his Name was the glory and splendor of his Nation, who had the first
prerogative of receiving and propagating the Christian Faith among the Saxons.
Some disposition thereto was begun in his Fathers time, H. Boet.
who by Hector Boethius his testimony ( who calls him Iurminric) permitted in
his Kingdom (at least a private) exercise of Christian Religion. But before it
will be openly professed there by his Son, thirty years of his reign must be
spent, as shall be showed hereafter. During which time many changes happened to
his state: for he was frequently exercised in war, wherein toward the beginning
he sustained great losses, which afterward he repaired by many victories, with
which he much enlarged the limits of his dominions.

2. In the third year of his reign the famous S. Columba by occasion of Civil
wars and the injurious dealing of the Bishops in Ireland, was compelled to
quitt that Island and come into Brittany. Thus does Adelmannus who wrote the
life of that Saint relate the particulars; Two years after the Civil war at
Culedre been, (...) Vsser in (...) f. 10^5. and f. ^02.
when Dermitius son of Kerbail was Monark of Ireland, and all businesses were
determined before the Kings Tribunal, it happned so that S. Columba was obliged
to appear before him to challenge a certain free man who had been made a
captive. And when the cause being pleaded before the King, an unjust sentence
had been pronounced by him, the Man of God rose up with great indignation and
before all there p^esent, said thus, O unjust King, Know that from this moment
thou shall never see my face within thy dominions, till God the Just Judge
shall have diminished thy Kingdom for thy injustice: For as thou have despised
me here before thy Nobles by a Wrongful judgment, so shall the Eternal God
despise thee before thine enemies in the day of war. Having said thus, he
presently took horse, smiting him with his whip so as that great store of blood
issued from him. This being observed by the Kings Counselors present, they
wondered at it, and humbly entreated the King to comply with the Holy man's
request, for fear God should dissipate his Kingdom according to his threatening.

3. But the King filld with fury would not understand, that he might do right:
but moreove^ swore that he would took revenge on all the kindred of S. Columba,
and make them all slaves. And according to this Oath he gathred a mighty army
of three and twenty thousand, horse, foot and charrets: and with it marched to
the confines of that country, with a resolution utterly to extirpate the
inhabitants. When therefore the people of Conal heard of the Kings coming, they
likewise were assembled to the number of three thousand, desirous to fight
manfully in defense of their country, being in so great danger, and placing
all their hope in God alone. S. Columba rose very early, and being full of Gods
Spirit, he encouraged them, and with a loud voice which sounded terribly
through the whole army, he said to them, Fear nothing, God himself shall fight
for you, as he did with Moses against the Egyptians at the Red sea: Not any of
you shall suffer the least harm: for our Lords wrath is inflamed against this
proud Kings army, so that if but one only person among you shall in his Name
give an assault, he alone by Gods power shall putt them to flight. Be
courageous therefore: Not a man of you shall fall in this combat.

4. As Soon as he had spoken this, which his army hearing believed as an
assurance given them from God himself, A. D. 565.
a few of his soldiers the same moment with wonderful courage rushed upon
their Enemies not at all expecting them: for the Holy man's words had utterly
taken from their minds all apprehension of death. And at the same time an Angel
of God armd like a soldier, and in the shape of a man of an incredibly high
stature appeard in the Kings Camp. His aspect was so terrible, that the
soldiers hearts utterly faild them, and instead of resisting their enemies,
they rushed one upon another in their have to fly away, and such a confusion
there was of horses and charrets, that for have they killd one another. Thus a
handful of men without the loss of any one defeated a great army, taking many
prisoners.

5. This wonderful victory being obtained, they returned to the Man of God:
who addressing his speech to a youth named Scandalan then attending on him,
with a prophetical voice thus said to him, My son, this day will procure for
me a tedious pilgrimage in a strange country, where I must live absent from
my kindred and friends many years. But say nothing of what I tell thee, till the
event show the truth of my words.

6. After this S. Columba went to S. Finian a Bishop, to receive condign
Penance from him, because of so much blood shed in the foresaid war: and with
him there went an Angel of God, who shone with wonderful brightness: but was
visible to none except the Holy man Finian, called also Find bar. When therefore
Saint Columba demanded Penance of the Holy Bishop, his answer was, Thou must
be obliged by thy preaching and example to bring as many souls to heaven, as
by occasion of this war have sunk into Hell. After which sentence, S. Columba
with great joy, said, Thou have pronounced a just and equal judgment upon me.

7. But the Holy man's troubles did not end thus: for by occasion of this war
and bloodshed Saint Columba in a Synod of Bishops was censured to abstain from
the Communion: though many among them dissented from this sentence: upon which
great contentions and disputes arose among the Clergy, which occasiond Saint
Columba his letter to Saint Gildas requesting him to endeavor the composing
those differences.

XII. CHAPTER
XII. CHAP.
1.2 etc. S. Columba's coming into Brittany. He fixes his habitation in the
Isle called Hye.

6.7. etc. He Converts the Picts. Monasteries built by him.

9. etc. His twelve companions: One of them was Constantin late King of
Brittany.

11. etc. His agreement with Saint Kentigern, etc.

14.15. His death: and place of burial.

A. D. 56^. Ap. Vsser. f. 1059. and f. 703.
1. SAint Columba wearied with these Ecclesiastical contentions resolved to
quitt his Native country, but not permitting himself to be a chuser of his
place of Exile, he consulted by a messenger the Holy man Brendan Abbot of
Birre, to whom God had given the Spirit of Counsel and Discretion. Who after he
had lifted up his eyes and heart to heaven, commanded to digg under the feet of
the Messenger, where was found a stone on which was engraven only the letter I*
whereupon he bade the Messenger to tell his Master that he must go to an
Island called I or Hy, where he should find employment for his zeal, and be
the cause of bringing many souls to heaven. Thus writes Adamannus in his life
quoted by B. Usher.

H. Boet.
2. But Hector Boethius assigns another more probable reason of his going into
that Country, saying, The fame of the great devotion and piety of Conal King
of the Picts draw the Holy man Columba out of Ireland into Brittany, attended
with a multitude of his disciples, where he became the Father and directour of
many Monasteries.

3. As for the Island called Hy, it is erroneously written by Dempster,
Hydestinatus, and from him by Baronius likewise: The ground of which mistake
was the wrong reading of this passage in S. Beda, Beda l. 3. c. 3
Monachus erat Episcopus Aidan, u^pote de Insula quae vocatur Hy destinatus
where the two last words which ought to be severed, are by him read as conjoynd
into one. This Island was afterward called Iona, falsely by some Exscribers of
Adamannus written Iova.

4. In the ordinary Copies of S. Beda in stead of S. Columba we find written S.
Columbanus: Whence many Writers being deceived do confound this Saint with
that S. Columbanus who founded the Monasteries of Luxueil (Luxoviense) in
France and Gobio in Italy: who was likewise an Irishman, and a Father of many
Monks. Whereas they are indeed distinguished both by their names, gests and
ages wherein they lived. As for the present S. Columba, the Britains usually
called him S. Columkill, for the great number of Monasteries or Cells of Monks
which he built in Brittany.

5. The Author of his Life in Capgrave besides a large Character of his
virtues, piety austerities, etc. (solemnly repeated almost in all Modern
Stories of Saints) further relates how he was many years before prophesied of,
Ap. Capgrav. i^ vit. ^. columb.
for says he, A certain Disciple of S. Patrick a Britain, named Maccaeus,
foretold of him, saying, In latter times shall be born one called Columba, who
shall illustrate the age wherein he shall live, and his name shall be spread
through all the Provinces of the Isles of the Ocean: for he shall be acceptable
to God and highly favored by him. He shall descend from Noble parents, and in
the forty fifth year of his age shall pass out of Ireland (Scotia) into
Brittany, where he will live a stranger and exiled person for Christ.

6. As touching his coming into Brittany, and his Gests here, we receive this
account from S. Beda, Beda. l. ^.
In the five hundred sixty fifth year of our Lords Incarnation, when Justinius
the Successor of Justinian governed the Roman Empire, there came out of
Ireland a certain Priest and Abbot, in habit and profession a Monk, called
Columba, with an intention to preach the Word of God to the Northern Picts, who
are separated from the Southern Regions by vast and horrible Mountains. For as
for the Picts dwelling on the South of those Mountains, they had many years
before renounced their Idolatry and embraced the Christian Faith (as their
Tradition is) by the preaching of Nynias a most Reverend and holy Bishop born
in Brittany, who had been regularly instructed in the Mysteries of Divine Truth
at Rome. The Seat of whose Bishopric dignified with a Church dedicated to S.
Martin, where the said holy Bishop with many other Saints does rest, is now in
the possession of the Angli. The said place pertaining to the Province of the
Bernicians is ordinarily called Candida casa (White House) because he built
there a Church of hewn stone, a way of building not practiced by the Britains.

7. Now Columba came into Brittany in the ninth year of the reign of Bridius
the Son of Meilochon, the most powerful King of the Picts: and by his
preaching and example converted that Nation to the Faith of Christ. So that for
a reward he received the Island of Hy (or Iona) for the possession of a
Monastery. The Isle is but small, being, according to the estimation of the
Angli, only of five families: And his Successors do hold it to this day:
where himself was likewise buried being seaventy years old, after he had spent
about thirty two years from his entrance into Brittany.

8. This Holy man before his coming into Brittany had founded a Noble Monastery
in Ireland named in that tongue Dear-mach, or the field of Oaks, for the
abundance of those trees growing there. And from these two Monasteries of Hy
and Dear-mach, many others were propagated in Ireland and Brittany by his
Disciples. Among all which notwithstanding the Monastery of Hy in which his
sacred Body rests does hold the preeminence and chief authority. Now the said
Island is usually governed by an Abbot who is a Priest: To whose Jurisdiction
the whole Province, and even Bishops themselves, by a custom no where else
practiced, ought to be subject, according to the example of their first Teacher
S. Columba, who was only a Priest and Monk, and not a Bishop: Of whose Life and
Sayings many strange things are extant in writing compild by his Disciples. But
what a kind of man soever he was, of this we are assured that he left behind
him Successors famous for their great continence, Divine Love and Regular
institution. Thus writes S. Beda.

H Boet. l. 9. f ^^6.
9. Hector Boethius has moreover collected from ancient Records the names of S.
Columba's twelve Companions in his Voyage and labors, called by Adamannus his
(Commilitones) fellow soldiers. There came (says he) into Albion with S.
Columba twelve men eminently imbued with the Doctrine of Christ, but more
adorned with sanctity. Their Names were Baathenus and Cominus, who after S.
Columba's death were Superiors over Monasteries, and no mean ornaments of the
Christian Church among the Scotts. Also Cibthacus and Ethernan nephews to S.
Columba by his Brother, and both of them Priests. Moreover Domitius, Rutius and
Feth^^, men illustrious for their descent, but more for their piety: Lastly
Scandalaus, Eglodeus, Totaneus, Motefer and Gallan. These men when S. Columba
passed from Ireland ^^to Brittainy, fixing their habitations in the Isle Iona,
afterward traveled through the Regions of the Scots and Picts, and by their
labors in teaching, disputing and writing imbued both those nations with
virtuous manners and true Religion.

10. One companion more the Scottish Historians add to S. Columba, to wi^, S.
Constantin formerly King of the Britains, who repenting of his crimes sharply
censured by Gildas, became a Monk. Concerning whom John Ford^n quoted by B.
Usher thus writes: Conte^porary to S. Columba was S. Constantin King of
Cornwall, l. Ford^n ap. Vsser. f. 69^.
who leaving his earthly kingdom, became soldier to the Heavenly King, and
with Saint Columba went into Scotland, where he preached the Faith to the Scots
and Picts He built a Monastery in Govane near the River Cluid, which he
governed as Abbot. He converted to the Faith the whole Province of Kentire,
where he likewise dyed a Martyr, and was buried in his Monastery of Govane.

Boet. l. 3. c. 4.
11. Hector Boethius names the King of the Picts, who bestowd the Isle of Hy or
Iona on the Irish Monks Comgall or Conval, who, says he, was King of Dalrieda:
and so eminent for his Piety that the fame thereof drew S. Columba out of
Ireland.

12. At the same time not far from S. Columba lived S. Kentigern, lately
returned to his Bishopric of Glasco, and who no doubt was an efficacious
assistant to him in his Apostolical Office. Of the solemn meeting of these
two Saints, A. D. 568.
with their Disciples, we have already spoken in the Gests of Saint Kentigern.

13. That in all Points there was a perfect agreement in Faith not only between
S. Kentigern and S. Columba, but also between the Disciples of S. Columba, and
S. Augustine is evident from S. Beda, etc. Only in one Rite or Ceremony they
differed, which was the time of observing Easter. Upon which unconsiderable
difference notwithstanding some Modern Protestants do ground an opinion that
the British Churches did receive not only their Sacred Rites, but Faith also
from the Eastern Churches, and not from Rome. But how great this mistake is,
has in some part already, and shall more clearly be demonstrated when we shall
treat of the Controversy agitated between S. Augustine the Monk, who urged a
conformity to the Roman observance, and the British Bishops zealous to
continue the Error taught them by the Picts and Scots, who had first received
it from S. Columba: whereas he fell into it, not out of any love to Novelty, or
refractary contention, but merely ignorance of the Paschall Computation.

14. Adamannus, followd herein by B. Usher, placing the arrival of S. Columba
in Brittany two years sooner then generally our other Historians do, they
consequently assign thirty four to have been spent by him here. When therefore
thirty of those years were past, the Holy man out of an impatient desire to be
freed from the burden of mortality, Ap Capgra in vit. S. Columb.
earnestly prayed to God to end his pilgrimage After which prayers often repeated,
he saw in a vision certain Angels approaching to him, as to conduct his soul
to heaven: Which sight imprinted such joy in his countenance that his Disciples
observed it. But that joy presently vanished, and in its place succeeded great
sadness. For he saw those Angels recalld, who told him that upon the Petitions
of the Pictish Churches, etc. God ha^ added four years more to his life. Thus
writes the Author of his life in Capgrave

15. At last in the year of Grace five hundred ninety seven, the year in which
S. Augustine came into Brittany, this Holy man dyed most happily, and his Sacred
Body was buried in his Monastery of Hy: from whence notwithstanding it was
translated, at least a great portion of it, into Ireland, and reposed in the
Church of Doun-patrick: The memory of which translation is celebrated in the
Ecclesiastical Office long ago printed at Paris: and in the same Church of
Down, according to the testimony of Ranulfus of Chester, an Inscription on his
Monument signified, That in that one Tomb three Saints, S. Patrick, S. Brigide
and S. Columba did repose.

A. D. 570.

XIII. CHAPTER


XIII. CHAP.
1.2. King Ethelbert invades the other Saxon Kings: by whom he is worsted.

3.4. etc. His Marriage with Bertha, or Aldiberga a Daughter of France: who is
permitted a free exercise of Christian Religion.

9.10 Saying Mass was the general Devotion of the Church.

A. D. 568.
1. HItherto the Saxon Princes had employed their forces only to the
destruction of the Britains: but now finding no resistance from them, turned
their arms against one another. Ethelvverd. in Chron.
For, says Ethelwerd, three years being expired after the coming of S. Columba
into Brittany, Ceaulin and Cutha moved a Civil war against Ethelbert. But
Malmsbury and Huntingdon acknowledge Ethelbert King of Kent to have been the
aggressour. Malmsb. l. i. de Reg. c. 2. Huntingd. l. 2
For it seems being vexed to see the Dominions and power of Ceaulin King of the
West Saxons so much increased, for besides his own Territoryes immediately
subject to him, the other Saxon Princes in the East and South acknowledged a
dependence, so that Ceaulin assumed the Title of Monark: Hereupon Ethelbert a
valiant Young Prince, being mindful of the glory of his Ancestors, who first
had established a Kingdom in Brittany, and had always enjoyd a preeminence
above other Princes, resolved to enlarge the bounds of his Empire, and not to
content himself with the only Province of Kent.

2. In pursuance of which design he raised an Army, A. D. 569.
and with it marched out of his own confines into the Province of the Regni, or
Surrey, where passing unwarily over a little River called Vandalis, he was
rudely repulsed by Ceaulin: and again endeavoring to march forward, the Armies
met at a Village called Wibbandun (now Wimbledon) where he was with a great
slaughter of his army compelld to fly back into Kent, having lost in the combat
his two Chief Captains, Oslaf and Knebban. Near the place where the battle was
fought remains still a Monument of it, to wit, a rampire raised in a round
form, as encompassing a Camp, which is at this day called Knebensbury, or the
Burg of Kneben.

3. Ethelbert after this loss, sought to strengthen himself by foreign aid: A.
D. 570.
for which purpose he treated a freindship and confederacy with the neigbouring
powerful Kingdom of the Franks: to make which confederacy more lasting, he
desired to join it more strictly by marriage: A. D. 575.
which accordingly was effected.

4. Hitherto when we had occasion to mention that Kingdom we called it Gaul,
which was its ancient Primitive name. But afterward a Nation out of Germany,
called Franks, invading it, and under King Pharamond possessing the greatest
part of it, changed the name of it from Gaul into France: and so hereafter we
shall call it. The Successors of Pharamond for several generations were
Pagans, till by the Apostolic zeal of Saint Remigius Bishop of Rhemes in the
year of Grace four hundred ninety nine King Clodoveus was converted to the
Christian Faith, and with him the greatest part of his kingdom: Which Faith
ever after continued and increased there.

5. At this time that Kingdom was divided into four parts, each of them
severally governed by four Kings Sons of Clotharius, and Grandchildren of
Clodoveus: Charibert the Eldest Son had the seat of his Kingdom at Paris;
Chilperic at Soissons; Gunthram at Orleans; and Sigebert at Rhemes. Now a
daughter of one of these did Ethelbert King of Kent marry: but of which of them
particularly, is not mentioned in our Story. Saint Beda indefinitly writes that
she was daughter of a King of the Franks.

6. The name of this Lady according to S. Beda, Malmsburiensis, etc. was Berta:
But S. Gregory who lived in this age, and had intercourse by letters with her,
more rightly calls her Aldiberga, and adiudges great praise due to her in the
conversion of the Saxons.

7. The parents of this Lady made a difficulty to deliver a daughter professing
the Christian Faith to the bed of a Pagan. But Ethelbert engaging himself to
allow her and her family an entire freedom publicly to profess her Religion,
and to exercise all the Sacred Rites belonging to it: the marriage was
concluded: and the Lady sent into Brittany.

8. She was attended by a prudent and devout Christian Bishop called Lethardus,
by Harpsfeild said to have been Bishop of Salvanort (but he doubts there is an
error in the Copies where this unknown name is found.) This Bishop is in
Capgrave styled the Precursor of S. Augustine, and one who opened the door by
which he brought in Christianity.

9. There were then in Dorobernia the prime City of Kent, since called
Canterbury, several Churches which had been built many ages before by
Christians in the times of the Romans, and which had not been utterly
demolished by the Saxons. Among which the Queen made choice of that which was
dedicated to the honor of Saint Martin, a holy Bishop in wonderful veneration
through all France. Beda l. i. c. 26
For thus writes Saint Beda, There was near to the City toward the East a
Church anciently consecrated to the memory of S. Martin whilst the Romans
inhabited Brittany. In which Church the Queen, who as has been said was a
Christian, usually performed her devotions.

10. What those Devotions were is thus more particularly expressed by the
Author of the life of the Holy Bishop Lethardus in Capgrave, Ap. Capgrav in
vit. Lethardi.
who writes thus: In the most ancient Church of the Holy Bishop S. Martin
situated near the City, the Queen together with her Christian family did
frequent the Sacraments of Masses and Prayers, in the celebrating whereof the
Blessed Bishop Lethardus was President, or Chief Prelat. For the saying or
singing of Masses were indeed the Solemn Devotions of the Church in those
times, as appears, for as much as concerns France particularly, the Native
country of this Queen, by the Councils of Orleans and Tours, C^^cil. Ann^^n.
1. c. 2^ C^^cil. (...). ^. c. 4. Magdeburg. Cent. 6 f. 334
celebrated in these very times: And this is acknowledged to have been the
general practice of this age by the Centuriators of Magdeburg who write thus,
The reader hereby may observe that the Solemnities of Masses did now fill all
places. And for as much as concerns Brittany, we have already showed that among
the Northern Picts S. Columba knowing by revelation the death of S. Brendan in
Ireland, Ad^^^^n. in ^it. S. Columb l. 3. c. 15.
celebrated a Solemn Mass for his soul.

XIV. CHAPTER
XIV. CHAP.
1.2 King Ceaulins conquests: and death.

3. etc. The Kingdom of the East Saxons Erected.

1. THE two Saxon Kings, in Kent and the Western parts, did not prosecute their
hatred against one another, but esteemd it more for their advantage to enlarge
their Dominions by invading the Provinces as yet in the possession of the
Britains. In order whereto Ceaulin King of the West Saxons, A. D. 571.
who had hitherto employed his forces in the conquest of places bordring
especially on the Sea, sent his Brother Cutha or Cuthwolf with an army into the
inland Provinces: The Success of which expedition is thus described by
Florentius, and which, says he, was undertaken in the year of Grace five
hundred seaventy one: 2. Cuthulf the Brother of King Ceaulin fought with the
Britains in a place called Bedanford ( or Bedford. A. D. 572. Flore^^. hic.
) And having obtaind the Victory, he took from them four Royal Cities, to wit,
Linganburgh (a place now unknown,) Egelesburgh ( now called Aylsbury in
Buckinghamshire) Bensingtun ( or Benson, in Oxfordshire) and Egnesham (where
placed, is uncertain.) After which victory, he the same year departed this life.



A. D. 575.
3. In the year five hundred seaventy five was erected the Kingdom of the East
Angles in Norfoll, A. D. 585.
Suffolk and Cambridgshire, together with the Isle of Ely. The name of the
first King reigning there was Vffa, from whom his Successors; or as some
write, all the subjects, were called Vffings. Some place the beginning of this
Kingdom before that of the West Saxons: but no where can we find their names
recorded: the reason perhaps being, because before Vffa's time they were Kings
only by courtesy and with dependence on greater Princes, as those of Kent, etc.
as indeed in following ages they were again the Beneficiarij sometimes of the
Mercian Kings, and sometimes of those of Kent.

4. Two years after the beginning of Vffa's reign was fought a Battle fatal to
the Britains, A. D. 577.
by which they were expelld out of almost all the fertile plain regions of the
Island, and driven to the Mountains of Cambria. Geffrey of Montmouth to make
his countrey-mens calamity more illustrious, tells us that a certain King,
called Gormand, came with an army of one hundred sixty six thousand African
soldiers and joined with the Saxons against King Careticus and his Britains,
and drove them beyond the Severn into Wales.

5. But Ethelwerd, Malmsb de Reg. l. 1. c. 2
Malmsbury, etc. more soberly inform us, that whereas the Britains had
hitherto defended themselves against the West Saxons by the firm walls of their
Cities of Gloucester, Cirencester and Bathe, this year Ceaulin after an
overthrow given them in battle, expugn'd those three strong Cities, and
forced them to retire to mountains and woods. This battle, says Camden, was
fought at a place called Deorham: Camden. in Somerset. Huntingd l. 2
after which the City of Bath was given up to the Saxons. In which battle
three Christian Kings of the Britains were slain, whose names were Commagil,
Condidan and Faringmagil. So that afterward Ceaulin and his Son Cuthwin were so
terrible to the Britains, that all places hastened to render themselves to
their power. Thus we read in Henry of Huntingdom.

6. The Britains notwithstanding after seven years rest, A. D. 584 Id. ibid.
again attempted another combat with the Saxons at a place called Fedhanlea,
says the same Author, where on both sides they fought with horrible fury. In
so much as Cuthwin the Son of Ceaulin being oppress^d with multitudes was slain,
and the army of the Angli putt to flight. But King Ceaulin having again
repaired his army, the soldiers whereof bound themselves by an oath that they
would not fly, at last in a battle vanquished the conquering Britains, and
pursuing them took many Provinces and innumerable spoils. B. Usher says that
this Battle was fought (iuxta Moram lapideam) at S^^an-more in West-morland:
Vss^r. in Primord. f. 570.
But that place being a part of the territories of Alla King of the Deiri and
Northumbrians, no probable cause can be assigned to draw the King of the
West Saxons so far from his own Dominions, unless perhaps to give assistance
to Alla.

A. D. 586.

XV. CHAPTER


XV. CHAP.
1.2 The Mercian Principality erected by Crida.

3.4. etc. Theonus Archbishop of London and Thadioc of York with most of the
Britains quitt England, and fly into Wales etc. carrying Relics etc. with them.

A. D. 585.
1. WHereas our Historians say that by the last battles the conquered Britains
lost many Cities and Regions, W^stmonast. hic.
we may judge that Matthew of Westminster had some reason to affirm that in the
year of Grace five hundred eighty five the Kingdom of the Mercians took
beginning, under their first King Croeda or Crida. Notwithstanding it may more
properly be said, that the foundations of that Kingdom were now laid, which
took not its just form till ten years after.

2. This Crida reckond himself the tenth in descent from Woden the Idol Deity
of the Saxons. And whereas the other Saxon Princes possessed themselves of the
extreme parts of the Island toward the Cambrians, Picts and the Ocean, Crida
pierced into the bowels of Brittany, by little and little possessing himself
of all the Provinces which were toward the North confined with the Rivers
Humber and Mersey: on the South with Thames: on the East with the Severn and
Deva: and on the East with the German Ocean.

3. The Britains themselves by a voluntary cession made Crida's way very easy
to his new erected throne, in which he as yet sat contented with the inferior
Title of Governor or Duke. For the Saxons being now dispersed through all the
parts and Provinces of Brittany, and every day gaining more strength, became
intolerably burdensome to the poor Britains, and being Infidels published Laws
extremely prejudicial to Christian Religion professed by them: Whereupon by
agreement between the Clergy and other British Inhabitants hitherto mixed with
the Saxons, they resolved to quitt the Country and to retire, some of them
flying to the mountains of Cambria, others into Cornwall, and great numbers
beyond Sea into Lesser Brittany and other Christian Regions.

A. D. 586. Westminster. hic. Godvvin.
4. Then it was, says Matthew of Westminster, to wit, in the year of our Lord
five hundred eighty six that the Arch-prelats, Theonus Bishop of London, and
Thadioc of York, seeing all the Churches which had been subject to them now
destroyed to the ground, they, attended with many Ecclesiastics who had escaped
danger from the Saxons fled into Cambria, and carried with them the sacred
Relics of Saints, A. D. 588.
out of fear least by an irruption of the Barbarous Saxons the Sacred Bones of
so many and so great Saints should otherwise be blotted out of the memory of
men. Many likewise passing over into Armorick Brittany, left the two Provinces
of Loegria and Northumbria utterly deprived of Christian Congregations. The
Bodies also of some Saints after they had reverently hid them in Monuments,
they cast great heaps of earth over them, least they should be obnoxious to the
contumelious scorn of the Infidels. For the Kings of the Angli and Saxons, as
they were very powerful in arms, so they were most violent Pagans, who
thirsted after nothing more then defacing of the name of Christ, and subverting
his Religious Worship. Insomuch as when they had subdued the country, if any
Church remaind untouched, they took occasion thereby to bring greater confusion
and contempt on the Name of Christ, by turning it into a Temple of their
profane Idoll-Gods, and with their impious Sacrifices polluting the Holy Altars
of the true God.

5. Concerning this Theonus Archbishop of London, Catalog. in London.
he was formerly Bishop of Gloucester, and from thence translated to London, in
the year five hundred fifty three, says B. Godwin. And the year of Grace five
hundred eighty Six taking his whole Clergy with him he is said to have fled to
his own country men in Wales, together with Thadioc Archbishop of York. And
those who afterward in the time of the Saxons sat at London, were simple
Bishops: the Metropoliticall dignity being transferd to Dorobernia, or
Canterbury, as shall be declared. Neither after the departure of Thadioc, do
we read of any other Archbishop of York, till by the conversion of Edwin son
of Alla, King of the Northumbrians, S. Paulinus was there consecrated
Archbishop.

6. By this Secession and flight of the British Clergy and other inhabitants,
there remaind the miserable relics of the Britta^ns says Matthew of
Westminster, only in three Provinces, Westmonast.
to wit, in Cornubia, or Cornwall (so called because it stretches it self like
a horn into the Sea:) in Demetia, which is Southwales: and in Venedotia, which
is called Northwales. With these narrow limits they were forced to be contented:
nevertheles they never departed from the true Faith of Christ. One thing indeed
there is for which they are justly to be reprehended: which is the mortal
hatred which even to this day they bear to the English Nation by whom they were
expelld their ancient Territories, which hatred is so irreconcilable, that
they will less willingly communicate with them, then with dogs.

7. By what has here been transcribed out of our ancient Historians the
discreet Reader may judge how vainly and groundlesly our Modern Protestant
Writers do boast of their conformity with the Religion of the ancient
Britains, in opposition to Writers do boast of their conformity with the
Religion of the ancient Britains, in opposition to that which S. Augustine the
Monk shortly after taught the Saxons: and how impudently some of them affirm
that the Saxons were instructed in Christianity by the Britains, and not from
Rome.

XVI CHAPTER
XVI. CHAP.
1.2.3. A preparation for the Conversion of England: erroneously denied by B.
Parker.

4 5. etc. How S. Gregory seeing pretty English slaves, was moved to seek the
Conversion of our country.

A. D. 588.
1. THE Saxons were no sooner in a secure possession of this Island, but
Almighty God began so to dispose the effects of his Divine Providence as to
prepare the way for their conversion to him, in order to their eternal
Happiness: as if an Earthly kingdom had not been a reward answerable to their
merits in destroying an ungrateful people, abandond to all filthiness and
impiety.

2. The instrument of this felicity, shortly to approach, was the Blessed man
S. Gregory, as yet a private Priest and Monk, but presently after a most worthy
Successor of S. Peter in the Chair Apostolic at Rome. And the occasion moving
him to interesse himself in so pious and glorious a design is thus briefly
declared by our learned Seldom: There having been brought to Rome, Seldom. in
Analect. Brit. l. ^. c. 2.
says he, a number of young English children to be exposed to sale in the
public market, Gregory then a Monk excited by a Zealous affection to propagate
the name of Christ, and moved to a tender compassion by seeing the amiablenes
and beautiful features of those youths, and being informed that the Nation
from whence they came was destitute of the knowledge of Christ, he took a
resolution to sow amongst them the Divine seeds of Christian Faith. And being
afterward exalted to the Pontificate, in order to the effecting his pious
design, he sent a certain Monk called Augustine to lay the foundations of a
Christian Church in the Island, adjoining to him other auxiliaries, devout
companions of his labors.

3. Notwithstanding B. Parker the generally supposed Author of the British
Antiquities, Antiquit. Britann. f. 34
out of envy and indignation to acknowledge any obligation to Rome, pronounces
this to be a mere Fable: His argument is, for that in his judgment there was no
probability that the Saxons for gain should sell their children. Tacit. de
Morib. Germanorum.
Whereas Tacitus recounting the manners of the ancient Germans, says that they
would out of greedines of gaining by dice-playing even set their own liberty
to stake: Malmsbur. de Reg. l. 1. c. 3
and Malmsburiensis affirms that it was a familiar and almost naturally inbred
custom among the Saxons to sell their Children: Which custom continued many
ages in our Nation, insomuch as in the days of our King Henry the second, by
the testimony of Giraldus Cambrensis, Girald. Cambr in Hibern. exp. l. 1. c. 18.
a Synod at Armagh in Ireland was obliged to make a Decree for the redeeming of
such English youths as had been sold for slaves in that Island. And before that
time, among the Laws of Inas King of the West Saxons, Inae Leg. 30.
there is more then one which under great penalties forbid this horrible and
unnatural commerce. Lastly with regard to Saint Gregory's own time, he himself
is a witness beyond all exception that the Angli were accustomed to sell their
children, for in an Epistle to Candidus a Priest, Gregor. M. l. 5. Epist. 10.
his Procurator in France, he gives him order to redeem such English children
as he met with sold for slaves in that Kingdom; and having bought them, to
send them to Rome to be there instructed in the Christian Faith.

4. This difficulty therefore being sufficiently cleared, we will here more
particularly and circumstantially set down that passage of Story, which gave
occasion to S. Gregory to extend his charitable care toward our Nation. We
find it related by almost all our ancient Historians, and by forrainers too
when they treat of the Gests of S. Gregory. Yet in some of them, and
particularly in Malmsburiensis and Ioannes Diaconus, one Error is to be
observed touching Chronology: For they referr this passage of Story to the
times of Pope Benedict, whereas most certain it is that it happened toward the
latter end of Saint Gregory's immediate Predecessor Pope Pelagius. For a good
while passed after Pope Benedicts death before Saint Gregory was Prefect of the
City: after which he undertook a Monastical Profession in a Monastery built
by himself Ad clivum Scauri: from whence he was shortly after called and created
Archdeacon of the Roman Church, then sent Apocrisarius (or Nuncio) to
Constantinople, at his return from whence he saw these English youths with so
much kindness and compassion.

5. The exact Narration of which passage is in this manner delivered by Saint
Beda: We must not pass in silence, Beda lib. 2 c. 1
says he, a relation which by Tradition from our Ancestors is brought down to
us, to wit, upon what motive it was that Saint Gregory expressed so much care
of the salvation of our Nation. For they tell us, how on a certain day when
great variety of Merchandise was brought into the Marketplace by foreign
Merchants lately arrived, and a world of people were met to buy, S. Gregory
among the rest came, and took notice chiefly of three young children of a pure
complexion, beautiful looks, and hair gracefully ordered. As Soon as he saw
them, he inquired from what country they came: and was told that they came
from the Isle of Brittany, A. D. 589.
where the inhabitants generally are so comely. He demanded further, whether
those Islanders were Christians or Pagans: and was told that they were Pagans.
Hereupon he deeply sighed, saying, Alas, what pity is it that the Prince of
Darkness should possess men of such lovely bright countenances, and that
persons so amiable in their looks should carry souls utterly void of inward
Grace. Again he askd what was the name of their particular Nation: to whom it
was replied, that they were called Angli. Well may they be called so, said he,
for they have Angelical faces suitable to such as shall be coheyrs with
Angels. He enquired further, how the Province was called from whence they were
brought. The answer was, that the inhabitants of it were called Deiri. They are
well called Deiri, said he, importing by their Name that they shall be deliverd
from the ire of God (de ira Dei eruti) and called to partake his Mercy. His
last Question was, How the King of that Nation was called: And he was told that
his name was All: whereupon in allusion to that name he said, Alleluia must be
sung in those parts to the praise of God the Creator of all things.

6. Afeer this discourse ended he went to (Pelagius) Bishop of the Roman and
Apostolic See (For as yet himself was not chosen Pope) and humbly entreated
him to send into Brittany some Ministers of Gods word to convert that Nation to
Christ: Adding, That himself was ready to be employed with Gods assistance in
such a work, in case his Holiness thought fit. But his offer could not be taken:
for though the Pope would have granted his desire, yet the Romans would not
permit his absence so far from the City. Notwithstanding a while after when
himself was exalted to the Popedom, he brought to perfection the work so long
and so earnestly desired by him, sending indeed other persons to preach the
Gospel there, but himself by his counsels, exhortations and prayers
contributing very much to make their preaching fruitful and effectual. These
things according to what our Ancestors have delivered, we thought proper and
fit to be inserted in our Ecclesiastical History.

XVII. CHAP. A. D. 590.

XVII. CHAPTER



1.2. S. Columban comes out of Ireland into Brittany: and thence goes into
France.

3. Of S. Phara a Holy Abbess: to whom many British Virgins repair.

1. BUT Alla King of the Deiri, Malmsb. de Reg l. 1. c. ^
(says Malmsburiensis) though by the selling of those children he gave
occasion of bringing Christianity among the Angli, yet was not so happy to hear
any thing of it himself. For the Divine Election regarded hi^ Son. Which Son
was not his immediate Successor Edelric, who the next year upon the death of
his Father Alla possessed his throne: But Edwin, a Prince who after many
vicissitudes o^ fortune came first to the Crown of the Northumbrians, afterward
to the Faith of Christ, and lastly to the glory of Martyrdom, as shall be
showed. As for Ethelric, his reign was short, for it lasted only five years,
and afforded nothing memorable.

2. In the first year of King Ethelrics reign, S. Columban, Haraeus 21. November
^ong vit. S. Columban.
after he had spent several years in the Monastery of Benchor in Ireland came
over into Brittany, being moved with a desire of seeing strange countries, says
Haraeus out of Jonas who largely wrote that Saints life. The Venerable Abbot
Comogel did much bewail his departure, but being unable to resist the Divine
Will, he dismissed him: so that he with twelve Companions inflamed with the
same desire took ship, and came into Brittany, from whence he afterward passed
into France. When he undertook this journey he was no more then twenty years of
age. In France he was very courteously received by King Sigebert (or rather his
Son Childebert) who gave him the choice of any place for his abode. These
devout men therefore entering into a desert called (Vosegus) the Vauge, found
there a certain place encompassed with old walls, and watered with warm springs:
but time had ruind all the buildings. The name of it was Luxovium.

3. Whilst S. Columban lived in Austrasia, a Province of France, he was
Spiritual Master and instructour to the Holy Virgin Phara, reckoned by the
Centuriators of Magdeburg among the British Nuns. Others say she was Neice
to S. Columban himself. From whomsoever she was descended, certain it is that
the sweet odor of her virtues and sanctity was so largely spread that many
devout Virgins, and some of them of Princely families, out of Brittany repaired
to her, to learn piety under her government in France, as shall in due place be
showed.

XVIII. C.
XVIII. CHAP.
1.2.3. War between the Scots and Picts.

4. The South-Saxon King subject to the West Saxons.

5. S. Gregory consecrated Pope.

1. IN the year five hundred and ninety a war was began in the Northern parts
of Brittany between the Scotts and Picts, which drew the whole Island into
great factions. In those parts Aidan or Edan son of the King of the Scotts then
enjoyed the principality, who had been crowned King by S. Columba in the Isle
Iona or Hy, says Adamannus.

2. The cause of these commotions was the same which had formerly raised so
long and furious wars between the Saxons and the Britains. For the Scots out
of Ireland at first were invited by the Picts to assist them against the
Britains, as the Saxons were by the Britains against the Picts and Scots: and
these Irish Scots, imitating the Saxons, at first stayed in those parts upon
courtesy: but afterward grew insolent, and new Aids from their own country
daily flocking to them, they fixed their habitation, and not long after a
Kingdom there. Which being once established, their next attempt was to drive
the Picts out of their own Provinces, which at last they effected, far more
entirely then the Saxons had against the Britains, for the Scotts utterly
rooted out of the world the very name and Nation of the Picts.

3. It was for this Empire of the Northern parts of Brittany that Edan Prince
of the Scotts now contended, and the whole success of the war though waged at
a great distance from the Isle of Iona where S. Columba then was, Adamnan. ap.
Capgrav. in vit. S. Colu^b.
yet was divinely revealed to him: For thus do we read in his Life; S. Columba
being in the Isle of Iona, on a certain day called his brethren together, and
kneeling down said, Let us now pray fervently for this people and their King
Aidan, for this very hour the battle against their enemies begins. A little
while after he rose up, and looking toward heaven said, Now are the barbarous
enemies put to flight, and the victory is given to Aidan, though dearly
purchased, for of his army there are slain three hundred and three. This needs
not seem incredible, for many examples occurr in Ecclesiastical story
declaring how God has often been pleased to reveal unto his servants events
happening in places far removed.

Westminster. hic.
4. The same year dyed Cissa King of the South Saxons, says Matthew of
Westminster, and his Kingdom was devolved on Ceaulin King of the West Saxons:
Yet so as that it was administered by his son Edelwalc, who enjoyed also the
Title of King, yet as Beneficiary to Ceaulin.

5 But that which most illustrated this year was the advancement of S. Gregory
to the Popedom, A. D. 591.
who immediately after the death of Pope Pelagius was with the wonderful
applause of all degrees and orders in Rome placed in S. Peter's Chair, to the
great benefit of the whole Church, but more especially to the incomparable
felicity of our Island. For his admirable Gests, among which the most
illustrious was the Conversion of the Angli and Saxons, he was deservedly
called S. Gregory the Great, and the Apostle of England, as our Martyrologes
declare.

XIX. CHAP. XIX. CHAPTER

1.2. Ceaulin King of the West Saxons driven out of his Kingdom: dies.

3 Ethelbert King of Kent becomes Supreme among the Saxons.

1. THE year following Brittany afforded a memorable example of the instability
of worldly greatness and power, in the person of the hitherto prosperous King of
the West Saxons Ceaulin: who after all his conquests was at last overcome in
fight and expelled his kingdom and life also. Which is in this manner related
by Malmsburiensis, Malmsbur de Reg. l. 1. c. 1.
Ceaulin, says he, in his last days was banished from his kingdom, exhibiting
to his Enemies a miserable spectacle of himself. For such was the general
hatred born to him both by the Britains and Saxons, that they all unanimously
conspired to destroy him: Armies therefore being gathred on both sides, a
battle was fought at Wodensdike in the one and thirtieth year of his reign,
where his forces were utterly defeated: after which he was compelled to forsake
his kingdom, and a little after he dyed.

2. The place where this battle was fought is in Wiltshire, Camden in Wiltshire.
where a great fosse divides the Province in the middle, says Camden, from
East to West, called by the inhabitants Wansdike, and fabulously reported to
have been made by the Devil upon a Wednesday: for it takes its name from Woden,
or Mercury the Saxon Idol, which gave the appellation to Wednesday. The cause
of the raising of that rampire seems to have been for a separation of the
Kingdoms of the Mercians and West Saxons. And near thereto, is seated a Village
called Wodensbury, where Ceaulin fighting against the Britains and Saxons was
utterly broken.

3. After the death of Ceaulin, his Brothers son Cealric possessed the Kingdom
of the West Saxons: but being much inferior in courage to his Predecessor, he
did not inherit that extent of power which Ceaulin had exercised over the other
Saxon Princes. Which opportunity was not omitted by Ethelbert King of Kent,
next in power to Ceaulin: who without much hazard obtained that preeminence. A.
D. 593
By which means a freer way was opened to communicate Christian Truths to
several Provinces of the Kingdom, after they had been once entertained by
Ethelbert, which happened little above three years after the death of Ceaulin.

XX. CHAPTER
XX. CHAP.
i.2. etc. The Irish Churches reduced from Schism by S. Gregory.

A. D. 592. Greg. Al. l. 2. Epist. ^6. Indict. ^0.
1. SAint Gregory in the third year after he was Pope, by his authority and
wisdom restored the Churches of Ireland to Catholic Unity, from which they
had been separated upon occasion of the quarrel about the Tria Capitula: of
which we treated before. His Epistle to them concerning that subject is extant:
which that it had its full effect to their satisfaction may be proved by many
arguments. For presently after this time there is mention of several of their
Bishops and devout persons, which undertook Pilgrimages to Rome to visit the
Holy places, and to express their duty to the supreme Bishop.

Ibid. l. 9. Ep. 62. Ind. 4.
2. Moreover another Epistle of the same Holy Pope is extant also, in answer to
certain doubts and questions which they had proposed to him touching the Rites
and manner of Baptism: what Form of Profession was to be administered to such as
returned to the Church from the Nestorian Heresy, etc. But since those matters
do not concern the Ecclesiastical affairs of Brittany, the Reader, if he be
inquisitive, may inform himself concerning S. Gregory's resolutions in those
cases from S. Gregory himself in his Works every where to be met with.

3. Only we shall in this place observe that the Churches of Brittany were at
this time free from any stain of Schism or Errors in Doctrines. Yea probable
it is that by them the Churches of Ireland were denounced to the Sea
Apostolic, as culpable. It was about the year five hundred sixty six, says
Baronius, that they engaged themselves in the said Schism, and now after twenty
six years, through Gods goodness, and by the endeavors of his servant S.
Gregory they were restored.

XXI. CHAP. A. D. 594.

XXI. CHAPTER



1.2. etc. The death of several Saxon Princes

4.5. The Death of the devout Queen Ingoberga, Mother to Queen Bertha.

1. IN the year of Grace five hundred ninety three Edelric King of the
Northumbers dyed, A. D. 593.
and his Son Ethelfrid succeeded him, surnamed the Cruel: concerning whom
Malmsburiensis gives this Character, Malmsbur. de Reg. l. 1.
Thus being possessed of his Kingdom he began first vigorously to defend his
own dominions, then unjustly to invade the bounds of others, and every where to
seek occasions of exalting his glory. Many combats were undertaken by him
providently, and executed gallantly: for neither was he restraind by sloth,
when war was necessary, neither in the exercising it did his courage impell him
to temerity.

2. About the same time Titillus King of the Eastangles being dead, his Son
Redwald possessed his throne: who by some Writers is accounted the first
founder of that Kingdom. By the persuasion of the Holy King and Martyr S.
Edwyn, he was induced to give his name to Christ in Baptism: But these and many
other things concerning him, which fill the Saxon Annalls, happened several
years after this time, and shall in their due place be declared.

3. This year was fruitful in the deaths of our Saxon Princes: for Crida King,
or Duke of the Mercians now likewise ended his life, to whom succeeded his Son
Wibba or Wippa, not memorable in story for any thing so much as leaving behind
him his illustrious children Penda, Kenwalch and Sexburga: of whom hereafter.

4. About the year five hundred ninety four, A. D. 594.
the pious and virtuous Queen Ingoberga received the reward of her patience by
a holy and happy death. She had been the wife of Charibert one of the Kings of
the Franks, and after she had born him a daughter, was unworthily repudiated by
him to make way for a Concubine called Meroflenda. Her memory challenges a
place in our History, in as much as most probably she was Mother to Bertha or
Aldiberga, the Christian Lady above twenty years since married to Ethelbert King
of Kent, whose piety and endeavors had a great influence in disposing her
Husbands mind to embrace the Christian Faith very shortly to be proposed to him
by S. Augustine the Monk.

5. As touching the said Queen Ingoberga we receive a character of her virtues
and an account of her happy death from a worthy French Bishop an eyewitnes of
both, to wit Gregory Bishop of Tours: whose relation is as follows: A. D. 595.
In the fourteenth year of King Childebert, Ingoberga Widow of Charibert
departed this life. Gregor. Turon. l. 9. c. 26.
A Lady she was of great sincerity and devotion, diligent in watching, prayers
and Almsgiving. She, I suppose by direction of the Divine Providence, sent
messengers to me desiring my counsel and assistance about her Last Will, and
disposing of matters which she intended for the good and remedy of her soul.
For which purpose she requested my personal presence that after advice between
us, her intentions might be committed to writing. I could not refuse to come to
her: and at my entrance I met with a Religious man, who received me
courteously, and presently called for a Notary. Then we advised together: after
which she bequeathed some legacies and Offerings to the Church of Tours, and of
Saint Martins: and some to the Church of Man's. This was the substance of her
Will, and a few months after spent with sickness she departed this life, by
orders left in writing having given freedom to many of her servants. At her
death she was, as I conjecture, seaventy years old. By the virtues, devotion
and charity of this good Queen, we may collect that Aldiburga her daughter, at
least unquestionably her near kinswoman, brought the like into Brittany.

XXII. CHAPTER
XXII. CHAP.
1.2. etc. The Saxon Heptarchy, or Seven Kingdoms of the Saxons in Brittany:
with their respective limits: and Princes at this time when S. Augustine came to
convert our Nation.

1. THE next thing that occurrs in our Ecclesiastical Records touching
Brittany is the rising of the Sun of righteousness upon it, by the Light whereof
the darkness of Idolatry and Pagan superstition was dispelled, and a new seed of
pious Princes, zealous Bishops, immaculate Virgins, devout Monks, and
multitudes of all sorts far excelling in all Christian virtues and Graces the
late British inhabitants, sprung up and flourished to the admiration of all
other Christian Churches: insomuch as that from this time Brittany began to
deserve the Title afterward annexed to it, of being called The Isle of Saints.

2. But before I relate how and by what degrees the foundations of so great a
Happiness were laid, it will be expedient to give a general prospect at one
view of the present state of Brittany, how the Provinces were divided into
several Saxon-Goverments: and what Princes ruled in each.

3. It is agreed generally among our Writers that the Day Star of Christianity
at least b^gan to shine in Brittany in the year of Grace five hundred ninety
six: for then the Apostolic Messengers from Rome received their Mission from
the most worthy Successor of Saint Peter, S. Gregory the Great in the seventh
year of his Pontificate, and begun their journey toward our Island, though
they did not arrive here till the year following.

4. Now at that time the Saxon Heptarchy was established in Brittany, for all
the Provinces of it (excluding the Northern Kingdoms of the Scotts and Picts,
with the Western parts called Cambria or Wales possessed by the Britains, and
likewise Cornwall not yet wholly subdued by the Saxons:) were entirely under
the dominion of the Angli and Saxons: and having been by degrees conquered by
several Princes and Captains out of Germany, which were independent of one
another, each one challenged his conquest, and governed the Provinces subdued
by him as his own lawful right and possessions: though some of them proving
less powerful, and confind within narrower limits then others, in a short
time were forced to demand protection and consequently acknowledge some
dependence on their more powerful neighbors.

5. The Kings so governing, each his respective portion were in number Seven:
Their Names and Provinces were as follows in order according to the antiquity
of each Kingdom.

6. First Ethelbert was then in the thirty sixth year of his Reign over the
Kingdom of Kent: He was Son of Irmeric, Son of Otha, Son of Eska, Son of
Hengist, who founded that Kingdom in the year of Grace four hundred fifty
seven. His Kingdom containd the County of Kent, as it is at this day bounded,
without any considerable difference.

7. Next over the Southsaxons (which Kingdom comprised Sussex and Surrey)
raignd Edilwalch the Son of Cissa, the Son of Ella, who established that
Kingdom in the year four hundred ninety one. Then was the seventh year of
Edilwalch's reign.

8. Thirdly the Kingdom of the West Saxons was now the fifth year possessed by
Celrick Brothers Son to Ceaulin, Son of Kenric, Son of Cerdic founder of that
Kingdom in the year of our Lord five hundred and nineteen. Within whose
Dominions were comprehended Hantshire, Berkshire, Wiltshire, Somerset,
Dorsetshire, Devonshire and part of Cornwall.

9. Next over the East Saxons, Sebert then was in the first year of his Reign.
He was Son of Sledda, Son of Erkenwin, who in the year of Grace five hundred
twenty seven founded that Kingdom, containing Essex, Middlesex and so much of
Hartfordshire as is under the Bishop of Londons Jurisdiction, whose Diocese is
adequate to this Kingdom.

10. After this was the Kingdom of the Northumbers, to which belonged
whatsoever lies between Humber and Edenborough-Frith. It was sometimes
subdivided into two Kingdoms, of Bernicia and Deira. Bernicia contained
Northumberland with the South of Scotland to Edenborough: and Deira consisted
of part of Lancashire, with the entire counties of York, Durham, Westmorland
and Cumberland. The whole Kingdom at this time was governed by Ethelfrid, in
the fourth year of his Reign: Who was Son of Edelric, Son of Alla, Son of Ida,
who founded that Kingdom in the year of our Lord five hundred forty seven.

11. After this was the Kingdom of the East Angles, containing Norfolk,
Suffolk, Cambridgshire with the Isle of Ely and some part of Bedfordshire. At
that time Redwald had been four years King thereof: who was Son of Titillus,
Son of Vffa esteemed the first King and founder of it in the year of Grace five
hundred seaventy five.

12. The last, though largest, of the Saxon Heptarchy was the Kingdom of the
Mercians, so called because being seated in the middle of the Island, it was
the Marches or Limits on which the other Kingdoms did border. It comprehended
the whole Counties of Lincoln, Northampton, Rutla^d, Huntingdo^, Buckingham,
Oxford, Worcester, Warwick, Darby, Nottingham, Leicester, Stafford, Chester,
Gloucester, Part of Lancashire, Herefordshire, Shropshire and Bedfordshire. At
this time, when S. Augustine the Monk was sent by Pope Gregory to the Conversion
of the Saxons the King, or at least Chief Governor of Mercia was Wibba son of
Crida who laid the foundations of it in the year of our Lord five hundred
eighty five.

13. These were the Kings reigning in Brittany when Almighty God from heaven
visited it by sending Apostolical men to teach the blind Inhabitants the ways
to glory and Happiness. And these were the limits of their respective kingdoms.
Which limits notwithstanding were in continual motion, varying according to
the success, good or bad, of the Princes invading, as often they did, the bounds
of their Neighbors. And among these seven Kings commonly one was most
puissant, overruling the rest, who styled himself King of the English Nation.
Which supereminence Ethelbert King of Kent at this time enjoyd: Camd. Britan.
to whom the Word of life was first offered, and by him thankfully accepted, as
shall consequently be declared.

14. Now since in the poursuit of our History we are to give an Account of
occurrents relating to another new Government and Church in Brittany, being
little concerned hereafter in the affairs of the Britains themselves: We will
therefore in the following Books denote the Succession of times not by the
British, but Saxon Kings, in whose raigns they shall happen respectively. And
though at this time in the Saxon Heptarchy the Kingdom of Kent was both the
most powerful, and will for a good space furnish us with most plentiful
matter proper to our History: Yet considering that ere long the West Saxon
Kingdom will both grow in power, and be very fruitful in affording richly
materials relating to Religion: but especially considering that in time the
same Kingdom will swallow all the rest, and reduce the whole Kingdom into a
Monarchy: we will therefore hereafter prefixe successively the Names of the
West Saxons Kings: beginning with Celric, in whose days the Holy Christian
Missionners arrived in Brittany, bringing with them the happy tidings of the
Gospel, joyfully hearkened to in Kent, but either not made known, or unwelcome
to the said Celric, as likewise to his Successor Ceolulf, and their Subjects
the West Saxons.

THE CHVRCH-HISTORY OF BRITTANY UNDER THE ENGLISH-SAXON HEPTARCHY. III. PART.
THE THIRTEENTH BOOK.
I. CHAP.
I. CHAPTER.
1.2. S. Gregory himself undertook the Mission into England* but was recalled.

3. etc. The Conversion of England falsely and maliciously ascribed to the
Britains: and French.

10. Queen Aldiberga a promoter of it.

11. Other Queens in this age did the like.

1 THOSE bowels of Compassion which eight years ago the sight of a few well
featured English slaves had moved in S. Gregory, then only a private person,
and those charitable designs which on that occasion God had inspired into his
heart to procure the eternal felicity of our Nation, seemd all this while to
have been little better then ineffectuall wishes, arguments of a good Nature,
or a merciful Christian disposition only, for which he might expect and
obtain a reward and blessing to himself, but with little advantage to us.

2. Yet if a Tradition verified by Authors of no mean esteem, may be believed,
even then also S. Gregory proceeded further then to wishes: for he is said not
only to have solicited Pope Pelagius to employ able Ministers for reducing into
Christ's fold a Nation both in name and beauty resembling Angels: but when the
difficulty of the journey, the uncertain event of it, the savagenes of the
Nations manners, and roughnes of their language had terrifyed all men from the
attempt, he himself petitiond for and obtained so dangerous art employment, A.
D. 596.
and had proceeded three days in the journey toward Brittany, when the Pope
was forced to recall him by reason the City of Rome loudly murmured to be
deprived of so excellent and so necessary a person, who was only fit to succeed
in the Chair of S. Peter, and to watch over the whole Church.

3. S. Gregory's holy intentions therefore seemd to sleep till himself was
invested with power to promote so heroically Christian an affair: and six
years were spent in his Pontificat before he could find persons capable of the
courage to undertake it. It may be wondered that among the British Clergy their
temporal losses should work so deeply on their minds, that they should envy
heaven to their Conquerours, and that not any should be found among them
willing to preach Christ among a blind people to whom he was unknown.

4. But such uncharitablenes and unchristian aversenes from the spiritual good
of their enemies is observed avd condemned in the Britains by our Ancient
Writers Gildas and S. Beda, Bed. l. 1. c 22.
as is fully testified by this expression of the latter of these two pious
Historians, Among other unexpressibly heinous crimes of his countrymen which
the British Historian Gildas describes and deplores in his mournful style, he
adds this also, That they would never be brought to preach the Word of
Christian Faith to the Nations of the Saxons and Angli inhabiting Brittany with
them.

5. Indeed if the Britains had undertaken a commission of such a Nature, small
success could have been expected: For as has been said heretofore, the whole
Nation both Ecclesiastics and Laics, were so coverd withal sorts of vices,
that such Teachers would have disgraced that Holy Truth which they professed in
words, but renounced by their actions. Id. ibid.
Therefore the Divine piety, says same Saint Beda, did not desert his people
whom he foresaw, but destined far more worthy Preachers to the Saxon Nation, by
whom they should be effectually induced to believe.

6. Notwithstanding in despite of such evident Testimonies, a Modern
Protestant Historian of the highest rank, Parker. Ant. Br^t. f. 7.8. etc.
without any ground from Antiquity, or any Motive but a hatred to the
Apostolic See of Saint Peter, will needs entitle the British Preachers to the
Conversion of several of our Saxon Princes, before Saint Augustins arrival
from Rome. He had rather acknowledge for the founders and Apostles of the
Christian Churches in this kingdom men by their own Writers described to be
enormously cruel, Gild. Bed. l. 1. c. 14.
haters of Truth and lovers of lies, men wholly polluted with luxury,
drunkenness, animosities, strifes, contentions, envy and all other vices: in a
word such men as provoked God to destroy their own Nation, and therefore very
improper instruments of the salvation of strangers, then profess any
obligation to Saint Gregory, for his virtues and piety only, sirnam'd Great by
the whole Church, a man eminent for his learning, exemplary for his piety,
illustrious for his Miracles, and by constant Tradition acknowledged the
Apostle of England.

7. Another Protestant Controvertist on the same motive of envy will shamelesly
ascribe to the French Clergy the greatest share in the Conversion of the
Saxons: Sut^lif. in Subvers. of Convers.
Whereas how slow they were in teaching the true Faith to their neighbors even
when some of them desirous of information implored their help, we find
testified bz Saint Gregory's complaint in letters to the French Kings Theodoric
and Theodebert themselves, and their Queen Brunichildis, Where he acquaints
them, that he was credibly informed that the English Nation through Gods mercy
were in a willing disposition to receive the Christian Faith, Gregor. M. l. ^.
Epist. 58. ^d. Ibi^ Epist. 59.
but that the French Clergy and Bishops their neighbors were negligent and
void of all Pastoral solicitude toward them: And therefore least the souls
of that Nation should perish in eternal damnation, he had undertaken the care
to send the bearer of those Letters Augustine, etc.

8. But let it be supposed that the Apostles of the Saxons had been British or
French Preachers, certain it is they would have been far enough from teaching
them such doctrines as these men have published in their Writings: They would
neither by their words nor example have taught the Clergy the convenience of
wives, or independency on the Governors of Gods Church: Nor the Layty to deny
due veneration to Gods Saints, to tread under feet their sacred ashes, to
demolish Monasteries, to detest vows of Chastity, to renounce Roman Rites, to
abominate the Holy Sacrifice and Altars, to abjure all care and charity to the
dead, etc. So that whosoever were the Planters of the Christian Faith among the
Saxons, such Preachers as Parker and Sutcliff are not their Successors, but
supplanters of the same Faith.

9. Now whereas Saint Gregory signifies that the Nation of the Angli were
willing to embrace the Christian Faith, we cannot ascribe this good disposition
in them more probably to any then to the pious Queen Aldiberga, her Bishop
Saint Lethardus, and her Christian Family, whose devout, charitable, peaceable
and humble lives and conversation could not choose but recommend the Religion
which they professed.

10. Particularly Queen Aldiberga had among her own Ancestors a worthy pattern
to imitate, which was her Great Aunt, Saint Clotilda, by whose prayers and
exhortations her husband Clodoveus King of the Franks was powerfully moved to
relinquish Idolatry, Baron. ad A. D. 553.
and with his whole Nation to embrace Christianity, as Baronius declares. Now
though Aldiberga's exhortations did not produce so ample an effect on her
husband King Ethelberts mind, yet that she effectually concurred to dispose him
to hearken to Divine Truth when represented by one employed from a greater
authority, and enabled more powerfully to confirm it, seems sufficiently clear
from several passages of Saint Gregory's letter to her, Greg. M. l. 9. Epist.
59.
in the close whereof he seems to wonder that she had not long before inclined
her husbands mind to follow that Faith which the professed: And however he
testifies that after Saint Augustins coming her diligence and zeal was
extraordinary: in consideration of which he uses this expression: We gave
thanks to Almighty God, Ibid.
who in mercy has vouchsafed to reserve the Conversion of the English Nation
for your merit and reward.

11. And it is observable that oftimes in this age God was pleased to use that
infirm Sex in the great work of planting his Faith in several kingdoms. Thus
four years before this by Queen Theodolinda the Longobards, who were Pagans or
Artans, were brought into the bosom of the Catholic Church. And not twenty
years before that, Ingundis daughter of Sigebert King of the Franks, and Aunt
to this Queen Aldiberga, was an instrument of converting her husband the
Spanish Prince S. Hermenegild from Arianism, who became a glorious Martyr.

II. CHAP.
II. CHAP.
1.2.3 The first Missioners Names: they were Monks.

4.5. etc. Whether Benedictins, or Equitians.

16. Whether the British Monks were of the Egyptian Institut.

A. D. 596.
1. THE notice which Saint Gregory had of the good inclination which King
Ethelbert and his Saxons had to hearken to the Word of life in all probability
came from his Queen. And this no doubt encouraged him to hasten thither a
Mission of devout and zealous Priests: whom he chose out of his own Monastery
Ad clivum Scauri, Religious men well known by him to be eminent for learning
and piety. These he instructed with good admonitions, and having furnished them
with Letters of recommendation to Princes and Bishops through whose territories
they were to pass, to be assistant to them in so holy a Work, he dismissed
them with spiritual authority to preach the Gospel: particularly advising
them in their passage through France to adjoyn to their company such as might
be helpful to them by their knowledge of the manners and language of the
Saxons, little differing from that of the Franks lately converted to
Christianity.

2. What the Names were of these first Missioners is not agreed on among our
Modern Historians. Baron. hic.
Baronius affirms that the principal of them were Augustine and Mellitus.
Others to Mellitus adjoyn Iustus and John. Bed. l. 1. c. 2.9
But they have not well distinguished times: for a Second Mission, four years
after this, was destined by Saint Gregory into Brittany to assist and cooperate
with Saint Augustine, when the number of Converts was multiplied: and on that
ground the names of the Missioners are confounded. But Saint Beda says
expressly that Mellitus a Roman Abbot, went not at first with Saint Augustine,
but was sent afterward for supply, and with him Paulinus and Ruffinianus. In
our authentic Records therefore we find only these Missioners named at the
first Delegation, Augustine, Laurence, Peter and John.

3. That these first Preachers of Christianity among the Saxons in Brittany
were Religious Monks, in all regards the Predecessors of those which about a
thousand years after were violently deprived of their Monasteries, their
country, and many of them their lives also for continuing in the same Faith
and a Profession of the like austerity of Discipline which they had from the
beginning been taught, is a truth so manifest in all our Records, that only
Passion can question it.

4. But whether these Religious persons were peculiarly of the Family of Saint
Benedict has of late been made a question. Cardinal Baronius was the first who
denied it, and his principal reason is, because Saint Gregory, out of whose
Monastery they came, assumed an Abbot to govern the same Monastery not from
Mount Cassin, where Saint Benedict had established his principal Convent, but
out of the Province of Valeria, and school of S. Equitius.

5. To clear this matter, in which some partial minds are willing to frame a
difficulty, we are to take notice that in those more ancient and devout times
the Masters and Instructours in a Monastical life did utterly neglect the
continuance and eternity of their names, their principal and only care being
employed in cultivating the souls of their Disciples and purifying their
affections. Hence it came to pass that the Professors of a Solitary austere
life, under what Master soever, were simply called Monks, without any addition
of the title or name of their prime Institutour. Thus here in Brittany though
Saint Patrick, Saint Columba, Saint Columban, Saint David, Saint Brindan and
others had gathered many families of Religious men, yet none of these, or their
Successors did distinctly call themselves by the names of their Masters, or
factiously pretend to any advantage or honor from being descended from any of
those Saints. So it was then in Italy and elsewhere. And therefore no wonder if
in Saint Gregory's or long after in Saint Beda's Writings we find not the names
of Benedictins, Equitians, etc.

6. Moreover though most of the foresaid Institutours of Monks did no doubt
prescribe certain Laws and Rules by which their Disciples were to be directed,
(so we read that Saint Brindan received a Rule by an Angel dictating it:) Yet
those Laws were not published, nor known out of their particular Convents,
neither did they extend beyond the general duties and exercises of their
Religious Subjects: very many things being reserved to the judgment,
discretion and will of the Abbots. Whereas Saint Benedict, no doubt by a
special direction of Gods Spirit, composed an entire and perfect Rule,
comprehending the whole duty both of Superiors and Subjects, and obliging both
to conformity, as well in the order of reciting the Ecclesiastical Office and
Psalmody, as the duties of each respective Officer, the managing of the
Convents revenews, the prescribed times of refection, of working, reading,
silence, sleep, etc. Which Rule for the excellency and perfection of it became
in a short time publicly known, admited and generally accepted.

6. Which general admission of Saint Benedicts Rule among the professors of a
Coenobiticall life found little or no difficulty, after the said Rule had not
only been highly commended in the Writings of so holy and admired a Prelate as
Saint Gregory, but moreover produced, read, approved and the observation of it
enjoined in a Roman Synod celebrated under the same Pope the year before Saint
Augustine and his fellow- Monks were directed by him in Mission to Brittany.
Biblioth. M. SS. Patrum tom 6. part. 1. f. 4.3.


8. This we read to have been done in the Great Bibliotheque of the Fathers,
quoted no doubt out of that Ancient Manuscript belonging to Saint Benedict's
Monastery at Sublac, mentioned by Baronius. In which this Form of Confirmation
of the said Rule by Saint Gregory in that Synod is found: I Gregory, Prelat of
the Holy Roman Church have written the Life of Benedict, and I have read the
Rule which the Saint himself wrote with his own hand. I have commended it, and
confirmed it in a holy Synod: Moreover I command that through the several
parts of Italy, and where the Latin tongue is read, it be to the end of the
world observed diligently by all those who shall come to the Grace of
Conversion. I do likewise confirm the twelve Monasteries which the Saint has
built.

9. No doubt therefore can be made but that Saint Augustine brought with him
this Rule into Brittany, which was observed in all the Monasteries there
founded by him and his Successors. This is confirmed by the universal,
constant and unquestioned Tradition of the English Churches, and the Testimony
of ancient Records, in which there is not the least mention or suspicion that
our first Missioners brought any other Rule besides this, and evident proofs
there are that in the next Age the Institut of Monks in their Convents was
Benedictin, yet not any where can the least foosteps or signs appear that any
change had ever been made among them, nor is any time assigned when they began
to be Benedictins. Whereas manifest proofs there are that in Brittany there
were many other Monasteries among the Britains and Scotts both before and long
after Saint Augustins coming, as at Banchor, Hy, etc. of a different Institut,
and which refused to submitt to Saint Augustine either as Bishop or Abbot: all
which notwithstanding in after times submitted to the Institut of Saint
Benedict: and the times of such submission are recorded.

10. Thus we read that in the Northern parts there were after this time many
illustrious Monks, as Aidan, Finian, Colman and others who came out of the
Monastery of Hy, and never had known the Rule of Saint Benedict: which when
they afterward knew, would not forsake their ancient Institut. And generally
through the Northern parts till about the year seven hundred Saint Benedicts
Rule was not in use: at which time S. Wilfrid brought it amongst them, as
himself professed in a public Synod, as will be showed in due place.

11. Likewise in the Kingdom of the Mercians, though-after its first Conversion
to the Faith by the endeavors of King Oswi there were many Monasteries, yet
among them the same Rule was little in use, till the year of Grace seven
hundred and nine. But then Pope Constantin in a letter to the Archbishop of
Canterbury confirming the Monastery of Evesham, Ap. Capgr. in vita ^aint
Egvvini.
adds this condition, To the the end that there the Congregation of Monks may
be reformed or ordered according to the Rule of their famous Father Benedict,
and continually serve our Lord: Which Rule is not commonly known or observed in
those parts. And yet before that time several Monasteries, at Peterborough and
elso where, had been founded by the same S. Wilfrid.

12. Hence appears that our Records do testify when the Rule of Saint Benedict
was introduced in the Kingdoms of the Northumbrians and Mercians, But no
Memorial can any where be found to witness where, or when the same Rule was
established in any Monasteries in the Kingdom of Kent, which notwithstanding
did abound in Monasteries, in all which, for ought appears, no other Institut
prevailed: but that this of Saint Benedict flourished there, innumerable
Proofs are extant. Which is an invincible argument that it was at first
brought in there with Christianity.

13. Therefore as touching the reason alleged to the contrary by Baronius
because Saint Augustine came out of the Monastery of Saint Andrew at Rome, the
Abbot whereof was a Monk taken out of the Convent of Saint Equitius in the
Province of Valeria. What proof can be brought that that Convent had not
embraced the Institut and Rule of Saint Benedict? or how ever that after his
coming thither Saint Gregory had not imposed that Rule, so much magnified by
himself, on that Monastery whereof he was founder?

14. In those days the difference between Religious Instituts was not so
considerable, as to cause any great difficulty in the changes. They all
intended the same thing, and generally proceeded the same ways to their End.
It was not then in Gods Church, as it is now, Where several Orders of
Religious persons are instituted of several Spirits; some rigorously confined
to solitude; others permitted freely to exercise Spiritual Works of Charity in
the world; Some forbidden to beg: others forbidden to accept of any thing but
daily Alms; Some obliged to great external austerities in their Habits, diet
etc. Others more exercised with internal Mortifications; Some destined to
preach or Write; others only to pray; Some to procure Charities for the
Redemption of Christian Captives; others to attend on hospitalls and sick
persons, etc.

15. These things considered, it may with full assurance be concluded that
Saint Gregory's Monks and Missioners were no other but Benedictins: although
they did not usually call themselves by that Title, till a controversy arising
in the following age between them and other Monks of a former British
Institut, they were obliged for distinctions sake to assume that Name.

16. And whereas many of our Modern Protestant Writers will needs have the
British Monks to have been of the Egyptian or Asiatick Institut: Not any
Records can be produced to testify that ever any Egyptian or Asiatick came
into Brittany to establish their Orders here: Or that any Britain traveled
into those Countries to acquaint himself with their manner of Religious
Conversation. Certain it is that generally the great Masters and Teachers both
of Faith and Monastical Discipline in Brittany came from Rome: From thence
came S. Fugatius and S. Damianus: and after them S. Patrick and S. Ninian, etc.
And therefore we may conclude, that as they were there instructed in the purity
of Christian Doctrines, so likewise in the institut of Monastical
observations. Yet it is not denied but that they might from thence also furnish
themselves with Books treating of the Egyptian or Syrian Instituts touching
Monastical Discipline, which in practice they might be willing to imitate,
such as are several pieces of S. Hierom, or Cassians Institutions, etc. But
this will not argue that they were Disciples of the Eastern Fathers in
Religious observances, and much less in the Doctrine of Christian Religion and
Discipline it self. But it is time that we attend the Holy Monk S. Augustine and
his companions in their voyage toward Brittany.

III. CHAP. III. CHA.

1.2. The Missioners being arrived in France are discouraged: and desirous to
return.

3.4. etc. S. Gregory encourages them: and recommends them to several Bishops,
and Princes

9 Ingratitude of some Protestants to Saint Gregory.

1. SAint Augustine therefore, the Provost or Priour of S. Gregory's Monastery
in Rome, in the company of Laurence a Priest, John and other Monks by S.
Gregory's command and benediction, set forward on their voyage toward
Brittany. From Italy by Sea they aborded at Marseilles and from thence went
forward to Aix (Aquas Sextias.)

2. Aut being arrived there, their hearts began to fail them. For they were
told how tedious a journey yet remains; what tempestuous seas must be passed;
it is another world whither they are sent; a rude and savage nation, whose
barbarous language they could not understand, etc. Affrighted with such ill
news, and imagining dangers yet greater then they had been told, they repent
their forwardnes and enter into consultation what they should do, and in
conclusion by common advice, they determine their best resolution would be to
return. Notwithstanding to the end this resolution might be less displeasing
to Saint Gregory, they first sent Saint Augustine before them to acquaint the
Holy Pope with the insuperable difficulties of such a voyage and to obtain
permission to proceed no further.

3. But S. Gregory's charity and zeal for conversion of souls was too
vigorous to be disheartened with such vain terrors. If worldly ambition had
encouraged the Romans to penetrate that remote Island, Christian Charity ought
much more to prevayle. If they had a good will to serve God, he would not fail
to furnish them with strength: and the reward which with a little labor they
should obtain would infinitely overweigh all corporal incommodities sustained
for the purchasing of it. With such considerations the Holy Bishop condemns
their pusillanimity, instills new courage into the mind of S. Augustine: whom he
sent back, with the authority of Abbot over the rest, by whom likewise he sent
several letters. One was to these Missioners his affrighted companions,
Gregor. M. l. 4. Epist. 32.
in which he earnestly exhorted them courageously to perfect that good Work
which through Gods help they had begun, and not to be affrighted with the
speeches of malevolent men, and so deprive themselves of that inestimable
reward which remaind to their perseverance. He required them likewise to be
humbly obedient in all things to their Abbot S. Augustine: and concluded with a
benediction and prayer for a good success of their labors, of the reward
whereof he hoped to be a sharer, since his desire was to labor as much as any
of them.

Id. ib. l. 5. Epist. 52.
4. The Second Letter, of which there were four several Copies, was directed to
Palladius a Bishop, (the place is not named) to Pelagius B. of Tours, to
Serenus Bishop of Marseilles, and Etherius Bishop of Lions: to all whom he
recommended S. Augustine and his associats, who had order to acquaint them with
the design of their voyage And moreover he desired their assistance to Candidus
a Priest his Procuratour for managing certain lands in France belonging to the
Patrimony of the Roman See.

Id. ib. Epist. 53.
5. A third letter to the same effect was addressed to Virgilius Bishop of
Arles: whom, after an earnest recommendation of S. Augustine and the other
Missioners, he enioyns to take care that such rents of the Churches patrimony
as his predecessor had for several years received and kept, should be
faithfully consigned to his Procurator Candidus: adding, that it would be an
execrable thing if Bishops should deprive the poor of that subsistence, which
even Pagan Kings would not presume to touch.

6. A fourth letter was directed to Protasius Bishop of Aix, Ib. ib. Epist. 55.
in which after thanks for his charity and kindness formerly extended to these
Missioners, he again recommended them to him. And touching the business of his
Precurator Candidus, he desired him that in case Virgilius should be unwilling
to restore the pensions received, he would admonish him to do his duty, and
also if there were need, he would not deny his testimony concerning the right
which he knew the Roman Church had to the said Patrimony.

7. And whereas one Arigius, Id. ib. Epist. 57.
a Patrician, had expressed much favor and charity to S. Augustine, the Holy
Pope in a fifth letter acknowledges his resentment, giving him great
commendations, and desiring the continuance of the same goodness to his
Missioners, as likewise his assistance in the foresaid business to his
Procurator. Id. ib. Epist. 54.
And moreover to the same effect he wrote a Sixth letter to Desiderius Bishop
of Vienna and Syagrius Bishop of Autun.

8. Neither did Saint Gregory content himself to procure for the comfort of
these devout Travellours the kindness and assistance of all such Bishops through
whose Dioceses they were to pass, but moreover by a seventh Letter addressed
to Theodoric and Theodebert Kings of France, and an eighth to the Qeen
Brunichilda, Id. ib. Epist. 56. Ibid.
he acquainted them more expressly with the true motive of their journey: how
through the negligence and want of zeal in the French Bishops to communicate
the Word of life to the Saxons, who even desird it, he was forced to send those
pious and learned men from Rome into Brittany to preach Christ unto them.
Hereupon he desired their assistance to them, and particularly that certain
French Priests acquainted with the tongue and manners of the Saxons their
neighbors might be adioynd to their company to be their interpreters and
cooperatours in their preaching. And in conclusion he recommended to them also
his Procuratour Candidus, as before.

9. Thus we see Saint Gregory was not sparing of his pains, neither did he
neglect any means or opportunity to advance the happiness of our Nation: such
was his tenderness and bowels of compassion to a poor barbarous people, living
at so great a distance from him. For which charity doubtless he deserves a
grateful memory at least in the minds of all posterity. And yet we find him
accused as an Apostle to the English not of the Christian Faith, Parker.
Mon^agu.
but superstitious Ceremonies: as a preacher of doctrines, not Catholic, but
only Topicall and Vrbicall, peculiar to the Roman Church. Whereas in his
Epistle to the French Kings he professes that their Kingdom for the rectitude
and integrity of the Christian Faith was conspicuous through the world: Which
he would never have said if the Roman Faith had been in any thing differing
from theirs; and much less would he have desired the assistance of French
Priests in the Mission, unless they had agreed both in Faith and Discipline
with the Roman Missioners. But Almighty God judged much better of S. Gregory's
endeavors: otherwise he would not have confirmed the Doctrins taught by those
holy Monks sent by him with so many and great miracles, A D. 597.
as shall presently be showed. A sad consideration whereof ought to have
prevented these cruel censures of S. Gregory's Charity, which till a thousand
years were passed, no man's tongue or pen durst presume to cast upon him.

10. The Holy Abbot S. Augustine thus encouraged by S. Gregory, and moreover
fortified by such earnest recommendations, returned to his companions at Aix.
Whose coming instilled a new Spirit and courage into them: they no longer
apprehend the tediousnes of the way, the incommodities by land, tempests by
sea, or dangers at their iourneys end. But cheerfully go on, and happily end
their long voyage, though not the same year in which they left Rome.

IX. CHAP.
IX. CHAP.
1.2.3 S. Augustine, etc. arrive in England in the Isle of Thanet.

4.5. etc. Their Message to K. Ethelbert: His kind Answer: and coming to them:
Their Conversation.

8.9.10. The Kings kindness to them.

ii.i2. etc. The manner of their life.

A. D. 597.
1. AFter much labor willingly undertaken for Christ, S. Augustine and his
companions, which with the French Interpreters amounted to about the number of
forty, with Gods blessing took land in Brittany in the year of Grace five
hundred ninety seven.

2. The place where they landed was the same where formerly the Saxons had
aborded, to wit, the Isle of Thanet: which is thus described by S. Beda, Beda
l. 1. c. 25.
On the Eastern coast of Kent is seated an Island called Tanetos, no very small
one, containing according to the English estimation six hundred families (or
Manses, or Hydes of land, each Hyde consisting of about one hundred acres.)
Which Island is divided from the continent by the River Vantsum above a quarter
of a mile broad, and which is fordable only in two places. Here the servant of
God Augustine with his companions, almost forty persons first landed.

3. Some Authors have more particularly markd the place where they first
descended from their ship, for thus writes F. Clement Reyner from Sprott and
Spiney, Cl. R^yner. in Apostolat. Benedictin f. ^8.
S. Augustine with his company took land in the Isle of Thanet in a place called
Ratesbourg. Where the Holy Father quitting his ship set his feet on a certain
stone, which as if it had been clay, received the impression of his feet. For
which reason the same stone was kept and laid up in a Chapel founded to his
memory. This Ratesburg I suppose signifies the shore of Rutupia, called by the
Saxons Reptacester and Ruptimouth, now Richborow, seated over against the
Island.

4. As Soon as they were come to Land, Saint Augustine directed messengers to
King Ethelbert to acquaint him that himself and companions were come a long
journey from as far as Rome, to preach to him and his subjects the true God, in
whom if he would believe he should not fail to attain eternal felicity. We
may reasonably believe that Ethelbert after so many years conversation with his
pious Christian Queen Aldiberga was not utterly ignorant of the Substance of
Christian Religion: Therefore he did not reject this Offer, nor command the new
arrived Strangers to be driven from his Coast, but courteously required them to
stay some time in the place where they landed, till he could find leisure to
hear and answer their Message. In the mean time he gave orders that all things
necessary should be provided for their entertainment.

5. Not long after, the King with great humanity went himself into the Isle of
Thanet to visit his New Guests come out of another world. There placing himself
on a Seat in the open air, he commanded they should be called before him, but
first admonishing them that the Religion of his country, from an ancient
Prophecy, forbad him to converse with such as they, under any roof. The true
reason was, because he was taught that within-dores he was more obnoxious to
fascination, or witchcraft.

6. The manner how S. Augustine and his company first addressed themselves to
the King is thus described by S. Beda, Bed. l. 2 c. 25.
They came says he, endued with virtue and power from God, not (as the
Idolatrous British Priests) trusting in Diabolical incantations. For instead
of an Ensign some of them carried a Silver Cross, with the Image of our Savior
painted on a table, and in the way Sung Litanies, and prayed earnestly to our
Lord for the eternal Salvation of themselves and those for whom and to whom
they were come. Yet this devout behavior is by some factious Sectaries called
a Superstitious Procession full of Roman vain Ceremonies.

7. Being thus arrived in the Kings presence S. Augustine after mutual
Salutations and respects, informed him more fully in the Motives of his
journey, by whom and for what end he was sent: He showed him the vanity and
perniciousnes of that Religion wherein he had been bred, that Idolatry was the
invention of Devils to destroy souls: That to free the world from such
ignorance and misery, God had sent his only Son to preach the only saving Truth
and to preserve the souls of those who believed in him from the Devils malice
and eternal damnation: For which end he willingly suffered himself to be nayld
on the Cross, and to dye an ignominious and tormenting death, that so he might
be a Sacrifice to propitiate Gods wrath for the Sins of the world. This
heavenly Truth he and his companions were come to declare to that Nation, etc.

8. After that S. Augustine had to this effect made known the occasion and
causes of his voyage, King Ethelbert, who had been very attentive to his
speeches, remaind some space in great thoughtfulnes of mind: Comparing the
Religion now proposed to him with his former Superstition, he could not but
acknowledge the advantage which Truth and Holiness caries from Vanity and
impurity: But on the other side it seemd to him to be an unbeseeming thing for
a prudent man and a Prince suddenly to give a public testimony of inconstancy
and rashness in deserting the Rites of his Ancestors and Religion of his
Country. At last therefore, conceiving that it became his dignity not to give
a sudden resolution in a matter of so great importance, his answer was, That
he took kindly their charity to him and his people, neither did he mislike the
proposalls they made him: but for a better satisfaction to him self and others,
he would take convenient time to deliberate.

9. After this, he invited them to his principal City of Canterbury
(Dorobernia:) where he designed a commodious dwelling for them, withal
commanding provisions to be made and supplied to these New-come strangers that
nothing might be wanting to them. But the greatest grace conferred on them was
a free permission to preach Christian Doctrine in the same City, not
forbidding any of his subjects to hearken to their Sermons and become Converts.

10. Such humanity in a Pagan King filled S. Augustine and his Associats with
great comfort, and hope that God would give a large benediction to their
journey. Thereupon they thankfully accepted the Kings offer of repairing to the
City, whither they went in the same order as they first came to the King: and
at their entrance into the City and Mansion designd for them, says Beda, with
consonant voices they sung this Litany: Bed. l. i. c 2^.
We beseech thee, O Lord, in mercy turn away thy fury from this City, and this
thy Holy house. Alleluia. Thus the Holy Cross once more took possession of the
place from which it had been banished: and thus the oraculous speech pronounced
by S. Gregory began to be accomplished, that Alleluia should be sung in that
Pagan country.

11. Let us now observe how these Holy Missioners employed their time: Of this
the same S. Beda will inform us, That as soon as they were entered into the
Mansion which the King had given them, Id. ib. c. 26.
they began to imitate the Apostolic life of the Primitive Church by attending
to assiduous prayers, watching and fasting, by preaching the word of life to
all they could, by despising all worldly things, as if they belonged not to
them, by receiving from their Disciples only such things as were merely
necessary for their subsistence; by practicing themselves according to the
preceps which they taught others; and lastly by having minds prepared to suffer
any adversities, even death it self for that Truth which they preached.
Insomuch as not a few beholding the simplicity of their innocent lives, and
admiring the sweetness of their celestial doctrine, believed and were baptized.

12. The same Author further declares that the Church of S. Martin deputed for
the Queens devotions, Id. ib.
as has been said, was the first public place where they met together, sung,
prayed, celebrated Masses, preached and baptized; till after the Kings
conversion they received a great liberty to preach and build Churches every
where.

13. Here we may see what manner of entering these our Apostles had among us, 1 Thessalonians. 1 9.
and how they turned our Ancestors from Idols to serve the living and true
God. Neither was their Gospel in speech only, but in power, and in the Holy
Ghost and a plenitude of his Gifts and miracles, as shall be showed. The
Preachers are Monks: they are sent by the authority of the Bishop of Rome; they
carry the banner of the Holy Cross, and the Image of our Savior before them;
they celebrate Masses; they work miracles: For all which they are honored,
their memory is precious through all Gods Church almost a thousand years
together. But now one Apostat Monk can persuade a great part of Christians,
Luther. Parker. in Antiq. Britann. f. 35.
that it was not Christ which these men preached: One Calvinisticall Bishop
dares call these men Apostles to the English not of the Christian Faith or Word
of God, but of Roman ceremonies and Rites, who taught them to become not
Christians, but Romanists and Papists. To such blasphemous accusations as these
no answer ought to be given: August.
Quia melius eas committo fidelium gemitibus quam sermonibus meis.

V. CHAP. V. CHAP.

1.2. Many Converted.

3.4. S. Augustine goes to Arles to be ordained Bishop: and why.

1. BY the life and preaching of these Holy men no small number of Converts
were gathered to the Church, which were baptized on the day of Pentecost in the
forementioned Church of S. Martin: But shortly after far greater multitudes
followed their Example. Whether King Ethelbert was one of those then baptized,
does not expressly appear in any of our ancient Records.

2. That which S. Beda relates touching him in particular, Bed. l. 1. c. 26.
is thus expressed: Among others King Ethelbert was much delighted with the
purity of these Saints lives, and with the comfortable sweetness of their
promises, the truth and certainty whereof they confirmed with many evident
miracles: So that in the end he also believed and was baptized. After which
very many others daily began to flock together that they might hear the word
of God by which they were persuaded to relinquish their Gentile Superstitions,
and to unite themselves to the holy Church of Christ. Which the King
perceiving, he much congratulated their Faith and Conversion, and embraced them
with more ardent Charity, as being fellow citizens with him of the Kingdom of
Heaven: but yet he compelled none to the profession of Christianity. For he had
learnt from the Teachers and Authors of his salvation, that the service of
Christ must be voluntary and not by compulsion.

3 Saint Augustine seeing a Harvest so plentiful and ripe, according to the
instructions formerly given him by Saint Gregory, went back into France, there
to be ordained Bishop: because besides the power of administering Baptism, the
other Sacrament of Confirmation was requisite, by which these tender plants
might be strengthened in the Faith. Which Sacrament could not be administered but
by the hand and power of a Bishop- This is testified by the same Saint Beda,
Id. ib.
saying, In the mean while the man of God Augustine went to Arles in France,
where by the Archbishop of that City Etherius (or rather, Virgilius) he was
Consecrated Archbishop of the Nation of the Angli, according as he had
received commands from Saint Gregory. Spelm tom. 1. Council. f. 92.
This was performed the sixteenth day before the Calends of December, says Sir
H. Spelman.

4. It may be demanded why Saint Augustine should receive his Episcopal
consecration from the Bishop of Arles the furthest distant from him in France,
and not rather from the Prelat of Lions, or some other nearer to Brittany? The
reason hereof doubtless was, because such a Prerogative belonged to the Church
of Arles, which Saint Gregory, who was most observant of Ecclesiastical
rights, would by no means infringe. This prerogative that See challenged and
enjoyed, because that was the first Church in those parts which had received a
Bishop, S. Trophimus, ordained by the Apostle S. Peter himself, as appears by
an Epistle of the Bishops of that Province to S. Leo, in which they justify
their rights and privileges of Ordination, against the pretentions of their
neighbor Church of Vienna.

5. It was a great prejudice to the New Saxon Church that the year before S.
Augustins coming into Brittany the Holy Bishop Saint Asaph Successor to S.
Kentigern in the Bishopric of Elwy in wales, should dye: as likewise S.
Columba, the same year that Saint Augustine arrived: For doubtless the authority
and piety of two such eminent Saints, would have prevented the contestations
and petulancy of the British Bishop, which followed.

VI. CHAP. A. D. 598.

VI. CHA.



1.2. etc. Saint Augustine consecrates an Idol-Temple near Canterbury into a
Church, dedicated to S. Pancraece.

6. A prodigy caused by the Devil there against S. Augustine.

7.8. He builds a Church and Monastery to Saint Peter and Saint Paul near the
City.

9. And another in the City to our Savior.

10. He places a Suffragan Bishop in the Church of S. Martin.

1. SAint Augustine having been consecrated by Virgilius Archbishop of Arles,
returned into Brittany in the year of Grace five hundred ninety eight, where he
was received by King Ethelbert with greater reverence, then before: who
assigned to him an Episcopal See in the same City: which he afterward enriched
with great possessions, Bed l. 1. c. ^6.
as S. Beda testifies.

2. This New Episcopal Church was not that of S. Martin, where the Queen was
formerly wont to pray: But it was a Temple anciently frequented by the King
whilst he was a Pagan, and was situated in the midway between the Church of
Saint Martin and the walls of the City. In this Temple, after it had been
purified from its former Superstitions and the Idol cast out, S. Augustine
consecrated to the honor of S. Pancrati^^.

3. Concerning which Church, Spelm in Council. tom. 1 ad A. D. 603.
Sir H. Spelman in his Councils furnishes us with this Extrait out of an
ancient Manuscript of the foundation of S. Augustins Monastery in Canterbury:
Augustine being ordaind Bishop returned into England, and was received by the
King and peo^ple with all becoming solemnity: and by the same Kings grant
obtaind an Episcopal See in the City of Canterbury, which was the Primatial
Church of the English Nation. The pious King himself undertaking the Patronage
of that Church, did triumph through joy, constituting him the President of his
Metropolis, whom before he had received as a poor stranger. Neither did he
only make him a Spiritual Watchman over his City, but his whole Dominions
also, translating the throne of his Kingdom into a Pontifical Seat, and his
Royal Court into a Church of Christ.

4. Yea moreover to show that he had putt off the old man with his acts, and
putt on the New, by the wholesome advice of the blessed Bishop he caused that
Idol-temple seated Eastward from the City between the Church of S. Martin and
the walls, in which he had often according to the rite of his Superstition
sacrifised to Devils and not to God, to be purged from the pollutions of
Paganism: and having broken in pieces the Idol which was in it, he changed it
into an Ecclesiastical Synagogue, and caused it to be consecrated by the name
of S. Pancratius Martyr. And this was the first Church dedicated by our
Patriark and prime Prelat S. Augustine.

5. Now it was very convenient and suitable to reason that the blessed child
Pancratius, who at Rome, the Mistress of the world, was honored as a famous
Martyr, should especially be venerated by the English, since that certain
English Children exposed to sale in Rome by their beauty and brightness had
moved Saint Gregory, then an Abbot in the Monastery of S. Andrew built by
himself, to associate those English children with Angels.

6. After this narration, there follows in the same Manuscript a relation of a
prodigy caused by the Devil, enraged against Saint Augustine for eiecting him
out of his possession: Whilst the blessed Bishop S, Augustine ( says that
Author) was celebrating Mass the first time in the same Church, Ibid.
the Enemy of mankind envying the purity of the English Nation likely to be
much increased by the child Saint Pancratius, and out of rage to see himself
expelled from a place possessed by him so long a time, he endeavored all he
could to destroy that Church to the ground. A rent in the Eastern wall of it,
plainly seen to this day, which he made with his nails, is a sufficient witness
of his rage. By which is evident that the Mass is not hated by Calvinists
alone.

Ibid.
7. King Ethelberts liberality ended not here, for as the same Author writes,
Saint Augustine obtained of him after this a certain portion of land adjoining,
in which the King built a Church to the honor of the Apostles S* Peter and S.
Paul, to be as it were a perpetual munition and Safeguard for himself and his
whole kingdom: and instituted therein a Convent of Monks to serve God for ever:
over whom was canonically chosen and placed Abbot a Monk called Peter, one of
S. Augustins companions sent thither from the Sea Apostolic. Spelman in
Council. tom. 1 ad A. D. 60.
But between the foundation and endowment of this Monastery there intervened
six years, says Sir H. Spelman, as appears by the Charters of that Foundation.

Bed. l. i. c. 33.
8. In this Church, says S. Beda, the Bodies of S. Augustine and his
Successors the Archbishops of Canterbury, as likewise of the Kings of Kent
were designed to be buried. Notwithstanding this Church was not consecrated by
S. Augustine, but by his Successor S. Laurentius. And the first Abbot of the
Monastery was Peter a Priest.

Ibid.
9. S. Augustine also by the liberality and assistance of the King obtaind
another Church in the same City, which, as he was informed had been built by
the ancient Christians in the time of the Romans: This Church he consecrated to
the glory of our Lord and Savior: and adjoining thereto he fixed an habitation
for himself and Successors, where he lived with such Clerks as he had brought
with him out of France, who performed all the Ecclesiastical Offices in the
Church. For a Monastery was not instituted in that Church till the age
following. And though these Latter Monks contended with the other for
antiquity, yet they lost their cause. Ap. Spelm. vbi supr
For, as the Author of the forementioned Manuscript observes, in all the
authentical Privileges granted by Popes to the Monastery of S. Peter and S.
Paul, we find this clause inserted, As in the infancy of Christianity in
England this was the first wherein Monastical Instituts were observed: So we
decree that it with all belonging to it remain for ever free from all service,
undisturbed by all secular noise and tumults, and exempted from all
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction and burdens.

10. Moreover the Church of S. Martin without the walls of the City eastward,
Monast. Anglic f. 26.
in which the Queen before had performed her Devotions, he made an Episcopal
See, in which he placed a Suffragan Bishop (Corepiscopum) who was always to
remain at home, or at the Archiepiscopall Palace within the City, and supplied
the place of the Archbishop when he was to attend the King, or to be absent
upon occasion of Visitations, or other affairs. At such times he celebrated
Solemnities in the Metropolitan Church, after which he returned home. He being
a Monk had power to call Monks to his assistance. He performed the Office of
Archdeacon, and summoned, ordered and corrected such Clergymen as pertained
to the Archbishop, but those Clergymen which lived in the Mann^rs pertaining
to the Monks were corrected by the Priour of the Church, otherwise called the
Dean. The same Suffragan Bishop likewise conferred the Minour Orders in the
Archbishops absence: Yet we do not find that ever he was summoned to
Councills, or subscribed in them. This custom continued till the beginning of
King William the Conquerours reign: At which time the last of such Suffragan
Bishops was Godwin: who dying in the fourth year of his reign, S. Lanfranc then
Archbishop refused to substitute another in his place, alleging that two
Bishops must not be in one City: whereas his See was out of the City:
Therefore, instead of a Suffragan Bishop he constituted one of his Clarks,
Archdeacon. For which he was by many condemned: Though in that age generally
through the Church those Corepiscopi were suffered to expire: because it was
found that they took too much upon themselves, so as to consecrate Holy Oils,
to ordain Priests, etc. insomuch as for humbling them many Decrees had been
made in Councills, etc.

VII. CHA.
VII. CHAP.
1.2. etc. Ten thousand baptized by S. Augustine, by the testimony of S. Gregory

5.6. B. Parkers calumnies against S. Augustine, answered.

7. The place where this Baptism was performed.

1. THese buildings and foundations did not withdraw the minds of S Austin and
the other Missioners from their more necessary duty and solicitude for
converting souls. For this very year our Records inform us of very great
numbers which by holy Baptism gave up their names to Christ: insomuch as no
fewer then ten thousand are said to have been baptized this year on the
Solemnity of our Lords Nativity. This appears also by an Epistle sent the year
following by S. Gregory to Eulogius Patriark of Alexandria, who had given him
an account of great numbers of Heretics in Egypt by his endeavors reduced to
Catholic Unity: In answer whereto S. Gregory after congratulation with him for
so great a harvest, informs him of a greater accession then lately made in
Brittany of Pagans there converted from their Idolatry. Gregor M. l. 7. epist.
10.
His words are these: 2. We give thanks to almighty God for that we see
fullfill'd in you what is written, Where the corn abounds, there the Oxen's
strength is manifested. For if it had not been a strong Ox which fixed the
plough of his tongue in the hearts of his hearers, so plentiful a harvest
would not have followed. But because by the merit of the good actions performed
by you there is made an addition or increase for which you ought also to
congratulate, I will in return to your courtesy give you an account of
occurrents among us not unlike those you have told me. And that is, that
whereas there is a Nation of the world, which till our times has remained
Infidels, enslaved to the worship of wood and stones, by the means of your
Prayers it has pleased God to inspire me to send thither a Monk of my
Monastery to preach the Gospel to them. He therefore by my permission having
been consecrated Bishop by certain Prelates of the German Nation, with the help
of some assistants which they gave him, was conducted to that barbarous
country: and but even now letters from him have acquainted us with the news of
his safety and labors; and how both himself and his companions have been so
glorified in that Nation by the miracles wrought by them, that in the wonders
they seem to imitate the power of the Apostles.

3. Moreover in the last Solemnity of our Lords Nativity, which fell in the
first Indiction, more then ten thousand of the English Nation, as we are
informed, were baptized by him our Brother and Fellow-Bishop. This I have told
you, that you may see how much good your preaching has wrought in Alexandria,
and your prayers in the utmost ends of the Earth.



4. Now whereas in this Epistle the baptising of ten thousand English on the
Feast of the Nativity of our Lord is said to have been performed by S. Augustine
Bishop, and in the first Indiction: since the Indiction is reckoned from the
eighth day before the Calends of October it follows that S. Augustine was then
Bishop, and consequently returned out of France. We may likewise observe that
Saint Gregory calls the French Bishops, Ge^mans, because being Franks, they
came out of Germany.

5. A late pretended Successor of S. Augustine, Park in Antquit. Brit. f. 35.
etc.
B. Parker who studiously catches at all advantages to deprave this our
glorious Apostle, calls this an inverted and reciprocal Baptism: and says that
these were converted by others, and not by him, for we read no where that he
preached: on the contrary he loved his ease, and lived an effeminate life: If
he had been truly Zealous for justice, he should have required King Ethelbert
to restore his Kingdom to the Britains who were the true Lords of the
Country, etc.

4. All which calumnies are manifestly disproved by all Antiquity: For first S.
Gregory in that Epistle says expressly that he sent S. Augustine to preach the
Gospel: and his assiduity in executing that Office is several times magnified
by S. Beda Again if S. Beda and Ethelwerd deserve credit, Bed. lib. i. c. 26
S. Augustine was a man of a most pure life: that in humility he always went on
foot, and never made use of a horse or wagon: that he was patient of labor
and a true Successor of the Apostles. And whereas in B. Parkers judgment King
Ethelbert ought to have been required to restore his Kingdom to the Britains:
He did not consider that that kingdom had been possessed by his family the
space of one hundred and fifty years: Which time if it be not sufficient to
make a prescription, and so legitimate his Title, Woe be to all Christian
Princes. Lastly by his calling this an inverted and reciprocal Baptism, he
reflects on a passage of an obscure Writer, that by reason of the multitudes of
those who came to be baptized S. Augustine was forced after he had baptized
some, to teach them the Form, and require them to baptize others. But what
inversion is here? Since it is well known, that Baptism being a Sacrament of
such absolute necessity, is valid and effectual by whomsoever conferred, since
it does not require Jurisdiction in the Minister of it.

7. As touching the place where this Baptism was celebrated, it is commonly
believed to have been, not in Kent, but in the Province of the Brigantes, and
County of Richmont belonging to the Kingdom of Deira, where the River Swale, in
which it is supposed to have been performed, was for that cause called the Holy
River. But the infancy and unsetlednes of the Churches of Kent, the care of
erecting Churches and Monasteries, A. D. 599.
etc. will not permit S. Augustins absence so soon. It is not therefore to be
doubted but that this solemn Baptism was celebrated in the Kingdom of Kent: and
the mistake of many of our Writers is grounded on the confounding this Baptism
with another as solemn performed by S. Paulinus in the seven and twentieth
year of the following Century, whose abode, says S. Beda, Bed. ibid.
was near to the said River of Swale: in which he baptized many thousands,
because Oratories and Fonts could not so soon be built in the first beginnings
of that Church. Therefore Camden writing concerning that River of S^ale, Camden
in (...)
says that it was called Holy from S. Paulinus his baptising in it more then
ten thousand men, besides women and children, in one day.

VIII. CHAPTER
VIII. CHAP.
1.2. S. Augustine sends to Rome for a Sup^ply, etc.

3. B. Godwins too sharp Censure of S. Augustine.

4 K. Ethelberts writings.

1. IN the year of Grace five hundred ninety nine S. Augustine seeing so
plentiful a harvest, and hoping for a yet greater increase if more laborers
were sent to cultivate the ground, resolved to acquaint S. Gregory with the
present state of affairs. This respect his duty required from him: For such an
account of their Stewardship had S. Fugatius and Damianus given to Pope
Eleutherius; and the like was afterward done by S. Patrick. In conformity
therefore to such good Examples S. Augustine directed to Rome Laurentius a
Priest, and Peter designed Abbot of his New Monastery to assure S. Gregory of
the welfare of his children, and the great hopes of a good success of their
Mission.

2. Withal he made a request for a fresh supply of New Missioners to assist
them in the dispensation of Divine Mysteries, considering the great co^course
of those which desired instruction: to comply with all which exceeded the power
of those few laborers already employed. And lastly for his own information, and
enablement to govern as became him the infant-Church of the Saxons, so as to
give no offense nor advantage of calumny to the British Clergy, which no doubt
attentively bent their eyes upon his actions, S. Augustine proposed certain
Questions and difficulties to S. Gregory desiring his resolution of them* What
these particular Questions were will appear when S. Gregory's answer comes.

3. For the present we will only take notice of a somewhat confident Censure
which a Protestant B. Godwin has given of S. Augustine on this occasion: A. D.
600.
Augustine, says he, was perhaps no ill man, B. Godvvin. in Catalog. de
Convers. Brit. c. 4.
but his ignorance was shameful, as appears by the Questions proposed by him
to S. Gregory. But he might have considered, that those Questions principally
regarding outward Rites and Jurisdiction, which Rites were not altogether
uniformly practiced at Rome and in France, etc. It was necessary in a tender
Church as this was, to take care and circumspection about matters, which
otherwise were not of so great importance. However the Character which S.
Gregory from knowledge and experience gave of S. Augustine deserves more to be
regarded then B. Godwins: which Character is contained in an Epistle written by
that Holy Pope to King Ethelbert: Greg. M.
Our most Reverened Brother and Fellow-bishop Augustine, says he, is a man very
learned in the Rule of Monastic Institution, full of the Science of the Sacred
Scriptures, and through the Divine Grace eminent in good works and virtues.

4. John Pits testifies moreover that by the same Messengers Letters were sent
to Saint Gregory from King Ethelbert, Pits in Ethelbert.
whom he reckons among the ancient Illustrious Writers of Brittany* because
there were extant, besides a Treatise called Decrees of Judgment, a Book of
Epistles written by the same King to S. Gregory and S. Augustine, as this Author
collects from S. Beda.

IX. CHAP. IX. CHA.

1. 2. etc. The Gests, Miracles, Translation etc. of S. Ivo.

1. WIthout interrupting the order of the Gests of S. Augustine, the next of
which regards S. Gregory's Answer to his Letters and Requests, which will not
arrive till this year of our Lord six hundred be past: We will here interpose
the Gests of two Saints, the one a stranger but dying in Brittany: the other a
Britain, but dying beyond seas: and of both the death has been consigned to
this year.

2. The first was S. Ivo, concerning thorn Camden thus Writes, Camden in
Huntingtonshire.
The River Use being ready to enter into Cambridgshire passes by a town handsome
enough and well inhabited, which in the Saxon tongue was anciently called
Sleep, but now S. Ives from Ivo a Persian Bishop, who about the year six
hundred traveled through England, and every where left a sweet-odour of his
Sanctity, carefully sowing the word of God where he passed, and at last left
his name to this Town where he ended his life. From whence notwithstanding the
Monks of Ramsey shortly after translated his Body thither. This was a very rich
Monastery seated among the Fenn^ about seven miles distant from thence.

3. More particularly concerning this Saint, we read in Capgrave, Florentius,
Mathe^^ of Westminster and Malmsburiensis, (...). Capgrav. in vi^. 5. Ivon
^loren^. Ad (...). 600. Westmon. ad ^. D. 101. Malmsbur. ^. 292.
that he was born in a City of Persia called Frianeos, that his Father was a
Prince there named Yomos, and his Mother Isitalia. That his only Brother
Athanatos lived an Eremiticall life in a certain wood, and was illustrious for
Miracles. That Saint Ivo was elected Bishop in the town where he was born, and
not long after translated to the Archiepiscopall See of the City Asitanea:
Which See he governed with great Sanctity and prudence, till a terrible famine
so desolated the Country that Parents were compelled to devour their children.
By reason whereof Saint Ivo with eleaven more devout companions forsook that
Region, and passing through many countries, at last came to Rome: where by the
advice of the Pope they severed themselves: and Saint Ivo by divine
disposition, together with his Nephew Sithius, his kinsman Inthius and some
others, ca^e into Brittany. Where he spread the Gospel wheresoever he came,
and afterward went over into France, where yet he could not be persuaded to
abide long, though the king and people expressed all kindness and respect to
him: but returned into Brittany, and to his death remaind in a town call Sleep
at three miles distance from Huntington, serving God all his days in watching,
fasting and prayers.

Ibid.
4. The occasion of the Translation of his body from thence, is by the same
Authors described after this manner, His Sacred Body remained several ages in
the place of his burial insomuch as his Memory was lost in that place: But at
last in the year of Grace one thousand and one a certain husband man as he was
plowing the ground light upon his Tomb, which being taken up and opened, the
Body of a Bishop in his Pontifical ornaments was seen in it. Whereupon the
Pastor of that village, called Ednoth, a Monk, being sent for, they with his
advice carried the Body into the Church, and with great reverence placed it near
the Altar. The night following the same Bishop S. Ivo appeared in a very
reverend form and with great brightness to a Carpenter called Ezi, and told him
who he was: commanding him to signify to another Ednoth Abbot of Ramsey that he
should translate his and his companions bodies from thence to his Monastery.
But the poor man not having the boldness to relate this vision, he appeared to
him a second time repeating the same commands: Which he still neglecting to
perform, at the third apparition the Bishop smote him on the side with his
Crosier, telling him that the pain of that stroke should remain, till he had
performed what had been enjoined him. The mun awaking presently after, found a
grievous pain in his side as if a sword had peirced it.

5. That was he compelled to declare his vision to the Abbot: which as soon as
he had done he was freed his pain. But the Abbot would give no credit to what
the man told him, but calling him clown and fool, said, Must we translate and
venerate the ashes of I know not what cobbler? The night following the Holy
Bishop appeared to the Abbot, and said, Rise quickly, for I whom thou
scornfully calledst Cobbler, have brought thee here a pair of boots that will
last a good while. These thou must putt on, and wear for my sake. Having said
thus, he seemed to draw on his legs a pair of boots, with care to make them
sit smooth and hand some. Presently the Abbot waking felt such horrible pain in
his legs, that he was not able to walk or stand. And fifteen years did he
remain in this infirmity.

6. By this Miracle the Sanctity of the Holy Bishop was approved: whereupon his
Sacred body was translated to the Monastery of Ramsey on the fourth of the Ides
of June: To whose honor the Abbot Ednothus built a Church: in which he placed
his Tomb after such a manner, that half of it appeared within, and half without
the wall, to the end that a fountain of water which flowed thence might be
ready for the use of every one who came in devotion, whether the Church was
shutt, or not. Which Water by the merits of the Holy Bishop had the virtue to
cure many diseases.

7. One great Miracle wrought there shall not be omitted, because the Relatour
protests himself an eye-witnes of it I my self saw, says Malmsburiensis, what
I shall now relate. Malmsbur. f. 292.
A certain Monk languished a long time with a Dropsy. His skin was strangely
swelled, and his breath so noysom that none could approach him: and his drouth
was so excessive that he thought he could drink whole barrells. On a time by an
admonition received in sleep he went to Saint Ivo's Monument: where after he
had taken only three draughts of the water, he cast up all the superfluous
humors within him. The swelling of his belly presently fell, and his thighs
lost their former withered leannes. In a word he was restored to perfect health.

8. As for the Abbot Ednothus though the infirmity and pain in his legs
continued till his death, Ap. Capgr. ib.
yet for a sign that his fault was pardoned, Seven days before he dyed the
Holy Bishop Ivo appeared to him in great glory, and said, The time is now at
hand when thou shall perceive that the pains I have inflicted on thee will
prove a remedy to procure thee eternal rest. Prepare thy self therefore, for
seven days hence I will come and deliver thee from the prison of thy body. And
it fell out accordingly.

X. CHAP.
X. CHAP.
1.2. etc. The Gests of S. Paul de Leon.

1. THE same year likewise is marked with the happy death of S. Paul, a kinsman
of S. Sampson Bishop of D^le. Concerning whom we read in the Gallican
Martyrologe published by Andrew Saussay that he was one of the Companions of S.
Sampson. Martyrolog. Gallican. 12 Mart.
That his Fathers name was Perfius: and that he was a Scholar to S. Iltutus,
both in wit and innocence excelling all his companions. Being very young he was
prevented with many Graces of Gods holy Spirit: and thereupon fearing least he
should be tempted with vain glory, at the age of fifteen he retired into a
desert, where building for himself an Oratory and a Cell, he lead there an
Angelical life. Thus growing every day more rich in merits, when he was
arrived at mature age, he was compelled to accept the dignity of Preistly
Office, which he adorned with the splendor of his Sanctity. The fame whereof
being spread abroad he was sent for by King Margus, ( probably the same with
Malgus or Maglocunus) whom together with his people he more perfectly
instructed in the Mysteries of Christian Faith, to which they had lately been
converted.

Ibid.
2. After some time by the admonition of an Angel he retired into an Island on
the Coast of Lesser Brittany called Ossa, where he brought many Infidels to the
heavenly Light of the Gospel. Where likewise by divine virtue he slew a
monstrous Dragon. After which the Prince of that Region called Vintrurus (or
Withurus) offered him a Bishopric, which he with a resolute humility refused.
Notwithstanding he was with a pious fraud circumvented by him. For being sent
upon certain pretended affairs to Childebert King of the Franks, he carried with
him private letters desiring the King to ratify his Election to the Bishopric.
The King received him with great reverence, but withal compelled him to accept
the Bishopric which he had refused, to which he was Canonically ordained by
three Bishops. The Sea of his Bishopric was by the Kings decree seeled at
Leon, to which he was wellcomed by all the people with wonderful joy. And this
sublime Office he administered with admirable sanctity and Pastoral prudence to
his death. His sacred body many years after was thence translated by his
Successor Mabbo to the Monastery of Fleury by occasion of the incursions of
the Normans: where it was a long time held in great veneration.

3. The Author of his life in the Bibliotheque of Fleury relates how he
quitted his Bishopric three several times, Ap. Vsser. f. 559.
but was forced to resume it upon the death of his Successors. But at last
when his strength was even quite spent, he ordained one of his Brethren, named
Cetomerin, Bishop in his place, a certain Noble Prince called Induael being
present, who came thither to recommend himself to his prayers. A D. 601.
And this being performed, he retired himself into an Island called Batha,
where he spent many years governing a great Congregation of Monks, and at last
happily concluded his life, being more then a hundred years old. His Church is
from him to this day called Saint Paul de Leon.

4. We read in Capgrave how this S. Paul on a time visiting a sister of his who
devoutly served God in a Cell seated near the Sea on the British shore, Ap.
Capgrav. in vit. S. Ithamar.
at her request he obtained of God by his prayers that the Sea should never
swell beyond the bounds marked by her by placing a row of stones. By which
means the sea was restrained the space of a mile from his usual course: and
continues so to this day.

XI. CHAP. XI. CHA.

i.2. etc. S. Gregory sends new Missioners: with Letters and presents to
several persons.

1. THE Messengers sent by S. Augustine to Rome stayed there a full year: which
delay it seems was caused by the difficulty of finding a sufficient number of
able lobourers to cultivate our Lords Vineyard in Brittany. At length in the
year of Grace six hundred and one Laurence and Peter returned accompanied with
twelve others to assist them in the founding of the Saxon Church in our Island,
the principal of whom were Mellitus, Iustus, Paulinus and Ruffintanus, all of
them Monks and Brethren of the same Institut with S. Augustine.

2. These devout Missioners were as the former, by S. Gregory recommended to
Princes and Bishops residing in the Cities through which they were to pass,
or were not far distant from their way. One Letter exemplified in several
Copies he directed to Serenus Bishop of Marseilles, Gregor. M. li. 9. Epist. 52.
to Mennas Bishop of Toulouse, to Lupus Bishop of Chaillon on the Saone, to
Agilius Bishop of Mets, and to Simplicius Bishop of Paris; all whom he
entreated to assist these Religious Monks with their charity, that they might
not be hindered from a quick dispatoh of their journey, so beneficial to the
Church of Christ.

3. Another letter was written by Saint Gregory to Siagrius Bishop of Autun,
Ibid. Epist.
in which he highly extolls his kindness exhibited lately to S. Augustine,
desiring the like to these his Fellow-Missioners. And to testify his tender
affection to our Nation, which he showed by a grateful resentment of benefits
conferd by Siagrius on the Pastors of it, he in requital honored this Bishop
with an Archiepiscopall Pall, giving him withal the next place to his
Metropolitan the Archbishop of Lions, ordaining that the rest of the Suffragan
Bishops should take place according to the priority of their Ordination. S.
Gregory further enioynd the said Bishop to assemble a Synod for the rectifying
of abuses, etc.

Id. ib. Epist
4. A third Letter the same Holy Pope wrote to Clotharius King of the Franks:
wherein having magnified him for his care in promoting the Churches good, he
recommended to his favor and charity these devout travelers, assuring him of
a great reward from God for his Charity. But withal he takes notice that in
that Kingdom Holy Orders and Offices were dispensed not according to the merits
of persons, but gifts: Whereupon he seriously enioyns him to take order that
the abominable vice of Simony may be totally repressed by a Synod of Bishops,
etc.

Ibib. Epist. 56
5. He directed a fourth Letter to Brunichildis Queen of the Franks, in which
after humble thanks given her for her favor and assistance formerly afforded
to S. Augustine, and acknowledged by him and the Monks his companions: He tells
her that the fame of her Christian Charity caused generally admiration in
others, but not in him, who by frequent experiments before had seen proofs of
her piety. He signifies likewise how the Faith of Christ prospered in Brittany,
being confirmed by many Miracles: So that she might promise her self a great
portion in the reward of so heavenly a work as the Conversion of that Nation.
And in conclusion he recommends the Monks accompanying Laurentius a Priest and
Mellitus an Abbot to her benignity and assistance. Ibid. Epist.


6. These Letters were distributed by these devout Monks in their way toward
Brittany: Where being arrived they presented from S. Gregory one Letter to
Ethelbert (or Aldibert) King of Kent: Wherein congratulating with him for the
great mercy extended to him by Almighty God in his conversion: He seriously
exhorts him by the example of the Emperor Constantin, to demolish Idols and
Pagan temples, and zealously to promote the Gospel among his subjects, both by
exhortations and examples of purity of life: assuring him that besides the
glory he will thereby gain above all his Ancestors, he will find great security
of mind in the terrible examination before the Tribunal of God: for the more
zealous he shall be to blott out the sins of his Subjects by contributing to
their faith and Sanctification, the more easy account will he render of his own
sins. After this he seriously exhorts him willingly to hear, devoutly to
practice and studiously to keep in mind the good advices and counsels which
shall be given him by his Bishop Augustine, a man learned in Monastical
Institution, and replenished with the knowledge of the Holy Scriptures: for if
he hear his Bishop, God will not fayl to hear his Bishop praying for him and
his kingdom. Moreover the Holy Pope forewarning him of the great changes and
calamities, which our Savior has foretold shall happen before the end of the
world, exhorts him not to be troubled or shaken if such things should come to
pass in his kingdom: but to make that good use which our Lord expects from us
by giving us these Signs of his coming, which is to express our solicitudes
chiefly about our souls, by preparing them with pious actions to meet our Lord
cheerfully. In conclusion he signifies to him that he had sent him some few
small presents: which yet no doubt will not be under valewd by him since they
come from the benediction of S. Peter.

7. What these Gifts were which S. Gregory sent to King Ethelbert, though not
particularly expressed in this letter, it will be no great difficulty to guess
at; it we peruse some other Epistles of his to Princes and Bishops, in which we
may find them expressly nominated. Greg. M. l. 7. Epist. 126.
Thus in a Letter to Recaredus King of Spain, he thus writes, I have sent you a
small Key from the most Sacred Body of the Apostle S. Peter, in which is
enclosed part of the iron taken from his chains, Which you may esteem as a
benediction sent you from himself: that the same iron which bound his neck to
the suffering Martyrdom, may loose yours from all your Sins. I have likewise
committed to this bearer, to be presented to you, a Cross in which is
concluded part of the wood of our Lords own Cross, and likewise some hairs of
S. John Baptist, by whose intercession you may receive comfort from our Lord
whose Forerunner he was. In other Letters of his we find him sending Relics of
Saints to his friends: I^. l. 9 Epist 27.
Thus he pleasur'd Maximianus Bishop of Arabia, who thought it worth so long a
voyage to send an Abbot Candidus as far as Rome, Id l.
to obtain some such Reliks.

8. Another Letter also he directed to the pious Queen Aldiberga, whose goodness
expressed to S. Augustine, together with her diligence and zeal in furthering
the Conversion of her Husband and his Subjects, he much celebrates: for which
he compares her to S. Helena Mother of Constantin the Emperor: and tells her
that the fame of her piety and the blessed effects of it was spread, not only
as far as Rome, but Constantinople also, where it was arrived to the Emperors
hearing. Consequently he exhorts her to perseverance in laboring for the
Conversion of her Subjects, whereby she would assuredly purchase eternal
rewards.

XII. CHA.
XII. CHAP.
1.2.3. Saint Greg^ries Advice to Saint Augustine touching the Miracles wrought
by him.

4 3* etc. His Answer to all the Questions prop^sed by him.

9.10.11. Within what Degrees of Consanguinity Marriage is forbidden.

12 13 S. Gregory censured by Catholics for his Indulgence herein to the
English. His defense of himself.

15. etc. Authority given to S. Augustine over British Bishops.

17.i8 etc. London why no Metropolitan See.

Greg. M. l. 9. Epist. 58.
1. TO S. Augustine himself S. Gregory sent besides a long Letter, in Answer to
several Questions proposed by him. In his Letter he first expresses the
incomparable joy which the News of his happy journey and the blessed Effects of
his Employment had caused, not only in himself, but all Rome likewise. Next
taking notice of the Miracles which in confirmation of the Faith God had
wrought by him, he uses this Expression, Notwithstanding in that celestial
Gift, there is some thing which together with great joy ought to cause likewise
great fear. For I know Almighty God by thy charity has shown great Miracles
among a Nation chosen by him. So that it is necessary that considering so great
a Gift of heaven whilst thou reioycest at it thou should fear, and whilst
thou fear thou should rejoice. The argument of thy joy must be to see the
English Nation by thy Outward Miracles drawn to a participation of inward
Grace: And of thy Fear, least among the Wonders wrought by thee, thy mind
naturally infirm, should be lifted up to a presumption of its own worth* and by
this means whilst it is raised up by a view of things without, it should within
fall by vain glory, etc.

2. To repress therefore all motions of presumption and self-esteem in him he
represents the Example of Moses, who after so many stupendous Miracles
wrought by him, after such inestimable favors received from God, yet for one
act of distrust committed thirty eight years before, he was forbidden to enter
into the land of Promise. He adds withal, that Miracles are no sign of Divine
Election, since our Savior says that in the last day Many shall say, Lord, in
thy Name we have prophesied, cast out Devils, and done many Miracles: But I
will say to them, I know not who you are: Depart from me all ye workers of
iniquity.

3. Notwithstanding least Saint Augustine should suspect that S. Gregory wrote
thus from any information given him of his vanity and pride, he adioyns these
words, These things I now say, because my desire is that the mind of my
Disciple should be abased by humility. But withal let this thy Humility not be
deprived of its confidence. For I a sinner have a most certain hope that by the
Grace of our Omnipotent Creator, and Redeemer Jesus Christ, thy sins are
already forgiven; and for that reason thou art chosen by God to be an
instrument by whom others also should attain to the forgivenes of their sins,
Neither shall thou hereafter have any cause to mourn for the guilt of thine own
sins, who art diligent to cause joy in heaven for the conversion of many
sinners, etc.

4. This is the substance of Saint Gregory's Letter to S. Augustine: to which we
will add the sum of his Answers and resolutions to several Questions which
S. Augustine had proposed to him, and which relating to the State of the
English-Saxon Church, Saint Beda thought expedient to record at large in his
History.

5. The first Question was, I. Quest.
How Bishops ought to converse with their Clergy: And how the Oblations and
Ecclesiastical Revenews ought to be distributed? Ansvv.
To the first part he referrs him to the instructions given by Saint Paul to
Timothy. To the Second, he acquaints him that according to the custom of the
Roman Church, and the injunctions thence given to all Bishop, the Revenews of
the Church were divided into four equal parts, of which the Bishops was to
receive one, for maintaining his family, and keeping hospitality: A Second was
to be distributed among the rest of the Clergy: The poor were to have a third:
And the fourth was to be expended on the Church and other Ecclesiastical
buildings. Notwithstanding he advised S. Augustine who had been brought up in
Monastical Observances, whilst the English Church was yet tender, to imitate
rather the conversation of the Primitive Church at Jerusalem, in which all
things were common, neither did any one call that which he possessed, his own.

6. The Second Question was, II. Quest.
Whether Clarks who had not the Gift of Continence might marry? And in that
case, whether they ought not to return to a Secular State? The answer was,
Ansv^.
that such Clarks as were not advanced to Sacred Orders, might take wives: and
for that were not to be denied their Stipends. But withal they were still to
be subject to the Ecclesiastical Rule, to be assiduous in reciting Psalms, and
to be examples of virtuous living to the Laity. Hereto he advised that
whatsoever remained of the Church revenews unspent, was to be employed in pious
works and Charity.

7. The third Question was, III. Quest.
Since the Roman and Gallican Churches, though agreeing in one Faith, yet had
diverse rites and customs in celebrating Mass, etc. to which of these he
should conform? The Answer was, that he would not so oblige him to the Roman
practices, Ansvv.
but if any where else he met with any observance which he thought would be
more acceptable to God, he should conform thereto. (So far was Saint Gregory
from deserving that imputation which Protestants charge him with, that he was
to the Saxons an Apostle not of Christian Faith, but Roman Rites.)

IV. Quest.
8. The fourth Question was, What punishment was to be inflicted on such as
stole any thing belonging to the Church. The Answer was, Ansvv.
that punishments were to be varied according to the qualities of Offenders:
for such as stole out of mere necessity were not to be so severely punished as
others. Some therefore were to be punished with stripes: others with pecuniary
mulcts, etc. But in all punishments Charity was chiefly to be regarded: not
revenge or fury: Since the only end ought to be the amendment of the offender
that he may avoid hellfire. Particularly in restitutions and pecuniary Mulcts
great care was to be had that the Church should not increase its gains by the
wickedness of Offenders.

V. Quest.
9. The fifth Question was, whether two Brothers might marry two Sisters far
removed in kindred from them? The Answer was affirmative, Ansvv.
since nothing in Scripture forbids it.

VI. Quest.
10. The Sixth Question was, To what degree of consanguinity may Christians
contract marriage. Ansvv.
The Answer was, that though the Civil Law permitted cosen germans to marry,
yet the Ecclesiastical Law forbad it, and experience showed that the offspring
of such marriages do not prosper. Therefore such as are removed in the third or
fourth generation or degree, may lawfully marry. But to marry ones stepmother
is abominable, for that is to reveal the turpitude of ones father. The like is
to be said of marrying the Relict of one's brother, because by the former
marriage the wife was made as one flesh with the Brother. For the condemning of
such a marriage S. John Baptist suffered Martyrdom: for though he was not
commanded to deny Christ, yet since Christ is Truth, and he dyed for
maintaining Truth, he may be said to have been Christ's Martyr.

VII. Quest.
11. The Seventh Question (though not extant in Beda) was Whether all such as
were married unlawfully within the degrees prohibited, were to be separated?
And whether they were to be denied the Holy Communion? The Answer was. Ansvv.
That such were to be admonished to abstain from the use of marriage; and to be
informed how grievous a sin it was: Yet since they incurred this fault in the
days of their ignorance before they were baptized, the Holy Communion was not
to be refused them. For such is the Churches chatity that some faults it
corrects favorably, others it tolerats meekly, and some it does prudently take
no notice off: and thereby often corrects a fault by dissembling which it is
much averse from. However for the future such unlawful Marriages are most
severely to be prohibited to all New Converts, and the Communion to be denied
to all transgressors, because they can no longer excuse themselves by
ignorance.

12. The indulgence which S. Gregory in the resolution of these two last
Questions showed to the New Saxon-Converts, by permitting marriage in the third
and fourth degrees, gave occasion of murmuring and complaining to other
Churches, particularly those of Sicily. Ap. Greg. M. l. 2. Epist. 10.
Whereupon Felix Bishop of Messana wrote to S. Gregory desiring to be satisfied
upon what grounds he dealt so favorably with the Saxons, whereas both custom
and the Decrees of ancient Popes, the resolutions of Ancient Fathers in the
great Council of Nicea and other Synods forbad Marriage to the seventh degree.
This satisfaction he demanded, not by way of accusing or calumniating S.
Gregory, as some Protestant Writers have done, but proposing reverently his and
his Fellow-Bishops difficulties, and desirous to be taught by him, Ibid.
who, says he, we know does undergo the care of the Universal Church, and
specially of Bishops (who in regard of Contemplation are called the Eyes of
Gods Church) as the Prelates of the Holy See, first the Apostles, and afterward
their Successors always have done.

13. Hereto S. Gregory answered, Ibid. V^ Baron. ad A. D. 604.
That by the indulgence granted to the Saxons he had no intention to innovate
or establish a general Law, but only for a time to qualify the rigor of it,
least that Nation as yet imperfect and incapable of solid food, should
relinquish the Christian Profession which they had lately undertaken. But as
for all other Churches, his intention was that the former Laws forbidding
Marriage between kindred to the Seventh generation, should remain unalterable.
This, says he, which we write in answer to thee and the other Bishops in
Sicily, who is thou say, have by thee consulted us, we command to be observed
generally by all (Christians.) And this Decree, renewed by S. Gregory, the
Catholic Church observed diligently, till Pope Innocent the third in the
Council of Lateran upon just and necessary causes, contracted this amplitude of
Degrees to the fourth, as is now observed. But quitting this diversion, let us
return to the rest of the Questions proposed by S. Augustine to S. Gregory.

14. The eighth Question was, VIII Quest
Whether, in case Bishops, Ansvv.
by reason of their great distance from one another, could not meet together, a
Bishop might not be ordaind by him in their absence? Hereto Saint Gregory's
Answer was, That in the English Church, where himself was then the only
Bishop, Ordinations must needs be celebrated by him alone, unless some Bishops
out of France would vouchsafe to come. But for the future Saint Gregory
enjoined Saint Augustine to ordain Bishops at a reasonable distance, that the
Canons of the Apostles and Councils might be duly observed, which in all
Ordinations do require the presence of at least three Bishops. By which
resolution it seems S. Gregory was informed of the perversenes of the British
Bishops, who were unwilling to afford any assistance in the establishing of
Saxon Churches.

IX. Quest
15. His ninth Question was, How he was to treat with the French and British
Bishops? Ansvv.
Whereto Saint Gregory answers, that he gave him no authority to judge the
Bishops of France, whose Metropolitan the Archbishop of Arles only was, in
token whereof he had from precedent Popes received the Pall. In case therefore
that he should go into France, he might assist the said Archbishop in
reforming the Clergy, or if he were negligent, he might in cite him thereto:
but not assume any jurisdiction over any Bishop there. But as for the British
Bishops, says S. Gregory, we committ them all to thy Fraternity, to teach the
ignorant, by persuasion to strengthen the infirm, and by authority to correct
the perverse. (If the Pall, which is the sign of Metropoliticall Jurisdiction,
had remained among the British Bishops, as it did at Arles in France, S.
Gregory doubtless would as well have pronounced them free from S. Aug.
Jurisdiction.) There were besides these nine, two Questions more with their
Answers, which for their length, and the Readers ease I omit: the curious may
read them in Saint Gregory, S. Beda or Sir H. Spelman, etc.

16. To these Questions we find in the late Edition of Paris adjoined in the
last place a Request, That S. Gregory would please to send him of the Relics
of S. Sixtus Martyr. The Motive of which request, it seems, was because he had
been informed that somewhere in Kent a Body of a pretended Martyr of that name
had been held in veneration. This Petition S. Gregory granted: but withal
enjoined him to repose the true Relics of S. Sixtus which he sent him in some
place apart: And in case no Miracles appeared to have been wrought at the Body
of the pretended Martyr, nor any sufficient Tradition concerning the Story of
his passion, he required him to damme up the place where it lay, and forbid the
people to venerate an uncertain Relick,

17. Another Epistle S. Augustine likewise received from S. Gregory at the same
time, in which he signifies to him that he had sent him a Pall, the use whereof
he allows him only during the solemn celebratio^ of Mass, and with this
condition, that he ordain twelve Suffragan Bishops in convenient places, which
were to be subject to his Jurisdiction. He tells him withal that the Bishop of
the City of London should ever after be consecrated by a Synod of that
Province, and receive the Pall of honor from the Apostolic See. He advised
him likewise to send a Bishop to York: and in case that City and Province
should be converted, his will was that twelve Bishops likewise should be there
ordained, over whom the Bishop of York was to be Metropolitan, to whom likewise
he promised to send a Pall. And as for the two Provinces of London and York
neither of the Archbishops should have jurisdiction over the other: and that
they should take place according to their Antiquity of Ordination. Only S.
Augustine as long as he lived, should have authority to exercise Jurisdiction
through both the Provinces, and over all the British Bishops likewise.

18 Here it is worth our observation that in all this Epistle the Sea of
Canterbury is not named as an Archiepiscopall See: Whereas that of London is
expressly decreed to be one. And yet if we consult all our Ecclesiacall
Histories after these times we shall not find that ever the Bishop of London
enjoyed that Privilege and authority, but was always subject to the
Archbishop of Canterbury, notwithstanding that during the ages before whilst
the British Churches flourished, London as the Prime City of the Island, had
been the Seat of the Prime Archbishop.

19. We must therefore conclude, that the orders prescribed in this Letter
never took effect: but that upon a following request from Saint Augustine, the
Metropoliticall authority was transferred from London to Canterbury. The
Motives of which request probably were, because though London was the most
Noble City for merchandise of the whole Island, Ap. Malmsb. de Pont. fi^. l.
1. f. 208.
yet then Canterbury was the Royal City, and place of residence of Ethelbert
the Christian King, and withal the most potent. Now that this Translation was
actually made by S. Gregory we read testified by the Letters of Pope Boniface
the fifth to Iustus Archbishop of Canterbury, writing thus, I perceive by your
Letters that our Predecessor of Blessed memory Gregory appointed to Augustine
and his Successors for the future the Metropolitan and primitive See in the
City of Canterbury, where the Head of the whole Nation since the times of
Paganism resideth.

20. The same is confirmed by the universal practice of all succeeding times.
Whereby it is evident that the entire exercise of Ecclesiastical authority in
ordring, changing and translating of Bishoprics, and Arch-bishopricks was by
all our Ancestors acknowledged to belong to the Sea Apostolic. Yea B. Parker,
a Successor of S. Augustine in the Sea of Canterbury as to the Rents belonging
to it, and his kind of jurisdiction also, though an Apostat from his Faith,
challenges this Jurisdiction upon no other grounds, but because Saint Augustine
received it from Saint Gregory to the prejudice of London: and yet both he and
his Successors in contradiction to their own claim and practice, will deny
that Saint Gregory or his Successors enjoyd any lawful Jurisdiction over
Brittany. Bed. l 1 c. 29.


11. With these letters and by the same Messengers, says S. Beda, the zealous
and charitable Pope Saint Gregory sent likewise all manner of things necessary
for the solemn worship of God and ministry of the Church. He furnished them
with Sacred Vessels, clothes for Altars, Ornaments for Churches, Vestments
proper for Bishops, Priests and other Ecclesiastics, Relics of the Holy
Apostles and Martyrs, and likewise very many Books. And for this his liberality
he is by Calvinists branded with the note of Superstition. But it is no wonder
that such men would despoyle Gods Church of all splendor and ornaments, who
have despoyld Faith it self of all good works.

XIII. CHAPTER
XIII. CHAP.
1.2 etc. S. Gregory's New Orders touching demolishing Pagan Temples and Rites.

5. A Privilege to the Monastery of Glastonbury.

A. D. 601.
1. WHen S. Gregory had dispatched away these Messengers, new cares began to
disquiet his mind. In his Letter to King Ethelbert he had advised him to
demolish the Temples dedicated to Idols, that no marks of former Superstition
might remain. But upon after-thoughts he considered that those Temples being
purified, might be useful for the worship of the true God. Therefore
apprehending the Kings zeal and hasty obedience, Bed. l. 1. c. 30.
he hastened away other Letters, which, says S. Beda, deserve to be recorded,
as a Monument of his affection and continual solicitudes for the good of our
Nation. They were directed to Mellitus Abbot, in the tenor following: Greg. M.
l. ^. Epist. 7.
2. After the departure of thee and thy company, we were in great suspension of
mind, not having heard any tidings of the prosperousnes of your journey. When
therefore it shall please God to bring you safe to our most reverend Brother ^
Augustine, acquaint him how having diligently considered the affairs of
England, I have now judged best, that the Temples consecrated to Idols in that
Nation should not be demolished, but only the Idols themselves. Let therefore
Holy Water be made and sprinkled through the said Temples, and then Altars may
be built, and Sacred Relics be placed in them: which being done they will be
useful for the service of God: And besides, the Saxons having cleansed their
hearts from Error by the knowledge and worship of the true God, will more
willingly and familiarly resort to the accustomed places, which they see
standing.

3. And whereas they were wont to kill many Oxen in their Sacrifices to
Devils, they may be persuaded to make this change in that solemnity, that on
the anniversary day of the Dedication of their Churches, or Feasts of such
Martyrs whose Relics they have, they may raise Tents or Boothes about the said
Churches, and celebrate the solemnity with merry feasting. At which time they
must not immolate their beasts to the Devil, as formerly: but kill them for
meat to be eaten to the praise of God the giver of them. By this means whilst
we permit them a continuance of their former external jollities, their minds
will more easily be brought to entertain spiritual joys. For it will be
impossible at once to withdraw such rude untractable minds from all their
former customs: they will not be brought to perfection by sudden leaps, but
leasurely by steps and degrees. Thus did our Lord indeed make himself known to
the people of Israel in Egypt: But withal permitting them to continue their
custom of Sacrifices, he taught them to offer them to his Honor, which before
they did to Devils. Thus their hearts being wholly changed, they relinquished
some thing and retaind likewise some thing of their former practice: So that
though the beasts were the same which they were wont to offer, yet since they
offered them now to God, and not to Idols, the Sacrifices were not the same.
These things I desire thee to tell our fore named Brother that he may consider,
being there present, how best to be have himself.



4. The discreet Reader may here observe how just a Title this Holy Pope S.
Gregory had to the Name of Apostle of the English Nation: since amidst the
distractions and tumults of businesses which necessarily atte^ded the care of
all Christian Churches, yet in one year he could write so many letters, give so
many admonitions, conferr so many Indults and Graces, and all this with so much
affection zeal, labor and solicitude; that he may seem to have had no other
thing in his thoughts but how to adorn this New English Church, and make her
fit to become a beloved Spouse of our Savior.

5. To this year likewise belongs what we read in William of Malmsbury out of
the Antiquities of Glastonbury, touching a Royal Privilege then granted to
that Monastery: Antiquit. Glaston ap. Malmsbur.
In the year of our Lords Incarnation six hundred and one, that is, five years
after the coming of S. Augustine, the King of Domnonia granted the land called
Ineswitrin to the ancient Church situated there: the land containing five
families (quinque cassata.) This he did at the Petition of Worgrez Abbot of the
same place. The Grant was subscribed by Manvorn Bishop and the said Abbot
Worgrez. Now the Name of the King (says the Author) does not appear, being
worn out of the Writing by age. But that he was a Britain can not be doubted,
since he calls the place Ineswitrin, for that is the British name. We may
likewise consider of how great Antiquity the said Church was, which is there
and then called an ancient Church. The Abbots of the same Church were doubtless
Britains too, A. D. 602.
as appears by their barbarous Names, Ladaemmid, and Bregorer. The times when
they succeeded one another are unknown: But their Names and Dignities are to be
plainly seen in a Picture on one side of the Altar in the Great Church.

XIV. CHAPTER
XIV. CHAP.
1.2 etc. K. Ethelberts Munificence to the Church.

4.5. Privilege of Coining given to S. Augustine and his Successors.

9 etc. The Archbishop of Canterburie's Jurisdiction over all Brittany,
Ireland, etc.

1. WE will now take a view of the effects which these Letters and admonitions
produced in the persons to whom they were directed, King Ethelbert and Saint
Augustine. King Ethelbert therefore casts down all Idols, and commands the
Temples accustomed to profane and impious Sacrifices, to be changed into places
of pure Worship and Piety. And S. Augustine assisted by fresh laborers, purges
those profane Temples, and instead of Idols erects the Sacred Cross, the
Hieroglyphick of our Faith.

2. More particularly King Ethelbert, to whom S. Gregory had proposed
Constantin for a pattern, Camden. in Canti^

Park in Antquit. Brit. f. 52.


with a munificence like Constantins, gave his Palace and whole Royal City of
Canterbury to S. Augustine, says Camden, and built for himself a Palace at
Reculver (Regulbium.) Which place, Says Parker was situated near the Sea:
Where likewise he founded a Monastery, the last Abbot whereof was called
Wenred. Nothing now remains of this place, by reason the Sea breaking in has
covered it. Only the tops of towers and other ruins of the Monastery are marks
to Seamen that they may avoid the dangerous flats there.

3. Together with the Royal City King Ethelbert conferred likewise on S.
Augustine and his Successors many Regal Privileges (Iura Regalia:) Among
which one was a right of coining Money with his own Stamp: For to this effect
Seldom thus Writes: The ancient Right of the Archbishops of Canterbury is
signified by an Old Coin, Seldom. In Spicileg. f. 2:7
one side whereof is signed with the name Plegmuud Archbishop, and the other
with the name of E^cmund the Coyner. The Prototype is preserved in the Treasure
of the family of Cotton: where I my self saw a piece of silver having imprinted
on it the name and image of Celnoth Archbishop. And it seems the right of
coining money, generally esteemed a Regal Privilege, did belong to the
Archbishop as Lord of that City in those times.

4. This Right remained to that See till the times of King Ethelstan, about the
year of Grace nine hundred twenty four: who then abrogated it, in the opinion
of Seldom, and published a Law that not any coin should pass but such as was
stamped with the Kings Image. Id. ib.
Notwithstanding it was not quite abrogated, for among the same Kings Laws this
is one, Let there be seven Minters or Coyners at Canterbury: Of which four
shall belong to the King, two to the Archbishop, and one to the Abbot. So that
this prerogative remained many ages entire to the Archbishops, though the
measure and value of the money coynd was restrained by King Athelstan, who
commanded the same coin for price and quantity to have passage through his
dominions: and that none out of Cities should be permitted to stamp it.
Neither can it appear from any authentic Record, but that this Privilege
continued till the time of the Norman Conquest.

5. To the same See of Canterbury also, by virtue of S. Gregory's Rescript, did
belong an Universal Jurisdiction over the whole Island. Forthough in a Synod
shortly following the British Bishops made their opposition and contradiction
to this Privilege, for which reason S. Augustine forbore to press it. Yet the
same was afterward admitted, not only by all the Churches of the Saxons, but of
Brittany in the largest sense, yea of the Brittanies in the plural number (
Britanniarum) comprehending in the language of ancient Authors (Polybius hist.
l. 3. and Ptolomy Georg. l. 2.) both old Scotland, which is Ireland, and Albany
which is Modern Scotland. For on the Sea of Canterbury did both those Nations
depend in Ecclesiastical matters.

6. Thus Queen Matildis called S. Anselm the Archbishop of the prime See,
Anselm. l. 3. Epist. 55.
and Primar of the Northern Islands called Orcades. And before S. Anselms time
the custom was for the Irish Bishops to receive Consecration from the
Archbishops of Canterbury, as evidently appears from S. Lanfrancs letter to
Gothric King of Ireland, extant in Baronius; as likewise from the letter, of
Murchertac another Irish King and Dofnald a Bishop to S. Anselm Archbishop of
Canterbury, ^admer. Hist N^vor. c. 3^.
in which they request him to institute a Bishop at Waterfoxd by virtue of the
power of Primacy over them which was invested in him, and of the authority of
Legate of the Apostolic See which he exercised. This is testified by Eadmerus
the Monk an eye-witnes of that transaction.

7. Next as touching Scotland in the modern acception, though anciently it was
subject to the Archbishop of York by a Decree of Pope Eleutherius sent by
Fugatius and Damianus: Yet now S. Gregory derogated from that Decree, and
either having regard to S. Augustins sanctity, or the eminent Empire of
Ethelbert, who was in some sort Monarch of the whole Island, he published a New
Decree that all Churches of the Brittanies should be subject to the Sea of
Canterbury. Id. ib l. 5. f. 132.
And this is manifest in the Controversy between Alexander King of the Scotts
and the foresaid Eadmer, A. D. 603.
who at the request of that King was appointed Bishop of S. Andrews in Scotland
by Radulphus Archbishop of Canterbury, whom the King would have to receive
Consecration from the Archbishop of York; but he refused, informing him, that
the authority of the Sea of Canterbury did of old extend over all Brittany, and
therefore that he would require Consecration from the said Archbishop. But the
King not being satisfied, Eadmer chose rather to relinquish his new Bishopric,
then prejudice the Prerogative of the Prime See of Brittany.

XV. CHA.
XV. CHAP.
i.2. The King of the Northumbers overcomes the King of the Scotts.

A. D. 603.
1. THE year following, which was the six hundred and third of our Lords
Incarnation, Ethelfrid King of the Northumbers overcame Edan King of the
Scotts. Id. l 1. c. 34.
This Ethelfrid, says Beda, was a most potent King, and wonderfully thirsty
after glory. He had wasted the Britains more then any of the Saxon Princes,
and had made many of their Provinces tributary. Whereupon Edan King of the
Scots inhabiting Brittany being moved by the great progress of his Victories,
came against him with a mighty and well appointed army, but was overcome and
forced to fly back with few attendants: For in a place called Degsasten, or The
Stone Degsa, celebrated by that battle, his whole army in a manner was
destroyed. Yet in the same combat Theobald Brother of Ethelfrid with that part
of the army lead by him, was slain. And from that time till the days of S.
Beda himself never durst any King of the Scotts enter Brittany against the
English Nation.

Ap. Vsser. in Primord. f. 710.
2. The said King Aidan, as Fordon the Scottish Chronicler testifies, after
that discomfiture did so afflict himself with grief that two years after he
dyed at Kentyre. After whose death Kennet Ker son of Conal seysed on the Crown,
but within less then a years space dying, Eugenius Buydwel Son of Aeidan
succeeded in the Kingdom. Which King Eugenius, says he, infested the Regions
of the Saxons, and sometimes of the Picts with furious irruptions. But in this
clause he manifestly contradicts S. Beda forecited, Bed. l. 5. c. 24.
who likewise elsewhere expressly affirms, That the Scotts inhabiting Brittany
contented themselves with their own confines and attempted nothing either
openly or privily against the English Nation. But from the Scotts we will pass
to the Britains, and their contentions with the now Christian-Saxons about the
Church and Ecclesiastical Rites.

XVI. CHAP. A. D. 604.

XVI. CHAPTER



i.2. etc The death of S. Gregory the Great: his admirable Sanctity, etc.

1. THE year of Grace six hundred and four is memorable to the whole Church, A.
D. 604.
but especially to Brittany for the death of S. Gregory the Supreme Pastor, and
the glorious Apostle of our Nation, as likewise for the General Synod of
Brittany convoked by S. Augustine, in which there was a convention not only of
Saxon and British Bishops, but likewise of several from among the Picts and
Scotts.

2. As touching S. Gregory we read thus in S. Beda: Bed. l. 2. c. i.
The blessed Pope Gregory after he had most gloriously governed the Roman and
Apostolic Church thirteen years, six months and ten days, departed this life,
and was translated to an eternal Throne in the Kingdom of Heaven. Whose memory
we are obliged to celebrate in our History, as being truly the Apostle of our
Nation, which by his industry was converted from the power of Satan to the
Faith of Christ. For being elevated to the Pontificat over the whole world, and
made a Prelat of Churches already embracing the true Faith, he made our Nation,
till his days enslaved to Idols, a Church of Christ: so that to him we may
apply that of the Apostle: For the seal of his Apostleship are we in our Lord.

3. His Memory is celebrated through the whole Chuch of God both Eastern and
Western on the twelfth of March: On which day we thus read in the Roman
Martyrologe, Marty. Romans 12. Mart.
At Rome, the commemoration of S. Gregory Pope, and eminent Doctor of the
Church, who for many illustrious acts, and converting the English Nation to the
Faith of Christ has the Title of Great, and is called the Apostle of the
English.

4. The many glorious Gests of this Holy Pope not pertaining to our present
subject, I willingly omit, because either generally well known, or easily to
be found in Ecclesiastical Historians: and I will content my self with
adjoining here a double Character given of him by two learned and Holy Bishops
of Spain, S. Isidor of Sevill and S. Ildefonsus of Toledo. Ifid. H^sp. de viris
Illustr. c. 27.
The former of which thus writes of him, Pope Gregory Prelat of the Roman and
Apostolic See, was a Man full of compunction and fear of our Lord, eminent in
humility, and endued with so great light of Divine knowledge by the grace of
Gods Spirit, that none was ever equal to him either in the times he lived in,
or any before him. In the next place S. Ildefonsus gives this parallel
description of the Pope, Idefons. de viris illustr. c. 2.
He shone so bright, says he, with the perfection of all virtues and merits,
that excluding all comparisons of any other illustrious persons, Antiquity
never showed the world any one like to him. He excelled S. Antony in Sanctity,
S. Cyprian in eloquence, S. Augustine in wisdom, etc.

5. I ought to have bespoken the Protestant readers patience, and now demand
his pardon for representing this our Apostle, rejected and disgraced by
several of them, in the features and colors drawn by two such eminent
Bishops, who lived either in, or near the same age with him, and whose
judgment, approved by the whole Christian world till this last age, in reason
deserves rather to be relied upon, then that of a few Apostats who lived almost
a thousand years after him. But I leave it to their consciences to determine,
whether this holy Pope deserved, in England especially, that such severe Laws
should be enacted, and such cruelties executed against him, as have been
against those who preach Christ as he did, by the confession of Protestant
Writers themselves: And they must of necessity answer, Yes: for certainly if
his Successors and disciples deserve these rigorous scourges, he who seduced
them, deserved to be tormented with Scorpions.

XVII. C.
XVII. CHAP.
1. 2. etc. A great Synod of Saxons, Britains etc. assembled by S. Augustine.

5.6. etc. The place is uncertain.

7.8. The Names of the Bishops.

A. D. 604.
1. SAint Beda after recounting the death of this our Apostle S. Gregory,
proceeds to relate the actions of S. Augustine the same year, Bed. l. 2. c. 2
in these words, In the mean time Augustine by the assistance of King Ethelbert
convoked to a Synod the Bishops, or Doctors of the greatest and next Province
of the Britains, who met together in a place to this day in the English
tongue called Augustins-ac or Oak, seated in the confines of the Wiccij (or
inhabitants of Worcester shire) and the West Saxons.

2. Now this Synod having been a matter of great importance, we will endeavor
to frame with some diligence a Narration concerning it, that is, touching the
place where it was celebrated, the persons assembled in it, and the special
matters debated amongst them.

3. The place though named with some Circumstances by S. Beda, yet after such a
vicissitude and change both of men and language is not at this day obvious or
easy to be found. It is doubtful whether Augustins-Oke in S. Beda signifies
simply a Tree only, or a village among such trees; that is, Whether the Synod
was held abroad in the open air, or in some house. The former seems more
probable to Sir H. Spelman, Spelm. to. 1. Council. f. 107
for, says he, It was an ancient custom in Brittany to hold their assemblies
abroad, for under a roof the Britains apprehended danger by witchcraft or
fascination, as has been formerly mentiond out of Beda at the meeting of King
Ethelbert with this same S. Augustine. Notwithstanding though by S. Beda's
relation such was the Superstition of the Infidel Saxons, no ground appears why
it should be imputed to the Christian Britains, much less to S. Augustine and
his companions who were Romans.

4. It is therefore more likely that this Synod was celebrated within-dores in a
place or village which had its appellation from an Oak, and from this meeting
obtaind the addition of S. Augustins name. And herein it resembled an ancient
Synod assembled by Theophilus against S. John Chrysostom in the suburbs of the
City of Chalcedon, which was called (Ad quercum) The Synod at the oak, from
some notable Oak which had stood near the Palace where the Bishops sat.

5. But where to find this village is yet uncertain. Camden with all his
diligence and perspicacity leaves it in the dark. For in his perambulation of
the Province of the Wiccij, mentiond by S. Beda, he gives only this account of
it: Camd^n in Wigorn,
About this territory there is a place, but the position of it is uncertain,
called Augustins-ake, or Oak: at which Augustine the Apostle of England and the
British Bishops met: and after many hott disputes about celebrating Easter,
preaching the word of God to the Saxons and celebrating Baptism after the Roman
rite, they parted from one another with disagreeing minds.

6. Notwithstanding if leave may be allowd to conjecture, why may we not
suppose that a place in the outward limits of Worcestershire called Ausric,
contractedly from Austinsric, may not have that appellation from S. Augustine
and this Synod? There is another village likewise in the confines of
Warwickshire called Haustake, which has some resemblance to the name in S. Beda.
And each of these lay commodiously enough for the meeting of the Britains. For
Speed's opinon that this Synod was held in Hampshire, wants probability both
because that disagrees from the limits of the place described by S. Beda, and
that province was not at all opportune for the Britains.

7. Next touching the persons meeting in this Synod, our Ecclesiastical
Writers speak very indistinctly: Sir H. Spelman affirms that we may truly call
this Synod (Panbritannicam) an Universal Synod of the whole Isle of Brittany:
Spelm. to. i. Council. f. 116.
since therein were assembled not only the Saxons under Augustine and his Roman
companions, but a multitude of Britains likewise; there were moreover some
Scotts and Picts quarelling about Easter. The names of those who met at the
first Session are unknown. David Powel writes thus, To this Synod were called
seven Bishops of the Britains. Povvel. in Ann^t. ad (...) in Cambriae l. 2.
c. 1.
For in those days that number of principal Churches, after the Asiatick
manner, had their Ordinations under the Metropolitan of Menevia, or Saint
David's. Thus he from the Apostat Bale: but most unskillfully.

8. For neither can it be showed, that in Asia every Metropolitan had under him
the determinat number of seven Suffragans. On the contrary it appears from the
Synod of Ephesus that the Metropolitan of Pamphilia, a Province of Asia, vid.
Baron. ad A. D. 43^.
by ancient custom had under him only two Bishops, which custom was ratified by
that Synod. Neither is there any show of probability that the Britains in
their Ordinations and Rites followd the Asiatick customs. On the contrary we
have demonstrated before, that Saint David, Saint Kentigern and other Holy
Bishops in Brittany received their exemplar and Rule from the Sea Apastolick:
^p. Capgr. in S. Kentig^rn.
And particularly S. Kentigern at his death gave and left to his Disciples
forcible precepts concerning the observation of the duties of holy Religion,
etc. and a firm, unshaken adherence to the Decrees of the Ancient Fathers, and
Instituts of the Holy Roman Church.

Bed. l. 2. c. 2 Hunting l 3 f. 315.
9. Therefore it we consult Saint Beda, and Henry of Huntingdom who writes
conformably to him, we shall find that in this Synod there were two Sessions:
and that to the first there came with Saint Augustine only Mellitus and Iustus,
who were then probably designed, but not yet consecrated Bishops: And of the
Britains neither is the number of them defind, nor the name of one of them
recorded. At the Second Session indeed Giraldus Cam^^ensis acknowledges the
presence of seven British Bishops, but seeks not out of Asia a reason of that
Number: for he writes thus, Girald. Itin. Cambr. l. 2 c. 1
The reason why at that time there were seven Bishops in Brittany, whereas at
this day there are only four, may be, because in those days there were more
Cathedral Churches in Wales, then now; and perhaps Wales it self was further
extended then at this day.

XVIII. C.
XVIII. CHAP.
1 The Gests of that Synod.

2.3. etc. Calumnies of Protestant Writers against S. Augustine for pride and
Ambition: disproved.

6.7. etc. Saint Beda's true Narration of the Gests of the Synod: And Saint
Augustins doctrine confirmed by a Miracle.

10.11. Wherein consisted the Error of the Britains about the Paschall
Solemnity.

A. D. 604.
1. ENough has been said concerning circumstantiall matters of place and
persons, regarding this Synod: in neither of which we can find any full
satisfaction. That which most imports us to know, is the business it self for
which the Synod was assembled: Which, if we consult our ancient Historians,
will appear manifestly enough. Whereas some Modern Writers since the Change of
Religion, incited by passion, do from their own invention, and without any
testimony of Antiquity tell us of ambitious designs of S. Augustine to establish
his Tyranny over both the Saxons and Britains, and to introduce Roman
ceremonies and superstitions unknown to the Britains, and prudently rejected
by them.

2. Thus writes David Powel: Augustine, says he, Povvel. in annot. ad itin.
Camb. l. 2. c. i
celebrated a Synod with this design to subdue to himself the Clergy of all
Brittany, and render them obsequious to the Roman Church. Thus likewise the
Centuriators of Magdeburg: Augustine a Roman, Magdeb. Centur. 6. f. 6.7.
a Benedictin Monk was in the year 582. sent by Pope Gregory into England to
gain it to the Roman Bishop, and to subdue it to his gainful and Superstitious
Jurisdiction, etc. And again, The same Augustine Bishop of the Angli met in a
Synod with the Bishops of the Britains and Scotts, and required of them to
submitt themselves to him, and to undergo the common labor of preaching the
Gospel to the Saxons. Ib. f. 448.
They add further, He in a Synod obtruded on the British Churches the Roman
Rites and customs, to wit, Altars, Vestments, Images, Masses, Chalices,
Crosses, Candlesticks, Incense, Banners, Sacred Vessels, Holy Water, Books of
Roman Ceremonies, Oblations, Processions, Pomps, Tithes and such like things
hitherto unknown to the Britains, who were content with the Asiatick and Greek
Ceremonies. He required moreover that they should celebrate Easter at the same
time with him, administer Baptism with the Roman Rites, preach the Gospel to
the Saxons together with him, and acknowledge him for their Archbishop. As if
these Ceremonies and solemnities in Administering the Sacraments were unknown
either to the Grecian or British Churches: When as S. Chrysostom several ages
before this time, who was an Asiatick Priest and Grecian Bishop, testifies of
the ancestors of these Britains, that they had experience of the power of the
Gospel: Chrisost homil advers. Gentil. c. 5.
For Churches were founded among them, and Altars erected, etc. And hundreds of
Examples have already been related in this History of the like.

3. Such Impudent calumnies may be expected from Writers, who had no other
designs in their labors. But they are not not pardonable in Sir H. Spelman, a
man versed in antiquity, and who ordinarily is ingenuous in his Writings: yet
he likewise imputes to S. Augustine a design of subduing the British Churches,
Spelm. to. i. Council. f. 104.
For the first thing demanded by Augustine in this Synod (says he) was
Obedience to the Roman Church. And to that purpose he annexes to the said Synod
a Writing translated out of Welsh, and compiled by an unknown Author in an
unknown age, as himself confesses, but supposed to be the Answer of an Abbot of
Bangor to Saint Augustine, wherein he tells him, Other obedience besides that of
Charity I do not acknowledge due to the man whom you call Pope, etc. Besides
this, We are already under the government of the Bishop of Caer-leon upon Vsk,
who under God is to have inspection over us, to make us observe the spiritual
rule and way.

4. This New found Schedule, though by him earnestly endeavored to be
justified, has been by many Catholic Writers sufficiently disproved: and there
needs no more to make it appear a Forgery, then that passage wherein the Bishop
of Caer-leon is said to have the principal care of the Welsh Provinces: Since
by all Histories it is evident that very many years before this the
Metropoliticall Jurisdiction had been transferd from that Church to Menevia:
And moreover neither at the time when this Synod was held, nor many years
before was there any Bishop at all at Caer-leon.

5. But all these discourses either about the Popes, or Saint Augustins
authority over the Britains, pretended to have passed in this Synod, are mere
fictions invented first by Bale an Apostat, and the Centuriatours without any
warrant from our Ancient Histories. It is true, Saint Gregory had invested
Saint Augustine with such authority over the Britains: but that he wisely
dissembled it at this meeting, and only required a conformity from the
British Bishops in the celebration of Easter and administration of Baptism,
with a request that they would ioyn with him in spreading the Gospel, is
manifest from Saint Beda, from whom alone we can securely be informed of the
passages of this present Synod: And whose Narration shall here entirely be set
down.

Bed. l. 2. c. 2
6. Augustine, says he, began with a brotherly admonition to persuade them to
entertain Catholic peace and Unity with him, and for our Lords honor to
undertake the common labor of preaching the Gospel to the Pagans. He told
them likewise that they did not observe the day of Easter^ in its due time, but
reckoned the Sunday from the fourteenth day of the Moon to the one and
twentieth. Which Computation is containd in a Circle of eighty four years. And
many other things beside they did contrary to the Unity of the Church. This was
the Substance of Saint Augustins discourse to the Britains in the first
Session of this Synod. Here is not a word of the Primacy of the Roman See, or
the submission of Brittany to it, and much less to him. But what effect these
Christian exhortations had on the minds of the Britains, the same holy Writer
thus further declares: Id. ib.
7. When the Britains, says he, after a long disputation would not be moved
to give their assent, neither by the exhortations nor increpations of Augustine
and his companions, but would needs prefer their own Traditions before the
consent of all Christian Churches in the world: The Holy Father Augustine
brought the tedious and laborious Dispute to this conclusion, saying, Let us
beseech our Lord who makes brethren of one mind in the house of his Father,
that he would vouchsafe by celestial ^igns to make known unto us, which of
these Traditions is to be followd, and which is the right path leading to his
Kingdom. Let some sick person be here produced among us, and he by whose
Prayers he shall be cured, Let that man's faith and practice be believed
acceptable to God, and to be ^ollowd by men.

8. This proposition being at last with much ado and great unwillingnes
accepted by the adverse party, a certain English man who was blind was brought
before them: and was first offered to the British Bishops, but by their
endeavors and ministry found no cure or help. At length Augustine, compelled
hereto by just necessity, kneeld down, and addressed his Prayer to God the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ that he would vouchsafe to restore sight to
that blind man, and by a corporal illumination of one to kindle the Light of
spiritual Grace in the hearts of many beleivers. Having said this, immediately
the blind man received sight, and Augustine was proclaimed by all a true Preacher
of celestial Light. Then at last the Britains confessed that they now
perceived that the way of justice ^^ught by Augustine was the true way: but
without the consent of their countrymen they could not renoun^e their ancient
customs. Therefore they requested that a second Synod might be assembled, at
which greater numbers might meet.



9. This is the simple and true Narration of the Gests of this first Session:
Hunting. l. 3. f. 529.
the sum of which is likewise deliverd by Henry of Huntington. And here we see
the way taught by Saint Augustine confirmed by a divine Miracle, and
consequently whatsoever the Britains taught in contradiction to that way
reproved from heaven. So that it is against God himself that they fight, who
calumniate the faith delivered to the Saxons by him. Be it granted therefore to
our Protestant Writers, that in this Synod Saint Augustine required obedience to
the Roman See from the Britains, and to himself sent from thence: they must
then be compelld to ioyn with the Britains in acknowledging that the way of
justice taught by him was the true way.

10. The principal, if not, as Huntington implies, the only point about which
such earnest contestations passed in this Synod, was the celebration of Easter,
or the Paschall solemnity. This Feast, as observed by the Jews, was to be
celebrated exactly on the fourteenth day of the first Moon after the Vernal
Equinox, on what day of the week soever it fell: and it was instituted in
memory of the deliverance of the Jews by means of sprinkling the blood of the
Paschall lamb on the posts of their doors, A. D. 603.
in the night wherein the first born of every family among the Egyptians was
slain by an Angel. Now that Sacrifice of the Paschal Lamb only typifying the
offering of Christ our true Pasch, the Christian Church from the Apostles times
in memory of Christ's deliverance from death after he had offered himself,
instituted this Christian Pasch almost at the same time with the Jews. But to
distinguish it from the shadow of a Jewish observation, they ordained that it
should be solemnised only on a Sunday, yet not that on which the fourteenth day
of the Moon fell, but the Sunday following: and therefore counted always from
the fifteenth day to the two and twentieth, excluding the the day of the Jewish
Pasch.

11. The Error therefore of the Britains consisted not, as generally
Protestant Writers conceive, in conforming to the Asiatick manner of the
Quarto-decimani, who kept their Easter always the same day with the Jews,
whether it were Sunday, or not: But they made their computation from the
fourteenth of the Moon to the one and twentieth (as Saint Beda properly
expresses their error) by which means it came to pass, that if the fourteenth
of the Moon proved to be a Sunday, the Jews and Britains once in seven years
would observe their Paschall Solemnity together, which was contrary to the
universal practice of the Church, and utterly forbidden by the first General
Council of Nicea. This difference is observed by Bishop Usher alone, of all
Protestants: Vsser. in Primord. f.
who therefore never charges the Britains with the Asiatick Error.

XIX. CHAPTER
XIX. CHAP.
1. 2. The Second Session of the Synod.

3.4. etc. The British Bishops consult an Anchoret: His answer: and the
Success.

6. What S. Augustine required of them: Not subjection.

7.8. The Britains erroneous about Baptism: and how.

9. Saint Augustins Prophecy against them.

1. SVCH having been the Success of the first Session of this Synod, the same
Saint Beda proceeds in the Narration of what befell at their Second meeting not
long after, Bed. l. 2. c. 2.
saying, The Britains requested that the Synod might meet a second time, when
a greater number might be present. Which being appointed, there came (as the
report is) seven British Bishops, A. D. 604.
and besides them many other very learned men, especially from that most Noble
Monastery of theirs which in the English tongue is called Bancornabury, the
Abbot whereof at that time is said to have been named Dinooth.

2. Whether there were seven British Bishops, or no, we see Saint Beda,
writes doubtingly, on uncertain report: But none of our ancient Historians
pretend to give the names of their See^. Only Bale, a Modern Aposta^, as
confidently names them, as if he had been present at the Synod: These were,
says he, the Bishops of Hereford, Landaff, Saint Pater^s, Bangor, Cluy or
El^y, W^rcester and Glamorgan. Spelm tom. 1. Council. f. 25.
But Henry of Huntingdon could only name three Sees at this time in Wales,
Saint David's, or Menevia, Bancor or Elwy, and Landaff under which is comprised
Glamorgan. In this Synod no mention is made of the Archbishop of Menevia,
says Sir Henry Spelman: And probably he therefore came not to the Synod, least
he should against the Canons submit his own Metropoliticall dignity to a
stranger Metropolitan in his own Province. But more probably there was then no
Bishop of Menevia at all: for since the time that Saint Sampson carried the Pall
over Sea into Lesser Brittany, in the year five hundred and sixty, we do not
find any constant report among Authors that he had any Successors.

3. How many soever, and whosoever these British Bishops were, Bed. l. 2. c.
2.
Saint Beda in the first place relates, how before they came to the Council,
they repaired to a certain holy and prudent ^an who lived an Anachoreticall
life among them, to demand his advice, whether upon the exhortation of Augustine
they should suffer themselves to be persuaded to desert their Traditions. His
answer was, if he be a man of God, follow him They replied, What proof may we
have whether he be a man of God, or no? He answered, Our Lord says, Take my
yoke upon you and learn of me, for I am meek and humble in heart. If this
Augustine therefore be meek and humble in heart, it is to be believed that as he
himself bears the yoke of Christ, so it is the same yoke that he would impose
upon you. But if he be discourteous and haughty, it is cer^ain that he comes
not from God, neither are his speeches to be regarded by you. They replied
again, But how shall we know whether he be haughty, or no? His answer was, Take
order that he with his companions be the first comers to the Synod, and if when
you app^aach, he rise up to you, judge thereby that he is a servant of Christ,
and be obedient to what he shall ordain. But if he in contempt shall refuse to
rise up to you being more in number, let him likewise be despised by you.

4. This was certainly a very casual sign given by the Hermit and the defect
of a co^plement was a ground very insufficient to excuse their dissent from
such things as they had seen and acknowledged to have been confirmed by a
Divine Miracle. But far more culpable are some Protestants, who from the
personal outward carriage of a man will condemn not only all his Sacred Rites,
but the substance of his Faith too. This the ancient Britains never did. They
had probably heard that S. Gregory had invested him with Ecclesiastical
authority over all Brittany, though he never challenged it from them: and they
suspected that if they yielded to him in changing any of their Traditions, they
should become subject to him in all: and for this reason they refused their
assent to every thing proposed by him.

Bed. ibid.
5. Let us therefore see the success of this advice of the Welsh Hermits which
Saint Beda thus relates: It came to pass that when the British Bishops and
Doctors came to the place, Augustine was sitting on his seat: which they
seeing, presently they were filled with rage and indignation, imputing that to
his pride: so that they earnestly contradicted him in all things that he said.
Synod Ephesians. sess 2.
It was the custom in Gods Church that the President of a Synod should be
cloathd in his solemn Pontifical robes (as we read of S. Cyrill in the
Council of Ephesus) in which posture it is not becoming to practice those
civilities, which are otherwise fitting: This may likely have been a cause of
this behavior of Saint Augustine at this time. Or his mind might have been
wholly taken up in thoughts about the present affairs, that he did not attend
to outward objects. If any charity had possessed the minds of the Britains,
they ought rather to impute this behavior to any thing then pride, considering
that pure charity to the souls of an Idolatrous Nation had forced him to
undertake so tedious and hazardous a journey: that being come, he earnestly
desired to join hands of amity and peace with these angry Bishops, not
requiring any subjection from them, but offering them an equal share in the
merits of his Apostolic Office.

6. Many things there were in which these British Bishops and Churches had
varied from their former practices, conformable to the general custom: as we
had heretofore an example in the point of Ordinations. And no wonder,
considering the late tumultuous times, the failing of Metropoliticall
Jurisdiction, the want of Synods and Visitations, etc. Yet such was S.
Augustins condescendence and love of Unity, that in case they would comply in
three points only, he would require no more. Bed. ibid.
Augustine told them (by S. Beda's relation) that there were many things in
which they practiced contrary not only to the Roman custom, but of the
Universal Church likewise: But if they would conform in three points only, he
would With equanimity tolerate all other matters in which their practices were
contrary: Which three Points were, First the celebrating the Paschall Solemnity
in its due time: Next, the administration of Baptism according to the custom of
the Holy Roman and Apostolic Church: And the third was to ioyn with him and
his companions in preaching the Gospel to the Saxons. Hereby it is evident
that there was no difference at all between the Faith professed by S. Augustine,
and by the Britains, no contrariety in Dostrines. And again, that S. Augustine
did not insist on, nor so much as mention any subjection expected by him from
the Brittih Churches. So that all the accusations charged by Protestants upon
Saint Gregory and S. Augustine for endeavoring to bring in among the Britains
a New Religion; and all their complaints against his ambition and thirst of
Superiority and tyranny over them, fall to the ground. There are only three
Points wherein he requires a conformity, in none of which that of Jurisdiction
is included.

7. We have already seen wherein the erroneous practice of the Britains about
the celebration of Easter consisted. But we do not find their particular
defect in administering the Sacrament of Baptism. Certain it is notwithstanding
that they did not celebrate it so nakedly destitute of solemn Rites, as it is
of late in the Churches which call themselves Reformed: For besides the sign of
the Cross ( without which no Sacrament is administered, says S. Augustine) they
used Holy Chrism, the benediction of Water and salt, etc. Most probable
therefore it is, that the like defects were in practice among them, which are
complaind of by S. Leo in his Decretal Epistle, to wit, the celebrating of it
without necessity out of the solemn times prescribed by the Church, Leo. Epist.
Decretal. 80.
Easter, Whitsontide, etc. or without sufficient previous instructions, for
want of which the Exorcisms and imposition of hands on persons of age
converted, would want their due effect. But concerning this matter, for want of
light from Antiquity, we can only give conjectures.

8. These most equal conditions of brotherly affection and Unity, were
rejected by the Britains: For says S. Beda, Their answer was, that they would
not do any one of these things: Bed. ibid.
Neither would they receive him for their Archbishop. This latter clause of
their Answer proceeded merely from the spirit of faction in them, since the
receiving him for Archbishop was not included in the conditions of Union, nor
so much as proposed by Saint Augustine: Which ill spirit is denoted by the
following words of the same Author, For conferring among themselves, they
said, If he would not vouchsafe even now to rise out of his seat in civility to
us, ibid.
how much more will he contemn us in case we begin to yield subjection to him?

9. The Britains therefore obstinatly refusing compliance in every thing, the
Treaty between them necessarily ended: But before the dissolution of the
Assembly, Saint Augustine by inspiration from God prophesied a heavy judgment
shortly to befall them for their uncharitablenes. The man of God Augustine, Id.
ib.
says S. Beda is reported to have foretold the Britains by way of threatening,
That since they would not accept of peace with their brethren, they should
receive war from their Enemies: And since they refused to preach the way of
life to the English Nation, they should by the hands of the same Nation suffer
no less a revenge then death. Which Prophecy of his in all the circumstances
of it was through the just judgment of God fulfilled upon them. The manner how
this came to pass shall in its due place be related: where likewise we will
clear S. Augustine from a most horrible calumny imputed to him, as if by his
impulsion many thousands of Religious Monks were murdered.

XX. CHAPTER
XX. CHAP.
1.2. etc. Sebert King of the East Saxons converted.

4 5. etc. The Church and Monastery of Westminster built.

7.8. etc. The wonderful consecration of it by S. Peter: attested by Authors
of eminent credit.

1. THIS Synod (of Worcester, as some call it) being thus ended without
producing any good effect, A. D. 604.
the minds of both parties being rather far more exulcerated: S. Augustine
returned into Kent, where he labored diligently in propagating the Gospel.
Neither were his endeavors in vain: on the contrary Almighty God to show that
the uncharitablenes of the Britains could not prejudice his designs of good to
the Saxons, so wonderfully exalted his Divine Truth among those Pagans, and so
depressed the Britains that the words of our Savior may seem to have been
fullfilled in them, The Kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and given to a
Nation bringing forth the fruits thereof. For from the British Churches, which
hitherto had with so much devotion and gratitude honored the Apostolic See,
but now rejected it, scarce any thing memorable is afforded to furnish our
Ecclesiastical Story: Whereas every year almost will suggest new matter to
glorify God in the heroically Christian actions of Saxon Princes, the sanctity
of Bishops, and the wonders which God wrought for the testifying of both.

2. In the next confining Kingdom to Kent, divided from it by the River Thames,
reigned a Prince called Sigibert, or Sebert, or Saberet, King of the
East Saxons, whose Father had married Ricula the only Sister of King Ethelbert.
This Prince moved either by the authority of his Uncle, or the admiration of
the Sanctity of Saint Augustine and his com^panions, signified his desire to be
instructed in Christian Religion. Whereupon Saint Augustine readily sent him
Preachers, who found little difficulty in persuading him to relinquish his
Idolatry and embrace the Faith of Christ.

3. Presently after Saint Augustine himself repaired to him, and administered the
first Sacrament of Baptism to King Sebert and his Queen Ethelgoda. And many of
his Subject* following his example gave up their names to Christ: insomuch as
Saint Augustine for the government of this New Church consecrated Mellitus, the
Roman Abbot sent him by Saint Gregory, Bishop of London. That these things
happened this year presently after the Synod of Worcester, Saint Beda is witness,
as likewise an ancient Historian named John Fleet, whose words are these, King
Sebert having been baptized by Saint Augustine in the Western part of London,
demolished a certain Idoll-Temple dedicated to Apollo, in a place called
Thorney, and in the room thereof built a Church to the honor of God and Saint
Peter: which he recommended to Saint Mellitus to be by him consecrated.

4. Others refer the foundation of this Church to King Ethelbert, whose
Tributary not only King Sebert was, but all other Saxon Kings as far as the
River of Humber, by the testimony of Saint Beda. But in the Charter of King
Edgar afterward granted to this Church of Westminster, it is more properly
said to have been built by Sebert a very rich Prince on the persuasion of
Ethelbert the first English Christian King. Displom. R. Edg^r. in (...)
Benedict. 72.
And in the same Charter the place where it was built called Thorney, is said
to have been a terrible place, probably not so much for the Savage rudenes of
it, as because wicked Spirits formerly worshipped in Apollo's Temple had
possession of it.

5. To this Church of Saint Peter the Holy Bishop Saint Mellitus adjoined a
Monaster^, Malmsbu^. de (...) l. 2. ^. 2^4.
being admonished to do so as the fame is, by S. Peter himself, says William
of Malmsbury. Indeed in these ancient times scarce any illustrious Churches
were built without a Congregation of Monks to attend Divine Service there: A
mark whereof remains to this day, for our Cathedral Churches are vulgarly
called Ministers, or Monasteries. And this was according to the advice given to
Saint Augustine by Pope Gregory, Bed. l. 1. c. 27.
to institute in his Churches a conversation of religious persons like that in
the primitive Church of Jerusalem, in which none accounted those things which
he possessed his own, but all things were common among them, as has been
declared already from S. Beda.

6. How this Church was consecrated immediately and miraculously by S. Peter
himself, though my intention is to be modest in recounting such wonders, I will
adventure to declare from an Ancient Writer Ealred Abbot of Rievall: But
because such things seem dreams to Protestants; for mine own justification, or
at least excuse, I conceive fit to premise, vid. Vsser. in Prim. f. 742.
That the Tradition of this wonder has been confirmd moreover by Sulcard in his
Chronicle of Westminster, by William of Malmsbury in his second Book of English
Bishops, by Richard of Cicester in his Annals: Yea moreover by other Witnesses
of higher rank and authority, Saint Edward the Confessor in his Charter given
to that Church nine days before his death, in the year of Grace one thousand
sixty six: and before him by King Edgar repairer of the same Church in his
Charter dated in the year nine hundred sixty nine, Apostolat. Bened f. 71.
tract. 1.
and lastly by Pope Nicholas the second in his Rescript to King Edward.

7. The Narration of the foresaid Abbot Ealred in his life of S. Edward
touching this Miracle is as follows: Ealred. in vit S. E^^ard Conf.
In the time when King Ethelred by the Preaching of Saint Augustine embraced the
Faith of Christ; his Nephew Sibert who governed the East Angles (rather,
East Saxons) by the same Holy Bishops Ministry also received the same Faith.
This Prince built one Church within the walls of London, the principal City
of the Kingdom, where he honorably placed Mell^tus Bishop of the same City.
Without the walls likewise toward the West he founded a famous Monastery to the
honor of S. Peter, and endowd it with many possessions. Now on the night
before the day designed for the dedication of this Church, the Blessed Apostle
S. Peter appearing to a certain Fisherman in the habit of a stranger, on the
other side of the River of Thames which flows beside this Monastery, demanded
to be wafted over: which was done. Being gone out of the boat, he entered into
the Church, in the sight of the Fisherman: And presently a heavenly light shone
so clear, that it turned the night into day. There was with the Apostle a
multitude of heavenly Citizens coming out and going into the Church, a divine
melody sounded, and an odor of unexpressible fragrancy was shed abroad. As Soon
as all things pertaining to the Dedication of the Church were performed, the
glorious Fisher of men returned to the poo^ Fisherman, who was so affrighted
with his Divine splendor that he almost lost his senses: But Saint Peter
kindly comforting him, brought him to himself. Thus both of them entering into
the Boat, Saint Peter asked him if he had any provision: Who answered, that
partly being stupefied with seeing so great a light, and partly detaind by his
return, he had taken nothing, being withal assured of a good reward from him.
Hereto the "Apostle replied, Let down thy Netts. The Fisherman obeyed, and
immediately the Nett was filld with a multitude of fishes. They were all of the
same kind, except one Salmon (Esocium) of a wonderful largenes. Having then
drawn them to shore, Saint Peter said, Carry from me this great Fish to
Mellitus the Bishop, and all the rest take for thy hire: and moreover be
assured that both thou all thy life time, and thy children after thee for many
years shall be plentifully furnished with these kinds of fishes: Only be
careful you fish not on our Lords days. I who speak now with thee, am Peter:
and I my self have dedicated this Church built to my fellow-cittizens and to my
honor, so preventing by mine own authority the Episcopal Benediction.
Acquaint the Bishop therefore with the things which thou have seen and heard,
and the signs yet marked on the walls will confirm thy speeches. Let him
therefore surcease from his design of consecrating the Church, and only supply
what I have omitted, the celebration of the Mystery of our Lords Body and
Blood, and the instruction of the people. Let him likewise give notice to all
that I my self will oftimes visit this place, and be present at the prayers of
the faithful: and I will open the gates of heaven to all who live soberly,
justly and piously in this world. As soon as he had said this, he presently
vanished from his sight.

8. The next morning as the Bishop Mellitus was going in procession to the
Church with an intention to dedicate it, the Fisherman met him with the Fish,
and related to him whatsoever Saint Peter had enioynd him. At which the Bishop
was astonished, and having unlocked the Church-dores, he saw the pavement
marked with Letters and inscriptions both in Greek and Latin, and the wall
anointed in twelve several places with holy Oil: He saw likewise the
remainders of twelve torches sticking to as many Crosses, and the Church every
where yet moist with aspersions. All which being observed by the Bishop and
people present, they rendered praises and thanks to Almighty God.

9. A further testimony and proof to this Miracle is afforded by the whole
progeny of that Fisherman: For his children according to the command received
from their Father brought the tithes of all their gains by fishing, and offered
them to Saint Peter, and the Priests attending Divine service in his Church.
But one among them having presumed to defraud the Church of this Oblation,
presently was deprived of the wonted benefit of his trade, till having
confessed his fault, and restord what he had reserved, he promised amendment
for the future. Thus wrote Ealred above five hundred years since: The sum
whereof was delivered some what before him by William of Malmsbury, who adds
this particular, Malmsb. de Gest. Pontific. l. ^.
That the Fisherman, who was very simple, and as yet not a Christian, described
to the Bishop very exactly the shape and line aments of Saint Peter, well known
to the Bishop by his Picture publicly extant at Rome, which long before this
S. Silvester showed to the Emperor Constantin.

10. The belief of this miraculous Story was the cause that this Church was
wonderfully enriched by following Princes, as King Offa and Kenulph, mentiond
in the fore named Charter of King Edgar. And for the same reason it was chosen
anciently for the place of the inauguration of our Kings. And a proof full of
evidence demonstrating the Truth here related was S. Mellitus his forbearing to
repeat the Ceremonies of the Dedication, which by certain signs he perceived to
have been performed before. And moreover because going awhile after to Rome he
related these particulars to a Synod there assembled, and demanded their advice
whether any more was to be done to the Consecration of the same Church. These
particulars being related by our Authors of the prime Class, it argues a
great contempt of the authority of our Ancestors, in Protestants who without
any proof from Antiquity, will confidently proscribe such Traditions; as dreams
and fables.

XXI. CHAPTER
XXI. CHAP.
i.2. etc. The Church of S. Paul in London, built: and endowed.

A. D. 604.
1. THE same year, in the same City of London and by the piety of the same King
Sebert another Noble Church was erected in the midst of the City to the honor
of the other Prince of the Apostles, Saint Paul. Yet some Writers ascribe this
munificent work to King Ethelbert, whose Tributary King Sebert his Nephew was.
Yea Polydor Virgil adds, Polyd. Virg. l. 4.
that the City it self a little before this was become part of King Ethelberts
own Dominion. Camd. in Tri^^bant.
And Camden to the like effect writes thus, Ethelbert King of Kent, under whom
Sebert reigned as by courtesy in this Tract, built a Church at London to the
honor of Saint Paul the Apostle: which in after times being enlarged and
beautified grew to that vastnes and magnificence as we now see it, as likewise
to such rich endowments, by which are plentifully maintained besides the
Bishop, a Dean, Precentour, Chancellor, Treasurer, four Archdeacons, nine
and twenty Prebends besides many others of inferior rank.

2. As Saint Peter's Church in Westminster was erected upon the ruins of the
Pagan Temple of Apollo: So was this dedicated to Saint Paul, upon those of a
Temple to Diana. Some marks whereof to this day remain, says the same Author,
for ancient adjacent Lodgings in the Archives of the Church are called Diana's
Chamber: Id ibid.
and in King Edward the firsts time an incredible number of beeves heads was
dug up in the Churchyard, the ancient Sacrifices (Tauropolia) solemnised to
Diana, etc.

3. In this Church by the Kings appointment the Bishop and his Successors had
their fixed seat: The Church service being sung, not by Monks, but other
Churchmen who lived Canonically in community.

Beda l.
4. To the Bishops of this Church, says Saint Beda, King Ethelbert offered many
rich gifts: and for the maintenance of those who lived with the Bishops he
added many territories and possessions. Particularly the Lordship of Tillingham
is named in the Formule of Donation supposed by Stow and Speed to have been
written by Ethelbert, in this manner, King Ethelbert by Divine Inspiration has
given to Miletus (rather, Mellitus) for the remedy of his soul, the land
called Tillingham, for the use of the Community (Monasterium) of Saint Paul.
Which Donation in after ages King William the Conqueror confirmed, in these
words, Know ye that I grant to God and Saint Paul and his Ministers the four
and twenty Hydes of land which King Ethelbert gave near the City of London to
the Church of Saint Paul at the first foundation, Vd. Stow. ^n Last-Sax.
to be free and quitt of all Gilds, and of all expedition, work, etc. Where we
find what quantity of ground that territory of Tillingham contained, to wit
four and twenty Hydes of land, each hyde being as much as could be cultivated
yearly by one Plough. And therefore in a Donation made by Saint Dunstan we read
it expounded thus, I grant a portion of seven Ploughs of land, which in
English is called seven Hides. A Hyde by Saint Beda is called a family or
Manse,

XXII. CHAP. XXII. C.

1. 2. An Episcopal See erected at Rochester.

3.4. etc. The Bishop of Landaff consecrated by the Archbishop of Canterbury.

1. THE same year another Episcopal See was erected in the Province of Kent,
in a City by the Romans called Durobrum, by Saint Beda Durobrevis, in after
times Roffa or Rochester, from the name of a principal Saxon to whom it
belonged. Where King Ethelbert built a Church to the honor of Saint Andrew the
Apostle, the Episcopal See of S. Iustus the first Bishop, who lately came from
Rome with S. Mellitus. Of whose Consecration S. Beda thus writes: 2. S.
Augustine ordained Iustus a Bishop in Kent it self, in the City of Durobrevis,
which the English Nation from a prime Noble person inhabiting there called
Rotchester. There did King Ethelbert build a Church to the honor of S. Andrew
the Apostle: and bestowed on that B. as he had done on the Church of S. Paul,
many Gifts: adding withal possessions and lands for the maintenance of those
who attended on the Bishop and Church. Thus in a few years the Province of Kent
obtained two Episcopal Sees.



3. The two Sees of London and Rochester acknowledged subjection to that of
Canterbury: And which is strange, the like was at this very time done by the
British See of Landaff, notwithstanding the late dissension of the British
Bishops in the Synod of Worcester. For we read that S. Oudoceus the Successor
of S. Theliau (surnamed Helios, or The Sun, for his learning and Sanctity) came
for Ordination to Saint Augustine.

4. The same moreover appears by a Protestation made in the Synod of Rhemes by
Urban Bishop of Landaff to Pope Calixtus the Second of that Name in the year of
Grace eleaven hundred and nineteen extant in B. Usher. Which Protestation was
by him thus conceived: Ap. Vsser in Primord. f. 85
From the ancient time of our Fathers (Holy Father) as the Handwriting of our
Holy Father Saint Theliau testifies, this Church of Landaff first founded to
the honor of Saint Peter the Apostle was in dignity and Privileges the
Mistress of all the Churches in Wales, till by seditions and wars in the time
of my Predecessor Herwold it was weakened, almost deprived of a Pastor and
annihilated by the cruelty of the inhabitants and invasion of the Norman
Nation. Yet there always remaind in it Religious men serving God, both by
reason of the neighborhood of the English by whom they were instructed, though
differing from them in the Ecclesiastical Ministry; as likewise because from
very ancient times, that is, from the days of Saint Eleutherius Pope, and after
the coming of Saint Augustine into Brittany, the Bishop of this place has
always been subject and obedient in every thing to the Archbishop of the
Metropolitan Church of Canterbury and to the King of England.

5. For what concerns the present year, the same learned B. Usher in his
Chronologicall Index writes, Id. in Ind. Chronol.
how Saint Theliau Bishop of Landaff and Caer-leon being dead, Saint Oudoceus
his Sisters Son succeeded him, whom at his return from the City of Canterbury
(where he had been consecrated by Saint Augustine the Archbishop) Mouric Prince
of Glamorgan honorably received, and by his authority confirmed the
Privileges of the Church of Landaff.

6. The same Author further declares the grounds upon which the Church of
Landaff became subject to that of Canterbury: Id. ib.
For, says he, The Bishops of Landaff, as heyrs of those of Caer-leon,
disdaind to be subject to the Bishops of Menevia (to whom the Metropoliticall
Jurisdiction had been transferd from Caer-leon:) And therefore from this time
they rather chose to receive their Consecration from the Archbishop of
Canterbury. And the Church of Caer-leon was so annexed to the neighboring
Church of Landaff, that the Dioceses were not only joined, but the Territory
likewise belonging to the Churches of Saint Julius and Saint Aaron was given to
Nuddus the one and twentieth Bishop of Landaff and his Successors, as we find
expressed in the Register of that Church.

7. Now if there be any truth in these Records, A. D. 605.
it will follow that those Protestant Writers are much mistaken who affirm that
all the British Bishops opposed S. Augustine. On the countrary the most
illustrious among them, S. Theliaus and his Successor S. Oudoceus either were
not present at the Synod of Worcester, or did not ioyn in the faction raised by
younger passionat spirits, who frequently in such meetings by tumults and
clamours overpower the counsels of such as are more wise and virtuous.

XXIII. CHAP. XXIII CH

1.2. etc. Two Charters of King Ethelbert to the Monastery of S. Peter and S.
Paul in Canterbury.

1. IN the year of our Lords Incarnation six hundred and five King Ethelbert;
A. D. 605.
who had expressed such munificence in the founding and endowing the Churches
of S. Paul in London, and S. Andrew at Rochester, showed more zeal in adorning
and amplifying the Church and Monastery by him first erected in his own Royal
City of Canterbury, on which he bestowd many donations, and noble Privileges.
And moreover to secure all these from the Sacrilegious invasions of his
Successors, or any other, he confirmd them with a Charter, ratifyed both with
Regal and Ecclesiastical authority. The Copy whereof we will here set down,
with the more confidence because the following Monarks of our Nation believed
and acknowledged it for the true Authentic Act of this King. For the two
Norman Edwards, Append. ad Apostolat. f. 56
the first and Second in their Letters, from the first word in them called
Inspeximus, have not only mentiond this Donation, but expressed likewise the
Tenor of it.

2. This Charter of Donation is recorded by William Thorn in his History of the
foundation of the Church and Monastery of Canterbury, Ibid. Tract. 1 f. 49.
Spelm. f. 126.
from whence we will here exscribe that which pertains to this matter: Viz. In
the year of our Lords Incarnation six hundred and five, King Ethelbert confirmd
in the Catholic Faith, together with his Queen Bertha, and their Son Eadbald,
as likewise the most Reverend Prelat Augustine and other Nobles of the land,
celebrated the Solemnity of our Lords Nativity at Canterbury. Where convoking a
public assembly as well of the Clergy as people, on the fifth day before the
Ides of January, with the approbation of all and every one of them, he by the
Blessed Bishop S. Augustine himself surrendered and delivered to God and the
Monks there perpetually serving our Lord, the said Monastery, on which he
conferrd a liberty from all burdens for ever, moreover enriching it with many
possessions and other magnificent Gifts: In the same Monastery likewise he
placed a Congregation of Monks, over whom he constituted Abbot a Monk named
Peter. And that these things may more manifestly appear to the Readers, I
thought expedient to adioyn hereto the Tenor of the Charter of King Ethelbert
and Saint Augustine, as follows: 3. In the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Every man who lives according to Gods Law and hopes to be rewarded by him,
ought cheerfully and from his heart to promote pious prayers and Devotions to
him, it being certain that he shall so much more easily obtain the effect of
his own prayers to God, as he more willingly bestows any thing on God.
Wherefore I Ethelbert King of Kent, with the consent of the Venerable
Archbishop Augustine and my Nobles, do give and grant for the honor of Saint
Peter a certain portion of land belonging to me, which lies on the East of the
City of Canterbury: to the end that both the place where the Monastery is
built, and the fore said land remain in the power and possession of the Abbot
who shall be there ordained. Therefore I adjure, and command in the name of our
Lord and Omnipotent God, who is the just Judge of all, that the foresaid land
be for ever confirmed by this Donation here subscribed, so that it may not be
lawful either for me, or any of my Successors Kings and Princes, or any
other Dignities or orders Ecclesiastical or Civil to defraud or diminish any
thing of it. But if any one shall attempt to prejudice or make void any thing
of this our Donation, Let him for the present be separated from the Communion
of the Body and Blood of Christ, and in the Day of Judgment for a just reward
of his Malice and injustice let him be severed from the Fellowship of Gods
Saints. The said land is encompassed with these limits: On the East with the
Church of S* Martin: on the South with the way of Burghate: On the West and
North with Druting-street. Acted in the City of Canterbury (Dorobernia) in the
six hundred and fifth year after our Lords Incarnation, and the eighth
Indiction. In the End there is added the sign of the Cross (omitted by Sir H.
Spelman) in this manner, I Ethelbert King of Kent, being in sound mind and with
deliberate Counsel have confirmed this with the Sign of the Cross made with
mine own hand. I Augustine by the Grace of God Archbishop in testimony of my
consent have willingly subscribed. Edbald. Hamegisilus. Augemundus Referendery
Hocca. Tangil. Pinca. Geddy.



4. This was the first Charter granted by King Ethelbert: to which he added a
Second: The Tenor whereof likewise shall for the Antiquity of it be set down,
with a desire of the Readers pardon, who shall very seldom be interrupted or
detained by such Forms: for I will content my self with delivering the
substance of them, when occasion is to mention them. This Second Charter is by
Sir H. Spelman inscribed, A Donation of the land of Langeport: the Form whereof
follows: 5. In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. Be it known to all both
present and to come, Id. lid.
that I Ethelbert by the Grace of God King of the English Nation, having from
an Idolater been made a Christian by Augustine my Father in the Gospel, have
given to God by the same Prelat a certain portion of land belonging to me
lying under the Eastern wall of the City of Canterbury, namely about the place
where by my said Instructour in Christ I built a Monastery to the honor of the
Princes of the Apostles Peter and Paul: Which Monastery with the said land and
all other things pertaining thereto I have endowed with free liberties; So that
it may not be lawful for me, or any of my Successors, or any other Power
Ecclesiastical or Secular to usurp any thing of it, but that it remain in the
free power and possession of the Abbot. If any one therefore shall attempt to
diminish or make void any thing of this our Donation, Let him by the Authority
of God, and Blessed Pope Gregory, as likewise our Apostle Augustine, and our own
imprecation be separated from all Communion of Holy Church, and in the Day of
Judgment from all Society of Gods Elect. The said land is on all sides
encompassed with these bounds. On the East with the Church of Saint Martin and
likewise with Siblendoune ( Al. be si Wendowne:) And so to the North be
Wikengesmarke. Likewise at the East by Kingesmarke. Also at the North and East
by Kingesmarke. So on the West to Rideschape. And so to the North to
Drutingstreete. This was done in the City of Canterbury in the six hundred and
fifth year from the Incarnation of Christ, and the eighth Indiction. I
Ethelbert King of the English Nation have confirmed this Donation with the sign
of the Holy Cross with mine own hand. I Augustine by the Grace of God
Archbishop have willingly subscribed. I Eadbald Son of the King have favored
this. I Hamegisilus Duke have commended it, I Hocca Count have consented. I
Augemund Referendary have approved it. I Graphio Count have blessed it. I
Tangisilus one of the Kings Nobles have confirmed it. I Pinca have consented. I
Geddi, have corroborated it.



6. Such were the Forms of these two Prime Charters conferred on this Prime
Saxon Monastery founded three years before. Spelman. ib.
And whereas Sir. H. Spelman seems to suspect the second by reason that in it
Ethelbert calls himself King of the English Nation, whereas properly he was not
so much King of the Angli, as of the Iutes and Saxons inhabiting Kent, for
which reason in his first Charter he styles himself only King of Kent:
Notwithstrnding if we consider that in those times among the several Saxon
Princes in Brittany, he who had, as King Etelbert at this time, an Empire over
the rest, was wont to entitle himself King of the Angli, which Title also S.
Gregory in his letter to him gave him, we shall not much be moved with this
suspicion. So King Lucius was called King of the Britains, though beside him
there were many other lesser Princes reigning there: A. D. 607.
his own peculiar Dominion being the Province of the Iceni, containing Norfolk,
Suffolf, etc.

9. This Monastery thus endowed and privileged remaind flourishing for the
space of above nine hundred years, much enlarged in the Buildings and Revenews
by the piety of succeeding Princes, Nobles and Abbots, and peculiarly cherished
by Popes, as immediately subject to them, who bestowd many more liberties and
Indults upon it, extant in our Records. And though at first it had the Name
from S. Peter and S. Paul, yet after the death of S. Augustine it passed into an
appellation from his Name.

XXIV. C.
XXIV. CHAP.
1.2. Peter the first Abbot of Canterbury, drowned.

3. A Church built at Ely.

4 The Inhabitants of Cernel, converted by Saint Augustine: The Saxon Idol, Heyl
demolished.

1. TWO years after the date of the forementioned Charters the Abbot of the
said Monastery was drowned in passing the Sea toward France. A. D. 607.
Concerning whom S. Beda thus Writes: Bed. l. 1. c. 33.
The first Abbot of the Monastery of the Blessed Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul
was called Peter, a (Roman) Priest: who having been sent upon a message into
France, was drowned in a bay of the Sea called Ampleat: and by the inhabitants
of those coasts ignobly buried. That bay of the Sea, says Malbranque is now
called Ambletea: Malbranc. in Morin. l. 3. c. 4.
and touching this Holy Abbot he adds, That Almighty God to publish the great
merits of the man caused a heavenly light to appear every night over his
sepulcher, till the neighbors observing it, judged the person there buried to
have been a Holy man: and making inquisition whence he came, and who he was,
they took the Body thence, and committed it to an honorable sepulture in the
principal Church of the City of Bouloign. This was done by a Count of that
place called Fumertius.

2. His Memory is celebrated in the Gallican Martyrologe on the thirtieth day
of December: But in ours on the sixth of January. Marty. Angl. 6. Ianuar.
To him succeeded in the Office and dignity of Abbot, John, who in the first
Mission of S. Augustine was sent one of his companions.

3. The same year were laid the first foundations of the Famous Abbey of the
Isle of Ely in Cambridgshire, by the persuasion of S. Augustine, and the
assistance of King Ethelbert. Yet Harpsfeild writes doubt fully of its
antiquity, saying, That Monastery was in the beginning founded by S. Augustine
Archbishop at the costs of Ethelbert King of Kent as some report, and
dedicated to the honor of the Blessed Virgin Mary: Hapsf. Saec 7. c. 24.
where was placed a Congregation of Monks of the Order of S. Benedict. But I am
not satisfied of the truth of this Tradition. It may be this is the place
intended in a passage out of the Book of Ely quoted by Camden, where he says,
The Book of Ely relates how our S. Augustine built a Church at Cradiden, which
Penda King of Mercia subverted. Camden i^ Cambridgshire.
Probable therefore it is that out of the ruins of this Church was afterward
raised that so famous Monastery.

4. William of Malmsbury reports likewise another example of the labor and
industry of S. Augustine in propagating the Gospel: Malm^bur. de Ponti^. l. 2
f. 1^0.
How passing through all the Provinces of Brittany, as far as the Empire of
Ethelbert extended it self, he came to a certain village in Dorsetshire, where
preaching the word of God, Camden. i^ Dorsetsh.
he gained many souls to Christ from the Devils Tyranny. There likewise
(says Camden) he brok in pieces a certain Idol called Heil (answering to
Aesculapius) to which was attributed a power of healing diseases. Hereat the
Devil being enraged, inflamed with fury the minds of the Pagans against him,
who set upon him and his companions, and after many indignities forced him to
retire three miles from thence, Where whilst he was quietly attending to
Prayer, he with the eye of his mind perceived the Divine presence: and
presently with a cheerful countenance said to his companions ( Cerno Deum,
etc.) I See God, who will shortly recompense our endeavors, and will inspire
into those raging people a more moderate and repenting mind. As Soon as he had
said this, those Pagans came in great hall to him, and demanding pardon of
their fault promised to submitt themselves to his teaching. Whom after he had
instructed, he intended to baptize them: but wanting water, at the Holy Bishops
command a foun^tain broke forth of secret passages, which to this day for the
merits of S. Augustine is held in great esteem by the people. And from the word
Cerno (I See) spoken by him with the addition of the Hebrew word El, signifying
God, the said village was afterward called Cernel, but vulgarly Cern. In that
place, says the same Author, Edwald after a life spent in great piety was
buried, with a high esteem of Sanctity: which in after times gave occasion to a
certain very rich man called Egilwald to build a Monastery there dedicated to
S. Peter.

A. D. 608.

XXV. CHAPTER


XXV. CHAP.
1.2 etc. King Ethelberts Ecclesiastical Laws.

Bed. l. 2. c. 5.
1. BEFORE we finish the course of the present story of Saint Augustins Gests,
it is expedient that we first relate how by his advice King Ethelbert
administered his kingdom with great Piety and justice. For, says Saint Beda,
among other eminent benefits by his prudence conferred on his kingdoms, he with
the counsel of his wise men instituted Orders and Decrees of Judgments,
according to the Examples of the Roman Laws and policy. Which Decrees were
written in the English tongue, and are to this day extant and in practice.
Among which he in the first place set down what satisfaction should be made by
those who stole or by fraud usurped any thing belonging to the Church, to
Bishops, or other Ecclesiastics of inferior degrees: For his desire was to
give his protection especially to those whom he had so reverently received, and
whose Doctrine he had embraced.

2. What those Decrees and Forms of Judgments were may be seen in that
celebrated Manuscript called the Text of Rochester, which in the days of King
Henry the first was compos^d by Enulphus Bishop of that City, under this
Title, These are the Decrees or Judgments which King Ethelbert constituted in
the life time of Saint Augustine. Here I will set down only such Laws as
regard the Church, and which Saint Beda seems to mention. The which have been
brought by Sir H. Spelman into the first Tome of English Councils, and
expressed both in the Saxon and Latin tongues. The sense of them here follows:
Ap. Spelman tom. 1. Council f. 127.
3. Whosoever shall uniustly take away any thing belonging to God and the
Church, shall make satisfaction by a twelve-fold restitution. If such things
belong to a Bishop, he shall restore eleaven fold: If to a Priest, nine fold:
If to a Deacon, six fold: If to an inferior Clark, three fold. If the peace of
the Church shall be violated by any one, let satisfaction be made by paying
double: and the like for disturbing the peace of a Monk. If when the King shall
call an Assembly of his people, and any injury shall be offered them, the
Offender shall restore double, and moreover pay to the King fifty shillings
(Solidos.) If when the King shall be entertained in any house, any damage
shall be done there, let it be recompensed double, etc.

Ibid.
4. Besides these (says the same Sir H. Spelman in his Annotations to these
Decrees) there follow many other Laws pertaining to honesty of life and
correction of manners: but these are all which regard the Church. The precise
time when these Decrees were published does not appear: but as the Title
declares, they were made whilst Saint Augustine was alive, and as the care of
the Church manifests, they were published after King Ethelberts conversion.



XXVI. CHAP. XXVI. C.

i S. Augustine ordains S. Laurence his Successor.

2.3. etc. His Bull confirming the Monastery of Canterbury: suspected.

1. A. D. 608.
THERE is among our Historians great variety of judgments touching the number
of years spent by Saint Augustine in Brittany, and in what year he dyed. Those
who place his death in the third year of this Century, as John Stow, or in the
fourth, as Baronius endeavors to collect from Saint Beda, do too-much hasten
his end: For the Charters of King Ethelbert before mentioned declare that he
was alive in the fifth year. On the other side those prolong his life too-much
who affirm that he dyed not till the year of Grace six hundred and fifteen, as
some Authors quoted by F. Reyner in his Apostolatus; or thirteen, as Sir Henry
Savill in his Chronologicall Fasts: or twelve, as Malmsburiensis; or eleaven,
as Polydor Virgil: For Pope Boniface in his Letters dated six hundred and ten
does suppose him dead. Therefore in such variety of opinions Sigebert and
Matthew of Westminster most probably place his death in the year of Grace six
hundred and eight.

2. A little before his death Saint Augustine consecrated Laurence a Bishop,
designing him his Successor in the Archiepiscopall See. Which he did after the
example of many former holy Bishops, who upon their view of death approaching,
relinquishing the care of others, attended devoutly to the contemplation of
that one necessary thing. This same passage is thus related by Saint Beda: B^d.
l 2. c. 4.
Laurence succeeded Saint Augustine, having been ordained Bishop by him whilst
he was yet alive, out of an apprehension least after his death the State of the
Church as yet tender, being destitute of a Pastor though but for a moment,
should begin to falter. And herein he followed the Example of the Prime
Pastor, of Gods Church, namely Saint Peter Prince of the Apostles, who having
founded the Church of Christ at Rome, is reported to have made Saint Clement
his Coadjutour in preaching the Gospel, and consecrated him his Successor.

Ap Spelm. tom. 1. Council. f. 123.
3. The last public Act attributed to Saint Augustine was the Confirming by a
Solemn Bull all the Rights and Privileges of his Beloved Monastery of Saint
Peter and Saint Paul, exempting it from all Episcopal Jurisdiction, from all
tribute, servitude, etc. Prohibiting all Bishops to say Masses, exercise
Ordinations or Consecrations, etc. as by their own authority or Jurisdiction in
that place, deputed for the Treasury of Saints and burying place of succeeding
Archbishops and Princes: And assigning the Election of Abbots to the free
Suffrages of the Monks, etc. All which Privileges he confirmed with a
denunciation of eternal damnation to transgeessours of them by the authority
of Saint Peter and his Vicar the Bishop of Rome, Saint Gregory. This Bull was
published in the presence and with the approbation of King Ethelbert, his Son
Eadbald, all the Nobility of the Kingdom, his Successor Laurence, Mellitus
Bishop of London, Iustus Bishop of Rochester, and Peter the Abbot and Monks of
the same Monastery.

Ibid.
4 To which Bull there was appended a Seal of Lead. Neither is it a wonder,
says the Transcriber of the said Bull, that Saint Augustine being a Roman, an
Apostle of the English Nation and a Legate of the Apostolic See, endued with a
plenary Authority to erect Bishoprics and consecrate Bishops, all which were
to be subject to him, should have the power and right to make use of a leaden
Seal: Though for the space of five hundred years the like privilege was not
afterward granted to any of our Bishops.

5. Notwithstanding Sir H. Spelman not unreasonably suspects this not to be a
genuine Bull, because the fabric of the Seal expresses not so great
antiquity; and the Sculpture of it more elegant then suited with that age;
likewise the Image of our Savior and the form of a Church engraved in it,
ressembles the exactnes almost of these later times: Moreover the Letters of
the Inscription are such as were used in far later ages, about the reign of
King Henry the second or Richard the first. And lastly the Seal is appended to
the Bull not after the Roman fashion, with a Chord of Silk, but with a Skrole
of parchmin after the Norman custom. To these we may add, that by mentioning in
the same Writing together both Laurence his Successor and Peter the Abbot, who
was drowned above a year before that designation of a Successor, the order of
times is manifestly crofounded, and the authority of the Bull prejudiced.

6. However that most of these Priviviledges were even from the beginning
conferred on that Monastery, yea by Saint Augustine himself in virtue of a
delegated authority from the Sea Apostolic, though the simplicity of that age
did not need such Legal Instruments and formal clauses, the constant
Tradition of that age does justify. Which Privileges in succeeding times were
frequently ratified by following Popes and Princes.

XXVII. CHAP. XXVII. C.

i. 2. etc. The Death of our Apostle, S. Augustine.

1. THE same year of our Lord, Westm^n^st. hic.
six hundred and eight, says Matthew of Westminster, Saint Augustine the first
Archbishop of Canterbury ended his life on the seventh day before the Calends
of June. The same is more expressly related by Saint Beda. Bed l. 2. c. 3.
Our Holy Father Augustine, beloved of God, dyed, and his Body was committed to
Sepulture abroad, near the said Church of the Blessed Apostles Peter and Paul,
because as yet it was neither finished nor dedicated. But shortly after when it
had been dedicated, the Sacred Body was brought into the Church, and decently
buried in the Northern Porch. In which place the Bodies of all succeding
Archbishops hitherto were likewise buried, except only two, namely Theodor and
Berthwald: Whose Bodies were laid within the Church it self, by reason the
foresaid Porch could receive no more.

2. In all Martyrologes the same day, to wit, the seventh before the Calends
of June is deputed for celebrating his Memory: In the Roman Martyrologe we read
thus: Martyrol. Romans 16. Maij.
At Canterbury in England is this day commemorated Saint Augustine Bishop of
that City: who together with many others was sent into Brittany, and preached
the Gospel of Christ to the English Nation: Where being glorious for his
virtues and Miracles, he reposed in our Lord.

3. The certainty of Miracles wrought by him has been sufficiently established
before in this History. We will here only add a compendious draught of his
Gests consecrated by this Island to Posterity in an Inscription on his Tomb: Of
which Saint Beda thus Writes, There was inscribed on the Sepulcher of Saint
Augustine this Epitaph: Here rests Dom Augustine first Archbishop of Canterbury,
who heretofore was directed hither by Blessed Gregory Bishop of the Church of
Rome, and being supported by God with the operation of Miracles, converted both
King Ethelbert and his Nation from the Worship of Idols to the Faith of Christ:
and having finished the days of his Office in peace dyed on the seventh day
before the Calends of June, in the time of the reign of the same King.

Ap. Capgrav. in vit. S. Augusti^^.
4. He was ( says the Author of his Life in Capgrave) tall in stature,
insomuch as he exceeded the ordinary height of men by the head: He was in his
countenance amiable and reverendly grave: Of the signs and cures which he
wrought among the people, no man can recount the number, they were so many. He
traveled always on foot: and often without shoes: thus he passed through all
Provinces of this Island: By reason of his frequent kneeling he had his knees
covered with a thick hard skin, etc. And yet one of his pretended Successors,
after he had related all this, affords him the Character of a Soft, Antiq.
Brit. f. 49.
nice or effeminate man. The great Veneration in which he was held by our
succeeding Princes, etc. I will declare in due place.

THE FOVRTEENTH BOOK OF THE CHVRCH-HISTORY OF BRITTANY.
I. CHAP.
I. CHAPTER.
1. S. Laurence his Gests.

2.3. etc. His Letter to the Scottish Clergy, etc.

1. SAint Laurence (says S. Beda) being seated in the Archiepiscopall throne
did strenuously endeavor to augment the Church of Christ in Brittany, A. D.
609. Bed. l. 2. c. 4
whose foundations had been so carefully laid, and by his daily exhortations
and examples of piety he sought to exalt it to its perfect height.

2. Neither did his Pastoral care extend only to the new Congregation of
Christians collected among the English-Saxons, Id. ibid.
but likewise to the ancient British Christians, moreover to the Scots in
Brittany and such as inhabited the neighboring Isle of Ireland. For knowing
well that the life and Profession not only of the Scots abroad, but of the
Britains also in this Island swerved from the Rule established in the
Catholic Church, principally in as much as they observed not the Paschall
Solemnity in its due time, but, as has been said, they kept the Sunday
reckoning from the fourteenth day of the Moon to the one and twentieth (so
including the day of the Jewish Pasch in their Circle:) Wherefore he, with his
fellow Bishops, wrote an Exhortatory Epistle to them, beseeching them to hold
the Unity of peace and Catholic Observance with the Catholic Church spread
over the whole earth.

3. The special cause moving them to write the said Letter is thus related by
the Centuriators of Magdeburg, Magdeb. Centur. 7. f. 518.
The Scots sent Daganus their Legate to Laurentius to commune with him about
Ecclesiastical affairs and differences. But he was so averse both from
Laurence and the rest who depended on the Pope, that he refused to eat at the
same Table, or to sleep in the same house with them.

4. What ever was the cause of this Scotttish Abbots scrupulous
uncharitablenes, Bed. ibid.
Saint Laurence and the other Bishops were forced to write this Epistle, To our
Lords the Bishops our most dear Brethren, and to the Abbots through all
Scotland, Health. The Sea Apostolic having directed us to preach the Gospel
to Pagans in these Western parts, as it has usually done through the whole
earth, as soon as we were arrived in this Isle of Brittany, we with great
reverence were ready to express all respect and charity to the Britains and
Scotts, beleiving then their practices to have been conformable to the
Universal Church. And after we perceived the Britains to swerve therefrom,
yet we thought the Scotts were better disposed. But we now perceive that the
Scotts also, we mean Dagan a Bishop sent by them into this Island, and Columban
an Abbot who is gone into France, do in their conversation and practices
differ nothing from the Britains. For the said Daganus who came to us, A. D.
610.
would not so much as eat with us, nor sleep in the same lodging. Thus far S.
Beda recites this Epistle, the remainder of it being lost.

Magd. Cent. 6. f. 754.
5. This Daganus was not, as the Centuriators, from Bale, affirm, a British
Monk, taken out of the Monastery of Bangor in Wales to be a Scottish Bishop,
but an Irish Monk of the Monastery of Banchor in Vlster and thence made a
Bishop in Ireland: for by the tenor of this Letter he was sent from beyond sea
into Brittany. Yet was he not the same Abbot Daganus, who ten years before this
went to Rome to S. Gregory (as we read in Bishop Usher) and showed him the Rule
which S. Molva (otherwise called S. Lugid) wrote and ordained for his Monks:
Vsser. in Primord. f. 920.
Which having read, S. Gregory said publicly, The Holy man who wrote this Rule
has planted a hedge about his family, which reaches up to heaven. For besides
that he is called an Abbot only, if he had so much respect to Rome, he would
not have been so averse from these Roman Missioners.

6. At the same time S. Laurence with the same his Fellow-Bishops (says S.
Beda) wrote letters also to the British Priests, Bed. ubi sup.
(Sacerdotibus) beseeming their Episcopal gravity and prudence: by which they
endeavored to settle them in Catholic Unity. Hereby we may observe that the
British Clergy were not broken out into a formed Schism, as Baronius suspects,
and others who make mention of an Interdict imposed by S. Gregory on the
public Schools in Brittany, of which no ground can be found in our ancient
Writers. But why this Letter should be written to the British Priests, and not
their Bishops, it does not appear.

7. The same Saint Beda discoursing of the pious industry of our Holy Bishop in
promoting Unity, thus concludes, How much good he wrought by these his
endeavors and labors, the present times declare. By which expression he
implies, that the ceasing of those Controversies, which in S. Beda's time were
quite silenced, was much to be imputed to the care and industry of S. Laurence.
For we shall see him shortly not contenting himself with writing letters, but
undertaking a voyage into Ireland, etc. to promote Ecclesiastical Unity, and
that with good success.

II. CHAP. II. CHAP.

i.2. etc. S. Mellitus his journey to Rome touching Monks, that they might have
a power of Elections: And to know whether they might be employed in Pastoral
Functions, etc.

1. THere is extant in Sir Henry Spelman the Copy of a third Charter of King
Ethelbert, Spelm. tom. 1. Council. f.
by which he gave to the Monastery of S. Peter and S. Paul a village named
Sturiga^, otherwise Cistelet, together with many other precious Gifts, all
which he offered for the redemption of his soul, and out of hope of eternal
retribution. Adding, that in the same Church he provided a place of burial for
himself and Successors, hoping that he should be loosed from the chains of his
sins, and conducted into the gate of eternal happiness by the Prince of the
Apostles, to whom our Lord delivered the Keys of heaven giving him the power
of binding and loosing, etc. Which Charter is dated the year six hundred and
ten, which was the fiftieth year of the same Kings reign.

2. At the same time ( says S. Beda) Mellitus Bishop of London went to Rome,
there to treat with Pope Boniface about affairs nearly concerning the English
Church. Bed. l. 2. c. 4.
Being arrived, the Pope assembled a Synod of the Bishops of Italy with an
intention to make ordinances concerning the life and secure quietness of Monks.
In which Synod Mellitus sat among the Italian Bishops, and by his authority
subscribed and confirmed the Decrees regularly ordained, which at his return
into Brittany he carried with him, that they might be observed there. The same
Pope likewise wrote Epistles to the Holy Archbishop Laurence, and to the
Clergy, as also to King Ethelbert and the English Nation. This Synod was
celebrated in the eighth year of the Empire of Ph^cas, and the thirteenth
Indiction.

3. In this Narration we find insinuated the principal Motive of Mellitus his
journey to Rome, which was to provide for the life and quiet of Monks: Which
will more manifestly appear by Pope Bonifacius his Letters to the King and
Archbishop, but especially by a Decree of the said Pope.

4. There were two special Points concerning Monastical Institution, the
clearing of which did much concern the present State of the English Church: the
first was a care to make them immortal by a succession, by permitting the
present Monks to choose and assume into the same Profession such among the
Britains, as they found well disposed thereto. This permission and power King
Ethelbert by Mellitus desired to be confirmed by the Pope: which he easily
obtained, as appears by Bonifacius his answer extant in a Letter of Pope
Alexander many ages after written to S. Lanfranc Archbishop of Canterbury, in
which we read this passage extracted out of it, Ap. Eadmer. l. 1. Nov^r.
That which thou, O glorious Son, have desired of the Apostolic See by our
Fellowbishop Mellitus we willingly grant and by our Apostolic authority
decree, namely that your Royal benignity may appoint an habitation of Monks
living regularly, and that the present Monks who were the Preachers of
Salvation to you may associate to themselves a congregation of Monks and adorn
them with holy Instituts in the Monastery which your Holy Doctor Augustine the
Disciple of Gregory of Blessed Memory did consecrate in the City of Canterbury
to the Name of our Holy Savior, in which at present our beloved Brother
Laurence is Prelat. This our present Decree, if any of your Successors Kings
or Bishops, etc. shall attempt to make void, let him be subject to Anathema,
etc. This part of Pope Bonifacius his Letter is recited out of Pope Alexanders
by Eadmer the Monk: and the entire Letter is extant in the Annals of
Peterborough.

5. The other Point seems to have been touching the employing of Monks in the
Office of preaching, administering Sacraments and other Pastoral Duties, which
some thought improper for Monks who are obliged to Solitude. But this
Controversy had been before decided by S. Gregory in his employing only Monks
in the English Mission, and was confirmed by Pope Boniface the fourth in a
Solemn Decree, by which he declares from the Examples of S Martin, S. Gregory,
and the late S. Augustine that the power of binding and loosing may worthily be
administered by Monks: Neither, says he, did S. Benedict the glorious
Institutour of Monks in his Rule forbid this: but only commanded them to
abstain from secular affairs. Which last Clause strongly proves against
Baronius, that S. Augustine, Saint Laurence, S. Mellitus, S. Iustus and the
rest, yea S. Gregory also were Disciples of S. Benedict and subject to his
Rule. The Sum of this Decree is referred into the Canon Law by Gratian, Cap.
Sunt nonnulli. 16. q. 1. And other authorities added, from whence he concludes
thus, By all these authorities it is clearly demonstrated, that Monks may
lawfully give Penance, baptize and administer other Preistly Offices.

6. If the Acts of this Roman Synod had not been lost, we should no doubt have
read their judgment touching the Consecration of the Church of Westminster,
Malmsbur. de Pontif. l. 2. f. 155.
performed, as has been declared, by S. Peter himself. But the result of it
appears by what William of Malmsbury writes: It is believed, says he, that the
Mystery of its Consecration was never repeated, which was showed to have been
perfected by so many Candles lighted in the Church, Crosses made, Holy Water
sprinkled, and marks of Sacred Oil in the due places. Human diligence
therefore gave place to an Office divinely administered, prophetically declaring
how illustrious that Church and Monastery would prove, in which the Apostle
himself exercised the Pontifical Office. A. D. 611.


III. CHAP. III. CHAP

1. Of Saint Golven a Bishop in Lesser Brittany.

2. Of S. Baldred, or S. Balter.

3. S. Mellitus his return from Rome.

4 Ceolulf King of the West Saxons dying, Kinegils succeeds.

1. THE same year dyed S. Golvin Bishop of Leon in Lesser Brittany, A. D. 610.
who in our Martyrologe is said to have been an Englishman: But whether thereby
be meant a Britain I cannot define. In the Gallican Martyrologe his
Commemoration is thus expressed: Marty. Gall. 1. Iulij.
On the first of July at Leon in Armorica under the Archbishopric of Tours is
celebrated the Memory of the Deposition (or death) of S. Golven Bishop and
Confessor: who succeeding S. Paul weaned the Church committed to him from its
childish nourishment, and strengthened it with the solid meat of holy Teaching,
illustrated it with the light of pious conversation, and advanced it to the
perfect form of virtue. So rendering himself gracious to our Lord by his care to
adorn his Spouse, he in white robes ascended to the Marriage of the Lamb,
celebrated in the Heavenly Jerusalem. The Holy Bishop dyed at Rennes, and was
buried in the Monastery of S. Melanius.

2. But the Original of S. Balred is more assured, a holy man born in the
Northern parts of Brittany, who dyed this year, and his Memory is celebrated in
our Martyrologe on the twenty ninth of March. Marty. Angl. 29. Mart.
Where it is said that he was wonderfully buried in three places, seeing three
Towns, Aldham, Tinnigham and Preston, contended for his Body. Probably this is
the same who by our Historians, Matthew of Westminster and Hoveden, is called S.
Balter, whose Church having been impiously laid wast by Analef the Dane, he was
shortly after punished for his Sacrilege by a miserable death.

3. The year following by the return of S. Mellitus, A. D. 611.
and the Decrees of Pope Boniface and the Roman Synod peace was restored and
confirmed to the English Church, and quietness to Monasteries.

4. In the year of Grace six hundred and twelve Ceolulf King of the
West Saxons, A. D. 612. Malmsbur. de Reg. l. 1. c. 2.
after a reign of fourteen years, dyed. He had spent all his life in war, says
William of Malmsbury, and never allowed himself any rest, but was always
employed either with defending or enlarging his Provinces. Two Princes
succeeded together in his Throne, both of them valiant, and both contending
with one another in all offices of kindness and freindship: their names were
Cinegislus and Quincelmus. And for their concord, unusual among Kings, A. D.
613.
they were a miracle to their own times, and an example for succeeding. Many
wars they managed so, as it was doubtful whether they showed therein greater
courage or moderation. Sometimes they fought against the Britains, sometimes
against Penda King of the Mercians, a Prince exercised in all the sleights of
war. This Quicelmus is by some Writers said to have been the Brother of
Cinegislus, but others more probably say he was his Son, and assumd into a
participation of his Throne.

IV. CHAPTER
IV. CHAP.
1.2. etc Ethelfrid King of the Northumbers kills above twelve hundred British
Monks.

7.8 S. Augustine uniustly accused of this slaughter by Protestants: and
defended. W. Prinns horrible calumnies.

A. D. 613.
1. THE year of our Lord six hundred and thirteen was blackned by a grievous
calamity happening to the Britains, and among them principally to those who
least deserved it, the Religious Monks of the famous Monastery of Bangor. Which
calamity was brought upon them by the barbarous King of the Northumbers,
Ethelfrid, who well deserved the surname given him of (ferus) cruel or Savage.
His Character we have already delivered from Malmsburiensis, and how he broke
the power of Edan King of the Scotts. The present Story is related by Saint
Beda in the manner following: Bed. l. 2. c. 2.
2. The most powerful King of the Angli Edelfridus having gatherd a mighty
army made a terrible slaughter of the perfidious Nation of the Britains at the
City of the Legions, in the English tongue called Legacester, but more rightly
in the British Caer-Legion (Chester.) When he was ready to begin the battle,
he saw their Priests who were met to pray to God for their army, standing a
part from it in a place of greater safety. Whereupon he asked, who those men
were, and for what design they were assembled in that place? Now most of them
were of the Monastery of Banchor, in which the Number of Monks was so great,
that being divided into seven companies, each under a particular President,
every company consisted of no sewer then three hundred: and all lived by their
labor. Now the greatest part of them were met together in this Army to pray
for it, where they likewise celebrated a Fast three days together: and a
certain Captain called Brochmal was appointed with convenient forces to protect
them from the swords of their barbarous Enemies, whilst they should be intent
to their Proyers.

3. King Edilfrid therefore having understood the cause why those Monks were
come together, he said, If it then be so that they they cry unto their God
against us, they do truly fight against us, though they wear no arms, since
they persecute us with their imprecations. Thereupon he gave command to set
upon them first: which was performd: and after their slaughter, he destroyed all
the other forces of the perfidious Britains, though with a considerable loss
to his own Army.

4. The report is, that of those Monks which came to pray, there were slain no
fewer then twelve hundred, and that fifty only escaped by flight. For Brocmal
at the first charge of the Enemy, fled with all his soldiers, so leaving those,
whom he ought to have defended, naked and unarmd to the swords of the barbarous
Saxons. And thus was fulfilld the Prophecy of the Holy Bishop Saint Augustine,
though himself a long time before was gone to heaven, That for their perfidious
refusal of his counsel and offer of eternal Salvation, they should feel a
Divine revenge by their temporal destruction.



5. This cruelty of the Pagan King was notwithstanding presently after justly
punished, for Nicholas Trivet a French Chronologist, from I know not what
Records writes, How Ethelfrid after this combat marching forwards toward Bangor
was met by three British Princes, N. Trivet. Chronic.
Blederic Duke of Cornwall, Margaduc Prince of Southwales (Demetiae) and Cadwan
Duke of Northwales (Venedotiae.) who fought with him, and killd of his army ten
thousand and sixty men. Upon which victory Cadwan was by joint consent made
King, who pursued Ethelfrid to the River of Humber. But when Ethelfrid returned
with his own and other Saxon auxiliary forces, a composition was made between
them by friends, on these conditions: That Cadwan should enjoy the Provinces
toward Wales on the south of Humber, and Ethelfrid all on the North side.

6. This is the true Narration concerning the slaughter, we may call it
Martyrdom, of the twelve hundred innocent Monks of Bangor, attested generally
by the consent of all our ancient Historians. Only Sigebert affirms this
calamity to have befalln the Scottish Monks (so he misnames them) in the war
between Edilfrid and Edan, ^igebert. ^hron. ad. A. D. 615.
which he refers to the year of Grace six hundred and fifteen: which was seven
years after the death of Saint Augustine. But true Chronology confirmed by our
best Writers place this massacre two years before: and thus (says B. Usher)
do the Annals of Vlster refer to the year of Christ six hundred and thirteen
the war of Kaerlegion, Vsse^. I^^. Chronol. ad A. D. 6^3.
where the Saints were killd, by the Saints intending these Monks of Bangor.

7. Which consent of Historians evidently disproves the blasphemous calumnies
by some Protestant Writers, Antiquit. Brit. f. 38. Apol^g. (...) 1. p. 11.
Catalog. de Con^e^s. Brit. c 4.
B. Parker, B. Jewel and B. Godwin cast on the memory of our glorious Apostle
Saint Augustine, to whom they impute this horrible Massacre, as if by his
instigation that Pagan King had by this cruelty revenged their refusal to
submitt to his Metropoliticall authority: Whereas by the joint testimony of our
Historians, and the express words of Saint Beda Saint Augustine was dead long
before, to wit, five years, at least.

8. But they reply that those words of Saint Beda (quamvis ipso iam multo ante
tempore, Id. ib.
ad caelestia regna sublato) that is, though Saint Augustine himself a good
while before this, was translated to Heaven, included in a Parenthesis, were
added by Papists to salve Saint Augustins honor, and are not found in the
Saxon Translation of Saint Beda made by King Alfred. True it is, that in the
Latin and Saxon Edition published by Abraham Whelock in the year 1643 those
words appear not in the Saxon Copy: But the publisher, though a Protestant,
ingenuously confesses that not only in all Impressions of Saint Beda's History,
some of which saw the light before any Protestants were, but in all ancient
Manuscripts extant in the Libraries of Cambridge that Clause of S. Beda was
exta^t, and never included in a Parenthesis, but only distinguished by Comma's.

7. Surely if we will judge of Saint Augustine by the Spirit of his Father and
Master Saint Gregory, we would not suspect him of so horribly murdrous a
disposition. For Saint Gregory, though Rome and all Italy had been many years
infested and wasted by the Lombards, yet was so fearful of being in any
measure accessory to blood, that he durst not concur to the death of any one of
their Princes, though he was assured thereby to free the whole country from
their Tyranny. And S. Augustine himself, as has been showed, taught King
Ethelbert a quite contrary Lesson, That in the cause of Religion, no violence
or compulsion ought to be used.

8. If any credit may be given to Ancient, and till this age never questiond
Tradition, Saint Augustine was a man of eminent piety, of admirable zeal for
the rooting out Pagan Idolatry and planting the Gospel in this Island: And
even Protestants themselves acknowledge that Almighty God gave testimony to his
Teaching by many great miracles. If he had been guilty of some defects,
Christian Charity requires us either not to mention them, or to let a thousand
great obligations we have to his Memory preponderate them: But upon mere
ungrounded suspicions disproved by the current of Story, to charge with crimes
execrable to Heathens a person, in the judgment of the whole Church for almost
a thousand years, now reigning with Christ in glory, is certainly a presumption
of which God, with whom the death of his Saints is precious, will one day
require a severe account,

9. Yet of late this poysonnous humor of calumniating Gods Saints is become
the principal Character of the New reformed Gospel. I will add one example
more of a calumniatour, at least parallel to these: wit, Mr William Prinn
alate stigmatized Presbyterian; W. Prinn.
who in his not long since published Censure of Archbishop Whitgift charges
Saint Anselm that he induced Sir Walter Tirrel to murder King William Rufus.
Now by the consent of all our Historians Tirrel himself was no murderer, for it
was by the unhappy casual glancing of an arrow that the King was slain.
However it happened, yet certain it is that at that time Saint Anselm was an
exild person in France: and whereas at that Kings burial many Noble men met,
Bromton. ^uller. Eccl Hist. l. 3.
but few mourned for his death, yet says a late Protestant Historian, of all
mourners Anselm expressed most cordial sorrow at the news. That blasphemous
tongue therefore must expect that such envenomed darts as these, shot against
heaven it self, will, if he repent not, one day descend upon his own head, and
the wounds made by them never be cured. But alas, what Repentance can be
expected in such a person who is inveteratus dierum malorum, when we see in
his decrepite age his rancorous tongue against innocent Catholics yet more
violently set on fire of hell, so far as to solicit a general Massacre of
them by publishing himself, and tempting others to damn their souls also by
publishing through the whole kingdom that in the last fatal calamity by fire
happening to London they were the only incendiaries. This he did, though himself
at the same time confessed that not the least proof could be produced against
them: But, said he, it concerns us that this report should be believed.
Complaints of this most execrable attentat were made, and several Oaths to
confirm this were offered. But in vain. However, surely there is a reward for
the innocent oppressed: And, what soever Mr Prinn may think, doubtless there is
a God who judges the world. Let him therefore remember what the Spirit of God
says, ( Quid detu^ tibi, aut quid apponatur tibi, ad linguam dolosam? Sagittae
potentis acutae, cum carbonibus desolatoriis.) that is, What must be given to
thee, and what must be assigned to thee for thy portion, O deceitful Tongue?
Sharp darts cast by an Almighty arm, with devouring coals (of juniper)

10. With as good reason therefore S. Augustine may be accused of the slaughter
of these Brittishs Monks, as S. Columban a Holy Irish Monk in France might be
charged with the most horrible death of Queen Bronichild happening at this very
time, for he also by the Spirit of Prophecy forewarned her of it. And so far
may we esteem the ancient Prophets guilty of the calamities befalling many
Princes and Stares, which by Divine Inspiration they foretold.

11. To all this we may add, that there was no such freindly correspondence
between the Kings of Kent and the Northumbers, as that this latter should be
employed by the former as an instrument of his unworthy revenge. On the
contrary we read that Ethelfrid bore so mortal a hatred to all Christians,
that he denounced to the Kings of Kent and Essex, A. D. 615.
that he would be no less an enemy to them, because they had forsaken the
Institutes of their Fathers, then he was to the Britains and Scotts. And to
conclude, according to the plain Narration of S. Beda, the Pagan King Ethelfrid
came with no design against the British Monks, but their slaughter was caused
by occasion of his seeing them on a hill together, and being told that they were
assembled there to pray to God against him. So that the Pagan Author himself
of the slaughter absolves both King Ethelbert and S. Augustine, unjustly
condemned by partial and ungrateful Christians.

V. CHAP.
V. CHAP.
1. Kinegils the West Saxon King overcomes the Britains.

2. 3 The death of Sebert King of the East Saxons: His Successors.

A. D. 614. Florent. hic. Auntingd. l. 2.
1. IN the year of Christ six hundred and fourteen Kinegilsus King of the
West Saxons after he had reigned three years assumed his Son (others say, his
Brother) Quicelmus a companion in his Throne: And presently after they both
fought a battle against the Britains at Beandune (Bindon) in Dorsetshire: But
at the first onsett the Britains affrighted with their large swords and long
bucklers were quickly putt to flight, without any considerable loss on the
Saxons side: who upon a survay found the bodies of two thousand and six hundred
Britains slain. These large swords, called by Huntingdon Secures, and by
Witechind, large knives, were in the Saxon tongue called Saxa, from whence that
Nation is said to have received its name.

A. D. 615.
2. The year following according to Walsinghams account dyed the virtuous and
devout Sebert King of the Trinobantes, or East Saxons, and with great and
general mourning was buried in the Church of Westminster built by himself,
which in succeeding times was magnificently enlarged and adorned, and made the
common Sepulcher of our Kings.

3. How acceptable to God was the Sanctity and merits of this good King,
appeared by a lasting Miracle: For in the days of King Edward the first of the
Norman Race, Wals^ingh. in Edw. 1 f. 93.
the Monks of Westm^nster having a resolution to translate his Body from the
Old Church to the New, as soon as with great devotion they had opened his
Sepulcher they found his right hand to the middle of his arm entire in flesh,
skin, nails and bones compacted. This was seven hundred years after he had
been there buried. Thus writes Walsingham. In his place succeeded his three
sons Sered, Seward and Sigebert, joined equally in the Government: but much
degenerating from their fathers piety.

VI. CHAP. A. D. 616

VI. CHAP.



1.2. etc. The death of King Ethelbert: and of the Holy Bishop Lethard.

4.5. The Sanctity of King Ethelbert acknowledged.

6. 7. His Children.

1. PResently after, if it was indeed after, dyed also Ethelbert, A. D 615.
glorious in piety and merits, the first Protector of the rising Christian
Church of the Saxons. His death befell in the fifty sixth year of his reign,
Bed l 2. c. ^.
and the one and twentieth after he had embraced the Christian Faith. He was
the third King of the English Nation whose Empire extended over all the
Provinces Southward from the River Humber, says S. Beda; adding that he was
the first of those who went to heaven. ( By which clause is employed that he
dyed before King Sebert. However certain it is, that a very small space of time
intervend between both their deaths.) He was buried in the porch of Saint
Martin within the Church of the blessed Apostles Peter and Paul: where likewise
the Body of his devout Queen Bertha (or Aldiberga) was laid. Id. ibid.
Martyr^^^. Romans 24 Febr.
And his memory is consecrated both in ours and the Roman Martyrologe, on the
sixth of the Calends of March.

2. King Ethelbert had also another blessed companion in the place of his
Sepulture, to wit, S. Lethard the Holy B. of Senli^* who came with Queen
Aldiberga out of France into Brittany. Concerning whom William of Malmsbury
thus writes, Malmsb. de Pontif. l. 1. f. 96.
An ancient Author called Gosselin celebrates the miracles of Saint Lethard
who accompanied Queen Bertha into this Island, particularly his readiness to
afford rain in times of drouth, when his intercession is demanded: a pleasant
example whereof was showed about the same Writers time. For there having been a
terrible fiery drouth about the height of Summer, the Sacred Body of the Saint
was solemnly carried in Procession with Litanies. But no rain succeeding
thereupon, the Cantor at his return with the Body with some indignation
addressed his speech to the Holy Bishop, saying, Do thou not see how great
the tribulation of the whole country is by reason of this drouth, and yet thou
art negligent in succouring us? These words of a seeming reproof were no sooner
uttred, but presently there fell such abundance of rain, that the most greedy
desires were satisfied.

3. The virtues of King Ethelbert are comprised by the Author of his Life in
these words: Ap. Capgra^. in vit. S. Ethelbert.
This blessed King, though his power extended as far as Humber, yet in his
conversation he showed himself as perfectly one of Christ beggars, as if he had
possessed nothing. It was a blessed sight to see this glorious King humbly
serving the poor to see him who terrified Kings, to stand in fear of Gods
Priests, and to show an humble respect to the meanest Ministers of the Church.
How brightly he shone in repressing vice, exalting virtue, fulfilling the
Divine precepts and in all works of piety is so much more clearly to be read in
Gods heavenly Book, as human Writers have been negligent in expressing, etc.
Antiquity and the favorable authority of former Saints is an irreproachable
Witness of his Sanctity, since from the beginning his Solemnity has been
celebrated by Gods Saints.

4. Among which Saints devoted to this Holy Kings memory S. Dunstan was one,
Ap. Osbert. in vit. ^. Dunstan.
who in a certain night watching in devotion at the sepulchers of this King, of
S. Augustine and other Holy Bishops his Successors, heard on a sudden voices of
certain persons singing this Antiphone of the Ecclesiastical Office (Gaudent
in coelis animae Sanctorum, qui etc.) The souls of th^se Saints who have
followed our Lords steps do now rejoice in heaven, etc. Whereat being
astonished, he approached to the door and looking through the clefts (for it
was locked) he saw the whole Oratory shining with a wonderful light, and a
quire of persons in white robes melodiously and joyfully singing that
Antiphone, Such honor is due to holy Kings and Prelates, etc. This we read
related by Osbern an ancient Compiler of the Life of Saint Dunstan. In which
Narration, though Saint Ethelbert be not named, yet without question he
reposing there, was principally intended.

Ap. Capgrav. (...) vit. S. Augustine.
5. In proof of his acknowledged sanctity, etc. there were in S. Augustins
Church set up daily five cierges continually burning, to wit, before the Tomb
of S. Augustine, of S. M^^red, of S. Adrian Abbot, before the great Altar,
before the Monument of King Ethelbert, and of S. Lethard Bishop, and a sixth in
the Grott before the Image of the Blessed Virgin Mary, where S. Dunstan was
honored with many visions of her, as the Author of S. Augustins li^e
testifies. And Polydor Virgil affirms, Polyd. Virg. l. 4.
that even to his days the Sacred body of King Ethelbert was illustrious by
many Miracles.

6. He left behind only two children by his Queen Adilburga, Eadbald to whom he
resigned the Title of King, after he had earnestly admonished him to be
careful in preserving and promoting the Christian Faith: which admonition how
he complied with shall be showed hereafter: And Edelburga, who was afterward
married to Edwin King of the Northumbers, and of whose Conversion she was a
principal instrument. To these two a third is added by Camden, Speed and other
Modern Writers, Camden in Kent.
namely the Holy Virgin Edburga, who among Saxon Virgins was the first which
undertook the Profession of a devout Nun. This holy Virgin, says the Author
of her life, Auth. vit. S. Edburgae.
after she had received Sacred Baptism, gave praises to God day and night,
fervently begging of him the grace to be esteemed worthy to enjoy the
spiritual rewards of her only Bridegroom Jesus Christ. She spent her life in
serving God with all purity in the Church and Convent where her Neice S.
Mildred was Abbess, A. D. 617.
to whom likewise she succeeded in the government of it.

7. Among the praises of this holy King Ethelebrt we will in the last place
mention his zeal to convert Redwald King of the East Angles to the Christian
Faith: though the event proved not so happy in him, as it had been in Sebert
King o^ the East Saxons. Bed. l 2. c. 15.
Concerning which Redwald S. Beda writes, That in Kent, the Kingdom of
Ethelbert, he had been imbued with the Mysteries and Sacraments of Christian
Faith: But in vain; for when he returned home he was perverted and depraved
from the sincerity of Faith by his Wise and other impious Teachers, so that his
latter end was worse then his beginning: for like the old Samaritans he would
both serve Christ and his old Pagan Gods together, placing in the same Temple a
Holy Altar for the Sacrifice of our Lord, and an impure Altar for the Victimes
of Devils. Br^nt. Chron. col. 745.
Which profane Altar Athelwolf, who lived King of that Province in the days of
S. Beda, testifies to have remained to his time.

VII. CHAP. VII. CHA.

1.2. etc. Apostasy of the Kings of Kent, and the East Saxons.

5.6 S. Mellitus banished from his See at London

7 8. etc. Laurentius determining to fly, is chast^s^d by S. Peter.

10. The Centuriators impudence.

1. CHristian Religion seemd to have been so firmly rooted in the two Kingdoms
of Kent and the East Saxons by the piety and zeal of the two late holy Kings,
A. D. 617.
Ethelbert and Sebert, that no danger could reasonably be apprehended of its
failing. But that it might appear that Faith is the free gift of God, his just
Providence permitted the impiety of their children and successors to endanger
the utter ruin of that heavenly Edifice which their Fathers had erected,
insomuch as that the Pastors of Gods people were banished, their Churches
profaned, and their Profession if not prohibited, at least discountenanced.

2. The order and manner of these disorders was as follows: King Ethelbert
had left in Kent his Successor his only Son Eadbald, who though in his Fathers
days he seemd inclined to Christian Religion, for he was a Witness and approver
of his Fathers Charters by which he bequeathed to the Church of S. Peter and S.
Paul several possessions: Yet after his Fathers death he quickly returned to
his vomit. The first step whereof was his unlawful lust to his Fathers second
Wife, whom he more unlawfully and incestuously married After which crime
incompatible with a sincere Christian Profession, he publicly renounced
Christianity, and again set up Pagan Idols, inviting also and tempting his
subjects to follow his Example, which the greatest part of them did. Yet he did
not force either S. Laurence Archbishop of Canterbury, or S. Iustus Bishop of
Rochester to abandon their Sees.

3. This unhappy change in Kent was accompanied with a like, or worse change in
London, and the rest of the East Saxons Kingdom. For the three Sons and
Successors of Sebert, perhaps communicating counsels with Eadbald,
relinquished their former seeming profession of Christianity: an occasion
whereof they took from the Holy Bishop Mellitus his refusing them the Holy
Communion, which they demanded out of a foolish curiosity, or perhaps with an
intention to make a quarrel. The particular Story is thus related by S. Beda:
Bed. l. 2. c. 5.
4. This storm and perturbation was much increased by the death of Sabereth (or
Sebert) King of the East Saxons, who at his departure out of this life to a
better Kindgdom in heaven, left heyrs of his temporal kingdom his three Sons
Sexred, Seward and Sigebert, who had remained obstinate in their Heathenish
Superstitions, though during his life time they had seemed to intermitt the
exercise thereof But as soon as he was dead they publicly professed Idolatry,
and gave free leave to their subjects to do the same.

5. Now it happened on a certain time that they saw the Holy Bishop Mellitus at
the celebrating a Mass in the Church give the Holy Eucharist to the people.
Whereupon they in a foolish pride said to him, Why do thou not as well give
us that white wafer which thou wast wont heretofore to give to our Father Saha
(for so they usually called him) and still continuest to give the people? His
answer to them was: If you will be washed with that saving water with which
your Father was purified, you may likewise, as he was, be partakers of this
Holy bread. But if you despise the water of life, you must by no means receive
the Bread of life. But they replied, We have no intention to enter into that
Font, of which we have no need: But however we will have our part of that
Bread. When they were thus often and earnestly admonished by him that without a
precedent purification by Baptism, it was not lawful to give them part of the
most holy Oblation; at last they grew into fury, and told him, If thou refusest
to consent to us in a matter so easy as this, thou shall stay no longer in our
Kingdom. Thus they banished him, commanding both him and all that belonged to
him to depart out of their Province.

6. Mellitus being thus expelled from his See of London, came into Kent, with
an intention to demand counsel of Laurentius and Iustus, what course for him
was best in these extremities. And after serious deliberation, it was decreed
by common advice among them, that their best way was rather to return into
Italy their Native country, where they might serve our Lord with free minds,
then to remain among such rebels and Apostats from their Faith where no good
could be done (con^idering the malice of their Princes.) Mellitus therefore and
Iustus forthwith departed, retiring themselves into France.



7. But S Laurence showed a little more constancy: he could not so suddenly
resolve to desert his flock, though extremely diminished, of which he was the
Chief Pastor. Sometimes he would entertain hopes that God would not permit so
much labor, so prospered by him, to be lost. But on the other side a sad
consideration of the inconstancy of the people, the impiety and unrestraind
lusts of the King, and that himself was now left alone without any to counsel
or assist him, such thoughts as these peircing deeply into his mind, quickly
extinguished his former faint rising hopes, so that he resolved to quitt the
ungrateful country likewise, and to fo^low his fellow-Bishops into France.
And this resolution he had putt in execution, had not our Merciful Lord by his
Chief Apostle prevented it. The manner of which prevention is thus described by
S. Beda: 8. When S. Laurence was upon the point to follow Mellitus and Iustus
and to desert Brittany, Bed. l ^. c. 6.
the night before his journey was to begin, he gave order that a couch should
be prepared for him in the Church of Saint Peter and S. Paul: Whereon when,
after many prayers and tears powrd forth to God, he had laid him down to rest,
and was falln asleep, there appeared to him the most Blessed Prince of the
Apostles, who after many sharp stripes inflicted on him, askd him with an
Apostolic Severity, Why he would forsake the flock with which he had entrusted
him? And, to what Pastors care he would committ the sheep of Christ, now
encompassed with so many wolves? Have thou forgott, said he, the example I have
given thee, who for the good of those Lambs which our Lord, in testimony of his
love, recommended to me, suffered from Infidels and enemies of Christ bonds,
stripes, prisons, torments, and in conclusion death it self, even the death of
the Cross, for which I am now crowned with him?

9. The servant of Christ Laurence, being encouraged with these stripes and
exhortations of the Blessed Apostle, as soon as morning appeared went to the
King, and laying aside his vestment, showed him how greivously his body had been
torn with whipps. The King wondering at it, demanded who durst be so
presumptuous to treat so worthy a person so cruelly? But when he was informed
that the Bishop had for his Salvation and eternal happiness suffered so sharp
torments, he was struck with great fear.



10. We will awhile interrupt the prosecution of S. Beda's Narration of the
happy effect of this Miracle, in the Kings conversion; to attend the judgment
given hereof by some Modern Protestants, especially the Centuriators of
Magdebury, Magdeb. Centur. 7. c. ^3.
whose censure is this, These things were prettily feigned by Laurence, to
astonish a Pagan King: for none but superstitious fools will believe that he
was in earnest scourged by Peter. Saint Beda then, it seems was misinformed, S.
Laurence was a cheating liar, and all posterity superstitiously credulous: yea
God himself, who prospered this invention with the Kings Conversion and the
restitution of the Christian Faith, in these men's judgment stood in need of a
lie to perfect his own work. Certain it is that above eight hundred years
since, Alcuinus, a man of admirable learning, made use of this argument of S.
Laurence his being chastised by S. Peter, Alcuin. Ep. 97.
to encourage a then Archbishop of Canterbury chased from his See: Ap. Anselm.
l 3. Epist 2.
And the same example was afterward applied by Osbern a Monk, and Precentor of
Canterbury to S. Anselm declining the burden of the same Church. But what
proofs have those Censurers to disprove Saint Beda's Narration? Magd^b. Cen.
ibid.
None at all but their bare assertion, That these lying Miracles were contrived
to support an Opinion that Saints have power to hurt those with whom they are
displeased. So that it seems in their opinion the real scourging of a man is
an act exceeding Gods Omnipotence.

VIII. CHAPTER
VIII. CHAP.
1.2. etc. Edwin Prince of the Northumbers, banished. His dangers.

7.8 He is comforted by an Angel.

9 10. His Enemy Ethelfrid, slain.

A. D. 617.
1. WE must a little longer delay the relation of the happy effects which the
visible marks of S. Laurence his stripes wrought in the mind of the Pagan King
Eadbalous (which effects began to be publicly seen the year following:) to
insert another illustrious Example of Gods Goodness to our Nation in exalting to
the Throne of the Northumbers a Prince called Edwin, by the destruction of that
cruel King Ethe^fr^d, the murderer of so many hundred innocent Monks of Bangor:
Which Edwin not long after embracing the Christian Faith, raised up a glorious
Church in those rude and barbarous Provinces, which were indeed the first
toward whom S. Gregory intended to express his Charity, upon the sight of a
few beauti^ull young slaves from hence exposed to sale in the Market at Rome.

Bed. l. 2. Hunting. l. 2. ^eril. A. D. Wig^rn Pol. Virg. l. 4.
2. This Edwin was the Son of Alla King of the Deiri, or Northumbers, to whose
name S. Gregory alluded, saying that Alleluia's should ere long be sung in his
Kingdom. Now Alla dying in the year of Grace five hundred eighty nine, and
leaving his only Son Edwin but three years old, the throne, due to him, was
usurped by Ethelfrid surnamed the Cruel or Savage.

3. Edwin living in this Tyrants Court grew up an example of all virtues and
endowments: which rendered him agreeable to all* but formidable to Ethelfrid. Who
yet though he ha^ed him, as one who both had right to the Kingdom and deserved
it, yet he durst not lay snares for his life, fearing in case such designs
should want success, least considering the general compassion and love born
to Edwin, a party should declare in his behalf, and endanger his Crown.
Therefore imputing to him some feigned crimes he sent him into Exile, hoping
that by poverty, want of friends and discontent he would quickly shorten his
own life.

4. Before his banishment he had married Quenburga the daughter of Ceorl King of
the Mercians, who accompanied him in his exile, and brought him two sons,
Offrid and Edfrid: after which she dyed, before his restitution. And Edwin
fearing the Tyrants trains, was forced to disguise himself, and shift from
place to place in the habit of a peasant: Till at last going into the Kingdom
of the East Angles, he committed himself to the faith of Redwald King there: in
whose Court he lived with great splendor, being acceptable both to the King
and all others for his rare endowments: for he divided his time between reading
and Martial Exercises, and in both he so far advanced himself, that his fame
was spread through the whole Island.

5. In the mean time Ethelfrid sought his destruction by all the ways he could
imagine, sending spies every where to discover him, and assassins to murder
him. But at last hearing that he was so kindly entertained among the
East Angles, he resolved either with treasure to buy, or with an army to
procure his death. He sent therefore an Ambassador to Redwald, by whom at
first he offered great sums of money to purchase the delivering up of Edwin:
But those offers being rejected; he next threatened open war upon refusal. This
threatening terrified Redwald, in so much as choosing rather to expose the single
life of a stranger, then hazard the destruction of his kingdom, he yielded to
the solicitations of Ethelfrid, promising either to deliver him up, or to take
order for the shortning his life.

6. These Treaties between the two Kings were not carried so secretly, but Edwin
had notice of them: and by the change of King Redwalds countenance and gestures
began to suspect his own danger. Which suspicion was changed into assurance by
an advice given him by a friend of Redwalds resolution. Which friend advised
him to secure himself by flight, offering himself his companion and guide
therein. But Edwins answer was, That having had so many years experience of
Redwalds fidelity and generosity, he would not be the first to show a suspicion
of so base a crime in a King: and that if he must perish, he would choose to do
it rather by the hand of a friend then of a declared Enemy. With this
resolution he dismissed his friend. This discourse between them for the greater
privacy passed in a solitary place, and in the evening when it began to be
dark.

7. Edwin being thus left alone in obscurity, had the greater freedom to
entertain his melancholic thoughts, which were busied rather how to dye nobly,
then how to secure his life, which he conceived impossible. Being taken up with
such meditations he on a sudden heard the voice of one at a little distance,
who asked him, Why he staid there alone in the dark, when all others were
asleep? Edwin nothing imagining who this unknown person was, desired him to be
gone. Yet he departed not: but continuing his speech he said, My Son, you have
indeed great cause to be greived, and to stand in fear of Redwald, who is
resolved on your ^uine. But what reward would you give to one who would restore
you without all danger to this Kings fidelity? Edwin answered, that it was
beyond his power to make an equal recompense. But, said the other, what
retribution would you make to him, who should not only do this, but make you
stronger then your enemy, and possessour of his crown, yea and increase your
patrimony with the accession of other kingdoms beside? Hereto Edwin said, I
can only promise a grateful mind: for such obligations exceed all possible
retribution. When he had said this, the Angel (for that it was an Angel, the
success demonstrated) added these words, But what will you do for him who
will not only make you happy and glorious in this world, but after this life
procure for you immortal glory? Will you not at least afford him your
attention and submission when he shall propose to you counsels in themselves
holy and good for you? This being readily promised by Edwin: Then the Angel
laid his hand upon his head, and said to him, When you shall hereafter see a
man's hand thus laid on your head, and all the things which I have foretold you
accomplished, then be sure to remember this promise you have made. And having
said this, he vanished, leaving Edwin in an uncertainty between hope and fear.

8 Now whilst these discourses passed between Edwin and the unknown Messenger
from heaven (which S. Beda, Huntingdon, Florilegus, and several Protestant
Writers doubt not to call a Divine Oracle) the Queen, Wife of Redwald,
undertook the patronage of Edwin, representing to her husband his noble
qualities, the baseness and infamy which would lie on him, being a King, if for
fear he should betray his friend, etc. In a word she so wrought with him that
he renounced the promise made to Ethelfrid, embraced Edwin confirming his
ancient fidelity, and in revenge of the infamy which the Tyrant would have
persuaded him to, he sent first a defiance to Ethelfrid, says Florilegus,
provoking him to a combat. Florile^ ad A. D. 616.
Whereupon armies were raised on both sides, which met in the Region of the
Iutes on the Eastern side of the River Idle.

9. Huntingdon gives this Narration of the combat: Hunting^^. ^. 2*
They fought, says he, in the Province of the Coritani (Nottinghamshire) in
the bounds of the Mercians, on the East of the River Idle, which lost its
color by the abundance of blood shed there. King Ed^lfrid wondering and
disdaining that any one should dare to oppose him, with his choicest and most
tried soldiers, with wonderful boldness, but withal discorderly, rushd among
his Enemies, whose army was ranged to the best advantage, and terrible to
behold: for they were not only more numerous, but with shining helmets, great
groves of spears and innumerable banners, they marched orderly in three great
bodies. Notwithstanding the King of the Northumbers hastily rushing, as to an
assured prey, among the thickest squadr^ns, slew Rayner the son of Redwald,
sending him and his part of the army before him to Hell* But Redwald nothing
affrighted, but rather incensed with this loss, kept his ground invincibly
with his two other Bodies: Which the Northumbrians being not able to pierce
through, Edilfrid beyond his power striving to enter, was separated a good
distance from his own soldiers, and in a short time wa^ slain, his body lying
upon a heap of enemies slaughterd by him. As Soon as this King was dead his
whole army fled.

10. This deserved end had the ambition of Edilfrid, nourished with all manner
of crimes, after he had reigned four and twenty years: In whose place succeeded
Edwin now rightful King of the Northumbers, who was present at this combat*
and seems to have given name to a town not far distant called Edwinstow: though
others derive that appellation from another root. As for the Sons of Ethelfrid*
Oswald and Ebba, born to him by Acca the sister of Edwin, they fled privily
into Scotland, by which some understand the original country of the Scottish
nation, Ireland: Of whose return we shall treat in due place. And thus much of
the Divine Oracle was this year fullfilld: the rest also will be duly
accomplished in the proper season.

A. D 618.

IX. CHA.


IX. CHAP.
i.2. etc Eadbald King of Kent repents his Apostasy.

A. D. 618.
1. WE will now contemplate the happy change which the right hand of our Lord
made in the heart of Eadbald King of Kent upon the sight of the wounds which
the stripes inflicted on the Body of the Archbishop S. Laurentius by S. Peter
caused. It is thus described by S. Bid: Bed. l. 2. c. 6.
When the King heard that for his eternal good the Bishop had suffered from the
Apostle such wounds and torments, he was sore affrighted: And renouncing his
former accursed Idolatry, also repudiating his incestuous Wife, he received the
Faith of Christ, and was baptized. After which he was careful to favor, and
with his utmost power to promote the affairs of the Church.

2. S. Beda had reason to mention his favor and liberality to the Church, for
there is to this day extant a Charter of his dated this year, (...) Rey^e^ in
(...). tr. 1. f. ^^.
in which after a commemoration of the occasion of his Conversion by seeing the
stripes inflicted on S. Laurence, he declares that for the remedy of the souls
of his father, his own and others of his kindred he granted for the use of the
Monastery of Saint Peter and S. Paul a portion of land of thirty ploughs in
Kent called Northborne* and withal confirmed all the Gifts, Privileges and
liberties formerly granted by his Father to the same Church, etc.

3. Moreover to testify his care of the advancing the Christian Faith in his
kingdom, Bed. l. 2. c. 6.
he sent (says Saint Beda) into France, from whence he recalled Mellitus and
Iustus, ordaining that they should return to their Churches, and freely
instruct and govern the flocks committed to them. Accordingly they came back
about a year after their departure: And Iustus indeed went to his Church at
Rochester, formerly committed to him: But the inhabitants of London would not
receive their Bishop Mellitus, for they rather chose to obey their Idolatrous
Priests.

X. CHAP. A. D. 619.

X. CHAP.



1.2. etc. S. Laurence his voyage to procure Unity with the Irish and Scottish
Bishops: the good Success of it.

5 6 His death: Saint Mellitus, his Successor.

1. AFter this S. Laurence survived no long time, A. D. 619.
for he dyed in the beginning of the following year. But the short remainder of
his life he spent very proffitably for Gods Churches. For not contenting
himself with providing for the spiritual good of his own See, he extended his
zeal and care beyond the limits of the Island. Insomuch as some Authors write
that to procure an Union and charitable correspondance between the Churches of
the Saxons, Britains* Scotts and Irish, he undertook a painful voyage into
Ireland, to persuade them to a conformity with the Universal Church in
celebrating the Paschall solemnity.

2. But perhaps their meaning was, that by his appointment a Conference or
Synod was assembled in which certain Irish and Scottish Bishops met to compose
differences about that point. M^gdeb. Centur. 7. f 518.
Which Synod according to the Centuriators of Magdeburg was celebrated in the
Isle of Man, in which S. Laurence earnestly contended for an uniformity with
the Catholic Church in that Observation, and wrote letters to the same effect
to the Irish and Scottish Bishops who were absent.

3. Neither were his endeavors vain: for as the Author of his Life in
Capgrave relates, Ap. Capgrav. in S. Laurent.
By S. Laurence his preaching and exhortations in Ireland (Scotia) his fame was
largely spread, insomuch as S. Tenan an Archbishop of Ireland came to him: A
man of so great Sanctity, that he is reported to have raised to life three dead
persons. Which Holy Bishop having heard S. Laurence disputing touching the
Paschall observation and other Apostolic Institutions, yielded the Victory to
Truth, and endeavored to ^eform the practice of his own Nation.

4. And no wonder it is that Truth defended by such a man should prevayle,
since he by Gods assistance confirmed it with Divine Miracles: Among which the
restoring of a dead man to life at his return from the same Synod is recorded
by the said Author, Ibid.
The man of God Laurence being returned* (says he) found the son of a man who
had kindly entertained him, dead, and the parents in great sorrow, Who with a
loud voice cried to him, O holy man, restore our son to us, that we may more
firmly believe in Jesus Christ whom thou have preached to us. Hereupon the Holy
Bishop having first offered up his prayers to God, said to the Child, Arise: who
presently rose up: and withal testified, that being dead his soul was
violently drawn by horrible spirits to the flames of Hell, but upon the prayer
of the holy man Laurence it was by Angels shining with brightness brought back
to the body. Hereupon the child together with his Father, mother, whole family,
and kindred were baptized, and the Holy Bishop passing through the whole region
dispersed saving doctrine every where, which he confirmed with Miracles.

5. These are the last Gests recorded of S. Laurence: A. D. 619.
who in the beginning of the following year of Grace six hundred and nineteen
deposed his mortality and was buried in his own Church near his Predecessor S.
Augustine: with an Epitaph inscribed, which commemorated his forementioned
scourging by S. Peter. Not the English only but Roman Church likewise
celebrates his memory on the second of February, for thus we read in the
Martyrologe, At Canterbury in England is this day celebrated the commemoration
of S. Laurence, Martyrol. Romans 2. Febr
who after S. Augustine governed that Church, and converted also the King to the
Faith. Baron. ibid.
Upon which passage Baronius thus writes, In the Catalogue of the Writers of
Brittany is signified, that the Life of S. Laurence was compiled by G^tzelin a
Monk of S. Bertins in Flanders: which probably is the same still extant in
Capgrave.

6. It happened commodiously that S. Mellitus Bishop of London was returned into
Brittany before the death of S. Laurence. For since the Kings of the
East Saxons would not admit him, neither could Eadbald, whose power was not so
great as his Fathers, constrain them to it, now upon the vacancy of the Sea,
also at the the request of Eadbald, and no man opposing, he succeeded S.
Laurence therein, whilst S. Iustus governed the Sea of Rochester. These two
Bishops, as we read in the Antiquities of Brittany, Antiq. Brit. in Mellito.
with an equal care and solicitude exercised their Episcopal function, and
received exhortatory letters from Pope Boniface, who after Deusdedit governed
the Roman Church. Those to Mellitus are not now extant: But the Letters
directed to S. Iustus shall be mentioned in due place.

7. King Eadbald the year foregoing this had begun the building a Chapel to
the honor of the Blessed Mother of God in the Monastery of S. Peter: Bed l. 2.
c. 6. Ap. Capgrav. in Mellito.
which being now finished was consecrated by S. Mellitus. S. Beda makes mention
of it: And how grateful it was to the Blessed Virgin Mary, was oftimes made
manifest by praises sung to God in it by the glorified Saints and many
Miracles, says the Author of S. Mellitus his life.

XI. CHAP. A. D. 622.

XI. CHAP.



1.2. etc King Edwins Conquests.

1. IN the mean time Edwin King of the Northumbers according to a Divine Oracle
being exalted from a state of Exile to that Kingdom, A. D. 620.
increased his dominions. For in the year six hundred and twenty he fought
against Cadwan the British King, who had compelled King Ethelfrid to retire
more Northward, quitting certain Provinces of the Brigantes (Yorkshire) lying
toward Wales: Which Provinces Edwin now again recovered, Ca^den ^ Briga^^.
having overcome him in battle. The Region thus recovered was anciently called
Elme^, says Camden: and it is seated near Leeds a principal town in
Yorkshire, in the Saxon tongue called Loyds, which became a Royal Town after
the burning of (Cambodunum) Almonbury, or Albanbury, in this Kings days, where
S. Paulinus built a Church to the honor of our Proto-Martyr S. Alban.

2. The year following the same King Edwin fought prosperously against the
Scotts and Picts, A. D. 622.
lead by their King Eugenius, and recovering from them the Provinces of
Galloway and Laudon, added them to his own Dominions. That Region was in the
times of the Romans called Valentia, and belonged to the Britains. Some
Wr^ter^ say that the Scottish King Eugenius was at this time dead, and that
these Provinces were won from Ferquhard his Son, and this with lesser
difficulty, by reason of civil dissentions between the said Ferquhard and his
Nobles. He is said to have been educated and instructed by Conan the Holy
Bishop of Sodor in the Isle of Man: (...) H. B^^t. l. 9.
and that afterward by means of frequent conversation with British Priests: he
fell into the Heresy of Pelagius, with which never any Scottish King before had
been tainted. Thus Hector Boethius: Although no other Historian does in this age
impute that Error to the Britains.

3. King Edwins conquests were the next year yet further extended: A. D. 622.
Bed. l. 2. c. 9.
For according to Saint Beda's relation, he subdued the Islands called
Mevaniae, or Meneviae, to the English Empire. One of which Islands lying more
toward the South (namely Anglesey) is both more happy in producing plenty of
corn and other fruits, and in quantity larger, as containing according to the
English estimation the measure of nine hundred and sixty families: Whereas the
other (to wit, the Isle of Man) contains little more then three-hundred.

4. Many proofs may be produced to demonstrate that these Islands anciently
belonged to the Jurisdiction of the Britains: Ib. ib. c. 5.
for S. Beda expressly calls them British Isles: A. D. 624.
but had been a long time injuriously possessed by the Scotts, taking advantage
from the weakness of the Britains at their first invasion by the Saxons, Hence
it was that the Bishop of Sodore in the Isle of Man, or lesser Menavia, was
subject to the Jurisdiction of the Archbishop of York.

XII. CHA.
XII. CHAP.
1. 2. Death of the Apostats, East Saxon Kings.

3. 4 Also of S. Mellitus Arch bishop of Canterbury: to whom S. Iustus succeeds.

5.6 Epistles of P. Boniface confirming the Privileges of the Sea of
Canterbury.

1. THE year of Grace six hundred twenty three is by Florilegu^ marked with the
death of Sexred and Siward Kings of the East Saxons: A. D. 623. Westminster. hic.
who were slain by Kinegils King of the West Saxons and his Son Quicelm: And
this, says he, came to p^sse by the just judgment of God, because after the
death of their Father King Sebert, they returned to the worship of Idols,
having expelled S. Mellitus Bishop of London out of their Dominions. Their
whole army was utterly destroyed, that not one escaped home to carry the news.

2. There succeeded in the Kingdom of the East Saxons, Sigebert surnamed The
little, son of Siward, says William of Malmsbury: from whence may be collected
that the third Brother, Sigebert the Son of Sebert was dead before: For to this
Sigebert the Little, of whom small mention is made, there succeeded another
Sigebert Nephew to King Sebert by his Brother Sigebald. As for Sigebert who
begun his reign this year, he had a Brother truly deserving the surname of
Great, celebrated in all our Martyrologes for a Saint: Of whom more hereafter.

3. The year following S. Mellitus the lately made Archbishop of Canterbury
dyed, A. D. 624.
having seen the miserable end of those ungrateful Kings of the East Saxons
who had banished him from his See of London: and was buried* says S. Beda in
the Church of S. Peter. His Memory is celebrated on the four and twen^ieth of
April, both in the Roman and Englih Martyrologe; Mrtyol. Angl. 2^. April.
as likewise that of S. Beda, Vsuardus and Ado.

4. His Successor in the said See was Saint Iustus Bishop of Rochester, who
only of all the Romans remained in the Island adorned with a Miter. Which moved
King Eadbald to acquaint Pope Boniface with the penury of persons sufficient
for so high a function. Saint Iustus likewise informed the same Pope of the
virtues and zeal of the King, and how great hopes appeared of a great access
to the Church, if more laborers were sent to cultivate our Lords Vineyard.

5. These particulars appear in the answer sent by Pope Boniface to Iustus
recited by Saint Beda: Bed. l. 2. c.
Wherein he expresses his great joy to hear the good effects of his labors
and zeal, which King Eadbald had declared to him: and exhorts him to persevere
to communicate the Gospel both to Kent and other Provinces. He likewise
informs him that he had sent him a Pall, to be made use of only in celebrating
the Divine Mysteries: giving him moreover a power to ordain Bishops in all
places commodious, etc.

6. Another Epistle from the same Pope to Saint Iustus, Malmsbur. de Pontif. l.
2. f. 208.
or rather a wrong Copy of the same is transcribed by William of Malmsbury,
wherein the Pope confirms the Privileges conferred by Saint Gregory on the Sea
of Canterbury, constituted the Metropolitan and Primatiall See of the whole
Nation, immediately under the protection of the Sea Apostolic. Yet this Copy
was by Saint Lanfranc sent to Pope Alexander to justify the Privileges of the Sea of Canterbury, Id. ib.
as the same Author declares. Yea even Bishop Parker transcribes it entirely
into his Antiquities, and on this Letter grounds the dignity and supereminence
of his See: Ant^q. Brit.
For other arguments he has none, but such as are derived from Popes, to whom
notwithstanding he can allow no other titles but proud, superstitious, impious
Prelates, and such as had no lawful Jurisdiction over Brittany. Thus manifestly
mentita est iniquitas sibi: Such self-contradictions necessarily attending
injustice and disorderly passion.

7. Upon the receipt of these Letters and the Pall, Saint Iustus consecrated
Romanus Bishop of Rochester, who for some time assisted him in propagating the
Christian Faith. But shortly after being obliged upon occasion of some emergent
businesses, not for the obtaining Consecration (as the Cen^uriators fancy) to
go to Rome, he was drowned at Sea by the way, and the Sea of Rochester became
once more vacant.

XIII. C.
XIII. CHAP.
1.2. etc. Redwald K. of the East angles dies: And Edwin elected his
Successor: but gives it to Redwalds Son.

3.4. etc. Edwin Monark of the English: demands the Sister of the King of Kent
to wife and on certain conditions obtains her.

A. D. 624.
1. THE same year Redwald the party-Christian and party-heathen King of the of
the East Angles dyed, and though he left behind him a son Erpenwald who was
bred up to the expectation of the Crown, yet were the affections and esteem of
that people to Edwin King of the Northumbers so great, that neglecting their
late Kings Son, they unanimously chose Edwin for their King, having had long
experience of his virtues during his exile in that Court, and also incited with
the fame of his Conquests.

2. Notwithstanding Edwin gave to Erpenwald the Title and Ensigns of Kingly
authority, contenting himself with an authority paramount over that Kingdom, as
he enjoyed the same over all the rest, excepting only the Kingdom of Kent: So
that among his other Titles he now inserted that of Monark of the English
Nation. For after King Ethelberts death that Title descended not upon Eadbald
his Son, but on Redwald King of the East Angles. For, says Saint Beda, Bed. l
2. c. 5.
the first who enjoyed this Empire was Elli, King of tho South saxons; the
second Celin or Ceaulin King of the West Saxons; the third, Edilbert King of
Kent; the fourth Redualt King of the East Angles, who also during the life of
Edilbert was Prince of that Nation; And the fifth was Edwin King of the
Northumbers, who with greater power then any before governd all the inhabitants
of Brittany, whether Saxons or Britains, except Kent only. He had also lately
subdued to his Empire the two British Islands called Menavia, seated between
Brittany and Ireland.

3. There remained nothing of the forementioned Divine Oracle given to Edwin
unaccomplish'd that concernd his felicity in this life: Of a poor, afflicted
and persecuted Exile, he was exalted to the Throne of the Northumbers, to that
Kingdom he had added several Regions and Islands lately subdued, likewise
another Kingdom of the East Angles which offered it self to him, and lastly a
Supereminent Monarchical Power over all the Britains and Saxons, excepting
Kent: Yet that was still wanting which alone could indeed make him happy, A. D.
625.
the knowledge and love of the true God.

4. In order therefore to a perfect accomplishment of the said Oracle, A. D.
625.
Almighty God putt it in his thoughts to demand for a second wife (in place of
Quenburga who dyed during his Exile) Ethelburga, called also Tata, daughter of
Ethelbert late King of Kent, and sister to Eadbald at this time reigning there.
For which purpose he sent Ambassadors into Kent: But the Royal Virgin who had
the devout Quern Aldiberga for her Mother, and Saint Augustine for her Spiritual
Father, who had instilld into her a Noble, and deeper sense of Christianity,
refused to hearken to such proposalls made by a Pagan, Idolatrous King. The
answer therefore brought back by the Ambassadors was according to Saint Beda,
That it was not lawful for a Christian Virgin to be married to a Pagan, Bed. l.
2. c. ^.
for fear least the Faith and Sacraments of the Celestial King should be
profaned by so near an association with a King who was ignorant in the Worship
due to the true God.

5. Notwithstanding this repulse, Edwin would not desist from his pretentions,
but remanding his Messengers with orders to press more earnestly the Marriage.
he assured King Eadbald and his Sister, Id. ib.
That for himself he would never do the least thing that might be contrary to
the Christian Faith professed by the Virgin: but rather would allow full
permission both to her and all those who came with her, men and women, Priests
and servants ^o enjoy after the Christian manner the perfect exercise of their
Religion, both as to an open Profession of their Faith, and performance of all
^ites belonging thereto. He added moreover, that he himself would not refuse to
embrace the same Religion, in case that after a serious examination by prudent
men it appeard to be more holy and beseeming the Majesty of God, then that in
which he had been brought up.

6* Such advantageous conditions as these from so potent a King could not be
refused: For no doubt the pious Virgin considered that, as to her self, there
would be no danger: and withal that hereby a way was opened to the gaining not
only of her husbands soul, but of the greatest part of his subjects too. This
was the very case of her own country: for by the marriage of a Christian Lady
into it, her Father had been well disposed to embrace the Christian Faith,
as soon as proposed by Saint Augustine: and he was no sooner converted, but
generally his whole Kingdom followed his Example. Besides Preachers were now
ready, and near at hand, not to be expected from foreign countries, or
strangers who had no knowledge of the Kingdoms language; and as for Religion it
self, it was become no wonder even among the Pagans, A. D. 626.
the fame of the great Miracles confirming it, was dispersed over the whole
Island, and no doubt would dispose the way for its reception.

7. Upon such considerations as these the Marriage was consented to. Yet before
her departure, the pious Virgin obtaind from Saint Iustus Archbishop of
Canterbury a man (...) indeed to be her Spiritual Father and Master, namely
Saint Paulinus, who was one of those which had been sent by Saint Gregory into
Brittany, to labor in the Harvest of souls. And moreover to enable him to
preach the Truth with greater authority and vigor, Paulinus (says Saint Beda)
was ordaind Bishop (of York) by Iustus Archbishop, on the twelfth day before
the Calends of August, and in the six hundred and five and twentieth year after
our Lords Incarnation.

8. Under the secure conduct of so prudent a Guide therefor the Royal Virgin
is sent to her Husband King Edwin: To whom likewise she presented Letters from
Pope Boniface, says Saint Beda, by whom they are at large recited: Bed. l. 2.
c. ^ ^^.
The substance whereof consisted in a summary Explication of the grounds of
Christianity, touching the Creation and fall of man, the Doctrine of the Holy
Trinity and Man's redemption, etc. from whence descending to exhortations to
renouncing Idolatry, the vanity and danger whereof he declared, he proposed King
Audubald (Eadbald) and his New Queen for his examples to follow in receiving
the sign of the Cross and Sacrament of Baptism, by which alone he might be
freed from the guilt of ^ins and eternal misery, etc. Hereto he added as a
sign of benediction from Saint Peter certain presents, a shirt adornd with gold
together with ( Laena ancyriana) a certain Robe of the Eastern fashion.

Id. ib.
9. The same Pope had likewise written a Letter to the Lady Ethelburga, In which
after expressing his joy for her own and her Brother King Eadbalds conversion,
he earnestly exhorted her to use all possible endeavors by persuasions to her
husband, and by prayers to God to instill into him a love of Christian Faith,
assuring her that he himself also would ioyn in the same prayers. He desired
her likewise to inform him by letters of the success of her pious endeavors:
concluding also with small presents of a Looking-glass set in silver, and an
Ivory comb gilded, etc.

10. It is not to be doubted but the pious Queen diligently followd such
charitable exhortations, and both by her words and example endeavored to
prepare her Husbands heart to admit the celestial Light of Divine Truth.
Neither can we suspect that Saint Paulinus would be wanting to contribute his
assistance in so pious a work. But King Edwin forgetful perhaps of the Divine
Oracles, could not suddenly be persuaded to renounce the Superstition received
from his Ancestors, and complying too much with vicious liberty, and instead
thereof to submitt his neck to Christ's yoke, easy only to hearts replenished
with Charity. A stronger hand therefore was necessary to expugn all
difficulties, and this, God was pleased to stretch forth ^o him the year
following.

XIII. CHAP. XIII. CHAPTER

1. King Edwin in danger to be murdered.

2.3. etc. His promises to become a Christian, upon conditions.

5. His War against the West Saxon Kings: and victory.

1. THE prosperity of King Edwin raisd extreme envy, especially in the mind of
Quichelm King of the West Saxons, and an equal desire to stopp the current of
it. But not daring to attempt this by a declared war, he had recourse to
treachery: and sent an Assassin under the show of a public Messenger to murder
him. King Edwin was then recreating himself in a country house at Auldby upon
the River Derwent, seven miles distant from York. It was then the day of the
Christian Paschal solemnity when the King was advertised of the Messengers
arrival, whom he commanded to be admitted: And while the King courteously
stretched forth his hand to salute him, the Assassin with a feigned submission
put his own hand under his Robe and took out a short sword, which with great
violence he directed against the King, and had certainly peirced him through,
had not a faithful servant of his, called Lilla, interposing himself, received
the sword into his own body. Notwithstanding so furious and forcible was the
thrust that the point of the sword passing through Lilla's body, entered a
little into the Kings, who was presently secured from further danger by his
Guards. Neither could the Messenger, whose name was Eumerus, be dispatched,
before he had slain another of the Kings soldiers called Forder.

2. This wound brought everlasting health both to the King and Kingdom of the
Northumbers. The Queen Ethelbuga was then great with child, and by the
consternation caused by that dismal accident and the Kings danger was before
her time the same night deliverd of a daughter. Whereupon the King partly in
gratitude to his Gods for his escape, and partly for joy of receiving issue,
obliged himself by certain vows to them (for he was naturally very devout) and
causing Public Prayers to be appointed, his intention was to sacrifise his
young daughter to the vain Idol worshipped by him. Which impious design of his
being come to the knowledge of Saint Paulinus, he very opportunely interposed
himself, and informed the King that he owed his present safety not to the false
Deities adored by him, but to the one only true God, from whom himself by
Prayer had obtaind safety both to the Father and daughter: and therefore that
it was just that the young child should be consecrated to Christ the Author of
his health.

3. Upon this remonstrance King Edwin was somewhat moved: but yet replied, What
assurance can then give me that I owe mine own and my daughters life to the
God worshipped by thee, and not to mine own Deities? Hereto Paulinus answered by
setting forth the impotency of Idols, and omnipotency of the true God: adding
other considerations touching the Queens sanctity very acceptable to God, and
her Prayers also for his life and prosperity. Well, said the King, who was then
recoverd of his wound, I will now putt it to the trial, whether I am to give
thanks for my present safety and happy successes to thy God, or no. I am
resolved to invade this murdrous King: If Christ whom thou adorest will give
me victory, I engage my Faith here to serve and worship him alone. In the mean
time, since Ethelburga earnestly desires it, I resign my child to be disposed
of by thee, and initiated in the Mysteries of thine and her Religion: And
moreover I promise, in case I return from this war with health and victory,
that I will seriously deliberate of the great affair, and will do as thou
advisest me.

4. S. Paulinus infinitely glad at these promises of the King departed from him,
and on the solemn day of Pentecost following baptized this firstborn child of
Ethelburga, together with twelve others of the Kings family, says S. Beda, who
were the first fruits of that Nation: And then was accomplished the Oracle
pronounced by S. Gregory, and Alleluia with great joy sung among them. The name
imposed on the child was Eanfleda. She was afterward a Queen, and illustrious
for Sanctity: concerning whom more shall be related in due place.

Bed. l. 2. c. 9.
5. King Edwin deferd not the war: but the same year gathering a great army,
says S. Beda, he marched against the West Saxons: and coming to a battle he
gaind the victory: after which he either killd, or had surrendered to him all
those whom he was informed, had conspired his death. Florilegus adds, that
Quichelm (whom he calls Quinchelin) was slain in the place of battle,
Florileg. hic.
which place in testimony of his victory Edwin called Quinchelines hame. And so
returned with triumph into his own kingdom. Malmsbur. l. 1. c. 2.
But William of Malmsbury affirms that both the West Saxon Kings, Kinegils and
Quichelm, escaped, and not long after embraced the Christian Faith by the
preaching of Berinus a holy Bishop: likewise that they fought prosperously
against Penda King of the Mercians.

XIV. CHAP. XIV. C.

1.2. King Edwin wonderfully converted to Christianity.

3.4. etc. A General Assembly called: in which Idolatry is renounced: and the
Christian Faith received.

11. The place of this Assembly.

1. CErtain it is that King Edwin obtaind an illustrious victory, A. D. 626.
as shortly appeard by his acknowledgment of his obligation to discharge the
Vow he had made to Almighty God. Notwithstanding at the first he delayed, partly
upon a pretense of public affairs, and partly out of a desire to deliberate
more maturely. Bed. l. 2 c 9.
For being a man (as S. Beda says) naturally of a peircing sagacious Spirit,
he would oftimes sit alone, silent, but revolving in his mind many doubtful
thoughts what he should resolve upon, and what Religion he should profess. He
was already unsatisfied in his own superstition, but withal he had framed in
his mind objections against Christian Religion: He thought it misbecoming a
great victorious King to submit his neck to the yoke of one who had been
crucified, etc.

2. On a certain day as he was agitated with such uncertain thoughts, Saint
Paulinus, no doubt by divine Inspiration, came suddenly to him, and laying his
hand on the Kings head, severely asked him, Whether he called to mind that Sign
of his Faith and promise formerly given when he was in a private condition, an
exild person, and in imminent danger of death? And he bad him take heed how he
continued longer a rebel against God: since he who had raised him up so high,
could as easily depresse him. The King was struck with this unexpected
behavior of Saint Paulinus: but having recovered the freedom of his thoughts,
and perfectly remembering the forementioned Divine Oracle, he presently fell at
Saint Paulinus his feet, acknowledging his guilty doubtfullnes, and submitting
himself to obey what soever he should command him from God, whom, by a new
infused Light, he perceived to have been his Guide through strange and
wonderful ways to his Divine saving Truth. Now all his doubts and objections
vanished, and he is resolved not only himself to become a servant of Christ,
but to endeavor to make his subjects also companions with him in that happy
servitude. He perceives a complete effect of all the promises formerly made by
the invisible Messenger, and he condemns his own slownes in corresponding to
the Divine Goodness.

3. But withal considering what inward suspicions and commotions in men's minds
a sudden public change of Religion would probably cause, he with the advice
and approbation of Saint Paulinus thought fit to proceed with as much prudence
and caution as might be, and by calling a General Assembly of his Estates, to
endeavor to make the introducing of Christian Religion an Act of the Kingdom,
as well as of the King. To this expedient Saint Paulinus the rather consented,
because since the Queen and her Christian families coming, he saw a general
disesteem of their Idoll-Gods among the people.

4. The great Assembly being convened, the King in the first place signified to
them the great and signal blessings he had received from God, and how desirous
he was to express his gratitude to his Benefactour. But since several Nations
according to their fancy appropriated to themselves many peculiar Gods, he
could not persuade himself there could be any more then One Omnipotent God.
That therefore which he desired to propose to their serious considerations was,
Which God they should devote themselves to. He added, That the virtuous
innocent life of his Queen and her family had begot in his mind a greater
esteem of the God whom she adored then any other, and whether they should
adhere to him only, rejecting all their impotent Idols, he desired them
faithfully to advise.

5. Such a discourse of the King was hearkened to attentively by the whole
company present, neither did any one among them express any dislike of his
proposal. Yea moreover a certain person among them named Coifius, who was the
Chief Pontife of the Pagan Superstition, freely confessed the vanity and
impotency of the Idols which they had served, and added that a plurality of
Gods contradicted human reason: concluding that One only God was to be
worshipped: But whether the Religion professed by the Queen should be admitted,
that he desired them further to consider of. As Soon as he had ended his speech
the whole Assembly unanimously cried out, Let the Idol-Gods be taken away, and
the Religion of Christ professed. But Coifius added moreover, That he thought
fit that the Queens Chief Priest Paulinus should be admitted to give an
account of the Christian Religion professed by him: which when they heard, they
might more advisedly proceed.

6. Hereupon Saint Paulinus was sent for, and required to expound to them
plainly and sincerely the Nature, qualities and condition of the Religion
professed by himself and the Queen. This task he cheerfully undertook, and with
a discourse full of prudence and zeal, began with an invective against the
Idol-Superstition in practice among them, showing that the Gods which they
worshipped were at the best but mortal and sinful men unable to help, and
many of them mere fictions of men's brains, or wicked impious Spirits, which
sought no other thing but the eternal perdition of their Worshippers. Then he
demonstrated that the Creator of Heaven and Earth could be but one only God,
the Principle and End of all things. Yet that, notwithstanding this Unity of
Nature, there was in the Deity such a fecundity of divine perfections, that
three Subsistences or Persons were to be distinguished, which three
notwithstanding are but one God. That among these, the Second Person the
Eternal Son of God out of infinite Love to Men lost in sin and misery, had
mercifully taken our Nature on him, and by his humi^ity had exalted us, by
delivering a Law full of Sanctity and Perfection, which Law he confirmed with
his own death, by which he made himself a Sacrifice of atonement for our Sins:
And after death by his own power restored himself to life, and in the sight of
many hundreds of Witnesses ascended gloriously into heaven, thereby in his own
person giving an assured proof that those who believed in him and lived
according to his Law, should by the same power be raised from death, to live
for ever with him in happiness incomprehensible. That Christians therefore
having such infinite obligations to Christ their Savior, joyfully profess, and
are not ashamed to worship him who was willingly crucified, since by a death so
full of torment and shame he made them for ever free from all shame and
torments.

7. What has been hitherto recounted, is conformable to Saint Beda's relation:
But the success of Saint Paulinus his Discourse shall be declared in his own
expression. Bed. l.
After this, says he, King Edwin having first consulted with the most eminent
in wisdom among them, asked them singly one by one what opinion they had of
this Doctrine and new manner of Worship, of which they had never heard before.
Hereto Coifi the Prime Pontife presently answered: Do thou, O King, consider
how this Doctrine newly preached before us is to be esteemd: for mine own part I
declare upon assured knowledge and experience, that the Religion which we have
professed hitherto has in it neither virtue nor proffit at all. There is not
any of your Subjects has been more diligent and zealous in the service of our
Gods, then my self: yet there are very many who have received far greater
benefits and dignities from you then I have: Now if our Gods were of any power
or gratitude they would surely be most kind to them by whom they are best
served. It remains therefore, that if in your opinion the advices lately given
us, how new soever, be indeed better and of more proffit, we should without
delay admit them.

8. To this discrett persuasion of Coifi another of the Kings Nobles assenting,
added, The present life of man upon earth compared with the time following it,
whose end is uncertain to us, seems to me as if, Whilst your Majesty are
feasting with your Nobles in the winter time in a room warmed with a good fire,
whilst abroad cold winds and tempests do rage, a silly sparrow entering into
the room at a window should presently fly out at another opposite to it: During
that moment of time in which she passes through the room, she feels not the
bitterness of the winter: but immediately she enters into the tempestuous cold,
and flies out of your sight. It is just so with this present life: it appears
for a short moment: but what follows, or what went before it, we are utterly
ignorant of. Therefore if this new Doctrine can give us any certainty what
shall befall us after this short life, it deserves to be embraced.

9. These and such other Discourses passed among the Kings Counselors and
Ancients of the Assembly. To which Coifi again adjoynd, that he was desirous to
hear Paulinus once more discourse to this point, of the God whom he preached.
Which being done by the Kings command, Coifi cried out, It is not of late only
that I have understood that the Gods worshipped by us are nothing worth:
because the more studiously I sought for Truth in their service, the less I
found. Now therefore I openly profess that in this man's discourse the Truth
appears manifestly, and such a Truth as is able to conferr on us the Gifts of
life and eternal happiness. Therefore my counsel is, O King, that without
delay our Temples and Altars, from which we never received good, may be cursed
and given to the fire.

10. In conclusion, not to be tedious, the King openly and plainly professed
his assent to the Doctrine preached by Saint Paulinus, and renouncing his former
Idolatry acknowledged that he received the Faith of Christ: And having demanded
of the foresaid Pontife, to whom the care of pro^aning the Altars, Temples and
ground about them dedicated to Superstition, should be committed: His Answer
was, To none but my self: For who is more fit to be a pattern for others in
destroying those things which in the time of my folly I worshipped, then my
self, now that by wisdom newly inspired by God I see their vanity? And having
said this, immediately abjuring his Superstition, he desired the King that he
might be furnished with arms and a horse: which having mounted, he hastened to
destroy the Idols. In which manner he rode, to declare publicly his deserting
his former profession: For it was against their Superstitious Law for a Pontife
to carry arms, or to ride except upon a mare. Thus being girt with a sword, and
having a lance in his hand, mounted likewise on the Kings horse he went to the
Idol-Temples. A. D. 627.
When the common people saw this, they thought him out of his wits: but he
went on however, and when he was come to the Temple he profaned it by casting
into it the lance which he held in his hands, showing great joy for the
knowledge of the true God which he had newly learnt. And having done this, he
commanded his companions to destroy and burn to the ground the Temple and all
buildings belonging to it.

11. The place where this Assembly was held and Idols destroyed is thus
described by the same Saint Beda; Bed. l. 2. c. 13.
Men show the place where the Idol-temple formerly stood: It is not far from
York, toward the East beyond the River Derwen, and it is at this day called
Godmundigham, where the foresaid Pontife, by Divine Inspiration, polluted and
destroyed the Heathen Altars which himself had consecrated. The memory thereof
has likewise been conserved ever since Saint Beda's time, being still called
Godmunham, or the mansion of the false Heathen Gods. Yet some Authors ascribe
an higher Original thereto, as far as the ancient British and Roman times: For
they conceive that the town called Delgovitia (which in the British tongue
signifies an Idol) was anciently seated here.

12. Hereto accords this Observation of Camden in his perambulation through
these parts, Camden in Brigant.
I do not doubt, says he, but that in the times of the Britains here was a
famous Oracle, when Superstition, spread through all Nations, had more strongly
possessed the minds of the ignorant inhabitants. But when Paulinus preached
Christ to the Northumbers, Coyfi who was the Pontife of their Pagan Ceremonies,
having embraced Christian Religion, was the first who by casting a lance into
it, profaned the Temple, a Mansion of impiety there.

XV. CHAP. XV. CHA.

1.2. etc. King Edwin Baptized: and great numbers of his Subjects.

1. KING Edwin though perfectly converted, A. D. 627.
deferred hic Baptism to the year following which probably he did to the end he
might have more companions of his happiness. Bed. l. 2. c. 14.
Saint Beda thus relates it: King Edwin with all the Nobles of his kingdom, and
great multitudes of the common people received the Faith and Laver of
Regeneration (or Baptism) in the eleaventh year of his Reign, which was the
year of our Lords Incarnation six hundred twenty seven, and about the hundred
and eightieth after the coming of the English into Brittany. He was baptized at
York, on the Holy Feast of the Paschal Solemnity, the day before the Ides of
April, in the Church of Saint Peter the Apostle, which, during the time of his
instructing in the Faith, he commanded to be suddenly erected for that purpose.

2. This Church for the quicker dispatch was at first built of wood: and though
of a good capacity, yet it was too narrow to receive all that flockd to
Baptism: among which are named Offrid and Edfrid, the Kings Sons born to him by
his Queen Quenburga whilst he was in exile.

3. In the same City of York ( says Saint Beda) he assigned the Episcopal
See to his Teacher and Prelat Saint Paulinus. Id. ib.
And presently after his Baptism, upon the proposal of Saint Paulinus, he took
order for the erecting a far larger and more magnificent Church in the same
place: and in the midst of the New Church was enclosed the Oratory built
before. The foundations therefore being prepared in a large square on all sides
of the former Oratory, the Churches building went on with great diligence.

4. How wonderfully King Edwins good example drew the rest of his Subjects in
other parts to seek instruction in Christian Faith, is thus described by the
same Author: It is reported that the peoples fervor to embrace the Christian
Faith, Id. ib.
and their desire to be initiated by Baptism was so great, that on a certain
time when Saint Paulinus attending the King and Queen came to a certain
country Palace of theirs at a Town called Adregin ( or rather, Adgefrin, now
Yeverin, seated in the utmost parts of Northumberland) he was obliged to stay
there thirty six days, spending that whole time from morning till evening in
Catechizing and baptising such as came to him, in the River Glent, which flowd
not far of This village was deserted in the times of the following Kings, who
made their abode in another called Melmin, (but now Melfeild.) In the same
country of the Bernicions, not far from that place there is a Town, Camden. in
Northumb.
says Camden, called Halyston (or Holy Stone) where the report is, that in the
Primitive Church of the Saxons Saint Paulinus baptized three thousand persons.

5. But a more plentiful harvest did Saint Paulinus reap in the other
Province, of Deiri, containing Yorkshire, etc. For thus Saint Beda prosecutes
his Story: Bed. l 2. c. 14.
In the Province of the Deiri where for the most part Saint Paulinus made his
abode with the King, he baptized greater numbers in the River Swale which
passes by a village called Cataract: For as yet in the infancy of that Church
Oratoryes and Fonts could not so soon be built. Notwithstanding at Campodon,
where the King had a Royal Mansion, he erected a Church, which afterward the
Pagans by whom King Edwin was slain, set on fire together with the town
adjoining. Instead of which the following Kings built themselves another in the
Territory called Leidis (or Leeds.) Notwithstanding the Altar belonging to the
said Church escaped the fire, A. D. 628.
because it was of Stone: and it is to this day kept in the Monastery of the
most Reverend Abbot Trumwulsi, which is seated in the forest Elmete. This place
Campodon is the same which now is called Almondbury, but the true name is
Albonbury, Camden in Brigant.
says Camden, from a Church built there, which was consecrated to Saint Alban
by Saint Paulinus the Apostle of the Saxons. And to this day the black color
of the Stones remaining of its ruins do testify its burning.

6. Among the persons baptized by Saint Paulinus we must not omit three Royal
Infants which Queen Ethelburga bore to King Edwin, concerning whom Saint Beda
thus writes, Bed. ib.
In the time following there were baptized by him other children of King Edwin
by his Queen Edilburga. Their names were, Edilhime, Edilfrida a daughter, and
another son called Wlfrea: Of which the two former were taken out of this life
whilst they were in their white robes of Baptism, and were buried in the Church
at York.

XVI. CHAP. XVI. CHAPTER

1.2.3. Christianity received in Lincolnshire.

4.5. Saint Iustus Archbishop of Canterbury dying: Saint Honorius succeed,
him: who is consecrated by Saint Paulinus.

1 NEITHER was the piety of King Edwin and zeal of Saint Paulinus confined to
the Provinces on the North-side of Humber: A. D. 628.
but their effects passed over that River the year following into the Province
of the Coritani, or Lincolnshire: For thus consonantly to Saint Beda, writes
Florilegus: In the year of Grace six hundred twenty eight the Archbishop
Paulinus converted to the Faith of Christ the Province of Lindissa, Florileg.
hic.
which lies on the South-coast of the River Humber. And the first baptized by
him was Blecca governor of the Prime City thereof (Lindocollina) with all his
family. In which City he likewise built a Church. Bed. l. 2. c. 16.
Which Church (says Saint Beda) was of stone, of exquisite work: the Roof
whereof either by negligence or hostile violence is cast down, but the walls
are yet standing: and every year in that place miraculous cures are wrought, to
the great benefit of those who in devotion visit it.

2. The same Saint Beda also testifies that the Pious King Edwin accompanied
Saint Paulinus in this devout labor, and was present when he baptized a very
great multitude in the River Trent. Id. Ibid.
Concerning the Faith of the inhabitants of this Province belonging to the
kingdom of the Mercians, says he, I was told by a certain Abbot and Priest
called Deda of the Monastery of Peurtanei, a man of great integrity, that an
ancient man had assured him that he himself was one of those who had been
baptized by Saint Paulinus at Midday, King Edwin being present: and that a
great multitude were also baptized with him in the River Trent near a City
called in the English tongue Tiovulsingacestir. The same man was likewise w^nt
to describe the shape of the said Holy Bishop, that he was a man of a tall
stature, but some what bowing, that he had black hair, a lean face, a nose
somewhat rising, that he was very slender, and with his aspect begetting both
veneration and terror in the beholders. He had lik^Wise attending him a Deacon
called James, Who was a man very illustrious in Christ and his Church, who lived
to our very times.

3. We read likewise in Camden that in the Province of Nottingham at the same
time a Church was built and consecrated to the Blessed Virgin at a town called
Southwell: ^amden. in Coritan.
the which Church, as the fame goes, Was erected by Paulinus first Archbishop
of York, when he baptized the inhabitants of this country in the River Trent.
He conjectures likewise very probably that this Southwel was the same City of
the Mercians which Saint Beda calls Tiovulfingacestir.

4. The same year dyed S. Iustus Archbishop of Canterbury after he had
administered that See three entire years. Harpif. saee. 7. c. 7.
He was a Bishop, says Harps-feild, of such integrity that the Name of Iustus
may seem to have been given him rather to honor his virtues, then as belonging
to his family. Which virtues were acknowledged to be in him, and wonderfully
cherished by Pope Boniface the fourth (rather fifth) who likewise by his
Letters exhorted him to consummate to the end his so excellent course of piety.
He ended this mortal life the fourth day before the Ides of November: and was
buried in the Church of Saint Peter and Saint Paul, near to Saint Augustine.

5. His Successor in the Archbishopric was Honorius, who indeed deserved all
Honor for his piety and zeal in preaching the Gospel. When he was to be
ordaind, he came to Saint Paulinus, Bed. l. 2. c 18
who met him in the City of Lincoln, where he was consecrated the fifth
Prelat of that See after Saint Augustine, says Saint Beda. Hereby it appears
that Saint Paulinus either had before this received his Pall, or at least a
power of ordaining the Prime Archbishop in case of vacancy, without the
assistance of any other Bishops. Which Privilege, considering the penury of
Bishops at this time, Honor. P. Ep.
was by Pope Honorius shortly after conferred on each of those two Sees, in
these terms, That when either of the Archbishops should leave this world and
return to his Creator, the surviver might ordain another in his place. This
appears in the Letters of the said Pope to King Edwin and Saint Paulinus,
written five years after this. Notwithstanding this Ordination of Honorius to
the Archbishopric seems to have been conferred on him not the same year that
Saint Iustus dyed, A. D. 629.
but the year following: during which time probably such Faculties were sent
from Rome.

XVII. CHAP. XVII. C.

1.2. etc. Of Penda the cruel King of the Mercians: His war against the
West Saxons.

1. AFter such hopeful beginnings of the Gospel in the kingdom of the
Mercians, A. D. 629.
the progress thereof was interrupted by the violence of Penda, King of those
Provinces, a Prince of an ambitious, turbulent and cruel nature, and one who
professedly bore an irreconcilable enmity to Christian Religion. He is by some
Authors esteemd the first King of the Mercians: For Cridae (descended in the
tenth degree from Woden, the Idol-deity of the Saxons,) about the year of Grace
five hundred eighty five invading the midland Provinces of this Island, laid
the first foundations of that Kingdom. To him succedeed his Son Wibba, who by
fire and sword enlarged the bounds thereof. After him reigned Ceorl (whose
daughter Quenburga was the first wife of King Edwin:) and he dying, Penda, a
Son likewise of Wibba, inherited the Crown, and more then all his Predecessors
rendered the Name and power of the Mercians formidable to all their Neighbors.
The former Princes are said to have contented themselves whith the Title of
Dukes: and Penda to have assumed that of King. Malmsbur l. 1. de Reg. c. 4.


2. He was according to William of Malmsbury, fifty years old when he ascended
the Throne, which was in the year of our Lords Incarnation six hundred twenty
six: a Prince illustrious for his descent, active and vigilant in war, and who
by frequent excursions into his Neighbors Provinces, had nourished and much
increased his boldness: But withal he was even fanatically zealous in his Pagan
superstition and impiety. Therefore as soon as he was possessed of the Kingdom,
being impatient of rest, and not regarding how great a crime an unjust war was,
he infested the neighboring Cities, disturbed the bounds of his confining
Saxon Princes, and filld all the Provinces about him with tumult and terror.
Fl^rileg. hic. Eth. lvverd. in ^bron. Huntingd. ^^


3. In the third year of his reign, in which happened the Conversion of Blecca
Governor of Lincoln, he broke into open war against Kinegils and Quicelm Kings
of the West Saxons: and beleaguerd the City of Cirencester belonging to them.
To raise which siege they gathred a great army, and came to battle: Which was
fought a whole day together with extreme fury, each army having abjured flight:
so that only want of light severed them. The next morning, both sides being
much weakened, by the intercession of persons of more moderation, they entered
into conditions of peace, and retired.

4. Cirencester, where this battle was fought, is the same ancient City which
Ptolomy calls Corinium, Antoninus, Cornovium, and the Britains, Ca^r-Cori: It
is seated in the Province of the Dobuni (Glocestershire) at the River Corin,
Camden in (...).
now called Churn. The ruins of the ancient walls containing a circuit of two
miles, show it to have been a large City. It belonged to the West Saxons: for
we read how Penda King of the Mercians besieging it with a numerous army, was
discomfited by Kinegils the West Saxon King. Yet it came afterward into the
power of the Mercians, and so remained till the English Monarchy.

XVIII. C.
XVIII. CHAP.
1.2. King Edwins Tufa, or Ensign of the Cross.

4. Conwal King of the Scotts: his devout veneration of the Cross.

5. Custom of subscribing Charters with the Cross: now began.

A. D. 629. Bed. l. 2. c. 16.
1. THVS tumults and bloodshed raged in the Province of the Pagan Saxons,
Whereas after receiving of the Gospel says S. Beda, there followd so great
peace through all the parts of Brittany to which the Empire of Edwin extended,
that according to the vulgar saying, If a woman alone with her newborn infant
should travel through the whole Island from Sea to Sea, she might do it
without the least danger. And such solicitude the King showed to procure the
commodity of his Subjects, that in most places where he saw any fresh spring
rising near the Highways, he would for the refreshment of travellours cause
brazen vessels with provisions, (caucos) to be set upon posts, which no man
would presume to make use of beyond necessity, such was the greatness either of
their fear or love to him. The Majesty likewise and splendor in which he lived
was so great, that whither so ever he went Ensigns were carried before him, and
this not in war-time only, but likewise in peace. Moreover in his progress
both through Cities and country that kind of Ensign which the Romans called
Tufa, and the English Tuf, was born on high before him.

2. This Ensign, according to Lipsius was a Ball or Globe, which Augustus used
as a Mark of Monarchical Soverainty. But Christian Emperors and Kings were
accustomed to fix a golden Cross upon the said Ball, as we see in many of
their ancient Coins: Particularly in those of the Emperor Heraclius and his
Son, who the same year that King Edwin was baptized recovered the Holy Cross
which Cosroes the Persian King had taken from Jerusalem: after which time the
Veneration of Princes thereto much increased.

3. Particularly of King Edwin we read that he bore with him a Cross of Gold,
which his Queen Ethelberga after his death carried with her into Kent. Neither
can his reverence to that Sacred Ensign of our Salvation be doubted of, Camden
in Yorkshire.
since his Master and Prelat S. Paulinus caused many Crosses to be erected
through the Kingdom. One of which Camden testifies to have been lately extant
at Deusborough (Duisburgum) a town in Yorkshire on the river Calder, with this
Inscription, Paulinus preached and celebrated (Mass) here.

4. Neither can this veneration of the Cross be imputed to these Roman
Missioners, as if they had first introduced it into this Island, for besides
many Examples already mentioned, our Historian Hollinshead will inform us that
Conwall King of the Scotts in the year of Grace five hundred sixty nine,
Hollingsh. in Scotland. f. 1, 6.
was carried with such devotion to the Holy Cross, that whither soever he went,
he made it be born before him: and both when he mounted on horsback and
descended, he prostrated himself before it, and reverently kissed it, as his
attendants likewise did (according to the fore mentioned example of S. Alban.)
That Cross was of Silver, to which was fixed the Image of Christ crucified:
and this Inscription was upon it, The glory of Christians. He commanded
likewise a Wooden Cross to be set upon the tops of Churches, over the gates
of Castles, Cities and most eminent Towers.

5. From the same respect proceeded the practice of subscribing Charters and
other public Writings with golden Crosses and other like sacred marks, Ingulf.
f.
which continued in use, says Ingul^us, to the days of S. Edward the
Confessor. And Seldom adds, That it was not rashly or without cause that
Writings and Instruments for conveying Lands, etc. were generally signed with
such sacred Marks: since Supreme Princes did usually carry round Balls with
Crosses (Staurophoros globulos) as testimonies of their Soverainty. For so
Suidas relates of the Emperor Justinian, that he carried in his left hand a
globe with a Cross for a sign that by his Faith in the Cross he became Lord
of the Earth. The like intention, no doubt, had King Edwin in carrying his Tufa
before him, signifying that he ascribed to the Virtue of the Holy Cross, and
his Faith in Christ crucified, all the Empire which he possessed.

A. D. 633

XIX. CHAPTER


XIX. CHAP.
1.2. A Controversy about Easter

3.4. etc. An Irish Synod determining the said Controversy. Of S. Lesrean, S.
Munnu, etc.

A. D. 630.
1. WHilst all things were so peaceable in King Edwins Dominions, commotions
were renewed among the Britains and Scotts touching the celebration of Easter.
Their practice discordant from the whole Church S. Beda calls the error of the
Quartodecimani: Bed. de sex. ae^a^ib. ad A.M. 4591.
which is not to be understood strictly, for they always observed it on a
Sunday: But their account was such that when the fourteenth day of the Moon
fell upon a Sunday they kept the Paschall Solemnity on that day, as the Jews
and Quartodecimani did: whereas in that case according to the Decree of the
Synod of Nicea, Id. ib.
they ought to deferr it till the Sunday following. He adds, That Pope H^norius
by an Epistle reproved their practice, and Pope John his next Successor after
Severinus, as soon as he was elected to the Pontificat wrote to them likewise
upon the same subject, and touching the Pelagian Heresy, which was revived
among them.

2. In like manner Ado of Vienna in his Chronicle testifies that at this time
among the Scots a very great Error arose touching the Solemnity of Easter. Ado
Vienn. Chron. aetai 6.
He calls it (errorem maximum) a very great Error, both because it was
esteemed a kind of Sacrilege to conform with the Jews in Christian solemnities;
and likewise because all the Mysteries and Feasts of our Lord almost depended
on this of Easter, so that upon a wrong solemnization of it there followed a
great distraction among Christians in the Worship of God.

3. The occasion of mentioning this by the said Authors, was because at this
time a great Synod was convok'd in Ireland about this controversy, which had
been agitated formerly by S. Columba and his Disciples. For a certain Irish
Abbot named Lasrean earnestly defended the Roman custom, whereas S. Munnu
(otherwise called Fintan or Finten) as earnestly opposed it. Vsser. in Primord.
f. 959.
In which Saints life (says B. Usher) we find these particulars related
thouching this Synod. On a certain time there was a great Council of the people
of Ireland assembled in the White field: among whom there arose a great
contention about the order of observing Easter. For Lasrean Abbot of the
Monastery of Leighlenne, under whom lived fifteen hundred Monks, defended the
New order which came from Rome. But others defended their old practice. Now
Saint Munnu came not presently to this Council therefore all the rest expected
him. The said Saint was for the Old custom. Then Subne Son of Domnail, A. D.
619.
and Duke of the Region Huamaircha said, Why do you expect so long this filthy
Leper? But Abbot Lasrean answered him, O Duke, do not speak ill of Saint Munnu,
for though he be absent in body, yet in Spirit he is present here, and no doubt
wheresoever he is he hears what thou have said, and our Lord will avenge upon
thee the injury of his servant. Now the same day before even Saint Munnu came
to the Council: and the company went went to meet him. And when Saint Lasrean
and Saint Munnu saluted one another, Duke Subne was likewise present, and asked
Saint Munnu his benediction. To whom the Man of God said, Why do thou ask the
benediction of a Leper? I tell thee for certain that when thou spokest so vily
of me, our Lord himself blushed at the right hand of his Father: For I am a
true member of Christ, who is my head: now the head is sensible of every injury
done to any member. Wherefore before this Month be ended some of thy kindred
shall kill thee, and cut off thy head: and cast it into the River Berow, which
shall never appear more. And so indeed it came to pass: for the same Month his
Brothers Son killed him near the River Blathach, and his head was cast into the
River, according to the Prophecy of the Man of God.

4. After these words, S. Munnu said to Abbot Lasrean before the people: It is
time the Council were ended, that every one may return to his own home. We have
a contention about the Order of the Paschal Solemnity: let us dispatch it in a
word, and pronounce Sentence in the Name of our Lord. I here offer thee, O
Lasrean, the choice of these three things: Let two Books, one of the old Order,
and one of the New be cast into the fire, and we shall see which of them shall
escape burning. Or let one of thy Monks and another of mine be shutt up
together in a house, and fire set to it; we shall then see which of them shall
be delivered. Or let us go to the grave of the Monk Iustus lately dead, and
restore him to life: and he shall tell us which of the two practices is best,
and let that be observed this year

5. After these proposals of S. Manna, S. Lasrean said, We will not contend
with thee, being assured that so great are the merits of thy labors and
Sanctity, that if thou should command that Mountain Marga to come into this
White field, or this White field to remove to that Mountain Marga, God would
not delay to do it for thee. Now they were in the White field at that time,
over which the Mountain Marga hangs. After this, the people consenting to these
Saints, returned to their houses. Or (as it is more fully expressed in another
Copy) after they all had professed their consent to the Holy man Munnu, they
returned home joyful.

6. Which consent, it is to be feared was to the Old erroneous Order: Id. Ib.
although Cummian in his Epistle to the Abbot Segeni affirms that in the said
Council the Bishops decreed that the year following the Paschal solemnity
should be celebrated together with the Universal Church. A. D. 632.
But it appears from Bishop Vshers observation that they kept Easter
differently from the Roman practice: for he adds, That year in which the
Council was assembled seems to have been the six hundred and thirtieth
according to the Christian account, which year the Irish, following the Cycle
of eighty four years, kept Easter day being Sunday on the first of April, which
was an entire week before the time prescribed in the Alexandrine Cycle of
Nineteen years (Enneadecateride) received by the Romans: Whereas the year
following, there interceded a full Month between the two accounts: for the
Irish kept Easter on the one and twentieth of April, and the Romans on the four
and twentieth of March.

A. D. 631.
7 Notwithstanding the summary deciding of this Controversy in the foresaid
Irish Synod, called the Synod of Leny from the place where it was kept, to
which the White field belonged, and in which the Archbishop of Imelac
presided: yet many there were unsatisfied, being desirous to explore the Order
observed at Rome: For the ^ore named Cummian in his Epistle to the said Abbot
Segeni writes thus: Ap. Vsser. in Syll^ge Epist. E. bern. 11. f. 637.
We sent to Rome certain persons of whose prudence and humility we had
experience, as Children to their Mother: Who by the Divine Will had a
prosperous voyage thither, and three years after returned to us. And there
according as they had heard, they saw all things, to be: yea they were now more
assured having seen, then they were before upon report. There they observed the
Paschall Solemnity in the Church of Saint Peter, in the company of a Grecian,
converted Jew, a Scythian and Egyptian, all which were their companions in the
same ^odging: Which Paschall Solemnity was a whole month distant from ours. The
same men before the Feast protested to us, that upon their knowledge Easter was
celebrated through the whole world the same day it was at Rome.

8. The same Bishop Usher moreover testifies that the foresaid Abbot Lasrean
with fifty others went to Rome this year about the same affair, Vsser. in I^d.
Chronolog. hic.
immediately after the Synod of Lechen (or Leny:) where he was ordaind Bishop by
the Pope, and moreover constituted his Legate in Ireland: Where after nine years
he dyed. So that probably he and his companions were the same mentioned in the
Letter of Cummian.

XX. CHAP. A. D. 633.

XX. CHAPTER



1. Erpenwald King of the East Angles converted: and for that made a Martyr.

2.3. etc Letters of Pope Honorius concerning the Paschall Solemnity, etc.

1. ANother proof of the piety and zeal of King Edwin to propagate the Faith
or Christ beyond the limits of his own kingdom, A. D. 632.
was given by him in the year of Grace six hundred thirty two, Bed. l. 2. c.
in which he dealt effectually with Erpenwald the Son of Redwald King of the
East Angles to renounce vain, impure Idols, and not only himself to receive the
Faith and Sacraments of Christ, but to induce his Subjects to do the like.
Neither did his zeal want a good effect, for Erpenwald, says William of
Malmsbury, embraced pu^e incorupt Christianity. Malmsb. de Reg l. 1. c. 5.
But the propagating the same right Faith among his Subjects was hindered by his
death: for not long after his profession of Christianity, says S. Beda, he was
slain by a certain Pagan named Ricbert: Bed. ib.
and thence it came that that Province continued three years longer in
Heathenish Error. He is deservedly styled a Martyr, because it was for his
Religion, and his care to introduce it into his kingdom that he was slain by
the procurement of that great Enemy of Christ, Penda King of the Mercians, as
Huntingdon affirms.

2. This year according to Baronius, Huntingd. l. Baron. A. D 633.
King Edwin sent Messengers to Rome, desiring Pope Honorius to send Palls both
to S. Paulinus Archbishop of York, and to Honorius Archbishop of Canterbury
To which request the Pope c^ndescending, returned an Answer by letters the
King, and with them sent the two Palls.

3 These arrived in Brittany the year following. Now in his Letters to King
Edwin called by S. Beda, A. D. 633. Bed. l. 2. c. 17.
exhortatory Letters (the Copy of which is recorded by him) after
^ongratulating with him for his piety and zeal, he with a fatherly charity
incites him to persist continually and advance in the Faith of that saving
truth which he had embraced. Adding withal, that at his request he had sent
two Palls for the two Metropolitans, Honorius and Paulinus, with a Faculty
enabling each of them, by his authority to subrogate another when either of
them should depart this life. This privilege he granted as well out of his
affection to the King, as in consideration of the great distance between Rome
and Brittany.

4. At the same time likewise Pope Honorius wrote letters to Honorius the new
Archbishop of Canterbury, Ib. c. 18.
in which, says S Beda, he renewd the Decree mentioned in the former letter,
That when the Archbishop of Canterbury or York should dye, he who remaind
al^ve, being of the same degree, should have power to ordain another in the
place of him who was dead: that it might not be necessary to weary themselves
with sending to Rome through so far extended spaces of land and Sea for the
ordaining an Archbishop. He further signified that he had sent him a Pall, and
another to S. Paulinus for the same purpose. The Exemplar of this Letter is
likewise extant in S. Beda.

5. Moreover the same year Pope Honorius wrote to the Scotts touching their
Error about Easter: Id. c. 9.
for thus writes the same Author: The same Pope likewise directed Letters to
the Nation of the Scotts having found that they erred in the observation of the
Paschal solemnity: Whom he earnestly exhorted not to prefer their own reason,
being inconsiderable for their paucity, and living in the utmost bounds of the
world, before all other Churches both ancient and Modern through the whole
world, and consequently that they would not celebrate another different Easter,
contrary to the Paschall computations and Synodal Decrees of the Vneversal
Church.

Vsser. ^in Primor. l f 934
6 The success of which Letters is thus declared by B. Usher, That these
admonitions were not unproffitable I partly collect from Beda, who relates how
the Scotts dwelling in the Southern parts of Ireland by the advice given them
from the Bishop of the Apostolic See were taught to observe Easter after the
Canonical Rite; and partly from Cummian who lived at the same time, and in his
Epistle to Segeni Abbot of the Monastery of Hye writes thus touching the first
admitting in Ireland the great Cycle of the Alexandrins consisting of five
hundred thirty two years, composed of the multiplication of nineteen (or the
Cycle of the Sun) into eight and twenty (the Cycle of the Moon) The first year,
says he, in which the Cycle of five hundred thirty two years was received by
our contrymen. I my self received it not, but held my peace, neither daring
to discommend, nor commend it But after a year was passed, I consulted the
Successor of our Holy Fathers Albeus Bishop, Queran of Cloen, Brendin, Nessan
and Lugid, who being assembled in the field of Lena made a Decree, that the
year following Easter should be celebrated the same time with the Church
Universal.

7. By this narration of Cummian it seems that in the Synod of Lena two years
since, at least the more sound and considerable part of the Irish
Ecclesiastics determined to conform to the general practice of the Church:
but that those inhabiting the Northern and more rude parts continued
refractary. Which the Abbot Lasrean signifying to the Pope, occasioned the
writing of these Letters in which the Church of Ireland in general is not
taxed, but only some part of it, for the Popes expression related by S. Beda
is this, Ap. Bed. l 2. c. 19.
I am informed that certain persons of your Province in opposition to the
Orthodox Faith, do endeavor to renew an Heresy already antiquated, etc. It
was so of old in Asia, for not that whole Province even of Lesser Asia, but
some particular Churches in it obstinatly maintained the Error of the Quarto
decimani.

XXI. CHAP. XXI. CHAPTER

1.2. etc. King Edwin slain: and acknowledged a Martyr, etc.

8. His Queen Ethelburga returned into Kent.

1. WHilst these contentions were agitated among the Scotts, A. D. 6^3.
who desired to draw the Britains into the same faction; the English-Saxon
Churches flourished wonderfully, Christian Faith having changed their manners,
heretofore extremely barbarous, but now exemplary to the whole world for their
Modesty, Justice and Charity, especially in the Kingdom of the Northumbers, In
which, says William of Malmsbury, there were no domestic thieves, Malmsbur.
no treacherous under-miners of conjugal chastity, no fraudulent usurpers of
other men's Estates: which happiness is to be attributed to King Edwins care. For
this large extended Empire was limited by Justice and peace, which there
mutually kissed each other. And this felicity had been accomplished, but that
an immature death unfortunatly snatchd him from his country. His death indeed
which happened this year, was most deplorable to his country, but most happy to
himself: For the chief blessing promised him by the forementioned Divine
Oracle, remaind alone not yet accomplished, which was after many temporal
Crowns, one that was eternal. The manner how he attaind it, is now to be
declared.

2. We have before showed how Cadwan Prince of Northwales for his valor and
good conduct against Ethelfrid King of the Northumbers was chosen King of all
the Britains. After his death his Son succeeded in the same power called by
Writers severally, Cadwallin, Cedwalla, and by Saint Beda, Carduella, but the
Britains call him Caswallo. Now there happened a Controversy between him and
King Edwin, Floril^g l. ^.
says Florilegus, which could not be decided without war. Whereupon they came
to a battle, in which Cadwallin was putt to flight, and lost many thousands of
his Soldiers. King Edwin therefore having obtaind the Victory, marchd with his
Army into the Provinces of the Britains, burning their Cities, destroying the
inhabitants, till at last he brought under his Dominion their three kingdoms of
Demetia, Venedotia and Menevia.

3. Cadwallin seeing his power thus broken, enters into a league with the potent
King of the Mercians, Penda, by which both of them conspired to the destruction
of King Edwin: Cadwallin was a Christian, and Penda a violent Pagan, yet the
Christian Prince was in his manners and cruelty far more barbarous and cruel
then the Pagan. Wherefore joining all their forces together, they invaded King
Edwins Territories.

4. The time and success of this war is thus described by S. Beda: King Edwin,
says he, Bed. l. 2. c. 10.
had now raignd seaventeen years most gloriously over the English and
Britains: of which he spent six years in the service and Spiritual warfare of
Christ. Then did Carduella King of the Britains rebel against him, and was
assisted with the auxiliary forces of Penda the potent Prince of the Mercians,
who governed that Kingdom with variable fortune the space of two and twenty
years. They came at length to a furious combat in a place called Hethfeild, in
which King Edwin was slain on the fourth day before the Ides of October, and
the year of our Lords Incarnation six hundred thirty three, in the forty eighth
year of his age: and his whole army was either slain, or dispersed.

5. In the same battle was also slain King Edwins son Offrid, a little before
his Father. And because this war was managed by him in defense of Gods Church
and Christian Faith against its barbarous enemies, our Ancestors, have allways
esteemd Kind Edwin a Saint and Martyr: so that his name deservedly enioys a
place in our Martyrologe on the fourth of December: Martyrol. Anglis* 4. December.
Where likewise it is said that a Church was anciently consecrated to him in
London, and another in Somersetshire at a Town called Brewe. His head, says S.
Beda, Bed. l. 2. c. 10.
was brought to York, and buried in the Church of S. Peter the Apostle, begun
by himself, but finished by his Successor Oswald. It was laid in the Porch of
S* Gregory Pope, by the preaching of whose Disciples he had received the Word
of life.

6. What followd the death of this Blessed King is thus further related by the
same Author: At that time there was made a most grievous slaughter in the
Church and Nation of the Northumbers, Id. ib.
inasmuch as one of the Leaders was a Pagan, and the other, because in his
nature barbarous, more cruel then a Pagan. For Penda with his whole Nation was
devoted wholly to Idols, and ignorant of Christianity. But Carduella (or
Cedwalla) though in name and outward profession he was a Christian,
notwithstanding in his mind and manners he was so very barbarous, that be
spared neither sex nor age, but like a raging wild beast, with cruel torments
killd all he could meet with. A long time he ranged through the country, every
where exercising his savage cruelty, determining to root out of the land the
whole Saxon race. Neither had he any regard to Christian Religion newly planted
among them: For such was, and to this day continues the malice of the
Britains, that they set at naught the Christianity of the English, with whom
they will no more communicate, then with Pagans.

7. To this horrible slaughter may be added the most iniust murder of King
Edwins second son Edfrid born to him by his former Queen Quenburga, and
baptized by S. Paulinus: Which Edfrid, Id.
says S. Beda, being thereto compelld by necessity, fled to Penda King of the
Mercians, by whom he was afterward slain contrary to his promise confirmd by an
Oath, during the reign of Oswald.

8. What became of the pious Queen Ethelburga, the same S. Beda thus declares:
Id.
The affairs of the Northumbers being brought to this miserable state (says
he,) immediately after this slaughter S. Paulinus seeing there was no security
but in flight, took with him the Queen Ethelburga whom he had at first
conducted thither, and fled with her into Kent, where he was honorably
received by the Archbishop Honorius and King Eadbald. He came thither under
the guard of Bassus a most valiant soldier of King Edwins; and with the Queen
there was her daughter Heanfled and her son Vulcfrea, together with Iffi the
son of Offrid, both whom the afterward sent into France, recommending them to
the protection of King Dagobert, out of the fear she had of Edbold and Oswald
Kings of the Northumbers. And there both those infants dying, were buried with
such honor as became their Royal birth and such innocent lambs of Christ. The
Queen likewise carried with her great store of King Edwins most precious jewels
and Vessels, and among the rest a great Cross of gold, and a golden Chalice
consecrated for the ministry of the Altar: Both which have to this day been
kept in the Church of Canterbury.

XXII. CHAP. XXII. CHAPTER

1.2. S. Paulin administers the Church of Rochester.

3. He repaires the Old Church of Glastonbury.

4 5 His Death: and Translation.

6 7. etc. Queen Ethelburga retires into a Monastery: Her happy death.

1. SAint Paulinus having been thus in duty obliged to conduct his special
charge, the Queen, in safety to her own Country left not for all that his
flock deprived of a good Pastor: Bed. l. i. c. ^. ^.
For according to S. Beda's narration, he recommended the care of the Church of
York to James his Deacon (of whom we have already made mention) a holy man, and
very observant of Ecclesiastical Order. He remaind in the said Church a long
time, and by teaching and baptising recoverd from the Devils power very many
souls. There is a village near Cataract, where he most usually made his abode,
that bears his name to this day. He was very skillful in Church Music, and
therefore when peace was afterward restord, and the number of Christians
augmented, he became the Master of Ecclesiastical Singing, according to the
custom of Rome and Canterbury: and in the end full of days and merits he
followd the way of his fathers.

2. In the mean time S. Paulinus was not without employment in Kent. The Church
of Rochester, says S. Beda, being vacant, because Romanus who had been Prelat
thereof had been drowned in passing the Sea toward Rome, whither he was sent by
S. Iustus Archbishop to consult with Pope Honorius about Ecclesiastical
affairs. S. Paulinus therefore at the invitation of the Archbishop Honorius
and King Badbald undertook the charge of it: till in his due time he went to
heaven there to reap the fruits of his glorious labors. And at his death, he
left in the said Church the Pall which he had received from the Pope.

Antiquit. Glaston. f. 44.
3. We read in the Antiquities of Glastonbury, That S. Paulinus, who had been
Archbishop of York, but then was Bishop of Rochester, the third from S. Iustus
who had been consecrated by S. Augustine, came to Glastonbury, where he abode a
long time, and made the walls of the old Church to be built from the top to the
bottom of timber (whereas anciently they were made of wattles,) and to be coverd
with lead. And thus that Holy Oratory remaind in the same plight till the time
that the Church was burnt (in the days of King Henry the first.) Such care had
that holy Bishop, that without preiudicing the Sanctity of that place, an
addition should be made to its beauty. We find mention of this Church thus
repaird by S. Paulinus in the Charters granted to it by King Inas in the year
of Grace seven hundred and four, Ap. Malmsbur de Reg. l. 2. c. 11.
and of King Canu^us above three hundred years after Inas: both which Charters
are said to have been confirmd and signd in the same wooden Church.

4. Concerning S. Paulinus nothing occurrs in our Ecclesiastical Records till
his death which happened in the year of Grace six hundred forty four, the sixth
day before the Ides of October, says S. Beda, after he had held the Bishopric
of Rochester nineteen years and one and twenty days. Bed. l. 3. c.
He was buried in the Secretary of S. Andrew the Apostle, which King Ethelbert
built from the foundations in the City of Rochester.

5. The opinion of his Sanctity was great after his death, and the memory of it
remaind in that Church many ages: for thus writes the Author of his Life: Ap.
Capgrav. in vit. S. Paulin.
When Gundulph was Bishop of Rochester, Lanfranc the Archbishop plucked quite
down the Church of S. Andrew, and built a new one; at which time he took out of
the ground the bones of S. Paulinus, and putt them honorably in a box. Now
among others then present there was a certain Matron greivously afflicted with
an infirmity of body, but much more burdned with a certain crime. She coming to
the Sepulcher of S. Paulinus, there with great devotion offered her vow to God,
That if by the merits of S. Paulinus she might be freed from her disease, she
would never more committ that sin, in which she then lived: and presently she
was restord to health. This Translation was on the fourth day before the Ides
of January, on which day his Anniversary solemnity was observed in the Church
of Rochester. His Memory is celebrated both in the English and Roman
Martyrologes on the tenth of October. Martyrol. Angl. 10. Oct. Bed. l. 3 c.
In his place Honorius the Archbishop of Canterbury ordaind Ithamar, A. D. 634.
descended from a family which was native of Kent, but in learning and piety
equal to his Predecessors.

6. As for the Widdow-Queen Ethelburga, after she had disposed of her Children,
the love to whom was the only worldly affection remaining in her heart, she
determind to shutt it entirely to temporal things, and to employ in a
Religious solitude all her thoughts and desires upon heaven and God alone.
Which intention of hers being known to her Brother King Eadbald, he piously
assi^ted her vow, and assigned her a place removed from the noise of the Court,
where she might with much commodity execute her Religious design, and moreover
bestowd on her a village called Liming, where she built a Monastery, and for
ought appears was the first Widow among the Saxons which with a Religious veyle
(received from S. Paulinus) consecrated her self to serve our Lord. Antiquit.
Britan^. in (...).
B. Parker most unskilfully calls her a veyld Virgin: thinking perhaps that
none but Virgins might take a Religious Veyle: Whereas S. Hierome expressly
says, H^er^n Ep. 43
that both Virgins and Widows, who in scorn of the world had vowed themselves to
God, did offer their hayr to be cut off by the Mothers of the Monasteries, and
afterward went not, in contradiction to the Apostles ordinance, with their
heads uncoverd, but bound and veyld.

7. Which Sacred veyl was not such an one as women ordinarily wear, of a light
transparent stuff: but made of a course weal, and ^o thick that men's sights
could not pierce it. True, entire and pure Virginal Chastity, says Tertullian,
Tertull de v. land. Virg. c. 14.
fears nothing so much as its own self It will not suffer the eyes even of
women. It flies to the veyl on the head as to a helmet, yea as to a shield to
protect its only good from the darts of Te^tations and scandals, against
suspicions and whispers. And concerning this Veyl S. Ambrose has this
expression, Ambros cont. (...)
Let men lift up the eyes of their minds and bodies, and consider this
congregation of modesty, this assembly of integrity, this Council of Virginity:
here are no curious ribbons to adorn the head, but an ignoble veyl, yet
enn^bled with the exercise of chastity: here all arts to set forth beauty are
abandoned.

8. This excursion may be pardond, being occasiond by this first example in our
Saxon Story. But this was an example which presently after was imitated by
thousands: Almost every year we shall read of Virgins hastening out of the world
to live with Christ, of Monasteries erected, enclosures established, and God
most purely and devoutly served: All which continued almost a thousand years in
the esteem and gratulation of all Christians, till an Apostate Friar solicited
a Professed Virgin for his lust to break her vow of chastity, and by that
example the habitations of Piety became exposed to the rapines and lusts of a
Sacrilegious generation.

9. This Religious Widow after that by Poverty, chastity and subjection of her
Will she had ascended to the Perfection of Divine Love, A. D. 633.
ended at last her Mortality. Her Memory is celebrated in our Martyrologe on
the tenth of September, where she is styled a Mother of Many Virgins and
Widows, Martyrol. Angl. 10. September.
because many such by her example undertook the Sacred Institut of a Religious
Profession.

XXIII. C.
XXIII. CHAP.
1.2. etc. The Gests and Martyrdom of S. Livinus.

1. ABout this time happened the Martyrdom of S. Livinus, who though not born in
Brittany, may yet challenge a place in this History. Fast. B. lg.
The Summary of his Life is thus described by Aubert Miraeus: Livinus was born
of a noble race in Scotland (he means, Ireland.) His Teachers were first a
worthy Priest called Benignus, afterward the Great S. Augustine first Bishop of
England, by whom also he was baptized The same Holy Bishop exalted him likewise
to the Order of Preisthood: in the discharge of which Office he behaved himself
so worthily that not long after the Scotts (or Irish) chose him for their
Archbishop But he after a while, leaving his Vicar in Scotland a man of
eminent Sanctity, called Silvanus, who was his Archdeacon, being moved with
the zeal of propagating the Gospel in other Countries, took, with him three
of his Disciples, Folian, Helias and Kilian, sailed into Flanders, and entering
into a Monastery at Gant lately built by the Holy Bishop S. Amand, he was there
kindly entertained by the Abbot Floribert, and his Brethren. Three years before
that S. Bavo had been there buried at whose monument great miracles were
wrought: And for this reason S. Livinus stayed there thirty days, celebrating
Mass continually upon his Sepulcher.

2. After this departing from thence to execute the Office of preaching, he by
his instructions, example and Miracles converted a world of Infidels to the
Faith of Christ. But certain impious persons, who hated our Lord and all piety,
perceiving such great multitudes brought by the Holy Bishop to a Religious
life, and a contempt of their former Vices and Errors, persecuted him
wonderfully. Neither did they desist from their malice, till having seized upon
him, they cut out his tongue, which they cast to be devoured by dogs: Which
notwithstanding was miraculously restored to him. Yet not mollified with this,
they at last, having wounded him greivously in several places, murdered him at
Escha a village in Flanders, in the year of Grace six hundred thirty three, or
as some reckon, the year following.

3. This S. Livinus is to be distinguished from another (almost) of the same
name, called Levinus, or Lebvinus, a companion of S. Willebrord and S. Suibert:
who likewise finished his Life by Martyrdom near Gant, and is styled the
Apostle of Daventre. But he was a Saxon, as we shall declare toward the end of
this Century. Whereas S. Livinus of whom we now treat, was an Irishman. Marty.
Gal. and Anglic. 12. December.
His Memory is celebrated in the English and Gallican Martyrologes, on the
twelfth of December.

THE FIFTEENTH BOOK OF THE CHVRCH-HISTORY OF BRITTANY.
I. CHAP.
I. CHAPTER.
1.2. etc. Osric and Eanfrid succeed King Edwin: Their Apostasy from
Christianity.

6. Oswald succeeds his Brother Eanfrid.

7.8. Letters of Pope Honorius.

1. RETVRNING to the Kingdom of the Northumbers, A. D. 634.
we shall see nothing but spectacles of misery, a Nation desolated, a Church
torn in pieces, and nothing but horror and confusion. Yet in a short time all
these tempests will be assuaged, and so great a peace and order will return
both to the Kingdom and Church by another pious King, that even the loss of
King Edwin will be fully recompensed. But first let us view the present
calamities, thus set down by S. Beda.

2. After that King Edwin was slain in battle (says he) Osric the Son of his
Uncle Elfric, who by the preaching of S. Paulinus had been imbued with the
Sacraments of our Faith, Bed. l. 32. c. 2.
took upon him the Kingdom of the Deiri. As for the Kingdom of the Bernicians
(for anciently the Nation of the Northumbers was divided into these two
Provinces) that was possessed by Eanfrid the Son of Edilfrid, born in the same
Province. Now we have already declared that during the whole course of King
Edwins reign the Sons of his Predecessor Edilfrid attended by great numbers of
the Nobility, retired themselves among the Scots and Picts, where they lived in
banishment. And they were instructed in Christian Religion professed by the
Scots, and purified by the Grace of Baptism.

3. As Soon therefore as their Enemy King Edwin was dead, they were permitted to
return into their country, and there the elder of them, Osric became King of
the Province of the Deiri, and the Second Eanfrid, of the Bernicians. But both
of them were no sooner invested with the marks of a temporal Kingdom, but they
renounced the Sacraments and badges of the Heavenly kingdom, with which they
had been initiated, and to their eternal ruin polluted themselves with the
filth of their former Idolatry.

4. But divine judgment quickly overtook them both: for they were slain in a
short time by the impious hand of Cedwalla King of the Britains, whom Almighty
God made the instrument of his just severity. For the elder of them Osric
having rashly besieged the said King in a certain town the summer following,
the King made an unexpected furious sally, and in a moment destroyed both him
and his whole army. After which Cedwalla possessed the whole kingdom of the
Northumbers, not as a victorious King, but a furious Tyrant, for he tore it in
pieces with the tragical slaughters committed by him. At length after about a
year was passed the other Prince Eanfrid accompanied only with twelve soldiers
unadvisedly coming to him to demand conditions of peace, A. D. 634.
was in like manner slain by him.

5. This was an unhappy year, and the memory of it remains still in execration
with all good men, as well for the Apostasy of these two Saxon Kings, who had
abjured the Sacraments of their Faith, as for the barbarous Tyranny of the
British King. And therefore by a general consent in the computation of the
times and succession of our Kings, the memory of these two perfidious Princes
was abolished, and this year assigned to the reign of the pious King Oswald who
succeeded them.

6. This Oswald brother to Eanfrid, was the son of Ethelfrid, and Nephew to the
Holy King Edwin by his sister Acca: so that his Title to the Kingdom of the
Northumbers was sufficiently valid. He after his Fathers death, retired also
among the Scots, where understanding the vanity of Idols, he embraced the
Christian Faith. Seaventeen years he continued in banishment: But now hearing
the desolation of his country, the ruin of Christianity and death of his
Brother, armed with zeal and charity he took the courage, though attended with
very unconsiderable forces, to hasten to the rescew of his kingdom, and the
Church of God in it, almost become in visible. With what success this attempt
was undertrken, S. Beda will inform us the year following.

7. It seems by the Letter of Pope Honorius to Honorius Archbishop of
Canterbury dated this year, Malmsbur. de Pontif. l. 1 f. 208.
and recorded only by William of Malmsbury, that the miseries of the
Northumbrian Church and Kingdom were come to his knowledge: for therein he
comforts and encourages the same Archbishop not to faint in the midst of so
many and grievous calamities, but to fix his trust in the promises of God to
his Church, and those who sustain the care of it. In the same letter he
likewise confirms the authority and Primacy of the Church of Canterbury over
all the Churches of Brittany, etc. This Epistle found in the Archives of
Canterbury was by S. Lanfranc directed afterward to Pope Alexander the Second,
as a proof of the ancient Privileges of his See.

Caius de Antiquit. Cant^brig. l. 1. f. 58.
8. There is another Letter of the same Pope produced by Caius the Defender of
the Antiquity of Cambridge, in which the said Pope exempts that University from
the Jurisdiction of all Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, etc. and their
Visitations or Censures, giving the sole authority over Students to the
Chancellor and Rectors of the same, with power to excommunicate, etc. In the
granting of which Privileges he professes to follow the examples of his
Predecessors, Pope Eleutherius, Fabian, Simplicius, Felix and Bonifacius But
what grounds there are to suspect fraud in the compiling this Grant, B. Tvvyn
de Antiq, Ox^n.
may be read in Brian Twyne the Advocat for Oxford, A. D. 635.
and since him in the learned Bishop Usher, to whom I refer the Reader. Vsser.
in Primord. f. 131.


II. CHAP. II. CHAP.

1.2. etc. King Oswalds miraculous Victory over the Britains.

5.6. etc. The Cross Venerated by all Christians: This approved by Miracles.

1. IN the year six hundred thirty five, Oswald King of the Northumbers
fighting against the Tyrants, A. D. 6^5.
happily triumphed. And because our gravest Authors S. Beda, William of
Malmsbury and others affirm that encountering them, Faith was his strongest
armor, we will endeavor more diligently and largely to recount the order and
manner of the Combat, by which he restored the Crown to himself, security and
Faith to his Subjects, and the Churches to God.

2. S. Beda's summary Narration of it is this: As Soon as Ceadwalla had slain
the two Kings Osrich and Eanfrid, Bed. (...) 2.
Oswald attended with an army weak for their numbers, but fortified with Divine
Faith, came upon him, and in the combat that execrable King of the Britains
was slain, together with his immense army, which he thought no power could
resist. This combat happened in a place (in Northumberland) called in the English
tongue Devils-burn, or the Devils-brook. It is at this day, Camden. in Northumb.
says Camden, called Dilston, but in ancient Records, Divelston, the Seat and
Mansion of the Noble family of Ratcliff. Yet B^omton calls the place
Denysbourn, Bromt. (...) 78^
or River of Denis, and adds that from this combat it took the appellation of
Slaughter of the Ce^wallians.

3. Oswald preparing himself for the fight, considered, no doubt by Gods
inspiration, that victory was not to be expected but from heaven therefore to
show his trust in Gods assistance, Bed. ib.
he made the Cross his Standard-royal, by which our Lord had triumphed over
Hell, and Constantin over the world. Bed. l. 3 c. 2.
This Cross being prepared and erected, Oswald himself held it upright between
his hands till it was fastened in the earth. Which being done, he called his
Army together, and thus spoke to them, (says Saint Beda) Let us bend our
knees, and with one heart and voice beseech the Omnipotent, true and living God
mercifully to defend us from this proud and feirce Enemy: For he knows that
this war undertaken by us for the safety of our country is just.

4. Having said this, his army with a new infused courage set upon the
Britains, and without any considerable resista^ce put them to flight. In this
combat nothing is more commended by our Authors then King Oswalds Faith:
Oswald, says William of Malmsbury, more armed with Faith then weapons,
Malmsburg. de Reg. l. 1. c. 3
at the first onsett drove out of his camp Cedwalla puffed up with the memory
of his former exploits, and destroyed him with all his forces.

5. But whence had Oswald received this Faith? If our Modern Protestants were
to answer, they would cry, No doubt from Rome: For thus Augustine met King
Ethelbert, carrying the Cross in a solemn Procession, and teaching the Saxons
to venerate it. And indeed if any Roman Teachers had instructed King Oswald,
they would have had reason to impute the Original of his Faith to Rome. But it
was among the Scots that he learnt Christian Doctrine, and they were at this
time very averse from Rites practiced at Rome. Which evidently shows, that
honor and veneration paid to the Cross, was the common practice of
Christians, who were therefore even in the Primitive age of the Church
scornfully stild by Heathens, Crucicolae, or Worshippers of a Cross. It was
therefore doubtless from the example of the Emperor Constantin that King Oswald
learnt, that Victory against Tyranny, injustice and infidelity would assuredly
attend the saving Standard of the Cross.

6 Yea moreover not the Cross only, but the very place in which King Oswald
had erected the Cross was by posterity had in veneration. Bed. ib.
For S. Beda above eight hundred years ago thus writes, To this day is shown,
and with great veneration esteemd the place where Oswald ready to fight,
erected the sign of the Holy Cross, and with bended knees besought almighty
God to afford to his faithful servants his celestial aid in their so great
necessity. The said place is called in the English tongue Heofen-Feild, or the
field of heaven. Which Name certainly was given it by a presage of followin^
events: For it signified that there a heavenly victo^ry to be begun, and
heavenly miracles to be in future times wrought. Now it is seated near that
great Wall anciently built by the Romans from Sea to sea acrosse Brittany, to
hinder the incursions of the barbarous Nations beyond it. The same place is at
this day called Haledon, says Camden.

Camd. in (...). Bed. ib.
7 S. Beda consequently adds, That it was a custom continued a good while before
his time for the Monks of Hagulstad, who lived near that place, to got thither
every year on the day before that of his death, and there to say Vigils for the
health of his soul, and the morning after to offer the Sacrifise of the holy
oblation with Lauds for him. Which good custom increasing they of late built
and consecrated a Church there, so rendering the place more sacred and
venerable. And this they did with just reason: For through the whole country
of the Bernicians, as far as we can learn, there was not any visible sign of
the Christian Faith, nor any Church or Altar before this good King the Captain
of that new Christian army had raised up this Standard of the Holy Cross, when
he was ready to fight against a most barbarous Enemy. Whence it appears that
though several Churches had been erected by S. Paulinus and King Edwin in the
southern part of his Kingdom, or Province of the Deiri, yet they had not space
enough to propagate the Cristian Profession among the Northern Bernicians.

8. Let us now see how God was pleased to show his approbation of King Oswalds
Faith, the erection of that Cross, and the veneration showed to it. For thus S.
Beda proceeds in the Narration of the Gests of his own time, Id. ib.
It will not be impertinent, says he, to relate one, among the many Miracles
which our Lord was pleased to work at this Cross. A certain Monk of the
Church of Hagulstad named Bothelm, who is yet alive, walking unwarily by night
upon the ice not many years since, fell suddenly and broke his arm: by which he
was so incommodated, that besides the pain, he could not lift his hand to his
mouth. One morning having heard that one of his Brethren was to go that day to
the place of the Holy Cross, he desired him to bring him a small portion of
that Sacred wood: For he said, he was confidently persuaded through Gods help
to be cured by it. The Brother performed what he desird, and coming back at
even when the Monks were in the Refectory, he gave him a little of the moss
which coverd the outside of the wood: which he putt into his bosom. When he
went to bed, forgetting to lay it by, it remaind in his bosom all night. But
waking about midnight, he felt some thing which was cold lying against his
side, and searching for it with his hand, he perceived that both his hand and
arm were become perfectly whole.

III. CHAP. III. CHAPTER

1.2. etc. K Oswald demands Preachers from the Scotts Corman is sent: but
returns discouraged.

5.6. etc. The Holy Bishop Aidan succeeds: Sent from the Monastery of Hy* His
virtues: and great austerities.

14.15. He places his See, and Monastery in the Isle of Lindes farn.

16 The Monastery of Hagulstad.

17.18. King Oswald finishes the Church at York: His Piety and Humility.

1. KIng Oswald, A. D. 635.
as a reward of his Faith and piety, having obtaind a glorious victory, and by
that a secure possession of the whole kingdom of the Northumbers, as well the
Province of the Deiri, as Bernicians, made it his first care to express his
gratitude to God, to whose goodness alone he imputed his victory, by restoring
his true Faith and Worship, the greatest ornament of a Kingdom But not finding
at home any Ecclesiastical persons capable o^ instructing and guiding others in
the way of Heaven, he seeks them abroad.

2. This good design of King Oswald is thus expressed by S. Beda, Bed. l. 3. c.
3.
Oswald, says he, as soon as he was possessed of his Kingdom, had a vehement
desire that his whole Nation should be imbued with the Grace of the Christians
Faith, great experience of the good whereof he had received in conquering his
barbarous enemies. Therefore he sent to the c^eif among the Scotts, by whom
himself and his, followers had received the Sacrament of Baptism earnestly
desiring them to send him a Prelat, by whose teaching and ministry his
subjects might be instructed in the true Faith, and enjoy the Sacraments of it.

3. The Scotts to whom he sent, were not such as S. Beda calls Scots of the
Southern, but Northern country, that is, not such as inhabited Ireland, the
ancient Native country of Scots, but the Northern parts of Brittany, and were
mingled with the Picts: Id. l. 3. ^. 1.
For among them it was that both himself and his Brethren had remained many
years during their banishment, by the testimony of the same Author.

4. Those to whom King Oswald sent, complying with his desire sent him out of
their country a Preacher, called by some Writers Corman. But his coming took
not that effect which was desired and expected: Whether it was that he was a
man of a rude disposition, so that he could not comply with the humor of the
Saxon Nation, or being not well acquainted with their tongue he found too great
tediousnes and difficulty in conversing with them, or that he was impatient of
labor; what ever the cause was, finding little proffit in his endeavors, he
shortly returned whence he came, and in a public Meeting of those who had sent
him gave this account of his deserting so suddenly his employment, says Saint
Beda, by telling them that no good could be wrought in that Nation to which he
had been sent, Id. l. 3. c. ^.
by reason they were men of a rough, barbarous and incorrigible nature.

5. Notwithstanding this man's endeavor to excuse himself by disparaging the
Saxons, yet did not that Assembly of Scottish Clergy desist from their
intention to endeavor the satisfaction of King Oswald: Id. ib.
Whereupon (says S. Beda) there was a great debate in the Council about the
course they were to take for that purpose for they had an earnest desire to
contribute to the salvation of that Nation, seeking it at their hands, though
they were somewhat troubled that the Preacher sent by them had not been
received.

6. It fell out happily that in this Assembly there was present among others
one called Aidan, a man of an humble, charitable and meek spirit, who earnestly
interceded for the ignorant rude Saxons: advising withal that such Missioners
should be chosen as could comply with the rudenes of the Nation, instilling by
little and little the Mysteries of Christianity into their minds, etc. Aidans
discourse pleased the whole Assembly: and himself was judged most proper to
succeed in this Apostolic employment. Him therefore they sent: and he was
received by King Oswald with all kindness and joy.

7. He was by Profession a Monk, educated in the famous Monastery of Hye, B^d.
l 3. c. 5
which had a Superiority over all other Monasteries of the Picts a long time,
and also enjoyed supreme i^risdiction in all Ecclesiastical affairs, says the
same S. Beda: Adding, that the said Island of Hye or Iona, of right pertaind to
Brittany, from which it was divided by a very narrow sea, but by the free gift
of the Picts inhabiting the adjoining continent, it had many years before been
bestowed upon the Irish Monks, by whose preaching they had received the Faith
of Christ.

8. From hence it was that the holy Preacher Aidan came into the Kingdom of the
Northumbers, Id. ib. c. 3.
having first been consecrated Bishop at the time that Segenius a Priest was
Abbot of the said Monastery. Now Aidan (says S. Beda) was a man of eminent
meeknes, ibid.
piety and moderation; having withal a zeal of God, though not perfectly
according to knowledge: For following the forementiond erroneous custom of his
own Nation, he observed the Paschal Solemnity from the fourteenth Moon to the
twentieth. Which Error though (according to the judgment of Baronius) it was
no light one, Baron.
yet did not exclude that Nation from the Churches Communion. It had indeed
been often condemned by Ecclesiastical Councils: but since it regarded only
external Rites, and not Dogmes of Catholic Faith, it was a while tolerated,
till the Truth could be more perfectly discovered to that people. Neither
indeed could the Scots be justly reckond among the Quartodecimani, condemned by
the Council of Nicea: for as they did not celebrate Easter after the Roman
custom, so neither did they after the Jewish.

9. S. Beda therefore thus excuses this holy man: Bed. l. 3. c. 17
I can neither commend nor approve Aidan for that he did not celebrate Easter
in the due time: which he did either out of ignorance of the Canonical account,
or if he knew it, would not conform thereto because he was unwilling to
contradict the practice of his own nation. Yet in this I do much approve him,
that in observing Easter after his own fashion, he neither in his heart
believed, nor openly venerated or taught any thing different from us, for he
kept it only in memory of the Passion, Resurrection and Ascension of the
Mediator of God and men, Jesus Christ. Moreover the day celebrated by him was
not, as some do erroneously think, the same fourteenth Moon which the Jews
observed on what day of the week soever it fell: for he always kept it on a
Sunday falling between the fourteenth Moon and the twentieth, to show his
belief of our Lords Resurrection which happened on the first day of the Week; and
likewise to show his hope of our Resurrection, which he believed, as the Church
also does, shall befall likewise on the first day of the week, or Sunday.

10. This is the only defect imputed by S. Beda to Aidan the Scottish Monk and
Bishop. In all other regards he acknowledges him Orthodox, agreeing in the
common Faith of the Catholic Church. Yea moreover he was esteemd by him not
only free from error or vice, but a great example of virtue and holiness. And
particularly, says he, among other good precepts of virtuous living, Id. Ib.
he left to Clergymen a most wholesome example of abstinence and continence.
(Now it is well known that by abstinence S. Beda understands an austere life,
consisting in a contempt of delicacy in food: and by continence, an abstaining
not only from all unlawful sensual delectations, but those also which to
others would be lawful in a Matrimonial State. Id. ib.
) He adds. That the thing which most commended his Doctrine to all, was that
as he taught, so both himself, and all that belonged to him practiced in their
lives. For he neither loved, nor cared for any contentments of this present
world.

11. It is very probable that from his Example proceeded the custom in
Brittany, not only of abstaining from flesh; but also fasting on Fridays, which
is not practiced in Catholic countries abroad: Though he then added Wednesdays
also to that austerity: For thus S. Beda writes, Id. ibid.
At that time Religious men and women, informed by Aidan's examples, through
the whole year prolonged their fast till three of the clock after noon on
Wednesdays and Fridays, except only in the Paschall time.

12. Moreover Aidan, being himself a Monk, came out of the School of S. Columba
in the Monastery of Hye, Id. ib.
who left behind him Successors of his own Institut, men eminent for their
great continence, Divine Love and Regular Observances Their only defect was
that in the celebration of the Paschal Solemnity they followed dubious accounts
and Cycles. And no wonder, since being seated as it were out of the world, none
took care to send them the Synodal Decrees touching the Paschal Observance. So
that they were informed therein no further then as they could learn from the
Prophetical, Evangelicall and Apostolic Writings, according to which they
diligently observed the Duties of P^ety and Chastity.

13. These Monks therefore being according to the Institut of S. Columba, so
continued many years: and to distinguish them from the Monks in Kent, who
coming from Rome followed the Rule of S. Benedict, our Writers began to call
the Benedictins, Black-Monks, from the color of the Habits which they then
generally wot: Whereas these Columbian Monks either wore white garments, or of
the natural color of the sheep. Notwithstanding we read that S. Wilfrid in a
Synod publicly professed that himself was the first who commanded the Rule of
the most Holy Patriark S Benedict to be observed by Monks in the Northumbrian
Kingdom. Malms^ur. de Pontif. l. 3. f. 26^.
But whether his command extended to Monasteries founded there before, or only
such as himself had built, I leave to the disquisition of others.

14. This Holy Bishop Aidan received the Sea of his Bishopric in the Isle of
Lindesfarn, seated among the Bernicians in the most Northern coast of the
Kingdom of the Northumbers Which is a little Island, says William of
Malmsbury, and is now by those of that country called the Holy-Island. Id. ib.
p. 275.
This Isle S. Aidan who was a lover of Silence made chocice of for his See,
despising the pomp and populousnes of York. But besides the advantage of
solitude and silence, another Motive inducing S. Aidan to choose that Island
seated in the German Ocean, might probably be, because the Bernicians, a people
hitherto more rude and ignorant stood in greater need of his care: And besides
it was easy for him, from thence by ship to visit the other Province of the
Deiri.

15. S. Aidan moreover having accepted this See, did according to the example
of S. Augustine, erect there a Monastery. This is after this manner related in
an ancient Manuscript of the Monastery of Evesham, cited by the R. F. Clement
Reyner* in the Appendix to his Apostolat: The Holy King Oswald and S. Aidan
Bishop and Monk, Ap. Reyne^ in Appendic ad Apostolat. f. 42
did first settle an Episcopal See and Order of Monks in the Church of
Lindesfarn, according to the relation of S. Beda, about the year of our Lords
Incarnation six hundred thirty five, and the thirty ninth after the coming of
S. Augustine. Which See and Order continued there together the space of two
hundred forty and one years: For then the Church of Lindesfarn was totally
destroyed by the most barbarous Infidel Danes, and the said See and Order
translated from thence to Conk Chester.

16. Besides this, B^d l. 3. c. 7.
several other Churches were built in many places among the Bernicians, says
S. Beda, and the people flocked with joy to hear the Word of God. King Oswald
likewise bestowd possessions and lands to maintain the Monasteries, in which
English Children were instructed by Scottish Teachers both in lower and higher
studies and also in the Observance of Regular Discipline: For those who came to
preach were Monks. At the same time likewise the famous Monastery of Hagulstad
is said to have been founded, in the place where formerly was seated
Axellodunum, now called Hexham, near the Picts wall where also in following
times was an Episcopal See.

17. The like care and Munificence the Holy King Oswald showed in his other
Province of the Deiri: where he not only finished the Noble Church of S. Peter
in York, begun by King Edwin: but likewise erected several Schools for the
education of youth in learning and piety: For which purpose he commanded more
Monks to be sent out of Scotland, Bed. l. 3. c. 3.
who, says S. Beda, came in great numbers year after year into Brittany, and
with great devotion preached the Word of Faith in the Provinces subject to King
Oswald, and those among them who were Priests, administered likewise Baptism to
such as had been instructed.

18. An admirable example of piety, Id. ib.
zeal and Christian Humility, the same Author relates of this blessed King:
Who, says he, as soon as S. Aidan was come, humbly and cheerfully hearkened to
his admonitions, and took great care and diligence to found and delate the
Church of Christ through his whole Kingdom: Where it often happened that a most
beautiful spectacle was represented, for whilst the Bishop, who was not
perfectly skilled in the English tongue, was preaching, the King himself would
be the Interpreter of the Heavenly Word to his Officers and servants: for he
during his long exile had fully learnt the Scottish language.

19. Now how Almighty God even with outward blessings recompensed this good
Kings piety, and how according to the increase of Faith his Empire also was
increased, Huntingdon thus declares: Huntingd. l. 3. f. 331.
King Oswald, says he, being formed by the institution of Saint Aidan, as he
made progress in the Graces of his mind, so did he likewise in the extent of
his Rule, beyond all his Predecessors. For all the Nations of Brittany,
Britains, English, Picts and Scots became subject to his Dominion. And yet
though he was so high exalted, he was humble and mercifully kind to the poor
and strangers.

IV. CHAP.
IV. CHAP.
1.3. etc. S. Birinus converts the West Saxons: His Miracles.

6.7. etc. K. Kinegils converted, and baptized: Dorchester appointed the
Episcopal See: And Canons under a Rule placed in it.

10 11 etc A great Controversy about S. Birinus his Relics.

1. THE same year was happy likewise to the West Saxons; A. D. 635. Bed. l.
which happiness how it arrived, S. Beda thus declares: At the same time, says
he, the Nation of the West Saxons, anciently called Gevissae, in the reign of
Kinegils, received the Christian Faith by the preaching of Birinus a Bishop,
who with the advice of Pope Honorius, came into Brittany: having promised in
the presence of the same Pope, that he would disperse the seed of the Gospel in
the inmost parts of Brittany, where never any Teacher had gone before. Upon
which promise, by command of the same Pope, he was consecrated Bishop by
Asterius Bishop of Genua. Ethelvverd. in Chron.
His coming into Brittany to preach the Gospel to the West Saxons happened,
(says Ethelwerd) six years after the same King Kinegils his fight against
Penda King of the Mercians at Cirencester; which fight we recounted in the year
of Grace six hundred twenty nine.

2. This Apostolic Mission of S. Birinus our Lord approved by a Divine
Miracle. Which because it powerfully manifests the Faith preached by him to
have been Orthodox, and ancient grave Authors have attested it, insomuch as
even John Fox after he had related it, Fox Acts and Mon.
adds, Of this there are so many Witnesses who constantly avow it, that it is
to me a great wonder, I will not doubt to give the Narration of it from
Baronius, who cites for it William of Malmsbury, Huntingdom, Florentius, Matthew
of Westminster, etc.

Baron. hic.
3. I have thought expedient, says he, to describe here out of the Acts of S.
Birinus a wonderful Miracle beseeming an Apostolic man, which is omitted by
S. Beda. It was thus. The Holy man being arrived to the shore of the British
Sea, and ready to take ship celebrated the Divine Mysteries, offering to God the
Sacrifice of the Saving Host, as a Viaticum for himself and followers. After
which, the season being proper, he was hastily urged to enter the ship: and the
wind serving the^ they sailed speedily, when on the sudden Birinus called to
mind that he had lost a thing infinitely precious to him, which by the urging
have of the Seamen having his mind other ways busied, he had left behind him
at land. For Pope Honorius had bestowed on him a Pall, or Corporal, upon which
he consecrated the Body of our Lord, and afterward used to wrap in it a
particle of the said Sacred Body, which he hung about his neck, and allways
carried with him: but when he celebrated Mass, he was wont to lay it by him
upon the Altar. Armed therefore with Faith, he by Divine inspiratio^ went down
from the ship into the Sea and walkd securely upon it to the shore. Where
finding what he had left behind, he took it and in like manner returned to the
ship: Which he found standing still immovable, whereas a little before he had
left it sailing extreme swiftly. When he was entered into the ship, not one drop
of water appeared on his clothes: Which the Mariners seeing, kneeld before
him and worshipped him as a God: and many of them by his preaching were
converted to the Faith of Christ.

4. This custom of carrying with them the Consecrated Body of our Lord was
practiced from the beginning of the Church, many proofs whereof are in
Tertullian, S. Cyprian, S. Ambrose writing of his Brother Satyrus, S. Basile,
Id. ibid.
etc. Which pious custom. says Baronius, as the fervor of Religion
introduced, so Religion as holy has in latter times forbidden it. Formerly a
firm Faith incited to the doing that which Reverence afterward dissuaded. In
both cases Gods faithful people deserve commendation: as we read both the
confidence and the modesty of the Apostles praised in the Gospel, both when,
they were sorrowful to want our Lords presence for a moment, and likewise when
S. Peter desired his absence, saying, Lord, go from me for I am a sinful man.

5. S. Birinus being thus arrived in Brittany, with an intention to visit the
inmost rudest parts of the Island, according to his promise to Pope Honorius,
he found at his landing so full a harvest, that, as William of Malmsbury says,
he thought it a folly to go any further, or to seek out sick men whom he
should cure, when as in the place where he already was, there were not any
sound. Thus it happened to S. Birinus, as it had formerly to S. Augustine, who
being sent to the Deiri in the North, stayed at the very entrance into the
Island in the South. He has notwithstanding found a more favorable esteem
among Protestant Writers then S. Augustine did, thought both taught the same
Doctrine: For B. Godwin calls him a man of great zeal and devotion: Godvvin. in
Catal. Camden in Dobu^.
and Camden says he was illustrious for his Sanctity even to a miracle, etc.

6. At his first coming, S. Birinus addressed himself to King Kinegils: to whom
he with a modest boldness expounded the Sum of the Christian Faith, which he
was come so far to preach for his salvation. The Doctrines of Christianity were
not now become strange even among the Pagans in Brittany: But withal it fell
out very happily that at the same time the most virtuous and Victorious King of
the Northumbers Oswald (as S. Beda styles him) was then present at the
West Saxon Court, being come thither to demand King Kinegils his daughter for
his wife. This pious King gave his royal testimony to the Truth of the Doctrine
preached by S. Birinus, which was suitable to that received in the whole
kingdom of the Northumbers: And this he did so effectually, that King Kinegils
submitted his judgment to the King and Bishop, desiring to be conducted to the
gate which opens into Heaven. Hereupon he was sufficiently catechized, and
after that admitted to Baptism: in which by a pious commerce King Oswald became
Spiritual Father to him whose daughter he presently after married.

7. The King being thus converted, the whole Province generally followd his
example: for, according to S. Birinus his Acts, the people hastened in great
troops to hear the H. Bishop preach, (...) Brin.
and with their hearts humbly embraced the Doctrine taught by him. And no
wonder: for besides the sanctity and innocence of the Preacher, God was present
with him to confirm his Doctrine by Miracles. One particularly is recounted in
the said Acts after this manner: Id.
There was in the Province a certain ancient Woman who a long time had been
deprived both of her sight and hearing: To her it was suggested by revelation
that she* should repair to the Holy Bishop for her cure. She delayed not
therefore, but took with her a Guide to conduct her. The Bishop therefore seeing
the woman's piety, immediately made the sign of the Cross upon her eyes and
ears, whereupon both her sight and hearing were restored to her.

(...) l. 3 c 7.
8. The Christian Faith being thus spread in that Kingdom, both the Kings, says
S. Beda, assigned to the Holy Bishop the City called Dorinca, to be his
Episcopal See: Where several Churches were erected and consecrated, and great
multitudes gained to Christ: after which he went to our Lord. This City
Dorinca is the same which is now called Dorchester, not the principal town of
Dorsetshire, but another of that name seated near Oxford: Which at this time
belonged to the West Saxons, but afterward passed to the Mercians.

9. This Holy Bishop not being by profession a Monk, instituted in his Church
at Dorchester a Community of Canons, Ap. Bed. l. 1. c. 27.
who lived in a kind of Regular Observance, and according to S. Gregory's
directions, imitated the Institut of the Primitive Church during the Apostles
times, wherein not any of them esteemed that which he possessed to be his own,
but they had all things common. In the said Church this Holy Bishop and seven
and twenty of his Successors continued the space of four hundred fifty seven
years.

10. Fifteen years S. Birinus labored with great fruit in cultivating this our
Lords vineyard: and at last in the year of Grace six hundred and fifty received
his reward, on the third of December, Marty. Angl. 3. December.
on which day he is commemorated in our Martyrologe. He was buried, says S.
Beda, in the same City (o^ Dorchester:) and several years after his sacred
Body was translated into the City of Winchester by Hedde Bishop of the same
City, Bed. l. 3. c. 7.
and reposed in the Church of the Blessed Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul.

11. This passage of S. Beda was cause of many troubles in ages following,
insomuch as the Sea Apostolic was often appeald unto to decide the Controversy
raised between the two Churches, which contended earnestly whether of them were
possessours of his Relics. The sum of which controversy though happening in a
far remote age, yet pertinent to the present subject, I will here deliver, that
I may show the esteem which the Monuments of our Holy Ancestors deserve at our
hands.

12. S Birinus, as has been said, instituted in his Church of Dorchester a
College of Canons Regulars, Act* S Birini ap. Capgrav.
which lived in a Community under a certain Rule: Which College in process of
time was seized upon by other Canons, called Seculars, who dividing the
revenews among themselves, each of them lived and enjoyed separatly his portion.
But in the Reign of King Steven, by the procurement of Alexander Bishop of the
Diocese the Regulars were restored. These men bearing a great respect and
devotion to their Prime Patron, and Founder, whose Body they were persuaded
still remained among them, by Letters demanded leave of the Pope to place his
Relics more decently and to adorn his Monument. Hereupon the Pope ( Hono^ius
the third) wrote to Steven Langton then Archbishop of Canterbury and Cardinal
to examine all things well, and accordingly proceed in satisfying the said
Canons: The Archbishop committed the affair to the diligence and prudence of
the Archdeacon.

13. Then broke out the pious contention between the Monks of Winchester and
Canons of Dorchester. Those of Winchester placed the sum of their cause in the
testimony of Saint Beda. But they of Dorchester produced several witnesses,
and among the rest a certain Canon who deposed up on Oath that a former Canon
called William in his hearing often protested that by Vision in sleep a certain
man appearing to him had commanded him to search such a sepulcher in the Church
of Dorchester before the Altar of the Holy Cross, and that there he should
find the Body of S. Birinus. Whereupon search having been made by the Abbots
permission, and in his presence together with the Canons, they found a Bishops
Body entire, with two stoles and other Episcopal ornaments, of a red colored
silk: together with a Cross of metal upon his breast, and a Chalice a little
below it.

14. Moreover in further confirmation they added proofs of several miracles:
as of a certain young man deaf and dumb cured there: who affirmed that he was
commanded in a vision to repair to that. And being cured at the Sepulcher of S.
Birinus, he spoke in the English tongue. Whereupon one of the Canons said in a
ieasting manner, He who taught thee to speak was no Courtier, otherwise he
would have taught thee a better language. And three days after he spoke
perfectly both in French and English. Other Miracles also were alleged, as of
a blind man receiving sight; a leper cleansed; and two dead persons restored to
life, etc.

15. As to the testimony alleged from S. Beda, the Abbot answered, That
Historians do not relate all things from their own sight, but often by hearsay:
Therefore S. Beda might have been misinformed: and for a proof that he was so,
the Abbot acknowledged that the Body of a certain Bishop called Bertinus, the
tenth from S. Birinus, had been translated to Winchester: Which body had been
buried in a corner of the Church near the door: a place unfitt for the Prime
Patron of the Sea. He added, that after the Invention of Saint Birinus his Body
a certain Anchoret a holy man named Matthew, living at Haliwell near Oxford,
heard a certain voice saying to him, Birinus under the pavement, Bertinus
behind the door. He concluded, that since many Miracles were wrought at
Dorchester; and not any at Winchester, this was a certain proof that the Sacred
Body had not been translated.

16. Notwithstanding all which allegations, yet would not the Archdeacon
presume to pronounce sentence in favor of the Canons: but sent a particular
relation of all the Acts to the Pope: Who in a Second Letter expressed so much
deference to the single authority of S. Beda, that he would not determine the
Controversy: but gave order for another Search to be made in the Church of
Winchester, and an enquiry whether any like Miracles had been wrought there by
the same Saints Intercession demanded by devout persons, etc. But what
proceedings were further made in the matter, and whether the Controversy were
decided, does not appear in any of our Authors. Probably permission was given
to both Churches to show honor to the Saint: since it was likely, and very
ordinary in such Translations, to divide the Relics.

V. CHAP. A. D. 636.

V. CHAP.



1.2. etc. Sigebert after his exile, King of the East Angles.

5.6. etc. He sends for Felix to convert his Kingdom: who is made Bishop of the
East Angles: His Piety, etc.

10. Quichelm King of the West Saxons baptized: and dies.

1. THE year of our Lord six hundred thirty six, as it was mournful to the
Eastern Church, for then did the Saracens possess themselves of the Holy City
Jerusalem. A. D. 636.
So was it joyful and happy to the Kingdom of the East Angles in Brittany, who
were then again converted to the Christian Faith, and held it more constantly
then they had done in the days of King Redwald or his Son Erpenwald: For now
Sigebert deservedly surnamed Pious, reigned there, to whom that Kingdom was
beholding for learning, and the Province for the Christian Faith: Who after a
Monastical profession was assumed to the Royal Purple, and that purple
adorned with Martyrdom.

2. This Sigebert was not, as Pits supposes, a Son of King Redwald, but only a
half Brother to Erpenwald by the Mother, as William of Malmsbury testifies: And
being very gracious among the Subjects for his virtues in the Reign of Redwald,
was commanded (as heretofore Edwin had been) to depart the Court, least his
eminent probity and endowments should prove prejudicial to Erpenwald heyr to
the Crown.

3. Sigebert being thus through envy expelled the Court, left the Prrvince and
Island also, and sayld into France, where civility, learning and Religion
flourished. He had not yet given up his name to Christ: but he was naturally of
so good a disposition, that any thing that was good would easily make an
impression in his mind. To qualify the anguish and tediousnes of his
banishment, he gave himself to the study of human learning, and by inquisition
into Natural causes, he was lead to the knowledge of the First supreme Cause.

4. His most frequent conversation was with learned men: among which the most
eminent were Desiderius Bishop of Cahors, as appears, says Pits by mutual
Letters between them still extant in the Monastery of Saint Gall among the
Swizzers: and Felix a Burgundian Priest, who afterward became the Apostle of
his Country the East Angles. By discourse with these learned and pious men he
quickly perceived the vanity of Idols and Pagan Rites, how unproffitable and
noxious to men's souls were the Gods worshipd by Heathens and how impossible it
was that there should be more then one Eternal Omnipotent God, Governor of
the world. This foundation laid in his mind, easily prepared it to admit the
Light of the Gospel, which once kindled, was never after extinguished. He
received Baptism from the said Felix, styled in his Life a Bishop: who thereby
gave him a Title to a far better Kingdom.

5. In the mean time King Erpenwald dyed, having been slain by one of his Pagan
Noblemen, at the Instigation of Penda the cruel King of the Mercians, as has
been said. After whose death Sigebert succeeded in the kingdom. Who as soon as
he was King made it his prime care to introduce among his subjects the
Christian Faith and civility of the French: For which purpose he called out of
France his Spiritual Father Felix the Burgundian: Who coming into Brittany,
first addressed himself to Honorius Archbishop of Canterbury, Antiquit. Brit.
in (...)
by whom he was sent to preach the Gospel to the East Angles. Bo Parker says
that Honorius first consecrated him Bishop, and then directed him in that
Mission: But the Author of his life affirms that he was a Bishop before his
coming: So that the reason why at his first coming he addressed himself to the
Archbishop was, because not having received his Mission immediately from the Sea Apostolic, he could not according to the Laws of the Church exercise
jurisdiction within the Archbishops Province without his permission. Now if
any one shall object the coming of Aidan out of the Monastery of Hy without
expecting orders either from within or without the Island, Saint Beda will
solve the difficulty by declaring, that the said Isle of Hye, or Iona, did
always enjoy for its governor an Abbot, Bed. l. 3. c. 15.
who was a Priest, to whose Jurisdiction that whole Province, and even Bishops
themselves were subject: the like example being no where else to be found: But
the reason of it was, because the first Apostolic Teacher of that Nation was
not a Bishop, but only a Priest and Monk.

6. Felix now Bishop of the East Angles went to Sigebert, by whom he was
received with great honor, and had assignd him for the Sea of his Bishopric,
says Saint Beda, the City called Dummoc situated in the Province of the Iceni,
or Suffolk. It is now called Dunwich (says Camden: Camd. in Suffolk.
) the greatest part whereof is swallowd by the Sea, and almost reduced to a
solitude: the Episcopal See many ages since having been transferd. At first it
alone exercised the whole Jurisdiction over the Kingdom of the East Angles: But
Bisus the fourth Bishop from Saint Felix, growing old and sickly, and incapable
to manage so large a Province, divided it into two Dioceses, constituting the
other Episcopal See at North-Elmholm, now a small town.

Bed. ib.
7. The desire which Saint Felix had to serve our Lord in that Employment
wanted not good success, says Saint Beda: for his labors produced manifold
fruits in that Nation. For according to the happy omen of his name, he reduced
the whole Province from its former infelicity and iniquity to the true Faith,
to the works of Christian Justice, and the rewards of eternal Felicity. And as
King Oswald assisted Saint Aidan by interpreting his speeches into a more
intelligible language: So did King Sigebert to Saint Felix being a stranger in
the country. Huntingd. l. 3
For Huntingdon writes, that Sigebert the Successor and Brother of Erpwald was
a most Christian King, and together with Felix the Bi^hop brought others to
Christianity.

8. The same King, whom S. Beda calls a most learned and most Christian Prince,
as by his example and command he lead his subjects to the true Faith and works
of Justice: So to establish the same Faith more firmly, he built Churches,
adorned Altars, reverenced the Clergy and those who professed a more severe
Christian austerity of life. Besides the Church belonging to the Episcopal See,
he erected another at a town called Babingley, where Felix first entered that
Province, and a third a place called Sharnburn: Thus writes Camden. Bed. l. 3.
c. ^8.


9. Moreover remembering the inconstancy of his subjects, who had more then once
deserted the Christian Profession, the pious King Sigebert, says Saint Beda,
desirous to imitate the good orders which he had seen practiced in France,
instituted a School for the instructing of children: Wherein he was assisted
by his Bishop Felix, who appointed Teachers and Masters according to the manner
of Kent. And though Saint Beda mentions a School in the singular number only,
which some interpret to be understood of the University of Cambridge:
Notwithstanding our other ancient Historians affirm, Malmsbur. de Pontif. l. 2.
Id. de Reg. c. 5 ^oril^g. hic. Huntingd. l. 3. lo stow. Huntingd. tib. 3.
Florent. Wigorn. hic.
that S. Felix instituted Schools in several opportune places, and by little
and little reformd the barbarousnes of the Nation by introducing the civility
of the Latin tongue. Which was a benefit much to be celebrated, to bring a
people formerly rude and fanatic to taste the sweetness of human literature.
This is the testimony of William of Malmsbury, in which Florilegus and
Huntingdon do ioyn. And our modern Writers do more particularly affirm that
at this time a School for the instructing young children was erected at
Flixton, a Town which took its name from Saint Felix.

10. This same year Quichelm the Son of Kinegils, and partner with him in the
Kingdom of the West Saxons, followd the example of his Father in embracing the
Christian Faith, and receiving the Sacrament of Baptism: but went before him to
receive the crown of his Faith and innocence, for he dyed the same year, says
Huntingdon, and Florentius of Worcester: who adds, that he was baptized by
Saint Birinus in the City Dorice, by which he seems to understand Dorchester
the Episcopal See of S. Birinus. A. D. 637.


11. King Oswald likewise the same year married Kineburga daughter to Kinegils:
by whom the year following he had a Son called Ethelwald.

VI. CHAPTER
VI. CHAP.
1.2. etc. The Gests of S. Fursey.

5.6. etc. His wonderful Visions.

11.12. He builds a Monastery in Essex: which he recommends to his Brother.

13. He goes into France: where he dies: His Memory celebrated at Peronne.

A. D. 637.
1. IN the year of Grace six hundred thirty seven Saint Felix Bishop of
Dunwich received great comfort and assistance in his Apostolic labors by the
arrival of a stranger out of Ireland. This was Saint Fursey, who having spent
many years in preaching the Gospel in his own country, Vsser. in Ind. Chron.
came this year into Brittany, says Bishop Usher.

Bed. l. 3. c. 19.
2. Saint Beda relates the same more expressly, saying: Whilst Sigebert as yet
held the raines of the Government in his hand, there came out of Ireland a holy
man, named Fursey, illustrious both for his teaching and piety: who was
desirous to spend the remainder of his life in a strange country, wheresoever
he could find opportunity, the more perfectly to serve our Lord. This devout
man coming into the Province of the East Angles, was honorably received by the
said King: and there he executed his usual employment of preaching, by which
joined with his virtuous example he converted many Infidels to the Faith, and
likewise strengthened in the same Faith and Love of Christ many who before
believed.

3. Supposing it may be for the Readers edification, I will not neglect to set
down here at large some of those wonderful visions which in an Excess of mind
our Lord revealed to him concerning the state of souls after death: Id. ibid.
Which visions, says Saint Beda, he himself would sometimes declare, but only
to such as out of a desire of compunction asked him.

Id. ibid.
4. This holy man, says the same Author, was descended from a most Noble
family among the (Irish) Scots: but was much more Noble for the virtues of his
mind, then his blood. From his very childhood he carefully gave himself to
reading holy Books, and practicing Religious austerities: and, which most
became Gods Saints, whatsoever good things he learnt by reading, he was
solicitous to express in his practice.

5. To be brief, in process of time he built himself a Monastery to the end he
might more freely and without interruption attend to heavenly meditations.
Where on a certain time falling into an infirmity he was rapt from his body,
and in that Ecstasy, which continued from Evening to Cockcrowing, he was
favored with the sight of troops of Angels, and the hearing the Hymns of
Praises which they sung to our Lord. And among other particulars he was wont to
relate how he heard them distinctly to chant these verses of the Psalm, The
Saints shall go from virtue to virtue: And again, The God of Gods shall be seen
in Sion.

6. Three days after being again in an Ecstasy he saw yet more glorious
apparitions of Angels, and heard Divine Lauds sung by them more solemnly:
Moreover there were discovered to him very earnest contentions of Wicked
Spirits, who by many accusations of a certain Sinner lately dead endeavored to
stop his passage to heaven, but by reason the Holy Angels protected him, they
could not effect their desire.

7. Now if any one desires to be more accuratly informed in all these
particulars, touching the malicious subtilty with which the Devils laid to the
Man's charge all his actions, idle words, and even his very thoughts, as if they
had them written in a Book; as likewise several others, some joyful, others
sad which he learnt from the Angels and glorified Saints which he saw among
them, let him read the Book of this Saints life, and I doubt not he will
receive thereby much spiritual edification. Amongst all which I will select one
passage to putt in this History, from which many may receive proffit.

8. On a certain time being elevated in Spirit, he was commanded by the Angels
which conducted him, to look down upon the Earth: whereupon bowing his eyes
down ward, he saw as it were a dark valley under him in a very low bottom. He
saw likewise in the air four fires, not much distant from one another. And
asking the Angels, what fires those were, he was told that those were the fires
which now inflamed the world and would in the end consume it. The first was the
fire of Lying, when we do not perform what we promised in Baptism, to renounce
Satan and all his works. The second was the fire of Covetousnes, when we
prefer worldly riches before the love of heaven. The third was the fire of
Dissension, when we are not afraid to offend our neighbors, even for things
of no moment. The fourth was the fire of Iniquity, when we make no conscience
to robb or cosen those who are weaker then our selves. Now these four fires
increasing by little, at last joined together, and became an immense flame. And
when they approached near them, Fursey was afraid, and said to the Angel, Sir,
behold the flames come close to us. But the Angel answered, Fear not, for since
thou did not kindle this fire, it will not burn thee. For though this flame
seems to thee great and terrible, yet it tryes every one according to his
Merits, so that the concupiscence which is in any one shall burn in this fire.
For accordingly as every one being in the body, is inflamed by unlawful
pleasure, so being loosd from his body shall he burn by condign torment. Then
he saw one of the three Angels which in both these visions had been his
conductours, go before the other, and divide the flame: and the other two
flying on each side of him, which defended him from the danger of the fire. He
saw likewise many Devils flying through the fire, and kindling war against the
just. These malign Spirits pursued him likewise with accusations, but the good
Angels defended him: And after this he saw greater numbers of blessed Spirits,
among which some were of his own Nation, Priests, who had well discharged their
Office, as he had heard by report: By these he was informed of many things,
very proffitable both to himself, and all who are willing to attend to them.
When they had finished their speeches, and were returned to Heaven with the
rest of the Angels, there remaind only with Saint Fursey the three Angels
mentioned before, who were to restore him to his body. And when he came close
to the foresaid great fire, one of the Angels divided it as before. But when
the Man of God was come to a door which stood open among the flames, the
Unclean Spirits snatching up one of those whom they were tormenting in the
flames, and casting him against him touched him, and burnt his shoulder and one
of his cheeks. He knew the man, and remembered how when he was ready to dye he
had received of him a garment: But the Angel laying hold of him cast him back
into the fire. But the Devil answered, Do not cast him back, since you have
once received him: For as you have taken the goods belonging to a Sinner, so
you must be partakers of his punishment. But the Angel replied, He took not
that out of covetousnes, but for saving the man's soul. After this the burning
ceased, and the Angel turning himself to Saint Fursey said, The fire that thou
have kindled has now burnt thee: For if thou had not received money from this
man who is dead in his sins, thou had not tasted of his torments. Many other
discourses he made, giving him wholesome instructions how he should deal with
such as repented at their death.

9. Saint Fursey being afterward restored to his body, carried visibly in his
shoulder and cheek all his life time the marks of the burning which he had
suffered in his soul, etc. There remains alive to this day an ancient Monk of
our Monastery, who is wont to tell us that a man of great integrity and
veracity assured him, that he saw Saint Fursey himself in the Province of the
East Angles, and from his own mouth heard him relate his Visions: Adding, that
it was in the time of a very sharp frosty winter, and yet the Holy man wearing
only a single slight garment whilst he related these things, yet partly by the
extreme fear, and sometimes great pleasure and sweetness which the memory of
past occurrents produced in him, he was all on a sweat, as if it had been in
the heat of summer.

10. This is the Narration af Saint Beda touching the visions of Saint Fursey,
which for the authority of the relatour; was not to be omitted: Magdeb. ^entur
7. f. 510.
Though I am not ignorant that our Protestant Centuriators of Magdeburg
confidently pronounce all such Stories ridiculous, and Saint Beda for relating
them, a man full of Superstitions, etc.

11. As touching the other Gests of this Holy man, Bed l. 3. c. 19.
the same Saint Beda writes that King S^gebert bestowed on him a place for a
Monastery, which he built with speed, and having replenished it with Monks,
instituted in it Regular Disciplines. The said Monastery was erected in a
certain Castle called Cnobberbury, or City of Cnober, seated in a very
pleasant place near the Sea and encompassed with woods. Which the succeeding
King of that Province Anna, and his Nobles adorned with magnificent Gifts and
buildings It is at this day called Burgh-castell in Suffolk, Camn^n in Suffolk.
where the Rivers Garien and Waveney mingle waters.

12. After this having well settled his Monastery, Bed. l. 3. c. 19.
he was desirous to abandon all secular cares, even of the Monastery it self:
and therefore committed the charge of it to his Brother Foilan, and to Gobban
and Dicul Priests: so being freed from all solicitudes he intended to spend the
remainder of his life in an Anachoreticall conversation He had another Brother
named Vitan, who from a Cenobiticall life was become an Hermit. To him
therefore he went alone, and with him lived a year in labors, continence and
Prayer. But troubles arising in the Province by the invasion of the Pagan King
of the Mercians (of which we shall speak in the proper place) and foreseeing
the danger imminent over his Monastery, he sailed into France, where he was
respectfully received by the French King Clodoveus and Helconwaldus a
Patrician, and built a Monastery in the place called Latiniac: And not long
after being surprised with sickness he piously ended his life.

13. His Memory is celebrated in the Gallican Martyrologe on the sixteenth of
January: Martyrolog. Gallic. 16. Ianuar.
Where he is said to have been Son to a Prince in Ireland named Philtan: and
that desirous to serve God with freedom, he passed first into Brittany, and
after into France, where he built the Monastery of Latiniac: and in his way to
a place where he intended to build another Monastery, he fell sick of the
infirmity whereof he dyed. In his sickness he was visited by the King, by
Erchenald the Maire of his Palace and other Courtiers, to whom he gave
excellent exhortations touching Eternal life: and after some day^ of sickness
which he bore with admirable patience, full of merits, in the midst of his
prayers he went to enjoy the same life of which he had discoursed. A. D. 638.
His Sacred Body was buried in the Monastery of Peronne: and four years after
was found entirely free from the least corruption by the Holy Bishops S.
Eligius of Noyon, and S. Aubert Bishop of Arras: who with very great honor
laid it where it now remains in wonderful veneration, and fully rewards the
inhabitants devotion by the continual protection which they receive from it.

14. What special Monastical Institut he professed, Vsser in Primord. f. 919.
does not appear. B. Usher mentions four several Rules in practice among the
Irish, written in the language of that country, but so ancient that it cannot
be understood in this age, all which like small Rivulets flowed from S. Patrick
as the fountain. The first was the Rule of the Monks of S. Columba: the second,
of Comgal Abbot of Banch^r: the third of Carthag the famous Abbot of Bathen,
and first Bishop of Lismore: and the fourth of S. Albeus, Archbishop of Imelac
(or Emely.) It is probable that one of these Rules S. Fursey brought with him
out of Ireland: but whether in Brittany or France he assumed the Rule of S.
Benedict, cannot certainly be defined.

VII. CHAPTER
VII. CHAP.
1.2. King Sigebert becomes a Monk.

3. The Southern Scotts in Ireland are corrected in the Observation of Easter:
But the Northern become more obstinate.

A. D. 638.
1. THE year of Grace six hundred thirty eight afforded an example of Horoicall
humility and contempt of the world, which had hitherto never been practiced in
Gods Church, but was afterward frequently imitated: which was that a King not
forced thereto by any calamity, freely abandoned his throne to enclose himself
in a Monastery, there to be subject to the will of a poor stranger, deprived of
all things that might please sense, mortified with continual abstinence,
frequent fasts, watching, cilices and scarce ever interrupted devotion: All
which he cheerfully underwent that he might more securely provide for another
kingdom after this life.

2. This was Sigebert King of the East Angles, who, Bed. l. 3. c. 19.
says S. Beda, became so zealous a lover of a heavenly kingdom, that at last
abandonning all affairs of his temporal Kingdom, which he commended to his
Kinsman Egric, who before held a part of it, he entered a Monastery which he
before had built, and receiving the Tonsure, made it his only care afterward to
contend for an eternal kingdom. The Monastery wherein he enclosed himself was
the same which S. Fursey at the Kings charges had taken the care of building:
and no doubt it was by the same Saints encouragement that he undertook a design
so strange and unexpected. Within four years we shall see him forced to leave
his solitude to change his Monastical Cowl for the glorious robes of a Martyr.
A. D.


3. This year the Southern Scots inhabiting Ireland, who, corrected by Pope
Honorius, now kept the Canonical day of Easter, wrote Letters to the same Pope,
accusing their Northern Countrymen of obstinacy in their erroneous practice,
and moreover of reviving the poysonnous Doctrine of Pelagius. To these Letters
an answer came the year following from Iobn the fourth of that name, A. D. 639.
elected Pope: For in the mean time both Honorius and his Successor Severinus
dyed. In which answer, recorded by S. Beda, we read that the said Northern
Scots, according to the perverse humor of disobedient Spirits began now to
renew the formal Heresy of the Quartodecimani, celebrating Easter with the
Jews on the fourteenth day of the Moon. Bed. ^b.
This Heresy, says S. Beda, now newly rose up among them, and did not infect
the whole Nation, but some particular persons among thus. And the like may be
affirmd of the Pelagian Heresy: However, certain it is that the Saxon Churches
were free from these.

VIII. CHAP. VIII. CHAPTER

1. Ercombert King of Kent.

2.3. etc. His Sister S. Eanswitha a Holy Abbess: Her Gests.

8.9.10. K. Ercombert by a Law commands the Observation of Lent.

1. IN the year of our Lords Incarnation six hundred and forty, A. D. 640. Bed.
l. 3. c 8.
says S. Beda, Eadbald King of Kent passed out of this life, and left the
government of the Kingdom to his Son Earcombert: which be managed most worthily
the space of four and twenty years, and some months.

2. King Eadbald had married Emma daughter of Theodobert King of Austrasia, by
whom he had two sons, Ermenred and Ercombert, and one daughter called Eanswitha.
His eldest son Ermenred dyed before his Father, leaving behind him a most holy
offspring, two sons, Ethelred and Ethelbert, both crowned with Martyrdom: and
two daughters, Domnena or Ermenberga, and Ermengita.

3. But among all these the most eminent for sanctity was S. Eanswitha daughter
of King Eadbald, whose Memory is celebrated in our Martyrologe, Ap. Capgrav. in
E^nswi^^.
and who dyed this same year with her Father. From her infancy she renounced
secular pomps, being desirous to serve God in solitude. But her Father had an
intention to marry her to one of the Princes of the Northumbers: to which
marriage she with as much constancy, as might become a tender Virgin, opposed her
self, and by her discreet reasons obtaind of her Father that she might ever be
a Virgin, consecrated to her heavenly Spouse. Whose heavenly conversation that
she might more freely enjoy, A. D. 641.
her Father gave her a town in Kent called Folkston, adjoining to the Sea: Where
she built a Monastery, very acceptable to God as did appear by a wonderful
accident, which may be read in her Life in Capgrave.

4. Her Example moved great numbers of devout Virgins in Kent to imitate her,
and to be companions with her in her spiritual Employment. One principal Act
of her Devotion was daily to give thanks to God for the Late immortal blessing
by him conferred on the English in her Grandfathers days, Harp^s. sac. 7 c. 10.
in discovering to them the heavenly light of his Gospel.

5. These Sacred Virgins found only one incommodity in this their happy
retirement, Ap. Capgrav. (...) sap.
which was a penury of sweet water: For the Monastery being seated on the top
of the high rocks, the water necessary for their daily uses was with great
labor to be brought from a spring a good way distant. The Holy Virgin was
sensible of this inconvenience: and after she had by prayer solicited our Lord,
she went to the fountain more then a mile remote from the Monastery, and
striking the Water with a Staff, commanded it to follow her. The deaf Element
heard and obeyed the Sacred Virgins voice, and against the inclination of Nature
followed her steps, till overcoming all the difficulties of the passage, it
mounted up to the Monastery, where it abundantly served all their uses. One
particular more increased the admiration of the event: For this little rivolet
in the way being to pass through a poole, flowed notwithstanding pure and free
from all mixture.

6. After several years innocently and chastely spent in the Office of Abbess,
she was at last seysed with a languishing infirmity, during which the flame of
her love to her Eternal Spouse increased, and at last on the last of August
she was called to his embraces: though in our Martyrologe her Memory is
celebrated the twelfth of September. Marty. Angl. 12. Sept.
Her Body was deposed in the said Monastery, where it was held in great
veneration, till the Sea breaking in forced them to remove it to the Church of
the adjoining Town Folkston consecrated to S. Peter, but which now is called by
the name of S. Eanswitha.

7. The Monastery is in ancient Writings called the Monastery of Black Nuns,
no doubt from the color of the habits worn by S. Eanswitha and her companions.
Which argues that she received her Veyle, either from the Archbishop Honorius,
or some of the Roman Monks of the Order of Saint Benedict.

8. As for her Brother Ercombert now King of Kent, he began his reign more
prosperously then his Father Eadbald had done: A. D. 641. Malmsbur. de Reg. l.
1. c. 1.
being illustrious for his devotion to God, and piety to his country. For
whereas his Grandfather and Father had professed Christian Religion without
forbidding Idolatry and destroying Idols; he esteemed it misbecoming his Kingly
devotion to suffer those Marks of impiety to remain, which his Predecessors
had only condemned in their private judgment. Therefore all the Chappells of
the Heathen Gods he cast down to the ground, that not any footstep of former
superstition might remain to posterity. This he did by the suggestions of his
most virtuous and pious Queen Saint Sexburga, daughter to Anna King of the
East Angles.

9. Moreover, says S. Beda, he by Royal authority commanded the Fast of forty
days in Lent to be strictly observed: Bed. l. 3. c. 8
Which Law least it should be exposed to contempt, he ordained condign
punishments against all transgressors. And thus he taught his Nation, too much
addicted to gluttony, to accustom themselves to sobriety and temperance. But
from hence Sir Henry Spelman unduly collects, that the Fast of Lent was not
hitherto observed by the English. Spelm. tom. 1. Council. f. 143.
On the Contrary, the observation of Lent is as ancient as Christianity it
self. We celebrate the Fast of forty days, says S. Hierom, according to the
Tradition of the Apostles, H^eron. Epist. 51.
once a year, in a season congruous to us. And S. Basile speaking of his own
age long before this, says, Now this holy Fast is more perfectly observed,
Basil Homil. de Land. Iein.
since the commendation of it is taught through the whole world: For there is
neither Island nor continent, neither City nor Nation, how remote soever, to
which the ordinance of observing Lent is not arrived. That therefore which
before was established by an Ecclesiastical Law, King Ercombert by his Royal
authority commanded to be observed by his Subjects, and those who would
pretermitt it out of their feeble love to virtue, he terrified with a
denunciation of temporal punishments.

10. But how sacred and unviolable the Observation of the Quadragesimal Fast
was not only in Kent, but through the whole Saxon-Heptarchy in the following
age, is manifest from the ancient English-Saxon Laws, which the same Sir Henry
Spelman has published in the Saxon character: among which this is the thirty
seventh Chapter viz, Ap. Spelm. tom. 1. f. 612.
The time of Lent ought to be kept with very strict observance, so that during
that whole time, except on Sundays which are exempted from abstinence, fasting
must not be dissolved. For those days are the Tenth of our whole year, which
therefore we must pass with great devotion and Sanctity. In them therefore no
occasion must be taken to dissolve our fast, which in other times may be
permitted for charities sake: But this is by no means allowd in the time of
Lent. At other times fasting is left in each man's will and choice: But not to
fast in Lent, is to transgress the Precept of God. Fasting at other times
obtains a reward of abstinence: But in this whosoever does not fast, except
sick persons and children, procures to himself a deserved punishment: for our
Lord has by Moses, by Elias, and by his own example consecrated those days to
a Sacred Fast.

A. D. 642.

IX. CHAP.


IX. CHAP.
1.2. King Sigebert and King Egric slain by King Penda.

3. Anna King of the East Angles: His holy Offspring

A. D. 642.
1. THE year of Grace six hundred forty two was mournful to Brittany, being
staind with the Blood of two most pious Kings Sigebert and Oswald. Four years
before this Sigebert having surrendered the Kingdom to his Cosen Egric, was
retired into a Monastery. Now Egric during his short reign, had often been vexed
with the incursions of Penda King of the Mercia^s: but this year he invaded his
country with a powerful army, which he was not able to resist. In this
danger, by common advice it was decreed to call King Sigebert out of his
solitude: For which purpose Messengers were sent to solicit him to prefer the
common care of the Kingdom before his private Devotions: He earnestly opposed a
good while this proposal, but at last, says Saint Beda, Bed. l. 3. c. 18.
even against his will they drew him from his Monastery to the Army: for they
hoped that the presence of so Noble and Valiant a Prince would encourage the
fainting soldiers, ready for fear to disband. Notwithstanding Sigebert mindful
of his present profession, though he was encompassed with a Royal army, would
not act the part of a soldier, nor carry in his hand any other thing besides a
rodd.

2 Thus unarmed, and with an intention to act the part of a General, only with
his counsel and prayers, he proceeded to the Battle: Which was violently
begun by Penda: in which Sigebert being prepared to receive, not give wounds,
took no care to defend his own life: So that he became an easy Victime to the
Enemies cruelty. King Egric likewise was slain with him, and for a perishing
Crown, received one that was immortal. How precious the death of Sigebert was,
fighting for Religion and his country, posterity showed by giving him the title
of a Martyr: for with that dignity he is commemorated in our Martyrologe on the
seven and twentieth of September: Marty. Ang 2^. September.
but in the Gallican, on the seventh of August.

3. The innocent blood of Sigebert and Egric watering this Eastern field, made
it fruitfully budd with flowers of many royal virtues in his Successor, Id. Ib.
which was Anna the Son of Eni, of the Royal family, a Prince of admirable
Virtue, and Father of a most glorious Offspring, says S. Beda. Now Eni was Son
of Titullus, and brother of Redwald: so that Anna's succession being legal, was
unquestioned by all, Never any Saxon King was blessed with such a progeny: His
son Erconwald, afterward Bishop of London was for his Sanctity illustrious to
the whole Church. His daughters were Queen Etheldreda, twice a wife, yet always
a most chaste Virgin: Sexburga also a Queen: Ethelburga a most holy Virgin, and
Abbess of Barking: Edilburga a Virgin likewise, and Abbess of Brigue: And
lastly Withburga a chaste Virgin: All which are inscribed in our Martyrologe
with the Title of Saints, concerning each of which we shall hereafter treat in
due place. With so many glorious Stars did this one good King Anna adorn the
palace of our Heavenly King.

X. CHAP. X. CHAP.

1.2. etc. King Oswalds Mercy and Piety.

5.6. His desire to dye for his people.

7.8. His battle against Penda: and death.

1. KING Oswald yet remained alive, expecting the like end of his race. But
before we conduct him to his death, A. D. 64^.
it will be expedient, after the old Roman fashion* to adorn and crown the
Sacrifice before its immolation, by declaring some of those many virtues which
he showed both in living and dying. We said some thing before of his Piety to
God, and munificence in his service. These sublime virtues were accom^panied
with others regarding Gods poorest servants, whose wants and incommodities he
would not only supply, when they were in his view, but he would often be
inquisitive to find out objects of his mercy and liberality. He never sent away
from him any poor man empty-handed, Ap. Capgrav. in vit. Sanct. Oswald.
but performed exactly that precept of our Lord, Give to every one who asks
thee. Yea his liberality was so boundless, that he almost impoverished himself
by supplying the indigence of the poor.

2. One Noble Example of this virtue is recorded by S. Beda, Bed. l.
and generally all our Historians: which was this. On a certain Feast of our
Lords Resurrection the Holy Bishop Aidan and King Oswald dined together: when
one of the Kings servants coming in, told him that at the gate there stood a
great multitude of beggars in great necessity. King Oswald glad of an occasion
to exercise his Charity, stretched forth his hand and took up a silver dish
full of meat, which he commanded the servant to distribute among those poor,
not the meat only, but the dish, which for that purpose was to be broken in
pieces. S. Aidan was much affected with so commendable an expression of piety
in the King, and taking that hand which had given the Plate, said, Let this
hand never be consumed which has so liberally distributed the Gifts of God.
This prophetical benediction God heard, and approved with a great Miracle: For
after the Kings death, when all the rest of his body was dissolved into dust
that hand remaind entire both in the flesh and sinews for many ages, as shall
be proved by many witnesses.

Bed. l. 3. c. 6.
3. How acceptable these virtues were to Almighty God, he showed by heaping on
him even great temporal prosperity. For, says Saint Beda, King Oswald together
with the Nation governd by him was blessed not only with a sure hope of a
heavenly Kingdom, unknown to his Ancestors: but moreover, by Gods special
assistance who made both heaven and earth, he increased his Dominion by the
access of more Provinces, then any of his Progenitors had enjoyed: For he not
only united the Kingdoms of the Deiri and Bernicians, but had a supereminent
power over the four Nations and Provinces of Brittany, which were divided into
four tongues, of the Britains, Picts, Scotts and English

Id. ib. c. 12.
4. Yet did not the cares of so largean Empire withdraw his mind from a frequent
conversation with God: On the contrary, the same Author writes that whilst he
managed the government of so many Provinces, his chief solicitude and labors
were how to obtain a celestial Kingdom. The general same gives that his
frequent practice was to persist in his prayers from Morning Lawds to br^ad
day: and that by reason of his almost continual custom of Praying and praising
God, wheresoever he was sitting he would hold his hands on his knees, with his
face looking up to heaven: and lastly that he ended his life in the midst of
his Prayers. For being compassed on all sides with enemies and weapons, when he
saw himself upon the point to be slain he prayed for the souls of his
soldiers. And hence arose the Now common Proverb, God have mercy on their
souls, said King Oswald when he was falling dead to the Earth. This expression
of piety we English Catholics to this day owe to this good King: for though
the general practice or the whole Church in all ages was to implore the Divine
mercy for those who dyed in her Communion, yet this special form of expressing
our Charity by saying, God have mercy ^n their souls, came from this most
pious King, who in his last danger, as it were forgetting himself, became an
intercessour for others.

5. Another eminent Example of the like Charity to others with neglect of
himself, the same King formerly gave in the time of a wasting Pestilence. Ap.
Capgravin vis. Sa^. (...) Oswaldi.
For being peirced to the soul with compassion, seeing such a world of
funerals, he earnestly prayed to God, as King David had done, that he would
spare his people, and turn the scourge against himself and his family. Which
prayer Almighty God heard: for presently after the plague seized upon him, with
such violence that he was brought to the utmost extremity. Lying thus a victime
for the whole Nation, and inwardly joyful in hope that with his single death
he should purchase a world of lives to others, he saw three persons of a
stature more then human, who approached to his bed, and conversing together
spoke many words full of comfort to him: A. D. 634.
At last one of them said to him; O King, thy Prayers and resignation are
acceptable to God: Thou art one of ours, for shortly thou shall receive an
immortal crown for thy Faith, Charity and Piety. But that time is not yet
come: For God at the present gives thee both thine own, and thy subjects live^.
Now thou art willing to dye for them: Shortly thou shall dye far more happily a
Martyr for God. Having said this, they disappeared leaving the King full of
wonder: Who presently recoverd his health, and after that; not any of his
subjects dyed of the same infection.

6. The Author of his life adds, That the King was wont to relate to his
Bishops, Ibid.
that not only with his intellectual, but corporal eyes also he often saw
Angelical Spirits in great splendor. By which visitations Divine love was much
more kindled in his heart and a studious care to increase in all virtues. And
because corporal purity does frequently attend that of the mind, by the consent
of his Queen Kineburga (daughter of Kinegils King of the West Saxons) he
abstaind from matrimonial conversation, knowing well how grateful to heavenly
spirits is an aversion from carnal sensuality.

7. Thus happily did King Oswald proceed in his course to heaven, when that
scourge of all good men Penda King of the Mercians, envying the progress of
Christianity, and the glory of Oswald, became an instrument of exalting him to
a heavenly Crown. For whilst King Oswalds thoughts were busied in advancing
Ch^ists Kingdom, the said Tyrant made an impression into a Province belonging
to him: to repel which, King Oswald with an army met him in a place by S.
Beda called Macerfelth. Bed. l. 3. c. 9.


8. It is not yet decided, in what Province that place of combat between these
two Kings is seated. The inhabitants of Lancashire earnestly contend that King
Oswald was slain near a well known village of theirs called Winwick, where they
find a place to this day named Macerfelth, and allege likewise an ancient
Inscription in the Church of Winwick importing the same. And their conjecture
may seem to receive strength from this consideration, that the said Province
certainly belonged to the Dominion of King Oswald, who was assalted by Penda.

9. Notwithstanding Camden and others of our learned Writers do rather design
the place of the Combat in the Western part of Shropshire, Camden. in. Cornavi.
s.
near the Kiver Morda, where there is a town from Oswald called Oswestre, ap.
Capgrav. in^v^t. a^cti Osvvaldi
and by the Britains, Oswalds-Crosse: And this agrees with what we read in
Saint Oswalds life, that the place of the Combat was near the confines of
Armorick Wales, seven miles distant from Shrews bury, not full half a mile
from King Offa's ditch dividing Wales from England, and Sixteen mile^ from the
Monastery of Wenlock. A. D. 642.
In the field where the battle was fought a Church called the White Church was
founded to the honor of Saint Oswald, near which arises a fresh spring which
the Inhabitants call Saint Oswalds fountain.

10. Now although Shropshire anciently belonged to the Kingdom of the Mercians,
yet at this time it seems among other Provinces to have been a portion of King
Oswalds conquests. For the same Author relates, how Penda a little before this
had been overcome and pu^t to flight by King Oswald, so that it seems that part
of the Mercian kingdom was become an accession to that of the Northumbers.

11. The two armies therefore joining here, that of King Oswald could not
sustain the fury of Penda, but after a short combat was forced either to seek
safety by flight, or like devout Soldiers fighting for God and his Church, by
patient exposing themselves to purchase immortality. King Oswald seeing his Army
dispersed, perceived that now the hour promised him by the Angels was come.
Therefore he was not very solicitous to avoid his Enemies weapons, but in the
expression of William of Malmsbury, Malmsburg de R^g. l. 1. c. 3.
having seen all his guards cut in pieces, though he had as it were a grove of
iron weapons planted on his breast, yet neither the greivousnes of his wounds,
nor the approach of death could hinder, or interrupt his devout Prayers to God
for the salvation of his faithful subjects. Thus was this Blessed King slain,
says Saint Beda, in a place called in the English tongue Macerfelth, in the
year of our Lords Incarnation six hundred forty two, and the thirty eighth of
his age, on the fifth day of August.

12. The barbarous Tyrant Penda was not satisfied with the death of his Enemy,
but most cruelly raged against his dead body, which he cut in pieces, and
caused his head and arms, divided from the trunk, to be hung up on three
stakes, as a Trophey and monument of his Cruelty, and to be a terror to others.

XI. CHAP. XI. CHAP.

1. 2. etc. King Oswi buries the Relics of his Brother S. Oswald.

5.6.7. The Incorruption of his hand: testified in several ages.

8. 9. etc. His other Relics where disposed: The great Veneration given to
him: Churches built in his honor.

1. THE inhuman Tyrant Penda thought by his barbarous usage of the Holy King
Oswalds liveles body to render him a spectacle of misery: but Almighty God
showed himself more powerful to glorify him, then the Tyrant had been to
dishonor him. For his Members had been for a whole years space exposed to the
injuries of rain and tempests, yet notwithstanding they preserved their former
lineaments, lively freshness and comlines. The head and left arm continued all
that time hanging on the stakes, and the right arm was fallen into water: for no
man durst take them away or show any regard to them, for fear of the Tyrant.

2. At last Oswy the Brother and Successor of King Oswald by a Divine Oracle
was admonished to perform due respect to his Brothers torn Body, by bestowing
an honorable buryall on it. Therefore fearles of the Tyrants rage or power,
Bed. l. 3. c. 6.
he gathered an Army, and marching into that Province he came to the place:
Where taking out of the Water the right Arm, he enclosed it in a Silver Box,
and reverently deposed it in the Church of S. Peter in a City then called
Bebba from a Queen of that Name, now Bamburg. The lest arm likewise he laid
there in a place separate from the other, as also the Body. And the whole Body,
Malmsbur de Reg. l. 3. c. 6
says William of Malmsbury, according to the course of Nature, was turned into
dust: But the arms and hands, by divine power do remain incorrupt, as an
Historian of great veracity affirms.

3. How long those Sacred Relics remaind there, was to the said Author in
certain. A report there is that a certain Monk of Peterborough perceiving great
negligence in keeping that Treasure, stole away the right arm and Silver box,
and deposed them in his own Monastery. Ingulph ad A D. 1^28 f. 891.
Ingulphus a grave Writer confirms this Suspicion, for relating the cruel
depopulations made by the Infidel Danes in that country, he declares how the
Abbot and Convent there were forced to fly, who carried with him the Sacred
Relics of the Holy Virgins Kineburga, and Kineswitha: and the Priour, says he,
accompanied with some of his Brethren, taking the arm of S. Oswald King, fled
with it to the Isle of Ely.

4. The benediction of S. Aidan (saying, Let this hand never be corrupted) was
fullfilld, Bed. l. 3. c. 6.
says Beda, for when it was severed from the rest of the Body after the
battle, it remains to this day incorrupt. Now what this learned and devout
Historians relates of his own time, which was almost a hundred years after the
death of S. Oswald: the succeeding Writers in following ages testify also with
regard to their times: Malmsbur. de Reg. l. 1. c. 3.
For William of Malmsbury, who wrote four hundred years after S. Beda, has
this Expression, I believe that the Truth of that Divine Oracle, He dispersed,
he gave to the poor, his justice remains for ever, was fullfilld in King
Oswald. For that royal right hand, which had bestowd so many Alm^, together
with the arm, skin and sin^ws remains to this day fresh and incorrupt: but the
rest of the Body, beside the bones, did not escape the common condition of
mortality, but was dissolved into dust. This may seem strange to the Reader:
but none has the impudence to dare to deny the Truth of this.

5. In the next age after lived Roger Hoveden, who was no Monk (this is added,
because Protestant Writers impute such stories to the fiction of Monks) who
writes thus, Ho^den part. 1. f. 403.
In the City Bebba, seated on the top of a Mountain, is a beautiful Church,
in which there is a precious box containing the right hand of the holy King
Oswald, which remains uncorrupted. Floril. ad A. D. 644.
After him lived Matthew of Westminster who gives this testimony, In the fight
where King Oswald was slain, his right hand and arm was cut of, which to this
day remains free from corruption. In the following age John Capgrave thus
writes, Capgrav. in S. Osvvalds.
When King Os^ald was slain, his Arm was cut from his body which hitherto
remains incorrupt.

6. Polydor Virgil, a secular Priest, in the next age recites the Prophetical
speech of S. Aidan to King Oswald, Pab^^r. virg. l. 4.
May this hand never perish: This, says he, we may believe proceede^ from
Divine Inspiration: For the same hand always remaind entire, though the body
was consumed: which is still preserved in a decent box, and with great
veneration deposed in the Church of S. Peter in the Royal City. Lastly
Nicholas Harpsfeild a secular Priest likewise, Harpsf. sa^ 7 c. 26.
who wrote not long after, says yet more expressly, S. Aidan who then sat at
Table, admiring this munificence of the King, prayed that a hand so liberal
might never wither. Which Prayer to this our times did never want effect, etc.
That munificent hand indeed did never wither: For what S. Beda and our
following Historians affirmd to be true, each one in respect of his own age,
our present age likewise has confirmed. There are at this day alive Witnesses
of great worth and veracity beyond all exception who have testified to me that
themselves saw the same hand.

7. Now let the Reader judge whether such a chain of Tradition deserves not
rather our assent, then the impudent charge of lying laid on all our Ancestors
by the Centuriators of Magdeburg, who without any ground or suspicion from
Antiquity impute forgery, Superstition, or what other crime they please to
Writers, whose learning and piety has been approved and commended by the whole
Church.

8. As for the other Relics of this holy King, his Sacred Head was deposed in
the Monastery of Lindesfarn, which himself had lately founded for his Bishop S.
Aidan. It was afterward removed from thence, and more decently buried with the
Body of S. Cuthbert. And when the Sea of Lindesfarn was translated to Durham
about the year of Grace one thousand and twenty, together with the Body of S.
Cuthbert, the same Head was removed by Edmand Bishop of that See: for William
of Malmsbury a hundred years after testifies, that the Head of S. Oswald,
together with his arms was found there.

9. His other bones, together with the trunk of his body, Bed. l. 3. c. 11
says S. Beda, were by the industry and devotion of Offrida wise to King
Ethelred son of Oswi at this time King of the Northumbers, removed to the
Monastery of Bardeney in Lincolnshire: Who likewise recounts how when the Monks
refused to receive these Sacred relics out of an ancient hatred to his person,
as a stranger and Enemy to the Mercians, by a Pillar of Light which all the
night before stood over the Chariot in which these Holy Relics were exposed
to the air, they earnestly begged that their Church might be honored with
them. And many other wonderful Miracles recounted by him, by William of
Malmsbury and others, which God was pleased to work in several ages by the
intercession of this holy King: all these may be read in those Authors, for I
have no inclination to transcribe them. ^^d. Bed. ib. and l. ^ c. ^.
Only I will add, that upon the incursion of the Danes, these Relics were
from the Monastery of Bardeney translated to Gloucester. Yea so illustrious was
the Memory of his Sanctity, that several other foreign Churches, in Ireland,
Flander, etc. were ambitious to be partakers of them.

10. Yea not only the bones of this Blessed King were held in veneration, and
operative in miracles: But according to the testimony of S. Beda, in the place
where fighting for his country and Religion he was slain by Pagans, Bed. l. 3.
c. 9.
frequent cures were wrought both on men and cattle. Whence it came to pass
that many took of the dust it self where his body fell, and putting it into
water, thereby restord health to the sick. Which custom was so much frequented,
that by the continual deminution of earth a trench was made the height of a
man in depth, etc.

11. So great was the veneration born among us to this Holy King, that several
Churches and Monasteries were built and dedicated to him: As in Cumberland near
the River Itun there is Kirk-Oswald: another in Northumberland at Silecester
near the Picts wall: a third in Lincolnshire at Bardeney: a fourth at Gloucester
when his Relics were translated thither: And in Yorkshire the Monastery of
Nosthil was consecrated to him, Camden in York^h.
says Camden: Now that which increased the reverence to this holy King was,
because, Malmsb. de Reg. l. c. 3.
says William of Malmsbury* he gave the first fruits of Sanctity to his
Nation: A. D. 643.
for before him I known not any of the English illustrious for miracles. To
conclude, his Memory is celebrated both in the Roman and English Martyrologes
on the fifth of August. Martyr^l. Romans 5. Aug.
Some part of his Relics are said to have been translated beyond sea into
Flanders and reposed in the Monastery of Bergs S. Winok, Miraus in Fast Belly.
the Memory of which Translation is celebrated there on the twelfth day before
the Calends of June.

XII. CHAPTER
XII. CHAP.
1.2. Oswi and Oswin Kings of the Northumbers.

3.4. etc. K. Kenewalch succeeds Kinegils, His Apostasy: and Repentance.

9. The Monastery of Malmsbury.

1. AFter S. Oswald was translated to a heavenly kingdom, A. D. 613.
says Saint Beda, his Brother Oswi, a young wan of about thirty years,
succeeded him in his throne, which with great labor he possessed eight and
twenty years. He was only natural brother to King Oswald, for he was born to
Ethelfrid by a Concubine. At the beginning he was only King of the Bernicians:
Id. ib.
For says the same Author, he made his consort in the Kingdom Oswin,
descended from the royal family, being the son of Osric, of whom we treated
before, a man of excellent piety and Religion, who governd the Province of the
Deiri seven years, enjoying great affluence of all things and beloved by all.

2. These two Princes for some years reigned in great concord, being united
both in blood and Religion. But afterward by giving ^are to flatterers and
sycophants, enmity arose between them, which proceeded so far, that war was
declared, the success whereof we shall declare in due season.

3. The same year that King Oswald dyed in the North, Kinigils also ended his
life in the West. He had lately embraced the Faith by the preaching of S.
Birinus. An argument of his Piety was his demolishing the Pagan Temple at
Winchester, Godvvin. in Catal Epict. Winton.
which had been polluted with the superstitions of Idols, and in the place
erecting a Church: which notwithstanding, being intercepted by death, he could
not finish, the care whereof he left to his son. Harpsf. saec. 7. c. 18.
To this Church he added a Monastery, says Harpsfeild, the revenews whereof
were so great, as ancient Monuments record, that the whole region at seven
miles distance about, was assigned by Kinegils to its use. The Church was
dedicated to the honor of S. Peter.

4. After a long and quiet reign for the space of one and thirty years, he
ended his life, and left his Successor Kenwalch (called by others Kenwald) his
Son: For Quechelm his eldest, dyed before him. Besides Kenwalch, he left
another son alive, A. D. 644
named Kentwin. William of Malmsbury adds a third called Egelwin a Holy man,
Malmsb^^, de Pontif. l. 2. f. 255.
and patron of the Monastery of Adeling: for treating of that Monastery, he
says: The Monks of that place are few in number, and poor: who
notwithstanding do at least reap comfort, if not joy* from their poverty, by
reason it affords them solitude and quietness. They d^e highly exalt the praises
of their Patron S. Egelwin, of whose sanctity they have experience by many
benefits. The constant fame is, that he was Brother to Kenwalch King of the
West Saxons, and by his virtue yet more ennobled his blood: for though he was
continually chaind by a long infirmity, yet that did not abate his diligence
and fervor in the service of God. At last he dyed happily, and by his
intercession is present to all who invoke his help.

5. Kenwalch succeeded his Father Kinegils in his kingdom, but not in his
piety: For, says S. Beda, Bed. lib. 5. c 7*
he refused to embrace (or, renounced) ^he Faith and Sacraments of the heavenly
Kingdom* and not long after deservedly lost the power of his temporal Kingdom.
This Character also William of Malmsbury gives of him: Malmsbur de (...) l. 1.
c 2.
In the beginning of his reign he might be compard with the worst Princes, but
in the middle, and conclusion with the best. Some write that by occasion of a
prosperous combat fought against the Britains he grew insolent, and trod
underfoot all Laws both humane and Divine But most probably his unhappines
arose from his unlawful repudiating his Queen Sexburga, Sister to Penda King
o^ the Mercians.

6. This a^front, increased by his marrying another wife, Penda deeply
resenting, says S. Beda, made war against him in the third year of his reign,
and deprived him of his Kingdom: so that he was forced to seek refuge with Anna
King of the East Angles: with whom he lived in banishment three years, and
there came to the acknowledgment of the true Faith. For King Anna was a pious
Prince, and happy in a holy Offspring* Kinewalch his conversion came by the
admonitions of this holy King, and his Apostolic Bishop S. Felix, by whom he
was baptized.

7. By this trienniall Discipline the Pride of Kinewalch being depressed, and
his lawful Queen Sexburga restored to his bed, he regained his Kingdom and
afforded to his Subjects a pleasing spectacle of his change. The recovering his
kingdom seems to have been effected rather by force then covenants: Huntingd.
l. 2.
for Huntingdon relats how he bestowd on his Kinsman Aedred, who had assisted
him three thousand villages* near Aescendun. This Aedred is by William of
Malmsbury called Cuthred, Malmsbur. de Reg. l. 1. c. 2.
who was his Brother Quichelms son, on whom he munificently bestowd almost the
third part of his Kingdom.

8. Kenewalch thus restored to his Kingdom, and his reason also, to secure his
crown for the future addicted himself to piety: He showed great reverence to the
holy Bishop Birinus: and the Church, begun by his Father, he so diligently
finished, Id. ibid.
that the same Writer gives him the whole praise: For, says he, he was so
religious, that he was the first of the Saxons who built a Church to God at
Winchester: which was so fair that though when it was made an Episcopal See it
was more beautified by Workmanship, yet the same structure remained.

9. At this time was founded the famous Monastery of Malmsbury by Maidulf an
Irishman, with the assistance of King Kenelwalk. It is seated in Wiltshire,
where in former time Dunwallo Mulmutius King of the Britains had built a Town
which he called Caer-bladon: which having been burnt in the Saxon wars, out of
its ruins was raised a Castle, called by the Saxons in their tongue Ingleburn;
till Maidulf an Irish-Scott, Camden. in Wil^on.
says Camden, a man eminent in learning and piety, invited with the pleasant
solitude of a wood growing under it, lead there an Eremiticall Life: Afterward
he opened there a School for learning, and consecrating himself together with
his Scholars to a Monastical Profession, he built there a Monastery. Hence
from this Maidulf, instead of Ingleburn, it was called Maidulfs-bury, and
afterward more contractedly Malmsbury: Some Historians call it Meldunum.

XIII. CHAPTER
XIII. CHAP.
1. Ithamar a Saxon, Bishop of Rochester.

2. Birth of S. Swibert.

3. S. Foillan Brother of S. Fursey.

4.5. Death of S. Birinus: whose Successor was S. Agilbert.

6. Death of Saint Felix Apostle of the East Angles.

A. D. 6^4
1. SAint Paulinus formerly Archbishop of York, and afterward Bishop of
Rochester, happily and holily dying in the year of our Lords Incarnation six
hundred forty four, Honorius Archbishop of Canterbury says Saint Beda, Bed.
l. 3. c.
ordaind in his place Ithamar a Native of Kent, but in learning and piety equal
to his Predecessors. This was the first of a Saxon race who was exalted to an
Episcopal degree in our Island. Who after he had the space of seaventeen years
with great sanctity governed the Sea of Rochester, received the reward of his
labors.

2. The year six hundred forty seven was illustrious for the birth of S.
Suibert, A. D. 647.
afterward the Holy Apostle of Westphalia. Concerning whose original Haraeus
from Marcellinus a Priest, and S. Ludger Bishop of Munster who largely compild
his Life, thus more compendiously writes: In the foresaid year in England was
born the Blessed child Suibert: Haraeus ad 1. Mart.
His Fathers name was Sigebert Count of Nortingran in the Kingdom of the
Northumbers, and his Mother was the pious Countess Bertha. His birth was
prevented by a Divine vision, for a star of wonderful brightness appeard to his
Mother in sleep, from which two gloriously shining beams proceeded, the one
pointing toward Germany, the other toward France: A. D. 650.
and the star it self, after she had a good while contemplated it, seemd to
fall from heaven into her bed. When the child was arrived at the age of fifteen
years, he preferred a Religious life before a Secular, and was graciously
received into the Monastery of Bardeney. Where having spent nine years in great
austerity, compunction, prayer, sacred Lection and other Menasticall
Disciplines, he attaind the dignity of Sacerdotall Order. Of him more hereafter.

3. In the year six hundred forty nine Foillan the Brother of S. Fursey, A. D.
649.
and who had been left by him Superior in his Monastery of ^noberbury in the
Kingdom of the East Angles, seven years after his departure following his
example went to Rome, and from Pope Martin obtaind an Episcopal benediction to
convert Infidels. Which having received, he went into France, where by the gift
of the holy Virgin Gertrude, he founded the Monastery of Fosse, on the River
Berven.

4. The year following S. Birinus the Apostle of the West Saxons dying, A. D.
650.
as has been declared, there came very opportunely an Apostolical man out of
Ireland into those parts to succeed him. Concerning whom S. Beda thus writes:
Bed. l. 3. c. 7.
After that Kenwalk was restored to his kingdom, there came into that Province
out of Ireland a certain Bishop named Agilbert, by Nation a Frenchman, but who
had abode a good space in Ireland for the opportunity of studying Scriptures.
This Holy Bishop came to the King, and voluntarily took on him the employment
of preaching. The King therefore observing his abilities and industry, desired
him to accept the Episcopal See then vacant, and to become the Bishop of his
Nation, whereto he condescended, and governed that Church many years.

5. In the Gallican Martyrologe this S. Agilbert is said to have been born in
the territory of Paris of a Royal Stock: Martyrol. Gallican. 11. October.
his Fathers name was Belfrid, and his Mothers, Aga. But whereas it is there
added, that the Sea of his Bishopric was Winchester, the Author Andrew
Sau^^ay was mistaken: for though in Agilberts time the Bishopric of the
West Saxons was divided into two Sees, one remaining at Dorchester, and the
other placed at Winchester, S. Agilbert continued at Dorchester.

6. The same year S. Felix the Apostle of the East Angles also dyed: Malmsbur.
de Pontif. l. 2 f 237.
Of whom William of Malmsbury thus writes: S. Felix after governing his
Bishopric seaventeen years, dyed and was buried in the Church of his See at
Dunwich. Thence he was translated to Seham, a town seated near a Lake
heretofore dangerous to such as would pass by boat into Ely: but now a Caussey
being made, men pass thither commodiously on foot. There still remain marks of
a Church burnt by the Danes, and in it were burnt the inhabitants likewise. But
the holy Bishops Body a long time after was sought for, and with much ado
found, and translated to the Monastery of Ramsey. His Memory is celebrated both
in the English, Martyrol. Romans 8. Mart
Gallican and Roman Martyrologes on the eighth of March. And his Successor in
the Bishopric was Thomas his Deacon of the Province of the Girvians, A. D. 651.
says Saint Beda: who was consecrated by Honorius Archbishop of Canterbury.

XIV. CHAPTER
XIV. CHAP.
1.2. etc. War between King Oswi and King Oswin.

4.5 King Oswin to spare his Subjects blood, dispers^d his army: Is murdered.

6 His great Humility

7.8 etc. The Translation of his Relics, etc.

A. D. 651. Malm^bar de Reg. l. 1. c. 3.
1. THE two Kings of the Northumbers, Oswi King of the Bernician^, and Oswin
King of the Deiri, hitherto lived in good correspondence, having passed nine
years in their reign: But in the year of Grace six hundred fifty one, by the
practices of wicked Sycophants, this amity was disturbed, and the mind of Oswi
incensed against his kinsman Oswin. Oswi a long time reverencing the Sanctity
of Oswin, by a principle of Christianity had kept himself free from ambition
and discord, but at last by suggestions of impious Parasites, a quarrel was
raised about the confines of each kingdom, which not being decided by Messages
and treaties, a declared war broke forth this year.

2. Oswi the feircer of the two, and greedy of prey, had gathered a very potent
army: But Oswin with inconsiderable forces came rather to deprecate a combat,
then to employ force, more careful to prevent the shedding of Civil Christian
blood, then to provide for his own safety. Therefore, says Saint Beda, Bed. l.
3 c. 14.
perceiving that he was unable to stand in fight against the numerous army of
his Enemy, he judged it best not to proceed at that time in the war, but to
reserve himself for a better season. He therefore sent his army home, telling
them, that he would not expose them to slaughter by an Enemy much stronger then
himself: that the controversy should be decided with his single personal
danger: and in case he miscarried, he advised them for their own safety to
submitt to Oswi. Thus he dismissed his soldiers, in a place called Wilfares-Dun
(or the Hill of Wilfar) situated ten miles westward from a Town called Cataract.

3 Thus being left attended by one only soldier, named Tonder, ^e retired to a
Town called Gilmy or Gelingam near Richmond in Yorkshire, which he had lately
bestowed on a Count called Hudwald, whom he much favored. There he supposed he
might lie hid securely, and that Oswi contenting himself with usurping his
kingdom, would not pursue his life: or however, that Hudwald so obliged by him,
would afford him a safe Sanctuary.

4. But experience showed that he every way deceived himself: For Oswi knowing
that he could not securely enjoy the Kingdom as long as a Prince so beloved and
reverenced by his subjects, was alive, sent the Steward of his house Ethelwin
to search out and kill the King. Ethelwin too too diligent makes enquiry
through the whole Province for Oswin, urging all men by Promises, rewards and
terrible threatenings to discover him. Hunwald either allured with gain, or
affrighted with danger treacherously betrayed his King and Benefactour. As Soon
as Oswin saw himself discovered, and the place encompassed with soldiers, he
desired Ethelwin to content himself with his death alone, and to spare his
companion Tunder, since his life only was sought by Oswi. But the cruel
executioner presently slew them both for indeed the faithful soldier refused
to survive his King. This murder was committed on the thirteenth day before the
Ca^ends of September.

5. The death of this pious King was greatly bewayld by all: Westmonast. (...)
for from his child hood, says Matthew of Westminster, he was a devout
Professor of Christian Religion: He was tall in stature, valiant, civil,
prudent, liberal: he was as his table sober, in his bed modest, affable to
all, and between the poor and rich he carried himself so, that the poor regarded
him as their equal, and the rich as their Master. Whence it came to pass,
that for the civility of his Royal mind all sought access to him and tenderly
loved him, even out of foreign Provinces. The like character S. Beda gives of
him.

6. But among all his virtues the same Author most commends his Humility, a
worthy example whereof he thus relates: He had bestowd on the Holy Bishop Aidan
a horse, Bed. l. 3 c. 14.
on which, though ordinarily he went afoot, sometimes he passed the rivers, or
upon necessity rode a journey. Awhile after as the Bishop was traveling, a
poor man met him and begged an alms: The Bishop presently lighting down,
commanded the horse to be given him, with all his sumptuous furniture: for he
was very merciful to the poor; and a Father to such as were in misery. This
being related to the King, he said to the Bishop as they were ready to sit
down to table, My Lord Bishop, what meant you to give so generous a horse to a
beggar, which I gave you for your own use? We had horses of less value, or
some other gifts which would have suffised him. The Bishop presently answered
him, Why says your Majesty so? Is a colt in more esteem with you, then the Son
of God? After these speeches had passed between them, they entered into the
dining room: and the Bishop sat in his place: but the King being newly come
from hunting, stood with his servants warming himself at the fire. And there
calling to mind the Bishops words to him, he putt off his sword, and in have
went and cast himself at the Bishops feet, beseeching him to pardon him, for,
said he, I will never speak or censure you for what you give to Gods children
of my goods, be it never so much. The Bishop seeing this, was deeply struck with
it, and rising, took the King up, assuring him that he was very well satisfied,
upon condition he would be cheerful and sit down to meat. Now whilst the King
at the Bishops request expressed much joy, the Bishop on the other side began
to be very sad, insomuch as he could not contain himself from weeping. Which
being observed by his Priest, he asked him in his own countrey-language, which
neither the King nor his servants understood, why he wept? The Bishops answer
was, I am assured that this good King will not live long: for till this hour I
never saw an humble King: whence I conclude that he will shortly be snatched
out of this life. And indeed it was not long after, that the Kings death made
good the Holy Bishops Prophecy.

Bed. ibid. ap. apgrav. ^^ S. Osvvins.
7. The place where he was slain, was in the English tongue called Ingethling,
where his body was ignobly buried. It was afterward called Gilling, not far
distant from Richmond: and there says Saint Beda, and the Author of his life.
Queen Eanfled wife of King Oswi and Kings Oswins kinswoman, having obtaind
permission from her husband built a Monastery for the expiation of his death,
in which daily Prayers were to be offered to God for the redemption of both the
Kings souls, of him who had been slain, and him by whose command he was slain.
Of which Monastery she appointed Abbot a certain devout man named Trumhere, by
nation an Englishman, but instructed and ordaind by the Scotts, who was also
kinsman to the King. This holy man was afterward made Bishop of the Southern
Mercians under their King Wulsere, where he converted great multitudes to Christ

8. This Monastery and Church by the furious incursion of the Danes was so
totally destroyed* Heved. ad A. D. 1065.
that the memory of King Oswin was abolished. But about the year of Christ one
thousand sixty five, by a vision in sleep a certain Monk of the Church of
Tinmouth was admonished to inform the Bishop where the Holy Kings body lay:
which being taken up, afforded a most sweet odor, and was there with great
veneration deposed in the Church of Tinmouth. A second Translation followed in
the year of Grace eleaven hundred and ten: Math. Paris. ^. A. D. 1110
when his Sacred Relics were removed to a New Church in the same town,
dedicated to our Blessed Lady.

Martyr. Aug. 20. Aug Walsingh. in Rich. 2. A. D. 1384.
9. After which time men's devotion to this Holy King and Martyr much increased,
the twentieth day of August being assigned for his Festival. And Thomas
Walsingham Historiographer to King Richard the second relates how by a strange
prodigy, the neglect of that Feast was punished: For, says he, two Mariners
at New Castle on the Tyne, on that day being busy at work in hewing a piece of
Timber for their ship, at every stroke with their axe, great quantity of blood
issued. And when one of them persisted notwithstanding in his work, and turned
the timber, Id. in Hypod^ugm. Ne^str. A. D. 1384.
still the blood on all sides flowd abundantly out of it. This Miracle, says
he, was seen by very many, and verified in an assembly of Ecclesiastics
appointed ^o examine it: and the piece of Timber all staind with blood, was
carried into the Church of Tinmouth where the Saints Body reposed.

XV. CHAP. XV. CHAP.

1. 2. etc. Death of Saint Aidan Bishop of Lindesfarn: His virtues, etc.

1. THE deplorable death of this Holy King Oswin was attended with that also of
S. Aidan Bishop of Lindesfarn, B^d. l. 3. c 14
for thus writes S. Beda: On the twelfth day after the murder of the King dyed
likewise the Holy Bishop who tenderly loved him, to wit, the day before the
Calends of September.

2. The place where this Holy Bishop dyed is described by the same Author to
be a country village belonging to the King, Id ib^d c. 17.
where there was a Church, and a lodging prepared for the Bishop, to which he
frequently retired to enjoy a better commodity for preaching. For he had
nothing in his own possession but a few small feilds about the said Church. His
lodging was a Tent pitched against the Western wall of the Church: here leaning
his head against the side of the Tent, he gave up the ghost, in the
seaventeenth year after he had been Bishop. His Body was carried to the Isle of
Lindesfarn, and buried in the Churchyard of the Monastery. But afterward when
a Church more magnificent was there built, it was translated thither, and
deposed at the right hand of the Altar, with veneration due to so holy a
Prelat.

3. How great the merit of this Blessed Bishop was (says the same S. Beda) God
was pleased to show by several Miracles. Id. ib. c. 15.
It will suffice to relate only two of them in this place. A certain Priest
named Vtta, a man highly esteemed even by Princes for his gravity and
integrity, was sent into Kent to conduct from thence Eanfleda the daughter of
King Edwin to be wife to King Os^in This Priest went thither by land, but
intended to return by Sea with the Virgin. Before h^^ journey he went to the
Holy Bishop Aidan desiring his prayers for a safe journey to himself and
company. The Bishop gave him his benediction, and withal delivered to him some
Oil which had been sanctified, saying, I know that when you shall be at Sea, a
contrary wind and tempest will come on you: but remember that when you are in
danger, you cast this Oil into the Sea, aend the tempest will p^esently cease,
and your return will be prosperous. All which particulars succeeded in order
exactly as the Holy Bishop had foretold. Thus the Man of God both foretold the
Tempest by the Spirit of Prophecy, and by the power of the same spirit, though
corporally absent, he calmed the Tempest when it was risen. The account of this
Miracle I received, not from a relatour of doubtful credit, but a Priest of
our Church of great integrity, called Cynimund, who protested that it was told
him by Vtta himself, the Priest to whom and by whom it befell. Ibid.


4. The Second Miracle was, that when King Penda entered with an Army into those
parts, and was determined to set on fire the Royal City (which took its name
from Queen Ebba) for which purpose he encompassed it with heaps of wood and
other combustible matter, to which fire was applied; S. Aidan being then
retired into his Isle of Farne, about two miles distant from that City, and
seeing the fire and smoke ascending up-wards, he lifted up his eyes full of
tears to heaven, and said, Behold, o Lord, how great mischief Penda does to thy
people: As Soon as he had said those words, the wind immediately turned the
flames upon those who had kindled them: So that the enemies forbore to impugn
the City, which they saw was defended from heaven.

5. Now though S Aidan and his White Monks did erroneously swerve from the
general practice of the Church in the Observation of Easter, Baron. ad A. D.
634.
yet says Baronius, far be it from us to reckon among the Quartodeciman
Heretics such a man, who by an Apostolic Spirit and power converted that
Nation to the Faith. How their practice differed from that of those Heretics
we have already declared out of S. Beda. His Memory is celebrated in the Roman
Martyrologe on the one and thirtieth of August: where this elogium is given of
him: In England on the said day is the commemoration of S. Aidan Bishop of
Lindesfarn, Martyrolog. Romans 31. August.
whose soul S. Cuthbert, then a keeper of sheep, seeing carried up to heaven, he
left his sheep, and became a Monk.

XVI. CHAPTER
XVI. CHAP.
1.2. etc. Saint Cuthbert a child sees Saint Aidans soul carried into heaven:
whereupon he quitts the world: and retires into the Monastery of Mailros.

1. THAT which the Roman Martyrologe wraps up in a few words touching the
occasion of S. Cuthberts undertaking a Monastical Profession, S. Beda more at
large sets down in his Book of the Life of that Saint, which for the reverence
due both to him and S. Aidan, we will h^^e transcribe: And shall hereafter have
^^equent occasion to write more of his Sanctity, the rudiments whereof now
began.

2. When the Divine Grace which governs the lives of Gods servants was pleased
that the devout young man Cuthbert, Bed. in vit. S Cuthberti cap. 4.
by undergoing a more austere Profession should obtain a higher reward of
Glory, he was then employed in the guard of sheep committed to his care in the
remote mountains. One night it happened that whilst he was watching in prayer,
his companions then being asleep: he saw on a sudden a light from heaven so
bright that it dispelled all the darkness: and therein he saw great multitudes
of Angels descending to the earth, and presently after return to heaven carrying
with them a soul of a mavelous brightness. This sight caused great
compunction in the devout youth, and an earnest desire to undertake a spiritual
Life, that thereby he might be partaker of eternal felicity among Gods Saints.
And presently giving thanks and praises to God for this favor: he also wakened
his companions, inciting them with brotherly exhortations to ioyn with him in
praising God: Alas, poor wretches, said he, we are wholly given up to sleep and
idleness, and are unworthy to see the light of Christ's Servants, who are always
watchful in his Praises. Behold, I, whilst I was even now praying, saw the
great wonders of God: the Gate of Heaven was opened, and the soul of some holy
person was conducted by Angels into the glory of heavenly Mansions, where it
will for ever blessedly behold our Lord, whilst we remain negligent in this
darkness below. Surely this was either a Holy Bishop, or some other perfect
Christian, whom I saw with such resplendent brightness and such Quires of Angels
carried up to heaven. These words of S. Cuthbert did not a little inflame the
hearts of the other Shephards to praise God.

3. The next day he was informed that S. Aidan Bishop of the Church of
Lindesfarn, a man of admirable piety, dyed that very hour in which he had seen
his soul mounting to heaven. Whereupon he presently resigned up the sheep
which he had fed, to their owner, and resolved without delay to go to a
Monastery.

4. S. Cuthbert now meditating seriously on his entrance into a new and more
stricks life, the Divine Grace was present to him, confirming his mind in that
good purpose, and moreover by manifest signs showed, that to those who seek the
Kingdom of God and his righteousness, all things necessary for bodily
subsistence shall be administered. For on a certain day as he was iourneying
alone, about the third hour he turned aside into a certain village, which he
saw a good distance from him, and entered into the house of a certain Matron,
being desirous to repose there awhile, and to get food not for himself, but
his horse. The woman received him kindly, and earnestly desired that she might
make some thing ready for his refection. But the devout young man refused,
telling her, that he could not eat because it was a day of Fast. For it was
indeed Friday, on which most faithful Christians, out of reverence to our
Lords Passion do prolong their fasting till three of the clock after noon. She
notwithstanding being devoutly addicted to hospitality, persisted in her
desire, and told him that all the rest of his journey he would find neither
village, nor any habitation of men: Therefore said she, I desire you before you
go to receive some sustenance, for fear you should faint, if you fast all day.
Notwithstanding out of a love to the Religious custom of fasting he would not
be overcome with the woman's importunity, but fasting as he was, he returned to
his journey, and so continued till evening.

5. Here we see that from the beginning of the English-Saxon Church the fast of
Friday was observed, so as that it was not permitted to dissolve the fast
before evening They likewise anciently kept the fast of Wednesday: but custom
afterward moderating the piety of our Ancestors, tempered that rigor,
affixing the observance only to Friday. Thus we read in an ancient English
National Council at Enham this among other Decrees, Spelm. tom 1. council f.
51^. lb f. 546.
Every Friday, except it be a Festival, a Fast must be observed. The same is
found among the Ecclesiastical Laws of King Ina and King Canutus: Both which
are recorded by Sir H. Spelman. But let us prosecute S. Cuthberts journey.

Bed. vbi sup.
6. When Saint Cuthbert saw that by reason of the evenings approach he could
not finish his journey that day, neither was there any lodging near, as he was
riding, he saw certain cottages which in the Summer time the Heards^en had
hastily raised up for their present use, but then the winter approaching, were
left empty. Thither he went with an intention to stay all night, and tying his
horse to the wall he gathered up a bundle of hay which the wind had blown from
the house-covering, and gave it him to eat: and himself passed his time in
Prayer. But on a sudden as he was repeating Psalms, he saw the horse lift up
his head, and with his teeth biting some thing which was on the house roof, and
presently after he drew down a linen cloth wrapped up. Being desirous
therefore to know what that was, as soon as he had finished his Prayers, he
took up the linen, and found wrapped up in it half a loaf of Bread warm from
the Oven, and so much flesh as would suffice for one refection: For which he
joyfully praised God saying, Blessed be God who vouchsafed to provide a supper
both for me and my companion. Half of the Bread therefore he gave to the
horse, and the other half he eat himself.

7. From that day he was ever after more willing and diligent to observe Fasts,
perceiving that in that solitude the same merciful Lord had provided
sustenance for him, who in old times had by the ministry of Crows a long time
nourished the Prophet Elias in the wilderness with the like food: for his eyes
are upon such as fear him and hope in his mercy, to deliver their souls from
death, and nourish them in time of famine. This passage was related to me by a
certain Religious Priest of our Monastery at the mouth of the River Wire, named
Inguald, who is yet alive, a very old man and one who can better see heavenly
objects with the eyes of his mind, then outward things with his bodily eyes:
and he protested that he heard this from S. Cuthberts own mouth being then
Bishop.

8. Saint Cuthbert being thus wonderfully refreshed, Bed. ibid.
went in the strength of that meat whither he intended. Now there were at that
time both in the Church of Lindesfarn men who lived in Regular observance, and
likewise Monks at Mailros on the R^ver Tweed: Both which Communities had been
instituted by the Holy Bishop Aidan. At M^i^ros, Eata was Abbot, and under him
Bo^silus was Priour of the Monks: Id. ibid.
Thither Saint Cuthbert went. Boisilus, says Saint Beda, kindly received the
devout young man, and when he had declared to him the Motive of his journey, he
detaind him there, approving much his resolution to prefer a Monastical life
before a secular. And a few days after at the return of Eata of happy memory,
then Priest and Abbot of the Monastery, and afterward Bishop also of
Lindesfarn, he declared to him the good intention of Cuthbert, and obtaind
permission for him after Tonsure received, to be admitted among the Brethren.
Thus entering the Monastery, he was careful to equal, or excel the rest of
the Monks in Religious observances of reading, working, watching and Prayer.

9. The Institut under which Saint Cuthbert began his Religious Profession was
certainly the same which Saint Aidan had formed, and which he had learnt in the
Monastery of Hye. For as yet Saint Wilfrid had not published in those parts the
Holy Rule of Saint Benedict: neither was the Roman manner of celebrating Easter
introduced among them: Which controversy divided the Black Monks from those
whom Saint Columba and the Monastery of Hye sent into Brittany. Now that Saint
Cuthbert did not wear then a Black Habit is evident from the testimony of
Saint Beda, who says, Saint Cuthbert used vestments of the common fashion and
color, so as he showed no singularity either in the nearnes of them, or a
wilful neglect of cleanlines. And hence it is that to this day in the said
Monastery, the Monks following his Example are content with habits of the
natural color of the wool afforded by the Sheep. But whether afterward the
Rule and Institut of S. Benedict was introduced among them, we shall examine in
due place. We will now leave S. Cuthbert in the solitude of his Monastery,
perfectionating his mind with those virtues and Graces which rendered him a
glorious Light to that Age: whose Actions will plentifully furnish our
following History.

XVII. CHAPTER
XVII. CHAP.
1.2. Finan Bishop of Lindesfarn, after S. Aidan.

3.4. Conversion of the Mercians.

5.6. etc. And of the East Saxons by S. Cedde.

9. Saint Honorius Archbishop of Canterbury dies: to whom Deus-dedit succeeds.

A D. 652. Bed. l. 3. c. 25.
1. IN the year of Grace six hundred fifty two Finan succeeded to the Holy
Bishop Aidan in the Church of Lindesfarn: He was ordaind and sent by the Scotts
( from the Monastery of Hye) says S. Beda. He built in the Isle of Lindesfarn
a Church for the Episcopal See: which according to the Scottish fashion he
made, not of Stone, but hewn Timber, and covered it with reeds. This Church was
afterward dedicated by the most Reverend Archbishop Theodor to the honor of
Saint Peter the Apostle. But Eadbert, who in following time was Bishop of that
place, took away the thatch, and made it be covered all over, both roof and
walls, with plates of lead.

2. As for King Oswi, though by the death of Oswin he became possessed of the
whole Kingdom of the Northumbers, yet either out of remorse of conscience, or a
pious regard to the memory of Oswin, he permitted his Son Edilwald to reign
over the Province of the Deiri.

A. D. 653.
3. The year following is worthily celebrated for the accession of two
Provinces in Brittany to the Faith of Christ, the Midland-Angli, and the
East Saxons. Concerning the former Saint Beda thus writes, Bed. l. ^. c. 24.
At this time the Midle-Angli under their Prince Peoda Son of King Penda,
embraced the Faith and Sacraments of Truth. This Prince being a young man of
excellent disposition, and well deserving the Title of King, was by his Father
set over that part of the Kingdom. He went to Oswi King of the Northumbers, to
desire his daughter Al^fleda in marriage, but could not obtain his request,
except himself and Subjects would receive the Faith of Christ and Baptism.
Whereupon he having given ear to the preaching of Truth, the promise of a
heavenly Kingdom, the hope of a glorious resurrection and future immortality,
professed his res^lution to be a Christian, though the Virgin should be denied
him. He was hereto persuaded most effectually by a Son of King Oswi, named
Alchfrid, his kinsman and friend, who had also married his Sister, a daughter of
King Penda, called Kineburga. He therefore together with all his friends and
attendants and their servants was baptized by the Bishop Finan, in a village
belonging to the King called The Village at the Wall (Ad murum.) And having
received four Priests, men who for their learning and piety of life were
esteemd fit to teach and baptize his Nation, he returned home with great joy.
The names of these Priests were Cedda, and Adda, and Betti, and Diuma: of whom
the last was by Nation a Scott, the rest were English. Now Adda was the Brother
of Veta^, a famous Priest, and Abbot of the Monastery called, At the Goats-head
(Ad Capreae caput.)

4. These coming into the Province with the foresaid Prince, diligently
preached the Gospel, and were willingly hearkened to by the people, so that very
many both of the Nobles and of inferior degree daily renounced Idolatry, and
were washed with Baptism, the Fountain of Faith. Neither did King Penda, though
an Idolater, forbid it: yea moreover he gave free leave to the preaching of the
Gospel in his own Kingdom of the Mercians, so that all who had a mind, might
hear it. He likewise hated and scornd such as having been imbued with the
Faith of Christ, did not bring forth fruits suitable thereto, saying, That
those wretches deserved contempt, who neglected to obey their God in whom they
believed. These things began about two years before the death of the said King
Penda.

5. The same year the Christian Faith was also restored among the East Saxons,
who had formerly rejected it, when the Holy Bishop Mellitus was expelled from
thence. Bed. l. 3. c. 22.
It was, says Saint Beda, by the instance of King Oswi that they now received
it. For Sigebert King of that Nation, who raignd there after a former Sigebert
surnamed The little, being a great friend to King Oswi, frequently came to
visit him in his Kingdom of the Northumbers: who was wont to exhort him to
consider, that those could not be Gods, which were made by men's hands, etc.
Such exhortations being frequently and in a brotherly manner inculcated, at
last had their effect: for Sigebert by the counsel of his own friends, who
were likewise persuaded of the vanity of Idolatry, was baptized with them by
the Bishop Finan in the Royal village seated twelve miles from the Eastern Sea,
near the Wall which the Romans built athwart Brittany.

6. Sigebert therefore become a Citizen of the Kingdom of heaven, returned to
the seat of his Temporal Kingdom, having requested King Oswi to give him some
Teachers who might convert his Nation to the Faith of Christ, and cleanse their
souls in the saving Font of Baptism. Oswi therefore sending to the Kingdom of
the Midland-English, recalled the man of God Cedde: and adjoining to him
another Priest, sent them to preach the word to the East Saxons. These two
going from place to place gathered a numerous Church to our Lord,

7. This holy Priest Cedde was born at London in the same Province, but had his
education in the Monastery of Lindesfarn among the Scotts, by whose
recommendation he was first sent to preach among the Midland-English, and now
to the East Saxons Where after he had spent about three years, he returned to
the Church of Lindesfarn, Id. ib.
says the same Saint Beda, to speak with Finan the Bishop. Who being informed
by him how the work of the Gospel had prospered under him, consecrated him
Bishop of the East Saxons, having called to him two other Bishops to assist in
the ordination. Cedde having thus received the Episcopal Degree returned into
his Province, and prosecuting his employment with greater authority, he erected
Churches in several places, and ordaind Priests and Deacons to assist him in
preaching the word, and administering Baptism: Especially in the City by the
Saxons called Ithancestir (a City in the Romans time named Othona, but now
swallowd by the Sea.) it was seated on the bank of the River Pente. He did the
like in another City called Tilaburg (now, Tilbury) near the River Thames. In
both these places, he gathered communities of devout servants of our Lord, whom
he instructed in the Discipline of a Regular life, as far as their rude minds
were capable.

8. Of this Holy Bishop Cedde we shall hereafter treat further: as like wise of
his three Brethren, in Sanctity as well as blood, Ceadda (or Chadd) Celin and
Cimbert. The seat of S. Cedds Bishopric among the East Saxons was not Tilbury,
Camden in Essex.
as Camden imagins, but London the Metropolis of the Kingdom.

9. The same year wherein began the Conversion of the East Saxons, Honorius
Archbishop of Canterbury ended his life, the last day of September, after he
had administered that See the space of six and twenty years: and was buried with
his Fathers in the Monastery of S. Peter and S. Paul. Bed. l. 3. c. 20
That See, says S. Beda, was vacant eighteen months, after which time
Deus-dedit descended of the Nation of the West Saxons was elected Archbishop,
and ordaind by Ithamar Bishop of Rochester, on the seventh day before the
Calends of April: he governd that Church nine years* four months and two days.

XVIII. C.
XVIII. CHAP.
1.2. etc. Of S. Wilfrid: his Descent, education, etc.

4.5. etc. At twenty years of age he goes to Rome, etc.

8. He lives with Dalfin Bishop of Lions: who was murdered.

A. D. 653.
1. IN this same year of Grace six hundred fifty three S. Wilfrid began to
appear in the world, being now twenty years old, and to give evident signs of
those many graces which afterward eminently shone in him. We shall often be
obliged in the pursuit of this History to mention his Gests: In this place
therefore we will from S. Beda relate his descent, manner of life during his
child hood, and till at the age of twenty years he undertook a Journey to Rome
to inform himself in certain Ecclesiastical and Religious Observances, which
he could not approve in Brittany.

2. He was born in the year of our Lords Incarnation six hundred thirty four
of a Noble English family, Ap. Capgrav. ^. Wilfrido. Bed. l. 5. c. 20
when Eadbald raignd in Kent, and Oswald over the Northumbers. Being a child of
a towardly disposition and innocent manners, he behaved himself in all things
with that modesty and circumspection that he was beloved and respected by those
who were more aged, as if he had been of ripe years. When he was arrived at the
fourteenth year of his age, he in his affection preferred a Monastical life
before a secular: Which having discovered to his Father (for his Mother was
then dead) he willingly approved his virtuous and heavenly desires, advising
him to pursue his good beginnings.

3. He went therefore to the Isle of Lindesfarn, where he committed himself to
the direction and government of the Monks, and was careful to learn and
practice such duties of Chastity and piety as belonged to that Profession. And
being of a sharp wit, he quickly learnt the Psalms and other Books, before he
had yet received the Tonsure, but in the virtues of Humility and Obedience he
excelled those who had long before received it. For which he was deservedly
loved and reverenced both by his equals and seniours.

4. It seems that whilst he lived in that Monastery he had not engaged himself
in a Monastical Profession, Id. ib.
for it follows in the same Author, Having spent some years in the said
Monastery in Gods service, he being of a peircing judgment observed, is young
as he was, that the way of virtue and piety taught by the Scots was not
perfect: therefore he resolved in his mind to undertake a journey to Rome,
there to see what Ecclesiastical and Monastical Rites were observed at the Sea
Apostolic. This his intention he having discovered to his Brethren, they
commended his purpose, persuading him effectually to accomplish it.

5. Thereupon without delay he went to Queen Eanfleda (the Wife of King Osw^,
and daughter of Edwin by Ethelburga Sister of Eadbald King of Kent) to whom he
was well known, for by her counsel and assistance he had been recommended to
the foresaid Monastery. To her therefore he made known his desire to visit the
Monuments of the Holy Apostles. She was much pleased with the good purpose of
the young man, and sent him to her Kinsman Earcombert King of Kent, desiring
him to assist him honorably in his journey to Rome. At that time the
Archbishop there was Honorius one of the Disciples of Blessed Pope Gregory, a
man profoundly skillfull in Ecclesiastical affairs.

6. During the short time of his abode in Kent, where he began studiously to
inform himself in the things he chiefly desird, there arrived another young
man, called Bishop, whose Surname was Benedict, born of Noble English parents,
who also had a desire to go to Rome. To his company therefore the King
associated Wilfrid, commanding him to take him along with him. When they were
come to Lions, Wilfrid was there detaind by Dalf^n Bishop of that City: so
that Benedict dispatched the rest of the journey alone: For that pious Prelat
was much delighted with Wilfrids prudence in speech, comelines of countenance,
alacrity in behavior, and maturity of judgment: insomuch as he supplied both
him and his companions, as long as they stayed with him, with all things
plentifully: and moreover offered him, if he pleased to accept it, a good part
of the country to be governed by him, and his Neice a virgin to be his wife,
so that he would account of him as his adopted son. But he rendering him most
humble thanks for the extraordinary goodness showed to him being a stranger,
told him, that he had resolved upon a quite different state of life: and that
for that reason, having left his country, he had undertaken a journey to Rome.
The Bishop having heard this, dismissed him to his journey, furnishing him with
a guide, and all things necessary thereto: but withal earnestly desired him,
in his return to his country, to visit him once more,

7. Being arrived at Rome he with wonderful diligence applied himself to his
Devotions and to the study of Ecclesiastical matters, as he had purposed* and
had the happiness to attain to the freindship of a very holy man called
Bonifacius, who was Archdeacon and one of the Popes Counselors. By his
direction he learnt the four Gospells by heart, likewise the true Method of the
Paschall Computation, and many other things pertaining to Ecclesiastical
Discipline, which in his own country none could have taught him.

8. After he had spent some months happily in these studies, he returned back
to the Bishop Dalfin in France, with whom he remaind three years, receiving the
Ecclesiastical T^nsure of him: and was so tenderly loved by him, that he had a
design to make him his heyr. But this design was interrupted by the cruel
death of the good Bishop, and Wilfrid reserved to a Bishopric at home. For the
Queen Brunichild^, sending soldiers, commanded the Bishop to be slain: whom
Wilfrid his clark attended to the place where he was beheaded desiring to dye
with him, though the Bishop earnestly desired him to leave him. But the
Executioners knowing him to be a stranger born in Brittany spared him, and
would not kill him with his Bishop.

XIX. CHAPTER
XIX. CHAP.
1. Saint Bathildis excused from the murder of Dalfin Bishop of Lions.

2. Ebroin Maire of the Palace guilty of it.

3. Saint Bathildis her Piety: she founded two Monasteries: and retired into
one.

4. etc. She came out of Brittany of a Saxon race.

1. THVS writes S Beda. But whereas in most of the printed Copies the death of
this holy Bishop is imputed to Queen Brunichilda, it is certain that cannot
consist with Chronology: for though she was infamous for the murders of
several Princes and Bishops, as Desiderius Bishop of Vienna, etc. yet about
forty years before this time she had received her condign punishment for her
cruelties. Therefore in the ancient Manuscripts and one ancient printed Copy we
more correctly read in stead of Brunichildis, Baldhildi^ or Bathildis, who was
indeed at this time Queen of France: But withal a Queen of such admirable
piety and Sanctity, that it is a wonder how S. Beda, and several of our
Historians following him, Malmsbur. de Pontif l. 3. f. 260. (...). in Wil^r^do.
Ap. Ha^aeum 26. Ian^^^.
could be so misinformed, as to brand her memory with a crime of so high a
nature, who in the story of her life is said to have been obedient to her
Husband (King Clodoveus the second) as her Lord: to have behaved her self to
the Princes as a Mother, and to Bishops, as a daughter.

2. To rectify this mistake therefore we are to observe from Sigebert and the
French History, S^gebert in Chron. A. D. 6^0.
that in this age the Kings of France had suffered their whole Regal Power to
remain in the hands of their chief Officer, called Ma^r of the Palace: so that
the Kings lived idly and voluptuously within doors, only on the first of May
they came abroad in ceremony to salute and be sa^uted, to receive and bestow
Gifts, etc. only enjoying the Name of Kings. Now at this time the Mair of the
Palace was Ebroinus, a man of horrible cruelty and injustice, and who was
indeed Author of this sacrilegious murder though in appearance done by the
Royal authority, in whose name the command issued, The King of France at
present was Lothaire, a child, and therefore no wonder if Bathildis the Queen
his Mother, who either knew not, or could not hinder the fury of Ebroinus, was
in common fame charged with the crime, though according to the Gallican
Martyrologe she was at this time retired into a Monastery.

3. The said Martyrologe therefore will give us a true information of this
Fact: Martyrol^g. Gallic. 28. October.
where on the twenty eighth of October in the commemoration of this Holy Bishop
we find this passage: Clodoveus being some years before dead, and his Widow S.
Bathildis retired into her Monastery at Cala, Ebroin Maire of the Palace a most
cruel man, and extremely disaffected to Ecclesiastical persons, began to rage
every where with sacrileges, rapines and murders of innocent persons. No wonder
therefore if S. Ennemund Bishop surnamed Dalfin, incurred his hatred, because
out of an affection of piety and justice he was earnest with the King to ease
the people of their pressures. Therefore after that the Brother of the Holy
Bishop, who was Prefect of Lions, had been slain at Orleans upon a false
accusation, as if he had an intention to rebel: Ebroin presently after with
the like violence persecuted S. Ennemund. Who being informed that accusations
were falsely charged on him before the King, perceiving the machinations of his
cruel adversary, at first departed from Lions: But presently after taking
courage, and placing his whole trust in God he returned thither again: where
whilst he was diligent in his devotions and pious works, he was seized upon by
the Emissaries of Ebroin, and to the general extreme grief of the City carried
away, with show that he was to be lead to the Kings presence: but by the way
near Chaillon in Burgundy, he was murdered by night, whilst he prayed God to
pardon his enemies: and so for a reward of his justice, charity and patience he
received a never fading crown of Glory.

4. This Narration does evidently absolve the good Queen Bathildis: Whose
memory ought to be in a special manner precious to us, since she descended
from a Saxon family in Brittany, which she left unwillingly. For as the Author
of her life in Surius and Haraeus, who lived in the same age recounts, She was
stolln out of Brittany by Pirates, Ap. Harae^^^ 26. Ianuar.
and by them sold to Erchinoald a famous Prince in France, then Maire of the
Kings palace. In whose service she behaved herself so decently (for she
descended from Noble Saxon Ancestors) that the said Erchinoald's Lady being
dead, he intended to have taken her to wife. But the Holy Virgin withdrew her
self from his sight, till he had married another. This her Modesty made her so
acceptable to King Clodovaeus the second of that name, son of Dagobert, that
(as we read in the Appendix to Gregory Bishop of Tours) he made her, Greg.
T^^n. l. 11, c. 91.
though a stranger, his Queen for her prudence and comlines, and had by her
three Sons, Cloathair, Childeric and Theodoric.

5. After Clodovaeus his death, she awhile governed the Kingdom with her
children: and then with great difficulty obtaind permission of the Nobility to
retire her self into a Monastery built by her self in a place called Cala in
the Territory of Paris, Ap. Sur. 26. Ianuar.
over which she had placed Abbess a Holy Virgin called Bertilia, sent for by
her out of the Monastery of I^dro. To this Monastery of Cala therefore she
retired, where she lived a great example of Piety and virtue. Now at that time
there being in Brittany few Monasteries of Religious Virgins;, Bed. l. ^. c. 8.
says Saint Beda, many Noble men sent their daughters out of Brittany into
France to be instructed there and espoused to their Heavenly Bridegroom:
especially in the Monasteries of Brige, Cale (now called Chelles) and Andilege.

6. She built likewise in the Territory of Amiens at a place called Corbey, Ap.
Sur. vbi s^p^.
a Monastery for Religious Monks, which she magnificently enriched with
possessions and all things necessary for their subsistence. Over which Monks
she placed Abbot a venerable person called Theofred, whom she had for that
purpose desired to be sent out of the Monastery of Luxueil. (Luxovium:) Which
Abbot was afterward a Bishop.

7 Neither was her piety confined to France only: Ibidem.
For she honored with many precious Gifts the Churches of the Holy Apostles S.
Peter and S. Paul at Rome, out of the great love and devotion she had to them:
Likewise great liberality she extended to the poor, and to persons professing a
Reclused solitary life in the same City.

8. Thus in all conditions, both as a simple Virgin, a Queen and a Religious
Nun she sparkled with all divine Graces. Particularly during her Regency, by
her zeal the Simoniacal Heresy, which then defiled the Church of God, was
quite driven out of the Kingdom. And for a further proof of her innocence
touching the death of S. Ennemund or Dalfin Bishop of Lions, there is mention
in her life of another Bishop called Sigebrand, who by the practice of Ebroin,
against her will, without conviction or examination was slain, contrary to Law
and justice.

9. Her piety to Holy Bishops, Ap. Sur. 7. December.
and particularly to S. Eligius the famous Bishop of Noyon is celebrated by S.
Audo^n Bishop of Rouen who lived at the same time, and wrote his life: For he
relates with what affection and devotion this Holy Queen with her children and
Nobles hastened to take care for his honorable enterment. Her desire was it
should be conveyed to her Monastery of Cala, but by no force it could be
removed. Whereupon overcome with a violent grief, she uncovered his face which
she bedewed with showrs of tears. At last turning her self to her Nobles, she
said, We now see it is not his will that his body should be removed from his
own City: let us therefore permit his own flock to enjoy it. Which words she
had no sooner uttered, but the Body and Coffin became easily moveable, so that
two persons alone were able without difficulty to carry it. Thus having
venerated the Sacred Body, she retired weary and hungry, for she had continued
a Fast of three days with Prayers and tears, thereby to know Gods will for
disposing the Body.

10. The same Holy Writer further declares the same Queens devotion to S.
Eligius after his death: and how in a vision by night he commanded a certain
Courtier to reprove her for wearing jewels and costly apparel during her
Widdow-hood: Which she did not out of Pride but because she thought it fitting
to be done whilst she took care of administering the Kingdom during her sons
minority. This command thrice repeated, not having been executed by the said
Courtier, he was p^nished with a violent fever: During which having been
visited by the Queen, he declared it to her: and immediately the fever quitted
him. Whereupon the Queen laid aside her Jewels and Ornaments, a great part of
which she distributed to the Poor, and with the richest of them she made a most
beautiful and sumptuous Cross, which she deposed at the head of S. Eligius
(or S. Eloy) Which devotion of hers was imitated by the Nobles so zealously,
that in a short time his Church was enriched with incredible riches and
Offerings.

11. Her death was answerable to her life: Ap Harae^^^ 26. Ianuar.
before which a wonderful vision was showed to her: for before the Altar of the
Blessed Virgin a Ladder was erected up to heaven, and Angels descended to
comfort her. She commanded her Sisters to conceal this Vision: and awhile
after signing her self confidently with the sign of the Cross, and lifting up
her eyes and hands to heaven, A. D. 655.
she breathed forth her pure spirit: and those who were present saw her friend
the holy Bishop Genesius among troops of Angels coming to meet her, on the
third day before the Calends of February. Her memory is celebrated the same day
in the Gallican Martyrologe. Her Sacred Body was afterward diligently sought,
and translated to a more honorable place in the time of S Lewis: Martyrolog.
Gallican. 28. Mart.
the Commemoration whereof is solemnised on the eight and twentieth of March.

XX. CHA.
XX CHAP.
1. Anna King of the East Angles slain by K. Penda.

2.3 etc The Mercian Tyrant Penda miraculously slain by K. Oswi: who
consecrates his daughter to God.

A. D. 614. Westmonast. hic.
1. IN the year of Grace six hundred fifty four, says Matthew of westminster,
Penda King of the Mercians, a man who breathed nothing but fury and war, and
loved to tread in ways staind with blood, invaded the Religious King of the
East-Angli, Anna, and in a moment destroyed him and his army. To him his Brother
Aethelherus succeeded in the Kingdom. With King Anna was slain his eldest son
Firmin^^: and both their bodies were buried at a Town called Blithborow in
Suffolk, seated on the River Blithe: Which town, says Camden, deserves to be
mentioned for no other thing, Camden in Suffolk.
but that there was the Sepulcher of Anna a Christian King of the East-Angli,
slain in battle by Penda the Mercian King. But afterward their bodies were
translated to S. Edmunds-bury, in the same Province.

A. D. 655.
2. But the year following this bloody King Penda, who seems to have been raised
up for the destruction of good Kings, received at last the reward of his
cruelty by the hands of Oswi King of the Northumbers. The particular Narration
we receive from S. Beda: Bed. l. 3. c. 24.
In those times, says he, King Oswi having received intolerable vexations from
Penda King of the Mercians, who formerly slew his Brother King Oswald, at last
was forced to promise him incredibly rich gifts to obtain a peace, and for a
cessation of the ruins of his Provinces. But the perfidious King Penda would
accept of no conditions, being determined to exterminate his whole Nation.
Whereupon King Oswi had his recourse to the Divine Protection only, to deliver
him from the barbarous impiety of his enemy. Wherefore he obliged himself by
vow, saying, since this Pagan King refuses our gifts, let us offer them to our
Lord God who will graciously accept t^em. He vowed therefore that in case he
got the victory, he would consecrate his daughter to serve our Lord in
perpetual Virginity, and withal bestow twelve possessions of farms for
building and endowing Monasteries. After which vow he marched with a very small
army to combat him.

3. Such a wonderful inequal^ty there was between the two Armies, Idem.
that the Pagans had a thirty fold greater army then the Christian King Oswi:
for they had thirty Legions conducted by as many Generals, against whom
notwithstanding Oswi with his Son Alcfrid, Idem ib. d.
trusting only in Christ their conductour, with very small forces adventured to
combat. King Oswi his Son Egfrid was not present there for he was then kept as
an hostage by King Penda's wife. And Edilwald son of King Oswald, who ought to
have assisted him, was on the Enemies side, being one of Penda's Captains to
fight against his Uncle and country. Though true it is that in the time of
battle he withdrew himself into a safe place, there expecting the event. Rad.
de Dicet c^l 9^6.
Yea we read in the History of the Britains that Alcfrid also the Son of King
Oswi, rebelling against his Father, was joined with King Penda.

4. Yet notwithstanding all these disadvantages, Idem ibid.
as soon as the combat began the thirty Pagan Generals of King Penda were putt
to flight and slain, and almost all their auxiliaries. Among which was also
Edilhere Brother and Successor of Anna late King of the East Angles, who was
the author of the war: he together with the forces attending him was likewise
slain. And because the battle was fought near the River Iuwet, which by reason
of great raines, had overflowed its banks, the waters consumed more in the
flight, then swords had in the combat.

5. This wonderful victory was gaind in the thirteenth year of King Oswi his
reign, and on the seaventeenth day before the Calends of December, in the
region of Loidis (now called Leeds io Yorkshire, were above thirty years
before, King Edwin had overcome the Britains. Westmonast. hic.
) The River which in S. Beda is called Iuwet, Matthew of Westminster more
properly calls Winwed, adding that thence the Proverb came, That in the River
Winwed were revenged the slaughters of five Kings, Anna, Sigebirt, Egric,
Oswald and Edwin. And near the place is yet extant a village, either from this
or King Edwins victory called Winfeild.

6. This victory brought incredible proffit to both the Nations: Bed. ibid.
for the Northumbers were secured from the hostile incursions of their Enemies,
and the Nations both of the Mercians and other confining Provinces became
converted to the Christian Faith, as soon as their perfidious Head was cut off.
For immediately after, the most Christian King Oswi took possession of Penda's
kingdom, by whose order the Holy Priest Diuma was ordaind by Finan, Bishop both
of the Mercians and Midland-Angli: for by reason of the scarcity of Priests one
Prelate was obliged to govern two Nations. And now also the Conversion of the
East Saxons, under their King Sigebert, of which we treated before, was
perfected.

7. King Oswi having thus by divine assistance gaind so miraculous a victory,
Id. ibid. c. 22.
forgot not his Vow. But says the same S. Beda, according to his promise made
to our Lord, and in thanksgiving for his victory he gave his daughter Elsleda,
scarce then a year old, to be consecrated in perpetual Virginity to our Lord:
and moreover twelve possessions of lands for the maintaining Religious persons
to pray daily for the perpetual peace of his Nation: Of which each possession
was ten families. The foresaid daughter of King Oswi therefore entered into the
Monastery called Heortsig, or the Island of the Heart, which was governed by the
Holy Abbess Hilda. And two years after having obtaind a possession of ten
families in a place called Streneshalch, she there built a Monastery, in which
the foresaid Kings daughter first learnt, and afterward taught Regular
observance: till having spent threescore years in our Lords service the happy
Virgin hastened to the embraces of her heavenly Bridegroom.

XXI. CHAPTER
XXI. CHAP.
i.2. etc. The Gests and happy death of the Holy Abbess S. Hilda.

1. AS for S. Hilda mentiond by S. Beda, she was the daughter of Hereric Grand
child of King Edwin by his son Egfrid: And when S. Paulin preached among the
Northumbers, she with others embraced the Faith and received the Sacraments of
Christ After which laying aside her Secular Habit, and desiring to serve our
Lord more strictly, she went into the Province of the East Angles where she
staid a year. Bed. l. 4. c. 23.
She had a purpose likewise, says S. Beda, to forsake her country and all
relations, and to go into France, there to spend her life as a stranger in the
Monastery of Cala, thereby to obtain a perpetual mansion in heaven. For at
the same time her Sister Hereswida Mother of Aldulph King of the East Angles,
had submitted her self to Regular Disciplines, expecting a heavenly Crown.
Desirous therefore to follow her example, S. Hilda had a purpose to go into a
strange Country: but before she could execute that purpose, she was recalld by
Bishop Aidan into her Country of the Northumbers, and receiving a place of one
family at the North side of the River Wire, she with a few companions lived a
Monastical life there another year. After which she was made Abbess in the
Monastery called Heorthu, which not long before had been built by the devout
handmaid of our Lord Heiu (or rather, Bega, according to Capgrave, vulgarly S.
Bees) who is said to have been the first woman in the Province of the
Northumbers who took the Habit and Profession of a Nun, by the Benediction of
Bishop Aidan. But she not long after she had built the Monastery, retird to the
City Calcaria, named by the English Calcester (vulgarly Tadcaster,) and there
instituted another Mansion.

2. S. Hilda therefore being preferred to the government of that Monastery, was
careful to establish therein Regular observance in every thing, according to
the instructions she had received from learned men. For both Bishop Aidan and
other Religious men who had known her, were wont to visit her, invited thereto
by her wisdom and Love of the service of our Lord, for which they bore great
affection to her, and were diligent to inform her touching Religious
Observances.

3. After she had governed this Monastery some years, she undertook likewise
the care of founding and ordaining another Monastery for Religious women, in
which the like Instituts of a Regular life were established: the place where
this Monastery was built is called Streanshalc (now called Whitby.) And there
also she taught the perfect observance of Justice* piety, chastity and other
virtues, but principally Peace and Charity. So that according to the example of
the Primitive Church, none were there either rich or poor, all things were
common to all, since none challenged a propriety in any thing. For she was a
woman of such eminent Prudence, that not only men of ordinary condition, but
Kings and Princes also would sometimes demand and follow her Counsel. Such
care she had ^o make her subjects diligent in reading Scripture: and exercising
works of piety, that there were very many Ecclesiastical persons found there
very fit to undertake the Ecclesiastical degree and Office of the Altar. In a
word out of that one Monastery we have seen to proceed no fewer then five
Bishops, all of them men of singular Merits and Sanctity: their Names are Bosa,
Eata, Ostfor, John and Wilfrid.

4. This Monastery of Streneshalch she piously governd till the year of Grace
six hundred and eighty, Id. ib.
in which says the same S. Beda, she passed to our Lord to receive in heaven a
reward for many heavenly works wrought upon earth, on the fifteenth day before
the Calends of December, being then Sixty six years old: Which time she divided
into equal portions, living the first thirty three years most nobly in a
secular state, and the other thirty three far more nobly in Monastical
conversation.

5* For her Piety and other excellent virtues, illustrious even among persons
far distant from her, she was generally styled by the Name of Mother, which she
made good by being the occasion and instrument of conversion and Salvation to
many: so fullfilling the dream of her Mother, Bregosuid, who living in
banishment with her husband Hereric under Cerdice King of the Britains where
he dyed by poison, she dreamd that she had sudde^ly lost him: wherefore seeking
him with great solicitude, instead of him she found under her garment a most
precious chain of Jewels so sparkling, that the beams thereof shone through
all Brittany: Which dream was truly ful^filld in this her daughter, whose life
afforded examples of heavenly light to many persons both near and far removed.

6. Before her death she was visited for the space of six years together with
sharp and tedious infirmities, during all which time she never ceased from
praising our Lord for so purifying a trial of her patience, nor from
instructing the flock committed to her charge to be diligent in serving and
praising God as well in adversity as prosperity: In the midst of which
exhortations also she ended her life.

7. Several Testimonies our Lord gave of her celestial happiness after death.
For one of her Religious Sisters in a Monastery thirteen miles distant from
thence the same night being wakened with the sound of a Bell like that which
called them up to Midnight prayers, saw a glorious light, and in that light
Angels carrying S. Hilda's soul to heaven. This vision she presently ran to
declare to a Holy Virgin named Frigit, who in the Abbesses place was Superior
of the Nuns: and the next morning Messengers came to inform them of her
death. The like vision was communicated to another devout Virgin in the same
Monastery where the Holy Abbess dyed, who had then the care of such women as
coming to conversion, were for Probation lodged beyond the bounds of the
Enclosure. So that this Blessed Virgin Hilda is deservedly placed in the number
of Saints in our Martyrologe on the fifteenth of December. Martyrolog. Angli^.
15. December.


8. Neither was it a deminution to her Sanctity, that she declared her self in
opposition to S. Wilfrid both in the rite of the Paschal Observation, and also
joining in a complaint to the Sea Apostolic against him, Bed. l. 3. c. 25.
as S. Beda testifies, and Pope John in his Epistle to King Ethelred in the
year seven hundred and five. For it is not to be wondered, if a woman should be
zealous in maintaining a ceremony received from her Ancestors. And we find in
Ecclesiastical Story that S. Athanasius and Saint Chrysostom were persecuted
not only by impious men, but also by some Bishops esteemd for their Sanctity.
From such examples we learn, says William of Malmsbury, the wretched condition
of our humane Mortality, Malmsbur. de Pontif. l.
when we read that men celebrated for their Sanctity by our Forefathers, as
Theodore, Berthwald, John, Bosa, and likewise the Abbess Hilda, with an
irreconcilable passion persecuted S. Wilfrid, a man most acceptable to God.

9. S. Hilda's Successor in the Government of her Monastery was the Royal and
Holy Virgin Edelfleda, who had been consecrated as an Offering to our Lord by
her Father Oswi King of the Northumbers, when she was then but a year old, in
thankfullnes for his victory obtaind against the bloody King of the Mercians,
Penda.

XXII. C.
XXII. CHAP.
1.2. The Gests of S. Adulf and S. Botulph, brethren.

A. D. 655.
1. AT the same time with S. Hilda flourished S. Botulph and his Brother S.
Adulph: whom erroneously some Writers affirm to have been Scotts, who are
confuted by the whole contexture of their Lives. For thus we read in their
Gests recorded by Ioannes Anglicus in Capgrave: Before Christian Religion was
spread over Brittany, Ap. Capgrav. in Botulpho.
the Venerable Fathers Botulph and Adulf, born of a Noble family and of a
German descent, and more strictly linked by charity then blood, being very
young were initiated in spiritual and celestial exercises. For being born of a
Saxon stock which conquered Brittany by martial courage, they from their
infancy were imbued in the Christian Faith. But their parents being rude and
unacquainted with the Documents of perfection, sent their children, five in
number, to their ancient country of Saxony, there to learn the Discipline of a
holy conversation.

2. Thus by mistake writes that Author for as yet Christianity was not entered
into Saxony: Ib them.
Therefore in stead of Saxony we are to understand Belgic France, whither by
S. Beda's testimony, our Ancestors in those times usually sent their children
to be in (...) in more sublime Christian Philosoph^. The same Writer thus
prosecutes hi^ Narratio.

3. With this intention the foresaid Fathers, pa^sing the Sea, repaired to
Monasteries of Holy Religious men, desiring communication with them, to be
instructed in the Document of a spiritual life. There being imbued with
Monastical Institu^ and disciplines of a more austere life, they received the
Religious Habit: and in a short time. Gods Grace became enabled co be Teachers
^ Perfection.

4. The King therefore hearing the fame of S. Adulphus, exalted him to the
Government of the Church of Virect in Belgium. Who in discharge of that sublime
employment was very watchfu^ and solicitous to prevent the snares and cunning
designs of the Devil, who like a ravening w^l sought the destruction of his
flock. He was sedulou^ in works of mercy, feeding the poor, clothing the
naked, correcting those which strayd, and comforting the afflicted, to the end
he might himself obtain the effect of our Lords Promise, Blessed are the
merciful, for they shall obtain mercy. He was instant in fasting, watching and
prayers. He prevented his preaching by his practice, and in all things lead a
saintlike life.

5. In the Gallican Martyrologe he is adorned with this Elogy: Martyrolog.
Gall. c. 17. I^n.
On the seaventeenth of June is celebrated the Memory of S. Adulph Bishop of
V^rect who was Brother of S. Botulph, and out of Brittany passing with him into
France, for his eminent endowments and Sanctity of life was raised to that See:
wherein by his admirable virtues and learning, he became a shining light to his
flock: and at last with a great affluence of merits ended his life, or rather
being translated by death he passed to a life immortal.

6. As for his Venerable Brother S. Botulph (by the testimony of the foresaid
Author) being well exercised in virtue and holiness, Ap. Capgrav. in Botulpho.
he resolved to return into England. Now there were in the same Monastery where
he made his abode, two Sisters of Ethelmund a Prince among the Southangles, who
had been sent thither to be instructed in Monastical Disciplines. They hearing
that the Blessed man had a purpose to return to his country, gave him
commissions to be delivered to their Brother. Having therefore passed the Sea,
S. Botulph was honorably received by the said Prince, who having heard his
Sisters petitions, and accepted them, granted to the Holy man a place for
building a Monastery. Now S Botulph did not desire that for his cause any one
should be driven out of his hereditary possession, but rather that some place
unpossessed and uncultivated should be assigned him, that there he might build
a Church, and congregate brethren to serve God, by whose pious lives and
prayers his Principality might be established in this world, and an eternal
kingdom prepared for him in the world to come. This request the Prince
willingly granted: whereupon the Venerable Father chose a certain untilled
place where none dwelt, named Ikanho. It was a Wilderness unfrequented by men,
but possessed by Devils, whose fantastical illusions were to be expelled
thence, and a Religious conversation of pious men to be introduced, that where
the Devils fallacies abounded, there our Lords Divine Grace might superabound.

7. Where this place called Ikanho was seated, is now uncertain. The
Centuriators of Magdeburg from Leland and Bale, place it not far from the City
of Lincoln. And indeed in that Province where the River Witham enters the Sea
there is a Town called Boston, but more truly Botulphs-town, for says Camden
it being formerly by Beda called Icanhoe, took a new name from Botulph a most
holy Saxon. Camd. in (...).
Likewise in Huntingdon-shire there is a town called Bottle-bridge, for S.
Botulphs-bridge. So that it seems in one of these two places S. Botulph built
his Monastery.

8. The said Author thus pursues his Narration: When he had finished his
Monastery, like a good shepherd he gathered together his flock, Ap. Capgrav.
in S. Botulpho
whom he diligently taught Apostolic Doctrines and Instituts of the Holy
Fathers: and whatsoever good Documents he had learnt abroad concerning
Monastical Disciplines, those he instilled into the minds and practices of his
Monks. He was beloved by all for he was free from arrogance, being humble, mild
and affable in all things. He was illustrious likewise for many miracles and
the gift of Prophecy: For sometimes by Divine inspiration he foretold future
things as expressly as if they had been passed. When he was oppressed with any
infirmity, he with blessed Job persisted in thanking God, and all his discourse
was of matters which might edify and advance the hearers. Such was his
conversation during his life, and in such exercises he attained to a good old
age.

9. He dyed most happily the same year in which S. Hilda also dyed and was
buried in the Monastery which he had built. There his Sacred Relics remained,
till the Danes invading this Island wasted all Holy places with fire and sword.
Then by the care of S. Ethelwold they were translated, part to the Monastery of
Ely, and part to that of Thorney. The Memory of S. Botulph was elsewhere also
celebrated: for at London there is a Church dedicated to his honor. Hence we
read this passage in Capgrave: In the Book of the Church of S. Botulph near
Aldersgate London, there is mention how a part of the Body of S. Botulph was by
King Edward of Happy memory conferred on the Church of S. Peter in Westminster.
Marty. Angl. 16. Maij.
His memory is celebrated in our Martyrologe on the sixteenth of May.

THE SIXTEENTH BOOK OF THE CHVRCH-HISTORY OF BRITTANY.
I. CHAP.
I. CHAPTER.
1.2. etc. The Mercians Converted: and an Episcopal See erected there.

5 Ithamar Bishop of Rochester dies: and Damian succeeds.

6. The Holy Offspring of Merovald a Prince of the Mercians.

1. BY the death of Penda King of the Mercians, A. D. 656.
that Kingdom together with that of the East Angles whose Kings he had slain,
became an accession to the Dominions of the Victorious Oswi King of the
Northumbers Notwithstanding in the year of Grace six hundred fifty six he
permitted Peoda the Son of Penda, on whom he had bestowd his daughter Alefleda,
to reign over the Southern Mercians: and likewise Edelwald the Brother of
Ethelhere to govern the East Angles.

2. By this indulgence of King Oswi the Christian Faith became spread through
several Provinces: Malmsbur. Cent. 7. f. 41.
For he built many Churches and Monasteries in the Kingdom of the Mercians:
among which the principal was that which was founded in an Island called the
Isle of the Heart, Id. f. 34.
in which as a testimony of gratitude to God for his Victory, he enclosed his
daughter. So that within the space of two years the Mercians following his
example were converted to the Faith and baptized.

3. And for a firmer establishment of Christianity among them, Godvvin. in
Catal Episc. Coventr. and Lichfield. Malmsbur. de Bontif. l. 3. f. 26.
he erected an Episcopal See common to the Mercians and Midland Angli, in the
City of Lichfe^ld, says Bishop Godwin. Though more probable it is that as yet
there was no certain place affixed for the Bishops residence: For several
years after this we read how Wuifer King of the Mercians offered Lichfeild to S.
Wilfrid that he might there either build a Monastery or erect an Episcopal
See, The first Bishop of the Mercians was Diuma a Scottish Priest, of whom we
have already made mention.

4. This is testified by S Beda in this passage, When Oswi the most Christian
King of the Northumbers having slain King Penda, Bed. l. 3. c. 21.
took possession of his Kingdom, Diuma one of the four forementioned Priests,
was ordainen Bishop both of the Midland Angli and Mercians by F^nan, Bishop of
Lindisfarn. For by reason of the Scarcenes of Priests they were compelled to
set one Bishop over two Nations. Now Diuma having in a short time converted
great multitudes, dyed: To whom in the year of Grace six hundred fifty eight
succeeded Cellach who was likewise a Scotch-man: Godvvin. ib.
Who after he had a few years governed that Province, voluntarily relinquished
his Bishopric, and returned to his Native country the Island of Hu, or Hy.

A. D. 658
5. At this time Ithamar who had succeeded S. Paulinus in the Episcopal See of
Rochester, dyed: Harpif. saec. 6. c. 11.
He was not inferior to his Predecessors in Sanctity and learning, says
Harpsfeild: who adds, That many years after his death by reason of frequent
Miracles wrought by his intercession, his Body was translated to a more
honorable place. Which translation was made on the fourth day before the Ides
of January: on which day his Anniversary Solemnity is celebrated in the Church
of Rochester. In our Martyrologe his Commemoration is made on the Tenth of
June, Martyrolog. Ang. 10. Iun.
which was the day of his death. Bed. l. 3 c. 20.
And his Successor was Damian, descended of the South Saxons, says S. Beda.

6. This year Merevald a Prince among the Mercians built a Monastery for
Religious Virgins at a Town called Lemster in the Province of Hereford. He is
said to have been the Son of Penda* and Brother of Peoda and of his Successor
Wolfer Kings of the Mercians. But he is more illustrious by his Holy Offspring,
his son Merefin, and his daughters Milburga, Mildreda, and Milgitha, born to
him by his Wife S. Ermenburga.

^. King Peoda likewise the Son of Penda first King of the Mercians, Camden in
Northamptonshire.
this same year for propagating Christian Religion, laid the foundation of the
M^nastery of Medeshampsted, in the Region of the Girvians (or Northamptonshire:
A. D. 657.
) But having been the next year slain by the treason of his Wife (Alcfleda the
natural daughter of Oswi King of the Northumbers) he could not perfect it.
Thus writes Camden from Robert Swapham an ancient Author. Ingulph.
And Ingulphus adds. That he left his fervor and devotion to his Brother
Wulfer his Successor in that Kingdom, and to Saxulph a man of great power
there: who finished the said Monastery eight years after. The place anciently
called Medeshampsted, afterward took the name of Peterborough, illustrious in
regard of this Monastery.

II. CHAP.
II. CHAP.
1.2.3. The Britains overthrown by the King of the West Saxons.

A. D. 658.
1. IN the year of Grace six hundred fifty eight the Britains received a great
overthrow from Kenewalch King of the West Saxons: which is thus described by
Huntingdon: Huntingd. l. 2.
Cenwald (so he calls him) King of the West Saxons in the seaventeenth year of
his reign fought against the Britains at Pennum. For they knowing that he had
been overcome by the stou^ King Penda, and (almost) driven out of his kingdom,
imagined that he was unable to sustain the burden of a battle. Whereupon
having gathered a numerous army, they with great pride invaded his Dominions.
At the beginning of the fight the Britains feircely setting on the Saxons, A.
D. 659
made them give ground: But the Saxons with great courage and constancy
resisting them, for they preferred death before flying, at last so wearied the
Britains, that their forces melted away like snow, so that they turned their
backs to the pursuers, and fled from Pennum as far as Pedredan. The wound which
the Progeny of Brutus received this day, was incurable.

2. The place where this battle was sought was an obscure Village in
Somersetshire at this day called Pen: but anciently famous for this Victory
over the Britains, and another which in after ages King Edmond Ironside gaind
there against the Danes. From thence the Britains fled to the River Pedre^,
now called Parret, where was seated the town called by the Saxons Pedridan, but
now Pederton, and it was sometimes the Royal Seat of Ina King of the
West Saxons.

3. After this combat and Victory the Saxons became so terrible to the
Britains, that they never afterward descended from their mountains to
encounter them. Besides this, their State became divided among several petty
Princes, each of which sought to secure and enlarge his own territory, so that
they never combind in any general design against the Saxons or English.

III. CHAP. III. CHAP.

1.2. Wolfer King of the Mercians: His wife S. Erminilda. Trumhere Bishop of
the Mercians.

1. KING Peoda, as has been declared, having been slain by the treachery of
his Wife in the time of the Paschall Solemnity, A. D. 659.
that Kingdom of the Southern Mercians returned to the Dominion of King Oswi:
Wig^rn. hic.
But three years after the Princes of the Nation of the Mercians rebelled
against him: their names were Immin, Eaba and Eadbert. These exalted to the
throne Wulfer the Son of Penda, then a young man, whom they had preserved and
kept conceald among them. And so with their new King, they joyfully persevered
in Profession of Christianity.

2. The wife of this King Wulfer was S. Erminilda: Ap. Caepgrav in S. Erminilda.
Whose parents were Ercombert King of Kent and S. Sexburga. By their pious
instructions she became so zealous in promoting the Christian faith, that by
her persuasions, kindness and holy example that perverse and rude Nation of the
Mercians was brought to submitt to the sweet yoke of Christ. And her husband
complying with her desires assisted her in extirpating Idolatrous
Superstitions, and filling the kingdom with Churches and Priests. Whence
appears that King Wulfer himself was also a Christian.

3. In the beginning of his reign Trumher, who as has been declared was
constituted Abbot in the Monastery of Gethlingum (or Gilling) founded in the
place where the Holy King Oswin was slain, was made Bishop of the Mercians,
after that Celiach the Successor of Diuma a Scot, had relinquished his
Bishopric and was returned into his country. This Trumher was by Nation an
Englishman, and kinsman or King Oswin: but he had his education and instruction
among the Scotts. There is no more recorded of him, but only that by him
Edilwalch Prince of the South Saxons was baptized, as shall be declared.

I^. CHAP.
IV. CHAP.
1.2.3. etc. S. Ethelreda married to Tombert: remains a Virgin.

8 9 etc. She a second time married to Egfrid Prince of the Northumbers
preserves her Virginity.

15.16. etc. She flies from thence: and is miraculously preserved from her
husband King Egfrid.

20. etc. She builds a Monastery of Virgins and another of Monks at Ely.

A. D. 660. Wigorn. hic.
1. IN the following year Egfrid the Son of King Oswi took to wife Etheldrith
(or Ediltrudis) a daughter of Anna King of the Eastangles. The Sanctity of this
Lady, twice a Widow, and always a Virgin, is highly and worthily celebrated by
all our Historians: and therefore her Memory must not be slightly passed over
in this Story.

2. She was born in the Province of the Iceni, Camden in Suffolk.
or Suffolk at a town called Ixning, which says Camden though now an obscure
Village, was anciently famous for the birth of Etheldreda daughter of King
Anna, a king wonderfully blessed by God in a Saintly offspring. Some Writers
affirm this Holy Virgin to have been the eldest of his daughters: But S. Beda
expressly testifies that S. Sexburga was elder then she.

3. Polydor commends her for her beauty, a quality very useles to virtue, which
notwithstanding may worthily enter among her praises, because the purity of her
mind triumphed over all the snares and machines which her beauty suggested
against her. In her infancy she dedicated her self to chastity: wherein the
suitable piety of her Sisters did confirm her: and during that tender age free
from tentations, though her affection to purity increased, yet her constancy
was not exposed to any trial till the year of Grace six hundred fifty one, A.
D. 660.
when being mariageable, her parents provided a husband for her. The Holy
Virgin who had fixed all her affections on Christ alone; though her desire was
to confine her self in a Cloister, yet durst not renounce her obedience to her
parents.

4 The Husband designed for her was Tombert Prince of the Girvians, a people
inhabiting the fenny Islands in Cambridgshire, whose country we read thus
described by an ancient Writer named Felix, Camden in Cambridgshire.
cited by Camden: There is a fenny marsh of an exceeding large extent, which
beginning from the banks of the River Gronta reaches northwardly to the Sea. In
some places there grow nothing but sedges, elsewhere there are springs from
whence issue black Waters which cause foggy vapors, and among these there are
several Islands with uneven winding bancks, which are pleasantly coverd with
woods. Hun^tingdon calls th^s Region a most delicious and fruitful country,
Ibid.
waterd with many plea^sant rivers, painted with several lakes great and
small, and flourishing with many groves and Islands. The whole Territory, from
the principal Islands name is called the Isle of Ely: which is therefore here
more accuratly described, because it was by Prince Tombert assigned to Saint
Ediltrudis, or Etheldreda (vulgarly called Saint Audrey) for a ioynture, and
thence became our Lords Patrimony.

5. To this Prince therefore S. Ediltrudis was given in marriage, which was a
state of life grievous to her who had entertained a far more Sublime affection.
Yet some hope remained, that though she could not incline her parents m^nds to
dispense with her marriage, she might perhaps obtain of her husband a permission
to preserve the integrity of her body. Therefore all her innocent arts she made
of use to engage her husband affections, to the end he might be indu^ced to
approve her design. She spared no prayers nor praises of Virginal purity.
Neither did her endeavors want effect: For admiring her Angelical chastity,
he gave her a hope of compliance with her desires. But not long after, reason
being overcome with the violence of corrupt nature, he yielded to his own
desires, and required of her that right which the Laws of Marriage allowd him,
and which he would not defer till the night following.

6. In this extremity God alone was her refuge. To him therefore she had
recourse by her most devout prayers, beseeching him, that if her Vows were
acceptable to him, he would send the Angel of her Virginity to guard her, and
suggest to her mind such thoughts, and to her tongue such words as might find a
grateful admittance into the heart of her Prince.

7. Presently after this Tombert entered into her chamber, with a resolution to
extort her consent to his impatient desires. But God prevented him: for he
found the Holy Virgin encompassed with a wonderful light and celestial flame,
which dazeled his eyes, and consuming the fire of lust boiling in his bosom,
changed his mind not only to admiration but love of Chastity: insomuch that now
perceiving that our Lord challe^ged her for his own Spouse, he not only
relinquished his clame to her, but professed himself a companion with her in
the same vow of consecrating himself to God. Thus they lived together the space
of seven or eight years in perfect concord: during all which time Saint
Etheldreda, being secure of her husbands fidelity and constancy in his promise,
employed her self wholly in the delicious exercises of Prayer and devotion.

8. But Almighty God, who had given to the Holy Virgin a most constant mind,
prepared new combats, and new triumphs for her. For her Husband Prince Tombert
dying, whereas this Virgin-Widow esteemed herself out of danger of being
exposed to any more trials, as being now in her own disposal, yet a new
tempest drove her out of the haven to Sea again. For Egfrid the Son of Oswi,
and Heyr of the Northumbrian kingdom, invited by the fame of her sanctity and
perfections, demanded her in marriage. Her parents together with the Nobles of
the Eastangles esteeming this marriage extremely beneficial to that Province
which languished under the government of her Brother Ethelwald, pressed her
therefore most earnestly to accept of it, and at last conquered her resistance:
So that once more for the common good she was compelled to submitt her self to
a new servitude. For Almighty God intended in her to show to the world an
admirable example of constancy and Chastity.

9. This year therefore she was conducted to the Kingdom of the Northumbrians.
In which journey, Bed. lib. 4. c. 3.
says S. Beda, she was attended by a certain person named Oswin her prime
servant and steward of her house. A man worthy to serve such a Queen. For he
afterward became a Monk, being a man of great merit, and who out of a pure
intention forsaking the world to obtain an eternal retribution, became worthy
to receive many revelations of Divine Mysteries from our Lord.

10. S. Etheldreda (or Ediltrudis) thus accompanied was conducted and married to
Egfrid Prince of the Northumbers. Who being possessed of such a treasure,
omitted nothing whereby he might conciliate her affections. But one only thing
could content her, which was the preservation of her Virginal integrity: all
other blandishments which a Princely State could afford, without this, were
tastlesse and noysom to her.

11. Once more therefore she made use of her former arts to obtain that from
Egfrid, which had been granted her by Tombert, that there might be between them
a conjunction of minds only, with a separation of bodies. Egfrid was a Prince
in whose veyns youthful blood was then boiling: Yet such power had the prayers
and reasons alleged by his chaste Princess, that by an example scarce hitherto
heard of in the Church, they lived twelve years together without any prejudice
or diminution of Saint Ethelreds Virginity. Her youth, beauty and other
admirable perfections of mind produced in him nothing but reverence: they
conversed together as if they had been divested of their Bodies.

12. To the present sensual age this may seem incredible: Malmsbur. de Reg. l.
2. c. 1.
but there is not wanting a clowd of witnesses to testify it. William of
Malmsbury thus writes: Etheldrida though married to two husbands, by a happy
continence lived free from any stirring of lust, so that without the least
deminution of her chastity she victoriously obtained in heaven the garland of
perpetual Virginity. To the same purpose Henry of Huntingdom: Huntingd l.:
Aeldiltrida was the wife of King Egfrid, yet to the end remained a pure Virgin.

13. But before these, Bed. l. 4. c. 19.
Saint Beda who lived in the some age with her, thus more expressly testifies
the same: King Egfrid, says he, took to wife a Lady named Ediltruda the
daughter of Anna King of the Angles, who was a very Religious Prince and every
way illustrious. The same Lady had been before, wife to a Prince of the
Southern Girvians named Tombert: after whose death, which succeeded not long
after the marriage, she was given to the foresaid King. And though she continued
the space of twelve years his Consort, yet she remained glorious in the
perpetual integrity of her Virginity. Hereof the Blessed Bishop Wilfrid gave
me an assurance, when upon the occasion of some persons who called it into
doubt, I asked him concerning it: For he professed that he himself was a most
certain witness of it: in so much as King Egfrid promised him great store of
money and lands if he could persuade the Queen, who respected none so much as
him, to afford him the use of marriage.

14. Thus writes Saint Beda: and as if he foresaw that there would arise in our
Nation a Sect either disgracing Virginity, or Professing that Continence is a
Virtue exceeding human forces, Id. ibid.
he adds, Neither ought we to distrust that that might happen in our age which
faithful history testifies to have sometimes formerly come to pass: since it
is a gift of the same Lord who promised to be present with us to the end of the
world. Moreover God was pleased by a Divine miracle to witness the same: For the
flesh of S. Edildreda a long time after she was buried could not be corrupted:
which was a sign that whilst she was alive she remaind uncorrupted by human
touches.

15. After twelve years thus conversing together, during which time King Egfrid
used all means, but force, to expugn his wives purpose: at last he gave her
free permission to spend the rest of her days according to her own desire, in
a stare of Religious retirement, where she might ^ive free from all
solicitations, and entirely employ her whole affection on her heavenly
Bridegroom. Thus writes Saint Beda, After she had made many earnest requests to
the King that she might be permitted to relinquish all worldly cares, Bed. l.
c. 4.19.
and serve our Lord Christ alone, the true King, in a Monastery: at last with
much ado she obtaind her petition, and entered into a Monastery, where Ebba the
Aunt of King Egfrid was Abbess, and which was seated in a place called the
City of Coluda or Coldingham: There she received the Sacred veyle of Religions
from the foresaid Bishop Wilfrid.

16. We must here interrupt the Narration of Saint Beda, and insert the
occurrents happening to this Blessed Virgin upon her departure from Saint Ebba,
before she arrived at her own Territory of Ely: as we find recorded in the
ancient Archives of that Monastery.

17. There we read how not long after her permission to retire her self, Hist.
Eli^us. ^^ d^^affic^. ^9.
King Egfrid repenting his indulgence toward her was desirous to recall her,
and by the instigation of his servants resolved by force to take her out of the
Monastery. Which being made known to the Holy Abbess Ebba, she counseled
Saint Ethelreda to fly speedily away, and not to rest till she came to her own
house at Ely. Whereupon the Holy Virgin without delay taking with her two other
devout Virgins, Selbenna and Selbera, went out of the Monastery and went up a
high Mountain not far distant called Coldeburches-heved (which signifies the
Head of Coldeburt.) In the mean time King Egfrid was come to the Monastery, and
hearing of her flight, pursued her. But Almighty God to defend his servants,
had encompassed the Hall with deep waters from the Sea, insomuch as the King
could find no means to pass them. At which being amazed, and perceiving a
Divine hand in it, he returned to York, and shortly after took to wife
Ermenburga. And after that time he conceived a deep hatred against Saint
Wilfrid, which broke forth afterward as shall be declared.

18. The Tradition of that region informs us that the Holy Virgin, and her
companions were sustained by God seven days on that mountain without any
corporal food. After which they descended, and passing over the River of
Humber they came prosperously to a place called Wintringham, and rested at a
Village named Alfham, where she took order for building a Church. From thence
traveling with great labor, and finding in her way a commodious shade, she
there laid her down to sleep. And when she awaked she found her staff which she
had fastened in the ground at her head had taken root and began to flourish with
leaves. In succeeding times it became a very large and tall Tree, and continues
to this day called Etheldredstow, or Ethelreds rest. And in memory thereof a
Church was there afterward built to her honor. She therefore pursuing her
journey, through many difficulties and dangers at last arrived safe at Ely with
her two companions. There she found a Holy Priest called Huna, who joyfully
received her, and performed all Ecclesiastical functions.

19. Now in that Island there had anciently been a Church built by King
Ethelbert at Saint Augustins request, which not long before this time had been
destroyed by the cruel Tyrant Penda, who had also slain or chased away the
Priests attending it. This Church the Holy Virgin restored in a more ample
form, and consecrated it, as it had been formerly, to the Honor of the most
blessed Virgin Mother of our Lord. Thereto likewise she by the assistance of
her Brother King Adulf adjoined a Monastery of devout Virgins, which with great
fervor flocked to her: over whom she was constituted Abbess. And concerning
her manner of life there, we thus read in S. Beda.

It is reported (says he) that from her first entrance into the Monastery she
never used any linen vestments, Bed. l. ^4. c. 19
and very seldom any warm bathes, except before the solemn Feasts of Easter,
Pentecost and Epiphany, and then she would be the last to wash her self, after
she had ministered to all the other Virgins. She rarely eat any thing more then
once a day, unless on the great Solemnities, or when any infirmity forced her
to do otherwise. From the time of Midnight Mattins till break of day she
remaind in the Church intent on her Prayers. Some affirm that by the Spirit of
Prophecy she foretold both the Pestilence of which she her self dyed, and
likewise in the presence of her whole Convent she signified the number of those
who were to be taken out of the world.

21. The sweet odor of her piety and virtues drew many Virgins and Widows,
some of Royal descent to follow her. For her Sister Sexburga Queen of Kent,
after the death of her husband Ercombert, (to whom she bore two sons, Egbert
and Lothair, who succeeded in the Kingdom) became a Nun under the Government
of S. Etheldred, to whom likewise she succeeded in the care of the Monastery.
Moreover the daughter of the same Sexburga, called Erminilda Queen of the
Mercians, when her husband Wulfer was dead retired to the same Convent,
bringing with her her only daughter S. Wereburga, of whom more hereafter.

Reyner. in Apostolat f. 37
22. Besides the Monastery of Religious Virgins, S. Ethelreda built likewise or
rather restord, in a place near adjoining, a Convent for Monks, over whom she
as Abbess retaind Jurisdiction. In both which Cloisters there were no fewer
then a hundred devout persons continually attending on the service of God.

V. CHA.
V. CHAP.
1.2. etc. S. Ethelreds Body found incorrupt.

7 Taudrey-lace.

8.9. etc. Apparitions and Miracles wrought by the Holy Virgin.

1. Seven years the Blessed Virgin Ethelreda governd her Monastery of Ely,
Bed. l. 4. c. 19
exhibiting her self a glorious example of Piety and all virtues: after which
in the year of Grace six hundred seaventy nine our Lord called her out of this
world to receive her reward, Wigorn. ad A. D. 679.
on the eighth day before the Calends of July: and according to her own command
she was buried among her own Religious Virgins in the same coffin of wood,
wherein she lay when she gave up her Spirit: and her Sister Sexburga, who had
been the Wife of Earcombert King of Kent, succeeded her in the Office of
Abbess.

2. The wonderful testimonies which God was pleased to afford in approbation
of the Sanctity and purity of this Holy Widow, twice a wife and always a
Virgin, are commemorated by S. Beda, who himself might have been a witness of
them. He was three and twenty years old when those things happened, and wrote
them forty years after. The relation by him given thus follows: Bed. l. 4. c. 9.
3. Sixteen years after the Blessed Virgin Saint Ethelreda was buried, her
Sister Sexburga Abbess thought fit to take up her bones, and putting them
into a New Coffin to translate them into a Church ( dedicated to her honor.)
She commanded therefore certain of the Monks to search out a Stone commodious
for that purpose. Now the region of Ely being all encompassed with rivers and
marshes, afforded no such stones of a convenient largenes. They therefore
taking boat, went to a certain City not far distant, which lay desolate, called
in the English tongue Grandacister, where presently near the walls of the City
they found a Coffin of white Marble, elegantly made, and fittly coverd with a
stone of the same. Perceiving hereby that God had prospered their journey, they
with great joy and thankfullnes brought the Coffin to the Monastery.

Id. ib.
4. Now when her Sepulcher was opened and the sacred body of this Holy Virgin
and Spouse of our Lord discovered, it was found ^s free from any corruption as
if she had been buried the same day. This the foresaid Bishop Wilfrid and many
other eyewitnesses have testified. But a more certain Witness hereof was her
Physician called Cinfrid, who assisted her at her death, and was likewise
present when her body was taken up. He frequently made relation how in her
sickness she had a great swelling under the hollow of her arm. Whereupon he was
advised to make an incision in the said swelling that the noxious humor might
flow out. Which I having done, says he, for two days after she found her self
at more ease, insomuch as many thought she would recover. But the third day
after her pains returning, she was suddenly taken out of the world, and made a
happy exchange of pains and death for life and perpetual health.

5. And many years after when her bones were taken out of her Sepulcher, Id. ib.
a Pavilion was set up, about which the whole congregation of Religious men
and Virgins stood singing Psalms In the mean time the Abbess attended with a
few of the Nuns where busy within the Pavilion, taking up the body: and on a
sudden we heard the Abbess from within cry out with a distinct voice, Glory be
to the name of our Lord And presently after they opened the door of the
Pavilion, and called me in: where I saw the Sacred Body of the Holy Virgin
taken out of her Sepulcher and placed in the Coffin, where it lay as if she had
been asleep. After which taking the cover from her face they showed me the
wound of the incision which I had made, perfectly cured, insomuch as instead of
a wide gaping wound which was in her body when she was buried, now only some
small signs of a scarr appeared, and those likewise were so fresh, that they
seemd as if they had been closed that very day.

6. The Religious Virgins also reported, Id. ib.
that when by reason of the foresaid swelling she was tormen^ed with extreme
pains in her neck and side of her face, she took great contentment in her
infirmity, and was want to say, I know of a certainty that I am justly paind in
my neck, because when I was a young maid I wore about my neck weighty chains of
jewels: Therefore God in his mercy has thus punished me, that the fiery heat
and rednes of the swelling in my neck may satisfy ^or my former pride and
levity,



7. Harpsfeild from this passage in S. Beda well collects, Harp^f. ^aec. 7. c.
24.
that the custom in England for women to were a neck-lace of fine silk, came
from this Exemple and saying of S. Ethelred: and therefore the said neck-lace
is vulgarly called Taudry-lace, that is the lace of S. Audrey or S. Ethelreda.
And it were to be wished that by such a monument the minds of our women and
Virgins would be incited to imitate the Virtues of this Blessed Virgin.

8. S. Beda thus proceeds in his Narration: Bed. ubi ^upr
When the Holy Virgins body was translated into the Church dedicated to her, it
happened that by the touching of her Vestments Devils were driven from the
bodies of the obsessed, and many infirmities were cured. The Coffin likewise of
wood in which she was first buried restored sight to the blind, and took away
pain from the eyes of such infirm persons as applied their head to the same
when they prayed. The Religious Virgins therefore washed the Saints body, and
putting new vestments on it, carried it into the Churchs placing it in the new
Marble Coffin late^y brought thither: where it remains to this day in great
veneration. And which was very strange, the said Coffin was found so exactly
fit for the Holy Virgins body, as if it had been made on purpose for her. The
place likewise of the head which was distinctly framed, did properly suit with
the measure of the Virgins head.

Matt. Angl 7. Oct.
9. This Translation was on the seaventeenth of October, on which day it is
commemorated in the Calender of Sarum. And the same day in following ages was
solemnly observed as a Feast: For in a Charter made by King Henry the first for
the erection of the Monastery of Ely into an Episcopal See, we find it dated,
in a Synod held at Nottingham Castle, on the day of the Translation of the
Blessed Virgin Ethelreda: though as M. Seldom observes, there be there an
antichronism, the ninth being written, instead of the one and twentieth of the
Calends of November.

10. In succeeding times when the fury of the Danes laid wast all places, and
their rage was chiefly exercised against the Sacred Relics of Saints, God by a
special Miracle preserved the Monument of this Holy Virgin. Malmsbur. de ^.
Pontif. l. 4 f. 293.
For thus writes William of Malmsbury: The Danes (says he) rushing violently
into that fenny country, drove out the Religious Virgins, and demolished their
buildings. Among which one, more outrageous then the rest, stole away the
Mantle which covered the Virgins Tomb, and with his sword smote the Marble: by
which stroke a splinter of it reverberated from the pavement into the
Sacrilegious Soldiers eye, and he fell distracted to the ground. Whereupon his
companions raising him up, sled away, and against their former design left
untouched all the other Sepulchers of the Holy Virgins which had been buried
there.

11. The same Author further relates, how in the age next following, Id. ib.
when the Danish troubles were ceased, there were placed in the said Monastery
Secular Priests to perform Divine service there: Among which one more r^^h and
saucy then his companions, tempted the rest to make a trial whether the Sacred
Virgins body yet remaind uncorrupted. But they upon an apprehension of danger
refusing, he foolishly adventured on it. And fasting a candle to the end of a
rodd, he passed it through a hole which the Danes had made in the Sepulcher,
and looking in as curiously as he could, searched round about the Tomb. And not
content with this, with the end of a forked stick he endeavored to draw to him
the clothes in which the Sacred Body was enwrapped; and some part of the Body
he discovered: When the Holy Virgin having indignation that a Vile person
should presume to look upon her naked body, A. D. 960
with great violence drew back the clothes, insomuch as he striving against
her, fell back ward, and was forcibly dashed against the pavement: by which
fall he became lame all his life, and afterward was struck with madness. That
hole made in the Sepulcher the Holy Bishop Ethelwold caused to be damned up
with stone and mortar: and thrusting out the Seculars, brought Monks into the
place: and moreover conferred on the Monastery an incredible number of Mannours
and possessions which he bought with his own money.

12. This happened about the year of our Lord nine hundred and sixty, in the
reign of King Edgar. Now what special lands then belonged to that Monastery
does not distinctly appear. Yet we find that the part of Suffolk adjoining to
Ely was anciently divided into three portions, of which one was called The
liberty of Saint Ediltrudis, because it appertaind to her Convent: On which,
says Camden, Camden in Suffolk.
our Kings heretofore bestowd territories Cum Sacha and Socha, as we read in
the Records of Ely, granting thereto an entire exemption from all Jurisdiction,
Ecclesiastical and Secular.

13 These possessions were continually increased by the great devotion born to
her during the Saxon Government and Monarchy. But when the Norman race came in,
this and many other Religious houses and Churches suffered much prejudice, many
of their Lands and Mannours being either confiscated to the Kings Exchequor, or
bestowd on Officers and soldiers assisting in the Conquest. Notwithstanding
after all such extortions, yet there remaind very considerable revenews to
Saint Ethelreda's Monastery: Concerning which William of Malmsbury thus wrote
above four hundred years since: Malmsbur de Pontif. l. 4. f. 273.
You may conjecture the largenes of the possessions of Saint Ethelreda by this,
that though very much was by fraud taken away, and more by violence usurped,
the last Abbot Richard putt up in his own purse yearly a thousand and four
hundred pounds, allowing scarce three hundred for the maintenance of the Monks;
besides those expenses which were consumed on his servants and guests. Godvvin.
in Elieus. Episcop
This Sum says B. Codwin if compared with the present rate of coin amounts to
more then four thousand pound yearly rents.

14 But it will be more expedient that we should celebrate this Holy Virgins
riches in Divine Graces, then worldly possessions. In the days of the said
Richard the last Abbot ( for after him that Church was made an Episcopal See)
the uncorruptednes of her body was not questioned, as we shall show presently
when we treat of her Sister S. Withburga a Holy Virgin also. To avoid
tediousnes I will omit many wonderful things which God was pleased to work by
S. Ethelreda in several following ages. Yet without a great fault we must not
pass by two apparitions of the holy Virgin, related by a faithful Historian,
and approved by many witnesses, wherein she promised her special patronage to
the inhabitants of our Island who should have recourse to her intercession.

Walsingh. in Rich. 1. f. 338.
15. In the year of Grace thirteen hundred eighty nine ( says Thomas
Walsingham) at Ely the Blessed Virgin and Queen Ethelreda appeared to a certain
young man admonishing him to beware of some dangers ready to befall him, and
informing him likewise of far greater calamities coming on the Kingdom, except
Almighty God being pacified by the prayers of his servants, would mercifully
hold his hand. Therefore she advised him to require the Priour and Monks of her
Convent in her name to pray unto our Lord for the common safety of the Kingdom,
adding, that She her self would also add her prayers for the same purpose. And
when the young man had not the courage to perform her commands, she told him,
that for a sign he should be contracted in his members, lame and disabled to
every thing till the day of her Deposition: on which solemnity if he were
carried to her Sepulcher, he should recover his perfect health. Hereupon the
young man published his Vision, insomuch as many believed it, being induced
thereto by seeing the penalty laid on him: For to show that there was no fiction
in the matter, his legs were so slender, that there was nothing but skin and
bones, and his hamms were so drawn up, that his heels stuck to his hanches.

16. The report of this being spread abroad, many came to see him, and for
trial they prickd his legs and feet with iron bodkins, but the skin being
dead, he felt nothing: Others endeavored, but in vain, to draw back his legs.
They determined therefore to expect the prefixed day, wherein the event would
prove his speeches either true or false. On the solemnity therefore of the
glorious Virgin-Queen the young man was carried to the Church. There being laid
he began first to fall into a slumber, but being wakd, he leapt up. Those who
were near heard the cracking of his sinews, after which followed the stretching
forth of his members: and the young man began to leap and in the presence of
many he went about the Virgins Sepulcher. And whereas by command of the Holy
Virgin he had foretold many secret matters touching particular persons (the
which he revealed to his Parish-Preist under seal of Confession) all which were
found to be true: men therefore did assure themselves that all the rest which
he said should afterward come to pass, were true likewise. Among which he
foretold that the summer following the heats would be so extreme, that the
leads on some Churches would be melted, unless God would qualify it. And
indeed we felt a very great heat, which but for the prayers of some devout
persons would have been intolerable. Moreover by lightning from heaven the lead
on some Churches was melted, as at a town called Manfeild in Sussex: the
Collegiat Church of Canterbury likewise was burnt, with a great part of the
City, several farm-houses also in Essex, and in some places both ships and
mariners were consumed by fire from heaven.

7 This Vision and prediction was moreover confirmed by another shortly
following, Id. ibid.
made by the same glorious Saint to an old decrepit woman of fourscore years,
who was healed of a long continued lamenes at her Sepulcher, as the same
Historian at large recounts: to whom the Reader is referred. To conclude, we
will here only add the Testimony given to this Holy Virgin in the Roman
Martyrologe, where on the three and twentieth of June we read these words,
Martyrolog. Romans 23. Iun.
In Brittany on that day is the Commemoration of S. Ediltrudis Queen and
Virgin, illustrious for Sanctity and Miracles, whose Body eleaven years after
she was buried, was found uncorrupted.

VI. CHAP. VI. CHAP.

1.2. etc. The Gests of S. Withburga Sister to S. Ethelreda.

6:7. etc. Her Body likewise uncorrupted, after many ages.

10.11. The Privilege of England above other countries.

1. THE same year in which S Ethelreda was the second time married to Egfrid
Prince of the Northumbers, A D 660.
her Sister S. Withburga daughter of Anna King of the East Angles according to
our ancient Martyrologe is said to have dyed, though in a later and more
correct Edition her death is placed ten years after.

2. This Holy Virgin S. Withburga, having scarce passed the years of child
hood, was enflamed with a desire of retiring from the tumults and conversation
of the world, that she might more freely attend to God: And accordingly she
built for her self an Oratory in a village of Norfolk called Derrega now
Derham, where as if she had been divested of her body, and estranged from all
delectations of sense, she gave her self entirely to Divine Contemplation,
living an Angelical life in perfect chastity and neglect of all contentments
of the flesh.

3. Now it happened that her self, and her innocent family of Virgins her
attendants, being solicitous only to feed their minds with spiritual
delicacies, fell into want of necessary sustenance. Capgrav. in S. Withburga.
Whereupon the Holy Virgin careful of her companions, addressed her prayers to
her heavenly Master, whose care extends it self even to the fowls of the air,
beseeching him to provide for his hand maids, Capgrav. in S. Withburga Malsb.
de Pass. 14.
who only attended on his service. After such Prayers she fell into a slumber,
in which she saw standing by her the Queen of Virgins adorned with
inexpressible beauty and Majesty, who bid her still putt her confidence in God,
and not to trouble herself for the morrow. Send, said she, two of the maid
servants every morning to the bridge which passes over the neighboring River,
for there will meet them two milch Does, which will afford sufficient
nourishment for this small family. According to this command the next morning
she sent her two mayds, to whom two Does offered themselves, from which they
drew a sufficient quantity of milk for their sustenance.

4. This effect of the Divine Providence toward his servants continued a long
time; till at last the Devil full of envy and rage incited the like passions
into the mind of a rude barbarous man, of principal authority in the same
village, who deriding so great a miracle, and agitated with a malicious,
spiteful indignation, with arrows killed the said beasts. But he that despised
miracles, perished with a miracle: for presently after being smitten with the
jaundise, he consumed away and miserably dyed.

5. But man's envy could nor shorten Gods hand, who is not confined to one mean
of providing for his servants. He who fills every creature with his
benediction; was not wanting in his care for the sustenance of this Holy Virgin
and her devout family, who persevered to the end in the same course of piety.
How many years she spent therein is not expressly declared by any ancient
Writer. Martyrolog. (...).
Only the eighth day before the Ides of July is in our Calend^r assigned for
the day of her deposition.

Camden in Nourfolk.
6. She was first buried, says Camden, in the same town of Derham whither she
had retired herself: and for her aversion from all luxury and vanity, was by
our Ancestors reckond among the Saints. And with great reason, since God was
pleased not only to beatify her Spirit with immortality, but her chaste body
likewise with incorruption. Florent. ad A. D. 79^.
For by the testimony of Florentius, her body fifty five years after being
translated and more honorably reposed in the Church built by her self, was
found entire, untouched by any corruption. Ap. Capgrav.
The Author of her life adds; that not her body only, but vestments likewise
were found as fresh as if she had the same day been laid in her tomb. And
moreover from the place where she had been first buried there issued a spring
of most pure water, which had virtue to confer health on many persons afflicted
with sundry diseases.

7. This Holy Virgin was for many ages celebrated with great honor in our
Church, and the town of Derham where her Sacred body reposed esteemd it a most
precious Treasure. For thus we read in her life: The holy Bishop Ethelwald
repaired the Monastery of Ely, and assembling a congregation of Monks he placed
Abbot over them Brithnot who had been Priour of Winchester. And King Edgar
added to that Monastery the Convent of Derham, together with the chief Treasure
thereof, the Body of the Holy Virgin S. Withburga.

8. Then it was that her Sacred Body was a second time translated, and reposed
together with her Sister S. Ethelreda. But the inhabitants of Derham at first
earnestly resisted this translation: Malmsbur. de Pontif. l. 4. f. 293.
till the authority of King Edgar, Bishop Ethelwald and the Abbot Brithnot
prevayled. The said inhabitants notwithstanding rose against the Monks sent to
remove it, and encompassed the Church with a guard. But the Monks deceived
them, and in the dark night cunningly conveyed away the Body. Which being
although too late perceived by the people, they pursued them: and had not the
Abbot Brithnot made great have to putt off from shore the boat in which the
Body was placed, he had not escaped without mischief: for at that time there
was no entrance into the Isle but by boat. But our age more sharp-witted then
the former, has overcome nature, and by filling the marish with great banks
and rampires, has at last made it easily accessible on foot. The boat-men
therefore hastily committing themselves to the Vast poole of which they had no
experience, ran into danger, but a pillar of fire from heaven descending,
directed the boat safely and swiftly to the shore.

9. The untainted Bodies of these two incontaminate Virgins and Sisters reposed
together in the Monastery of Ely till the year of Grace a thousand one hundred
and six in the reign of King Henry the first: And then again Richard the last
Abbot caused them to be taken up, that they might be more magnificently buried.
At which time for the removing a scruple entertained by some, the miracle of
their incorruption was publicly manifested. This we read thus related by the
same Author: Id. ibid.
A doubt entering into the minds of some touching the incorruption of S.
Withburga, in the time of the Abbot Richard, when the Bodies of those two Holy
Virgins were translated, that doubt was putt to the trial. And as touching S.
Ethelreda, considering the ancient proofs of her incorruption, none durst
presume to touch her body. But they discovered the Body of Saint Withburga as
far as her breasts: and she was seen perfectly entire, more like to one asleep
then dead, with a silk cushion under her head, her veyle and Vestments shining
as if they had been new, her countenance cheerful with a rosy blush, her teeth
white, her lips a little opened, and her breasts exceeding small. The Author
of her life adds, Ap. Capgrav.
That one of the Monks adventuring to touch her body, a lively blush colored
her cheeks, as if she still had breath in her: her dead body expressing the
same shamefastnes, which her self would have done when alive.

10. Surely if S. Athanasius his judgment may be accep^ed, Athanas. Apolog. 1.
who affirms That Virginity is a great proof of the true Religion, that
Religion which the Virgins of this age were taught was undoubtedly the true
one: for the Garden of Gods Church was never adorned with so many Lilies of so
bright a candor: Neither can any Christian province boast of so many Saints
whose purity has been so visibly glorified by Almighty God. Malmsbur. de Reg.
l. 2. c. 1^.
And therefore William of Malmsbury discreetly observes in how extraordinary a
manner the Divine piety did illustrate our Nation, for, says he, I suppose that
not in any part of the Christian world can be found so many Bodies of Saints
exempted from corruption after their deaths, being images of the last eternal
incorruption. This I conceive to have been an especial grace and benediction
of God, to the end that our Nation seated as it were out of the world, by
considering the incorruption of his Saints, may be animated to conceive a more
assured hope of the Resurrection. There are no fewer truly then five Saints of
my knowledge (and others boast of more among them) to wit, S Ethelreda and S.
Withburga Virgins, King Edmond, Archbishop Elpheg, and the ancient Father S.
Cuthbert, all whose bodies do still remain with a seeming exterior Vital
warmth, as representing persons asleep.

11. So many visible proofs of Gods approbation of chastity and Virginity
professed by Vow, testified by so many Authors, confirmed by the experience
and sight of such a world of persons for many ages together, by which our
Island was illustrated above almost any other Christian Province, such
evidences as these, I say, in all reason ought to have been a demonstration
even to the weakest judgments, that the New pretended Reformation of Religion,
begun by the impure, incestuous marriage of a Religious Friar and a consecrated
Nunn, and continued with a professed condemnation of such Vows as unlawful,
because impossible to be observed, was far from deserving the name of a
Reformation, which endeavors to root out of the Churches garden the most
beautiful ornaments of it, those candid Lilies so precious in Gods sight, that
Solomon himself in all his glory was not adorned like one of them.

VII. CHAP. VII. CHA.

1.2. The Holy Offspring of Anna King of the East Angles.

3. 4. etc. The Gests of S. Eartongatha, S. Sedrido, and Saint Edilburga, Holy
Virgins.

1. NEVER surely did any Princes Court and family afford so many and such
illustrious examples of Sanctity and purity, as that of Anna King of the
East Angles. He was blessed with a numerous issue, and not any of his children,
of each sex, but is fixed like a bright starr in our Ecclesiastical Calendar.
Besides the two glorious Virgins last treated of, there was another Sister,
Wife to Earcombert King of Kent, S. Sexburga, who in obedience to her parents
became a most pious chaste wife, and by her own election, after she was Widow,
became a consecrated Nunn under the obedience of her younger Sister S.
Ethelreda, to whom, as has been said, she succeeded in the Office of Abbess,
by the pious administration whereof she deserved a place among Gods Saints.
These glorious Sisters either were examples to invite and promote their Brother
S. Erconwald in the course of Sanctity, for which he is worthily glorified in
our Annals, or followed the pattern which he gave them: for their ages are
uncertain. Concerning him we shall treat hereafter, and show how he
relinquished all pretentions and designs of the Court, to consecrate himself to
the service of God in an Ecclesiastical employment, which he discharged with
admirable charity, humility and zeal.

2. Besides all these, three other Virgins eminent for Sanctity proceeded out
of the same family: S. Edilburga the natural daughter of King Anna, Saint
Sedrido daughter to King Anna's wife Hereswida by another husband, and Saint
Eartongatha neice to them both, being daughter to Earcombert King of Kent and
his wife Saint Sexburga. These three Holy Virgins, though they dyed in several
years, yet since Saint Beda ioyns them together, we will here follow his
example, placing their Gests this year of Grace six hundred and sixty, in which
S. Sedrido, according to our Martyrologe, dyed.

3. They all out of a desire of a more strict and perfect life went over into
France, by reason that as yet there were not in Brittany many Monasteries for
Religious Virgins: and there betook themselves to the Monastery of Saint Phara,
whom formerly Saint Columban had instructed in Piety and a love of Christian
Perfection. The relation which Saint Beda gives of them is as follows: 4.
Eartongatha the daughter of King Earcombert ( and S. Sexburga) was a Virgin of
eminent virtues, Bed l. 3. c. 8.
as became the offspring of such parents. She spent her life in our Lords
service in a Monastery of France built by the most illustrious Abbess S.
Phara, in a place called Brige (or Brye.) For at that time by reason there were
not many Monasteries erected in Brittany, it was the custom for many parents
in this Island, to send over their daughters into French Monasteries, there to
be instructed in piety, and consecrated to our Lord, especially in the
Monasteries of Brige, Cale ( or Chelles) and Andilegum. In the number of such
noble Virgins so sent into France was Sedrido daughter of the wife of Anna King
of the East Angles, and likewise Edilburga a natural daughter of the same
King. Both these Virgins for the merit of their virtues, though strangers, were
constituted Abbesses of the Monastery of Brye ( now called Pharmonstier.) And
hence may those Writers be corrected, who place Saint Sedrido in the Monastery
of Chelles, which as yet was not built by the Holy Queen S. Bathildis.

Martyrolog. Gall. c. 7. December.
5. Therefore Andrew Saussay in his Martyrologe on the seventh of December
truly writes concerning Saint Phara and these Virgins after this manner: The
Father of Saint Phara being at last better advised, built for her a Monastery
in the forest of Brye, in a place then called Eboriacum, but afterward it took
the name of Pharmonstier, from the said Holy Abbess. She being settled there,
by the odor of her Sanctity drew many other devout Virgins thither, over whom
she becoming a Mother, excelled them more in Grace and virtue, then in her
preeminence and dignity. And indeed so great was the some of her Sanctity, that
great numbers of Noble Virgins, yea and Princesses, out of all the Provinces of
France, yea Germany, England and Ireland contended to be there received, and to
those, being inflamed with Divine love, she communicated her own virtues and
Graces. Among those devout Virgins the most renowned for Piety was Edilburga.
(natural) daughter of Anna King of the East Angles, who after the death of
Saint Phara supplied her Office in the government of the Monastery, and by the
divine progress of her life deserved to be inscribed in the number of Saints
after her death. Where succeeded her in the same Office her niece Saint
Earthongatha, daughter of Earcombert King of Kent, a worthy branch and well
beseeming so noble a Stock, for she flourishing with eminent piety and virtue,
served our Lord there till her death, in wonderful purity both of body and
Spirit.

6. Our Martyrologe seems to make Saint Sedrido the immediate Abbess of
Pharmonstier after S Edilburga, and after her S. Earthongatha is supposed to
have succeeded, though her name, which is strange, be there omitted. And as
touching S. Sedrido her commemoration in the French Martyrologe is on the tenth
of January, Ibidem 10. Ianuar.
in these words: On that day is celebrated the memory of S. Sethrida Virgin in
the Monastery of S. Phara in the territory of Brye: Who being an English Lady,
out of z^ale to Perfection came to the same Monastery, where she professed a
Religious state, and having consummated the course of an Angelical life upon
earth, departed to the heavenly society of Holy Virgins. Her praises are
written by venerable Beda.

7. We must not here omit what the same Saint Beda writes concerning S.
Earthongata: Bed l. 3. c. 8.
Many things are related very miraculous by the inhabitants of that territory
concerning this Holy Virgin. But we will only mention briefly her death, and
the wonders succeeding it. When the day approached in which she was to be
called out of this world to eternal happiness, she went about the Monastery
visiting the Celles of the Religious Virgins, especially such as were more
ancient and eminent for piety, to whose prayers she humbly recommended her
self, not concealing from them that she was taught by revelation that her
departure was at hand. The manner of which revelation was said to be this: She
saw a great troop of men in white garments enter the Monastery: and asking
them, what they sought for there, their answer was, That they were sent thither
to receive and carry back with them a precious Medall of gold which came
thither out of Kent. Now on the same night toward the end whereof near break of
day she passed from the darkness of this world to the heavenly Light, many of
the Monks whose lodgings were adjoining to the Monastery, report that they
heard distinctly a Melody of Angels singing, and a noise as it were of a great
multitude entering the Monastery: Whereupon going forth to see what the matter
was* they saw a wonderful great Light from heaven, in which that holy soul,
when delivered from the prison of her body, was conducted to eternal joys
They add many other wonders happening the same night: which we, pursuing other
matters, leave to their relation.

8. The Sacred body of the Virgin and Spouse of our Lord was buried in the
Church of the Protomartyr S. Steven. Three days after they having a mind to
take up the Stone which covered her Sepulcher, and raise it higher, as they
were busy about this, a sweet odor of so wonderful fragrancy evaporated from
beneath, that it seemd to the Religious men and Sisters there assisting, as if
a cellar full of precious bau^m was then opened, Thus writes S. Beda touching
S. Earthongata.

9. And concerning S. Edilburga he adds. Idem Ibid.
Likewise S. Edilburga formerly mentioned, the Aunt of S Earthongata by her
Mother, she likewise preserved the glory of perpetual Virginity with great
purity and perfection: and of how eminent merits she was, appeared yet more
after her death. In the time whilst she was Abbess she began the building of a
Church in the Monastery to the honor of all the Apostles, where her desire was
to be buried. But death snatched her away before half the building was
finished: notwithstanding she was buried in the same place where she had
desired. After her death the Monks who had care of the Monastery employed their
minds in other matters, so that the building was interrupted. Insomuch as
seven years after they resolved by reason of the excessive charges to give
over that structure, and to translate the Body of the Abbess into another
Church already finished and dedicated. Therefore opening the Sepulcher they
found the Body of the Holy Virgin as free from all corruption, as it had been
during her life free from carnal affections. Therefore the Religious Virgins
having again washed and clothed it with fresh vestments, they translated it
into the Church of S. Steven the Martyr. Martyrol. Gallic. and Anglic. 7. Iulij.
The solemnity of her Deposition is there with great glory celebrated on the
Nones of July. On which day likewise her name is recited among the Saints in
our English Martyrologe.



VIII. CHAPTER
VIII. CHAP.
1.2. The Gests of S. Beuno and S. Elerius British Saints, and Masters to
Saint Winefrida.

4.3. etc. The Gests of the glorious Martyr S. Winefrida.

A. D. 660.
1. AT the same time Virginity and chastity triumphed likewise in the British
Church: for excepting the difference about the celebration of Easter, there was
a perfect agreement in all points of Faith between the Britains and Saxons.
The person whose Victorious Chastity illustrated this age was the glorious S.
Winefride, who willingly offered her self a Sacrifice to preserve her Virginity
consecrated by vow to her Celestial Bridegroom: Which voluntary Oblation was
so acceptable to Almighty God, that he recompensed it with so stupendous a
Miracle, as neither the precedent nor following ages of the Church could afford
one to equal it.

2. This love and value set upon holy Virginity was instilld into her by her
Spiritual Teachers, two British Saints, Saint Beuno and Saint Elerius: of
both which the Memory is celebrated in our Martyrologe: Martyrol. Anglic. 14.
Ianuar. Ib. 13. Iun.
Of the former on the fourteenth of January, where he is said to have been
famous for Sanctity and Miracles: and of the latter on the thirteenth of June:
and the year of both their deaths is assigned this six hundred and sixtieth: in
which also the Author of Saint Winefrides life in Surius says that she
flourished. Now the Gests of these three Saints we will here deliver together,
from the credit of Robert Abbot of Shrewsbury, who above five hundred years
since wrote the life of Saint Winefride out of ancient British Records: which
he begins thus: Robert. S^lop. Abb. Ap. Capgrav in S. Winefrida.
3. There was a certain holy man of great perfection, who dwelt in the Western
part of Brittany. He was descended of Princely parents, but despising his
hereditary glory, he fled away poor, and became a Monk, eminent in all
virtues. And having built several Churches in many places, in which he placed
Monks for the service of God; he was divinely admonished to seek out an
habitation provided for him by God. At last he came to the territory of a
certain man of great power named Thewith, or as some call him Trebwith, to whom
he said, I beseech you to grant me out of your hereditary possessions a small
portion, which may serve partly for mine own use, and partly for the service of
God, that I may there build a Church, in which I may attend on Gods worship,
and daily pray for your salvation. The Noble man readily granted his request,
and withal committed to him his only daughter named Wenefred, to be
instructed by him in piety. Whenever therefore the holy man taught the
people, preaching to them the doctrines of salvation he set the said young
maid at his feet, admonishing her to attend diligently and affectuously to his
admonitions. By this means the Virgin through Gods Grace and mercy increased
every day in piety and spiritual Wisdom, and entertained a purpose of
renouncing marriage: yet durst not make known to her parents such her
resolution. But coming to the man of God, she freely declared her most secret
thoughts to him, telling him, That the seed of the Divine Word which he had
sowd, had wrought such effect in her, that she determind to renounce all the
pleasures of the world, and for the honor of God to preserve her Virginity
entire and undefiled. Now that I may perform this my purpose, said she, I must
desire your intercession with my parents.

4. The Holy man having heard the Virgins request, promised her his utmost
endeavor to obtain her parents consent. And presently after having proposed
the matter to them, they with tears blessed God for their child's piety, and
willingly granted her desire. From that time the devout maid assiduously sat
at the Holy man's feet, and with an ardent affection attended to the praises of
her heavenly Spouse proceeding from his mouth: She suffered no earthly cares to
enter into her mind: she frequently watched whole nights at her prayers in the
Church: She would often importunely solicit the Holy man to discourse to her of
the life, graces and perfections of her Lord: which when he delivered, the
comfort and pleasure which she received from thence exceeded all worldly or
sensual concentment. Thus though she was of tender years, yet in virtues and
piety she was very aged, and as it were dead to all concupiscence.

5. Now it happened on a certain Sunday when her parents were gone to Church,
some necessary occasion detaind her at home. At which time a certain young man,
named Caradoc the Son of Alan Prince of that country, entered the house, where
he found the Virgin alone sitting near the fire. She knowing the Prince,
hastily rose up, and humbly desird to know his pleasure. His answer was, You
are not ignorant who I am, and how I abound in riches and honor: all these
riches and honors you shall partake, if you will yield to my will. The modest
Virgin perceiving his foul intent, held down her dead, and blushed extremely:
At first she seemd as if she was much troubled that he should find her unready
and unadorned, and she told him, Sir you being a Prince, there is no doubt but
you are able to heap upon me all worldly happiness in abundance, if I were your
wife. However be pleased to expect here awhile till my Fathers return; in the
mean time I have some business in my chamber, and will come back presently. This
she said to gain a little time, for she saw the unhappy young man, burning and
almost enraged with lust. With much ado he permitted her to go to her
chamber, having some hope that she would return as soon as she was dressed and
adorned. She therefore entered hastily her chamber, and as hastily went out of
the door on the other side, and with all her force ran toward the Church.

6. As Soon as the young man perceived this, he became all in a fury, and
drawing out his sword he ran swiftly after her, soon owertaking her: and with a
stern look told her, I have a long time loved thee and desired to enjoy thee,
and dare thou scorn me? Be now assured, that if thou refusest my embraces, I
will presently cut of thy head. She hearing and nothing affrighted with these
threats, answered him saying, I am by Vow espoused to the heavenly King: and
besides him as long as I live I will never admit another Lover. Therefore use
thy sword if thou please, for be assured that neither thy flatteries nor
threats shall have power to draw me from him to whom I ^an by vow obliged. The
lustful young man enraged to see himself so contemned, and the maid so
inflexible, beleiving he could never enjoy rest as long as she lived so
resolved, mad with lust and rage presently struck of her head: and immediately
in the place where it fell to the earth a most pure and plentiful Spring
gushed forth, which flows to this day, and by the Holy Virgins merits gives
health to a world of diseased persons.

7. It being in the steep descent of a hill where the Virgins head was cut of,
it lightly rouling down to the bottom, slidd into the Church: whereas the body
remaind in the place where it first fell. The whole congregation there
attending to Divine Mysteries were wonderfully astonished to see the Head
tumbling among their feet, detesting the crime of the murderer, and impre^ating
Divine vengeance on him. But the parents of the Virgin broke forth i^ to tears
and sad complaints. They all went out, and found the murderer near the liveles
body, wiping his sword on the grass: For being the Princes Son, he apprehended
no danger, and as for the crime committed against God, he was unsensible of the
heynousnes of it. The man of God therefore seeing his pride and obstinacy, and
having in his hands the Virgins head, looked earnestly upon him, and said,
Impious Villain, have thou no shame of the slain wherewith thou have defiled
thy high birth, and shewst thou no repentance of this horrible crime? Thou have
disturbed the peace, thou have polluted the Church with thy sacrilegious
murder, thou have highly provoked Almighty God, and do thou show no sorrow
for all this? Since therefore it is so, that thou have not spared Gods Church,
nor reverenced his solemn day, I beseech him without delay to inflict on thee a
just punishment for this thy unworthy and detestable crime. As Soon as the Holy
man had ended these words, the young man immediately fell to the ground, and
gave up the ghost: and, which was more wonderful, his body presently
disappeared from the eyes of the bystanders: and many say that it was swallowed
up by the earth, and with the wicked soul sunk into Hell.

8 But the man of God often kissing the head which he held in his hands, could
not refrain to weep bitterly. Afterward joining it to the body and covering it
with his mantle, he returned to the Altar, where he celebrated Mass. Which
being ended, he returned to the Virgins body: and there began a devout sermon
to the people, in which among other passages he said, That the Holy Virgin had
made a vow ( of Religious Profession) but being thus intercepted by death, had
not opportunity to perform it: Therefore he exhorted them to prostrate
themselves on the ground, and earnestly beseech Almighty God to restore her to
life. The Congregation readily obeyed him, and after they had so continued a
good while in prayer, the man of God rose from the earth, and stretching forth
his hands to heaven, said, O Lord Jesus Christ, for whose love this Virgin
despised all earthly things, and desired only heavenly, we most ardently
beseech thee in mercy to hear our prayers, and grant the request we make to
thee. And although we doubt not but that this thy Virgin, who suffered only for
thy love, shall be received by thee into thy joy, and therefore little regards
our society and conversation, yet vouchsafe to grant the humble requests of thy
servants, and command this Virgins soul to return to her body, and thereby
show that thou have an entire power and rule both over our souls and bodies:
and likewise that she being by thy mercy restored to life, may for ever magnify
thy Name, and increasing in the fervor of a holy conversation, may after many
years return more pure to thee her Spouse, who art the only Son of the
Eternal Father, with whom and the Holy Ghost thou live and raignest one God
world without end. This Prayer being ended, to which all the people cried
aloud, Amen: the Virgin presently rose up, as from sleep, cleansing her face
from the dust and sweat, and filled the Congregation with wonder and joy.

9 Now in the place where the Head was reioynd to the body there appeard a
white Circle compassing the neck, small as a white thread, which continued so
all her life, showing the place where the Section had been made. And the report
in that country is, that from that white circle she had the name of Winefrid
given her, whereas at first she had been called Breuna: For in the British
language Win signifies White. And moreover the Tradition is, that after her
death whenever she appeared to any, that White mark was always visible. The
place where her blood was first shed was not much distant from a Monastery in
North Wales called Basingwerk: The Name of it formerly was, The dry vale: but
after her death to this day it is called Saint Winefrids Well. The Stones
likewise, both where the spring gushes forth, and beneath in the Current,
having been sprinkled with her blood, retain the rednes to these times: which
color neither the length of so many ages, nor the continual sliding of the
water over them, have been able to wash away: and moreover a certain Mass
which sticks to the said stones, renders a fragrant odor, like Incense.

10. The Holy Virgin being thus miraculously revived, did daily attend the man
of God, and devoutly hearkened to his exhortations: and at last received from
him the Holy veil of Religious Profession Whereupon assembling several Maids
of Noble families, the instilld into their minds a Love of Purity, and contempt
of all flattering delights of the world: so that they willingly submitted their
ne^ks to the easy Yoke of Christ, and by a Regular vow consecrated themselves
to his service.

11 Not long after the Holy Man Beuno dyed, and by Divine admonition Saint
Winefrid had recourse to another devout Man named Deifer, who was of so great
Sanctity, and so highly favored by God, that he made a fountiain break out of
the earth, and conferred health on many infirm persons. When Saint Winefrid
therefore came to this Holy man, a voice from heaven signified to him whilst he
watched that night in prayer, Saying, Tell my most dear daughter Winefride
that she repair unto a man named Saturn, from whom she shall be informed in
what place she is to spend the remainder of her life. As Soon therefore as the
Holy Virgin came to him he said to her, There is a certain place called
Witheriac (it is vulgarly named Guitherine in the Province of Denbigh) which is
held in great reverence by all the people: This place it is Gods will that thou
visit, and remain there whilst thou live, by thy good example informing
others in the way of piety. There inhabites an Abbot of Eminent virtues, named
Elerius, who by continual Penance and Prayer is become so exempted from
secular cares, that nothing in this present life has any taste to him, all his
affections being employed on celestial matters.

12. Thither therefore the Holy Virgin directed her steps, and the said Abbot
Elerius by Gods holy Spirit being admonished of her coming, went out to meet
her, and receiving her with great honor, brought her into a Convent of
Religious Virgins, recommending them to her care and government. Whosoever was
sick and came to her, returned back with perfect health: and if any were sad or
dejected in mind, they received consolation and inward peace of soul.

13. At last on a certain night as she was inten^ive to her devotions, our Lord
appeared to her, and signified to her that the day of her dissolution was at
hand. Wherefore on the fourth day before the Nones of November, being full of
virtues and good works, she gave up her Spirit to God: And was buried near the
bodies of Saint Chebi and Saint Senan. By her intercession Almighty God was
pleased to work many Miracles: among which this was one, that she gave fight to
a certain Carpenters daughter who had been blind from her Nativity, etc.



14. This is the account which Robert Abbot of Shrewsbury has given of the
Gests of this glorious Virgin Saint Winefrid. From what particular Records he
extracted his Relation, does not appear. But Tradition delivers, that
immediately after her death her Story was written by the Holy Abbot Elerius, her
last Spiritual Father: and probably from him the said Robert received most of
the passages in his Narration.

19. The Sacred Relics of this Holy Virgin lay at Witheriac or Guitherine till
the year one thousand one hundred and thirty eight, at which time her Body was
translated to a Monastery of Monks in Shrewsbury, where Almighty God approved
the Veneration which men with great devotion showed to her, by wonderful
miracles. So frequent and so great a concourse there has been ever since to
her Shrine and likewise to her Well, that in several of our Kings raigns the
fame of almost continual Miracles wrought by her intercession has invited
several Popes to confer special Indulgences on those which Visited them. Her
Feast on the third of November was generally celebrated in England with Nine
Lessons, and in her Office this Prayer was added, O Almighty everlasting God,
who have honored the Blessed Virgin Saint Winefride with the reward of
Virginity, Grant to us we beseech thee by her intercession, that we may despise
the allurements of this world, and together with her obtain the Seat of ever
lasting glory. Amen.

16. Now it ought not to be esteemd a prejudice or ground of suspicion of the
Truth of these Gests of Saint Winefride, that Saint Beda and some other of our
ancient Saxon Historians have not mentioned her among the other Saints of this
age, in whose praises they have so largely employed their Eloquence: For Saint
Beda professes his design to have been to relate the History of his own Saxon
Nation only ( in which he was imitated by following Historians:) and besides
this, so great a divorce there was in the affections of the Britains and
Saxons, that they renounced all commerce together. Hence it is that in the
Writings of S. Beda, etc. there is a pro^ound Silence, not only of S.
Winefride, but likewise of S. Patrick, S. Vrsuls, S. David, S. Dubritius, S.
Kentigern and others of whom we treated heretofore, who yet without doubt were
most illustrious Stars of their respective ages and of the British Church.

IX. CHA.
IX. CHAP.
1.2. etc. Of several British Saints: Saint Beuno: S Chebeus: S. Senan: S.
Deifer: S. Elerius.

1* IN the forogoing Narration we have the Memory of five Saints celebrated, A.
D. 660.
Saint Beuno, S. ^hebeus, S. Senan, S. Deifer and S. Elerius: whose Names being
written in the Book of Life, have worthily found a place likewise in our
Martyrologe. As for S. Beuno, no more of him is found, then what has been
written already.

2. S. Chebeus is no doubt the same whom heretofore we called S. Kebi surnamed
Corineus, a Disciple of S. Hilary Bishop of Po^^tiers, in the year of our Lord
three hundred sixty one, who having instructed the Inhatants of Anglesey
(Monae) in the Faith of Christ, dyed and was buried in Northwales, in whose
Monument the Sacred Body of S. Winefride was laid His Memory is celebrated in
our Martyrologe on the ninth of November. Martyrol. Ar^l. 9. November


3. S. Senan the assistant and instructour of S. Winefride in the perfection of
a Religious li^e is commemorated in our Martyrologe on the twenty ninth of
April, Ib 19. April.
where his death is assigned to this year six hundred and sixty. He was for his
Sanctity famous not only in Wales, but Cornwall also, where there is a small
haven and Town of Fishermen called from his Name.

4. S. Deifer at the same time lived a retired life not far from SS. Winefrids
Monastery built by S. Beuno, whose Successor he was in the direction of the
said Holy Virgin. He for his Sanctity and Miracles is in our Martyrologe placed
among the Saints on the seventh of March: Ib. 7 Mar^.
and his death is ascribed to the year of Grace six hundred sixty four.

5. The Memory of S. Elerius is more celebrated then the rest: he lived longer
with S. Winefride, and built a Monastery in the vale called Clutina (says
Leland etc.) because watered with the River Cluid, which divides the Province
of Flint from that of Denbigh. There it was that S. Winefride directed by
several Divine admonitions found him. He so conjoynd the exercises of an
Eremiticall and Monastical conversation, that he had diverse Disciples of both
sexes, which imitated his example and Institut of life.

6. He for some time, to decline the frequent concourse of Visitants, and that
he might more freely attend to God, Pits. in Elerio
retired into a desert, says Pits. And from hence Malbranque a French
Antiquary collects, that he passed over into France, and fixed his habitation
in the Northern parts o^ it amongst the Morini: For thus he writes: About the
year of Lord six hundred and sixty, Elerius a Noble personage of Brittany
passing the Sea, Malbranc. l. 3 de ^lor^n. c. 26.
and traveling the way which from Bouloign leads to Tero^anne, came to Fruge a
little distant from the rising of the River Life, where he chose a seat for his
Solitary living. To this day a fountain and little Chapel are monuments of
his Memory, These in ancient times afforded great benefit and help both to the
inhabitants of those places and strangers.

7. The same Author acknowledges that he returned into Brittany, where he also
dyed, as the Acts of S. Winefride do testify. Now though our Martyrologe do
consign his death to the year of our Lord six hundred and sixty, yet since Pits
and many other of our Writers do affirm that he wrote her life, and
consequently outlived her, his death is to be placed several years later.

X. CHAP. X. CHAP.

1.2. etc. The Gests of Saint Foillan, Martyr And of S Vltan, both of them
Brethren of S. Fursey.

1. THIS year was wonderfully fruitful in Saints: For in the same, S. Foilla^
was crowned with Martyrdom. He was Brother of S. Fursey, and with him came o^t
o^ Ireland into Brittany, where he lived a (...) in the Monastery of
Knobberri-burg and a^te^ his departure, succeeded him in the O^ce o^ Abbot, as
has been already decl^^^d in the year six hundred forty two. He is
comme^morated in our Martyrol^g^ on the thirtieth of October* Martyrolog. (...)
^. Oct
and held in great veneration not only in Brittany, but Ireland also and France.

2. Concerning him we read thus in the French Martyrologe, That out of Brittany
he went to Rome to obtain a benediction and faculties from Pope Martin,
Martyrolog. Gall. ^0 Oct.
to convert Infidels Which having received, he went into France, where after
some progress made in his Apostolical Office of preaching, he was received
with great reverence by S Gertru^e with whose assistance he founded the
Monastery of Fosse. Yet he did not so fix himself in that place, as if he had
found there a quiet abode and secure haven, and would dispense with his
Apostolic Office: but on the contrary his zeal to exalt the glory of Christ
was so urgent in him, that like lightning he went up and down, plucking up the
seed of Idolatry yet remaining there, and sowing the true Faith he incited the
inhabitants, as yet spiritually blind, to admit the Light of Truth, the Grace
of God, and eternal life to their souls: those who were obstinat against the
light he sharply reproved, and both by exhortations and good example instantly
besought, and with a pious zeal even compelled them to be saved. But the Enemy
of man's salvation could no longer endure so watchful a preacher of the Mystery
of piety: He therefore arms certain impious men with a blind envy and malice
against him, who violently and furiously assaulted this Holy Messenger of God
in a forest of Hannow, where with their swords they barbarously massacred him,
who did not resist them, but dyed praying for them. But God was not wanting to
honor his servant, for both from the merits of his past life and the miracles
following his death he was acknowledged and honored as a glorious Martyr, and
not long after a magnificent Monument was erected at his grave near R^dium a
Town of Hannow, which remains illustrious to this day, where there is seen a
Noble Monastery of Canons Regulars of the Order of Saint Norbert, which takes
its appellation from this Blessed Martyr.

3. We must not separate Brethren: Therefore we will here adjoyn the
commemoration of Saint Vltan, Brother to S. Fursey and Saint Foillan, whose
death in our Martyrologe, is assigned to the same year, on the second of May:
Concerning whom the Gallican Martyrologe thus writers on the first day of the
same month: Martyrolog. Gall^c. 1. Maij.
At Peronne is the commemoration of Saint Vltan Confessor, Abbot of the
Monastery in the same town, and Brother and Successor of Saint Fursey and of
the glorious Martyr S. Foillan. He was a wonderful observer of Religious
piety, and by the assistance of Saint Gertrude of Nivelle having finished the
Monastery of Fosse in the territory of Liege, and emparted wholesome
instructions to the Religious there, returned to this Monastery of Peronne (the
Abbot whereof he was after his Brothers death) he there honorably received,
and in a fatherly manner entertained S. Amatus Bishop of S^ns, who for his
zeal to justice was banished his Diocese, and having spent the remainder of
his life in a most holy conversation, was called to his eternal reward: and
presently after was followed by S. Vltan. Both whose Sacred Relics are with
due honor preserved partly at Peronne, and partly at Fosse.

XI. CHAP. XI. CHAP.

1.2. etc. Of S. Christiana an English-Saxon Virgin.

1. ABout this time most probably a Holy Virgin named Christina, or Christiana,
derived from an English-Saxon family ended a most holy life: yet her memory is
not celebrated by any of our English Histories. But Miraeus in his Belgic
Calendar on the twenty sixth of July thus writes concerning her, Teneramund, a
town of Flanders Imperial, in the diocese of Gaunt, Miraeus in ^ast. B^lg. 26.
Iul^j.
seated at the meeting of the Rivers Scaldis and Tenera, acknowledges two
Tutelar Saints, S. Hilduard Bishop, and S. Christiana a Virgin, whose Sacred
Relics are preserved there in a College of Canons. S. Christiana was the
daughter of a King of England: And Saint Hilduardus flourished in the year
seaven-hundred and fifty.

2. But some what more particularly touching her parents and manner of life we
read in the Gallican Martyrologe as follows: Martyrolog. Gallic. 7. Septt
On the seventh of September at Teneramund in the Bishopric of Gaunt is
commemorated the Translation of S. Christiana a Holy Virgin the daughter of
Migra^nus King of England, who coming into Flanders, at Diclivena was received
among the Religious Virgins, and having devoutly performed her course of virtue
in the service of our Savior the Spouse of Holy Virgins, there happily dyed,
and was buried with a great esteem of Sanctity. And afterward being glorified
by innumerable miracles, to the end her veneration might be more frequent, her
Sacred Relics were translated to Teneramunda, and honorably reposed there in
the Collegiat Church of the most Holy Virgin Mother of God together with the
bones of S. Hilduardus the Apostle and Tutelar Saint of the same town, together
with whom she is by the inhabitants of the same Town and Territory adjoining
honored as companion of the same Saint in the protection of that place.

3. Again touching the manner how being born and educated a Pagan, she was
miraculously converted, and exalted to so high a degree of Sanctity is thus
further related in the same Martyrologe: Ibidem. 27. Iulij.
On the twenty seventh of July at Teneramunda in Flanders is celebrated the
Memory of S. Christiana a Virgin, who being the only daughter of Migramnus King
of the English, was in her tender age most devout to her false Gods and Idols,
according to the Tradition of her Ancestors. But Almighty God looking on her
with eyes of Mercy, sent an Angel from heaven to her in the shape of a beggar
who instructed her in the Christian Faith, and commanded her to be baptized. By
whose conduct likewise she came to Dikelvenna, where after she had with great
perfection consummated her course, she attained to eternal Beatitude. Her Body
afterward shining with many Divine Miracles, was from thence translated to
Teneramunda: For whose honor and veneration Ringot Prince of that place having
reedified a Church which had been demolished by the Normans, commended the
Patronage of that City to the same Holy Virgin. Hence it was that to this day
she is honored by the inhabitants as their peculiar Protectresse.

4. This Translation was performed in the year one thousand ninety two. But who
this Migramnus, said to have been an English King, was, and what time he lived,
does not appear in any History. Probably he was some inferior Saxon Prince in
Brittany, for among the Kings of that Heptarchy no such name is mentioned. And
later then this time he could not probably live, since very few of the Saxon
Princes did now remain in their ancient Heathenish Idolatry. His daughter S.
Christiana's name is placed among the Saints recited in our Martyrologe on the
same seven and twentieth of July. Martyrol. Anglic. 17. Iul.


XII. CHAPTER
XII. CHAP.
1.2. etc. The Gests of S. Cedde and his Brethren.

6.7. The death of Sigebert King of the East Saxons: denounced by Saint Cedde.

1. AT the same time our Island of Brittany received a notable luster by the
piety of four Brethren, all of them consecrated Saints, their names were S.
Cedd, Saint Celin, S. Cimbell and S. Ceadda (or Chad.) they were all of them
Priests, and two of them exalted to the dignity of Bishops, to wit, S. Cedd,
who was now Bishop of London, and S. Ceadda who shortly will be the first
Bishop of Lichfeild.

A. D. 660.
2. As touching S. Cedd, how in this year of Grace six hundred and sixty he
founded the Monastery of Lesting in Yorkshire, Bed. l. 3. c. 23.
S. Beda at large thus relates: It was the custom of the man of God S. Cedd
whilst he was Bishop of the East Saxons, frequently to visit his own native
country of the Northumbers, to the end he might impart among them his
Spiritual exhortations. Now Edilwald, the son of King Oswald, reigning then in
the Province of the Deir^ (or Yorkshire,) perceiving him to be a holy and wise
man of great integrity, desired of him that he would accept at his hands a
certain possession of land, there to build a Monastery, where to himself might
repair to perform his devotions, and hear Gods word, as likewise bury the
dead: For this King believed that he should receive much benefit by the daily
prayers of those that served our Lord there. A. D. 661.
Now the said King had then in his attendance a Brother of the said Bishop,
named Celin, a man of great piety, who was wont to administer to him and hi^
family the Sacraments of our Faith, (for he was a Priest) and by his
information he came to know and love the Holy Bishop. S. Cedd therefore
complying with the Kings desire made choice for the Seat of a Monastery a place
among steep and remote mountains, which seemd fitter to be a retrait for
thieves, or lurking place for wild beasts, then a habitation for men. Now the
man of God being desirous by prayers and fasting first to cleanse that place
from the filth of crimes formerly executed there, and consequently to lay the
foundation of a Monastery, desired permission of the King that he might abide
there in Prayer the whole Lent then at hand. Which being granted, he according
to the Ecclesiastical custom, prolonged his Fast till evening every day,
except Sundays; and then also he contended himself with a small portion of
bread, one egg, and a little milk mingled with water. For he said that such was
anciently the custom of those who founded Monasteries, and from whom he had
received the Rule of Monastical Profession, by prayers and fasting to
consecrate the places where they intended to build a Monastery or Church.

3. Now toward the latter end of Lent, when only ten days remained, one came
to call him to the King. He therefore to the end so Religious a work should not
be intermitted for the Kings affairs, desired his Brother Cymbel, who was a
Priest, to continue there the devotions which he had piously begun. Whereto he
willingly condescended: And thus the full time of Prayer and fasting being
consummated, he there built a Monastery, called now Lestinghen, and instructed
the Monks with such Religious Instituts as were practiced at Lindesfarn, where
he had been brought up. The care of which Monastery he recommended to his
Brother Ceadda* who was afterward Bishop, first of York and shorly after of
Lichfeild.

4. Now whereas Saint Beda calls this Edilwald King of the Deiri, he is to be
esteemed only a King by courtesy of Os^^, ^o whom the whole Kingdom of the
Northumbers at this time belonged: And therefore in the Catalogue of the
Northumbrian Kings extant in Matthew of Westminster, Edilwald is omitted. And as
for the Monastery of Lestinghen, in the Breviary of Sarum it is said to belong
to the Isle of Lindesfarn. Which Island notwithstanding did not pertain to the
Province of the Deiri, but of the Bernicians. Wheresoever it was placed, there
flourished in it many persons eminent for Sanctity, among which Os^i a Monk in
our Martyrologe is reckoned in the number of Saints, who dyed in the year of
Grace six hundred sixty seven.

5. Saint Cedd remaind among the Northumbers no long time: A. D. 661.
for the year following happened the death of Sigebert the good King of the
East Saxons, inflicted on him for contemning the Ecclesiastical C^nsure
imposed by this Holy Bishop Cedd on one of his Nobles. The Story is thus
particularly recounted by S. Beda. Bed l 3. c. 22.
One of the Nobles of King Sigeberts Court had contracted an unlawful marriage
against the Orders of the Church. Which the Bishop not being able to prevent
nor correct, he excommunicated him, commanding all under his care to abstain
entering into his house, or eating of his meat. Which prohibition the King not
regarding, when he was invited by the said Count, he went to feast at his
house. At his return the Holy Bishop met him: Whom as soon as the King lookd
^n* he began to tremble, and leaping from his horse pr^strated himself at his
feet, begging pardon for his offense: for the Bishop likewise who was on
horseback, had lighted down. And being angry, he touched the King as he lay
with his rodd which he held in his hand, and with an Episcopal authority said
to him, I tell thee, O King, because thou would not abstain from the house of
that desperate excommunicated person, thou thy self shall dye in the same house.

6. This denunciation of the Holy Bishop was accordingly accomplished: for as
the same Author relates, Whilst the Christian Faith increased daily in that
Province to the great mutual joy both of the King and people, Idem ibid.
it happened, by the instigation of the Enemy of all good, that the King himself
was murdered by the hands of his own kindred. They were two Brethren who executed
this heinous crime: And being askd why they did it, they could give no other
answer but this, That they were enraged enemies to the king because he was wont
to be too merciful to his enemies, and quietly to pardon injuries whenever
those who did them begged his mercy. Such was the fault for which this good
King was slain, because with a devout heart he observed the Precepts of the
Gospel. Yet by this death happening to him without his fault, a former real
fault was punished, according to the Prophecy of the man of God. Now we may
piously believe that such a death of this Religious Prince did not only wash
away the stain of such a fault, but moreover increased his Merit, since it
happened to him for justice sake, and for his zeal to obser^e the Precepts of
our Lord. Thus writes S. Beda: and the same judgment is given also by William
of Malmsbury. Malmsbur de Reg. l. ^. c. 16. Bed. vbi sup.


7. The Successor to this good King Sigebert, was Suidelm the son of Sexbald:
who was baptized by the same Holy Bishop Cedd in the Province of the
East Angles, in a village belonging to the King called Rendelesham, or the
mansion of Rendilus. And Edelwald King of the East Angles, the Brother of Anna
formerly King, was his God father, who received him ascending out of the Sacred
Font. His reign continued only three years.

XIII. CHAP. XIII. CHAPTER

1.2. etc. The Province of the West Saxons divided into two Dioceses,
Dorchester and winchester: For which the Holy Bishop Agilbert retires into
France.

1. IN the same year of our Lord six hundred sixty and one, A. D. 661. Godvvin
in Winton. Episc.
which was the eighteenth of the reign of Kenewalch King of the West Saxons,
the said King perfected the Structure of the Church of Winchester begun by his
Father Kinegils, and not only ratified his Fathers donation thereto, but
moreover added the Mannours of Dornton, Altesford and Wordyam: thus writes B.
Godwin.

2, And at the same time the Church of the West Saxons by the industry of
Agilbert Bishop of the same Province, was so mightily increased, that the King
thought good to divide that Province into two Dioceses. One other Motive hereto
the King had, because Agilbert being a stranger, could not, but very
imperfectly speak the Saxon tongue. Bed.
For says Saint Beda: At last the King who understood no other but his Native
language, being weary to hear the Bishops barbarous pronunciation of the Saxon
tongue, or his expressing himself in French which the King understood not,
brought into the Province another Bishop of his own tongue, named Wini, who was
ordained in France. Thus he divided the Province into two Dioceses, and to Wini
he gave for his Episcopal See the City Venta, called by the Saxons
Wintancestir (or Winchester.) Herewith the Holy Bishop Agilbert being
greivously offended, because the King had done this without his advice,
returned into France, where he received the Bishopric of Paris, and died there
an old man and full of days.

3. Andrew Saussay in his Martyrologe assigns another cause of Bishop Agilberts
indignation and departure, Martyrolog. Gallican.
for says he, the King being corrupted with money, gave a portion of that
Bishopric to Wina. Which abominable Simony Agilbert having an Excoration,
quitted his Episcopal Seat, and returned presently into his native country,
retiring himself to Paris, as a secure harbor. But herein he much wrongs the
memory of King Kenewalch, who is not taxed by any of our Historians for that
Crime. Indeed it was justly imputed to Wina, who by such an execrable
negotiation purchased the Bishopric, not of Winchester but of London: Bed.
for so S. Beda testifies, saying, Not many years after the departure of
Agilbert out of Brittany, Wini was thrust out of his Bishopric of Winchester
by Kenewalch, and retiring to the King of the Mercians, named Wulfere, bought
with money of him the Sea of London, where he remained Bishop till his death.

4. As for the Holy Bishop Agilbert after his relinquishing of his See at
Dorchester he did not presently go into France, but as Huntingdon relates,
Huntingd. l. 3.
he retired to Alfrid the son of Oswi King of the Northumbers, who was his
friend: And three years after this we read that he was present at a Synod or
solemn Conference touching the Celebration of Easter, and the Preistly
Tonsure, of which we shall treat shortly: where he declared himself for the
Roman Observation against the Scotts.

XIV. CHAPTER
XIV. CHAP.
1.2. etc. The South*Saxons last converted: And their King Edilwalch baptized.

8 9. etc. The Martyrdom of Vlfald and Rufin, sons of King Wulfere.

A. D. 661.
1. THE same year was illustrious in the Conversion of the South Saxons. That
was one of the first Saxon-Principalities settled in Brittany by Ella, then the
most potent of all the Kings: and it was the last which admitted the Christian
Faith. The manner how that Kingdom came to be converted is thus described by
Henry of Huntingdon* Huntingd. l. 2.
Kenwald (or Kenwalch) King of the West Saxons in the twentieth year of his
reign fought against Wulfere King of Mercia the Son of Penda, a Prince who
inhe^^ed both his Fathers courage and success in Martial affairs* in which
battle the King of the West Saxons was defeated and compelled to fly Whereupon
Wulfere entered his country in a hostile manner, insomuch as penetrating to the
utmost confines of it, he invaded and conquered the Isle of Wight. In which
expedition by Wulfers industry and zeal Adelwold (or, as S. Beda calls him,
Edilwalch) King of Sussex was converted first of all to the Faith* Upon whom at
his Baptism Wulfere being his God father, bestowed as a sign of adoption, the
Isle of With (or Wight) and withal for the conversion of the said Island, he
sent thither a Priest named Epa to preach the Gospel. But his preaching as yet
had not any good success.

Speed Hist. f 220. lib. de Hist. c. 3.
2. It is no easy matter to find out who the person was that baptized this King.
The Historiall Books of S. Swithun of Winchester in Speed, and of S. Hilda
relate how Athelwold was the first King of Sussex who was converted to the
Faith of Christ and baptized in Mercia by S. Birinus a Monk and Apostle of the
Gevisses, in the presence and by the suggestion of Wolfere King of the
Mercians. But this cannot consist with the truth of Story and Chronology:
because S. B^rinus was dead long before Wulfere was King of the Mercians.
Others ascribe his Baptism to S. Wilfrid Bishop of York: But these Writers
place his Baptism too late, as the former did too early: for S. Wilfrid was not
yet Bishop. And though they would ground their asser^tion on the authority of
S. Beda, yet S. Beda plainly disproves them, affirming that this King was
baptized before S. Wilfrid came into his Province.

3. His words are these: S. Wilfrid turning out of his way into the Province of
the South Saxons, Be^. l. 4 c. 13.
and finding the people as yet addicted to Pagan Idolatry, preached to them the
word of Faith, and baptized many. Now the King of that Nation Edilwalch not
long before had been baptized in the Province of the Mercians in the presence
and by the persuasion of King Wulfere: By whom as he came out of the Font he
was received and for a mark of adoption had bestowed on him the Isle of Wight,
and the Province of the Meanvari, belonging formerly to the West Saxons (but
lately conquered by Wulfere.) Which little Province seems to be a small
Territory in Hampshire, containing three Hundreds, East-mean, West-mean and
Means-borough, which preserve still the Marks of the old name in S. Beda,
Meanvari.

4. Therefore in all probability King Edilwalch was by the Sacred Waters of
Baptism admitted into the number of Christians by Trumhere Bishop of the
Mercians, whom before we declared to have been of English parentage and kinsman
of Oswin King of the Northumbers, Vid. sup. l. c.
that he had his education from the Scotts, was a Monk* and afterward Abbot of
the Monastery of Gethlin, and last of all consecrated Bishop of the Mercians.

5 But a greater difficulty remains, How King Wulfere should deserve the Elogy
here given him of piety and zeal for the propagation of the Orthodox Faith
beyond the limits of his own Kingdom. Yea besides this, in other Authors we
find him employed in building of Monasteries and Churches: And William of
Malmsbury gives him this general Character, Malmsb. de Reg. l. 1. c 4.
that at his first Assumption to the throne, to the end he might not deceive
the expectation of his Subjects, he spared no diligence, study or labor to
show himself a good Prince who sought the proffit and felicity of his Kingdom.
Moreover that by his favor and countenance he earnesty advanced the Christian
Faith then even gasping for life, as being but a little before newly brought in
by his Brother. Whereas several other Authors, particularly such as have
written our Saints lives paint him forth for a most horrible persecutour,
insomuch as seven years after this Conversion of the South Saxons by his
incitation he is said to have putt to death his two sons Vlfald and Ruffin,
because by the preaching of S. Ceadda then Bishop of Lichfeild they embraced
the Christian Faith:

6. How can those things consist together? Perhaps some will imagine that the
praises given this King proceeded from flattery in the first Authors, by whom
those which followed were seduced. Yet we shall find that those very Historians
who so much celebrate his praises, have not conceald his vices. Id. ibid.
Thus the last mentioned Author after the passage even now cited, thus tempers
the commendations given him, Notwithstanding in these, and whatsoever other
virtues were in him, were corrupted and depressed by the infamous crime of
Simony, of which he was the first King of England that was guilty, selling for
money the Sacred Bishopric of London to a certain ambitious man, called Wina.
He moreover adioyns the Offspring of King Wulfere, Kindred and Wereburga,
without any mention of the two Martyrs Vlfald and Ruffin. So that in this Kings
Story there is an obscure Mist, which we may conceive to proceed from our
Ancient Writers of Saints Lives, who having a Story, for the substance of it
true, to relate, deliver it undigestedly, without any choice of names, times
and other circumstances. In order therefore to the clearing of this obscurity,
we will first briefly set down the Sum of the Story of those two Martyrs, and
consequently endeavor to correct the circumstantiall faults of the relatours.

Martyrol. Anglic. 24. April.
7. Vlfald and Ruffin were Brethren, sons of Wulfere King of the Mercians and
Hermenilda, who was daughter of Earcombert King of Kent and his wife S.
Sexburga. Wulfere their Father was an Infidel: But Herminilda a devout
Christian Lady of great Sanctity. She during the tender age of these her
children was diligent to imbue their minds with Christian Principles of piety:
and when they were come to riper ^ears she sought out a Master for them, but
with great secrecy, least her Husband, who was horribly averse from
Christianity, should know it. She had recourse therefore to Ceadda Bishop of
Lichfeild, who instructed them more perfectly, and regenerated them to Christ
by the Water of Baptism. These young Princes often went forth upon pretense of
hunting, and either by their Mothers persuasion, or their own inclination took
that opportunity to Visit the Holy Bishop. But being at last deprehended by
their Father, he agitated with the furies of his false Gods would compel them
to renounce their Religion: which they constantly refusing to do, he caused
them both to be slain in the Sacred place of Prayer. Their Holy Mother having
understood the cruel death and Martyrdom of her children, was desirous to give
them an honorable burial; for which purpose she according to the Roman
custom, gathered a mighty heap of Stones for their Monument. The place of their
Sepulcher by its name still testifies the same, for it is to this day called
Stone, a place which upon this occasion is grown to a populous Town. Now when
the death of these Holy Martyrs Vlfald and Ruffin was made known to the people,
and the cause likewise for which they dyed, they began to be held in great
honor: and a Church, with a Monastery, was built, consecrated to S. Vlfald,
yet so as that his Brother also became partaker of his honor. By this means
the place came to be frequented. Neither was their Father King Wulfere more
slow then others in honoring them. For the guilt of the parricide committed by
him wounding his conscience, he in an humble manner went to Saint Ceadda, and
with great grief acknowledging his crime, embraced the Christian Faith, and
with the Sacred Waters of Baptism expiated all his offenses.

8. This account do our ancient Records give of the Martyrdom of these two
Princes: the substance whereof cannot reasonably be questioned, considering the
lasting monument yet remaining, and that their names are extant among the
Saints in our Martyrologe on the four and twen^tieth of July. Martyrolog.
^ngl^c. 24. Iu^ij.
But that they should have been instructed by S. Ceadda then Bishop of
Lichfeild, and slain in the year of Grace six hundred sixty eight by their
Father then a Pagan, this contradicts all our most authentic Histories, in
which long before that time King Wulfere is celebrated for his Faith and Piety.
Therefore it will be necessary to affirm that they were instructed by some
Bishop of the Mercians before their Father began his reign, during the time
that their cruel Grand Father Penda lived, who earnestly labored to
extinguish the Christian name, and effectually caused the death of many
Christian Kings.

9. Therefore the Narration given by Camden deserves our acceptance, who more
distinctly and simply recounts the story in this manner: To Peada King of the
Mercians succeeded his Brother Wolfer, Camden in Coritants.
who having been most averse from Christian Religion, with barbarous inhumanity
slew his Sons Wolfald and Ruffin, because they had given up their names to
Christ. But a few years after himself also embraced the Christian Faith, and to
the end he might by some pious work expiate that his impiety, he finished a
Monastery begun by his Brother.

XV. CHA.
XV. CHAP.
1.2. etc. Of S. Winoc.

1. SOme refer to this year the retiring of S. Winoc into the Monastery of
Saint Bertin. Iperius ap. Mirgum in ^^st Belg. 6 November. vbi sup. i.
Thus writes Iperius in his Chronicle: About the year of Grace six hundred
sixty one S. Winoc Son of Iudicael King of the Britains, and brother of S.
Iudocus (of whom we have alrea^dy treated) despising the world, became a Monk
in the Monastery of Sithiu under Saint Bertin, together with his three
brethren, Kadanoc, Ingenoc and Modoc: S. Bertin then was Abbot over one hundred
and fifty Monks: among whom Saint Winoc shone like the Morning Starr.

2. Marcellinus in his life of S. Suibert affirms that S Iudoc and S. Winoc,
Anchorets and Preachers were sons of a King of England. But the Saxon Annalls,
exact enough in recounting their Kings names, mention no such King as Iudicail.
Most probable therefore it is that they were children of some British Prince
of this age. For many examples we have of Britains which for devotion passed
over into Little Brittany or Belgic France: but scarce any of the Saxons.

3. Saint Winoc having spent several years in great fervor under the
government of Saint Bertin, was commanded to set his Light of piety on a
Candlestick, to enlighten others by his Doctrine and example. This he admirably
performed in several places. At last being sent to a Town of Heremare, then
called Wormholt, but now Womholt, he there laid the foundation of a Monastery,
where to his death serving God with great purity, he was by him glorified by
many Miracles. He his supposed says Iperius, to have dyed in the same
Monastery about the year of Grace seven hundred and seaventeen: where he was
likewise buried. His Memory is in benediction: For in the year nine hundred and
twenty the same place was fortified and became a pleasant Town, which to this
day takes its name from S. Winoc, being seated in the confines of France and
Flanders.

Greg. Turon. Hist. ^^ancor. l. 5.5. c. 21.
4. Some doubt whether that passage in Gregory Bishop of Tours, be to be
understood of this S. Winoc, where he says, At that time Vinoc a Britain, a
man of admirable abstinence came out of Brittany to Tours, having a desire to
go to Jerusalem. He wore no other Vestment but one made of Sheepskins without
wool. And because he seemd to us a man of great piety, to the end we might
detain him amongst us more easily, we honored him with the dignity of
Preist-hood, If this be the same person, we must conclude that Iperius places
him much too late: For Baronius refers that Narration of Gregory of Tours to
the year of our Lord five hundred and eighty.

XVI. CHAP. XVI. CHAPTER

1 2. etc. The Gests of Saint Wilfrid continued.

4.5. etc. Controversy touching the Observation of Easter.

1. IN recounting the rudiments of Saint Wilfrids piety* Vid supra l.
we have already declared how in his younger years undertaking a journey of
devotion to Rome: in his passage through France he was with great benignity
received and for some time detaind by the Holy Bishop Ennemond or Dalfinus
Bishop of Lions: likewise how in his return from Rome he again visited him and
remaind with him to his death and Martyrdom by the cruelty and injustice of
Ebroinus Maire of the Palace to Clodovaeus Second of that name King of France.
A. D. 662.


2. Now according to the best Chronology it was in the year six hundred sixty
two that the said Holy Bishop was martyrd: after which Saint Wilfrid having
nothing to detain him longer in France, Malmsb. de Pontif. l. 3 f. 260.
returned into his own Native Country of Brittany. Where being arrived the
fame of his virtues and abilities was quickly spread abroad: whereupon, says
William of Malmsbury, Alfrid the son of Oswi, and by his permission King of the
Province of the Deiri, (or Yorkshire) sent for him: and with great kindness
received him, taking great pleasure to hear him discourse of the occurren^s of
his journey and dangers, the Elegance of France, the Roman pomp, as likewise
of the Laws and Orders of Ecclesiastical Discipline. Many days he continued
in this Kings Court, and for his virtuous conversation, industry, preaching,
profound learning and copiousnes of elocution he was admitted into a near
freindship with him. Now this Alfrid was natural son of King Oswi, born to him
of a Concubine: and when Edilwald the same Kings legitimate Son was dead, whom
he had made King of the Deiri, Alfrid succeeded him in the same Kingdom.

3. What followed after this is thus related by Saint Beda: Wilfr^d (says he)
being returned to Brittany was joined in freindship with King Aldfrid, who had
been taught to love and obey the Catholic Rules of the Church. Wherefore
finding Wilfrid to be a perfect Catholic he shortly gave him a possession of
ten families, in a place called Stanford. And not long after he added a
Monastery of thirty families in a place called Inrhypum (now Rippon in
Yorkshire.) Which place he had ^ormerly bestowed for building a Monastery on
certain Monks who conformed to the Scottish discipline. But because they,
having the choice given them, would rather quitt the place then conform to the
Catholic customs of the Roman and Apostolic Church in the celebration of
Easter and other Canonical Rites, A. D. 664.
the King conferred upon Wilfrid the said Monastery, perceiving that he was
imbued with better disciplines and manners. At which time by command of the
said King he was in the same Monastery ordained Priest by Agilbert who had been
Bishop of the Gevissi among the West Saxons: For the King was very desirous
that a man of so great erudition and piety, as Wilfrid, and one admitted to so
near a freindship, should be made a Priest and Doctor. A. D. 6^4.


4. S. Wilfrids fame was presently after much enlarged by occasion of a great
Controversy then renewd and with greater heat then ever agitated between him
and the Scotts, chiefly about the Celebration of Easter. In which Controversy
not only the Monks and Ecclesiastic persons were engaged, but great
partialities and divisions were by occasion of it caused among the Laics, and
even in the Princes Courts, where some celebrated the Solemnity of our Lords
Resurrection on one Sunday, and some on another: so that when one Company
rejoiced, another were in Penance and fasting. The order how this Question was
agitated is thus accuratly described by Saint Beda.

Bed. l. 3. c. 25.
5. In those days, says he, a Notable Question was raised touching the
celebration of Easter. For all those who were come into those Northern parts
either out of Kent or from France, resolutly affirmed that the Scotts observed
the Feast of our Lords Resurrection contrary to the custom of the Universal
Church. There was among them one named Roman, a zealous defender of the true
Observance, he was by Nation a Scott, but had been taught the Rule of
Ecclesiastical Truth in France and Italy. This man in former time had had many
conflicts with Finanus Bishop of Lindesfarn: and many persons were reduced by
him to the right way, and many were incited by him to a more diligent
inquisition of the Truth. Yet he could never persuade Finanus to yield: on the
contrary being a man of a rude feirce nature, the more he was reprehended, the
more sullen he grew, insomuch as he declared himself a professed Enemy of the
Truth.

6. Besides this Roman, Jacob the forementioned Deacon of the late Venerable
Archbishop S. Paulinus observed Easter after the true Catholic way, together
with all those whom he could instruct and persuade thereto. The like did the
Queen Eanfleda, with all that attended her out of Kent: from whence she brought
a Priest named also Roman, a man zealous for the Catholic Observance. And
hence it often fell out in those times that in the Kings Court Easter was twice
observed the same year: For whilst the King solemnised the Feast of our Lords
Resurrection, having ended his Fast, at the same time the Queen with her
attendants, persisting still in their Fast, celebrated Palm Sunday.

7. This dissonance in the Observation of Easter was patiently tolerated by all
whilst Bishop A^dan lived: because it was well known that though those who sent
him would not permit him to celebrate the Feast of Easter otherwise then they
were accustomed, yet he was zealous to perform all Christian duties of Faith,
Piety and Charity according to the custom practiced by all Gods Saints. And
therefore he was deservedly beloved by all, even those who differently
celebrated Easter; and not only by such as were of mean condition, but by
Bishops themselves, though following the Roman observance: as Honorius
Archbishop of Canterbury and Felix Bishop of the East Angles had a venerable
esteem of him.

8. But when his Successor Finanus was dead, and Colman in the year of Grace
six hundred sixty one was sent by the Scotts to succeed him in the Bishopric
of Lindesfarn, the Controversy about the Observance of Easter, as also other
points of Ecclesiastical Discipline began to be agitated with greater heat:
insomuch as some did not without reason fear, considering the pretended
importance of the Question, least an error in it might prejudice their
salvation, and that, though they called themselves Christians, they had or might
run in vain.

9. This Controversy was so publicly agitated by the Ecclesiastics, that it
came to the knowledge of King Oswi and his Son Alcfrid, both which interessed
themselves in it: King Oswi having been taught and baptized by the Scotts, and
perfectly understanding their language, believed the Truth to lie on their
side: But Alcfrid whose Teacher in matters of Religion Saint Wilfrid, a most
learned man, was, followd his judgment, who had made a voyage to Rome on
purpose to learn true Ecclesiastical doctrine, and had spent much time in
France with the Holy Bishop of Lions Dalphinus, from whom also he had received
the Crown of Ecclesiastical Tonsure. These things considered, King Alcfrid had
reason to believe that the teaching of S. Wilfrid deserved to be preferred
before Scottish Traditions. And for the esteem he had of his piety and learning
he had bestowd on him a Monastery of forty families, in a place called Inrhipun
(or Rippon,) which before had been in the possession of the Scotts, but because
they chose rather to quitt the place then change their countries custom, the
King conferred it on him, who both for his le^rning and piety well deserved it.

XVII. CHAP. XVII. CHAPTER

i.2. etc. A Synod or Solemn Conference touching the Paschal Solemnity,
between S. Wilfrid and Colman a Scottish Bishop.

1. AFter this Narration, S. Beda continues to relate how for the settling of
peace in men's minds, who were much divided, it was necessary to assemble a
Synod* for so he calls it, though indeed it was more properly a solemn
Conference, says Baronius, in as much as all the Bishops of that Province were
not convoked to it, Baron. ad A. D. 664.
but only such as then happened to be present debated the matter before the King.

2. As touching the time when this Assembly was convoked, S. Beda setts it down
precisely, saying, Bell. l. 3. c. 26
This Question was agitated in the year of our Lords Incarnation six hundred
sixty four, which was the two and twentieth of the Reign of King Oswi, and the
thirtieth from the time that the Scotts administered the Bishopric of
Lindesfarn in a Province of the English. For Aidan held that Bishopric
seventeen years, Fin^n ten, and Colman was now in his third year.

Id. ib. c. 25.
3. The same Author likewise elsewhere relates the names of the persons who
were present in the said Assembly: About the same time, says he, Agilbert
Bishop of the West Saxons, a friend of King Alcfrid and of Abbot Wilfrid, was
come into the Province of the Northumbers, and stayed some time with them.
Moreover upon the entreaty of King Alcfrid he ordained Wilfrid a Priest in the
foresaid Monastery. He had likewise attending on him a Priest named Agathon.
When therefore the Question about Easter; the Ecclesiastical T^nsure, and
other Rites was moved, it was orderd that a Synod should be assembled in the
Monastery called Strenes-halch or Beacons-bay, whereof Hilda a devout woman was
Abbess, and that there the controversy should be determined.

4. Both the Kings, Oswi the Father, and Alcfrid his son, came thither, and
these Bishops, Colman with his Clarks from Scotland, and Agilbert, with the
Priests Agathon and Wilfrid, with whom also joined Jacob and Romanus. As for
Hilda the Abbess with her dependants, and the Venerable Bishop Ceadda, who as
we have formerly declared, was ordained by the Scotts, they declared for the
Scottish opinion. This last Bishop was a most vigilant Interpreter for both
parties.

5. When all these were met, King Oswi first of all by way of Preface advising
them that since they all professed to serve the same God, and to expect the
same heavenly kingdom, they therefore ought all to hold the same Rule of
living, and uniformly celebrate the Divine Sacraments: And for this reason, the
principal Enquiry ought to be, Which side held the truer Tradition, for that
certainly was to be followd by all. Having said this, be in the first place
commended his own Bishop Colman to declare, What Rite that was which he in
practice followd, and whence he took its Original.

6. Hereto Colman thus answered, The manner of celebrating the Paschal
Solemnity which I in practice conform to, I received from my Superiors who
sent me hither and ordained me Bishop: And it is the same which all our
Ancestors, men known to have been beloved and highly favored by God, have
always practiced. This Rite let every one take heed how they contemn or
reprove, for it is the very same which, as we read in Ecclesiastical Story,
the Blessed Evangelist S. John, as likewise all the Churches governed by him
have from the beginning celebrated.

7. After that Bishop Colman had spoken these" and other words to the same
effect, the King next commanded Bishop Agilbert to declare publicly likewise
the manner of his Observance, whence it sprung, and upon what authority be
conformed thereto. Agilbert answered, I beseech your Majesty that in my stead
my Disciple Wilfrid the Priest may speak, for we are both of the same
judgment, and agree with the rest here sitting, who follow the general
Ecclesiastical Tradition. Besides, he can much better and more perspicuously
declare our sense in the English tongue, then I can by an Interpreter.

8. Wilfrid therefore, the King so commanding, thus began: The manner of
celebrating Easter practiced by us, we our selves saw generally practiced at
Rome, where the Blessed Apostles Peter and Paul lived, taught, suffered and were
buried. The very same observance we saw in the rest of Italy, and in France
likewise, through both which countries we traveled, partly in devotion, and
partly with an intention of gaining instruction in Ecclesiastical matters.
Moreover we are certainly informed, that in Africa, Asia, Egypt, Greece and all
other ^^rts of the world through which the Church is spread, how different
soever the inhabitants be in language and manners, yet they all universally
celebrate Easter at the same time with us. So that these Scotts and their
accomplices the Picts and Britains, inhabitants of two remote Islands, and not
all of them neither, are the only persons which with a foolish obstinacy
contend against the whole world.

9. Whilst Wilfred was thus speaking, Colman interrupted him, saying, I wonder
you will call our practice foolish, since no man can deny but that therein we
follow the example of so great an Apostle as S. John, dignified by our Lord to
be permitted to lie in his bosom, and who certainly can not be charged with
folly.

10. Hereto Wilfrid replied, God forbid that any of us should impute folly to
S. John for observing literally the Rites of Moses his Law at a time when the
Christian Church did as yet Iudaize, because it was not possible for the
Apostles on a sudden to cast off all the Legal observances. The Jewish Church
therefore at first being the only true Church of God, the Gentiles who were
converted, when they were admitted into it, were obliged not only to cast away
all their Idols invented by the Devil, but likewise in many countries where
the Jews abounded, to conform to many of their Rites, for fear of giving
scandal to them. Hence it was that S. Paul circumcised Timothy, that he offered
Sacrifices in the Temple, and together with Aquila and Priscilla at Corinth
cut off his hair in sign that he had made a vow: all which Ceremonies were in
themselves of no proffit at all, but were done by him because he would not
offend the Jews. And upon this ground it was that the Apostle S. James said to
the same S. Paul, Thou see, Brother, how many thousands among the Jews there
are who believe, and are withal extremely zealous for Legal Observances, etc.
But notwithstanding these practices of the Apostles in the beginning, yet now
that the Gospel is clearly preached and believed through the world there is no
necessity: yea it would be unlawful either to be circumcised, or to offer
carnal sacrifices to God. Therefore it was that S. John in a charitable
compliance with the Jews, according to their custom celebrated the Paschall
Solemnity on the fourteenth day of the first Month at even, not regarding
whether that day happened to be a Sabbath, or any other day of the Week.

11. But as for S. Peter, he preached at Rome, and considering that it was on
the first day of the Week that our Lord rose from the dead, thereby giving the
world hope likewise of a resurrection, he understood that Easter was so to be
celebrated, that, according to the precept of the Law, the fourteenth day of
the Moon of the first Month was first to be expected, as S. John did also in
the East. And that day being come, if it happened that the next following was
Sunday (called in Scripture our Lords day, or first of the Week) then at even
of the Sabbath day he began to celebrate the Paschall Solemnity. But if the
next day after the fourteenth Moon was not Sunday, but the Sixteenth,
Seaventeenth or so following to the one and twentieth, he expected till Sunday
came, and the Saturday-even before, he began the Paschal Feast. Thus
Easter Day, being a Sunday, was observed from the fifteenth Moon till the one
and twentieth. Neither does this Evangelicall and Apostolic Tradition
dissolve, but fulfill the Law, by which the Paschal Feast is to be observed
from the even of the fourteenth Moon of the first Month, until the even of the
one and twentieth Moon of the same Month. Which Observance is imitated by all
S. John's Successors after his death, and by the Universal Church through the
world. And that this is indeed the true Easter, and only to be observed by all
Christians, has been, not newly ordained, but confirmed as an ancient practice
by the first General Nicene Council, as Ecclesiastical History informs us.

12. Hence it is manifest, O Colman, that you Scotts neither follow the example
of S. John, what ever you pretend, and you directly contradict the Tradition of
S. Peter: so that in Observing Easter you neither conform to the Law nor
Gospel. For S. John observing the Paschal time according to the Letter of the
Law, had no regard whether it was our Lords day, or no: Whereas you keep it only
on our Lords day. And S. Peter observed it from the fifteenth to the one and
twentieth Moon; but you from the fourteenth to the twentieth, insomuch as you
often begin that Solemnity on the thirteenth Moon at even for which the Law it
self gives no warrant. Neither did our Lord himself, the Author of the Gospel
either eat the ancient Pasch on that day, but on the fourteenth Moon at even,
or deliver the Sacraments of the New Law to be observed by the Church. Moreover
by your disorderly observance you sometimes exclude the one and twentieth Moon
from your Solemnity, which yet the Law commands to be celebrated most solemnly.
Thus, as I said, in your Rite you neither agree with S. John nor S. Peter; you
are neither conformable to the Law nor Gospel.

13. Against this discourse of Wilfrid, Colman thus objected: Will you presume
to say that Anatholius, a Holy man, and highly commended in Ecclesiastical
Story, did in his judgment contradict both the Law and Gospel, who yet wrote
that the Feast of Easter was to be observed from the fourteenth Moon to the
twentieth? Or is it credible that our most Reverend Father Columba and his
Successors did teach contrary to Divine Scriptures, when as their Sanctity has
been attested by many celestial Miracles? For my part, being assured that they
are Saints, I will never desist following their practices and Discipline.

14. Here to Wilfrid reioynd: It is not to be doubted, said he, but that
Anatholius was a man of admirable Sanctity and learning: But why do you
allege him since you do not so much as observe his Decrees? For he in his
Paschall Computation, observing the Rule of Truth, placed the Cycle of Nineteen
years (or Golden Number:) Which Cycle either you are ignorant of, or if you
understand it, you impudently despise it, though in use through the whole
Church. He did so compute the fourteenth Moon in the Sunday on which he
performed the Paschal Feast, that on the same day at even he according to the
Egyptian custom, confessed that it was the fifteenth Moon. In like manner he
did so reckon the twentieth Moon in his account on the Easter Sunday, that the
declining part of that day he attributed to the one and twentieth Moon. Now it
is manifest that you are ignorant of his distinction since some times you
celebrate your Paschal Solemnity before full-Moon, that is when it is only
thirteen days old.

15. And as touching your Father Columba and his Successors, whose Rule you
say you follow, and whose Sanctity has been asserted by many Miracles; I might
answer, That in the last day many will say to Christ, that in his name they
have prophesied, cast out Devils and wrought many Miracles; to whom he will
say, That he never knew them. But far be it from me to apply this to your
Fathers, since it is more just that I should believe good, then evil of
persons unknown to me. Therefore I will not deny but that they were devout
servants of our Lord, and favored by him, since with a pious intention, though
rusticall Simplicity, they served him. And my judgment is, that such an
erroneous Observance of Easter did not much prejudice or endanger them, because
not any one had showed them Rules of a more perfect Institut. Whereas, no doubt
if any Catholic skillful in calculation had rightly informed them, they would
as well have followd his instructions, as they did obey these Precepts of God
which they had learnt. Whereas if thou and thy Companions henceforth contemn to
obey the Decrees of the Sea Apostolic, yea of the Universal Church, which are
moreover confirmed by Holy Scriptures, without all doubt you will sin
greivously. For though your Fathers were Saints, are they, so few in number,
living in the corner of a remote Island to be preferred before the Universal
Church spread over the whole world? And if your Columba, yea ours also if he
were Christ's, was a Saint powerful in Miracles, shall his authority outweigh
that of the Apostle, to whom our Lord said, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock
I will build my Church, and the gates of Hell shall not prevayl against it: And
to thee I will give the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven?

16. Wilfrid having thus finished his discourse, the King addressing his speech
to Bishop Colman, said, Tell me, Were these words in very deed spoken by our
Lord to S. Peter? Who answered. They were indeed spoken to him. The King
replied, Can you produce any proof of so great power given to your Columba? He
answered. No, Sir. The King added, Do both sides then among you agree that
these words were spoken principally to S. Peter, and that the keys of Heavens
gates were given him by our Lord? They answered, We both acknowledge this.
Thereupon the King concluded, saying, And I also assure you I have no intention
to contradict the Porter of heaven: but according to my knowledge and power I
will obey his Ordinances in all things: for fear when I come to heaven gates,
and he who keeps the keys be displeased with me, there be none to open them
and let me in. When the King had said thus, all that were present, both
accessours and bystanders applauded his speech, and relinquishing their former
imperfect instituts, speedily embraced those which appeared to be better.

17. Thus ended this Synod ot Conference. What effect it produced among the
Scotts shall be showed, when we have concluded the Narration of another
Controversy at the same time agitated, touching the manner and fashion of the
Ecclesiastical Tonsure.

XVIII. C.
XVIII. CHAP.
1.2. etc. A Controversy in the same Synod touching Ecclesiastical Tonsure.
Three several manners of Tonsure.

12. Agreement between the Saxons and Scotts, etc. in all Points of Doctrine.

13. Obstinacy of the Scotts.

1. THAT at this meeting there was a dispute touching Ecclesiastical Tonsure,
S. Beda expressly testifies. But does not explain the point wherein the
difficulty lay. Yet this is certain, that there was not any one in that
Assembly which either derided or neglected the said Tonsure, as Protestants now
do.

2. The primitive antiquity of this Tonsure, by which Ecclesiastical persons
for a sign of distinction from the Layty, by cutting off some part of the hair
on the top of their heads, formed it into the fashion of a Diadem, or Crown, is
referred by S. Isidor to the Apostles, Isid. de Divin. Off. ap. Baron. ad A. D.
58.
and said to be an imitation of the Nazarites, for thus he writes: If I be not
deceived, the practice of the Ecclesiastical Tonsure was derived from the
Nazarites. Who first nourishing their hair and suffering it to grow long,
undertook by vow a laborious Exercise of Continence, abstinence and other
austerities: which having performed, they shaved their heads, and by Gods
command cast their hayr into the fire of the Sacrifice, signifying thereby that
they consecrated the perfection of their Devotion to our Lord. The practice
according to this example was introduced by the Apostles, importing that
Ecclesiastical persons devoted to the service of God are consecrated to him, as
the Nazarites were, which they testified by cutting off the hayr: so professing
that they divested themselves of the old man and his acts.

3. The Controversy therefore was about the manner and fashion of the Tonsure:
of which there were several kinds, the Principal whereof are said to have
taken their Original from Saint Peter, or Saint Paul. The manner of Saint
Peter's was to shave the top of the head, leaving below toward the forehead and
ears a Circle or Diadem representing the Crown of thorns which our Lord bore:
Amalar. de Eccl.

Off l 4 c. 39. Alcuin. de Divin. Offic. cap. 35.

Ap. Vsser. in Prim. Eccl. Brit. f. 922.


Thus write Amalarius, and Alcuinus: who adds, that this Saint Peter ordaind
to the end that Clergymen might be distinguished from secular, not only in
their clothing, but form of wearing their hayr. And Steven the Priest, called
also Eddius, writes of Saint Wilfrid that he willingly received from Saint
Dalfinus Archbishop of Lions the form of S. Peter's Tonsure, resembling the
Crown of thorns encompassing our Lords head.

4. This is the form of Tonsure at this day in use among the Disciples of S.
Benedict and S. Francis, as likewise some other Religious Orders, and no doubt
was anciently received by all Ecclesiastical persons: and which by the Greeks
is called (...). But in following times, Balsam. in 21 Can. Trullan. Bellarm.
l. de. Monach.
as Bellarmin observes, Ecclesiastical persons among the Secular Clergy
changed this Tonsure, instead of the said Diadem about the lower part of the
head, shaving only the top or crown of the head in form of a Circle, the which
Circle at this day is enlarged according to the degrees of their Orders. By
which change the ordinance made by the fourth Council of Toledo is manifestly
transgressed: Let all Ecclesiastical persons and Lectours, as likewise Deacons
and Priests shave the whole upper part of their head, and leave below only the
crown of a Circle: Not as in the parts of France the Lectours are observed to
do, who wear long hair, as laymen do, and only shave a small Circle on the
top of their heads. For such a fashion is observed in Spain only by Heretics.
Wherefore it is necessary for the taking away scandal from the Church that
this mark of shame be abolished, and that there be one only fashion of
Tonsure, as is practiced generally in all Spain.

5. The Second manner of Tonsure is supposed to have descended from Saint Paul,
and, B^d. H^st l. 4. cap. 1.
says S. Beda, was in practice among the Eastern Ecclesiastics: though he
does not describe the fashion of it. But it seems to have consisted in a total
shaving, or at least close polling of the whole head. For he affirms that Saint
Theodore Archbishop Elect of Canterbury, who came out of Cilicia, was obliged
to expect four months, till his hair was grown sufficiently to have a crown
made round about his head, after the Roman manner.

6. The present Dispute therefore was whether S. Peter's manner of Tonsure in
use at Rome was to be only received in Brittany. This seems to appear from an
Epistle of S. Aldelm by command of a Synod directed to a certain British
Prince called Geruntius, Aldelm. Epist ad Geru^^.
in which he reprehends the Britains for using a Tonsure different from the
Roman. The passage of the said Epistle pertinent to this purpose is this: A
rumor, says he, is largely spread that there are certain Priests and
Clergymen in your Province who obstinatly reject the Tonsure of Saint Peter:
alleging for their only excuse, that herein they imitate their Predecessors,
whom they with swelling language describe as persons wonderfully illustrated
with Divine Grace.

7. The care which the Popes of this age had, that S. Peter's Tonsure should be
only received in Brittany, is manifested by Pope Vitalian, who would not suffer
Theodorus Archbishop of Canterbury, who had been shaved after the Eastern
manner, to come into Brittany, till his hair was grown so as that he might be
shorn after the Roman manner. Thus writes S. Beda, Bed. l. 4. c. 1
Theodorus, says he, after he was ordaind Subdeacon, expected four months,
till his hair was grown to a length sufficient to be cut into a Crown. For his
Tonsure before was after the Eastern fashion; attributed to S. Paul.

8. But besides these there was a third manner of Tonsure, by which only a
half crown was formed on the lower part of the head before, from one ear to the
other, all the rest of the hair being left at full length. And this fashion in
these times came in use among the Irish Clergy: This form, the Irish Writers
condemning it, call Simon Magus his Crown: which appellation they received from
Rome. Now how this practice came into Ireland we read in an ancient Book of
Canons cited by B. Usher. Ap. Vsser. f. 924.
The Romans say, that this Tonsure took its beginning from Simon Magus, who
shaved himself only from ear to ear, thereby to expel the virtue of the
Tonsure of Magicians, by which only the forepart of the head was covered. The
Sermon likewise of S. Patrick testifies that the first Author of this kind of
Tonsure in Ireland was one who had been Swine-heard to Loiger the Son of Nele
King of Ireland: and from him the Irish have generally received this fashion.

9. Against this manner of Tonsure the English Abbot Ceolfrid in S. Beda writes
to Naitan King of the Picts: In which letter he affirms the most excellent sort
of Tonsure to be that of S. Peter, in practice at Rome and the most detestable
this of Simon Magus. Adding for a proof of the excellency of S. Peter's Crown
these words, We are shorn after that manner, Ibid.
not only because S. Peter was so, but because S. Peter thereby commemorated
our Lords Passion: and therefore we desiring and hoping to be saved by the same
passion, bear the sign of it, as he did, on the higher part of our body. For as
every Christian baptized being made so by the death of our Savior, is wont to
bear the sign of the Holy Cross on the fore head, that by its defense we may
be guarded from the incursions of Evil Spirits, and also be admonished that we
ought to crucify the flesh with its vices and lusts: So likewise ought those
Ecclesiastics or Monks who more strictly oblige themselves to continence for
our Lord, to bear on their heads that form of a Crown which he in his Passion
carried on his head, and which was made of thorns, that he might take away the
sharp thorns of our Sins.

10. Now whether the Picts and Scotts had received from the Irish the Tonsure
ascribed to Simon Magus, is not certain. However, it is manifest that this was
a practice introduced in Ireland after S. Patricks time, and contrary to his
Institut: A^. Vsser. ^. 924.
For in a Synod celebrated there in his time, we read this Canon: Whatsoever
Clergyman, from the Dore-keeper to the Priest, shall be seen abroad without a
Tunick or Cassick, and not cover the nakedness of his belly: or who shall not
wear his hair thorn after the Roman manner: And if his wife shall not wear a
veyle when she walks abroad, Let such be contemned by Seculars and separated
from the Church.

11. From the several passages here alleged we may conclude that the Motive
of the Dispute in this Synod or Assembly of Strenes-halch, proceeded from a
zeal in S. Wilfrid and other Ecclesiastical persons from Kent, etc. to reduce
the Scotts and Picts to their first Principles and Rites which they received
from Rome; and which by negligence had been depraved: which was a design very
commendable, since Uniformity even in small things once neglected, draws after
it divisions in greater. Notwithstanding that they urged not this Uniformity in
Tonsure as a matter in it self of any necessity, the forementioned Abbot
Ceolfrid declares in his Letter to Nattan, where he says, Ap. Bed. l. 5. cap.
22.
We do freely profess that the Error about Tonsure is not harmfull to those
who have a pure Faith to God; and Charity to their Neighbor: Especially
cinsidering that in the ancient Catholic Fathers we cannot read that there
have been any Controversies about the manner of Tonsure, as there have been
about differences in matters of Faith; or Celebration of Easter.

12. These were the Points debated in this Conference, concerning the
Canonical time of celebrating the Paschal Solemnity, and Ecclesiastical
Tonsure. Other small differences likewise there were about External Rites, but
of so small consideration, that our ancient Records have not vouchsafed to
mention them. And surely they were very small, since the fashion of Tonsure
deserved to be mentioned, as a matter of Dispute. And from hence we may
undeniably conclude, that the Scotts, Picts and Britains in all matters of
Faith without exception, agreed with the Saxon, that is, the Roman Church.
Those dissenters had through neglect or ignorance varied from the Universal
Church in some outward Observances, but in all Doctrines, and public Practices
consequent to such Doctrines, they still remaind unreproveable: Otherwise, no
doubt, they would at this time have been called to an account for their Errors.

13. Now what success this Conference or Synod produced, as to the Scotts, S.
Beda thus briefly declares: The debate being ended; and the Assembly dissolved,
Agilbert returned home (namely, into France.) But Colman Bishop of Lindesfarn
perceiving his Doctrine and Sect now exposed to contempt, took a long with him
those who had a mind to follow, to wit, all those that refused to admit the
Catholic Observance of Easter, and the Tonsure of the Crown (for of this also
no small debate was made:) And went back into Scotland, with a purpose to treat
there with his Contrymen whether for the future he should conform to the
Catholic Rites, or no. But not long after he returned to his See: and
forsaking the Scottish custom, submitted to the Catholic way of celebrating
Easter.

XIX. CHAPTER
XIX. CHAP.
1.2 etc. B. Colman goes into Ireland: Where he builds a Monastery for
Saxon-English Monks.

5.6. etc. His death: and Elogy. Monks then in great veneration.

1. COlman Bishop of Lindesfarn, though he returned presently out of Scotland
well reformed from his former Errors, yet his abode at his See was very short:
For, says Saint Beda, Bed. l. 4. c. 4.
he relinquished Brittany (upon what Motive is not expressed) and took with him
all the Scotts which he had assembled in the Isle of Lindesfarn: And besides
them, there went with him thirty of the English Nation, who had likewise been
imbued in Monastical Exercises by him.

2. Thus having left a few Religious Brethren in his Church, he went first to
the Island His (or Iona) from whence he had formerly been sent to preach the
Gospel to the English Nation. After that he retired from thence into a little
Island Westward from Ireland which in the Scottish language is called
Inhys-bovinde, or The Isle of the White Calf. There he built a Monastery, in
which he placed the Scottish and English Monks, which had attended him from
Lindesfarn. But shorly after a disagreement happened between them, upon this
occasion. The Scotts in Summer time when fruits were to be gathered, were wont
to leave the Monastery; and to wander up and down in the country where they
had much acquaintance. But the Winter following they would return, and expect
their part in the Provisions gathered by the English, which they thought
unreasonable to allow them.

3. To remedy this dissension therefore Colman after much travel up and down,
at length found another place in Ireland commodious for building a Monastery,
called in the Scottish (or Irish) tongue Magi^ (or Maiyo.) There he bought of a
certain Count to whom the possession belonged, a part of it, to found his
Monastery; adding withal this Condition, That the Monks in their daily
Devotions should be obliged to pray for the said Counts prosperity. Having
therefore with the assistance of the Count and Neighbors adjoining* built a
Monastery, he placed the English Monks there, having left the Scotts in the
foresaid Island. Which Monastery is to this day possessed by English Monks: and
from a slender beginning enlarged very much, being vulgarly called Intugeo.
Here resides a famous Congregation of Religious Monks gathered out of England,
who are much reformed in their Institut, and following the Example of their
Venerable Fathers, do live under a Canonical Rule and Abbot by the labor of
their hands, with great continence and simplicity.

4. When Colman left Lindesfarn, Id. ib. c. 25.
says the same Author, he took with him part of the bones of his Predecessor
the most Reverend Bishop Aidan: and part he left in the Church which he had
governed, commanding they should be buried in the Secretary, or Chancell of the
same Church. Whereby it is plain that certain Protestant Writers do unjustly
impute the introducing of these practices of Veneration of the Relics of
Saints to Roman Missioners after the departure of these ancient Preachers from
Scotland. These Relics Bishop Colman reposed in his Monastery of Bovinde: in
which Island S. Rioch Nephew of S. Patrick by his Sister Darerca, had long
before fixed an Episcopal See.

5. In that Island the same Venerable Bishop Colman ended his days in the year
of Grace six hundred seaventy five, as the Annals of Vlster do testify.
Martyrolog. Angl. 13. October.
Though our Martyrologe signifies that he went into Austria, and there
preaching ^he Gospel of Christ was slain by Infidels, about the year of our
Lord seven hundred and five.

6. To honor the Memory of this worthy Bishop, we will here adioyn the
Character given of him by Saint Beda, Bed. l. 3. c. 25.
together with that of the Religious Monks of that age: How great the parsimony
and continence of the Venerable Bishop Colman was, the very place which he
governed will declare: For when they were departed, excepting the Church only,
scarce any other buildings were found, that is, no more then were absolutely
necessary for Civil conversation. They had no money at all, for they contented
themselves with a few cattle. For indeed there was no need neither of money
nor buildings for the reception of great men which often repaired to that
Monastery: for they never came upon any other business but only to pray; or hear
the Word of God preached, The King himself upon occasion would some times come
attended only by five or six servants, and as soon as he had ended his Prayers
in the Church, he would depart: Or if sometimes they took any refection there;
they would desire no more then the daily simple Provisions of the Monks.

7. For the Teachers of that age employed all their solicitude in serving God,
not the world: all their care was to garnish their souls* not their bellies.
And for this cause the Habit of Religion was in those days held in great
veneration: insomuch as whithersoever any Ecclesiastical or Religious person
went, he would be joyfully entertained by every one, as a faithful servant of
God. And whenever such an one was me^t in a journey, the people would
approach to him, and bowing down their heads, would desire him to sign them
with the Cross, or give them his benediction. And they were very attentive to
their good admonitions and exhortations. Upon Sundays likewise and Feasts the
people with great fervor would repair to Churches or Monasteries, not for
refreshing their bodies; but hearing Gods Word. And if any Priest occasionally
came into a village, all the Inhabitanes would gather together, and desire him
to communicate to them the Word of life. For indeed Priests and Clergymen in
those days had no other business to call them out of their Solitude into towns
or Villages, but only to preach, baptize, visit the sick or to do some other
spiritual good to souls. They were then so perfectly free from the infection
of covetousnes, that without some violence and constraint they would not so
much as accept of lands and possessions from men for building Monasteries. And
this devout conversation of Clergymen and Monks continued a good while after
this in the Churches of the Northumbers.

XX. CHAPTER
XX. CHAP.
1.2 etc. A great plague. Death of King Earcombert: and of the Archbishop
Deus-dedit.

4.5. etc. Apostasy of one King of the East Saxons: and piety of the other.

8. Of the Holy Bishop Iarumannus.

9 10. wini the first Simoniacall Bishop in England.

A. D. 664. Westmenast. hic Huntingd. l. 3.
1. THE same year in the Month of May there was a great Eclipse of the Sun, and
a mortality or plague followed it, so raging, as no memory had been of the
like, says Matthew of Westminster. The destruction caused by it in Brittany and
Ireland was so great, that it almost laid wast both those Islands, as
Huntingdon testifies. It began, says S. Beda, Bed. in Epitom.
in the Southern parts of Brittany, which were even depopulated by it: and from
thence it proceeded to the Province of the Northumbers, where it raged in all
quarters, and destroyed a wonderful multitude.

2. Now because he says it began in the Southern parts, and also recounts
several illustrious persons taken away by it: we will follow its course in
our Narration: and beginning with Kent, we there are told of the death both of
the King and Archbishop. The King was Ercombert, Malmib. de Reg. f. 11.
a Prince so devout, that neither the luxury of the Court, nor solicitudes of
the Kingdom could withdraw him from the service of God. And hereby living
secure under the Divine Protection and favor, all things both at home and
abroad succeeded prosperously to him, and he lived in great tranquillity to a
very old age. Thus writes William of Malmsbury. So that it may be a doubt
whether it was of the pestilence or some other disease that he dyed. But
whether that or the Eclipse was Gods Messenger to summon him, we may piously
believe that he was called from an earthly to a heavenly Kingdom.

3. The like we may affirm of the Holy Archbishop of Canterbury, Deus-dedit,
who sat the sixth in that Chair, and after nine years devoutly and zealously
spent in administering that See, received this year the reward of his labors,
and has deserved a place among the Saints in our Martyrologe on the last of
June. Martyrol. Angl. 30. l^^.
A worthy Character of his virtues is afforded us by the Author of his life in
Capgrave. After his death the Sea was vacant for a considerable time, for by
reason of the raging pestilence, care could not be taken to provide a
Successor.

4. From Kent we pass to the East Saxons, governed by two Kings, Signer the
Son of Sigebert surnamed the Little, and Sebb a Prince of great Sanctity, and
Son (not of Edilred, as Harpsfeild affirms, but) of that King Seward, who
shamefully betrayed the Christian Faith, and was slain by the King of the
West Saxons.

5. In this Kingdom the pestilence was more violent and furious, then any
other. And we may judge that Gods design thereby was by kindling the furnace of
this calamity to sever the gold from the dross, and to render the Piety of one
of those Kings more illustrious, by opposing it to the impiety of the other.
For King Sigher upon this Visitation fell back to his former Pagan
Superstition, hoping to obtain from his Idols a remedy against the infection,
whereas nothing but impurity could proceed from them, whose infection was more
mortal then that of the pestilence. Which Apostasy of the King became an
Example to his inconstant Subjects: Yea, says Saint Beda, his Nobles, Bed. l.
3. c. 30.
who loved only this present life, and had no care, or perhaps believed not a
future, began to restore the Idoll-temples formerly demolished, and to adore
their senceles Idols, as if by them they could be defended from the Mortality.
But the violence of the pestilence afterward more increasing taught them that
what they hoped would be a remedy, more inflamed the disease.

6. As for the other King Sebb, his portion of the Kingdom was free from this
Superstition, and his Piety, being more purified by Humility and Resignation to
Gods Visitation, became a pattern to all his Subjects. For, says the same
Author, he was a man very devout to God, Id. l. 4. c. ii.
and fervently intent to Religious Acts, frequent Prayer, and pious exercises
of Charity and Almsgiving. In his own inclination he preferred a private
Monastical life before the riches and pomp of a Kingdom, A. D. 678.
and if the obstinate refusal of his Wife to admit a Separation had not
hindered, he would long before have forsaken his throne to retire into a
Monastery. Hence it was that many were of opinion that a man so qualified was
fitter to be ordained a Bishop, then a King.

Yet he showed himself to be a very good King: and his Kingly solicitude was not
confined to his own portion, but extended it self to the reducing to Christian
Profession Sigher his companion in the Throne. For which purpose he advised
Wulfere King of the Mercians of the danger his Kingdom was fallen into of ruin
from an infection far more horrible then the Pestilence. Whereupon Wulfere, as
became a good Christian Prince, sent thither Iarumannus Bishop of the Mercians,
lately there succeeding to the Holy Bishop Trumhere, by whose endeavors the
Christian Faith was again restored among the backsliding East Saxons.

Id. l. 3. c. 30.
8. Concerning this venerable Bishop Iarumannus, S. Beda thus writes: He was a
Religious good man, very industrious, and passing through all quarters he
preached the Word of Life, and by his labors reduced both King Sigher and his
Subjects to the way of justice, which they had forsaken, insomuch as
relinquishing or demolishing their Idoll-temples and Altars; they joyfully
confessed the Name of Christ formerly renounced by them, and desired much
rather to dye in him with a belief of the Resurrection; then to live in the
filth of Infideity among their Idols* Iarumannus having gloriously finished so
good a work, together with the Priests and Teachers at^ending him returned home
with great joy.

9. The piety of King Sebb rested not here, but out of a care to provide
against the inconstancy of the East-Saoxns, he treated once more with Wulfere
King of the Mercians to send him a Bishop to govern and administer the Sea of
London. There was then residing among the Mercians Wini, who had been Bishop at
Winchester in the Kingdom of the West Saxons, but for some now unknown crime
was driven from his See by K Kenewalch. This man incited by an inordinate
ambition and desire of Rule and wealth, most shamefully with money obtained of
King Wulfere to be recommended to the Bishopric of London; into which he
entered in the year six hundred sixty six, and is marked in our Annalls as the
first Simoniacall Bishop in our Island. Hence William of Malmsbury thus writes:
Malmsbu^. de P^^^. l. 2. c. 241.
Wina having bought the Bishopric of London; quickly ended there the remainder
of his days. He became an ominous and fatal example to posterity, so that it
cannot easily be discerned to whom the greater sin and infamy is to be imputed;
to him who sold, or who bought with money this Sacred Dignity.

10. However certain it is that King Sebb was perfectly exempted from this
stain. His desire was to obtain, and joy to receive a Bishop, Orthodoxe in the
Faith. As for his manners, being a stranger to him, he hoped well and
undoubtedly was wholly un interessed in the infamous bargain which passed
between wulfere and Wini.

XXI. CHAP. XXI. CHAPTER

1.2. The plague among the East Angles: which destroyed many Religious Virgins
in Cher^esey.

1. IN the Eastern parts of Brittany li kewise the pestilence was very feirce.
Bed. l. 4. c. ^.
The dismal effects whereof S. Beda particularly relates, happening in a
Monastery of Religious Virgins. For, says he, Erconwald Son of Anna heretofore
King of that Nation, had formerly built two Monasteries, one for himself, and
the other for his Sister Edilburga. His own Monastery was seated in the
Province of Suderige (or Surrey) near the River Thames, in a place called
Ceorotesey, that is, the Island of Ceorot (the present name is Chertsey.) His
Sisters Monastery was in a place called Berekingham (Barking) in the Province
of the East Saxons, where that Holy Virgin became a Mother and Nurse of many
devout Virgins, showing her self worthy such a Brother, being Zealous to
advance the Spiritual perfection of those under her charge* as several Divine
Miracles did testify.

2. The fury of the pestilence wasting the country about, Ib. c. 7.
invaded likewise this Monastery, as well the part where the Virgins inhabited;
as that of the Monks which attended the Altar. Whereupon the Holy Abbess
consulted with her Religious Subjects concerning a place commodious for the
burial of the dead. But receiving no resolution from them, she purposed to
expect an answer from God. On a certain time therefore after they had ended
their Midnight-devotions, the Virgins going out of the Church to sing at the
graves of the Monks* on a sudden a wonderful Light, like a Sheet, came over
them, wherewith they were so affrighted that they were forced to intermitt
their Psalmody. A little after the said light removed to the Southern part of
the Monastery, which lay westward from their Oratory, and presently was taken
up into heaven, in the sight of them all, insomuch as not any of them doubted
but that the same light which was ^o conduct their Souls to glory; marked also
the place where their bodies were to expect a glorious Resurrection.

3. The names of those Spouses of our Lord which out of this Monastery during
this plague; went to heaven, are written in the Book of life. S. Beda names
only one before the death of S. Edilburga: her name was Eadgida. How she was
called to her eternal reward he thus relates: There was; said he; in the same
Monastery a little boy not above three years old called Esica, Ib. c. 8.
who by reason st his infant-age was bred up and taught by the Religious
Virgins. This child having been struck with the said infection, and ready to
dye, called aloud to one of the said Virgins, A. D. 664
as if she had been present, crying out, Eadgid, Eadgid, Eadgid, and with these
words ended his present life, and entered into life eternal. And the same
Virgin which the child at his death called, on that very day dyed also of the
same disease, and followd him who had called her, to the celestial kingdom.

4. Another likewise of those Handmaids of our Lord being struck with the same
contagion, and drawing to her end, began about midnight to call to those which
attended her, desiring them to putt out the candle standing by. This she often
did, but none obeyed her. At last she said, I know, you think I speak I know
not what: but it is not so: For I assure you I see so wonderful a light in the
room, that the candles light is darkness compared to it. And when after all
this, none answered her, or complied with her desire, she said again, Well let
the candle burn if you please; but know, that is not my Light: For my light
will come at daybreak. After this she told them how a certain Holy man who dyed
the same year had appeared to her, assuring her that the next morning she
should go to everlasting light. And the truth of this Vision was confirmed by
the death of the said Virgin, who expired at the break of day.

XXII. C.
XXII. CHAP.
1.2 etc. The Plague among the Northumbers* the death of S. Cedde: and of Tuda
Bishop of Lindesfarn.

1. THe same horrible infection spread it self Northward likewise, A D. 664.
and there wrought the like destruction, not only among the lay people, but
Religious also: insomuch as many eminent for learning and Sanctity ended their
mortality by it. Among which the most illustrious were Cedd Bishop of London,
who according to his custom visiting his Monastery in the Province of the
Northumbers, was seized upon by that disease: And Tuda Bishop of Lindesfarn.

Bed. l. 3. c. ^
2. Concerning the former Saint Beda thus writes: The Venerable Bishop Cedd
having for the space of many years administered the Bishopric of London in the
Province of the East Saxons, and thereto joined the care likewise of the
Monastery of Lestinghen in the Province of the Northumbers, ^ver which he
appointed Superiors, it happened that coming to visit the said Monastery in this
time of Mortality, the contagion surprising him, he dyed there. At first he was
buried abroad: but not long after a Church of Stone being built in the said
Monastery, and dedicated to the honor of the Blessed Virgin Mother of our
Lord, his Body was removed, and laid at the right hand of the Altar. He
committed the government of his Monastery after his death to his Brother
Ceadda, who was afterward consecrated a Bishop, as we shall shortly declare.

3. When the Monks of another Monastery of his in the Province of the
East Saxons heard that he was dead and buried in the Kingdom of the
Northumbers, Ibid.
about thirty of them went thither, being desirous to live, and, when the
pleasure of God should be, to dye and be buried near the Body of their
Venerable Father. They were willingly received by their Brethren there, and in
a short time they all dyed of the same infection, excepting one young child
only, who, as was constantly believed, was preserved from death by the prayers
of the Holy Bishop. For whereas he lived a long time after, and gave himself to
reading the Holy Scriptures, he found at last that he had not been regenerated
by the Waters of Baptism. Whereupon being presently baptized, he afterward was
promoted to the Order of Preist-hood, and did much good to many in Gods Church.
Therefore I do not doubt, as was said, but that he was detaind from death by
the intercession of his Holy Father, out of love to whom he was come thither,
by whose prayers he thus esca^ped the danger of eternal death, and also by h^^
teaching afforded the ministry of life and Salvation to others.

4. In the same Province of the Northumbers by the same pestilence was snatche^
away also Tuda Bishop of Lindesfarn, who had a little before, upon the
departure of Bishop Colman, Id. ib. c. 26.
been ordained his Successor: For so writes S Beda: Colman, said he, being
return^^ into his Country, the servant of our Lord Tuda received after him the
Bishopric of the Northumbers. He had his instruction among the Southern
Scotts, and by them was ordained Bishop. He received the fashion of the
Ecclesiastical Tonsure according to the Custom of that Province, but he
observed the Catholic Rule of the Paschal Solemnity. He was a good Religious
Bishop: but his government of that Church lasted a very short time. He came out
of Scotland during the life of Colman, and with great diligence both by
preaching and good example he taught every where things belonging to Christian
Faith and Truth. Presently after his consecration, being struck with the
contagion then reigning in that Province, says Huntingdon, Huntingd l. 3
he dyed, and was buried at a place called Womalet. But in S. Beda it is called
Peynalech, who adds, that it was a Monastery.

5. Moreover, Bed. ib.
as S. Beda testifies, when the Scottish Monks living in Lindesfarn departed
thence with their Bishop Colman, those which remaind, received for their
Superior, with the authority of Abbot, the most Reverend gentle and mild man
Eata, who before was Abbot in the Monastery called Mailros* This Translation
was made, as the report is, upon the request of Bishop Colman at his departure
to King Oswi* Because the same Eata was one of the twelve children which Saint
Aidan in the time of his Bishopric, had received from the English Nation, to
instruct them in the Doctrine of Christ. The said request of Bishop Colman was
easily granted by King Oswi, because he loved him very much for his gravity and
prudence. This is the same Eata, who a while after was ordained Bishop of the
same Church of Lindesfarn.

6. Presently after the death of the Venerable Bishop Tuda there followed great
commotions and debates in the Church of the Northumbers, by reason of several
pretenders to the administration of the same Church, as shall shortly be
declared more at large.

XXIII. C.
XXIII. CHAP.
1.2. The Plague in Ireland.

3.4. etc. The Gests of S. Egbert a Saxon Priest: He reduces the Scotts to
Catholic conformity: his death.

1. THere are several other Saints commemorated in our Martyrologe, whose
death is assigned to this year, as the two Royal Martyrs Ethel^ed and
Ethelbert, Sons of Wulfere King of the Mercians* of whom we have already
treated, demonstrating that their Martyrdom could not fall so late. Likewise
two Royal Virgins, S. Mildreda and Saint Milburga, Neices of the same King by
his Brother Merevald, of whom we shall treat more commodiously hereafter.

2. Following therefore the progress of this Pestilence, it will lead us into
Ireland, were we shall find matter proper for our present Subject, and related
by S. Beda, in the manner following. The same killing infection, faith he, Bed.
l. 3. c. 27.
with equal destruction raged in Ireland. Now there were at that time in the
same Island many persons both of noble extraction and meaner state, who in the
times of Finan and Colman Bishops, leaving their native country, retired
thither, some to gain instruction, and others to attend to their Spiritual
Exercises and Mortification. Several of them therefore undertook a Monastical
Profession: and not a few going from Cell to Cell where learned Masters
inhabited, addicted themselves to Reading and Study. All these were freely and
with a good will entertained by the Scotts, who afforded them upon free cost
both daily nourishment, books to read, and instruction likewise.

3. Among these there were two Noble young men of virtuous and towardly
disposition: Their names were Edelhum and Egbert. The former of these was
Brother of Edilhum or Ethelwin* a man of great Sanctity, who likewise the year
following went into Ireland to enrich his mind with learning: and being well
instructed, returned into his Native country, Brittany, where he was ordained
Bishop of Lindisse; or Lindesfare, and worthy governed that Church many years:
( of whom we shall treat more at large hereafter.)

4. The said two young men being in a Monastery; which the Scotts ( or Irish)
call Rathmesige, where all their companions were either taken out of the world
by the infection, or dispersed in other places, they likewise both of them were
struck with the same disease, and greivously affected. And of these two, Egbert
(as a certain grave and sincere Priest, who professed that he heard it from
Egbert himself, assured me) beleiving that he should not escape, went one
morning out of the Infirmary into a retired place, where ^itting alone, he
began seriously to call to mind his former actions, and feeling great
compunction by the memory of his past sins, he bedewd his face with tears, and
from the depth of his soul prayed to Almighty God not to take him out of the
world till he had more perfectly performed Penance for his past negligences
and faults committed in his child hood and youth, and till he had more
plentifully exercised himself in good works. He made a Vow likewise that he
would live all his days a stranger, and never return into Brittany where he was
born: likewise that besides the Solemn Canonical Office, he would every day
recite the whole Psalter in memory of the Divine praises, and also every week
pass one whole day and night in fasting, except he should be hindered by some
bodily infirmity.

5. Having concluded his weeping, prayer and Vows, he returned to his Cell,
where finding his companion asleep, he likewise laid himself on his bed, and
falling into a slumber, he was presently awaked by his companion, who looking
earnestly upon him, said, O Brother Egbert* what have you done? I hoped we
should both together have gone to heaven: But know* that the things thou so
earnestly prayed for, are granted thee. For he had learnt by a Vision both the
subject of Egberts prayers, and that God would perform his desires. In a word,
the following night Edelhum died.

6. But Egbert in a short time shaking off the pains of his disease, recovered*
and lived many years after. He received the degree and Order of Preisthood,
which he adorned by many good actions suitable to that Profession, and
according to his desire being full of virtue and piety, he a little while
since, to wit, in the year of our Lords Incarnation seven hundred twenty
nine, being fourscore and ten years old, went to everlasting joys.

7. He lead a life with all perfection of Humility, meeknes, continence,
simplicity and justice: Insomuch as both by the example of his life* by his
assiduity in teaching, zeal in correcting, and liberality in giving what he
had received from rich men, he was very beneficial both to his own
countrymen, and also to the Scotts and Picts among whom he lived.

8. He added likewise to his forementioned Vows, this, Of never tasting any
thing in Lent but once a day, and then also only bread, and a small measure of
thin milk. Which milk his custom was to putt the day before in a glass, and
when the night was past, to take off the cream, and drink the rest with a small
portion of Bread. The like measure of abstinence he was w^nt likewise to
observe forty days before our Lords Nativity, and as many after Pentecost.

9. This is that S. Egbert who was the first and chief mover of the glorious
design of twelve Apostolical English Priests to convert certain German Nations
our Primitive Ancestors to the Christian Faith, which they undertook, and in a
great measure performed. These were S. Su^bert, S. Willebrord, S. Boniface and
the rest of their illustrious companions. See l.
S. Egbert was desirous to have joined in their labors and dangers, but was
miraculously forbidden and hindered, as we shall show more at large when we come
to the season of that Mission. For Almighty God designed him for another
employment, which was the reducing of the Scottish Monks and Clergy to a
conformity with the Catholic Church in the Celebration of Easter, in
Canonical Tonsure and other Rites. How this was effected, S. Beda thus
relates: Bed l. 5. c. 2*
10. Not long after, says he, those Monks also which inhabited the Island of
Hy, of the Scottish nation, together with all the Monasteries subject to them,
were by Gods Providence brought to the Catholic Observance of Easter and
Canonical Tonsure. For in the year after our Lords Incarnation seven hundred
and sixteen, in which after that Osred King of the Northumbers was slain,
Coe^red governed there, there came to them out of Ireland the holy and
Venerable Priest Egbert (of whom we spoke before) and was with great reverence
and joy received by them. He being a very winning Teacher, and moreover one who
devoutly practiced what he taught, was willingly hearkened to by them all, and
by his diligent and pious exhortations changed the inveterate Tradition of
their Ancestors: to whom we may apply that saying of the Apostle, That they
had a zeal of God, but not according to knowledge: and taught them to
celebrate the Prime Christian Solemnity, and to receive the Canonical Tonsure
after the Catholic and Apostolic manner. And herein we may admire the
merciful dispensation of Divine Providence, that the same Nation which
formerly had with great willingness communicated to our Ancestors the Light of
Divine knowledge, should afterward by our English Nation be brought to a
perfect form of living, in things whereof they were formerly ignorant. As on
the other side, the Britains, who refused to communicate to the English the
knowledge of the Christian Faith, now that the same English were perfectly
instructed in the Rule of Christianity, yet they remaind in their inveterate
Errors, and celebrated Christian Solemnities and Rites in a manner different
and opposite to the Universal Church.

11. Now the said Monks of Hy by the teaching of Egbert received the Catholic
Rites when Dunchad ( the tenth from S. Columba) was Abbot of that Monastery,
and about fourscore years after they had sent Aidan to preach the Gospel to
the English Nation. The man of God Egbert remaind thirteen years in the said
Island, which he had consecrated as it were anew to our Lord, by bringing among
them the Spirit of Christian communion and peace.

12. At length in the year of our Lords Incarnation seven hundred twenty nine,
in which the Paschall Solemnity fell on the eighth before the Calend^ of May,
Id. ib.
when he had solemnly celebrated Mass in Memory of the said Resurrection of
our Lord, the same day he likewise went to heaven, and there in the Society of
our Lord and his Apostles finished the joy of that highest Festivity, which he
had begun on earth with his Brethren whom he had converted to Unity: Yea now he
never ceases to celebrate it without end.

13. And truly it was a wonderful dispensation of the Divine Providence, that
this Venerable man not only passed out of this world to the Eternal Father upon
the Paschal Feast, but when that Feast was celebrated aright on such a day, as
it never had been before in those places. This was great joy to the Monks that
they were arrived to the certain Catholic time of that Feast, and that they
were assured to enjoy the Protection of the same Venerable Father by whom they
were rectified. And it was a joy to him that he was preserved alive till he
might see his Disciples solemnise that day together with him, which formerly
they had always avoided. Thus being assured of their amendment, the most
Reverend Father exulted to see that day of our Lord: he saw it, and was glad.
Thus happily he dyed, and both in the Roman and other Martyrologes his name is
recited among the Saint on the four and twentieth of April. Martyrolog. Angl.
14. April.




THE SEAVETEENTH BOOK OF THE CHVRCH-HISTORY OF BRITTANY.
I. CHAP.
I. CHAPTER.
1.2. etc. Pope Vitalians Letter to King Oswi, concerning the election of an
Archbishop of Canterbury in the place of Wigard who dyed at Rome.

1. BY reason of the distractions caused by the late raging Pestilence; A. D.
665.
the two principal Sees of Brittany were some years vacant: But in the year of
Grace six hundred sixty five by the care of two pious Kings, Oswi King of the
Northumbers and Egbert King of Kent, order was taken for supplying them. Thus
writes Saint Beda, King Oswi, Bed. l. 3. c. ^9.
says he, though he had received his education and instruction from the
Scotts, yet now came to understand of a truth that the Roman was the Catholic
Apostolic Church, therefore joining in counsel with Egbert King of Kent, they
with the election and consent of the English Clergy sent to Rome to be ordained
Archbishop of Canterbury a certain virtuous Priest and fittly qualified for
that dignity, named Wigard, one of the Clergy of the late Archbishop
Deus-dedit: to the intent that he being invested with Archiepiscopall authority
might ordain Catholic Bishops over all the Churches in Brittany.

2. Moreover in token of their respect to the Sea Apostolic, together with
Wigard they sent Letters and presents to Pope Vital^an who then sat in S.
Peter's Chair, Id. l. 4.1.
with vessels of gold and silver in no small number, says the same Author.

3. Wigard being arrived at Rome, and having acquainted the foresaid Pope with
the cause of his journey, Id. ib.
presently after both himself, and almost all those of his attendance were
swepd away by a pestilence which suddenly seized on them.

4. Pope Vitaliam by his Letters to King Oswi, A. D. 666.
dated the year following, and which are extant in S. Beda, Id. ib.
gave him an account of these things: In which Letters he first congratulates
the Kings Orthodoxe faith, and zeal for propagating the same Faith among his
subjects: Exhorting him earnestly in all things to follow the pious Rule and
Tradition of S. Peter and S. Paul who were the two great Lights of the
Universal Church: Particularly he instructs him how the Catholic way of
observing the Paschall Solemnity came from their teaching and practice.

5. Consequently he informs him how he could not so soon find a man in all
points adorned with such qualities as they required in a Prelate, considering
that the great distance of their country deterred men from accepting the
Episcopal charge there. But as soon as a fit person could be found he would
not fail to direct him thither to pluck up all the tares which the Enemy had
sown in their Churches. A. D. 666


6. Then he adioyns his grateful acknowledgment for the Gifts which he had
sent in honor to the Blessed Prince of the Apostles, assuring him that both
himself and his whole Clergy would daily pray to Almighty God for his health.
But as for the designed Archbishop Wigard, who brought those gifts, he with
great grief recounts his sudden taking out of the world, whom he buried
honorably in the Church dignified with the Sacred Bodies of the Prime
Apostles.

7. He further tells him that he had delivered to the present Messengers, as
tokens of his Fatherly respect, certain Relics of the Blessed Apostles S.
Peter and S. Paul, and of the Holy Martyrs Saint Laurence, S. John and Paul,
Saint Gregory and Saint Pancratius: which they were commanded to present to
him. Adding withal that he had sent a Cross in which was a golden key
containing of the filings of the chains of the same Prime Apostles, which were
to be presented to the Queen his spiritual daughter, the fame of whose piety
caused great joy in the whole Roman Church.

8. Then he concludes his letter with exhortations to proceed in his zeal of
reducing the whole Island to an uniformity of Catholic Faith and Practice:
which he doubted not but would be effected; if to his diligence he would add
his Prayers to our Lord to give a success to his endeavors: Withal assuring
him that his own continual Prayers should not be wanting for Gods assistance
in all pious works in this life, and an eternal kingdom with Christ in the
world to come.

9. The Queen here generally mentioned, though not named, was Eanfleda the
daughter of S. Edwin King of the Northumbers and Ethelburga, daughter of
Ethelbert the first Christian King of Kent. She was the first who received
Baptism in that Kingdom, by the Ministry of S. Paulinus: and after her Fathers
death was forced to retire with her Mother into Kent* but at last was sent back
to become the Wife of this King Oswi.

10. It may seem strange, why this letter concerning the Election of an
Archbishop of Canterbury should be addressed to Oswi King of the Northumbers,
without any mention of Egbert King of Kent. But the difficulty will cease if we
consider, that though in Brittany there was a Heptarchy of Kings, yet among
them one for the most part had a general superintendence over the rest, being
in a sort the Monark of the whole Island, so that without his advice and
concurrence no matters of moment or general concern might pass, such as was
the constituting an Archbishop with authority to ordain Bishops in other
Provinces and regulate their actions. Now such a Monark at this time was Oswi
King of the Northumbers, the most potent of all the Saxon Princes.

11. Almost three years passed before an Archbishop was sent in the place of
Wigard, who dyed at Rome. Therefore it will be convenient to intermitt awhile
the prosecution of this subject, that we may insert other Ecclesiastical
affairs regarding the Saxon Churches in Brittany which intervened.

II. CHAP. II. CHAP.

1.2.3. Saint Wilfrid constituted Bishop of York by King Alcfrid. And Saint
Ceadda, by King Oswi.

1. KING Oswi, whose care we have seen in providing for the Widowed State of
the Sea of Canterbury, was not wanting at the same time in supplying the
Vacancy of the Churches of the Northumbers by the death of Tuda last Bishop of
Lindesfarn. Now the Kingdom of the Northumbers consisting of two Provinces, one
more Northerly, called the Province of the Bernicians containing all beyond the
River Tine to the Frith of Edinborough: and the other the Province of York and
Lancaster, called the Province of the Deiri: The Former was governed immediately
by King Oswi himself: and the Latter by his Son Alcfrid subordinatly to him.

2. King Alcfrid being likewise solicitous for a Spiritual Pastor to govern
his Churches, sent his friend and Instructour S. Wilfrid into France to
Agilbert, who, as has been said, was lately departed out of Brittany into his
Native country France, where presently after his coming, upon the death of
Importunus Bishop of Paris, he was substituted Bishop of the same See.
Martyr^log. Gallican. 1. October.
To whom, as to the most resplendent Starr of all France, when Saint Wilfrid
newly elected Bishop of York came out of England to receive Episcopal
Consecration, he was by him solemnly ordained, eleaven other Bishops assisting.
These are the words of the French Martyrologe. Huntin. f. 333
Huntingdon adds, That S. Wilfrid was consecrated in the village called
Compendium (or Compiegne)

3. Whilst these matters were transacting in France, King Oswi, either
prevented by the suggestions of those whom S. Wilfrid had maisterd in the late
disputation, or impatient at his delay in France, without expecting longer sent
the Holy Abbot Ceadda into the Western Province to be consecrated Bishop of
York by Wina, who as yet did not administer the Sea of London. Thus the Church
of York had two Bishops at the same time: and moreover Ceadda administered the
Vacant See of Lindesfarn. Which Controversy between two Bishops, both of them
eminent for Sanctity, how it was managed between them, and how upon occasion
thereof great benefit accrewd to other nations by enlarging the Churches
bounds, shall be showed hereafter in the proper Season.

III. CHA.
III. CHAP.
1.2. etc. The Martyrdom of Saint Clarus a Hermit: and of his Companion Saint
Cyri^us.

1. OUR English Martyrologe refers to the year of Grace six hundred sixty six
the Martyrdom of an English Hermit called Saint Clare: A. D. 666.
Whose Gests are more expressly and largely related in the Gallican
Martyrologe, where on the fourth day of November the following Narration is
inserted: 2. This day is celebrated the Memory of Saint Clare an Ermit and
Martyr, Mrtyrolog. G^ll. 4. November.
by birth an Englishman of a very Noble descent, and illustrious for his
outward comelines, and inward natural endowments, but principally for his
singular piety and rare Chastity. Being come to years of maturity, he was by
his parents affianced to a Noble and beautiful Virgin: But when the time
wherein the Marriage was to be solemnised approached, the devout young man out of
a desire to preserve his Virginal purity, privily withdrew himself from his
parents house, and out of Brittany passed over to Neustria in France, and
arrived at a town called Cherbourg (Casaris-burgum.)

3. There he retired himself to a certain Wood confining to that place, where
assuming to himself two others who were desirous to imitate his pious
conversation, he began to serve our Lord in all purity of body and mind, being
wholly abstracted from secular cares and attending entirely to celestial. But
by the Devils envy he was exposed to many persecutions, so that unable to
abide there longer, he repaired to a Holy man called Odobert Abbot of a
Monastery called Madvin, by whom he was kindly entertaind, and from him learnt
and practiced a more strict Rule of Monastical Discipline.

4. But when the fame of his eminent Virtue: occasioned a concourse of great
multitudes of both sexes to the said Monastery; He fearing lest by his frequent
conversing with such throngs of visitants his Chastity or Humility, which he
earnestly desired to preserve, might be endangered, he obtaind premission from
Odobert to retire to another Monastery, seated near the River Epta. And there
being exempted from all other care, he entirely addicted himself to the
Spiritual employments of Prayer and Preaching (for by the incitement of
Odobert he had submitted himself to receive Holy Orders.) By which exercises of
Piety the shining beams of his Sanctity were spread abroad, to the admiration
of all.

5. The Enemy of man's Salvation could no longer support the brightness of Divine
Graces shining in this Saint: to obscure which he inflamed with lust the mind
of a certain Noble Woman dwelling near, who impudently attempted to expugne the
Chastity of the Servant of God. But Saint Clare resolutly resisted the shameless
Lady: notwithstanding which resistance, when her solicitations still more
increased, he was forced for his own quietness and liberty, ^o forsake the
Monastery.

6. The lascivious Woman desperately enraged with his departure, sent two
Murderers in search of him, who at last found him in a poor cottage where he
had fixed his habitation with one only companion named Cyrinus. There they
first set upon him with many opprobrious speeches, and at last drawing out
their swords, they most cruelly cut off his head, whilst he devoutly kneeling
offered his Sacrifice of Chastity to our Lord, the lover of pure minds and
Patron of innocence.

7. This glorious Champion of Chastity being thus Victorious by patience,
presently after arose, and with his hands taking up his head, by the assistance
of Angels carried it to a fountain not far distant, into which he cast it: and
then carried the same back to the Oratory of his Cell, and going on a little
further toward a Village seated near the River Epta, which since took a new
name from this glorious Martyr, he there consummated his course, and
transmitted his blessed Soul to Heaven.



8. Much to the same effect is the Narration of this holy Saints Martyrdom
extant in Capgrave: Where concerning his Companion Cyrinus we read, That he
being first dangerously wounded, Ap. Capgrav in ^. Claro.
was by the prayers of Saint Clarus wonderfully restored to health. And hence
it follows in the fore said Martyrologe in this manner: 9. Saint Cyrinus
(miraculously recovered) took care of the Holy Martyrs burial: Who also
afterward in a conflict for piety consecrated his own name likewise to
Martyrdom: whose memory is there celebrated on the thirteenth of June.
Martyrolog. Gall. 13. Iun
Moreover the Sacred Head of Saint Clarus is with due Veneration conserved in a
Village in the territory of Paris called by his name, whither it was afterward
translated. And at Paris it self in the ancient Monastery consecrated to Saint
Victor the Martyr his commemoration is anniversarily repeated: For thither the
most Chaste Martyr (like the Patriark Saint Joseph) is said to have fled from
the face of the foresaid unchaste Lady. And a fit place it was for his
retirement, being in those days divided from the noise and tumult of that
City.



10. The distinct place where this Holy Martyr suffered, is there said to be in
the Territory about Ro^^en in Normandy (in tractu Vulcassino) near the River
Seyne; where in the Primitive times another S. Clarus a Priest and Martyr is
recorded to have suffered: A. D. 668.
Who immediately after the Apostles times being sent from Rome to preach the
Gospel, illustrated a good part of Celtick Gaul first with his Doctrine, and
after with his Blood. The day of his Passion is said to have been the fourth of
November: as that of our present Martyr, the fifteenth before the Calends of
August. Mart. Angl. 18 Iul.


IV. CHAPTER
IV. CHAP.
1.2. etc. The Martyrdom of two Kentish Princes, Ethelred and Ethelbert.

6, 7. their murder miraculously discovered

8.9. etc. Satisfaction made for it by King Egbert.

A. D. 668.
1. A Little before the arrival of a New Archbishop of Canterbury from Rome,
two young innocent Princes, Ethelred and Ethelbert, in the Kingdom of Kent were
crowned with Martyrdom; For that Name was given to the violent death by which
they were taken out of this world without any demerits of their own, inasmuch
as God was pleased miraculously to testify their innocence.

2. We have before declared that Eadbald King of Kent had by his Queen Emma two
sons, Ermenred the elder, and his Brother Ercombert. Ermenred dying before his
Father and leaving behind him two infants, Ethelred and Ethelbert (of whose
Martyrdom we now treat) not they, but their Uncle Ercombert succeeded in the
Throne. Notwithstanding these two young Princes were bred as became their
birth: and were yet more enriched with Divine Graces then secular ornaments:
Westm^n^st A. D. 7^4.
For says Matthew of Westminster, after their Regeneration by Baptism, they
remaining in their innocence and voluntary neglect of worldly advantages,
fortified their other virtues by the safeguard of Humility.

Malm^sbur. de^eg ^a^s. 11. Id. de Font. l. 4. f. 291.
3. King Ercombert at his death recommended them to the care of his Son and
Successor King Egbert, who being a Prince of great benignity treated them with
all Kindness and affection, not having any jealousy or prejudice against them,
though their Title to the Kingdom in reason and justice ought to have taken
place of his who was their Uncle, since they were children to the Elder Brother.

4. But his kindness to them did not last long: For by the ordinary fate of
Courts, certain Sycophants suggested to him that by cherishing them he fomented
his own danger. Among these the principal Counselor of mischief was one
called Thunr^ chie^ Minister of state in that Kingdom, who in a seeming care of
King Egberts safety advised him to take out of the way these two Princes, now
of an age fit for government, whose virtues and excellent endowments had fixed
them in the affections of the people, so that it was justly to be feared that
either they would challenge their right, or the people voluntarily give them it.

5. These Suggestions at first were unwillingly heard by King Egbert, who
forbad him to continue them. But Thunre (called by others Thimur) pretending
duty and a zealous care of the Kings Safety, again renewed them more earnestly
and eloquently then before, till in the end the King made no reply, but by
silence seemed to consent to his proposal. Hereupon Thunre, promising to
himself at least impunity, inhumanly murdered these two innocent Princes. It was
easy for him to execute this crime, by reason of his familiarity and privacy
with them: for in his outward profession and behavior he always expressed a
great tenderness and affection to them, in so much as they not suspecting any
treachery at all from him, afforded him all advantages against themselves, so
that with drawing them into a solitary place, amidst his caresses and
embracings of them he stabbed them with his poniard.

6. Having thus murdered them, as the report is, he buried their bodies in a
deep trench which he dug under the Seat where the King was wont to sit,
supposing that none would seek for them there. But the Eye of Divine Providence
from whom the secrets even of hearts are not concealed, quickly discovered
them, and by many Miracles testified their innocence. For the next time that
the King was sitting there, a flame issuing out of the Seat scorched and
extrely terrified him. Whereupon his servants digging the ground under it,
where they perceived the rubbish newly laid, discovered the bodies, and
afterward a Church was built in the same place to honor their Martyrdom.

7. Hereupon King Egbert, Westmonast. A. D. 654.
says Matthew of Westminster, inwardly considering what had passed, imputed the
whole crime to himself alone, and being wonderfully confounded in his mind,
spent the whole night following in tears. As Soon as the morning light appeard,
he commanded an Assembly to be convoked of the newly arrived Archbishop
Adeodatus (or Theodorus) and his Nobles, and to them he freely related all
former passages touching that business, and likewise how the night before a
pillar of fire from heaven descended on the Bedies of those Holy Princes. The
Archbishop hereupon gave his advice that the Bodies should be carried to the
Metropolitan Church, and there buried after a Royal manner. Thence proceeding
therefore to the place, they found the Sacred Relics undecently laid under
the Kings Chair. These things befell in a village belonging to the King, called
Eastrey. Wherefore taking up the B^a^es and honorably putting them in coffins,
the Archbishop commanded to carry them to Christ-Church in Canterbury. But in
vain they attempted this, for with all the force they ^ula use, they could not
remove them out of the place. Whereupon changing his purpose, he advised to
transport them to the Church of Saint Augustine: but with as little success as
before. At last it was agreed that they should be carried to the Monastery of
Wering (or ^akering) of great renoun in those days: Which being resolved upon,
the Sacred Bodies were as easily removed, as if they had no weight at all.
Being arrived therefore at that place, the Exequies were solemnly performed by
the Archbishop, after which the Saints bodies were honorably buried near to
the great Altar: Where many wonderful Miracles are daily wrought to the glory
of God and honor of his Saints. The fame of which Miracles increasing, a
certain Count of the East Angles, named Egelwin, caused them to be translated
to Ramsey, in the time of King Edgar, as shall in due place be declared.

8 After this, King Egbert by the advice of the Archbishop Theodorus and the
holy Abbot Adrian* endeavored to redeem his former note of impiety by liberal
Alms and many Religious Works. Among which one memorable Monument of his Piety
was the erecting a Monastery in the Isle of Thanet, at a place called Menstrey
(or Minster.) This is testified by Thorn an ancient writer, Chron. Thorn. c^l.
1906.
who says, The said Archbishop and Abbot sharply reproved King Egbert for his
fault, and persuaded him to send for Domneva, Princess of the Mercians, and
Sister to the two murdered Princes and Holy Martyrs of our Lord, and to make
some satisfaction to her for the loss of her Brethren. She therefore being
come, received in the Isle of Thanet as much ground as a hind, nourished by
her, at one course encompassed by running, which contained forty eight
ploughes. There Domnevae with the Kings assistance built a Monastery of
Virgins, and sent for her daughter Milreda by Merwald Prince of the Mercians,
from the Monastery of Chelles (Cala) in France near Paris, who being arrived
was consecrated Abbess of the said Monastery by the Holy Archbishop Theodore.

9. Of this Lady Domneva we have already spoken: she is called by several
names in our ancient Monuments; Speed styles her likewise by the Name of
Edburga, and Harpsfeild of Ermenburga. As for her daughter Milreda, she was not
the first Abbess of Minster in Thanet, but succeeded to a Holy Virgin named
Sabba, to whom the government of the said Monastery was first committed.

10. Such satisfaction the penitent King made for a crime the guilt whereof was
chiefly to be imputed to his impious Minister Thunre: who though by the Kings
taking upon himself the whole sin, he was not made a due Sacrifice to human
justice, yet he escaped not the Divine vengeance: For as William of Malmsbury
writes, Malmsbur. de Pontif. l. 4.
When the said Thunere according to his usual impudence with scornful and
depraved words misinterpreted the Kings piety in building the said Monastery,
he was swallowed up into the ground which opened wide under his feet, and so
descended quick into Hell.

11. There is yet extant a Charter granted by King Edward the Confessor to the
said Monastery, in which several of these particulars are recorded, for
therein we read this passage: Ap. Reyner. in Apostolat. s. 58.
I likewise who am descended from the stock of the same King Edelbert, and by
the Divine Grace enjoy his Kingdom, do in like manner grant the Isle of
Thanet, which King Egbert gave for an hereditary possession to the Venerable
Queen Domneva the Mother of Saint Mildreda, as much thereof as a Hind in her
course encompassed, in satisfaction for the murder of her two Brethren Ethelred
and Ethelbert, who by command of the said King were uniustly slain by the
accursed Thimur, whom presently after, the Divine vengeance pursued in a
terrible manner by a sudden death.

V. CHAP. V. CHA.

1.2. etc. S. Theodore a Grecian sent Archbishop of Canterbury into Brittany:
with Adrian an Abbot.

1. THE forementioned murder of the two innocent Princes happened the same year
that the new consecrated Archbishop Theodore arrived in Brittany: Concerning
the manner of whose Election we will now treat.

2. The Sea of Canterbury had been now vacant four years, since the death of
the Archbishop Deus-dedit: For Wigard who had been elected to succeed him, and
sent to Rome to receive consecration from Pope Vitalian, dyed there of the
plague before that could be effected. After whose death the Pope, as he
informed King Oswi by letters, undertook to provide that See and Church of a
worthy Prelat.

3. For which purpose after much consultation with his friends, Bed. l. 4 c. 1.
says S. Beda, he at last resolved to make choice of a certain Abbot named
Adrian, residing in a Monastery called Nirida, not far from Naples in Campania,
who was by birth an African, eminently imbued in Sacred Learning, as likewise
in Monastical and Ecclesiastical Instituts, and perfectly skilled in the
Greek and Latin tongues. Him therefore he sent for, and enjoined him to accept
of Episcopal Ordination, and to repair into Brittany. But the humble Abbot
answered, that he was unworthy of so high a degree, yet withal told him, that
he could recommend another both for learning and age much better qualified for
so sublime a charge then himself. Therefore presenting to him a certain Monk
named Andrew, who was Spiritual Father in a Monastery of Religious Virgins
near adjoining, after examination he was acknowledged by all worthy of that
Bishopric. Notwithstanding by reason of his corporal infirmity he obtaind to
be excused. Once more therefore the Abbot Adrian was urged to accept of that
degree: who humbly begged a short respit, to the end he might try whether he
could find any one more proper for that employment.

4. Now there was at the same time in Rome a Monk well known to Adrian, named
Theodore, born in Tarsus of Cicilia, a man instructed both in secular and
Divine litterature, and skillful in Greek and Latin, withal very pious in
conversation and venerable for his age, for he was sixty six years old. Him the
Abbot Adrian offered to the Pope to be ordaind Bishop: and obtaind his desire,
but upon this condition, that he should be his conducter into Brittany, in
as much as upon several occasions having made already two iourneys into France,
he had both better knowledge of the way, and of men's dispositions in those
parts. Another more weighty Motive likewise there was inducing the Pope to
oblige the said Abbot to attend Bishop Theodore, which was, that he might
assist him in preaching Christian Doctrine, and also be watchful that he
should not introduce into the Church of Brittany any Greekish customs or
Opinions swerving from the Truth.

5. And from the same consideration, when Theodore was to be ordained
Subdeacon, he was obliged to expect four months till his hair was grown out,
to the end he might be shaved after the Roman manner: For formerly he had
received the Eastern fashion of Tonsure, called the Tonsure of S. Paul.

61 Thus we see how our Saxon Churches in Brittany received Teachers and
Instructors, as well in Faith and Discipline both Ecclesiastical and
Monastical, the one from Asia, and the other from Africa, both which agreed in
Faith with the Roman Church, and conformed to her customs. The progress of
their journey to Brittany, we will next declare,

VI. CHA.
VI. CHAP.
1.2. andC. S. Theodores journey from Rome into Brittany: His Companions
Benedict Biscop, and Adrian.

A. D. 668. Bed l. 4. c. 1.
1. THeodore, says S. Beda, was ordained Bishop by Pope Vitalian in the year
of our Lords Incarnation six hundred sixty eight, on the seventh day before
the Calends of April, being a Sunday: and so attended by Adrian was sent into
Brittany on the sixth before the Calends of June. They went together by Sea to
Marseilles, and from thence by land to Arles, where they presented to the
Arch-B. of that City, named John, commendatory Letters Written by Pope
Vitalian: And were detained by him till Ebroin Maire of the Kings house granted
them leave to go whither they pleased. Which permission being ^^^eived,
Theodore went to Agilbert Bishop of Paris, of whom we spoke before, and was
with great kindness entertaind by him a good space: But Adrian went to Emmesenon
and afterward to Faro Bishops of Meaux, where he likewise soiourned with them
a good while. For the approaching Winter compelled them to repose quietly
wheresoever they found convenience.

2. Another companion of their journey was Benedict Biscop, who fifteen years
before went out of Kent to Rome together with Saint Wilfrid: and from thence
repaired to the Isle of Lerin, where he associated himself to a Congregation of
Monks living there, among whom he received the Tonsure, and abode with them two
years in Regular Observance. Afterward he returned into Kent, and was
constituted Abbot of the Monastery of Saint Augustine by King Egbert. From
thence he returned again to the Monuments of the Apostles in Rome, Malmsbur. d^
Pontif. l. 4.
says William of Malmsbury, at the time when Pope Vitalian sent Theodore
Archbishop of Canterbury into Brittany: in whose company he also returned,
carrying back with him many Relics of Saints.

3. In the French Martyrologe we read that it was by Pope Vitalians order that
Theodore in his passing visited Saint Agilbert Bishop of Paris, Martyrolog.
Gall. 11. October.
with whom he consulted concerning the English affairs well known to that
Bishop. From him he received many good admonitions and advices, together with
his Nephew Eleutherius for his assistant, who was afterward Bishop of London.
And by their labors the whole Island was at last made subject to our Lord.

4. But the Author was herein mistaken, when he says that Eleutherius Nephew
to Saint Agilbert was Bishop of London: For it was the Sea of Winchester, a
long time void by the deposition of the impious Bishop Wina, that he now
received, and to which his Uncle refused to return, though earnestly invited
thither by Kenewalch King of the West Saxons. Malmsbur. de Pontif. l. c. 241.
For thus writes William of Malmsbury, Angilbert having been earnestly
entreated by Messengers from the King to return, excused himself, for that he
was now chaind to reside at Paris, the government of which Church was committed
to him. Notwithstanding because he would at least in some measure comply with
the Kings expectation, he sent thither his Nephew Leutherius who was received
with great affection by the people of that Diocese of Winchester, and
consecrated Bishop thereof by the Archbishop Theodore: Which Church of the
West Saxons he governed seven years.

6. A. D. 669 Bed. l. 4. c. ^
But to return to Saint Beda's narration touching the progress and arrival
into Brittany of the New Archbishop Theodore. When certain News (says he)
came to King Egbert that the Archbishop whom they had demanded from Pope
Vitalian, was come into France, A. D. 669,
he sent presently thither Redfrid his Principal Servant to conduct him: Who
by permission of Ebroin Maire of the Kings house brought him to the Haven
called Quentawic^^ where the Bishop infirm and weary with his journey, was
compelled to make some stay. But as soon as he began to recover a little
strength, he sailed thence into Brittany.

7. As for the Archbishops companion, the Abbot Adrian, he was detained in
France by Ebroin, who suspected that he had some commission from the Emperor
to the Kings of Brittany, to treat of matters which might be prejudicial to
the Kingdom of France, the affairs whereof he managed. But when he became
satisfied that his suspicion was groundless, he dismissed him and suffered him
to follow the Archbishop. And immediately after his arrival Theodore gave him
the government of the Monastery of S. Peter's in Canterbury, where the
Archbishops were usually buried: For at his departure from Rome the Pope had
enioynd him to provide for the said Abbot some convenient residence in his
Diocese, where Adrian, with his Monks attending him, might commodiously abide.

8. It was a little before the coming of the Archbishop that the forecited
Martyrdom of the two innocent Princes, Ethelred and Ethelbert, happened, either
by the command, or, at least, connivence of King Egbert: which was a great
stain to his memory, though otherwise a just and pious King. But how he
endeavored by persuasion of the Archbishop to redeem this fault by serious
compunction and signal works of charity, we have already declared.

VII. CHA.
VII. CHAP.
1.2. etc. S. Theodore's care of Religion, and learning in Brittany.

A. D. 669. ^ed. l. 4. c ^2.
1. THE Holy Archbishop Theodore presently after his arrival, says S. Beda,
made a progress through the whole Island, and was gladly received and
obediently submitted to by the inhabitants every where: among whom he spread
abroad holy Instructions of Christian living, as likewise the Canonical rite
of celebrating Easter: In all which labor he was accompanied and assisted by
the Abbot Adrian. He was likewise the first Archbishop to whom the whole
English Nation voluntarily submitted. And in as much as both himself and the
said Abbot were perfectly skillful both in Divine and Secular litterature, they
gathered a numerous Congregation of Disciples, into whose minds they instilled
the waters of saving knowledge. Yea moreover they mingled with the Instructions
of Christian Doctrine out of Holy Scriptures other Documents likewise of Poetry,
Astronomy and Ecclesiastical Computation. In proof whereof there remained
alive to these times several of then Disciples, who understood the Latin and
Greek Tongues as perfectly as their Native language. Thus writes S. Beda.

2. And forasmuch as concerns the Greek tongue, Godwin in Catalog. in Theodor^.
the said Archbishop ( says B. Godwin) erected a School for the teaching of
it in a village which from thence was called Greeklade (but now corruptly,
Cricklade:) The teachers whereof afterward repairing to Oxford, about twenty
miles distant from thence, are supposed to have thereby laid the foundations
of that most famous University. Notwithstanding Brian Twine the Antiquary of
the said University will not allow this to have been the prime Original
thereof but earnestly contends that it was a long time before in the times of
the Britains founded by certain Grecian Doctors.

3. The said B. Godwin adds, Id^m ibid.
that the Archbishop and Abbott brought with them from Rome a plentiful store
of most choice Books, both Greek and Latin, and among the rest a Homer so
accuratly written in such beautiful letters, that it is scarce credible that
at this day there should be extant any one Copy even among the most exquisite
Prints, either more fair or more perfectly correct then it.

4. So great indeed was the benefitt which this Nation received from the
diligence, zeal and liberality of these two eminent persons, Bed l. 4. c. 2.
that Saint Beda with just reason affirmed, That there had never been more
happy times since the Saxons and English first entered this Island: Such
valiant, and withal Christianly pious Kings governed here, that they were a
terror to all barbarous Nations. Likewise generally their Subjects desires
were carried to heavenly and eternal joys, at this time more effectually
preached unto them then any time before: And whosoever were willing to be
instructed in Sacred learning, had Masters ready the teach them. Moreover they
begun now through all to Churches of the English to learn the Roman manner of
singing in the Church, which before was only practiced in Kent. And the first
Master of Ecclesiastical Music in the Kingdom of the Northumbers, except
Jacob heretofore mentioned, was Eddi, surnamed Steven, who was invited thither
out of Kent by the most Venerable Prelat Wilfrid, who was the first Bishop of
the English Nation which taught the Saxon Churches the Catholic manner of
living.

VIII. CHAPTER
VIII. CHAP.
1.2. Saint Theodore visites all Provinces.

3.4. etc. He ends the Controversy about the Bishopric of York between S.
Wilfrid and Saint Ceadda, to the advantage of S. Wilfrid.

6. etc. S. Ceadda made Bishop of the Mercians, at Lichfeild.

1. WHereas S. Beda, as has been declared, testifies, A. D. 669.
that the Holy Archbishop Theodore made a progress through all the Provinces
of Brittany to reform abuses, determine Controversies, and settle Order and
Uniformity every where, in as much as an Universal Jurisdiction was committed
to him by the Pope. We will here mention some particular Gests of his
especially recorded in our ancient Monuments.

2. In the first place then, says S. Beda, the Archbishop Theodore coming to
the City of Rhofi (Rochester, Bed. l. 4. c. 2.
) which See since the death of the Bishop Damian, remaind Vacant, he there
ordaind a man more versed in Ecclesiastical matters, and content with the
former simplicity of living, then exercised in secular businesses: His name was
Pu^ta. He was most eminently skilld in the Roman manner of Singing in the
Church, which he had learnt from the Disciples of Pope Gregory.

3. From thence he went Northward: and in the Kingdom of the Northumbers
concluded a long debate touching the Bishopric of York, to which there were
two pretenders, both venerable and Holy Bishops, S. Wilfrid and S. Ceadda. S.
Wilfrid had been first Elected thereto, and was sent by Al^frid King of the
Deiri (or Yorkshire) into France to be consecrated by Agilbert Bishop of Paris.
But his Father King Oswi, upon what Motive is not declared, appointed Saint
Ceadda, then an Abbot among the Northumbers, to be Bishop of York, to which he
was consecrated by the impious and Sacrilegious Wina formerly Bishop of
Winchester, and then of London. This controversy the Archbishop Theodore
determined to the advantage of S. Wilfrid, who returned into Brittany a little
before his arrival, Id. ib.
and in Kent, says Saint Beda, ordained Priests and Deacons, until the Arch
bishop Theodore came to his See.

4. In this Controversy the Sanctity of Saint Ceadda did eminently shine forth,
who readily and humbly obeyed the Archbishops sentence, and willingly rendered
both his See and Episcopal dignity to S. Wilfrid. This is thus related by the
same S. Beda: Id. ibid.
When the Archbishop, says he, charged S. Ceadda that he had not been duly
consecrated Bishop, he with an humble voice answered, If you are sure that I
have not entered into this Bishopric aright, I willingly depart from the
Office: for truly I never judged my self worthy of it, but it was simply out of
Obedience that I, though unworthy thereof, undertook it, being thereto
commanded. The Archbishop hearing the humility of his answer, said, that it
was not requisite he should quitt the Episcopal dignity: and therefore he
again perfected his Consecration after the Catholic manner. Now what Error
had been committed in his former Consecration is not declared by any of our
Writers: For though his Ordainer, Wina, were indeed an unwortly Bishop, impious
and Sacrilegious; and though he had been consecrated to a Church not vacant;
this might be a sufficient cause to oblige him to relinquish that See, but
neither of these could invalidate his Consecration.

5. Now it happened at the same time very commodiously that Iaruman^us Bishop of
the Mercians dying, King Wulfere requested the Archbishop to appoint a Bishop
over his Province. Id. ib.
The Archbishop would not ordain there a New Bishop, but desired King Oswi
that Ceadda might be given them for their Bishop, who at that time lived
quietly in his Monastery at Lestinghe. Thus S. Ceadda undertook the Bishopric
of the Nation of the Mercians and likewise of the Lindesfari, which he
according to the examples of the ancient Fathers administered with great
diligence and perfection of life. Thus writes the same Saint Beda. From whose
words misunderstood John Stow erroneously collects that S. Ceadda was Bishop
both of the Mercians, and of Lindesfarn also: whereas the Lindesfari in that
passage are the inhabitants of Lincolnshire, among whom not long before the
Christian Faith having been spread, they had a Bishop of their own, seated at
Sidnacester, an ancient City whereof at this day no traces remain.

6. S. Ceadda now a second time Bishop, did not for all that relinquish his
Monastical manner of living, but according to the ancient custom joynd it
with the Episcopal. And for that purpose (says S. Beda) King Wulfere gave
unto him a possession of fifty families for building a Monastery in a place
called Etbearn, Bed. l. 4. c. 3.
that is, At the wood, in the Province of Lindissi (or Linconshire) where to
this day the Observances of a Regular life instituted by him do still remain.
The Author of Saint Ceadda's life in Capgrave calls this place Brawe, the
situation whereof is now unknown.

7. But his Episcopal See was at Lichfeild: concerning which the same Author
thus writes, Id. ib.
He had the Sea of his Bishopric at a place called Licidfeld, where he also
dyed and was buried, and where his Successors have still remaind. Moreover he
built for himself a mansion not far from the Church, whither he was wont to
retire with seven or eight Monks that he might in solitude attend to prayer
and reading, A. D. 672.
as often as the solicitudes of his Episcopal Office would permit.

8. The same King Wulfere finished likewise the Monastery begun by his Brother
in the year of Grace six hundred fifty six, which he consecrated to S. Peter,
commanding it to be called Peterborough, and enriched it with great
possessions, C^^den in C^ritan.
appointing the first Abbot of the same in the year six hundrod sixty nine a
very pious man (says Camden) called Sexwulf, by whose persuasion principally
it was built. And he adds, That the said Monastery flourished with great
opinion of Sanctity the space of two hundred and fourteen years, till the most
calamitous times when the Danes laid all places, especially Sacred, wast. For
then the Monks were murdered, and the Monastery lay buried in its own rubbish, a
hundred and nine years. This Sexwulf had formerly lived an Eremiticall life in
the Island called Thorney, where he built an Oratory, which by the liberality
of King Edgar, became a Noble Monastery, in the year of Grace nine hundred
sixty nine, as we shall then declare.

9. As touching the said Bishop Ceadda, he was industrious in preaching,
assiduous in prayer, unwearied in labors, and always conversant with God. And
whereas, says Saint Beda, Bed. l. 4. c. 3.
it was the usual custom of that most Reverend Bishop in preaching the Gospel
through his Diocese for the most part to go on foot from place to place, the
Archbishop Theodore enjoined him that when he was to go to any place a good
way distant, he should ride: the good Bishop was very unwilling, so great was
his aversion from ease in the work of God. Yet in the end the Archbishop even
compelled him thereto, and with his own hands lifted him on horse back: For he
saw that he was a very holy man, etc.

IX. CHA.
IX. CHAP.
1.2. etc. The Holy and most happy death of S. Ceadda.

1. BEcause we will not interrupt the Narration touching this Holy Bishop
Ceadda, we will here adioyn the relation of his happy death shortly ensuing,
suitable to his pious life, which is thus at large recorded by S. Beda: ^^d. l.
4 c. 3.
2. After he had governed the Church of the Mercians most gloriously the space
of two years and a half, the time by divine dispensation approached, concerning
which Ecelesiastes writes, There is a time to scatter, and a time to gather
stones: For a destroying sickness was sent from heaven by which many living
stones of Gods Church were translated from earth to the heavenly building. And
hereby not a few belonging to the Church of this most Reverend Prelate having
been taken out of the world, the hour of his passage likewise to our Lord drew
near. It happened then on a certain day that himself accompanied only with one
Monk, A. D. 673.
named Owin, abode in the forementioned Mansion: all the rest upon some
occasion being returned to the Church. The said Owin was a Monk of great merit,
who out of a pure intention for a heavenly reward had forsaken the world: and
indeed he was in all respects a person esteemed by our Lord worthy to receive
Divine revelations, and worthy also of belief when he discovered them to any.
He had formerly come into that Province from the Region of the East Angles with
Queen Edildride, being the chief Officer of her family. Not long after his
arrival, the fervor of his Faith increasing, he resolved to leave the world
which resolution he exe^uted diligently, insomuch as relinquishing all his
possessions, and contenting himself with a simple habit, and taking in his
hands only an axe to cut wood, he went to the Monastery of the same most
Venerable Prelat, called Lestinghen: For he did not, as some have done, retire
to a Monastery to live idly there, but to labor diligently, as he gave good
proof by his conversation: for the less proper he was to spend much time in
Meditation, the more did he addict himself to manual labor.

3. This man therefore having for his zeal and devotion been selected to abide
with the Bishop in the said Mansion, commonly when the rest were busied
within-dores in reading, he was abroad busy about some external work for the
common benefit. Now on a certain day as he was thus employed, while the rest of
the Monks, as has been said, were returned to the Church, and the Bishop in
his Oratory reading or praying, he said that on a sudden he heard most
melodious voices of many persons singing and rejoicing, which descended from
heaven to the earth. These voices he heard at first as from the South-east
quarter, which by little and little approached to him, till they came to the
roof of the mansion where the Bishop was, into which they entered, and filled it
all about. He therefore attending solicitously to this Music, about an hour
after he heard the same voices and songs of Joy with unexpressible sweetness
ascending from the top of the house by the same way to heaven again. After
which remaining astonished a good space, and wondering what this should be, the
Bishop opened the window of his Oratory, and according to his custom made a
noise with his hand, which was to give notice that if any were without, they
should come to him. Hereupon the Monk hastily entered: to whom the Bishop said,
Go presently to the Church, and bidd those seven brethren to come immediately
hither, and come thou with them. When they were all come, he first admonished
them to observe Charity and peace both among themselves, and with all others:
and likewise diligently to follow the Instituts of Regular Discipline, which
they had learnt both from his tongue and practice, or had found in the
instructions and actions of their precedent Fathers. Hereto he added, that the
day of his death was near at hand: For, said he, that blessed and amiable Guest
who was wont to visit our Brethren, did me the grace to come this day to me,
A. D. 666
and summoned me to depart out of this world to our Lord. Therefore go to the
Church, and desire the rest of our Brethren to commend my departure to our
Lord: and let them be mindful to prevent also their own deaths, the hour of
which is uncertain, with watchongs, prayers and good works.

4. After he had spoken these and other words to the same purpose, and that
they having received his Benediction were returned full of sorrow, the Monk who
had heard the celestial Music went to the Bishop: and prostrating himself to
the ground before him, said, Venerable Father, may it be permitted me to ask
you a question? The Bishop answered. Ask freely whatsoever thou will. Then said
he, I beseech you tell me, What meant that joyful song which I heard sung by
many with great joy, who came from heaven to this Oratory, and after a while
returned back to heaven again? The Bishop replied, If thou have indeed heard
that Music, and perceived the heavenly company which came hither, I command
thee in the Name of our Lord, that thou acquaint none with it before my death.
The truth is they were Angels and celestial Spirits which came to call me to
receive those heavenly rewards which I always loved and desired: and they have
promised me to return seven days hence, and conduct me with them to heaven.
And indeed, thus it came to pass, as he had foretold. For presently after a
languishing infirmity came upon him which daily increased, and on the seventh
day, as had been promised him, after he had armd himself against death by
receiving devoutly the Body and blood of our Lord, his soul was freed from the
prison of his body, and, as we may piously believe, accompanied by Angels to
celestial joys: Sup. l.
Of whose glory S. Egbert was a witness, as we have already showed in his Gests
related by the same Author.

Bed. vbi sup.
5. It is no wonder if he entertained with joy the day of his death, says the
same Author, since through the whole course of his life his chief solicitude
was to prepare himself for it, insomuch as when any great wind or thunder
happened, he would presently lay aside all other business in hand and prostrating
himself on his face, pour forth his soul to God in prayer. For, as he told his
Disciples, the reason why God sends forth those voices of terror is, to
imprint his fear in men's minds: and make them mindful of those storms and
tempests which shall be raised in the last days before the General Judgment.
This S. Beda relates from the testimony of a Religious Monk called Trumbert his
Master in Divine learning, who had been a Disciple of this Holy Bishop.

Idem ibid.
6. Now S. Ceadda dyed on the sixth day before the Nones of March, and was
first buried near the Church of our Blessed Lady: But afterward a magnificent
Church having been built to the honor of the Prince of the Apostles, his
Sacred bones were translated thither. And in both places, for a proof of his
Sanctity frequent miracles and cures were wrought.

Idem ibid.
7. The place where he was buried, was covered with a wooden tomb, built in
the form of a little house, having a window in the wall, through which such as
in devotion came thither, were accustomed to putt in their hand, and take
thence some part of the dust: Which they mingled with water, and gave to be
tasted to sick men, or cattle also, by which their infirmities were presently
taken away.



8. We may with more assurance relate these Miracles, because even the Lutheran
Centuriators of Magdeburg acknowledge their belief of them: Magdebur. cent. 7.
f. 534.
For thus they write, Ceadda the Brother of Ced succeeded Iarumannus in the
Bishopric of the Mercians. He received from King Wulfere his Episcopal See in
a town of Lindissi, called Lichfeild, and governed the Churches of the
Midland-English and Lindesfarians. After his death he was renouned for
Miracles, insomuch as a man who was frantic, and slept only at his tomb, was
restored to health, and others afflicted with any manner of diseases, by
tasting the dust of his monument, were perfectly cured.

9. His Memory was with great devotion celebrated in all succeeding ages,
insomuch as the Cathedral Church of his Bishopric being raised with greater
magnificence took its appellation from him. This came to pass in the days of
King Edward the second, Godvvin. in Catal. in Gu^l^. Langton.
at which time, says B. Godwin, Walter Langton Bishop of that See of Lichfeild
bestowed two thousand pounds to enrich the Chest which contained the Body of
his Predecessor S. Ceadda, or Chad: and likewise encompassed the precincts of
the Church with a wall and ditch: adding thereto two gates, one very
magnificently built toward the west, and a lesser one to the East.

10. To conclude this Narration, we must not omit one late memorable example
of a wonderful judgment of God against the professed Enemies of his Saints. In
the beginning of the late rebellious war, a war undertaken as much against
Gods departed Saints, Lord Brook.
as living Governors, one of the most zealous Leaders of a Sacrilegious
faction conducting his Army to this City of Lichfeild, with an intention to
break into the Enclosure of S. Ceadda's Church, fortified by a Royal party,
whilst completely armed he pulled up the visour of his helmet that he might
better view how to place his Ordinance against the wall, was mortally wounded
in the eye, being the only part of his body exposed to danger, by a bullet
short at random: Thus he perished in the heat of his fury whilst he assaulted
the Church of S. Ceadda, and upon the very Feast day of S. Ceadda.

11. In the place of S. Ceadda the Archbishop Theodore ordained Bishop of that
See, a good and modest man, says S. Beda, named Winfrid, or Wilfrid: who was
Deacon to his Predecessor, and at that time lived in the Monastery of Athburn.
Of whom we shall speak more hereafter.

A. D. 670.

X. CHAP.


X. CHAP.
1.2. etc. The death of several Saints: Of King Oswi: Of Abbot Boisilus: Of
Oswin a Monk: of Diman and Adammannus.

A. D. 670. Bed. l. 4. c. 5.
1. IN the six hundred and seaventieth year of our Lords Incarnation (says S.
Beda) which was the second year after the coming of Theodore into Brittany,
Oswi King of the Northumbers in the fifty eighth year of his age fell sick of
an infirmity of which he dyed. At the same time he was so affectionatly
desirous to receive more perfect Instruction in Religion from the Apostolic
See of Rome, that he was determined in case he had recovered of that disease,
to go thither, and end his days at the Sacred places of the Apostles: for
which purpose he had desired the Holy Archbishop Wilfrid to be his guide in
that journey, for which he designed him a great sum of money. He dyed the
fifteenth day before the Calends of March, and left his Son Egfrid heyr of the
Kingdom. He was buried in the Monastery of Strenshalch, to which he had long
before consecrated his daughter Edelfleda from her first infancy, Vid. sup. l.
as has been declared.

2. That he dyed in general opinion of Sanctity, Martyr. A^g. 15. Febr.
appears in that his Name is read among the Saints in our Martyrologe on the
fi^teenth of February. And William of Malmsbury recounts how his body together
with the bodies of many other Saints was removed three hundred years after his
death: For thus he writes, Malmsbur. de Pontif. f. 271.
At Streneshalt in the Quire of Religious Wirgins there, famous for being the
Monument of many holy Bishops and glorious Princes, (it is now called Whitby)
by the devout industry of certain persons, their sacred ashes almost lost in
oblivion were discovered to the light: and of late there were found and
translated to a more honorable place the Bodies of several Saints: as Bishop
Trumwin, King Oswi and his daughter Elfleda, who was Abbess of the same
Monastery after S. Hilda.

3. Besides King Oswi, several other English Saints are recorded to have dyed
the same year. Marty. Ang. 25. Ianuar.
Among whom our Martyrologe mentions the Holy Abbot Boisilus, who governed the
Monastery of Mailrose, and there gave the Habit and Tonsure to S. Cuthbert. He
was famous for the gift of Prophecy, and after he had spent many years there as
Monk, and afterward Abbot, Bed. in vit. S Cuthbert cap. 22.
was at last called and conducted to heaven by Angels. S. Beda styles him a
man of sublime Virtues, and relates how S. Cuthbert was vont to say of him, I
have known very many who have far excelled me in purity of heart and sublimity
of Prophetical Grace. Among whom was the Venerable servant of Christ Boisilus,
whose name is to be mentioned with all honor by me, in as much as in his old
age he gave me, then a young man, my education in the Monastery of Mailrose:
at which time he prophetically foretold all things which were to befall me.
And among all his predictions there remains now only one, which I desire may
never be fulfilld. This he spoke, because the said Servant of our Lord had
declared to him that he should be exalted to the degree and Office of a Bishop:
Which charge he trembled to undergo, being much affected to a retired
contemplative life. His successor in the government of the said Monastery was
the same S. Cuthbert.

4 The same year likewise dyed a certain holy Monk in the Monastery of
Lestinghen, called Oswin, a man eminent for his abstinence and Prayer. He was
descended from British Ancestors, but spent his life among the Scotts and
English: wfiich is an argument that the Britains, Scotts and Saxons were
united in the same Faith.

5 In the same Martyrologe are recorded also the names of S. Diman on the
nineteenth of July, Martyr Ang 19. Iul. Ib. 2 Nov.
and S. Adamannus Abbot of the Monastery of Hye on the second of November, this
same year. Whose gests I leave to the Scottish Writers.

XI. CHAP. XI. CHA.

1. Many pious Kings and Bishops.

2. King Kenwalch his Liberality to Glastonbury

3.4 Of Brithwald Abbot of Glastonbury.

1. THE English-Saxon Church at this time flourished wonderfully under several
Kings eminent in Sanctity, A. D. 670.
and munisicent in advancing the service of God by building Churches and
Monasteries: such were Egbert in Kent, Sebb at London, Kenwalch in the West,
Wulfer among the Mercians, and Oswi among the Northumbrians. And at the same
time the piety of these Kings was much advanced by the zeal of many holy
Bishops industrious in propagating the true Faith and Ecclesiastical
Discipline: Theodore Archbishop of Canterbury, Wilfrid in the Province of the
Northumbers, Ceadda in that of the Mercians: To whom we may add Putta Bishop
of Rochester and Lentherius (or Eleuthetherius Nephew of S. Agilbert Bishop of
Paris) who accompanied Theodore into Brittany, and at the desire of King
Kenwalch was this year consecrated by the same Theodore, Bishop of the
West Saxons.

4. Among the fruits this year gathered out of this fertile ground we may
reckon the Donation of King Kenwalch to the Monastery of Glastonbury mentioned
in the Great Charter of King Ina dated the year of Grace seven hundred twenty
five, in which among others we read this passage: To the Ancient Church seated
in the place called Glasteie, A. D. 671.
I grant out of my paternall possessions for the maintaining Regular Observance
and use of the Monks, Ap. Vsser. f. 112.
ten hydes of land at Burnt, etc. together with all the lands conferred by my
Ancestors on the same Church, as King Kenwalch, who by the intercession of S.
Theodore Archbishop, gave to the same Church Ferlinguere, Beokerie, Godeneie,
Martinsie, and Edresie. But this, though styled a Donation, seems rather for
the most part to have been a Restitution of Lands anciently given to that
famous Monastery by former British Princes.

3. At this time the Abbot of Glastonbury was Brithwald, who was the first of
the Saxon race who governed that Monastery, for before this all the Abbots were
Britains. So writes William of Malmsbury in his Antiquities of this place: Ap.
Vsser. f. 110.
There succeeded at Glastonbury, says he, very many Abbots of the British
Nation, whose names, gests and memory have been oblitterated by antiquity. Yet
that the Church it self was held in great veneration by the Nobles of the
Britains appears by this, that many of their Bodies have been enterred there,
etc. But after that two hundred sixty seven years from the time of Saint
Patrick were run out, during the reign of Kenwalch the Son of Kinegilse, who
was also called ^enwall^, the first Abbot of the English Nation who governed
that Monastery was Brithwald.

4. This Brithwald was Son to a Brother of the King of the Mercians: and
according to the familiar devotion of that age renounced all secular
pretentions, and retired from the world to consecrate himsel to the service of
God in solitude: to which he was so affected, that he again retired from that
Monastery much frequented, to another more obscure, called Raculf or Reculver,
although both the King and Bishop of the Diocese, says the same Author, did
earnestly oppose it. But Almighty God for the good of his Church crossed his
design, Id. ibid.
for the New Monastery chosen for his retreat being seated near Canterbury, a
person so illustrious for his birth, being son to a Brother of King Ethelred,
and so famous for his religion and piety, could not long lie hid, but after the
death of the Archbishop Theodore, was elected and even compelled to succeed
him in that See. Of him we shall treat further in due place.

XII. CHAP. XII. CHA.

1. 2. etc. Of the building of the Monastery of Abindon by Cissa, and his
Nephew HEANE.

6. Cylla the Sister of Heane builds a Monastery of Virgins at Helnestow: Of
her Black Cross.

1. A Certain Author called John in his Golden History cited by the R F.
Clement Rayner in his Apostolate of the Benedictins, affirms, that at this time
the Monastery of Abindon was built by a certain Saxon Prince, called Cissa.
Which if it be true, as indeed it seems most probable, it will invalidate the
authority of the British Records which pretend that this Monastery was built
and flourished exceedingly in the ancient times of the Britains, and that
there was a famous School of learning, in which Constantin is said to have
been taught in his younger years, as we have related in the occurrents of the
year of Grace three hunered and nine

2. Concerning this famous Monastery we read in the History anciently written
of it, Vid. Monast. 57.
that when Hengist the Saxon perfidiously murdered at a Feast four hundred and
sixty Noble Britains, a son of one of the said Neblemen, named Aben, with much
ado escaping retired himself into a wood on (...) mountain nor far distant
from Oxford Southward, where he lived a long time among wild beasts sustained
only with herbs and roots: and wanting water, he by hi^ Prayers obtained a
spring, remaining to this day. And the people of the country observing his
Sanctity, frequently visited him for instruction in Christian Piety But he
thirsting after solitude, privately went into Ireland, where he happily ended
his days. The mountain was from him called Abendun: on which was built a Cell
and a Chapel consecrated to the blessed Virgin Mary.

3. In such state the place continued till this time, in which a Monastery was
built there by the liberality of the forementioned Cissa a Prince of the
West Saxons, under whose dominion was Wiltshire and a great part of Barkshire:
And the occasion of that foundation was this: Cissa had a Nephew called Heane,
a man of great piety, who having heard from a certain Preacher a sermon on
those words of our Savior, That it is easier for a Camel to go through the
eye of a Needle, then for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of heaven,
presently conceived a contempt of earthly riches, and a resolution to aspire
only to heavenly Beatitude. Thereupon coming to his Uncle Cissa he begged of
him a place for erecting a Monast^^y: Which he willingly gave him, making
choice of this Mountain called Abendun.

4. There therefore Heane began to build: but with very ill success: For
whatsoever was raised in the day fell down in the night: and this happened
successively very often. At which Heane being much troubled, there came to him a
certain Hermit who lived in a Wood called Comenor, and told him, saying Father
Heane this last night I saw certain men with carts carrying away the stones and
timber from thi^ place: And I said to them, You do very ill in taking away
these materials provided for the honor of God and our Blessed Lady. But they
answered me. We know that very well: Therefore to morrow go and tell Heane the
Abbot that it is not Gods will he should proceed in this building: But let him
go to a town called Sevekesham, there he shall find the place marked where he
shall build. Heane went thither with the Hermit: and they found there near the
Thames a large square Trench, made as on purpose to lay the Foundation.

5. There therefore the Monastery was built, and the name of Sevekesham changed
into Abendon. The Habits of the Monks were black: but they wore no stamines.
They had noods lined with Catts skins. They lived separated in Cells and to
each Cell belonged an Oratory: but on Sundays and Feasts they met in the
Church at Mass, and dined together: And then they used Silken Cowles. They
abstained from flesh, except in great sickness etc. For the endowment o^ this
Monastery Cissa gave many Lordships, and Heane, the greatest part of his
inherit^nce.

6. Heane had also a Sister named Cylla, or Cyssa, who with the consent or her
Uncle Cissa employed all her possessions in erecting a Monastery of Religious
Virgins at a place called He^nestow seated near the River Thames: so called
because there a Chapel had been built to the Honor of S. Helen There a
Congregation being assembled of many devout Virgins, she became their Abbess.
And having obtained, or rather probably found in the old Chapel, a small
portion of one of the Nails of our Lords Cross* she caused it to be inserted
unto a large Cross of Iron: with command that when she was dead it should be
laid on her breast and buried with her: And out of Reverence thereto, she made
her Mo^astery to be consecrated to the honor o^ the Holy Cross and of S.
Helena. Concerning this Cross called the Black Cross^* how it was afterward
found by S. Ethelwold, and held in great Veneration, we shall declare further
in due place. This Monastery was afterward translated to Witteham: and wars
following, the Religious Virgins were dispersed, and what became of them, is
not known, for they never returned thither.

XIII. CHAP. A. D. 672.

XIII. CHAPTER



1.2 etc. Egfrid King of the Northumbers. His Victory over Wulfere King of the
Mercians.

5. His Liberality to the Monastery of Rippon.

6 7. Two Miracles wrought by Saint Wilfrid.

1. IN the year of Grace six hundred seaventy one Egfrid succeeded his Father
King Oswi in the Kingdom o^ the Northumbers: for though his Brother Alefrid
King of the Deiri was elder, yet he being then on some occasion absent in
Ireland, Egfrid was admitted to the Throne, into the society whereof he piously
received his Brother Elsuin.

2. He was in the beginning of his reign disquietted on both sides, on the
North by the incursions of the Picts, and on the south by the Mercians: but by
his valor and good conduct, assisted also by the Prayers of Saint Wilfrid to
whom he was most munificent, he not only secured his Province from danger, but
triumphed gloriously over his Enemies.

3. As touching the Picts, Malmsbur de Pont. f. l. 3.
William of Malmsbury relates, how upon the death of King Oswi a Warlick
Prince, they despising the unsettled state of his Son Egfrid made furious
incursions into his kingdom: but the young King together with his General
Berney met them, and with a very small army defeated an innumerable multitude
of Picts, insomuch as heaps of their dead bodies lying on the groand, made that
which formerly was a plain become a hilly country, and the Rivers b^
multitudes of carkeises were in^ercepted in their course.

4. And presently after Wulfere King of the Mercians lead an army against the
Northumbers, enraged with the memory of his Father Penda, who had been slain by
them. He came therefore with a confidence, at least to recover the former
damage, if not to acquire a New Kingdom. But his fortune was unprosperous as
his Fathers had been: only whereas King Penda had lost his life in the
Battle* his Son Wolfer was compelled to a shameful flight, which he survived
but a few days, and part of his Provinces became subject to the King of the
Northumbers, to wit, the greatest part of Lincolnshire.

5. King Egfrid expressed his thankfullnes to God for these victories by
liberal endowments of his Church. Particularly his bounty was extended to the
Church and Monastery of Rippon founded by S. Wilfrid, on which he bestowed
large possessions, says William of Malmsbury: Id ib.
And when the said Holy Bishop was to consecrate that Church, he invited both
King Egfrid and his Brother King Elswin to the Ceremony, where they were
entertained magnificently three days, and highly exalted for their piety and
munificence. Which external pomp and gladness was increased by a wonderful
miracle which God wrought by S. Wilfrid, in restoring a dead child to life. The
manner whereof, because from thence we may observe the agreement between the
British and Saxon Churches in Faith and Ecclesiastical Discipline,
particularly in their zeal and devotion to the Sacrament of Confirmation, of
which the Britains also were very desirous (as has been declared) I will here
set down in the words of the same Author, with whom likewise Matthew of
Westminster agrees in the relation.

Malmsb. de P^nt l 3. f 61. W^stmo^^st. ad A. D. ^78.
6. When the Bishop entered into a village called Tid^afrey (or according to
Matthew of Westminster, Tundanfre) there met him a great multitude of Women,
offering their children to be confirmed by him. Amongst them one woman mingled
her self, cra^ti^y carrying in her arms her dead child, pretending that he
should be catechized, but inwardly persuaded that by the Bishops Sanctity he
should be restored to life. The holy Bishop therefore uncovering the chids face
to the end he might perform the due Rites, found that he was dead. Then the
woman perceiving that her fraud did not succeed, betook her self to prayers,
earnestly beseeching him for God and his holy Mothers sake, if he had any Faith
or pity to restore life to her child Saying this she cast her self at his
feet, and would not be removed, thus offering an importunate violence toward
him. All this while the Bishop continued doubtful, whether he should seem rash
in attempting the Miracle, or reject the tears and prayers of the disconsolate
woman. But a charitable pity at last got the Victory: therefore after he had
with a low voice repeated certain devout passages out of the Psalms, he laid
his right hand on the dead body, whereupon immediately the soul was restored:
for by gasping, moving his eyelids and stirring his whole body, he gave proof
that he was alive. The mother for joy began to cry out, but was restraind by
the Bishop. The child was called E^h^lwald, who was afterward a Monk at Rippon,
remaining there a Monument of the Bishops Sanctity.

Malmsbur. ib.
7. The same Author further relates another Miracle wrought by the same Bishop
upon a Monk who falling from the topp of the Church whilst it was building at
the costs of the same King Egbert, broke all his bones and tore a sunder almost
all his members, and was restored to health by the prayers of the Holy Bishop
and his Convent.

A. D. 672.
8. It was in the year following that King Egfrid at last gave way to the
importunate prayers of his Virgin Wife Saint Ediltrudis to retire into a
Monastery at Coldingham under the government of S. Ebba, Aunt to King Egfrid,
and Sister to S. Oswald and Oswi Kings of the Northumbers: as before has been
declared at large.

XIV. CHAP. A. D. 673.

XIV. CHAPTER



1. Lothere succeedes his Brother Egbert in the Kingdom of Kent.

2. 3 etc. A National Synod assembled by Archbishop Theodore at Hertford. The
Acts of the said Synod.

1. IN the year of our Lords Incarnation six hundred seaventy three ( says S.
Beda) Egbert King of Kent dyed in the ninth year of his reign, A. D. 673. Be^^
l. 4. c 5.
and though he left behind him two sons, Edric and Wigtred, yet whether it was
by Egberts example who succeeded his Brother to the prejudice of his Nephews,
or that the infancy of these two young Princes made them esteemd incapable of
governing, he was succeeded by his Brother Lothere, who reigned eleaven years
and seven months, and then was deprived both of his Kingdom and life by his
Nephew Edric.

2. In the same year Theodore Archbishop of Canterbury, Idem ibid.
having a pious intention to compose and introduce an uniformity in Faith and
Discipline among all the Saxon Churches of Brittany, convoked a Synod of the
Bishops of both Provinces. Such an Universal authority in this Island had been
either conferred, or confirmed to him by Pope Vitalian at the first entrance of
the said Archbishop into Brittany, as appears by his letters dated to him in
the year of Grace six hundred sixty nine, which Letters are recorded by William
of Malmsbury, Malmsbur. de Pont l. 1. f. 209.
and in them we read this passage: It has seemd good to us to exhort thee and
at this present to commend to thy wisdom and piety all the Churches situated
in the Isle of Brittany. Whatsoever Privileges and Ordinances therefore have
been established and ratified by our Predecessor Saint Gregory to Augustine his
Legate (Sincello) or allowed by the Sacred use of the Archiepiscopall Pall, we
grant unto thee for ever, etc.

3. By virtue of this authority therefore was this Synod assembled by the Arch
bishop Theodore: The place where it was celebrated is by the same S. Beda
styled Herudford, mistakingly interpreted by B. Parker and B. Godwin to be
Hereford in the Province of the Silures, and by others to have been Thetford
among the Iceni. Camden in Hanford.
Camden therefore in his Description of the Cattieuchlani rightly names the
place of this Synod, Hertford, the true name whereof is Herudford, and it
signifies the Red sord.

4. We will here from S. Beda set down a Copy of the Acts of this Synod,
compiled by the said Archbishop himself according to this tenor: Bed. l. 4.
c. 5.
In the Name of our Lord God and Savior Jesus Christ, the same Jesus Christ
reigning for ever and governing his Church, It was by us judged fit that we
should meet together according to the manner prescribed by the Venerable
Canons, and treat touching matters necessary for the Church. We assembled
therefore together on the four and twentieth day of September, on the first
Indiction, in a place called Herudford. The persons meeting were these: I
Theodore appointed, though unworthy, by the Sea Apostolic Bishop of the Church
of Canterbury: and my fellow Bishop and most Reverend Brother Bisi, Bishop of
the East Angles: Likewise our Brother and fellow Bishop Wilfrid, Bishop of the
Nation of the Northumbers, was by his Delegates assistent to us: There were
personally present also our Brethren and fellow Bishops, Putta Bishop of the
Castle of the Cantuarians called Rochester; Leutherius Bishop of the
West Saxons; and Winfrid Bishop of the Province of the Mercians. (Harpsfeild
adds, that besides these Bishops, H^^psf. sac. 7. c. 3.
there was present at this Synod Egfrid King of the Northumbers.)

5. When we were all met together, and every one had taken his seat according
to his order, I thus spoke to them; I beseech you my beloved Brethren, by the
fear and love of our Redeemer that (...) may all unanimously advise and
determine sincerely to keep and observe all the Decrees and definitions
touching our Holy Faith which have been made by the Holy and Orthodoxe Fathers.
These and several other speeches regarding the conservation of Charity and
Unity of the Church, I prosecuted to them: and having concluded, I asked them
one by one in order Whether they did consent that those things which had been
Canonically decreed by the Fathers should be inviolably observed. Hereto all
our Fellow-bishops answered saying, It pleases us all very well, that
whatsoever has been defind by the Canons of the Holy Fathers should be
cheerfully and willingly observed by us all. Hereupon I presently produced to
them the same Book of Canons, in which I had especially noted in several
places ten Chapters, which I read unto them, because I conceived them very
necessary for us, and I desired that those Chapters might with a more
particular diligence and care be observed.

6. The first Chapter was, That we should all uniformly keep the Holy Feast of
Easter on the Sunday following the fourteenth day of the first (of March.) The
Second, That No Bishop should usurp or invade the Diocese of another, but
content himself with governing the

7. After we had in common treated and defind these Chapters, or Canons, it
was thought good, to the end that no scandalous contention should he^eafter
arise, and to prevent the publishing false Transcripts of them, that they
should be confirmd by every Bishops Subscription. And this Resolution of the
Synod I dictated to the Notary Titillus, who wrote it down. This was done in
the Month and Indiction before mentiond. Whosoever therefore shall any ways
endeavor to infringe these our Definitions conformable to the Decrees of
ancient Canons, confirmed by our unanimous Subscriptions, Let such an one know
that he is separated from our Communion and from the Exercise of all
Sacerdotall Offices. May the divine Grace preserve us in safety living in the
Unity of Gods Holy Church.

8. These were the Acts of this Synod, as they are recorded by S. Beda who
subioyns these words, Id. ib.
This Synod was celebrated in the year six hundred seaventy three from our Lord
Incarnation, in which year Egbert King of the Cantuarians had dyed in the month
of July: to who^ his Brother Lothere succeeded in the kingdom* which he held
eleaven years and seven Months.

XV. CHA.
XV. CHAP.
1. 2. 3. The Province of the East Angles divided into two Dioceses, Dumwich
and El^ham.

4. 5 etc. The Gests of S. Editha Virgin and Martyr.

1. WHereas in the ninth Canon of the forementioned Synod it had been treated,
but not fully concluded, at least not putt in execution, that the number of
Bishops and Episcopal Sees should be increased, presently after by the care and
authority of the Archbishop Theodore the Church of the East Angles hitherto
governed by one Bishop, was divided into two Dioceses.

2. This is thus particularly related, together with the occasion of it by S.
Beda: Bisi Bishop of the East Angles (says he) who is said to have been
present in the forementioned Synod, Id. ib.
was the Successor of Boniface, of whom we spoke before. He was a man of great
Sanctity and Religion. For Boniface dying after he had administered that
Bishopric seaventeen years, Bisi was by the Archbishop Theodore ordained
Bishop in his place. Who though being yet alive, but by a grievous infirmity
rendered incapable to execute his Episcopal function, there were in his room
elected and consecrated two Bishops, Aecca and Beadwine: ( the Episcopal See
of Aecca being placed at Dumwich, and that of Beadwine at North-Elmham:) And
from that time to this the said Province has been administered by two Bishops.

3. These were the two Prelates mentioned in the life of Ositha Queen and
Martyr: Whose gests therefore are unduly referred to the year of Grace six
hundred fifty three by Alberic the Writer of her life; in which error he is
followd by Haraeus in his Martyrologe, etc.

4. S. Ositha was daughter of a Mercian Prince named Frithwald and of
Wilteburga daughter of Penda King of the Mercians. She had her education in
virtue and piety in a certain Monastery governed by the Holy Abbess Movenna:
Out of which she was afterward recalled by her parents, and notwithstanding she
had in resolution of mind consecrated her Virginity to God, yet by their
authority she became wise to Sighere Companion of S. Sebb in the Kingdom of the
East Angles: Baron. ad A. D. 653.
And following the example of S. Ediltrudis Queen of the Northumbers, she
preferred the love of her heavenly Bridegroom before the Embraces of a King.
With which devotion of hers her husband likewise piously complied, and moreover
not only permitted her to consecrate her self to our Lord, Haraeus in
Martyrolog. 7. October.
but bestowd on her a village situated near the Sea called Chic, where building
a Monastery she enclosed her self: And after she had spent some time in the
service of God, it happened that a Troop of Danish Pirates landed there. Who going
out of their ships wasted and burnt the country there about, using all manner
of cruelty against the Christian inhabitants. Then he who was the Captain of
that impious band, having learn the condition and Religious Life of the
Blessed Virgin S. Ositha, began by entreaties and presents to tempt her to
Idolatry, adding withal threats of scourging and other torments, if she
refused to adore the Gods which he worshipped. But the Holy Virgin despising
his flatteries, and not fearing his threats, made small account of the torments
attending her. Whereupon the said Capptain enraged at her constancy and scorn
of his Idols, pronounced sentence of death against her commanding her to lay
down her head to be cut off. And in the same place where the Holy Virgin
suffered Martyrdom a clear fountain broke forth, which cured several kinds of
diseases. Now her parents having heard of her death, earnestly desired, as some
recompense for their loss, to enjoy the comfort of burying with them her
heaules body. Which being brought to them, they enterre^ it it a coffin of lead
in the Church of Aylesbury, where many Miracles were wrought by her
intercession. At length her Sacred Relics ^ a Divine Vision were translated
thence back again to the Church of Chic, which Maurice Bishop of London reposed
in a precious coffer ^ at which time the Bishop of Rochester then present was
cured of a grievous infirmity.

5. Her memory is celebrated in our Martyrologe on the seventh of October,
Mart. Ang^. 7. Oct. 6.
where also is mention how the said holy Virgin Ma^tyr took up her head after
it was separated from her Body: Which the Author of her Life in Capgrave thus
more expressly relates: As Soon as her head was off, Casgrav. in S. Ositha.
the body presently rose up, and taking up the head in the hands, by the
conduct of Angels walked firmly the straight way to the Church of the Apostles
S. Peter and S. Paul about a quarter of a mile distant from the place of her
suffering: and when it was come there, it knocked at the door with the bloody
hands, as desiring it might be opened, and thereon left marks of blood. Having
done this it fell there down to the ground.

6. The Sanctity of Ositha ( called by William of Malmsbury, Osgitha) has quite
extinguished the name anciently belonging to the Village where she lived;
Camden. in. Essex.
For thus writes Camden, In the place where the River Coln enters into the Sea
is seated the little Town called S. Osith's, the ancient Name whereof was Chic,
which Name this Royal Virgin Ositha has abolished, Who living there in great
Sanctity and devotion was slain by Danish Pirates, and therefore acknowledged by
our Ancestors, a Saint and Martyr.

A. D. 674.

XVI. CHAPTER


XVI. CHAP.
1. 2. King Kenewalch dying, leaves the Kingdom to his* wife Sexburga.

3. S. Egelwin Brother to King Kenewalch.

4 5. Sexburga retiring into a Monastery, Escuin succeeds in the Kingdom, with
Kentuin. Their liberality to the Monastery of Malmsbury: as likewise of
Leutherius Bishop.

6. 7. War between Escuin and Wolfer King of the Mercians.

8. The death of Wolfere.

1. IN the year of Christ six hundred seaventy four happened the death of
Kenewalch King of the West Saxons, A. D. 674.
after a reign of thirty and one years. Who leaving no issue behind him, he
bequeathed the administration of the Kingdom to his wise Sexburga, says (...)
liam of Malmsbury. Malmsbur. ^. Reg. l. 1. c. 2.
And adds withal, That she wanted not spirit and courage to exercise so great
a charge: insomuch as she gathered new forces, and kept the old in their duty:
She governed her Subjects with clemency, and kept her enemies in awe with
threats. In a word she behaved her self in all things so worthily, that no man
could discern any difference in her government from that it was in her
husband^ time, but only that she was a woman. Notwithstanding her Rule was but
short, for before she had fully spent a year, death-surprised her in the midst
of her magnanimous designs.

2. This Character given her by William of Malmsbury is more proper and
receiveable then that which Matthew of Westminster writes, That the Nobility of
that Kingdom disdaining to be subject to a woman's government, Westminst. ^^ A.
D. 674.
expelled her out of the Province. Other Historians say, That out of a desire
of entering into a more holy and strict life she voluntarily quitted the
Royalty, Sp^^d. Heli^gs head
and for devotions sake entered into a Monastery. But they do wrongfully
ascribe to her the founding of a Monastery in the Isle of Shepey, where she is
said to have taken the Habit of Religion, and afterward to have succeeded S.
Edrifride in the Abbey of Ely: For these things belong to another Sexburga
daughter of Anna King of the East Angles, of whom we treated before.

3. Though K Kenwalch had no sons yet he had a Brother eminent for Sanctity,
named Egelwin, concerning whom William of Malmsbury thus writes, Malmsbur. de
Pont. l. 2. f. 155.
The Monks of Adeling exalt to the skies the praises of their Patron S.
Egelwin, the effects of whose Sanctity they perceive by many benefits which
they receive by his intercession. The constant fame is that he was Brother of
K. Kenewalch, and that he was more illustrious for his Sanctity then emine^cy
of descent. He was all his life afflicted with sickness, yet that hindered not at
all his service and de^otion to God He ended his life most happily, and after
his death readily assisted the necessities of all that reclamed his help and
intercession. A. D. 675.


4. After Sexburga's death, Bed l 4 c. 12. A. D. 675.
says S. Beda, two Princes of that nation took on them the government, and
held it divided between them the space of about ten years: These were Escuin
and Kentwin, both of them of the Royal family: Kentwin was Brother (Huntingdon
says he was son) to King Kenwalch; and Escuin was descended in the fourth
degree from Cerduic. Huntingd. l 2
Some Writers affirm that they did not jointly reign: But that Escuin first
managed the government: and after two years dying* left it to Kentwin, who
reigned after him nine years.

5. They were both of them Catholic devout Princes, as appears by the
magnificent Structure of the Monastery of Malmsbury, built this year at their
charges by the procurement of S. Aldelm, who had now been nine years a Monk and
four years Abbot of the same. Malmsbur. d. Reg l. 1. c. 2.
It was at first, as has bee^ said, poorly built by a certain Scott named
Maydulf, by profession a Monk, and by erudition a Philosopher (from whom the
place took its name:) But till this time the revenues of it were so scant, that
the Monks had great difficulty to provide themselves necessary sustenance,
says William a Monk of the same place. But now that by the suggestion of S.
Aldelm those two Princes endowd it with possessions, Id. ib.
and adornd it with buildings, the affairs and reputation of that Monastery
increased wonderfully: from all quarters Religious men flocked thither to S.
Aldelm, some of them desiring from him instructions in a devout Life, others in
the knowledge of learning.

5. Moreover Leutherius Bishop of the West Saxons contributed his care to the
establishing of this Monastery, ^d. ib.
as appears by a Charter of his extant in William of Malmsbury, in which upon
the Petition of the Abbot of this Diocese he grants the said place to the Monks
there living, to be entirely possessed by them. Which argues that heretofore
they enjoyed it only by courtesy. This Charter is dated the eighth day before
the Calends of September, in the year of our Lords Incarnation six hundred
seaventy five, at a place near the River Bladon: Where says Camden, Camd^n in
Wiltsh^re.
in ancient times Dumwalio Malmutius King of the Britains built a handsome
town, and called it Caer-Bladon: which having been destroyed in the Saxon
wars, they built out of the rubbish of it a Castle, which in their tongue they
named Ingelborn; a mile distant from which the Saxon Princes had a Palace
called Caer-Durburg, now Broken-bridge. The said place kept the name of
Ingelborn till Maidulf the Scottish Monk retired thither, from whom it took the
name of Ma^dulfs-burg, and contractedly Malmsbury: some Writers call it Meldun.
Among the Disciples of Maidulf the most famous was Aldelm, who succeeded him,
and by the help of the Bishop Eleutherius, to whom the Seat belonged, built
there a very fair Monastery, of which himself was Abbot: and from him some
Writers have called the place Aldelms-birig: but that Name was quickly
obliterated: though his Memory be continued there by a much frequented Fair
yearly kept on his Feast.

Malmsbu. de Reg. l. 1. c. 2.
6 The said West Saxon Kings, Escuin and Kentwin, as they were in their Faith
Orthodoxe, and in their Charity magnifice^t, so were they likewise in defense
of their Kingdom courageous: For says the same Author, Escuin in a battle
gave a great overthrow to the Mercians, and Kentwin in another to the
Britains. The Controversy which Escuin had with Wulfere King of the Mercians
was touching the limits of their kingdoms, to decide which they were forced to
come to a combat, in which notwithstanding, Huntingdon rather ascribes the
victory to Wulfere. However certain it is that neither of these two Kings
survived their Victory or defeat many days: for Wulfere dyed the same year, and
Escuin in the following.

W^gom ad ^. l. 675. Spelm. f. 193. ^amden. in Ocvan.
7. The place where this battle was fought is by Florentius called
Bindanheaf^l: and in a Manuscript cited by Sir Henry Spelman, Bedanead:
Probably it was the same Town in Devonshire which is now called Bediford, of
some esteem, says, Camden, for the numerousnes of its inhabitants, and a
stonebridge of arched work.

8. The foresaid Florentius mentioning the death of Wulfere ( called by some
Authors Fulgere) gives him this Elogy, Wigorn. ubi sup.
In the year of Christ six hundred seaventy five dyed Wulfere King of the
Mercians, after he had reigned seaventeen years. He was the first King of that
Province who embraced the Christian Faith, and received the Sacrament of
Regeneration. He utterly rooted out of his whole Kingdom the Pagan Worship of
Devils, commanding the name of Christ to be preached every where. He built
many Churches, Bed. in Epist.
etc. At his death, says Saint Beda, he left his Brother Edilred, or Ethelred,
his Successor in his Kingdom.

XVII. CHAPTER
XVII. CHAP.
1.2. etc. Of S Wereburga daughter to King Wolfere: her Gests, Miracles, death,
and uncorruption of her body.

1. THE Memory of King Wulfere received a great luster from the wonderful
Sanctity of his daughter Saint Wereburga, A. D. 675.
born unto him, Id. ibid.
says the same Author, by his Queen Ermengilda who was the daughter of
Ercombert King of Kent and his Queen S. Sexburga, daughter of Anna King of the
East Angles, and Sister to the glorious Virgin and Queen Saint Ethelreda.

2. S. Wereburga from her infancy was by her pious Mother Ermenilda educated in
the fear and love of God, and in a contempt of worldly vanities: so that from
her tender years she entertained a desire to consecratt her whole life to our
Lord in a state of Religion and Virginity. Her great beauty and endowments of
Nature rendered her desirable to others: but the greater beauty of her mind
enriched with Divine Grace disposed her to reserve her affections for him only
who was beautiful beyond the Sons of men. During her Fathers life she was not
permitted to aspire to the Espousals of her heavenly Bridegroom. But as soon as
he was dead, she, accompanied with her Mother Erminilda, betook her self to the
lately founded Monastery of Ely, where she undertook a Religious Profession.

3. This is thus more expressly related by Harpsfeild: Harpsf. sae^. 7. c. 23.
Saint Wereburga (says he) being descended from most Noble Parents would not
be affianced to any but the most Noble Bridegroom, and therefore gave up her
immaculate body and chaste soul to the spiritual embraces of our Lord. These
glorious Espousalls, to which the Church and heavenly Angels were witnesses,
were publicly celebrated in the Monastery of Religious Virgins at Ely, of
which her Mothers Sister the illustrious S. Ethelreda was Abbess: there this
devout Virgin received the Sacred Veyle of Religion. And from that time her
only diligence and solicitude was employed in avoiding all things that might
displease the eyes of her Heavenly Bridegroom, for whose love she despised
gold, jewels, rich attire and all other vanities admired by the world All her
thoughts were busied in this one thing, how she might excel her Religious
Sisters in observing silence, abstinence, watching, devout reading and Prayers.
Which holy design having compassed, insomuch as she was as far exalted above
them in these and all other Virtues, as in the Noblenes of her descent, yet the
thought so meanly of her self, and was so free from arrogance and pride, that
she showed her self always ready and willing to obey them all, and cheerfully
underwent the vilest Offices: among which a charitable care of the poor and
needy, to whom she was a pious and tender Mother, took the principal place. In
a word, through the whole course of her life her conversation was such as
showed, that though according to humane condition her body moved on the earth,
yet her mind was always fixed in heaven.

4. How long this Holy Virgin lived in the Monastery of Ely under the
government of S, Ediltrudis does not distinctly appear. Certain it is that her
death is unduly in our Martyrologe referd to this present year: for from our
most ancient authentic Records it is unquestionable that she survived her
Mother S. Erminilda, who became Abbess of the same Monastery after S.
Sexburga, who succeeded S. Ediltrudis dying the year of Grace six hundred
seauenty nine. However in as much as her Gests are not interwoven with the
general History, we will here adioyn the remainder of her Acts recorded by
Matthew of Westminster, Florentius, etc.

5. Her Brother Ethelred, who succeeded his Father Wolfere in the kingdom of
the Mercians, admiring his Sisters Sanctity, and unwilling that his Province
should be deprived of so illustrious a light, recalled her from Ely into her
native country, where she with difficulty was persuaded to accept the
government of three Monasteries of Religious Virgins, Trickingham, since called
Trent in Staffordshire, Ap. Capgrav. in ^. Wereborga.
Wedun and Hamburg in Northamp^onshire: which she governed with such meeknes,
that she seemd rather their servant, then Mistress, directing them more by her
example then command.

6. And no wonder she should find obedience from her devout Daughters, when as
even irrational and wild creatures became subject to her command, as if by her
Sanctity she had recovered that empire which man enjoyed in his primitive
Innocence. I should forbear relating an illustrious miracle to this purpose
touching her banishing from her territory great flocks of Wild-geese for their
importunity and wastfull devou^ing her corn and other fruits, were it not that
I find it related by ancient credible Authors, and not concealed also by
Protestants.

7. Camden makes mention of it as done at Wedun, Malmsbur. de P^^^tis. l. 4.
Ap. Capgrav. 1. Wereburgd.
though other Writers affirm that it happened at Chester, where she is said to
have lived several years. The manner of it was as follows: There was near
the walls of the Town a farm belonging to the Monastery, the corn whereof was
much wasted by flocks of Wild-geese, which the Steward of the place
endeavored, but in in vane, to chase away: Of which incommodity he made
complaint to the Holy Virgin. Whereupon she commanded him, saying, Go our ways
and shutt them all up in a house. He wondering at so strange a command, thought
the Saint spoke those words in ^east. But when she renewd the same iniunction
constantly and in a serious manner, he returned among the corn, where seeing
great numbers of such foul devouring the grain, he with a loud voice commanded
them in his Mistresses name to follow him. Hereupon immediately they all in one
drove followd him, and were shutt up together in a house. Now it happened that a
certain servant privately stole one of the said birds, which he hidd, with
intention to eat it. The next morning early the Holy Virgin went to the house,
where after she had in a chiding manner reprehended the birds for usurping that
which belonged not to them, she commanded them to fly away and not return.
Immediately the whole army of them took wing; but being sensible of the injury
done them, they flew not away, but hovering over the Holy Virgins head, with
wonderful noise made complaint of their loss. She hearing their importunat
clamours, understood by inspiration the cause thereof: and after search made,
the offender confessed his theft: Whereupon she commanded the bird to be
restored to her companions: after which they all with one consent flew away, so
as not any bird of that kind was afterward seen in that territory.

8. Thus writes the Author of the Virgins Life in Capgrave, more simply and
credibly then William of Malmsbury, who affirms that the stolen bird was killd,
and again restored to life by the Saint. As for Camden, succinctly mentioning
this miracle, he covertly insinuates his unwillinge^s to believe it: for thus
he writes, Camd. in Northamp.
The Miracles of Wereburga in driving away Wild-geese are ambitiously related
by credulous Writers: Implying that he had not faith enough to assent thereto.
Notwithstanding recounting the very like Miracle formerly by S. Hilda he is far
from professing any distrust of it, Id. ib. p. 585. alia's. 645.
For, says he, those Wild-geese whenever they fly over the territory
anciently belonging to S. Hilda, do suddenly fall to the ground, to the great
admiration of beholders. This I should have forborne to relate, had I not
received it from the testimonies of very many persons of good credit. And this
is ascribed to the Sanctity of S. Hilda. So that it seems the belief of such
Writers is an act, Harpsf. saec 7..c. 36.
not of reason, but of will or humor. Now the said territory says Harpsfeild,
contains the circuit of about twelve miles.

9. We will now pass to the death of the Holy Virgin. As Soon as she perceived
that Almighty God called her to receive the reward of her piety, Ap. Capgrav. in
^. Werburga.
she gave a strict command to her Religious Sisters, that in what place soever
she departed this life, her body should presently be carried to the Monastery of
Hanbury, and there buried: Which Monastery is situated in the Province of
Cambridge, near the Isle of Ely. So that it seems her desire was to rest where
she had learnt the first rudiments of her Sanctity. But notwithstanding her
command, the devout Virgins of Trickingham, where she dyed on the third day
before the Nones of February, out of excessive affection and reverence to their
beloved Mother neglected her command, and not only refused to deliver the
sacred treasure to the inhabitants of Hanbury, who justly demanded it, but by
all ways endeavored to secure their own possession of it. But in vain: for no
human care or force could resist the Holy Virgins Will. The foresaid Author in
Capgrave thus relates the matter full of wonder: Id. ib.
The body of S. Werburga, says he, was carried to the Church of Trickingham,
where it was most diligently kept, the doors of the Church being carefully
barred, and a watch moreover set upon it. But one night a deep sleep suddenly
seized on those which watched: and at the same time great multitudes of the
inhabitants of Hambury coming on them, all the doors of the Monastery became
opened, the locks and bar without any violence offered, falling to the ground.
Whereupon they took away the body, not any one resisting, and with great joy
carried it to Hanbury, where it was honorably buried. In which place sick
persons recover health, sight is restored to the blind, hearing to the dumb,
the leaprous are cleansed, and persons oppressed with several other diseases,
do there praise God for their recovery.

10. Nine years after her Sacred Body had been thus removed to Hanbury (or
Eanbirig) it was found entire and untainted, as a certain proof of the purity
and integrity of her soul, and so it remaind the space of fifty years, till
the time when the Pagan Danes with horrible cruelty wasted most of the
Provinces of Brittany: For then it was removed to Chester, anciently called
Civitas Legionum. There a certain Count named Leofric a little before the
Norman Conquest founded a Monastery of Religious Virgins, which was afterward
enlarged by Hugo Lupus Earl of Chester in the year of Grace one thousand
ninety two, and dedicated to the honor of Saint Wereburga: For the settling and
ordering of which Monastery Saint Anselm, afterward Archbishop of Canterbury:
was first invited into England. Martyrolog. Angl. 3. Febr.
The Commemoration of this Holy Virgin is in our Martyrologe instituted on the
third of February.

XVIII. C.
XVIII. CHAP.
1.2. etc. The Gests, Miracles and death of S. Milburga.

A. D. 676. Baron. hic.
1. AT this time the Saxon Churches in Brittany flourished like the Paradise of
our Lord, says Baronius: For they were plentifully adorned with Lillies of
pure Virginity, with violets of Religious Monks, not so conspicuous, because
growing in more humble places. They abounded likewise with most Holy Bishops:
Among which Saint Erconwald was most illustrious for his Sanctity. He might
have added Saint Theodore in Kent, Saint Leutherius among the West Saxons, and
Saint Wilfrid among the Northumbers. And to these he might have adjoined
several pious Princes, as Sebb King of the East Angles, and Ethelred of the
Mercians, both which laying aside their Crown and Purple took on them the
humble Habits of Monks, as shall be showed here after, and have deserved a place
among Saints in our Martyrologe.

2. Among the Lillies which adorned this Paradise none were in this age more
illustrious then the three daughters of Merwald who this year began to reign
over the Mercians together with his Brother Ethelred; Their names were Saint
Milburga the eldest, Saint Mildreda the second, and Saint Milgitha ( or as some
Authors call her, Saint Milwida) the youngest. These three were born to him by
Saint Ermenburga, or Saint Domneva, daughter to Eadbald King of Kent, and
Sister to the two forementioned Martyrs Saint Ethelred and Saint Ethelbert. She
was appointed Abbess of the Monastery of Menstrey in the Isle of Thanet, built
by King Egbert in expiation for the murder of those two innocent Princes, as
has been declared.

3. The life of her eldest daughter Saint Milburga, has been diligently
written by several Authors. A. D. 676 Harps^^^ saec 7. c. 23.
We will here content our selves with transcribing what Harpsfeild relates
concerning her, as follows: There concurred, to the affording a prerogative
of honor to Saint Milburga among other Holy Virgins, and particularly the
children of King Merwald, not only the splendor of a Royal descent from the
Kings of Kent and Mercia, but her Primogeniture also. But these privileges,
though, admired in the world, were so far from exalting her mind, that
prevented with Divine Love, by which she aspired to God only and celestial
things, she generously despised them, fixing all her thoughts and desires in
this one design, how she might remove all such impediments hindering her from
consecrating her whole life to Divine Meditations and Contemplation. For the
effecting of which glorious design she made a joyful enchange of splendid
Palaces for a Monastery, of Royal Purple for sackcloth, of a Princely Diadem
for a Religious veyle, and of all pretensions to the highest Earthly
Espousalls, for Christ her heavenly Bridegroom.

4. She therefore founded a Monastery of Religious Virgins at Wenlock a town in
Shropshire, over whom she was consecrated Abbess by Theodore Archbishop of
Canterbury. This Monastery was afterward endowd with ample possessions by her
Father and Uncle, Merwald and Wolfere Kings of the Mercians, and adorned with
great Privileges and many precious Relics of Saints. So that the said place
represented a New Paradise, considering the heavenly Society living there of
Virgins wholly employed in divine things, especially of Saint Milburga a worthy
Mother of so holy an Offspring, among whom there was a devout emulation and
contention in promoting the Zealous care of Humility, Chastity, and all other
offices of Piety.

5. Milburga having thas made a wonderful progress in all kinds of virtues,
and desiring nothing but her heavenly Spouse, and his Divine presence, when her
age and strength began to decline, her beloved Savior called her to him, after
she had been purified with daily fevers. In her last Sickness therefore she
called together her holy Community, which she commended in her prayers to God,
and desired them after her death to make choice of a pious and fitting
Superior. She exhorted them likewise to Unity and Pureness of heart, often
repeasting, Blessed are the peaceable for they shall be called the children of
God, Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God Having added other
like admonitio^s, and religiously armed her self against Death by the Holy
Sacraments of the Church, she departed happily on the seventh day before the
Calends of March to her eternal Bridegroom, to reign for ever with him for
whose love she despised all things on the earth. And for a testimony of her
present happiness, God was pleased after many ages to discover her Sacred Body
to the knowledge and veneration of pious Christians, in the year of Grace
eleaven hundred and one, during the reign of King Henry the first.

6. Concerning the invention of her Body William of Malmsbury thus writes,
Saint Milburga rests at Wenlock: Malnib. de Reg.
In ancient times her memory was celebrated by the inhabitants, but after the
coming in of the Normans by reason that the place of her Sepulcher was unknown,
she became forgotten* but of late a Convent of Cluny-Monks having been
established there* whilst they were busy in erecting the fabric of a New
Church, a certain child running earnestly over the pavement, the vault of her
Sepulcher broke under him, by which means the Body of the Holy Virgin was
discovered. Which being taken up, a most odoriferous vapor, as of a most
precious Balsam, perfumed the whole Church: And such a World of Miracles were
wrought by her intercession, that Wonderful multitudes flockd thither, both
rich and poor, insomuch as there was scarce room in the open feilds to receive
them, so strong a faith they had to find remedy there for their maladies.
Neither did they fail of their expectation, for none departed away without a
cure, or at least a mitigation of their dise^ses. And particularly the
Kings-Evill; incurable by Physicians, was through the merits of the Holy
Virgin, healed perfectly in several persons.

7. Hence it came to pass that the fame of her Sanctity could not be confined
within the bounds of Brittany: For in the Roman Martyrologe her Memory is
celebrated among the Saints on the three and twentieth of February, ^artyr.
Romans ^3 Febr.
where she is styled the daughter of the King of the Mercians, to wit, of
Merwald Brother of Ethelbert, and his companion in the Rule.

XIX. CHAPTER
XIX. CHAP.
1.2. etc. The Gests of Saint Mildreda, and Saint Milgitha Sisters to Saint
Milburga

9. And of their Brother Saint Meresin.

A. D. 67^.
1. WE will next adioyn to Saint Milburga her equally Holy Sister Saint
Mildreda, who in her tender infancy was by her Mother Saint Ermenburga sent
into France, to be educated and instructed in the Monastery of Cala (now called
Chelles) nea^ Paris, that so Divine Love might first take possession o^ her
soul. There, as we read in the Legend of her Life in Capgrave, ^p. Capgrav.
(...) S. Mildred
she excelled all the other Virgins her companions in humility and other
virtues.

2. During her younger years, her beauty and other Graces rendered her the
Oblect of the impure desires of several persons, which she constantly and
courageously resisted, passing untouched through the flames of lustful
tentations. Whence some Writers of following ages, from an unwary mistake, have
related that she was cast into a fiery furnace, because whilst she live^ there
in a secular Habit, she utterly refused the Marriage of a person of great
Quality: and by Divine assistance was preserved from burning But neither
William of Malmsbury, nor any of our Ancient Records mention this Miracle:
Therefore we willingly abstain from adorning that illustrious Virgin with
borrowed and false or suspected colors.

3. As Soon as King Egbert had finished the Monastery in the Isle of Thanet for
expiation of the Murder of the two forementioned Princes, Saint Mildreda was
recalled out of France; and by Saint Theodore Archbishop of Canterbury
consecrated Abbess there over seaventy Religious Virgins: Ibid.
among whom she behaved her self rather as a servant then a Mistress; desiring
more to be loved then feared by them: and by continual watching, fasting and
prayers spent her life in the service of God.

4. After a like rehearsal of her virtues* Harpsf. saec. 7. c. 10.
Harpsfeild adds, That she having severa^ years with great Sanctity
administered the Office of Abbess, at last by sickness was confined to her bed:
when causing all her Religious Virgin^ to be assembled, she gave them many
Instructions full of piety, above all earnestly exhorting them to conserve
among themselves mutual charity and Humility. After which she happily departed
to our Lord on the third day before the Ide^ of July: and was both dur^ng her
life and after her death powerful in Miracles.

5. Her Body was with great honor enterred in the said Monastery of Menstrey:
where it reposed near four hundred years, illustrious by the Veneration of
pious Christians, and the glory of frequent Miracles. From thence about the
year of Grace one thousand and thirty it was translated to Canterbury, Alstan
being Abbot there as shall be declared Concerning which Translation William of
Malmsbury thus writes, Malmsb. de Reg. l. 2. c. 1^.
In following time the Sacred Body of Saint Mildred was translated to the
Monastery of Saint Augustine in Canterbury; where it is with great devotion
venerated by the Monks, and for the fame of her piety and sweetness, answerable
to her Name, honored by all. And although all the corners of the said
Monastery are full of Saint Bodies, eminent for their Sanctity and Merits,
insomuch as any one of them might suffice to give a luster to the whole
Kingdom, yet the Relics of none are with more affectionate honor venerated,
then hers. She is present to all that love her, and ready to hear and fulfill
the requests of every one, etc. At London likewise there remains to this day a
Church dedicated to her honor.

6. Mir. in Fast. Belg. 13. Iulij.
Moreover her Memory is celebrated in the Belgic Provinces. For as Aubert
Miraeus testifies, part of her Relics was transported to Daventry, and reposed
there in the Cathedral Church. Mention is also made of the same Relics in the
Gallican Martyrologe, Martyrolog. Galli^ 1^. Iulij.
on the thirteenth of July, in these words. At Daventry in Belgium is the
Veneration of the Relics of S. Mildreda an English Virgin, consecrated to God
in the Monastery of Chelles in the Territory of Paris, which are reposed in the
Cathedral Church of S. Lebuin, together with the Bodies of the same Saint
Lebuin, and also of S. Marcellinus. Her departure out of the world have given
luster to this day. Saint Mildreda was conveniently associated to these two
Saints, Lebuin and Marcellinus, for her agreement with them both in her faith
and country: For they were English-Saxons likewise, who together with Saint
Willebrord preached the Faith to the inhabitants of Friseland and Geldres: of
whom we shall treat hereafter.

7. The determinate year of the death of these two Holy Virgins Saint Milburga,
and Saint Mildreda, is uncertain: Certain only it is that it is wrongfully
ascribed by some Writers to the year of Grace six hundred sixty four. For since
the same Authors affirm that they were consecrated by Saint Theodore
Archbishop of Canterbury, who came not into Brittany till after that year, it
is evident that in their computation there is an Antichronism.

8. We may therefore more commodiously ascribe it to this year of our Lords
Incarnation six hundred seaventy six: In which year on the six and twentieth of
February, our Martyrologe commemorates the Deposition of their youngest Sister
Saint Milgitha (or, Saint Milwida.) Concerning whom a very shhort account is
given by our ancient Authors: For of her we read only that she entered into
the Monastery of Estrey, built by the Penitent King Egbert in Kent, where she
so well imitated the Sanctity of her Sisters, that she likewise deserved a
place in the Catalogue of our Saints.

6. From these we must not separate a young Brother of theirs, called Mere^in:
Westmon ^ A. D. 676. Wigorn. A. D. 675.
Concerning whom Matthew of Westminster and Florentius testify this only, that
he was a child of eminent Sanctity.

XX. CHAP. XX. CHA.

1. 2. etc. The death and Miracles of Saint Ethelburga daughter of Anna King of
the East angles.

5. 6 Of S. Thoritgitha.

7. Of S. Hildelida.

1. TO the same year is referred likewise the death of Saint Ethelburga
daughter to Anna the pious King of the East Angles, and Sister to Saint
Erconwald. She was, as has been said, Abbess of the Monastery of Berking,
founded by her Brother.

Marty ^^^g Angl. 10 ^ct. (...). l. 45.9.
2. Concerning her death, happening the fifth day before the Ides of October,
thus writes Saint Beda: When Edilburga the pro^^ Mother of that devo^^
Congregation was to be taken out of the world, a wonderful vision appeared to
one of the Religious Sisters named Theorethid, who had lived many years in the
Monastery, serving our lord with all humility and sincerity, and had been an
assistant to the Holy Abbess in promoting the observance of Regular Discipline,
her charge being to instruct and correct the younger Sisters. Moreover to the
end that her spiritual strength might be perfected by infirmity, as the
Apostle says, she was suddenly assaulted by a most sharp disease, and for the
space of nine years greivously tormented with it. This happened to her by the
merciful Providence of her Savior, to the end that by this furnace of divine
tribulation whatsoever defects or impurities through ignorance or negligence
had insinuated themselves into her soul, might be cleansed away and consumed.

3. Now on a certain night toward the dawn of the morning, this Religious
Virgin upon some occasion going out of her chamber, saw manifestly, as it were,
a human body more bright then the Sun, enwrapped in linen, which being
transported out of the Dormitory of the Religious Virgins, was carried up to
heaven. And whilst she observed diligently by what force the said body should
be raised upwards, she saw that it was so lifted up by certain ropes, more
resplendent then gold, by which it was drawn higher and higher, till at last
the heavens opening, it was received in, after which she could see it no longer.

4. Considering this Vision, she did not at all doubt, but that it imported
that some one of that devout Congregation should shortly dye, whose soul by
good works formerly done, should as by certains cords be raised up to heaven.
And indeed so it fell out: For a few days after Saint Edilburga the devout
Mother of the said Congregation was freed from the prison of her body who had
lead her life in such perfection that none who knew her could doubt, but when
she left this world the entrance into her heavenly country would be opened to
her.

5. S. Ethelburga was buried in the same Monastery, and after her death
likewise was not wanting to procure comforts and blessings to her Religious
Sisters. For as the same S. Beda relates, Ide^ Ibid.
There was in the same Monastery a Devout Virgin of Noble descent, but more
ennobled by her Piety called Thorithgida who for many years had been so utterly
deprived of the use of her limbs, that she could not stir any one of them. She
being informed that the Body of the Venerable Abbess was carried to the Church,
where it was exposed some time before the burial, desired she might be
transported thither, and placed leaning toward it in the posture of one that
prays. This being done, she addressed her petition to her, as if she had been
alive, beseeching her to obtain from her merciful Creator that she might at
length be freed from her so tedious and bitter torments. And within a short
time her prayers, were heard, for the twelfth day after, she was delivered from
her corruptible body, and made an exchange of her temporal afflictions for
eternal happiness, and rest.

6. We will hereto from the same Author add another Testimonial of the same
Holy Virgins Sanctity, happening three years after in her Monastery of Barking.
Ide^ Ibid.
When the forementioned Hand-mayd of our Lord Thorithg^d had continued yet
three years in the body after the decease of her Mistress, she was so wholly
consumed with her foresaid infirmity, that there remaind scarce any flesh to
cover her bones. And at last when the time of her dissolution approached, she
lost all use and motion not only of her limbs, but her tongue also. In this
state after she had continued three days and as many nights, she was on a
sudden revived with a spiritual vision, insomuch as she opened both her eyes
and lips also, and looking up steadfastly to heaven, she began thus to speak to
a person, who, it seems, appeared to her, Your presence is most wellcom to me.
Having said this, she held her peace a little while, as expecting the answer of
the said person. And again with some show of passion, she added, If this may
not be, yet I beseech you let not the space in the mean time be long. Then
remaining silent awhile, she concluded, If this decree can by no means be
altered, yet I pray you let the delay not be beyond this following night.
Having spoken this, she was askd by her companions assisting her, who it was
with whom she talkd? With my most dear Mother Edilburga, said she. From whence
they understood that the Saint was come to signify to her that the ^ower of her
departure was at hand: For according to her request, after one day and night
had passed, she was freed from the chain both of her infirmity and body, and
was rewarded with eternal joys. No wonder therefore that this devout Virgin
Thorithgitha is placed among the Saints in our Martyrologe on the three and
twentieth of February, Martyrolog. Angl ^3. Febr.
in the year of Grace six hundred seaventy eight. A. D. 677.


7. There succeeded her in the government of the Monastery of Barking, Idem ib.
c. 10.
says Saint Beda, the devout servant of our Lord Saint Hildelida, who
continued many years Abbess thereof (no less then four and twenty) and showed
great diligence, and zeal in maintaining Regular observance and providing all
things necessary for her Community. This is the same Saint Hildelida to whom
Saint Aldelm, fourteen years after this, inscribed his Book entitled of
Virginity, and between whom passed several Letters yet extant: Of whom we
shall treat further hereafter.

XXI. CAAP. XXI. CHAPTER

1. The death of Escuin King of the West Saxons.

2. Of Hedda Bishop of the West Saxons Successor to S. Leutherius.

3. 4. etc. The Rule of S Benedict introduced into Glastonbury: when, into
other Monasteries, etc.

1. EScuin King of the West Saxons after a short reign of two years dying,
Kentuin remained sole King of those Provinces. He is by Alcuin named Entuin. A.
D. 677.


2. In the beginning of his reign, Leutherius Bishop of the West Saxons dying,
the said King called out of his Monastery a Religious man named Hedda, who
according to Saint Beda's testimony, Bed l 5 c. 19
was a good and just man, and worthily exercised the Episcopal charge in
directing and teaching his flock, being enabled thereto rather by the love of
piety engrafted in his heart, then by study or learning. Which Character
seeming to import that he was but meanly furnished with litterature, does not
satisfy William of Malmsbury, M^lmsb. de Pont. l. 2. f 241.
who professes that he had seen several Epistles of his which argued the
Writer not to have been destitute of learning, as likewise several Treatises
of S. Aldelm directed to him abounding with eloq^nce and profound knowledge. He
having been a Monk and Abbot administered the said Bishopric the space of
thirty years and more: and his Sanctity was testified by many Miracles, etc. He
was consecrated Bishop in the City of London, says S. Beda, by Theodore
Archbishop of Canterbury.

3. Concerning this Holy Bishop, and particularly his solicitude to advance
Religious Observance, A^ Vsser in ^^^mo^d. f. 112.
we read this passage qouted out of the great Table of Glastonbury by B. Usher:
Bishop Hedda his body to this day reposes under a stone-Pyramid heretofore
curiously engraven in the upper Churchyard of the Monks. He obtained of King
Cantwin to the Old Church a liberty royal in the Isle of Glastonbury, as
likewise a free power to the Monks there serving God, of electing and
constituting over themselves an Abbot, according to the Rule of S. Benedict.

4. Inas King of the West Saxons in his great Charter of Privileges granted to
the same Monastery in the year of Grace seven hundred twenty five, makes
mention of this Indult, Antiq. Glast.
confirming all former Donations given by his Predecessors or others to that
Monastery: particularly that of King Kenwalch, who by the intercession of
Theodore Archbishop of Canterbury bestowed on it these lands, Ferlingmere,
Beokeri, Godney, Martinesey, Edresey; likewise of King Kentwin who gave
Glastingie, and was wont to call the said Monastery the Mother of Saints,
ordaining that it should enjoy an immunity from all both Secular and
Ecclesiastical duties, and added withal this Privilege, That the Monks
living there should have the power to elect and constitute to themselves a
Superior according to the Rule of S. Benedict: Also of Bishop Hedda, who with
the allowance and approbation of Cedwalla, though a Pagan under his own hand,
gave Lantocai: of Baldred who gave Pennard containing six hydes of land, of
Athelard who gave Pohelt containing sixty hydes: all whose Donations I do
approve and confirm, etc.

5. Here is the first mention of S. Benedicts Rule received in the Monastery of
Glastonbury. How long before this time it had been there embraced, or whether
it now entered by the procuring of Bishop Hedda, does not appear. But certain it
is that those Writers are mistaken who affirm that before S Dunstan's
government of that Monastery the Monks thereof were not professed Disciples of
S. Benedict. After this time the said Rule and Profession by little and little
took place in most other Monasteries, as in the Norin-parts by the diligence of
S. Wilfrid, and of S. Benedict, surnamed Biscop: Yea the Britains also, and
Scotts who had received their Religious Instituts from the Irish, began to
disuse their ancient Rites, and esteemed it piety to conform themselves to the
Rule of S. Benedict. But as for the Monasteries of Canterbury and the whole
Province of Kent there is not the least mark afforded in ancient Story that the
Institut of S. Benedict was introduced among them after their coming into
Brittany: on the contrary they were Kentish Monks, who were employed in settling
the said Institut among the Northumbers. So that it is demonstrably evident
that the Prime Apostles of the Christian Faith among the Saxons professed and
brought in the same Rule.

6. Now this Privilege at this time given to the Monks of Glastonbury of
electing their own Abbott, argues that in former ages the constituting of
Abbots belonged, not to the Monks, but to the Bishop or the Prince: from whose
power and Jurisdiction the Monks could not exempt themselves, without their
free devesting themselves of it: which we see here done by King Kentwin and
Bishop Hedda: concerning whom we shall speak more hereafter.

7. As for King Kentuin the Memory of his Munificence to the Monastery of
Glastonbury was there gratefully conserved, for this Elogy we read of him in
the great Table of that Monastery, Antiq. Glast. ap. Malmsb.
In the same place reposes the body of King C^^twin, under a stone-Pyramid in
the Churchyard of the Monks. He was the first of the English Kings which
granted to the Isle of Glastonbury an Exemption from all Regal Service: as the
British Kings before him had of old time confirmed.

8. To this time is referred the erecting* or rather restoring of the prime
Church in the Isle of Ely, which was first consecrated to the honor of S.
Peter Prince of the Apostles, but afterward entitled to S. Ediltrudis (or
Ethelreda:) Concerning which Church we read this testimony of B. Godwin:
Godvvin. in Catal. Episc. E^ens.
Ethelbert (says he) King of Kent by the advice of S. Augustine had seaventy
years before this time built a Church in that place, to wit, in the year of
our Lords Incarnation six hundred and seven. Which Church through neglect for
want of reparation falling to ruin, was rebuilt in a more magnificent manner
in the year six hundred seaventy seven by S. Ediltrudis. This she did by the
counsel of Wilfrid Archbishop of York: but her Brother Aldulfus (or Alnufus)
King of the East Angles furnished the Charges of the work. This Aldulfus was
the Successor of Edilwald in that Kingdom: and if, according to Speed, he was
the Son of Ethelherd Brother of Anna, he was not Brother, but cousin german to
S. Ediltrudis.

XXII. CHAP. XXII. C.

1.2. etc. Kent miserably wasted: Putta Bishop of Rochester quitts his See* in
whose place Quichelm succeeds.

1. AT this time there was a great desolation in the Churches and kingdom of
Kent, whereby the labors of Saint Theodore were much increased. Which
desolation was caused by a furious invasion of that kingdom the year before by
Edilred King of the Mercians. What the provocation or motive of this war was
is not mentioned by ancient Writers: but the effects of it were terrible.

2. S. Beda thus briefly describes it: Bed. l. 4 c. 12.
In the year of our Lords Incarnation six hundred seaventy six Edilred King of
the Mercians brought a furious army into Kent, and laid the whole country
wast, yea without all regard of Piety or the fear of God profaned and
demolished also Churches and Monasteries. Particularly the G^tty Rhofi (or
Rochester) was utterly consumed in that common calamity. Of that City Putta
was ^he^ Bishop, though absent at the time of its destruction. Lothair was now
King of Kent, who fearing the violence and courage of Ed^red, says Huntingdon,
Huntingd. l. 2.
made no resistance at all, but avoided his fight. So that Edilred passed
freely through the whole Province, destroyed the City of Rochester, and carted
back with him innumerable Spoils.

3. As for Putta Bishop of Rochester, being a man that loved quietness and
solitude, he, Bed. vbi sup.
according to Saint Beda's relation, seeing his Church utterly spoiled and
wasted, retired to Sexulphus Bishop of the Mercians: from whom having received
the possession of a Church and a small piece of ground adjoining, he there
ended his life in peace. He did not at all employ his solicitude about the
restoring of his Bishopric, being one whose industry was little exercised in
worldly affairs. Therefore he contented himself in serving God after a poor
manner in the foresaid Church: and some times when he was entreated, he would
go to other places for the instruction of Ecclesiastical persons in the
(Roman) manner of singing the Church service.

Id. ibid.
4. The Sea of Rochester being thus deprived of a Pastor, the Archbishop
Theodore in the place of Putta consecrated Quithelm Bishop of that City: and
when he also shortly after quitted his Bishopric by reason of its extreme
poverty, the said Archbishop substituted in his room another Bishop called
Gebmund.

XXIII. C.
XXIII. CHAP.
1.2. The death of Vina the Simoniacall Bishop of London.

3 4. etc. S. Erconwald succeeds in that See.

1 DVring this confusion in Kent, the Kingdom of the adjoining East Saxons
enjoyed a profound peace under the government of Sebb and Sigher two pious
Kings. Particularly King Sebb employed all his care in advancing Piety among
his Subjects, in promoting the affairs of the Church, and in encouraging
devout persons to renounce the world, and consecrate themselves to God in a
Monastical Profession. To which state of life himself also earnestly aspired,
being desirous to abandon his Regal authority, and to change his purple for a
poor Religious Habit, but was hindered by the obstinacy of his Queen, who
refused to consent to a separation, and to imitate her husbands piety: and
without her compliance the Ecclesiastical Canon rendered him incapable of
executing his pious design. Many years he spent in persuading her to her own
and his happiness, and at lost by devout importunity expugned her resistance, as
shall shortly be showed.

2. In the mean time a great part of his solicitude was employed in settling a
worthy Prelut in London, the Metropolis of his Kingdom. We have declared before
how Wina the Sacrilegious Bishop of the West Saxons, having for his crimes been
expelled out of that Province, with a sum of money Simoniacally procured from
Vulfere King of the Mercians to be violently introduced into that See in the
year of Grace six hundred sixty six: which he for the space of nine years
unworthily administered. After whose death King Sebb expressed a zealous care to
repair the prejudice and harm done to that Province by so impious a Prelat. For
which purpose he earnestly sought out a Successor as eminent for piety and
integrity as the other was for his crimes.

3. At that time there lived not any one in that Kingdom in so high esteem of
all men for virtue and Religion, as Erconwald. He was as has been declared,
the Son of Anna King of the East Angles (not of Offa, as Capgrave, and from him
Harpsfeild mistakes:) and from his tender years conceived a distaste and
contempt of secular designs and pleasures: Insomuch as he relinquished his
Native Province, and retired among the East Saxons, where he employed his
plentiful patrimony in works of piety. We have already declared how he founded
two Monasteries in that Kingdom: one for himself at Chertsey in Surrey, near
the River Thames: and another for his Sister Edilburga in Essex, in a village
called Barking.

4 This in all regards so eminent an Abbot, Erconwald, was made choice of by
King Sebbe to administer the vacant See of London. to which he was consecrated
by Saint Theodore Archbishop of Canterbury, according to this relation of
Saint Beda: Bed. l. 4 c. 6.
At that time, says he (to wit, in the year of our Lords Incarnation six
hundred seaventy five) Sebbe and Sighere Kings of the East Saxons constituted
Earconwald Bishop in the City of Londen: whose life and conversation, both
whilst he was Bishop, and before, is reported to have been full of Sanctity, as
the Miracles to this day wrought by his intercession do demonstrate: For the
horse litter in which during his sickness he was wont to be carried, and which is
preserved by his Disciples, does still continue to cure many persons afflicted
with fevers and other infirmities. Neither does it work this effect only upon
such as are placed under it, or lean against it, but likewise chipps sliced
from it, and carried to the sick, do restore them to health.

Godvvin in in Catal. Episc. Londin.
5. We will adioyn hereto the testimony even of B. Godwin likewise: Erconwald,
says he, a man eminent for learning and Sanctity, bestowed his whole Patrimony
in erecting and endowing Monasteries. One he founded for himself at Chertsey:
and another for Religious Virgins at Barking, over which he appointed his
Sister Edilburga Abbess. He employed wast sums of money in the structure of
the Church dedicated to S. Paul, the revenews whereof he much increased, and
obtained from the Princes of that age great Privileges thereto. He addsi, That
his Body was laid in a Coffin of great price and buried in the East part of S.
Paul's Church, above the high Altar, where it continued till about fourscore
years ago, at which time it disappeared. Concerning this Holy Bishop occasion
will offer it self to say more hereafter.

THE EIGHTEENTH BOOK OF THE CHVRCH-HISTORY OF BRITTANY.
I. CHAP.
I. CHAPTER.
1.2. etc. A debate between Saint Wilfrid and Saint Theodore: raised by the
covetous Queen of the Northumbers: Saint Wilfrids Appeal, and banishment.

1. IN the year of Grace six hundred seaventy eight Pope Donus dying, A. D. 678.
Pope Agathon succeeded him in the Chair Apostolic, whom we shall have
occasion frequently to mention by reason of a great controversy this year begun
in Brittany between the two Supreme Prelates of this Island, S. Wilfrid
Archbishop of York, and S. Theodore of Canterbury, which lasted many years,
sometimes composed by the said Popes authority, and again breaking forth, to
the great disturbance of the peace of our Saxon Churches, though it pleased the
Divine goodness by occasion thereof to enlarge his Church by the happy
c^nversion of several Nations both within and out of Brittany.

2. A brief account of this dissension, foresignified by a prodigious Comet
appearing the same year, Bed. l. 3. c. 12.
it thus recorded by S. Beda, In the year of our Lords Incarnation six hundred
seaventy eight (says he) which was the eighth year of the reign of Egfrid King
of the Northumbers, there appeared in the month of August a Comet or blazing
star, which for three months together arose every morning, representing a great
pillar of wonderful light. The same year a dissension arising between the said
King Egfrid and the most Reverend Prelat Wilfrid, the Holy Archbishop was
driven from his See, and in his place were substituted two Bishops to govern
the Nation of the Northumbers, to wit Bosa who administered the Episcopal
Office in the more Southern parts of the Deiri, or Yorkshire, etc. and Eata in
the Nation of the Bernicians, or Northumberland, etc. The former had his
Episcopal See at York, the other in the Church of Hagulstad (Hexham) or
Lindesfarn. Both of them were taken out of a Convent of Monks, and thence
promoted to the Episcopal degree. And together with these a third person named
Eadhed was ordained Bishop over the Province of the Lindesfars, (or
Lincolnshire) which a short time before King Egfrid, having defeated Wulfere
King of the Mercians, had got the possession of. This Eadhed, was the first
peculiar Bishop of the said Province: Fasti Savil ad hunc annum.
(the prime Seat of his Bishopric was Sidnacester, a place whose memory is now
worn out by age: Yet some esteem it to be the same that is now called
Gainsborow, or at least situated near it: from whence in after times the Sea
was translated to Dorchester, and last of all to Lincoln, where it still
remains.)

A. D. 678.
5. Thus writes S. Beda of S. Wilfrids expulsion, and of a new distinction and
institution of Episcopal Sees. Saint Ceadda before he was translated to
Lichfeild, had been the only Prelat of the whole Kingdom of the Northumbers,
governing both the Churches of York and Lindesfarn. He by the sentence of
Archbishop Theodore, surrendered that whole Province to Saint Wilfrid. Now
Saint Wifrid by the displeasure and Violence of King Egfrid being expelled, in
his place Bosa administers the Sea of York, and Eata that of the Province of
the Bernicians, who is reckoned the fifth Bishop of Lindesfarn, and first of
Hagulstad.

4. The Institution of these New Bishoprics was ordered in virtue of the ninth
Canon of the forementioned Synod of Hertford assembled by Archbishop Theodore
five years before this, where it was ordained, that the number of Christians
increasing, Bishoprics likewise should be multiplied. From hence issued the
first spark of dissension this year between the two Holy Archbishops, S.
Wilfrid and S. Theodore, which afteward was raised to a great flame. The
progress of which dissension we will consequently relate from William of
Malmsbury: which indeed took its first original from the Court of King Egfrid,
and the malicious envy of his new Queen Ermenburga: For it has been fatal to
the British, Saxon and Norman Churches of this Island, that generally
disorders and Schisms have been begun by women.

5. As long as the glorious Virgin Saint Ediltrudis enjoyed the Title of Queen
and Consort to King Egfrid, Malmsbu. de Pontif. l. 3.
all things succeeded happily to the Kingdom and Church of the Northumbers, and
Saint Wilfrid by the great esteem and reverence which his piety and zeal had
obtained, was well enabled to promote the affairs of the Church. But as soon as
the said Holy Virgin by Saint Wilfrids assistance had gained her husbands
consent to exchange a temporal for a celestial marriage, and to retire into a
Religious Solitude enriched with poverty and a want of all sensual
contentments, there more freely to enjoy the Spiritual embracements of her
heavenly Bridegroom: King Egbert received into her place a Second Consort,
Ermenburga, a Lady of a disposition much different from the former, and
particularly tainted with the vices usually enough attending that Sex,
Covetousnes and Envy.

6. By the piety of the former King Oswi and several of the Nobility, so
wonderful an accession of possessions and riches had been made to the tender
growing Churches of the Northumbers under the care of Saint Wilfrid, that the
Sacred Vessels pertaining to Gods Altars were many of them of pure gold, and
not any of a lower metal then Silver: and the Vestments and other ornaments,
of a suitable magnifice^ce. This splendor dazeled the eyes of the New Queen,
who with a malignant aspect began to look upon the Holy Archbishop, by whose
zeal such riches had been consecrated to Gods service.

7. This Envy, corroding thus the Queens heart, she endeavored to impart to
her husband, whose ears she incessantly filled with malicious suggestions
against the Holy Prelat, insomuch as by little and little his affection and
respect to him diminishing, at length his Love was turned into hatred, and he
began to persecute him by whose prayers he had formerly obtained so many great
Victories.

8. Notwithstanding though this credulous King hearkened too willingly to his
wives malicious suggestions, yet he would not assume to himself a power to
dispose of Ecclesiastical revenews, or to deprive the Holy Bishop of that
wealth with which his Predecessor and others had entrusted him. Therefore he
consulted Saint Theodore Archbishop of Canterbury, suggesting to him that
Saint Wilfrid did abound with an immense superfluity of wealth, which might be
sufficient for the maintenance of many Bishoprics, of which so large a
Province did stand in need.

9. By so fair a pretense of extending piety, the King drew the Archbishop S.
Theodore into his faction: who without any delay, and without consulting Saint
Wilfrid, presently introduced into his Province three New Bishops, pretending a
ground of justice, that three Bishops might sufficiently be maintained by those
revenews, which being in one man's disposal, nourished in him arrogance and
pride; and moreover the Province being so vast, and the number of Christians so
multiplied, it was necessary that the care of them should be committed to many
Governors. These allegations may indeed appear rational and just: But there
was no show of justice in despoyling a worthy Bishop of all the possessions
which by his industry he had procured to the Church, and without demanding his
consent, imparting them to others. This injustice on Saint Theodore's part was
much aggravated, in that he was said to be induced to so hasty and violent
proceedings against Saint Wilfrid, by Gifts sent him from the King and Queen.

10. That the Archbishop of Canterbury should assume to himself such a power
and jurisdiction over so great a Province not in an ordinary way subject to
him, we need not wonder: seeing, as has been declared, that Power was
conferred on him, not only by the Pope, but by virtue of the Late National
Synod of Hertford, which ordained an increase of the number of Bishoprics.
Notwithstanding the manner of exercising this extraordinary jurisdiction was
unexcusable: and Saint Theodore himself a little before his death was sensible
of the injury done by him, acknowledging his fault, and desiring pardon of it.

11. S. Wilfrid understanding well enough that this violence and oppression was
brought upon him by the Kings command, repaired to him, and complained of the
injury done him, alleging that the Ecclesiastical Laws forbade any deminution
or change to be made in any Episcopal See, before permission was given to the
Bishop to allege and defend his own rights. That Kings were the Patrons and
Defenders of the Patrimony of Christ, and not dissipatours thereof. If any
fault or demerit could be imputed to him, he desired his accusers might be
produced, and space allowd him for his defense. All the answer that the Holy
Bishop could obtain hereto from King Egbert was this, We lay no crime to your
charge: but what we have ordained touching your Bishopric we will see ratified.

12. S. Wilfrid, perceiving that a Legal and Canonical debate of this matter
was refused him, replied to the King with a constancy beseeming a worthy Prelat
in maintaining the Rights of his Church: I see, said he, that Your Majesty has
been wrought upon to my prejudice by certain factious and malignant persons
about you, I appeal therefore from them to the Sea Apostolic.

13. This conference passed between King Egbert and S. Wilfrid in a full
assembly of Nobility and other attendants. The Courtiers therefore as soon as
they heard the Holy Bishop mentioning an Appeal, broke forth into open laughter
and derision of him. But he presently repressed their irreverent Scorn with
this sad denunciation and prophecy, Unhappy men, you laugh now to see the
Churches ruind: but on this very day the next year you shall with tears bewayl
your own ruin. Having said this, he departed from the Kings presence, and
presently after forsook both his See and the Kingdom of the Northumbers,
retiring into the next Kingdom of the Mercians.

II. CHAP. II. CHAP.

1.2 etc. S. Wilfrid passes through the Mercian Kingdom.

3. He is by tempests cast among the Frisons: whom he converts to the Faith.

4.5 etc. His enemies seek to murder him, by the means of Ebroin: He comes safe
to Rome.

1. SAint Wilfrid being thus expelled his See, took his journey toward Rome
through the Kingdom of the Mercians, where by King Ethelred he was honorably
received. The said King at that time had finished the Monastery of
Medeshamsted, afterward called Peterborow, which had been begun by his
Predecessors, King Peada and King Wolfer. And he took this opportunity of our
Holy Bishops voyage to Rome, to send by him a request to Pope Agathon, that he
would by Apostolic authority confirm the Liberties, Privileges and Exemptions
of that Monastery, which by Kingly authority had been granted. Mention is made
of this Request in an Ancient Manuscript of the said Monastery of Peterbortw in
Sir Henry Spelmans Councils. And what Answer Pope Agathon gave to it shall be
declared two years hence at Saint Wilfrids return from Rome, where he gaind his
cause.

2. S. Wilfrid made no stay in the Kingdom of the Mercians, Bed. l 5. c. 20.
but continuing his journey to the Sea, as soon as he took ship, says S. Beda,
he was by a South-west wind driven to the Country of the Frisons, where he was
honorably received by that barbarous Pagan Nation and their King Adalgise, to
whom he preached Christ, and having instructed many thousands of them in the
Word of Truth, he washed away the stains of their sins with the saving water of
Baptism. Thus he was the first Preacher of the Gospel in that Nation: and
that Doctrine which he taught, was afterward with great devotion perfectly
planted among them by the most Reverend Bishop S. Willebrord. In this
Apostolical employment Saint Wilfrid happily spent the Winter succeeding among
that new converted people: and the spring following resumed his journey toward
Rome.

3. Herein, as Baronius well observes, the merciful Providence of God did
manifestly shine forth, Baron. A. D. 678.
in permitting a most holy Bishop to be violently thrust from his See, to the
end he might derive the fresh springs of the Gospel to a Nation ready to dye
with thirst: insomuch as with regard to this his Apopostolick Office, those
Prophetical words of Scripture may be applied to him, Who are those which fly
abroad like clouds, etc? For he by a blast of wind was carried into a dry and
barren land, which he presently watered and rendered fruitful by heavenly showrs
poured upon it,

4. Whilst S. Wilfrid busied himself in reducing to the purity of Christian
Faith the Nation of the Frisons from their filthy Idolatry, Malmsbur. de Pont.
l. 3.
the Devil to interrupt that good work, or to be revenged on the worker,
kindled again in the minds of his Adversaries among the Northumbers that envy
and malice, which seemd to have been assuaged by his exile: insomuch as they
became enraged to hear that the Holy Bishop persecuted by them should be made
an instrument of good to Srangers. Hereupon by messages and gifts they
solicited the Franks to procure the murder of the Apostolic Prelat.

5. There lived still in greatest power among the Franks, Ebroin, Maire of the
Kings Palace, who, as has been declared, had already embrued his hands in the
blood of Dalphinus Bishop of Lions, Sup. l.
and several other Prelates of the French Church. Him did the malicious
Northumbers hire to this execrable murder: Who immediately by promises, gifts
and menaces solicited Adalgise King of the Frisons to be the Executioner. But
this barbarous, half-pagan Prince did so utterly abhor this unchristian
proposal, that he threw the Letters of Ebroin into the fire, after he had read
them in the hearing of Saint Wilfrid who was then feasted by him, and whilst
they were burning he added these words, So may he be burned, who for
covetousnes of gold, would dissolve the band of freindship once agreed upon.

6. Thus by the watchful Providence of God did the Holy Bishop escape the
snares laid against his life: and when the Spring had mitigated the feircenes
of the air, A. D. 679.
and opened the ways for traveling, Saint Wilfrid renewed his journey toward
Rome, and, Malmsbu. ib.
as William of Malmsbury relates, passing through the Kingdom of the Franks
inhabiting beyond the Rhene, came to the King of that Nation called Dagobert:
Who entertained him with all kindness and respect, calling to mind how when he
himself had formerly by a faction of his Nobles been driven out of his Kingdom
into Ireland, at his return this Holy Bishop had lodged him freindly, and
moreover furnished him with horses and attendants to his own country. To
express his gratitude therefore this King not only with extreme benignity
received Saint Wilfrid, but with most earnest prayers solicited him to accept
the Bishopric of Strasbourg, and fix his habitation in his country. This
kind offer the Holy Bishop thought not convenient then to accept, but deferred
his resolution till his return from Rome: Whereupon he was, though unwillingly,
dismissed by the King, and being accompanied with his Bishop Deodatus,
prosecuted his journey.

7. Thus writes the said Historian. A. D. 679.
But what he relates of Dagoberts expulsion into Ireland. ought to be applied
to Theodoric King of the Franks who lived at this time, and being rejected by
his Subjects, might have been thus hospitably entertained by S. Wilfrid.
Whereas King Dagobert was dead several years before this.

8. Saint Wilfrid being thus dismissed with recommendations, Id. ib.
passing through Champaigne diverted out of the straight way to visit Berthaire
Prince of that Province. This Prince had from the Holy Bishops enemies been
informed of the cause of his journey, and moreover invited by promises to
procure some mischief to him. Whereupon at his first coming he received him
with an arrogant frowning countenance: but as soon as he had been acquainted
with a true relation of the cause, his displeasure was mitigated, insomuch as
he did not only abstain from doing him any hurt, but by his recommendation and
assistance brought the controversy to a good end: Withal professing that he
was induced hereto by the humanity of the King of the Hunns, in whose Court he
had formerly lived during his banishment, who though he was a Pagan, yet could
by no offers be corrupted to do the least harm to him to whom he had once
promised security.

9. The like courtesy and Civility did Saint Wilfrid find from all Princes
through whose Courts and Provinces he passed: insomuch as at last he arrived
safely at Rome, where he found Pope Agathon busily employed in repressing the
Heresy of the Monothelites, who taught that our Savior though subsisting in
two Natures, yet had but one Will. This Heresy had at that time greivously
infected the Eastern Churches, for the extirpation whereof, and preventing the
spreading of it in the West, that Holy Pope had at this time assembled a Synod
at Rome: to which S. Wilfrid was invited, where likewise his cause was
determined: But before we relate the success thereof, it will be expedient to
declare how in his absence almighty God justified his innocence by inflicting a
sharp judgment on his Enemies and persecutours at home.

III. CHA.
III. CHAP.
1 2. etc. Saint Wilfrids Prophecy fullfilled.

Winfrid Bishop of Lichfeild expelled.

1. THAT Prophetical denunciation, by which Saint Wilfrid, being derided by
the Courtiers of King Egfrid for his Appeal to Pope Agathon, ^oretold them,
That their laughter should precisely within the space of a year be turned into
grievous lamentation, Malmsb. l. 3
was exactly fulfilld the next year in which he remaind at Rome. For not long
after his departure Ethelred King of the Mercians, Brother of Wolfere, being
desirous to avenge the injuries of his brother sustained from King Egfrid, who
had overcome him in battle, and possessed himself of the Province of the
L^ndesfars (or Lincolnshire) he denounced war against the said Egfrid: Who
swelling with pride for his former victory, courageously met him with an army,
not doubting of like success against him.

^ed. l. 4. c. ^1.
2. The two armies met, says Saint Beda, near the River Trent, where coming to
a decisive battle, the Mercians utterly defeated the army of the Northumbers,
and among a multitude of others there was slain, E^win, the Brother of Egfrid,
a young man about eighteen years old, tenderly loved both by the Northumbers
and Mercians: for his Sister, named Ostrids, was wife to King Ethe^red. And it
happened that on the very day, a twelf-month after Saint Wilfrid had suffered the
^orementioned injury, the dead body of that hopeful young Prince was brought
to York, which caused a general and long continued mourning both to the City
and Province.

3. If this battle was fought on the South side of Trent in Nottingham-shire
where remains a village called Edwinstow, it is most probable that place took
its name rather from this Prince, who by William of Malmsbury is called Edwin,
then from the Holy King and Martyr Saint Edwin, who by Saint Beda's testimony
was slain at a place called Heathfeild in Yorkshire.

4. By this victory King Ethelred recovered that portion of his Kingdom called
the Province of the Lindesfari, which Egfrid had formerly won from his brother
Wolfere. But this one defeat not concluding the war, to the continnance of
which both these Kings made great preparations: Idem Ibid.
S. Theodore Archbishop of Canterbury, trusting in the Divine assistance,
interposed himself between them, and by many zealous exhortations pacified
their minds, so as that flame was quite extinguished, insomuch as no other
satisfaction was given to King Egfrid, for the death of his Brother, but only a
sum of money. And the peace concluded between the two Nations continued
inviolate for many years.

5. King Ethelred having thus repaired the breaches formerly made in his
Kingdom, Malmsbur. de Pont. l. 3.
expelled out of his Province Winfrid Bishop of Lichfeild and Successor to the
Holy Bishop Ceadda, for that he had favored the party of King Egfrid. The
exiled Bishop therefore passing over the Sea, was driven on the shore of
France: where he fell in to the hands of Theodo^ick King, and Ebroin chief
Commander of the Franks, to whom, as hat been said, a Message had been sent
to^^ apprehend the Holy Bishop Wilfrid. These therefore by a mistake of the
name of Winfrid for Wilfrid, slew the said Bishops attendants, and suffered him,
after he had been pillaged of all things, to go his way: So dearly did he pay
for the affinity of his Name to Saint Wilfrid. Thus writes William of
Malmsbury: In whose narration this difficulty appears, that Theodorick King of
the Franks is declared a persecutour of Saint Wilfrid, who a little before is
said to have entertaind him with all kindness. But the same excuse is here to be
made for him, which heretofore was made for Saint Bathildis Queen Regent of
France, to whom some Writers impute the murder of the Holy Bishop Dalphinus;
not that she was guilty of it, but because it was done during her Regency, by
the cruelty of Ebroin, who had the whole power of the kingdom in his hands.

IV. CHAP. IV. CHA.

1.2 etc. A wonderful Miracle, showing the efficacy of the Holy Sacrifice of
the Mass.

1. IT would be a fault in this place to omit a wonderful accident which
befell in the late b^ttell where the young Prince Elwin was slain, by which
Almighty God was pleased to declare the efficacy of his servants Prayers,
especially during the solemn Sacrifice of his Church. The fact is upon good
testimony related by S. Beda in the manner following: 2. Among others, Bid. l.
4. c. 22
says he, there was in the said battle one of the Princes soldiers, named
Imma, slain (at least in opinion.) This soldier all that day and the night
following lay among the other dead bodies, as if he had been slain: but at last
his Spirit returning he sat up, and as well as he could, bound up the wounds
he had received. Then resting himself awhile, he raised himself on his feet,
and began to walk away with an intention to find out, if possible, some
friends, who might take care of him. As he was going away, he was met with and
taken by some of the enemies, the Mercians, and brought to their Captain, a
principal Officer of King Ethelred, who examined him what he was. The poor
man was a fraid to acknowledge himself a soldier, therefore he answered that he
was a poor countryman, who had a wife, and was come in this expedition with
several others of the like quality, to bring provision to the Army. Upon this
answer the Officer commanded that care should be taken of his wounds, and when
they began to be almost cured, he made him every night to be putt in chains, to
prevent his running away.

3. But no chains could hold him: for after they were gone which had putt the
chains upon him, they presently fell off. And the cause of this wonder was
this. He had a Brother named Tunna, a Priest and Abbot of a Monastery in a
certain town which at this day from his name is called Tunnacestir. This Abbot
having heard that his brother was slain in the late battle, came himself to
search for his body: and having found another in all regards very like to his,
he carried it to his Monastery, and there buried it honorably. Moreover he took
care that several Masses should be said for the pardon of his sins: and by
virtue of those Masses it came so pass that no bands could hold him, but they
presently fell loose from him.

4. In the mean time the Officer whose Prisoner he was, began to ask him, How
it came to pass that he could not be bound? Whether he had about him certain
Charms, which as some think, have a power to untye all bands? His answer was,
that he was utterly ignorant of such unlawful arts: But, said he, I have a
Brother in mine own country, and I am assured that he thinking I am slain,
says frequent Masses for me: so that if I were now in the other world, I doubt
not but my soul by his intercession and prayers, would be absolved from all
pains.

5. After he had continued a good space a Prisoner to the said Officer, those
who guarded him observed by his countenance, gesture and speeches that he was
no countrey-peasant, but a person of quality. Thereupon the Officer calling him
aside privately, enquired more diligently who he was: withal promising him that
if he would simply declare his condition, he would not use him any thing the
worse. He then plainly manifested to him that he was a servant of the King of
the Northumbers. Whereupon the Officer replied, I did assure my self by the
manner of thy speech that thou were not of a base condition. And now thou
deservest to dye, in revenge of all my brethren and kinsmen who have been slain
in the battle: but because I will not break my promise I will not kill thee.

6. As Soon therefore as he had recovered health and strength the Officer sold
him to a certain man at London called Freson. But neither could he be bound by
his New Master: for after try all of several sorts of bands and chains, they
became all unloosed. When he therefore who had bought him perceived that he
could not be restained by fetters, he gave him permission to redeem himself, if
he could. For commonly after nine of the clock in the morning the usual time
of Masses, his bands were untyed. Upon this offer the Prisoner was suffered to
depart, having first given his promise by oath that he would either send the
money agreed on for his ransom, or return and yield himself a prisoner again.
He went therefore from London into Kent to King Lothere Nephew to the famous
Queen Ethelreda by her Sister, who likewise had formerly been a servant to the
said Queen: and from him the Prisoner received the money appointed for his
ransom, which according to promise he sent to his Master.

7. Being thus free, after some time he returned to his Country, and coming to
his Brother the Abbott, he related to him particularly all the accidents, both
good and bad, which had befalln him: and then perceived that his chains for the
most part had been loosed precisely at the hours in which Masses had been
celebrated for him: and moreover that many other commodities and comforts had
befalln him from heaven, in his dangers, by his Brothers prayers and the
Oblation of the saving Sacrifice.

8. Very many persons being informed from the foresaid person of these
particulars, have been much kindled in their Faith and devotion to pray, give
alms and Offer holy Sacrifices for the deliverance of their friends who were
departed this life. For hereby they perceived that that saving Oblation was of
wonderful virtue for the redemption both of soul and body. This relation I my
self received from several persons who had heard it from the man himself to
whom these things befell: And therefore I thought it expedient, having been
clearly convinced of the truth of it, to insert it as undoubtedly certain in
this my History. Thus writes S. Beda. After this disgression, we will return
to Saint Wilfrid at Rome.



IV. CHAP. IV. CHA.

i.2. etc. Saint Wilfrids cause heard and determined in a Roman Synod, to his
advantage.

1. WE have already declared how Saint Wilfrid arriving at Rome found Pope
Agathon in great solicitude concerning the faith of all Churches, upon occasion
of the Heresy of the Monothelites much spread in the East. For which purpose
among other Provinces, he sent likewise into Brittany, where he commanded a
Synod to be assembled, to the end he might explore whether the Faith of the
Saxon Church there were sound and uniform with other Catholic Churches, or in
any point corrupted.

2. The person sent by him for this purpose, says S. Beda, was a Venerable
Priest called John Arch-Cantor of the Church of S. Peter, and Abbot of the
Monastery of S. Martin, who this year arrived in Brittany (being conducted by
the most Reverend Abbot Biscop, by surname Benedict) His business was to invite
the Arch-bisho Theodore to come himself, or at least to depute another in his
name to the Rome Synod to be assembled for repressing the foresaid Hiresy. This
appears by the said Popes Letters written the next year to the Emperors of
Constantinople, Heraclius, and Tiberius: in which this passage is extant: Our
hope was, says he, to have joined to this our Assembly our Fellow-bishop
Theodore, ^^. Bernn. ^. D. 680.
a learned Philosopher and Archbishop of the great island of Brittany,
together with other Bishops abiding in those parts: and for that reason we
hitherto deferred this Council. Which expression as it argues a wonderful
merit and esteem in which this holy Archbishop was held in that age: so it
disproves manifestly the assertion of Sir H. Spelman, who thence collects that
S. Theodore was called to the Council held at Constantinople, whereas it is
evident that it was the Roman Synod assembled the year following to which he
was invited.

Malmsb de P^^t. l. 3.
3. In the mean time S. Wilfrid being arrived at Rome, says William of
Malmsbury, he found the whole City in a solicitous expectation of him. For his
coming was prevented by a Messenger sent from S Theodore Archbishop of
Canterbury, whose name was Kenewald, a Monk of a modest and Religious
comportment, who brought with him in Writing several Articles of accusation
against S. Wilfrid, conceived in very rude and bitter expressions. S Hilda the
famous Abbess likewise sent Messengers on purpose to aggravate the charge
against him. This seemd a matter of so great consequence to the holy Pope
Agathon, that for determining it he presently assembled a Council of fifty
Bishops and Abbots in the Great Church of our Savior, which had its surname
from the founder of it, the Emperor Constantin. Before this Council was S.
Wilfrid summond, accused, defended, and in the end absolved. The whole
proceeding of this Council in the cause of this holy Bishop, which was the only
business debated in it, cannot be better related then we find in the authentic
Copy of it preserved by William of Malmsbury, and also extant in a Manuscript
produced by Sir. H. Spelman among his Councils of Brittany: Spelm. Council.
(...). 1. p. 158.
The Form whereof is as follows: 4. In the Name of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Chr. In the twelfth year of the reign of our most pious and glorious Emperor
Constantin the elder, and his Brethren our new made Emperors Heraclius and
Tiberius, in the seventh Indiction, in the month of October, Agathon the most
blessed Pope of the Catholic Church presiding: the most holy Gospels being
set before in the Church of Savior named from Constantin, and together
sitting with him these holy and learned Bishops as Assessours in the present
cause, Crescens Bishop of Vinon, Phoberius Andreas of Ostia, Iuvenal of Albano.

5. Agathon the most Holy and Blessed Bishop of the Catholic Church and
Apostolic City said thus to the Bishops sitting with him: I do not believe
that your Holy Fraternities are ignorant of the cause moving me to call you to
this Assembly: For my desire is that your Reverences would ioyn with me in
hearing and treating of a Debate lately risen in the Church of the British
Isle, where through Gods Grace the multitude of true Beleivers is increased. A
relation of which Controversy has been brought to us as well by information of
persons thence arrived here, as by Writings.

6. Then Andrew the most Keverend Bishop of Ostia, and John of Porto said, The
ordering of all Churches depends on the authority of your Apostolic
Sanctity, who sustain the place of the Blessed Apostle S. Peter. But moreover
we, by your command, have read unto our fellow-Bishops sitting here with us,
the several Writings which Messengers directed hither from Brittany presented
to your Holiness: as well those which certain Messengers a good while since
brought from the most Reverend Archbishop there, together with the
informations of others against a certain Bishop who (as they say) is privily
slipped away, as also those which were presented by the Devout Bishop Wilfrid,
Bishop of the Holy Church of York, who having been cast out of his See by the
forenamed Holy Archbishop, is come hither. In all which Writings, though many
questions be inserted, yet we do not find that by any Ecclesiastical Canons
he has been convicted of any crimes, and consequently he was not canonically
and legally e^ected: Neither do his accusers here present charge him wi^h any
naughty acts meriting a degradation: On the contrary it appears to us that
notwithstanding his unjust sufferings he has born himself modestly, abstaining
from all seditious contentions. All that he has done is, that being driven out
of his See, the said venerable Bishop Wilfrid made known his cause to his
fellow-bishps, and it come for justice to this See Apostolic.

7. Agathon the most holy and blessed Bishop of the Catholic Church, and of
the Apostolic City of Rome said to his Brethren sitting with him, Let Wilfrid
the Venerable Bishop ^f the Holy Church of York, who, I am informed, attends at
the doors of our Secretary, be here admitted, and bring with him the Petition
which he is said to have compiled The holy Bishop Wilfrid being entered into the
Venerable Secretary, said, I beseech your Holiness, be pleased to command that
my Petition may be openly read. The most holy Bishop Agathon said, Let the
Petition of Venerable Wilfrid be received and publicly read. And John the
Notaery received and read it to the holy and Apostolic Council, in tenor
following:

8. I Wilfrid an humble and unworthy Bishop have at last by Gods assistance
brought my steps to this supreme residence of Apostolic dignity, as to a
strong tower of safety, from whence does proceed the regulation according to
Sacred Canons to all the Churches of Christ: and therefore I do assure my self
that your Venerable Paternities, both by my suggestion in writing and likewise
by the discourse which at my first coming I made to your Holiness, have been
sufficiently informed that certain persons have violently and unjustly invaded
my Bishopric, without convicting me of any fault, and in an Assembly in which
were present Theodore the most Holy Archbishop of Canterbury and other Bishops,
they have endeavored to usurp my See which I had administered the space of
more then ten years: and in my Diocese three Bishops have been promoted, though
their promotion be contrary to the Canons. Now upon what Motive or provocation
the most holy Archbishop Theodore by his authority without my consent should
ordain three Bishops in my See, out of reverence to his person, who was sent
thither from this Apostolic Chair, I am unwilling to examine. Notwithstanding
if it shall appear that against the Rule of Ecclesiastical Canons being driven
from my ancient See without any offense committed which is so severely
punishable by the sa^d Canons, I have for all that been free from all factious
tumultuousnes, and quietly departed away, after I had protested my innocence
and the illegal proceedings against me before the Bishops of the said
Province, I do here submitt my self to your Apostolical judgment. If your
Sentence shall be that I remain deprived, I do with all willingness and humble
devotion embrace it. But if you shall think fit that I be restored to my
Bishopric, this one thing I shall only beg of this Apostolic See, that the
foresaid invaders may be expelled from the Dioceses, which I though unworthy
have so many years governed. Yet if you, shall judge expedient that more
Prelates be ordained in the said Province of which I have been the sole Bishop,
I beseech you to take order that such may be promoted there as may be persons
with whom I may quietly and peaceably ioyn in the administration of it.

9. (This Petition being read) Agathon the most holy and blessed Bishop of the
Holy Catholic Church and Apostolic City of Rome, said, It is no small
satisfaction to this Assembly that in this Petition the Holy Bishop Wilfrid
has manifested to us, that though he has been unduly cast out of his See, yet
he never made any obstinate resistance by Secular power, but with all humility
begged the assistance of Blessed Saint Peter Prince of the Apostles, withal
professing his readiness to submit to what soever Sentence the same Blessed
Apostle, from whom we receive our authority, shall pronounce by my mouth,

10. The Sacred Synod there residing among other decrees unanimously consented
to this, We do ordain and Decree that the Holy Bishop Wilfrid be restored to
the Bishopric which he lately possessed: And that the Archbishop shall ordain
for his Coadjutours such persons as himself shall, with the consent of a Synod
to be assembled there, make choice of: and as for those persons, who in his
absence have illegally intruded into his Bishopric, let them be utterly
expelled from thence. A. D. 680.
And whosoever shall refuse to receive this our Decree, let them be
interdicted.



11. Saint Wilfrid being thus absolved and reestablished by Apostolic
authority, with the unanimous consent of the Roman Synod, did not presently
return: but made his abode at Rome till the year following, in which another
more frequent Synod was assembled in the cause of the Monothelites, of which
Synod he appeared a principal member, sitting there not as an Appellant, but
as sustaining the place of the Clergy of Brittany and Ireland.

12. During the time of this his absence happened the blessed death of his most
beloved Disciple the glorious Virgin Saint Ethelreda, or Ediltrudis, twice a
wife and always a Virgin: Of whom we have already by anticipation largely
enough treated in the foregoing Narration of the Story of her Gests, death,
burial and incorruption: to which we refer the Reader. We will only add
the Prayer, which the ancient English Church recited on the ninth of the
Calends of July, being the day of her Deposition: O God, who do increase our
joy by the yearly Solemnity of thy Virgin S. Ethelreda, Grant in mercy that we
may be assisted by her merits, with the examples of whose Chastity we are
enlightened, through our Lord, etc. Another Prayer, to the same effect was in
the Church Office on the day of her Translation on the three and twentieth of
June.

V. CHAP. V. CHAP.

1. S. Wilfrid declares the Faith of the Saxon Church in a Roman Synod.

2. He obtains a Confirmation of the Privileges of the Monastery of
Medeshamsted, or Peterborow.

1. THE year following the same Pope Agathon, A. D. 6^0. Bed. l. 5. c. 10.
says Saint Beda, having assembled a Synod at Rome of one hundred twenty five
Bishops (all whose names are found subscribed to the Synodall Letters in the
fourth Action of the Sixth Council) against the Monothelites, who taught that
there was only one Will and operation in our Savior, commanded Saint Wilfrid
to be called to the same Synod, and there to declare openly his own Faith, as
likewise the Faith of the Province and Island from whence he came. Which he
having done, and thereby approved himself and his contrymen to be Orthodox
Catholics: it seemed good to the Council that among other things that also
should be inserted in the Synodall Gests: which was performed in this form:
Wilfrid the devout Bishop of York, having appealed to the Sea Apostolic in a
particular cause of his own, by whose authority he was absolved from all
accusations both certain and uncertain, and afterward called and admitted to
this Synod of one hundred twenty five Bishops: Where in the name of all the
Churches in the Northern parts of Brittany and in the Isles of Ireland,
inhabited by English, Britains, as likewise the Nations of Scotts and Picts,
he made open profession of the true, Catholic Faith, confirming it moreover by
his subscription.

2. The other Acts of this Synod not pertaining to our present History we will
omit. After this Saint Wilfrid according to the Commission given him by
Ethelred King of the Mercians, obtaind from the Sea Apostolic and Roman Synod
a Confirmation of the Privileges and Exemptions granted by the said King to
the Monastery of Medeshamsted ( or Peterborow,) which he had lately finished.
There is extant in Sir. H. Spelmans British Councils a Copy of a Brief of Pope
Agathon to the same effect, Spelm. Council. l. 1. fed. 164.
which he translated out of the Saxon language into Latin: In which
notwithstanding there is one passage whereby the said Pope constituts the
Abbots* successively of the said Monastery, Legates of the Apostolic See in
Brittany, which seems repugnant to the custom and practice of that and
following ages, which always acknowledged that Title to be the ornament and
honor of the Sea of Canterbury.

VI. CHA.
VI. CHAP.
1.2 etc. A Synod at Hatfeild in Brittany touching the Faith against Eutyches:
S Theodore's Synodall Letters, etc. The Subscriptions, etc.

8.9 10. John a Roman Abbot present there: His virtues: In his return he dies
in France.

1. WHilst these things were agitated at Rome, the Roman Abbot John
Arch-Cantour or the Church there of S. Peter, being now in Brittany and
commissioned to explore the Faith of the English Churches, and give an account
thereof to the Sea Apostolic, diligently executed his commission. By his
suggestion no doubt it was that this same year, Bed. l. 4. c. ^7.
as Saint Beda testifies, the Holy Archbishop Theodore being informed that the
Faith of the Church of Constantinople was much disturbed by the Heresy of
Eutyches, and desirous to preserve the English Churches, committed to his care,
free from that contagion, he assembled a Synod of Venerable Bishops and very
many learned men, in which he diligently inquired what the Belief of each
person was: after which enquiry he found amongst them an unanimous agreement in
the Orthodoxe Catholic Faith.

Id. in Epiton^.
1. This Synod, says he, was held in a place called Heatfeild. But there being
several places in Brittany of the same name, he leaves it uncertain in what
Province it was. Most probable it is that it was the same which at this day is
called Bishops-hatfeild in Hertfordshire so called rather from this Synod there
held. then, as Camden would, because it belongs to the jurisdiction of the
Bishop of Ely.

3. The Synodall Letters dictated by S. Theodore Archrbishop of Canterbury who
presided therein, Id. l. 4. c. 17.
were according to the same S. Beda of the tenor following: In the name of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: In the tenth year of the Reign of our most
Religious Lord Egfrid King of the Northumbers, on the fifteenth day before the
Calends of October, and the eighth Indiction: and in the sixth year of the
reign of Edilred King of the Mercians: in the seaventeenth year of the reign of
Adulfus King of the East Angles, and in the seventh year of the Reign of
Lothair King of Kent, Theodore by the Grace of God Archbishop of the Isle of
Brittany and City of Canterbury presiding, and the rest of the Bishops of the
Isle of Brittany sitting with him, the most Holy Gospells being honorably
placed among them, in a town according to the Saxon tongue named Hedtfeild: We
there after common advice have unanimously declared the true and Orthodox
Faith, according as our Lord Jesus Christ incarnate delivered to his Disciples
who saw him and heard his words, and as is contained in the Symbol of the Holy
Fathers, and generally all Saints, Universal Synods, and particular Orthodox
Churches have delivered. We following these faithful Guides, according to
their doctrine divinely inspired, do unanimously believe and profess
according to the Holy Fathers, in truth and propriety of speech confessing the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, the Trinity consubstantiall in Unity, and Unity in
Trinity, that is, One God in three Subsistences or Persons Consubstantiall, of
equal glory and honor, 4. And after many other speeches added to the like
effect, which pertain to the Confession of the Orthodox Faith, this Holy Synod
has to its common Letters added this Profession, We receive the five Holy
Universal Synods of the Blessed Fathers, that is, of the three hundred and
eighteen Bishops assembled at Nicaea against the impious Heretic Arius and his
Dogmes: and of the hundred and fifty Bishops assembled at Constantinople
against the madness of Macedonius and Eudoxius, and their Errors: and of the
two hundred Bishops met at Ephesas against the impious Nestorius and his
dogmes: and of the six hundred and thirty Bishops assembled at Chalcedon
against Eutyches and Nestorius and their Dogmes: and again they were assembled
in the fifth Council at Constantinople, in the time of Justinian the younger
against Theodorus, Theodoret, and the Epistles of Ibas, and their dogmes
against Cyrill. Likewise in the Synod held at Rome in the time of Blessed Pope
Martin, in the eighth Indiction, and ninth year of the Religious Emperor
Constantin. We receive all these, and glorify our Lord Jesus Christ as the
said Holy Fathers glorified him, neither adding any thing, nor diminishing from
their Decisions We with heart and tongue anathematize those whom they have
anathematized, and we receive those whom they have received, glorifying God the
Father without beginning, and his Only begotten before all ages, and the Holy
Spirit unexpressibly proceeding from the Father and the Son, as the
forementioned Holy Apostles, Prophets and Doctors have taught. And hereto we
all subscribe, who together with the Archbishop Theodore have declared the
Catholic Faith.



5. Such was the tenor of the Synodall Letters of this Council at Hatfeild:
but the names of the Bishops subscribing, for brevities sake, were omitted by
S. Beda. Yet in the forementioned Saxon Manuscript produced by Sir. H. Spelman
and translated into Latin we read that the Apostolic Brief touching the
Privileges of the Monastery of Medeshamsted, or Peterborough, was read
publicly in the said Synod, and approved there: Witnesses whereof by the
Author cited are there mentioned.

Spelm Conc. l. 1. f. 164.
6. Moreover King Ethelred in the foresaid Synod said, I do immoveably ratify
and confirm whatsoever gifts my Brethren Penda and Welfere, and my Sisters
Kyneburgh and Kineswith have given and by will conferred on S. Peter and this
Abbot. And my will is that in the Anniversary days of their deposition they be
commemorated for the good of their souls and mine. And this day I my self give
to S. Peter and his Church of Medeshamsted the lands here under named with
their appurtenances, to wit, Bredune, Hre^pingas, Cedenac, etc. These lands I
give to S. Peter with the same liberty as I my self now possess them:
forbidding my Successors in any thing to prejudice this my Gift. And if any
shall do contrary hereto, the Anathema of the Pope and all other Bishops fall
upon him. Of these things all here present are Witnesses. I Ethelred do
confirm these things with the sign of the Cross of Christ. I Theodore
Archbishop of Canterbury am Witness of this Writing of Meleshamsted: and I
excommunicate all who so ever shall violate any thing of it: and give my
benediction to all who observe it. I Wilfrid Archbishop of York am witness, and
confirm the same with an Anathema.. I Saxulf formerly Abbot and now Bishop do
in mine own name and of all my Successors inflict an Anathema against all
infringers of this.. I Ostritha Queen to King Ethelred, confirm this.. I Adrian
legate decree the same.. I Putta Bishop of Rochester have written this.. I
Waldhere Bishop of London do ratify this.. I Cuthbal^ Abbot do so confirm it,
that whosoever shall violate it, may he bear the malediction of all Bishops and
of Christians in the world. Amen.

7. If this Writing be indeed authentic, we are to suppose that all the
subscriptions were not made at once, but successively: for certain it is that S
Wilfrid was absent during the Session of this Council: and therefore subscribed
it after this return. Again at this time Saint Erconwald, and not Waldhere, was
Bishop of London, to whom Waldhere succeeded four years after this, and then
might probably subscribe. Lastly Putta here named Bishop of Rochester had
resigned his See several years before this, and at this time lived under
Sexulf Bishop among the Mercians: So that either we must affirm that he
conserved the Prerogative of his Title, notwithstanding his Resignation: or
that it was another Bishop of the same name, and perhaps the same who is said
by Bishop Godwin to have been the first Bishop of Hereford.

8. Besides the Bishops of Brittany there was present in the said Synod of
Hatfeild the forementioned John Arch-chantour of B. Peter's, and Abbot of the
Monastery of S. Martin, says S. Beda: and he likewise confirmed the Decrees of
Catholic Faith. When he came into Brittany he brought with him the Synodicall
Acts of a Council not long before this celebrated at Rome by Pope Martin and
one hundred and five Bishops, against those who taught that there was only one
Will and operation in Christ: A Copy of which Synodicall Acts he caused to be
transcribed and left in the Monastery of the Venerable Abbot Benedict Biscop:
and carried back with him toward Rome a Transcript of the Decrees of the Synod
of Hatfeild.

9. Among other benefits which the Churches in Brittany received from this
Venerable Roman Abbot John, this is reckoned by the same Author, that he
taught the Monks of the foresaid Monastery (of Giruy) governed by S. Benedict
the Roman Order and Rite of singing, leaving them likewise Rules for the same.
He also committed to writing the Order of celebrating all Feasts through the
year: all which were till S. Bedes compiling his History observed in that
Monastery, and transcribed by many other adjacent Convents. And very many
Religious men from almost all the Monasteries of the Province, who had any
skill in singing flocked to him to better their skill.

10. The same Holy Abbot returning toward Rome, a little while after he had
passed the Sea was surprised by an infirmity, of which he dyed. And his body
was by his friends carried to Tours and there honorably buried: This was done
out of love and respect to S. Martin: in as much as he had been Abbot of a
Monastery dedicated to the same Saint at Rome. And in his way from Rome to
Brittany passing by Tours he had been with great kindness entertained in the
Church of S. Martin there, and earnestly requested by the Monks to take the
same place in his way at his return. Moreover he had from thence received
assistants in his journey and labors. Now though he dyed in his return,
notwithstanding the Exemplar of the Catholic Orthodox Faith of the English
Church was carried to Rome, and joyfully read by the Pope and all others there.

VII. CHAPTER
VII. CHAP.
1.2. etc. King Egfrid despises the Popes Decrees for the restitution of Saint
Wilfrid.

4.5. etc. S Wilfrid emprisoned: and miraculously defended by God.

9.10. etc. Queen Ermenburga punished by Divine power.

1. SAint Wilfrid having been thus absolved at Rome, returned the year
following into Brittany, where he found greater tempests attending him then he
had left at Sea: for the Letters from Rome testi^ying his innocence were so far
from qualifying the fury of King Egfrid against him* that they rather more
incensed it. The progress of his succeeding sufferings is thus related by
William of Malmsbury: Malm^b^^. d (...). l. 3. ^ ^ 4.
2. S. Wilfrid, says he, in his return having by Gods protection escaped all
dangers by the way, came safe to his own country* Where with much difficulty
having obtained access to the presence of King Egfrid, he presented to him
Pope Agathons Letters Sealed. These Letters the King, attended by the Bishops
of his own faction, enemies to S Wilfrid, commanded to be read: After which he
was so far from showing any Reverence to the Sea Apostolic, that he delivered
him up to a certain Officer of his, a man of well known cruelty, to be cast
into an obscure Prison, having first despoyled him of all things, and dispersed
his attendants into several places: For he gave credit lightly to those who
affirmed that those Decrees were obtained by bribes at Rome, where they said
money could procure any thing.



3. Hence we may collect that King Egfrid did not move any controversy or
doubt of the Popes Lawful authority to determine this controversy, which was
sufficiently acknowledged by the Bishops Adversary S. Theodore, who made no
protestation against his Appeal, but sent a Religious man to charge S. Wilfrid
at Rome. But this pretense King Egfrid gave of his disobedience to the Pope's
and Roman Synods Sentence, that it was unduly procured, or that the true state
of the Co^troversy had not been aright represented at Rome, or some other like
excuse, which is never wanting to those who are resolved not to submitt to
justice and authority.

Id. ib.
4. The same Author thus further proceeds in his Narration: The Holy Prelat,
says he, with a spirit unmoved and an unaltered countenance suffered this
violence, and with holy admonitions exhorted his friends, whose sufferings he
compassion^ted, to expect a happy end of these calamities from the Divine
goodness. As for the Officer to whom he had been committed, though he was to all
others of a barbarous and savage comportment, yet to him he showed himself,
gentle and mild, neither did he afflict him with any torment or other vexation,
but only this* that he shutt him up in darkness: for he durst no. altogether
neglect or resist the Kings orders. But Divine Justice would not permit this
holy Prelat, who was the Light of Brittany, to be unworthily oppressed with
darkness. For a Light from heaven darted into the obscurity of the prison
supplied the Suns absence, creating a bright day there, from whence the worlds
light had been excluded; and the beams of this heavenly light shining through
the chinks of the prison, terrified the Keepers, and compelled them to fly and
acquaint their Master with the wonder. He was much astonished at the hearing of
it, but such was his fear of King Egfrid, that he durst not express any
further kindness to his prisoner.

5. But a terrible disease suddenly happening to his wife forced him to overcome
his fear* for a most grievous impostume after terrible torments at last burst
in her body, the wound whereof was so wide and gaping, that the sight thereof
horribly affrighted her husband: and presently after, she was tormented by the
Devil possessing her, by which she became bloodles, and dumb, and a cold
stiffnes seized on all her members as if she had been dying Upon which the
husband in great have running to the Holy Bishop, and casting himself at his
feet, with earnest prayers obtained pardon from him. In so much as without any
delay he went, and making his prayers over her, and casting Holy Water into her
gaping throat, her disease and torments presently ceased, and perfect health
returned.

6. King Egfrid was forthwith acquainted with all these things by a message
from his Officer, who with much grief beseeched him that he would not sacrifice
him to the Devil by making him any longer guilty of cruelty to the holy and
innocent Bishop. But nothing could alter or mollify the Kings rigor: therefore
he commanded that he should be taken from the custody of Offrith (so was the
said Officer called) as being a faint-hearted coward, and delivered to another
named Tumber, a Sergeant of a far more fell and savage disposition.

7. But as the Kings cruelty increased, so likewise did Almighty God more
miraculously declare his goodness to his servant. For when this new ^aylour
commanded him to be laid in chains, the chains applied by his servants to the
Holy Bishops limbs, were found either so streit that his legs would not enter,
or so large that they took no hold: and if at any time they proved fit, hey
were no sooner putt about his limbs, but they presently fell off. At last
therefor the laylours obstinate malice was forced to yield to the Divine
power, and the Holy Bishop suffered no other incommodity, but only a confinement.

8. As for King Egfrid the report of these things wrought no good effect upon
him, yea when any one mentioned them, he could not abstain from casting
reviling scoffs against the Saint. Yet frequent Messengers passed between him
and the Bishop, with commands that he should acknowledge the invalidity of the
Roman Decrees, and that they were illegally extorted with bribes: This if he
would yield to, then perhaps by the Kings indulgence he might recover the
things taken from him, and a part of his Bishopric: But if he refused, he
might thank himself for his losses, as being the only cause of the present
quarrel and variance. But such threatenings as these had small effect on the
holy Bishops mind: on the contrary he protested to the King that to save his
own life he would not do any thing that might cast an infamy or disparagement
on the authority of the Sea Apostolic.

9. But how does Queen Ermenburga behave her self all this while, she who was
the first cause of all this mischief, and continually fomented it? She passed
her whole time, days and nights, in banquets, and entertainments: and whither
soever she went she carried with her, either on her neck or in her chariot, as
in triumph, (Chrismarium) the precious Box of Sacred Oils ( or as we read in
Capgrave, a costly Reliquary) which had been violently extorted from the holy
Bishop: This she were, not out of a sense of piety or devotion, but to testify
her envy and pride in enjoying the spoils of her enemy.

Id. ib.
10. But this her joy did not last long: For as the same Author in pursuance
of the story relates, On a certain night in which she lodged with the Holy
Abbess Ebba, her husbands Aunt, by Gods permission the Devil entered into her,
which put her besides her senses, insomuch as she began to be outrageous and
frantic in her talk. The Abbess being awaked with the noise she made, arose
and in great have ran to her, asking her mildly what she ayled. The Queen
answered her nothing to the purpose, for by the extremity she was in, her
speech was taken from her. But the good Abbess having been informed ly others
of the true cause, earnestly solicited the King her Nephew that the Holy
Bishops Reliquary might be restored, and himself, according to the Popes
sentence, re-invested in his rights. This she told him was to be done if he
would have his Queen restored to her health. But if through animosity he would
not yield so far, at least let restitution be made of the things wrongfully
extorted from the Holy Prelat, and permission given him to quitt the country.
To this the King yielded: and presently the Queen recovered her senses and
health: and after the death of her husband, the forsook the world, and
undertook a Religious Profession, showing great sorrow and remorse for the
injuries done to the Holy Bishop.

11. Hence we may be informed of the true cause of S. Wilfrids sufferings and
banishment. The pretense was piety in committing the care of so large a
Province and the revenews of it to several persons, as being too exorbitant
for one: but under this pretense was shrouded the envy and avarice of Queen
Ermenburga, who earnestly thirsted after Church goods, and by this division
expected a good share in those sacred spoils. Therefore the partiality of the
Centuriators of Magdeburg is evident, who against the testimony of all
Antiquity affirm, Magdeburg. Cent. 7. f. 529.
that Wilfrid was therefore driven into banishment, because he had persuaded
Ethelreda the former wife of King Egfrid to forsake her husband, and under
pretense of a vow to retire into a Monastery, as Bale shows. Whereas in all
the debates of S. Wilfrids cause in his own country, at Rome, and in several
Synods both before and after this, not any scruple was moved about S.
Ethelreda. But it concernd such Writers as these to invent any fictions for
justifying the sacrilegious marriage of Luther. But who can suffer himself to be
persuaded that Queen Ermenburga, who is styled by William of Malmsbury the
cause and nourisher of this long debate, should fill all Europe with the noise
of this Controversy, in which if proof had been made that S. Ethelreda had done
ill in retiring from the world, and S. Wilfrid in advising her thereto, it
would have followed that Ermenburga was no lawful Queen, but an Adulteress.

VIII. CAAP. VIII. CHAPTER

1.2. The Death of S. Hilda: one of S. Wilfrids adversaries.

3. The death of S. Ermenburga, Mother to S. Milburga, etc.

4. S. Erection of two New Bishoprics, at Worcester and Hereford: A succession
of the Bishops in Hereford.

1. IT is an useful admonition which William of Malmsbury affords us from this
debate between S. Wilfrid and his adversaries: Malmsb. Sup.
For, says he, we may thence observe the miserable condition in which human
nature is involved, when as those persons which by Antiquity are celebrated for
eminent Saints, and were such indeed, as Theodore, Brithwald, John, Bosa, as
likewise the famous Abbess Hilda should ioyn themselves with those impious
persons, who with an irreconciliable hatred persecuted a Bishop of such eminent
Sanctity as was S. Wilfrid.

2. As for the glorious Abbess S. Hilda, Sup l. 16. c. 21.
of whom we have already treated, this same year of S. Wilfrids banishment she
received the reward of so many heavenly works performed by her on earth. And we
can not doubt but that this fault of persecuting S. Wilfrid, proceeding from
misinformation of others, and not premeditated malice in her own heart, was
expiated by her former merits for thirty three years together, and a sharp
sickness which continued six years before her death, all which time she ceased
not from praising God for her sufferings, and daily instructing the innocent
flock committed to her charge. What testimonies at and after her death God was
pleased to show of her Sanctity, has been already declared from S. Beda.

5. The same year likewise dyed S. Ermenburga Mother of the glorious Virgin S.
Milburga, S. Mildreda and S. Milgitha, as likewise of the Saint-like child
Merefin. Concerning whom Harpsfeild thus writes, Harpsf. saec. 7. c. 10.
Ermenburga though she had for her husband Mervald son of Penda King of the
Mercians, who was yet alive, yet so inflamed a desire she had to a solitary
Religious life, that she never ceased her importunity, till she had procured
her husbands consent. Having thus obtained her wish, she returned into Kent to
her Brother Egbert, to whom she discovered her pious purpose, desiring his
assistance for the execution of it. Whereupon he built for her at Estrey a town
of Kent a Monastery consecrated to the young Princes Martyrs, Saint Ethelbert
and S. Ethelbritht. There she passed the remainder of her life with seaventy
other Virgins consecrated to God, in wonderful Sanctity. Her name is recited
among the Saints in our Martyrologe on the nineteenth of November. Martyrolog.
(...). 15. November.


4. At this time Saint Theodore increased the Number of Bishoprics, erecting
the Sees of Worcester and Hereford: Of the former he consecrated Boselus, and
of the other Putta Bishop: concerning whom, as likewise his Successors for
many years, little more being recorded but their Names: because we judge it not
expedient to make frequent breaches in this History only to insert Names, we
will here briefly give a Catalogue of those which sat at Hereford: for the
Bishops of Worcester have left considerable monuments of their Gests and
virtues.

5. To Putta therefore Bishop of Hereford after he had administered that
Province eleaven years, succeeded Tirtell: Whose Successor after twelve years
was Torther: who continued in that Bishopric fifteen years, and either
deserting it voluntarily or by death, the next was Walstod in the year of Grace
seven hundred and eighteen: To whom after seaventeen years succeeded Cuthbert.
Now concerning Walstod the only thing memorable in him was that he began the
fabric of a Cross very costly and magnificent, but dyed before he could
finish it, which care he left to his Successor, who engraved in it certain
Latin verses importing the same, which are recorded by Bishop Godwin in his
Catalogue of the Bishops of that Diocese: whereto I referr the curious Reader.

IX. CHAP. A. D. 681.

IX. CHA.



1.2. etc. S. Wilfrid is forced to leave the West Saxons: And converts the
South Saxons.

8. He teaches the people a remedy against the famine.

9. He erects an Episcopal See and Monastery at Shepey

11. Of Eappa the Abbot there.

1. SAint Wilfrid being thus banished his Native soil, A. D. 681
says William of Malmsbury, took his journey* toward the Kingdom of the
West Saxons, where he was kindly entertaind by a certain Noble man called
Berethwald: But within a few days he was forced to qui^t that Refuge. For
Ethelred King of the Mercians, whose subject that Noble man was, ( being
likewise his Brothers Son) with threatening commanded him that he should not
retain the Bishop so much as one day longer. This was done in compliance with
Egfrid King of the Northumbers, whose Sister Osdritha (to comfort them for the
loss of their Brother Elwin) was given in marriage to the said King Ethelred,
by whom a peace was concluded between the New husband and Brother. S. Wilfrid
therefore during this short abode with Berethwald, having built there a small
Monastery, was forced to leave the Monks and to fly for refuge to the Pagan
South Saxons, since he could find no security among Christians.

2. The King of these South Saxons was named Edilwalch, who having been
informed of the causes of this holy Bishops banishment, ^ith great readiness and
affection offered him his assistance, resolutly and firmly engaging himself that
no entreaties of his enemies should induce him to betray him, nor any offers of
money to expel him the country. S. Wilfrid therefore being thus confident of
his protection, began to preach the Christian Faith first to the King and
Queen, and afterward to the inhabitants of that Province. Neither were his
persuasions unsuccessfull, for in a very short time the King was baptized by
him, by whose example almost all his subjects were animated to embrace the
Christian Faith. Thus writes William of Malmsbury.

3 But as touching the baptizing of King Edilwalch, Sup. l. 17. c. 4.
we have already related from S. Beda, that he was baptized twenty years before
this by the persuasion of Wolfere late King of the Mercians: although indeed
very few of his Subjects could then be induced to imitate him: who yet now by
the preaching of S. Wilfrid were persuaded to cast off their Pagan Idolatry.
The manner of this Conversion is thus declared by S. Beda: 4. The Holy Bishop
Wilfrid, Bed l. 3. c. ^3*
says he, having been driven from his See by Egfrid King of the Northumbers,
Bed. l. 3. ^. 13.
was forced to wander through many Provinces: he went to Rome and after
returned into Brittany. And although by reason of ^he hostile enmity of the
said King he could not be admitted to his Diocese, yet none could hinder him
from his Ministry of preaching the Faith. For having been forced for refuge to
turn aside into the Province of the South Saxons, lying between the Kingdoms of
Kent and the West Saxons, and containing land for about seven thousand
families, which Province at that time was wholly addicted to heathenish
Superstitions, he preached there the Christian Faith, and having converted
many, he administered to them the Sacrament of Baptism.

5. As for the King of that Nation Edilwalch, he had some years before been
baptized in the presence and by the suggestion of Wolfhere King of the
Mercians, by whom at his coming out of the Font he was received as his Son, and
in sign of such adoption he bestowed on him two Provinces, to wit, the Isle of
Wight, and the little Province of the Meanvari.

6. But the whole Province of the South Saxons remained ignorant of God and his
holy Faith. Now there was there a certain Scot^ish Monk, his Name was Dicul,
who had built a very small Monastery in a place called Bosanham, compassed with
the Sea and woods, where lived five or six Monks who served our Lord, living in
an humble and poor manner. But not any of the inhabitants of that country
gave any ear to their preaching, and much less emulated their profession.

7. But when the Holy Bishop Wilfrid preached the Gospel among them, he not
only delivered them from eternal damnation, but likewise from a present
temporal calamity ready to destroy them. For the space of three years before
his coming into that Province no rain at all had falln: by means of which a
most grievous famine ^ame among the people, destroying great numbers of them.
For the report is, that many times forty or fifty men together half consumed
with hunger would go to some precipice hanging over the Sea, and holding their
hands together cast themselves down into the water, or upon the ^ocks. But on
the very day in which that Nation received Baptism there sell a seasonable and
plentiful rain, by which the earth flourished again, and the feilds with a
pleasant verdure brought forth fruits of all kinds in great plenty. Thus
abandoning their Idolatry, the hearts and flesh of all the inhabitants exalted
in the living God, perceiving that he was indeed the only true God, who in
mercy had enriched them with goods of all kinds, both for their souls and
bodies.



8 The same Author in another place relates how Saint Wilfrid taught the
people another remedy against the famine. Idem ibid.
For, says he, the Sea and rivers in that country abounded with fish: but the
inhabitants had no skill at all in fishing, except only for Eeles. But by his
command a great number of such Netts as were used for Eeles being gathered
together, they cast them into the Sea, and by Gods providence took of several
sorts of fishes to the number of three hundred. Which being divided into three
parts, one hundred was given to the poor, another to those which labored, and
the third he reserved for the use of him and his attendants. By such benefits
as these he got a cordial affection of them all, by which means they were the
more easily induced to expect heavenly blessings promised them in his Sermons,
since by his assistance they had already obtained temporal.

9 Great numbers therefore having been converted, the next care was to appoint
a Mansion for Saint Wilfrid and his companions. This care was not wanting, for
as the same Author says, Id. ib.
At that time King Edilwalch gave to the most Reverend Bishop a possession of
eighty seven families, for the entertainment of himself and those who would
not forsake him in his banishment. The place was called Seolesea, or the Island
of Seals. It was encompassed by the Sea on all sides except toward the West,
where the entrance into it is in breadth about a bow-shoot. Ass^on as the Holy
Bishop had the possession of this place, he founded there a Monas^ery, placing
therein for the most part ^uch as he had brought with him, whom he instituted
in a Regular conversation: and this Monastery is to this day governed by such
as have succeeded him. For he remained in those parts the space of five years,
that is, to the death of King Egfrid, and worthily exercised his Episcopal
Office both by word and deed. And whereas the King, together with the said
land, had bestowed on him all the goods and persons upon it, he instructed them
all in the Christian Faith and purified them with the Sacrament of Baptism:
among whom were men and mayd-ser^ants two hundred and fifty, all which were not
only by baptism* rescued from the slavery of the Devil, but had likewise
bestowed on them a freedom from human servitude.

10. Several Bishops anciently have had their Episcopal See in this
Half-Island, and were called Bishops of Selsey: but none succeeded S. Wilfrid
there, till the year of Grace seven hundred and eleaven. Afterward about the
year one thousand and seaventy the Episcopal See, was translated thence to
Cissancester* now called Chichester, where it remains to this day. Camden in
Sussex.
As for the ancient small City in which those Bishops resided, there remains
only the ca^keyse of it, which in high tides is quite covered with the Sea, but
at low water is open and conspicuous, says Camden.

11. Over the Monks in this new founded Monastery S. Wilfrid appointed Abbot a
devout Priest named Eappa, of whom we have already treated And a little after
happened a terrible plague which swept away great numbers both of Religious
persons there, and in the country about. Bed. l 4. c. 14.
By occasion of which the Monks appointed a solemn Fast three days together,
with prayers and Sacrifices for the asswaging of it. And on the second day of
the said Fas^ happened that Miracle which we mentioned ^^fore at the Death of the
Holy King and Martyr S. Os^ald: how a young child in the said Monastery lying
alone sick of the infection, whilst the Monks were at Prayers in the Church,
there appeared to him the Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul, bidding him not to be
afraid of death, for the same day he should be carried by them into heaven: but
he was to expect till the Masses were finished, after which he should receive
the precious body and blood of our Lord for his Viaticum. They commanded him
likewise that he should call for the Priest and Abbot Eappa, to whom he should
declare that God had heard and accepted their prayers, and excepting the young
child himself, not any one of the Monastery or possessions adjoining should dye
of that sickness. And that this mercy to them was obtained by the intercession
of the glorious King and Martyr Saint Oswald who the very same day had been
slain by Infidels. This the child declared accordingly to the Priest Eappa: and
the event confirmed the truth, for he dyed the same day, and not any one after
him: all that were sick recovered, and the infection ceased.

X. CHAP.
X. CHAP.
1.2. Three Bishoprics among the Northumbers.

3.4 etc. Trumwin ordained Bishop of the Picts: and afterward expelled.

1. WE will leave S. Wilfrid among the South Saxons awhile, busy in his
Apostolic employment among his new Converts: and return to take a view what
passed in the mean time in the Northern parts of Brittany. We have already
declared how S. Theodore Archbishop of Canterbury partly in compliance with
King Egfrids passion against S. Wilfrid, and partly in conformity to a Canon of
the Council of Hertford, divided the single Diocese of the Northumbers into
two* that of York* and another of the more Northern Provinces, the Episcopal
See whereof was placed indifferently at Lindesfarn and Hagulstad This was done
in the year of Grace six hundred seaventy eight. And two years after, he again
added a third Bishopric in the same Province. For whereas Eata had been
consecrated Bishop both of Lindesfarn and Hagulstad, he then divided that
Diocese, leaving that of Lindesfarn to Eata, and ordaining Tumbert, or Cumbert,
over that of Hagulstad, now called Hexham.

2. He instituted likewise at the same time a New Bishopric among the
Viccians, or inhabitants of Worcestershire consecrating Boselus their first
Bishop: For he who had been formerly designed thereto, named Tatfrith, God^v in
Episc. Wigorn
a man of great courage and learning, and of an excellent judgment (says S*
Beda quote by B. Godwin) had immaturely been snatch^^ away by death before he
could be consecrated.

3. At this time the Nation of the Pict^* though they had embraced the Christia
Faith many years before, yet by reason o^ the great vicissitudes happening among
them, wanted a Bishop. In the year six hundred forty two they were subdued by
King Oswald and made tributary. After the death of the next King, Oswi, and in
the first year of the reign of Egfrid, the same Picts (says William of
Malmsbury) contemning the infancy of this young King, Malmsbur. de Pont. l. 3.
f. 261.
withdrew themselves from his obedience, and boldly invaded his Kingdom under
the conduct of a Noble man named Berney: The young King courageously met them,
and with an army much inferior in number, destroyed an innumerable multitude
of Picts, insomuch as the feilds were covered, and rivers choked up with their
carkeyses. This happened in the year of our Lords Incarnation six hundred
seaventy one.

4. Now King Egfrid who notwithstanding his unjust rage against S. Wilfrid, was
yet zealous enough to protect and enlarge the Church, admonished S. Theodore
Archbishop o^ Canterbury, to whom the general care of the Ecclesiastical
state of Brittany was committed, that the said Nation, though professed
Christians, was distitute of a common Pastor to administer to them spiritual
nourishment. Here upon S. Theodore ordained Trumwin Bishop, Bed. l. 4. c. 12
whom in the year of Grace six hundred eighty one he sent into the Province of
the Picts, at that time subject to the Empire of the English, says S. Beda.

5. It does not appear in any ancient Records, whether any peculiar place was
assigned him for his Episcopal See: Most likely it is that he had no fixed
habitation, for in a Synod a little while after his consecration at which he
was present, he subscribed in this form, I Trumwine Bishop of the Picts have
subscribed hereto.

6. This good Bishop, though he continued alive till the year of Grace seven
hundred, yet administered that Bishopric but a short while. For four years
after this the Nation of the Picts rebelled against King Egfrid, and coming to
a battle obtained a great victory against him and slew him. After which
Victory, they entirely freed themselves from the dominion of the English, whom
they drove out of their country, killing all those which fell into their
hands. Now among those which by flight escaped their fury, says S. Beda, Bed.
l. 4. c. 26.
one was the most reverend man of God Trumwine, who lately had received the
Office and dignity of Bishop among them: He together with all the Religious
persons and others living in the Monastery of Abercurwig, newly founded by him,
departed out of that country. His escape was the less difficult, because the
said Monastery was seated near the limits of both the Nations of the English
and Picts As Soon as he was come into a place of security, he sent away the
Monks attending him, commending the^ to several Abbots his friends. As for
himself he chose for his mansion the famous Monastery of streanshalck, A. D.
682.
where there was a Congregation both of men and women consecrated to God.
There, attended with a few of his Brethren, he spent many years in a strict
Monastical Conversation, to the benefit not only of himself, but many others.
At that time the Royal Virgin Elfleda was Abbess of the said Monastery,
together with her Mother Eanfleda. And by the coming of the Holy Bishop thither
the said devout Abbess received much comfort and assistance in the regulating
her Religious subjects.

Sup. l. 16. c.
7. This Holy Abbess Elfleda, or Edelfleda, was the daughter of Oswi formerly
King of the Northumbers, and consecrated by him to God in the year of Grace six
hundred fifty five, when she was but a year old, so fullfilling a vow which he
made to God when he was to fight a battle against Penda the cruel King of the
Mercians. She had all her life been educated in piety by the Holy Abbess
Hilda: and after her death succeeded in the government, of the Monastery of
Streanshalck. Among her Subjects and Disciples none deserved better to have her
memory recorded then her Mother Eanfleda, who after the death of her husband
Oswi retired into the same Monastery, willingly submitting her self to be
instructed in Monastic Observance, and governed by her own daughter.
Concerning whom occasion will be given to speak further.

XI. CHAP.
XI. CHAP.
1.2.3. Two Monasteries of S Peter and S. Paul built by King Egbert among the
Northumbers.

4.5 etc The Gests of S. Benedict Bis^op: of S. Ceolfrid, and S. Easterwin,
Abbots there.

A D. 682.
1. IN the year of Grace six hundred eighty two Pope Agathon dyed: after which
the Sea remained vacant the space of nineteen months, for what cause it is
uncertain. His name is read recorded among the Saints for his zealous and
prudent administration of Gods Church and many acts of Virtue and piety.

Florent l^c.
2. The same year, says Florentius, Egfrid King of the Northumbers for the
redemption of his soul gave again to the Holy Abbot Benedict, surnamed Biscop,
a possession of forty families. Upon which land the said Abbot built another
Monastery in a place called Giruum, which he dedicated to S Paul the Apostle
(as the other had been to Saint Peter:) and sent thither two and twenty Monks,
appointing over them Abbot Ceolfrid, who was in all things his ready and
courageous assistant.

3. It will be convenient and seasonable in this place to treat somewhat largely
of the foundation of the two Monasteries of S. Peter and S. Paul by the
liberality of King Egfrid and care of S. Benedict Biscop: Likewise of the
Abbots governing them and other occurrents, related by Saint ^^da, who was a
Monk in one of them in the first age of their foundation, and besides several
particulars regarding them, sprinkled in his general Ecclesiastical History,
has compiled a Treatise expressly on this Subject, which has been lately
rescued from the dust and darkness and published by the learned Antiquary, Sir
James Ware.

4. In which Treatise we read how [ S. Benedict Biscop born of a Noble family,
Bed. Hist. Abbatum W^remouth.
and a household servant of Oswi King of the Northumbers, from whom he received
a possession of land competent to his degree, notwithstanding at the age of
five and twenty years despised worldly preferments, and aspiring only to
celestial honors forsook his country and kindred for Christ, and traveled to
Rome out of a devotion to visit and religiously venerate the Monuments of the
Blessed Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul. At the same time Alcfrid son of the said
King Oswi moved with the same devotion, accompanied him in that voyage, but was
recalled by his Father. Yet this hindered not S. Benedict from proceeding in his
journey, which he dispatched with great diligence, and arrived at Rome in the
days of Pope Vitalian.

5. The short time of his abode there, which was not many months, he employed
in perfecting himself in the knowledge of Divine things, of which he had tasted
some sweetness before. After that he departed to the famous Island Lerin, where
he adjoined himself to a Congregation of Monks, received the Ecclesiastical
Tonsure, and with great diligence observed Monastical Discipline, to which he
obliged himself by Vow. After he had spent two years in the Exercises of
Mortification and Devotion, the zealous affection which he bore to Saint Peter
incited him to return to Rome, sanctified with his Body: Which voyage he
performed by Sea in a Merchants ship.

6. This his return to Rome happened at the time when Egbert King of Kent, as
has been declared, desirous to have an Archbishop of Canterbury acquainted
with the Saxon tongue, who might without an Interpreter imbue his Subjects with
Divine Mysteries, sent thither a devout and learned Saxon Priest elected to
that dignity, named Wighard, to be by Pope Vitalian ordained Bishop. But this
good man, with all his attendants, presently after their arrival at Rome dyed
of the Pestilence. After which the said Pope to the end King Egberts Message
and request should not be wholly ineffectuall, among his Priests made choice of
S. Theodore whom he consecrated Archbishop of Canterbury, assigning him a
colleague and Counselor, the holy and prudent Abbot Adrian. And knowing S.
Benedict Biscop to be an industrious, noble and religious person, he enioynd
him for a higher and more common good to interrupt his pilgrimage undertaken
for Christ, and to attend the said Archbishop in his journey to Brittany, in
the quality of a guide and interpreter.

7. Being thus arrived in Brittany, S. Theodore committed to him the government
of the Monastery dedicated to S. Peter at Canterbury: Which charge as soon as
Adrian arrived, he resigned to him: And after about two years abode there
resumed a third journey to Rome, which he prosperously performed, and shortly
after returned furnished with a plentiful Library of sacred Books of all
kinds, some of which he bought with his money, and some were given him by the
liberality of friends, both at Rome and Vienna in France.

8. As Soon as he was landed in Brittany his intention was to repair to Coynwalh
(or Kenwalch) King of the West Saxons, with whom he had formerly contracted
freindship, and received many kindnesses. But being informed that he at the
same time was taken away by an untimely death, he went into his own native
country, and presented himself to Egfrid King of the Northumbers: To whom he
related particularly all the occurrents of his Voyages, how many sacred
volumes, and what plenty of holy Relics of the Blessed Apostles and Martyrs of
Christ he had brought into Brittany out of foreign countries. He did not
conceal likewise from him the ardent desire he had to a Religious Profession,
and what knowledge he had got at Rome and elsewhere of Ecclesiastical and
Monastical Discipline.

9. By such discourses he found so much favor and kindness with the King, that
he presently bestowd upon him of his own possessions as much land as might
maintain seaventy families: commanding him to build thereon a Monastery to be
dedicated to the honor of S. Peter the Supreme Pastor of the Church. This was
done, and the Monastery seated at the mouth of the River Wire (Vedra) on the
northside of the River, in the six hundred seaventy fourth year of our Lords
Incarnation, the second Indiction, and fourth year of the reign of King Egfrid.

10 Scarce a year was passed after the Monastery was built, but S. Benedict
went over Sea into France, from whence be brought with him Masons, to erect a
Church of Stone according to the Roman fashion, which he always most affected.
And so great was his diligence, out of the love he bore to Saint Peter, to
whose honor it was built, that within the compass of a year after the
foundations were laid, it was entirely perfected, insomuch as Solemn Masses
were sung there. Moreover when the building was almost finished* he sent
Messengers into France, who brought back with them glasiers to make windows for
the Church and upper galleries. This was an art formerly unknown in Brittany,
and was taught the Britains at this time, being very commodious for lamps and
other vessels useful in the Church. In a word whatsoever was convenient for
the service of the Altar and adorning of the Church, both vessels and
Vestments, which could not be found in Brittany, he took order should be
brought out of foreign countries.

11. And because he could not be furnished with all things out of France, he
undertook a fourth journey to Rome, from whence he came loaded with abundance
of spiritual wares* as Books, Relics, Images, etc. Besides that he obtained
o^ Pope Agathon to send with him the forementioned John Abbot of S. Martins
and Arch-Cantour of S. Peter's Church in Rome, to be a Master of Church-Musick
and singing in his Monastery according to the Roman manner: Which Office the
said John diligently performed, not only in that, but many other Churches in
Brittany. Lastly the devout Abbot Benedict brought with him from Rome another,
which was no mean, present, to wit, a B^eif of Pope Agathon by which the said
Monastery was made free and exempted from all outward usurpations and
oppressions: Which Privilege was d^manded by the advice and desire of King
Egfrid.

12. The said King being well satisfied and delighted with the zeal and
industry of S. Benedict, and perceiving that his former Gift had been well and
proffitably employed, he added a second Gift of a possession of forty families,
on which by command of the said King Egfrid he built another Monastery on the
opposite side of the same River, which he consecrated to the honor of S. Paul
the Apostle, sending thither seaventeen Monks under the government of Ceolfrid
a Priest their Abbot. Now a special care S. Benedict had in the constitution
of these two Monasteries of S. Peter and Saint Paul, the former seated at
Wiremouth, and the other at Girwy (now called Iarrow) that they were linked
together in peace and unity, as if they were but one body, being governed by
the same Rule and Institut.

13. As for this Ceolfrid, he had been a companion and assistant in all things
to S. Benedict from the first foundation of the former Monastery: He had also
attended him in his last journey to Rome, which he willingly undertook both out
of devotion, and also a desire to increase his knowledge in sacred and
Ecclesiastical matters. Upon occasion of which journey Saint Benedict made
choice of a certain Priest and Monk of the Monastery of S. Peter, called
Easterwin, whom he constituted Abbot of the said Monastery, to the end he might
assist him in the labor of its government, which by reason of his frequent
iourneys and absence, he could not sustain alone. Neither ought it to seem
absurd that two Abbots at the same time should jointly govern one Monastery:
For Ecclesiastical History informs us that Saint Peter constituted two Bishops
a^ Rome, under himself, the necessity of affairs so requiring at that time: And
the great Patriark S. Benedict himself, as the Blessed Pope S. Gregory writes
of him, appointed over his Disciples twelve Abbots subordinate to himself,
without any prejudice to Charity, yea to the augmentation of it.]

XII. CHA.
XII. CHAP.
1.2. The Gests of the holy Abbot Easterwin: his death.

1. BEcause we will not interrupt this narration touching the foundation of
those two Monasteries of S. Peter and Saint Paul, with the discipline and
government of them for several years under the direction of S. Benedict and
other Abbots subordinate to him, we will proceed in setting down a summary of
the Treatise of S. Beda touching that argument, in which is contained an
abstract of the lives and actions of the said Abbots, beginning with him who
dyed first, which was the Venerable Abbot Easterwin.

Bed. ib.
[2. He was born of a Noble extraction, but was far from making that an argument
of pride and contempt of others, as some do: but as became a true servant of
God, he used it as a motive to aspire to true Nobility of soul, consisting in
Piety and humility. He was cousin germain to his Abbot S. Benedict, but in both
of their minds there was such a contempt of worldly respects or privileges,
that neither did Easterwin at his first admission into the Monastery expect any
preeminence in consideration of his birth, nor any privilege or favor for his
propinquity to the Abbot, who likewise for his part did not at all consider
these relations: but he lived in the Monastery in an equal state with the
meanest.

3. Add hereto, that whereas he had been an Officer in the Court of King
Egfrid, as soon as he had quitted secular employments, and undertaken a
spiritual warfare only, he continued always like the rest of his poor
brethren, humble and obedient, and not only willingly but joyfully, would he
winnow or thrash corn, milk the ewes or heyfers, and labor in the bake-house,
garden or kitchen, and any other painful or mean services of the Monastery.

4. Yea after he had unwillingly undertaken the degree and Office of Abbot, he
remained in the same mind he was before toward all, according to the Wise man's
admonition, saying, They have made thee a Ruler, be not lifted up, but be
amongst them as one of them, mild, affable and kind to all. Whenever upon
occasion he was obliged to exercise Regular Discipline or correction toward
any of his brethren, after a fault committed, he so behaved himself, as rather
to prevent any future recidivation, then to express anger for what was past,
neither did he show a countenance clouded with any passion. Whenever the
necessity of business called him abroad, which often happened, if he found any of
his brethren at labor, he would presently join himself with them, either
holding the plough, or turning the van to winnow, or hammering iron and the
like: For in his youth he was robustious and fit for any labor. He had a
sweet and winning speech, a cheerful heart, a liberal hand, and well
conditioned aspect. Whilst he was Abbot he contented himself with the same diet
he used before, and as the rest of his Community used, he lay in the same
Common Dormitory, insomuch as when the disease of which he dyed seized on him,
so that, as he perceived by certain signs, it would prove mortal, he continued
two days resting in the Dormitory: For the five remaining days before his
death he made himself to be removed to a more retired lodging in the Monastery:
And one of those days coming abroad into the air, he sent for all his
Brethren, and with great compassion and kindness gave to each of them the kiss
of peace, they all the while weeping and bewayling the departure of so good and
great a Father and Pastor.

5. He dyed the night before the Nones of March, whilst the Monks were
exercised in singing Martins. He was four and twenty years old when he first
entered the Monastery, in which he lived twelve years: seven of which were
spent in his Preistly duty, and four in governing the Convent: after which
leaving his earthly corruptible body, he went to receive his reward in the
heavenly kingdom.] Having premised this short account of the life of the
Venerable Abbot Easterwin, we will return to the order of our Narration.

XIII. CHAP. XIII. CHAPTER

1.2. etc. The Gests, sickness and death of the Holy Abbots S. Sigfrid, and
Saint Benedict Biscop.

[1. SAint Benedict having constituted the said Easterwin Abbot of the
Monastery of S. Peter, Bed. ib.
and Ceolfrid of that of Saint Paul, he not long after undertook his fourth
voyage to Rome: and as formerly, he returned enriched with innumerable gifts
proper for the Church, as Sacred Books, and abundance of holy Images: In which
was described the whole life of our Savior in so many several pieces as they
suffised to encompasse the whole Church of our Lady, built in the greater
Monastery. And our Church of S. Paul likewise was adorned with pictures
containing such histories in the Old and New Testament as had a co^formity each
to the other. For example, there were placed opposite to one another the Image
of Isaac carrying wood with which he was to be burnt in sacrifice; and over
against it our Lord in like manner carrying his Cross: Again to the Serpent
exalted by Moses in the wilderness there answered the Image of our Lord exalted
on his Cross. Besides these he brought with him two Mantles all of pure silk
of inestimable work, for which he had in exchange from King Aldfrid and his
Counselors (for before his return King Egfrid was slain) a possession of
three families, lying Southward to the Mouth of the River Wire.

2. But to qualify the joy of the good success of his voyage, he found his
Monastery in a sad condition, by reason of the death of the Venerable Abbot
Easterwin and a great number of the Monks under his charge which had been taken
out of the world by a pestilence raging through all that country. Yet this
grief was attended with some consolation, for as much as in the place of
Easterwin, by an Election made by the Religious Monks there, with whom also was
joined the Reverend Abbot Ceolfrid, there was substituted a Successor in the
charge of Abbot, Sigfrid a Deacon, a man of equal gravity and meeknes with his
Predecessor. He was sufficiently learned in the Scriptures, adorned with all
virtues, and of wonderful abstinence: But as his mind was enriched with all
Graces, his body was much depressed with sickness, for he was tormented with an
incurable disease of the lungs.

3. And not long after, the Venerable Abbot Benedict also began to be afflicted
with a tedious sickness. For God in his merciful Providence, to the end he
might prove the solidity of their piety by patience, cast them both upon their
beds, that after their infirmities had been cured by death, he might eternally
refresh them in the quiet repose of Light and peace. For, as we said, Sigfrid
after he had been vexed with a tedious and irksom pain in his lungs and
entralls, was brought to his end. And Benedict for three years space
languishing with a Palsy, was reduced to that extremity, that all the lower
members of his body were deprived of motion and life, and the upper parts,
without which life could not consist, were reserved free for the exercise of
his patience. Now during the time of their sickness, both these Holy Abbots
ceased not to give thanks to their Creator, continually attending to the
Praises of God,, and charitable admonitions to their Brethren.

4. Particularly S. Benedict did frequently and earnestly exhort his Monks to a
constant Stability in the Observance of the Rul^ which he had given them. For,
said he, You must not think that the Constitutions which you have received from
me, were inventions of mine own brain. But having in my frequent voyages
passed through no fewer then seaventeen-well ordered Monasteries, I informed my
self in all their Laws and Orders, and selecting the best among them, those I
have recommended to you Moreover he enjoined them to have a special care that
the most noble and well furnished Library which he had brought from Rome, and
which was so necessary for the instruction of the Church, should not through
negligence be spoyld or dissipated.

5. But one special Injunction he often and earnestly renewd to them, which
was, That in the Election of an Abbot no regard at all should be had by any of
them to kindred, but only to integrity of life and ability of reaching. For
(said he) I prosesse unto you that I would much rather choose that this place in
which I have founded this Monastery, if such were the will of God, should be
reduced to a barren wilderness, then that mine own Brother, who, we know, does
not walk in the ways of Piety, should succeed me in the charge of Abbot. And
therefore, my Brethren, be ye in a special manner wary not to seek in my
place a Father either among strangers, or for propinquity of blood to any of
you: But according as is contained in the Rule of the Great ( Patriark and)
Abbot S. Benedict, as likewise in the particular Decrees of this Monastery,
when you meet together in the common Assembly of your Congregation for the
Election of an Abbot, let him be proposed to the Bishop to receive his
Benediction, whom you shall unanimously choose as most apt for that charge, both
with regard to his virtue and learning.

6. The same Venerable Abbot Benedict likewise to qualify the tediousnes of
long nights, which by reason of his infirmity he was forced to pass without
sleep, was accustomed to send for one of the Monks to read to him some portion
of Scripture suitable to his present state, as the Story of the patience of
Job, or such like, by meditating on which his mind might be more vigorously
affected to the love and desire of heavenly things. And because he was utterly
unable to rise out of his bed to the Quire, and withal found great difficulty
to raise his voice and frame his tongue to the usual course of Psalmody, he
out of a prudent devotion would every Ecclesiastical hour send for some of
his Monks, and whilst they, divided as it were into two quires, chanted the
Psalms proper for the Hour, by day or night, he, as well as he could, would
ioyn his voice with theirs: and so by their assistance he would perform the
divine Office, which alone he could not do.

7. These two Venerable Abbots being thus oppressed with sickness, one day had a
desire to meet together, that they might see one the other, and consult
together touching the common good of the Monasteries, which they were become
unable any longer in their own persons to govern. But so extreme was their
weakness, that Abbot Sigfrid was carried in a Coffin to the Chamber where S.
Benedict lay on his bed: and both of them being placed close to one another
with their heads on the same pillow, yet their weakness was such that without
the help of others attending on them, they were unable to ioyn their lips
together to give and take their last kiss of charity: which was a sad
spectacle to the assistants, who helped them to perform this last Office.

8. At that time Holy Abbot Benedict by the advice of Sigfrid and consent of
all the Monks of both Monasteries sent for Ceolfrid, a man of nearer
propinquity to his virtues, then blood, whom he had formerly constituted Abbot
of the Monastery of S. Paul, and proposed him to be Abbot of both the
Monasteries: whereto all the Religious men present willingly consented, as
judging it most proffitable to the common good and the preservation of peace
and concord that one Spiritual Father should have the care and direction of
those two neighboring Monasteries.

9. After these things were thus ordered, within two months the Venerable and
devout Abbot Sigfrid, having passed through the fire and water of many
tribulations, was conveyed to the refreshment of eternal peace. And four
months after his death S. Benedict also, the great conqueror of all virtues,
was brought to his last end. That whole night the Religious Monks spent in
watching and modulating Divine Psalms, so comforting themselves in the loss of
so beloved and reverenced a Father. Several of them continued in the chamber
where the devout Abbot lay expecting his deliverance from mortality. All that
night they employed in reading some parts of the Gospel for his comfort, and
in prayers: and, his last hour approaching, they gave him for his Viaticum the
Sacrament of the Body and Blood of our Lord. And thus that holy soul, after it
had been purified in the furnace of many tribulations, took her flight freely
to eternal glory, precisely in the point of time when the Monks reciting the
whole Psalter, were come to this Psalm, Domine, quis similis erit tibi, etc.
the scope of which Psalm imports that notwithstanding the malice and violence
of our spiritual enemies continually watchful to destroy us, yet by Gods help
every faithful soul shall triumph over them, and mock at their eternal
confusion. So that it may seem that by Divine Providence this Psalm was recited
the same moment when that happy soul left her mortal body, to show that no
Enemy should have power to hinder her passage to eternal felicity.

10. His death happened in the sixteenth year after he had founded the Monastery
of Saint Peter, A. D. 683.
which he governed eight years alone, and the eight years following with the
assistance of Easterwin, Sigfrid and Ceolfrid, the first of whom continued
Abbot four years, the second three, and the third one. He dyed on the day
before the Ides of January, and was buried in the Church of the Blessed Apostle
S. Peter, Ma^^. Angl 1^. Ianu.
to the end that after his death his Body might not be far divided from the
Altar and Relics of him, to whom whilst he lived in the flesh he bore a devout
affection, and who was to open unto him the gates of the celestial kingdom.]

11. Thus far have we continued the History of the two ancient and famous
Monasteries of S. Peter and S. Paul at Wiremouth and Girwy, together with the
Gests and death of the first Abbots, S. Benedict, Easterwin and Sigfrid: which
though they happened beyond the present time of this History, yet I thought fit
not to interrupt S. Beda's Narration, or divide each occurrent assigning it to
its proper year, to the prejudice of the Readers memory. As for the Gests of
the remaining Abbot Ceolfrid, to whose care our famous and learned Historian S.
Beda was committed, Vid. infra l. 12. c. 1.
we will treat of them hereafter in due place.

XIV. CHAP. XIV. CHAPTER

1.2. etc The Gests of Saint Ebba, Abbess of Coldingham.

1. IN the year of Grace six hundred eighty three S. Ebba Abbess of the
Monastery of Coldingham, A. D. 683.
a Virgin of eminent Sanctity, received the eternal Reward of her Piety. She
was daughter of Ethelfrid King of the Northumbers, and consecrated to God in
perpetual Virginity by Finan formerly Bishop of Lindesfarn. Ap. Capg^a^. in
vit. S. Ebba.
This was done, says the Author of her life, in an age when persons of high
birth esteemed their Nobility to consist principally in the humble service of
our Lord, and that those were most highly exalted, who with greatest submission
undertook the Cross of Christ. At that time innumerable Congregations both of
men and women were sprinkled through the whole Island, severally embracing the
spiritual warfare of our Lord. Yea somewhere in the same place persons of both
Sexes, men and Virgins, under the government of one spiritual Father, or one
Spiritual Mother, armed with the sword of the Spirit, did exercise the combats
of Chastity, against the Powers of darkness, enemies thereto. The Institut and
practice of these was imitated by S. Ebba, who for the love she bore to the Son
of God, even in the flower of her youth contemned whatsoever was great or
desirable in the world. She preferred the service of our Lord before secular
Nob^lity, spiritual Poverty before riches, and voluntary objection before
honors For though descended from Royal parents, yet by Faith she overcame the
world, by virtues, beauty, and by spiritual Graces, her own Sex.

2. At the beginning of her Conversion she by the assistance of her Brother
King Oswi, built a Monastery near the banks of the River Derwent in the
Bishopric of Durham, Camden. in (...)
where now is situated a small Village called Ebbchester, so named, says
Camden, from the Virgin Ebba, born of the family of the ancient Kings of the
Northumbers, who about the year of our Lord six hundred and thirty was so
illustrious for her sanctity, that by the Roman Church she was Canonized among
Saints, and very many Churches in this Island were dedicated to her name, which
are vulgarly called S. Tabbs. This Monastery flourished till the time of the
Danes, whose fury, as many others did, it selt.

3. S. Ebba did not long continue in her own Monastery, before she was invited
to the government of the Monastery of Coldingham seated in a place called by
Saint Beda the City of Colud: Ca^g^av. in ^it. S. Ebba.
There, says the Author of her life, she had the charge of a Congregation of
men and women which had Cells, though divided, yet contigi^ous to one another,
who all united in one holy Profession, with great joy and comfort lived under
her direction: for by an admirable prudence she showed her self to the Virgins a
careful Mother by the power and efficacy of her admonitions, and to the men as
it were a Father, S^p. l. ^^. ^. 6.
by her constancy of mind. That famous Virgin S. Ethelreda ( or, Ediltrudis) as
has been said, was a Disciple of this holy Abbess Ebba, submitting her self
to the rudiments of so great a Mistress, but afterward became the glory of
the Monastery of consecrated Virgins at Ely. And the Blessed Bishop Cuthbert,
though from his infancy he avoided the conversation of women, like the
pestilence, yet he frequently came to discourse with S. Ebba, and would
sometimes for instruction of the devout Virgins her subjects, make some days
abode in that Monastery.

Capgr^^. ib.
4. At last, as we read in her life, this holy Virgin Ebba, full of all virtues
and good works departed this life to her heavenly spouse on the eighth day
before the Calends of September, in the six hundred eighty and third year of
our Lords Incarnation, which was four years before the death of the said Holy
Bishop S. Cuthbert. And her body was with great honor buried in her own
Monastery. Her memory is worthily celebrated among the Saints in our English
Martyrologe on the five and twentieth of August, Marty. Angl. ^5. August.
where her death is consigned to about the year of Grace six hundred eighty
four.

XV. CHAP. XV. CHA.

1.2. etc. The burning of the Monastery of Coldingham: and the cause of it
foretold by an Angel.

1. IT will not be impertinent in this place to adioyn to the Gests of the Holy
Abbess Ebba the relation of a wonderful calamity which through Gods just
judgment befell her Monastery a few years after her death, and a warning
whereof she herself had in her lifetime. The cause of which calamity was the
relaxation of Discipline in the said Monastery, proceeding from the vicious
disposition of human Nature, not restrained by the vigilance and severity of
Superiors. The whole matter is at large set down by S. Beda in the tenor
following:

[2. In those days, B d. l. 4. c. 25
says he, the Monastery of Virgins in the City of Colud, (or Coldingham)
through a faulty negligence was consumed with flames. Which misfortune
notwithstanding was indeed to be ascribed to the malice and wickedness of those
which inhabited there, especially Superiors, as all that knew it did observe.
The divine Piety was not wanting to admonish beforehand those upon whom this
judgment was to come; to the end that correcting their faults, they might, like
the Ninitives, by fasting, tears and prayers avert from them the wrath of God.
For there lived in the same Monastery a man of the Scottish Nation whose name
was Adamannus, who lead a very devout life in continence and prayers, insomuch
as he never used to take any sustenance but on Sundays and Thursdayes, and
oftimes spent whose nights in Prayer.

3. This so rigorous a mortification was first practiced by him out of
necessity, for the correction of his former wickedness and licentiousnes: but in
process of time necessity was turned into custom. For in his youth he had
committed some very great crime: for which, afterward soberly considering, he
had a most horrible remorse, and fearful expectation of divine judgment.
Therefore going to a Priest who, he hoped, might show him the way of salvation,
he simply confessed his guilt, beseeching him to advise him how he might escape
the Divine Vengeance. The Priest having heard his Confession said thus to him:
A great wound requires a great cure. Therefore according to thy utmost ability
persist constantly in fasting, reciting of Psalms and Prayers, that thus
preventing the face of our Lord in confession, thou ma^s^ find mercy from him.
The young man, overwhelmed with sorrow, and infinitely desirous to be freed from
the bonds of his sins, thus replied, I am young in years, and vigorous (...)
body, so that whatsoever you shall impose upon me, so I may in the end be
saved, I will cheerfully suffer and perform, though you should command me to
spend every night wholly in prayers, standing all the while, and pass the
whole week entirely in fasting. The Priest told him, It is too much to endure a
whole week without sustenance: it will be sufficient therefore if you continue
your Fast for two or three days together. Do this therefore for some time,
till I see you next, and then I will tell you more particularly what you are to
do, and how long your penance is to last. Having said this, and prescribed
him the measure of his Penance, the Priest went away: And awhile after upon
some pressing occasion passed over into Ireland his Native country. Neither
did he ever after return according to his promise.

4. However the Penitent mindful of his injunction and promise, gave himself
wholly to tears of Penance, to devout watchings and continence, insomuch as
he took his re^ection only two days in the week, as has been said, and fasted
all the rest. And afterward when he heard that the Priest was gone into
Ireland, and that there he was dead, notwithstanding according to his
injunction he persever'd in the observance of the same measure of fasting. So
that what at first he undertook out of compunction and fear of Gods judgment,
afterward he continued the same out of Love to God and hope of eternal
rewards.

5. After he had with great diligence and care for a long time observed this
rigorous course of Mortification, it happened on a certain day that he in the
company of one of his Brethren went out of the Monastery, to a place at a good
distance, and returned at night. Being come near to the Monastery, and
observing the lofty buildings of it, the good man fell presently a weeping,
showing withal great sorrow in his countenance. Which his companion observing,
askd him the cause. He answered, All these goodly buildings both public and
private, which thou see shall within a very short time by fire be consumed to
ashes. As Soon then as they entered into the Monastery, he to whom this was told,
went presently to the Mother of the Congregation, whose name was Ebba, and to
her discovered the holy man's speeches.

6 She being extremely troubled with so ominous a presage, as there was reason,
sent for the good man, and diligently enquired of him the matter, and how he
came to the knowledge of it. He answered thus, Awhile since as I was employed
one night in watching and reciting Psalms, I saw standing by me a person whose
face I had never before seen, the sight of whom putt me into a great fear.
But he bad me I should not fear: and in a familiar manner said to me, Thou
do well in passing the night in watching and prayers, and that thou do
not indulge to sleep. I replied, Alas Sir, I have great need to persist in
devout watching, and incessantly to pray our Lord to pardon my sins. He
replied: Thou say well, both thou and many others have need to redeem their
sins by good works, and when they cease from bodily labors, then to labor
more diligently for eternal goods: but few there are who do thus. For but
even now I have taken a view of this whole Monastery, I have beheld every
chamber and bed one after another, and besides thy self I have not found one
person employed in the care of his souls health: But every one, men and
women, are either benumbed in a sluggish drowsines, or if they are awake, they
are doing some what that is naught. For the lodgings here which were intended
for places of prayer or reading, are now turned into chambers of good
fellow-ship, drinking and other wantonnesses. Yea moreover the Virgins
consecrated to God, contemning the Sanctity of their profession, whenever
they are at leisure they employ their time in weaving delicate garments, wish
which they adorn themselves like Brides, or endeavor to win the affection of
men who come to visit them. Therefore a terrible judgment from heaven by fire
is deservedly prepared against this place and those which inhabit it.

7. When he had said this, the Abbess replied: Why would you not sooner
discover to me this revelation? He answered, I was silent out of respect to
you, and for fear of troubling your mind too much. Notwithstanding this comfort
you may have: this judgment shall not happen in your days.

8. This Vision being afterward divulged, the people of that place for a while
conceived some fear, and began to intermitt their exorbitances. But after the
death of the Abbess they returned to their former corruptions, yea they
committed far greater wickedness, and when they said, Peace and security, on a
sudden the foresaid vengeance came upon them.

9. A true and perfect relation of these things (says S. Beda) I received from
my reverend fellow-Preist Edgils who then lived in the said Monastery, and
after the desolation of it, he came into ours, where he lived many years, and
afterward dyed.

10. When this happened, S. Cuthbert being as yet a Monk, though, as has been
said, he bore great respect to S. Ebba for her Sanctity, yet perceiving how
dangerous any commerce between Religious men and women was, whatsoever pretext
of Charity might be made for it, he utterly forbade it to his Monks. Concerning
which prohibition and the occasion of it, thus writes Turgothus Priour of
Durham quoted by Bishop Usher, Not long after, says he, Vsser. in Primord. f.
^45.
the man of God Cuthbert, being exalted to the Episcopal throne, entirely
separated from his Monks all society with women, for fear any then alive or
their Successors might after the forementioned example, provoke the wrath of
God against them. By the general consent therefore of all of both sexes he
both for present and future times interdicted to his Monks any commerce with
women, wholly forbidding them entrance into his Church. And therefore in the
Isle of his Episcopal See he built a Church, A. D. 684.
which in the Saxon tongue is called Grenceyric (or, Green Church) because
seated in a green plain, and ordained that women should come thither to hear
Mass or Sermons; but that they should never approach nearer to the Church in
which himself and his Monks served our Lord. Which custom is diligently
observed to this day, insomuch as, unless an invasion of enemies, or burning
of the place compel them, it is not permitted that women should set their
feet no not within the Churchyard, where for a time the body of Saint Cuthbert
reposed. But quitting this not unusefull digression, we will return to the
course of our general History.

XVI. CH^
XVI. CHAP.
1.2. etc. King Egfrids cruelty to the Irish: their imprecations against him:
and his punishment foretold.

A. D. 684. Bed. l. 4. c. 26.
1. IN the year of our Lords Incarnation six hundred eighty four, says S. Beda,
Egfrid King of the Northumbers (upon what provocation it is uncertain) sent an
army under the command of Bertus into Ireland, who miserably wasted that
innocent Nation, a Nation withal which had always been affectionate to the
English. Yet for all that, so furious was the rage of this army against them,
that neither Churches nor Monasteries were spared by them. As for the Irish,
according to their ability they repelled force with force, and withal by
earnest prayers solicited the divine help, using many imprecations against
their enemies. And although those who use bitter language and cursing shall be
excluded the Kingdom of God, yet the general belief was, that the English who
by their impieties deserved such curses, by the just judgment of God shortly
after received their due punishment. For the very next year the same King
leading forth his army to wast the Province of the P^^sts, was slain by them.

2. Among others who fearfully apprehended Gods revenge upon this unjust
cruelty of King Egfrid, was his devout Sister Edelfleda, who lately succeeded
the Holy Abbess Saint Hilda in the government of the Monastery of Streneshal^.
Therefore in great solicitude she consulted with S. Cuthbert, then a Monk and
famous for the gift of Prophecy, concerning her Brother, and whether the
imprecations of the Irish nation ahainst him would not prove too successful.
And from him she understood that the King her Brother should not outlive the
following year. The particular narration of these things is thus compiled by
Saint Beda.

3. On a certain time, Bell. in vit. S. Cuthbert. cap. 24.
says he, the most Venerable Virgin and Mother of our Lords Virgins Elfleda
(or Edilfleda) sent to the man of God Cuthbert, adjuring him in the name of God
that she might have the happiness to see him and to speak with him about matters
of necessary importance. He therefore accompanied with some of his Brethren
took ship, and came to an Island which receives its name from a River called
Coqued, before whose entrance into the Sea it was situated: For the foresaid
Abbess had desired him to meet her there. When they were come together, she
proposed many questions to him whereto he gave her satisfactory answers: And
upon a sudden in the midst of their discourse, she cast her self prostrate at
his feet, and adjured him by the terrible name of the Almighty and of his
Angels to tell her plainly how long a time the life and reign of her Brother
was to last: For, said she, I am assured that if you will you can tell me this
by the Spirit of Prophecy which God has given you. But he, astonished at this
adjuration, yet unwilling to give her a plain discovery of the secret, thus
answered her, It is a strange thing, that you being a prudent woman and
skillfull in the Scriptures will call the time of man's life long, whereas the
Psalmist says. Our years are like a spiders webb; and Solomon admonishes us,
If a man live many years, and has spent in mirth all his life, he ought to be
mindful of the time of darkness and the many days following, which when they
shall come, all that is passed will appear to be vanity: How much more truly
may this be applied to him who has but one year more to live?

4. When the devout Abbess heard this answer, she fell a weeping bitterly, and
bewailed this ominous presage: But at last wiping her eyes, she again with a
woman-like boldness adjured him by the Majesty of God to tell her who should
succeed him in the Kingdom, for said she, you know he has no children, and I
have never a brother besides him. The Holy man continuing silent awhile, at
last said, Do not say that you want Brethren, for you shall see one to succeed
him whom you will affect with as tender and sisterly a love, as you now do
Egfrid himself. She replied: I beseech you tell me in what country he now
lives. He answered. Do you see this Vast Sea, abounding with Islands? It is an
easy thing for God out of some one of them to provide a man whom he may set
over this Kingdom. By this she understood that he spoke of Alfrid, who was
reputed to be her Fathers (natural) Son, and at that time lived as a banished
man in one of those Scottish Islands, where he addicted himself to the study of
learning. After many discourses, he said to her, I command you in the name of
our Lord and Savior that you reveal to none before my death what you have
heard from me. After this he returned to his solitary Island and Monastery.

A. D 6^5
5 Before this year was ended King Egfrid, whose disaf^ection to S. Wilfrid
still continued, was so far from any intention to recall him to his See of
York, that when there was a vacancy in any of his Bishoprics by the death of
any who possessed his place, he would take care that some other should be
substituted in their room: as he did this year, in which S. Theodore
Archbishop of Canterbury at the said Kings request assembled a Synod of
Bishops at a place called Twiford in Northumberland, in which the famous Saint
Cuthbert was, notwithstanding his earnest resistance, elected, and the year
following consecrated Bishop of Lindes^arn, But of this we will treat more
largely when we come to the Gests of the said glorious Bishop. We will now
declare the success of his Prophecy touching the approaching death of King
Egfrid.

XVII. CH
XVII. CHAP.
1.2.3. King Egfrid slain by the Picts.

4.5. Different censures of him.

6. Bishop Tr^mwin driven out of Pictslands.

A. D. 685. Bed. l. 4. c. ^6.
1. THE year after the forementioned invasion of Ireland, says S. Beda, King
Egfrid would himself conduct an army to spoil and wast the Province of the
Picts, though his friends and especially S. Cuthbert, lately ordaind a Bishop,
earnestly diss^aded him. Being entered the Province with his army, the enemies
conterfe^^ing fear fled from him: whom he pursuing, was lead into streits of
inaccessible mountains, and there with the greatest part of his forces slain on
the thirteenth day before the Calends of June: in the fortieth year of his age,
and fifteenth of his reign. Now, as I said, his friends earnestly opposed his
undertaking this war: But as the year before he would not hearken to the most
Reverend Father Egbert who diss^aded him from invading Ireland (Scotiam) from
whence he had received no injury: So now by Gods just judgment for punishment
of that crime, he was hindered from harkening to those who desired to withold
him from his destruction.

2. Whilst King Egfrid was fighting against the Picts, S. Cuthbert anxious
about the success went to Lugubalia (or Carlisle) to comfort his Queen
Ermenburga: and there God revealed to him the death of the King, and defeat of
his army. The particulars are thus related by S. Beda: Bed. in vit Cuthbert
cap. 27.
Whilst King Egfrid (says he) rashly adventured the invasion of the Picts, and
with horrible cruelty wasted their country: the man of God Cuthbert, knowing
that the time drew near which he had foretold his Sister, that the King should
live but one year longer, he went to the City Lugubalia, corruptly named by
the inhabitants Luel, to speak with the Queen, who there expected the event of
this war in a Monastery of her Sister. The day after as the Citizens were
honorably leading him to see the walls of the City, and a fountain in the
same of a wonderful structure according to the Roman manner, the Holy Bishop
on a sudden as he was leaning on his staff, became troubled in mind, and with
a sad countenance cast his eyes on the ground: and presently raising himself up
again, and looking to heaven, he said not very loud, Now is the combat decided.
A Preist-standing by, who understood his meaning, suddenly and indiscreetly
said to him, How do you know this? But he unwilling to publish that which he
had received by revelation, said, Do you not see how suddenly and strangely
the weather is changed, and grown tempestuous? But who can find out the
judgments of God?

3. After this he immediately went to the Queen, and speaking with her secretly
(it was then Saturday) Be sure, said he, that on Monday morning betimes you
take coach (for on Sunday you must not travel:) and make have into the Royal
City, for fear the King be killed* And because to morrow I am entreated to
consecrate a Church in a Monastery near at hand, as soon as the dedication is
dispatched I will make all have after you. Thus writes S. Beda: and a little
after he adds: The day following one who had fled out of the battle arrived,
who plainly enough declared the secret predictions of the man of God and by
computation it was found that the same moment the King was killed, in which it
had been revealed to the Holy Bishop whilst he stood by the forementioned
fountain.

4. Thus unhappily dyed this famous King Egfrid, and has left to posterity an
argument of much dispute whether he be to be numbered among good or evil Kings.
William of Malmsbury after a curious debate and examination of his particular
acts, Malmsb. de Reg. l. 1. c. 3.
abstains notwithstanding from a resolute Sentence: whom we will imitate.
Certain it is that he had a great zeal in defending and propagating the
Catholic Faith that he was wonderfully munificent toward Churches and
Monasteries: that he bore great reverence to holy men, as to S. Cuthbert, etc.
But on the other side what excuse can we find for his obstinat and
irreconcilable hatred to S. Wilfrid, or his cruelty against the innocent
Irish, etc. We will therefore leave him to the Judgment of Him who cannot
judge unjustly.

5. Some Writers affirm that he was slain by Bride or Bird his cousin
germain, King of the Picts: However certain it is that by his death the Kingdom
of the Northumbers suffered an irreparable loss: for by the testimony of Saint
Beda, from that time the hopes and strength of the English began to decay: Bed.
l. 4. c. 2^.
for both the Picts recovered all their lands of which the English had been
possessed: and the Scotts likewise living in Brittany, and some part of the
Britains regained their liberty, which they enjoy to this time, forty six
years after that battle. By which last clause and computation it appears that
S Beda wrote his History in the year of Grace seven hundred thirty and one.

6. The Picts puffed up with Victory, drove all the English out of their
country: and among others their worthy Bishop Trumwin who, as has been said,
betook himself to Streneshal^, the Monastery of Saint Elfleda, where he lived a
great comfort and assistant to her in the government of her Monastery.

XVIII. C.
XVIII. CHAP.
1.2. To Lothere King of Kent succeeds Edric.

3.4 5. Kentuin King of the West Saxons dying Cedwalla succeeds him.

6 Cadwa^lader last King of the Britains.

1. THIS year was fatal to several of our Saxon Kings in Brittany, for
besides Egfria King of the Northumbers slain by the Picts, Lothere King of Kent
was also slain by his Nephew Edric. This Lothere was brother to the former King
Egbert, after whom he seized upon the Kingdom, to the prejudice of his Nephews,
as has been declared: of which he kept the possession twelve years, though
with much trouble and danger. For Edric the elder of his Nephews, and lawful
heir of the Crown, after he was come to years sought to gain his right by
force, insomuch as many battles were fought between them with various
success. At last Edric assisted with an army of the South Saxons, fought with
his Usurping Uncle, in which battle Lothere was sore wounded, of which wounds
he shortly after dyed. Vid. l. 23.5.22
He is said to have left behind him a son named Richard, eminent for sanctity:
of whom we shall treat hereafter.

2. Concerning these two Brothers Egbert and Lothere successively Kings of
Kent, our ancient Ecclesiastical Writers do observe, Malm^bur. de ^eg. l. 1.
c 1.
says William of Malmsbury, that for their cruelty they both came to an
untimely end, in as much as Egbert slew; or at least connived at the murder of
his uncles children Ethelred and Ethe^^bert, who were Canonized Martyrs: and
Lother^ derided the honor done to their memory. Tru^ it is Egbert afterward
bewayld the fact, an^ in testimony of his sorrow gave part of the Isle of
Thanet to their Mother, for the endowment of a Monastery.

3. Besides these, this year also dyed Kentwin King of the West Saxons after a
reign of nine years. Westmon. hic.
His memory is celebrated for his great victories against the Brittain^,
Hutingd.
whom he invaded with great forces, and without much difficulty drove them to
the Sea; wasting their country and inhabitants with fire and sword.

4. His piety and munificence to the famous and ancient Monastery of
Glastonbury is recorded in the Antiquities of the same, where we read that
Kentwin granted to the said Monastery a liberty from all service, Antiq. Glast.
f. 45.
six hides of land, and a privilege that the Monks of the same place might
have the power of electing and constituting to themselves an Abbot, according
to the Rule of S. Benedict. He gave moreover near the wood called Cantodun, the
Manor of West-munkaton, three and twenty hides, and in Caric twenty hides of
land for a supplement of Regular Observance in the same Monastery. And when he
had reigned nine years he departed to our Lord. His Body reposes in the
Churchyard under a Pyramid of an ancient and noble structure. Some Writers are
of opinion that before his death he laid aside his Crown in the said Monastery,
spending his last days, as his Successors did, in solitude and devotion.

5. To Kentwin succeeded Cedwalla in the Kingdom of the West Saxons: to
Lothere, Edric in Kent: and to Egfrid, Alfrid among the Northumbers, according
to the Prophecy of S. Cuthbert to his Sister the Holy Abbess and Virgin Saint
Elfleda. Of which several Princes more hereafter.

6 To this same year likewise is consigned the beginning of the reign of
Cadwallader, Son of Cadwallon, and last King of the Br^ttains in Wales. For
after his death, happening twelve years from this time, the Britains lost all
show of Monarchy.

THE NINETEENTH BOOK OF THE CHVRCH-HISTORY OF BRITTANY.
I. CHAP.
I. CHAPTER.
1.2. Of Boysil the Holy Priour of Mailros.

3.4. etc. The Gests and virtues of S. Cuthbert before he was Bishop.

1. THE same year that the foresaid Kings dyed, the famous and glorious S.
Cuthbert, having the year before with great repugnance been drawn out of his
beloved Solitude, was consecrated Bishop of Lindesfarn. The admirable way by
which Almighty God drew him from keeping sheep to a spiritual life of
contemplation, by representing to him in a Vision the assumption into heaven of
S. Aidaeus soul Bishop of Lindesfarn, and how thereupon he betook himself to
the Monastery of Mailr^s seated beyond the River of Tweed in the Province of
T^fidale, then part of the dominion of the Northumbers, of which Eata was then
Abbot, and Boyfil; Priour, by whom he received the Monastical tonsure and was
admitted into the Society of the Monks there: all this we have particularly
related among the Acts of the year of Grace six hundred fifty one.

2. Nineteen years after that, when the holy man Boyfil dyed* S, Cuthbert
succeeded him in the government of the said Monastery, in the year of our Lords
Incarnation six hundred and seaventy. Concerning the said Holy Abbot Boysil, S.
Cuthbert; as S. Beda relates, was wont to give this Character, Bed^^ vit. S.
Cuthbert. c. 22
I have known very many who have much excelled me bi^h in purity of mind, and
the eminent grace of Pr^phecying. Among whom was the Venerable servant of
Christ, never without honor to be mentioned by me, the Abbot Boysil, who many
years since being then an old man admitted and educated me in the Monastery of
Mailros, being then very young. He during the time that I was under his
discipline foretold me all things that should befall me, and the event
confirmed the truth of all his predictions. There remains of all the
particulars foretold by him only one thing unaccomplished, which I wish may
never come to pass. This, says S. Beda; he sp^ke, because the said Holy
servant of God had signified to him, that he should be called to the charge and
dignity of a Bishop; from which he had a great aversion, out of the love he
bore to a retired (contemplative) life, and humility.

3. During the fifteen years of his government of the said Monastery, the odor
of S. Cu^hberts virtues and graces dispersed it self far beyond the bounds of
his Solitude, insomuch as many resorted to him to receive comfort in their
afflictions, or light in their doubts and apprehensions: An example whereof we
have already given in the Holy Abbess Elfleda to whom he foretold the death of
her Brother Egfrid King of the Northumbers. If we would be informed of the
manner of his life, we shall only need to read the most perfect precepts of a
Monastical conversation and conceive them to be exemplified in his. His whole
employment was to perfectionate his own soul and the souls of those committed
to his charge, by Solitude both external and internal; by continual silence,
except when Devotion to God or Charity to his neighbor opened his lips; by
zeal and authority of a Governor joined with the humility of a Monk; by an
uninterrupted attendance to God in spirit, even in the midst of external
businesses; by an Angelical purity of heart; by rigorous Mortifications of the
flesh, fastings., Watchings, etc. And as for the wonderful Graces communicated
by Almighty God unto him, by which he was enabled to penetrate into the
thoughts of such as conversed with him, to foretell future events, miraculously
to cure the diseased, yea and to raise the dead: with these things, though
testified by great authority, I do unwillingly enlarge this History: the
Reader may have recourse to the compilers of his Life (among whom the
principal is S. Beda) to be informed.

4. Omitting therefore a particular account o^ his private life, it will be
sufficient to relate his Gests during his last three years, two of which he
spent in administering the Episcopal Office, and in the last returned to his
solitude. That he might have been exalted to the dignity of a Bishop long
before, appears by a passage in the forementioned conversation between him and
the Holy royal Abbess S. Elfleda: in which after he had signified to her the
death of King Egfrid to succeed the year following, Bed. in vit. Cuthb. c. 24.
she said to him according to the relation of S. Beda, O how variously are the
hearts of mortal men divided in their intentions and desires! Some do much
rejoice having obtained riches for which they sought: Others who love riches,
are yet always in want. As for you, you reject the pomp and honor of the
world, though it be offered you. Though you may arrive to the dignity of a
Bishop, which is the highest degree in Gods Church, yet you prefer the
enclosure of this wilderness before it. Hereto the holy man answered, I do know
my self to be unworthy of that sublime degree. Yet I cannot avoid the judgment
of God our Supreme Governor. Whose pleasure if it be that I must undergo so
burdensome a charge, yet I believe he will free me from it in a short time:
and within the space of no more then two years will resto^e me to my
accustomed solitude and rest.

5. Now how his resistance against that honor was combatted and at last
vanquished: and how his prophecy concerning the short time of his administering
that charge, and how he was permitted to prepare himself for heaven by retiring
to a conversation with God only, we will from the same Author consequently
declare.

II. CHAP. II. CHAP.

1.2. etc. In a Synod Saint Cuthbert is elected, and with great difficulty
persuaded to be consecrated Bishop.

6.7. etc. The great munificence of King Egfrid to him.

1. WE have already declared how Egfrid King of the Northumbers the year before
his death being constant in his disaffection to S. Wilfrid, obtained of S.
Theodore Archbishop of Canterbury to make a supply of vacant Sees in his
kingdom, by ordaining new Bishops, without any regard to S. Wilfrid, to whom
the administration of the whole Province belonged. For this purpose S. Theodore
assembled a Synod, says S Beda, near the River Alne (Alaunum) at which the
said King was present, Bed. l 4 c 25. and in vit. Cuthb. c. 24:
in a place called Twiford, which signifies a double ford: Which Synod was no
small one, (for besides S. Theodore who was President, Seven other Bishops are
said to have met there, only four of whose names we can reckon, to wit,
Trumwin Bishop lately of the Picts, B^sa, Eata and Tumbert, who was deposed, in
whose place succeeded S. Cuthbert. For as tou^hing Saint Ceadda and S. Ced,
whose presence by some Writers is affirmed, the general consent of History
contradicts it, since S. Ced Bishop of London was dead twenty years before
this, and S. Ceadda of Lichfeild twelve.)

2. In this Synod, which we may wonder how it came to be omitted by Sir Henry
Spelman, Tumbert Bishop of Hagulstad (or Hexham) for what demerit is not
expressed in any ancient Author, was deprived of his See: and by an unanimous
consent S. Cuthbert was elected in his place. But it was no easy matter to
obtain his own consent to this Election: For says S. Beda, though many letters
were sent, Bed. in vit. Cuthbert. c. 24.
and several Messengers directed to him from the Synod, he could not be
removed out of his solitude. At length the foresaid King Egfrid, attended by
the holy Bishop Trumwin and very many other Religious persons, sailed to the
Island where he was retired: Whither being come, they kneeled before him, they
adjured him in the name of our Lord, they besought him with tears, and
persevered so long in their humble request, till at last they vanquished his
resistance, and drew him, full of tears likewise, out of his most sweet
retirement to the Synod. Where being arrived, though he again renewd his
resistance, yet at last he was overcome by the united wills of all the Bishops,
and compelled to submitt his neck to the burden of the Episcopal Office.

4. But though he was then elected, and had consented to his Election, yet he
was not consecrated till the year following, at the great solemnity of Easter.
The Sea to which he was ordained, was not that of Hagulstadt, now vacant by the
deposition of Tumbert: but Lindesfarn, administered by Eata. For Eata who at
first had been consecrated Bishop both of Lindesfarn and Hagulstad, in the year
of Grace six hundred seaventy eight, when that Province was shortly after
divided, he surrendered the Sea of Hagulstad to Tumbert, reserving Lindesfarn to
himself: and now perceiving that S. Cuthbert rather desired Lindesfarn, in
which Diocese his beloved desert was seated, the humbly devout Bishop Eata
willingly surrendered it to him, and again resumed Hagulstad: Thus writes the
Author of S. Cuthberts life in Capgrave.

5. This Synod, in which S Cuthbert was Elected Bishop, continued a part of two
years, for he was elected toward Winter, and not ordained till the Easter
following, at whose ordination all the Bishops were present. And before the
dissolution of the Synod King Egfrid gave many munificent gifts to his new
Prelat, which were confirmed by the subscription of the King and all the
Bishops.

Capgrav. in vit. S. Cuthb.
6. In his Life preserved by Capgrave we read, That King Egfrid gave to him in
York all the land from the Wall of S. Peter's to the great Westgate, and from
thence to the Citty-wall toward the South. He gave him likewise a village
called Creike, three miles in circuit, that it might be a mansion for him in
his journey to and from York. There Saint Cuthbert founded a Monastery,
constituting an Abbot named Gave. Camden in Brigant.
The said place called Creike is seated in the forest of Gautres (in Calaterio
nemore) in some parts abounding with wood, and elsewhere a morish plain: It
stands a little Northward from York in the way toward Durham: thus writes
Camden.

Capgrav. ib.
7. Besides this the King added another and greater Gift: for he bestowd on him
the City Luel, or Caer-leil: and fifteen miles about it: where the holy Bishop
founded a Monastery for consecrated Virgins, ordaining an Abbess over them. He
appointed Schools for learning also in the same City. Concerning this
Donation the same Camden thus writes in his Description of Cumberland, Camden.
(...) Cumbria.
Egfrid gave to S. Cuthbert the City Lugubalia in this form, I have given the
City which is called Lugubalia, and the land about it for the space of fifteen
miles. This name of Lugubalia or Luguvallia was given to that city by reason
of its proximity to the famous rampire (or Vallum) raised by the Romans to
exclude the barbarous Nations beyond it, commonly called, The Picts Wall.

Capgrav. ib.
8. Neither did King Egfrids munificence rest here, for thus it follows in
Capgrave, After that S. Cuthbert had raised a child from death in a village
called Exenford, King Egfrid gave to him the land called Carthmel, and all the
Britains inhabiting there etc. Afterward Egfrid gave to the man of God,
Mailros, that is to say, Meuros and Carram, A. D. 686.
and all the Appurtinances. It is said that in that rich Treasury of British
Antiquities, the Library of Sir John Cotton, there is extant a Charter of these
Donations of King Egfrrid, subscribed by Trumwin Bishop of the Picts, and other
English Bishops, out of which Bishop Usher quotes certain passages. And the
Munificence of King Egfrid was imitated by several Princes his Successors,
who wonderfully enlarged their liberality to his Church and See, afterward
transferred to Durham, called the Patrimony of S. Cuthbert Of which more
hereafter.

9. But as for S. Cuthbert himself, Bed. l. 4. c 28
he was nothing the richer for these possessions, he practiced the poverty of a
Monk in the sublime state of a Bishop, and, as S. Beda reports in his life, he
adorned with works of piety the Episcopal degree undertaken by him, therein
imitating the Apostles of our Lord, and with his wholesome admonitions invited
to eternal happiness the flock committed to his charge. And the thing which
gave the greatest efficacy to his exhortations was, that himself in his own
practice afforded an example for others to imitate. For he was in a supreme
degree fervent in divine Charity, modest in the virtue of patience, studiously
intent to Prayer, and affable to all who came to him for comfort. Yea he
esteemed the contributing his charitable assistance to his infirm brethren
equivalent to Prayer, because he who said, Thou shall love the Lord thy God,
said also, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. His abstinence was
admirable: he through the grace of compunction had his mind always elevated to
heavenly things. To conclude, Whenever he offered to God the most holy
Sacrifice, he addressed his prayers to him, not with a loud voice, but with
tears flowing from the depth of his heart. This may suffice touching S.
Cuthbert for the present: we shall add more when we come to treat of his death.

III. CHAP. III. CHA

1.2. etc. The Gests of Saint Eata Bishop of Hagulstad: with his death.

6. S. John of Beverley succeeds him.

1. IN the year of Grace six hundred eighty six, A. D. 686.
the holy Bishop Eata after the administering the Sees of Lindesfarn, and
afterward of Hagulstad the space of seven years, dyed with such opinion of
Sanctity, that in our English Martyrologe his memory is celebrated among the
Saints on the twenty sixth of October. Martyrol^g. Angl. 26. Oct


2. Concerning his education from his infancy we read thus in the Author of
his Life, Ap. Capgrav in vit. S. Eata Bed l. 3. c. 26
who follows S. Beda: The Holy Bishop Aidan, says he, undertook to instruct in
the Religion of Christ twelve young children of the English Nation. Of these
Eata was one, being a child of a very good disposition and a meek humble heart.
By the admonitions and good examples of his pious Teacher, to whom he gave
diligent attendance, he became notable in all virtues: so that finding grace
both with God and man, he became a Monk, and according to the Profession of
that state he sedulously gave himself to Watchings, fasting and other good
Exercises day and night. For he was a man eminent for the virtue of patience,
brightly adorned with chastity, affable and pleasing to all, and, as Venerable
Beda testifies of him, he was beyond all others adorned with the Grace of
Meeknes and holy simplicity.

Afterward the was made Abbot of the Monastery of Mailros, or Meuros, in the
execution of which charge he exhibited to his Brethren yet greater examples of
humility and charity then formerly, insomuch as they tenderly loved him, not as
an awful Master, but an indulgent Father. He was held in such veneration among
the rich and powerful men of that age, that even Kings themselves reverenced
him as a Father, and with devout minds conferred on him large possessions for
the building of Monasteries. Whose intentions he diligently executed, erecting
several Churches and Monasteries in commodious places, and assembling many
Disciples studious of piety and learning: among whom the most eminent were
Boysil, Priour of the Monastery of Mailros, and S. Cuthbert afterward Bishop of
Lindesfarn, who were men of admirable sanctity, and withal eminently endued
with the Spirit of Prophecy.

4. After the disputation and conflict touching the Observation of Easter,
which was held in the Monastery of the Holy Abbess S. Hilda, Bishop Colman by
descent a Scott, obtaind of King Oswi that the Venerable Monk Eata should as
Abbot govern the Church of Lindesfarn. For the Scots bore a great affection to
Eata, insomuch as he was one of the twelve English children which had received
their education from Bishop Aidan. Eata therefore having undertaken the care of
the Church of Lindesfarn brought with him thither S. Cuthbert* whom after the
death of Boysil he had made Priour of the Monastery of Mailros, and constituted
him Priour of the Convent in Lindesfarn. And when afterward the dissension grew
hott between King Egfrid and the holy Bishop Wilfrid, by means of which he was
expelled his Bishopric, Bosa was in his place substituted Bishop of York in
the Kingdom of the Deiri, and the Holy Abbot Eata was ordained Bishop in the
Province of the Bernicians, having his Episcopal See partly at Hagulstad, that
is, Extoldesham (now Hexham) where at this time there are Canons Regulars, and
partly in the Church of Lindesfarn, or Holy Island. They were consecrated
Bishops by Theodore Archbishop of Canterbury.

5. Thus writes the Author of the Life of S. Eata, whereto he adioyns the
Narration how the Province of Lindesfarn being divided, S. Eata was confined to
that of Lindesfarn, and another placed at Hagulstad: and after the Election of
S. Cuthbert, he resigned to him the Sea of Lindesfarn, and removed to
Hagulstad, then vacant by the deposition of Tumbert. And in conclusion he
relates the manner of his death, after he had with great zeal and piety
administered his Episcopal Office, saying: When our merciful Lord thought good
to crown the labors of this holy Bishop with an eternal reward, Idem ibid.
he was struck with a grievous disease of the bowels, called a Dyssentery, the
torments whereof increasing daily, he was purged thereby like gold in a fiery
furnace, and at last all the dross of sinful imperfections being spent and
consumed, he dyed most happily, so entering the gate of heaven there to abide
for ever. He was buried toward the South end of the Church of Hagulstad, and a
little Chapel of stone was built over his Tomb. From which place his body was
afterward translated, but by whom is uncertain, and with due honor placed in a
Shrine within the Church.

6. His Successor in the said Bishopric of Hagulstad was the famous Bishop
John (de Beverlaco) of Beverley, so called from a well-known Town of that name
in Yorkshire, where he, or his family lived. This holy man, as we learn from
the Author of his Life in Capgrave, Ap. Capgrav in S. Joan. Bever l.
was born in England, and being very young, was for his instruction committed
to Saint Theodore Archbishop of Canterbury, who educated him in all innocence
of manners and virtue, and taught him the knowledge and prudence of Holy
Scriptures. And after he had been well imbued with other learning likewise, his
custom was to travel through several provinces, sowing among the ignorant
people the word of God. But after that the Venerable Bishop Eata by Gods
disposition had ended the course of human life, he with the consent of King
Alfrid, received the Episcopal honor. Concerning this Holy Bishop more will
be said in the Sequel of this History.

VI. CHAP. VI. CHA.

1.2. The Tyranny and death of Edric King of Kent.

2.3. etc. Of Cedwalla King of the west Saxons: at first a Pagan. His Brother
Mol is burnt.

7.8. He conquers the Isle of wight: which receives the Christian Faith.

9. Cedwalla's munificence to S. Wilfrid.

1. WE must awhile surcease this Narration touching the Ecclesiastical affairs
among the Northumbers, that we may attend to the great combustions and change^
in the Southern parts of this Island, This was the first year of the Reign of
Edric King o^ Kent after the death of his usurping Uncle Lothere. His
government was Tyrannous, and therefore unquiet: Malmsbur. de Reg l. 1. c. 1
For as William of Malmsbury observes he did boast but a short time in the
Success of his Tyranny, for within two years he was deprived both of his
kingdom and life: leaving his country exposed to be torn in pieces by its
enemies.

1 But Cedwalla the Successor of Kentwin in the kingdom of the West Saxons,
though at the first no Christian, reigned fair more gloriously, and concluded
both his reign and life more happily. He was, says the same Author, Id. ib.
c. 2.
a Noble branch of a Royal Stock, being the great grandchild of Ceaulin by his
brother-Cuda. He was a young man of immoderate ambition, who would let pass no
occasion of exercising his courage. His restles disposition had procured
against him the anger of the greatest part of the Nobility of that kingdom, by
a faction and conspiracy of whom he was driven into banishment. In resentment
of this injury, he drew out of the kingdom in a manner the whole strength of
it: for the warlick youth there either out of pity of his misfortune or
affection to his courage, resorted to him in his exile. Edilwalch King of the
South Saxons was the first against whom he vented his fury: insomuch as coming
to a battle, his whole army was defeated, and himself slain. But after that
Victory obtained, Wigorn. A. D. 685.
Cedwalla was driven out of that Province by Bertun and Ethelhun two
South-Saxon Generals, who after that possessed themselves of the Kingdom.

3. About this time, Kentwin dying, Cedwalla by consent of the inhabitants was
made King of the West Saxons: Who immediately with new forces invaded once more
the Kingdom of the South Saxons, Id. ib.
which he subdued and held in great slavery moreover killing Beorthun, the
Prince or General of the forces of that Nation.

4. And not content with this acquest, he and his Brother Mul wasied also the
Kingdom of Kent: Id. ib.
but in the end was driven out with loss. This happened indeed the year
following: but since the whole Reign of Cedwalla containd only two years, or
little more, in which short time the hand of God wrought wonderful changes
upon him, converting him from a furious Pagan to an humble devout Christian,
from a Lion to a Lamb: We will here make no breaches in his Story, but deliver
it all at once.

5. Concerning his invasion of Kent, William of Malmsbury thus describes it:
Malmsb. de Reg. l. 1. c. 1.
Presently after Cedwalla accompanied by his Brother Mollo breathing forth a
furious hatred against the inhabitants of Kent, with all the forces he could
make made an invasion into that Province, which he thought might easily be
subdued, by reason of a long peace it had enjoyed, and at this time was also
divided by an intestin war. But he did not, as he hoped, find them unprepared,
nor destitute of courage to resist him. For after many losses sustained in
several parts of the country, they at last took courage, and uniting their
forces together came to a battle, wherein they had the upper hand, and
constraind Cedwalla to fly. As for his Brother Mollo (or Mull) he in his flight
being compelled to retire into a certain Cottage, the enemies fett it on fire,
so that he not daring to issue out, was consumed by the flames. Yet did not
Cedwalla for all this desist from repairing his losses by frequent micheifs
done to the inhabitants of Kent: and a more full revenge he bequeathed to his
Successor King ^na^* as in due place shall be declared.

6. B. Parker in his Antiquities assigns a strange cause w^y this Mollo was
burnt by the Kentish soldiers, Park. in Ant^q. Brit in Brit^^y valdo.
saying, Some affirm that the cause of the death of Mollo was, because the
Kentishmen perceived that he was very obstinat in defending Images, concerning
which a Controversy in that age was solemnly debated. But it does no where
appear that Mollo was a Christian. Certain it is his Brother Cedwalla was not
baptized till after this, when he had made a journey to Rome in devotion for
that purpose. It was therefore in probability his obstinacy not to reliquish
his Idols or Pagan worship that might because of his death. And as for the
pretended Question about Sacred Images, it was not raised in the Church till
about a hundred years after this, and then it began in the East by certain
factious Christians, half-Iewes. Neither do we find any signs in our ancient
Records that Brittany was disturbed with that debate. If this Mollo therefore
was a Christian, it is well known what doctrine Saint Augustine and his
Successors taught in Kent touching the Veneration of Images, and that Saint
Birinus, Agilbert. Hedda and Wilfrid taught the same among the West Saxons.

7. Cedwalla after he had for some time vented his fury against Kent, turned
his arms to the subd^ing the Isle of Wight, adjoining to the Province of the
South Saxons already conquered by him. And how great a blessing that Island
obtained by his cruelty we find thus related by Saint Beda: After that
Cedwalla (says he) had the possession of the Kingdom of the Gevissi (or
West Saxons, Bed l 4. c. 18.
) he subdued the Isle of Wight, the inhabitants whereof were to that time
wholly addicted to Pagan Idolatry, whom he endeavored wholly to exterminate,
and to place in their rooms his own Subjects: yea, as the report is, he obliged
himself by vow, though as yet he was no professed Christian, nor baptized, that
if he got the possession of the Island, he would consecrate to our Lord the
fourth part both of the land and spoils. And this Vow he effectually
performed, insomuch as he gave to Saint Wilfrid, who not long before was
arrived there out of the Northern parts, the use of the said land and prey. Now
the measure of that Island according to the English estimation is so much as
may maintain twelve hundred families. So that the possession of three hundred
families was given to the Bishop. But he recommended the portion given him to
one of his Clarks, A. D. 687.
named Berwins, who was his Sisters Son: And withal gave him a Priest called
Hildila, to the end he might administer the Word of life and Baptism to all
that would be saved.

Seldom in Analect. f. 78.
8. It is also probable that about this time the same Cedwalla gave to S.
Wilfrid the Town called Paganham, concerning which Seldom makes mention of a
certain clause in the said Kings Charter, importing that a threefold freedom
was granted to that place now given to the Church, to wit, a freedom from
having a Castle built there* and from contribution to mending the bridge, and
lastly from payments to the army (if this be the right interpretation of the
rude Latin phrase, Absque trinoda necessitate totius Christiani populi, id est,
areis munitione, pontis emendatione, exercitij congestime liberam perstrinxi.)
Another Charter to the same holy Bishop is likewise extant, to which is annexed
this clause, For a further confirmation hereof, I Cedwalla have putt a turf of
the said ground upon the holy Alt^r of our Savior, and by reason of my
ignorance in writing my name, I have expressed and subscribed the sign of the
holy Cross. Now from hence is manifest that at the time of the invasion of the
Isle of Wight, Cedwalla was a Christian Cathecumen, though he deferred his
Baptism out of a desire to receive it at Rome.

V. CHA.
V. CHAP.
1.2. Two young Princes Martyrs in the Isle of Wight.

3. King Cedwalla his reverence to Saint Wilfrid.

1. THE Isle of Wight was the last Province of Brittany which received the
Christian Faith: and that New Church was consecrated with the blood of two
young Princely Martyrs, the Brethren of Arvald, or Arvand King of that Island.
The manner hereof is thus described by S. Beda:

Bed. l. 4. c. 16.
2. We must not pass over in silence, says he, how two Royal children,
brethren to Arvald King of the Island were by a special Grace of God crowned
with Martyrdom, being made an Oblation of First fruits of such inhabitants of
the said Island as were to be saved by Faith. For when the Enemies army
approached, they fled privately out of the Island into the adjoining Province of
the Iutae (or Hampshire.) Where being come to a place called (Ad lapidem)
Stoneham, they hoped to conceal themselves from the sight of the conquering
King Cedwalla: but they were betrayed, and by his command appointed to be slain.
The report of this command being come to the hearing of a Certain Abbot and
Priest, named Cymbert, who governed a Monastery not far distant from thence,
called Read-ford, or the Ford of Reeds (it is now called Redbridge,) he came to
the K. who then lay privately in those parts to be cured of his wound received
in the late battle in the Isle of Wight, A. D. 688
and humbly requested of him, that of those children must needs be killed, he
would at least permit them to be instructed in the Christian Faith, and
baptized before their death. The King yielded to this request: whereupon the
good Abbot taught them the Mysteries of Christian Religion, which they*
embracing, he washed them from all their sins in the Laver of saving Baptism,
and thereby gave them an assurance that they should enter into an eternal
kingdom. Thus the Executioner being come, they joyfully underwent a corporal
death, not doubting but that thereby their souls should be translated to a
life of happiness everlasting.

3. Thus writes S. Beda: Id. ^b. Camden in Hampshr^re.
the sum whereof is repeated by Camden in his description of Hampshire:
thereto adding this observation, from the same Author, That after all other
Provinces of Brittany had received the Faith of Christ, the Isle of Wight in
the last place of all embraced the same. Notwithstanding by reason of the
miserable Subjection thereof to a foreign Prince, not any one accepted the
Episcopal ministry and charge there, till the time that S. Beda wrote his
History, when a certain Prelat called Daniel was ordained Bishop of the
West Saxons and Gevissi. Notwithstanding true it is that at this time,
presently after the conquest of the Island, S. Wilfrid discharged that Office
there, Malmsb. de Pont. l. 3.
being one (says William of Malmsbury) whom King Cedwalla set over the whole
Province as Master and Governor, neither without his assent would he himself
do any weighty matter in his kingdom.

VI. CHAP. VI. CHAP.

1.2. etc King Cedwalla having made Inas his Successor*, in devotion goes to
Rome to receive Baptism.

5.6. etc. The occurrents of his journey: his Companions.

9. etc. As Soon as he was baptized, he dyed at Rome: His Epitaph, etc.

1. THE year following, A. D. 638.
which was the year of Grace six hundred eighty eight, Cedwalla who had
hitherto acted the Lions part, now divested himself of his natural feircenes,
entertaining thoughts and designs of peace, meeknes and humility: and though he
was a victorious King, and withal young, full of spirits and vigor, yet he
made choice rather to show himself an humble servant of Christ, then to
continue his reign full of temporal glory. This was a wonderful change of the
right hand of the Almighty, of which we may confidently acknowledge S. Wilfrid
to have been the principal Instrument. And therein admire the good Providence
of God in the disposal of that his faithful servant. A. D. 686.


2. We can scarce find in Ecclesiastical story any example, except S.
Athanasius, of an innocent holy Prelate which suffered persecutions and
banishments so frequent and tedious: for we shall see S. Wilfrid once more
restored, and again banished, and after that restored again: all which
vicissitudes of sufferings did not only cooperate to the perfectionating his
own soul in patience, but were occasions of procuring eternal happiness to
thousands of souls. Whole nations were converted to Christ by this wandering
Prelate, as the Frisons, South Saxons and inhabitants of the Isle of Wight, so
that he had the fate of the ancient Prophets, to be loved and honored every
where, but in his own native country.

2. But to return to Cedwalla* This year in a voluntary and heroical devotion
he divested himself of his Royal Purple, and assumed the Habit of a Pilgrim,
to visit the Monuments of the Holy Apostles at Rome, and there to receive the
humble badge of Christianity. There wanted not in Brittany many holy and
Venerable Bishops and Prelates, who might have conferred that blessing on him,
as S. Theodore at Canterbury, S. Erconwald at London, S. Hedda in his own
country, and S. Wilfrid also then present with him: to whom we may add the
holy and learned Abbot S. Aldelm, the Abbot Cymbert, and many others. But it
seems Cedwalla calling to mind that his Noble Predecessors King Lucius, the
Emperor Constantin, and King Ethelbert had received their Faith and Baptism
from Rome, he desired to repair to the fountain of Ecclesiastical Hierarchy,
and to pay his humble respects to the Princes often he Apostles, then in a sort
living and governing in their Successor Sergius at that time Pope. Bed. l. 5.
c. 7.


3. To this effect S. Beda has left us an account of this matter: In the third
year of the reign of Alfrid King of the Northumbers, says he, Cedwalla King of
the West Saxons after he had for two years space valiantly governed his
Kingdom, voluntarily quitted the same for our Lord, and for the gaining an
eternal Kingdom, and went to Rome. For his desire was to obtain this singular
privilege and glory, to be washed from his Sins by Baptism at the Sepulchers
of the Blessed Chief Apostles: for he had been taught that by Baptism only the
entrance into eternal life was opened to mankind. Withal he had a hope that
as soon as he was baptized he should be freed from his mortal flesh, and pass
to everlasting joys. Neither did he fail of his hope in either of these
regards, so great was the Mercy of God to him.

4. Before he departed out of Brittany, he took care to compose and settle his
Kingdom under the government of a worthy Successor. For which purpose with the
advice and consent of his Nobles choice was made of Inas, a Prince of the Blood
Royal, being great grandchild of Cuthbald brother to King K^negils, or as
Florentius writes, the son of Ken, son of Ceolwald brother of Kinewald sons of
Cuthwin who was son of Ceaulin. Others affirm him to have been the son of Cissa
founder of the Monastery of Abindon. He was a young man of eminent endowments
which gained him the affections of all, and thereby the Crown. Therefore as
William of Malmsbury well observes, Malmsb. de ^^ont. l. 2. cap. 252.
he was advanced to the Principality, rather for his courage and industry, th^n
proximity of blood, being a Prince of admirable valor, prudence and piety: by
which qualities he obtaind great affection at home, and reverence abroad.
Insomuch as he exercised supreme authority the space of forty years wanting
two, without any apprehension of treachery.

5. King Cedwalla having provided so worthy a Successor, delayed not his
journey to Rome: In which his Companions were Saint Aldelm Abbot of the
Monastery o^ Malmsbury (who had also another motive, Miraeus in ^ast ^. Febr.
S^^ssay id Martyrolog. Gall 4 Febr.
to obtain from the Sea Apostolic certain Privileges and liberties to this
Monastery) and as some writers affirm, Saint Leitphard a Bishop and Martyr, who
returning from Rome, an^ passing through a forest called Trecaultium near
Arras, was by certain impious persons lewdl^ slain. But of this supposed
companion of King Cedwalla no mention is made among ou^ Ecclesiastical Writers.

6. Having taken ship they landed in the Province of the Morini (or Terouanne)
in France, the nearest to Brittany, where says Suriu^ and Miraeus, King
Cedwalla then a Catechumen, having heard of the Sanctity of an Abbot called
wulmar, and of his admirable zeal an^ prudence in instructing souls, repaired
to him to receive his spiritual counsel and a more perfect knowledge in
Christian Mysteries. The holy Abbot at that time had finished the building a
Church to the honor of the Blessed Virg^n and of S. Peter the Apostle.

7. From thence traveling through France, and having passed the Alps, (...)
Warnefrid de Gest. Lon (...) barp l 6. cap. 15.
King Cedwalla (called by Paul Warnefridus, Theo^wald) a Prince who in his own
country had fought many battles, after which having been converted to the
Faith of Christ, he hastened to Rome there to receive Baptism, and by the way
passing through C^^alpin Gaul or Lombardy) he visited the King of that Nation,
called Cunibert, by whom he was entertained with wonderful humanity and
magnificence.

8. From thence arriving at Rome very opportunely near the Solemnity of Easter,
at which time by the ancient custom of the Church the Sacrament of Baptism was
solemnly administered to such as had been converted from Infidelity, he
addressed himself to Pope Sergius in the Second year of his Pontificat, by whom
he was gladly received, and admitted to Baptism, in which also according to the
usual manner his Name was changed from Cedwalla to Peter: Bed. l. 5. c.
the cause of which change is thus related by S. Beda: At the time of his
Baptism the foresaid Pope imposed on him the name of Peter, to the end he might
bear the Name of the Prince of Apostles, out of a pious love to whom he had
undertaken so long a journey to visit the Monument of his most sacred Body.

9. After the celebration of his Baptism he was, according to the most ancient
Ecclesiastical custom, clothed with a White Vestment or Stole, signifying the
immaculate purity of those who had duly received that holy Sacrament. The Stole
was to be worn eight days: but before those days were ended he was seized on
by a mortal infirmity, of which he dyed most happily, to the great grief of
the whole City.

10. Pope Sergius bewayling the loss of so glorious and pious a Son, to
testify his affection and esteem of him celebrated his funerals with great
solemnity: and moreover by his order his body was entombed in the Church of S.
Peter, and an Epitaph both in verse and prose inscribed on his monument, says
S. Beda, to the end the memory of his devotion might remain to future ages, and
that those who either did read or hear it, might by his example be inflamed to
the love and Zeal of Religion The Epitaph in verse is at large copied out by
the same Author, containing a Summary of what has been already related
touching this glorious King* To which was adioynd this Inscription in prose,
Bed. l. 2. c. 7.
Here lies buried Cedwalla, otherwise named Peter, King of the Saxons, the
twelfth day before the Calends of May, in the second Indiction: who lived about
the space of thirty years: and dyed in the fourth year of the Pontificat of
Pope Sergius.

11. It de^erves not our care to disprove the assertion of the fabulous Writer,
Geffrey of Monmouth, who confounds this Cedwalla a Saxon King with Cadwallader
the last King of the Britains, to whom he ascribes the heroical Gests of
Cedwalla, so burying that Kingdom with honor. Whereas it is evident from S.
Beda, William of Malmsbury, Henry of Huntingdon, Florentius of Worcester, and
the express tenor of the forementioned Epitaph, that Cedwalla who dyed at
Rome was King of the West Saxons, or Gevissi: Which Nation was so called from
the name of the Grand father of the first King Cerdic, Asser in initio Histor.
Geuvis, the father of Elesa, the Father of Cerdic, says Asser. Neither are
there three Kings called ^edwalla mentioned by S. Beda, Baron. hic.
as Baronius by mistake affirms, but only two: one who was a British Prince,
who in the year of Grace six hundred thirty three slew the pious King of the
Northumbers Edwin: and this Saxon King Cedwalla, of whom we now treat.

Martyr. A^g 20. April.
12. A place is assigned to him in our Martyrologe among the Saints, where on
the twentieth of April his deposition is commemorated, with this Elogy, that
he was baptized at Rome by Pope Sergius, and dyed in his white baptismall robe
in the year of Christ six hundred eighty nine. His whole reign not having
continued full three years, we have here to the relation of his Gests added
that also of his happy death, because we would not interrupt our narration
concerning him: though in the progress of our Story we are not yet arrived to
the year in which he dyed. We will therefore return to relate occurrents
happening in the Saxon Churches in the mean time between King Cedwalla's reign
and death. Among which the most memorable are those which concern the last
actions of our glorious S. Cuthbert.

VII. CHA.
VII. CHAP.
1.2 S. Cuthbert gives the Religious Veyle to Queen Ermenburga.

3.4. etc. He obtains for a Holy Hermit Herebert, that they should dye at the
same time.

8* He cures miraculously a sick Lady with Holy Water.

1. WITH what unwillingnes S. Cuthbert was drawn out of his solitude to be
exalted to the Episcopal Throne, Sup. c.
and with what perfection he afterward discharged his Episcopal function, has
been already declared. It remains that we relate how the conclusion of his Life
was suitable to the beginning and progress of it.

2. Yet one action of piety more, performed by him whilst he was Bishop, we
will not omit, which was the consecrating to almighty God the Queen
Ermenburga, whose heart it seems Gods holy Spirit had touched with compunction
for all the mischeifs done by her to the Holy Archbishop Wilfrid. This
particular is thus related by S. Beda: Not long after the death of King Egfrid
the Servant of God S. Cuthbert, being thereto requested, came to the City
Luguballia (or Carlisle) there to ordain Priests, Bed. in vit. S. Cuth^. c. 28
and also to give his benediction to the Queen Ermenburga, by conferring on her
the Religious habit of Holy conversation.

3. At the same time he was admonished from heaven concerning his approaching
death, which he discovered to a devout Hermit, to whom he bore a particular
affection, and who had been accustomed once a year to repair to him for
spiritual comfort and instruction. The circumstances of their last
conversation the same devout Author setts down in the manner following:

[4. There was ( says he) a certain Venerable Priest named Herebert, Idem
ibid. and l. 4. Hist. c. 29.
who for many years before had been joined in spiritual freindship to the Holy
Bishop. This man lead a solitary life in a little Island situated in the vast
lake out of which the River Derwent flows: and his custom was every year to
visit the man of God, and to receive from him documents of piety and salvation.
He being informed that S. Cuthbert was to make some stay in the foresaid
City, came to him, as his manner had been, with a desire to be more inflamed
in heavenly desires by his wholesome exhortations.

5. They being thus met together, and interchangeably communicating to one
another draughts of celestial wisdom, among other discourses S. Cuthbert
said to him, Be mindful, Brother Herebert, to propose now to me whatsoever
doubts you desire to be resolved in, for after we are parted, we shall never
see one the other in this life. For I am assured that the time of my
dissolution approaches, and that I shall very shortly putt off this my mortal
Tabernacle. The devout Hermit, having heard these words, cast himself at his
feet, and with many ^eates and groans said, I beseech you by our Lord, that you
will not forsake nor forgett your old companion, but make your petition to the
Divine mercy that as we have jointly served our Lord together on earth, we may
likewise together pass out of this world to see his Glory. For you know that I
have always been diligent to conform my life to your admonitions, and likewise
according to your will to correct what soever faults I have any time committed
through ignorance or frailty.

6. Hereupon the Holy Bishop betook himself to prayer, and being inwardly
taught in Spirit that his petitions were granted by our Lord, he said to him,
Arise, dear Brother, weep no longer, but rather rejoice, for the Divine
Clemency has mercifully granted our desires.

7. The truth of this Prophetical promise was really confirmed by the event:
for after they were parted they never saw one the other corporally: and in the
same moment of time their Spirits were delivered from their mortal bodies, and
by the ministry of Angels translated to the beatificall vision of God. But
the devout Hermit before his death was purified by a tedious and painful
infirmity, which probably happened to him by a merciful divine dispensation, to
the end that the torments of a long sickness might instrumentally supply the
defect in which he came short of the holy Bishops merits, that so being made
equal in Grace with his pious Intercessour, he might not only in the ^^me
moment of time, but with an equal participation, enjoy eternal Glory together
with him.

8. Among the many miraculous proofs of his Sanctity and favor with God we
will here recount only one, which he performed during his last Visitation of
his Diocese, which is recorded by the same Writer, as follows: Id. in vit. S.
Cuthb. c. 29.
On a certain day when in Visiting his Province he preached the word of life to
the poor countrey-people, and likewise by imposition of hands conferred the
Grace of Confirmation on such as had been baptized, he came to the Village of a
certain Count, A. D. 687.
whose wife at that time lay sick at the point of death. The Count himself met
him in the way, and with bended knees gave thanks to our Lord for his coming,
and so conducted him into his house. And when the Venerable Bishop after he had
according to the use of strangers, washed his hands and feet, and was set
down, the Count began to acquaint him with the desperate state of his wife,
beseeching him that he would give his benediction to water for sprinckling her:
For, (said he) I firmly believe that either she will thereby by Gods blessing
presently recover, or if she dye* she will pass from her miserable and tedious
pains to eternal rest. The Holy Bishop assented to the man's request, and
water being brought* he blessed it, and gave it to a Priest, commanding him to
sprinckle the sick Lady with it. Who thereupon entered into her chamber, where
she lay like one deprived of sense and life, and both sprinkled her face and
her bed, yea withal opening her mouth distilled a few, dropps into it. The
holy Water had no sooner touched her, but, o Wonderful! though she was utterly
ignorant of what had been done, she presently recovered a perfect health of
body and mind, and devoutly blessed our Lord who had sent such holy guests to
visit, and restore her to health. And without delay rising up, she herself,
like the Mother of S. Peter's wife, came to do service to the Bishop, being the
first of the whole family which presented to him a Cup of refection.]

VIII. CHAP. VIII. CHAPTER

1.2. etc. Saint Cuthberts preparation to death.

4.5. etc. The admirable occurrents at his death.

1. THIS was the last time that S. Cuthbert visited his Diocese: A. D. 687.
after which he again retired himself into his solitude of Lindesfarn, there to
prepare himself without distraction for his last account, which he was shortly
to make, as Gods holy Spirit had signified to him. Only three months space was
allowed him for this preparation, for as Saint Beda declares, he retired
himself when the Feast of our Lords Nativity was ended in the year six hundred
eighty six, and dyed on the twentieth of March following.

2. What his employment was during this his last retirement, S. Beda who either
was, Bed. ib. c. 36.
or might have been present, will inform us: Having passed (says he) two years
in performing his Episcopal charge, the Holy man of God knew in spirit that
the day of his departure out of this world approached, whereupon he discharged
himself of his Episcopal solicitude, and made have to return to his beloved
exercises of an Eremiticall conversation, to the end that by the flame of his
accustomed compunction he might purge away and consume all the dross of
worldly affections. In which time he oftimes would go out of his solitary
mansion to exhort and comfort his Religious brethren who came to visit him.

3. The same Author a little after declares the particular occurrents happening
to the Holy Bishop a little before his death which he relates in the words of a
devout Monk, whose abode was near to the place, and also was scrupulously
inquisitive into all matters concerning the Holy Bishop. The account given by
him is as follows:

4. [The holy man of God S. Cuthbert returned into his Mansion in the Island as
soon as the Solemnity of our Lords Nativity was ended. He was attended to the
boat by a troop of his Religious Brethren, and being ready to enter into it,
one of the ancient Monks venerable for his piety, strong in Faith, but weak in
body by reason of a Dyssentery which afflicted him, said thus to him, Tell us,
my Lord Bishop, when we may expect your return. To this simple and plain
question the holy Bishop answered as plainly: for he certainly knew what should
befall him, My return shall be when you shall bring back my dead body.

5. Thus he passed into the Island, where for two months space he spent the
time in great joy for the recovering his beloved tranquillity and solitude, yet
not admitting any sensual refreshment, but on the contrary mortifying himself
both externally in body, and internally in mind according to his ancient
accustomed rigor. After which he was suddenly assaulted with a sharp sickness,
by the bitter pains whereof he was purified and prepared for eternal rest and
joy.]

6. As for the manner of his death, I will relate it (says Saint Beda) in the
very words of him from whose mouth I received it, which was a Priest venerable
for his Piety, named Herefrid, who at that time was Abbot of the Monastery of
Lindesfarn: viz. [Three whole weeks was he continually tormented and purified
with his disease of which he dyed: for upon a Wednesday he began to be sick,
and upon a Wednesday death ended his sickness and sent him to our Lord.

7. Now the first day in which his last infirmity had seized on him, I went
early in the morning to him ( for three days before I arrived in the Island
attended by several of my Brethren:) for I had a desire to partake the comfort
of his benediction and pious exhortation. As Soon as I had given the accustomed
sign of my being there, he came to the window of his Mansion, and when I had
saluted him, all the answer he gave me was a sigh. My Lord Bishop said I, how
do you? Perhaps your usual languishing infirmity has this last night grown
upon you. It is true, (said he) I have been very weak this night. Now I thought
he had meant it of his old infirmity which seldom left him, and not of a new
unusual sickness: Therefore I questioned him no further but said, Give us your
benediction, for it is time for us to return. Do so, answered he, take boat,
and go home in safety. But when God shall have received my soul, bury me in
this mansion near my Oratory toward the South, which lies Eastward from the
holy Cross which I have erected. Now toward the Northern part of the said
Oratory there is a Coffin covered with green turf, which the Venerable Abbot
Cudda gave me long since: In that Coffin lay my body, having first enwrapped
it in a sheet which you will find in the same place, which I would never make
use of in my life time, having had a care, out of my affection to the devout
Abbess Verca who sent it me, to reserve it for my Winding Sheet.

8. When I had heard him speak thus, I said to him: Since you speak of your
sickness and that you shall dye shortly, I beseech your Paternity to permit
some of our Brethren to remain here to attend you. But his answer was, For the
present go away and in convenient time return hither again. Notwithstanding I
earnestly entreated him to accept of one to serve him; which he utterly
refusing, at last I asked him when he would have us return to him: He answered,
when it shall be Gods pleasure to direct you.

9. We therefore according to his command went back to our Monastery where
assembling all the Monks together, I ordained Prayers to be said without
intermission for him: for, said I, I perceive by some speeches of his, his
departure is at hand. Now I was very solicitous to hasten my return to him by
reason of his sickness: But for five days together there was such a tempest that
we could not possibly take boat. And the event showed that this impediment was
caused by a special dispensation of Divine Providence. For Almighty God having
a purpose by his Fatherly chastisements to purify his servant from all stains
of humane fraylty, and to show how weak were all attempts of his Spiritual
Adversaries against the firmnes of his Faith, he was therefore pleased that he
should remain so long a time separated from all society of men, that he might
be examined and tried to the uttermost both by bodily pains, and a most sharp
combat and assault of his Old Enemy the Devil.

10. At last when the weather grew calm we returned to the Island: where being
arrived we found that he was gone out of his own mansion, and was sitting in
the house, where we ordinarily made our abode when we visited him. Now
because a particular necessity required it, I took order that the Brethren who
came with me, should sail back to the next shore, and my self remained alone
in the Island to assist and minister help and comfort to him Therefore warming
some water, I washed one of his feet, which having been long swollen was broke
then into an ulcer, out of which corrupt matter issued, so that it stood in
need of dressing. I likewise brought him a little wine which I had warmed also,
and desired him to drink of it: For I perceived by his look that his spirits
were even spent with fasting and feeblenes caused by his infirmity.

11. After I had administered these refreshments to him, he sat up upon his
couch, saying nothing: and I also sat by him. And when he remained still
silent, I said to him, I perceive my Lord Bishop, that since we left you you
have been much tormented with your sickness: and indeed I wonder why you would
not permit us to leave with you any to assist you. He answered, This was done
by the Divine Will and Providence, to the end that being destitute of all human
society and help, I might be exposed to sufferings. For as soon as you were
departed from me, immediately my sickness increased: and therefore I went out of
mine own mansion to this place, that if any of you came to attend me, they
might find me here, and not be obliged to go into my mansion. And from the
time that I entered into this room and seated my self here, I have never stirrd
from hence, but remained these five days and five nights quiet in the same
place. I replied, But how was it possible you should continue so? Have you
remained so long a time destitute of all sustenance? Then he lifting up a skirt
of the Coverlet on which he sat, showed me five onyons hid there, and said,
This has been all my food these five days. For whenever my palate was dried
and burnt with thirst, by tasting of these I received some refreshment. Now I
perceived that one of those onyons had had a less half of it diminished.

12. Moreover he added saying, My spiritual Enemies have these five last days
assaulted me with more frequent and bitter persecutions then they have done
all the time that I have abode in this Island. I durst not presume to ask him
concerning the nature and quality of those tentations: Therefore I only
besought him that he would admit of some to assist him. To this request he
yielded, and retained with him certain of our Brethren: among whom one was the
Elder Beda a Priest, who anciently had been his familiar assistant, and
particularly had taken an account of whatsoever he had given or received: Him
he made choice of to the end he might acquaint him whether any thing had been
received, for which no recompense had been made, and which before his death he
would needs have restored. He designed likewise among his attendants another
Monk especially, who a long time had been sick of a flux, and could receive no
help from Physicians: but for his piety, prudence and gravity became worthy to
be a wittnes of the last words of the holy Bishop and of the manner of his
happy death and departure to our Lord.

13. In the mean time I returned home, and acquainted my Brethren that it was
our Venerable Fathers will to be buried in his own Island: But in my opinion it
would be more just and fitting that we should solicit him to permit his Body
to be translated hither, and buried with honor in our Church. The motion made
by me was pleasing to them all: therefore going to the Bishop we petitioned
him saying, We dare not presume contemptuously to disobey your Order that your
Body should be buried in this place. Notwithstanding we humbly request you to
honor us so far as to permit us to translate it to our Monastery, that we may
enjoy the blessing of its presence among us. He answered, Truly my desire was to
repose in my body here where I have combatted so long time against my
Spiritual Enemies, and at last according to the Grace given me consummated my
course: and my hope was that from hence I should be called by my merciful
Judge to receive a crown of glory. Moreover my opinion is that it would be more
commodious for you also that I should repose here, considering that
notwithstanding my many imperfections, a fame is gone out and entertained by
the people that I am a faithful servant of Christ, by which many facinorous or
persecuted men will probably have recourse to my Tomb for protection and
safety, upon which account you will be often obliged to intercede in their behalf
with Princes and Great men, to your great distraction and inconvenience. For
this reason it is that I am unwilling that my Body should repose among you.

14. But notwithstanding all these allegations we persisted in our Petition,
professing that the incommodity and trouble alleged by him would seem light
and even grateful to us. Whereupon the Holy Bishop seeing our constancy, at
last with great gravity said, Since you are resolved to conquer my will, and
will needs have my Body among you, it seems to me your best course to bury it
within your enclosure, for so you may whenever you have a mind visit my
Sepulcher, and it will be in your power to admit or exclude strangers. When he
had given us this permission and advice, we upon our knees gave him most humble
thanks, and returned home. Yet after this we frequently went to visit him.

15. But when by the increase of his disease and weakness he perceived his death
to be at hand, he commanded us to carry him into his own little mansion and
Oratory: It was then about nine a clock in the morning. We carried him
therefore, for through extremity of weakness and pain he was not able himself to
walk. When we were come to the entrance of it, we desired him to permit some
one of us to enter with him for his assistance: For during the space of many
years not any one but himself had entered thither. He therefore taking a view of
us all, fixed his eyes on the Monk who, as I said, was troubled with a flux,
and said, Let Walchsted (that was his name) enter in with me. He therefore
went in, and remaining with him till three a clock in the afternoon, came then
out and called me, telling me that it was the Holy Bishops pleasure I should
enter also to him: He added withal, I can tell you a strange thing, As Soon as
ever I touched the Bishop to conduct him into his Oratory, immediately I
perceived my self perfectly freed from all my pa^n and infirmity.

16. I went in therefore to him about the hour forenamed, and I found him
sitting in a corner of his Oratory over against the Altar. I sat also by him
He spoke very little, because the extremity of his pain and weakness made
speaking difficult to him. But when I earnestly asked him what good advice he
would leave to his poor Brethren for a last Legacy, he then began to make a
short, but efficacious discourse concerning peace and humility, and the
avoiding of such as were enemies to these virtues Be careful, (said he,) to
conserve Peace and Divine Charity among you: and whenever any necessity shall
oblige you to consult in common about your affairs, be unanimous in your
counsels. Maintain likewise a good correspondance and concord with other
Servants of Christ who profess also a Religious life, and whenever they come
to you for hospitality, do not neglect them but entertain them with
familiarity and kindness, and so dismiss them, not preferring your selves
before others of the like Profession. But as for such as have broken
Ecclesiastical Unity either by their perverse living, or celebrating Easter
out of its due time, have no Communion at all with them. Know this therefore,
and be sure not to forgett* that in case you be compelled to make choice of one
among two opposite incommodities, I had much rather that you should di^g my
body out of the tomb, and carry it with you to what other place so ever God
shall provide for you, then that you should in the least measure consent or
submitt your necks to the yoke of Schismatics. Be diligent to learn and
observe the Catholic Instituts of our Fathers, as likewise those which by Gods
mercy I have ordained for regulating your Religious conversation. For I am
assured, that though to some I appear contemptible, yet after my death it will
appear what an one I was both for my life and Doctrine.

17. When the Holy Bishop had concluded these and the like discourses, with
many intermissions, because, as I said, the extremity of his weakness would not
permit him to continue his speaking, he spent the rest of the day till evening
in silence and repose. The following night likewise he passed in watching and
still prayers. But when the usual time of Midnight Prayer was come, perceiving
his end to be at hand, he received at my hands the last Sacraments, and armed
himself against his Spiritual Enemies with the Communion of our Lords Body and
blood. After which lifting up his eyes to heaven, and stretching likewise his
hands on high he breathed forth his soul, then fixedly intent on the Divine
Praises, to continue the same Praises for ever in celestial joys,

18. As Soon as he was dead I presently went out and signified it to my
Brethren, who likewise had passed the whole night in watching and Prayer, and,
as it happened, in the same moment, according to the order of the Nocturnall
Office were singing the fifty ninth Psalm, which begins, Deus repulisti nos and
destruxisti nos: tratus es and misertus es nobis. At the same time one of them
likewise in have ran out of the Quire, and taking in each hand a candle
lighted, went with them to a place more elevated, and there waved them that the
Brethren remaining in the Monastery o^ Lindesfarn might see them, for that was
a sign agreed on between them to signify the Holy Bishops death. This being
observed by a Brother who for that purpose stood on a Watchtower in Lindesfarn,
he presently ran to the Church where the Monks likewise were then employed in
the Nocturnall Psalmody: and at his entrance thither they also were repeating
the same Psalm. And the following Events showed, that this was ordered
prophetically by Divine dispensation. For as soon as the Holy Bishop was buried,
so great a Tentation and storm of persecution shook that Church and
Congregation, that several of the Monks chose rather to depart from thence,
then to expose themselves to the dangers threatening them.

19. But after a year was passed, and Eadbert, a man of great piety and
knowledge in the Scriptures, and withal much given to Alms, was ordained
Bishop, these tempests of persecution were dissipated, and to use the phrase of
Scripture, our Lord again built up Jerusalem, that is the Visian of peace, and
gathered together the dispersions of Israel: He healed the broken in heart, and
bound up their ruptures: By which it was plainly discovered what was signified
by the foresaid Psalm sung at the Holy Bishops death, to wit, that immediately
after his departure his children should be persecuted and oppressed, but after
men had for a while made show of their fury, Divine pity would again comfort
and refresh them.

20. We laid the venerable Body of our Holy Father in a boat, and so brought it
back to the Isle of Lindesfarn, where it was received by a great Troop of
devout people who met it, together with several Quires of Monks singing
Psalms: and it was with great reverence laid in a Stone- Coffin and buried in
the Church of the Blessed Apostle S. Peter, on the right side of the Altar.
This is the Narrative which the Venerable Abbot Herefride, who was an
eye-witnes of all things, gave to Saint Beda touching the circumstances of the
happy death of the glorious Saint Cuthbert.

IX. CHAPTER
IX. CHAP.
1 2. etc. The incorruption of Saint Cuthberts Body: testified in all ages. The
great liberality of our Kings to his Church: Its Privileges, etc.

1. SO precious in the Sight of God was the death of this most admirably holy
Bishop, that to show the incorruption of his Faith God was pleased to confer
an incorruption on his Body likewise. A miraculous Privilege not only
conspicuous to the age immediately following, but even to these our times. Saint
Beda who wrote his life, and might have been an eyewitnes of what he wrote,
testifies as much for that age.

Bed l. 4. c. 3^ and in vi^. S. Cuthb. c. 4.
[^. The Divine disposition, says he, being pleased to demonstrate in how great
glory the man of God Saint Cuthbert lived after his death, the Sanctity of
whose life had before been arrested by many miraculous signs, gave this
illustrious testimony: Eleaven years after his burial God inspired into the
minds of his Brethren the Monks to take up his his bones, which they conceived
according to the course of Nature to be dry, and the flesh dissolved into dust.
Those bones they intended to lay in a new Coffin, and place them more
honorably in a Tomb raised above the pavement. This intention of theirs they
signified to their Venerable Bishop Eadbert: who approving it, commanded them
to put it in execution on the next Anniversary day of his Deposition. They did
so, and opening the Sepulcher found his body perfectly entire, with a lively
freshnes, and all his limbs as flexible as if he had been alive, so that he
appeared like a person rather asleep then dead. Moreover all his Vestments were
not only undecayed, but appeared in their primitive freshnes and also with the
addition of a wonderful luster.

^. The Monks seeing this were much astonished, and with great have signified
these wonders to their Bishop, who then had retired himself to a place a good
way distant from the Church, which every tide was encompassed by the Sea: (For
his custom was every year both during the time or Lent and forty days
likewise before our Lords Nativity to confine himself to that solitude, there
passing the time in great abstinence, compunction and prayer. And to the same
place his Venerable Predecessor S. Cuthbert had been accustomed several times
to retire himself for devotion and mortification, before he went to the Isle
Farne.

4. Hither came the Monks, bringing with them some shreds of the vestments
wherewith the Sacred Body had been clothed, which they presented to the Bishop.
He accepted their gift very thankfully, and with much content heard their
relation of this miracle, with an affectionate devotion kissing those garments,
as if the body which they had covered, had been there present. Withal he
commanded them to provide new vestments to enwrapp the body, and to lay it
reverently in the New Coffin which they had provided: For I am assured, said
he, that the place consecrated by God with so celestial a miracle will shortly
be frequen^ted with great devotion. And how happy shall that man be on whom
God, the Author of all Blessedness, shall confer the Grace and privilege to
repose there. Many other like speeches did the Venerable Bishop add with a
trembling tongue and great compunction. After which the Monks according to his
command inwrapped the Sacred Body in new vestments, and laid it in a New Coffin
which they putt into a Tomb raised above the pavement of the Sanctuary.

5. Presently after this the devout Bishop Eadbert was assaulted by a very
sharp disease, the violence of which increasing more and more, an within in a
few days, that is, the day before the Nones of May, he also departed to our
Lord. Whose body likewise the Monks laid in the Tomb of their Blessed Father
S. Cuthbert over the Coffin in which his incorrupted Body r^posed. After which
many miraculous cures there done have given an assured testimony of the
Sanctity of them both: a particular relation of several of which I have set
down in the Book of the life of the same glorious S. Cuthberth (to which I
referr the Reader.)]

6 Occasion will frequently be given in the pursuit of this History to renew
the memory of this glorious Saint, for several times have his Sacred Relics
been translated, and never without a renewing of miraculous testimonies of his
Sanctity and glory.

7. So wonderful was the Veneration in which his memory was held by all
succeeding ages, that Kings and Princes set no bounds to their magnificence
toward him, that is, toward the Church for his honor, heaping Gifts, lands,
Privileges and immunities on it. Camden in Dunelm.
Alfrid, who at this time was King of the Northumbers, out-passing the
liberality of his Father Egfrid, gave the whole country between the Rivers
Were and Tine for a perpetual possession to S. Cuthbert, and those who
administered divine Mysteries in his Church. Which likewise succeeding Kings
made a Sanctuary and Refuge to all that on any occasion whatsoever repaired to
it, granting them an entire security for the space of thirty seven days, upon
no ^ccasion to be infringed. Thus writes Camden in his Description of the
Bishopric of Durham, to which place S. Cuthberts Reliks were last of all
translated.

8. And for that reason, says the same Author, that whole Region with others
confining is by Monks in their writings called, The land or patrimony of Saint
Cuthbert. For that title was given to all the land belonging to the Church of
Durham of which Saint Cuthbert was Patron. This Cuthbert in the first infancy
of the Saxon Church was Bishop of Lindesfarn, a man of such Sanctity and
integrity of life, that he was canonized among the Saints. And our Kings and
Nobles, beleiving him to be a Tutelary S. against the Scotts, did not only
very often visit his Body with great devotion (which our Writers have persuaded
us to have continued hitherto entire and uncorrupted) but likewise bestowed
upon it very large possessions and many immunities. Idem ibid.


9. Among which immunities this was one not the least signal, that all the
inhabitants of that country, as being the Watchmen and Guards of Saint
Cuthberts Body, were exempted from all servitudes and obligations of attending
even the King himself in his war: Idem ibid.
for as we read in the ancient Book of Durham, They said that they were
Halywerke folks, and that they held their land for the defense of the Body of
Saint Cuthbert: and they ought not either for King or Bishop to go out of the
limits of the Bishopric, that is, beyond the Rivers Tine and Teise.

10. It was no doubt not so much by persuasion of our Writers, as by evidence
of wonderful Miracles wrought by the intercession of this illustrious Saint
that our Kings honored his Monument with such extraordinary Privileges: Such
esteem our greatest among the Saxon and Danish Princes before the times of the
Normans had of Saint Cuthbert: Idem ibid.
And particularly of the last of these, King Canutus, it is related that going
in devotion to visitt his body, he approached his monument with bare feet: a
sign of his excellency and incorruption of his Body.

Malmsbur. de Pont ^4. f. 478.
11. Four hundred and eighteen years after his death his Sacred Body was again
raised out of his Monument, and showed openly to all who had a mind to see it:
at which time it was found still uncorrupted. This Translation was made by
Radulph afterward Archbishop of Canterbury, Harpsf. serc. 7. c. 34.
says William of Malmsbury. And four hundred twenty-three years after that,
when by command of King Henry the eight the S^rines of all our Saints through
England were broken and robbed, his body was again found entire. only a small
part of the extremity of his nose was wanting: and on his finger was found a
gold ring in which a Sapphire was enchased, which Harpsfeild boasts that he had
seen and touched; Flor Hist. Eccles. p. 110.
and the late learned Bishop of Chalcedon with greater reason gloried in the
possession of it, having received it in gift from the late Lord Antony Viscount
Montagu. who had it from Robert Hare a Noble Catholic Gentleman, and he, from
Thomas Watson Bishop of Lincoln, who in Queen Elizabeth's time suffered much for
the Catholic Faith.

12. So unquestionably illustrious was his Sanctity, that even Protestant
Writers deny him not their testimony. Godvv. in Episc. Dunelm.
B. Godwin affirms that he discharged the Episcopal Office committed to him
with great praise of Sanctity and industry. And if any one be desirous to read
the miracles performed by him, he may find them at the end of the fourth Book
of Saint Beda's Ecclesiastical History. F^x in Acts p. 110.
He adds, That he was a diligent preacher of Gods word. And Fox in his Acts
writes thus, Cuthbert, Iaruman, Cedda and Wilfrid lived in the same age: all
whom I esteem to have been Bishops of holy Conversation. A^ touching their
miracles, since they are not written in the Gospel or Creed, but in certain
ancient Chronicles of that age, they are no part of my Faith. But as for their
lives, this I read and believe, that the British and English Clergy of that
time had no worldly designs, but gave themselves wholly to preaching and
teaching the word of our Savior, and in their lives and actions they performed
what they taught, so giving good examples to others, etc.

13. Both the Scotts and Irish would arro^gate him to their own countries. The
Scotts, because he was in his childhood bred at Mailros, a place now belonging
to Scotland. But they forget that in this age the Province of Laudon in which
Mailros is seated, was under the dominion of the English: and was afterward in
the year of Greece nine hundred seaventy five given to Kened King of the Scotts
by Edgar King of England, Westm^^ast. A. D. 975.
as Matthew of Westminster witnesses.

14. As for the Irish, Ap Vsser. in Rel^g. Antiq. Hib^rn.
some of their writers affirm that Saint Cuthbert was born in Ireland of a
certain Kings daughter defloured by force, and left in England at Mailros,
whilst his Mother performed a pilgrimage to Rome. But Saint Beda a witness
beyond all exception, Bed in C^rm. de vit. S^^ns Cut^bert. Id in vit. ^iusd c.
14.4.6.
in the beginning of his Poem of Saint Cuthberts life expressly says that he
was born in Brittany: and likewise affirms that he often visitted a devout woman
in England, who had nourished him in the very beginning of his childhood, whom
therefore he often called Mother. And moreover, that being a child he had the
care of guarding Cattle committed to him. And being come to man's age, he
entered the Monastery of Mailros. Yea his Name alone, compounded of
English-Saxon words, Cuth, that is, knowledge, and Bert, or bright, manifestly
declares his Original to have been English.

15: The Anniversary celebration of his Memory is in our English Martyrologe
assigned to the twentieth day of March: Martyrolog. Angl. 20. Mart.
And with him is joined S. Herebert the holy Hermit before mentioned, who in
the same day and moment in which S. Cuthbert dyed in the Isle of Farne,
departed likewise this life in an Island seated in a very great lake (in
Cumberland) out of which first issues the River Derwent: Which was obtained by
the merits and prayers of S. Cuthbert.

X. CHAP.
X. CHAP.
i.2. etc. Saint Theodore repents his persecuting Saint Wilfrid: and is
reconciled to him, recommending him to the Kings of the Mercians and
Northumbers: By whom he is restored to his rights.

1. THE same year in which by the death of S. Cuthbert the Northern Provinces
were deprived of so eminent a Light, a compensation was made by the return of
Saint Wilfrid from his long, but not unproffitable five years exile. For Saint
Theodore Archbishop of Canterbury, who had so earnestly opposed him, was at
last, a little before his death, mollified by the good Bishops patience, and
struck with admiration of his Sanctity and successful labors in the
Conversion of so many nations from Idolatry to the obedience of Christ.
Insomuch as he was desirous, instead of restoring him to his Northern Province,
to make him his Successor in the Sea of Canterbury. Almighty God likewise
touched the heart of Alfrid King of the Northumbers to desire and endeavor to
procure the Holy Bishops return. This, together with the circumstance of time
is thus briefly related by Saint Beda: Bed. l. 5. c. ^0.
Wilfrid, says he, in the second year of the reign of Alfria who succeeded
Egfrid, by the invitation of the said King received again his See and
Bishopric. In the quiet possession whereof he remained the space of five
years, after which by a New tempest he was driven out of the haven, as in due
place shall be declared.

2. As touching Saint Theodores repentance and reconciliation with Saint
Wilfrid, the particular circumstances thereof are thus set down by William of
Malmsbury: Malmsb. de (...). l. 3.
At this time Egfrid King of the Northumbers had been slain in his war against
the Picts, and Theodore Archbishop of Canterbury declined toward his end: when
being wounded in conscience for his injustice committed against Saint Wilfrid,
he summoned him and Bishop Erconwald to meet him at London. There being met
together, he confessed to them all his sins, acknowledging withal that the
thing which caused in his mind the sharpest remorse was his injustice against
the said Holy Bishop, in that he had partly by open endeavors procured, or by
secret connivance permitted him to be despoyled of his Bishopric against the
Ecclesiastical Canons. And because, said he, I am by a warning from heaven and
my frequent infirmities admonished that my death will not be delayed beyond the
next year, I beseech you, O holy Bishop Wilfrid, mildly to forgive me my
fault, and moreover to take upon you the charge of my Archbishopric for I do
not know any one of the English Nation so capable of it, considering the
eminence of your learning and skill in the Ecclesiastical Laws of Rome. As
for my self, I will by Gods grace for the future be very diligent to wipe out
all old offenses by my care to perform all good offices, and among the rest I
will endeavor by my intercession and all the authority I have to reconcile to
you all the Princes who have hitherto been your persecutours.

3. Saint Wilfrid answered the Archbishop with all meeknes, as became so holy
a person: but to accept of the Archbishopric without the order and decree of
a National Council, he would by no means consent. Saint Theodore
notwithstanding used his utmost endeavors to obtain his compliance in this
point, but in vain. Therefore he sent Messengers with letters to Alfrid King of
the Northumbers who succeeded Egfrid, and to his Sister Elfleda Abbess of
Streneshalch, earnestly requiring them to lay aside all displeasure, and
without delay to receive into their affection and favor the Holy Bishop. These
Letters are not now extant: but others which he wrote to the same effect to
Ethelred King of the Mar^cians have been preserved by William of Malmsbury* in
this form:

4. Your admirable Sanctity, My beloved son may hereby take notice that a
perfect reconciliation is made between my self and the Venerable Bishop
Wilfrid. Id ibid.
Therefore I do admonish you, and in the Love of Christ require that y^u would
still continue, as you have hitherto done, your protection of him, who these
many years has bee^ despoyled of his revenews, and forced to live among Pagans,
in the Conversion of whom he has se^ved our Lord with great effect. Therefore I
Theodore humble Bishop do now in my decrepite age make this request unto you,
desiring the same which the Apostles authority recommends, touching a Holy
Bishop who has so long a time possessed his soul in patience, and in imitation
of Christ our Head with all humility and meeknes expects an end of so many
injuries done him. Moreover if I have found favor in your eyes, let me enjoy
the comfort of seeing your face most desirable to me* and let not a journey
for that purpose seem burdensome to you, that my soul may bless you before I
dye. Beloved Son, perform the reques^ I have made you in behalf of the said
holy Bishop, and be assured that if you obey your Father who am shortly to
depart out of this world, you will reap great proffit to your soul by it.
Farewell.

5 S. Wilfrid armed with these Letters and re^recommendations, took his journey
to the Kingdom of the Northumbers: and before he entered it, he received a kind
invitation from King Al^frid, who at his coming, with the consent of a Synod
assembled, restored to him all the revenews of which he had been deprived. The
Church of Lindesfarn was now vacant by the voluntary cession and ensuing death
of Saint Cuthbert. And as for Bosa Bishop of York, and John lately ordained
Bishop of Hagulstad (or Hexham.) they showed a greater inclination to preserve
peace and declare their obedience to the ordinance of the Pope, then to retain
their dignities or revenewes. To this effect the foresaid Author thus writes,
Id. ib.
When Saint Wilfrid came with the Archbishops Letters to the forementioned
Kings, he was entertained with very kind speeches and all expressions of
favor. And particularly King Alfrid, who had familiarly known him before, of
his own accord invited him to come to him: And being arrived, he first of all
restored to him the Monastery of Hengsteldeim: and afterward by decree of a
Synod, the Bishopric of York together with the Monastery of Rippon. We will
now leave him in quiet possession of his Bishopric: which lasted the space of
five years: after which shall be related fresh troubles and persecutions
renewed against him.

XI. CHA.
XI. CHAP.
1. The Martyrdom of Saint Lewina a Virgin.

2.3. Her Relics removed into Flanders: and venerated there.

1. TO this year of Grace six hundred eighty seven is assigned in our ancient
Records the death and Martyrdom of a certain British Virgin called Lewina,
whose memory is celebrated in our Martyrologe on the two and twentieth day of
July, Martyr log. Angl 22. Iulij.
and she is said to have been slain in this our Island by a certain Saxon out
of his hatred to the Christian Faith. She suffered in the Province of the
South Saxons, whom S. Wilfrid had lately converted to the Faith. And she was
buried in Sussex at a place called Seaford, not far from the Town of Jews,
which probably took its name from this Virgin.

2. When the Danes in after ages cruelly vexed this Island, and with a furious
zeal, imitated since by Calvinistes, raged against the Monuments of Saints,
the Holy Virgins Body was taken up, and translated beyond Sea, where it was
reposed at a place called Berga, or Monts in Brabant, or rather Flanders, where
now is seated the Town of S. Winoc. Thus writes Miraeus in his Belgic
Calender, Miraeus in Fast. Belgic. 22. Iulij.
on the two and twentieth of July: Then is celebrated the memory of Levinna, or
Lewina an English Virgin, when flourished under Eubert (or rather Egbert the
Father of Alfrid) King of the English Nation, and suffered Martyrdom in the time
of Theodore the seventh Archbishop of Canterbury. Her Sacred Body was taken
out of her Monument by Edelin a Bishop, and translated at last to Bergs of S.
Win^c, together with the Relics of S. Oswald King and Martyr, and of S.
Iti^berga (or Idalberga) a Virgin. Concerning the Miracles of Saint Lewina
there is extant a Book written by Drogo Bishop of the Morini (or Terou^^ne. A.
D. 688.
)

3, Consonantly hereto we read in the Gallican Martyrologe, Martyr. Gall. 5.
Aug.
on the fifth of August, At Bergs in the Province of the Morini is then
celebrated the Memory of the reception of Saint Lewina Virgin and Martyr, whose
most Sacred Body was by Balger a Monk of Bergs brought to his Monastery from
the Monastery of S. Andrew at Zevored (or Seaford) a Sea port in England. The
said Sacred Body being carried through several villages and Towns in Flanders
before it came to Bergs, became illustrious by many Miracles, affording comfort
and health to any one who implored her intercession, as Drogo Bishop of the
Morini manifestly declares in his Book of the said holy Virgin and Martyr^
Miracles.

XII. CHAP. XII. CHA.

1. Ina King of the West Saxons.

2.3. etc. Saint Aldelm at Rome obtains Privileges for his Monastery of
Malmsbury. A fabulous report concerning Pope Sergius.

1. IN the year of Grace six hundred eighty eight began the reign of the
glorious King Ina, A. D. 688.
King of the West Saxons, as we have already declared when we treated of the
cession of King Cedwalla after his conversion, who left his throne to undertake
a pilgrimage to Rome, there to receive Baptism, where he happily dyed in his
Baptismall innocence.

2. The same year Saint Wilfrid, contenting himself with the Churches of York
and Hagulstad, which he administered with great perfection, voluntarily
surrendered the Church of Lindesfarn, which he committed to the governance of
Eadbert (mentioned before upon occasion of the death of S. Cuthbert) who was
ordained Bishop of that Diocese. At this time the English-Saxon Churches
flourished wonderfully, when the Princes and others following their example,
sought not their own interests, but those of Jesus Christ. This we shall
shorty make good, by relating the actions of several of our Kings and
Apostolical men, who filled France, Germany and even Italy it self with the
seeds of Gods Word, and the fame of their Sanctity.

3. The year following in which King Cedwalla dyed at Rome, A. D. ^89.
S. Aldelm, who, as has been said, was his companion in that journey, became a
Petitioner to Pope Sergius, and obtaind of him in the behalf of his Monastery
of Malmsbury a Privilege of exemption from Episcopal Jurisdiction, and a
power to the Monks of electing their own Abbot, according to the Rule of S.
Benedict: Of this Privilege, says William, A. D. 690.
a Monk of the same Monastery, the same S. Aldelm obtained a confirmation from
Ina King of the West Saxons, Malmsbur. Hist. Novell. l. 2.
and Ethelred of the Mercians.

4. Among other Acts of S. Aldelm at Rome, Baron. A. D. 689.
there is reckoned by a certain Author of no great credit, says Baronius, his
freeing Pope Sorgius from a scandalous imputation and calumny imposed on him of
being the Father of a bastard then incestuously born. Which calumny S. Aldelm
is said to have dissipated, Vid. S^^. 25. Maij.
by commanding the infant then but nine days old, expressly to acquitt the
Pope of that crime. This fable the Centuriatours of Magdeburg having met with,
they according to their accustomd impudence do thus pervert, There was great
familiarity between Aldelm and Pope Sergius: to whom a Son having been born by
adultery at Rome, Centur. Magdeb. cent. 7. f. 5, 9.
he had not the boldness to declare the truth ingenuously. What ever the truth
was, certain it is that these Writers have most disingenuously adulterated it.

XIII. CHAPTER
XIII. CHAP.
1.2. The death of Saint Theodore Archbishop of Canterbury: His Disciples.

3. The death of S. Eanfleda.

4.5. Likewise of S. Hersewida.

1. THE next year after the death of King Cedwalla at Rome, that is, the six
hundred and ninetieth after our Lords Incarnation, A. D. 690. Bed. l. Bar^^.
hic.
says S. Beda, Archbishop Theodore of blessed memory, being an old man and
full of days, for he was then in the eighty eighth year of his age, happily
dyed. That his life should be continued to this number of years, he had been
advertised by Revelation in a dream, as he often told his friends. He administered
the Sea of Canterbury the space of two and twenty years: and was buried in the
Church of S. Peter, where the Bodies of all the Archbishops were enterred.
Concerning him, and all his Predecessors in that See likewise it it may be
truly and properly said, Their Bodies do rest in peace, and their names live
from generation to generation. For to sum up all in a word, the English
Churches received more spiritual advancement during his government, then they
had done in any age before.

2. A great ornament to S. Theodore were his Disciples, whom he left behind him
for the perpetuating his name. Among which the most eminent were those who are
named by Bishop Parker in his Antiquities, where speaking of S. Theodore,
Antiqui^ Brit. in Theodore.
he says, Besides his other virtues he was in great perfection learned, and
after his death he did, as it were, live in his Disciples, which were many and
illustrious. Among which the more notable were these, Saint Beda, John of
Beverley, Albin the Venerable Abbot of the Monastery of S. Augustine in
Canterbury, and Thobias Bishop of Rochester, who was as skillfull and ready in
the Latin and Greek as his own native language. S. Beda ingenuously
acknowledges that Albin assisted him much in the collecting his History, and
for the tongues makes him equal to Thobias. Of all these Disciples of S.
Theodore, we shall speak particularly hereafter.

3. The same year dyed also S. Eanfleda the daughter of Edwin King of the
Northumbers. She was the first person baptized in that Province. After her
Fathers death she returned with her mother into Kent, and in process of time
was married to Oswi King of the Northumbers: who by her admonition built the
Monastery of Gethlin, now called Gilling, not far from Richmond in expiation
for the death of Oswin slain by Oswi. After the death of her husband, she
retired into the Monastery of Streneshalch (or Whitby) in which her daughter S.
Elfleda had spent many years in great devotion, and after the death of S.
Hilda, was made Abbess of it. There S. Eanfleda received the Religious habit
and veyle, and submitted herself to the instructions and command of her own
daughter. She was buried in the Church of Saint Peter belonging to the said
Monastery, where formerly her husband King Oswi, and afterward her daughter S.
Elfleda were also enterred. Martyrolog. Angl 5. December.
Her name is commemorated in our Martyrologe among the Saints on the fifth of
December.

4. To the same year is likewise assigned the happy death of S. Hereswida the
daughter of Hereric Nephew to the glorious King S. Edwin. She was married to
Ethelhere King of the East Angles, to whom she bore three Sons, all which were
consequently Kings, Aldulph, Eflwold and Beorna. After her husbands death, she
retired from Court, and being desirous to pass to a more strict and private
life, she left her country, and in the famous Monastery of Cala (or Chelles)
in France, she undertook the Profession of a Religious life. So great was her
devotion and piety, that both in France and Brittany many were inflamed to
imitate her example. And among the rest her Sister S. Hilda had an intention to
follow her into France, but was persuaded not to deprive her own country, the
Kingdom of the Northumbers, of the luster of her virtues. In the mean time S.
Hereswida having spent many years in the delicious exercises of Contemplation,
this year received the Crown so long expected by her.

5. In the Gallican Martyrologe we read this testimony of her, Martyrolog.
Gallic. 20. September.
In the Monastery of Cale seated in the territory of Paris, this day, being the
twentieth of September, is celebrated the memory of S. Hereswida: She being a
Queen in England out of love to Christ forsook her Scepter and kingdom, and
betook her self to the said famous Monastery* where after she had afforded
admirable examples of Piety, A. D. 691.
humility and Regular Observance professed by her, she was consummated with a
blessed end, and obtained the reward of a heavenly crown. Her glorious gests
Saint Beda, who was a great admirer of her, has celebrated with condign
praises.

XIV. CHAPTER
XIV. CHAP.
1.2.3 Saint Wilfrid again expelled his Diocese.

4 5. etc. He retires among the Mercians: where he succeeds to Sexulf in
administering the Sea of Leicester: and ordains Bishops.

7 8. Bosil Bishop of Worcester dying: Ostfor succeeds.

A. D. 691.
1* SAint Wilfrid had now five years enjoyed with quietness, and with great piety
administered his Province of the Northumbers, when this calm was disturbed with
new ^torms. S. Beda dispatches this Tragedy in a ^ew words, saying, After five
years he was accused once more, and by the said King Alfrid and very many
Bishops expelled from his See, not mentioning the heads of his accusation.

2. But William of Malmsbury insinuats that the ground of their charge against
him was the same with the former, to wit, that he had united the Jurisdiction
and revenews of two Bishoprics, which S. Theodore had formerly separated,
namely York and Hagulstad. Adding, that considering the vast ex^ent of the
Province, it was fit to erect a third at Rippon.

3. The freindship, says he, between King Alfrid and S. Wilfrid stood a good
while unshaken, Malmsbur. de Pont. l. 3.
till about five years after his return the poysonnous counsels harbored in
the breasts of certain malignant persons at last broke forth. By these men's
suggestions King Alfrids mind being prevented, withdrew some of the possessions
belonging to the Monastery of Rippon, having a design to constitute a new
Bishopric there: For he alleged that these Decrees of the late Archbishop
Theodore which he made, not in the beginning or end of the Controversy, but in
the time intervening, were (...) continue in force.

4. S. Wilfrid resenting this injustice and violence, left the Province of the
Northumbers, and retired to his friend Ethelred King of the Mercians, with whom
he continued a long time. After whose departure King Alfrid restored the Sea of
York to Bosa, who formerly had the possession of it: and John, surnamed of
Beverley, he constituted Bishop of Hagulstad (or Hexham,) who this same year at
the request of the Abbot Ceolfrid promoted to the Order of Deacon S. Beda now
entered into the twentieth year of his age. A. D. 692.


5. Before S. Wilfrid entered into the Kingdom of the Mercians, Putta, who ten
years before had been ordained Bishop of Hereford, dying, there succeeded him
in the same See, Tirtellus this year, according to the Calender published by
Sir Henry Savill. So that not any Church being vacant in that Kingdom, S.
Wilfrid lived a private retired life, but in high esteem and favor with King
Ethelred, who had a great desire to fix him in the government and Episcopal
administration of some Province there.

6. Which good design of his was effected the year following, A. D. 692.
by the death of Sexulf, Bishop of Lichfeild, who in the year of Grace six
hundred seaventy eight, as has been declared, was constituted Bishop of that
Diocese upon the deposition of Winfrid. This Sexulf was a very holy man, and
highly honored and beloved through his whole Province, in so much as after his
death he was numbered among the Saints.

7. To him by Kings Ethelreds appointment succeeded S. Wilfrid. Notwithstanding
some Writers affirm that after the death of Sexulf, his Diocese was divided
into two Sees, the one at Lichfeild and the other at Leicester: and that S.
Wilfrid was constituted Bishop of Leicester, and that Headda Bishop of
Winchester adjoined the other to his Diocese. However these matters were
ordered, certain it is that S Wilfrid exercised the Office not only of a
Bishop, but a Metropolitan also, ordaining Bishops there. Thus this very year
in the Diocese of Worcester (Wicciorum) Bosi^ who twelve years before was there
consecrated Bishop, being now broken with age and labors, at the request of
King Ethelred, S Wilfrid ordained Bishop there a man of eminent piety and worth
named Ostfor.

8. Concerning this Ostfor, Bed. l. 4. c. 23
S. Beda gives this account: Ostfor, says he, after that in both the
Monasteries of the Holy Abbess Hilda he had employed his time diligently in the
study of the Divine Scriptures, at length aspiring to greater perfection, he
went into Kent to the Archbishop Theodore of blessed memory: where having
spent some time in sacred Lections, he resolved to go further, as far as to
Rome: for in that age it was an argument of great virtue and piety to undertake
that journey. In process of time returning from thence into Brittany, he
diverted into the Province of the Wiccians (or Worcestershire) the Governor
whereof was a person called Osri^. There he remained a long time, preaching the
Word of God, and in his conversation affording an example of all virtues and
piety to those that saw or heard him. At this time the Bishop of tha^ Province,
named Boselus, was so oppressed with infirmity of body, that he could not
himself discharge his Episcopal Office. Therefore by the judgment and consent
of all, the foresaid holy man Ostfor was elected Bishop in his place, and by
comman of King Edilred, Wilfrid of happy memory, wh^ then administered
Episcopal jurisdiction amon^ the Midland-English (or Mercians) ordained him
Bishop, because the Archbishop Theodore was then dead, and not any as yet
ordaind to succeed him.

XV. CHAPTER
XV. CHAP.
1. 2. etc. Of King Ina's Laws: especially such as regard the Church.

4 etc. The Welsh, whence so called, etc.

6 7 Priests, whether then married.

8. The Saxons, etc. tender of shedding blood.

1. THE same year Inas King of the West Saxons being desirous to compose and
settle his kingdom in good order, by rooting out such ill customs as had
crepp'd in among the people, called an Assembly of his Bishops and Nobility,
(at which great numbers of other inferior Ecclesiastical and Secular persons
were present also,) and by common advice enacted those famous Laws, called
King Ina's Laws, which continued in force many ages, even till the coming and
Conquest of the Normans, and of which William of Malmsbury says, Malmsbur. de
Reg l. 1. c. 2. Spelm. de Synod. f. 182.
a mirror of their purity remained to his time. These were seaventy five in
number, and are extant in Sir Henry Spelmans collection of Councils, to which
the curious Reader may have recourse. I will only select a few of them, such
as regard Ecclesiastical affairs, and therefore are pertinent to this History.

2. In the first place (says King Inas) we command that Gods Ministers be
careful to observe the Canonical order of living: Ibid.
And our Will is, that these Laws and Ordinances be observed by the people 2.
Let each infant be baptized within thirty days after he is born. If this be
not done let the person in fault be fined in thirty shillings (solidis.) But if
it happen that the infant dye before he is baptized, let the faulty persons
forfeyt their whole estate. 3. If a servant (a slave) shall do any servile
work on our Lords day by his Masters command, let him be free, and his Master
fined in thirty shillings. But if the servant without command of his Master do
any such work, let him be whipped, or redeem that penalty with money. If a free
man work on that day, not commanded by his Master, let him either be made a
slave, or pay sixty shillings. And if a Priest offend in this kind, let his
penalty be doubled. 4. Let the Firsts-fruits of seeds be paid on the solemnity
of S. Martin. And whosoever shall not then pay them, Let him be fined in forty
shillings, and moreover pay the said First Fruits twelve-fold. 5 If any one
guilty of a Capital Offense shall fly to the Church, Let him enjoy his life,
and make compensation according to justice and Law. And if any one who has
committed a fault punishable only with stripes, and shall implore the
privilege and favor of the Church, let those stripes be remitted.

3. Then after several Ordinances touching Civil matters follows the
eleaventh Law, If any one shall buy one of his own country, servant or free,
or guilty of any crime, and shall send him away to be sold beyond sea, let his
penalty be the full price of such a person, and moreover let him make full
satisfaction both to God and his Master. (That this was the ancient custom
among the Saxons to sell their children, has been formerly declared in the
relation how S. Gregory having seen in the Roman marketplace certain children
brought to sale out of the Province of the Northumbers, was by that spectacle
moved to procure the conversion of our country.) The twelfth Law is, If any
one shall bring a false testimony or pledge before a Bishop, let his penalty be
one hundred and twenty shillings (so^lidos.)

4 We will hereto add the two and twentieth Law, though not regarding the
Church, because therein is the first mention that can any where be found of the
Welsh (Walli.) Let a Wallus (or stranger) who pays an annual tax, be rated
at one hundred and twenty shillings: and his Son, at one hundred. From whence
we may observe that the German-Saxons among us called the Britains, Walli or
Welchmen, (a Name which they never gave to themselves) and the utmost Western
Province, Cornwall, not from a certain Qveen called Wallia, nor as descended
from the Gauls, but because they were strangers, and spoke a language not
understood by them, for such the Germans call Wealsh: and hence it is that the
lower Germans called their neighbors toward France, Camd. in Danmoniis.
Wallons, as Camden has learnedly observed.

5. There remain only three Laws which regard Bishops, and the Font of
Baptism. One is the forty sixth Law, in which by the piety and sense of that
age a King and a Bishop are in a sort esteemed equal. Let one hundred and
twenty shillings be the penalty of one breaking peace in a town of the King or
Bishop: and fourscore shillings, in the town of a Senator (who is called in
the Saxon tongue Ealdorman, and Eorle) etc. Another Law is this, Let every one
pay the first fruits of his Seeds out of that house in which he abode at the
Solemnity of our Lords Nativity.

6. The last, being the seaventy fifth in order is this, If any one shall kill
the Godfather or God-son of any one, let him pay to the kindred of the person
slain as much as is due to a Lord for compensation of the slaughter of his
servant And let this payment be increased or diminished according to the rate
of the slain persons estimation, in like manner as the payment to a Lord for
his servant slain is to be rated. But if the person slain was the Kings
God-son, let satisfaction be made to him according to that made to the kindred
of the slain. A. D. 687.
But if such a man's life was taken away by one of his kindred, let some
abatement be made of the money to be paid to the Godfather, accordingly as it
uses to be done when money is to be paid to the Lord for the slaughter of his
servant. And if he who is slain be the Son of a Bishop, let the amercement be
diminished by the half.

7. As touching this last clause Sir Henry Spelman well observes, That whereas
some Writers would thence contend that Bishops in this age were married,
because here is mention made of a Bishops Son, they are mistaken: For this is
not to be understood of the Natural or conjugal Son of a Bishop, but of his
spiritual Son, for whom he was undertaker at the Sacred font. This is manifest
from the Rubric of this Law, which is inscribed, Of the slaughter of a
Godfather or God-son, or to use the ancient Terms, Of him that shall kill
Patrinum or filiolum of any one. For in old time a Godfather or undertaker for
one in Baptism was called Patrinus, and a God-son, filiolus: (as now in
France, Parrain and Filieul.)

8. In general, from these Laws of King Inas we may observe, That among the
Saxons, man slaughter was never punished with death, but only with a fine of
money: nor any other crime except Robbery, and that committed not by a single
person, but by at least seven in a troop: So tender they were of blood. Whereas
in later times the life of a man is become of so low an estimation, that the
loss of it is made the satisfaction for a trifle, as the private pilfering of
any thing beyond the value of a shilling. And the like tenderness of men's lives
we may observe in the Laws of all the Northern Nations of old, as the
Visigoths, Vandals, Lombards, etc.

XVI. CHA
XVI. CHAP.
1.2. etc. S. Aldelm appointed to write to the British King of Cornwall, to
invite his Bishops to Catholic Unity.

4. His Book of Virginity, written to certain devout Virgins.

1. AS touching the foresaid Assembly in which these Laws were enacted, whether
it may properly be called a Synod, is doubtful. But since in the Title of
these Laws the only persons, as Authors of the same named, are King Inas
himself, by the persuasion and appointment of his Father Kenred, and Hedda and
Erkenwald his Bishops, together with his Aldermen, it is not probable that this
was that Synod concerning which S. Beda writes thus, Bed. l. 5. c. 19.
Aldelm being only a Priest and Abbot, by command of a Synod of his Nation
wrote an excellent Book against the errors of the Britains, because they
celebrated Easter not in its due Season, A. D. 688.
and did many things contrary to Ecclesiastical chastity and peace (So the
printed Copies read, whereas in ancient Manuscripts we read, Ecclesiastical
Charity and peace,) and concerning which Synod S. Aldelm himself thus writes,
When I was lately in a Synod of Bishops assembled out of all Brittany almost,
Aldelm. Epist. ad Gero^^. 7
an innumerable company of Gods Priests met there, etc.

2. However, certain it is that such a National Synod of the English-Saxons
was convoked and held about this time, in which after wholesome Constitutions
made for the regulating and composing their own Churches, the charity of those
Bishops extended it self to their uncharitable neighbors the Britains,
especially such as inhabited in Cornwall under the government of their King
then called Geruntius, who was Tributary to Inas King of the West Saxons. Which
Britains hitherto retained their old aversion and hatred of the Saxons, and
perhaps for that reason were obstinate in persisting in their old Errors,
particularly about Ecclesiastical Tonsure, and, which was most considerable,
an undue celebration of Easter: insomuch as this their perversenes rendered them
Schismatics from the Catholic Church. To restore them therefore to
Ecclesiastical Unity and charity the Saxon Bishops enjoined S. Aldelm, present
in the same Synod, to write effectually in their names to Geruntius King of the
said Britains in D^nmonia, or Cornwall, and to demonstrate to them their
dangerous errors and schism, earnestly inviting them to depose their passions
and aversenes from their brethren, and unanimously to promote the true Faith.
This charge was imposed on S. Aldelm, as being a person the most eminent for
learning and piety in that age, and this he discharged with the sufficiency
expected from him, as may appear by the said Treatise or Epistle yet extant,
the tenor whereof in English we will hereto adioyn.

3. And whereas from those words of Saint Beda, saying that Saint Aldelm wrote
against the Britains because they offended much against Ecclesiastical
Chastity, certain of our late more learned P^otestant Writers do pretend to
derive and confirm the lawfullnes of marriage in Bishops and other
Ecclesiastical persons. But besides that this collectio^ is disproved by
ancient Manuscripts, in which we read, not Castitatem, but Charitatem, the
following Epistle it self will be an evident confutation, in which not one word
can be found which gives any suspicion that the Britains were guilty of
incontinence or impurity, but extreme uncharitablenes is imputed to them. Which
clearly evinces that the printed copies ought to be corrected.

4. But before we set down the said Epistle of Saint Aldelm, it will be fit
to premise how in the way as he was going to this Synod, he was presented with
a Letter from certain Religious Virgins, A. D. 692.
to wit, Hil^elida, whom he styles the Mistress of Regular and Monastical
conversation, together with Iustina, Cuthburga, and Osburgi; who had some
relation of kindred to him: also Alfgiaa, scholastica, Hidburga, Berngida,
Eulalia and Tecla. Which Letter he highly commended, as arguing not only a
great zeal and love of chastity vowed by them, but an exquisite skill in Holy
Scriptures, with the flowers whereof they gracefully adorned their Letter. In
answer whereto he compiled a whole Book, which he inscribed Of Virginity, and
which the Reader may find in the Bibliotheca Patrum.

XVII. CHAPTER
XVII. CHAP.
1.2. etc. The tenor of Saint Aldelms Letter in the name of the English Saxon
Synod, to Geruntius King of the Britains in Cornwall.

1. THE Letter of Saint Aldelm reproving the errors of the Britains now
follows: which though it be some what long, will deserve a place in our
History, though it were only to show, that excepting two or three points of
Discipline, there was a perfect agreement between the Saxons and Britains in
all things touching the Catholic Faith: otherwise the Saxon Bishops would not
have railed, in case they had erred, to rectify their judgment. The Inscription
of the said Letter is as follows.

[2 To my glorious Lord Geruntius King of the Western Kingdom, whom I, as God
the searcher o^ hearts is my witness, do embrace with brotherly charity: And
likewise to all Gods Priests inhabiting Danmonia (or Cornwall.) I Althelm,
unworthy Abbot, do wish health and salvation in our Lord.

3. Being lately in a Synod of Bishops assembled out of the whole nation in a
manner, a wonderful multitude of Gods Priests came thither, being moved
thereto out of a solicitude for the good of the Churches, and care of the
peoples salvation, to the end that advising in common about the Ecclesiastical
Canons and Ordinances of the Fathers, they should through Christ's assistance be
putt in practice.

4 After these things were duly performed, the whole Assembly u^animously
imposed upon me, though unworthy, a command to frame Letters directed to your
Piety, in which I might acquaint you with their fatherly suggestion and request
that you would be careful not to break the Unity of the Catholic Church, nor
admit opinions not suiting with the Christian Faith, since so doing you would
deprive your selves of future rewards in heaven. For what proffit can any one
receive from good works done out of the Catholic Church, although a man should
be never so strict in Regular Observances, or retire himself into a desert to
practice an Anachoreticall life of Contemplation?

5. Now that you may better understand for what especial causes this Letter is
directed to you* I will here briefly discover them to you. We have heard, and
by several relations been assured that your Priests do very much swerve from
the Rule of Catholic Faith enioynd in the Scriptures, and that by their
quarrels and verbal co^tentions there is arisen in the Church of Christ a
grievous Schism and scandal, whereas the Psalmist says, Great peace is to
those who love thy name, Psalm. 1*8.^, 5.
and among them there is no scandal. For the Peace of Religion is preserved by
a charitable concord of men's minds, as on the other side contention violates
Charity. Hence the same Psalmist exhorts all those who embrace the true Faith
to a fraternall unity saying, It is God who makes brethren to live in one mind
in a house. Now by this House is understood the whole Church of God spread
through the world. Psalm. 6.7
For Heretics and Schismatics being estranged from the Communion of the
Church, and by contending about several new opinions increasing in their
numbers, do, like unproffitable tares sown in a rich soil, corrupt and defile
our Lords harvest. But the Apostles trumpet does repress this shameful humor
of contention, saying, If any one will be contentious we have no such custom, ^
Cor 11.
nor the Church of God, which is without spott or wrinckle. For that peace is
the Mother of Catholics, is declared by the Evangelicall Oracles, Math 5.
Blessed are the peaceable, for they shall be called the children of God. And
hence it is that when our Lord and Savior descended from heaven that he might
wipe away the handwriting of our first parents which was against us, and that
by Peace intervening he might reconcile the world, an Angelical Quire
melodiously sung, Luc. 11.
Glory to God on high, and on earth peace to men of good will: and the Psalmist
says, Let Peace be made by thy power, and abundance in all thy Towers.

6. Moreover a rumor is spread abroad, that in your Province there are certain
Priests and other Ecclesiastics, who contrary to the teaching of the Church
do obstinatly refuse to admit the Tonsure of S. Peter Prince of the Apostles:
and do pertinaciously defend themselves with this excuse, that they do
imitate the Tonsure of their Predecessors whom with pompous phrases they
exalt, as men eminently illustrated with Divine Grace. Whereas if we press
them to tell us who was the first Author of this their rasure and Tonsure,
either out of ignorance of the Truth* or dissembling a lie, they have not a
word to say. But we, and many others with us can assure them that Simon the
Inventour of Magical arts, was the Author of this Tonsure. The fraudulent and
diabolical skill of Necromancy contrived by whom against S. Peter, is
testified by the ancient Book called The Combat of the Apostles, and by the ten
books of S. Clement.

7. But as for us, we are able according to the authority of Holy Scriptures to
give a true and sufficient testimony of our Tonsure, and do affirm that S.
Peter ordained this Rite of Tonsure for several causes: First that thereby he
might on his head bear a representation of our Lord, who ascending the Cross
for our Redemption was Crowned by the execrable Jews in a cruel manner with
sharp peircing thorns. Next that the Priests of the Old and New Testament might
be distinguished by their habit and Tonsure. And lastly, that the same Apostle
and his followers might carry the ridiculous expression of scorn used by the
Romans, who when they sold their slaves taken in war, they were wont to crown
them. But in the Old Testament this Sign of Tonsure took its Original, if I
be not mistaken, from the Nazarites, who were persons consecrated to God: for
it is a mark of a Royal and Sacerdotall descent. For a Tiara was anciently
set on the heads of the Priests; which being enwrapped in fine linen was
round, like the Middle Sphere: and this is represented by that part of the head
which is shorn. Now a Crown or Diadem was a golden circle of some breadth,
which encompassed the heads of Kings. And both these signs are expressed on the
heads of Clergymen, concerning whom S. Peter says, You are an elect nation, a
Royal Preist-hood. And moreover by this Rite of shaving and polling is
signified our duty to cut off all our vices, 1. Pet. 11.9.
and that we should divest our selves of our sins as we do of our hairs.

8. But there is among you another practice, far more pernicious to souls,
which is, that in the observation of the Solemnity of Easter you neglect to
follow the Rule of the three hundred and eighteen Fathers who in the Nicene
Council, with great sagacity established the Circle of Nineteen years to last
to the end of the world, by the numbers of Eight and Eleaven: and also ordained
the Paschall supputation from the fourteenth day of the Moon to the one and
twentieth, making these the terms of the Paschall Circle, which it is unlawful
for any one to transgress. Whereas the Priests among you according to the
Account and Circle of Anatolius, or rather according to the Rule of Sulpitius
Severinus who described a Course of eighty four years, do sometimes observe
the Paschall Solemnity on the fourteenth Moon with the Jews, whereas the
Bishops of the Roman Church do observe neither of these ways of calculation:
Neither have they decreed that posterity should follow the Paschall Table of
Victorius, which contains a course of five hundred thirty two years. For there
was a sort of Heretics in the East called Tessera-decatitae, because they
celebrated the Paschall Solemnity on the fourteenth Moon with the Jews who
blaspemed our Lord, and trod under foot the pearls of the Gospel. And for
this they were excluded from the Communion of the Church, and ranked among the
unhappy conventicles of Schismatiks. Of these, as I remember, S. Augustine makes
mention in his Treatise of Ninety Heresies.

9. But besides these enormities, there is another thing wherein they do
notoriously swerve from the Catholic Faith and Evangelical Tradition, which
is, that the Priests of the Demetae (or South-west Wales) inhabiting beyond the
bay of Severn puffed up with a conceit of their own purity, do exceedingly
abhor^ communion with us, insomuch as they will neither ioyn in prayers with us
in the Church, nor enter into society with us at the Table: yea moreover the
fragments which we leave after refection they will not touch, but cast them to
be devoured by dogs and unclean Swine. The Cupps also in which we have drunk,
they will not make use of, till they have rubbed and cleansed them with sand or
ashes. They refuse all civil salutations or to give us the kiss of pious
fraternity, Romans 16.
contrary to the Apostles precept Salute one another with a holy kiss. They
will not afford us water and a towel for our hands, nor a vessel to wash our
feet. Whereas our Savior having girt himself with a towell, washed his
Disciples feet, and left us a pattern to imitate, saying, As I have done to
you, so do you to others. Moreover if any of us, who are Catholics, do go
amongst them to make an abode, they will not vouchsafe to admit us to their
fellowship till we be compelled to spend forty days in Penance. And herein
they unhappily imitate those Heretics, who will needs be called Cathars (or
Puritans.)

10. Such enormous errors and malignities as these are to be mournfully
bewayld with sighs and tears: since such their behavior is contrary to the
precepts of the Gospel, Math. 23.
and suiting with the Traditions of Jewish Pharisees, concerning whom our
Savior says, Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees who cleanse the outsides of
Cupps and dishes. On the contrary our Lord disdaind not to be present at feasts
with Publicans and sinners, thereby showing himself a good Physician, who was
careful to provide wholesome cataplasms and medecines to heal the corrupt
wounds of those that conversed with him. Therefore he did not, like the
Pharisees, despise the conversation of sinners, but on the contrary, according
to his accustomed clemency, he mercifully comforted the poor sinful woman who
bewayld the former pollutions of her life, and casting herself at our Lords
feet, washed them with showers of tears, and wiped them with the curled locks
of her hair, concerning whom he said, Her many sins are forgiven her, because
she has loved much.

11. Since therefore the truth of these things cannot be denied, we do with
earnest humble prayers and bended knees beseech and adjure you, as you hope to
attain to the fellowship of Angels in Gods heavenly kingdom, that you will no
longer with pride and stubbornes abhor the doctrines and Decrees of the
Blessed Apostle S. Peter, nor pertinaciously and arrogantly despise the
Tradition of the Roman Church, preferring before it the Decrees and ancient
Rites of your Predecessors. For it was S. Peter, who having devoutly confessed
the Son of God, was honored by him with these Words, Thou art Peter, and upon
this Rock will I build my Church, Math. 16.
and the gates of hell shall not prevayle against it: And to thee will I give
the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and whatsoever thou shall bind on earth
shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever thou shall loose on earth shall be
loosed in heaven. If therefore the Keys of the kingdom of heaven were given to
S. Peter, who is he, who, having despised the principal Statuts and ordinances
of his Church, can presumingly expect to enter with joy through the gate of the
heavenly Paradise? And if he by a peculiar Privilege and happiness received the
power of binding and the Monarchy of loosing in heaven and earth, who is he,
who having rejected the Rule of the Paschall Solemnity, and the Rite of the
Roman Tonsure, will not rather apprehend to be indissolubly bound, them
mercifully absolved from his sins?

12. But it may be some nice Disputer presuming on his skill in Scripture and
other learning, will fancy that he can excuse and defend himself under the
shield of such an Apology as this, saying, I do sincerely venerate the
Precepts of both the Old and New Testament, and with my heart and tongue I do
confess in God an Unity of Essence and Trinity of Persons: I do freely preach
to the people the Mystery of our Lords Incarnation, the Cross of his Passion,
and the Victorious Trophey of his Resurrection: I do diligently denounce to my
hearers the last Judgment of the living and dead, in which with a most equal
balance every one according to their different merits, shall receive a
different retribution of happiness or misery This I believe and profess, and by
the privilege of this Faith I do not doubt but I shall be reckoned and
rewarded with the lot of true Orthodox Catholics.

13. But alas, this seeming Fortress under which they hope to lurk securely, I
will endeavor to batter to the ground with the Engine of the Apostles reproof;
Iam 11.
For S. James who is called the Brother of our Lord, says, Thou beleivest that
there is one God: and immediately he adioyns, directing his speech by an Irony
to the twelve Tribes in the dispersion, Thou do well. But take notice of
this, The Devils likewise believe this, and tremble: For Faith without Works
is dead. His meaning is, that Catholic and Brotherly Charity must inseparably
walk together in the same path, as that glorious Preacher and Vessel of
Election S. Paul testifies, 1. Cor 13*
saying, If I knew all Prophecy and all Mysteries, if I had Faith so that I
could remove mountains, and if I should give my body to be burnt, and had not
Charity, all this would proffit me nothing at all. I will sum up all in one
short sentence: That man does in vain boast of the Catholic Faith, who does
not follow the Dogme and Rule of S. Peter. For the foundation of the Church and
stability of Faith which can be shaken by no winds or tempests, rests
principally on Christ, and after him consequently on S. Peter. 1. Cor. 3.11.
Hence the Apostle says, Other foundation can no man lay, besides that which
is laid, which is Jesus Christ. And Divine Truth it self has thus established
the Privilege of the Church to S. Peter: Thou art Peter, Math. 16.
and on this Rock I will build my Church.

14. This is the tenor of Saint Aldelm's Epistle to Geruntius King of
Cornwall, and to the British Priests his Subjects, in which may be observed
what extreme bitterness and malice still possessed their minds against the
Saxons, insomuch as they chose rather to be separated from the Communion of the
Catholic Church, then to conform to them by relinquishing any of their old
irregular Rites. And here likewise may be observed, how vainly our Protestant
Writers endeavor to fly to the Britains for defense of their deserting
Catholic Doctrines. Hence the Centuriators of Magdeburg, Magdeb. Cent. 7. f.
5* 9
(and others imitating them) taking advantage from an error in the printed
Copy of S Beda's history, where Castitatem is read for Caritatem, do affirm,
That there was a sharp debate between Aldelm and the Britains, against whom he
earnestly inveighs, because they would not approve Celibacy of Priests, and
other new invented Rites, as Beda testifies in the fifth Book of his History
and nineteenth Chapter. The same likewise is manifest out of Aldelms Epistle to
Geruntius King of the English. Whereas it is manifest that not a word is spoken
in this Epistle touching Celibacy.

15. This Epistle was not written in vain, for as S. Beda testifies, By the
reading of it many Britains subject to the West Saxons were brought to the
Catholic Rite of celebrating our Lords Paschall solemnity. Bed. l. 5. c. 2^.
Whence we may likewise observe that these Britains, though they were
immediately governed by a King of their own nation, yet both he and they were
subordinatly dependent on Inas King of the West Saxons: Notwithstanding which
dependence and subjection, the Saxons did not seek by violence and terror to
force their consciences, but with all meeknes and tenderness to invite them to
Catholic Unity.

A. D. 693.

XVIII. CH


XVIII. CHAP.
1.2. Withred, after six years interregnum, is made King of Kent.

3.4. He redeems with money an invasion of his Country: by King Inas: And
builds S. Martins Church in Dover.

A. D. 693.
1. IN the year of Grace six hundred ninety three the Kingdom of Kent began to
take breath after six years agitation both by civil and extern commotions. For
after Edrick had deposed his usurping Uncle Lothere, and obtained the throne by
right of blood due to him, by his Tyranny and injustice he incurred the hatred
of his Subjects, and after two years reign lost both his government and life.
His death notwithstanding rather increased then ended the troubles of that
Province, for whether it was that many pretending to the succession, factions
and civil debates divided the nation, or whatsoever was the cause (for
Historians afford us little Light to discover those affairs distinctly) during
the space of six years there was not any King there.

2. To these civil broils was added an invasion of that Kingdom by Cedwalla
King of the West Saxons, as has been declared. Which invasion notwithstanding
for the time united their dissentions, so that after much hurt received, the
inhabitants of Kent repulsed Cedwella, and driving his Brother Mul (or Mollo)
into a Cottage, set it on fire and consumed him in it. Cedwalla after this
being converted to Christianity, and relinquishing his kingdom to perform a
pilgrimage to Rome, where he desired to receive Baptism, recommended the
revenge of the death of his Brother Mul to his Successor Inas. Who having
prudently employed the five first years of his reign in settling his own
kingdom and the Churches in it by wholesome Laws and constitutions, at last
this year he made a terrible impression into Kent.

Malmsb. l. ^ c. ^.
3. At this time the principal Pretender to that Kingdom was Withred the Son of
Egbert, who by his courage and industry had repressed the envy of his
opponents, and gained the general affection of the people, so that he was
unanimously chosen and acknowledged King. When King Ina^ therefore in revenge
of the death of Mul, brought a formidable army into Kent for a while a vigorous
resistance was made. But King Inas having great advantage by his martial skill
and courage assisted with a far greater power, King Withred was at last forced
to redeem the safety and peace of his country with money. So that a Treaty was
begun, and King Inas being mollified with the sum of thirty thousand marks of
gold, pardoned them the death of Mul, and drew back his army into his own
country.

4. Bishop Parker from S. Beda gives to Withred an associate in the throne, his
Brother Swinfard: Antiq. Brit.
who jointly administered the kingdom with great justice and piety. They built,
says he, the Church of S. Martin in the Town of Dover, and enriched the Monks
living there with large possessions.

XIX. CHAP. XIX. CHAPTER

1. Brithwald consecrated Arch bishop of Canterbury.

2.3 Pope Sergius his Letters to the Saxon Kings: and Bishops.

4. Brithwald ordains Bishops.

1. PEace and tranquillity being thus restored to the Kingdom of Kent, the
Consecration of a New-Arch-bishop in the place of S. Theodore, dead two years
since, was very seasonable and necessary. Bed. l. 5. c. 9.
His Successors name was Brithwald, who, says S. Beda, was an Abbot in a
certain Monastery seated near the place called Raculf, where the River Genlade
discharges it self into the Sea. He was a man well versed both in holy
Scriptures, and likewise in Ecclesiastical and Monasteriall Disciplines: Yet
much inferior to his Predecessor. He was chosen Bishop in the year of our
Lords Incarnation six hundred ninety two, on the first of July: Wichtred and
Suebhard being then Kings of Kent. But his Ordination was deferred to the year
following: for the attaining of which he was forced to pass over the Sea to
Rome, and thence returned into France, where he was consecrated by Godwin a
Metropolitan there on the third day before the Calends of January: and took
possession of his own See on the day before the Calends of September, being a
Sunday.

2. The same year there came Letters from Pope Sergius, Malm^b. de Pont. l. 1.
f. 2^9.
directed to Ethelred, Alfrid and Adulf English Kings, to whose protection and
favor he earnestly recommended the New Archbishop. The Motive of writing this
Letter seems to have been the divisions and turmoyles of Kent, of the composing
of which it seems the Pope was ignorant and therefore did not address it to
Withred King of Kent.

3. Other Letters also came then from the same Pope to all the Bishops of
Brittany, in which he acquaints them with how much gladness he entertained the
said Elect Archbishop newly arrived at Rome, as likewise the tidings of the
Orthodox Unity which was among them. Consequently he signified to them that
according to the ancient Privilege of that Church of Canterbury from the days
of his Holy Predecessor S. Gregory to the present time, he had invested him
with the Primacy of all the Churches of Brittany, and conferred on him the
Sacred use of the Pall and Dalmatick Vestment. Whereupon he required and
commanded them to yield to him all due honor and obedience as their Supreme
Prelat and Primat. These two Letters are cited by William of Malmsbury, in his
Discourse touching the dignity of the Sea of Canterbury.

4. The first care of this New Archbishop was to supply the vacant Sees with
worthy Prelates: Bed.
and says S. Beda, among many Bishops ordained by him, he consecrated in the
place of Gebmund Bishop of Rochester then dead, Tobias a man skillful in the
Greek, Latin and Saxon tongues, and adorned with great variety of litterature.
To Tobias we may adioyn Waldher about this time ordained Bishop of London, and
successor to the holy Bishop Erconwald, concerning whose Princely extraction,
virtues and Sanctity attested by many miracles before and after his death, we
have already spoken. S. Erconwalds body was buried in his Church at London: but
in the year of Grace eleaven hundred forty eight his Sacred Relics were taken
up, and translated to a more honorable place, where for many miracles they
were held in great veneration, as Matthew of Westminster testifies, Mat. Westminster.
(...).
in the same year.

XX. CHA.
XX. CHAP.
1.2. etc. King Sebbe becomes a Monk: His sickness: and Blessed death.

6. Impious folly of the Centuriators of Magdeburg.

7. etc. A miracle at the enterrement of the Holy King Sebbe.

9. The Holy Bishop Egwin succeeds to Ostfor in the Sea of Worcester.

1. THE same year afforded to the world an illustrious example of the contempt
of perishing honors and pleasures in the person of a Prince, who had many
years enjoyd them and by experience knew the just value, or rather the real
baseness of them, and unsatisfaction to be found in them. This was an example as
ordinary in that age, as to be esteemed miraculous in this.

2. The person who afforded this example was Sebbe King of the East Saxons,
concerning whose piety, and desire to relinquish his purple for a poor
Religious habit we have spoken already. This desire at last he this year
executed. The order and manner whereof is thus related by S. Beda.

Bed. l. 4. c. 11.
[3. When Sebbe had spent thirty years in the government of the East Saxons, all
which time by his piety and devotion he showed himself a soldier contending for
a heavenly kingdom, he was at last assaulted by a grievous sickness, which left
him not till it brought him to his grave. Being in this condition he admonished
his wife that she should no longer oppose his retirement from the world, but
rather ioyn with him in dedicating the remainder of their lives in the service
of God, since neither of them could any longer enjoy any content in the
pleasures, or rather slavery of the present world. It was with much ado that
he obtained her liking hereto: But having at last with much importunity wrested
her consent, he went to Valdhere then Bishop of London, and successor to S.
Erconwald, and with his approbation and benediction he received the Habit of
Religion so long and so earnestly desired by him. He brought to the said Bishop
a great sum of money to be distributed among the poor, reserving nothing at
all to himself, so great was his desire to become truly poor in spirit for the
kingdom of heaven.

4. When his sickness increased on him so far that he perceived his death to
approach, being a person of a truly royal mind, and therefore apprehending
least the pains of his end night enforce him either by words, gestures or
actions to behave himself otherwise then became a person of his quality and
condition, he being then at London, sent for the foresaid Bishop, and desired
him that besides himself and two of his own servants, no other should be
present at his death.

5. This request the venerable Prelat willingly granted: And not long after the
devout King in his sleep by a comfortable Vision was freed from all the anxiety
of his former solicitude, and moreover had notice given him of the precise day
in which he was to end his life. For, as himself afterward related, he saw
three men in shining vestments coming to him: of which one sat down before his
bed, whilst the other two his companions stood by, and askd him how he did.
Then he that was set down, said to him, Be of good cheer, for your soul shall
without any pain at all, and with great splendor forsake your body: and on the
third day following you shall dye. And the event really made good both these
promises which he received in the vision. For on the third day immediately after
Noon, without any sense of pain he breathed forth his soul as if he had
quietly rested in sleep.]

6. Thus happily dyed this Religious King, whose death no doubt was precious in
the eyes of God, and is with devotion celebrated by his Church, being
commemorated both in our English and also the Roman Martyrologe on the
twentieth day of August. Martyrolog. Anglic. and Romans 20. August. Magdebur.
Cent. 7. f. 579.
But the Centuriators of Magdeburg reading all these things, are moved to
choler both against S. Beda, Sebbe and all Monks in general, which choler
suggested this profane censure to their pens, A Monastical course of life, not
having any ground in Gods word, stood in need to be recommended by vain dreams
and Visions. And again: In this seventh age, say they, Kings began to
relinquish their authority, and to addict themselves to a Monastical life
Which impiety must be adorned with lying miracles. Hence Beda writes concerning
King Sebbe, that in a Vision three men appeard to him as he lay sick in his
bed, and foretold to him both the day of his death, and that it should be
without pain. So that to forsake all worldly pleasures and contentments purely
for the Love of God is not only not warranted by Gods word, but is an impiety,
excluding men from the enjoying of God, in the judgment of these new sensual
Evangelists.

7. But how after this holy Kings death God was pleased to declare how far
different a judgment he gave of his servant, the same learned and devout
Historian thus further relates: Bed. l. 4. c. 11.
A Coffin of Stone, says he, was prepared for entombing the Body of this holy
King. But when they endeavored to putt the Body into it, they found that it
was a hands-breadth too long for the Coffin. Whereupon paring away as much of
the stone at each end as they could, they thereby lengthned it about the
measure of two fingers breadth. Yet after all it would not receive the body.
Whereupon finding so great a difficulty to enteire him, they intended either to
seek out a new Coffin, or to endeavor by hewing the body to shorten it so much
as to make it enter into the Coffin. But by a wonderful accident, which could
proceed from no less then a heavenly power, both these designs of theirs were
prevented* for presently in the sight of the Bishop, and Sighard son to the
said King and Monk, who together with his Brother Seofrid raignd after him, a
great multitude likewise of others being present, the Coffin was found of a
convenient length, insomuch as there was room enough to place a cushion under
his head, and yet at the feet there remaind four fingers breadth beyond the
body. He was buried in the Church of Saint Paul, the Doctor of the Gentiles,
by whose teaching he had learnt to aspire to heavenly things only.

8. To this day his Sepulcher is seen in the same Church adjoining to the Wall
on the North side, and encompassed with railes. But the present Monument being
of marble, and not ordinary stone, as at first, shows that in ages following
through some men's devotion it was changed, and more honorably entombed. So
that a late malignant Historians skoffe does little prejudice S. Beda's
narration, I^. Speed.
saying, that the Coffin which in the beginning was miraculously lengthned,
has been since by a new Miracle again contracted.

9. The Holy Bishop of Worcester Ostfor, consecrated the year before by Saint
Wilfrid, this year dyed, in whose place succeeded a Religious person named
Egwin, born of Princely blood, but one who aspiring to a higher kingdom, for
Christ's sake became poor. Concerning whom we shall treat more largely
hereafter, for great examples of patience and equanimity in sufferings he will
afford us, insomuch as being tried in the furnace of many tribulations his
sanctity became illustrious not in Brittany only, but foreign regions also.

THE TWENTIETH BOOK OF THE CHVRCH-HISTORY OF BRITTANY.
I. CHAP.
I. CHAPTER.
1.2. Of English Missioners sent to convert the Germans.

3.4. etc. S. Egbert the First Mover in that work: He is desirous to go
himself: but is hindered by God: and employed to bring the Scotts to the Unity
of the Church.

8.9 Wibert preaches without Success to the Frisons.

10.11. S Willebrord with eleaven others undertake the Mission.

1. THE same year of Grace six hundred ninety three was made illustrious by the
death and Martyrdom of two Apostolical Brethren of the English Nation, A. D.
693.
both of them called by the same name, Ewald; whose zeal for the enlarging of
Christ's kingdom compelled them to become strangers to their own country, and
in the company of several other devout Priests, to pass over into Germany,
exposing themselves to all incommodities and dangers, yea death it self for
the rescuing of a world of souls from ignorance and Idolatry, in which
hitherto the Devil had held them captive.

2. But before we apply our selves to the relating of the particular Gests of
these two Apostolic Martyrs, it will be requisite that we return three years
back to the year six hundred and ninety in which the Mission for the conversion
of several German nations began. We deferd it to this year, because now are
seen the first fruits of the labors of those Apostolical Missioners. It will
now therefore be seasonable to relate the occasion and first execution of this
Mission, the names of the devout persons who undertook it, their first attempt
and succeeding progress hitherto: Which having done, we will in due place
declare the wonderful and happy success of it.

3. The First Mover in this holy Work and chief Architect of so glorious a
design was S. Egbert, of the rudiments of whose Sanctity this our History has
from S. Beda treated in the year six hundred sixty four: where we declared how
he together with his companion Edelhum, in the time when Finan and Coleman were
Bishops* went out of this their native country into Ireland together with many
other associats both of Noble and mean condition. Not long after, the great
plague, which had almost wasted Brittany; passed over into Ireland, and among
many others seized on this S. Egbert then living in an Irish Monastery called
Rathmelsige: Who expecting death, with great compunction examined his former
life, and with many tears besought almighty God not to take him out of the
world till he had performed due penance for his sins: He adioynd to his
Prayers a Vow never to return to his native country: to recite the whole
Psalter daily: to fast every seventh day, etc. After which God restored him to
his health, and he lived many years in great perfection of humility, meeknes,
continence and simplicity: and both by his example and teaching was very
beneficial to the Irish.

[4. After he had spent twenty six years thus devoutly in Ireland, Bed. l. 5 c.
10. Baronius. A. D. 690.
in the year of Grace six hundred and ninety (says S. Beda, and out of him
Baronius) he took a resolution to extend his charity to foreign Nations, and
for that purpose to undertake the Apostolical Office of preaching the Gospel
to such as had yet never heard of it. Particularly he knew that in Germany
there were many Nations as yet in darkness* from whom the English and Saxons now
inhabiting Brittany drew their Original, such were the Frisons, Rugini, Danes,
Hunns, Old Saxons, Boruchtuarians and several other. To these the foresaid
soldier of Christ intended to direct his voyage round about Brittany by Sea, to
the end he might endeavor to snatch some souls out of the snares of Satan,
and bring them to the obedience of Christ: Or in ca^e his endeavors proved
fruitles, to continue his voyage to Rome, and there devoutly visit the
Monuments of the Blessed Apostles and Martyrs. But this his good design could
not take effect: and by what impediments it was obstructed, the same Writer
from Saint Beda thus further relates:

Baron. ib.
5. Saint Egbert pursuing this good resolution, was notwithstanding forbidden by
Divine Oracles and wonders to putt it in execution. For having made choice of
companions in the said work, men of learning and courage, when he had prepared
all things necessary for the voyage, on a certain day early in the morning
there came to him a Monk who had formerly in Brittany been a Disc^ple and
attendant on the Venerable Priest Boisil, then Priour of the Monastery of
Mailrose under Eata: Which Monk related to him a Vision which had appeard to
him the night before.

6. When I had finished the Midnight Psalmody (said he) I laid my self down to
sleep, in which there appeared to me my ancient Master and benefactour Boisil,
who addressing his speech to me said, I am come hither to bring an answer and
commission of our Lord and Savior to Egbert, with which thou must acquaint
him. Tell him therefore that it is Gods will that he pursue not this voyage,
but betake himself to the Monasteries instituted by Columba, and there teach
the Monks their duty. Now this Columba was the first who preached the Faith to
the Northern Picts inhabiting beyond the Mountains: he was also the first
founder of the famous Monastery seated in the Isle called Hy: which Columba is
now by some called Columcelli, by a name compounded of Columba and a
(Monastical) Cell. When Egbert had heard the words of this Vision, he charged
the Monk to tell no man of it, having a suspicion that it might be an illusion.
Yet considering better of it, he had an apprehension that it was a truth:
Notwithstanding he ceased not for all that to make preparation for his journey.

7. But a few days after, the same Monk came again to him and told him that
the night before presently after Matins Boysil appeard once more to him saying:
Why did thou so negligently and coldly relate the commission I gave thee, to
Egbert* But now go and tell him, that whether he will or no he shall be forced
to go to the Monasteries of Columba, because their ploughs do not go right:
and it must be his charge to rectify those disorders. Egbert hearing this,
again commanded the Monk not to discover these things to any. And for himself,
though he had no doubt of the Vision, yet he adventured to begin the designed
journey with his Brethren.

8. As Soon therefore as all things necessary for their voyage were putt into
the Ship* after they had for some days expected a favorable wind, there
happened one night so furious a tempest, that the ship was cast on one side in
the water, which entering in spoiled most of the provisions laid therein: yet
whatsoever belonged to Egbert and his companions was saved. Egbert seeing this
and saying in the words of the Prophet, For my sake is tempest as happened,
retired himself, not daring to pursue the journey, and so was compelled to stay
at home. But one of his companions named Wibert, being eminent for his contempt
of the world and his knowledge in spiritual matters (for he had spent many
years in Ireland leading an Anachoreticall life in great perfection) took ship,
and coming into Friseland, preached the word of life to the inhabitants there,
and to their King Radbode, yet with small fruit among them. After two years
therefore unproffitably spent there, he returned to his beloved solitude, where
he attended to God only, and since his endeavors had been unsuccessfull in
converting strangers to the Faith, he was careful to proffit his own
countrymen by the good example of his piety.

9. Baronius having recited these things out of Saint Beda, adioyn this
observation, That since all things which proceed from God are orderly and free
from confusion, it is no wonder that these zealous devout men had no success,
since they had not received their Mission from the Pope to whom belongs the
power to conferr the Apostolical Office.

10. Saint Beda proceeds in his Narration thus, Bed. ibid.
As Soon as the man of God Egbert perceived that himself was not permitted to
go and preach to the Infidel Nations, being detained for another benefitt of
the Church revealed to him by a Divine Oracle: and moreover that Wibert, who
had made a voyage thither, had small success in his preaching; His zeal
rested not here* but he attempted the same design once more, and sent other
holy men, and withal very industrious, among whom the most eminent was
Willebrord a Priest of great desert. Those new Missioners, twelve in number,
as soon as they had passed the Seas, turned aside out of their way to visit
Pipin Duke of the French nation, by whom they were favorably received. And
whereas he had a little before subdued the Southern Friseland, out of which he
had driven the foresaid King Radbode, he sent them thither to preach: and
moreover assisted them with the royal authority, forbidding any one to molest
them in their preaching, and promising his favor to all who should receive the
Faith. Hence it came to pass through the divine Grace that in a short time
many were converted by them to the Faith of Christ.

11. The place where these holy men aborded was Wiltemburg, or Traiectum (now
called Vtrecht) seated on the ancient Rhin, in lower Germany, mistaken by some
Writers for another City called likewise Traiectum or Maestricht in Brabant,
seated upon the River Meause Of the former Traiectum S. Willebrord was
afterward Archbishop, as shall be showed in due place.

II. CHAP.
II. CHAP.
1.2. etc. The Names of the twelve Apostolic Missioners. etc.

1. IT will not be curiosity, but duty to propagate to posterity the names of
these twelve Apostolical Missioners, as likewise to declare by what authority
they willingly undertook the charge of preaching the Gospel to Pagans. A
perfect information hereof we have received from one of that number, S.
Marcellinus, who has committed to writing an account of their progress, as
likewise the particular Gests of S. Willebrord and Suibert who were most
eminent among them

Marcellin. ^p. Suria^ in ^. Suibert.
[2. The illustrious Prelat S. Egbert; (says he) thirsting after the salvation
of all, and particularly of the Pagan Frisons and Saxons, in as much as the
English were descended from them, and persevering in this charitable design,
endeavored to send to the discharge of that holy employment of converting
souls certain holy and industrious persons, fitted thereto both in point of
learning, courage and diligence. He selected therefore and assembled out of
diverse Monasteries twelve Apostolical men, firmly established in the Faith to
preach Catholic Doctrine to the Germans.

3. Now the names of those zealous Missioners were these, Willebrord, Swibert,
Acca, Wigbert, Willibald, Winnibald, Lebwin, two Brethren called Ewald,
Werenfrid, and my self the meanest of all called Marcellin, who am the Writer
of this History as likewise of the Gests of S. Willebrord. All these forenamed
were Priests: and to them was adjoined the holy Deacon Adelbert Son of the King
of the Deirs (or Yorkshire,) who for the love of Christ quitted his Royal
Patrimony, and refused not a voluntary banishment in the company of the
foresaid holy Priests, having been elected thereto by S. Egbert.

4. And because these Holy Doctors born in England were descended from
Progenitors who were Frisons and Saxons, by that means they were enabled to
preach the Gospel of Christ in the German tongue. Some of these were afterward
crowned with Martyrdom, others persisted to their death in laborious preaching
among Barbarous Nations, and some were substituted Bishops in Episcopal Sees
when they were vacant.

5. When all necessaries therefore were prepared, the foresaid Twelve
Apostolical Missioners, after they had taken leave of their friends and
kindred, and received the holy Prelates benediction, took ship, and by Gods
blessing having a prosperous wind they made a quick voyage and landed safely at
Wiltemberg or Vtrect (Traiectum) in the year six hundred and ninety after our
Lords Incarnation* which was the third year of the Pontificat of Pope Sergius,
Justinian then being Emperor, and the most glorious King Alfrid then reigning
over the Northumbers, a Prince zealously affectionat in observing the Laws of
Holy Church.]

5. Cornelius Kempius in his Treatise concerning the Writers of Friseland
affirms that those Twelve Apostles were elected out of the whole English-Saxon
Nation, K^mp. de ^cript. Fris. Decad. 4.
being the most eminent for learning and piety that could be found But most of
them, were furnished out of the Kingdom of the Northumbers, which certainly was
the Native soil of S. Egbert, as likewise of Saint Willebrord, S. Swibert and
S. Adelbert.

III. CHAP. III. CHA.

1.2. etc. The rudiments of S. Swibert.

1. THese were the names of the Twelve English Missioners and glorious Apostles
of the German Nation, whose memorie^ remain in benediction in many Provinces of
that vast Continent, and are moreover celebrated in most of the Martyrologes of
the Western Church. It would be a blameable ingratitude to neglect the
recording whatsoever particular actions or occurrents pertaining to any of them
have hitherto escaped the injury of time: Since therefore our Ecclesiastical
Monuments have delivered to us very little concerning any of them before they
labored in this Mission, except of Saint Willebrord and Saint Swibert, we
must of force content our selves with an account of the birth, descent and
Gests of these two glorious Prelates.

2. Of these S. Swibert was the elder, whose Life and actions have been
recorded by his companion in the Mission, S. Marcellin, as likewise by Saint
Ludger Bishop of Munster. From both whose relations Haraeus thus briefly
recounts his descent and wonderful birth. Hara. Man.
In the year of Grace six hundred forty seven the blessed child Swibert was
born in the Kingdom of the Northumbers: His parents were Sigebert Count of
Nortingra^ and the pious Countess Bertha, who before she brought him forth was
favored with a Divine Vision and heavenly light.

3. As Soon as he was come to the fifteenth year of his age preferring a
Religious before a secular life, he was graciously received into the Monastery
of Berdeney, In which having spent nine years in great continence and
mortification, having by the grace of compunction his mind elevated to
celestial things, employing himself withal in Sacred Lections and Monastical
Disciplines, and thereto adjoining rigorous Fasts, Prayers and unwearied
watchings, he was advanced to the dignity of Preisley Order Thus briefly writes
the said Author.

4. But as touching the wonderful prodigy attending his birth, by which was
portended his future Apostolical employment, it is thus more particularly
related by S. Marcellinus and S. Ludger: Marcellin. ap (...) Martij.
The pious and Noble countess Bertha frequently meditating with inward joy how
that the children of several Princes adorned with the luster of many virtues,
had made the people partakers of the fruits of their piety, to the great
happiness and peace of the whole kingdom, she became inflamed with an incredible
desire of enjoying the like favor: and thereupon with daily prayers she
solicited our Lord to bestow upon her a Son, whom she promised to consecrate to
his service.

5. Not long after it happened on a certain night when she was falln into a quiet
sleep, she seemed to behold in the firmament a star of a wonderful magnitude
and luster, from ^he ^ast side of which proceeded two beams of admi^able
brightness, one of which regarded Germany, and the other France. At last after
she had with great wonder contemplated this star, it seemed to her that it fell
from heaven into her bed. At which being extremely affrighted, she shreekd out
aloud, and with the noise awaked her husband Sigebert, who trembling all over
at this unusual clamor of his wife, with great solicitude demanded of her the
cause of her fear, which she plainly declared to him. The next morning they
sent for Aidan Bishop of Lindesfarn, to whom they discovered the manner and
order of the Vision. At the relating of which, he by a celestial Light
illustrating his mind, gave them a confident hope of a child, which by the
luster of his learning and piety should enlighten the souls of many with the
beams of Divine Truth.

6. The event proved him to be a true interpreter of the Vision: for the child
whose coming into the world was attended with so prodigious a sign, from his
very infancy gave proofs of most sublime virtues. And being arrived at the
fifteenth year of his age, out of a care least worldly tentations and
alurements should draw him among the dangerous rocks of vice and error, he
took refuge in the secure port of Religion. And after he had spent nine years
in the daily contemplation of divine things, he attained the Degree of
Preist-hood. Which he administered the space of seven years with so great
sanctity, that he drew several Kings and Princes into a great admiration of
him.] Such were the rudiments of S. Swiberts sanctity: concerning whose
admirable actions and miracles we shall frequently be obliged to treat
hereafter.

VI. CHAP. VI. CHAP.

1.2. Of S. Wilgis the Father of S. Willebrord

3. 4. etc. The Nativity and rudimen^s of S. Willebrord.

1. ELeaven years after the birth of S. Swibert, S. Willebrord, A. D 658.
by divine Providence designed his companion in the Apostolic Office, was
born, whose Nativity likewise was attended by the like celestial prodigies.
His life has been written by S. Marcellin and also by our learned Alcuin: in
the preface where of he thus describes the quality and piety of his Parents.

2. [In the Isle of Brittany and Province of the Northumbers, Alcuin. in vit.
S. Willebrord.
says he, there lived a certain Saxon named Wilgis, who together with his wife
and whole family lived a religious life in Christ, as afterward appeared by
evident proofs. For having relinquished a secular habit he made choice of a
Monastical course of life: and not long after the fervor of aspiring to
Spiritual Perfection increasing in him, he retired himself to a rigorous
soli^tude in a certain Promontory encompassed partly by the Sea, and partly by
the River Humber. There he served God a long time in a little Oratory dedicated
to S. Andrew the Apostle, mortifying himself with fastings, prayers and
watchings: and moreover became notable by many miracles. Whereupon great
multitudes of people repaired to him, whom he by many sweet admonitions out of
Gods word exhorted and encouraged in the ways of Piety. Hereby he became
highly esteemed by the King and Nobles, who bestowed on him certain possessions
adjoining to the said Promontory for building a Church wherein our Lord might
perpetually be served. There this devout Father assembled a small but well
ordered Congregation of persons which consecrated themselves to God: Of whom I
my self, though in merits and order the meanest, have by legitimate succession
received the government in the same Cell built by him. Thus Writes Alcuin
touching S. Willebrords Father Wilgis: Adding withal, how on the Anniversary
of his Solemnity in S. Willebrords Monastery Wine failing for celebrating
Mass, God was pleased to supply it by a miracle. (...). Angl. 3^. (...).
For the merit of his Sanctity he is placed in our Martyrologe on the last day
of January.

3 Thence he proceeds to treat of his Son S. Willebrord, in these words, As
Blessed S. John Baptist the Forerunner of our Lord, being sanctified to God
from his Mothers womb, was as the Gospel teaches us, born of Religious
Parents, and like the Morning Star went before Christ the Sun of righteousness,
being designd by Almighty God to procure blessings to many: In like manner S.
Willebrord who was also designed for the eternal good of many nations, is
known to have descended from devout and Religious Parents. For we may piously
believe that the Venerable man Wilgis by Gods predestination undertook a
Matrimonial life for this end only, that from him might proceed a Son of so
eminent Sanctity, by whom many Nations might receive spiritual benefit.

4. This seems to have been signified by a heavenly Vision appearing to his
Mother in her sleep* about midnight: at which time it seemd to her that she saw
as it were a New Moon in the heave^s, which increased by little and little till
it came to the full. Whilst she was earnestly looking upon his Moon, on a
sudden it seemd with a swift course to fall into her mouth, and from thence
descending into her stomach, all her inward parts glistered with a shining
brightness. Whereupon she awakd in great fear: and the next day recounted her
dream to a certain Religious Priest. Whose answer was this. The Moon which you
saw at first very small and afterward increasing to a larger magnitude, denotes
the Son which you conceived this night, who with the beams of heavenly Truth
shall dissipate the darkness of errors, and wheresoever he shall go, the
splendor of Divine Light shall accompany him, so that by the brightness of his
virtues he shall draw the eyes and admiration of all men to him. Thus did the
said Religious Priest interpret the Vision, which interpretation was confirmed
and verified by subsequent events.

5. Now it came to pass that the said woman in due time brought forth a Son,
to whom at his Baptism she gave the name of Willebrord. And not long after he
was weaned his Father gave him to the Monks of Rippon to be instructed in
learning and piety, to the end his frail and tender age might be fortified by
Religious disciplines in a place where he should see nothing uncomely, and hear
nothing but what was pious and holy. Divine Grace gave a good success to his
Fathers pious intention, insomuch as from his childhood he proffited
wonderfully in learning, prudence and virtue, so that in that age he seemed a
young Samuel, being pleasing and acceptable both to God and men.

6. In the said Monastery S. Willebrord continued till he had received
Ecclesiastical Tonsure: after which he undertook a Monastical^ Profession
among several other devout young men, to none of which he was inferior in a
cheerful Observance of Discipline, Humility and sedulous study of learning:
but daily proffited so much that in modesty, discretion and gravity he much
transcended his age, being in understanding aged, though in body tender and
small.

7. Thus increasing in the knowledge of Sacred learning, A. D. 678.
in sobriety and virtuous manners, when he arrived at the twentieth year of his
age he was inflamed with a fervent desire of a more strickt course of life, and
a love of visiting foreign places. And because he had heard that in Ireland
learning did much flourish, he intended to go thither, being hereto
principally moved by the fame spread abroad concerning the pious conversation
of several Holy men, among whom the principal were the Blessed Father and B.
Egbert, called the Saint, as likewise the Venerable Priest Wigbert, both who
for the love of a celestial country had forsaken their houses and kindred, and
retired into Ireland* where in solitude they enjoyed the sweet fruits of
heavenly contemplation, naked and poor as to the world, but plentifully
enriched with Divine Grace.

8. The Blessed young man Willebrord piously emulating the Sanctity of these
two Holy men with the connivence and permission of his Abbot and Brethren took
ship presently for Ireland, where he adioynd himself to the society of the said
holy men, to the end that like a diligent Be, he might by their vicinity suck
the mellifluous flowers of piety, and build up in the Hive of his own breast
the sweet Honey-combs of virtue. There for the space of twelve years under the
tuition of those two illustrious Masters of Piety and learning he treasured up
knowledge and virtue, by which he might be enabled to become a Teacher of many
Nations.] Now at the end of these twelve years, that is, in the year of Grace
six hundred and ninety, he together with his eleaven devout companions wa^ sent
an Apostolical Preacher of Christian Faith to the Germans, as has already
been declared.

V. CHAP.
V. CHAP.
i.2. etc. The Martyrdom of two Apostolical Brethren, called Ewald, the Black
and the white.

1. WE will now recount the success of the pious endeavors of these
Apostolical Missionners. Their first arrival was in Friseland at Vtrecht,
where they immediately began to sow the precious seed of the Gospel. Now among
them, as has been said, there were two Brethren called by the same name of
Ewald, who seeing the industry of their companions in the conversion of the
^ris^^s, were desirous to employ the like charity among the Saxons: which they
happily performed, for they confirmed the Faith which they preached with the
sacrifice of their lives. The manner of their Martyrdom is thus described by S.
Beda.

Bed. l. 5. ^. ^
[2. Two certain Priests of the English Nation, who ^or attaining to their
heavenly ^ountrey had lived as it were banished persons a long time in Ireland,
went into the Province of the Old Saxons, hoping by their preaching there to
gain souls unto Christ. They were both of them, as of the same devotion, so
likewise of the same name, each of them being called Ewald: yet with this
distinction, that according to the color of their hair the one was called
Black, and the other White Ewald. There was little difference between them as
to their piety and ^eale: but he who was called Black Ewald was more skillfull
in the learning and knowledge of Scriptures.

3. These two Brothers, as soon as they were entered into the Province took their
lodging with a certain Farmer, whom they entreated to direct them to the Prince
of the country, because they had a Message to deliver to him which would bring
much proffit to the public. Now those Saxons had no Kings but several petty
Princes, who upon occasion of any war approaching meet together and by lotts
choose a common Ruler and General, whom for the time they all obey: but the war
being ended, they return to their former state of equality among themselves.

4. The countrey-farmer entertained them therefore, promising them that he
would ^ond^ct them to their Prince: and in this expectation he detained them in
his house several days. Now the barbarous Neighbors adjoining, perceiving
that they were strangers and of a quite different Religion from that of the
country; for they spent the greatest part of their time in Hymns, Psalms and
Prayers, and daily offered to God the saving Sacrifice, for which purpose they
were furnished with Sacred Vessels, and a small Table in stead of an Altar:
Thereupon having a suspicion that if those Holy men should have access to
their Lord, and converse with him, they would avert him from their Gods, and
induce him to embrace a New Religion, by which means the whole Province might
by little and little be in danger to forsake the old Religion: They therefore
suddenly set upon them, and forcing them out of the house, ^lew them Him who
was called the White Ewald they killed with the sword: but the other they putt
to death with great and tedious tortures, tearing his members asunder, and
having slain them, they cast their Bodies into the Rhene.

5. When the Prince of the country, whom these Holy men desired to see, heard
of this, he conceived great fury against those his barbarous Subjects for not
permitting strangers desirous to speak with him to come to him: Whereupon he
sent soldiers, and slew all the inhabitants of that Village, and burnt their
houses with fire. The foresaid Priests and Holy Martyrs suffered on the fifth
day before the Nones of October.

6. Now how precious their death was in the eyes of God appeared by many
celestial signs. For whereas their dead bodies, as has been said, were by the
Pagans cast into the River, it so fell out that they were carried against the
stream the space of forty miles upward to the place where their companions
abode. Moreover every night a very great light reaching to heaven shone over
the place where the said bodies remained. And this was observed by some of the
Pagans who had murdered them. Likewise one of these Brethren Martyrs in a Vision
by night appeared to one of their companions, named Tumon, a man who while he
lived in the world had been in great esteem for his Noble birth, but from a
soldiers profession became a Monk. To this man the Holy Martyr discovered that
he might find their bodies in the place where he should see a glorious Light
shining from heaven. And so it came to pass: for their Sacred Bodies being
thus discovered, were with great honor enterred as became such glorious
Martyrs, and the days both of their suffering and Invention is celebrated in
those places with due Veneration.

7 In the Gallican Martyrologe we read the foregoing relation abbreviated,
Martyrolog. Gall. 3. October
and the place of their Martyrdom to have been in Westphalia. And there is this
addition, That when Pipin the glorious Duke and General of the French Nation
was informed of these things, he caused the Martyrs Sacred Bodies to be brought
to him, which he buried with great splendor at Colen in the Collegiate Church
of S. Cumbert. Their Memory is celebrated on the third of October, which was
the day either of their suffering, or invention.

8. These were the First Fruits which consecrated this English Apostolic
Mission. A. D. 694.
How plentiful the succeeding Harvest was reaped by the incredible labors,
the unwearied industry* and neglect of dangers, yea readiness in these zealous
laborers to expose themselves to death it self for the salvation of barbarous
and pitiless Nations, shall shortly be more largely declared.

VI. CHAP.
VI. CHAP.
1.2. etc. A Synod in Kent: The Acts of it, etc.

A. D. 694.
1. WHilst those Holy men were laboring abroad, the new ordained Archbishop of
Canterbury Brithwald, assisted by the pious King of Kent Withred, employed his
industry and zeal in composing that Church and Kingdom, much deformed by the
late tumults and disorders. For which purpose by the joint consent of them both
a Synod was assembled at a place called Becancelde, at which were present
besides the King and Archbishop, the greatest part of the Nobility and Clergy
of that Kingdom.

2. The Acts o^ this Synod, or rather mixed Assembly, to which were admitted
certain Abbesses also, have been rescued from oblivion and darkness by the
learned Antiquary Sir Henry Spelman, who out of five Manuscripts, of which
three were more contracted then the other, has lately exposed them to public
view. Neither Saint Beda nor William of Malmsbury have spoken particularly of
this Synod, though both of them have recorded in a general expression the
magnanimity and piety of this King Withred. ^^d. l. 4. c. 26.
Thus writes the former, Victred son of Egbert the legitimat King of Kent,
as soon as he was firmly established in his Kingdom, by his Religious piety and
industry freed his Nation from external invasion. And the latter thus,
Malmsb^r. (...) l. 1. ^. 1.
King Withred was at home civil and court^ous, and abroad invincible: He with
great devotion advanced Christian Religion and piety, and withal did largely
extend his Regal power.

3. As touching the forementioned Synod; in as much as the Acts thereof do
well represent to us the piety and justice of that Age, it would be a wrong to
the Reader to be deprived of the particular knowledge of them: I will therefore
adioyn them in this place according to the largest Copy ext^nt in Sir. H.
Spelman. They are composed in the person and as the Laws of King Withred,
according to the form following:

Spelm* ^n Synod. l. 1. f. ^^^.
[4. In the name of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, a great Council was
assembled in a place named Becancelde in the year of our Lords Incarnation six
hundred ninety four: In which Council the most Clement King of Kent Withred
presided, likewise Bertwald the most Reveren^ Archbishop o^ Brittany, together
with Tobias Bishop of the Church of Rochester, and other Abbots, Abbesses,
Priests, Deacons, Dukes, and Lords, all which me^t together, and in common with
great diligence and solicitude we advised and consulted what ordinances were to
be made and established for perpetuity touching the state o^ Gods Churches and
Monasteries within the Kingdom of Kent, and the Revenews of them given by
devout Kings my Predecessors and kinsmen for a perpetual possession.

5. Therefore I Withred earthly King, being touched with compunction, and
inflamed with a love of Justice by the King of Kings, have learnt from the
Ancient Traditions and Precepts of the Holy Fathers, that it is not lawful for
any lay-person to draw and usurp to himself as his own proper possession any
lands or Revenews formerly given to our Lord, and consecrated or established
with the Cross of Christ: for we know and by experience find, that whatsoever
thing any man has thus taken into his own power from the Church, our Lord will
not suffer such sacrilege to pass without Divine vengeance. It is a horrible
crime therefore to robb the living God, or to mangle his coat and inheritance.
When therefore any part of our earthly substance has been offered to God, to the
end that thereby we may expect an eternal retribution in Heaven, it is
manifestly declared, that the less cautiously a secular person shall invade
the inheritance of the Eternal King; the more severely shall he be punished by
him.

6 These things being seriously considered we do ordain, decree and in the
Name of the Omnipotent God and all his Saints we do command all our
Successors, Kings, Princes and all persons whatsoever of secular state, that
not any of them presume to usurp the Demeans or rights of any Church or
Monastery which either by my self or any of my Predecessors in ancient times
have been offered for a perpetual inheritance to our Lord Jesus Christ, to his
Holy Apostles, as likewise to the Blessed Virgin Mary Mother of our Lord.

7. Great care moreover is to be observed, according as is commanded in the
Ecclesiastical Canons, that whenever any Prelat, Bishop, Abbot or Abbess
shall dye, intimation thereof be given to the Archbishop of that Province, and
with his counsel and consent let another be chosen whose life has by
examination been found to be pure and unblameable: And without the advice and
consent of the said Archbishop, Let none be promoted. For things of this
nature do not at all pertain to the command or disposition of the King.

8. Now if any one either through ignorance or malice shall do otherwise, let
his Election be void and himself deposed without delay. Neither let secular
King interpose their authority in the spiritual matters, A. D. 695.
for it belongs not to them to ordain Ecclesiastical persons, but secular
Princes, Prefects and Officers: Whereas to govern the Churches of God, to
constitute Abbots, Abbesses, Priests and Deacons, to consecrate, establish or
depose such persons, and to have a care that not any of our Lords sheep should
wander from his flock, all this belongs to the Office of the Metropolitan
Bishop. This our Precept we ordain shall be observed with regard of these
Monasteries here named, the Monastery of Saint Peter Prince of the Apostles
called Vpminster, Raculf, Sudminster, Dofras, Folcanstan, Hymminque, Scepeys
and Hor. We do utterly forbid any lay-person whatsoever to usurp or take into
his own possession any thing belonging to any of these Monasteries: And let
this Law in behalf of all the Churches of God in our Kingdom remain and be in
force for ever, for the eternal health of my own soul and the souls of my
Predecessors, and the hope of an everlasting Kingdom.

9. We further add in this place the concession of a greater liberty to the
Church. In the first place let the whole Church (of Canterbury) with
possessions thereto belonging, and in like manner the Church of Rochester, with
her possessions and all the other foresaid Churches be subject to God: For the
salvation therefore o^ mine own soul and my Predecessors, and for the hope of
an heavenly kingdom, from this day hence forth we give and grant unto them that
they be free from all difficulties of secular service, from all provision to be
given to the King Princes o^ Counts, likewise from all labors, all greivances
greater or lesser, from all claims, violence and censures of Kings: Which
liberty is to continue for ever, except of their own free will and abundance
they shall think good to contribute any thing. Which if they do, such free
contributions shall not oblige them for the future to the like, nor advantage
be made from them to bring in an ill custom: But on the contrary let them
remain in all security, to the end they may offer to Almighty God worthy
Sacrifices for us, and by their immaculate Oblations wash away our sins, that
by their intercessions we may become worthy to hear that happy Sentence, Come ye
blessed of my Father, receive the Kingdom prepared for you from the beginning
of the world.

10. Now if any King hereafter to be raised to this Throne, or any Bishop,
Abbott or Count or any other in authority shall attempt to contradict or
infringe this Charter, Let him know that he is sequestered from the Body and
Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, and that he is so excommunicated that he is
incapable of remission of his sins in this world and the world to come, except
he first make full satisfaction according to the judgment of the Church.

11. Let this our Writing irrefragably confirmed be kept and preserved for ever
in the Church of our Savior seated in the City of Canterbury, where the
Primat resides, for an Example and Defense of all Churches in the Kingdom. Let
this Law remain unviolable to the end of the world: For these Privileges are
not given to any earthly man, for they are all granted and given into the hands
of the Omnipotent God and all Saints.

12. This is the tenor of the Charter made in this Assembly of the Clergy and
Nobility of Kent: To which are adjoined in order these subscriptions following:
I Withred by the aid of Christ have subscribed to these Laws constituted by me
for my self, for the Queen Werburga, and our Son Alric I Bertwald by the Grace
of God Archbishop have subscribed to these Laws constituted by us* The sign of
the hand of Ethelbart for himself and his Brother Eadbert* The sign o^ the hand
of Tobia Bishop. The sign of the hand of Etheldride Abbess. The sign of the
hand of Wilnolda Abbess. The sign of the hand of Redemptus Priest. The sign of
the hand of Bothred Bishop. The sign of the hand of Walch Pr^^st. The sign of
the hand of Mildreda Abbess. The sign of the hand of Aete Abbess. The sign of
the hand of Herelwida Abbess. The sign of the hand o^ Ealfrid Priest. The sign
of the hand of Bissan Priest. The sign of the hand of Aldulf Priest. The sign
of the hand of Bonn^ Priest.]

13. The same King Withred the year following granted another Charter to a
certain Abbess in the Isle of Thanet called Eabba, A. D. 695.
by which he gave unto her four plough-lands in the same Island belonging to
the said King, and seated in a small Territory called Human. Which Charter he
made in his own name, and in the Name of his Queen Kinegytha. So that it seems
the Queen in the former Charter named Werburga either was dead at the making of
this, or had two names.

14. Thus by the piety of King Withred, and the zealous diligence of the
Archbishop Brithwald the Kingdom of Kent recovered its former tranquillity, and
the ruins which through factions and disorders in the state had happened to the
Church, were repaired. But far greater and more happy changes on the other side
of the sea, caused by the industry and zeal of our foresaid Apostolic
Missioners, invite us a while to leave Brittany and attend to them. Where we
shall see how prosperously the seeds of heavenly Truths sowd by them, do grow
and multiply, and this the more plentifully, because these Spiritual Laborers
joyfully watered them with their own Blood.

VII. CHA
VII. CHAP.
2 etc. G^sts of the Missioners among the Frisons: Cruelty of King Radbode.

1. THE Narration of these happy successes in the country of the Frisons we
will here set down in the words of the Eminent Cardinal Baronius taken from
the faithful Relation of Marcellinus one of the said Missioners, A. D. 695.
who wrote what he saw with his eyes, and in which himself had a part.

[2. In the six hundred ninety fifth year of our Lord, Ba^^. hic. ex Marcelli^.
in ^ct S. ^^ibert.
and in the eight Iudiction (says he) the Church of the Frisons was happily
propagated, being bed^w'd with the blood of Martyrs. For besides the Martyrdom
of the two Brethren called Ewald, before related, the Holy Priest Wigb^rt, one
of the twelve Apostolic Missioners was this year made partaker of the same
Crown. These things are particularly declared by Marc^llinus in the Acts of S.
Swibert, where to the Gests formerly related he adioyns the following Narration:

3. At that time Radbode the infidel King of the ^risons, having been expelled
out of Vtrecht by the illustrious and most Christian Prince Pipin Sen^schall of
the Court of France, made his abode in the Isle of Fosteland, called so from
the name of a certain Idol-De^ty called Fosta, where that Sect of Idolatry was
most solemnly celebrated. In that Island the Holy Priests and Apostolic
Missioners by the suggestion of S. Wigbert being assembled together, destroyed
the profane Temples of Jupiter and Fosta: and yet with all their diligence in
preaching could persuade only three persons to renounce the Pomps of Satan,
and ioyn themselves to the Orthodox Faith.

4. But King Radbode, an obstinate Idolater, having heard that his Idols had
been destroyed by Christians, conceived a most furious rage against them, and
resolving to revenge the injury done to his Gods, commanded Saint Wigbert, whom
he knew before to be a Christian and companion of the Holy Missioners, to be
putt to death with horrible torments. Which manner of death was most acceptable
to him, for in his daily prayers his custom had been to beg of almighty God
the favor of suffering Martyrdom for him. And as for the rest of the Holy
Preachers, he drove them violently out of the said Island.

5. These devout Priests perceiving that King Radbode could by no means be
withdrawn from the profane worship of Idols, and that by reason of his Tyranny
they could by preaching make small progress in gaining of souls, they retired
out of that country to the foresaid illustrious Prince Pipin, by whom they
were gratefully entertained. And whereas a little before he had by conquest
obtained the possession of the Southern F^^seland, from whence he had expelled
the said King Radbode, he sent them back to preach the Gospel there, with a
command from the King directed to his Pagan Subjects that not any of them
should dare to disturb or in the least sort molest them in their preaching.
Hence it came to pass by Gods Grace assisting them, that by their sedulous
teaching they daily converted many souls from Idolatry to the Faith of Christ.

6. The place where these Holy Priests upon any occasion met together, was the
Castle of Vtrecht, anciently called Wiltanburg, which at this time was under
the power of the Eastern Francks: and where a little before in the reign of the
Emperor Heraclius the illustrious and Holy King of France Dagobert had caused
a Church to be built to the honor of the Apostle S. Thomas: which Church
presently after, the perverse and obstinat Frisons had utterly ruind to the
ground. In the same place these Holy Priests this year built another Church to
the honor of the Holy Cross, adjoining to the ruins of the former, where
they consecrated likewise a Sacred Font to which the new-converted Christians
might have a secure access to receive the holy Sacrament of Baptism, by reason
of the strength and defense of the said Castle and garrison. Thus writes S.
Macellinus, cited by Baronius.

VIII. CHAP. VIII. CHAPTER

1.2. etc. The Gests of S Swibert.

9. He and S. Willebrord ordained Bishops.

1 TO the foregoing Narration the same Author subioyns another more
particularly of the Gests of S. Swibert, according to the tenor following:
M^rcellin. in Act S. S^^bert.
[After this the foresaid Priests perceiving that the harvest was indeed great,
but the laborours few, they therefore divided themselves, and after the manner
of the Apostles and Disciples of our Lord w^nt two and two, or three and three
through diverse Provinces of Germany, taking with them certain new converts,
and so preached the Gospel to the Nations.

2. Among these, that glorious Priest of our Lord S. Swibert inflamed with the
fire of Divine Love, at the same time attended by Werenfrid and my self went to
a great Village filled with a world of Pagan Rites, and adorned with diverse
Idoll-Temples: And it was distant from Vtrecht about two miles Eastward. There
whilst he preached that Christ was the true God, who would give eternal life
to all who believed in him, and admonished them to reliquish the vain worship
of Idols, which were full of Devils, which could not afford any help to such
as served them, presently he was seized upon by the Pagans and Idoll-Preists,
and greivously scourged by them, crying out and saying, This blasphemer
prophanes our Law, affirms that our Omnipotent Gods are Devils, and would
seduce the people, boldly telling them, that the man who was crucified is the
true God: So that unless he be killed or driven out of our country, the
Worship of our Gods will cease, and the Rites taught (...) by our Fathers shall
be exterminated.

3 Having said thus they took him and cast him into prison, intending the day
following to putt him secretly to death: for being under the dominion of the
French who were Christians, they durst not kill him openly.

4. As for Werenfrid and my self ( Marcellin) we followed him to the prison
weeping: Which the Holy Priest Swibert observing, with a cheerful countenance
he comforted us, and exhorted us to stand constantly for the Faith of Christ,
and not to fear death for his cause.

5. Now the following night toward morning as Saint Swibert was praying and we
weep^ing, an Angel of our Lord appeard to him in the prison with great
splendor, and said to him, Servant of the true God, fear not, for our Lord is
with thee. Having said this in the presence of the Keepers, who stood amazed,
he set him at liberty, commanding him to preach Christ constantly every where
to the Pagans After this the Angel ascended to heaven, and the Holy man came,
and kneeling down devoutly related to us what had happened, whereupon we with
great fervor gave thanks to God for this Angelical Visitation and
consolation.

6. The Pagans, and specially the Idoll-Preists the next day hearing that he
had been thus delivered, began to perceive the impotency of their Idols, and
extolled the power of Christ. As for the Holy man he with great courage
preached the Gospel to them to their great astonishment, and converted many of
them to Christ: and no man had the boldness to lay hands on him.

7. As Soon as he had performed his Ministry there, he returned with us to
Vtrecht, where he declared to our Brethren all things which had happened to him
at Duerstat, at the hearing whereof they wept for joy, and unanimously blessed
God for his goodness. After which he departed into several villages and towns
in Friseland, Holland and Teisterband, publicly and constantly preaching the
Gospel o^ Christ to all: and though thereby he suffered in many places great
persecutions from the Pagans, which he endured with patience and joy, yet being
always sustained by Divine assistance he brought great multitudes to the
knowledge and obedience of Christ.

8. Toward the end of the same year, being attended by Werenfrid and my self
he went into the Eastern coast of the Principality of Holland, where there was
a town a mile distant from Vtrecht toward the South called Haganstein. At which
time there happened a famous solemnity of the Pagans, whereto were assembled
great multituds of them to perform detestable sacrifices, incense and Rites to
their false Gods. The Holy man then went boldly into the midst among them,
crying aloud, O ye men, if you have any reason left in you, draw near and
hearken to me: I am a Messenger sent to you from the most high God, etc. (And
with a long Oration, recorded by Marcellinus an car-wittnes, he declared to
them the Truth of Christ's Doctrine, and vanity of their Idoll-worship.)
Moreover his preaching was confirmed by a following miracle, for he restored
sight to a man well known to them all, whose name was Giselbert, and who had
been born blind. After which succeeded a notable conversion of many Pagans of
the blind man's acquaintance, who were witnesses of the Miracle.

9 Now the Brethren seeing so manifest an assistance of God, thought fit to
choose amongst them all two persons, to be ordained Bishop^, to wit, Swibert
and Willebrord. The former they sent into England to S. Wilfrid Bishop of the
Mercians by whom he was consecrated Bishop this same year. As for Saint
Willebrord he was sent to Rome, where he was by Pope Sergius ordained
Archbishop of Vtrecht and the whole Province of Friseland, as shall be
declared. What special Diocese was allotted to Saint Swibert, does not appear:
yet in a particular manner he is named the Apostle of Teisterband, Westphalia
and the Boructuarians, as the companion of his labors Marcellin has informed
us. And the reason why he was directed into Brittany to Saint Wilfrid for his
ordination, and not to the Archbishop Brithwald, seems to be because, as has
been declared, a Legatin Power had been conferred by the Pope on the
Archbishop of the Northumber^, which Power was not taken from him by his
unjust exile: Or else because these Holy Missioners being come out of that
Kingdom acknowledged a particular relation to and dependence on S. Wilfrid.

A. D. 696

IX. CHAPTER


IX. CHAP.
1.2. The Gests of Saint Swibert being a Bishop.

3.4. etc. His miraculous raising to Life a person who had been drowned: and
the Success of that Miracle.

A. D. 696.
1. IN the year of Grace six hundred ninety six S. Willebrord was consecrated
Archbishop of Vtrecht hy Pope Sergius, but returned not to his Province and
companions till the year following: In the mean time Saint Swibert having
dispatched a shorter voyage into Brittany came back this year, and gloririously
bi^^^ ^arged his Episcopal function, God assisting his labors with the Gift
of most stupendous Miracles, faithfully related by the companion of his
Travells S. Marcellinus, as follows:

Marcellin. i^ vit. S. ^^ibert.
[2. The most holy Prelat Swibert having been exalted to the Pontifical Dignity
and consecrated by S. Wilfrid, after he had saluted his kindred and friends, he
together with his attendants and companions* returned to the Work of the
Gospel, and arrived at Wiltenburg or Vtrecht some what more then a year before
S. Willebrord was come back from Rome. He was received by the Brethren and New
Converts with great honor and joy. He adorned his Episcopal Degree with all
the virtues becoming it, living afterward in yet greater perfection of
Humility, Meeknes, Simplicity and piety. The Work of preaching the Gospel he
constantly fullfilld, traveling through the Villages and towns not on
horseback, but as the Apostles were wont to do, on foot. Thus he passed
through all the quarters of Friseland, Holland and especially the County of
Teisterband, converting great multitudes to the Faith of Christ, and diligently
extirpating Idolatry. Thus by his assiduous preaching and exhortations he
reduced in a manner the whole County of Teisterband to the belief of the
Gospel: and there in many places he built new Churches, and elsewhere
consecrated Idoll-Temples to Christian Churches: Thus in Zanduic near T^el a
Church was erected to the honor of the Holy Martyr S. Vincent, another in
Arkel to the honor of the Blessed Virgin Mary Mother of God: and a third in
Hornaer to the honor of S. Denis Areopagite, with many others.

3. Now how in the Dedication of one of those Churches he raised to life a
young man who had been drowned, is at large described by the same devout and
most faithful Writer, whose relation though diffused, will very well deserve a
place in this our History.

Ibid.
[4. The Divine Providence did so order (says he) that whilst on the eighth day
before the Calends of October this same year Saint Swibert was dedicating a
Church in Malsen a Village seated near the River Lighen in the Country of
Teisterband, a certain young man, named Splinter of Adingyn, Son of a person
chief in authority at Duerstat, being out of curiosity desirous to see the
manner of Christian Worship, and particularly the Actions of S. Swibert, of
whom he had heard wonderful things, though as yet he remained in his ignorance
and infidelity, he attended by three servants took boat about seven a clock in
the morning, willing to see the Ceremonies of the Dedication of the Church at
Malsen, which was but a small mile distant from Duerstat. Now as the boat was
sailing in the midst of the River Rhene or Leck, the young man sat on the side
of it leaning on his sword, and sportfully passing the time: but on a sudden by
reason of the moistnes and slipperines of the boat, his feet sliding he fell
backwards into the River, and notwithstanding all the endeavors of his
servants to save him, was swallowd by the deep gulf and drowned. Whereupon the
servants filled the shores on both sides of the river with their clamours: and
not daring to return to his parents, they ran away. This misfortune caused an
incredible sorrow not only to his parents and kindred, but all the inhabitants
near adjoining.

5. At last about noon the same day his body was taken up in a Nett by
fishermen, and with great lamentation carried to the house of his parents, and
though his joints were become stiff and inflexible, yet by the advice of the
Pagan Priests he was putt into a warm bed, and so carried into their
Idoll-Temple of Mars. For they had heard that the Christians having carried
several persons who had been drowned into their Churches, they were by the
Sacrifices and prayers of the Bishops restored to life. The Father, therefore
of this young man, called Gunther, a Noble Soldier and Lord of Adengyn, made
have with his family and friends to the Temple of Mars, where he offered an
abominable Sacrifice, killing many beasts of several sorts to their great God
Mars, hoping thereby to have his only Son restored to life. But after they had
with mournful hearts continued in their Sacrifices and Prayers two hours, and
found no help, the afflicted Father despaired of his Sons recovery, neither
indeed had they ever heard that their false God had had the power to do such
things.

6. Now the same day there were present several Christians, who being desirous
to see the success of these Sacrifices and Prayers, followd the Funeral to
the Porch of the Temple. These seeing the inexpressible grief of Gunther and
his friends, and rejoicing at such a proof of the impotency of Heathen G^ds,
they called Gunther aside, and to the end that Christ might be magnified, they
advised him with all speed to send for S. Swibert the Christian Bishop from
Malsen, to whom his Sons intention had been to go, assuring him that upon
condition himself would renounce his Idols and believe in Christ, the Bishop by
our Lords Power would raise his Son to life.

7. Gunther having heard this, and calling to mind how the same Saint Swibert
in that very City had been freed by an Angel out of Prison, and how in
Hagenstein he had in the Name of Jesus restored sight to one born blind, was
encouraged by these Christians speeches, and without delay, taking with him
some friends of the better sort, he went presently to Malsen. Where being come
to the presence of Saint Swibert, he immediately leaped from his horse, and
casting himself at the Holy Bishops feet, and kissing his hands, he with many
tears and sighs declared to him the manner of his Sons unfortunate death,
beseeching him that he would vouchsafe to go with him to Duerstat, and by the
power of the glorious Name of Jesus the Omnipotent God, restore his Son to
life, promising that himself with his whole family and kindred would believe
and be baptized.

8. Saint Swibert with great courtesy and respect raised him up, speaking
comfortable words to him: but notwithstanding he had great compassion of his
grief and lamentations, yet he piously excused himself, fearing to tempt God in
a matter of so great importance. Gunther therefore again embracing his feet,
with great importunity beseeched him for the love of Jesus Christ the living
God to go along with him. Thus at last being overcome with his pitiful
cries, and principal with the prayers of Werenfrid, and my self, together with
other New-Converts, he, attended by us entered a Charret prepared for him, and
with great speed came to Duerstat after Complin, about six of the Clock. Now
there was a great multitude of people assembled on the banks of the Rhene or
Leck expecting the arrival of Saint Swibert, at which Profane Idoll-Preists
were much greived.

9. As Soon then as we had passed over the River Leck, as he was in the way
toward the place where the dead body lay, being attended by his Disciples and
also a great troop of Pagans, the Lady Mechtildis the Mother of Splinter who
had been drowned, met him almost distracted with grief, and casting her self
at his feet in the open street, she with a loud voice cried, O servant of the
living God help me, and restore my Son in the Name of thy God, and I will
believe in him with my whole family, for our Gods are unable to raise him up.
S. Swibert took up the Lady, and comforting her, sighed within himself a
little.

10. Now the Body of Splinter who had been drowned, was again carried from the
Temple of Mars into his fathers house. When the Holy Bishop then was come
before it, he desired that the Pagan Priests would please to be present with
him, that they might see the power of our Lord Jesus Christ the Omnipotent God.
In the mean time he commanded us to attend devoutly to our prayers, and to
implore the Divine Mercy for restoring life to the dead man, and himself
likewise prayed. Whilst the whole multitude therefore wept, and when some of
the Idoll-Preists at the request of the Lord Gunther stood by trembling, S.
Swibert kneeling down, and weeping abundantly, with a loud voice cried unto our
Lord, saying, O Lord Jesus Christ who art our Refuge, incline thine ear unto
our prayers, that thy glory may be revealed to these men, and thy holy Name be
glorified by these Vnbeleivers That they may know that our Faith is not vain,
and that besides thee there is no other God, whose Mercy is endless, and whose
gifts are ^^measurable. For the glory of thy Name restore life to this thy
servant, who has been deluded by the fraud of the Devil; that they may know
that all Idols which they worship for Gods, are images filled with Devils,
and that seeing the Power of thy Mercy, they may believe in thee, and beleiving
may be saved.

11. Having thus said, he rose from Prayer, having a great confidence in
Christ, and said, O Lord Jesus Christ, the comforter of the sorrowful, who
have said, Whosoever beleives in me, the works that I do he also shall do,
and greater then these he shall do: O most merciful Lord God, who at the
tears of the two holy Sisters, Mary Magdalen and Martha, did restore to life
Lazarus having been four days dead, vouchsafe for showing the power of thy
Divinity, to raise to life this dead person.

12. Then taking the hand of him who had been drowned, he said, In the Name of
our Lord Jesus Christ who was crucified, God omnipotent, I command thee to
rise, live and confess thy Creator. Immediately after this he who was dead
opened his eyes, and sighing arose as from a deep sleep, and embracing the feet
of the holy Bishop, he cried out with many groanings, There is no God in heaven
and earth but the Lord Jesus Christ who was crucified, and whom this his holy
servant Swibert preaches, who by his merciful goodness at his prayers has
raised me from death and Hell. O how glorious is this man's life, who by his
Prayers has driven away death from another body, and by the trust he has in
Christ, has robbed hell of its prey. Surely death can have no power where the
holy man Swibert interposes his prayer.

13. Immediately upon this all that were present, and had heard these words and
seen the wonderful and strange Miracle, exalted with condign praises the
goodness of God through Jesus Christ our Lord, who had vouchsafed to make his
holy Servant Swibert illustrious by so glorious a Miracle: Whereupon casting
themselves at the feet of the H. Bishop, they professed their readiness to
believe in Christ, and desire to be baptized in his name: And among these, some
were Pagan Priests, who despised and renounced the vain worship of their Idols.

14 Lastly the parents and kindred of the Young man with infinite joy gave
thanks to God and his Saint, embracing him with great devotion, and
affectionatly kissing him and his Disciples. Saint Swibert also himself, with
the other Christians, prostrated themselves on the ground, blessing God who had
done great things among his people. There was moreover in the street so great a
clamor or Pagans who had a desire to see the young man who had been restored
to life, that S. Swibert was compelled, after he was clothed, to lead him
forth by the hand with great devotion to the glory of God, that he might be
seen by all: Whom as soon as they saw alive and walking, they cried out, Of a
truth the God of the Christians is a great God, who by his servant has wrought
such admirable things. There was therefore an universal joy among them all who
saw these wonders, and the name of our Lord Jesus Christ was glorified.

15. At the same time Splinter who had been restored to life was baptized
together with his parents, kindred and others, to the number of one hundred
twenty six, besides many children of both sexes.

16 The day following, when an infinite multitude of Pagans were assembled
together, Saint Swibert, after he had premised a Prayer to the Holy Ghost, that
he would open their hearts to despise Idols and embrace the Faith (in which
Prayer his Disciples joined with him) he preached to them at large, declaring to
them the Transgression of our First Parent Adam, the Incarnation of the Son of
God, and how all those shall be eternally damned who contemning the true God
worship Idols, and boast in graven Images: And the efficacy of his Preaching
was such, that a great part of the City was converted to the Faith of Christ.

17. Now that City though by Profession Pagan, was subject to the Dominion of
the Christian Princes the King of France and his General Duke Pipin and the
Regions confining, Brabant, Flanders and Part of Holland had already embraced
the Faith: So that the Pagans of Duerstat freely conversing with Christians,
had frequently heard mention made of Christ.

18. S. Swibert remained many days in the same City, with great vigilance and
assurance preaching Christ to the Pagans, and confirming the Neophytes:
Insomuch as not only the ordinary Sort of Pagans, but likewise many
Idoll-Preists seeing the wonderful Miracle, and heavenly Grace shining in the
Holy Bishop, cast off their Infidelity and Idolatrous Profession, and with
great devotion received Baptism of him.] Thus does Marcellin relate the Gests
of his Master S. Swibert, till the return of Saint Willebrord* Of which Gests
himself had been an eye-witnes.

X. CHAP. X. CHAP.

1.2. etc The Wonderful story in S Beda of a man revived, and recounting his
Visions.

1. IT will be pertinent, and, I conceive, not unpleasing to the devout
Catholic Reader that here should be adjoined another Story related at large by
S. Beda, in which we shall read how about the same time in Brittany another
dead person, for the instruction of the living, was restored to life. Which
Story though by some Protestant Writer: it be derided, because the Churches
Doctrine touching Purgatory is confirmed by it: Yet since no arguments can be
produced by them to disproove it besides their voluntary ungrounded
asseveration that they will not believe it, I will not be sparing of the labor
to set it down, as it is found in S. Beda's History.

[2. In these times, Bed. l. 5. c. 13.
says he, a Miracle very memorable which might be compared to the Wonders of
old, happened in Brittany: For to the end that negligent Christians then alive
might be raised up from the death of their souls, a certain man who had been a
good while dead, was restored to the life of his Body, and related many Notable
things which he had seen. This man was an honest Housekeeper, who with his
family lived a religious life in a Region of the Northumbers, called
Incuningum. Who having been struck with a disease, the same growing more and
more violent upon him, it brought him to extremity, so that on a certain day
toward evening he dyed. But the day following early he came to life again, and
suddenly raising himself up in his bed, all those who mourn fully watched the
Body, were terribly aff^ighted, and ran away: Only his Wife* whose love to him
was excessive, though she trembled at the sight, stayed still by him.

3. The man seeing his Wi^e, bid her be o^ comfort: Fear not, said he, for I am
truly restored to life from death which had seized on me, and permission is
give me to live awhile longer among men. But my conversation hereafter must he
quite otherwise then formerly it has been. Having said this, he presently rose,
and went to an Oratory of that Village, where he remained a good while in
Prayer. Afterward having divided his whole substance into three portions, one
portion he gave to his W^fe, a second to his children, and the third he
distributed to the poor.

4. Not long after, having thus freed himself from all worldly cares, he went
to the Monastery of Mailros, which for the greatest part is encompassed with
the River Tweed. There having received Tonsure, he entered into a secret mansion
assigned him by the Abbot, where he continued to the day of his death in such
contrition and mortification both of mind and body, that though his tongue were
silent, the manner of his life did sufficiently tell the world that he had seen
many things, some extremely horrible, and others wonderfully pleasant and
ravishing, which are concealed from the rest of mankind.

5. Now the account which he gave of his Visions, was on this manner: A certain
person brightly shining in his face and vestments conducted me: and we walked
together silent, as it seemed to me toward the place where the Sun rises in
high Summer. Thus walking together, we came to a place where there was on our
left hand a valley of a vast depth and breadth, and the length of it seemed
infinite. One side of this valley was terrible with its burning flames: and the
other no less intolerable for the bitterness of the cold blasts, hayle and snow
driving through it. And both these places were full of men's souls, which
seemed to be ^orcibly tossed from one side to the other: For those which were
in the fire, not being able to endure its scorching, leaped into the horrible
cold: and not ^inding ease there, they leaped back into the unquencheable
flames Having observed an infinite number of deformed souls thus tormented
with an interchangeable vi^^issitude of tortures without any respite of ease, I
began to think that this place surely was Hell, of whose intolerable torments I
had often heard Preachers speak. But my ^onductour who went before me, answered
these my thoughts, saying, Do not entertain such an imagination: for this is
not Hell, as thou think.

6 But when he saw me affrighted with so ^orrible a spectacle, he condu^^ed
me leasurely somewhat further, where I saw all places round about me become
obscure, and at length filled with utter darkness. Into which when we were
entered, the darkness was so thick, that I could see nothing but the shape and
vestment of my Conductour. And as we went on further in this shady darkness, on
a sudden there appeared before us frequent globes of hideous flames ascending
out of a deep pit* and again falling down into it.

7. When I was come thither, presently my Guide vanished out of sight, leaving
me done in the midst of this darkness and horrid spectacle. But when the said
globes of fire without any intermission mounted up and again fell down, I
perceived that they were full of human souls, which like sparks of fire carried
up by the smoke, were sometimes cast upward, and then drawn back by the vapors
of fire Moreover an unexpressibly noysom stink belched out by those vapors
filled all the dark spaces round about. As I was thus standing still in a
terrible fright, being uncertain what to do, whither to go, and what would be
the end of all this, I heard behind my back a most horrible noise, as of
persons wailing in unutterable misery, and also at the same time I heard others
loudly and scornfully laughing, as the rude vulgar people are wont to do when
they insult over their captive enemies. When this Noise came nearer to me, I
perceived a troop of wicked Spirits haling into the midst of that darkness the
souls of men which woefully cried out, whilst the others burst forth into
laughters. And among these souls I could distinctly see that one was shaved
like an Ecclesiastical person, another was a layman, and a third was a woman.
These unhappy souls thus haled along by those spitefully malicious Spirits, at
length were plunged into the midst of that burning pit. Into which after they
were descended a good way, I could no longer distinctly hear the wayling of men
and laughing of Devils, but only had in mine ears remaining a confused
promiscuous sound.

8. In the mean time certain obscure Spirits ascended out of that fire-vomiting
pit, which approached me on all sides, and with flaming eyes and stinking
fire issuing out of their mouths and nostrills vexed me greivously. Moreover
with fiery pincers which they held in their hands they threatened to catch me:
but for all that, though they frighted me, they had not the boldness to touch
me. Being thus on all sides encompassed with darkness and enemies, I turned
mine eyes every way to see if there were any one to deliver me. At last there
appeared by the way which I had passed some thing that shone like a stars,
which increasing and approaching nearer and nearer, as soon as it came to me,
all those hateful Spirits which had endeavored with their fiery pincers to
lay hold on me, were dispersed and fled.

9. Now he whose coming drove away these Spirits was the same who at first had
been my Conductour. Who presently after turning his steps more southerly toward
the East ledd me out of that darkness into a clear and lightsome air: In which
after we had walked awhile, I saw before us a mighty wall of the length and
height whereof every way I could see no end, I began then to marwell to what
purpose we should go to that wall, in which I could discover neither door,
window nor any other passage. But being come to it, presently, I know not by
what means, we found our selves on the top of it. And there appeared to me a
most large pleasant field, so replenished with all sorts of odoriferous
flowers, that the sweet fragrancy of them immediately took away all the former
stench of the dark fiery furnace. A. D. 695.
And so great was the light there on all sides, that it far exceeded the
brightness of midday Moreover there were in that field innumerable assemblies of
men in pure white garments, all rejoicing and singing. Now as he ledd me among
these happy Quires, I began to think, that this might be the Kingdom of Heaven,
which I had often heard preached of. But he again answered to any thought, No
this is not Heaven, as thou supposest.

10. And as we passed on in our progress: I saw before mine eyes a far
greater and more pleasant Light, then we had seen before: and in that Light I
heard a most sweet Melody of persons joyfully singing: and so wonderful a
fragrancy of a most sweet odor issued from thence, that the former sweetness,
which before seemed excessive to me, now I very meanly esteemed. As likewise
the former light compared with this, appeared almost obscure. Now when I was in
a hopeful expectation that we should enter into this Blessed place, my Guide
made a stopp: and presently turning his steps, he lead me back again the way
that we had come.

11. And when in our return we were come to the joyful mansions of those
inhabitants clothed in white garments, he said to me, Duest thou know what
all these things are which thou have seen? I answered, No. He replied, That
valley which thou saw so terrible by the scorching flames and horrible
frosts, is the place* in which those souls are to be tried and afflicted,
which having delayed to confess and amend their sins, at the very point of
death retire for safety to Repentance, and so depart out of the body. These
because even in the last moment of their lives they confessed and were contrite
for their sins, they shall all at least in the day of Judgment come to the
Kingdom of heaven. And many of them before that day are eased and delivered by
the Prayers, Fasting and Alms of the living, and especially by the celebrating
the most Holy Sacrifice. Moreover that flame-vomiting and stinking pit which
thou saw, is the very Mouth of Hell, into which whosoever once falls, he
shall never come out of it for all eternity.

12. As for this pleasant flowery field here before thine eyes, in which thou
see such multitudes of youth making mercy and clothed with white raiment,
this is the place which is the Receptacle of such souls which have continued
to their death in the exercise of virtue, but yet their Works have not been of
such Perfection as to deserve their present admission in the Kingdom of Heaven.
Yet all these in the day of Judgment shall arrive unto the Vision of our Lord,
and the Joys of his heavenly Kingdom. But as for those who in their Words,
Works and Thoughts have attained to Perfection, such as soon as they have left
the Body, shall enter into that Blessed Kingdom. To the confines of which
Kingdom that Place pertains where thou saw so glorious a Light, and heardst
so sweet Harmony, and wast refreshed with so admirably sweet smelling Odours.

13. Thou therefore having seen all these things, must presently return to thy
Body, and again as formerly live among men. If then hereafter thou will be
diligent to examine all thine actions, and to observe uprightnes and simplicity
in thy conversation and speeches, thou also after death shall receive a mansion
among these joyful troops of happy Spirits. For I, having departed for a time
from thee, did it to this end that I might see what would in the end become of
thee. When he had spoken thus to me, I had a horrible aversion from returning
to my Body, being extremely delighted with the sweetness and beauty of that
place which I saw, and the happy society of the persons living in it.
Notwithstanding I had not the boldness to make any such request to my Guide. And
whilst I was busy in these thoughts, I know not how, I presently perceived that
I was again alive among men.

14. These and other particulars did the Man of God usually recount concerning
his Vision: and these he related not to negligent slothful Christians, but
such only as being either affrighted with the meditation on future Torments, or
delighted with the Hope of eternal Joys, were in a disposition to receive
proffit by his words.

15. At a small distance from his Cell there lived a certain Monk, whose Name
was Genigills, who was also exalted to the Degree of Preist-hood, which he
adorned with many virtues: He is alive at this day, leading a solitary life in
Ireland, and sustaining his decrepit age with bread and cold water only. This
Monk often visited that devout man, and asking him many particulars touching
his Vision, received perfect information from him.

16. The same Holy man related likewise his Visions to King Alfr^d, a Prince
adorned with all sorts of learning, who with great willingness and attention
hearkened to his Narration nd at this Princes entreaty he was entertained in the
foresaid Monastery, there receiving the Monastical Tonsure. And when the King
had occasion to make his progress into those parts, he very often visited him
out of a desire to hear the same things again. At that time the Abbot of the
Monastery was Aedilwald then a Priest of a conversation very Religious and
modest, who now worthily possesses the Cathedral Church of Lindesfarn. Now the
Holy man had assigned unto him in the said Monastery a very retired place,
where he might with all freedom attend to the service of his Creator and
Prayer.

17. And his private Mansion being seated on the bank of the River, his custom
was frequently for mortifying his Body to plunge himself into the same, A. D.
696.
sometimes to the loins, and sometimes to the neck, where he continued singing
Psalms and praying, as long as he could possibly endure. And when he came out
he never putt off his wett and cold garments for change, but suffered them to
dry and receive warmth from his Body. And when in the Winter time crusts of
ice, which himself often broke to have place wherein to plunge himself, came
about him, and some who saw it said to him, It is a wonder, Brother Drithelm
(for that was his name) how you are able to endure such bitter cold, He would
answer simply, for he was of a simple mild nature, I have seen far colder
places then this. And when they said, How is it possible you can sustain such
strange austerities* His answer was: I have seen much greater austerities then
these. Thus to the day of his death he lived, and out of a servent desire of
celestial Happiness tamed his weak aged body with Fastings and other
Mortifications, and by his exhortations and pious conversation became an
instrument of the salvation of many.]

18. This is Saint Beda's Narration, which, as appears, he received from
witnesses of unquestioned credit Notwithstanding weighing the circumstances of
the Vision, we may probably conclude that the Holy man was mistaken in
thinking that he had been really dead. For this seems to have been a Vision
imparted by Gods direction to his soul while he was in a deep and death-like
Trance, both for his own good and the good of others. So that we are not to
conceive that there are extant any where such Valleys, pitts and Walls, as are
mentioned in this Story, but that God thought fit by representing to his
imagination such objects, to signify thereby the great variety of States, in
which souls, according to their several dispositions shall after death be
placed Some Happy which Happiness notwithstanding is greater or lesser,
according to the degrees of perfection to which they had ascended in their
lifetime: And some painful, but with far greater variety, the Torments of
impenitent souls being inexpressible and endless: whereas such souls as have
lived sinful lives, but yet have had the Grace of Repentance before their
deaths, shall suffer most bitter anguish, yet such as by the devotion of their
friends and mercy of God may be assuaged, and shall certainly have an end: The
intolerablenes of which Anguish, peircing the inmost Spirits of men, is
represented here by scorching flames and bitter Frosts, the greatest tortures
our bodies are capable of, yet far short of the internal Agonies of imperfect
separated souls, which are altogether pure Sensation.

XI. CHAP. XI. CHAP.

1.2. etc. Queen Kyneburga, becomes a Nun.

4. The Monastery of Dormund.

6.7. S. Kineswitha Sister to Q. Kyneburga.

8 Of S Tibba a Virgin.

9.10. Of another S. Kyneburga: and her Son S. Rumwold.

1. ABout this time Kyneburga wife to Alfrid King of the Northumbers, by
permission of her Husband forsook the world, and entered into a Monastery. That
which hastened the execution of this good design might probably be the famed
report of this Vision of Drithelm. Certain it is that some Writers do from
Saint Beda's Narration collect that King Alfrid himself felt such compunction
there from, that he took the Monastical habit in the same Monastery of Mailros
in the one and twentieth year of his Reign, as the Author of our Martyrologe
affirms: Whereas indeed his Reign lasted not so long. Whether therefore the
said Vision or any other Motive wrought that effect in King Alfrids mind, is
uncertain. But by agreement of all our Ancient Records his pious Queen
Kyneburga about this time consecrated her self for the remainder of her life to
God.

2. She was the pious daughter of Penda the most impious, cruel and Idolatrous
King of the Mercians. And though she had been bred by him in Pagan
Superstition, yet she was even then, Malmsbur. f* 27.30. etc.
says William of Malmsbury, eminent for her continence and chastity. Which
natural good disposition rendered her more capable and inclined to embrace the
holy Doctrines of Christian Faith, when after her Fathers death, it was
preached among the Mercians. For her virtue she was by Oswy King of the
Northumbers, who had conquered her Father and possessed his Kingdom, chosen to
be wife to this Son Alfrid: And in exchange the same Oswy gave to her Brother
Peada his daughter Alcfleda, restoring him his kingdom to be held at his
pleasure and courtesy.

3. Thus Kyneburga now a Christian was obliged to quitt her country, and
follow her Husband into the Kingdom of the Northumbers to whom she bore a Son
named Osred, who succeeded him in the Kingdom, as shall be declared. But the
seeds of Christian Perfection sown in her mind produced so ardent an affection
to God, that, as writes the Author of her life in Capgrave, Ap Capgrav. ^n
K^neburga.
she had an impatient desire to renounce a Temporal Kingdom, that she might
freely submitt her neck to the Yoke of Christ. Her Husband King Alfrid was much
delighted with the devout chaste mind of his Queen, and now at last suffered
himself to be persuaded to comply with her desires. Yea moreover his Wives
zealous affection to Chastity wrought so far upon him, that he undertook a
perpetual Vow if not of a Religious, yet a continent life, so that in the
expression of Harpsfeild, in a short time the Kings Court was converted,
Harpsf. sae^. 7 c. 23.
as it were, into a Monastery and School of Christian Perfection and
Discipline.

4. The place chosen by the devout Queen Kineburga for her future voluntary
prison was Dormund, anciently by Antoninus called Durobriva, seated in the
Region of the Girvij, or Eastern Mercians, now in the confines of Huntington
and Northampton shires: a place moist and fenny, and though not propitious to
bodily health, yet pleasing to her for its retirednes. There she built her self
a Monastery, to which she gathered a chaste congregration of devout Virgins:
Though some Writers affirm that the said Monastery had been formerly built by
her Brothers Wulfere and Ethelred. The place is thus described by Camden: Our
ancient History affirms, says he, that near the River Avon there was a place
called Dormund-caster, Camd. in Hunting^^^.
in which after that Kineburga had built for her self a small Monastery, it
first began to be called Kineburge-caster, and afterward contractedly Caster.
The said Kineburga was the most Christian daughter of the Pagan King Penda, and
Wife of Alfrid King of the Northumbers, who changed Royal authority into the
humble service of Christ, and governed this Monastery in the quality of a
Mother of Holy Virgins.

5. Thither flowed together (says the Author of her Life, Ap. Capgr. ib.
) to receive institution in a Religious life from her, Virgins of all sorts:
Daughters of Dukes and Princes reverenced her as a Mistress, the Poor embraced
her as a companion, and all her Daughters venerated her as a Mother, who
neglecting to multiply a carnal offspring, became far more happily fruitful
in Spiritual children, etc. And as for the Queen her self, she was a Mirror
of all Sanctity, and no expression of words can declare the bowels of Charity
with which she cherished the souls committed to her care, and which she had
brought forth to Christ, how watchful she was over their conversation, how
diligent to instruct them in the Divine Law and Religious Discipline, and with
what tears she implored the heavenly protection over them. She was a
compassionate provider for the Poor, a pious Mother of the afflicted, and a
Zealous exhorter of the Kings and Princes her Brethren to Almsgiving and works
of Mercy.

Id. ib.
6. The odor of her Sanctity invited a few years after a younger Sister of hers
to embrace a retired Religious life in the same Monastery. Her name was
Kineswitha a Virgin: who though by her Brethren she had been promised a Wife to
Offa King of the East Saxons, yet out of a desire to consecrate her Virginity
to God, she not being able to resist their earnest persecutions, had recourse
to Prayer, imploring withal the assistance of the Queen of Virgins, who in a
Vision by night comforted her with an assurance that she should obtain her
desire. Whereupon she sent Messengers to King Offa employing her most earnest
Prayers and adjurations that he would not by violence bereave our Lord of a
Spouse in heart consecrated to him. Upon which the pious King not only
disengaged her from a Promise and consent which her Brethren had extorted from
her, but within a few years after followed her example, and forsaking all
worldly pomps and vanities, he changed his Regal authority into an humble
Service of God in Poverty and Devotion, as in due place shall be showed.

7. How long those two Holy Sisters lived does not appear: But their Festivity
was celebrated together on the day before the Nones of March in the Monastery
of Peterborough, Martyrolog. ^ngl. 6. Mar^.
not above two miles distant from Dormond-caster, the place of their Religious
abode, to which place their Sacred Bodies were translated. There they remained
till the year one thousand and ten, in which the Danes cruelly wasting the
whole Island, and especially Monasteries, they were from thence translated to
Thorney.

8. Together with them on the same day was celebrated the memory of Saint Tibba
a Virgin and kinswoman of theirs: Id. ib.
Ingulphus calls her Tilba, and Harpsfeild, Cibba. She having spent many years
in a devout solitary life, in the end rendered her Spirit to God. And after her
death appearing to a certain Holy man, among other things told him, I am come
down from the celestial Festivity to declare to thee the day of my happy
transmigration. This is the day of the blessed Virgin Lucia, in the Night of
whose Vigile I gave up my soul to our Lord Jesus Christ. She was anciently in
great veneration among the Corita^^, in the County of Rutland: For, Camd in
Rutland.
says Camden, near the River Wash there is a Town called Rihal, where a Saint
named Tibba was honored: and particularly was by Falkoners, as a Diana and
Patroness of their profession, had in veneration. Thus perversely he confounds
the Honor due to Gods Saints with the Idolatrous Worship of Heathen Gods.

9. Harpsfeild writing of S. Kineburga, affirms from Marianus and Matthew of
Westminster, that she founded another Monastery at Winburn. But he seems to be
mistaken. For there were at this time two Holy women called Kineburga: This,
who was Wife to King Alfrid, and Mother to his Successor Osred and another
Kineburga Sister to Ina King of the West Saxons, a Virgin of whom we shall
treat in the next Century.

10. The present S. Kineburga is said to have been Mother to another child
called Rumwold, who immediately after he was born is reported to have made
confession of his Faith, and demanded Baptism: after which he presently dyed.
Capgrav. in Ruinvvold. Camden in Northampt.
Thus writes Capgrave, whose credit though it may be questionable, yet certain
it is that anciently in the Church of Brackley in Northamptonshire a child
named Rumwold was had in great veneration: to which Church his Body was
translated three years after his death, where his Monument remained an
illustrious Mark of the peoples Love and Reverence to his Memory. His name is
in our Martyrologe commemorated among the Saints on the Second of November.
Martyr. Angl. 2. November.


XII CHA
XII. CHAP.
1.2. etc. Saint Willebrord ordained at Rome Arch bishop of Vtrecht. His Name
changed into Clement, etc.

1. BUT relinquishing a while Brittany, the affairs happily succeeding with
our English Apostolic Missioners in Germany require our care and attendance to
them, and that we should contemplate the wonderful goodness of God to that
Nation. We have before related how, considering the multitude of Converts
there, it was thought expedient by our holy and zealous Priests to compose and
settle the Church there in good Order by ordaining Bishops to govern it: And
how for this purpose Saint Swibert and Saint Willebrord were chosen by them as
most meet to sustain so sublime and weighty an Office. For this purpose Saint
Swibert was sent into Brittany to receive consecration from Saint Wilfrid the
rightful Archbishop of the Northumbers, though at this time living in exile
among the Mercians. After which Consecration performed, he returned the same
year into Germany, where how executed his Episcopal charge, and how
wonderfully God assisted him has been declared.

2. As for Saint Willebrord, who six years before this had been at Rome, from
whence he received authority of preaching Christ to the Pagans, how this same
year by the counsel and recommendation of the Pious Prince Pipin he undertook
a second voyage thither to receive Episcopal Ordination, Saint Beda in his
History declares. He might have received Ordination either in Brittany or
France, but New Episcopal Sees were to be erected, which by the ordinary
Jurisdiction of Bishop^ could not be done, and therefore authority to effect
that was to be obtained from the Supreme Bishop. Now how this was performed ^.
Beda thus ^ela^est Bed. l. 5. c. 12.
3. After that the foresaid English-Preists, bad for the space of siverall
years preached the Gospel in the country of the Frisons, by the general
consent of them all Pipin sent the Venerable man Willebrord to Rome, the
Pontificat whereof was still administered by Pope Sergius, to the end he might
be ordained Archbishop of that Nation. Which according to his request was
fullfilled in the year six hundred ninety six after our Lords Incarnation. Now
he was ordained in the Church of the Holy Martyr Saint Cecily, and on the day
of her Feast: and the Pope who ordained him imposed on him the Name of Clement,
and presently after, to wit, fourteen days after his arrival at Rome, he
dismissed him that he might return to his Episcopal See.

4. The which See by the munificence of Pipin was established in his
illustrious Castle, which in the old German language was called Wiltaburg, that
is the Town of the Wil^^, but in the Gallick language was called Vtrecht. In
this place a Church was built, and the most Reverend Bishop preaching the Word
of Faith far and wide, and recovering much people from their Pagan Errors,
erected in those Regions many Churches and some Monasteries. For not long after
the said Venerable Archbishop ordained several other Bishops out of the
number of his Brethren the prime Missioners who attended him at his first
coming, of which some are falln asleep in our Lord: but Willebrord himself,
surnamed Clement, is yet alive ( that is, in the seven hundred and one and
thirtieth year of Grace, in which Saint Beda ended his History:) A Prelat he is
Venerable for his old age, for this is the thirty sixth year since he was
Bishop: and after manifold labors and dangers sustained in this Christian
Warfare, he with his whole mind and a longing desire expects a heavenly
retribution.



5. To this Narration of Saint Beda touching the Ordination of Saint
Willebrord, Albinus Flaccus, who has compiled the Gests of this Holy Prelat,
adds one particular very memorable, to wit, that it was not performed without
a Prophecy and Revelation from heaven preceding it: for thus he writes: On the
fourth day before Saint Willebrords arrival at Rome the Holy Pope Sergius was
in sleep admonished by an Angel to receive him with great honor, Albin.
Place. in Act. (...) Willibrord.
as being a man appointed by God to enlighten many souls, who came thither to
receive the supreme honor of Preist-hood, and therefore that he should deny
him in none of his requests. The Pope thus admonished entertaind him with
wonderful honor and joy, and by conversation with him observing in him great
Fervor, devotion of Religion, and plenitude of wisdom, having appointed a
convenient day, and assembled great numbers of Prelates to ioyn with him in the
Ordination, to which there was a wonderful concourse of people, he publicly
ordained him Archbishop with great solemnity, after an Apostolic manner, in
the Church of S. Peter Prince of the Apostles, and when he was ordained, he
imposed on him the name of Clement. Moreover he vested him with his own
Pontifical Robes, adding likewise the Pall, an ensign of the plenitude of
Archiepiscopall dignity. Whatsoever he desired, whether Sacred Relics of
Saints, or Ecclesiastical ornaments, he with all chearfullnes bestowed upon
him, and having conferred on him his Apostolical Benediction, with wholesome
precepts and admonitions, he sent him back to the Work of the Gospel.

A. D. 697.

XIII. CHAPTER


XIII. CHAP.
i.2. etc Saint Willebrord arrives at Vtrecht: Their preaching: A Synod
assembled there, etc^

A. D. 697.
1. SAint Willebrord, or Clement, having thus prosperously performed his journey
to Rome, arrived not at his Archiepiscopall See till the year following. When
the News of his approach thither was divulged, Marcellin. in Act. S. Swibert.
Saint Swibert (says his companion Marcellin) attended by his Disciples and
many other Christians made have as far as Embrica to meet him, where with much
honor and joy in our Lord they received him. And Saint Willebrord having been
informed that Saint Swibert had been consecrated Bishop, and that by his
preaching the County of Teisterband, with almost all Bat^a and a great part of
Lower Friseland had been converted to our Lord, he with great devotion gave
infinite thanks to God. Being thus met they returned together to Vtrecht, and
presently after upon the ruined foundation of the ancient Church of Saint
Thomas near the Castle, they erected a Church in which they placed Canonical
Priests who lived in Community, Which Church they dedicated to the honor of S.
Martin Bishop of Tours. There S. Willebrord Archbishop of the Frisons
established his Cathedral See, and together with S. Swibert and the rest of
the Brethren, with their own hands consecrated it with its primitive
benediction, having translated into it the Sacred Body of S. Cunera Virgin and
Martyr, being one of the companions of S. Vrsula.

2. In process of time when Radbode King of the Frisons was dead, free
permission was given to Christians to preach the Gospel every where through
Friseland. Wherefore the foresaid Holy Prelates with the Priests and other
Ecclesiastics passing through the coasts of Holland and Friseland instructed
the rude people in the Documents of the Gospel, teaching them to renounce
their profane Idolatry: they baptized the Cathecumens, they confirmed the
Neophyts, they dispensed Sacred Orders, and with great constancy and devotion
published the Gospel of Peace through all villages, ordaining Priests and
Deacons every where to assist them in the Ministry of Baptism, especially in
the great Town of Duerstat: where after two years preaching they brought the
whole people to embrace the Faith of Christ, and by the assistance of the
forementioned Noble man Gunther and his friends, they changed the Temples of
Idols into fifty two Christian Churches.

3. Neither did they content themselves with preaching the Word of life in
Friseland and Thuringia, or Hervingia, but as far as Denmark they brought to
the Orthodox Faith great multitudes, having purified them from their barbarous
and Idolatious customs. Thus these Holy Prelates and Preachers having with great
fervor published for the space of several years the Doctrine of Christ in
several Provinces, they returned with great joy to Vtrecht to their Brethren
and fellow-laboures, declaring to them how great things God had done by them.
And though the Holy Bishop S. Swibert was first advanced to Episcopal Dignity,
yet S. Willebrord in place and honor went before him, and is esteemed the
first Archbishop of Vtrecht, inasmuch as he was by Pope Sergius ordained
specially the Archbishop of the Frisons, and by the Apostolic See sent in
Mission to the same people.

4. Conformably hereto writes Albinus Flaccus, Albin. Flacc. in Act S.
Willebrord.
who likewise touching S. Willebrords preaching to the Danes adds this
relation: When the Holy Archbishop, says he, perceived that he could not with
any fruit or success endeavor the Conversion of Radbode King of the Frisons,
he turned his steps and course of preaching to the Savage Danes. At that time,
as the report is, there reigned a Prince called Ongend, a man of a disposition
more cruel then any wild beast, and whose heart was more impenetrable then a
rock. Yet this man by Gods operation treated with great honor this Preacher of
Truth. Who finding the said barbarous Prince obdurate in his perverse manners,
and wholly given up to Idolatry, so that he had no hopes at all to work any
good change in him: He took with him thirty young children of that country,
and returned with them to the Provinces subject to the French. But being
desirous to prevent the cunning malice of the Devil, he in the journey having
catechized the said children, washed them in the Font of life; for fear least
by some accident in so long a voyage by Sea, or the incursions o^ the barbarous
people through which he passed, he might endanger their eternal state.

5. Now this Devout Apostle pursuing his voyage came to a certain Island in the
confines of the Frisons and Danes, called by the inhabitants Fositesland, from
a certain profane Deity of theirs named Fosite, to whom many Temples were there
erected. This place was held by them in such wonderful veneration, that no man
durst presume to touch any beast feeding there, or any other thing consecrated
to the said Idol, nor so much as draw any water from a spring flowing there,
except in sign of veneration he observed an exact silence. Into this Island the
man of God being cast by tempest, was forced to stay there some days,
expecting a seasonable time to putt to Sea. But the Holy Bishop making small
account of the foolish superstition of that place, or of the feirce disposition
of King Radbode, who was wont to putt to a cruel death all those that violated
such ceremonies, he himself with the solemn invocation of the Blessed Trinity
baptized three men newly converted: and moreover gave order to his companions
to kill certain beasts feeding there, A. D. 696
for their nourishment. This the Pagans beholding verily believed that such a
sacrilege would be punished either with madness or some sudden death. But
perceiving no harm to come to them, in a great rage they went and told the King
what had been done by the Christians. Who being enflamed with excessive fury
against the Holy Bishop, seized upon him, and intending to revenge the injury
done to his false Gods, he according to the ancient custom of that Nation,
every day cast lotts three times upon him and his companions, and yet never did
that Lot which condemned to death, fall upon the Bishop or his Disciples:
only one Christian of the company was designed to death by the lot, and so
ended his life by Martyrdom. Now this custom of casting lotts in such cases is
verified to have been very ancient among the Germans by the testimony of Caesar
in his commentaries.

Id. ib.
6. The same Author moreover testifies, how after the return of Clement, or
Willebrord, a Synod was assembled at Vtrecht, by appointment whereof other
Missioners and Preachers were sent into the circumiacent Provinces. And by
occasion of the mentioning this ordinance of the Synod, he makes a collection
of the names and most memorable Gests of those devout Missioners which either
formerly, or in this present Synod, or afterward were sent to labor in our
Lords vineyard, saying, Then the foresaid Holy Prelates, together with the
excellent Priests and Preachers which came out of Brittany with them to
Vtrecht, observing that through Gods blessing much people was converted from
Infidelity to the Faith of Christ, they in the Synod assembled in this lately
sprung Church of Vtrecht, decreed that other zealous Preachers should after the
manner of the Apostles and Disciples of our Lord be sent through the confining
barbarous Nations to preach unto them the Faith of Christ. Now there were in
the said Primitive Church of Vtrecht at that time the foresaid Apostolical
Prelates, Canonical Priests and worthy Preachers, which, together with the two
Holy Brethren whose names were Ewald, following S. Swibert, constantly preached
Christ to the Gentiles. Afterward likewise were joined to them S. Winfrid a
Priest, who after he had lived thirteen years a Canon in the Church of Vtrecht,
was consecrated Archbishop of Mentz, and called by a new name, Boniface: from
whence returning after the death of S. Willebrord, he was ordained the Second
Archbishop of Vtrecht. And having spent sixteen years in preaching the Gospel
through Friseland, he, together with his associats, was crowned with Martyrdom.
In like manner S. Wir^ a Bishop of the Deiri (or rather of Iren, that is,
Ireland) and S. Plechelm Bishop of the Church by S. Beda called Candida casa:
Saint Orger a Deacon, with other glorious Priests and Preachers. A. D. 697.
But of these later Missioners we shall speak more largely in due place: for
they are mentioned in this place by Marcell^^us only occasionally.

7. Hereto he adds a Summary Narration of the various successes and ends of the
Prime Missionners, thus proceeding: S. Acca returning in England with S.
Swibert, was by S. Wilfrid consecrated Bishop of Hagulstad and after many years
spent in great purity and Holiness, there rested in our Lord. S. Wigbert, as
has been declared, was crowned with Martyrdom in Fosteland. Saint Will^bald
going into the Eastern part of France was made Bishop of Eystat: S. Winnibald
his Brother was ordained Abbot of Heyndelam: the Sister of these two Holy men
was the devout Virgin Walburgis. Lebvin after he was consecrated Bishop, was
crowned with Martyrdom near Gaunt. The two Brethren of the Name Ewald having
preached Christ in Nabia, and thence going up into Saxony, ended their lives
with a glorious Martyrdom. Saint Werenfrid a Priest and worthy Preacher was
sent toward Batua, and piously governed the new-converted flock of Christ in
E^st and Westerw^irt, and being both in his life and death illustrious through
many Miracles, at Westerw^irt happily rendered his Spirit to God on the Ides of
September, and was miraculously buried at Elst. S. Adelbert a Deacon, son of
Edilbald King of the Deiri, who was Son of S. Oswald King and Martyr, having
built a Church at Egmond in Holland, after the Conversion of many Pagans, and
glorious consummation of a most holy life, happily rested in Christ on the
seventh day before the Calends of July, and was buried in Egmond, where by his
intercession many Miracles are wrought to this day. He was an illustrious
Confessor, and first Archdeacon of the Church of Vtrecht. Thus writes
Marcellinus touching his Brethren and devout companions: and concerning himself
adds these words:

8. And I Marcellinus an unproffitable Priest, was sent by the foresaid Holy
Bishops to the Region beyond the River Isel, and at the present have the care
over Aldenseel, Trent, Tuvent, Coverdy and Daventry in which places through
Gods Providence and blessing I have by preaching gained to our Lord in a manner
all the people, having purged them from their Superstitious Idolatry. As for
Saint Willebrord he remained in his Diocese of Vtrecht, and with great fervor
preached the Gospel of Christ to all the people there about. But the rest were
dispersed here and there to preach the Word of God, and after the Conversion of
a world of Pagans happily rested in our Lord.

XIV. CHA.
XIV. CHAP.
1.2.3. Laws of King Withred.

4. Ostritha Queen of the Mercians murdered.

1. THE same year in Brittany there was assembled a Synod also by Withred King
of Kent and Brithwald Archbishop of Canterbury at Berghansted, where many
wholesome Laws and Constitutions, called The Judgments of King Withred, were
enacted for the regulating both the Church and Civil state of that Kingdom.

2. Of which Laws the first was, That public Prayers should be made for the
King. Spelm. Conc. Brita^s.
And the following regard several Heads, as the preserving the Peace of the
State and Church: The punishment of Adultery in several conditions of men:
Against irregular Tonsure: Forbidding working or traveling on our Lords day
and the even before it: Against offering any thing to the Devil: and giving
flesh to ones servant on a Fast Day: Concerning the several ways by which
several conditions of men were to purge themselves, the King and Bishops by a
simple affirmation without Oaths: Priests and Abbots in this Form, I speak the
truth in Christ, I lie not; So likewise Deacons; Inferior Clerks with four
compurgators, laying one hand on the Altar, and the other extended to the Oath;
a stranger without compurgators, laying his hand on the Altar; So likewise a
Thane (or Noble man) of the King; a simple countryman with four compurgators,
and bowing down his head toward the Altar: That if any one depending on the
Bishop be accused, the hearing of the cause belongs to Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, etc. That no compensation shall be made by one who kills a
Theife, etc. And that if a stranger shall privily wander through the country,
and neither cry aloud, nor sound with his horn, he is to be taken for a theif,
and either to be killed or banished.

3. These Judgments of King Withred are extant among the Collection of British
Councills compiled by Sir Henry Spelman* and translated by him into Latin out
of Ancient Saxon Manuscript, called The Text of Rochester (Textus Roffensis:)
to whom the Reader is referred.

Hunting. l. 4.
4. About this time a barbarous Act was committed by the Mercians against their
Queen Ostritha (or Ostgida. Bed. in Epit.
) Sixteen years before this she had been given by her Brother Egfrid King of
the Northumbers a wife to Ethelred King of the Mercians, as it were in
compensation for the death of his Brother Elwin, and to establish a peace
between the two Kingdoms. And this year says Huntingdon, the Mercians, called
South-humbers, committed a base Villainy: for they inhumanly murdered Ostrida
their Queen, A. D. 698
Wife to King Edelred and Sister to King Egfrid. S. Beda particularly charges
the Nobility of those Mercians with that foul crime, namely the inhabitants of
Lincoln, or of Nottingham shire. What was the Motive or provocation to this
inhuman act, does not appear in History.

XV. CHAP. XV. CHA.

1.2. Edfrid succeeds to Eadbert in the Sea of Lindesfarn.

3.4. etc. Death of Adamannus the Holy Abbot of Hy: he could not persuade his
Monks to the Catholic Observance of Easter.

6. The Northumbers defeated by the Picts.

1. THE year of Grace six hundred ninety eight was the eleaventh after the
death of S. Cuthbert: A. D. 698.
in which the Monks, in whose Church his sacred Body reposed, having hitherto
privately performed veneration to his memory, seeing the frequent Miracles
wrought at his Sepulcher, thought fit to translate his Relics to some more
honorable place, and expecting to have found nothing but dry bones, they saw
his Body as entire, yea and his garments as fresh, as when they were first laid
in the ground Which being certified to his Successor Saint Eadbert, he caused
New Vestments to be putt upon him, and the Body to be raised above the
pavement: pronouncing withal happiness to any to whom God would grant the
privilege to be laid by him. Which Privilege himself obtained this same year:
for rendering his devout soul to our Lord on the day before the Nones of May,
his Body was enterred under the Body of S. Cuthbert, says Bishop Godwin: And
his memory is celebrated not only in the English, but Roman Martyrologe also on
the sameday, Martyr. Rom 6. Maij.
with this Elogy, In England the Commemoration of S. Eadbert Bishop of
Lindesfarn, eminent for his learning and piety.

2. His Successor in the same See of Lindesfarn was Edfrid, a man, says the
same Bishop Godwin, who from his childhood had been brought up in good letters,
and in that age was highly esteemed for his eminent learning. This is that
Edfrid at whose request S. Beda extolled the virtues and miracles of his
Predecessor S. Cuthbert both in prose and verse, as appears by his Epistle
prefixed to his Book.

3. About the same time dyed S. Adamannus the devout Abbot of Hy, commemorated
in our Martyrologe on the second of September. Marty Ang. 2. September.
To him is attributed the conversion o^ most of the Irish and many Britains to
the true observation of the Solemnity of Easter according to the Catholic
manner, though he could not reduce the obstinate minds of his own Monks. A. D.
699.
His zealous endeavors herein are thus expressed by S. Beda: 4. At that time
the greatest part of the Scotts in Ireland, Bed. l. 5. c. 16.
and not a few Britains in Brittany by our Lords blessing conformed themselves
to the right Ecclesiastical time of celebrating the Paschal. Solemnity. For
Adamannus a Priest and Abbot over the Monks lived in the Isle of Hy, having
been sent in Embassage from his Nation to Alfrid King of the Northumbers, and
staying a good space of time in his Province, carefully observed the Canonical
Rites of the English Church, and moreover was seriously admonished by certain
learned men that he with a few Monks hid in the utmost corner of the world
should not presume to live in a practice directly contrary to the custom of the
whole Church in the Paschall Observance and other Ecclesiastical Decrees: By
which admonitions his judgment became quite changed, insomuch as he willingly
preferred the Observances which he had seen and heard in the Churches of the
English, before the customs of his own country. For he was a good man and
wise, and moreover eminently skillfull in the Scriptures.

5. When he was returned home, he employed his utmost care to induce his Monks
in Hy and all the rest depending on them, to return into the path of Truth,
which he had lately found and with his whole heart approved. But all his
endeavors through their obstinacy proved vain. Whereupon leaving them, he
sailed into Ireland: where by preaching and modest exhortations he persuaded in
a manner all the Monks who were not subject to the Dominion of the Monastery of
Hy to quitt their Error, and return to Catholic Unity in observing the
legitimat time of Easter, which he taught them. Thus having celebrated in
Ireland one Canonical Solemnity of Easter, he returned to his Island: And
again earnestly preached the true Observance to his own Monks, yet could by no
means persuade them to conformity. Now it happened that before the years Circle
was finished, he was taken out of this world: Divine Providence so mercifully
disposing that this Holy man, who was an earnest lover of Unity and Peace
should be taken from hence to eternal Happiness before the next ^as^hall time
was come, least he should be compelled to enter into a more sharp debate and
discord with those who would not be persuaded to follow him in the way of Truth.



6, The same year the Northumbers received a great defeat from the Picts: Math.
West. Beda in Epitome.
for as Matthew of Westminster relates, Brithric a Count of the Northumbers
being desirous to avenge the death of his Master King Egfrid, invaded in a
hostile manner the land of the Picts: but as his Lord before had done, he
likewise felt the curses of the Irish, for he also was slain by the Pictish
people. Notwithstanding as shall be showed, ten years after this the Northumbers
had a sufficient revenge upon them.

XVI. CHAP. XVI. CHAPTER

1.2. etc. The Picts reduced to the Catholic observance of Easter, upon
occasion of an Epistle written to their King Naitan by the Holy Abbot Ceolfrid.

1. WHAT S. Adamannus could not effect among his Scottish obstinat Monks and
Islanders of Hy, A. D. 699.
to take away their Errou^ about the Paschall Solemnity, was the next year
brought to pass among the Picts by their King Naitan,, exhorted thereto and
instructed by the holy English-Saxon Abbot Ceolfrid. The order and manner of
this memorable change S. Beda thus describes: 2. At that time, Bid. l. 5. c. 22.
says he Naitan King of the Picts inhabiting the Northern coasts of Brittany
by frequent meditation on Ecclesiastical Writings became rectified in his
judgment, and renounced the error which formerly himself and his whole nation
had embraced and persisted in, reducin^ all his Subjects to the Catholic
observance of the solemnity of our Lords Resurrection. Now to effe^^ this more
easily and with greater authority, b^ sought for help and advice from the
English Nation, whose Religion he knew was instituted according to the pattern
of the Holy Roman and Apostolic Church.

3. He sent therefore Messengers to the Venerable man Ceolfrid Abbot of the
Monastery of the Blessed Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul seated in a place called
Girwum at the mouth of the River Wire and near the River Tine, in the
Government of which Monastery he succeeded the Holy Abbot S. Benedict Biscop:
And by those Messengers the said King Naitan requested him to send in Writing
instructions to him by which he might be enabled more efficaciously to confute
such as presumed to observe the Paschall Solemnity in an undue time: He desired
likewise to be informed of the true and ^anonicall manner of Ecclesiastical
Tonsure. Moreover he entreated him to send him Masons and Architects to build a
Church in his country of stone, after the Roman manner: promising that he
would dedicate it to the honor of S. Peter Prince of the Apostles; and
likewise that both himself and all his subjects should in all things imitate
the manners and Discipline of the Holy Roman and Apostolic See, as far as they,
who lived at so great a distance from thence, and whose language was so
different, could be informed.



4. The most Reverend Abbot Ceolfrid very willingly complying with desires and
requests so full of Religion and Piety, sent him such Architects as he
demanded, and withal wrote an Epistle, containing an exact information in all
the points proposed to him by the King. Which Epistle by reason of the
prolixity of it, it will not be expedient to transcribe: the curious Reader may
have recourse to Saint Beda's History for it, who no doubt, as may appear by
the style, was either the inditer of it, or at least had a great influence in
the framing it: For at this time he was a Monk living under the government of
Ceolfrid, and the ^ame of his learning was so far spread, that the year next
following Pope Sergius by letters to the said Abbot invited Saint Beda to Rome,
whither he had gone, but that news of the said Popes death prevented his voyage.

Id. ibid.
5. The sense of the said Epistle is summarily this: In the first place as
touching the Paschal Solemnity, common both to Jews and Christians, we are to
observe how the Jewish Synagogue celebrated it in shadow and figure, and next
how the Christian Church, in truth and reality.

6 God commanded the Jews to begin their Ecclesiastical year in the Spring,
and that the third week of the first Month beginning from the Second Vespers of
the fourteenth day to the one and twentieth day at evening, should be entirely
consecrated to him as a most solemn feast to be spent only in his Service, in
commemoration of a twofold deliverance, one from the destroying Angel which
killed all the first born in every family of the Egyptians, and the other from
their slavery under the Egyptians. The former deliverance they celebrated by
the Sacrifice of a Lamb, whose blood having been sprinkled on the upper posts
of their doors was a mark for the destroying Angel to pass over them. And the
Second deliverance, by putting away out of their houses all leaven, and for the
space of seven days together using unleavened bread only: Of which seven
days the first and the seventh were to be esteemed most holy and solemn.
This deliverance was effected on the fifteenth day of the Moon, and was thus
celebrated because they were urged to go out of Egyt in such have, that they
were forced to take their dough before it was leavend. Thus did the Jews
observe their Paschall Solemnity.

7. But when Christ our true Passover was immolated, and by his Resurrection
had consecrated for ever the first day of the Week, therefore called our Lords
day, Apostolic Tradition ordained that our Paschall solemnity should always
begin on our Lords day, yet so that the said day should be inserted within the
space of the Jewish solemnity, that is, on some day in the third week beginning
at the fifteenth and ending on the one and twentieth day. The first Month
therefore being come, and the even of the fourteenth day likewise being come,
then must moreover be expected the Lords day, which of necessity must fall
within the third week, that is, on one of the seven solemn days celebrated by
the Jews, beginning at the fifteenth and ending at the one and twentieth. This
is the order of the Catholic Observance, prescribed anciently by the Church of
Alexandria.

8. From which order several sorts of Christians have swerved after several
manners. For. 1. Some had no regard at all to Sunday or the Lords day, but
celebrated the Paschall solemnity exactly on the very day that the Jews did,
whether it were Sunday or not: These were the Quarto-decimani. 2. Again others
anticipated the due time, for in case that Sunday fell on the fourteenth day,
they then celebrated our Lords Resurrection, beginning the feast on the even of
the thirteenth day, which is no part of the third week, nor at all prescribed
by the Jewish Law. This was the Error of the Scotts and ancient Britains, who
thought that the seven days of the Moon were to be reckoned from the
fourteenth to the twentieth. 3. Lastly some there were who did transcend the
due time, accounting from the sixteenth to the two and twentieth, and in case
the Lords day fell on the two and twentieth, they then kept, the Christian
Paschall Feast, not in the third week of the Moon, but in the beginning of the
fourth, contrary to the prescriptions of the Law: This was anciently a mistake
of the Latins, who afterward corrected themselves, and conformed to the
Alexandrins.

9. Now it was by the Vernall Equinox that Catholics found out what Month
according to the Computation of the Moon was to be esteemed the first Month of
the year: Which Vernall Equinox according to the calculation of the holy
Bishops in the Council of Nicea was to be the fixed on the twelfth-day before
the Calends of April, that is, the one and twentieth of March. So that
whatsoever Moon was full before the Equinox, it belonged to the last Month of
the precedent year, and pertaind not to the Paschall solemnity. But if it was
full, that is, if the fourteenth or fi^teenth day of it fell either in the
Vernall Equinox or after it; the first Month was to be reckoned from the first
day of its New Mood, and on the first Sunday then following, the Feast of our
Lords Resurrection is to be celebrated:

10. The Christian Paschall solemnity depending on the right placing of the
first full Moon there were several Cycles instituted, as the most ancient
Cycle of Nineteen years, which was enlarged by Saint Cyrill into a Cycle of
ninety-fiue years, containing five of the former Cycles, and in these days in
Brittany many had extended it to five hundred thirty two years: The use of
which Cycles were to show, that when they were expired, the Full Moons returned
again to the same order, as formerly. This is the substance of what the Holy
Abbot Ceolfrid wrote concerning the Paschall Solemnity.

11. In the next place touching Ecclesiastical Tons^re, of which there were
several manners and fashions, though he acknowledged that a difference in
Tonsure could not harm such as have true Faith in God and charity to their
Neighbor: yet that among all the sorts, that was most to be approved which
Saint Peter used, and which represented the Crown of Thorns which our Lord bore
at his Passion: As on the other side that was most to be detested, which, they
say, Simon Magus wore, which was so made that if a man looked him that wore it
in the face, it would have some appearance of a Crown, but behind was so
curtaild, that it had no such show at all. How ever he did not deny, but that
those who out of custom used even this kind of Crown and Tonsure might be good
men, such was the Holy Abbot and Priest of the Columbin Monks of Hy, Adamannus,
who was lately sent on a message to King Alfrid, and for this reproved by
Ceolfrid himself and whose only excuse was, That though he wore the Tonsure of
Simon Magus, yet he detested his Simoniacall perfidiousnes, and desired to
follow the example of S. Peter whom in the secret of his heart he sincerely
venerated. To which Ceolfrid replied: That it was very fitting, as he in his
heart reverenced S. Peter and abhorred Simon Magus, so outwardly to imitate the
habit of S. Peter, and reject that of Simon Magus. Which Discourse so wrought
upon the good Abbot Adamannus, that no doubt he would have endeavored to
correct this custom, as well as he did the Scottish Error about the Observance
of Easter, if it had been in his power.

12. To this effect was the said Epistle, which concluded with a serious
exhortation to King Naitan to cause his whole Kingdom to observe such things as
were accordant to Catholic Unity and practiced by the Apostolic Church of
Christ, that so S. Peter Prince of the Apostles after the end of his Temporal
Kingdom, might open him an entrance into a Heavenly.

Id. ib.
13. This Epistle being sent, and publicly read in the Kings presence attended
by an Assembly of prudent and learned men, and also translated into the Pictish
language for the instruction of the ignorant, it is reported that the King
rising from the midst of his Nobles, kneeled down, and gave humble thanks to
Almighty God for the present received from the English Nation, adding these
words: Truly I was a good while ago satisfied that this was the right way of
Paschall Observance, but this Epistle has so fully cleared the matter, that
what I formerly understood in these matters, is not considerable. Therefore I
openly here profess, and I desire you to be witnesses hereof, that hence
forward my resolution is that this time of the Paschall Solemnity shall
perpetually be observed in my kingdom: And moreover I command all
Ecclesiastical persons my Subjects to receive this manner of Tonsure, which,
as you have heard, is so rationally grounded.

14. This the King professed and decreed: and without delay by his Kingly
authority putt it in execution. For public order was given that the Paschall
Cycles of nineteen years should be transcribed, learnt and observed through all
the Provinces of the Picts, and that the formerly used erroneous Cycles of
eighty four years should be obliterated: and the whole Nation greatly rejoiced,
seeing themselves by this New Reformation reduced under the Discipline and
protection of S. Peter Prince of the Apostles.

XVII. CHAP. XVII. CHAPTER

1.2. etc. Of S. Edilwald successor to Saint Cuthbert in his Hermitage of
Earn-Island.

5.6. etc. The Gests of Saint Sexburga Queen, and Abbess* and of her holy
Daughters Saint Eartongatha and Saint Ermenilda.

1. THE same year dyed S. Edilwald, Martyrolog. Ang. 23. (...)
and is commemorated in our Martyrologe on the three and twentieth of March. He
was brought up a Monk in the Monastery of Rippon, Bed. l. 5 c. 1.
and afterward says S. Beda, he succeeded the Holy man of God S. Cuthbert in
the exercise of a Solitary life in the Isle of Farne, having many years before
by worthy and pious actions adorned the degree of Preist-hood which he received
in the Monastery called Inripum (Rippon.) For a proof of his Merits and Holiness
I will content my self with relating one Miracle, which was told me by a
Religious Monk, who was one of the persons for whose sake it was wrought. His
name was Godfrid, a venerable servant of Christ and a Priest, and was afterward
Abbot of the Monastery and Church of Lindesfarn, in which he had had his
education.

2. On a certain time, said he, I came with two of my Brethren to the Isle of
Farne, out of a desire to enjoy the conversation of the Reverend Father
Edilwald. Afterward having been much refreshed with his pious discourse, and
having asked his Benediction, as we were sailing home wards, on a sudden in the
midway our former calm was interrupted, and so furious a storm came upon us,
that neither ^ares nor sails could help us at all, but we expected every
moment to be swallowd up by the waves. Having a good while thus in vain stroven
against the wind and Sea, we at last looked back upon the Isle from whence we
were come, to see if by any means we might return thither. But we found that
the tempest equally threatened us on all sides, so that we were in utter despair
of escaping.

3. As we were earnestly looking toward the Isle of Farne, we perceived the
most pious Father Edilwald, who was come out of his solitary retirement to see
what became of us. For having heard the noise of the winds and roaring of the
Sea he was for that purpose come abroad: And having perceived the great pains
we took, and the extremity of our danger he fell on his knees, earnestly
praying to God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ for our safety and escape.
He had no sooner ended his Prayer, but immediately the swelling waves grew
smooth, the raging tempest ceased, and the winds favoring our voyage carried us
prosperously and evenly to land. Where being arrived we had no sooner drawn up
the boat to dry ground, but presently the same Tempest, which for awhile had
for our sakes been interrupted, returned with its former violence, and the
whole day after never ceased to rage: by which we evidently saw that the short
pause intervening had been procured by the Holy man of Gods prayer made for our
escape.

4. The same Holy man remained in the Isle of Farne the space of twelve years,
and there ended his Life: But he was buried in the Isle of Lindesfarn, near the
Bodies of the glorious Bishops Saint Cuthbert and Saint Eadbert, in the Church
of the Apostle Saint Peter. These things happened in the days of King Alfrid, who
after his Brother Egfrid governed the Nation of the Northumbers eighteen years.

5. In our Martyrologe likewise we read a commemoration of the Deposition of
Saint Sexburga assigned to this year. She was daughter of Anna the pious King
of the East Saxons. From her infancy she, after the example of her other
Sisters, was disposed to virtue and piety. And being come to a more ripe age,
though her earnest desire was to consecrate her Virginity to God, yet by the
importunat request of Erc^mbert King of Kent, she was by her Parents given him
to wife. And Almighty God, who showed himself admirable in the purity of her
Virgin Sister Saint Ediltrudis, was no less glorified another way in the piety
of Saint Sexburga. The Province of Kent, of which she became Queen, stood in
need of one who might be a shining light and pattern to that Sex. For King
Ercombert, though hey^ of his Pred^cessours Faith and piety, yet wanted the
zeal and courage to extirpate Idolatry out of his Kingdom, in which as yet no
Law had interdicted the public worship of Idols. This defect was supplied by
his virtuous Queen, whose assiduous exhortations had that power upon him, that
in a short time the whole nation by their united industry conspired in the
worship of the One true God.

6. The Kingdom being purged from this deadly pollution, became disposed for
the reception of greater degrees of Piety. Hence a Law was promulgated for the
due observatio^ of Lent, which though from the beginning commanded by
Ecclesiastical Constitutions, yet for a due Observation of it stood in need of
the Civil authority, and temporal penalties. This Act of zeal our Annals
ascribe principally to this virtuous Queen Sexburga. By whose suggestion
likewise Ornaments were provided for Altars and Churches, and several
Monasteries erected by the Kings munificence.

7. One special place the Queen her self made choice of, which she endowed,
enriched and dedicated to be a habitation of Religious Virgins. It was seated
in that part of Kent where the River Medway disburdening it self into the Sea,
makes an Island fruitful in pastures, and which there, fore from the abundance
of Sheep feeding there is called the Isle of Shepey. To this place her desire
was to confine herself: but God thought (...) to delay the execution of her
desires, that she might with no less merit, and far more labor in her high
condition afford examples of virtue and piety to all her Subjects. Which she
performed in a most admirable manner, being as the Author of her Life
describes her, ^p. Capgrav. in S. Sexburga.
a most reverenced Mistress to the Great ones, and a kind Patroness to the
poor: The former observed her as a Princess, and the l^tter as a Mother: Those
venerated her Majesty, these admired her humility: To the Nobles she was
awful, and to meaner persons she seemed equal: To all she was amiable, and to
all venerable, rarely seen in throngs, but frequent in Churches.

8. Four and twenty years she reigned with her husband King Ercombert: but he
dying in the year of Grace six hundred sixty four, and thereby she being left
free to her self, would be a Queen no longer: but after she had seen the
Commonweal settled, says Harpsfeild, Harpsf. saec. 7. c. 24.
like a bird which had been a long time enclosed in a Cage, she gladly escaped
out of it, and devesting her self of all her Royal Ornaments and marks of
worldly pomp and pride, she betook her self to the Society of Sacred Virgins in
the City of Ely, governed then by her Sister the most glorious Virgin
Ediltr^dis, or Ethelreda. Fifteen years she lived under her discipline, being
therefore more assiduous in devotion, and more rigorous in mortifications,
because she came later then the rest to that School of Piety.

9. In the end she buried her Blessed Sister, and by the Unanimous votes of her
companions the Religious Virgins, was chosen Abbess in her place, as has been
already declared in the Gests of the year of Grace six hundred seaventy nine.
In which charge, being to afford documents and examples of all virtues to
others, she was more vigilant over herself, more circumspect in her actions and
more fervent in her prayers to God, as being to give an account to him for so
many souls besides her own.

10. Having spent sixteen years more with all Perfection in this Office, at
last being mindful of her dear Sister, the constant opinion of whose Sanctity
had taken deep root in all minds* she thought fit to take up her ashes, and
translate them to a more honorable place. But how instead of empty ashes she
found her Sisters body as entire, as fresh and sweet as if she had rested in
sleep, we have already declared. To conclude after she had with admirable
constancy and fervor performed the course appointed her by God, she was this
year called to receive a heavenly crown: so that the day before the Nones of
July she followed her Sister to heaven leaving a command that her Body should
be enterred together with her Sisters.

11. From so holy a root there sprung two most fragrant and beautiful
flowers, her daughters, S. Eartongatha, and S. Erminilda. Of the former we have
treated already. As for S. Erminilda she was, as has been said, married to
Wulfere King of the Mercians, whose mind she inclined to all piety. After her
Husbands death, she with her daughter S. Werburga, as her Mother formerly had
done, consecrated her self to our Lord in the same Monastery of Ely, where
entering into the Royal path of Humility, she behaved her self more submissly
then the rest, as her desire was more earnest to approach nearer to our Lord.
This was so grateful to all, that her Mother Sexburga being dead, she by the
unanimous suffrages of her Religious Sisters was elected to succeed in her
office of Abbess of that famous Monastery.

Martyr. Aug. 13. Feb.
12. The year of S. Erminilda's death is not recorded. But her Deposition is
commemorated in our Martyrologe on the Ides of February:

13. The sum of what concerns these three Holy Princesses and Religious
Abbesses is thus briefly set down by William of Malmsbury, The most happy Lady
Edildrida, Malmsb. de Pont. l. 4.
says he, first founded the Monastery of Religious Virgins at Ely. After her
her Sister Sexburga, who had been wife of Ercombert King of Kent, and Mother of
the most Holy Virgin Ercongetta, lived to her old age in the same place under
the Religious profession and Title of Abbess. And there succeeded her in the
government of the same Abbey her other Daughter Erminilda, who had been wife of
Wulfere King of the Mercians, and Mother of the holy Virgin Wereburga. These
three in continued successions were Abbesses there.

14. This only is to be added in this place, That this holy Queen and Abbess
Sexburga is different from another Queen of the same name, wife to Kenwalch
King of the West Saxons, who after his death in the year of Grace six hundred
seaventy four governed the same Kingdom* But either willingly, or forced
thereto by a faction of the Nobility which refused to be ruled by a woman,
retired to a quiet Religious life, as has before been declared.

XVIII. CHAP. A. D. 700.

XVIII. C.



1. The death of Saint Trumwin Bishop of the Picts.

2. Also of S. Baru^ a Hermit.

3. etc. And of S. Hildelida Abbess.

1. IN the year of Grace seven hundred is recorded the death of S. Trumwin B.
of the Picts: A. D. 700
who in the revolt of that Nation from the Northumbers was driven from thence
and retired to the Monastery of Religious Virgins at Streneshalck, where he
lived fifteen years with some few companions in Monastical rigor, both to the
good of his own soul, and the benefit of many other, and was with due honor
buried there in the Church of S. Peter. Many centuries of years after, his
Sacred Body was found and translated to a more honorable place, together with
the Bodies of several other Saints reposing there Concerning which William of
Malmsbury thus writes, Malmsb. de Pont. l. 3.
At Streneshalck, now called Whitby, in the Qu^re of the Church belonging t^
Religious Virgins, which is famous for the Monuments of Holy Bishops and
glorious Kings, the industry of certain devout men has, as it were, restored
to life the slumbring ashes of several persons: For not long since there were
found and translated to a more eminent place the Bodies of many Saints,
particularly of S. Trumwin Bishop of the Picts, Martyr. Aug 10. Feb.
etc. His name is commemorated among Saints in our Martyrologe on the tenth of
February.

2. The same year likewise is assigned to the death of S. Baruck a Hermit,
whose me^mory is celebrated in the Province of the Silures and region of
Glamorgan. He lies buried in the Isle of Barry, which took its name from him:
Concerning which we read this testimony in Camden, Camd. in ^^lar.
The most outward Isle there is called Barry, from Baruck a Holy man there
buried: Who as he gave his Name to the Island, so did the Island give a Surname
to the Lords of it: For the Noble family of the Viscounts of Barry in Ireland
received their original from thence. In our Martyrologe this Holy Heremit
Baruck is said to have sprung from the Noble Blood of the Britains, and that
entering into a solitary strict course of life, he at this time attained to a
life immortal.

3. We will conclude this year, which concludes the seventh Century of our
History, with celebrating the Memory of S. Hildelida, who in the Monastery of
Berking built by S. Erconwald for his Sister Edilburga, Bed. l. 4. c. 10
as Saint Beda testifies, succeeded her in the Office of Abbess, and for the
space of twenty four years governed the same in a constant observance of
Regular Discipline, withal carefully providing all things necessary for the
subsistence of the Religious Virgins. She by reason of the streitnes of the
place in which the Monastery was built, A. D. 701
thought fit to take up the Bodies of several Holy persons of both Sexes
there buried, and to translate them all to one place in the Church dedicated to
our Blessed Lady: At which time Almighty God gave testimony to their Sanctity
by a glorious light from heaven shining on them, by a wonderful delightful
odor, and many other miraculous signs, as may be read in the Book relating the
same, out of which we have excerpted these particulars.

Ap. Capgrav in Hildelida.
4. The Author of her Life in Capgrave affirms that this Holy Abbess S.
Hildelida was replenished with Divine Charity, insomuch as both by instructions
and actions she became a pattern and Teacher of all virtues in watchings,
abstinence, benignity, clemency, and every other virtue becoming her
profession: She was careful that her Religious Subjects should want nothing
necessary for their souls or bodies, so showing herself unblameable both
before God and men.

Mart. Angl. 22. December.
5. And as in her life she was a singular Example of Piety to others, so after
her Death, which is consigned to the two and twentieth of December in this
year, She deserved veneration and praise from all posterity: For thus testifies
the same Author, The Blessed Virgin Hildelitha is glorified by many glorious
Saints: Ibid.
For her Memory is celebrated not only by S. Dunstan, S. Ethelwold and S.
Elphegus, but her Sanctity is also renouned by many Ancient Saints before them.
To her did Saint Aldelm as yet an Abbot dedicate his Book inscribed Of
Virginity, in the preface of which he highly exalts her virtues and piety.

XIX. CHAPTER
XIX. CHAP.
1.2. etc. Of Offa the pious King of the East Saxons.

1. IN the year following Offa the pious King of the East Saxons began his
Reign, eight years before this King Sebb^ had relinquished the Court for a
solitary retirement, A. D. 701.
and exchanged his Royal Purple into an humble course Religious Habit. To whom
succeeded in that Kingdom his Sons Sighard and Seofrid jointly reigning: and as
they were associated in receiving the Crown; so were they likewise in quitting
it in the beginning of this Century: Whether it was by death, or by a voluntary
Secession after their Fathers example, is uncertain. But certain it is that in
this year Offa by full right succeeded in the Kingdom: and within a few years
by an hereditary piety grew weary of worldly pomps; as shall be showed. He was
the Son of Sigher, who a good while before this administered the Kingdom
together with King Sebbe.

3. King Offa at his coming to the Crown was a youth of a beautiful aspect,
Malmsb. de Pont. l. 4.
and cheerful disposition; he was of a floride age, and tenderly beloved by
his Subjects, says William of Malmsbuay. Yet in this scarce ripe age he had a
soul mature for piety* A. D. 702
insomuch as he entered into an inward debate whether he should expose himself
to the anxiety of wordly cares and tempests wherewith, being exalted so high,
he was in danger to be disquitted; if not overthrown, and to the entising
snares of sensual pleasures from which a Kingly state without almost a
miraculous Grace can seldone be secure; or after his Predecessors example, at
once break through all temporal impediments, and give himself wholly to God in
expectation of a far more glorious and eternal Kingdom.

4. Such a debate and irresolution argued in so tender an age a solid piety:
and though his inward strength was not sufficient then to conquer the world so
far as to forsake it; yet it was not the love of sensual contentments,
ambition or secular Pride which induced him not to reject a Crown, but a Hope
that virtue and piety even with a Crown would be acceptable to God and rewarded
by him. He might likewise esteem it an argument of a more courageous mind in
the midst of pleasures to preserve himself from the infection of them, then
entirely to exclude them.

5. Being thus resolved, his next care was to find an associate in his Throne:
for which purpose he demanded for his Wife Kineswida the daughter of Penda
formerly King of the Mercians, and sister to the present King Ethelred and the
Holy Abbess Kineburga. King Ethelred without demanding his Sisters consent,
readily promised her: But how she, having in resolution consecrated her
Virginity to God, resisted, and by the power of her Prayers obtained the
execution of her pious and chaste resolution, has been already declared. And
how her Example induced King Offa courageously to imitate her shall in due
place be showed.

XX. CHAP. XX. CHA.

1.2. etc. S. Wilfrid called before an English Synod: and injuriously treated.

1. IN the year of Grace seven hundred and two Pope Sergius dying, A. D. 702.
there succeeded him in the Apostolic Chair John the sixth of that name,
elected the year before. He was by Nation a Grecian: which was a proof of the
consent of the Eastern and Western Churches in the same Faith, since without
any distinction of Nations or partiality the Supreme Bishop of Gods Church was
thus chosen.

2. Under this Pope John the cause of Saint Wilfrid was again ventilated, and
at last determind. He had lived a banished man from his See of York now eleaven
years: and though Pope Sergius had decreed his restitution, yet Alfrid King of
the Northumbers and Brithwald Archbishop of Canterbury by delays and excuses
suspended the execution of the Popes commands. But now pretending a show of
piety, they assembled a Synod, to which they summond S. Wilfrid, and
endeavored with a fraudulent show of kindness to entangle him, whom they had
expelled by violence. S. Wilfrid being secure in his own innocence, and not
suspecting any deceit, presented himself to the Council. The proceedings of
which Council, and constant behavior of S. Wilfrid therein are thus described
by William of Malmsbury:

Malmsb de Pont. l 3.
[3. When Sexulf Bishop of Lichfeild in the Kingdom of the Mercians was dead,
says he, S. Wilfrid governed that Bishopric, being both tenderly loved and
cordially reverenced by all the inhabitants of that Province. In the mean time
Alfrid King of the Northumbers and Brithwald Successor to S. Theodore
Archbishop of Canterbury complotted many designs to his prejudice. At last it
was resolved by them both that a Synod should be assembled, and that under a
pretended desire of Peace S. Wilfrid should be called to it, and there either
by fair words induced to a compliance with their wills, or in case of his
resistance, oppressed by violence. The Holy Bishop unskillfull in guiles, and
who measured other men's minds by the sincerity and uprightnes of his own, went
to the Synod. But there he found far other usage then he expected. For at first
they set upon him with reproachful speeches, and false accusations and when
they had wearied him with those, at last they proposed to him this Question,
Whether he would obey the Decrees of the late Archbishop Theodore? He
perceiving their malignity, defeated their design with a subtle answer*
saying, That he would willingly obey all such Definitions of Theodore, as were
agreeable to the Holy Canons. Having answered thus, he in a long discourse
confidently and truly inveighed against them, for that they who for the space
of two and twenty years had despised the precepts of three Popes, Agathon,
Benedict and Sergius, did now make choice of such Decrees of the Archbishop
Theodore as had been made in a time of trouble and dissension: and when he had
said this, he was silent.

4. When the King had heard S. Wilfrid thus justifying the equity of his cause,
he was not able to endure it longer, but broke forth into a speech misbecoming
his Majesty: Id. ib.
insomuch as he said to the Archbishop, If such be your Will, most Reverend
Father, I will oppress him by violence. Id. ib.
But the Bishops there present would not consent to such injustice. Yea even
his enemies did not approve, that a Bishop of so high esteem and renown, and
one who out of a confidence in their justice was come to the Synod, should
suffer a manifest oppression. Besides, though they could have been content that
he should have been obliged to quitt his Bishopric yet they would not suffer
the Authority of the Apostolic See to be directly violated by the King. Id. ib.


5. Hereupon, says the same Author, the Bishops thought fit to proceed
another way. Therefore they began to set upon him with persuasions, that since
for his cause such frequent dissensions had happened in Gods Church, he would
willingly and of his own accord give up his Bishopric and possessions, and
confirm such a renunciation by Writing. They added, that this would highly
recommended his fame, and be a great accumulation to his glory, if he would
rather choose to end his days in peace as a private man, then for a Bishopric to
move storms of sedition either by himself or others in his behalf.

6. The Holy Bishop easily perceived how their design was to entangle him, and
therefore answered, them, That nothing could be more dishonorable and
infamous, then that a man should condemn himself with his own tongue. He then
putt them in mind, That he was the first man who having cast out the Scotts had
taught the Churches of the Northumbers the true Canonical way of observing
Easter: That he had brought among them the Ecclesiastical Song by way of
Antiphons; That he had commanded the Rule of the most Holy Patria^^ S. Benedict
to be observed by all the Monks of that Province: and for all these merits and
benefitts his only reward must be, that he an old man, and a Bishop of seaventy
years of age should be compelled to condemn himself by his own Writing. But he
would have them know, he would never be induced to do that which would bring to
himself shame, to those who were under him a calamity, and to all damage.
Therefore he once more appeald to the Sea Apostolic to which he challenged any
of his accusers to repair.]

7. When S. Wilfrid had thus appealed, the Synod was presently dissolved: for
the matter being referred to the Supreme Tribunal of the Church, the Bishops
could make no decrees about it. Neither would King Alfrid any longer interpose
his Regal and Civil authority in a cause depending between Ecclesiastical
persons. Every one therefore went to his own place. And Saint Wilfrid returned
to the Mercians, to prepare for his voyage once more in his old age to Rome.

A. D. 703.

XXI. CHAPTER


XXI. CHAP.
i. 2. etc. The death of S. Benedict Biscop: and summ^^ of his Gests.

1. ONE whole year was passed before S. Wilfrid arrived at Rome, at least
before he debated his cause with his adversaries sent thither by Archbishop
Brithwald: A. D. 703.
In which year S. Benedict Biscop Abbot and founder of two famous Monasteries
of Wiremouth and Girwy dedicated to the honor of the two Chief Apostles S.
Peter and S. Paul, dyed. Whole Gests have been already from S. Beda related,
containing his wonderful zeal for the regulating Monastical Discipline
according to the Institut of our Holy Patriark S. Benedict, his frequent and
unwearied travells to Rome for procuring Books, Vestments, Sacred Pictures and
other Ornaments of his Monasteries, his prudence in uniting and governing the
said Monasteries, and in choosing other Superiors to assist him being present,
and to govern in his absence, with all other virtues becoming one who professed
Perfection, and through his whole life made good that Profession.

2. Neither ought it to be accounted among the least benefits conferred by him
upon his Order, (...). de S. Be^^d. Biscop.
that he obtained from the Apostolic See a Brief of Privileges by which,
says Saint Beda, the liberty of the said Monasteries and Religious men living
there was secured from all incursions and invasions of externs, their Temporal
possessions defended, and all disturbance of peace prevented.

3. In consideration of these great obligations received from him, the
Congregation of English Benedictins lately restored, or rather continued by the Sea Apostolic in their ancient Liberties and Rights, have deservedly entitled
him their Patron: and particularly inasmuch as he so strictly united the two
forementiond Monasteries, that they not only professed the substance of the
same Benedictin Rule, but all the same circumstantiall observances, giving
thereby such a form of Union as was imitated through all other Provinces in
Europe, to the notable advancement of Piety and Uniformity in their holy
Discipline.

4. It is wonderful to consider how great and universal a benefitt accrewed
to all the Churches of Brittany by the zeal of this Holy Abbot: for as long as
those Regular Observances instituted, or renewed by him, continued, Heresy
could have no access into our Island: But those being dissolved, this our land
formerly watered with showers of Divine Grace from heaven, ^
and made a Paradise of God (as Bar^nius observes) was presently turned (in
falsuginem) into a brackish salt barrenness, by the malice of its inhabitants.

5. Not our English Martyrologe only, but the Roman also celebrates his Memory
on the day before the Ides of January, Martyrolog. Romans and Angl. 12. Ian.
as an alumnus of that Church, A. D. 704
where he first embraced a Monastical Profession, and had his former name of
Biscop changed into Benedict.

XXII. CHAP. XXII. CH

1.2. etc. S. Wilfrids cause again judged at Rome: to his advantage.

8. etc. His miraculous recovery from a sickness in France.

1. SAint Wilfrid arriving at Rome the year following, A. D. 704.
expected awhile his accusers: who being also come, they presented their state
of the present Controversy in Epistles sent by Archbishop Brithwald and other
Bishops of Brittany to Pope John: and S. Wilfrid declared his cause in a
Petition or Memorial which he humbly offered to the same Pope.

2. The sum of which Petition, extant in William of Malmsbury, Malmsb. de
Pont. l. 3.
is this: He first showed how he had been obliged to appeal to the Sea
Apostolic for justice against the Usurpers of his Bishopric, Monasteries and
other possessions contrary to the Decrees of the late Holy Popes Agathon and
Sergius: Which Decrees he humbly desired the present Pope to confirm: yet
withal professing that he was ready to suffer the severity of Ecclesiastical
Canons, in case he could not disprove any accusations laid against him.
Moreover he humbly requested that letters in his behalf might be written from
the Sea Apostolic to Ethelred King of the Mercians desiring him to protect in
peace all the Monasteries in his Kingdom: and moreover to Alfrid King of the
Northumbers, requiring a restitution of all that belonged to him: Or in case
that he might not be suffered to enjoy his Bishopric of York, he besought the
Pope to take care that a fitting person might be ordained there. But as for the
two Monasterses founded by him at Rippon (Ripis Hagulstaniae) in that Province,
he would by no means quitt his right to them. These things being granted, he
concluding protested all due obedience to such Decrees of Archbishop
Brithwald, as were not contrary to to those of the Popes Predecessors.

3. This Petition being read, his Accusers were commanded to show what they
could allege against it. Id. ibid.
The principal thing that they insisted on was this, That he was guilty of a
capital crime, having publicly and contumaciously said in a Synod assembled
in Brittany, that he would not obey the Decrees of Archbishop Brithwald. As
touching this accusation, the Holy Bishop standing in the midst of the
assembled cleared himself saying, That it was not true that he had answered so
indefinitly but only that he would not obey such Decrees as were contrary to
the Ecclesiastical Canons: Now nothing is more contrary to them, then that a
Bishop should be compelled to depose himself, no crime being laid to his
charge.

4. This Answer so simple, easy and allowable was by the Romans received with
joyful applause: and his Accusers being unable to disprove it were commanded
to return home, the Roman Bishops telling them, That though by the Canons it
was ordered, that an accuser* failing in the proof of the first point of his
charge, should not be admitted to make good the rest, yet for the reverence
they bore to the Arch bishop Brithwald, they would not forbear to discuss all
their allegations in order. And so in effect they did, insomuch as for the
space of four months seaventy assemblies of Bishops we made chiefly about this
Controversy: the end of which was glorious to S. Wilfrid, and ignominious to
his accusers: for the Romans exceedingly admired their impudence, and his
eloquence who without any study, only by the help of God and his own innocence,
with the first moving of his lips dissipated and broke asunder like cobwebs,
all their objections and accusations. But especially the Roman Bishops
condemned the bold rashness of those English pleaders, in that being laymen all
of them, except one, who was a Deacon, they presumed to accuse a Venerable
Prelat seaventy years old, whose Eloquence flowed like a torrent. Therefore
discoursing a long time among themselves in the Greek tongue, at last turning
themselves to the Plaintives and Defendant, they in Latin pronounced. That the
English Messengers deserved prison, and that he who sent them was unwise: on
the other side they declared S. Wilfrid innocent of any crime whatsoever.

5 I would here add (says the same Author) how great an advantage came to his
cause by the reading of the Acts of the Synod assembled formerly by Pope
Agathon: And after by a miracle happening to him in his return from Rome homeward
at Meaux a City of France, Eastward from Paris, where falling greivously sick*
he was restored to health in an Angelical Vision: but that the Venerable
Historian Beda, who for the sobriety of his style deserves credit, has already
recorded it. For my design is briefly to relate such particulars as have been
omitted by him.

6. These two passages pretermitted by William of Malmsbury we will here adioyn
out of S. Beda: Who as touching the former thus writes: One thing there was
which brought great advantage to the clearing of S. Wilfrid, which was the
reading of the Synod of Pope Agathon of blessed memory: For when by command of
Pope John the Acts of that Synod came to be read before a great multitude of
Nobles and other inferior people, and that the Reader was come to that passage
before related, to wit, Wilfr^d the pious Bishop of York appealing to the Sea
Apostolic, was by full authority of this Synod declared innocent and absolved
from all matters laid to his charge, certain or uncertain, etc. an astonishment
seized on all the hearers, and they began to ask one another, Who that Bishop
Wilfrid was? A. D. 705.
Then Boniface one of the Popes counselors and several others who had seen
him at Rome in the days of Pope Agathon, said, That this was the same Wilfrid
now again come to Rome with his accusers to be judged by the Sea Apostolic. At
his former coming, said they, his cause was fully heard, and the allegations on
both sides eyamined, and in the end he was by Pope Agathon of blessed memory
pronounced to have been uniustly expelled from his Bischoprick: Moreover he was
entertaind by the said Holy Pope with so much honor, that he assigned him a
place in a Synod of Bishops, as being a man of incorrupt Faith and probity.
When these things were heard, the whole Synod together with the Pope
pronounced, That a man of such authority, who for the space of forty years had
worthily administered the Episcopal Charge, could not with any justice be
condemned, but ought to be dismissed with honor, as innocent and free from all
crimes falsely imputed to him.

7 Now before we add the other passage for which we are referred to S. Beda,
touching the Miracle happening to S. Wilfrid in his voyage back toward Brittany,
we will insert out of William of Malmsbury what befell S. Wilfrid before he
quitted Rome: Although, says he, the Holy Bishop had clearly obtaind his
cause, yet he made it his earnest suit that he might be permitted to remain the
short time he had to live, at Rome, that so he might breath forth his decaying
Spirit at the feet of his Holiness. But Pope John would not yield to his pious
request, giving this reason, That such a man as he was necessary to the English
church and Kingdom: and therefore he enioynd him to employ the remainder of his
age in procuring the commodity of his own country and not spend it
unproffitably in a foreign air.

8. S. Wilfrid having been thus honorably dismissed from Rome, in his way
through France the Miracle befell him thus related by S. Beda: Bed. (...) sup*
Whilst he was traveling through France an infirmity suddenly seized on him,
which daily increasing brought him to that extremity that he could not so much
as ride on horseback, but by his servants was carried in a handlitter. In this
manner he was brought to Meaux (Meldum) a City of France, where four days and
nights together he lay as one dead, and a faint breathing, scarce perceptible,
showed only that he was yet alive. Thus long continuing without meat or drink,
without speaking or hearing any thing spoken, at last about daybreak on the
fifth day, he awaked as from a deep sleep, and sat up in his bed. Then opening
his eyes he saw about him his Brethren singing Psalms and weeping: And sighing
a little he demanded where Acca the Priest was. Presently therefore he was
called for, and seeing the Holy Bishop pretty well recovered and able to speak,
he kneeled down, and the other Brethren with him, and gave thanks to God for so
great a blessing.

9. After this they sat down together, and entered into discourse concerning
the terror of Divine judgments: A. D. 704.
which discourse having continued awhile, the Holy Bishop commanded all the
rest to leave the room except Acca, to whom directing his countenance and
speech, he said, A terrible Vision lately happened to me which I intend to
discover to thee, but which thou must conceal till I see how it shall please
God to dispose of me. There stood before me a certain person in a glorious
shining vestment, who said he was the Archangell Michael, and that he was sent
to recall me from death. For, said he, our Lord moved by the Prayers and tears
of thy Brethren and Disciples, and by the Intercession of his most Blessed
Virgin Mother, has given thee life. Therefore I assure thee that thou shall for
the present recover of this sickness: but be prepared, for four years hence I
will visit thee. Thou shall arrive safe in thy native country, and there
receive the greatest part of thy possessions, and conclude thy life in great
tranquillity.

10. The event showed this Vision to have been no illusion: for presently the
Holy Bishop perfectly recovered his health to the great joy of all, who gave
humble thanks to God for it, And not long after renewing his journey, he came
safe into Brittany. But because he arrived not there till the year following,
we will here interpose a Narration of the great cha^ges happening in this Island
in the mean time, which gave a new course to the Holy Bishops affairs.

XXIII. C.
XXIII. CHAP.
1.2. Ethelred King of the Mercians becomes a Monk.

3. He founds certain Monasteries.

4. Co^nred succeeds in the Kingdom.

5.6. Munificence of King Ina: And of Bugga a Princess, to Glastonbury, etc.

1. SAint Wilfrid among other requests to Pope John, had desired him to write
Letters in his favor to Ethelred King of the Mercians, Huntingd. l. 4.
which he also did accordingly. But in the Holy Bishops absence King Ethelred
having been visited with the Grace and mercy of the Omnipotent, was become a
Monk, says Henry of Huntingdon. And this change all our other ancient
Historians attribute to his piety and contempt of worldly glory. Whereas
certain Modern Protestant Writers, not traind up in the School of Gods Spirit
do without any ground from Antiquity affirm, That King Ethelred being touched
with remorse of his crimes, and a terror in conscience for having usurped the
Kingdom, was moved to build a Monastery, and to enter himself into it, after he
had held the Kingdom full thirty years.

2. As touching the place where this devout King undertook a Monastical
Profession, S. Beda thus writes, There is in the Province of Lindissi (or
Lincolnshire) a Noble Monastery named Beardanam, which was much affected and
honored by Offrida Queen of the Mercians, as likewise by her husband Ethelred.

3. The same King before he forsook the world had founded several other
Monasteries: one whereof he bestowed upon Egwin afterward Bishop of Worcester,
of which himself makes mention thus, Being in the prime of my age in the days
of Ethelred King of the Mercians, I made my humble request to him, that he
would vouchsafe to bestow on me an ancient Monastery called Fled^nburch: which
he with great kindness granted me. It was seated in the Province of
Worcester, near to the River Avon, and is at this day called Flatbury, a place
which, says Camden, in the Primitive Church of the English was inhabited by
Religious men. Camden in Worcestershire.
The same Author likewise ascribes to this King Ethelred the founding of the
famous Monastery of Evesham, concerning which we shall treat more largely e're
long.

4. The Successor to King Ethelred in the Kingdom of the Mercians was Coenred
or Kenrea son to his Brother Wulfere, Pol. Viogil. Malmsb. de Reg. l. 2. c 4
who diligently imitated all his virtues for as his Predecessor had done, he
passed his life in great sincerity of manners, being eminent for his piety to
God, and justice in administering his Kingdom Thus writes Polydor Virgil, and
William of Malmsbury. And as he lived, so likewise ended he his life according
to his example: for he built many Monasteries, and after a few years embraced
also a Monastical Life.

5 Piety and munificence to Gods Church was the ordinary employment and business
of the Kings of this age: Idem ibid.
For Ina also King of the West Saxons by the Counsel of S. Aldelm re-instated
the ancient Monastery of Glastenbury in all possessions and privileges which
by reason of former troubles had been taken from it, and settled the Monks in
good order under the government of their Abbot Hemgesil. And the said Abbot
dying this year, he gave to his Successaur Berwald several Lordsh^ps mentioned
in his Grant preserved by the said Author: and the Tabernacles, and other
Vessels of gold and silver given by the said King to that Monastery are of a
value almost incredible. Also at the same time Bugga the daughter of Kentwin
formerly King of the West Saxons seemed to contend with King Ina in adorning
this famous Church and Monastery for as Alcuin in his Po^m recounts she built
there a Chapel in which were twelve sumptuous Altars shining with gold and
silver, and consecrated to the twelve Apostles This she did for the refreshment
of her Fathers soul, who was there buried.

6. The same King Ina moreover built a Church in Somersetshire at a Town
anciently called Theorodunum, G^dvvin in Catalog.
and vulgarly Tiddington* but afterward for the abundance of springs named
Wells: To which he added a College for Ecclesiastical persons to live
sequestered from the world in devotion. The Church he dedicated to God and the
Apostle S. Andrew: ^amd. in Somerset.
which shortly after, A. D. 705
says Camden, was by Princes and Noble men enriched with large revenews. It
grew in succeeding times into an Episcopal See: and Athelm is by Bishop Godwin
reckoned the first Bishop of Wells in the year of Grace nine hundred and five.
So that Polydor Virgil was mistaken in saying, that King Ina erected it into a
Bishopric.

XXVI. C.
XXIV. CHAP.
1. 2. etc. Saint Wilfrid returns with the Popes Letters: which are neglected
by King Alfrid.

8.9. who shortly after dies.

A. D. 705
1. IN the year of Grace seven hundred and five Saint Wilfrid arrived in
Brittany, bringing with him Letters and Messengers likewise from the Pope to
the two Kings Ethelred and Alfrid, giving them account of what had lately
passed at Rome in debating the Controversy. What the success was William of
Malmsbury thus relates:

Malmsb. de Pont. l. 3.
[2. Saint Wilfrid, says he, presently after his return presented the Letters
from the Sea Apostolic to Ethelred late King of the Mercians, now a Monk:
Which he received in an humble posture, kneeling. And having read them, he with
little difficulty obtained from Kenred Son of Wulfere whom he had made his
Successor in the Kingdom, an order that they should be obeyed. For Kenred was a
Prince replenished with the fear of God, a good proof whereof he gave to the
world by a voluntary renouncing his Kingly authority four years after, and
embracing a Monastical Profession. In like manner Brithwald Archbishop of
Canterbury showed himself as earnest to enter into brotherly concord with Saint
Wilfrid. Some say he was affrighted thereto by the Popes Messengers who
denounced to him his condemnation from the Sea Apostolic, altough S. Wilfrid
interposing hindered the pronouncing Sentence.

3. Only Alfrith King of the Northumhers still persisted in his obstinacy and
resistance. For when Messengers directed from Saint Wilfrid came to him, at
first he gave them a mild answer: But afterward being, as is believed, depraved
by the suggestions of certain malignant persons about him, favored by him much
to his dishonor, when the Messengers again presented themselves to him on the
day appointed, he sent them away with sad hearts by pronouncing this his
determinate Sentence, That for the persons of the Messengers, for the gravity
of their lives and vene^ablenes for their age, he honored them as parents: But
as touching the subject of their message, he utterly refused compliance with
it, since it was against all reason that upon any Letters, perhaps
surreptitiously obtained, from the Sea Apostolic, a man who had been twice
condemned by a National Synod of the English, should be restored to his
dignity and Communion.

4. Having made frequent mention of these Letters of Poope John, inasmuch as
they afford great light to Saint Wilfrids cause, we will bear set down the
tenor of them from William of Malmsbury, by whom they are recorded. They are
inscribed, To the most eminent Lords, Ethelred King of the Mercians, and Alfrid
King of the Deiri and Bernicians.

5. We do much rejoice he^^ing the report of the increase of your Religious
devotion through Gods Grace cooperating, and seeing the fervor of your Faith,
which, God illuminating your minds, ye at first received by the preaching of
the Prince of Apostle, and do still constantly retain. And I would to God that
this our joy might be enlarged by the good behavior of many among you. But the
incurable dissension of some Spirits there does much disquiet our minds: Which
dissension we are obliged to censure and correct, least instead of being
observers, we be found transgressors of Apostolic Precepts.

6. For it is now a good while since that Bishop Wilfrid in the time of Pope
Agathon of Blessed Memory appealed in a certain cause of his to this See: His
accusers also sent from Theodore Archbishop of Canterbury and from Hilda an
Abbess of Religious memory, came hither. Whereupon Bishops from several
places were assembled in this City, who examined the matter diligently and
canonically, and after Examination pronounced Sentence: Which Sentence the
Popes his Successors and my Predecessors have confirmed. And the Archbishop
Theodore never contradicted the said Sentence, nor sent afterward any more
accusations against him. Moreover now of late more accusations having been sent
against the same Wilfrid, we took order that they should be examined in a
Synod of Reverend Bishops, together with his respective Answers and defense,
which Examination continued many days together, both from Epistles ancient and
modern touching that cause, and verbal allegations made by such persons as
were present. So that all has been done in the cause that can be performed in
the absence of the principal accusers: who in case they approve not the
Sentence here given, must repair in presence hither.

7 Wherefore we do hereby admonish our Brother Archbishop Brithwald, that
together with Wilfrid he convoke a Synod commanding Bosa and John to repair to
the same: There let him hear and consider what the parties can say, and what
proofs can be made on either side: Which being done, if he can determine the
cause, he will do a thing very acceptable to us. But in case he cannot, let
him then admonish both parties to have recourse in person hither, where the
cause hitherto depending may be finally decided by a greater Council. And let
those who shall neglect to come hither, know that they shall be ipso facto
suspended, and neither here nor there esteemed legal Bishops. As for your
Royal Highness, be pleased to afford your assistance that the Orders which with
Christ's help we have herein given, may come to effect. And whosoever, of what
condition soever, shall presumptuously contemn our authority, he shall not
remain without Gods punishment, nor escape without his harm and danger from the
spiritual bonds in which he is tied.]

8. This was the tenor of the Popes Letters: which were contemned by King
Alfrid alone: who notwithstanding presently after found that the denunciation
of Divine judgment in the end of them was not in vain: For he lived but a
little while after as the same Author relates, Id. ibid.
saying, As Soon as the Messengers were departed he was assaulted by a very
sharp disease which shortly brought him to his end. But then the bitterness of
his torments awaked reason, which had slumbred a long time in the Kings mind,
and according to the Prophets saying, Vexation gave him understanding. For
perceiving that this punishment had deservedly come upon him for his
disobedience, he promised to make a reparation of his fault to Wilfrid, if he
could be brought to his presence before his death. And the same he continued to
promise as long as he had use of his tongue: withal adiuring his Successor to
perform the same, in case himself could not do it. Thus he repented too late
his contempt of the Letters sent from the Sea Aposto^ick the comminations of
which he could not avoid.

9 Thus dyed this worthy King Alfrid, who for the space of nineteen years had
governed his Kingdom in great justice and peace, and against whom we read not
any accusation or charge of any other crime, but this his pertinacious
persecution of this Holy Bishop. Whosoever he was that inserted him in our
Martyrologe on the twelfth of March by the Title of a Monk in the Monastery of
Mailros, was surely mistaken, since neither S. Beda, who lived at the same time
near the place, nor any of our Ancient Historians mention any such thing. And
Florilegus expressly says that he dyed at Driffeld seated on the River Hull in
Yorkshire which Camden calls the village of Alfrid the most learned King of the
Northumbers, wherein his Monument is ex^ant.

XXV. CHAP. XXV. CHAPTER

1.2. etc. S. Wilfrid in a Synod in Brittany restored to his Rights: The
testimony of the Holy Royal Virgin Elfleda, etc. in his behalf.

1. WE are now approaching toward an end of the long continued troubles of
this illustrious Bishop Saint Wilfrid. Whose restitution though it found some
delay and opposition after the death of King Alfrid, yet by a Synod shortly
after assembled in the Province of the Northumbers, it was fully effected The
manner and progress whereof is thus declared by the same Author: 2. When King
Alfrid was dead, a certain Noble man named Edulf, Malmsb de Reg. l. 3.
who had a design to usurp the Kingdom, vomited likewise forth his malicious
fury against Saint Wilfrid, as if he had been by oath engaged in the frenzy of
King Alfrid. For when the Holy Bishop, calling to mind that the same Edulf had
professed freindship formerly to him, thought it expedient to go to him, the
senceles man fell into such a passion, that he commanded him presently to
depart his Kingdom, and gave order that all his goods should be confiscated,
and himself cast out thence. But two months after, the Tyrant loft both his
Kingdom and life: and the Nobility restored to the Throne Osred the Son of
Alfrid.

3 Now among the Nobles of that Kingdom the highest both in authority and
fidelity was one named Berthfrid. Him did Brithwald Archbishop of Canterbury
admonish to cause a Synod to be assembled in that Kingdom for determining the
cause of Saint Wilfrid: whereto he consented. And in the said Synod, to the end
that controversy might have a peaceable end, it was ordered, according to the
precepts contained in the Popes Letters, that a choice should be offered to the
Bishops who were parties against Saint Wilfrid, that either they should resign
to him his Episcopal See, or repair presently to Rome, there to justify the
cause of their refusal: And whosoever would not accept of this choice, should
be excommunicated.



4. S. Beda notes the particular place where this Synod me^t, Bed. l. 5 c. 20.
saying it was near the River Nid, which gives a name to the Province of
Nidds-dale, now belonging to the Kingdom of Scotland, but anciently within the
Dominion of the Northumbers. At this Synod were present Archbishop Brithwald
with S. Wilfrid, likewise Bosa Bishop of York, and John of Hagulstad. There
came thither also the Royal Virgin and Abbess of Streneshalck Elfleda Sister
to King Alfrid, whose testimony was of great moment for ending the controversy.
For thus writes William of Malmsbury: 5. Whilst the cause of S. Wilfrid was
agitating in the Synod, Malmsb. ib.
and the Bishops according to their former manner contradicted his pretentions,
the Holy Virgin Elfleda Sister to the late King Alfrid, and Abbess of
Streneshalck after S. Hilda putt an end to the business, Saying, Let these
tedious discourses little to the purpose cease: Here do I produce the last
Will of my Brother, at the making whereof my self was present, by which he
declares that if God restored him his health he would without delay observe and
execute the commands of the Sea Apostolic: or if death kindred him, he would
oblige his heyr and successor thereto.

6. After the Holy Virgin had spoke thus, Berthfrid immediately added these
words, My sentence is that we ought to obey the Popes commands, especially
considering that our obligation thereto ^^ strengthened by our late Kings will,
and the solemn promise also which we our selves made in our necessity: for when
after his death we were besieged in the City of Bedda-burgh, and that the
enemies enclosing us used their utmost endeavor to break into the Town, in
this extremity and danger we made a Vow to God, that if we might escape, we
would fulfill the commands of the Sea Apostolic. We had scarce ended this
Vow, but presently the whole Province submitted it self to us, and every one
strove who should prevent the other in running to our assistance. The Royal
youth Osred was acknowledged King, the Enemy was defeated and the usurping
Tyrant slain. To conclude it is our young Kings will also that the Venerable
Bishop Wilfrid be restored. Now Berthfrid had no sooner spoke thus, but
immediately all clouds of dissension were dissipated, and a lightsome calmnes of
peace succeeded. All the Bishops hastened to embrace one another, and passed the
remainder of their lives in amity and concord.



7 The result of the Synod was, That Saint Wilfrid should be re-instated in all
the dignities and possessions formerly belonging to him. Notwithstanding Bosa,
who had been Bishop of York, dying presently after this Synod, S. Wilfrid
permitted John to remove to York, and himself being now very old, contented
himself with the Sea of Hagulstad (or Hexham) and his own Monasteries.

8. Thus at last ended all the troubles of this Holy Bishop Wilfrid: Which were
the more heavy to him, in that all his persecutours were persons of virtuous
holy lives. The consideration whereof gave occasion to the Historian to make
this complaint: Id. ib.
It is hence manifest how great the misery is wherein human Nature is involved,
inasmuch as those men and women whose sanctity is much celebrated by
Antiquity, such were Theodore, Brithwald, John, Bosa and likewise the Holy
Abbess Hilda, they all with utmost violence persecuted S. Wilfrid, a Bishop
most highly favored by Almighty God. Particularly as touching Bosa he is
styled by S. Beda, a most holy Prelat and beloved by God: and his Name is
commemorated among Gods Saints in our Martyrologe on the ninth of March: Bed.
l. 5. c. 31. Marty. Ang. 9. Mart.
though his death, happening this year, is assigned to the year of Grace seven
hundred.

THE ONE AND TWENTIETH BOOK. OF THE CHVRCH-HISTORY OF BRITTANY.
I. CHAP.
I. CHAPTER.
1.2. etc. S. Hedda Bishop of the West Saxons dying, his S^e is divided into
two: Winchester, of which Saint Daniel is made Bishop: and Shirborn: of which
S. Aldelm.

1. THE same year in which debates were so happily ended in the Northern part
of Brittany, A. D. 705.
Hedda Bishop of Winchester dye^: concerning whom thus writes S. Beda, In the
beginning of the Reign of Osred King of the Northumbers, Heddi Bishop of the
West Saxons departed this world to eternal felicity. Id.
For he was a good and just man, and was enabled to discharge his Episcopal
function in governing and teaching rather by the light proceeding from Charity
and the love of virtue deeply imprinted in his heart, then by reading of Books.
In a word, the most Reverend Prelat Pechthelm, who then was a Deacon and Monk
in the Monastery of S. Aldelm his successor, was wont to relate how in the
place where the holy Bishop Heddi was buried, many miracles were wrought by his
merits and intercession: and that the inhabitants of that Province were
accustomed to take dust from thence, which they putt into water, and either
therewith sprinkled or gave it to drink to such as were sick, either men or
beasts, and thereby conferred health on them. By means of which frequent taking
away the dust, a trench of no small depth and largenes was made in the place.
Mart. Angl. 7. Iul.
His name therefore is deservedly commemorated in our Martyrologe and the Roman
likewise among the Saints on the Nones of July.

2. S. Hedda being dead, the Bishopric of that Province, Id. ib.
says the same Author, was divided into two Dioceses: one whereof was given
to Daniel, who governs the same to this day (that is, to the year of Grace
seven hundred thirty one, in which S. Beda concluded his History:) and the
other to S. Aldelm, who worthily administered the same the space of four years.
Both these men were eminently skillful in Ecclesiastical affairs and in the
doctrine of Holy Scriptures.

3. S. Beda does not mention the name of the Episcopal See assigned to Daniel:
but other Authors do generally agree that it was Winchester, which he
governed forty years. As for S. Aldelm, the Seat of his Bishopric was Shirburn
in the Province of the Durotriges, or Dorsetshire: in which a few of his
Successors continued: till the Episcopal See was afterward translated to
Saru^ or Salisbury.

4. These were two Prelates of eminent learning, and illustrious stars of the
West Saxon Kingdom. As touching Daniel, we shall show hereafter how S. Boniface
the glorious Apostle of the Germans frequently consulted him in difficulties
occurring about the discharge of that sublime office. Hence it is that Bishop
Godwin gives this Character of him, Daniel was a man excellently learned,
Godvv. in Cat. ep W^nt.
and wrote many volumes, amongst others these following: Of the affairs of the
Province of the South Saxons. Of the Life of the Holy Bishop Cedda. Of the
affairs of the Isle of Wight. All which are now lost.

5. As for S. Aldelm, he was from his youth bred up in learning and piety by S.
Ma^dulf a Scottish Hermi^, from whom the famous Monastery of Malmsbury received
its name, for many devout persons moved with the fame of his Sanctity had
recourse to him in that solitude, by whom they were coenobitically governed:
and a Monastery was there erected by Kenwalch King of the West Saxons. In the
year six hundred and seaventy S Maidulfus dying, Saint Aldelm succeeded Abbot
in his place. And five years after, the said Monastery was endowed by the
liberality of Leutherius Bishop of the West Saxons upon the suggestion of S.
Aldelm: For before that time the Monks lived there only upon courtesy. Thirteen
years after he attended King Cedwalla to Rome, where he obtained from Pope
Sergius a Brief of Privileges and immunities to his Abbey. How in the year of
Grace six hundred ninety two he was appointed by a Synod to write to a certain
Prince of Cornwall called Geruntius a Book in confutation of the Britains
erroneous observation of Easter and other miscariages, has heretofore been
declared. At last this year he was upon the death of S. Hedda ordained a Bishop
of the West Saxons, and, as has been said, kept his Episcopal residence at
Shireburn.

6. Being thus made a Bishop, he gave a full and free authority to his Monks of
Malmsbury to choose their Abbot. But their duty and affection to him was such
that during his life they would acknowledge no other Spiritual Father: Only
they humbly petitioned him to grant them the Privilege after his death to
elect their own Abbot: And that such Election should not pertain to the Bishop,
as the custom was in Kent by the Ordinance of King Withred, but descend to the
Monks. This Privilege S. Aldelm granted not only to them, but to all other
Monasteries which he had founded. And moreover caused his Indult to be
confirmed by the Subscription of K. Ina and of Daniel Bishop of Winchester.
Authentic Copies are still extant of this Indult and Privilege granted both
by S. Aldelm and King Ina, in the Register of the said Abbey of Malmsbury.
Concerning this holy Bishop S. Aldelm, more remains to be said when we come to
speak of his death. In the mean time the affairs of Germany happily managed by
S. Swibert and his blessed companions recall us thither.

II. CHAP. II. CHAP.

i.2. etc. Swiberts Preaching and miraculous freeing a man possessed by the
Devil.

1. SAint Swibert after he had successfully preached the Gospel to the
Inhabitants of Brunswick and other neighboring Nations, directed his steps to
a people called Boructuarians (or Prussians) lying more Northerly, and yet more
savage then the former. Concerning his progress in their conversion we have
this account from his companion S. Marcellinus. Marcel. in vit. ^. Suiber:
[Assoon as he was entered that Province, says he, he instilled the saving
Mysteries and precepts of the Gospel into their foolish and blind hearts, and
enlightened their savage minds with the luster of divine Truth, being glorious
among them in his preaching, and holy in his actions: So that turning them from
their profane superstitions to the Faith of Christ, he confirmed them in the
same Faith by many wonderful miracles. But the multitude o^ Converts
increasing, the Devils envy likewise increased* who, enraged to see so many
escape his snares, earnestly endeavored by his malicious instruments either to
kill him or expel him from that Province.

2. On a certain day therefore as he was preaching to a great multitude of
Pagans, their sacrilegious Priests drunk with the Idolatrous cupp of Babylon,
set violently upon him, and after they had beaten him with their fists, rodds
and stones, they endeavored to drive him out of their coasts. But by the
industry of certain courageous Christians he was taken out of their hands, and
for a few days was concealed by them, for they durst not kill him, out of fear
least their Governor should be offended. But presently after the Holy Bishop
renewd his preaching among them, and daily baptized great numbers, which
despising their Idols, publicly confessed the Name of Christ.

3. Consequently the same Holy Writer declares, how by occasion of the Devils
malice the Faith of Christ became more illustrious among that people: For,
says he, on a certain time in a village of the Boructuarians a Rich and potent
man, named Ethelhere was possessed by the Devil, insomuch as they were forced
to bind him with chains, because he endeavored to bite all that came near him,
and tore his own clothes. Now the same Ethelhere was one of those who had
persecuted, and incited others to persecute the Holy Bishop, and was the first
that had the boldness to smite him with a staff. This man being thus daily in a
horrible manner tormented by the devil, it happened on a certain day in the
presence of several Pagan Priests and others who came to visit and condole
with him, that the Devil cried out, Except Swibert servant of the living God
and Bishop of the Christians come hither, I will not depart out of this man.
And when he often more and more loudly repeated the same words, the Idolatrous
Priests and other friends of the Demoniack went away in great confusion and
perplexity what they should do. At last they all agreed that Saint Swibert
should be sought out, and humbly entreated to visit the said unhappy person.

4. This being accordingly done, Saint Swibert moved with great compassion and
Charity went to the house, attended by his Priests and other Disciples: and
being yet in the way thither, the Devil presently caused the possessed person
to foam and gnash his teeth, and to cry out in a far more horrible manner then
before: at which all that were present were much greived and astonished. But
as soon as Saint Swibert approached the house the clamours ceased, and the
Demoniack lay still in his bed, as if he had been asleep.

5. As Soon as the Holy Bishop saw him lying in this posture, he commanded all
us who attended him, to betake our selves devoutly to our Prayers. And he
himself likewise with fervent zeal besought almighty God that he would
vouchsafe to free the Demoniack from the Devils power, to the end that his
Holy Name might be glorified, and those Infidels converted to the Faith. Having
thus prayed, we all rose up, and he signed the Demoniack with the sign of the
Saving Cross, saying, In the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ I command thee, O
unclean Spirit, that thou depart from this Creature of God, that he may
acknowledge his true Creator and Savior. Immediately hereupon the Wicked
Spirit departing with a noysom stink, began to cry out aloud, O thou servant
of the Great God, thou shall not abide long in this Province: for as thou have
driven me from this my habitation, so will make thee to be driven out of this
country.

6. As for Ethelhere who was thus freed from the Devils power, he presently
arose in the sight of all, and casting himself at the Holy Bishops feet, he
begged pardon for the injuries he had done him; and earnestly besought him that
he might be baptized in the Name of Jesus Christ, in whose Name he had been
delivered. In like manner many Pagans, and two Idol Priests there present cast
themselves at S. Swiberts feet, desiring to be instructed in the Mystery of the
Christian Faith: Whom the Saint raised up and taught them how the Eternal
Wisdom descended from Heaven to Earth that by his Blessed Death and Blood shed
on the Altar of the Cross he might restore life to mankind dead in sins. Thus
he continued three whole weeks instructing and confirming them in the Faith,
and yet baptized only two and forty of them, A. D. 706.
besides women and children or both sexes.]

7. Two years he spent among them constantly preaching the faith whereby he
converted great numbers, which with their own hands broke their Idols, and
built Churches, in which the Holy Bishop constituted Priests and Deacons to
assist him. Many likewise having been informed of the Miracles done by him came
to see and hear him, of whom he converted and baptized not a few. He gained the
affection and veneration of all chiefly by the tenderness of his love which he
showed to the poor and afflicted, whom he meekly visited in their necessities
and infirmities, and these not only Christians, whom he confirmed in their
Faith, but Pagans also, who by his charitable assistance were withdrawn from
their Superstitions and Idolatry. Notwithstanding how after two years the
Devil, by Gods permission made good his threatening that he would shortly
expel him out of that Province, shall hereafter be declared.

III. CHAP. III. CHA.

1.2. etc. The death of S. Adelbert, and of S. ^erenfrid, Apostolic Missioners
in Germany.

4.5. S Decumanus a Holy Hermit, murdered. A miracle after his death.

1. TO this year is assigned in our Martyrologe the death of S. Adelbert, who,
as has been declared, was one of the twelve English Apostolic Missionners
into Germany: Concerning whom in the Gallican Martyrologe on the five and
twentieth of June we read this Testimony: 2. At Egmond in Holland is the same
day celebrated the Memory of S. Adelbert Confessor and Deacon: Martyrolog^
Gal. 29 Iun
Who being descended from the Royal stock of the Kings of the Deiri in
Brittany ( for he was the Son of Edilbald, son of S. Oswald King and Martyr,)
and by S. Willebrord constituted Archdeacon in the Provinces of the Batavi and
Frisons, did notably promote the Christian Faith. For he was made choice of
among the most excellent Disciples of that Holy Prelat, and sent into the
utmost confines of that Diocese to preach the word of life to that pagan people
in Knemaria where he gathered a plentiful harvest to our Lord. And after he
had confirmed his New plantation in the Faith, he was called by Almighty God to
receive his eternal reward. After his death he received Divine Testimonies of
his celestial Happiness: For at Egmond, where he was buried in his own Oratory,
he became illustrious by such Miracle ^as afforded great security and
protection to the inhabitants, and invited a wonder^full concourse of strangers
to perform veneration to him and to beg his intercession.



3. This same year likewise another associate in the same Mission S. Werenfrid
a Priest received an eternal reward for his labors. His memory is also
celebrated in the same Martyrologe on the fourteenth of August with this Elogy
At Elst in Gelderland is this day commemorated the Deposition of S. Werenfrid
an illustrious fellow-worker with Divine Grace. bid. 14. Aug.
He was associated with S. Willebrord in the business of Piety, and heaped up
the gain of many souls to our Lord. Thus laden with such precious spoils, he
was received into Glory. His body reposes honorably in a Collegiat Church
consecrated to his honor and name in the foresaid town seated on the Rhene
between Nimegen and the Sand. He is by others said to have dyed at a Town
called Westervert, and afterward to have been buried at Elst: And that he
sowed the precious seed of the Gospel at Medemblick, Dur^stad, Elst and other
towns in Batavian.

A. D. 706. Martyr. Angl. 27 ^ugust. Capgrav in vit. ^. Decumani.
4. The year following we find commemorated in our Martyrologe the Martyrdom of
S. Decumanus, born of Noble parents in the South-Western parts of Wales, who
forsaking his country the more freely to give himself to Mortification and
devotion, passed the river Severn upon a hurdle of rodds, and retired himself
into a mountainous vast solitude covered with shrubbs and briars where he spent
his life in the repose of Contemplation, till in the end he was slain by a
murderer.

5. The place so described by the Author of his life in Capgrave is seated in
the County of Somerset, where a Castle in after times called Dorostorum (now
Dunstor) was built by the family of the Mohuns. Camd. in Somersetsh.
To this Castle, says Camden, are adjacent two Villages, consecrated to two
Saints, The one is called Caranton from a British Saint Carantac: and the
other Decombes from S. Decumanus, who out of Southwales arrived here,
renouncing all wordly vanity, and by a murderer was peirced through with a
sword: For which, says he, he obtained in the esteem of the ignorant common
people divine honor. Thus writes this Author, skillfull indeed in places, but
ignorant in the Faith of his Ancestors, who never attributed Divine honor,
but a Veneration infinitely inferior thereto, to Gods Saints.

6 This veneration he probably obtained from a Miracle related by the Author
of his life in this manner: Ap. Capgrag. 16.
We must not, says he, leave buried in silence this prodigious wonder, how
when his head was cut from his body, the trunk raising it self up took the
head, which it carried from the place where he was slain to a spring not far
off, which flowed with a most Christallin water, in which with the hands it
washed the blood away. Which spring in a reverent memory of the Saint is to
this day called S. Decumanus his Spring. Near to which place the body together
with the head was honorably buried by the neighboring inhabitants.

IV. CHAP. A. D. 707

IV. CHA.



1. 2. etc. A fearful judgment on a Soldier who delayed Confession and
Penance to the last.

1. A. D. 707. Westmonaster h^^.
AMong the Gests of the year of Grace seven hundred and seven Matthew of
Westminster relates the sad accident of a Soldier of the family of Kenred King
of the Mercians, which deserves a place in this History to forewarn the Reader
of the danger of delaying Confession and Penance for sins. The Narration he
receives from S. Beda, in whose words we will deliver it, though he names not
the precise year as the other does.

[2. In the days of Coenred (or Kenred) who succeeded Edilred in the kingdom of
the Mercians, Bed. l. 5. c. 14
there was a certain military Officer, who as he was for his industry and
courage acceptable to the King, so on the contrary for the neglecting his soul
he no less displeased him. And therefore he on admonished him to confess and
amend his wicked life, for fear a sudden death might prevent his repentance.
But the unhappy man though thus frequently admonished by the King, little
regarded his wholesome advice, only he promised that he would take a time
afterward to do penance for his crimes. Not long after it happened that a
sickness surprising him, he was forced to keep his bed, where he lay in great
torments. The King then, who loved him much, came to visit him, and earnestly
renewd his exhortations that at least then before he dyed, he would go to
confession and demand Penance: but the man answered him, That he would not
confess his sins till he were recovered of his present disease, for fear his
companions should upbraid him that the fear of death made him do that, which
in the time of health he had refused to do. Now he thought this Answer argued
a great courage in him, but as afterward appeared, he found that he had been
miserably seduced by the Devil.

3. His sickness then growing more violent and dangerous, the King once more
came to visit and advise him: but as soon as he was entered the chamber, the sick
man cried out with alamentable voice, What would you have, Sir? Why come you
hither? It is not now in your power to give me any comfort or assistance. The
King replied, Do not say so: I fear your sickness distracts you. No Sir,
(answered he) I am not mad: but I have before mine eyes a foul and miserable
conscience. What means this, said the King His reply was, Awhile since there
entered into this chamber two beautiful young men, the one of which sat down
at my head, and the other at my feet. And one of them brought forth a Book
curiously garnished, but extreme little, which he gave me to read: and there I
found written every good action which I had done in my life but alas, the
number was very small, and the worth of them not at all considerable. When I
had read it, they took it from me without saying a word.

4. Then there presently came toward this house a vast army of wicked Spirits,
horrible to be looked on, which both surrounded it without, and filled all the
rooms within. As Soon as they were sat down, one of them, who by the more
horrid darkness of his face and preference in sitting seemed to be the
principal among them, brought forth likewise a Book of a dreadful shape, an
enormous greatness and insupportable weight: This Book he gave to one of his
attendants, bidding him to bring it to me that I might read it. As Soon as I
had looked into it, I found there all the crimes which ever I had committed in
deed, word and even the slightest thoughts, all this plainly described in
hideous letters. Then he said to the two young men in white garments who sat
there, why do you stay here, since you manifestly see that this man is ours?
They answered, It is true: take him, and make him partaker of your damnation.

5. As Soon as they had said this, they presently disappeared: and two of the
most wicked among those Spirits of darkness arising, with forkes in their hands,
smote me, one on the head, and the other on the feet. And now they are to my
most horrible torment creeping through my inward parts, and as soon as they
shall meet together I shall dye, and be hurried by them into Hell. Thus ^pake
this unhappy despairing man, and presently after dyed: and now being for all
eternity tormented, he practices repentance without any fruit, which he
neglected to do^ in his life time, when a short Penance might have procured
him pardon.

6. Now, as S. Gregory writing of the like case, observes, we are to judge
that this man had these apparitions, not for himself, to whom they proffited
nothing, but for our good: that we, knowing his unhappy end, may fear to delay
the time of Penance now allowed us, least being prevented by unlooked for
death, we may dye impenitent. And as touching the Book^ of a fashion so
different which he saw presented to him by the good and by the evil Spirits,
this was done by Divine dispensation to putt us in mind that our deeds and even
our thoughts do not vanish into air, but are reserved to the examination of
the Supreme Judge, and shall be presented to our view in the last day either by
our good or evil Angels And whereas in this Vision the Angels brought forth
a white Book, and afterward the Devils, a Black one, the former a very small
one, and the latter one of an enormous bigness: that signified that in his youth
^e had done some few good actions, all which notwithstanding had been obscured
by the sins of his riper age. But on the contrary, those who in their ripe age
do endeavor to hide from the eyes of God the sins committed in their
childhood, may be associated to those concerning whom the Psalmist says,
Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered.
This Story, (says S. Beda) as I received it from the Venerable Prelat
Pecthelm, I thought fit simply to commit to writing for the spiritual benefit
of those who shall read or hear it.

V. CHAP. V. CHAP

1. 2. etc. S Egwin Bishop of Worcester: is by calumny eiected: goes in
Penance to Rome: and is miraculously absolved.

8 9. etc At his return upon an apparition of our Blessed Lady he builds the
Monastery of Evesham.

1. IN the occurrents of the year of Grace six hundred ninety three, Godvvin in
Ep. Worcest. Capgrav. in Egvvino Malm^b. de Pontif l, 4.
we have declared how upon the death of Ostfor Bishop of Worcester, there
succeeded him in that See Egwin, a man in high esteem for his Sanctity, born in
the same Province of a Princely extraction: who in his tender age, b^ing
prevented by Divine Grace, conceived an aversion from secular pomps and
pleasures, and consecrated himself to the service of God in an Ecclesiastical
state: In the which having regularly passed the inferior degrees, he was
exalted to Preist-hood: and afterward, that See being vacant, he was by the
earnest petition both of the Laity and Clergy demanded for their Pastor and
Bishop: Which charge notwithstanding he very unwillingly, and not without the
forcible persuasions of King Coenred at last accepted.

2. But in the execution of this sublime Office he incurred the general
disfavour of that Province, insomuch as he was forced to forsake his country:
God so disposing it for the trial of his piety, and to render him more
illustrious in his Church. That which made him obnoxious to the displeasure of
worldly men was his zeal and constancy in reproving vice, and particularly in
opposing himself to many unlawful customs which that people, lately converted
to Christianity, would not be persuaded to forsake, certain heathenish
Superstitions, incestuous marriages, and other noxious errors to which they had
been accustomed.

3. Persons who are sick of such incurable diseases ordinarily become more
enraged by Physic: whereupon these men not only refused all correction and
reformation, but combined seditiously to raise a fu^ious persecution against
the Holy Bishop, and to drive violently out of the Province. To effect which,
they spread abroad many calumnious accusations against him, by which they
induced not only the virtuous King Coenred but the Holy Archbishop Brithwald
also to declare an enmity against him.

A. D. 708
4. The holy man assured of his own innoce^ce as to any of the crimes laid to
his charge, yet behaved himself as if he had been guilty: for he undertook a
laborious and painful Pilgrimage to Rome, thereby to satisfy for the offenses
of his people, and withal, as some Ancient Authors have written, to do a
rigorous Penance for some faults formerly committed in his youth. And to
render his Pilgrimage more painful, he in the presence of a great multitude
bound about his legs certain iron-chains, and cast the key which locked them
together, into the River of Avon, publicly protesting that he would never
esteem himself secure of the pardon of his sins, till either the key were
restored to him, or the chains unloosed by a power Supernatural. Withal he
vowed, that if God would vouchsafe to make his journey prosperous, he would
build a Church to his honor.

5. Having performed this voyage with great incommodity and painfullnes, he at
last arrived at Rome, where whilst he was performing his devotions in the
Church of Saint Peter, his servants going to the rivers side to buy provision
for their Master, they found in a fishes belly the key which had formerly
locked the chains about his legs, which being brought to him, he in the
presence of a great multitude unlocked the said chains, perceiving that such
was the Divine Will and mercy. An event so miraculous was immediately spread
through the whole City insomuch as he who before was looked upon as a
miserable enormous sinner, was afterward honored as a Saint and servant of God
highly favored. Thus writes the Author of his life in Capgrave: Whereas
William of Malmsbury relates, that it was in his return as he passed the Sea
between France and Brittany that the Key was found in a fishes belly taken by
the Mariners.

6. Notwithstanding this variety as to the circumstances of this miracle,
certain it is that S. Egwin at his return recovered with advantage King
Coenreds esteem, and also great veneration among the people for his Sanctity,
A. D. 708.
the fame whereof was largely spread in the world.

7. Now to what year precisely we ought to ascribe this his first journey to
Rome (for he undertook afterward a second voyage thither) not any Ancient
Writers do afford us sufficient Light to determine But it seems to have been
in the year of Grace seven hundred and eight that he built the famous
Monastery of Evesham in the Province of Worcester: for as himself declares in a
Writing preserved by the Author of his life in Capgrave, the said Monastery
was founded a little time before the death of the Holy Bishop Aldelm, which
happened the year following.

Ap. Capgrav. in vit. S. Egvvin.
8. The same Author from Brithwald a Monk of Glastonbury relates a wonderful
apparition which occasioned the building of the said Monastery: In those days,
says he, there was in the territory of Worcester a certain place wholly
uncultivated, and almost unpassable by reason of thorns and briars thick
growing there: This place formerly called Homme, was in succeeding times named
E^vesham for the reason which I will now declare. S. Egwin had appointed four
Shepherds to feed their flocks about the said wood for the sustenance of his
Monks. Now on a certain day it happened that one of the said Shepherds, named
Eoves, entering deeply into the midst of the wood, there appeared before him a
certain most glorious Virgin, attended by two others, her splendor darkened
that of the Sun it self, and her beauty incomparably exceeded al^ wordly
features: She held in her hand a book out of which she with the other two
Virgins, sung hymns of praise to God. The poor man dazeled with this
splendor upon which he durst not fix his eyes, stood awhile silent and
trembling, and presently after in great fear retired home, and repairing to the
Bishop acquainted him with this vision.

9. The Holy Bishop considering the matter advisedly with himself, on a certain
day after he had fasted and prayed, taking three companions with him, went
toward the place described by the Shepherd, walking all the way barefoot
praying and singing Psalms: And commanding his attendants to step at a
distance, he himself passed further into the wood, and being come to the place,
be fell prostrate on the ground, where with many sighs and tears he remained a
good space imploring a merciful regard from our Lord. After which he rose up
from prayer, and immediately there appeared to him the three Virgins, with the
same majesty and glory as before: among whom she who stood in the midst, seemed
more tall and resplendent then the other, in pure whitenes infinitely excelling
lillies, and in freshnes roses, and from her proceeded a celestial and
inestimable odor: She held in her hand a Book, together with a golden Cross
casting forth bright beams of light.

10. Now whilst he thought within himself that surely this was the Mother of
our Lord, the said glorious Virgin as it were approving such his inward pious
cogitation, stretching forth the said Cross gave him a Benediction with it,
and presently with that farewell disappeared. The Holy man with great joy
rendering thanks to God for this favor, understood thereby that it was Gods
will that the same place should be consecrated to his service, and dedicated to
the honor of the Blessed Virgin Mother of our Lord. For during his former
afflictions and persecutions he had made a vow, that if God would vouchsafe to
give a prosperous end to his desires, he would build a Church to his service.
Hereupon without delay be cleansed the place, began the work, and shortly
brought it to perfection. The fidelity of this Narration is verified by a
writing or Charter of S. Egwin himself which shall shortly be produced.

A. D. 709

VI. CHAP.


VI. CHAP.
1.2. etc. Two Kings, Coenred and Offa, undertake a Pilgrimage to Rome: where
they dye.

7.8. etc. S. Egwin obtains great Privileges to his Monastery of Evesham from
Pope Constantin.

1. TO this miraculous vision of S. Egwin we may in part imp^te the devout
pilg^^mage o^ King Coenred, or Kenred King of the Mercians to Rome, to visit
the Sacred Monuments of the Apostles: In which Pilgrimage he was also attended
by the same Saint Egwin. Other encouragements thereto likewise he might have
from the example of his Predecessor King Ethelred, whose Sanctity was at this
time in high esteem. Moreover the sad and horrible death of his impenitent
servant, mentioned before, probably incited him not to delay the securing of
his future everlasting condition: for that might teach him that sins are with
ease committed, but with great difficulty cleansed away. Which of these, or
whether all these Motives concurred to induce this devout King to free himself
from those encombrances with which a Crown was attended, which made the way to
heaven far more dangerous and painful, it is uncertain But certain it is that
at this time, This pious King, as Saint Beda says, Bed. l. 5. c. 20
having for the space of four or ^ive years with great dignity and renown
governed the Kingdom of the Mercians, with far greater dignity and Noblenes
relinquished that Scepter, to become an humble suppliant at the Sepulchers of
the glorious Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul. And by the advice of S. Egwin he
constituted his Successor in the Kingdom Coenred the son of Ethelred, from
whom himself had received the Crown.

2. How much more efficacious good Examples are then Words, was at this time
also in an eminent manner declared to the world. For the generous Act of King
Ethelred, who out of Love to Christ exchanged his Purple into an humble Habit
of Religion, was so far not only imitated by his Successor King Coenred, but
also by Offa the pious King of the East Saxons, that he also at this very time
resolved in his company to quitt his Throne after a reign of eight years, ^o
undertake a tedious journey, that he might dye as it were in the Society of the
same Blessed Apostles.

3. We have already declared how in the beginning of his Reign he demanded for
his wi^e, Kineswida daughter of Penda King of the Mercians, a Lady adorned with
all the embellishmets of Nature and Grace. This proposition was readily
accepted by her friends, who without consulting her, confidently promised him a
success to his desires: for they doubted not but she would esteem it a
condition to be accepted with willingness and joy.

4. But the devout Virgins ambition lay a quite different way. She had lately
seen her Sister Kineburga descend from a Royal Throne into a Monastery: and
from thence by the Ministry of Angels called to their Society in Heaven. Sup.
l. 20. c. 11.
Such a spectacle raised her thoughts and desires above the earth: and
notwithstanding the earnest opposition of her friends, those desires were
effected by the intercession of the Quuen of Virgins to whom she had recourse,
as has been already related.

6. It is not to be doubted but King Offa, A. D. 709.
though perhaps afflicted with the refusal, yet by her example learnt to
disesteem worldly pompes, which he saw she trodd under her feet: And thereupon
would not neglect the present opportunity to accompany his neighbor King
Kenred in his devout Pilgrimage to Rome.

6. These two devout Kings together with Saint Egwin Bishop of Worcester
arrived there the year following, Pope Constantin then sitting in S. Peter's
chair. Where having performed their public Devotions, each of them receiving
the Monastical Tonsure, ended their days in an humble Religious Profession.

7. As for the Holy Bishop Egwin, the Motive of his journey thither, was not
only to attend these pious Princes, but also to obtain from the Sea Apostolic
a Confirmation and Privileges for his new erected Monastery at Evesham: Which
by the intercession of the two Kings he easily and effectually obtained.

8 Moreover to the endowing of the said Monastery King Kenred and Offa, before
their quitting the world, munificently contributed several Manors and
villages containing sixty six Manses, the names of which are contained in a
Charter yet extant made by the same Kings, the Title whereof is, Ex Regist. de
^vesham in B bli^th. Cotton Ib^dem vid. Monast. volu^ 2.^. p. 145. ^46.
A Charter of Kenred and Offa Kings, concerning the Lands in which the Blessed
Virgin Mary is said to have appeared to Bishop Egwin, together with many other
possessions conferred on the Monastery of Evesham, all which were confirmed by
Pope Constantin in the Church of Lateran. To the same effect there is likewise
still remaining another Charter of Bishop Egwin in which he relates the
substance of the forementioned Story concerning the appearing of our Blessed
Lady to him: and likewise setts down the names of the se^verall Lordships and
villages given to the said Monastery by the Kings Ethelred and Kenred, as
likewise by a young Noble Gentleman called Atheric, and a Venerable Priest
named Walterns: So that in a short time there were conferred on his Monastery
one hundred and twenty Manses. All which possessions, says he, were by
Apostolic authorities and privileges, and by Regal Edicts exempted from all
exactions by any power whatsoever: to the end that the Monks serving God there
according to the Rule of S. BENEDICT may pass their lives in quietness without
any disturbance.

6. Pope Constantin being a Witness of these Kings munificence, Id. ib.
and having been informed of the wonderfully gracious Visitation by which our
Blessed Lady had vouchsafed to dignify the Province of the Mercians, admonished
the Holy Archbishop Brithwald to publish the great wonders of our Lord, and
for that purpose to assemble a Synod of the whole Kingdom, in which he should
in the name of the said Pope denunciate to all Princes, Nobles, Bishops and
other Ecclesiastics the Confirmation which he had given to the endowments of
the said Monastery made by the said Kings, together with many Privileges and
Exemptions by himself bestowd upon it, to the end, says he, that there should
be restored a Congregation of Monks, who should incessantly serve our Lord
according to the Rule of the glorious S. Benedict, which Institut as yet is
rarely observed in those parts. Moreover he enjoined him and his Successors
with the assent of Egwin Bishop of that Diocese to take into their care and
protection the said Monastery, and in case any Tyrants or oppressors should
invade the rights or possessions of it, to smite them with the rodd of
Excommunication.

10. S. Egwin being returned with these Charters and Letters, the Archbishop
accordingly assembled a Synod at a place named Aln-cester, so called by reason
of its situation on the banks of the River Alne: it being a place commodious
for the present purpose, by reason of its vicinity to Evesham, from which it
was distant about seven miles: it was also a remarkable place, because there
was a Palace of the Kings of the Mercians. And it is observed in the Life of
Saint Egwin, that this was the place where he ordinarily preached and exhorted
the people.

11. The only business in this Synod of Alne, was the reading and confirming
the ^ayd Charters and Privileges: Which being ^one, the said Archbishop sent
Saint Wilfrid Archbishop of York, who was there present, ^o Evesham, to
consecrate the place.

VII. CHAP. VII. CHA.

1.2. etc. The death of S. Wilfrid: with his preparation thereto.

8.9. etc. S. Acca succeeds him in the Sea of Hagulstad.

1. THIS was the last public action that we read performed by S. Wilfrid. For
now were finished the four years, according to a promise of the Holy Archangel
S. Michael, added to his life, after his great sickness in France. The which
sickness returning presently after this Synod, he prepared himself for his last
hour: The manner of which preparation is thus described by William of
Malmsbury:

[2. S. Wilfrid, says he, having for the space of four years enjoyed an
undisturbed tranquillity, Malmsb. ^^ Pon^. l. 3.
according to the promise of the Archangel Michael, was again assaulted with
the same infirmity which formerly had seized on him at Meaux (Meldis) in
France: and now it was so violent, that it suddenly deprived him both of his
senses and speech. Whereupon his Disciples who assisted him made their prayers
unto God that he might at least recover his speech, to the end he might dispose
his affairs, then not well settled. After which Prayer his speech was
immediately restored to him, and a few days after he recovered likewise so much
strength that he was enabled to visit all the Monasteries and other places
depending on him. Thus being, by his frequent sicknesses, admonished that death
approached, he took care to accomplish those good designs in the administration
of which he formerly had not been sufficiently diligent.

3. He ordained Abbots and Superiors over all his Monasteries: and as touching
his Treasures, he divided them into four parts: Of which one portion, and that
was the greatest, he bequeathed to the Roman Church, by whose authority he had
been exempted from all injuries, and restored to his honors: And this part he
intended himself to present, notwithstanding his great age, if he had not been
prevented by death. A second part he gave to the poor. A third he delegated to
the Superiors of his Monasteries, to the end that thereby they might be enabled
to purchase the freindship and favor of Great men, and consequently secure
themselves from the violence of their adversaries. The fourth part he bestowed
on those who had been his attendants and companions in his travells, and who as
yet had not received possessions for their Sustenance.

4. Having performed these things, he took leave of his Disciples at Rippon,
whom he especially loved, and in other parts of the Northumbers, and took a
journey to a conference with Ceolred King of the Mercians, to which he was
invited (namely to the forementioned Synod, and consecration of the Monastery
of Evesham:) And being there he provided carefully for the security and peace
of his Monasteries in that Region, which through the indulgence of Princes, he
had founded in great number.

5. After he had made a progress through them all, and procured great
advantages to them, in which care he spent a year and a half, immediately after
he was by a renewing of his infirmity again admonished of his approaching
death. This happened to him when he was in the Isle Inundule (or as Saint Beda
calls it, the Province of Vndule, a region in Northamptonshire at this day
called Oundale, corruply (says Camden) for Avondale, or the Vale of Avon.)
Perceiving then that his last hour was come, he made a short exhortation to
his Disciples and children, for his weakness would not permit him to speak much,
and having bestowed on them, his Benediction, he, for ought appeard, without
any pain at all finished his life, whilst the Monks there present reciting the
Psalier were come to those words of the Psalm, Send forth thy Spirit, and they
shall be created, etc. He dyed on the fourth day before the Ides of October,
says S. Beda: and in the seaventy sixth year of his age, having been Bishop
the space of forty six years.

6. He was a man who for justice sake had been exposed to many dangers, and who
in the places to which he was banished did not spend the time unproffitably,
but was very diligent in erecting Monasteries, and founding Bishoprics. He was
naturally qualified so as easily to ingratiate himself with Stranger Princes in
whose countries he lived an exile: and on the other side by reason of his
inflexible love to justice he was exposed to the hatred of his Natural
Princes. No man ever lest so many Monasteries behind him, which he distributed
to many Successors. From the Monastery of Oundalo where he dyed, and over
which he had appointed a certain, Abbott called Cudbald, his Body was carried to
Rippon, where it was buried with great honor. These wonders attended his
death:

7. In the hour of his expiration there was heard a sweet melody of birds, and
clapping of their wings as if they were flying up to heaven, but not one bird
could be seen. And the same thing happening several times during the solemn
Procession when his body was transported, certain devout and prudent persons
then present interpreted it to be an assembly of Angels, which according as
had been promised him, were come to conduct his soul to heaven. For, as has
been already declared out of Saint Beda, the Archangell Michael appearing to
him in France, said to him these words, I do assure thee that for the present
thou shall recover from this sickness. But be prepared, for after four years I
will visit thee again. Bed. l. 5. cap. 20.
His Body was buried in the Church of the Blessed Apostle Saint Peter in
Inrhypum (Rippon,) near the Altar toward the south; and on his Tomb was
inscribed an Epitaph recorded by the same Saint Beda; and importing, how he had
founded the same Church and richly adorned it: how he had erected there a rich
Cross of silver: how he had left there the four Gospells written in Letters of
gold, enclosed likewise in a golden case: How he had ^educed his country to
the Catholic observation of Easter: How he had founded great numbers of
Monasteries, instructing them in the ancient Rules of the Holy Fathers: And
lastly how during the space of forty five years in which he exercised the
Episcopal charge, he having been exposed to many dangers both at home and
abroad, at last attained to his eternal happy rest in our Lord. Martyrolog.
Angl. 2. October.
His Memory is celebrated among the Saints by the Church on the twelfth of
October, the day on which he dyed. How his Sacred Relics were translated from
Rippon to Canterbury two hundred and thirty years after his death, we shall in
due place declare. Bed l. 5. c. 21.


8. His Successor in the Sea of Hagulstad (or Hexham) says Saint Beda, was
Acca, formerly one of his Priests: a man of admirable magnificence: for having
founded a Church to the honor of Saint Andrew the Apostle, he richly adorned
it, and having gathered many Relics of the Apostles and Martyrs, he raised
therein several Altars in which he placed the said Relics. Moreover he built
in the same a most Noble Library, furnished with a vast number of volumes He
provided also for his Church all manner of holy vessels, Lamps and other
ornaments. And for a more solemn performance of the Divine Office he sent for
out of Kent a famous Cantour named Maban, who had learnt Ecclesiastical
modulation of the Successors of Saint Gregory there: Him he detained the space
of twelve years to instruct his Monks both in such Song as they either had
never learnt, or by disuse had forgotten.

9. The devout Bishop Acca also himself was very skillful in Church-song, and
moreover learned in Holy Scriptures, untainted in his Confession of the
Catholic Faith, and perfectly versed in Ecclesiastical Discipline. For from
his infancy he had been brought up among the Clergy of the Holy Bishop Bosa,
Bishop of York: And afterward aspiring to Religious Perfection, he adioynd
himself to Saint Wilfrid, in whose attendance he continued to his death. Whith
him also he went to Rome, where he learnt many things pertaining to
Ecclesiastical institution, which he could not have learnt at home.]

10. We find in Saint Beda, that Saint Acca, before his exaltation to the
Episcopal degree, had been an Abbot: for under that title there is an Epistle
directed to him, ^d in Prefat. ad Hexameron.
declaring how by his instinct and order Saint Beda had written his Treatise
called Hexameron, touching the Creation of the world. And how after he was made
Bishop, he wrote oftimes to the same Saint Beda, and exhorted him to write his
Commentaries on Saint Luke, etc. shall be declared hereafter.

VIII. CHAPTER
VIII. CHAP.
1.2. etc. Death of S. Aldelm Bishop of Shirborn.

5.6. etc. Elogies given to him: even by Protestants.

8.9. etc. Forther succeeds him: To whom an Epistle from Archbishop Brithwald.

1 THE same year in which Saint Wilfrid dyed, our Island lost another Star
likewise of the first magnitude, the Holy and most learned Bishop Saint Aldelm,
Bishop of Shirborn: concerning whom frequent mention has been already made.

Ap. Capgravium in S. Aldelmo.
2. As touching his death, thus writes the Au^hour of his life in Capgrave: S.
Aldelm in a good old age, full of virtues and Sanctity departed to our Lord on
the eighth day before the Calends of June, in the seven hundred and ninth year
after our Lords Incarnation, and the fifth year after he had been promoted to
the Episcopal charge, and the thirty fourth after his being instituted Abbot.
He was buried in his Monastery of Meldun (or Malmsbury) with great honor.

3. His death was by divine revelation foreknown to Saint Egwin, who in a
certain Treatise thus writes, Two years after the foundation of the Monastery
of Evesham the Holy Bishop Aldelm departed to our Lord: whith being made known
to me by revelation, I called together she Religious Brethren to whom I
declared the decease of that Venerable Father: and presently after with great
speed I took my journey to the place where his Sacred Body reposed, above fifty
miles distant from his Monastery of Malmsbury: Whither I conducted the same,
and there buried it very honorably. Moreover I gave command, that in every
place in which the said Body daily rested during the Procession, there should
be erected Sacred Crosses. All which Crosses do remain to this day, neither
has any one of them felt any injury by time. One of the said Crosses is yet to
be seen in the Cloister of that Monastery.

4. Two hundred and forty years after his death, to wit, in the year of Grace
nine hundred forty nine (says the foresaid Author) his Sacred Body was taken
up out of his Tomb and placed with great honor in a Shrine. His Memory is
yea^ly celebrated by the Church on the Anniversary day of his death, which was
the twenty fifth of May. Martyrolog. Romans 25. Maij


5. This glorious Bishop is never mentioned by any of our ancient Historians
without high praises: Yea even our late Protestant Writers are very large in
his commendations. Bale, Bale Cent. 1. cap. 83.
though ordinarily rude and uncivil toward Catholics, yet of S. Aldelm he
testifies that he was so diligently studious in all learning, Divine and
Humane, that he far exceeded all the Ecclesiastical Writers of his time. And
that both in verse and prose he was wonderfully learned, both for Latin and
Greek: for his wit, sharp: and for his style, elegant. He happily departed to
our Lord in the year of his Incarnation seven hundred and nine. Camden
likewise thus writes of him: He is truly worthy that his Memory should for ever
flourish, not only in regard of his Sanctity, but learning also. He was the
first of the English Nation who wrote in the purity of the Latin tongue: and
the first who taught the English to compose both verse and prose as well in the
Greek as Latin style. This Aldelm after he was dead was reclamed by the Great
King Athelstan as his Tutelar Saint. The like Elogies do Bishop Godwin, D.
James and the Centuriators of Magdeburg make of him.

6. Yet after all this, there is scarce one Point in which they condemn the
Roman Church, as an Error justifying their Separation from it, but was held by
him. And particularly touching the Supreme Universal authority of the Pope,
Vid. sup. l. c
in the heretofore mentioned Epistle of his to Gerontius King of Cornwall,
Aldelm Ep. ad G^re^^. u^ Regem.
he in the name of the whole English Synod writes: That S. Peter merited by a
happy and peculiar Privilege to receive from our Lord the Monarchical Power
of loosing sins both in heaven and Earth. Moreover, That the foundation of the
Church, and bullwark of Faith was placed principally on Christ, and
consequently on Pe^e^, etc. And that Christ who is Truth it self did thus
establish on Peter the Privilege over the Church, Thou art Peter, and on this
Rock I will build my Church. Yea Flacius Illyricus writes that S. Aldelm
maintained, Illyr. l. 7. Testium p. 611.
That the Confession of the true Faith, wholesome Doctrine and a life otherwise
unreprocheable would nothing proffit him who lived in separation from the Unity
of the Catholic Roman Church. This is the Faith taught then in the English
Church: and the Teachers of this Faith the Protestants, now esteem Saints: Yet
neither their Sanctity nor learning could secure their Lives from the present
sanguinary Laws now in force.

7. Some Writers affirm that S. Aldelm was a Scott: but his name, merely Saxon,
does disprove them, which signifies an ancient Helmet: Capgrav in S. Aldelm.
Godvvin in Epise. Sa^isb Tvvin. in H^ol. Acad. Oxon. l. 2. s^ct. 110. Malmsb de
Reg. l. 2.
And generally our Historians acknowledge him to have been of the English-Saxon
progeny. Capgrave, B. Godwin and others affirm that he was Brothers son to King
Ina. Brian Twine says he was son to King Ina himself: And William of Malmsbury,
that he was from ^is ancient Progenitors nearly allied in blood to King
Ethelstan.

8. There succeeded him in the Episcopal See of Shirborn a devout Priest,
named Forther, who by the test^mony of Saint Beda, his contemporaney, is
described to have been a man well versed in the study of Divine Scriptures.
Little more is extant concerning him in our Ecclesiastical Monuments: Only
Bishop Godwin relates of him that almost thirty years after this he attended a
Queen of the West Saxons in her pilgrimage to Rome.

9. Probably this is the same person to whom Brithwald at this time Archbishop
of Canterbury wrote an Epistle extant among those of Saint Boniface the Apostle
of Germany, Bonifac. Ep. 58.
with this Inscription, To the most Reverend and most Holy our Fellow-Bishop
Fortherey, Berthwald a Servant of the Servants of our Lord, sends health in
our Lord. The Epistle it self, because it gives some Light to the practice of
that age, we will here adioyn as follows: Ibidem.
10. Since the request which in your presence I made to the Venerable Abbot
Beorwald took no effect, which was that he would set at liberty a young
captive maid, whose kindred dwell near to this City: being importuned by them I
thought fit to direct once more these Letters to you by a Brother of the same
maid, whose name is Eppa: Hereby therefore I do earnestly entreat you that you
would by all means obtain from the foresaid Abbot that he would from this
bearers hands accept three hundred shillings (solidos) for the ransom of the
said young maid, and consign her into his hands to be brought hither to the end
she may spend the rest of her age in joyful freedom among her friends. This
affair if you will bring to good effect, you will not fail to receive a good
reward from God, and many thanks from me. Besides this, I conceive that our
Brother Beorwald receiving this money will be no looser. I ought to have made
my first request, that you would be mindful of me in your daily Prayers. Our
Lord Jesus Christ preserve your Reverence in health many years.



11. The slavery of this young maid mentioned here denotes the ancient custom
of the Saxons, continued a long time after by the Normans, of buying slaves and
annexing them to certain Manors or Lands, which were therefore called
Villains: which without a ransom could not be restored to freedom.

12. As for Beorwald, mentioned in this Letter, he was probably Abbot of
Glastonbury, who succeeded Hemgisle, in the year of Grace seven hundred and
five: as the Antiquities of that Monastery declare. And he it was who wrote the
life of the Holy Bishop Egwin, and not, as some mistakingly affirm, Brithwald
Archbishop of Canterbury, who sat above four and twenty years in that See
before S. Egwin died.

IX. CHAP. IX. CHA.

1.2. etc. The Martyrdom of S. Indractus an Irish Prince: his murder
miraculously discovered.

1. ABout this time happened the Martyrdom of a son of a certain Irish King, who
returning from a Pilgrimage to Rome by Brittany, in his way from Glastonbury
toward Ireland, was together with seven of his companions barbarously murdered
by robbers. His name was Indractus, and his Memory is celebrated in our
Martyrologe on the fifth of February. Maryrolog. Angl. 5. Febr. Ap. Capgrav. in
S. Indract.


2. Concerning him thus writes the Author of his life in Capgrave, [After that
Saint Patrick had converted the Irish Nation to the Faith of Christ by many
signs and wonders, he passed over the Sea thence into Brittany, and at
Glastonbury he happily ended his days in a good old age. For this cause many
devout persons of Ireland have accustomed in devotion to visit the said
Monastery. Now there was in Ireland the son of a certain King, his name was
Indractus, a young man well imbued with learning, adorned with virtues, and
favored both by God and man. This young Prince aspiring only to heavenly
joys, for a more secure obtaining them resolved to despise, yea to fly from
all the snares of Princely palaces and delicacies. Taking therefore with him
nine companions, together with his Sister named Dominica (our Martyrologe calls
her Drusa) he in devotion undertook a pilgrimage to Rome. Having therefore a
prosperous passage by Sea, he arrived at a Haven in Brittany, named Tamerunt:
And there this devout assembly built an Oratory, and spent a long space of time
in the service of God and mortification. At length leaving his Sister there, he
with his other Companions pursued their pilgrimage to Rome. As for the frequent
Miracles wrought by the Holy man, in Brittany or in his journey, I omit them:
the curious Reader may have recourse for them to the Author: who thus
prosecutes his Story: 3. Returning after some time from Rome into Brittany,
Idem. ibid.
he had a resolution to go to Glastonbury, and there at the Monument of Saint
Patrick to pour forth his Prayers to God. Now at that time Inas King of the
West Saxons held his Court near that place in a town called Pedret: in the
villages round about which many of his Servants and attendants were dispersed.
Among whom there was a certain son of iniquity named Hona. This man curiously
observing Indractus and his companions in their way from Glastonbury, that
their baggs and purses were well stuffed with money. Whereupon the Minister of
Satan with his accomplices following them, overtook them at a Village named
Shapwick, and violently breaking into the house while they were sleeping, there
murdered them all. Which having done, they took their Sacred Bodies, and cast
them into a deep pit, to the end no man might find them.

4. Now it fortuned that King Inas (whose abode was near that place) on a
certain night being afflicted with great pain in his bowels, to ass^age the
same, went abroad into the open air, and looking toward heaven, he saw a
pillar as it were of fire, issuing out of the place in which the sacred bodies
were hidden, the splendor of which was always in his eyes which way soever he
turned them. The same spectacle offered it self to him three nights
consequently, whereupon taking some of his Courtiers with him, he went to the
place, and having found the bodies of the holy Martyrs, he took care that they
should be buried at Glastonbury with great honor. The Body of S. Indractus was
placed on the left side of the Altar, opposite to the Monument of S. Patrick,
and his companions under the pavement round about. As for the Murderers, they
having the impudence to be present at the burial, were visibly seysed on by
Devils, and so horribly tormented, that they tore their own flesh with there
teeth, and shortly after with terrible roarings miserably ended their lives.



5. Thus writes the said Author: a summary of which relation may be read in
William of Malmsbury, collected out of the Antiquities of the Church or
Glastonbury. The village where they were murdered still keeps the same name,
Shapwick, and it is seated near unto Glastonbury.

X. CHAP.
X. CHAP.
1.2. etc. Geruntius King of Cornwall overcome by King Ina.

5.6 The Picts overcome by the Northumbers.

1. THE year of Grace seven hundred and ten was spent in Brittany in great
preparations and turmoyles of war: A. D. 710.
For one way the Picts, and another the Britains invaded the Saxons and
English, endeavoring to recover some part of their former losses.

2. Gerontius King of the Britains in Cornwall, was the first who brought his
army into the field, against Inas King of the West Saxons. This is the same
Gerontius, to whom S. Aldelm wrote the Epistle before cited, in which he
endeavored to quality the inveterate rancour still burning in the hearts,
especially of the British Clergy, against the Saxons, though now Christians
and their Brethren. A. D. 710.


3. What was the particular ground of their quarrel, not any of our Historians
do declare. It is probable that Gerontius, seeing King Inas so employed in
works of piety, building of Churches and settling affairs both of State and
Religion, imagined that by a sudden invasion finding him unprepared, he might
gain some considerable advantage against him. But he found himself deceived,
for King Inas showed himself as courageous in war, as devout in peace.

4. The combat fought between them, and the time of that combat is thus
described briefly by Huntingdon: Hunting. l 4.
The next year after the death of S. Wilfrid, says he, King Ina and his
kinsman Nun fought against Gerente King of Wales. In the beginning of which
combat Higebald a Saxon Duke was slain. But afterward Gerente with his army and
associates was compelled to fly, leaving their arms and other spoils to their
pursuers.

5. At the same time, says the same Author, Berfrid, Id. ib.
who was Consul, or General of the Kingdom of the Northumbers, resisted and
quelled the Pride of the Picts. That which begott and nourished this pride in
them was the good success which twelve years before this they had against
Br^thric, or Berthred Captain of the Northumbers, who desiring to avenge the
death of his Master King Egfrid slain by them, W^stmin. ad A. D. 700
made an hostile invasion upon their country: but as his Lord, upon whom the
curses of the Irish, cruelly treated by him, lay heavy, fell by the swords of
the Picts: so did Brithric also, says Matthew of Westminster, who yet places
this story two years too late: which mistake in Chronology is usual with him.
Since that time till this present year no mention is made of any debates
between those two Nations, which it seems the Picts attributed to the weakness
of the Northumbers, and thereupon now attempted an invasion of their country.

6. But they found not the same success as before, Hunting. l. 4.
for Berthfrid Captain of the Northumbers coming to a battle with them between
Here and Cere, putt them to flight, and slew great multitudes of the Picts, so
avenging the death both of King Egfrid and his Consul Brithric.

XI. CHA.
XI. CHAP.
1.2. Death of Saint Adrian Abbot of Canterbury.

3. His Successor Albinus: different from Alcuinus.

Bed. l. 5. c. 21.
1. THE same year, says S. Beda, which was the fifth of the Reign of Osred King
of the Northumbers, the most reverend Father Adrian Abbot (of the Monastery of
S. Augustine in Canterbury) dyed, and was buried in his Monastery. He was a
faithful assistant in preaching the Word of God with Theodore Archbishop of
Happy Memory. This was the one and fortieth year since he had been appointed by
Pope Vitalian to attend Theodore, and the nine and thirtieth since he arrived
in Brittany. Among other proofs of the learning and great endowments of this
holy Abbot, as likewise of S. Theodore, this is one, that Albinus his Disciple,
who succeeded him in the government of the said Monastery, was by his care so
perfectly instituted in learning and the study of Holy Scriptures, that he had
more then an ordinary skill in the Greek tongue, and for the Latin, he was as
perfect in it, as in his Native language.

Matyr. Angl 9 Ianuar.
2. Our Island preserves a grateful memory of this holy Abbot Adrian, for in
our Martyrologe his name is recorded among the Saints, and anniversarily
recited on the ninth of January. It was not by his learning that he purchased
this honor: for, as the Author of his life in Capgrave testifies, his
Sanctity was testified by many miracles.

3. As touching his Successor Albinus, there is a great controversy among our
Modern Historians whether he was the same with Flaccus, surnamed Albinus or
Alcuinus, the Instructour of the Emperor Charlemagne, and founder of the
University of Paris. But the proofs demonstrating that they were different
persons seem unanswerable. For this Elder Albinus was of Canterbury; the other
of York. This was the Disciple of his Predecessor Adrian and the Holy
Archbishop Theodore; The other had for his Masters Hechbert Archbishop of
York, a Disciple of S. Beda, and Egbert his Successor: This was an Abbot: the
other only a Priour during his abode in Brittany: Lastly This Albinus dyed and
was buried at Canterbury in the year of Grace seven hundred thirty two, Weaver
Mon. G Thorn in Chron. An. l. 32.
as Weaver in his Monuments testifies, as likewise our ancient Chronicler
William Thorn; but the younger Albinus or Alcuinus dyed and was buried at
Cormorac in France in the year of Grace eight hundred and four, or rather eight
hundred and nine. So that a whole age intervened between them.

XII. CHAP. A. D. 711.

XII. CHAPTER



i.2.3. An Episcopal See established among the South Saxons at Selsey.

1. IT has been declared in the occurrents of the year of Grace six hundred
eighty one, how S. Wilfrid being driven from York, and retiring into the
Kingdom of the South Saxons, did in a wonderful manner convert them to the
Faith of Christ. After which he received from their King the Isle of Selsey for
a quiet and settled habitation. Which Isle, says Malmsbury, he filld with
Monks, and withal transmitted it to posterity dignifyed with an Episcopal
See. Notwithstanding hitherto not any one since his departure from thence, had
succeeded him in that Bishopric, but the Churches there were governed by the
Bishop of Winchester. The first therefore who sat in that peculiar See after
S. Wilfrid was Eadbert: concerning whom Matthew of Westminster thus writes: 2.
In the year of Grace seven hundred and eleaven a Synodal Decree was made in
the Province of the South Saxons, A. D. 711. Westmonast. ad An. D. 711.
that whereas the said Province had hitherto pertained to the Diocese of
Winchester, at this time administered by Daniel Bishop thereof, it should
afterward enjoy its own Bishop. Now the first Bishop ordained there was
Eadbert, who had been Abbot of a Monastery built by S. Wilfrid of happy memory,
and called Selsey: Where the said servant of God after his banishment from York
remained the space of five years, and obtained of the King of the same Province
a possession of eighty families, in which he might receive and maintain his
companions in banishment. Now S. Wilfrid, as soon as he had received that land,
he built upon it a Monastery, in which he placed and instructed in Monastical
Discipline many Monks, especially such as had accompanied him in his banishment.
But when he was restored to his See of York, first of all Cedwalla, and
afterward his Successor in the Kingdom of the West Saxons, In a invaded the
said Province, subdued and killed the Kings of it, and annexed it to their own
kingdom. And hence it came to pass that all that time the South Saxons had no
peculiar Bishop of their own, but were subject, as has been said, to the Sea
of Winchester.



3. As touching the forementioned Synod by the Decree whereof a New Bishopric
was erected in the Province of the South Saxons: Where it was assembled, what
Bishops sat in it, or what other Decrees were made in it, no mention is made
in any of our Ecclesiastical Writers. Neither does Sir H. Spelman take any
notice of it. We may therefore so interpret the foresaid Historian, as
likewise S. Beda who affirms also that the South Saxons received a Bishop by
virtue of the Decree of a Synod, that this Decree has relation to the Synod of
Hartford assembled thirty years before this time, Sup. A. D. 673
in the ninth Chapter of which was ordained, That the number of Bishoprics
should increase proportionably to the multiplying of New Converts.

XIII. CHAPTER
XIII. CHAP.
1.2. etc. The Gests of Saint Cungar a Hermit.

1. TO this time we must refer what our Historians write concerning S. Cungar a
holy Hermit, Ap. Capgrav. ^^ S. Cungar.
who (as the Author of his Life testifies) was Son to the Emperor of
Constantinople: who^ when his Parents intended to engage in a Matrimonial
state, he despising worldly pomp and glory, and aspiring to an eternal
heavenly Crown, withal purposing to preserve his Virginal Chastity inviolate,
stole privately in a mean habit from the Imperial Court, without discovering
his intentions to any. Neither would the holy and humble young man settle his
abode in any place near his parents, for fear, in case he should come to be
discovered, they might recall him home. In this regard therefore, as likewise
by the encouragement of an Angel he passed the Sea into Italy: from when he
traveled over the Alps into France, and out of France sailed into Brittany.
For all his thoughts and endeavors were employed in finding out a seat proper
for a solitary life: In his iourneys therefore he diligently enquired after
such a place.

2. Saint Cungar at last being arrived in Brittany, and still earnestly
pursuing his good intention inspired by Almighty God, directed his journey
toward a Province thereof, named Somerset: where by the admonition of an Angel
he came to a place perfectly agreeable to his mind; a place compassed about with
waters and reeds, and which from his name, was afterward called Cungresbury:
(Concerning which place, which to this day keeps its name, thus writes Camden,
Under the hills of Mendipp toward the North, says he, is seated a small
village called Congersbury, Camd. in So^^^sitsh.
so named from a terrain person of great sanctity called Congar, who lived a
Hermit there.)

Ap. Capgr. ib
3. S. Cungar much delighted with the pleasant situation of the place among
Waters and woods, said thus to himself, This is the place I have so long sought
after, here shall be my abode, here I will spend the rest of my life in serving
the Blessed Trinity. Thereupon he presently raised up a little habitation for
himself: and afterward measured out a Church yard: Which having done, he built
there an Oratory to the honor of the most Holy and undivided Trinity. In this
place therefore this devout servant of God continued, being clothed with
Sackcloth, and without any distraction leading a most innocent devout life in
fasting and prayer. Early every morning he entered into the cold water, where he
remained for his mortification till he had thrice repeated the Pater noster.
This being done, he came shivering with cold into his Oratory, where he spent a
great part of the day in devout prayers to God. At three of the clock after
noon he did eat a small portion of barley bread, never using other sustenance,
nor this to satiety. By this means his body became so very lean, that all that
beheld him, judged that he was sick of an age. This Eremiticall life was most
delicious to him, who aspired to the imitation of the actions of Saint Paul the
first Hermit and Saint Anthony.

4. To this relation the same Author annexes an account of several Miracles
wrought by this servant of God, Idem ibid.
which I willingly omit. After which he proceeds thus: Such miracles, says he,
being published abroad, Ina the magnificent King of the English, liberally
bestowd upon the venerable Hermit all the little territory lying about that
village, assuring him that the same place should be to him a secure and
undisturbed refuge, and that as long as himself reigned, no soldiers or any
other should hinder him from his devotions. The same King after he had bestowd
this land upon Saint Cungar, abstained ever after from visiting him, because he
would not molest the holy man, nor interrupt his prayers.

5. Thus writes the said Author, to which he adds, Id. ib.
How Saint Cungar in the same place instituted twelve Canons, who lived a
Regular life: and how afterward passing over the River Severn into Northwales,
he there erected another Oratory where he assembled a Congregation of Monks.
Lastly how he undertook a pilgrimage to Rome, and from thence to Jerusalem:
where he dyed and his Sacred body was brought back to Congersbury. But as
touching the year or day of his death, he affirms nothing.

XIV. CHAPTER
XIV. CHAP.
1.2. etc. S. Swibert by reason of wars, leaves the Boructuarians.

6.7. etc. Prince Pipin gives him the Isle of verda: where he builds a
Monastery.

1. BUT the glorious Exploits wrought in Germany by S. Swibert and our other
Missioners from Brittany, do require our attention to them. These we will
relate in the words of an irrefragable witness S. Marcellin (cited by Baronius)
who was an eyewitnes and fellow worker in the Gospel with S. Swibert;
beginning with the occurtents happening three years before this time, which
avoiding distraction we thought fit to ioyn together.

Romans ad. A. D. 70^. (...).
[2. Two years being passed (says Baronius) since a door had been opened to the
Holy Apostle of the Boructuarians, S. Swibert, for preaching the Gospel to
that Nation, there fell out a bloody war between them and their neigbouring
Saxons: Which war was contrived and raised by the malice of the Devil, as
himself before had threatened to the Holy man. The Narration of which matter is
thus made by S. Marcellinus.

3. Although the Devil be a liar and the Father of lies, says he,
notwithstanding he made good his threatening to S. Swibert when he was cast out
of a person possessed by him, That he would take a course to drive him out of
the Province. For two years after that, an illustrious man called Bruno one of
the principal Nobility among the Saxons coming into the Province of the
Boructuarians with a great retinue, took up his lodging in a village named
Ratigen: Where being entertained by one of principal authority there, there
happened a quar^ell between them, after they had been inflamed with drink: and in
this dissension the Saxon through the Devils instigation, killed the other with
two of his servants. Which being known through the village, the friends and
kindred of those who had been slain betook themselves to ^rms, and to revenge
their death putt to the sword the said Noble man of Saxony, and almost all his
followers.

4. A true report of this being spread through Saxony, presently the Saxons, in
great rage with a powerful army entered the borders of the Boructuarians, where
they killed great numbers with the sword, besides other horrible mischeifs
which they did to the rest: and as for the village of Ratigen, they with an
implacable fury utterly destroyed it. On the other side the Boructuarian^, and
principally such as had relation to the men who had ^een slain there, having
likewise assembled strong forces of armed men, with fire and sword demolished
many towns and fortifications of the Saxons.

5. Such violences and depopulations on both sides having continued a long
time, the Boructuarians and specially such Christians among them as had been
converted by Saint Swibert, considering that they were not able to resist the
power and insolence of the Saxons, they took leave of Saint Swibert, and having
received his benediction, they were forced to remove themselves into remoter
Provinces, to the end they might there with more security serve our Lord.

6. In the mean time the glorious Prelat S. Swibert perceiving his flock to be
dispersed up and down, and that no truce could be procured between the two
Nations, nor any fruit by his preaching, by reason of the stony hearts of the
Saxons, he made his prayers earnestly and assiduously to God that he would
please to show him some convenient place, where he might dwell quietly in his
old age. At last by the admonition of an Angel he was commanded to go to
Colen, where the Noble Duke Pepin and his wife Plectrude, would bestow on him a
fit place for his habitation.

7. Now, says Baronius, how when the Holy Bishop came to Colen, he was there
kindly and respectfully entertained by Plectrude the Wife of Pipin: how
likewise after he had done many things beseeming his Apostolical Office, and
by her recommendation obtained from her husband a village called Werda, seated
in an Island of the Rhene, where he built a Noble Monastery, is at large
recounted by the same Marcellinus. That establishment proved a strong bulwark
to expugne the infidelity of the Saxons. And thus it happened that wheresoever
this Apostolical Bishop went, his presence proved advantageous and healthful
to souls: and that dispersion of Christians became a mean for the further
spreading of the Gospel, as it happened in the Primitive Church, when by
occasion of a violent persecution of Christians at Jerusalem, the dispersion of
the Disciples round about became proffitable to the salvation of infinite
multitudes.

8. Thus writes Baronius out of Saint Marcellin: S. Marcell. ib
But let us hear the relation from the Holy man's pen. The Noble and devout
Princess Plectrudis (says he) with great devotion received the Holy Bishop in
the Palace of the Dukes of Colen and Lorrain, a great part of which she had
changed and consecrated into a Cloister of Religious Virgins, entitled the
Church of the glorious Virgin, Ad Capitol^um. And awhile after she directed the
holy man attended by a Noble person of Ardenna named Gerald, who had been
healed by Saint Swibert a little before of a pestilent disease, with
commendatory Letters to her husband Prince Pinpin, earnestly requesting him
that he would bestow on the holy Bishop the village of Werda, seated in an Isle
of the Rhene, to the end that there he and his Disciples attending him might
take care and do good to the souls of the Pagan Saxons living near. Pipin,
being at that time well stricken in years, received S. Swibert with great
honor, detaining him a good space of time with him. In the end with great
chearfulnes, as one who thirsted after the Conversion of the Infidell-Saxons,
he with a Regal magnificence, not only bestowed on him the said village, but
withal out of his own copious Treasure offered and added great store of gold
and silver to enable him for the building a Church and Monastery to the glory
of God, and the nourishing with the word of life that barbarous people utterly
ignorant of the Faith.]

9. Now this Pipin was not the younger Pipin, who was son to Charles the Great:
but Pipin firnamed de Herstallo, Magd^b.
Father to Charles Martel, who was founder of this Monastery: So that the
Centuriators of Magdeburg relating otherwise, do show great want of exactnes
in distinguishing times; and great ignorance in citing Saint Beda for a witness,
who was dead above forty years before the younger Pipin reigned, who was so far
from being a founder of the Monastery of Werda, that he changed into a Castle
and fortification against the Saxons. But let us return to S. Marcellins
Narration.

S. Marcell. ib.
10. The holy Bishop, says he, having taken leave of the Prince, returned to
Colen to Saint Plectrudis. By whose assistance and authority he being attended
by many Masons and other workmen went to Werda, where he presently began to
found a Monastery near the Rhene to the honor of the glorious Virgin Mary, and
there he collected a Congregation of Monks devoutly serving our Lord. After
which it can hardly be expressed with what humility, devotion and reverence he
preached the Faith of Christ to that rude Pagan people, and especially with
what purity of mind and body he celebrated Masses and performed all other
Ecclesiastical duties.

XV. CHAP. A. D. 712.

XV. C^A.



1.2. etc. Saint Swibert raises to life a dead man, etc.

1. AFter two years preaching there, Bar^^ (...) A. D. 71^.
says Baronius, the foundations of the Saxon-Church began to be laid by the
most holy Apostolic Bishop S. Swibert, who came to them in abundance of
benedictions, with signs and Miracle, raising a dead man to life, being
powerful in all things, both deeds and words. Let us attend therefore to what
S. Marcellinus has delivered concerning these things.

2. In the seven hundred and eleaventh year of our Lords Incarnation, S.
Marcell. (...)
says he, when S. Swibert not only in Werda, but also in the towns and
villages preached the Gospel of Christ with great fervor to the profane
Saxons, it happened on a certain day, being Teusday, that he went into a certain
neighbour-village attended by a venerable Priest called Willeic, to celebrate
Mass: and a certain richman (who had been a Pagan called He^nger, but was
afterward converted, and being baptized on the Feast of S. Peter and S. Paul,
was named Peter) this man out of a great servour of Faith, devotion and
Humility himself took care of conducting a Cart laden with sand, stones and
other materials convenient for building the Monastery and in the way, by the
malice of the Devil an Enemy to all good works, the said Peter fell from the
Cart under the wheels, and was taken up dead, having his head and other
members greivously wounded in several places. By occasion of which there being
assembled a great concourse of people, who with grief beheld so sad a
spectacle: When preparation was making for his burial, the Holy Father, S.
Swibert with his devout Chaplain Willeic came to the place: Where being
informed of the manner of the death of the said Peter, he having great
confidence in our Lords goodness, commanded the dead body to be carried to his
Cell. Which being done, he in the presence of a great multitude expecting the
issue, with many sighs and abundance of tears kneeling down, powrd forth his
prayers most earnestly to our Lord to restore to life the said Peter, who was a
servant of his Monastery. And having a good space multiplied such prayers, he
rose and kissing the body, immediately the dead man revived and rose up
perfectly whole, insomuch as there was not left on his body the least marks of
any wounds, nor no settling of blood. Which the people seeing, with great joy
gave thanks to the Mercy of our Savior.

3. The fame of this wonderful Miracle being spread in the Province, many
Neophytes were confirmed in Faith, and Infidels converted which were
regenerated by Baptism. Now the same Peter lived a long time after in perfect
health, till the building of the Church was quite finished, and after the Holy
Bishop departed to our Lord. Notwithstanding this, he did not reap that fruit,
which might reasonably be expected, among that hardhearted peogle, for though
many both of the common people and Nobles were converted, yet the greatest part
remained in their Infidelity.

XVI. CHAPTER
XVI. CHAP.
i. 2. etc. A fictitious pretended Synod of London introducing the Veneration
of Images* Which was in use from the beginning.

A. D. 7.7 (...)
1. FOR want of matter to furnish the year of Grace seven hundred and twelve,
Bale the Apostate, and the Centuriators of Magdeburg have invented a fiction of
a certain Synod pretended to have been held at London decre^ing the introducing
of Sacred Images into Churches and veneration of them: as if before this time
either Images had not been seen in the Churches of Brittany, or no respect had
been given to them.

H^^psf. saec. 8 cap. 5. ^pelman ^n Council. p 20^.
2. This assertion of theirs Harpsfeild deservedly calls a false and senseless
fable. Yea Sir H. Spelman, though no friend to Images, acknowledges that the
Centuriators report this without the least testimony of any ancient Writer. And
whereas the occasion of this fiction was taken from the Apparition of the most
Blessed Virgin Mary to S. Egwin, upon which he founded the Monastery of Evesham
the same Sir H. Spelman confesses that neither in the Charter of King Coenred
nor of S. Egwin, Id. ib.
neither likewise in the Letters of Pope Constantin, nor in any other Monuments
recorded by him any thing is to be found concerning the introduction or
adoration of Images.

Id. ib. p. 217. Bed. l. ^. c. 20 and l. ^. c. 20.
3. He grants indeed that our Apostle Saint Augustine made use of the Cross and
Image of Christ, because Saint Beda expressly affirms the same. But he
resolutly denies that before these times the Saxons did ever adore the Cross
or Sacred Images. Indeed if by Adoration he mean that worship is due only to
God, we agree with him that neither then, nor before or since the Saxons, or
any Catholic allowed it to the Cross or Images, as appears in the seventh
Occumenicall Synod. But if he will by Adoration understand a worship or
veneration Superior to a Civil respect, but infinitely beneath the Worship due
to God it is most apparent that both S. Augustine and the Saxons after their
Conversion did allow and practice Veneration to Crosses and Images.

4. For S. Gregory who was S. Augustins Master expressly calls the Cross
Venerable ( Venerandam: Greg. M. 7 Ep. 5.
) and commands that the Image of our Blessed Lady and the Cross should be
taken out of a Synagogue of the Jews with that veneration that becomes them. ^.
Ep 53.
And again* I know, says he, that you do not therefore desire the Image of
our Savior to the end you may adore it as a God. And we likewise prostrate
our selves before it, but not not as before a Divinity. ^ Mar.. ^n ^oc. C. ^^t.
de Imagine.
Hence Peter Martyr treating of Images, says concerning him, Gregory the Roman
Bishop was a Patron of Superstition, for among his Prayers this is one: Grant
unto us, O Lord, that those who come to adore thy Holy Cross may be freed from
the chains of their sins. Bale Cent ^. c. 68.
Yea Bale himself the inventour of the forementioned fable, acknowledges that
Gregory admi^s of adoration of the Cross, and Masses for the dead.

5. Again Saint Beda praises Saint Oswald for erecting a Cross and praying
before it: Bed. l 3. c. 3.
and moreover he adds: Idem ib.
To this day many devout persons are wont to cut off slices from the wood of
that most Holy Cross, which putting into water and giving that water to be
drunk either by sick men or beasts, they are presently restored to health. All
which particulars are manifest signs of a Religious Veneration. Hence it is
most apparent, not only that the Saxons did from the beginning use the Cross
and Image of Christ (and this Sir H. Spelman confesses:) but likewise
religiously venerate them. And that be ore the Saxons time the Christian
Britains did the same, has been upon several occasions demonstrated in the
former part of this History.

6. As touching therefore this mentioned fictitious Synod of London we will
only add that which B. Parker writes: Antiq Br^ta^ ^n Br^thvvald Archiepisc.
What was decreed in that Synod, is not come to light. And whereas some
Writers affirm that the worship and ^^oration of Images was permitted by it,
how truly they affirm this, I will not interpose my judgment.

XVII. CHAP. XVII. CH

1.2. etc. Another pretended Synod: censured.

1. AFTER that Sir Henry Spelman had abated the authority of the foresaid Synod
of London, Spelm. in Con^^ l f. 219.
he adioyns another Synod which he affirms to have been celebrated under King
Ina about these times, and which he calls a great Council of all Bishops and
Princes, Nobles, Counts and a^ Sage Counselors and Senators as likewise the
Commons of the whole Kingdom, which Council was assembled by the c^mmand of
King Ina.

2. Now what was transacted in this pretented Council he thus relates out of
the Appendix (Auctarium) to the Laws of King Edward the Confessor: King Ina
took to wife a Lady named Guala, for whose regard that country was named
Wales, which formerly had been called Cambria: For the said King had two wives.
And with this his last wife he had possession of Wales, Cornwall and the happy
Crown of Brittany. Likewise generally the English at the same time took to
themselves wives of the stock of the Britains: The Britains also took wives
of the illustrious blood of the English, that is, Saxons. For this was
performed by a common Council and assent of all Bishops, Princes, Nobles,
Counts, sage Counselors, Senators and Commons of the whole Kingdom, and by
the command of the foresaid King Ina.

3. Moreover not a few English took wives of the blood and stock of the English
of Germany: Thus all the inhabitants of Brittany at that time became of one
flesh and blood: and the Laws of Matrimony were well ordered, fornication and
all uncleannes being quite banished out of the Realm. Moreover great diligence
was used that for the establishment of the Kingdom and security of the people
just judgments should be given. And by this means through the Divine mercy all
the inhabitants of Brittany were made one Nation and one people. The Kingdom it
self likewise was by all named England or the Kingdom of the English, which
before was called Brittany.

4. Such an Union being established among the inhabitants of this Island,
formerly much divided, they all unanimously stood together for the common
proffit of the kingdom, and courageously fought against the Danes and
Norwegians, unplacable Enemies of the same, with whom for a long time most
furious wars and battles were fought. For the foresaid King Ina was a Prince
magnificent, liberal, wise, prudent, moderate, courageous, just and warlick;
and upon occasion showed himself illustrious in his skill in Divine and secular
Laws, and magnificent works: and he governed, united and established his
kingdom in peace and unity by his great Wisdom and prudence, and when occasion
was, by power and armed force. Thus far the Appendix to the Laws of King Edward
surnamed the Confessor concerning this pretended Great Council, which truly
for the many ungrounded circumstances in it, well deserves to be joined to the
foregoing Synod of London. Id. ib.


5. The observation and censure which Sir H. Spelman therefore gives of it,
deserves to be here annexed: Among our ancient approved Authors, says he,
there is not any mention of a second marriage of Ina King of the West Saxons
with Guala, as is presumed, the daughter of Cadwallader last King of the
Britains, nor of the change of name of Cambria into Wales upon that occasion,
or that King Ina had any more then one wife which was Ethelburga ( whose name
shows her to have been of an English extraction) who manifestly was his last
wife. A. D. 713.
For when he undertook a Monastical Profession at Rome, she became a Nunn in
England, and was afterward Abbess of Barking: and both of them continued in
their Religious habit till death. Likewise concerning the time and authority of
this Council I can give no resolute judgment. For some Writers affirm that
Cadwallader reigned only three years, others five, and Geffrey of Monmouth
allows him twelve, so that it is utterly uncertain at what time King Ina should
get possession of the Kingdom of Wales or Cambria. Again Geffrey makes King
Inas the Nephew of Cadwallader, Henry Lluid his Son, and this pretended
Council, his Son in Law.

XVIII. CHAP. XVIII. C.

i.2. etc. S. Cathburga Sister to King Ina: builds the Monastery of Winburn. Of
her Sister S. Quenburga.

1. A. D. 713.
TO the year of Grace seven hundred and thirteen is referred the foundation of
a Monastery of Religious Virgins at Winburn in Dorsetshire by S. Cuthburga and
S. Quenburga Sisters to Ina King of the West Saxons. The town where this
Monastery was built, had been anciently called Vindoglade, but the Saxons
changed the Name into Winburn. It is a Town (says Camden) seated upon the side
of a Hill, Camd. in Dorse^sh.
and in the Saxons time was very large and populous, and of great renoun. In
the year seven hundred and thirteen Cuthburga a Sister of Ina King of the
West Saxons, who had been married to the King of the Northumbers, but upon
discontent was divorced from him, built here a Monastery of Virgins.

2. The name of the King of Northumbria to whom Saint Cuthburga had been
married, is by Matthew of Westminster call Egfrid, by Florentius, Alfrid: but
Chronology in the opinion of F. Alford demonstrates that it was Osred: and the
cause of the divorce was the Kings shameful intemperance: For says William of
Malmsbury, Malmsb. de Reg. l. 1. c. 3.
he reigned twelve years and lead a most filthy life, frequently offering
violence to consecrated Virgins.

3. Certain indeed it is, that if she built this Monastery presently after her
divorce, it must needs be Osred who was her husband: for it was founded in the
eighth year of his reign. But Malmsbury, as likewise Florentius expressly
affirm that King Alfrid was her husband, Florens. A. D. 718. Malmsb. de. Reg.
l. 3.
and Saint Cuthburga having promised her Virginity to our Lord, by earnest
prayers and tears obtained of him permission to perform her vow: and retired
her self into the Monastery of Barking, where she lived under the Discipline of
the Holy Abbess Hildelida. But afterward (how long afterward is uncertain) she
her self became the Mistress of a Monastic Rule, A. D. 714.
and built the Monastery of Winburn, where she spent the remainder of her days
in quiet devotion. And this is the more probable, because in the Missal and
Breviary of Sarum her Office is prescribed of a Virgin, and the Prayer imports
the same. So that it is not likely that so licentious a Prince as Osred would
suffer himself to be persuaded to permit her the accomplishing of her promise.

4. Here then we have an example not to be paralleld in all the History of
Gods Church, Of three Kings of the same Kingdom, to wit, the Northumbers,
almost immediately succeeding one another, and as some Writers affirm, sons of
the same Father, ( King Oswy the Brother and Successor of Saint Oswald) who
having received three Queens Virgins, were content to dismiss them all
untouched. The first was Alcfrid the eldest son, who took to wife Saint
Kineburga daughter to King Penda, who by his leave became first a Nun, then
an Abbess of Dormancester, afterward called Kineburg-Castle, and now
contractedly Caster, about two miles distant from Peterborough. The next
Brother, Egfrid who married Saint Ethelreda, who with his consent first took the
veyle at Coldingham; then became Abbess at Ely: And the third this Alfrid (or
Osred) who espoused S Cuthburga; and resigned her to her heavenly Bridegroom.

5. Saint Cuthburga having built her Monastery, and therein a Church to the
Queen of Virgins (says the Author of her life in Capgrave) there macerated
her body with almost continual watchings and fastings. Ap. Capgr. in S.
Cuthburga.
She was humble both to God and men, and mild to all. Many Virgins she
assembled in the same place. She permitted her Body to enjoy no rest, but
importunatly day and night her Prayers sounded in the merciful ears of God.
She happily ended her days in the year of Grace se^ven hundred twenty seven:
Martyrlog. Angl. 31. August lb 22. Sept.
and her memory is celebrated by the Church on the last day of August. Her
Sister dyed three years after, and is commemorated on the two and twentieth of
September.

6 A great proof of the perfection of Monastical. Discipline observed after her
death in her Monastery, Rudolph. in viz. S. Liobae. A. D. 790.
is this. That Saint Boniface the glorious Apostle of the Germans having
founded a Monastery in those parts made choice of her Disciples above all
others* and particularly of Saint Lioba, to plant Religious observance there.
This is testified by Rodulphus, Disciple of Rabanus Maurus in the life of S.
Lioba written by him.

Idem ibid.
8. The same Writer also affirms that in the same town of Winburn there was
erected likewise a Cloister of Monks, either by Saint Cuthburga, or her Brother
King Ina: And that from the beginning a Law and Decree of Religious Discipline
had been made, That excepting Priests who were to serve at the Altar, no men
should be permitted to enter the Monastery of those Religious Virgins: Nor any
woman into that of Religious men: And that among the other obligations of the
Virgins at their Profession, this was one, never to step out of their Cloister,
except upon a necessary cause to be approved by Superiors.

9. Among the Epistles of Saint Boniface there is one inserted from one Aldhun
an Abbot, and two Abbesses called Cnenburg and Coenburg (which were probably
these two Princely Sisters, Saint Cuthburga and Saint Quenburga) desiring a
devour Priest called Wietbert an attendant of Saint Boniface, to recommend to
God in his Prayers two Religious women Quoengyth and Edlu, both which dyed the
same day; being the Ides of September.

XIX. CHAP. XIX. CHAPTER

1.2. etc. The death of Prince Pipin: to which S. Swibert endeavored in vain
to prepare him.

1. THE death of Duke Pipin happening about this time, A. D. 714.
since the holy Apostolic Bishop Saint Swibert was employed in preparing him
to it, which charge he performed with great zeal, though with small effect, it
will not be judged impertinent to give an account of what passed between them,
from the relation of S. Marcellin, a witness whose authority cannot be
questioned. Thus therefore he writes.

[2. It happened, S. Marcellin in Suiverto.
says he, in the year seven hundred and fourteen after our Lords Incarnation,
that Pipin of Herstall a magnanimous Prince and Ma^re of the King of France his
house, sell fick of that disease which endred with his life. Hereupon the
illustrious Bishop Saint Swibert was earnestly desired by certain Noble persons
to visit him: But he thought fit first to go to Colen attended by his two
Disciples Willeic and Theodorick; there to demand counsel of Plectrudis the
illustrious Duchess of Lorrain or the Austrasians, how he should carry himself
in that affair. She with great devotion received and entertaind him, at last
for her own consolation retaining with her the pious Priest Willeic, she
dismissed Saint Swibert, accompanied by Agilulf Archbishop of Colen and other
Prelates, giving them charge seriously to advise her husband Prince Pipin, that
in case he should dye he would take care not to disinherit his illustrious
lawfully begotten children, Drogo Duke of Champagne and Grimoaldus Maire of the
house to Childebert King of France, by substituting in his Will as his Heyr,
Charles Martell a bastard by Alpaide his Concubine which injustice he could not
do without the loss and damnation of his soul, besides the stain that he
would bring upon his name in the sight of the whole Church, and Scandal of his
Nobility and Subjects.

3. This was an employment which not long before had cost the Holy Bishop
Lambert very dear, for because he had reprehended the same Prince for his
unlawful cohabitation and marriage with the same Harlot, he lost his life and
was deservedly esteemed a Martyr.

4. The foresaid Bishop, therefore being arrived at Ioppilta (a Town upon the
River Mosa) where the sick Prince lay, were kindly received by him. They
therefore to comfort and encourage him to suffer with patience temporal
afflictions or infirmities, told him that Almighty God in his wisdom and
goodness made the way to heaven rough and unpleasant to his Elect, least being
delighted in the way they should forget or disesteem the happiness which they
expected in their country.

5 After such like discourse often repeated, at last having found a convenient
and opportune season, among other spiritual advices which they gave him for
the good of his soul, they with great affection and zeal discovered to him
the special motive of their journey, sharply reprooving him for his unlawful
marriage. But they had no sooner touched upon this argument, but they were with
great indignation repulsed by the Prince. And the harlot Alpaide having
diligently enquired into and found the occasion of these Prelates journey,
rudely commanded them presently to be gone: And withal was so importunate with
the Prince in behalf of her Son Charles Martel, that she obtained of him
whatsoever she requested. And accordingly Pipin dying the same year, left
Charles Martel heir of all his Principalities.

6. This being seen by the foresaid Prelates they were forced to return to Colen
with grief and dishonor: where they made known to Plectrudis all things which
had passed at Ioppilia with Pipin, withal comforting and exhorting her to
sustain such crosses with patience.

XX. CHAP. XX. CHA.

i.2. etc. The Birth education and Gests of S. Guthlac: Of his Disciple
Bertelins intention to murder him. Of Ethelbald a banished Mercian Prince
comforted by him, etc.

BUT in Brittany a far more comfortable and happy death befell a Hermit of
admirable Sanctity, named S. Guthlac, who, as in this life he enjoyed a familiar
conversation with Angels, so in the next he was made their companion in
blessedness for ever. His Gesis we have thought fit to remitt till this time
when he dyed, because having lived a solitary life, they were scarce at all
involved with the common occurrents of the Church in his time The story of his
life may require from us a more then ordinary attention and credit, because
written by Felix a devout ^reist of the same age, and dictated to him by
Bertelin a Monk of Croyland his companion in Solitude. The Author dedicated
his Writing to Elwold King of the East Angles, which is a sufficient warrant to
rectify the Chronology of some of our Historians, who place the death of this
Elwold in the year of Grace six hundred and ninety. By the general account S.
Guthlac lived forty seven years, and being twenty four years old he undertook
a soldiers Profession, in which he lived eight years, and fifteen years after
in the Solitude of Croyland: so that his Birth must fall in the year of Grace
six hundred sixty seven. The wonderful circumstances of which is thus
recorded by the foresaid Author Felix:

[2. In the days of Ethelred King of the Mercians, In vit. Saint Guthlac^ ^p.
^uv. 11. Aps.
says he, a certain Noble person of Royal offspring, named Penwald, had by
his wife Tecta the holy servant of God Guthlac. At the hour of his birth his
future Sanctity was miraculously designed: For from heaven there appeard the
hand as it were of a man, of a red color and a splendor inexpressible, which
marked the outward door of the house with the Sign of the Cross: thereby
happily prefiguring, that the infant then ready to be born should constantly
carry in his body the Cross of Christ. A great multitude of neighbors there
present being astonished with the strangenes of this Miracle, concluded that
some great unknown Mystery was represented by it: when presently one of the
Midwives issuing forth, p^blished the birth of the infant. When he was
baptized, he had the name Guthlac given him, which in the Saxon language
signifies, A good gift: And indeed he was given to his parents by God, to the
end he might courageously fight against their oppressors, both carnal and
spiritual, and victoriously triumph over them He was of a countenance
cheerful and mild, so that he became grateful and beloved by all.

3. When he had attained to the four and twentieth year of his age, seeing the
Enemies of his country grow strong, he began to aspire to military honors,
and raising soldiers he feircely invaded them, broke into their Cities,
subverted their Castells and by many warlick exploits gaind to himself
immortal fame. Yet even in the midst of his fury he showed mercy to his
enemies, and restored a third part of all the spoils gotten by him.

4. But at last calling to mind the sad and ^earfull deaths of many Princes
from whom he had descended; and considering how all secular pomp is but a smoke
suddenly passing away; that life is short, death terrible, a dreadful Judge,
and the pains to be suffered for sins incomprehensible and endless: Therefore
calling his soldiers together, he told them, That having hitherto fought for
vanities, he would spend the remainder of his life in our Lords warfare: That
they should choose themselves a Captain, but for his part he would follow the
Cross of his Captain, Christ. And when by no persuasions he could be drawn
from this resolution, quitting his arms, he went to Rependon (or rather,
Rippon) where there was a famous Monaste^y, in which receiving the Clericall
Tensure, he submitted himself to a strict Monastical Discipline, wholly
abstaining from any drink which could inebriate. He was very diligent in
learning the Psalms and Church Hymns, and in the space of two years he with
great facility advanced himself in the knowledge of Srcred Scriptures. He had a
pleasing aspect, was humble in his gesture and gate, religiously showing great
fear of in God his actions, firm in Faith, patient in hope, profuse in Charity,
kind and mild to all, provident in counsel, and circumspect in his words.

5. Having spent two years in a Coenobiticall conversation, he aspired to
greater austerities in a solitary. Anachoreticall life. Now there is in
Brittany a vast fenny country which beginning from the River Gron^e extends
itself Northward along the Sea coast for a very great space, and it is
variously divided by fe^ns, woods, and serpentine rivers. Thither did he
repair, having first obtained leave of his Religious Brethren: and was told by
the inhabitants of the place that the I^le was named C^oyland: where several
persons having had a desire to dwell, were forced to fly away by terrible
apparitions of Devils. This report not discouraging him, he passed over into
it in a fishers boat, on the Feast day of S. Bantholmew the Apostle: in whose
intercession having a special confidence, he resolved to make his abode there
in that place of horror and vast solitude, having with him only two young men
which had followed him.

6. Whereupon he built himself a small cottages his clothing was only raw
skins of beasts, and his nourishment barley-bread with muddey water, and this
never till Sun^ett, and with great parsimony. The Enemy of mankind therefore
envying the Humility of this Man of God, did suggest to his mind so vehement a
tentation, that he had falln into the pit of despair, had not our Lord
mercifully regarded him by the intercession of the Blessed Apostle S.
Bartholmew. For when he being in great disturbance of mind was upon the point
to desert his Desert, S. Bartholmew visibly appearing to him, encouraged him to
co^stancy, by discovering that such Tentations were permitted by our Lord for
the trial of his Faith, and to the end that distrusting himself he might place
all his confidence in God, who would never forsake him. After such like
exhortations, the Apostle vanished out of his sight, and from that hour the
Devil never had the boldness to tempt him with the spirit of Despair.

7. Consequently the devout Author recounts several other particular
Tentations, horrible apparitions of Devils in several shapes; sometimes
persuading him to immoderate and indiscreet fasting, thereby to destroy his
health: sometimes insulting upon him, whipping, binding and carrying him
through those fenng places, etc. all which he despised, and triumphed over.

8. Now, as has been said, there were attending him two youn^ men, the name o^
one of them was Bertelin: he had received the Clericall Tonsure, and served our
Lord in Spiritual Exercises under the direction of the Holy man. Now the Wicked
Spirit perceiving that he could not by any tentation subvert the Saint, raised
in the heart of this young man so violent a passion against him, that he took a
firm resolution to murder his Master and Teacher, that he being dispatched out
of the way, his house and furniture in it might descend as by right upon him.
But the pious servant of our Lord by revelation of the Holy Ghost was
acquainted with all these malicious designs of Bertelin therefore on a certain
day calling him to him, he plainly and distinctly told him all his thoughts,
when, and where, and in what manner and with what intention he had designed his
murder. The young man perceiving that he was deprehended, with great remorse
cast himself at his feet, begged and easily obtaind pardon. And from that hour
he showed all fidelity to him, and continued with him to his death: after which
he had the honor to assist at his burial This is the same Bertelin who
dictated all these particulars to Felix the Writer of his Life.

9. Hereto the Author adds several mi^aculous signs wrought upon several
occasions by the man of God: which the Reader at leisure may have recourse to.
Moreover he relates how he was visited by a certain Bishop named Hedda; who,
being a witness of his piety testified by his discerning the thoughts of a
Priest, called Wilfrid (who attended the Bishop and promised to explore whether
he was not an Hypocrite, such as he had seen many in Scotland, who pretending a
solitary life, gave themselves to idleness and excess) Hereupon the Bishop
forced the Holy man against his will to receive the degree and honor of
Preist-hood.

10. One particular more we will add, briefly mentioned by the foresaid Author
of his life, but more fully related by Ingulfus Abbot of Croyland; who writes
the History of his Abbey, beginning it with this story of the Conversion of a
certain Prince of Mercia called Ethelbaldus by the good advice of S. Guthlac.

11. In those days (says he, that is, in the year before the death of this
Holy Hermit) Prince Ethelbald great grandchild of Alwy the Brother of King
Penda was banished out of the kingdom of the Mertians. He was of an elegant
stature, strong of body and warlick of mind, but (which was to be bewailed) he
was high-minded, and apt to any rash attempt against the King. For which
turbulent spirit of his (as we may justly imagine) he was exposed to many
dangers, and for a long space debarred all meddling with State-affaires. And not
only so, but King Coelred did violently persecute him every where, insomuch as
being in great danger, and wholly destitute of friends and all means to resist,
he would often come privately to the man of God Saint Guthlac, who was his
Confessor to seek for spiritual counsel, when all worldly assistance failed
him: and to him he humbly made his complaints.

12. The Holy man having heard him, kindly and mildly comforted him: and
withal, as one to whom future things were by divine revelation known, he
distinctly and particularly discovered to him what should succeed afterward,
promising him that he should be King of his Nation, and subdue all his Enemies.
Yea moreover he bad him be confident that all these things should happen to him
without any combat or effusion of blood, only by Gods power and Providence over
him.

13. But to these comforting promises he added serious admonitions, that he
should fear our Lord God above all things, and show ^ll subwission and respect
to his Holy Church: That he should often deplore his former crimes, and
constantly make good his purpose of amendment: For he told him that if he would
be careful to obey the Divne Law he might with confidence expect Gods help and
favor. By such exhortations and comforts the mind of the afflicted Prince was
exceedingly refreshed, insomuch as in the presence of his holy Father Saint
Guthlac, and others then standing by, he expressly promised, that as soon as God
should set him peaceably in the Throne of the Kingdom, he would found a
Monastery in the same place, to the honor of God and memory of his said
Father: And this promise a short time after he effectually accomplished.]

XXI. CHAP. XXI. CHAPTER

1. 2. etc. The death of Saint Guthlac: and wonderful occurrents. Of his
Sister Saint Pega.

1. AFter a life spent with such austerity, holiness and devotion, there must
needs follow a death conformable to it: which is thus related from the mouth of
his companion and Disciple, Berthelin.

2. When the day of his departure approached, he called to him his Disciple
Berthelin, In vit. Sanct. Guthlaci ap. Sur 11. April.
to whom he said, My son, I am now going to reap the fruit of my Labors: I
desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ. And after other words to the same
effect, he enioynd him to go and with great affection in his name salute his
Sister Pega, desi^ing her to take care of his burial. Withal he bid him tell
her, that therefore he had avoided the seeing and conversing with her in this
present life, that they might for ever enjoy each others company in the life to
come.

3. Then his said Disciple took the boldness to say thus to him, I adjure you,
Holy Father, that you will not refuse to tell me plainly what the matter was,
that every morning and evening since I dwelt with you I heard you speak to, and
sometimes seem to answer some body: Who was that person with whom you
conversed? Your speeches I heard, but could never understand with whom you
spoke. To this question the Holy-man answered, My dear son, My last hour is
now at hand: It is not therefore expedient for me now to lie, who all my life
have abhord it. Know therefore that from my first entrance into this wilderness,
every morning and evening I have enjoyed the conversation and comfort of a
heavenly Angel, who by his celestial consolations refreshed me in all my
labors and tentations. He foretold to me things future, discovered such as
were absent, and acquainted me with hidden Mysteries, which it is not
expedient nor lawful for me to make known. But now, My son, be careful to
seal up in silence these things: and presume not to discover them to any but my
Sister Pega, and the devout Anchoret Egbert.

4. When he had said this, such an odortferous fragrancy came from his mouth,
that it seemed as if one had strowed roses, or pourd forth balsam in the place.
And from midnight till morning a Light of inestimable brightness shone through
the whole house. And as soon as the Sun was risen, he said to his Disciple
Bertelin, My Son, now is the moment that I must go to Christ: Having said
"this with hands stretched forth toward heave, he fell asleep in our Lord, on
the third day before the Ides of April. And the same Brother saw as it were a
tower of fire reaching from the earth to heaven, the splendor of which was so
wonderful, that in comparison the light of the Sun at midday was pale and
obscure. A while after Blessed Pega the holy Man's Sister coming into the
Island, found the whole house replenished with a sweet fragrancy infinitely
exceeding all odours which either art or nature could produce. Then having
decently buried her Brother S. Guthlat in his Oratory, she returned to her own
dwelling.

5. About a year after his death, his sister and other Priests came to his
Oratory with a resolution to bury his body more honorably, and they found it
entire without the least corruption, as if he had been asleep. The joints
likewise of his arms and fingers were as easily flexible, as if the humors and
spirits were yet running through his veyns, and his sinews had lost nothing of
their former vigor. Moreover the garments in which his sacred body had been
wrapped preserved still their primitive freshnes and glass. With great joy and
exaltation therefore they again reposed the Sacred Body once more in a Tomb
expressly made for it.

6. Now Prince Ethelbald in his exile having heard of the death of the Holy
man, was overwhelmed with grief, and coming to his sepulcher, he cried out with
many tears, O Father whither shall I a poor banished man go? to whom shall I
have recourse? Now indeed I perceive that I am a miserable exile. Dear Father
Guthlac, do not you forsake him who is abandond by all, and exposed to all
miseries and torments. Having spoken many such words with extreme grief and
bitter sighs, toward midnight he saw the Oratory wonderfully enlightened with
an inexpressible brightness, and the Holy man himself appeard to him with a
celestial splendor, saying to him these words, My dear Son, our Lord has a
regard to thee, be comforted and assured that within two years all thy travells
shall have an end and thou shall recover thy throne with great glory. Besides
this, the Holy man expressly discovered to him how many years he should live,
and many other things which should befall him. And when the Prince desired some
sign to assure him that these things should be accomplished, the Holy man
added, Let this be a mark and sign to thee, that to morrow before nine a clock
in the morning the inhabitants of this place, now in want, shall be beyond
their hope supplied with abundance of provisions. Now when the Prince saw this
really fullfilld, his mind before wavering, was confirmed with great hope and
confidence. A. D. 715.
And indeed a short while after Almighty God took out of the way King Ceolred
his persecutor, and dispersed all his enemies, so that within the ^^ne
promised, the Royal dignity was restored to him, as shall shortly be declared:
and likewise how Ethelbald gratefully and magnificently accomplished his
Promise.

XXII. CHAP. XXII. CHAPTER

1.2. The Death of the Royal Virgin Saint Eanfleda, etc.

3. The death of Waldhere Bishop of London: to whom Inguald succeeds.

4. Beorna King of the East Angles after Elwold.

1. THE same year the Royal Virgin and holy Abbess S. Eanfleda likewise left
this val^^y of tears to go and enjoy the eternal embraces of her heavenly
Bridegroom, to whom she had been consecrated from her infancy. Vid. sup. l. c.
We have already declared, how she being born immediately before her Father
Oswi King of the Northumbers was ready to ioyn battle with the bloody King of
the Mercians, Penda, he made a vow that in case God would give him the Victory
he would devote her to his service in a Religious life: And the Victory
ensuing, he gave her to the care of S. Hilda Abbess of the Monastery of
Heortsig, and afterward of Steneshalch: in which S. Eanfleda lived some years
in obedience, and afterward became Abbess thereof: Where, (says S. Beda)
having accomplished threescore years in great devotion and purity, Bed. l. 3.
c. 24.
she was translated to heaven to celebrate her marriage with our Lord, to whom
she had been all her life espoused. In the same Monastery both she and her
Father Oswi, her Mother Eanfled, and her Mothers Father Edwin, and many other
Noble personages were buried, in the Church of S Peter the Apostle: and her
name is anniversarily recited among the Saints in our Martyrologe on the eighth
of February. Maryrolog. Angl. 8. Febr.


2. Among the Epistles of S. Boniface there is one which seems to have been
written by this Holy Virgin to an Abbess named Adolana, who lived in foreign
parts somewhere in the way to Rome: for therein she recommends to her care and
charity another Religious woman formerly brought up in her Monastery, who in
devotion to the Blessed Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul had undertaken a
pilgrimage to Rome to visit their Holy Sepulchers.

3. The year following Waldhere Bishop of London dyed, A. D. 715.
who had succeeded the glorious Bishop S. Erconwald in that See, and who, as S.
Beda testifies, gave the Habit of Monastical Profession to Sebbe the devout
King of the East Saxons a little before his death. His Successor was Inguald,
who governed the same Diocese about thirty years, and is reckoned the sixth
among the Bishops of London.

4. About the same time also happened the death of Elwold King of the
East Angles, in whose place his Brother Beorna reigned, who was the youngest
son of Ethelhere.

XXIII. C.
XXIII. CHAP.
1.2 War between King Ina and Ceolfrid.

3. Horrible crimes of Ceolfrid.

1. THE same year there arose great troubles in Brittany by reason of a bloody
war between Inas King of the West Saxons and Ceolred King of the Mercians.
These were both in power and extent of Dominion, the most puissant Kings among
the Saxons. An equality therefore bred a mutual emulation and desire in each
of them to advance themselves by the ruin of the other. King Ina was the
invader: Neither did he find Ceolred unprepared: so that they quickly came to a
battle. And the place of their combat was a Town in Wiltshire called
Wodensbury, from Woden the Idol of the Pagan-Saxons answering to Mercury. It is
seated near Wansdike, and is the same place where in the year of Grace five
hundred ninety one Ceaulin King of the West Saxons fought his last battle,
which having lost, he dyed presently after.

2. In this place did Inas and Ceolred meet to decide their controversy whether
should be Master: And (says Huntingdon) the battle was fought on both sides
with such horrible obstinacy, Huntingd. l. 4
that it could scarce be determined ^^ w^ether part the destruction was greater.

3. Ceolred esteemed it as a victory that he could resist so powerful a King
as Ina, from whom he little apprehended a second invasion, considering the
great deminution of his forces by the last combat. So that he esteemed himself
secure, and freely gave himself up to his lusts and abominable sacrilege. By
which he filled up the measure of his sins, and felt the year following in a
terrible manner the avenging hand of Gods justice. His lusts he extended even
to Religious Virgins consecrated to the immortal God, who therefore ought to
be exempted from the touch of any mortal man. And as for his Sacrilege in
in^ringing the privileges of Religious houses and invading their possessions,
our Historians do not particularly exemplify in any: So that it is probable
that it was the late-built Monastery of Evesham which was violated by him*
notwithstanding the great Privileges and Exemptions conferred on it both by
the Papal and Regal authority, and notwithstanding the solemn maledictions
denounced by the founder thereof Saint Egwin, yet alive, who in consecrating it
is recorded to have pronounced these words, If any King, Prince or other shall
be incited by the Spirit of avarice so as to diminish the Rights of this
Monastery (which God forbid:) Let him be judged before the Tribunal of God, and
never come into the memory of Christ: but let his name be for ever blotted out
of the Book of the living, and himself bound with the chains of eternal
torments, except he repent and satisfy for his crime in this life.

4. But before we relate the effect of this Curse upon this unhappy King, it
will be expedient to recount the story of a wonderful vision happening about
this time to a certain man who was restored from death to life, on purpose that
by relating the wonders of the other world he might deterr sinners from the
obstinacy of their rebellion against God. By which vision it appears, that this
King Ceolred was some time before his death destined to eternal torments. It
is not without some scruple that I am moved to insert in this History
Narrations of this Nature: But the unquestionable authority and Sanctity of the
Relat^ur obliges me not to omit it, though the Centuriators of Magdeburg
without any show of a rational disproof of it, do voluntarily and at
adventure condemn it as a fable.

XXIV. CHAP. XXIV. C.

1.2. etc. The Narration of a terrible Vision of a man, when his soul was
separated from the body* and afterward restored: related hy S. Boniface.

1. THIS wonderful relation is extant in an Epistle written by Winfrid,
afterward called Boniface, the glorious Apostle of the German Nation, and happy
Martyr of Christ. Which Epistle was directed to Eadburga Abbess sister to S.
Editha or Edgitha and daughter of Frewald a Prince among the East Angles. And
probably it is the same Eadburga concerning whom we read in the life of Saint
Guthlac, Ap. Caper. in S. Gutl. ^acs.
that the sent to that holy Hermit a coffin of lead, and in it a linen sheet,
in which she desired that after his death he would permit his body to be
enclosed. Her name is commemorated among the Saints in our Martyrologe on the
eighteenth of July. Martyrolog Angl. 18. Iul.


2. Concerning these two devout sisters we read thus in Camdens Description of
the Province of the Catechleum or Buckinghamshire: Camden in Buckingham.
The Town of Ailsbury in that county (says he) was anciently illustrious by
the Memory of Editha born and brought up in it: Who having obtained from her
Father Frewald this Town for her portion, by the persuasion of Priests
presently quitted all pretentions to a husband or the world, and taking the
Sacred veryle of Religion was, together with her Sister Eadburga, illustrious
for holiness in that age, wonderfully abounding with Saints. From her name there
remains to this day a village seated among the hills near adjoining, called
E^burton. Now the ^enour of S. Boniface his letter to S. Eadburga is as
follows:

B^^ifac. ^pist. 21.
[3. Most dear Sister, Your request to me is that I would carefully send you in
writing an account of the Visions showed of late to a certain man in the
Monastery of the Abbess Milb^rga, who was restored from death to life,
according as I was particularly informed by the Venerable Abbess Hildelida. I
thank God I can now more fully and clearly through his help fulfill your
desire, for I my self have discoursed with the revived person himself in these
transmarine parts, who perfectly informed me of all those wonderful visions,
which he in Spirit, and separated from his body, saw.

4 For first of all he told me that by a violent and mortal sickness he was
delivered from the weight of his lumpish body, and presently became in a state
resembling that of one whose eyes having been clowded with a thick veyle was on
a sudden freed from that impediment, for all things, which formerly had been in
darkness, became clearly visible to him. So himself having cast off the thick
veyle of his body, the whole world was at once represented to his sight, so
that with one glance he saw all creatures.

5. As Soon as he was thus escaped from his body, certain Angels so bright and
shining that they dazeled his sight, received him, and they with a melodious
harmony sung these Words of the Psalm, O Lord, rebuke me not in thine anger,
neither correct me in thy fury. They raised me up aloft into the air, an^
(...) ^aw the whole earth compassed with fire, (...) whence issued a flame
upwards vastly spread and most terrible to behold and it seemed as if the fire
would have consumed all things, had not the Angels, assuaged it by the
impression of the sign of the holy Cross: Which as soon as they had done, the
flame presently settled, and the pain which my eyes had felt by the ardour of
it became much qualified, though by reason of the splendor of the Angels
accompanying me it was not wholly taken away, till one of the principal among
them with his hand covering my head, protected me from all danger and
incommodity.

6. Moreover he told me that whilst he was out of his body, he saw such an
innumerable multitude of souls, that he thought there had not been so many
since the Creation: A like troop of wicked Spirits likewise there was, as also
of glorified Angels, and these were in a continual earnest dispute together
about souls as soon as they were issued out of their bodies: the devils
accusing and aggravating each ones sins, and the Angels qualifying and excusing
them.

7. Yea all his own sins and offenses which from his infancy he had committed,
and not confessed either through negligence, forgetfullnes, or ignorance that
they were indeed sins, all these he heard with his own voice earnestly crying
out against him and accusing him, every vice setting itself distinctly before
him, and upbrading him severally, one saying I am thy o^cupiscence, by which
thou did desire things unlawful, and contrary to Gods Law I am thy vain
glory, by which thou did boast thy self before men: I am Lying, with which
thou have often offended: I am idle speech, oftimes practiced by thee: I am vain
and wan^on on Seeing I am contumacy and disobedience to thy Superiors: I am
Spiritual sloth in holy Exercises I am wandering and cur^m cogitation, to
which thy mind almost every day yielded in the Church, or elsewhere: I am
Drowsines, which hindered thee from rising to praise God: I am an idle journey
which thou tookest for thy vain pleasure: I am negligence and want of care in
study about divine matters. And many other vices like these which in the days
of his flesh he had committed, and neglected to confess: yea beside these,
many sins cried out terribly against him, of which he had no suspicion that
they were sins. In like manner the Wicked Spirits joined with his sins in such
clamours and accusations, fiercely testifying to him he times and places where
he had committed all his sins.

8. Particularly he said he saw there a certain man whom whilst he was as yet
in a secular state he had wounded, and who was yet alive: this man was brought
to ioyn in testimony against him by those Wicked Spirits, and his bloody gaping
wound seemd to have a tongue which loudly upbraided him with his cruelty* Thus
all his Sins in a great heap being counted, his terribly malicious Enemies
cried out confidently, that he belonged to them, and therefore they had a ^ight
to torment him.

9. On the other side those few small virtues, said he, which I poor wretch had
with great imperfection practiced in my life time, they likewise lifted up
their voices to excuse me: One said, I am Obedience which he showed to his
Superiors* Another, I am Fasting, with which he mo^tyfied the unlawful
desires of his flesh: A third, I am Psalmody, exercised by him in satisfaction
for idle speeches. And thus every virtue cried out in my behalf to excuse me
against the clamours of the opposite Sins. And with these virtues did those
gloriously shining Angels ioyn themselves in my defense, so exalting and
magnifying them, that they now seemed to me far more excellent then before,
and much exceeding the strength I formerly had.

10. Besides this he told me, that in the lower part of the world he saw a
great number of pitts vomiting flames, and that in some parts the earth would
break asu^der, and there would issue terrible flames. Now among those pitts he
saw many wretched souls like birds of a black color, weeping and howling in
the flames, bewayling their demerits which had brought them to such torments;
which souls would sometimes sit on the brink of the pitts in some
refreshment, and anon with great wayling fall into the flames again. And one of
the Angels told him, that such a short vicissitude of rest did signify that
God after the last judgment would give perpetual rest to those poor souls.

11. Now under those Pitts there were others infinitely lower, whence, said he,
I heard a most dreadful and inexpressibly horrible groaning and shreiking of
souls, such as to which our Lord would never extend his mercy, but everlasting
flames shall torment them.

12. He saw likewise a place of admirable deliciousnes, in which there was a
glorious multitude o^ persons wonderfully beautiful, and rejoicing with
inexpressible joy, who invited him, if it were possible, to come to them, and
partake of their happiness: And from that place there was exhaled a most
odoriferous fragrancy, which was nothing but the breath issuing from those
happy and joyful souls. This place the Angels said, was that so much spoken
of Paradise of God.

13. And not far from this delicious place he saw a terrible River, which
flowed with fire and pitch: over which there lay a narrow plank instead of a
bridge, toward which those happy souls made great have, to the end that
passing over it they might arrive on the other bank to another place infinitely
more glorious and happy then the former. And some of them without any wavering
or difficulty soon passed over: but others slipping aside, fell into that
horrible River, some only to the knees, others to the arm-pitts, and others
quite plunged over head: yet every one of them came out much more beautiful
and glorious then before they fell in. And one of the Blessed Angels said,
These are such ^oules as when they ended their mortal life were staind with
some not very heinous sins and therefore stand in need of Gods mercy, that they
may be perfectly purified before they be admitted to his presence.

14. Beyond that River he saw the walls of a City of an unmeasurable length
and height, shining like the Sun: and he heard the Angels saying, This is that
Holy and glorious City, the Heavenly Jerusalem, in which those pure souls
shall rejoice for ever and their glory therein shall be so immense that for the
incomprehensible splendor no eye can look upon them.

15. The man likewise told me, that among others he saw the soul of a certain
Abbot lately dead, which seemed of great beauty: which notwithstanding was
seized on by the Wicked Spirits: crying out earnestly that he belonged to them.
But one of the Angels said, A. D. 716.
O you wicked wretches, I will presently show you that you can have no power
ovrr him. Then immediately there appeared a great multitude of white shining
souls, which cried out saying, This man was our Teacher and Instructour, and
by his exhortation gained us to God, by the merit of which charity he is
rescued from you, and therefore manifestly can not belong to you. And with
these souls the Angels joined in their contention with the other infernal
Spirits: by which assistance of the Angels that soul was delivered. Then one
of the Angels sh^rply rebuking the Devils, said, Take notice that without any
right or title at all you have laid hold on this soul: therefore be gone from
hence into everlasting fire. As Soon as he had said this, immediately those
Wicked Spirits with grievous houling cast themselves into those horrible pitts.
But a while after there came out others which renewed the contention about the
merits or demerits of souls.

16. He said moreover that at that time he could discern the different merits
and condition of men yet alive. And that those who kept themselves free from
crimes were manifestly in Gods favor, and defended from all danger by Angels
to whom they were united and in a sort allied by Charity. But to those who
polluted themselves by heinous sins there was continually associated a Wicked
Spirit always in^iting them to sin: And after every sin committed by them in
thought, word or deed, this Wicked Spirit would make it known to other
Infernal Spirits, at which they would rejoice: and immediately the former Evil
Spirit would return to his Office o^ tempting.

17. Particularly he told me that he then saw a maid yet alive, who grinding
in a mill saw near her lying a new distaffe curiously carved, which belonged to
another woman: and this distaffe because it pleased her, she stole. Then those
wicked spirits with joy declared this theft to their companions, bidding them
take notice of it.

1^. He added saying, I saw the soul of a certain Brether, newly dead to whom
I gave assistance during his sickness and assisted at his burial: and he at his
death charged me to require in his name of his brother that for the comfort of
his soul he would give freedom to a certain captive maid. But his Brother
through avarice refused to perform his request: for which the foresaid soul
with grievous sighs complaind of his brothers hard-heartednes.

19. He likewise testified concerning Ceolred, King of the Mercians, who at the
time of these visions was certainly alive. Him he saw defended from the
violence of Devils by Angels, who held over his head a certain Vmbrella like
a large book: But the Devils panting with earnestnes besought the Angels to
take away that defense, and give him up to their fury, for they laid to his
charge a multitude of most horrible crimes, for which, said they he is designed
to everlasting torments in Hell. Then the Angels with sad countenances said.
Alas, alas, this wretched sinner can be defended no longer, neither can we
afford him any further assistance, so great and unpardonable is his guilt and
impenitence: Having said this they removed the defense from over his head: and
immediately those infernal spirits more in number, then all creatures now alive
in the world, with shoutings and joy laid hold on him and tore him incessantly
with several sorts of torments.

20. At length the Angels commanded the person who being rappd from his body,
saw and heard all these things in a spiritual vision, that he should without
delay return to his own body: and that he should confidently manifest all these
things to such as with a good intention asked him, but by no means to
unbeleivers or deriders. They likewise charged him to discover particularly to
a certain woman dwelling a great way off, all her sins committed by her;
withal signifying to her that if she would, she might yet by Penance and
satisfaction recover the favor of Gtd. But in the first place they commanded
him to reveal all these visions distinctly to a certain Priest named Buggan,
and according to his instructions declare them to others. That he should also
confess to the same Priest all those his own sins of which he had been accused
by the Unclean Spirits, and according to his judgment correct and amend them.
And for a proof that it was by an Angels command that he had recourse to him,
he should tell the Priests that for the Love he bore to God he had worn the
space of many years an iron girdle about his loins: a thing which no man alive
knew of.

21. To conclude, he told me that whilst he was separated from his Body he had
such a horror and hatred against it, that in all his Visions he saw nothing so
odious to him, or so contemptible, and that evaporated so filthy a stink,
except the Devils and the flame in which they were tormented, as his own body.
Yea seeing the care and kindness which his brethren and fellow servants
expressed to his hateful body, he had a horror therefore to approach to them.
However being commanded by the Angels he was forced to return to his body, and
this he did at break of day, having left it a little after midnight.

22. After he was restored to life, it was a full week before he could see any
thing, for his eyes were full of Blisters, and blood issued out of them. And
afterward all proved to be true which had been told him by the Angels,
touching the devout Priest, and sinful woman. Likewise the sudden death
presently following of the wicked King Ceolred confirmed too well the truth of
those things which were seen touching him.

23. Besides these, there were many other like things represented to him in his
vision, which he could not distinctly call to mind: Greg. M. Dialog. l. 4. c.
36.
and indeed he professed that his memory afterward was nothing so retentive, as
formerly. Now all these particulars which at your earnest request I have here
written were related by him, not to me alone, for there were three Religious
and venerable Monks present with me, who do here ratify by their
subscriptions the truth of this Writing. Farewell, truly holy Virgin, etc.

24. Such is the tenor of S. Boniface Epistle: and, accordingly as S. Gregory
observes, thus does the Divine Goodness in his great mercy dispose, that some
even after their death do return presently to their body, to the end that by
seeing they might be induced to fear the torments of Hell, which having heard
from others they would scarce believe.

XXV. CHAP. XXV. CHAPTER

i. 2. etc. Death of King Ceolred: to whom Ethelbald Succeeds: who according to
his promise to S. Guthlac, builds the Monastery of Croyland.

1. IN the year seven hundred and sixteen after our Lords Incarnation Ceolred
King of the Mercians by his incestuous lasts, A. D. 716.
sacrilege and other crimes having filled up the measure of his sins by his
fearful death too well confirmed the truth of the foregoing Prophetical
Vision concerning him. William of Malmsbury only writes in general concerning
it, saying, Ceolred miserable in his immature death after a reign of only eight
years, was buried at Lichfeild, leaving his wife Queen Wereburga a widow, who
became a Religious woman, and afterward an Abbess: His heyr and successor in
the Kingdom being Ethelbald grandchild of Alwi brother to King Penda.

2. But Saint Boniface writing to this New King Ethelbald, and deterring him
from impiety by the sad example of his Predecessor, thus describes his
miserable death: Colred, says he, thy Predecessor a ravisher of Consecrated
Virgins, and infringer of Ecclesiastical privileges, whilst he was splendidly
feasting with his Nobles, the infernal Spirit seized on him, and forced from
him his soul without Confession or any Sacrament, as he was talking with the
Devil, and blasphemously detesting God and Divine Law. By which expression
that learned and famous Saint reckons among the most heavy and terrible
punishments of a soul, to depart out of the world not purified by Confession,
nor armed with its last Viaticum, the Sacrament of our Lords Body.

3. The Successor of Ceolred in the Kingdom of the Mercians was, as has been
said, Ethelbald, to whom Saint Guthlac had promised it not long before. And he
likewise delayed not the same year to perform the promise he had made to the
Saint by building and richly endowing the Monastery of Croyland. Concerning
which, Ingulphus a Monk and Abbot of the same Monastery thus writes: King
Ethelbald perceiving that his dear Father and comforter Saint Guthlac became
glorious by many Miracles, Ingulph. hist.
with great joy and devotion went to the place of his burial, and having now
got the kingdom promised by the Holy-man, he entirely accomplished whatsoever
he had promised him whilst he was alive. For presently sending for a Monk of
Evesham named Kenulph, a man of noted piety, he gave unto him the whole Isle of
Croyland, that he might there build a Monastery and gather a Congregation of
Monks to serve God for ever: Which Monastery he entirely freed from all secular
charges and customs: Of which Grant he made them a Charter signed and
subscribed by his Bishop and Nobles. A Copy of which Charter is there by the
same Author recorded.

4. In the ^ame Charter is containd a measure of the Land by him given: for the
Isle of Croyland is there described to be four leagues in length and three in
breadth: To which were added two adjacent Marisnes, the one being two leagues
in length and one in breadth: and the other, each way two leagues. Moreover for
the building of the Monastery he gave out of his treasury the first year three
hundred pounds, and for ten years following one hundred pounds yearly.

5 But this devout King thus far only was able to accomplish his vow this first
year, Idem ibid.
that he assigned the place for building the Monastery, together with the lands
and possessions annexed to it. But to erect so vast a building on a soil so
fenny and yiedling, required strange industry and labor. Which how it was
performed, the same Author thus describes: Because Croyland was a fenny soil,
as the name imports (for it signifies a crude muddy ground) and therefore could
not sustain a stone-building of any considerable bulk, the foresaid King took
order that innumerable vast piles of oak should be forcibly driven deep into
the earth, and that solid earth should be brought in boats from a place called
Vpland, nine miles distant from thence, which Ne^ earth was mixed with the
morish soil and laid over the said piles And thus, whereas S. Guthlac had
formerly contented himself with a wooden Oratory, the King began and
consummated a magnificent Church of Stone, thereto building a Monastery which
he enriched with possessions and all sorts of ornaments: and during his whole
life loved that place most tenderly. And since this first foundation that
Monastery never wanted Religious persons to inhabit it to this day (that is,
till the Norman conquest at which time the said Author lived.)

6. The first Abbot of that Monastery is in the forenamed Kings Charter called
Renulphus, sent for out of the Abbey of Evesham. But besides the Monastery,
there was a little Hermitage in which S. Guthlac lived. Who being demanded who
should succeed him therein, answered, That it was a person who when that
question was asked, was a Heathen Idolatour. His name was Cissa: who being
afterward converted, betook himself to an Anachoreticall Life, and succeeded S.
Guthlac in his solitude.

XXVI. CHAP. XXVI. CH

1.2 3. The unhappy death of Osred King of the Northumbers.

1. IN the kingdom of the Northumbers the same year dyed King Osred after he
had reigned eleaven years. And as he resembled the Mercian King Ceolred in his
life, so he did in his unfortunat death likewise. Therefore S Boniface in his
Letter to King Ethelbald, who notwithstanding his good beginning fell afterward
into the crimes of incest and sacrilege, to deter him from pursuing such
sins, makes use not only of the unhappy end of his Predecessors Ceolred, as
has been declared but likewise of this King Osred his neighbor: The words of
his Epistle are these: 2. Since the time, S B^nifa^. (...) Ethelbald. R.
says he, that Saint Gregory sent from the Sea Apostolic Preachers of the
Catholic Faith into Brittany, the Privileges of Churches have remaind
unviolated to the times of Ceolred King of the Mercians and Osred of the Deiri
and Bernicians. These two Kings by the Devils instinct not only practiced, but
by their example taught others publicly to practice in this kingdom these two
horrible sins, the vi^lating of consecrated Nunns, and infringing the
Privileges of Monasteries: For which by the just judgment of God they have not
only been cast down headlong from the height of Regal authority, but being
prevented by an immature and terrible death, they are separated from
everlasting Light, and plunged deeply in the bottom of Hell. For first as
touching your Predecessor Ceolred, etc. (as before.) And Osred who likewise
was a Sacrilegious adulterer and ^avisher of holy Virgins, the infernal Spirit
never ceased to agitate and impell him from one excess to another, till he
made him loose his kingdom, youthful life and soul likewise by a
dishonorable death. To these may be added a third example: for Charles the
late King of the Franks, who was an invader and consumer of the revenews of
Monasteries, was at last consumed by a tedious tormenting sickness, and fearful
death following it.



3. As touching the manner of King Osreds death all that we can find in our
Ecclesiastical monuments is, Huntingd l. 4
that in a combat near unto Mere he was unfortunatly slain by the treason of
his kinsman Kenred the son of Cuthwin, who succeeded him in the government of
the kingdom: but enjoyed the price of his impiety only two years.

XXVII. C.
XXVII. CHAP.
1.2. The happy death of the holy King Ethelred

3 And of Saint Egwin Bishop of worcester.

1. BUT there were two illustrious persons in Brittany whose deaths this year
were as precious and happy as those of the two forenamed Princes were
miserable. These were Ethelred who had quitt the throne of the Mercian Kingdom
to spend the remainder of his Life in the solitude and austerities of a
Monastery: And Egwin the famous Bishop of Worcester, founder of the Noble
Monastery of Evesham.

Wigo^n. hic.
2. Concerning the former, Florentius of Worcester thus briefly writes: Ethelred
late King of the Mercians after he had been Abbot of the Monastery of Bardeney
built by himself, this year departed this life, and entered into the joys of
eternal felicity, tranquillity and Light. He was buried in the same Monastery,
called Bardeney by William of Malmsbury, Malmsb. de Reg. l. 1.
who affirms that many ages it was famous for the Sanctity of the Religious
Monks living in it, and its plentiful endowments, especially after that King
Ethelred there took the Crown of Monastical To^sure. In the Church of the said
Monastery his Monument is seen to these times. We do anniversarily celebrate
his Memory among Saints on the fourth of May. Martyrolog. Angl 4. Maij


3 In the next place the happy and holy death of Saint Egwin Bishop of
Worcester is from the Author of his life thus described by Harpsfeild: ^rp^^.
saec. 8 c. p 15.
When Saint Egwin (...) come to the extremity of his mortal life, he called
together his Monks and children whom he had begotten to God, and said to them,
My Brethren, I have lived thus long amongst you, and I am not ashamed that I
have so lived: for I have done what good I was able, though all I have done is
very small. What you are to do, and what to avoid, I have frequently and in
all the manners which seemed to me expedient, informed you. Having therefore
showed you the only right way, I beseech you to walk in it, and let not any
vain shadow of present felicity seduce you out of the way: for it quickly
vanishes, and never remains in the same state. Our Lord who is the way, Truth
and life, remove from you the way of iniquity* and instruct you in the way of
his judgments. Thus being full of virtues he departed to our Lord on the third
day before the Calends of January, in the seven hundred and twentieth year of
Grace. (leg. 16) And he was buried in the Monastery of Evesham founded by
himself. After his death God was pleased to work many Miracles by his
intercession. His Successor in the Sea of Worcester was Wilfrid, or, as he
subscribes his name to the Charter of King Ethelbald given to the Monastery of
Croyland, Winfrid. He was elected this year, but not consecrated till the next.

XXVIII. CHAP. XXVIII. CHAP.

i.2. etc. The Scottish Monks of Hyreduced to the due Observation of Easter,
etc. by S. Egbert.

1, A Great access was made to the luster of this year by the Conversion of
the (...) of Hy in Scotland, and all the Monast^ries and Churches subject to
them to the Unity of the Catholic Church in the Observation of Easter and the
Ecclesiastical Tonsure: Which pious work was per^ormed by the H^ly Monk
Egbert, of whom we have several times treated. How this was done by him S.
Beda thus relates: 2. Not long after (says he) those Monks of the Scottish
Nation inhabiting the Island Hy, Bed. l. 5. c. 23.
together with other Monasteries subject to them were brought through Gods
Providence to the Observance of the Catholic rite of Easter and the Canonical
Tonsure. For in the year seven hundred and sixteen after our Lords
Incarnation, in which Osred King of the Northumbers being unhappily slain,*
Coenrea (or Ken^e:) un^ertook the government of the same, the most Venerable
Father Egbert Priest (of whom we formerly made mention:) came to them out of
Ireland, and was with great honor and joy received by them He being both a
winning, Teacher, and a devout practiser of the duties he taught, was willingly
hearkened to by them all, and by his pious and diligent exhortations wholly
changed the inveterate Traditions which they had received from their Fathers
(to whom might be applied that saying of the Apostle, That they had the Zeal
of God, but not according to knowledge) and taught them the Celebration of the
Paschal Solemnity, and the right Ecclesiastical Tonsure or Crown, after the
Catholic and Apostolic Manner.

3. And truly herein was visible an effect of Divine dispensation and goodness
that whereas that Nation had formerly with great charity communicated to the
English people the knowledge of Divine Verities as far as they had ^carn^ them
they in succession of times should be instructed by the English Nation in those
things which they had not so well learnt, and be brought to a perfect form of
living. As on the contrary the Britains who refused to make known to the
English that knowledge of Christianity which they had, when as afterward the
English became by other means perfectly instructed in the Rule of Christian
Faith and Discipline; they remain in their old error, and irregular practices,
neither admitting the ancient Catholic Tonsure on their heads, and observing
the Christian solemnities contrary to the Orders and practice of the Catholic
Church.

4. Now these Monks of Hy by the instruction of Saint Egbert received the
Catholic Rite when Dunchad was their Abbot: about fourscore years after they
had sent Aidan their Prelat to preach to the English Nation. This Dunchad was
the tenth Abbot of Hy after Saint Colomba: and the Annals of Vlster observe
that he admitted the Roman Rites of Easter in the year of Grace seven hundred
and sixteen, on the fourth day before the Calends of September being Saturday,
and that he dyed the year following.



5. As touchinh S. Egbert, S. Beda adds, that he remained thirteen years in
the said Island, which by a new Grace of Ecclesiastical Communion and peace he
had consecrated to Christ. Concerning his happy death we shall speak in due
place.

THE TWO AND TWENTIETH BOOK OF THE CHVRCH-HISTORY OF BRITTANY.
I. CHAP.
I. CHAPTER.
1.2. etc. The Gests of the Holy Abbot S. Ceolfrid: He resigns his Office and
in traveling toward Rome, dies at Langres in France.

1. THE year of Grace seven hundred and seaventeen is illustrated by the
deaths of two glorious English Saints, the great S Swibert Apostle of the
Germans, and Saint Ceolfrid the worthy Successor of S. Benedict B^scop in the
government of the Monasteries of Saint Peter and S. Paul at Wiremouth and Girwy
in the Kingdom of the Northumbers.

2. Treating above of the occurrents of the year of our Lord six hundred eighty
three, we then out of a History of Saint Beda lately published concerning the
Abbots of those two Convents, related the memorable Gests and happy deaths of
Easterwin, Sigfrid and S. Benedict Biscop, who had been Abbots of the same
before this S. Ceolfrid, to whom S. Benedict at his death recommended the care
of them both, and by whom Saint Beda himself received his education in learning
and piety. Now therefore it will be requisite to pursue his Narration
concerning this his devout, careful Master and Benefactour: Which is as
follows:

3. S. Ceolfrid (says he) was a man industrious in all things, Bed. Hist.
Ab^^^m Wi^m and Gi^vvy.
sharp of wit, diligent in business, ripe in judgment and fervent in his zeal
for promoting Religion. He as has been already declared, by the assistance of
S. Benedict Biscop in the space of seven years founded, perfected and governed
the Monastery of S. Paul the Apostle: and afterward became Abbot both of that
and the other Monastery also of S Peter, which considering their mutual
charity and propinquity were to be esteemed as one Monastery: In which Office
he continued twenty eight years, carefully and pr^dently accomplishing the
worthy design begun by his Predecessor S. Benedict. For he added several new
built Oratories, increased the number of Sacred Vessels and Vestments for the
Altars and Church and also much enlarged the Libraries of both the Monasteries,
formerly well furnished by his Predecessor. Particularly he added three
Pandects of a New Translation, A. D. 717
to a former one of an old, of which one he took with him in his last voyage to
Rome, leaving the others to each Monastery one: he gave likewise a large Book
of Cosmography of an admirable work, which S. Benedict had bought at Rome.

4. Moreover he purchased of the devout and learned King Aldfrid a piece of
land of eight families near the River Fresca, for a possession to the Monastery
of S. Paul: which land had been taxed by S. Benedict, but he dyed before he
could accomplish the purchase. But afterward in the reign of King Osred, Saint
Ceolfrid made an exchange of this land for other land of twenty families near a
town called Sambu^e, (from which it took its name) because it lay nearer and
more conveniently to the Monastery: for the effecting of which exchange he
added a considerable Sum of money. And having done this, he sent certain Monks
to Rome who obtained of Sergius Pope of happy memory a Privilege for the
security of the Monastery, as S. Benedict before had received from Pope
Agathon: and this latter likewise, as the former, was confirmed in a Synod by
the subscription of the Magnificent King Aldfrid and the Bishops there present.
In his time also a certain servant of Christ learned in Scriptures and secular
knowledge, called Witmer undertaking a Monastical Profession in the Monastery
of S. Peter, which he afterward governed, gave for a perpetual possession to
the same Monastery a piece of land of ten families, which had been given him by
King Aldfrid.

5. But S. Ceolfrid after a long and exact practice of Regular Observance,
instructions for which he had received partly from his Father Saint Benedict,
and partly himself had collected from the ancient Fathers; after an
incomparably skillful exercise of Prayer and Psalmody, never omitted by him;
after a wonderful fervor showed by him in correcting the disobedient and
irregular, as likewise an equal mildnes in comforting and strengthening the
infirm; after a sparingnes in eating and drinking not usual in governors, as
likewise a coursenes and vileness in clothing, at last seeing himself full of
days, and by reason thereof incapable of continuing the due Office of a
Spiritual Superior in teaching and giving good example to his Monks, having
seriously and a long space meditated on these things at last it seemed to him
most expedient to give order to his Monks that, according to the Privilege
given them, and according to the Rule of the Holy Abbot Saint Benedict, they
should choose to themselves an Abbot (as himself had been chosen young by his
Predecessor then going to visit the Sepulchers of the Apostles) that by this
means himself night have the opportunity before his death to attend to his own
soul in solitude and exemption from secular cares; and they under the conduct
of a younger Abbot more perfectly observe the instituts of a Regular life.

6. Now having made this proposal, though all the Monks at first opposed
themselves with sighs, tears and prostrations, yet at last he obtained his
desire. And so earnest he was to begin his journey, that the third day after he
had discovered his purpose secretly to his Brethren, he began it toward Rome.
For he was afraid least he should be prevented by death before he could come
thither, as in effect it fell out: and indeed he was desirous to avoid the
importunity of his friends, men of quality in the world, who, he knew, would
interpose delays: and lastly he apprehended that some friends would present
him with gifts, which he should not be able to require on a sudden: For this
had been always his custom, that whenever any presents were made him, he
would not fail either presently, or in a competent time to return some thing
as valuable.

7. On the day therefore before the Nones of June being thursday, Mass being
solemnly sung very early in the Church of the most Blessed Virgin and S. Peter,
at which all who were present communicated, he immediately prepared himself for
his voyage. All the Monks therefore being assembled in the Church of S. Peter,
he having incenced the Altar and made his Prayer before it standing upon the
steps with the Censer in his hand, gave his benediction to them all whilst they
were singing Litaries, which they interrupted with their sighs and tears: Then
from thence they went into the Oratory of the Holy Martyr S. Laurence, which is
in the Dormitory, there giving them his last farewell, he admonished them all
to preserve mutual Charity and peace, and not to omit, on occasion, brotherly
Correption, as the Gospel enioyns: after which he imparted to all who had any
way offended him his pardon and love, desiring all to pray for him, and to
pardon him if he had showed too much severity in reprehending any.

8. This being done, they went to the Sea shore, where once again kneeling, he
recited a Prayer, and having given them all the kiss of peace, who wept all
the while, he took ship with his attendants. The Deacons of the Church likewise
lighting their Tapers, and carrying their golden Cross, he passed over the
River, adores the Cross, mounts on horseback and so departed, leaving in his
Monasteries almost six hundred Religious Brethren.

9. When he was gone the Brethren went to the Church, where with weeping they
commended themselves and all their affairs to our Lord. And awhile after having
recited Tierce, they assembled again, and consulted what was to be done, and
resolved that by Prayer, Psalmody and fasting they should without delay demand
a Superior and Father of God, A. D. 719.
and w^thall by sending some of their brethren they declare to the Religious
Monks or Saint Paul what they had determined ^o do^, who willingly give their
assent the^eto: So that ^ll became of one mind, all their hearts and tongues
were lifted up to God.

10. At length on the third day after, being Whitsunday, they met t^gether
again, and to them came not a few of the elder Monks of Saint Paul. Then with
an unanimous consent they elected for their Abbot, Whetbert, w^o from his
childhood had been brought up in the Monastery, and well instructed not only in
Regular Observance, but in the skill of writing, singing, reading and teaching.
He likewise in the days of Pope Sergius of happy memory had been at Rome,
where continuing a good space he learnt, wrote and brought back with him
whatsoever things he judged necessary.

11. This man then being by the general consent of the Monks of both the
Monasteries chosen Abbot, took with him some of his Brethren, and with have
went to the Holy Abbot Ceolfrid who expected a wind proper for his voyage, and
to him he signified the Election which the Monks had made, whose answer was,
God be thanked: and presently confirmed the Election. Then he received of the
new Abbot Letters commendatory to Pope Gregory, in which with great tenderness
they besought his Holiness to extend all requisite Charity to their most beloved
and most careful Father, whose corporal presence though they were deprived
of, yet they were assured that whether he were alive or dead, they should ever
find him an intercessour with God and Patron to them.

12. Now when Abbot Whetbert was returned home, Bishop Acca was desired to come
to the Monastery, who with the accustomed form of Benediction confirmed the
Abbot in his Office. And he among innumerable actions performed to the common
advantage of the Monastery, added this which was very acceptable to all, that
he took up the bones of Abbot Easterwin which had been buried in the porch
entering into the Church of Saint Peter, as likewise the bones of Abbot Sigfrid,
who had formerly been his Master, which had been reposed without the Sacristie,
and putting them into one Coffin, yet so that there was a partition between
them, they buried them within the Oratory of the Blessed Father Saint Benedict.
This solemnity was performed on the eleaventh day before the Calends of
September, being the Anniversary day of Abbot Sigfrid: on which very day also
by a strange Providence of God the Venerable servant of Christ, Withmer,
mentioned before, departed this world, and was buried in the same place with
the said Abbots, the example of whose virtues he had carefully imitated.

13. But to return to the servant of God Ceolfrid: he pursuing his journey
toward the Monuments of the Apostles at Rome, before he could approach
thither, he was seized on by a sickness of which he dye^ For being come as far
as Langres in France about nine of the clock before noon, at four in the after
noon he departed to our Lord: and the day following was honorably buried in
the Church of the three Twin-brethren and glorious Martyrs Speusippus,
Eleusippus, and Meleusippus, who as they were born at the same birth by one
Mother, so they were regenerated together in the same faith of their Mother the
Church, and on the same day together with their Grandmother Leonilla, they
left to that place a worthy Memory of their Martyrdom.

14. At the burial of the Holy Abbot Ceolfrid there was vehement weeping not
only by those of the English Nation attending him in his journey, who were no
fewer then fourscore, but likewise the inhabitants of that City, who much
bewayld the retarding and failing of the desire of the Reverend Old man.
Neither could any one without difficulty contain his tears seeing the
dispersion of this good Abbots Disciples and followers, for some of them,
notwithstanding the loss of their Father, continued their devout journey to
Rome: and others thought fit rather to return home and give notice of his
death: Lastly some there were who out of an unquencheable affection to their
beloved Father would continue at his Tomb, amongst a people whose language
they understood not at all.

15. He was when he dyed seaventy four years of age, he had been a Priest forty
seven, and had executed the Office of Abbot thirty five, (or rather three:)
for from the time that Saint Benedict began to build his Monastery to the
Honor of the Prince of the Apostles, he was his inseparable companion, and
assisted him not only in that labor, but also in the care of Monastical
Institution. In the practice of which he was so sedulous, that notwithstanding
any occasion of age, infirmity or journey, from the day that he left his
Monastery till his death, that is* from the day before the Ides of June to the
seventh before the Calends of October, which was one hundred and fourteen
days* besides the Canonical hours he recited the whole Psalter twice a day,
and this when he was so sick that he could not tide on horseback, but was
forced to be carried in a Litter: every day, except that on which he passed the
Sea, and three days before his death he sung Mass and offered the Saving
Sacrifice to God. A. D. 717.


16, He dyed on the five and twentieth day of September, in the year after our
Lords Incarnation seven hundred and sixteen, upon a Friday after three of the
clock in the after noon, in the feilds of the foresaid City of Langres, and
was buried the day following in the Monastery of the three Twin-Martyrs about a
mile distant from the City toward the south, there being present no small
army, partly of English who attended him, as likewise inhabitants of the
Monastery and City adjoining, all which with loud voices sung Psalms at his
enterrment. Thus far writes S. Beda.

Suppl. Martyrolog. Gal. lic. 25. November.
7. It seems his body did not remain at Langres: for in the Supplement of the
Gallican Martyrologe on the six and twentieth of November we read celebrated
the Translution of Saint Ceolfrid an English Abbot, who at his return from his
pilgrimage to Rome dyed at Langres in France, and was buried in the Church of
the three twinn Martyrs. Afterward his contrymen demanding his Sacred Body,
which had been glorified by many Miracles, it was with great veneration carried
back to his own Monastery. The day of his deposition is celebrated in our
Martyrologe on the five and twentieth of September. Martyrol. Angl 25. Sept.


II. CHAP.
II. CHAP.
1.2. etc. The death: Burial and Miracles of S. Swibert.

1. THE same year, as has been said, Saint Swibert the glorious Apostle of the
Germans and Frisons ended his mortality. [This was the third year after he had
visited Prince Pipin and was returned to Werda (says Marcellin. S. Marcellin.
in S. S^^b^t.
) At last Almighty God who is himself the great reward of his faithful
servants, and who by a temporal death of the flesh translates the living
Stones of his Church from earth to his heavenly building, was pleased to call
the valiant Champion of his Faith, Saint Swibert, to receive his Crown in his
eternal kingdom. Therefore in the said year Saints Swibert replenished with
all Divine Graces, and inflamed with a cordial desire to See God; after he had
celebrated the Divine Mysteries on the Feast of Saint Peter's Chair in his
Monastery, a languishing sickness took him, so that he was forced to confine
himself to his bed.

2. And when he saw that his disease every moment grew more violent, he called
all his Brethren and Disciples together, to the number of twenty, and in the
first place admonished them to follow our Lords footsteps, and to be careful
to preserve peace and charity with one another, and with all of the household
of Faith. Likewise that with all care they should observe the Instituts of
Regular Discipline, which he had taught them by Word and example. Then he told
them expressly that the day of his death was at hand: whereupon they all began
to weep bitterly. But the Holy Bishop said to them: My beloved Brethren, do
not weep, but rather rejoice in my behalf, for now I shall receive the
recompense of all my labors. Extend your charity to me at this time of my
retiring out of the world, and protect me with your prayers. After he had said
this, he much rejoicing in our Lord, exhorted them to a contempt of this
present world, and an earnest desire of heavenly rewards, and again putt them
in mind by their watchings, prayers and good works to prevent the hour of his
death, which was uncertain. And having added other words to this effect, and
bestowed his Benediction on them, by his command they went out to the Church
with great sadness.

3. But he retained with him the Superior of his Monastery Saint ^i^eic, with
whom he joined in most devout Prayer to God and meditation of Divine things. And
when the day of his departure and repose was come, of which he had before been
informed by an Angel, causing his foresaid Brethren to be once more assembled,
he commanded that Mass should solemnly be celebrated in his presence. Then
arming himself with the Communion of our Lords Body, and making the sign of the
Cross on all that stood about him, he quietly slept in death, and his blessed
soul was carried by Quires of Angels to the eternal happy Society of the
Saints. And immediately his face became of a shining brightness: his Cell
likewise yielded an odoriferous fragrancy, which wonderfully refreshed all that
were present. Thus this most Holy Prelat Saint Swibert Bishop of Werda happily
dyed in the sixty ninth year of his age, on a friday being the first day of
March, on which day the Church every where celebrates his Memory.

4. In the same hour that he dyed his soul with great glory and joy appeared
to Saint Willebrord his beloved companion, Martyrolog. Angl. 1^ Ma^t. S.
Marcellin. ibid.
Bishop of Vtrecht then in his way returning from Epternac to Verona,
requesting and admonishing him that he would be present at his Funerals in
Werda and commend his body to the Sepulcher. This being declared to us by Saint
Willebrord with much grief, he presently took boat, and made great have to
Werda. There was then present with him his illustrious Spiritual daughter the
Duchess Plectrudis with certain Prelates, who blessed God for the merits of his
holy Confessor Saint Swibert. All these the day following, being Saturday, as
they were according to custom singing the Vigile of the Dead, a young man was
brought among them, who had been made blind by lightning, and with his clamours
interrupting the Psalmody, and calling to the Saint to have his sight restored,
as soon as he had touched the Coffin, he immediately recovered his sight, to the
astonishment of all. Besides another who was raging mad being brought in, and
kissing the cover of the same Coffin, was presently restored to his senses: A
third also who was possessed by the Devil by the same means was perfectly
freed from the Wicked Spirit.

5 At last on Sunday after all the solemnity of the funerals had been devoutly
fullfilld, the Sacred Body with hymns and Lauds was reverently committed to the
ground by Saint Willebrord Archbishop of Vtrecht, Saint Willeic a Priest, the
glorious Princess P^ectrud^ Duchess of the Austrasians, and many others his
Brethren and Disciples.

6. And I Marcellin Priest, who have written this History, and had been
formerly a Disciple and companion of the Holy Bishop S. Swibert, I was also
present at the Burial with Saint Willebrord: after which at the earnest
request of my dear Brethren Willeic, Gerard, Theodoric and others we remained
with them in the Monastery of Werda fifteen days for their consolation. I will
therefore here relate among many some few testimonies of Miracles, which I saw
with mine own eyes, and many other with me, so that it not only deservedly
may, but ought to be believed, that the said Holy Bishop is great in the sight
of God, and that his glory is wonderful in heaven, since he has made him so
resplendent by miracles on earth. For after his death he ceases not to cure the
sick, etc] Thus Writes the Holy Apostolic Priest Saint Marcellin, adding
moreover a Narration of several stupendous Miracles of which himself was an
eye witness: and which the devout Reader may find in his Life* for I am
unwilling to swell this History with such like Relation^.

III. CHAP. III. CHAP.

1.2. etc. The Monastery of Theokesbury founded.

7. The death of Saint Egwin Bishop of Worcester.

1. TO the same year is by our Historians assigned the foundation of the
Monastery of Tewksbury, though in the Chronicles of that Monastery the Erection
thereof is said to have been made two years sooner. And there we find this
account of it: 2. In the raigns of the illustrious Kings of the Mercians
Ethelred, Chron. de T^vvk^bury in B^blioth. Cotton.
Kenred and Ethelbald there lived two Dukes in great estimation, Oddo and
Doddo, men of high descent, much regarded for their virtues, but (which most
crowns their memory) persons who with sincere devotion loved almighty God, and
sought his honor: Which they made good by their charitable actions, for they
and their Progenitors magnificently built and endowed many Monasteries. These
foresaid Dukes about the year of Grace seven hundred and fifteen gave order
for the building a Monastery in their own Territory near the Severn, seven
miles distant from Claudiocester (or Gloucester) at place called Theokusbury*
from a certain Hermit named Theocus who anciently had lived there.

3. This Monastery they built to the honor of God and the glorious Virgin
Mary: and conferred upon it a Village called Stanwey with all its dependances,
and some few possessions besides, for the susten^ation of Monks, not many in
number, for at first there were but four or five which under the Obedience of a
Priour served God according to the Rule of our Holy Father S. Benedict.

4. Now after that these two Dukes were for their devout actions translated to
heavenly joys (as we firmly believe) their Bodies were buried in the Church of
Persora (Parshur) in which Duke Doddo had taken the Habit of a Monk and which
they had enriched with ample possessions.

5. These foresaid Dukes had a certain Brother named Almaric, whose body was
buried at Derhurst in a little Chapel over against the Gate of the Priory
there, which Chapel had formerly been a Royal place. There to this day is
showed his Sepulcher, where in the wall over the door is this Inscription, This
Royal Hall did Duke Doddo cause to be consecrated into a Church to the honor
of the Blessed Virgin Mary, for love which he bore to his Brother Almaric.



6. Thus we read in the said Chronicle: Where consequently is related how by
reason of the great troubles and wars happening both in Mercia and other parts
of the Kingdom till it was reduced to a Monarchy under King Althelslan, the
said Monastery was often spoiled, and twice burnt: But afterward reedified, and
annexed to the Abbey of Cranborn: A. D. 718
and in conclusion for the commodious and pleasant situation of the place, it
was it self erected into an Abbey, and the Monastery of Cranborn depressed into
a Priory, and made subject to it. The great Patron and enlarger of it was
Robert the Son of Hamon in the beginning of the Norman times, Malm^b. de Pont.
l. 4.
as William of Malmsbury testifies: Who by mistake affirms that the Name of
Theocksbury did seem to destine it to a Religious use, being so called as if
the Title were Theotocosbury, or the Court of the Mother of God. But Camden
according to the forementioned Chronicle more genuinely derives the name from
Theocus a devout Hermit formerly living there

7. To this year is assigned the death of Egwin Bishop of Worcester, after he
had administered that See the space of twenty four years: To whom succeeded
Wilfrid, who governed the same seven and twenty years. Scarce any thing
concerning either of them, besides their names, is recorded.

IV. CHAP.
IV. CHAP.
1.2. Kenred King of the Northumbers dying: Osric succeeds.

3. The Piety of Ethelbald the Mercian King.

A. D. 718.
1. THE year following Kenred King of the Northumbers after two years
possession of the Throne, to which he mounted by Treason and murder of Osred
his Kinsman and predecessor, dyed: and in his place succeeded Osric, his
associate in the same crime.

2. Concerning these Kings, William of Malmsbury thus writes: Malmsb. de Reg.
l. 1. c 3.
Kenred who reigned only two years, and after him Osric eleaven, have left this
one mark upon their memories, that shedding the blood of their Master (how well
soever deserving such an unhappy end) they defiled the air with their
shameful deaths. Yet Osric before he came to that Crown, seemd to have had
more sense of piety, for it is said that he built about the year seven hundred
a Monastery for Religious Virgins at Gloucester.

3. But in the Kingdom of the Mercians King Ethelbald, Ingulph. hist.
says Ingulphus, having perfected his Monastery of Croyland, employed his mind
to promote Holy Church through his whole Kingdom, granting immunities and
Privileges to other Monasteries also of Religious men and women. For which
purpose in the third year of his reign, he pub^ished a general Statut to that
effect, recorded there by the same Author.

V. CHAP. A. D. 719.

V. CHAP.



i.2. The Birth: and first radiments of Saint Boniface, Apostle of the Germans.

1. THE great loss which the New-planted Churches of Germany sustained by the
death of their glorious Apostle S. Swibert, A. D. 719.
was quickly repaired with advantage. For in the year seven hundred and
nineteen God provided for them New Pastor, no less diligent and powerful
both in word and deed, and who after incredible pains and dangers with infinite
fruit thence proceeding, crowned all his labors with Martyrdom. This was S.
Winfrid, which name was afterward changed into Boniface: who the said year
having received a Benediction and authority from Pope Gregory the Second of
that name, cheerfully began his Apostolic Office in that country. His Gests
have been written by several writers, and particularly by S. Willebald a
Bishop his Disciple with great care and sincerity: likewise more largely by a
certain Priest called Othlo: and besides those, a great Volume still extant of
S. Boniface his Epistles will furnish us with sufficient materials for this
History many years consequently. Here therefore we will begin a Narration,
hitherto deferred, of his Birth, and education till this great charge was
imposed on him, and consequently proceed in recounting his glorious actions and
labors, referring them to the several times in which they were performed.

2. He was born in the year of Grace six hundred and seaventy, of an English
Saxon family, Othlo Presb. Ap. Su^ in S. bonif. 5 Iun. Haraeus. 5. Iun. Willeb
ap. Sur. ib.
as appears evidently from his own Epistles. The place illustrated by his Birth
was Creden, now called Kirton in Devonshire: the names of his parents are not
recorded. He was by them with great care educated, and even in his infancy he
was so earnestly studious to enrich his mind with spiritual knowledge and
piety, that his father was first astonished, and after displeased with it, so
that he spared not severe reprehensions, and endeavors to induce him to mind
worldly cares. But the holy Child not abating his solicitudes after heavenly
things, his Father by a sudden sickness from God was admonished not to resist
any longer the good inspirations of his child. Whereupon changing his former
rigor, he sent him being then thirteen years of age to a Monastery called
Adestancester (but more truly, Exceter) commending him to Wolfhard the
Venerable Abbot thereof. Under whose government and direction he remained
several years, with great perfection practicing all the Discipline of a Regular
life, and incessantly meditating on the Holy Scriptures. Notwithstanding by
reason of the penury of learned Teachers not finding full satisfaction to his
desires of spiritual knowledge, by the permission of the said Abbot and
Religious Brethren, he betook himself to another Monastery at this day called
Huntcell, or Nutcell where he submitted himself to the direction of the Abbot
thereof called Winbert, who at first refused to admit him, but seeing his
perseverance in his earnest desire and supplications, at last through Gods
Providence yielded to him. Now where this Monastery was seated it does not
appear. And no wonder, since by the succeeding invasions and fury of the Danes
the memory of many Monasteries is lost.

3. In this Monastery he proffited so much in learning and piety, that he
became a Master and Teacher to others. And his fame was so great, that a Synod
being assembled to compose certain differences in the Churches of the
West Saxons, he was made choice of by the recommendation of his own Abbot
Wintred or Winbert, Wintra Abbot of Tisselbury, and Beerwaldt Abbot of
Glastenbury to go into Kent, and consult the Archbishop Brithwald about the
present affairs: which employment he discharged with so much sufficiency and
prudence, that to the great satisfaction and joy both of the West Saxon King
and Bishops, all debates ended.

4. After this he burning with charity and zeal for the conversion of
Infidels, and having received the Order of Preisthood, after much importunity
he obtained from his Abbot permission to follow S. Swibert into Germany, where
by the Testimony of S. Marcellin he became Canon of the Church of Vtrecht under
the Blessed Archbishop S. Willebrord. But by reason of a furious persecution
raised against the New-planted Churches of the Frisons by the Tyrant Radbode,
all those Apostolic Missionners being dispersed, he returned into his own
country and Monastery. Where with great grief he found his beloved Father the
Abbot Winbert sick, who also dyed shortly after. And S. Winfrid (or Boniface)
by the unanimous consent of the Monks was chosen Abbot. But that Prelature he
utterly refused, being designed by almighty God for a far more laborious
employment, and in his place procured the election and institution of a pious
Monk called Steven in the Office of Abbot.

5. In this Monastery he remained only two years, after which the zeal of Gods
house consuming all desire of rest in his mind, he once more resolved to
attempt the Apostolic Office of converting the Infidel Germans: Which that he
might perform with more security and order, he, being now forty nine years old,
undertook a voyage to Rome, to receive from the Holy Pope Gregory second of
that Name, his Benediction and a Missionary authority. His proceedings in this
journey we will consequently relate out of the Narration of his Disciple S.
Willebald.

VI. CHAP. VI. CHAP.

i.2. etc. S. Boniface his journey to Rome: where he receives authority to
preach the Gospel to Infidels.

1. IN order and preparation to his voyage to Rome, Ap. Sur 5. Iun.
S. Winfrid ( not yet called Boniface) repaired to the Reverend Bishop Daniel,
Bishop of Winchester, desiring of him, with his blessing, letters of
recommendation to the Sea Apostolic. To this request the good Bishop willingly
condescended. And exercising the Office of a Provident Pastor, after he had
preferred to the government of the foresaid Monastery a good Religious Monk,
called Steven, he dismissed the man of God Winfrid with commendatory letters to
his voyage toward the places much desired by him.

2. The Letters of recommendation given him by that good Bishop Daniel, Ap.
Bonifac. Ep. 33.
by which he demanded in his behalf the charity and favor of all Kings,
Princes, Bishops, Abbots and all devout Christians in the way, are to this day
extant, among S. Boniface's Epistles: In which he declares to them by the
examples of Blessed Abraham and Loath how acceptable to almighty God charity and
hospitality to strangers is, since for the merit thereof they were honored
with the presence of Angels. Consequently he promises to them eternal rewards
if they would in the Religious Priest the bearer of those Letters, charitably
entertain Christ himself.

3. S. Winfrid ( says the same Holy Author) encouraged with the good Bishops
benediction, Id. op. Sut. ib.
presently took leave of his Brethren, and began his journey through far remote
countries and ways hitherto unknown to him. Now there joined themselves as
companions of his redious voyage a good number of Gods devout servants, who
with great fervor and devotion visiting many Churches of Saints by the way,
begged the Divine assistance, that they might without danger pass the terrible
precipices of the Alps, and afterward find the feirce minds of the Lombards
civil and kind to them.

4. This Prayer Almighty God mercifully granted, for without any harm or
incommodity they traveled through the regions inhabited by that savage Nation,
and arrived safely at the Monuments of the Blessed Apostles S. Peter and S.
Paul: where after due thanks to Christ their Protector, they by Penance and
Confession begged Absolution of their sins, and a prosperous success of the
chief design of their voyage.

5. Neither were they frustrated of their desires: For as soon as the Holy man
S. Winfred was admitted to the presence and speech of Gregory the second then
Prelat of the Sea Apostolic, and had declared to him the occasion of his
voyage, and the Zeal with which his heart was enflamed, immediately the holy
Pope looking on him with a cheerful countenance, asked him whether he had any
commendatory letters from his Bish^p. Whereupon he presently presented to his
Holiness the Epistle folded and sealed according to the due form. Which being
read by him, and thereby the holy man's design more fully discovered, the Pope
had afterward free and frequent disc^urse with him, entertaining him with much
respect all the time of his abode at Rome, and moreover he bestowd on him
whatsoever sacred Relics of Saints he desired. In the end he gave him
commission and authority to preach the Gospel through all Germany, exemplified
in Apostolic Letters yet extant, (...) Ep^st. 18
and directed to him, in which moreover he signifies to him: that he was
obliged to administer the Sacrament of Baptism toward such as by Divine Grace
should be converted, according to the Form and Order prescribed in the Roman
Church contained in the Offices of the Sea Apostolic: And withal commanded
him that in case any thing were wanting to him in the succeeding discharge of
his Office and Ministry, that he would not fail to give intimation thereof to
him.

Ap. Sur. ^b.
6. Saint Boniface after he had received these Letters from the Venerable Pope,
went from Rome to Luitprand King of the Lombards, by whom he was honorably
entertained, and abode with him some space of time. Then taking leave of him he
passed the steep mountains of the Alps, and visiting the formerly unknown
borders of the Bavarians and Germany, from thence came into Thuringia, where
like a diligent and prudent Be he searched all places where he might gather
and carry the delicious Nectar of the Holy Faith.

7. During his abode, which was a considerable time, in Thuringia, he with
lively and spiritually exhortations invited the Princes of that Province to
embrace the Holy Faith and Religion of Christ. And certain Priests, whom he
found in those parts addicted to many vices and disorders, he with effectual
reprehensions reduced to an orderly and Canonical conversation.

VII. CHAPTER
VII. CHAP.
i.2. etc. The miserable death of King Radbode: deluded by the Devil.

1. WHilst S. Boniface abode in Thuri^gia the happy news came to him of the
death of the Tyrant Radbode King of the Frisons, Idem ibid.
who had lately with great fury persecuted the Christians. At which report he
received great joy, and presently after sailed into Friseland, where with great
Zeal and diligence he disper^ed the precious seed of the Gospel, and withdrew
very many from their Superstitions and Idolatry.

2. But before we proceed in this Narration touching the Gests of this
glorious Apostle, it will be expedient to declare the circumstances of the
miserable death of this Tyrant Radbode, recorded by a devout Writer of the same
age, Jonas a Monk of Fontanell in France, who in the life of S. Wulfran
Archbishop of Sens a ioynt-labourer with S. Willebrord and S. Boniface in the
Conversion of the Frisons, professes that what he wrote he received from the
testimony of a Venerable Priest called Ovo, a Frison by Nation, who himself had
been miraculously delivered from death by the said Apostolic Bishop, when he
had been condemned and for the space of two hours actually hanged by the
Tyrants command, as a Sacrifice to his Idols.

3. When by the sight of many Miracles says he, Jonas Font. in vit. s. W^fran.
ap. Sur. 20. Mart.
King Radbode had been convinced of the Verity of Christian Religion, and was
disposed to receive Baptism, he by many earnest adiurations obliged the
Apostolic Bishop to answer him to this Question, In whether of the two places
did remain his Predecessors Kings and Princes; in that celestial Region
promised to him in case he would be baptized; or in the other Region of darkness
and torments? Hereto the Bishop replied, that without doubt since they all dyed
without Faith in Christ and Baptism they were condemned to eternal torments.
When the barbarous King heard this, He being ready to step into the fountain
where he was to be baptized, straight withdrew his foot, and said, That he
could not be induced to want the society of so many gallant Princes, and live
for ever among a small company of beggars and vile people.

4. Yet again after this he was persuaded once more to advise with the Holy
Bishop Willebrord, whom he sent for to see whether he taught the same Doctrine
with S. Wulfran, S. Willebrord answered the Messenger, Since the King will not
hearken to the counsel of my Holy Brother Wulfran, it is not likely that he
will be persuaded by me: For this last night I saw him bound fast with a fiery
chain. Yet he followed the Messenger; but in the way was told that that the
unhappy King was dead without Baptism.

5. And indeed it appeard that the wicked King had filled up the measure of his
sins, and was given up by God to impenitency; For in his last sickness by the
Divine permission the Devil appeard to him in his sleep, transformed into an
Angel of light, with a crown of gold upon his head glistering with inestimable
jewels, and garments gloriously shining, and said to the astonished King, Tell
me, Noble Prince, who has seduced you to a willingness to forsake the Religion
of your Predecessors? Do not hearken to them, but continue constant in the
worship of the ancient Gods of your Nation, and you shall not fail after death
to be translated to golden Palaces, and live there in all manner of pleasures
and felicity. And to show you that I do not seduce you, To morrow send for the
Christian Doctor Wulfran, and command him to give you a sight of that happy
eternal mansion which he promises you in case you will embrace the Christian
Faith and be baptized. This since I am assured he cannot do: Let there be
Messengers chosen of his Belief and yours: I will undertake to be their Guide
to show them that gloriously happy Mansion which I have promised you.

6. As Soon as the King awaked, he sent for the Holy Bishop, and recounted to
him his Vision: Who groaning in Spirit told him, that it was an illusion of the
Devil, to bring him to eternal misery, no way to be avoided but by Faith in
the Savior of the world, and purging of Sins by Baptism. But the King replied,
that unless he would give him a sight of the Happiness promised him, he would
not fail according to the order prescribed in the Vision to send his
Messengers. Hereupon the Holy Bishop apprehending that in case he should refuse
to send one Messenger likewise to detect the Devils fraud, the Pagans would
publish their own fictions, therefore he thought good to send one of his
Deacons to accompany the Kings Messenger. These two therefore as soon as they
were at an indifferent distance from the town, mert with one who appeared in
the shape of a man, and told them, saying, Make have, for I will show you the
happy mansion which I promised the King. Hereupon they following him, traveled
through many unknown paths, till at last they came to a large way paved with
several sorts of polished marble. Then they saw afarr off a golden house, and
the street leading to it was covered with gold and precious Stones. As Soon as
they were entered into the house, they saw a most glorious Throne, of a
wonderful beauty and magnificence: and their Guide told them, This is the
Palace and this the Seat which God has promised to give to King Radbode.

7. When the Deacon with great astonishment saw these things, he said, If all
these things be works of the Omnipotent God, let them remain for ever: But if
they be illusions of the Devil, let them presently vanish. Having said this,
he immediately armed himself with the sign of the Cross, and the Guide which
seemed to have been a man vanished into a Devil, and the whole Palace became
dirt. So that the two companions, the Deacon and the Frison, found themselves
entangled in the midst of reeds and briars in a great Marish plain. From whence
they could not in less then three days space return to the Town. But being
thither arrived, they found the King dead without Baptism: and related to the
Blessed Bishop how strangely they had been deluded by the Devil.

8. As for the Frison, he presently professed his belief in Christ and was
baptized: his Name was Ingamar: and afterward attended the Bishop to our
Monastery of Fontanell. But the unhappy King was not permitted to be
undeceived, because he did not pertain to Christ's flock. And this Miracle was
spread through the country, whereupon a great multitude was converted to our
Lord. Now the death of the foresaid miserable King Radbode happened in the year
of our Savior seven hundred and nineteen, which was the seventh of the
illustrious Prince Charles Martel.

VIII. CHAP. VIII. CH

1.2. etc. Several Epistles of Saint Boniface.

1. BUT to leave this not impertinent digression, Baron. ad A. D. 719.
and return to S. Boniface: He says Baron^us, though he was by Apostolic
delegation empowred to preach the Word of God independently, yet even in this
he showed the marks of Apostleship, in as much as embracing Christian humility,
he thought fist to exercise the apprentiship of his Apostolic Office under
another. For during the space of three years he adioynd himself a Coadiutour to
S. Willebrord (named by the Pope, Clement) in the conversion of the Frisons.
And being earnestly pressed by him to accept of his Archbishopric of Vtrecht,
he constantly refused, and begging license departed from him to work alone in
that heavenly Office.

2. And moreover distrusting his own forces, he humbly begged the Prayers of
others for the Divine assistance in so sublime a work. Among his Epistles there
is still extant one to the same effect directed to Leodbata a kinswoman of his,
Bon^f. Ep. 2^.
to Bedda, Chunigildis and other Religious Virgins to continue their earnest
Prayers to Almighty God that he might be delivered from many pressures which he
suffered from importune and wicked men, and that he might not be discouraged
from defending Christ's Faith and Church from many Heretics, Schismatiks and
Hypocrites which used all their endeavors to make a prey of the new converted
Lambs with their Mothers, and did more encomber him, then, the professed
enemies of our Faith, the Pagan Idolaters.

3. There is likewise found another Epistle to him from a Holy Virgin named
Buggan, Ib. Ep. 35.
an Abbess then in Brittany, of a Royal family as is witnessed in other
Letters of a following date written to him by Hildebert King of Kent. This
devout Virgin he had found at Rome when he repaired thither to Pope Gregory:
and being returned into Brittany she in an Epistle congratulated with him the
sublime Office imposed on him by that Holy Pope; as likewise a vision which he
had received from God, who revealed to him the great success of his preaching:
and moreover had cast down before him that great Enemy of his Holy Faith King
Radbode. A. D. 720.
Moreover she informed him that whereas he had desired her to send him the
Passions of Martyrs, she could not as then procure them, but would use all her
endeavors for his satisfaction. Consequently she begged of him to send her
certain Collections out of Holy Scriptures for her consolation, as he had
promised her: and that he would offer to God the Sacrifices of his Holy Masses
for the soul of a dear kinsman of hers lately dead. In conclusion she told him
that by the same messenger she had sent him for his present supply fifty
shillings ( Solidos) and a Pall for the Altar: the smallnes of which presents
she excused by her poverty: and earnestly begged his Prayers, in which she had
great confidence.

Id. ^pist. 17.
4. Another Epistle himself also about this time wrote to Tatwin and Wigbert
Priests, and to Bernard, Hiedde, Hunfrith and Stirme Monks of the Monastery of
Nutscelle from whence he came, earnestly exhorting them to conserve the Regular
Discipline taught them by their late Venerable Father Wigbert. He ordained
likewise that they should observe the directions of the other Wigbert Priest,
and Mengingord Deacon touching the hours and order of the Ecclesiastical
Office: That, Hiedde should be the Superior over the servants, and Hunfrid his
assistant: that Stirme should be in the Kitchen, and Bernard have care of
building: lastly that in all things they should be obedient to Tatwin their
Abbot. (Now this Tatwin Abbot was a person of great esteem, for after the death
of Brithwald Archbishop of Canterbury, he was chosen to succeed in that See.
Notwithstanding Bishop Parker affirms that Tatwin the Successor of Brithwald
was taken out of a Monastery called Brinton, and S. Beda calls it Bruidum:
which whether it was the same, or a distinct Monastery from Nutscelle in the
Province of the Mercians, Bedl. 5. c. ult.
it is hard to determine.)

IX. CHAP.
IX. CHAP.
1.2. etc. Several Bishops ordained, etc.

6. The Gests of Saint Pega, sister to Saint Guthlac.

1. BUT we must for some time leave Saint Boniface busy in his Apostolic
Office in Germany, and return into Brittany, where according to our
Ecclesiastical Monuments, Eadbert who eight years before had been consecrated
Bishop of the South Saxons by the Archbishop Brithwald, dying, there succeeded
in his place Eolla. Who governed that See a very short time, Bed. l 5. c. ult.
for Saint Beda ending his History in the year seven hundred thirty one, there
expressly affirms that the said Church of the South Saxons having remained some
years without a Bishop, was obliged to have recourse to the Bishop of the
West Saxons for the performing of such rights as required an Episcopal
jurisdiction.

2. And the year following the Sea of Dumwich in the Kingdom of the East Angles
becoming void by the death of Astwolf, or Aesculf, A. D. 720.
there succeeded in it Aldbert: And likewise the other Episcopal See of
Helmham being vacant by the death of Norbert, Hadulac succeeded him, which two
Bishops are by the same S. Beda affirmed to be alive at the end of his History.
Id. ib.


3. The same year also Aedgar Bishop of the Lindesfart (now called Lincoln)
dying, his successor was Kinebert, a man learned in the Ecclesiastical
History, and from whom S. Beda professes that he received help in the writing
of his. Concerning all these Bishops little more besides their Names has been
transmitted to posterity.

4. In the Kingdom also of the East Saxons at this time dyed King Beorna, who
left the throne to be possessed by Alfwald, for so we shall find that he calls
himself in Letters written by him to S. Boniface, of which hereafter.

5. But the person whose death gave the greatest loster to this year was Pega
Sister to S. Guthlac, Martyr. Ang. 3. Iun.
mentioned before: for so we read in our Martyrologe on the third of June. And
hereto agrees our Historian Ingulphus Abbot of Croyland, who describing the
state of that Island made famous by the Sanctity of Saint Guthlac, records the
names of several holy Hermites which imitated the said Saint in a solitary
life of Contemplation, among the rest he makes express mention of his Sister
Saint Pega, withal relating the following course of her life: 6. In the same
Island, Ingulph. hist
says he, in those times several devout persons lived an Heremiticall life,
who whilst the Holy man Saint Guthlac was alive enjoyed a spiritual familiarity
with him, and as sick men to their Physicions, they had recourse to him for
remedy to all their spiritual infirmities. Among whom one there was lately
converted to the Catholic Faith, a man illustrious for his noble descent and
power in the world. His name was Cissa, who immediately after his conversion
forsook all secular pretensions, and in a poor austere life followed our Lord
Jesus Christ. A second was Bertelin, a familiar attendant of the foresaid holy
Father. A third was Egbert, to whom the said Saint did most frequently and
confidently discover his secrets. And a fourth was Tatwin, the person who
formerly had been his conductour by boat into the Island. All these devout
persons in several cottages, not far removed from the Oratory of Saint
Guthlac, by the permission of the fore mentioned Abbot Kenulphus, spent their
lives in solitude and prayer.

7. As for S. Pega Sister to the said glorious Saint, about a years space after
his death, having left in the hands of Kenulphus the Abbot the whipp of S.
Bartholmew, her Brothers Psalter and diverse other Relics, she removed from
her Brothers Oratory to another place about four leagues distant toward the
West, where having spent two years and three months in a mournful penitent
life, she undertook a pilgrimage with great abstinence and austerity to the
Monuments of the glorious Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul at Rome. There
immediately after her arrival the whole City resounded with the fame of her
Sanctity. There she devoutly ended her days in the holy fear and service of
our Lord. Her Sacred body was with great honor buried there and her soul
freed from all incommodities of this present mortal life, was received to
eternal rest and joy in heaven.



8 But though she dyed in a foreign country, yet her memory was preserved in
Brittany with great veneration. For a Church was built and dedicated to her
honor, in the same place where, according to the description of Ingulphus, her
Cell had been seated. There to this day in the County of Northampton remains a
Town from her name called Peagkirk: Camd. in Northamp^^^shire.
concerning which Camden describing the course of the River Welland, thus
writes, After a few miles from hence the river Welland passing by Maxey Castle
and Peagkirk is swallowd up in the forementioned fenns. Now Peagkirk is the
place where in the primitive Church of the Saxons Pega the sister of Guthlac,
together with many other Sacred Virgins, afforded illustrious documents of
piety and Chastity. From her that town took its name.

9 In the territory about this place, called Peagland, we shall find two
hundred and thirty years after this time a certain community of Priests, who
though they lived a devout Religious life, yet they were not Monks, nor by any
vow obliged to perseverance in that condition: They wore a secular, though very
grave habit: and were obliged to continence and obedience. They depended on the
Abbot of Croyland, without whose authority none could be admitted among them.
But in the foresaid time Monastical institution flourishing, and few
Ecclesiastics offering themselves to embrace their Institut, most of them
became Monks of Croyland, as the same Ingulphus testifies.

X. CHAP. A. D. 721.

X. CHAP.



1.2. etc. The Gests and blessed death of Saint John of Beverley.

6. 7. etc. Several Miracles wrought by him.

1. IN the year of Grace seven hundred twenty one, A. D. 721.
the famous Saint John surnamed of Beverley, being oppressed with age resigned
his Bishopric of York, and retired himself to the end he might only attend to
the care of his own soul, and prepare himself for a happy end.

Concerning his original, as likewise his education during his childhood under
the care of S. Theodore Archbishop of Canterbury, by whom he was instructed in
all learning and piety, we have already treated. After that returning to his
own country of the Northumbers, he retired into the Monastery of Screneshalch,
under the government of the Holy Abbess S. Hilda: for she near unto her own
Abbey of Religious Virgins had founded a small Convent of Monks for the service
of her Church: Out of which Saint Beda professes that he had seen to issue five
Bishops; Bed. l. 4. c. 23
all of them men of singular merit and sanctity, whose names were these; Saint
Bosa, Saint Eata, Saint Osifor, this S. John, and S. Wilfrid.

3. In the year of our Lords Incarnation six hundred eighty six he was
consecrated Bishop of Hagustlad (or Hexham) and successor to Saint Eata. But
the year after Saint Wilfrid returning from his long banishment, and being
restored to the Archbishopric o^ the whole kingdom of the Northumbers,
comprehending the three Dioceses of York, Hagustald and Lindesfarn, Saint John
willingly yielded up to him his New possessed Bishopric. But five years after
S. Wilfrid being again expelled, S. John was restored to his See: at which time
he promoted to the order of Deaconship S. Beda then twenty years of age. This
he did at the request of his Holy Abbot S. Ceolfrid. But in the year of Grace
in which S. Wilfrid was recalled from his banishment, and quietly restored to
his rights, he contenting himself with the single Bishopric of Hagustald then
vacant by the death of S. Bosa, permitted S. John to remove from thence to the Sea of York.

4. Having therefore with admirable perfection spent thirty four years in the
administration of those two Sees successively Hagustald and York, ^p Capgrav
(...) vit. S Io^. de Beverl.
and findin^ that by reason o^ his weakness and old age he had not strength to
discharge such an Office attended with cares and labors, this year, as has
been said, h^ eased himself of so great a burden, and having ordained in his
place his Priest Wilfrid who was a kinsman of the great S. Wilfrid, and by the
advice of the Holy Abbot Brithun, retired himself to a Monastery built by him
self at Deirwode (Sylva Deirerum) or Beverley, he there spent the remainder of
his life in all sanctity, and on the Nones of May departed to our Lord, and was
buried in the porch of Saint Peter, in the same Monastery. Thus writes the
Author of his life in Capgrave.

5. He was both in his life and after his death illustrious for his Miracles:
several of which are recorded by Saint Beda, who lived with him, Bed l. 5. c.
2.
and writes nothing but what he had received by the testimony of such as
familiarly knew him, and particularly of the most reverend and most sincere
Abbot Berctun, or Brithun, who had been his Deacon. Now though I am unwilling
to swell this History with the frequent narration of Miracles: Yet being
secured by such an irrefragable authority, I will here adioyn a brief relation
of one or two among them.

Id. ibid.
6. There was a certain retired mansion compassed about with a wood and trench,
at the distauce of about a mile and a half from the Church of Hagustald, from
which it is separated by the River Tine: To which mansion there is adjoining a
Churchyard consecrated to the honor of Saint Michael the Archangel. Thither
the Holy Bishop attended by a few of his Disciples was wont, when opportunity
was afforded, to retire himself, especially in Lent, that he might without
interruption attend to Prayer and Spiritual Reading. On a certain time
therefore in the beginning of Lent going thither, he commanded that there
should be conducted thither some poor beggar, who withal was afflicted with
some extraordinary infirmity, that he might there have a fit object for his
charity and Alms. And the same course he usually held in his retirements.

7. Now there was then in a village not far distant a certain youth not unknown
to the Bishop, who was altogether dumb, and withal had his head wholly covered
with a thick scurf, which entirely hindered the grouth of hairs, except a few
which like bristles stood in a thinn circle about the lower part of his head.
This young man was brought therefore to him, and a small cottage was built for
him, to which the Holy Bishop daily went with his Alms. Now on the second
Sunday of Lent he commanded this poor child to enter into his Cell, and being
there to putt forth his tongue, which the holy man took hold of, and made the
sign of the Cross upon it And having done this, he bid him speak: Pronounce,
said he to him. gea, gea (that is, yea, yea:) This the child pronounced
distinctly: and presently after other words of more syllables: and in
conclusion whole Sentences: So that before night by frequent practice, in which
he took great delight, he was able to express his thoughts freely.

8. This recovery of the poor dumb child did much rejoice the Holy Bishop, who
presently after commanded a surgeon to use his skill for curing the scurse of
his head: and in a short time by such care, but principally by the prayers and
benedictions of the good Prelat his head was perfectly healed, and the child
who formerly had been deformed and dumb, became of a lovely cheerful
countenance, adorned with beautifully curled hair, and ready in speech. Being
thus cured, the Holy Bishop offered to entertain him in his family, but he chose
rather to return to his friends.

9. This Miracle was wrought in his first Diocese o^ Hagustald: Whereto we will
add another performed in that of York: related by the same devout Abbot Brithun
to Saint Beda. Id. ibid. c. 4.
There was, said he, a certain village belonging to a Count named Puch, distant
about two miles from our Monastery of Deirirode (or Beverley.) This Counts wife
had for the space of forty days been greivously tormented with a sickness, so
that for three weeks she could not be removed out of her chamber. Now it happened
at the same time that the Man of God was desired by the said Count to dedicate
a Church in the same place. Which having done, the Count earnestly requested
him to dine with him. But the Bishop refused, saying, He must needs return to
his Monastery near adjoining. The Count told him that if he would vouchsafe to
honor his house with his presence, he would give considerable Alms to the
poor. I likewise joined with him in the same request, promising the like
Charity to the poor, upon condition he would dine in his house and give his
benediction to it.

10. With much ado at last we obtained this favor from him, and so went to
dinner: Now the Holy Bishop had by one of my Monks attending us sent to the
Counts wife some part of the Holy water which he had consecrated and used among
the Ceremonies of the Dedication: commanding him to give her some part of it to
drink, and that with the rest she should wash that part where she felt the
sharpest pain. Which she having accordingly performed, immediately rose up
perfectly sound, and was not only freed from her pains, but had her former
strength entirely restored: so that she (imitating Saint Peter's wives Mother in
the Gospel) came down, and during the whole dinner presented drink to the
Bishop and to all the rest of the company.

11. The Centuriators of Magdeburg write with a very uncertain style concerning
this famous Bishop: Magdeburg Cent. 8. f. 821.
sometimes highly commending him, and again as sharply censuring him He dyed,
say they, with great constancy of an Evangelicall Spirit. And again: He was
illustrious for his piety and miracles, as Saint Beda relates. But withal they
add, Notwithstanding such great wonders he did not perform without
Superstition: For he did not rely alone upon his Prayers, but moreover made
use of holy water (aqua lustrals.) Unhappy man; they little understand the
efficacy of the Prayers and benedictions of Gods Church, by virtue of which for
at least fifteen ages together the power of Devils has been so often rendered of
no force by the use of Holy Water and sign of the Cross, terrible to infernal
Spirits, and odious to such Ministers.

12. I will only add what William of Malmsbury relates as a thing usually
performed and Malamsb. de Pontif.
generally acknowledged by the inhabitants of Beverley in testimony of the
sanctity of their glorious Patron, which is, that the feircest Bulls being
haled with many strong ropes by the force and sweat of several lusty men,
as soon as they are brought into his church yar^, immediately loose all their
fury and feircenes, and become gentle as lambs, so that they are there left to
their freedom to sport themselves, whereas before with their feet and horns
they endangered all that came near them. Moreover how by the intercession and
patronage of this Holy Prelate, above a hundred years after his death, King
Ethelstan obtained a signal victory against the Scotts, shall be declared in
its proper place. His Memory is celebrated in our Martyrologe on the seventh
of May the day of his death: Martyr. Aug. 7. Maij. Ib. 25. October.
and his Translation made in the year of Grace one thousand sixty three, is
solemnly commemorated on the twenty fifth of October. To conclude, his Feast
always solemnly observed in the Province of York, was by a Decree of a Synod
assembled in the year fourteen hundred and sixteen, ordained to be kept Holiday
through all England, upon occasion of a great Victory which then King Henry the
fifth obtained in France the same day.

XI. CHAP.
XI. CHAP.
1.2. Of S Brithun Abbot.

3. The Pilgrimage of S. Daniel Bishop of winchester to Rome.

1. IN this Narration of the Gests of the holy Bishops S. John of Beverley,
often mention was made of his Deacon S. Brithun, Martyr. Ang. 1^. Maij.
or as in a Manuscript Copy of S. Beda he is called S. Berctun, whose Name is
commemorated among the Saints in our Martyrologe on the fifteenth of May. Now
though our Ecclesiastical Monuments do not place his death till almost twenty
years after that of S. John. Yet in consecrating his Memory to posterity in
this our History, it seemed expedient not to divide them.

2. Concerning him thus we read in the Author of his Life in Capgrave: Ap.
Capgrav. in S Brithun.
The Venerable Confessor of Christ Saint Brithun drew his original from the
Nation of the English. He was Deacon for many years to the Holy Bishop of York
Saint John of Beverley: and for the sanctity ^f h^s life and laudable
conversation; he was in his affection preferred by him before others, and
constituted Abbot in the Monastery of Deirwode, now called Beverley, which the
said Holy Bishop built from the foundations. And to the same Monastery Saint
John in his old age refigning his Bishopric retired by the counsel of the
said holy Abbot, where also he dyed after he had spent four years in an
Angelical purity of conversation. After his translation to heavenly joys the
Venerable Abbot imitating his good Master, persevered to the end of his life in
watchings fastrags, prayers and other good works. For he was a lover of
virtues, a persecutour of vice, a despiser of this present world, a Zealous
aspirer to heavenly joys, a faithful guardian and instructour of the flock
committed to him, an unwearied practiser of j^stice and piety, a munificent
disperser of Alms, and in a word, one who with all diligence performed
whatsoever he knew to be pleasing to God. Thus constantly serving our Lord in
all good works to his decrepi^e age, he crowned a most holy life with a suitable
death, and having qui^ted this world on the Nones of May, he received his
reward in heaven. His body was with great h^nour buried in his own Monastery.
Where in process of time his sanctity becoming illustrious by many Miracles,
with consent of the Clergy and people it was taken up; and his sacred Relics
placed near the Coffin of his beloved Master and Instructour the Holy Bishop
Saint John, close to the Altar in his Church of Beverley.

3. The same year is recorded the devout Pilgrimage of Daniel Bishop of
Winchester to Rome, who is supposed by ^ome to have subscribed to a Synod about
this time assembled there, in which a heavy Anathema is pronounced against al
such as presume to associate to themselves in marriage any Virgins or other
women consecrated to God or those whose matrimonial society men being promoted
to such orders, have according to the Churches Discipline, been obliged to
forsake.

A. D. 723.

XII. CHA.


XII. CHAP.
1. A Rebellion of the South Saxons repressed.

2.3 etc. Of Saint Pechelm Bishop of Casa Candida: and of S. Wir^ (an Irish
Bishop.)

6.7. etc. Casa Candida was within the Saxon Dominions.

A. D. 723. Hunting^. l.
1. THE year following great commotions were raised in the Southern parts of
Brittany. For the South Saxons impatient of the yoke laid on them by the
West Saxons, elected among them a General a young man of great courage called
Ealdbrith, under whose conduct they seized on a strong Castle newly built by
King Inas in Somersetshire at the River The One, therefore called Thoneton, and
now Taunton. At which time King Inas being by some design, or perhaps by
sickness diverted, his magnanimous Queen Edilburga with a choice army laid siege
to the said Castle, and in a short space took and destroyed it, that it should
no more be a seat of Rebellion. But Ealdbrith by flight escaped into Surrey,
and from thence retired into Sussex, where King Inas following him with a
powerful army, and fighting with him, dispersed all his forces, and slew
Ealdbrith, so utterly extinguishing the rebellion.

2. The same year a New Episcopal See was erected in the Province of the
Picts, or rather an ancient one being decayed, was restored: This was the
Episcopal See called Candida Casa, and a holy man called Pecthelm was
consecrated Bishop of it. Bed. l. 5. c. vlt.
For thus writes S. Beda, concluding his History, Pecthelm now sitts Bishop in
that part of the Province which is called Candida Casa (or White house:) the
which Diocese was newly erected by reason of the multiplying of beleivers in
those parts, and the first Bishop was the said Pecthelm.

Sup. l 8 c. 23.
3. We have in the eighth book of this History declared how in the year of
Grace three hundred ninety four S. Siricius Pope consecrated S. Ninian first
Bishop of the Southern Picts, who established his Episcopal See at this place,
where he built a Church to the honor of S. Martin, and with great industry
converted a great part of the Nation. But after the Saxons had subdued the
Picts, we read of certain Bishops of the Picts, as about forty years before
this, the devout Bishop Trumwin: but it seems they had no determinate See, at
least not this of Wite-hern, or Candida Casa, which was at this time restored.

4. As for this Pecthelm, he was a man of great piety and learning, and so
illustrious that he was consulted in difficulties of great importance by Saint
Boniface, as appears by several Epistles yet extant. In his younger age he was
educated in the kingdom of the West Saxons, where he was Disciple to the famous
Saint Aldelm, and made Deacon, as William of Malmsbury testifies. After that he
went over into Germany, Malmsb. de Pon^. l.
where he associated himself to Saint Willebrord, and was present at a Synod
assembled by that Holy Apostolic Bishop at Vtrecht, to which his name is found
subscribed. It was he who related to Saint Beda the sad Story of the impenitent
Soldier and favorite of Coenred King of the Mercians, Sup. l. 21. c. 4.
formerly recounted in this History.

5. By whom this holy man was consecrated Bishop, not any of our Historians do
declare: but in the Belgic Calendars published by Miraeus we read that he was
ordained Bishop by the Pope, Mir. in Fast. Belg 15. Iulij.
as likewise the companion of his pilgrimage Saint W^ro: For there we read
this passage: Saint Plechelm (so he is there named) born of Noble parents in
the kingdom of the Northumbers, from his youth excelled in humility and
modesty: and even in that tender age chastised his body by watchings and
fastings, attending assiduously to Prayer. Being come to riper age, he was
diligent in the study of Holy Scriptures. When he was promoted to the order of
Preisthood, he was liberal to the poor, and adorn^d with all virtues, insomuch
as that internal Light which he received from Gods holy Spirit shone forth
gloriously in all his actions. Not long after associating himself to Saint Wiro
he accompanied him in a pilgrimage to the Monuments of the Blessed Apostles
Saint Peter and Saint Paul at Rome. There they with great devotion visited all
holy places, and by assiduous Mortifications and prayers offered themselves
Holocausts of sweet savor to God. These two holy men being observed by the
Pope to be endued with divine wisdom and enflamed with Charity, he consecrated
them Bishops, and enriching them with Sacred Relics of Saints, he dismissed
them to their own country. There Plechelm became Bishop in the Church called
Candida Casa, where with unwearied labor he extinguished all remainder of
Idolatry.

6. Here is a great controversy against the Saxon pretentions, raised by the
ancient Scotts or Irish, and the Modern Scotts, each of them challenging to
their own country these two Saints. The Irish contend that Saint Pecthelm was
Bishop of Tuam, and S. Wiro of Dublin: and consequently that their Saint
Pecthelm was different from the present Bishop of Candida Casa. As for S. Wiro
their pretentions seem to be well grounded: For though he be in the printed
Copies of S. Marcellin and other our Historians named Bishop of the Deiri, that
is Yorkshire, yet since in none o^ our ancient Catalogues we find any such
Bishop, their suspicion of a mistake in the writing seems reasonable, that
instead o^ Deiri, we ought to read De Iren, that is, o^ Ireland. But as for
Saint Pecthelm, who accom^panied S. Wiro first to Rome, and after to the
country of the Frisons a second time, it is evident in S. Marcellin that he
was Bishop of Candida casa.

7. As for the Modern, now only called, Scotts, they have no show of right in
their plea. For it is manifest by the consent of all our Historians, that the
Diocese of Casa Candida, though now included in Scotland, yet anciently
belonged to the English-Saxon Kingdom of the Bernicians, and so continued to
the times of King Edgar. So that the impudent rashness of Dempster affirming,
That this does evidently appear that the Bishopric of Candida Casa was always
in the dominion of Scotland, and never was subject to the jurisdiction of the
English, is unanswerably refuted by the learned B. Usher in his British
Antiquities, Vsser in Primord. f. 665.
who demonstrates that the Diocese of Casa Candida, or, as it was afterward
named, of Glasgo, was a part of the Cumbrian Kingdom. And Malmsbury expressly
affirms that the Kings of the Northumbers in these times extended their
Dominion to all the Regions beyond Humber as far as Scotland, and that within
their confines were contained these Dioceses, The Archbishopric of York, the
Bishopric of Hagustald and Rippon, that of Lindesfarn, and lastly the Sea of
Candida casa. And this is ingenuously acknowledged by Ioannes Mayor a Scottish
Writer.

8. Of these two Bishops S. Pecthelm and S. Wiro, we shall treat further
hereafter, when we shall find them with great zeal and fruit exerc^sing the
Apostolic Office with our other Saxon Missioners in Germany. To which country
the memorable Gests of S. Boniface at th^s time, do call us.

XIII. CHAPTER
XIII. CHAP.
1.2. etc. S. Boniface being summoned, repaires to Rome: gives an account of
his Faith: and is cons^crated Bishop by Pope Gregory.

9. The Form of his Obedience to the Sea Apostolic.

6.7 etc. He returns with many recommendations.

Beron. h^c. Auth vit. S. Bonifoc. ^p. Sur. S. Inn.
1. THE labors of S. Boniface were so great in dispersing the precious seed of
the Gospel in Germany, and so wonderful a Benediction had Almighty God showrd
on them in those few years which passed since his leaving Rome, that the report
thereof coming to Pope Gregory, he thought fit to recall him thither, that he
might hear from his own mouth an account of his Apostleship, and thereby enable
him to proceed with more vigor and authority.

2. S. Boniface having received letters to this effect, deferred not at all his
Obedience to the Holy Popes summons: but attended by a troop of his brethren
and Disciples immediately took his journey toward Italy, and being come within
the sight of Rome, he gave God thanks for his prosperous voyage, and commended
himself to the patronage of the holy Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul. As Soon as
the Pope was informed of his arrival, he presently sent for him, and after
kind salutations, he appointed him a convenient and honorable place for his
entertainment. And afterward taking an opportune season, he sent for him to
come to a conference at the Church of the Blessed Apostle S. Peter. And after
long discourses with mutual satisfaction, the Pope required of him an account
of his Faith. The Holy man answered him in these terms, It will not be easy for
me to give a reasonable satisfaction to your Holiness by a sudden speech or
reply to a demand of so great importance* My request therefore is that you
would afford me some time to answer by writing. To this the Pope yielded.
Whereupon accordingly shortly after he presented to him in Writing a full
account of his Faith.

3. When the Pope had per sed the said Writing, he commanded him in a familiar
manner to sit by him: and exhorted him to retain constantly, and with great
ca^e to teach that Faith which he there professed. And afterward entering into
long discourses touching spiritual matters, in which they spent the greatest
part of the day: at last he asked him in how many regions he had pl^nted the
Faith: Whereto he having succinctly answered, the Pope then plainly discovered
his i^tention to him, that he would c^nsecrate him Bishop, to the end that
being promoted to a higher Apostelick dignity, he might with greater confidence
and authority correct such as were in error: adding withal, that his sermons
and exhortations would be more acceptable and effectual, when it should appear
that he was empowred to that office by the Supreme Bishop of Gods Church.

4. Then the Holy man seriously considering this proposal, and apprehending
least if he should refuse it, that saying of the Prophet might be applied to
him; He rejected benediction, and it shall be removed far from him, submitted
himself to his Holiness will. The day therefore of his Ordination being come,
which was the Feast of S. Andrew, the Pope consecrated him Bishop, and withal
would have him thence forward to be called Boniface, whereas before his name
was Winfrid. Moreover to the end he might more strictly oblige him to exhibit
Obedience to himself and his Successors, and to observe the Tradition of holy
Faith, he required and received an Oath from him in the Form following, as is
to be read in the most ancient Records: 5. In the Name of our Lord God and
Savior Jesus Christ, I Boniface by the Grace of God now ordained Bishop, do
promise to thee, O Blessed Peter Prince of the Apostles and to thy Vicar-Bishop
Pope Gregory, by the Father, son and Holy Ghost the inseparable Trinity, and by
this thy most sacred Body that I will constantly maintain the Universality and
purity of Holy Faith, in the Unity of which Faith I will through Gods
assistance ever persevere, since therein the salvation of every Christian does
consist: I do promise likewise that I will never be induced by the persuasions
of any to dissent from the Unity of the Catholic Church, but as has been
said, I will in all things maintain this Faith and the purity thereof, and
exhibit my endeavors and concurrence to advance the proffits of thy Church,
since to thee our Lord God has given the power of ^inding and loosing, and to
thy foresaid Vicar and his Successors. And in case I shall know any Bishops
transgressors of the ancient Decrees of the holy Fathers, I will have no
communion or participation with them; but on the contrary to the utmost of my
power I will resist them, and however I will faithfully without delay denounce
them to his Holiness. But if it should happen, which God forbid, that I should
hereafter attempt or any way do any thing contrary to the tenon of this my
Vow, may I in the last dreadful Judgment incurr the Sentence and punishment of
Ananias and Saphira, who presumed to deal unfaithfully with you in disposing
their goods. This form of Oath also I Boniface humble Bishop have written with
mine own hand, and having laid it upon the most sacred Body of S. Peter, I
have, in the presence of God who is my judge* taken this my oath accordingly,
which I do promise to keep.



6. After this the Pope studiously assisted and respected him in all things:
for he gave him a Book containing all Ecclesiastical Decrees which had been
Synodically made by his Predecessors: enioyning him that both his Clergy and
people should be ordered according to the said Instituts. He likewise by a
Privilege in Writing promised and confirmed to him and all that depended on
him the favor and Protection of the Sea Apostolic.

7. To conclude, at his departure he gave him several Letters, to the
illustrious Duke Charles Mair of the French Kings palace, to all Bishops,
Priests, Nobles, etc. requiring their assistance and defense of the said holy
man, in the execution of his Apostolic Office among the Nations feared on the
Eastern parts of the Rhene. With these he adioynd a Letter also to the Clergy
and people peculiarly subject to this Holy Bishop, requiring them to show all
reverence and obedience to him: acquainting them withal that among other
Injunctions given him, he had commanded him not to presume to make any
unlawful Ordinations; not to permit any one who had two wives, or one which
had not been a Virgin, no illiterate man, or deformed and vitiated in any of
his members, none which had been in public Penance, or obnoxious to Justice,
to be promoted to Holy Orders. A. D. 724
That he should not receive to the same Orders any Egyptians or Africans,
because many such were Manicheans and often rebaptized: That he should be
careful not to diminish, but rather increase the revenews or ornaments of his
Churches: And that the Rents and Oblations should be divided into four
portions, of which one he should reserve to himself: a second should be
distributed to the Clergy proportionably to their Offices: a third to the poor
and strangers: and a fourth to be reserved for maintaining the fabrics of
Churches: Of all which he was to give an account in the Judgment of God. That
Ordinations of Priests and Deacons should be celebrated only in the Fasts of
the fourth and tenth Months, at the beginning of Lent, and on the Vespers of
Saturday after Whitsontide. Lastly that except in danger of death the Sacrament
of Baptism should not be conferred but only on the Solemnities of Easter and
Pentecost.

8 To these Letters were added others full of pious exhortations and
Catechisticall Instructions to the people of the Province of the Thuringians
and also the Alt Saxons, both Idolaters and new converted Christians. And
lastly whereas among the Thuringians there were some courageous persons who in
defense of their Faith had suffered grievous persecutions from the Pagans, he
addressed a particular letter to them, by name to these Noble persons, Altolph,
Godolas, Wilary, Gunthar, Albold, etc. in which he highly exalted their
constancy, giving humble thanks to God for the same: and encouraging them to
persevere in their constancy; to have recourse to the Sea Apostolic in any of
their necessities; and to be obedient to their new consecrated Bishop.

XIV. CHAP. XIV. CHAPTER

1.2 etc. S Boniface returning into Germany constantly exercises his*
Apostolic Office: He destroy, Idolatry etc.

4. He excommunicates Heretics and licentious Christians

5. He is encouraged by S. Michael to whom he builds a Church.

6.7 8. He by Letters beggs the Prayers of several Devout persons.

1. A. D. 714. Auth. Vit. S. Bonif. ap. Sur.
SAint Boniface encouraged and secured by the authority of so many
recommendations began his journey toward Germany the beginning of the year
following: and being come to the Noble Prince Charles, surnamed Martel, he
presented to him the Holy Popes Letters: and recommending himself to his
protection, with his consent he proceeded in his journey to the Region of the
Catti, now called Hassians, to whom he had already begun to preach the Gospel:
and to secure him both there and in the way thither the Prince gave him
likewise Letters of safeguard, directed to all Bishops, Dukes, Counts, etc.
signifying to them that it was his will that the Apostolic Father and Bishop
Boniface the bearer of those should without any molestation or injury go or
remain in the said countries as being one whom he had received into his favor
and Protection (which he calls Mundiburde.)

2. When he was come into the Province of the Catti he found there very many
who had cast off the Profession of Christianity; Some Sacrifised to trees and
fount^ins* at least privately: some followed sooth saying and cousening
divinations, and many were addicted to abominable Sacrifices: so that a very
small number remained constant in the way of Truth which they had been taught.

3. By the advice of these the Holy Bishop with their assi^tance attempted to
cut down a certain Tree of a prodigious vastnes which grew in a place called
Ge^smer, and had been for many ages called the Tree of Jupiter. Whereupon a
great multitude of Pagans ran thither, with an intention to kill him as an
Ennemy of their Gods. But at the same instant the Tree though not at all deep
cut, as if it had been agitated by a Divine force, was torn into four pieces.
This when those Pagans saw, they gave glory to God, and embraced the Faith.

4. Neither did he find greater opposition from Pagans, then from Heretics and
licentious Christians. For going from that Province to the Thurigians, he found
there a great decay of the Catholic Faith occasioned by the death of some of
their Princes which had been converted. The principal Authors of several
Heresies among them had been these infamous persons Dorthuvia, Berther, Eanbert
and Humed. Others there were horribly defiled with scandalous lusts and
adulteries: All which after sharp reprehensions he cut off from the Churches
Communion by Excommunication.

5. In the mean time the fam^ of his Preaching, being spread, great accessions
were made to the number of Beleive^s. Many Churches were erected and
Monasteries built. Among which one of the most Notable was founded at Ordorf to
the honor of the Blessed Archangel Saint Michael, who had appeared with great
glory to the Holy Bishop on a certain night sleeping in his Tent near the River
Oraham, where he had been employed in preaching and baptizing, and with many
comfortable words encouraged him to be constant in that holy employment. The
morning following he celebrated Mass in the same place: after which he
commanded that dinner should be prepared. But being told that there was no
meat: Is it so, answered he? How many thousands did God fee^ in the wilderness
forty years together? Cannot he provide for his servant, how unworthy soever,
nourishment for one day? Having said this, he commanded the Table should be
covered: and presently a great bird flew thither bringing in her mouth a fish
sufficient to satisfy all their hunger. This fish he bidd should be dressed:
which having eaten, the remainders were cast into the river. This was the
occasion of dedicating the said Monastery to the honor of Saint Michael: in
which he assembled a great number of Gods servants, all which living after the
Primitive manner, provided themselves necessaries for their sustenance and
clothing by the labor of their hands.

6. Now though such effects of his preaching were indeed admirable: yet their
strangenes will be diminished if we consider the profound Humility of this man
of God, who distrusting his own forces, depended only on God, whose assistance
he begged daily himself, and by frequent letters solicited others to do the
same. To which purpose there are to this day extant several Epistles directed
to his devout friends in Brittany. Two there were written to the devout Abbess
Eadburga kinswoman to the King of Kent: Bonif. Ep. 24 and 28.
in one of which he entreats her to send him written with her own hand the
Epistles of his Master (so he calls him) Saint Peter, who had directed him to
that journey, whose words he desired to have always present before his eyes.

7. Answers also to other Epistles of the like nature he received from several
persons; Ib. Ep. 76. Ib. Ep 43.
From Ael^owald (or Ethelwald) King of the East Angles, from a Bishop called
Torthelm (probably the same with Torther who had surrendered his Bishopric of
Hereford to Walstod, and was yet alive: or perhaps with Totta Bishop of
Leicester, of whom more hereafter.) Likewise from Daniel Bishop of Winchester,
Ib Ep. 67.
by whose encouragement and benediction Saint Boniface first undertook this
Apo^tolick employment, and who had been Bishop twenty years before him: Who
therefore in the same letter with a becoming gravity instructs our Holy Bishop
how to proceed in his confutation of the Errors of the Pagans, etc. He
likewise complains of an infirmity with which he was much afflicted, and
desires his prayers to God for a remedy. Which infirmity, as appears by S.
Bonifaces answer, was some disease in his eyes.

8. Of the happy success of his preaching Saint Boniface, according to orders
received, informed Pope Gregory, ^s appears by the same Popes answer: In which,
Ib Ep. 125.
besides thanks given to Almighty God for the power of his Grace; and
exhortations S. Boniface to persevere in his labors, A. D. 725.
which God would gloriously crown: He acquaints him, that whereas, according to
his information, a certain Bishop in those parts, through slouthfullnes would
not assist him in preaching to the Infidells, yet challenged a portion in the
Oblations and contributions of the Diocese he had written to the Noble Prince
Charles Martel to forbid the attempt of the said Bishop, not doubting but he
would obey such his admonition.

XV. CHA.
XV. CHAP.
1.2. etc. Religious Virgins out of England, Mistresses of Piety in Germany.

4.5. etc Proceedings of S. Boniface.

A. D. 725. Auth vit. S. Bonifac. ap. Sur. Baron. hic.
1. THE year following S. Boniface perceiving how great a harvest there was in
those regions of the Catri and Thuringians, and how few laborers: he therefore
sent into Brittany for more assistants. And the whole English Church there did
so willingly comply with his desires, that not only many persons eminent for
learning and sanctity were sent over to him, but likewise Books and other
furniture and presents of several kinds.

2. The principal men which went from Brittany to assist him were Burchard,
Lullus, Gregory, Willebold, Willebald and his Brother Witta. Several Religious
women likewise upon his invitation passed over into Germany to become
instructours in Monastical Discipline: Among whom the most eminent were
Cunigildu Aunt to S. Lullus, and her daughter Bertgictis, likewise Cunitrudis,
Tecla, Lioba and Wa^tpurgis sister to Willeblad, and another Cunigildis sister
to Willebold, with her daughter Bertgictis: These were skillful in sciences and
appointed Mistresses in learning and piety among the Thuringians. Cunitrudis
was sent into Bavaria, Tecla by his order remained at Ochnofurt upon the River
Mogan, and Lioba was made Abbess of Religions Virgins at Bischofesheim. All
these were eminent for sanctity: and of them the names of three are recorded
among the Saints, to wit, Tecla, Lioba and Waltpurgis. The Life of Saint
Waltpurgis was faithfully written by a devout Monk called Wolfard: and that of
S. Lioba upon the command of Rabanus by his Disciple Rodulphus.

Vit. S. Liobae.
3. In which Life we read how S. Boniface being desirous to establish in Germany
Monastical Discipline in a most exact manner, sent to the ^ountain thereof, the
principal Monastery of S. Benedicts Order, Mount-Cassin, his Disciple
Sturmius, to the end that making his abode there a convenient space of time he
might be perfectly instructed in their most accurate observances. So unwilling
he was to pretermitt any thing which might advance piety: although himself had
from his infancy been bred up in the same Discipline, which was also practiced
in many Monasteries in Brittany as S. Beda testifies, and as appears in
several of S. Bonifaces Letters.

4. About the same time Withred King of Kent (whom S. Beda calls Victred) dyed
on the ninth day before the Calends of May, Bed. l 5. c. 25.
and left his three Sons, Edilbert, Eadbert and Aldric heyrs of his kingdom
which himself had worthily governed the space of thirty four years and a half.
Of these three Sons, Edilbert, first named by S. Beda, and therefore probably
eldest (though William of Malmsbury gives the preference to Eadbert) wrote the
same year an Epistle to S. Boniface, Ap. Bonifac Ep. 40.
which he sent him by a Monk called Etheld who accompanied the foren^med
Missioners in their voyage: In which he signified to him the joy which he
received in the assurance given him by the holy Abbess Buggan his Kinswoman,
lately returned from her pilgrimage to Rome, that he the said Boniface would be
mindful of him in his Prayers. He withal told him how great the general joy
in his kingdom was for the wonderful benediction which God had given to his
preaching among the Pagans. Moreover he ex^used the ^ma^lnes of a present sent
by the same bearer, to wit, a vessel of silver gilded within, weighing three
pounds and an half, and two smaller ones. One request also he made to him* to
send over two falcons, because birds of that sort bred in his kingdom were not
so vigorous. He conc^uded with begging his prayers for himself living or dead,
and entreating the favor af an Answer.

5. Now as S. Boniface courageously labored in Upper Germany, so did S.
Willebrord in the Lower. And this year he seems to have visited and cultivated
the Ter^itory of Antwerp: For thus writes Miraeus in his Belgic Calender, In
the sixth year of Theodoric King of France. M^r in ^ast Belg. 7. November.
Ro^ing Prince of Antwerp and his wife Bebelina gave to S. Willebrord a third
part of the Customs, and likewise the Church belonging to the Castle there
which S. Amand Bishop of Maestrick had built. These gifts he bestowd for buying
incense and Lights, and that the Priests serving in the said Church might pray
for Gods mercy and pardon of the Sins of the Donours: as appears in the Charter
of the said Princes, recorded by the same Author. Moreover in a Second Charter
the same Prince and his wife signify that they had also given to the Church of
S. Peter and S. Paul built likewise by Saint Amand, (of which Church S.
Willebrord had the oversight) the entire village of Preprusdare seated on the
River Nutta, and half the rents and proffits of another village called
Winlindechim. Thus writes Miraeus out of an ancient Manuscript belonging to the
Abbey of Epternac, A. D. 726.
where also the same S. Willebr^rd dyed, as shall be showed in its due place:
And he thus concludes, That Evangelicall Plantation which S. Amandus and S.
Eligius began among the inhabitants of Antwerp, was perfected by S. Willebrord.

XVI. CHAPTER
XVI. CHAP.
1.2. etc The Piety of King Ina: His devout journey to Rome.

1. THE year of Grace seven hundred twenty six was much illustrated by the
piety and devotion of the glorious King of the West Saxons, A. D. 726.
Ina, who after a reign of thirty eight years, having munificently extended his
liberality to the Sea of Rome, then at last in his old age undertook a tedious
journey thither, leaving his Kingdom to younger and stronger shoulders, and
resolving to spend the remainder of his life in devotion meditation of
celestial things, near the monuments of the glorious Apostles S. Peter and S.
Paul: Bed. l de 6. et ^tibus.
A practice of devotion in these days very frequent with all sorts, Noble and
ignoble, men and women also, as S. Beda testifies.

Antiquit. Glaston. Spel. in Council. p. ^
2. Before he putt this in execution, he the year before had, beyond all his
Predecessors, richly endowed the ancient venerable Monastery of Glastonbury,
where from the foundation he erected a New Church consecrated to our Savior,
and the Honor of S. Peter and S. Paul Princes of the Apostles: and withal
conferred on the said Monastery (which he styles the prime fountain and
Original of all Religion in Brittany) very many large possessions and Manors,
confirming withal, whatsoeves had been formerly given by Kings his
Predecessors or any others a particular account whereof he setts down in his
Charter. Moreover he granted to the same Monastery very great Privileges and
exemptions from the Bishops authority, permitting the Monks to receive in the
said Monastery or in any Chappells annexed to it the Ecclesiastical Sacraments
from whatsoever Bishop they should think fit, so he were such an one as was
conformable to the Church in the Paschall celebration.

3. A Copy of which Royal Charter is extant in Sir H. Spelman, extracted out
of the ancient Archives of that Monastery: Where it is further written, Ibid.
that the foresaid King Ina after the sealing of this Charter by himself, with
the consent and attestation of his Queen Edilburga, of King Buld^ed, of Adelard
the Queens Brother, of Beorthwald Archbishop of Canterbury, etc. directed
Letters to Pope Gregory signed with his Royal Seal, in which was enclosed the
same Charter exemplified, together with a Cup of gold and other royal
presents, beseeching him that he would receive the Church of Canterbury with
all its appartenances and privileges into the protection of the Sea Apostolic
and confirm them for ever by his authority. The same year likewise the said
King took a journey personally to Rome, and sent back to Glastonbury this
Privilege confirmed by the Apostolic signet.

4. This devout journey of King Ina to Rome was suggested to him principally by
his virtuous and pious Queen Ethelburga: The innocent subtilty by which she at
last effected it is related by William of Malmsbury, to this effect: King Ina,
says he, had to wife Ethelburga, a Lady of Royal blood and a Royal mind
likewise. Malmsb. de Reg. l. 1. c. 2
She frequently instilld into the cares of her husband motives to induce him to
bid farewell, at least in his last age, to all wordly vanities. Such good
suggestions he would seem to approve, but the execution of them he delayed from
day to day. At last she attempted to overcome him by subtilty, in the manner
following: 5. On a certain time being in their Countrey-palace, where a Royal
court was kept with extreme magnificence: as soon as they were gone from thence,
the Keeper of the house by the Queens private order defiled all the rooms of
the palace with rubbish and the dung of cattle; yea in the bed where the King
and Queen had lain, he putt a sow with her young piggs. In the mean time when
the Court had proceeded little more then a mile in their return, the Queen
entreated and importuned the King to go back to the same palace, as if it
imported almost her life. The King with no great difficulty was persuaded: but
when he found his Palace, which he had el^t but even then magnifice^tly
adorned, now become so ugly and nasty, he wonderd at it, and turning his eyes
to the Quern, seemed to ask her the reason of this change. She taking advantage
of this occasion, with a smiling look said to him, so, where are now the
rustling tumults and noises* Where are the magnificent purple Tapistries? Where
are the many vessels of gold and silver? where the luxurious banquets for which
sea and land was searched? Are not all these vanished away like smoke and wind?
But woe to those who fix their minds on such vanities, which like a swift
torrent make have to loose themselves in the abyss, for they likewise sholl be
snatched away with them. The more powerful we are, the more powerful will
our torments be, unless we provide in time for our eternal state To this
purpose she spoke, and with such efficacy she by this emblem drew her husbands
mind to perform what for many years together she could not obtain by her
persuasions. For after many victories and rich spoils gained from his enemies,
and many noble explo^^s performed in the world, he at last aspiring to the
supreme perfection of piety, undertook a pilgrimage to Rome.



6. As touching his pious Queen Edilburga, how she disposed of her self,
entering into a Monastery, of which she became Abbess and dyed in great
Sanctity, we shall treat in due season and place.

XVII. CHAPTER
XVII. CHAP.
1.2. King Ina first conferrs on the Sea Apostolic the Pension called
Romescot, or Peter pence.

3. 4. etc The same is continued by succeeding Princes: even of the Norman
Race: and the like by foreign Kings, etc.

1. KING Ina being not only resolved, but in a readiness to begin his
Pilgrimage toward Rome, determind to leave some lasting monument of his Piety
and affection to the Sea Apostolic. His Predecessor Cedwalla had voluntarily
quitted the throne, and with great devotion changed his Purple into a poor
Monastical habit there near the Monuments of the Apostles. King Ina not
content to imitate him in that, will moreover testify his submission and
respect to the Sea Apostolic by a liberal contri^ution to last for ever. For
which purpose, says an ancient Historian, a general Decree was made by the
whole Kingdom of the West Saxons, that out of every family there should yearly
be sent and offered to S. Peter and his Church one penny, Westmon. ad A. D. 727.
which was therefore called Romescott, or Peter Pence, not because it was
collected at the Feast of S. Peter ad Vincula, as Sir H. Spelma^ imagins (for
that order was made long after this time) but to show the signal obligations,
and more then ordinary respect, Union and subjection which that kingdom had to
S. Peter and his Successors in the Sea Apostolic.

2. This Munificence of King Ina was in future times imitated by other Saxon
Kings also. For in the year of Grace seven hundred ninety four Offa King of
the Mercians (says Huntingdon) gave to the Roman Bishop a settled rent out of
every house in his Kingdom for ever. And in the year eight hundred fifty four,
when the whole Kingdom had been reduced into a Monarchy, King Ethelwolf the son
of Egbert undertaking likewise a pilgrimage to Rome, as William of Malmsbury
testifies, offered to S. Peter in the presence of Pope Leo the fourth a tribute
out of his whole kingdom, which is paid to this day.

3. As touching the succeeding Saxon Monarks, though no doubt this contribution
was paid, yet there is to be found no solemn Decree enioyning the payment of
it before King Edgar, who made a Law (recited by our learned Seldom) the title
whereof is, Seldom in Spic^legio leg. 18.20.
Concerning S. Peter's pence or the Roman tribute (Vectigali.) In which a
certain Tax is established proportionably to each man's ability: and moreover,
in case of Non-payment there is prescribed a determinate penalty and forfeyture
to be paid to the Bishop and the King. And the same Law was received and
submitted to by the Danes who at that time, which was in the year of Grace nine
hundred sixty four, possessed some Provinces of the Kingdom.

4. Afterward when, during two or three successions, the Danes had subdued the
whole Kingdom, the said Tribute was augmented, money then it seems being more
plentiful, or the peoples charity increasing, and instead of a Penny, Hoveden
f. 603.
half a mark was appointed to be paid on a certain day. Thus we read in the
Ancient Laws recorded by Hoveden. And King Canutus in the year of Grace one
thousand thirty two being then at Rome, whither in imitation of this King Ina
he had undertaken a devout Pilgrimage, wrote from thence Letters to his
Bishops, Nobles and all Officers in Brittany, Malmsbur.
in which with great severity be required them before his return to discharge
all arrears due by the ancient Law, to wit, the pence due to S. Peter out of
all Cities, towns, villages, etc. Which if they failed to do, he threatened to
those who faild in this duty a severe punishment without pardon.

5. After the expulsion of the Danes, S. Edward King and Confessor, the last
of the Saxon race, as he exceeded all his Predecessors in piety, so likewise
in reverence and affection to the Apostolic See. Ap. Seld. i^ Spicoleg f. 171
And therefore in a Body of La^s collected by him with the consent of his
Barons, he renewd all ancient Laws of his Saxon Progenitors which savoured of
justice and piety, and among the rest this Pension of S. Peter's pence. And
though in the Chronicle of Lichfeild it be said that the said Laws (ever
afterward called S Edwards Laws) had for the space of sixty seven years,
since the death of his Grandfather Edgar, been forgotten: that is to be
understood not of this particular Law touching Peter Pence, but o^ some other
of the Saxon Laws then renewd: Since it i^ evident that the said Pension had
not been omitted. as we showed by the example of King Canutus.

6. After this time followd the Race of the Norman Kings, among whom this Piety
of K. Ina was not obliterated. Ep. Gull. In Conquest. ad Gregor. c. vii
For in an Epistle to Pope Gregory the seventh from K. William the Conqueror
we read, that the same King assures the Pope that the money due to him which
for the last three years had been negligently collected, should then at his
return be sent: And that for the future his Archbishop Lansrank and other
Bishops should have the care of collecting and sending it. Consequently in
another Epistle from the said Pope to the Archbishops, Bishops, Ep. Gregor. P.
vii. ad Archi^p. etc
etc. we find the particular rates imposed on each Diocese, and at that time
due, collected out of the Register of the Sea Apostolic viz. From Canterbury
Diocese, seven pounds, eighteen shillings sterling: From London, sixteen
pounds, ten shillings: From Rochester five pounds, twelve shillings: From
Norwich, one and twenty pounds, ten shillings: From Ely, five pounds: From
Lincoln, forty two pounds: From Chester, eight pounds. From Winchester,
seaventeen pounds, six shillings, eight pence: From Exceter, nine pound^, five
shillings: From Worcester, ten pounds, five shillings: From Hereford, six
pounds: From Bathe, twelve pounds, five shillings: From Salisbury seaventeen
pounds From Coventrey, ten pounds, five shillings: From York eleaven pounds,
ten shillings.

7. As for his Son and next Successor King William Rufus, Malmsb.
William of Malmsbury informs as that the Bishop Elect of Exceter being at Rome
pleaded the Kings cause before the Pope with all his eloquence and skill*
telling him that all his Fathers and Brothers customs should be restored: That
England was a peculiar Province of the Roman Church, and therefore yearly paid
Tribute to it. Whether he had order from the King to strain his compliment so
far, it does not appear. As for King Steven, King Henry the second and King
John, they not only continued this Pension, but standing in need of the Popes
favor and assistance, they to flatter the Pope, acknowledged the Kingdom of
England to be feudatary to the Church of Rome, and under her Jurisdiction: yea
King John made himself the Popes Vassal, and his son did homage to the Pope for
his Crown: Mat. Par. a ^. D. 12^3.
a subjection which Matthew Paris deservedly calls ( non formosam, sed famosam)
not seemly, but on the contrary infamous. In succeeding times the same Pension
was duly paid, but never acknowledged to be in proper expression a Tribute but
an honorable contribution, or charitable Alms, of justice indeed due, because
established by Law: but far from giving the Pope a Temporal right or dominion
in England. A^n. i6. R. Rich. 2.
On the Contrary, in a Parliament in King Richard the Seconds days all the
Bishops and Lords of the Kingdom protested, Tha^ the Crown of Englan^^^ and
ever had been free from subjection to any, as to the Temporal Rights and
Regalities of it, and that it depended on ^od alone. As for the Peter Pence
they were always paid: and proper Coin: or that purpose was anciently stamped:
yea and the Pope had in England peculiar Officers for the Collection of it as
John Derlington in the times of three Popes, Pits descrip. Angl A. D. ^^84.
John the One and twentieth Nicholas the third, and Martin the fourth. And
Polydor Virgil an Italian acknowledges that he was sent into England to perform
the Office of Collectour for the Pope.

8. This liberality begun by our Saxon Kings, was imitated by other Extern
Princes in succeeding times: Ap Baron. ad A. D. 804.
Thus Pope Gregory the ninth of that Name in an Epistle to his Legates declares
that in the Archives of S. Peter in three several places it is f^und that
Charles the Emperor collected yearly for the service of the Apostolic See
twelve hundred pounds, besides what every one offered in his particular
devotion. And in the year of Grace one thousand forty six by a General
Assembly of the States of Poland under King Casimir a promise was made of a
half penny yearly to be paid by every person in that kingdom to the Pope.
Coriolun. ad. A. D. 1476.
And in the year of our Lord one thousand seaventy six Demetrius Duke of
Dalmatia and Croatia in a Synod assembled at Salona obliged himself to pay to
the Sea of Rome an annual Tribute of two hundred pieces of Gold called
Byzantins. Id. ad. A. D. 1076.
The like Pensions we read to have been given by the Dukes of Brittany, etc.
Thus much we thought fit to add upon occasion of this charitable Liberality
to the Sea of Rome begun by the devout Saxon King Ina. A. D. 727
We will prosecute his journey the year following.

XVIII. CHAP. XVIII. C.

1. Death of Tobias Bishop of Rochester.

2 3 S. Boniface consults the Pope about several Questions: which are resolved
by him

1. THE same year Tobias Bishop of Rochester dyed. He was, Bed. l. 5. c. 24.
says S. Beda, Disciple of Theodore Archbishop of Canterbury of happy memory,
and of Adrian Abbot of S. Augustins Monastery. And to a great perfection of
learning both Ecclesiastical and secular he added so accurate a skill in
languages both Greek and Latin, that they were as familiar to him as his Native
countries tongue He was buried in the Porch of S. Paul's, which himself had
built within the Church of S. Andrew to be a place for his sepulcher. From this
passage of S. Beda the great Cardinal Baronius inferrs, Baron. hic
that the English Nation received from the Roman Church, not the Catholic
Faith only, but likewise all good literature. To Tobias there succeeded in the Sea of Rochester Aldulfus, who was the tenth Bishop of that Church.

2. But the incessant labors of S. Boniface will often interrupt our Narration of
the affairs of Brittany, Ap. Bonifac. ^p.
and require our attention to them. This year (as appears by an Epistle or Pope
Gregory to him) he sent his Priest Denua^ to the said Pope to onsult him about
certain difficulties occurring in the discharge of his Apostolic Office. As 1.
within what degrees of propinquity Marriage may be permitted: to which the
Resolution was, that the utmos^ strictnes ought not to be exercised to such new
converted Nation, and therefore tha^ beyond the fourth degree of affinity or
consanguinity Marriage might be allowd. Again 2. that in case a woman have an
incurable infirmity (before Marriage be accomplished) it may be lawful for the
husband to marry another 3. That if a Priest be defamed by an accusation of the
people, and no certain Witnesses be produced against him, the Priest by oath
making God witness of his innocence shall remain in his degree 4. That it is no
fit that more Chalices then one should be upon the Altar at celebration of
Mass 5 That concerning eating meats consecrated to Idols, it may be allowd
after making the sign of the Cross over them except in case o^ scandal
mentioned by S. Paul, ^^ at one should say, This was offered to Idols. 6. That
children ^o either sex offered by their parents to God in their infancy to a
Regular Discipline, may not afterward in ripe age leave that state and contract
matrimony. 7. That persons baptized by adulterous and scandalous Priests ought
not therefore to be rebaptized. But in case there be a doubt whether infants
have been baptized or not, then according to the Tradition of the Holy Fathers,
they ought to be baptized 8 That the holy Sacrament of Christ's body and blood
ought not to be denied to persons infected with Leprosy, or other like
contagious disease: but they must not be admitted to eat and drink with others.
9. That in case the Pestilence should rage in Monasteries o^ Churches, it would
be a folly to fly, since no man can escape Gods hands. 10. That he ought
sharply to reprove scandalous and licentious Bishops or Priests: but was not
obliged to refuse eating or conversing with them: For this may be a mean to
gain them.

Ib. Ep. 3. and ^n not. Serrar ^d^and.
3. Some of these doubts also S. Boniface proposed to his learned friends in
Brittany, and particularly to the holy Prelat Daniel Bishop of Winchester, who
returned him the like answers: and comforted him being much afflicted with his
perverse and obstinat German Clergy. Both his Epistle and the Answer to it are
still extant.

XIX. CHAPTER
XIX. CHAP.
1.2. etc. King Ina at Rome builds the School of the English: ^h^re it was
seated.

6 7 He there takes a Monastical Habit. his happy death.

1. IN the year of Grace seven hundred twenty seven the devout King Ina
finished his journey to Rome. A. D. 727.
At his leaving Brittany he resigned his kingdom to his kinsman called
Ethelard, a worthy Successor of so Noble a Prince. And being thus discharged
of so great a burden of secular solicitudes, he performed his journey more
cheerfully.

Westmon. hic.
2. Being arrived at Rome says Matthew of Westminster, he by the consent and
will of Pope Gregory, built in the City a certain house, which he would have
to be called The School of the English. To the said house the following Kings
of this Nation, the Princes, Bishops, Priests or any other Ecclesiastics, were
to come, to be instructed in the Catholic Faith and learning, to prevent the
teaching any perverse doctrine contrary to Catholic Unity: and when they were
become well established in the Faith, they returned home again*

3. It seems that not only the Popes in these times, but the Saxon Princes in
Brittany thought more convenient, that the youth of this Nation should be
taught learning and virtue at Rome rather then public Schools should be
erected at home. And the reason is given by the same Author, Id. ib.
saying, From the time of S. Augustine our Apostle to this Public Schools and
Professors of Teaching were by the Bishops of Rome straightly forbidden to the
English, by reason of the many Heresies which at the coming of the English into
Brittany (at which time the Pagans were mixed with the Christians) did much
corrupt the doctrines and Discipline of Christianity. So that the Censure given
by the Apostat Bale touching this Foundation does well become him, B^l. cent.
1. c. 15.
who affirms, That it was erected to the great mischief of the English state.

4. Besides this house, Id. ib.
the same King Inas built near to it a Church to the honor of the Blessed
Virgin Mary, in which the Divine Mysteries might be celebrated by and for such
English as should come to the City, and in which if any of them happened to dye,
here they might be buried: Thus writes the same Author: who in another place
declares, that Burrhed last King of the Mercians going in pilgrimage to Rome
and there dying, Id. ad. A. D. 874.
was after a Royal manner buried in the Church of the Blessed Virgin,
adjoining to the School of the English.

5* It is not easy to determine in what region of this City the said School
and Church were placed. Several of our Historians agree that it was the same
which is to this day called the Hospital of the English, or the Hospital of
S. Thomas* thus write Polydor, Harpsfeild, Parker* etc* But other Authors
mentioning the frequent conflagrations of it, particularly Anastasiu^
Bi^bliothecarius in his description thereof about the year of Grace eight
hundred, Ap. Baron. A. D. 823.
twenty three shows that it was seated in the Suburbs, near to the Church of S.
Peter, in that place which is now called the Borgo, and anciently Saxia,
because a Colony of Saxons was sent thither by Charles the great.

6. King Inas having thus provided for securing a perpetual succession and
propagation of the Faith among his countrymen, presently retired himself to a
quiet repose in contemplation. He therefore in the expression o^ William of
Malmsbury, cut off his hair, Malmsb. l. 1 c 2.
and clothing himself with a vile plebeian habit spent the short remainder of
his age in a secret retirement. And how acceptable this last sacrifice of
himself was to Almighty God, Id. ib.
he was pleased to show by many miracles, says the same Author. Now that by
this plebeian habit was meant a Monastical one, the general consent of our
Historians do confirm. For the clothing of Religious persons at the beginning
was the same with that of the ordinary meaner sort of people: but fashions
altering among secular persons, and Religious men not changing, hence it comes
that they have a distinct peculiar habit, nothing at all resembling the
general fashion of other men in the world.

7. His life was not prolonged at Rome: Martyrol. Angl. 7. Febr*
For in our Martyrologe he is recorded to have dyed this same year: and his
memory is celebrated among Saints on the seventh of February. Which does not
well agree together. For his arrival at Rome, and the orders taken for such
buildings could not be effected so early in the year. Yet that he did not pass
through the following year may be collected from hence, that being dead his
Sacred Body was buried with great honor in the entrance of S. Peter's Church,
by reason that the Church founded by him to the honor of the Blessed Virgin
was not quite finished.

A. D. 729.

XX. CHA.


XX. CHAP.
1.2. Death of S. Willeic: and of S. Engelmund a Martyr.

3.4. Oswold rebels against King Ethelard: and is expelled.

5 6 etc. Death of S Egbert.

8.9 Osric King of the Northumbers dying, the pious King Ceolulf succeeds.

1. TO this same year is consigned the happy death of the Holy Priest and
Disciple of S. Swibert, S. Willeic, of whom some what has been said before.
Concerning him thus writes Miraeus in his Belgic Calendar: Mir. in Fast. Belg.
2. Mart.
S. Willeic was an assistant of the holy Bishop S. Swibert in the preaching of
the Gospel: and became a Canon of the Church of Vtrecht lately erected. After
S. Swiberts death he governed the Monastery of Werda the space of ten years
with great commendasion and esteem. He dyed this year: and his Memory is
celebrated among the Saints on the second of March.

Id. ^b. ^d 21. (...).
2. About the same time also dyed, yet more happily, because his life was
sacrifised by Martyrdom, the glorious Saint and c^panion of S. Willebrord, S.
Engelmund, who, according to the same Author, imbue^ with Evangelicall Doctrine
the ^acavians and Kenemarians. But in the Supplement to the Gallican
Martyrologe a larger Elogy is ^iven o^ him in this manner At Welsa in Holland
on this one and twentieth day of June is celebrated the happy death of S.
Engelmund Priest and Martyr. Supplem. Ma^^yr Gall^c. 2^. (...).
He by Nation an Englishman, was companion of S. Willebrord, and by command of
Pope Sergius was joined in commission with him in his Apostolic Office, in
preaching, converting of souls and working miracles among the P^isons. He was
also Abbot and directour of many Religious persons which he assembled together
to praise our Lord. At length being zealously urgent to withdraw the Savage
Nation of the Prisons from their horrible Superstitions and barbarous manners,
he for so great Charity incurred their hatred and fur^ous persecution, with
which he was at last oppressed: So crowning his Apostolic Office with a
glorious Martyrdom.

A. D. 728.
3. The year following the Kingdom and Churches of the West Saxons were much
disquieted by the restles ambition of a young Prince of the Royal family
called Oswold, who it seems in indignation that King Ina in resigning the Crown
preferred his kinsman Ethelward or Adelhard before him, thought by force to
give it himself. Concerning this tumult and the success of it, unhappy to the
aggressour, Huntingd. l. 4.
thus writes Henry of Huntingdon: Adelhard King of the West Saxons before the
first year of his reign was expired, fought a batel against Oswold a young man
of the Royal stock, who attempted to obtain the kingdom for himself. But the
young man not being able to bring equal forces into the field, having for some
time born the burden of a furious combat, at last being overpowred was forced
to fly, and quite abandon the kingdom: By which means King Ethelward was firmly
established therein.

4. This worthy King to show himself a deserving Successor of King Ina, A. D.
729.
presently after extended his Royal magnificence to houses of piety and
Religion: particularly to the famous Monastery of Glastonbury, the memory
whereof the Antiquities of that place do thus commend to posterity: Antiquit.
Glaston.
When C^ngisle was Abbot in the year of our Lords Incarnation seven hundred
twenty nine, Ethelard King and Successor of Ina bestowed for a stable
possession to the Religious family serving our Lord in the Monastery of
Glastonbury sixty h^des of land in Pohonhol^, and twelve hydes in Thoric. His
Queen likewise named Fridogitha gave Brunant. How this devout Queen nine years
after this quitted her Royal state, and undertook a pilgrimage to Rome, where
she consecrated herself to God, we shall show hereafter.

5. This year likewise dyed the most holy Abbot Egbert, of whom frequent
mention has been made. This is he who in the year of Grace six hundred sixty
four being mortally sick of the Pestilence was wonderfully restored to health:
and forsaking his Native country Brittany, went into Ireland in the year six
hundred and ninety, where for his admirable piety he was in ^igh estimation:
and being desirous to expose himself to all incommodities and dangers for
spreading the Faith in foreign countries, wa^ by Almighty God* who designed him
for another employment, hindered; Notwithstanding by his exhortations the
glorious Saint Willebrord, Sutbert and their companions undertook that most
famous Apostolic Mission into Germany: This likewise was he who, thirteen
years before this, reduced the Monks of Hy in Scotland to conform themselves to
the Catholic observation of the Paschall So^lemnity.

6. This Blessed Saint, whom S. Beda calls a Venerable and not without honor
to be named servant of Christ and Priest Egbert, Bed l. 5 c. 10. and l. 3 c 27.
being ninety years old, departed this world to a heavenly kingdom. And for a
proof that this his zeal, whereby he united that Schismatic Church to the
Universal Church, was acceptable to God, the same Author observes, that, as
he had much labored in establishing the true celebration of Faster he received
his eternal recompense on the same Feast. For thus he writes: 7. The man of
God Egbert remained thirteen years in the said Island of Hy, Id l. 5 c 23.
which he by a new extraordinary illustration of Divine Grace of
Ecclesiastical Communion and peace, had consecrated to our Lord. In the year
therefore of our Lords Incarnation seven hundred twenty nine, in which the
Paschall Solemnity was celebrated on the eighth day before the Calends of May,
when he had solemnly celebrated Mass in memory of our Lords Resurrection, the
very same day he himself likewise departed to our Lord, and having begun the
joy of so great a Festivity with his Brethren on earth, whom he had converted
to the Grace of Ecclesiastical Unity, he finished it with our Lord, and his
Apostles together with all the glorified Saints in heaven; or rather he still
celebrates it to all eternity. Indeed the Divine dispensation was wonderful,
that not only this Venerable man should pass to our Lord on this Feast of
Easter, but in such a day on which it had never before been celebrated in that
place. His Religious Brethren therefore rejoiced for the certainly true
Catholic knowledge of the Paschall time which they had learnt of him: and they
rejoiced in the assured protection of their holy Father by whom they were
taught and corrected. And he himself likewise congratulates, that he was
continued alive in the flesh till he might enjoy the happiness to see his
Brethren and Disciples admit, and together with him celebrate Easter on that
day, which in former times they had always avoided. Thus the most reverend
Father being assured of their correction rejoiced to see the day of our Lord,
he s^ it and was glad. He dyed therefore thus happily, Martyr Romans 24. Apr^l.
and both in the Roman and other Martyrologes his name is anniversarily recited
among the Saints on the four and twentieth day of April.



8. To conclude, the same year King Osric having reigned eleaven years over the
Northumbers, and appointed for his heyr in the kingdom Ceolu^f Brother to King
Kenred, dyed, Ethelvv. l. 2. c. 13.
or as Ethelwerd writes, was slain. He was in nothing happy so much as leaving
behind him so worthy a Successor, for Ceolulf both for piety and learning was
comparable with the best Princes* and after he had happily governed his kingdom
many years, voluntarily quitted it, to aspire to an immortal Crown.

9. Concerning the beginning of his Reign, William of Malmsbury writes in this
manner: Ceolulf, says he, the eighth King from Ida, ascended the trembling
throne of the Northumbers this year. A man he was of ability sufficient for any
employment, and besides that, endued with learning in great perfection, which
with assiduous study and a sharp wit he attained to. S. Beda will be my surety
for this: for presently after this, in a time when Brittany most abounded with
learned men, he made choice of this Prince, to whom he dedicated his History of
English affairs, as being a person who by his authority could add strength to
whatsoever was well written therein: and by his knowledge and skill could
correct, if any thing was written amiss. Concerning him more shall be said
hereafter.

XXI. CHAP. A. D. 731.

XXI. CHAPTER



1.2. Death of the Venerable Abbot Cymbert.

3.4. Death of Saint Brithwald Archbishop of Canterbury: to whom succeeds
Tatwin.

1. IN the year of our Lords Incarnation seven hundred and thirty, A. D. 730.
according to our English Martyrologe dyed the holy Abbot Cymbert, styled there
Bishop and Confessor, and supposed by some to have had his See in the Isle of
Wight. But none of our Ancient Monuments do signify that that Island was ever
made the Seat of a Bishop, for generally it has been assigned to the Sea of
Winchester: neither is the name of Cymbert recorded among Bishops, except only
by Saint Beda, who thereby understands the same person, who by other Writers is
called Kinebert, and was Bishop of the Mercians, and had his Seat at
Lindesfare, now called Lincoln. Which Kinebert is at this time alive, as S.
Beda testifies in the conclusion of his History, which ends the year following.

2. This therefore may seem to have been the ground of the mistake of those who
compiled our Martyrologe. The Cymbert therefore commemorated there as dying
this year is the same Holy Abbot of Redford in Hampshire, Vid. l. 20. ^ 5.
who, as has been declared, obtaind permission to instruct in the Christian
Faith and baptize two young Princes Brethren o^ Arwald King of the Isle of
Wight, before they were to be putt to death by the command of King Cedwalla,
who had subdued the said Island. Martyr. Ang. 21 Feb.
The Memory of this holy Abbot is celebrated among the Saints on the one and
twentieth of February.

3. The same year also dyed Saint Brithwald Archbishop of Canterbury,
successor to Saint Theodore after he had administered that See the space of
almost thirty eight years, V^d. l. 17 c. 11
says Huntingdon. We have before declared how he being Nephew to Ethelred
King of the Mercians was the first of the Saxon race who was Abbot of
Glastonbury: which dignity in love to solitude he relinquished, and retire^
himself to a secret place called Reculver From whence he was even by force
drawn to sit in the Archiepiscopall See of Canterbury: which he adorned with
many actions of Pastoral zeal and piety, assembling Synods and regulating
disorders in several Provinces of this Island. And at last full of years and
merits was this year translated to heaven. He is commemorated in our
Martyrologe on the ninth of January. Martyr. Ang 9. Ian.


4. In his place the year following was elected and consecrated Archbishop the
Venerable A. D. 731. Bed. l. 5. c 24.
Abbot Tatwin, says S. Beda, a Priest and Abbot of a Monastery called Bruidun,
or Brenton. He was consecrated in the City of Canterbury by the Venerable
Bishops, Daniel of Winchester, Inguald of London, Aldwin of Lichfeild, and
Aldwof of Rochester, on the tenth of June in the year of our Lords Incarnation
seven hundred thirty one. He was a man illustrious for his piety and prudence,
and eminently learned in Sacred Scriptures. Of him more hereafter.

XXII. C.
XXII. CHAP.
1.2. etc. The State of Brittany at this time in which Saint Beda ended his
History.

1. SINCE it was in this year of Grace seven hundred thirty one that Saint
Beda concluded his History, and as some Authors affirm, his Life also: we
will here, as he has done, give a brief prospect in general of the state of
Brittany at this time, as well touching the Church as State. In the next place
to manifest the sincere veracity of so learned and pious an Author, we will,
from his penn, declare upon how well grounded an authority he built the whole
frame of his History, as likewise what diligent search he made for true
information in all things, as well such as happened in former ages, as during his
own age in the other regions and kingdoms of Brittany and foreign countries:
And lastly we will conclude with a particular Narration of Saint Beda's own
life and happy death.

(...) l 5. c. 24.
2. As touching the first thus he writes: At this present time ( to wit, in
the year of Grace seven hundred thirty one) the Bishops governing the several
Episcopal Sees of Brittany are these following. The Province of Kent is
administered by Tatwine Archbishop (o^ Canterbury) and Aldulf (Bishop of
Rochester) That of the East Saxons by Inguald (Bishop of London.) The East
Angles by Eadbert (or Aldbert Bishop of Dumwich) and Hadulac (Bishop of
Helmham.) The Province of the West Saxons by Daniel (Bishop of Winchester) and
Forthere (Bishop of Shirborn.) In the kingdom of the Mercians Alduin is Bishop
(of Lichfeild,) Walstod Bishop ( of Hereford and the region beyond the Severn.
Wilfrid Bishop of Worcester, and Cymbert (or Kinebert) Bishop of the Lindisfari
(or Lincoln:) as for the Isle of Wight, it was annexed to the Sea of
Winchester. The Province of the South Saxons of late has been vacant, and
therefore has recourse to the Bishop of the West Saxons (that is Winchester)
for such necessities as require Episcopal Ministry. And all these together
with other Southern Provinces, though governed immediately by particular Kings,
yet both they and their Kings also from the South Sea as far as the Humber
Northwards are subject to Edilbald King of the Mercians. Lastly the large
Province of the Northumbers, of which Ceolulf is now King, is administered by
four Bishops: the Church of York by Wilfrid (the younger) that of Linde^^arn by
Edilwald: Hagustald (or Hexham) by Acca: and Candida Casa (or Witehern) by
Pecthe^m. This last Episcopal See has been lately erected, by reason that the
number of Christians there has been greatly multiplied, and Pecthelm was
consecrated the first Bishop thereof. Thus are the several Episcopal Churches
of Brittany administered.

3. As touching the several Nations inhabiting it, d ibid.
that of the Picts is joined in league with the English: and to their great joy
with the Universal Church in the Orthodox Faith, Communion and peace. The
Scotts inhabiting the Northern parts of Brittany are quiet, and make no
attempts or fraudulent designs against the English. Britains.
The Britains although for the most part out of a National hatred they have
an i^^econcileable aversion from the English, and likewise do erroneously and
impiously oppose the Catholic Church in the Paschall Observance: yet in
neither of these regards can they attain their purpose and prevail, both
divine and human power resisting their designs. For though a great part of that
Nation be independent on any other, yet in some places they are subject to the
Empire of the English: And again the times at present being peaceable very many
of them in the Northern parts (called Cumbers) both Nobles and of inferior
condition do more frequently receive the Monastical Tonsure in English
Monasteries, and consecrate their children to the same Profession, then
exercise themselves in arms and warlike exploits. And what good issue may come
from hence the succeeding age will see.

4. Such at present is the state of all Brittany in this year, which is the two
hundred eighty fifth since the coming of the English into this Island, and the
seven hundred and one and thirtieth after our Lords Incarnation. I will
conclude with this prayer: That the earth may all ways rejoice in the kingdom
of our God, and many Islands with joy confess to the memory of his Holiness the
constancy of Brittany in his Faith. Thus does S. Beda conclude his History.

XXIII. CHAP. XXIII. C

i 2. etc. The names and qualities of such persons from whom S. Beda received
information in his History.

1. IN the next place for a proof of his veracity in his History, we will
produce his Epistle to the illustrious and learned King Ceolulf then reigning
over the Northumbers, to whom S. Beda presented the same, desiring not so much
his protection, as judgment and censure of it. In which Epistle to the end he
might approve his care and diligence to inform himself in the truth, he
produces the names and characters of the principal persons from whom he
received information and assistance, persons of such abilities, piety and
esteem, that no man can reasonably suspect in them either want of knowledge or
of sincerity: Thus therefore he writes: Bed. Epist. ad Ceolulf. Regem.
2. The principal Author and assistant in this work (says he) was Albinus
the most reverend Abbot of Canterbury, a man of eminent learning in all kinds
of litterature, having been educated therein by those two most venerable and
learned men, Theodore Archbishop of the said Church of happy memory, and
Hadrian Abbot. This worthy Abbot Albinus was pleased to communicate to me
partly in writing, and partly by the Religious Priest of the Church of London,
Nothelm, whom he sent to acquaint me with all particular occurrents worthy
memory which had, after diligent enquiry, come to his knowledge, either in the
Province of Kent or adjacent Regions, concerning the Gests of the Disciples of
the Blessed Pope S. Gregory, or whatsoever he could find in ancient Record, or
receive from the Tradition of Ancestors. The said Nothelm likewise afterward
going to Rome, by permission of Pope Gregory searching the Archives of that
Church, found and copied out certain Letters both of the said Pope and some of
his Predecessors touching the affairs of Brittany, which at his return, by
the advice of the most Reverend Abbot Albin, he brought to me to be inserted
in this History.

3. In the which, those things which are related from the beginning thereof to
the times in which the English Nation received the Christian Faith, we
collected principally out of such Writings as we could here and there meet
with. Then from that time to the present age all the Gests performed in the
Province of Kent by the Disciples of S. Gregory and their Successors, and
under what Kings they were performed, all these came to my knowledge by the
industry of the foresaid Abbot Albin, and the relation of Nothelm sent by him.
The same persons likewise informed me in several things touching the
Conversion of the West and East Saxons the East Angles and Northumbers, by the
preaching of what Bishops, and in the reign of what Kings those Provinces
received the Christian Faith. In a word it was principally by the advice and
persuasion of the same Albinus that I had the courage to set upon this work.

4. Besides these, the most Reverend Bishop of the West Saxons Daniel, who is
yet alive, gave me an account in writing of many things regarding the
Ecclesiastical History of that Province, and that of the South Saxons
confining to it, together with the Isle of Wight. Again how by the ministry of
the Holy Priests Ceddand Ceadda the Province of the Mercians came to embrace
the Faith of Christ, before unknown to them, and that of the East Saxons to
recover that Faith which once received was afterward rejected by them: And
likewise how those two Holy Fathers spent their lives in all Sanctity, and how
happily they dyed, all these things we learnt from the Religious Brethren of
the Monastery of Lestingen, built by them. Moreover in the Province of the
East Angles the Ecclesiastical Gests, we understood partly by writings and
Tradition of their Ancestors, and partly by the relation of the most Reverend
Abbot Esius.

5. But as touching the Province of Lindissi (or Lincoln) how the Faith of
Christ (...) spread there, together with the Succession of Bishops, we were
informed in some part by Letters of the most Revered Bishop Cymbert (or
Kinebert) or by discoursing with several men of good credit. To conclude, the
occurrents happening in the Kingdom of the Northumbers and several regions of
it, these I came to the knowledge of by the constant report, not of a few, but
of almost innumerable Witnesses, who might well know or remember them, besides
many things to which I my self can give testimony. Among which those things
which I have written concerning our most holy Father and Bishop Saint Cuthbert,
either in this History, or in a particular Book of his Gests, those I received
and transcribed out of certain writings compiled by the Religious Monks of the
Church of Lindesfarn, the sincerity of which I had no reason to suspect: and to
those I added with great care many other things which I my self learnt from the
most sure attestation of several faithful and sincere persons.

6. To conclude, I humbly entreat the Reader, that in case he find in those my
Writings any particular passage swerving from Truth, he would not impute that
to me as my fault, since my only care has been simply and sincerely to commit
by writing to posterity for their instruction, such things as either from
vulgar fame or writings of former ages I have collected. Now it is against the
general Law of History, that the Writer should be answerable for the mistakes
of other men. Thus much touching the Truth and sincerity of S. Beda's History.



XXIV. C.
XXIV. CHAP.
1.2. etc. The birth, life and Gests of the Venerable Doctor of the Church S.
Beda.

1. WE will in the last place add a Narration of the Life and blessed Death of
this great Ornament of his age, and glory of our Island, S. Beda, a man so
admirably eminent in all kinds of learning, so excellent a Poet, an Orator, an
Historian, an Astronomer, an Ari^hmetician, a Chronographer, a Cosmographer, a
Philosopher and a Divine, that it was a common saying among the learned of his
age, That a man born in the utmost corner of the earth had dazeled the whole
world with the luster of his Wit and learning: And such use he made of all
these great Talents in his life, that, according to his own testimony, between
the observances of Regular Discipline, and daily singing the Divine Office in
the Church, he always found a great sweetness in learning, or teaching, or
writing some thing. For which in his life time he was first by Pope Sergius,
and for that reason perhaps generally by all, styled Venerable, and in that
regard that Title since his death has by the whole Church been in a sort
appropriated to him: For though in all Histories and Martyrologes his Sanctity
is celebrated, yet he is seldom found written or named Saint, but Venerable
Beda: so that perhaps I may incurr the censure of some Readers for not
observing the same in this present History.

2. How long he lived cannot certainly be determined. Some, as has been said,
assign his death to this year in which he concluded his History But this is
sufficiently disproved in that Saint Boniface, Sig^bert. Rayne^. Bonif. Ep. 8.
fourteen years afther this, writing to Egbert Archbishop of York, and
desiring some Books of Venerable Beda to be sent to him, speaks of him as then
newly dead, for he entitles him a man, as he had heard, who of late had been
much enriched with divine Grace and spiritual knowledge, and shined gloriously
in that Province, etc. And the like passage we find in an Epistle of the same
Holy Bishop to Cuthbert Abbot and Disciple of S. Beda.

3. Again, others prolong his age beyond the year of Grace seven hundred
seaventy six, grounding their opinion on an Epistle written as by him that year
to a Priest called Withreda: Upon which account he should many years over-live
Saint Boniface, contrary to what was even now produced. Moreover several of
our ancient Historians place his death four years after this: But neither will
S. Bonifaces expression well suit with that position.

4. In this uncertainty without interposing mine own judgment, it seemd most
expedient, since we can no longer make use of the testimony and light of this
so holy and faithful an Historian, to adioyn his own story to that which he
wrote of his country: especially considering that we find no Gests of his
hereafter inter-woven with the general Ecclesiastical affairs, so that
without any prejudice to order, we may treat of his end in this place
conveniently enough.

5. He was born in the year of Grace six hundred seaventy one, as evidently
appears in that himself affirms that he was this year in which he concluded his
History fifty nine years old. The place of his Birth was a little village not
far from Durham called Girwy (now Iarrow) where the River Tine is ready to fall
into the Sea. A village then of no consideration, though since ennobled not
only by his birth, but by its neighborhood to the famous Monastery of Saint
Peter founded by S. Benedict Biscop three years after S. Beda was born, and it
self being the Seat of another Monastery about eight years after built by the
same Holy Abbot, and dedicated to S. Paul.

6. Who or of what condition his parents were, has not been recorded, but in a
poor village then so obscure, we may expect to find inhabitants as obscure.
What ever condition they were of, he was in his infancy deprived of them both,
and left to the care of his kindred, who probably for want of subsistence
recommended him, being but seven years old, to the care and discipline of the
foresaid S. Benedict: by which means he in his tender years was imbibed in the
rudiments of a Monastical Life according to the Rule of the Great Patriark of
Monastical Instition S. BENEDICT: which Rule, as has been declared, was not
long before this time introduced into the Province of the Northumbers by the
famous Bishops S. Wilfrid.

7. In this Monastery of S. Peter seated at Wiremouth S. Beda under so careful
and pious a Master spent his time in all innocence and devotion, till he came
to an age capable of Professing that Discipline under which he had been bred:
and then he was committed to the care and government of the Holy Abbot Ceolfrid
in the new-built Monastery of Saint Paul at Girwy (or Iarrow) the place of his
birth, from whom he received the Monastical Habit.

8. What special Masters he found there of ability sufficient to train him up
in learning and to bring him to that prodigious perfection therein as that he
became the wonder of all Christendom, it does not appear. There were indeed
then in the kingdom o^ Kent two eminent Masters in all kinds of Literature, S.
Theodore Archbishop, and S. Adrian Abbot of Canterbury. But it is without any
ground from History that some Modern Writers have sent him thither to School.
Neither is there any necessity to frame such an imagination. A. D. 729.
For S. Beda himself describing the plenty and richnes of the Library which
with immense costs Saint Benedict Bishop provided for his Monastery, we ought
not to doubt, but that he furnished Masters likewise to make those Books
useful to the Religious Disciples living there. Neither indeed was there
probably any great necessity of eminent Masters to a Scholar of so vast a
capacity as Saint Beda. It was sufficient for him to be taught the rudiments of
our learning: for after that his own natural quicknes of wit and solidity of
judgment would not fail to make a speedy progress, especially since he enjoyed
the advantage of so famous a Library, of the richnes whereof himself alone was
a Proof more then sufficient, since it appears by such a world of volumes
written by him, he wanted not instructions in all manner of Litterature, and in
all learned languages.

9. It is a sufficient sign that he was very early much advanced in learning,
and in esteem likewise for piety, that when he was entering into his twentieth
year he was at the request of his Abbot S. Ceolfrid promoted to the Order of
Deacon by the famous Bishop S. John of Beverley then newly possessed of the Sea
of Hagustald, who by some Writers is affirmed also to have been an Instructour
of S. Beda in learning, and specially in the study of Holy Scriptures.

10. As Soon as he was thirty years old he was by command of the same Abbot
advanced to the degree of Preist-hood. For in these days that was the age which
rendered persons capable of that sublime Order, in which the Church proposed to
her self our Blessed Savior for an Example, who about those years began the
Ministry of his Prophetical Office, as the Gospel teaches us: Though in
succeeding times the same Church for reasons no doubt weighty, has diminished
six years of that measure.

11. At this time S. Beda's fame for learning was so spread, even among foreign
Nations, that Pope Sergius by Letters written to the Holy Abbot Ceolfrid,
called S. Beda to Rome, to be his assistant in Ecclesiastical affairs and
dispatches, as Saint Ierom had been anciently to Pope Damasus. The Epistle of
the same Pope, Ap Baron. ad A. D. 701.
says Baronius, is extant to Ceolfrid in Brittany Abbot of that Monastery in
which Saint Beda had been educated, and was grown into a perfect man,
illustrious for his Sanctity and learning. Whereupon the same Pope commanded he
should be sent to him. The tenor of the Epistle is this: 12. What words are
sufficient to exalt the unexpressible clemency and Providence of our God
toward us, so as that we may render him worthy praises for his immense
benefits bestowed on us, whom out of darkness and the shadow of death he has
called and brought to the light of his knowledge! Ad a little after he proceeds
thus: Know that we have with a cheerful mind received the present, A. D. 726
and grace of Benediction which thy Religious devotion has sent us by the
bearer of these. And we do most willingly comply with those requests which so
opportunely and with such a religious solicitude thou have made unto us. We
do likewise exhort thy Piety, as becomes one who has a true zeal for the
advancement of the Holy Church, that since there have been of late raised here
certain difficulties about Ecclesiastical causes of great weight, the
examination and clearing whereof cannot be long delayed, thou would not fail
to afford thy devout obedience to our request, and without delay to send hither
to the shrines of my Lords and thy favorable Patrons and Protectours S. Peter
and S. Paul Princes of the Apostles, the Religious servant of God Beda a
Venerable Priest of thy Monastery, that he may here appear in our presence: And
do not doubt but as soon as the said causes shall through Gods assistance be
solemnly determined, he being assisted with thy prayers shall shortly return to
thee in safety. I do the more confidently desire this from thee, because I do
not doubt but whatsoever he shall contribute to the general good of the
Church, will be proffitable to thee and to all committed to thy charge.



13. Some Writers are of opinion that S. Beda accordingly undertook this
journey: But that is not very probable, since Pope Sergius dyed toward the end
of this very year in which S. Beda was made Priest, and in these Letters he is
named Venerable Priest: so that there could not intervene space enough for so
long a voyage. Besides this, if he himself had been at Rome, he had stood in no
need of Nothelm's searching into the Archives of that See for furnishing thence
fit materials for his History: since he himself might more conveniently have
done it.

14. There do not occur in our Ecclesiastical Writers many more particular
matters touching his life. Neither indeed can it be expected: For what can be
said of a solitary Religious man and a student, but that he passed his days
and nights in Prayer to God, in Sacred learning and Writing, and in Teaching
others? And thus much he delivers of himself in a Postscript to his
Ecclesiastical History. So many volumes written by him do testify almost an
impossibility that he should have misspent any hour of his life: especially
considering how considerable a part of it the daily attendance to Psalmody in
the Church, and other Regular observances in the Monastery would require.

15. He had, says Trithemius, many eminent men his Disciples, Thrithem. in
vit. S. Bed.
whom by his example and most fervent exhortations he did incite to a love of
Holy Scriptures: so that his endeavor was to render them illustrious not so
much by studies, as religion and sanctity. Out of all Brittany men flowed to
him, desirous to advance themselves in sacred knowledge and piety under his
Direction.

A. D. 731.
16. He adioynd to his History a Catalogue of his Works containing about
seaventy several Books: Of which some have miscarried. Some also were afterward
published, as having been written after he had made the said Catalogue, which,
as himself testifies was this year when he was fifty nine years old. For there
is an excellent Epistle of Spiritual advice which he sent to Egbert Bishop of
York instructing him in Pastoral Duties. Now Egbert did not enter into that
See till the year of Grace seven hundred thirty five. And indeed that seems to
have been one of the last things he ever wrote, for in it he complains of his
age and sickness: Neither would it have been very seemly for a simple Monk to
write instructions of that Nature to an eminent Father of the Church, but that
the advantage and authority of age might justify it.

17. Many Books he has written of great curiosity and subtilty: but his chief
delight was to meditate and interpret Holy Scriptures: which he did with so
unwearied a diligence, that he allowed no time o^ leisure for the Devil or the
flesh to tempt him. And particularly concerning his Expositions of Scripture he
says, Bed. l. 3. in Samuel.
That if they brought no other proffit to the Readers, at least they were
beneficial to himself in this, that whilst he employed his whole studies on
them, he avoided all vain thoughts of wordly things.

18. A principal encourager and inciter of him to proceed in such expositions
was the Reverend and Holy Bishop Acca the successor of S. Wilfrid in the
Episcopal See of ^^gustald, as William of Malmsbury testifies. There is still
extant a Letter of Acca to him in which he exhorts him to explain the Gospel
of S. Luke with a just Commentary, after he had finished that upon the Acts of
the Apostles. Many others had desired the same thing from him: but he deferred,
or rather excused the labor, partly for the difficulty, and likewise because
S. Ambrose had left a sufficient explanation of the Gospel. But these reasons
not satisfying the Holy Bishop Acca, who told him that the commentary of S.
Ambrose it self needed an Interpretation: Hereupon S. Beda delayed no longer,
but in an Answer testified his Obedience. Which Letter also he prefixed to the
same Commentary.

19. Such his Expositions of Holy Scriptures were even in his own age of so
reverend esteem; that by an Ordonnance of an English Synod they were received
into the Ecclesiastical Office: and at this day by the consent of the
Universal Church many Lessons on several occasions are publicly read in the
Church Service out of his Homilies.

20. It is not unexpedient to treat so particularly concerning S. Beda's study,
meditation, and explanation of Holy Scripture to stop the mouths of Modern
Sectaries, who vainly impute the pretended Errors and Superstitions of
Catholics to their ignorance in Scripture: Whereas we see a holy* mortified,
disinteressed person, who spent his whole life in prayer and Meditation on
Scripture, and yet confidently taught those Doctrins and Practices which such
men will needs call Superstitions Errors.

21. I will conclude this Discourse of this Holy Doctors Life with those words
which he is said a little before his death to have spoken to his Disciples, Ap.
Capgra^ in vit. S. Bed.
If by my labors and study I have in any measure proffited you or the Church
of God, render me I beseech you this requital, to be mindful of me after my
death there where Christ our Lord is every day both the Priest and Sacrifice of
Propitiation.

XXV. CHAP. XXV. CHAPTER

1.2. etc. The order and circumstances of the happy Death of S. Beda.

1. AS touching S. Beda's happy departure out of this Life to God, there is
still exitant an Epistle written by one of his Disciples (whose name I suppose
was Cuthbert, afterward Abbot of his Monastery.) It is written with great
sincerity, neither is it obnoxious ^o any suspicion of being supposititious: We
find it annexed to the end of his Works, and well deserves a place in this
History. The person to whom it was directed is not known, and the Writers name
only guessed at: But the tenor of it is as follows:

2. The small Gift you were pleased to send me I gratefully received, Epist.
de Obit. ^. Bed.
and your devout Letter I read with much consolation, especially finding in it
that your Community does carefully celebrate Masses and Prayers for our Beloved
Master and Father in God, Beda. Therefore being moved rather by my affection to
him then any opinion of mine own ability, I will most willingly acquaint you in
a short discourse with the order and circumstances of his happy departure out
of this world, since I perceive that you desire and have requested to be
informed of it.

3. His last sickness began about a forthnight before Easter, and continued till
the Feast of our Lords Ascension. The thing which most troubled him in it was
shortness of breath: other pain he had little or none. During all which time he
ceased not day and night to give thanks to God. All this hindered him not to
continue his Lessons to his Disciples at the Ordinary hours: and except that
short time, all the rest of the day he spent in singing of Psalms with great
chearfullnes of mind. The whole night likewise (except when sleep, which was
very short, interrupted him) he spent in Prayer and giving of thanks to God. I
sincerely profess I never saw, nor heard of any man who so incessantly
employed his time in praising God. A most blessed man certainly he was. He
would sometimes repeat also that sencence of S. Paul, It is a fearful thing to
fall into the hands of God, and other like passages of Holy Scripture, to
admonish us by meditating on our last hour to awake from spiritual sleep and
negligence. Again at other times he would sing certain Antiphones, for both our
and his own consolation. Particularly in repeating one which begins thus, O
King of glory, Lord of all power, when he came to those words, Leave us not
orphans, he broke forth into excessive weeping: But he would again resume it,
and such was his employment all the day. As for us his Disciples who attended
him, we could not abstain from weeping: Some times we would read, and
presently burst forth into tears, and sometimes we would read, and weep
together.

4. In such an exercise mixed with grief and joy we passed the days of Lent
till the aforesaid Feast. And he would oftimes rejoice and give God thanks for
his sickness, frequently saying, God corrects every child whom he receives:
sometimes also he would repeat that speech of S. Ambrose, I have not so lived
among you as that I need to be ashamed: neither do I fear to dye, because I
have a merciful Lord.

5. In those days moreover, besides our daily Lessons, he accomplished two
Works, (which deserves to be remembered for the strangenes:) the one was the
Translation of S. John's Gospel into the English tongue for the Churches
proffit, till he came to those words (in the sixth Chapter) but What are these
(five loaves and two fishes) among so many? The other was a Collection of
memorable passages out of S. Isidores works.

6 But when the Tewsday before our Lords Ascension was come, his sickness became
much more violent, and breathing more difficult: and besides that, a swelling
began to arise in his feet. Yet all that day he taught and dictated to us very
cheerfully: and he would now and then say to us, Be diligent in learning, for I
know not how long I may last, nor whether my Creator will very shortly take
me from you. Such speeches made us believe that he foresaw when he should dye.
The night following he passed without any sleep at all, and spent it wholly in
praying and praising God. The morning following very early he bid us to be very
attentive and diligent to make an end of writing the Lesson we had begun: So
that we continued in receiving his Dictats till nine of the clock. After which
hour we went in solem^e Procession with Relics of the Saints, as the Office
of that day required. One of us his Disciples in the mean time stayed with him,
and told him saying, There remains still one Chapter of the Treatise which you
did dictate to us: But I fear it will be too great trouble for you to speak.
No, said he, Take your pen presently and Write: and he did accordingly.

7. About three of the Clock after noon he called me to him and said, I have
in a little box some precious things, there is Pepper, incense, and Oraria
(which some interpret Handkercheifs, others, Stoles; and some likewise,
Chaplets, for numbering of Prayers, which, say they, therefore from him took the
name of Beads.) Run presently and fetch them: and desire the Priests of our
Monastery to come hither, that I may distribute among them some such small Gifs
as God bestowd on me. This I performed with much trembling. And when the
Priests were come, he earnestly requested every one of them not to fail to
pray and say Masses diligently for him. Which they also heartily promised him.
But they burst out into bitter weeping when he told them, he believed they
should never see his face again in this world. But again it was a joy to them
when he said, It is now time* if such be the pleasure of God my Creator, that
I should be delivered out of this flesh, and go to him who when I was not,
framd me of nothing. I have lived a long time, and my merciful Judge has well
ordered my life. The time of my freedom is at hand, for my soul desires to see
Christ my King in his glory. In such like speeches to our great comfort and
edification he spent joyfully that which was his last day, till even.

8. The foresaid young Disciple of his (whose name was Wilberck) said once
again to him, Dear Master, There remains yet one sentence unwritten. But he
answered, Well, well, all is finished. Thou have said right. Come and turn my
head for I much desire to sit and look to my Orato^y, and pray to my heavenly
Father. Thus being laid upon a hayr-cloath spread on the floor, as he was
singing these words, Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy
Ghost, etc. he happily breathed forth his soul: And we may assuredly believe
that considering his laborious constancy in praising God, his soul was by
Angels carried to eternal joys.

9. Now all which heard his speeches and were witnesses of the manner of the
death of this our good Father Beda, do profess that they never saw any one
end his life with so great tranquillity of mind and devotion. For as you have
heard, as long as his soul continued in his body he never ceased to praise God
and with arms stretchd forth to give thanks to him. Now you must know that
besides what I have written, there remain many other particulars, which for
want of skill in expressing I am forced to omit. Yet I have a purpose through
Gods help to relate more amply several other things which I saw and heard from
him. This account did this Disciple give of his holy Masters death. After
which, as we read in the Author of his Life in Capgrave, there followd in the
room where he dyed a sweet fragrancy so wonderfully odoriferous, that all the
persons present thought themselves in Paradise, Ap. Capgrav. in S. Bed.
for no Perfumes or precious balsam came near the sweetness of it.

10. And hereto William of Malmsbury adds, which was omitted by the said
Disciple, That the whole congregation of the Monks being assembled, Malmsb. de
Reg. l. 1. c. 3.
he received Extreme Unction and communicated the Body of our Lord for his
Viaticum to strengthen him in his last combat against his spiritual enemies:
and moreover that having kissed them every one, he earnestly desired to be
remembered in their Prayers, etc.

11. He dyed on the seventh day before the Calends of June, which was the
twenty sixth of May: But because that day was also the Feast of our great
Apostle S. Augustine, therefore the Church thought fit to commemorate S. Beda
the day following, Marty. Romans 27. Maij.
and so we find both in the Roman and English Martyrologes. He was buried in
his own Monastery, in which from his infancy he had lived about threescore
years. But the fame of his Sanctity afterward increasing, his Bones together
with the Sacred Body of Saint Cuthbert Bishop of Lindesfarn were translated to
Durham, and there reposed together.

12. As Soon as his Death was known abroad, several Letters came from foreign
countries to desire some of his Treatises and Books. Two Epistles there are
still extant from S. Boniface, Ap. Bonif ap. 89 (...)
and from S. Lullus Successor to him and to S. Willebrord, to the same
purpose; And particularly S. Lullus writing to Cuthbert who had been his
Disciple three and forty years, and was afterward Abbot of the same Monastery,
tells him that he had sent a Vesture all of silk to enwrap the Relics of his
beloved Master: To which the Answers of the same Cuthbert also are still extant.

13. I do not know by what warrant from Ancient Monuments the devout Writer,
by some styled the Chancellor of the Blessed Virgin, B. Alanus de Rupe affirms
that Saint Beda was the first who began in England the Exercise of particular
Devotions and reciting of Chaplets to the honor of that glorious Queen of
Virgins, for so weer find the Oraria distributed by S. Beda to his Brethren,
interpreted. And that from Brittany such Devotion was propagated into France
and other foreign countries.

14. I will conclude this Narration with the large Testimonies given to S.
Beda's learning and Piety, even by Enemies to that Religion which he taught.
Thus then writes Camden of him, Beda among all our Writers is a lover of Truth.
And again, Our Beda, the singular glory of England, Camd. in Hist. Britt. p.
12. Id. ib p. 670.
for his piety and erudition got the Title, Venerabilis. He gave up himself,
as he testifies, to the Meditation of Holy Scriptures, and wrote a very great
number of Volumes, in an age turmoyld with huge waves of barbarism. Thus
likewise Whitaker, Beda did excel in many virtues, and singular learning. To
the same purpose Fox, Whitac. ad 2. them. Sand. Fox in Act. p. 114.
Beda was a man worthy of eternal memory: the whole Western Church of that age
gave him the palm and preeminence for learning and understanding of Scripture.
Very many more like testimonies may be added: but I will content my self with
that of the carnal Apostat Bale, Bale Cent. 2. c. 1.
Beda, says he, was esteemed by many even above Gregory the Great, for his
exact skill both in the Latin and Greek tongues. There is scarce any thing
worthy the reading in all Antiquity, which is not found in his Writings. If he
had lived in the times of Hierom, Augustine and Chrysostom, I do not doubt but
he might have come in competition with them for esteem. He published very many
works full of all kinds of learning: and in a decrepit age he dyed at last
among his Disciples, and obtained a most happy end.

15. Now since evident Truth extorted such praises from the penns of the
desertours of that Religion which so pious and so learned a Doctor of Gods
Church who both lived and dyed in eminent Sanctity, always taught, our dear
Countrymen will do wisely to attend to the affrighting admonition of the
learned Cardinal Baronius, Baron. ad A. D. 731.
saying, The Holy English Church has always gloried, and with great reason, in
so holy Doctor: whom since her Apostate children do now reject, and instead
of him do follow deceived and deceiving Apostles of Satan, they have reason to
apprehend, least in the last Judgment, so great and powerful an accuser
standing against them before the Tribunal of our Lord, they shall receive a
sentence of damnation.

THE THREE AND TWENTIETH BOOK. OF THE CHVRCH-HISTORY OF BRITTANY.
I. CHAP.
I. CHAPTER.
1.2. S. Boniface receives from the Pope a resolution of certain doubts.

3 4. Likewise an Archiepiscopall Pall.

5 6. Of another Saint Wigbert, his companion, etc.

1. HAVING with due honor buried S. Beda, who has hitherto been our
principal and most secure Guide, Malmsb. de Reg. l. 1. c. 3.
and with whom in the judgment of William of Malmsbury, all knowledge in a
manner of the Gests of former ages has been buried: We will pursue this
History, making use of the best Light can be found, and beginning with an
account of the proceedings the same year of the glorious English Apostle of
Germany S. Boniface, as we are informed by the Author of his Life from the
Writings of his Holy Disciple and companion Saint Willebald.

Vit. S. Bonif. ap. Sur.
2. S. Boniface, says he, having by himself or his companions converted to the
Faith of Christ many thousands, whom he purified with the Water of saving
Baptism, heard news of the death of the Holy Pope Gregory second of that name,
whose Successor was a third Gregory. Whereupon he sent Messengers with Letters
to Rome, to renew with the New Pope the league of amity which he had enjoyed
with his Predecessor; to make profession of all duty and obedience to the Sea
Apostolic: and to give him an account of the great number of German Idolaters
converted to the Faith: Moreover he proposed certain difficulties occurring in
the exercise of his Apostolic charge, a resolution whereof he desired.

3. Though S. Boniface's Epistle be not extant, Bonifac. Epis. 122.
yet all these particulars may be collected from Pope Gregorye's Answer to him:
In which. 1. He testifies his joy for the great Benediction given by God to his
preaching. 2. He signifies to him that to give him more authority in those
parts, he has sent him an Archiepiscopall Pall, which yet he was only to wear
when he celebrated Mass, or ordained Bishops, Which power he now gives him. 3.
Whereas S. Boniface had given him notice of a certain Priest who went to Rome,
and at his return boasted that he had obtained Absolution of the Pope from his
many scandalous and enormous crimes: He tells him that such a Priest came to
him, signifying only that he was a Priest, and desiring Letters of
recommendation to Charles Martel: but that he made no Confession to him, nor by
consequence received any Absolution. Therefore he advises S. Boniface to avoid
Communion with him, and such like as he. 4 He advises him severely to penance
such as fed upon horseflesh. 5. He enioyns him to rebap^ize such as had been
unduly baptized by Pagans, and by a Christian Priest revolted from the Faith,
and who had sacrifised to Jupiter. 6. That Oblations should be received, and
commemoration made by the Priest at the Altar, not indifferently for all that
were dead, but only such as were true Catholic Christians. 7. He disswades
from Marriage to the seventh degree of affinity or consanguinity. 8. And
counsels him to exhort men after the death of their wives, not to marry more
then once. 9 As touching such as had murdered their Father, Mother, Brother or
sister, that they should be denied Communion all their life, except only at the
point of death, and be obl^ged to fast every Monday, Wednesday and Friday. 10.
And whereas there was an impious custom among even the converted Germans to
sell their slaves to Pagans to be sac^ifised by them, he requires him
absolutely to forbid it, and to impose the same Penance on transgressors
which the Canons inflict on Homicides. 11 Lastly that he should never
consecrate any Bishop, but in the presence and with the assistance of at least
two Bishops.

4. The Messengers returning with these Letters and Presents, Auth. Vit S.
Bonif. ap. Sur
brought great joy to S. Boniface, who presently after erected two new Churches
one at Fritzlare to the honor of S. Peter Prince of the Apostles: and the
other at Amanbury to the honor of S Michael the Archangel. And to those two
Churches he adioynd two Monasteries, in which he placed a good number of Monks
to serve and praise Almighty God.

5. Over one of these Monasteries he seems to have appointed Abbot a certain
Priest named Wigbert, whom he sent for out of Brittany from out of the
Monastery of Glastonbury. Which devout Priest being arrived, wrote an Epistle,
yet extant, to his Fathers and Brethren at Glastonbury to give them notice of
his prosperous journey: desiring their prayers to God that he would give good
success to his labors in this Mission, which exposed him to great
incommodities and dangers He requests them to give notice of all these things
to his Mother Tetta, and the Congregation with her.

6. This S. Wigbert is evidently different from that Saint Wigbert a Martyr,
which we mentioned six years before this time. Mir. in Fast. Be^g. 13 Aug.
And he is doubtless the same concerning whom Miraeus thus writes in his
Calender on the thirteenth of August: In Germany the commemoration of S.
Wigbert Priest and Confessor. He was, I suppose, designed first Abbot of
Fritzlare by S. Boniface the Apostle of the Germans. A. D. 733.
His Relics were afterward translated to the Monastery of Hirsfeld in Hassia
by Lullus Successor of S. Boniface in his Archbishopric. To his name and
honor Rabanus Maurus who was Archbishop in the year of our Lords Incarnation
eight hundred and fifty, built a Church in Hirsfeild. And several ages
afterward Mathildis the most pious Empress Mother of Otho the first, did the
like.

7. This S. Wigbert was present at a Synod celebrated at Mentz in the year of
Grace seven hundred forty five: and consequently outlived S. Beda. Therefore
whereas his name is found in S. Beda's Martyrologe, and a Homily pretended as
made by S. Beda on his solemnity, we many conclude that both these were added
by S. Beda's Disciples after his death.

8. Not long after S. Boniface visited the confining Regions of Bavaria, Auth.
Vit. S. Boni. ap. Sur.
the Prince whereof was called Hugbert: To whom the Holy Bishop with great
zeal preached the Faith of Christ. There likewise with much fervor and
authority he condemned and cast out of the Church a certain pestilent Heretic
called Ermewolf. What his Heresy was it does not appear: probably it died with
the Author.

II. CHAP. II. CHAP.

1.2. The Primacy of the Sea of Canterbury, again established by the Pope.

3.4. Bishops con^ecrated by Archbishop Tatwin, after he had received the
Archiepiscopall Pall.

5.6. Sedition among the Northumbers, etc.

1. WE read in B. Parkers British Antiquities that in the year of Grace seven
hundred thirty two, A. D. 732. Antiq Br^tan. in Tatwin^.
being the second after the consecration of Tatwin Archbishop of Canterbury, a
controversy arose between that See and the Sea of York about Primacy: Upon
which occasion Tatwin went to Rome, where he obtained the Pall from Pope
Gregory, and likewise a confirmation of his Primacy. After which he made great
have to return into Brittany.

2. There is indeed extant in William of Malmsbury an Epistle of Pope Gregory
addressed to all the English Bishops, Malmsb. de Fon^. l. 1. p. 210.
in which he exhorts them to Unity and constancy in Faith and Charity: and
withal signifies that he had given the Archiepiscopall Pall with the venerable
use of the Dalmatick to Tatwin Successor to S. Augustine in his chair of
Canterbury: and that after a diligent search in the Sacred Archives for the
Privileges and rights of Jurisdiction belonging to that See from the time of
the said S. Augustine, he had confirmed the same; commanding all the Churches of
Brittany with their respective Bishops to yield due obedience to all the
Canonical precepts of the said Tatwin, whom he appointed Primat, and withal
conferred on him authority in his stead to visit all Churches in that Region:
Moreover that the Church of Canterbury being the first offspring of
Christianity and Mother of all other Churches there, he took it into his
special protection, threatening severely to vindicate all contempts and
disobediences to it on any person whatsoever.

3. To this effect did Pope Gregory write, but without any mention or
reflection on the Sea of York, or any competition of any other in the Primacy.
Besides this, the present Bishop of York, Wilfrid second of that name, was a
man of great modesty and aversion from contention. Whereas indeed his
Successor of a Princely family, and high Spirits, did, not long after, not
only restore his See o^ York to the Archiepiscopall dignity, which at first S.
Paulinus the Apostle of that Province enjoyed, but challenged an equality with
the Archbishop of Canterbury, as shall be declared. And this perhaps gave
occasion of mistake and a confusion of times to B. Parker and likewise B.
Godwin.

A. D. 733. Hoved. ad A. D. 733.
4. Archbishop Tatwin having thus received the Pall, and being returned into
Brittany, the year following consecrated two Bishops: For Kinebert Bishop of
the Lindesfari (or Lincoln) being dead: he substituted in his place Alw^, whom
we find present in a Synod assembled fourteen years after this. Likewise the
Episcopal See of the South Saxons by the death of Eolla, being vacant, he
consecrated for his Successor Sigga, or Sigfrid.

Westm^^. hic.
5. The same year there were great tumults in the Kingdom of the Northumbers, by
a faction, the Head whereof is now unknown. But so violent was the Sedition,
that both King Ceolulf and the Holy Bishop Acca, were forced to submitt to the
impetuousnes of it. King Ceolulf was made prisoner and Shaved as a Monk.
Notwithstanding presently after in consideration of his integrity, virtue and
prudence, he was restored to his Throne.

6 But as for the Holy Bishop Acca the persecution against him continued
longer. For during the space of three years he remaind banished from his See.
Yea, says William of Malmsbury, it is uncertain whether ever he returned to
it, or no. However, that after his death he was with great honor buried there,
and became famous to posterity by his frequent Miracles, shall be showed
hereafter.

III. CHAP. A. D. 734.

III. CHA.



1.2.3. Ethelbald the Mercian King invades his neighbors.

4.5 Tat^in Arch bishop of Canterbury dying: Nothelm succeeds. And Egbert
succeeds in the Sea of York.

6 7 8. S. Boniface proposes a Scrupulous doubt to Nothelm, etc. The R^solution
of it.

1. IN the year of Grace seven hundred thirty four Ethelbald King of the
Mercians, A D. 734.
who as has been said, was wonderfully called by God to the Kingdom, became
very powerful, and not content with the limits of his own kingdom* invaded the
Provinces of his Neighbors. Wigorn. A. D 731.
All the Regions from the South Saxons as far as Humber Northward, though
governed by petty Kings yet those Provinces with their Kings were subject to
his Dominion, says Florentius. Yet all these to a mind so vast as his were
narrow bounds. Therefore making an impression into the Western parts, Westminster.
hic.
he besieged the Castle of S^merton, and no assistance coming to the soldiers
there enclosed, he brought it into his own power. By which means he became
possessour of a great part of Somersetshire, which takes its name from that
place.

2. And not content with this, Huntingd. l. 4.
he marched with his Army Northward, and force prevayling over justice, he in a
hostile manner entered the Kingdom of the Northumbers: where finding none to
resist him, he enriched himself and his army with spoils, as much as he
thought good, and then withdrew his forces homewards. Thus writes Huntingdon.
The Abridger of S. Beda's History referrs this invasion to the year seven
hundred and forty: but the general consent of other Writers disproves him.

3. But this prosperity which Gods goodness gave him, he abused, and plunged
himself into many enormous crimes, as shall be showed. Notwithstanding the
Divine Grace did not utterly forsake him: For at last he repented his
ingratitude to God, amended his errors, and with a mixture of virtues and
vices ended his life by the treason of his Subjects.

4. The same year, Hoved.
as Hoveden testifies, the Moon for the space of an hour early in the morning
on the thirtieth day of January became of a deep blood-red color: and from
thence turned black, after which its natural brightness was restored. This
prodigy, it seems, in his opinion foreshewed the death of Tatwin Archbishop of
Canterbury: for he immediately adds an account of his death thereto, happening
the twenty ninth of July following, and in the fourth year after his
Consecration. He was a man, says S. Beda, highly eminent for his Religion and
prudence. He succeeded Brithwald his equal in learning and piety, who was
Successor to S. Theodore.

A. D. 735.
5. The year following gave to the two Principal Sees of Brittany, Canterbury
and York, A. D. 735.
vacant by the death of their Pastors, two worthy persons to succeed in the
exercise of the Episcopal function, to Canterbury Nothelm, and to York,
Egbert. As touching the former, Nothelm was born at London, in which Church he
was Priest ( not Bishop, as Parker mistakingly affirms.) Some thing has
already been spoken of him, Antiq Brit. in Nothelme.
when we related how S. Beda made use of his industry and assistance in
composing his History.

6. To this New Archbishop, Nothelm, presently after his consecration S.
Boniface directed an Epistle, in which, after he had desired from him the same
Christian affection and Union of minds, which heretofore he had with S.
Brithwald his Predecessor, he proposed to him a difficulty and scrupule which
had much and long tormented him, a resolution whereof he desired from him* as
he did from diverse others, and particularly from Pecthelm Bishop of Candida
Casa, and also from an English Abbot called Duddo, who had formerly been S.
Boniface his own Scholar, yet such was his humility, that he disdaind not to
consult him. Now the Doubt or difficulty I will set down in S. Boniface's own
expression: Bonif. Ep. 18.
7. I desire, says he, to hear your counsel touching a sin committed by me
through ignorance, in permitting marriage between two parties: the Case stood
thus. A certain Man with my leave married a woman a widow to whose s^n he had
formerly been Godfather. This the Romans say is so unlawful, that they ought
to be divorced. Yea moreover they affirm that anciently under the Christian
Emperors ^uch a crime was punished with death, or at least perpetual
banishment. Now I beseech you to inform me whether you can find either in the
Decrees of the Ancient Catholic Fathers or Holy Scriptures that this is so
great a sin. For mine own part I can by no means comprehend how a carnal
conjunction between persons in a Spiritual pr^pinquity should be a heinous
sin, since in Sacred Baptism we are all of us sons and daughters of Christ and
his Church, and Brothers and S^sters to one another.



8. The Resolution of this Doubt we can not find, since their Answers hereto
are lost. But Serrarius a learned Jesuit, Serrar in (...) Bonif. Ep. 11.
who published Saint Boniface's Epistles with Annotations, after he had
produced several Decrees of Ancient Popes strictly forbidding such Marriages,
shows the Answer to this Doubt to be now very easy: Adding withal, That if in
S. Boniface's time the Ancient Ca^ins had been in the same number and order as
now, he would never have doubted of the Question. However his diligence in
seeking satisfaction is highly to be praised, and his humility of mind to be
imitated, since he not only proposes his doubts to Bishops* but even his own
Disciples, desiring to be taught by them now in his old age yea since he
professes that he will not pertinaciously adhere to his own judgment, but
obediently acquiesee in the Decrees of the Church and Holy Fathers. How far now
are our modern Sectaries from such a disposition of mind! For Luther and Beza
grounding themselves upon their private judgment, Luth in Capt. Bab B^z l. de
Matrim.
and proudly contemning and opposing all Antiquity and authority, do set as
naught all regard of Spiritual Alliance: Such difference there is between the
Spirits of a modest humble Catholic, and an arrogant Heretic.

IV. CHAP. IV. CHAP.

1.2. etc The Gests of S. Pecthelm.

6.7.8 Of S. Wiro.

9. And of S. Otger.

1. AS touching S. Pecthelm Bishop of Candida Casa to whom S. Boniface directed
one of his Epistles demanding his judgment touching the forementiond doubt, it
is not easy to determine in what place that Epistle might find him. We
signified his Ordination to that See in the year seven hundred twenty three:
and S. Beda in the eighth year after concluding his History, affirms that he
continued at that time Bishop there: Yet the Writers of the Gallican and
Belgic Antiquities consonantly a^^^rm that he left Brit^tany, and after the
example of S. Boniface propagated the Christian Faith in those Countries: Of
which there is an absolute silence among our English Historians. Let us
therefore enquire concerning his Gests of foreign Authors.

2. In the Gallican Martyrologe upon the fifteenth day of July we read thus:
Mart^ir. Ga. ^5. Iulij.
In the Mount of S. Peter, otherwise called the Monastery of S. Odila, near
Rurem^nd in Belgium ^s that day celebrated the deposition of S. Pecthelm Bishop
of Candida Casa in Scotland (that (...) now, for anciently it was within the
Do^^nio^ of the English-Saxons) and Confessor: who being inflamed with a zeal
to root out Heathenish Superstition to that time springing ^p in some parts of
Belgium, undertook a voyage into those countries in the company of S. Wiro
B^^hop and S. Otger a Deacon: Where he was kindly entertaind by King Pipin, and
encouraged ^o so pious a work. He brought very many to the Light of
Evangelicall Truth, and cast down several profane Temples of f^lse Gods,
building many Churches to the honor of the only true God. The like testimony
we find in Miraeus his Belgic Calendar.

5 Now the death of this Holy Bishop our Historian Florentius referrs to this
present year. Concerning which the said Martyrologe thus treats. In the same
Monastery S Pecthelm full of days and merits peaceably dyed. Ib.
And many Divine Miracles shining at his Sepulcher declared him a glorified
Saint in heaven. Whereupon veneration and honor due to Saints was attributed
to him and his Holy Companions: For their Sacred Relics were taken up and
reposed under the Altar of the Cathedral Church of Ru^emond* and moreover an
annual Feast and Office celebrated in their honor, not only through that
whole Diocese, but also at Oldensale in the Bishopric of Daventer, where his
Head is preserved and with great veneration of the people honored. Hereunto
Miraeus adds, Miraeus in Fast. Belg. 15. Iul.
That this an^ient Inscription is found upon their Shrines, Parts of the
Relics of S. Wiro, S. Pecthelm and Saint Otger. In the year of Grace one
thousand five hundred seaventy one, in which the rebellious Gueuses (or
Calvinists) having overthrown the Table of the Altar, but leaving the base
untouched, they were by a singular Providence of God defended from the fury of
those Heretics: and twenty three years after, when the same Altar was
repaired, they were there found, and afterward honorably taken up, as we read
in the Office of the Church of Ruremond.

4 In this Narration there occurr difficulties of some weight. For whereas it
is said that Saint Pecthelm was kindly received by King Papin, it will not be
easy to determine among three Princes in this age, all of the same name, which
was he who received our Saints: Whether the first Pipin son to the elder
Carloman, or his Grandchild by his daughter Begga, or the last who was Son to
Charles Martel: and was the only Pipin who was King. But he not beginning his
reign till the year seven hundred fifty two, he could not be King at S.
Pecthelm's arrival in France. Therefore most probable it is, that he was at
this time only a young Duke, but is styled King, because he became so
afterward. Notwithstanding after all this, the Irish Historians confidently
apply all this Story to their Pecthelm Bishop of Tuam: and indeed their
pretentions are not all together unprobable.

5. Saint Pectelm being dead, to him succeeded Frithwald in the Sea of Candida
Casa. So that the Illustrious Cardinal Baronius is evidently mistaken in the
sense of a passage in S* Beda, in which after mentioning the death of Heddi, he
immediately adds these words, To conclude Pecthelm, who a long time was Deacon
and a Monk with his Successor Aldelm, was wont to relate, etc. From which
Passage the learned Cardinal affirms that Pecthelm had for his Successor
Aldelm: whereas S. Beda's meaning was, that Aldelm was Successor to Heddi, and
that Pecthelm was S. Aldelms Deacon and Monk: which from several Authors we
have verified before.

Vid. l 22. c. 12.
6. As touching the Companions of S. Pecthelm the uncertainty of their native
country is as great. Saint Wiro, as has been declared, is likewise challenged
by the Irish, and one particular mentioned in his Life argues strongly for it,
where it is said, That it was the custom in the Island where he was born that
when any Bishop was elected, he was sent to Rome to receive Ordination from the
hands of the Pope, and so to return and take possession of his See.

7. Saint Wiro therefore being thus ordaind, Ap. Capgr. in S. Wirone.
was with great joy received by his flock, to whom he diligently gave wholesome
instructions both by preaching and example. Yet a desire long fixed in his
mind, to live in a foreign country known only to God, still remained.
Whereupon privately escaping away with S. Pecthelm and S. Otger, he passed over
into France: where as has been said, he was with all respect and favor
received by Prince Pipin: who held him particularly in such Veneration for his
eminent Sanctity, that he chose him for his Spiritual Father and Guide of his
soul, to whom he usually confessed his sins, and this with so great humility,
that his custom was to approach to him with bare feet.

8. How long he remaind wi^h (...) is ^ncertain: But certain it is that
thirsting after Solitude, he retired himself to the place called the Mount of
S. Peter of Odilia, near the City of Ruremond in the Diocese of Liege, where
both by his preaching, Sanctity and Miracles he became illustrious: And being
full of years and Sanctity, a fever not violent freed him from the prison of
his flesh, and sent his Spirit to heaven. His commemoration among the Saints is
placed in our Martyrologe on the eighth of May. Martyr. Aug 8. Maij.
His Body was buried in the Chapel dedicated to our Blessed Lady near
Ruremond: but afterward, at least a great part of it was translated to
Maestrick, where it is held in great veneration.

9. It remains that we speak briefly of S. O^ger, who is generally
acknowledged to have been born in Brittany: Sur. 10. Sept
For Surius in his Life declares that Saint Pecthelm and S. Wiro in their
journey to Rome passing through Brittany, by a special Providence of God S.
Otger a Deacon adioynd himself to their company, who out of a fervent desire of
heavenly good things contemning all commodity, and pleasures on earth, became
an inseparable Companion to S. Wiro; whom from Rome he followed to the said
Mount of Saint Peter, where leading a heavenly life upon earth, and inflaming
the souls of many with a Love of Spiritual and Celestial good things he
there happily ended his Life on the tenth of September, Martyr. Aug. 10. Sept.
on which day his memory is celebrated. The Centuriators of Magdeburg
confounding him with S. Aldebert, do mistake in affirming that he was son to
the King of the Deiri, or Yorkshire.

V. CHAP. V. CHAP.

1.2. etc. Egbert Archbishop of York: restores the Primitive dignity to his See.

5. He consecrates Suff^agan Bishops.

1. THE same year, as has been said, not only the Sea of Canterbury, but that
of York also received a New Pastor: For Wilfrid the younger, either dying, or
which seems more probable, voluntarily reliquishing that See, there was chosen
in his place Egbert Brother to Eadbert, or as some also call him, Egbert,
Malmsbur. l 3.
who shortly after was King of the Northumbers.

2. The Church of York, since the death of the founder of it and first
Archbishop Saint Paulinus, to this time continued in much depression; By whose
fault this happened, it does not appear perhaps it was by means of the
contentions long continuing among the Bishops, or the multiplication of
Bishoprics. But now Egbert being a man of great parts, and courage, restores
it to its primitive Dignity, Id. ib. f. 269.
as William of Malmsbury thus declares: Egbert, says he, by his prudence and
assisted with his Brothers power reduced that See to its first State. Vid. l.
14^ c. 21 22.
For as it is manifest to any one who reads the Ancient Gests of the English
Nation, Saint Paulinus the first Prelat of that Church, was by open violence
and hostility driven out of it: So that he was forced to retire himself to
Rochester in Kent, where he died Bishop of that See, and there left the
Archiepiscopall Pall which he had received from Pope Honorius. As for his
Successors in that great Church of York they contented themselves with the
simple Title of Bishops, not aspiring higher. But Egbert a man of a more
haughty disposition, considering with himself that, as it is a mark of ^ride
for a man to seek honors undue so is it a mark of baseness to neglect such as
are due, thereupon by several Appeals to the Sea Apostolic he at last
recovered the Archiepiscopall Pall, so raising that Church, once more to a
Metropolitan Dignity.

3. Not any of our Historians do impute this action of Egbert to a culpable
ambition, on the contrary his memory is much celebrated by them: Harp. f. saec.
8. c. 22. Malmsb. vbi sup.
Harpsfeild says that he was a Prelat in many regards worthy of high
commendation. And William of Malmsbury gives him this Character, That he was a
Treasury of all liberal sciences. And of this, says he, I can produce a witness
of unquestioned authority, the learned Alcuin, who in an Epistle to the
Emperor Charles the Great thus writes, Let me be furnished with Books of more
exquisite learning, such as whilst I lived in mine own country of Brittany, by
the favor and industry of my worthy Master Egbert Archbishop of York I had
the use of. And if such be your Excellencies pleasure, I will send thither some
of my Disciples, to copy out there, and bring with them into France the
choycest flowers in their Libraries. Probably this Alcuin who after Saint
Aldelm and Saint Beda was the most learned man of the English Nation had a
principal regard in this passage cited out of him, to that most Noble Library
which Egbert furnished at York.

4. But nothing gives a greater luster to him, and more setts forth his
learning and erudition then that Saint Boniface judged him a person capable to
resolve his difficulties. There is among his Epistles one written after the
death of Saint Beda to him, in which he desires him to send him some of that
Holy Doctors Treatises: Boni^. c. Ep. 85.
and withal asks his advice, A. D. 736.
whether he might lawfully permit a certain Priest, besides whom there was
none other, to administer Baptism, and celebrate Mass in a large territory
inhabited by Christians indeed, yet such as were tainted with errors:
considering that the said Priest who long ago had falln into the sin of
fornication, afterward not only was absolved after Penance, but also restored
to his degree and Office, contrary to the express Canons of the Church. Now
the Question is, Whether it be better, or at least a less ill that such a
Priest should perform the Office of the Altar contrary to the Canons, or in
case he be deprived, a multitude of Infants should dye without Baptism, and the
rest of the people without Sacraments: since that people can not be furnished
with another more chaste Priest? Which is indeed no Question at all.

5. Egbert having obtaind his Archiepiscopall Pall this same year supplied two
Episcopal Sees which were vacant. For to Plecthelm Bishop of Candida Casa he
substituted Fridwald: And the Holy Bishop Acca having been unjustly expelled
his Church of Hagustald, and there being no probability of his restitution,
least our Lords flock should remain longer without a Pastor, he consecrated
thereto Fridbere: Who notwithstanding in our Ecclesiastical Monuments is not
esteemed Bishop, till the death of Acca, which followed five years after.

VI. CHAP. VI. CHAP.

1.2. etc. A Sum of the Gests of S. Willebrord: and his death.

6.7. etc. Several Bishops consecrated by Nothelm Archbishop of Canterbury.

9. Queen Frithogitha's pilgrimage to Rome.

1. THE year following the most famous Apostle of the Frisons, A. D. 736.
the erectour and first Archbishop of Vtrecht, Saint Willebrord received the
eternal reward of all his labors. We have often mentioned him before, and
will here only add a brief Sum of his Life and Gests out of the Gallican
Martyrologe: 2. On the seventh of November at Epternac in the Territory of
Triers is celebrated the Commemoration of Saint Willebrord Bishop and
Confessor, Martyrol. Gallic. 7. November.
Apostle of the Frisons. He was by Nation an English-Saxon, and being endowed
with many Divine Graces, he with nine Companions were by Saint Egbert directed
into Lower Germany. From Brittany therefore he passed over into Friseland: and
began the Apprentissage of his Apostolic Office at Vtrecht, but was desired by
Pipin to go further into the country of the Frisons. At the Castle of Vtrecht
near an Ancient ruind Church of Saint Thomas, he built an Oratory to the honor
of the Holy Cross. Pope Sergius being before admonished by an Angelical
vision, solemnly ordained him Archbishop in the Church of Saint Peter, at the
request of Duke Pipin: and withal strengthening him with Apostolic authority
to preach and dilate the Gospel, to the end he might with a more prosperous
omen undertake that labor, he gave him the Surname of Clement, to whom after
the two Princes of the Apostles the Care of Religion in its infancy was
committed.

3. From Rome he returned into Friseland, and at Vtrecht upon Rhene placed his
Episcopal See, building there a Church which he consecrated to Saint Martin.
He baptized with the Water of regeneration Pipin the Son of Charles Martel. He
spread the Gospel largely in Friseland, baptizing Catechumens, confirming
Neophytes, celebrating holy Orders, and almost in every village building
Churches, over which he constituted Pastors.

4. Whilst he was busily employed in these sacred works, there came to him
Saint Boniface, who in process of time became his Successor in his Bishopric
and Apostleship of the Frisons: Who staying with him about two years, assisted
him with courage and diligence in procuring the salvation of many. At last
after many labors, incommodities and travells undertaken by him for many years
in planting the Church and saving of souls, he rendered his holy and happy
Spirit to his Creator at Epternac: after he had for the space of forty years
with a piety and virtue truly Apostolic governed the Church founded by himself.

5. His Sacred Body was buried in a Monastery of that Town, which formerly he
had erected: where it did ^hine with so many illustrious Miracles, that both
the Monastery and Church were afterward called by his Name. Concerning his
Successors Eoban, Boniface and Gregory we shall treat in due place. His Life
was written both in verse and Prose by his Country man Saint Alcuin, an
eloquent Witness of his Sanctity.



6. The same year Nothelm Archbishop of Canterbury having received his
Archiepiscopall Pall from Rome consecrated several Bishops: For the Sea of
Hereford being vacant by the death of Walst^d he substituted in his place
Cuthbert: Who four years after succeeded Nothelm himself, being translated to
the Sea of Canterbury. But before that, he finished a very costly Cross begun
by his Predecessor, Godvvin. in Catal. Ep. Hereford.
and moreover built a sumptuous Tomb, in which he placed the Bodies of the
three preceding Bishops, Tirtil, Torthere and Walst^d: to which he adjoined
three more, a certain Nobleman called Milfrid, with his Lady called Quenburga,
and Osrith the Son of Oselin: as appears by the verses inscribed on it,
recorded by B. Godwin in his Catalogue of the Bishops of Hereford.

7. A. D. 737.
The Church of the East Angles likewise being deprived of her two Pastors
Eadbert Bishop of Dumwich, and Hadulac Bishop of Helmham; The said Archbishop
gave for successor to the former Cuthwin (called by Hoveden, Heordwald) and to
the other, Ethelfrid: Concerning whom nothing remains to posterity but their
names.

8. The next year Alduin Bishop of Lichfeild dying, A. D. 737.
two Bishops were consecrated in his place, Witta in Lichfeild, and Totta (or
Torthelm) in Leycester. In this City of Leycester (which, says William of
Malmsbury, is very ancient, and situated in the midland country of England,
called Legecestria from the River Ledger passing by it) Saint Wilfrid, as has
been declared, after his expulsion out of the Kingdom of the Northumbers, made
his abode, and exercised Jurisdiction there. After whose departure the Kingdom
of the Mercians had but one Bishop: till this year, in which for the Vastnes of
the Province two Bishops were ordained. And Leycester continued an Episcopal
See till the time of King Edgar, when Leov^n Bishop of the Lindesfari, or
Lincoln, united Leycester to his See.

9. Moreover in the place of Forthere Bishop of Shirburn, Herwald was
consecrated: The cause whereof was not the death of Farther, Wigorn. hic
but as Florentius testifies, because be attending Frithogitha Queen of the
West Saxons, undertook a Pilgrimage to Rome: And it was not fit that the
Church should want a Pastor. This is the same Frithogitha Wife to King
Ethelard who eight years before this was so munificent a Benefactrice to the
Monastery of Canterbury: And now the flame of Divine Charity increasing in her
soul, she abandoned all her splendid possessions, and gave her self entirely
to God. And in those days, at we read in Matthew of Westminster, many Kings and
Bishops, Noble men and ^gnoble* Clergymen and Secular, yea women also did the
like.

VII. CHAP. VII. CHAPTER

1.2. etc Ceolulf King of the Northumbers becomes a Monk: His Muneficence to
the Church of Saint Cuthbert.

1. THE same year Brittany saw a spectacle, which all other Christian countries
esteemed prodigious, but was become no wonder in our Island: and this was a
potent King in his ripe age, and the midst of his prosperity, to renounce all
wordly glory, advantages and contentment, and to prefer before all these a poor
Cell, a course habit, sparing and simple diet, and submission to the meanest of
his Subjects. This was Ceolulf King of the Northumbers to whom S. Beda had
dedicated his History of Brittany, not so much that he might by his eminent
quality be a protector of it or of the Author, as by his learning and
judgment to be a correctour. And it is not to be doubted but that so many
examples which he found there, of persons contemning, hating and flying from
all worldly tentations and pleasures, had a strong influence on his mind to
inflame it with the love of heavenly and only true happiness.

2. A little before he thus offered himself a Holocaust to our Lord* he had
bestowd liberally many possessions on the Monastery of Lindesfarn where the
famous S. Cuthbert learnt and practiced the rudiments of his Sancti^y whose
life and glorious act^ons he had read in S. Beda's writings. Hoveden among the
munificent gifts of this King to S. Cuthbert reckons these p^aces, Heved. ad A.
D. 882.
Vdecester, Wittingham, Edulfingham, and Cewlingham. But the Religious King
esteemed this liberality not consid^rable* unless he gave himself likewise to
him by embracing a penitenciall Life in his Monaste^y: which this year being
the ninth of his reign, he perform^d 3 This space of nine years spent in vanity
( says Huntingdon) seemed to him a whole age: Huntingd. l. 4
for he was in great anguish of mind that so great a part of his Life should be
lost in the vain cares and encombrances of the world. He resolved therefore to
consecrate the remainder of his years to spiritual Wisdom, and to the
eternal advantage of his own soul. Therefore proposing to himself out of the
History of S. Beda six potent Kings for his imitation, he resolved to follow
their examples. These were Ethelred King of the Mercians, and Kenred his
Successor: Likewise Cedwalla King of the West Saxons and Ina his Successor:
Sigebert King of the East Angels, who became a Monk, and was afterward slain
by the Tyrant Penda: And Sebbi King of the East Saxons, who embracing a
Religious Profession, by Divine revelation foresaw the wishd-for day of his
death, he saw it and was glad. These did not consume their Substance with
harlots, like the Prodigal son, but went on their way with sorrow sowing their
seed, that they might return with joy and present their ^heaves to our Lord.
King Ceolulf therefore added a seventh (Hebdomadam) to the number of perfect
Kings: and receiving a Monastical habit, in exchange of the Temporal Crown
which he left, God set upon his Head a glorious Crown of one entire precious
stone



4. The Monastery into which he retired was that of Lindesfarn* the Monks
whereof were the Disciples of S. Aidan, whom long before this, King Oswald had
sent for thither out of Scotland: and they following his example practiced far
more rigourous austerities, Bed. l. 3. c. 5.
then were usually seen else where. For not only all the R^ligious men, and
women too, of that institut continued fasting every Wednesday and Friday till
Vespers were accomplished: but also wholly abstained from wine and all strong
drink, A. D. 738.
contenting themselves with Water mingled with a little milk. But whether it
was that experience showed them that English Complexions, not so robustious as
those of the Scotts, could not support this great austerity, or whether
likewise it was out of condescendance to the delicacy and infirm temper of King
Ceolulf, at his entrance an indulgence was given to the Monks, and they were
permitted for their drink to use a moderate proportion of Wine or Ale.

5. Now besides his former liberalities to that Monastery, King Ceolulf at the
time of his Monastical Tensure gave the Manor of Warkworth: Camd. in Northamb.
So writes Camden out of our Ancient Monuments: Warkworth, says he, with all
its dependences was a possession of the Church of Lindesfarn by the gift of
King Ceolulf For this mansion at his renouncing the world he bestowd on the
said Church, in which being made a Monk he aspired to a heavenly kingdom.

6. Our Martyrologe, Martyr. Arg Ianuar.
in which his memo^^ is celebrated among the Saints on the fifth of January,
refers his death to this sa^^ year: But certain it is that his life was
pro^long^d there the space of twenty thr^^ years: So that we are to interpret,
tha^ thi^ year he dyed to the world. Now how happily he concealed himself in
that solitude from the world, and how charged he was with merits and graces
when he left it, this is sufficiently testified, M^lmsb. d^ Reg. l. 1 c. ^
says William of Malmsbury, by the honor he received in being buried close to
S. Cuthbert, and by many Divine Miracles wrought there by his intercession. His
Relics were afterward translated to Northam, H^veden hic H^rpsf. sae. 9. c. 14.
says Hoveden, where they likewise became illustrious by Miracles* being
placed in a Church there built by Egred Bishop of Lindesfarn about seaventy
years after this Kings death, and dedicated to the honor of Saint Peter, Saint
Cuthbert and S. Ceolulf.

7. This Holy King resigned his Kingdom to his Nephew Eadbert, or Egbert, a
Successor likewise of his virtue and piety: for says William of Malmsbury,
Malmsb. ^6
he governed it the space of twenty years with great prudence and justice. He
had likewise a Brother of his own name Archbishop of York, who by his own
wisdom and his Brothers power restored his See to its primitive dignity. But
of these two illustrious persons more hereafter.

VIII. CH
VIII. CHAP.
1.2. Saint Boniface his journey to Rome.

5.6. etc. He by Apostolic authority erects several Bishoprics in Germany.

1. THE Gests of S. Boniface, which are the principal business of the greatest
part of this Age, almost yearly furnishing our History, do call us into
Germany, from thence to attend his journey to Rome, which he again undertook in
the year of Grace seven hundred thirty eight: The occusion of his journey (as
we read in the Author of his Life, the account whereof is collected from that
of his Disciple S. Willebald) was partly to visit Pope Gregory third of that
Name, Vid. Bar. hic. Auth. vit. S. Bonif. ap. Su^
as likewise to commend himself to the Prayers of the Holy Apostles and other
Saints reposing there: and also to obtain from the said Pope, as appears by his
Letters, a resolution of certain difficulties touching the care of souls
committed to his charge.

2. He went therefore to Rome attended by a great troop of French men,
Bavarians and Britain: Where being arrived, he was kindly received by the
Pope. The people of Rome likewise had him in such veneration, that they flocked
in great multitudes to his preaching, and endeavored to detain him a long time
among them. For of old it had been their custom when any man of note or
sanctity came to Rome, they would with all civility, respect and kindness
entertain him. Thus they did in former ages with S. Athanasius, S. Epiphanius,
S Hierom, S. Peter of Alexandria and many others.

3, Now when S. Boniface was ready to depart, the Pope very liberally bestowed
on him many gifts, and whatsoever Relics of Saints he desired. He sent
likewise by him several Letters to the Bishops, Princes and Abbots of Germany,
requiring their assistance to S. Boniface in the great charge committed to him
of converting souls, as likewise their presence to whatsoever Synods he should
assemble, and their Obedience to his orders and Decrees made according to the
Rule prescribed by the Sea Apostolic, which had authorized him to his
Apostolic Office, and constituted him the supreme Prelat of Germany.

4. With these Letters S. Boniface departed from Rome, and came to Ticinum, or
Pavia, where he abode some time with Luitprand King of the Lombards. Thence he
proceeded toward Germany, Ap. Bonif. ^p. 27.
and being arrived near the River Danubius, he made some stay there, expecting
a Synod of Bishops which he by the Popes order had called. And from thence* he
wrote Letters to certain special friends Goppin, Eoban, Tacwin and Wyx
Religious Abbots, as likewise to all their Monks, and several Religious
Virgins, in which he gave them a particular account of this his journey, and
the success of it.

5. The year following being invited by Vtilo Duke of the Bavarians, A. D. 739.
he visited his country, staying there many days, and preaching the word of
God, with great fruit. There he found many false Christians, who wasted the
Churches, and seduced the people. Some of these falsely pretended themselves to
be Bishops, and others usurped the Office of P^eists: Many likewise with
fictions and pernicious lies wrought great mischief among the ignorant. A
further course of whose malice he found not any means more effectually to
prevent, then by dividing the Province of Bavaria into four Dioceses: which
with the consent of Duke Vtilo he performed: the Government of which he
committed to persons of eminent virtue, whom he ordained Bishops.

6. Of these the first was John, whose Episcopal See was placed at Salisburg:
The second was Erimbert, who governed the Church of Frislingen: the third was
Hunibald, who was consecrated Bishop of Ratisbon, the Metropolis of Bavaria.
And Winilus, who before had been ordained Bishsp by the Pope of the whole
country, had the Church of Patary assigned to him.

7. Having done this, he wrote to the Pope giving him an account of all things
and desiring his confirmation and ratification for perpetuity: Therein
imitating his Predecessors: For so did Fugatius and Damianus, in the British
Church: so did S Patrick in Ireland; and so did S. Augustine among the
English-Saxons demand from the Sea Apostolic a confirmation of their
Ordonnances.

8. We have still extant the Popes answer hereto, Ap. Bonifac. ^p. 10.
containing an approbation of what he had done: Likewise an iniunction to
as^semble a Synod of all Germany, and in his place to preside over it. And
because the necessities of those Churches would not allow him repose in any one
place, he renewed his Apostolic Authority to erect Bishoprics wheresoever he
should judge expedient.

A. D. 740.

IX. CHAP.


IX. CHAP.
1. Cuthred succeeds King Ethelard in the Kingdom of the West Saxons.

2. Nothelm Archbishop of Canterbury dying, Cuthbert succeeds.

3.4. The Death of the Holy Bishop Saint Acca.

5 6. etc. The Martyrdom of Saint Iuthwara a British Virgin: of her Sister S
Sidwella.

10.11. etc. The Gests of the Holy Virgin S. Frid^svida

17.18 Death of S Ethelburga Abbess, formerly Queen of the West Saxons.

19 The Death of Saint Arnulf a Hermit.

1. IN the year of our Lords Incarnation seven hundred and forty Cuthred began
his reign over the West Saxons, A. D. 740.
whose Predecessor Ethelard, by some called his Brother, by others his
kinsman, dyed the year before. This King, says Huntingdon, was much afflicted
by the proud King of the Mercians Ethelbald, who sometimes made open war
against him, and sometimes raised sedition in his country In all which Fortune
showed her self very various between them, sometimes the one, and some times
the other gaining advantage. And now and then, being weary they would make
peace: which seldom lasted any considerable time, the one or the other
presently renewing the war.

2. The same year there was exalted to the Archiepiscopall See of Canterbury
being vacant by the death of Nothelm, Cuthbert, who four years before had been
consecrated Bishop of Hereford. He was descended from an illustrious Saxon
family* and as Nobly he administered his Office. He was no sooner established in
his Seat, Hoved hic.
but Aldulf Bishop of Rochester dying, he consecrated his Successor in that
See a Priest called Dun.

3. At this time the Holy Bishop Acca formerly a great friend to S. Beda and
encou^ager in his studies and Writing, ended his ^ite, of whom mention has
been several times made before. A brief relation of his Gests we will here
adioyn from Miraeus: who recites his name among the Saints on the last day of
November though in our Martyrologe his commemoration be on the nineteenth of
February. Mart. Angl 19. F^br. M^r in Fast. Belg. 30 Nov
Concerning him Miraeus thus writes Acca a Bishop is named the third among the
Apostolic Priests which under the con^uct of S. Willebrord departed out of
England and arrived at Vtrecht in the year of our Lord six hundred and ninety,
to procure the consecrat on of S. Swibert, he was there detained, and not long
after ordained Bishop of ( Hagustald, not) Lindesfarn (as Miraeus mistaking
writes) 4. How Saint-like his life was Almighty God showed by many miracles
after his death, as Hoveden testifies saying, Heved. hic.
The same year Acca Bishop of Venerable memory was received into the happy
region of the living, after he had administered the Church of Hagustald twenty
four years. His body was buried with great honor in the Eastern part of that
Church. And above three hundred years after his death, by occasion of a
Revelation made to a certain Pre^st, his Sacred Relics were translated, and
putt into a shrine: Where to this day he is held in great veneration. And for a
demonstration of his Sanctity his ^hasuble, Albe and Maniple which had been
buried with his Sacred Body, to this day do not only preserve their color,
but primitive firmnes likewise.

5. In our Martyrologe on the three and twentieth of December this year is
commemorated the Martyrdom of a devout British Virgin called Iuthwara: Martyr.
A^g. 23. December
The Circumstances of her death and Martyrdom and a brief abridgment of her
life we find in Capgrave: Capgrav in S Iuthwara.
The Holy Virgin S. Iuthwara (says the Author there) was born of Noble
parents, and from her childhood being prevented by a plentiful Grace of Gods
holy Spirit, she was diligent to serve our Lord in all good works. She living
in her Fathers house after the death of her Mother, with all innocence, became
amiable to all, and made a progress in virtues, as she did in years.
Whenever any Pilgrims came to her Fathers house, as frequently they did, she
with great chearfullnes of devotion and humility attended and minist^ed to
them. She had a Brother called Bana, and three devout Sisters, S. Eadwara,
Saint Wilgitha and Sidwella, all which imitated her piety and virtue.

6. Not long after S. Iuthwara's Mother was dead, her Father took a second
Wife, a woman for her extraction Noble enough, but of a most malicious
disposition, for her soul by the Devils instinct was full of the gall of
bitterness, especially against this devout Virgin for the destruction of whom
she employed continually the thoughts of her poysonnous heart in contriving
snares and mischeivous treachery: And for the executing thereof she intended to
make Bana, a robustious man, but fit for any villainy, her instrument.

7. It was the Holy Virgin's constant practice in all Vigils of Saints to be
present at Divine Service, and to spend whole nights in Prayer: But thither she
never went alone, but in the company of other Virgins. She was likewise very
assiduous in Watching and Fasting and other Mortifications subduing carnal
desires. With these austerities and grief for her Fathers death, she became
extremely feeble and pale. This occasion by the Devils suggestion her
malicious Mother in Law took to execute her rancour against her. For which
purpose dissembling her bloody intent under a show of Motherly affection and
care, she began to speak kindly to her, and solicitously to enquire the causes
of her palenesse. S. Iuthwara suspecting no ill, imputed it to the loss of her
dear Father, the grief for which had caused great pain in her breast. The
Malicious woman having heard this spoke comfortably to her, and promised her to
find out some remedy. And presently after she brought her two small pieces of
Fresh cheese still dropping with whey, which she bad her to lay upon each
breast before she went to Church, assuring her that this would take away all
her pain. The simple Virgin suspecting no harm, did accordingly. Then the
cruel stepdame went to the Virgins Brother Bana, and told him that his Sister
was with child: and for a proof thereof advised him to open her breasts, and
taking away the linen cloth which covers them, he should see them all were
with milk dropping from them. The young man foolishly beleiving her, meets his
Sister as she was coming out of Church, and before all the people asked her,
Who had got her with child. The poor Virgin astonished at such a Question,
protested she was not with child. Whereupon he presently opened her breasts,
and finding the linen all moist, in a rage he drew out his sword, and cut off
her head.

8. Immediately after this, the Holy Virgin with her own hands took up the head,
and to the astonishment of all, carried it back steadily into the Church. And
moreover for a further proof of the Holy Virgins Sanctity, Almighty God caused
a fountain to burst forth out of the place where the head fell: and over the
fountain as miraculously a Tree began to grow.



9. Thus writes the Author of her Life, adding many other Miracles as
testimonies of her Sanctity. The memory of this Holy Virgin, as likewise of her
Sister Sidwella is much renowned in some Western parts of England, and certain
Chappells have been erected to their Honor in Devonshire. Our Martyrologe
styles them British Virgins, adding that the Martyrdom of S. Iuthwara happened
in some part of South Wales. Which is very probable, because none of our
Ancient Historians treating of Saxon affairs, have mentioned any of these
Sisters.

10. We will adioyn to her another admirable Virgin, who was without all
question of English blood, and whose glorious Memory is celebrated both at home
and abroad. Now though her actions and death can not by any certain signs be
consigned to determinate years, yet since our Writers generally agree that they
belonged to the times of the Reign of Cuthred King of the West Saxons, and our
Martyrologe likewise declares that she flourished about this year seven
hundred and forty, it seems expedient here to assemble such particul^r passages
touching her life and death, as are found dispersed in our several Authors,
William of Malmsbury, Matthew Paris and Capgrave.

11. The Holy Virgin concerning whom we are now to treat, is the famous S.
Frides^ida, the ornament and Patroness of the most illustrious City and
University of Oxford. Her Fathers name was Didan a person of Noble quality,
Capgrav. in Saint Fridesvvida. Malmsb. de Pont. l. 4. Math. Paris a^ A. D. 111.
and her Mothers, Safrida: Both which for their happiness in the birth and pious
education of such a daughter, have deserved to be kept in the memory of
posterity. Almighty God was pleased even from her infancy to show that he chose
her for his own, so great a sense of piety he inspired into her soul in her
most tender years. For, says the Author of her life, even then she had an
aversion from all delicacies, in so much as she usually lay upon the hard
pavement, and not this rest would she afford her self till she could no longer
resist sleep: so that a great part of the night she spent in prayer upon her
knees, or prostrate on the ground Her ordinary diet was barley-bread with a few
herbs and roots, and her drink only water. Hence it was that her Parents
perceiving that all her thoughts were directed to God, freely gave her leave to
consecrate her self entirely to him in a Religious Profession. And by her
example twelve other Virgins of Noble families forsook the world to attend only
upon our Lord.

12. By the Munificence therefore of the King she built a Monastery, into which
entering with her companions, she passed the greatest part of her time in Prayer
and Fasting: And this particular task of Devotion she imposed on her self, to
recite a certain number of Prayers to God upon her knees a hundred times each
day, and as many in the night.

13. But what soul can perfectly aspire to goodness, without incurring the envy
of him who is unchangeably evil? And when his envy is once raised, all his
pernicious subtilties will be employed to destroy or diminish at least, the
good which he envyes. Saint Frideswida enclosed in a Monastery may seem secure
from all attempts prejudicial to her purity: Yet even there the Devil found a
way to endanger her. Before she had consecrated herself to God, there was a
certain Prince deeply wounded by her beauty, not knowing that he was prevented
by another celestial Rival. He used all the Arts and flatteries of a Lover to
win the devour Virgins affections. But in vain: Her spiritual espousalls made
his hoped-for Marriage impossible, and the desire of it Sacrilegious. But what
will not carnal Love inflamed with rage attempt? Since flatteries could not
prevayle when she lived free in the world, he will not fear to use force now
she is confined to her Enclosure. This when the Holy Virgin saw, she concluded
there could not be any other security for her but in flight. Hereupon she
privately stole alone out of the Monastery, and endeavored to secure her self
in a wood neighboring thereto. But the peircing eyes of a Lover discovered her
flight, and pursued her thither: Which she perceiving, by secret paths through
our Lords guidance she escaped to Oxford, whither she arrived very late in the
dark night. But thither also did lust and rage conduct the furious Lover, who
early in the morning entered the Town. Then the Holy Virgin, whose strength was
wholly spent, utterly despaired of all succor from Creatures, and therefore
having recourse to Gods omnipotence only, she with rears begged of him a
defense to her self, and punishment to the Ravisher. This she did at the
instant when the Young Prince, whose Name was Alard, or Algar, was entering the
gate of the Town, attended by many servants. She had no sooner sent up his
Prayer to heaven, but by a Divine hand the lustful young man was struck with
blindness Which visible judgment opened the eyes of his mind, and made him
clearly perceive how hateful to God his obstinate attempt was. Whereupon by
Messengers directed to the Holy Virgin ^e condemned his own fo^ly, and with
great submission begged pardon, promising an eternal banishment of all such
desires out of his mind. This his repentance procured compassion from the Holy
Virgin: by whose ^enewd Prayers his blindness was as quickly cured as ^t had
been inflicted. This Miracle recorded by all our Historians* was so notable to
all, and so unquestioned for many A^es, that as William of Malmsbury observes,
the Princes of this Island had a scrupulous fear to enter into that gate of the
City, which Algar found so fatal to himself.

14 In thankfullnes to God for this deliverance the pious Virgin erected
another Monastery, where assembling other chaste companions of the same Institut
and devotion, she ^pent the remainder of her life in purity and divine
Contemplation. And after her death her immaculate Body reposing there, became
the principal Ornament of the City. For though long before this in the time
of the Britains, Oxford had been a Seat of the Muses, yet we do not find
that the English Saxons as yet had restored it to that dignity.

Camd. in Oxfordshire.
15. Hence it is that Camden, a diligent surveyer of ancient Monuments, thus
writes, Our Ancestors the Britains with great prudence consecrated this City
of Oxford to the Muses, which from Greklade they translated hither, as to a
more happy and fruitful Seminary. But the following ages under the Saxons
being much employed in destroying of Cities, this place was not exempted from
the common lot: So that for a long time it was celebrated for nothing but the
Relics of S. Fridesw^de, who was numbered among the Saints because a certain
Prince called Algar violently attempting her chastity, after she had by solemn
vows consecrated it to God, was miraculously struck with blindness.

Martyr. Aug. 19 October.
16 The Memory of her Sanctity is celebrated in our Martyrolo^e on the
ni^eteenth of October And as for her Monastery a first inhabited by Religious
Virgins, it was in after times possessed by Seculars Canons, and from them it
came to Regulars, as shall be showed in due time.

17. This year also dyed S. Ethelburga, A. D. 741.
formerly Queen of the West Saxons, who had so zealously and prudently incited
her Husband King Ina to relinquish the perishing glory and pleasures of this
world, that he might without interruption attend only to eternal and Spiritual
happiness. After his departure to Rome she retired her self into that famous
Monastery of Barking, where she professed a Religious life: and after some time
was elected Abbess, in which Office having with great Sanctity spent several
years she happily dyed, and is numbered in our Martyrologe among the Saints on
the ninth of July. Martyr. Aug. 9. Iulij.
William of Malmsbury writing of her and King Ina her husband, says that they
were both united in mutual charity during their Lives, and after their deaths
both dignified by God with Divine Miracles.

18. This is a different S. Ethelburga from her who was first Abbess of the
same Monastery of ^arking, who was daughter of Anna King of the East Saxons,
and Sister to Saint Er^o^ Wald Bishop of London. She had for her Successor in
the Office of Abb^sse (...) S. Hildelitha, to whom S. Aldelm dedicated his Book
of Virginity. And after her the third Abbess of the same Monastery was this
Saint Ethelburga Queen of the West Saxons. Insomuch as that Monastery well
deserved (...) Title given it by one of our Historians, who styles it, a well
known Sacred Repository of many Saints.

19. We will conclude the occurrents of this year with briefly recording the
Memory of a certain devout Hermit called S. A^nu^f, who as a Memorial of his
Sanctity has (...) his name to a Town in Huntingdonshire, wh^^e he piously
lived and happily dyed ^is called Arnulfsbury, or more contractedly Eynsb^ry,
near a place dedicated to S. Neo^. There this devout Hermit having served God
many years with great fidelity and fervor, after he had filled the whole
Province with the odor of his virtues, this same year blessedly dyed, as we
read in our Martyrologe, where his Name is recorded among the Saints o^ the two
and twentieth of August. Martyr. Aug. 12. August.


X. CHAP. X. CHAP.

1. 2. etc. The Letters of Pope Zachrias to S. Boniface: with several
Ordonnances.

1 IN the year of Grace sea^en hundred forty one Pope Gregory third of that
name dyed, A. D. 741.
to whom succeeded Pope Zachrias. Which being come to the knowl^dge of S.
Boniface in Germany, Bonif. Ep. 132.
he presently wrote an Epistle to him by one o^ his Preist^ called Denechard,
to testify his obedience, and give him an account of his proceed in S. Among
which he informed him that he had newly erecte^ three Bishoprics in Germany:
The Episcopal Seat o^ one was a Town called Wirtzburg, A. D. 742.
of another Buriburg; and of the third Erfsfurt (or as some write, Eychstedt,
so called from the abundance of Oaks growing near.) These Episcopal Sees he
desires may be confirmed and established by the Pope. And several other Points
he added, in which he humbly desired the said Popes Order and resolution: As
will appear by the Answer returned to him the following year. Id. Ep. 39.


2. Another Letter likewise he sent by the same Priest to a certain Prefect
whose Territory lay in his way to Rome, desiring him that he would grant the
same security, and afford the same assistance to this his Messenger, that he
had formerly done to others. The said Prefects name is Regibert.

3. As touching the three Episcopal Sees by him newly erected, he does not
name the Bishops ordaind in them. But by the Subscriptions to a Synod the next
year we may collect that they were those three Priests which in the year of
our Lord seven hundred twenty five he had called to his assistance out of
Brittany: namely Burchard, Witta, and Willebald. Burchard was consecrated by
him Bishop of Wirtzburg (Herbipolis*) Witta, who likewise from Whitenes (for so
the German name signifies) is by some named Albuinus, had his See at Buriburg,
an ancient Town near Fritzlare or Paderborn: And Willebald, who came out of
England, being the son of a Prince called Richard son to king Lothere, as some
affirm, seems to have been placed in the third See* though commonly in Writers
he be called Bishop of Eystad.

A. D. 742. Ap. Bonif. ^p. 142.
4. The year following Saint Boniface received an Answer to his Letter from Pope
Zacharias: wherein after expressing much joy for the wonderful success of his
preaching he. 1. Confirms the three Bishoprics, newly erected by him in
Germany: adding that he had sent to the three Bishops Epistles of Confirmation,
which they were to receive from his hands. 2. Whereas Carloman Duke of the
French had desired Saint Boniface to assemble a Synod in France and preside in
it, to correct the infinite disorders of the Clergy happening by reason they had
no Archbishop, neither had any Synod been convoked there of fourscore years: S.
Boniface answered the Duke, that F^ance not being within the district of his
Jurisdiction, he had no authority without order from the Pope to call a Synod
there: Hereupon Pope Zacharias gives him authority to assemble a Synod, and in
his name to preside there. 3. The special disorders which he would have
rectified were to exclude from Preist-hood, or if they were already Bishops or
Priests, to prohibi^e the exercises of their office to all such persons as were
guilty of adultery, or had had many wives, or cohabited after they were Priests
with the wives they formerly had, or had shed the blood of any, Christians or
Pagans. 4. Whereas Saint Boniface had petitioned for leave to constitute one
who might be his Successor in his Archiep^scopall authority, the Pope
absolutely refused him: as being contrary to Ecclesiastical Canons: Yet he
permitts him at the hour of his death to design a Successor, upon this
condition notwithstanding, that such his Successor shall repair to Rome and
receive Ordination there, and no where else. 5. Whereas a certain person of
quality had married his Uncles wife, who likewise formerly had been the wife of
her cosen german, and in his life time was separated from him, and had
received the Sacred Veyle of Religion, and the New husband pretended, but
falsely, that he had a dispensation for this Marriage from the the Sea
Apostolic, Pope Zacharias commands Saint Boniface that he should take order to
dissolve so abominable a Matrimony, telling him withal that he had sent a
Commonitory Brief, to the same purpose. 6. To a certain admonition which Saint
Boniface had sent to the Pope, desiring him to prohibit certain Superstitions
said to be practiced at Rome near Saint Peter's Church on New Years day, or the
night before, at which time there were publicly in the streets dancing after a
Pagan manner, with loud acclamations: neither would any one then out of a
Heathenish Superstition lend his neighbor any thing out of his house, not so
much as fire: and more over women wore about their arms and legs ligatures,
phylacteries and superstitious knotts, which also they made to sell to others:
that they observed auguries, incantations, etc. All which superstitions caused
great Scandal among the Germans, who thought every thing to be lawful which
they saw or heard to be practiced at Rome: Hereto the Pope answered that indeed
such things had been some times done at Rome: but as soon as he was consecrated
Pope, he utterly forbad them as most detestable and pernicious practices,
commanding Saint Boniface to do the like. 7. Whereas certain Bishops or
Priests formerly guilty of adultery and fornication, pretended that they had a
dispensation from the Sea Apostolic to exercise their charges notwithstanding,
the Pope bids Saint Boniface by no means to believe them, but to execute
against them the rigor of the Canons. 8. To conclude, he tells him he had sent
other Letters to Carloman desir^ng his assistance to him in the execution of
these Ordonnances.

XI. CHAP.
XI. CHAP.
1.2. etc A Synod at Ratisbon convoked by King Carloman: in which S. Boniface
presided.

4. The Decrees of it confirmed by the Pope.

5.6 etc. S. Boniface his Letter to C^thbert Arch bishop of Canterbury: taxing
the disorders of the English.

Baron. ad A. D. 742.
1. AFter the receipt of these Letters, the proceedings of S Boniface and his
su^^^a an Bishops are thus described by Cardinal Baronius, out of the Author
of Saint Bonifac'es Life: At that time, says he, when the Noble Duke Charles
Martel had finished the course of his life, and his Sons Caroloman and Pipin
had succeeded in his Government, of which, Caroloman, as being the eldest,
disposed all public affairs of the Kingdom: S. Boniface went to him, and
presenting Pope Zacharias his Letters, earnestly besought him for the Love of
God, the establishment of his Dominion and the salvation of his Subjects to
advance the Orthodox Faith, therein imitating the zeal of his Illustrious
Father. Upon which request Caroloman as if he had received a command from
heaven, used his utmost endeavors to recall to the way of justice and piety
all persons, Ecclesiastics and Secular, who had swerved from the duties to
which Christian Religion obliged them: for this purpose employing both his
Kingly authority and the Ecclesiastical likewise. He commanded moreover a
Synod to be assembled at Ratisbon, by the prescript whereof all abuses should
be corrected. The Decrees of which Synod, being full of edification, do here
follow.

2. In the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, I Caroloman Duke and Prince of the
French, in the year after our Lords Incarnation seven hundred forty two, on
the eleaventh day before the Calends of May, have by the Counsel of the
Servants of God and of my Nobles, in the fear of Christ, assembled to a Synod
the Bishops which ^^e in my Kingdom, together with their Priests, namely
Boniface Archbishop, Burchard, Rinfrid, Wittan, and Willebrord, Dadan and Adan
with their Priests: to the end they may give me advice how the Law of God and
Christian Religion, which in our Predecessors days has been much dissipated,
may be restored, and the Christian people hitherto seduced by false Priests may
be brought back into the way of salvation. Therefore by the counsel of the
said Religious Prelates, as likewise of my Nobles order has been taken for
consecrating Prelates in our Cities, over whom we have constituted Archbishop
Boniface who is Legate of the Sea Apostolic. We have appointed likewise, that
every year a Synod be assembled in our presence for restoring the ancient
Canons and Discipline of the Church, and correcting abuses.

3. More particularly, we command that restitution be made of all moneys
fraudulently taken from Churches. 2. We have deprived of all participation of
Church-revenews all false Priests, Deacons and other Clarks who have been
adulters or fornicatours, moreover degrading them, and constraining them to
Penance. 3. We have utterly forbidden all the Servants of God,
Ecclesiastics, to fight, or wear arms, yea or to be present in our Armies,
excepting only those who are purposely chosen for the Divine Ministry, the
Celebrating of Mass, or carrying Sacred Relics, that is, one or two to attend
the Prince, and to every Prefect one Priest to hear Confessions and enioyn
Pennances. 4. Likewise we have interdicted the same persons to hunt with
dogs, or to keep hawks. 5. Moreover we have decreed according to Holy Canons
that all Priests in their Parishes be subject to their proper Bishops, and
every Lent give him an account of their Ministry, of the order observed by
them in Baptism, celebrating of Mass, reciting Prayer and Cathechising. And
that whenever the Bishop according to the Canons shall make his V^^itation
for administering Confirmation to the people, every Priest be ready to receive
and entertain him at the charges of the people to be confirmed: As also that
every Maundy Thursday they receive new ^hrism of the Bishop ^ receiving
likewise from him a testimony of their chastity, unblameable Life and soundnes
of Faith. 6. We have also ordained according to the circumspection en^^ynd by
the Canons that no stranger-Bishops or Priests from whence soever they come,
shall be admitted to the Ecclesiastical Ministry before they have received an
Approbation from the Synod. 7. Likewise we have decreed that every Bishop show
great solicitude to withdraw the people of God from all Heathenish
Superst^tions, all Sacrifices over the dead, all So^^ileges, Divinations,
Phylacteries, Auguries and Incantations exercised after a Pagan manner by some
foolish Christians near their Churches, under the name of Holy Martyrs and
confessors, so provoking the wrath of God and his Saints: Particularly we
require them to forbid earnestly those Sacrilegious Fires called Meefres. And
for the rooting out of all such Pagan Superstitions we command our Magistrates
(Graphiones) every where to give their assistance to the Bishops. 8. Also we
have ordained that whatsoever Ecclesiastical person or Religious woman shall
after this Synod fall into the crime of fornication, shall be putt in prison,
and do penance in bread and water. And if he be a Priest, he shall be
scourged and remain a Prisoner two years. If an inferior Clark or Monk be
guilty of the same sin, he shall be whipped thrice, and continue in prison a
year, there to do Penance 9 We have decreed moreover that no Priests or
Deacon* shall we are Cassacks like Laymen, but Ecclesiastical robes (casulis)
as becomes the servants of God. And that not any of them permit a woman to
live in his house. 10. Lastly that all Monks and Religious Virgins be careful
to order their Lives as becomes their Profession, according to the Rule of S.
BENEDICT.

4. When this Synod was concluded Saint Boniface transmitted to Rome a Copy of
its Decrees, to be approved by the Sea Apostolic. Which being perused by the
Pope, he likewise called a Synod, Ap Bonifac. ^p. 1, 7.
in which the said Decrees were read and confirmed: Of all which Pope Zacharias
gave information in an Epistle directed to all Bishops, Priests, Deacons,
Abbots, and likewise to all Dukes, Counts and all Gods servants in the
Dominions of the French: Particularly enioyning all due respect and obedience
to their Archbishop Boniface. This he did because many of the French Clergy
looked with envious eyes upon him, as being an extern and a Religious man: for
which reason his preeminent Legantin Authority was displeasing to them.

5. Of all this S. Boniface likewise gave an account in an Epistle to Cuthbert
Archbishop of Canterbury, who the year before had written and sent some
presents to him. In which Epistle he gave him a brief of the foresaid Decrees:
Adding this moreover, That in that Synodall Meeting all the Bishops present
made a Confession of the Catholic Faith, Ib. Ep. 105
and protested their resolution to their deaths to preserve Unity and
subjection to the Roman Church, and that they would be obedient to Saint Peter
and his Vicar. That every year they would assemble a Synod: That all
Metropolitans would demand from the Sea Apostolic Archiepiscopall Palls: and
that in all things their desire was to be Canonically obedient to the Precepts
of S. Peter, that so they might be reckond in the number of the Sheep commended
to him. To this Confession, said he, we all consented and subscribed, directing
it to the Body of S. Peter Prince of the Apostles. Which the Pope and Roman
Clergy received gratefully.

6. Thereto he adds many grave Instructions and Advices beseeming an Apostolic
Prelat: As, That all Bishops should denounce to their Metropolitan such abuses
as they could not amend in their Dioceses: and in like manner the Metropolitan
to the Pope: for so doing, they shall free their own souls from the guilt of
the blood of such as perish. Moreover he signified to him that most of the
servants of God with him were much scandalized and displeased upon occasion of
a great stain and ignominy cast on the English Church and Nation, which he
adiures him to wipe away by a solemn prohibition made in a Synod of the Clergy
and Nobility, to hinder that frequency of their women's going and coming back
from Rome: considering that few of them returned uncorrupted: A proof whereof
is, that there were few Cities in Lombardy or France in which there were not
Harlots of the English Nation. He advised him likewise severely to reprehend,
and if they amended not, to excommunicate both alive and dead any of their
Princes and Great men who sacrilegiously invaded Monasteries, A. D. 743.
possessing their revenews, and governing the Monks, as if themselves were
Abbots. And lastly with his utmost endeavors to hinder the intolerable
superstition and excess of clothing reigning in Brittany, where their
vestments were, as they thought, adorned, but indeed defiled with embroidery of
Purple and silk Which vanity, said he, is a sign of the coming of Antichrist,
and an occasion of bringing luxury and uncleannes even into Monasteries.

7. It is probable that admonitions so severe and earnest from a person of so
great authority as S. Boniface, Spelm. l. 1. Conc. Brit. ad hanc annum.
being the Popes Legate in so great a kingdom, might be the occasion of
celebrating a Synod in Brittany at Cloveshove, Vid. l. 20. c. 6.
in which a remedy was found against sacrilegious invasions of Church-revenews
and Privileges. For after diligent search, the formerly mentioned Law and
Privilege made by Withred the pious King of Kent was found and recited in this
Synod: whereupon Ethelbald King of the Mercians by a New-Law confirmed the same
in his Kingdom also. Notwithstanding as shall be declared, King Ethelbald
himself became a transgressour of his own Law, for which he was sharply
reprehended by S. Boniface, and repenting his injustice, made satisfaction for
it.

XII. CHAP. XII. CHA.

1.2. etc. Another Synod at Liptin: In which Adalbe^t and Clement, Heretics
are censured, and emprisoned.

5.6. S. Boniface imputes Simony to the Pope: who cleares himself.

7. Jurisdiction over all France given to S. Boniface.

1. THE year following S. Boniface celebrated another Synod at a place called
Liptin not far from Cambray, whither Caroloman who kept his Court there, A. D.
743.
called him. In which Synod, besides a Confirmation of the Decrees of the
former, Vid. Baron. hic.
it was ordained that a Petition should be made to the Pope to send three Palls
for three Archbishops newly ordained by S. Boniface, Grimmon in the City of
Ro^en, Abel in the City of Sens, and a third at Triers.

2. In the same Synod likewise, Ap. Bonif. ep. 144.
as appears by Pope Zacharias his Answer, S. Boniface discovered and condemned
the blasphemies and errors of two Arch-hereticks, Adalbert, and Clement. Of
which the one challenged to himself Episcopal authority without Ordination:
wallowd in luxury: set ut Crosses and little Oratories in the feilds, seducing
the people by false pretended miracles, and withdrawing them from public
Churches. Yea such was his Pride that he would be styled a Saint, and
consecrated Churches to his own honor, affirming that he knew many Angels by
name: several of which names S. Boniface had sert down in his Epistle to the
said Pope, which were judged to be the Names rather of Devils then Angels.

3. The other Heretic was so given over to lust that he kept a Concubine by
whom he had two children: yet challenged Preisthood to himself, saying that
this was agreeable to the Old Testament. Further he affirmed that Christ rising
from the dead, took with him all that were then in Hell, not leaving any one
behind him. All which most detestable Doctrines and practices the Pope likewise
condemned, saying that S. Boniface rightly styled the Authors of them
Ministers and Precursours of Antichrist, and did well in causing them to be
shutt up in prison.

4. The reason which made Saint Boniface more earnest against these Heretics,
particularly Adalbert, was because though his Errors and wicked practices were
manifestly contrary to the Doctrine and Tradition of the Church, yet his
behavior was so subtle and hypocriti^all, and such a moving perswasivenes he
had in his tongue, that he had almost seduced the Religious Prince Carol^man.
Now the first time that Saint Boniface entered into dis^ute with him, among
others, Sturmis the first Abbot of Fulda was present: who earnestly ^ndeavoured
to dissuade him from that dispute: the like did Lullus and Meginguazus. But S.
Boniface answered them, He that is in us is greater then he that is in him.
Thereupon reasoning with him, he so convinced him, that he putt him to silence.
After which he enclosed him prisoner in the Monastery of Fulda. But more of
these Heretics, when they shall be sent to Rome, where their Heresies will be
more fully detected.

5 But presently afterward by the false suggestion of certain unknown persons,
there had like to have ensued a breach and division between the said Pope and
S. Boniface, by occasion of a scandalous imputation cast upon the Pope, that he
had Simoniacally demanded money for the Archiepiscopall Palls which he had
lately sent. This report being too easily believed by S. Boniface, he wrote a
sharp Letter to the Pope, telling him he was astonished that Simon Magus his
poison should infect S. Peter's Chair, which had heretofore thundered out
maledictions against that crime.

Ap. Bonif. ep. 143.
6. But the good Popes mild, yet grave answer prevented all progress of
dissension between them: Dearest Brother, said he, I beseech your Charity that
hereafter you would forbear to write in such a style to us: for it is very
offensive and injurious to be accused of that which we do detest. Far be it
from us or any of our Clergy to sell for money the Gift which we have received
by the Grace of the Holy Ghost. And as for those three Palls, know for certain
that not any money at all has been received by any of my Officers for them.
Yea on the contrary, the Fees which by custom was due to our Coffer for your
Confirmation, I freely allowd it out of mine own purse.

7. Besides this, in the same Letter, to show he had blotted out all resentment
of this injurious imputation, he not only confirmed the Province granted to
Saint Boniface by his Predecessor, but besides Bavaria, enlarged his
Jurisdiction through all France, giving him authority in his Name and his Power
to correct and reform whatsoever he found any where to decline from Christian
Faith or the Constitutions of Canons. The year following an occasion happened to
S. Boniface to have his turn of reprehension from the same Pope, which he
suffered with the same Spirit of Christian meeknes. But before we relate it,
certain affairs of Brittany require to be interposed.

XIII. CHAP. XIII. CHAPTER

1.2. The Britains furiously invade the west Saxons: and are repulsed.

4.5. The resignation and death of Daniel the Venerable Bishop of Winchester,
etc.

1. ALL sorts of vices reigning among the English and Saxons, provoked Almighty
God to punish the Kingdom with a bloody war against an Enemy which though
allways full of malice, yet through civil divisions and want of strength had
many years given disquiet to none but themselves. These were the Britains, who
this year made an irruption into the Provinces of the English with such
prodigious forces, that they seemed to have a design and hope to hazard the
regaining of the whole Kingdom again. The time and success of the war is thus
described by Henry of Huntingdon: 2. Cuthred King of the West Saxons in the
fourth year of his Reign, Huntingd. l. 4.
says he, making peace with Ethelbald King of the Mercians, they joined both
their forces together, to fight against an innumerable multitude of Britains
which had newly broke into their Provinces. When they were met, the two Kings,
each of them followd by most valiant tried soldiers, dividing their armies to a
reasonable distance, made several ways so furious an impression upon the Vast
body of the Britains, that though for some time they courageously resisted,
yet they were not long able to sustain so terrible a weight, but at length were
forced to fly, yiedling their backs to the swords of their pursuers and their
spoils to them returning Victorious. Which being done the two Kings ^ith
triumph retiring each into his own dominion, A. D. 744
were with great joy received by their Sub^ects.



3 The year following the Reverend and Holy Bishop of Winchester Daniel having
with great piety spent forty three years in the administration of that Diocese,
A. D. 744. Malmsb. de ^ont. l. 2. f. 241.
to the end he might conclude his long-lasting age in quiet repose, surrendered
his Bishopric, and became a Monk at Malm^bury (Melduni.) Thus writes William
of Malmsbury from the ancient Tradition of his own Monastery. But his repose on
earth continued a short time, for the year following he happily attained to an
eternal repose in heaven. His Successors name was Humfrid, whose name we find
among the Subscriptions to a Synod assembled at Cloveshove the second time,
shortly after. As for the Holy Bishop Daniel though by his great virtues he
well deserved a n^me among our Saints, yet we do not find him recorded in our
Calendar.

4. The same year Milred was ordined Bishop of Worcester, the successor of
Wilfrid who dyed the year before. Concerning whom we can find nothing in our
Ecclesiastical Monuments, but what Bishop Godwin produces, Wilfrid Bishop of
Worcester, contemporancy to S. Beda was consecrated Bishop in the year of Grace
seven hundred and seaventeen, and dyed in the year seven hundred forty three.

XIV. CHAPTER
XIV. CHAP.
1.2. S Boniface falsely calumniated to Duke Pipin.

3.4. etc. His Letter to the Pope: and Ans^er.

6. A^stedius his malicious mistake.

1. IN the mean time Saint Boniface his patience is exercised for his good: for
he found adversaryes not only in the Court of Duke Pipin, a proper seat for
envy and malignity: but at home also among his companions in the work of the
Gospel. As for the former sort, he easily made void all their designs against
him with a Letter written to the Duke: and his domestical accusers he overcame
by his meeknes.

2. Who these were, and what they laid to his charge we find in a Letter
written to him by the Pope: Ap. Bonif. Ep. 234.
the tenor whereof is this: Virgilius and Sidonius Religious men living in the
Province of the Bavarians have lately visitted us with their Letters: in which
they have intimated that your Revered Fraternity enioynd them to rebaptize
certain Christians. At the reading of this we were much troubled: and should
extremely wonder if it should be true. Among other examples they produced this,
of a certain Priest in the same Province who being ignorant of the Latin
tongue, he pronounced it wrong in baptizing, saying, Baptizo ^e in nomine
Patria and Filia and Spiritua Sancta. And for this, it i^ said, your Reverend
Fraternity thought fit* that Baptism should be reiterated. But holy Brother,
if he who baptizes, introduces no error o^ heresy, but through ignorance only
fails in pronunciation, we can by no means allow that suc^ Baptism should be
repeated. For as your Holy Fra^ternity well knows, whosoever is baptized even
by Heretics in the name of the Father, of the son and of the Holy Ghost, must
by no means be rebaptized, but only be purified by imposition of hands. If the
matter therefore stand, as hat^ been related to us, Holy Brother, abstain
hereafter from such injunctions: and be careful to observe what the Holy
Fathers teach.

3. Upon the receipt of this Letter S. Boniface presently without reply
acquiesced: An^ the same year dispatched to Rome his Priest Eoban with Letters
to the Pope, in which h^ suggested many things very necessary for the Churches
of France, contained in twenty seven heads of great advantage to
Ecclesiastical Disc^pline.

4. Hereto Pope Zacharias immediately answered, Bonifac. Ep. 139.
adjoining to every one of the said Points his own judgment. Withal he
in^formed him that the most excellent Prince P^pin had sent likewise to him a
Religious Priest named Audoba^, with other Points of the like nature,
concern^ng the Rights of Bishops, Priests, etc. also touching unlawful
Marriages, inquiring what was to be observed therein according the Rites of the
Church, the Doctrine of Holy Fathers and Canons of Councils: And many other
things he had proposed relating to the good of souls. To all which likewise he
had returned an Answer. Consequently he enjoined S Boniface to assemble a
Synod, and therein to discover to the Bishops his said Determinati^ns.

5. He gave him moreover order that the forementioned contumacious and
Sacrilegious Heretics Aldebert, Godel^ace and Clement should be made to appear
before the said Synod, that their cause might again be accurately examined. And
in case they were found wholly to swerve from the way o^ Truth and justice, and
being convinced, would not retract their errors and amend their faults, that
then the Princes assistance being desired, they should be proceeded against
with all severity according to the Canons of the Church. But if they should
persist in Pride, and protest that they were innocent, then his will was that
they should be sent to Rome, and with them two or three Priests approved for
their piety and prudence, to be their accusers: and there the cause should be
with all care examined by the Sea Apostolic, and judgment given on them
according to their merits.

6. Before we declare how S. Boniface observed what was enioynd him by the
Pope, in calling a Council, A. D. 745.
and therein convincing again the said Heretics and doing other matters for
the Churches good, all which was done the year following, it will be expedient
in the mean time to admonish the Reader of a mistake made by Alstedius a
Calvinisticall Chronologist, who affirms, that this year a Synod was assembled
in Brittany against the Sodomiticall impurity of the English Clergy: Whereas no
Synod was called there this year: and in that which was assembled two years
after, though many disorders are censured in it, yet this is not named among
them.

XV. CHA.
XV. CHAP.
1.2. A third Synod assembled by S. Boniface at M^nts.

3 4 etc In which Ge^vilio Bishop of Mentz is deposed ^o^ Homicide, etc.

6 S Boni^ace A^ch bishop of Mentz: and Primat of Germany.

A. D. 745.
1. IN the year of Grace seven hundred ^orty five, S Boniface according to the
admonition given him by Pope Zacharias, and the command of Duke Caroloman
assembled his third Council at Mentz in Germany: Bonif. Ep. 10.
at which were present (according to the account given by himself to Herefr^d
an English Prelat) eight Bishops, Mirae. Fast. ^e^g 5. Iun.
all of the English Nation: But of them those only Names remain which Miraeus
has recorded saying, At the Synod of Ments convoked by S. Boniface were
present Abel, Burchard, Willebald, Werbet and Wera (perhaps Wetta, or Wittan.)

2. The Decrees of this Synod touching Ecclesiastical Discipline containd in
the forementioned thirty seven Heads, sent by Saint Boniface to Pope
Zacharias, and by him with some correcti^ns approved, are not now extant. But
other affairs of great consequence agitated and determined, Ap. Sur. in Vit S
Bonif. 5. Iunij.
are mentioned in the Life of S. Boniface in Surius: Where we read that in the
said Synod not only many Ecclesiastics infected with Heresy were
excommunicated; but several Bishops also infamous for horrible crimes were
depofed. The prime Authors of all Errors in Germany were the two
Arch-hereticks Aldebert and Clement: Whose cause was remitted to Rome, and
there with all circumspection judged, as shall be largely declared.

3. Of Bishops said to be deposed in this Synod, the name and special demerit
of one only is now recorded, and that was Gervilio Bishop of Men^z where the
Council was held. Id. bid.
The cause of his Deposition (according to the said Author) was this: At that
time the Thuringians implored the ^ssi^^ance of ^aroloman against the Saxons
which wasted their country. He presently sent an Army, and with it Gerold
Bishop of Mentz, who was Father of Gervilio. Gerold in the combat among many
others was slain. And his son who at that time was a Lay man attending at
Court, to assuage his grief for his Fathers death, was taken into the Clergy,
and made Bishop of Mentz in his Fathers place.

4 Not long after Caroloman gathered another Army, which himself lead into
Germany, and took Gervilio with him. Whilst this Army lay encamped on both the
sides of the River Visurgis (Weser) Gervilio commanded his servant to go
privately into the enemies camp, and there diligently enquire who it was that
slew his Father. This he did, and finding the man not far off, he desired him
to come and speak with his Master. He came, and as soon as Gervilio had notice
of it, he me^t him on horse back in the midst of the River: Where as they were
discoursing together, Gervilio taking out a Sword which he carried privily, run
the man through, who presently falling into the river, there dyed. Upon this a
mighty clamor was made, and the two Armies began a feirce combat: in which the
Saxons were overcome, and Caroloman after the victory retired home. Now this
fact of Gervilio, was by none at that time imputed to him as Homicide. He
returned therefore to Mentz, where, as before, he administered the Office of
Bishop.

5. But among other crimes with which he was char^ed in the present Synod,
this was one. And the Holy P^elat Saint Boniface publicly declared, That no
man could exercise lawfully the function ^f a Bishop, who had been polluted
with the slaughter o^ any one. And besides this, he objected to him that he
himself had seen him with Hawks and Hounds publicly recreate himself: which
was ab^olutely forbidden to Bishops by the Canons* Gervilio having heard his
accusation, and perceiving that he could not resist both secular and
Ecclesiastical authority armed against him, re^erred himself to the judgment
of the Synod, and was deposed.

6. After whose deposition Saint Boniface (who hitherto had been an Arch bishop
at large, without any particular Title or See) was by Caroloman and his Brother
Pipin appointed Prelat o^ the Church of Mentz: And that his dignity might be
more eminent, the same Princes determined to exalt the Sea of Mentz, which at
this time was subject to another, to be the Metropolitan Church of all Germany:
which likewise by a Message sent to the Pope, they obtained and effected.

XVI. CHAPTER
XVI. CHAP.
1.2. etc. The Heresies of Adalbert a French man and Clement a Scot^: condemned
by Pope Zacharias in a Synod.

11. Colen made an Archbishopric: but subordinate to Mentz.

1. THE cause of Gervelio being thus determined, the Fathers of the Synod
consulted concerning the two Arch-hereticks, Aldebert and Clement: Whose
Errors though they then condemned, yet they thought meet to send them to the
Apostolic See, that their condemnation might be more solemn. They decreed
likewise to send with them the forementioned Priest, Deneard, to act the part
of an Accuser in the name of the Synod before the Pope: To him likewise they
gave Letters and the Acts of the Synod to be presented and confirmed by him.

Bonif. Ep. 13
2. Being arrived there, Pope Zacharias called together, according to the
custom, a Synod of Bishops, before whom Deneard appearing, presented the
Epistle of S. Boniface, in which he informed the Pope that since the time that
he had conferred on him a Jurisdiction over all the Churches of France, at
their own request, he had suffered many injuries and persecutions from false,
and adulterous Priests and other Ecclesiastics. But that his greatest trouble
proceeded from the said two blasphemous Heretics, Adelbert who was a
Frenchman, and Clement, a Scott: Who though they differed in their Errors,
yet were equal in the enormity of their crimes. For whose regard he had
incurred the enmity and maledictions of the French, who greivously complaind
against him because he had taken from them their great Apostle, Adelbert, their
Patron and intercessour with God, a man who was a worker of wonderful
Miracles. He desired therefore the Pope to shutt them up in close prison, after
he had given them up to Satan, that none might be poysond by their abominable
Heresies.

3. Now we will here more, fully declare the Errors, blasphemies and crimes
charged upon Adelbert, and further demonstrated by Deneard, who presented
certain Writings to the Synod containing the Life and Acts of that
Arch-heretick, together with an Epistle of our Lord Jesus, which he said fell
from heaven into the City of Jerusalem, and was found by the Archangel Michael
in the Gate of Ephraim, and copied out by a Priest called Icoras, and by him
sent to another Priest in Germany called Thalassius, etc. and at last by the
hands of an Angel was brought to the Sepulcher of Saint Peter at Rome, where
twelve persons belonging to the Pope finding is kept that days Vigill with
fas^ing and prayers, etc.

4. As for the other Book, it was read, and it began thus: In the name of our
Lord I^su Christ, here begins the life of the Holy and Blessed Bishop
Adelbert, born by the Election of God. He was begotten of simple parents, and
crowned by the Grace of God: For whilst he was yet in his Mothers womb, she saw
in a vision as it were a Calf issuing out of her right side: Which Calf
designed that Grace which he received from an Angel before he was brought
forth, etc.

5. Besides these the same Deneard presented likewise a Prayer, composed by
Adelbert. ^n which after supplications made to God the Father, he addressed
himself to the Angels saying, I beseech, conjure and humbly entreat you, etc.
Angel Vriel, Raguel, Tubuel, Michael, Adinis, Tubuas, Sabaouc, Simichel, etc.

6. When these Writings were read before the Synod by Gregory the Notary,
Regionary and Nomenclator, all the Bishops concluded that the man was madd, and
that those were names of Devils, not of Angels, except only S. Michael, since
Divine authority delivers to us only the Names of three Angels Michael,
Gabriel and Raphael. Therefore, they condemned them all to be burnt:
Notwithstanding the Pope thought fit they should be laid up in his Archives
with a perpetual mark in memory of their condemnation and reprobation.

7. Besides these Writings it was laid to the charge and proved against the
same Adelbert, that from his childhood he was an Hypocrite, saying that an
Angel of our Lord in human shape ha^ from the utmost ends of the world brought
him Relics, he knew not of whom, but such a^ were of wonderful Sanctity, by
virtue of which he could do all things whatsoever he asked of Go^. Hereby he
insinuated himself into the minds o^ silly women and ignorant peazants, who
affirme^ him to be a man of Apostolic Sanctity. That he had h^^ed unlearned
Bishops to ordain him, contrary to the Canons: and that hereby his heart
s^relled with such Pride, that he esteemed himself equal to the Apostles of
Christ. Insomuch as being appointed to consecrate a Church to the honor of the
Apostles and Martyrs, he consecrated it to h^^ own honor, ^or rather defiled
it That he would likewise reprehend those who desired to visit the Shrines of
the Apostles, and to hinder them he built Oratories, and set up Crosses in the
feilds, or near Springs, or where soever he thought good, commanding the people
there to make their Prayers to him: Insomuch as multudes of seduced people
desp^sing their own Bishops, and Churches gathered meetings in such places,
saying, The me^rits of S. Adelbert will help us. Besides this, (...) gave to
the people the parings of his nails, and the hayr which fell from his head,
bidding t^em t^ mingle those with the Relics of S. Peter. Yea h^^ presumption
came to that point, that wh^^ any came* and prostrated themselves at h^^ feet,
desirous to confess their sins, h^ would tell them: I know all your sins
already, your very thoughts are not hid from me therefore there is no need to
confess the^ Go home in peace, have no doubt at all but your sins are
pardond. These and many other like marks of Pride and Hippocrisy did Adelbert
show in his habit, gate, gesture and behavior.

8. As for the other Heretic called Clement, his Heresies did more openly
destroy the common Faith of the Church: He rejected all the Sacred Canons, all
the Writings of the Holy Fathers, and all authority of Councills. He would
maintain that he might lawfully be a Catholic Bishop, though he had two
children born in adultery. Yea he introduced Judaism, affirming that a
Christian might without sin, if he pleased, mary his own Brothers Widow.
Moreover in opposition to the constans Doctrine of the Fathers, he taught that
Christ the son of God, when he descended into Hell, delivered out of that
Infernal prison all without exception, beleivers and infidells. And many
Heresies more he published touching Divine Predestination, contrary to
Catholic Faith.

9. These things being made known to the Synod at Rome, The Fathers unanimously
deprived Adelbert of his Sacerdotall function: condemning him to Penance: and
in case he should afterward seduce any, they pronounced Anathema against him,
and all that should adhere to him or his doctrines. In like manner they deposed
Clement, and actually excommunicated him: and whosoever should consent to his
sacrilegious Opinions.

10. Our late Zealous Reformers of Scotland may here discover with gratulation
their prime Patriark, who desirous to be an Apostle of a New pure^-Religion,
made the foundation of it to be a contempt of the Doctrines of Ancient Fathers
and Sacred Canons of the Church. And in the like unhappy attempt he will
sho^tly be imitated by another Priest of the same Nation called Sampson, who in
despite of Sacred Tradition and the Universal practice of the Church denied
the necessity of Baptism, asserting that by the simple Imposition of hands by a
Bishop, without Baptism, one might be made a good Catholic Christian.

Ap Bonif. Ep. 138.
11. An account of all these Proceedings Pope Zacharias gave S. Boniface in a
Letter, requiring him to publish through Germany and France the condemnation of
these Heretics. He signified moreover that he confirmed all things which had
passed in the Synod of Mentz: ratifying the erection of that See to a
Metropolitan dignity, though he knew that many Schismatic Priests in France
did earnestly oppose themselves against it. And whereas a request had been made
to him from France that the City formerly called Agrippina, but then Colonia,
might be erected to be a Metropolitan Church, he signified his ^ssent, but so
that it should be subordinate to h^s See of Mentz. He also intimated to him,
that in case a certain Seducer, named Geoleob, who formerly had usurped the
name and authority of a Bishop, should present himself to him at Rome without
his approbation, he would treat him as he deserved: And he enioynd likewise S.
Boniface not to admit any Bishops or Metropolitans confirmed by him at Rome,
except they brought Commendatory Letters from him.

XVII. CHAP. XVII. CHAPTER

1.2. etc. A Letter of Saint Boniface and the Synod of English Bishops at Mentz
to the Mercian King Ethelbald reproving him for his incestuous lusts and
Sacrilege.

7. etc. Another Letter of the same to Egbert Archbishop of York.

1. NEither did S. Boniface's Christian Charity and Pastoral solicitude
confine it self to Germany alone: But he thought it his duty to give his best
assistance to his Native country Brittany, almost over-whelmd with a Sea of
vices. There King Ethelbald, the most potent among the English-Saxon Princes,
had in a high manner offended God in a sacrilegious invasion of the rights and
revenews of Churches within his Dominions of Mercia, in offering violence to the
chastity of Religious Virgins consecrated to God, and many other crimes, and
there was a just fear least such enormities in a King should become exemplary
to his subjects, and draw many to imitate them; Therefore S. Boniface and his
companions in this Synod of Mentz who were all Bishops of English race, thought
expedient to admonish the said King Ethelbald of his Duty as a Christian
Prince, by a Letter directed to him in the name of ^he whole Synod: Which was
likewise done by them.

2. This Letter is still extant In which with a modest yet vigorous style,
Bonif. Ep.
becoming an Apostolic Spirit they signified to him, that public fame having
informed them that he had all his life abstaind from Marriage: which if he had
done out of the Love and fear of God and for chastities sake, they should have
much rejoiced in it: But they were told that he refused to take a lawful wife,
and polluted himself in adulteries and unlawful lusts, not abstaining even
from devout Virgins the Spouses of our Lord: a sin so horrible, that it is by
God esteemed equal to Heathenish Idolatry. Yea the ancient Pagan Saxons did so
abhor adultery that if any woman, though unmaried were found guilty of it,
they would compel her with her own hands to hang her self, and after her death
they would consume body with fire, and hang him who had corrupted her, over her
smoking ashes. Or else they would cause a multitude of women to drive her out
of their town with whips, cutting all her garment away to her wast, and lancing
her body with knives: and thus she would be entertaind by the women of the next
village, A. D. 746.
who would use the like rigor toward her till they dispatched her of her Life
Now if Heathens have such a zeal for Matrimonial Chast^ty, how jealous will
our Lord be of his Spouses contracted to him by Vow, and how infinitely more
heavy will the punishment be which he will inflict on their Sacrilegious
corrupters!

3. They adjured him moreover to consider that Gods fury will more feircely be
inflamed against Kings who are guilty of unlawful lusts, because probably
their subjects will imitate them: by which means the whole Nation, like Sodom,
will become polluted, and thereby leave a posterity effeminated by lusts,
despised both by God and men, and regardles even of their Faith. An example
whereof might be seen in the Nations in Spain, Province and Burgundy, which
giving themselves to filthy luxury were forsaken by God, who justly suffered the
Saracens to come upon them and overcome them, so that now they have lost all
knowledge of God and their Holy Faith.

4. Hereto they added another great Crime which public fame made him guilty
of, which was breaking the Privileges of Churches and Monasteries, and
invading their revenews: ^n which abominable sin he was followed by his Nobles,
who set no bounds to their rapin and cr^^lty to Ecclesiastics and Monks,
depriving them of their subsistence, and bringing them into servitude. They
therefore earnestly be^ought him to consider that among all the Saxon Kings
since the Conve^sion of that Island, not any had been guilty ^f such
Sacrilegious cruelty and unbounded lusts, except only two, Osred King of the
Northumbers, and Ceolred his predecessor in the Kingdom of the Mercian^: And
how horrible their deaths were, he could not be ignorant: particularly of this
latter, whom the Devil visibly hurried away to hell in the midst of his
iollity and banqueting,

5. Therefore with humble and Fatherly prayers they besought him not to despise
their counsel: but freely and speedily to amend those grievous offenses
against God: considering how short this present life is, how momentany the
delectation of the filthy flesh, and how ignominious it is for a Prince after a
short life to leave behind him a perpetual example of sin to posterity, etc.

6. This Letter being written they did not send immediately to King Ethelbald,
but prudently considering that reproofs or counsels which arrive unseasonably
to persons of high estate, seldom produce any good effects, Bonif. Ep. 10.
but rather harden them the more: Therefore they enclosed it in another
directed to a certain Pressed named Heresfrid, to whom the King would more
willin^ly hearken, then any other, and who likewise out of fear to God, would
not fear boldly to admonish the King. Him therefore they desired to present it
to King Ethelbald, when he saw a fitting opportunity.

7. At the same time likewise Saint Boniface wrote another Epistle to Egbert
the learned Archbishop of York, ^b^d. Ep. 8.
in which he acquainted him, that having received command from the Apostolic
See that in what Nation soever he saw or understood that errors were sowed
among the people, o^ the Ecclesiastical Rules depraved by ill practices and
customs, that he with the Popes own authority should endeavor to invite and
reduce into the right any Transgressors whosoever they were. In obedience to
which command he together with eight other Bishops of the English Nation
assembled in a Synod at Mentz, had sent an humble admonitory Letter to
Ethelbald King of the Mercians which they had given order should be first
shewe^ to him, that he might correct in it any thing which he did not approve,
and add thereto what in prudence he should think meet. Withal desiring him
that if in his Province of the Northumbers any such poysonnous root of
wickedness was springing, he should speedily pluck it up. He requested him
likewise to sen^ him some Treatises of Beda, who of late brightly shone with
divine Light and Grace in that Province. Telling him also that among other
small presents he had sent him the Copies of certain Epistles of Saint Gregory,
which he believed had never before ^ome into Brittany, and if he pleased, would
afterward send him more: Because he had at his being at Rome copied out of the
Popes Archives a multitude of such Writings. Be^sides all this he with much
seriousnes entreats him that he would be his Counselor and helper in
inquiring and finding out the Ecclesiastical Rules of the Judgments of God,
etc.

8 What was the success of the foresaid Letter of Saint Boniface to King
Ethelbald, B^ron. hic.
it is not known, says Baronius. But not any Historian has declared that by
these admonitions he any thing amended his life. However certain it is that two
years after this (he should have said twelve) he ended his life very unhappily:
For thus we read in the Epitome of the English History: In the year of our
Redeemer seven hundred fifty seven Edilbald King of the Mercians was by night
miserably murdered by his Guards. Thus writes Baronius. Notwithstanding though
none of our Historians expressly mention the amendment of this King, yet we
shall show probable grounds of it, by^ declaring his joining with Cuthbert
Archbishop of Canterbury in restoring the privileges of the Church and
Ecclesiastical Discipline* etc. and we may reasonably judge that this Epistl^
had a great influence into such a good change.

XVIIII. C.
XVIII. CHAP.
1.2. etc. S. Boniface by the Donation of Caroleman builds the famous Monastery
of Falda in Germany.

4.5.6. Successions of Bishops in England, etc.

1. SAint Boniface having established for himself and his successors a fixed
Metropolitan See at Mentz in Germany, was desirous to find for himself a place
of quiet retirement in which he might unbend his mind, and recollect it from
Pastoral solicitudes and conversation, whenever his affairs would permit.
For which purpose a certain Seat in the Solitude of Bu^honia near the River
Fulda seemd to him very convenient and agreeable, that there interrupting a
while the tumultuous businesses of Martha, he might at fit seasons embrace the
best part and employment of Mary, to sit at our Lords fee^, and in quiet
contemplation attend to what our Lord would say unto his soul.

2. But because a Seat to agreeable belonged to the right and jurisdiction of
others, A. D. 746.
he was compelled to have recourse to Caroloman by Petition, to have that place
charitably bestowed on him. Which petition of his was not in vain: For as
Baronius from the Author of S. Boniface his Life declares, Ap. Bar* hic.
Caroloman having read this Petition was much pleased with it, and having
called together all his Nobles, he made known to them the Holy Bishops request;
and with their consent in their presence he made a sur^endry of the place to
him, saying, Whatsoever therein belongs to me, from this hour I transferr it
to God, insomuch as all the land which on all sides lies about it for the space
of three miles is to be assigned to his service. Having made this Assignment,
he sent Messengers to all the Nobles in the Territory of Grapheld earnestly
desiring them, that whosoever had any interest in any part of the land situated
within the foresaid limits, they would freely, bestow it upon God, to be the
Seat of a Monastery which S. Boniface had a desire to build. This Request of
the Prince being made known to those Noble men, they unanimously and with all
devotion gave up all their right to God, to S. Boniface and the Venerable Abbot
Sturmis. And to the end the said Assignment and Delivery might remain firm to
posterity, Caroloman, who was the principal Be^efactour, commanded a Charter
to be made in good form, to which he putt his Seal.

Mir. in Fast. Belg. 5. Iun.
3. Thus in the year of our Lords Incarnation seven hundred forty six the
famous Monastery of Fulda, says Miraeus, by the free donation of Caroloman and
Pipin Princes and sons of Duke Charles Martel was erected, or at least the
foundations of it were laid. In which, as soon as it was perfected, A. D. 747.
Sturmius having congregated a certain number of Monks was constituted Abbot.
This Noble Monastery prooved in after times a source of innumerable blessings
to the whole country of Germany.

4. The same year in Brittany, Inguald Bishop of London dying, there succeeded
him Egwolf, known only by his name to posterity, and by his subscription to a
Synod the year following assembled by Cuthbert Archbishop of Canterbury.

5 In the Kingdom likewise of the East Angles both the Bishoprics of Dumwich
and Helmham being vacant by the deaths of Cuthwin and Ethelfrid, there was
substituted in their rooms one only Bishop to administer both the Sees. His
name was Herdulf, who subscribed likewise to the same synod as Bishop of
Dumwich and Helmham. Yet true it is, that this does not agree with the order of
Bishops of those Sees found in William of Malmsbury, who assigns two Bishops
succeeding at this time in the foresaid Sees, namely Lamfert and Albrith. But
concerning these two, we shall treat, and of their succession many years after
this.

6 At this time also the Kingdom of the East Saxons was deprived of their King
Sel^ed by a violent death, after he had reigned twenty eight years. All that
we can find concerning it is this short account given by Henry of Huntingdon,
Huntingd. l. 4
King Sel^ed, says he, this year was taken out of this Life for ancient
Writers affirm that he was slain at this time: but how or by whom he was slain,
they say nothing at all.

XIX. CHAP. XIX. CHAPTER

1.2. etc. A third Synod at Clovesho in Kent for reforming abuses: and the
Decrees of it.

1. THE year of Grace seven hundred forty seven brought much good and
spiritual proffit to the English-Saxon Churches in Brittany, A. D. 747.
by the happy reformation of Ecclesiastical Discipline made in a famous Synod a
third time assembled at Clovesho by Cuthbert Archbishop of Canterbury. Which
place seated in Kent, is at this time called Cliffe, by reason of a high
mountain or cliffe (anciently named Clivas) and a sm^ll territory interiacent
between the Rivers Thames and Medway called (...) from which two names arose
the word Clivetho, or Clovesho.

2. The cause of assembling this Synod was the miserable decay of piety, and
Order through the whole Kingdom, suggested to Archbishop Cu^hbert by Saint
Boniface in an Epistle sent him five years before, as has been declared. For
rectifyng which disorders the Archbishop seriously treated with Ethelbald King
of the Mercians, to whom the Kings of Kent were subject and tributary, desiring
that himself would assist in Reformation of the Church by a Synod to which he
would please to afford his own presence. This being obtained, the Synod was
called, in which twelve Bishop were present, all of them contained within the
Province of Canterbury, for of the other Province of York, not one appeard. And
besides them, King Ethelbald with his Princes and Nobles was assistant.

3. The Acts and Decrees of this Synod have out of a very ancient Manuscript in
Saxon letters, Spelm. tom. 1. de Council.
been faithfully extracted by Sir H Spelman. In the Preface where of is
expressed the general design and motive of the present Meeting to have been,
that with good advice order might be taken for restoring Unity in the Church,
concord among one another and Reformation of the State of Religion. After which
Cuthbert Archbishop of Canterbury presiding in it caused to be read two
Writings of Pope Zacharias translated into English in which were contained
Prescriptions for reforming abuses, regarding persons of all degrees and
conditions, with terrible denunciations against the disobedient. The reading of
which caused great thoughtfullnes in the minds of the Bishops, who began
mutually to exhort one another by rectifying of their own lives to afford good
example to the rest of the Clergy and Seculars of the kingdom: and that they
should set before their eyes the Homilies of the Holy Pope S. Gregory and
Canonical Decrees of the Fathers, as a fit Rule by which they might reform
themselves.

4. Then followd several special Canons, one and thirty in number, written in
an abstruse style, which argues the Antiquity of them. The Reader may at large
peruse them in Sir H. Spelmans first volume of our ancient Saxons Councils: It
will suffice in this place briefly to set down the sense of each in order, as
follows:

5. It was ordaind therefore. 1. That Bishops should be careful to show
themselves by the sanctity of their lives good examples to others, and to
exercise their Pastoral Offices according to the Canons of the Church. 2. That
they should preserve the Unity of Peace among one another. 3. That every year
they should visit their Dioces. 4. That they should take care that Abbots and
Abbesses govern their Monasteries Regularly. 5. That since at this time
Monasteries by the avarice and Tyranny of Great men were miserably oppressed
and depraved, yet Bishops should at least take care that the poor Monks should
not want the Ministry of a Priest, for the necessity of their souls. 6. That
no Monks should be exalted to Preisthood till after due trial of their virtue
and capacity. 7. That Bishops take order that in Monasteries there should be
Schools for the trayning up the young Religious in the love of Sacred
knowledge, to the end they might become afterward proffitable to the Church.
8. That Priests should always be mindful of their Office and vocation to
attend to the Altar in celebrating Masses to Reading, Prayer, etc. 9. That they
should be diligent in preaching and baptizing according to the lawful Rites of
the Church. 10. That they should be studious to understand aright the Creed,
Pater noster, and the Holy Mysterious words in the celebration of Mass: and
that they should interpret them to the people, and explain them in the English
tongue. 11. That they should all agree in the manner and order of baptizing,
Teaching, etc. 12. That they should sing in the Church with modesty, and if
they were unskillfull, they should content themselves with reading. 13. That
they should celebrate the Office of the Church uniformly, and in like manner
solemnize the Feasts of the Church 14. That our Lords day should be celebrated
by all, and that the people should be obliged to repair to Church, etc. 15.
That seven Canonical Hours should be observed uniformly both in Churches and
Monasteries. 16 That Litanies and R^gations should be performed by all the
people uniformly according to the Rite of the Roman Church on the seaventeenth
before the Calends of May, and three days before our Lords Ascension* with
celebration of Masses and Fasting till three in the after noon, without
admixing vanities plays, running of horses, feast, etc. 17 That the Feasts of
S. Gregory Pope, and of S. Augustine sent by him the Apostle of the Kingdom
should be solemnly celebrated 18 That the Times of Fasting in the fourth, sea
venth and tenth month according to the Roman Rite be neglected by none: and
that the people be admonished before those times come. 19. That Religious men
and women observe their Regular Instituts modestly, and abstain from vanity in
apparel. 20. That Bishops take care that Monasteries, especially o^ women, be
places of silence and devotion: and that the entrance into them of Poets*
Musicians, vain ieasters, drinkers and feasters be utterly forbidden: since
great scandalls and suspicion arise from such. 21. That all Ecclesiastics and
Monks fly particularly the Sin of Drunkenness. 22. That such likewise live in a
fit preparation for the Holy Communion: and that when occasion is they
confess their sins etc. 12 That Lay persons also, young and old dispose
themselves so as to be fit to receive the same Holy Sacrament. 24. That
Seculars be not admitted to Religious Profession, till after fit examination
and probation. 25. That after every Synod Bishops promulgate to their Clergy
the Decrees there made. 26. That the people be exhorted to Almsgiving by which
their sins may be redeemed: but withal that they be taught not so to trust in
their Alms, as from thence to take a license to sin. 27. That in the Holy
exercise of Psalmody, A. D. 748.
whether in the Latin or Saxon tongue, men be careful to ioyn their hearts to
their voices: And that those who do not understand the Office in Latin, should
however be careful to have their minds and affections fixed upon God and
Spiritual things. 28. That Monasteries be not burdned with a greater multitude
then they can maintain: That Superiors do not over-presse their Religious
with labor: and that both Men and women Religious abstain from secular vanity
and fashions in apparel. 9. That Monks and Nunns be not permitted to inhabit
among Seculars. 30. That since there is a suspicion entered into the minds of
Kings and Princes, that Ecclesiastics, Bishops and Priests do not bear them
inward affection, nor wish their pro^perity, but rather the contrary: The said
Ecclesiastics in this Synod do prot^st that such suspicion is without ground;
and i^ it were just, they should be guilty o^ sins not only contrary to their
sublime Profession, but even to the common Duty of Christians To show therefore
that they were free from a vice so detestable, it was ordained, That all
Ecclesiastics and Monks in every Canonical Hour should incessantly implore
the Divine ^lemency for the safety of their Kings, Dukes, Nobles and all
Christian people, as ^ell as for themselves. 31. That ^^ey be all unanimons in
Faith, Hope and Charity both to God and one another: and diligent in Pra^ing
both for the Living and the Dead, celebrating often the Propitiatory Sacrifices
for their repose etc.

6. To this effect were the Canons of this worthy Synod. After the conclusion
whereo^ Cuthbe^t the Archbishop of Canterbury sent a Copy of all the Acts and
Decrees by his Deacon K^nebert to Saint Boniface: thereby showing him that he
had not been unmindfull of his admonitions, nor of the Precepts of Pope
Zacharias. And it is not to be doubted but now King Ethelbald renewd that
respect to Gods Church, which he showed so worthily in his younger years: a
further proof whereof he gave two years after this, in restoring the
Privileges and immunities thereof, which had by himself and others been so
much infringed.

XX. CHAP. A D. 749

XX. CHAPTER



1. Succession of Kings in Kent.

2. Kenred a hopeful Prince of the West Saxons, unhappily slain.

3. The Monastery of Bredon in Worcestershire, founded.

4 5 etc. Of Sampson a naughty Scottish Priest.

1. THE year following Edilbert King of Kent and eldest son of Withred, A. D.
749.
after a reign of three and twenty years, dying witho^t issue, his Brother
Edbert succeeded him. Some of our Historians account Edbert the elder Brother,
and affirm that he dying this year, Edilbert the next succeeded The E^rour on
which side soever it lies, is not much material. And indeed these Princes o^
Kent to whom the Titles o^ King are given, were so obscure, that no wonder,
both their names and actions should be delivered to po^terity uncertainly. In
the late S^nod at Clove^^ in Kent, among the subscriptions none (...) named as
King* but Ethelbald King o^ the Mercians, to whom these Princes were tributary,
and therefore those three Brothers, Edilbert, Edbert and Al^c, w^o reigned
successively in Kent, are to be esteemed ^s reckond under the Ti^les of Princes
and D^^es, Subscribers to the said Synod. As touching the Prince who now dyed,
all that is recorded of him, is that he bestowd on the Monastery of Religious
V^rgins at Men^rey in the ^sle of Thanet certain lands, as Harpsfeild declares.

2. The same year, which was the ninth of the Reign of Cuthred King of the
West Saxons, says Huntingdon, his Son Kenric was slain a Prince of wonderful
hopes: tender in years, but vigorous and ^eirce in combats, and joyful to find
any occasion to exercise his valor. This young Prince in a certain expedition
being too eager in pursuing his good success, through immoderat heat
discontented his own soldiers, and in a ^edition raised by them was slain.

3. To thi^ year is referred the new erection of a Church and Monastery at a
Town called Bredon, in the Province of Worcester by a certain Noble man of the
Mercian kingdom called Eanulf* Concerning which Camden thus writes: Camd. in
Worcest.
At the root of the said Hills is seated a Town called Bredon where was a
Monastery founded: Concerning which we read this passage in a Charter made by
Offa, who was afterward King of the Mercians, I Offa King of the Mercians do
give land containing thirty five acres of tributaries to the Monastery named
Breodun in the Province of the Wiccians (Worcestershire) to the Church of S.
Peter Prince of the Apostles built there, A. D. 748.
which my Grandfather Eanulf founded to the praise and glory of God who lives
for ever. This devout Charity of Eanulf Almighty God rewarded by exalting to
the throne of the Mercian Kingdom his grandchild Offa, who held it
illustriously the space of nine and thirty years, as shall hereafter be
declared.

4. This is all which occured memorable in Brittany this year. Passing
therefore over into Germany, we shall find there the whole care of the late
planted Church to lie in a manner upon Saint Boniface alone. Who being much
disquieted with false Teachers pretending to be Priests, and spreading
pernicious errors touching the Sacraments of the Church, his best remedy was
to consult the Sea Apostolic: for which purpose he sent this year Burchard
Bishop of Wirtzburg to Rome with Letters to acquaint Pope Zacharias with the
impediments which he met with in propa^ating the Faith.

Ap. Bonif. Ep. 140.
5. What those special impediments were, does appear by the Popes Answer: In
which we find that great numbers of false Priests who never had been ordained
by Bishops, and confounding all Ecclesiastical order, refused to be subject to
Bishops, against whom they armed popular tumults, making separated
Congregations, in which they taught doctrines contrary to Catholic Faith, not
requiring before Baptism an abrenunciation of Satan, and refusing to sign with
the Cross, yea not so much as instructing such as were baptized in the Faith
of the Blessed Trinity.

6. And among such Ministers of Satan a principal one was a certain Scott,
named Sampson, who also had the impudence to teach that without the Mystical
inv^cation of the Blessed Trinity, yea without any baptism at all, a man might
become a good Catholic Christian only by the imposition of the hands of a
Bishop.

7. Now to prevent any further contagion by such guilefull seditious Ministers,
the Pope advised S. Boniface to coll^ct a Synod, and there not only depose
them, but likewise shutt them up in Monasteries, there to do Penance to the
end of their lives. For which purpose he should require the assistance of the
Noble Dukes and Potentats of France And particularly as touching that naughty
Scottish Priest (Nequissimum virum) Sampson, he required him not to content
himself with only deposing him* but that he should also excommunicate and
expel him out of the Church.

XXI. CHAP. A. D. 749.

XXI. CH



1.2. A Noble Charter confirming the Privileges of the Church, by Ethelbald
King of the Mercians.

3.4. etc. A famous Miracle in Germany by the Intercessi^n of S. Swibert.

1. IN the year of Grace seven hundred forty nine Ethelbald King of the
Mercians touched with a remorse for his Sins, A. D. 749.
made worthy satisfaction to the Church for his forme^ Sacriledges, by
publishing a Noble Charter to confirm its immunity. Which Charter may be read
in Sir H. Spelman, thus inscribed by him: Spelm. de Council.
The Privilege of Ethelbald King of the Mercians, granted to Monasteries and
Churches. In which being mindful of the reprehension given him by S. Boniface
in an Epistle fore mentioned, and repenting his former Life, he made all the
Monasteries and Churches of his kingdom free from all taxes, labors, burdens,
gifts, etc. And at the end of it is signified, that the said Charter was signed
by several Bishops and Noblemen in the three and thirtieth year of the said
Kings reign, at a famous place called Godmundsleech: Which place is at this day
called Godmunchester, and it is seated in the Province of the Icens (or
Huntingdon shire.)

2 At the same time dyed Ethelwold King of the East Angles, called by some
Elfwald, by others Ethelred: to whom succeeded his his son Ethelbert, or as
some Writers: name him, Albert: who was born to him by his Quee^ Leosruna.
Concerning whose admirable virtues and Sanctity we shall treat at large when
we come to his Marriage and death, or more truly his Martyrdom immediately
attending it.

3. Here we ought not to omit an illustrious testimony which God was pleased
this year in Germany to give to the Sanctity of our glorious Saint and Apostle
of the Germans Saint Swibert. It is faithfully related in an Epistle sent by
Saint Ludger Bishop of Munster to Rixfrid Bishop of Maestricht, in which
Epistle a large description is made of the affairs of the Authors own tim^
touching the Apostasy of the Frisons. But that which concerns the glory of S^
Swibert, is there thus related: 4. It happened in the year of our Lord seven
hundred forty nine that the illustrious Prince Pipin after a glorious Victory
obtained against the Saxons and Westphalians, Ap. Sur. in Append. and vit. S
Svv^b. Mars. i
hastened his return to Colen with his wearied Army. But the Westphalians,
though utterly routed by the triumphant sword of this Noble Prince, had such
indignation to be under the dominion of Christians, that without delay they
gathered a new powerful Army, and marching by paths unhaunted and more
compendious they got before the Princes army near to the town of Werda, A. D.
750.
where they cunningly laid ambuscades with a resolution furiously to rush upon
him in his march.

5. When this came to the Knowledge of Pipin by the relation of his Scouts, he
was some thing troubled by reason his Army was much diminished, and had in it
many wounded unserviceable men: Notwithstanding calling to mind the many great
Miracles which by the intercession of Saint Swibert, whose body lay there at
Werda, had been performed, and having a firm confidence in God, he lighted from
his horse, and prostrating himself on the ground, he with great devotion
implored the help and Patronage of that most holy Bishop, withal vowing to God
and Saint Swibert, that if by his intercession and merits he might obtain a
Victory over the Pagans, and bring his Christian Army safe home, he would in a
solemn Procession attended by all his Nobles with great devotion make a
Pilgrimage to his shrine at Werda.

6. This Prayer was no sooner made, but immediately a wonderful light shone
over the Christian Army, which not only dazeled, but quite blinded the Pagans,
insomuch as in a terrible fright least the God of the Christians should from
heaven consume them, they dispatched away to Prince Pipin two of their chiefest
Princes to beg peace* and make profession of subjection to him: Who withal
constantly related to him what they had seen, and how much they were amazed at
it.

7. As Soon as the Prince heard this, being assured that so great a delivery
came by the intercession of S. Swibert, with great joy he adored and gave
thanks to God: and having received from the Pagans hostages for performance of
conditions, he attended by his whole army entered in an humble manner into
Werda: and there both himself and his Nobles putting off their shoes he
visited the Shrine of S. Swibert, and there offered Royal Gifts to Almighty God
and S. Swibert, for that without any effusion of blood he had got the upper
hand of his perfidious enemies. And from that time he chose S. Swibert for his
special Patron and Protector. Niether did his piety rest there, but a few
years after this he treated solemnly with the Pope for his Canonization.



XXII. CH
XXII. CHAP.
1.2. etc. Of. S. Richard an English King: the Father of S. Winebald, etc. He
dies at Lucca.

5. The death of S. Tecla an English woman, and Abb^sse in Germany.

8. Of S. German an English Missioner in Germany: and Martyr.

A. D. 750.
1. THE year of Grace seven hundred and fi^ty is consigned by several Writers
to the death of an English King called Richard, memorable to posterity for his
Sanctity: A brief of whose life is represented in an Epitaph to this day extant
in a Church of the City of Lucca in Italy, where he dyed and was enterred, the
tenor whereof is as follows: 2. The sister of King Offo was Mother to S.
Richard. This King S. Richard was King of England, Ap. Baron. hic.
a voluntary exile from his country, a despiser of the world, a contemner of
himself. He was Father to the two holy Brethren S. Willebald and S. Winibald,
and of their Sister S. Walburgis a Religious Virgin. He made an exchange of an
earthly kingdom for an heavenly: He quitted a Kings Crown for a life-eternall.
He putt off his Royal Purple, to take a mean habit: he forsook a Royal
throne, and visited the shrines of the Saints: He laid by his Scepter, and took
a Pilgrims staff. He left his daughter S. Walburga in his kingdom, and went
into a foreign country with his Sons. Them also he left with S. Boniface the
glorious Martyr, the^ Archbishop of Mentz a man of wonderful sanctity, and
born in his own kingdom England. The same holy King extended the bounds of his
banish^ment further, and visitted the shrines of the Holy Apostles beyond the
Alps: and afterward retired himself into other uninhabited places to the end
he might more freely there attend to God. At length after a long continued
exile, after many internal combats, after frequent and painful sufferings by
hunger, thirst and cold, all his conflicts ended in the Province of Italy and
City of Lucca there he received his rewards, thence his soul was received
into heaven: and his Sacred members were placed near the Body of S. Frigidianus
in a Church dedicated to his honor* where his glor^ shines abroad by many
miracles. His Festivity (...) solemnized on the seventh day before the Ides of
February.



3. The observations made by the illustrious Cardinal Baronius in his Annals
this year upon this Inscription, particularly to disprove the Title of King of
the English attributed to S. Richard, do not seem to me concluding. For
though it be true that his name is not found in the Catalogue of the Saxon or
English Kings that is no sufficient proof against him: Since we read very many
examples or the like: Bedl. 3. c. 23 and l. 4. c. 23
So in S. Beda mentioned is made of Edilward son of Oswald, King of the Dier^
likewise of Elbuin: and of Osri King of the Wiccians* And Cissa in his Charter
in Harpsfeild calls himself King of the West Saxons. Harpsf. saec. ^^. c. 9.
Bonif. Ep. 49
S. Boniface also mentions S^g^^ald King of the same Province and Ina, a King
called Balred: Lastly in the Life of S. Botulph we read of one Ethelmun^ King
of the South Saxons, yet not the name of any of these appear in the Catalogues
o^ the Kings of those several Kingdoms. And whereas he affirms that Philip of
Eyslat a German is the first Author who gives the Title of King to S. Richard,
it is a mistake* For Wolfhard an Author much more ancient, Wolfard. in vit. S.
Walburgae.
who lived in the next Century to this, and with great fidelity wrote the Life
of Saint Walburga, affords him the same Title; ^tuart. in Not. 3. ibib.
and Stuartius in his Notes upon the same Life affirms, that all Authors
almost with one consent make him a King of England, Senart. in Not. 3. ib.
insomuch as none in his sound wits will deny it. And indeed hereto agree the
Roman Martyrologe, Martyrolog. Romans 7. Febr. Gre^s. ad vit. vit. S. Wil^baldi.
Philip Bishop of Eystat, Trithemius, Molanus, Yepes, Gualter and very many
others. Yea Gretser in his observations on the Life of Saint Wilibald son to
this Saint Richard prooves by many arguments the same, as from common
Tradition, from ordinary Images of him, from several Missals, Breviaries and
Authors. Notwithstanding, that he did not actually, at least not long, enjoy
this Title and power, may be granted. Now the right which he had thereto may be
showed out of our Ancient Monuments.

Vid. l. 18 c. 18.
4. For we have before declared how Lothere King of Kent succeeded to his
Brother Egbert, to the prejudice of his Brothers son Edric. And after eleaven
years reign being dispossessed and slain, his son was also debarred the
Succession, and never mounted the Throne. Now this Prince Richard according to
the opinion of some Writers, and particularly of the learned Annalist, R.F.
Alford was that disinherited son of Lothere, who content with the security and
sweetness of a private Life, never sought nor desired sovereignty though justly
due to him.

5. But more probable it is, that this Richard was a King of the West Saxons
immediately after King Ina. For though Ethelard be the the only King named his
Successor: Yet Saint Beda says expressly, that King Ina left his Kingdom to
several young Princes, among who^ this S. Richard probably was one. This is
confirmed by what we read in the life of this Prince, Vit. S. Richardi ap.
Capgr.
that he recommended his children Winnebald and Willebald to S. Boniface,
because he was of his kingdom: Now it is certain that S. Boniface was born at
Kirton near Exceter in the Kingdom of the West Saxons. But Ethelard being a
Prince of high spirits seems to have excluded the rest: and S. Richard, whose
ambition lay another and better way, was willing to employ his thoughts and
endeavors in pursuing the hopes of an Eternal Kingdom, to be obtained by
peaceablenes and neglect of temporal Glory.

6. And God was pleased to reward this his love with a far greater Blessing, in
giving him three children worthy of eternal memory, S. Willibald, S. Winibald
and S. Walburga. These three children in the year of Grace seven hundred
twenty five were sent by their Father to S. Boniface in Germany because he was
born in his kingdom, as the Author of S, Richards Life writes, twenty years
before the said S. Boniface was Archbishop of Mentz neither did their Father
accompany them at that time, as the Author of the Inscription mistaking
writes: But several years after followed them thither, out of a desire to
enjoy their happy conversation, and end his Life in the society of so many
Saints. Notwithstanding out of a Motive of Devotion very fashionable in that
age, he undertook a Pilgrimage in a mean habit to visit the Shrines of the
Blessed Apostles at Rome: After which in his return this year through Etruria,
or Tuscany, God was pleased in the City of Lucca to putt an end to his
journey, and restore to him with advantage a heavenly Crown. And we are obliged
to that Noble City for preserving his Memory in so Noble a Monument.
Martyrolog. Romans 7. Febr.
His name is both in the Roman and English Martyrologe recited among the Saints
on the seventh of February: Where likewise he is styled S. Richard King of the
English: because perhaps he had a right, though never any possession of the
Kingdom.

7. The same year dyed the Holy Virgin Tecla Abbess of the Monastery of
Kirzengen at Ochnafort in Germany, for so do the Centuriators of Magdeburg
style the place And write concerning her and her holy companions in this
manner: Magdeb. Cent. 9. fol. 342.
This age or Century likewise had women famous for their learning: some of
which Boniface sent for out of England into Germany to preach the Gospel;
namely Chunit^ude, Tecla, Lioba Waldoburga, Chunilda, and Beragytha. We do
indeed acknowledge that these Holy Virgins were sent for out of England into
Germany: but not to be Preachers: It is no Catholic custom to make women
overseers and disposers of Ecclesiastical matters: The end for which they were
invited out of England was indeed to teach German Virgins the Instituts of a
Religious Conversation. As touching S. Tecla in particular, she had her devout
education in the Monastery of Winborn: wherein she proffited so well that S.
Boniface thought her fit to teach others what she had so well learnt, and to
govern others, having been so perfect in Obedience her self. This Office after
she had piously and diligently exercised fifteen years, she was called to the
embraces of her heavenly Bridegroom, on the fifteenth day of October: on which
day she is commemorated among the Saints in the Roman Martyrologe. Martyr. Romans
15. October.


8. Our Martyrologe likewise mentions a certain English man a Bishop called
German, who went over Sea to preach the Gospel to the Brabanters and Frisons.
Which Office having performed in an Apostolic manner, he received an
Apostolic reward, which was a Crown of Martyrdom this year* Ros^eyd^s a
learned Jesuit mentions him in the Calendar on the second of May. Whether this
were a person distinct from him who was Brother to S. Ediltrudis, is uncertain:
Concerning whom William of Malmsbury makes mention, Malm^b. de Pont. l. 2. f.
240.
saying, In the Church of S. Edmundsbury these lie the Bodies of two Saints,
German and Botulf: whose Gests I cannot find in the Antiquities of that Church,
nor any where else. Only this I find of them, that the former was Brother to
Saint Etheldritha, and the second a Bishop.

XXIII. C.
XXIII. CHAP.
1.2. Edilhun a Valiane Consul rebels against the King of the West Saxons: and
is subdued.

3.4. The King of the Northumbers persecutes a holy Bishop.

Huntingd. l 4 f 341. W^gorn. h^c.
1. THE same year there were commotions both in the Western and Northern
Provinces of our Island. For in the West Saxons Kingdom, as Huntingdon relates,
Cuthred in the eleaventh year of his Reign fought a furious combat against
Edelhun a Noble man (Consulem) of a most bold courage: Who raising a sedition
against his Lord, and both their Armies meeting in the field, though Edilhun
was far inferior to the King in number of soldiers, yet he maintaind the
combat a long time with admirable courage, for his single valor supplied the
place of many bands of soldiers. And when the victory was ready to declare it
self for him, an unfortunat wound peircing his body made the Kings just cause
to triumph over his perjury and infidelity.

2. Edelhun with the blood issuing out of this wound expelled likewise Pride
and contumacy out of his heart. So that voluntarily submitting himself to his
King, and repenting his rebellious Treason, he not only found pardon, but was
admitted into his Lords favor and freindship.

3. But in the Kingdom of the Northumbe^s we find a virtuous King persecuting
a worthy Bishop and another innocent person: and what the offense or
provocation was, not any of our Historians mention. The Story is thus briefly
touched by Matthew of Westminster and Hoveden: Westmon. hic Hoved. hic. Godvv.
in Dunelm.
Eadbert (or Egbert) King of the Northumbers took Renulphus Bishop of
Lindesfarn Prisoner, and lead him Captive into the City called Bebba, where he
was cast into chains, and in that state remained a long time. Likewise he
commanded the Church of S. Peter in Lindesfarn to be besieged. The motive of
which siege is further declared by the same Houeden, Hoved. ib.
saying, Offo the son of Alfred, an innocent young man was compelled for
avoiding the fury of King Eadbert to seek sanctuary at the Relics of the Holy
Bishop S. Cuthbert, where he remained till being almost starved to death by
famine, he was without arms taken out from thence. As touching the City where
the said Bishop was so straightly imprisoned, and which in this Narration is
called Bebba, it is seated in the Province of Northumberland near the Isle of
Farne, and is at this day called Bamborow:

4 Now though we find expressed in no Historian the cause of the Kings
displeasure against the said Bishop, yet we may perhaps probably collect it
from other actions of the same King performed this year. To which purpose the
Authaur of the Epitome at the end of S. Beda's History relates how King Eadbert
this same year by force annexed to his Dominions the territory of Cyel, A. D.
751 Ep. past. Bed Hist.
with other regions. Now this Territory at this day called Keile or Coil was
possessed by the Scotts: and was seated at the Frith of Cluid ( Glottae
aestuarium:) where the City Alcuit, and the Castle now called Dunbritton lies.
Notwitstanding since the King of the Northumbers pretended to all the right
which the Romans formerly enjoyed in those parts, which extended as far as the
said Frith: King Eadbert might think he had just cause to recover it. Now it is
probable that the pious Bishop Renulf opposed the Kings ambition and avarice,
and so incurred his displeasure.

XXIV. CHAP. XXIV. C.

1.2. etc. Pope Zacharias resolves several Doubts of S. Boniface, etc.

1. THE following year nothing occurrs to furnish our History either in the
Ecclesiastical or Civil state of Brittany, A. D. 751.
but only the death of two Bishops in the Kingdom of the M^rcians: of Witta
Bishop of Lichfe^ld, to whom succeeded Hemel: And of Alwy Bishop of the
Lindesfari, whose place was supplied by Aldulf.

2. But in Germany S. Boniface affords sufficient matter. Bonif. Ep 141.
For he this year sent Lul or Lullo in a message to Pope Zacharias, to desire
of him a resolution of certain difficulties occurring in his Province: and also
a confirmation and Privileges to his Archiepiscopall See of Mentz, and his new
founded Monastery of Fulda.

3. As touching the Doubts proposed to the said Pope, Ap Bonif. Ep 14^.
the Resolution of them is found in his Answer: where he tells him. 1. That he
could not condemn him for refusing to communicate with the French Bishops, who
refused to keep the Promises made by them. 2. That Christians ought to abstain
from eating the flesh of Choughs, Crows, Storks, and much more of wild horses.
3. That the Roman Rite was, upon Maundy Thursday after the making of Chrism, to
cause three Lamps to be lighted, capacious enough to burn three days: and that
upon Saturday the Vigil of Easter other Lamps to be lighted from thence for the
ceremony of blessing the Font. As for the making use of fires taken from
burning glasses, they had no such Tradition at Rome. 4. Concerning such as had
the falling-sicknes, if it came from their birth, they were not to be admitted
into the Church, for fear of infecting others: But the same rigor was not to
be used to such as had it afterward: those might be admitted to the Communion,
yet so as that they must come when all others had communicated.

5. That there was no prohibition for Religious Virgins to wash one another
feet, A. D. 752.
as well as men. 6. That it is more congruous not to admit to Preisthood any
till they be of good years and such as have a good testimony: and that the age
prescribed by Canons is thirty years: Notwithstanding in case of want, and
necessity, such may be taken as have passed five and twenty. 7. As touching the
Question how long men are to stay from eating Lard after the beast is skilld,
this was not found in Tradition: yet his counsel was not to eat of it till it
had been dried well in smoke and then boyld: Yet in case any desired to eat it
unboyld, let him at least abstain till after Easter. 8. That concerning the
revenews of the Church, he need to make no scruple to require a shilling of
every house ( solidum de casa) and that would suffice. 9. That in case any had
been received into the Clergy, who at their Ordination had conceald such
Capital sins as they had formerly been guilty of, and such sins came afterward
to be discovered: such were to be deprived and condemned to Penance. 10. That
in insupportable persecutions by Pagans, it is permitted to fly. 11. That
Tribute might be exacted from the Slavi inhabiting in that country. 12. That
by his Messenger Lul, he had sent him a Roll, signifying where, and how many
Crosses are to be made in celebrating Mass.

Ap. Baron. hic.
4. For as much as concerned the Privileges to be given to his Archiepiscopall
See of Mentz, he in a distinct Letter declared in this Form, By the Authority
of the Blessed Apostle Saint Peter we do ordain that the foresaid Church of
Mentz be for ever to thee and thy Successors erected and confirmed a
Metropolitan Church, having under it these Cities, Tongres, Colen, Worms,
Spire and Troyes (Trectis, or Trecas,) as likewise all the Nations of Germany
which by thy preaching thou shall convert to the Light of the Gospel.

Ap. S^r. l. 2. c. 1^.
5. Lastly whereas Saint Boniface had signified to the said Pope that he had
built a Monastery dedicated to the honor of our Savior, in a forest of vast
extent, in which he had placed Monks who lived under the Rule of Saint Benedict
in great austerity, abstaining from flesh and wine, who had no servants, but
contented themselves to live by their own labor: in which Monastery he
purposed with the Popes leave to retire himself some times to rest his old
weary limbs, and after death to be buried: and consequently desired his Holiness
to patronize it and endue it with convenient Privileges: Hereto the Pope
condescended, subiecting the said Monastery immediately to the Sea Apostolic,
forbidding any Bishop or others to exercise any authority in it, or so much as
say Mass, unless invited by the Abbot: and confirming for ever all lands of
which it was possessed at that time, or should accrue to it afterward.

A. D. 752.
6. These were the last Letters which passed between Saint Boniface and Pope
Zacharias, for he presently after dying, and Pope Steven the next year
succeeding in his place: who held that See only three days, after whom another
Pope of the same Name, and styled Steven the third, Ap. Bonif. Ep. 19.
being consecrated, Saint Boniface wrote an Epistle to him professing his Duty
and obedience* as he had done before for the space or thirty years to three
Popes his Predecessors, and in conclusion he asked his pardon for the delay of
sending that Letter, the cause wh^reof was his necessary occupation in
repairing Churches, which to the number of thirty had been burnt by the malice
and fury of Pagans.

XXV. CHAP. XXV. CHAPTER

1.2 The Bodies of Saint Kiliam, Saint Colman and S. Totnan translated by Saint
Boniface.

3 4* etc. Their Gests: and Happy Martyrdom: and wonderful discovery of their
Relics.

1. THE same year Saint Boniface with great devotion took up the Bodies of
Saint Kilian formerly Bishop of Wirtzburg, Saint Colman a Priest, and Saint
Totnan a Deacon, all which had come out of their Native country Ireland, to
preach the Gospel in Germany, where they were blessed with the Crown of
Martyrdom. Their Sacred Bodies, I say, Saint Boniface now took up, to expose
them to the veneration of devout Christians, and afterward to bury them more
honorably: a happy presage of the honor himself was shortly after to receive.

2. Now though their Gests do not properly belong to our present History: Yet
so much interest this piety of Saint Boniface gives us in them, that a brief
account of their actions and Martyrdom will not be judged altogether
impertinent here: which we will collect from a very ancient Anonymous Author
in Surius.

3. Saint Kilian, Ap. S^r. 8. Iulij.
says he, was born of a Noble Stock in Ireland and from his childhood was
brought up in learning: But shortly by Gods preventing Grace despising curious
study, and worldly enticements, he retired himself into a Monastery where with
great perfection he gave himself to Prayer and the observance of Regular
Discipline. Such progress he made hereby in all piety and virtue, that he was
esteemed worthy in due time to be promoted to the Degree of Preisthood, and
afterward to the Government of his Monastery.

4. The same of his Sanctity being far spread, and drawing very many to see and
admire it, the Holy man fearing the tentation of vainglory, began to meditate
how he might retire himself from the knowledge of friends, and withal the
Spirit of Charity to the souls of others, inflaming, among so many others in
this age, his heart likewise, he took with him certain companions, and passing
over into Brittany, he from thence sailed into France: and traveling through
several Regions he entered into Germany as far as Wirtzburg* determining there
to sow the precious seed of the Gospel. Which that he might do with better
success, he went to Rome to demand from the Sea Apostolic, in which at that
time Conon sat ^ope, a license and power to preach to Pagans. And having
obtained this together with Episcopal dignity, he returned ^o the same place
in Germany.

5. At his going to Rome he had left Saint Gallas the famous Abbot, in Germany:
and at his return he left Saint Columban in Italy: so that there remained to
attend him only Saint Coloman a Priest, and Saint To^an Deacon. And being
arrived at Wirtzburg (...) found a new Duke there, called Gozbert. Now after he
had spent some time in preaching the Gospel with great efficacy, the said Duke
sent for him to appear before him, and demanded what New Doctrine that was
which he taught. To whom the Holy Bishop freely revealed the Sum of Christian
Doctrine touching the Blessed Trinity, the Incarnation of the Son of God, and
other necessary Mysteries of our Religion. At that time the Duke, though
convinced of the unconquerable truth of his Doctrine, yet deferred the
acknowledging of it. But not long after seeing the Holy man's perseverance, he
came privately to him to be more perfectly informed, and, forsaking the
Idolatrous worship of Diana, who had been held in great veneration by him, he
gave up his name to Christ, and on the next solemnity of Easter was baptized.
Whose example was followed by great multituds of his Subjects in Franconia.

6. Now the said Duke had formerly taken to wife a Lady named Geilana, who had
been married to his Brother and remained still a Pagan. The unlawfullnes of
which marriage the Holy Bishop delayed to discover to the Duke, fearing it might
be a hindrance to his embracing the Faith. But when he saw him well established
therein, he then told him sincerely that such a Maria^e was forbidden by the
Religion he professed. The Duke at the hearing of this was much afflicted and
astonished for he loved his wife with great passion. Yet his answer was, That
he resolved not prefer the love of any creature before God: But that at present
preparing for an expedition against his enemies, he could not suddenly effect a
business of so great importance: but at his return he would perform his duty.

7. But when these things came to the knowledge of the Duchess Geilana, her
rage was horribly inflamed against the Men of God, and she meditated
continually how to destroy them in her husbands absence, and so as that it
might not come to the notice of any. Presently therefore by the Devils
suggestion she found two fit Ministers of her cruelty, who for a certain
reward promised to satisfy her. At this time it happened on a certain night that
Saint Kilian being not perfectly awaked from sleep, there appeard to him a
certain man in glorious apparel, who said, Friend Kilian, arise, thy labors
are almost at an end: there remains only one conflict more, and then thou
thalt come home to me with victory. Having said this, he presently vanished
out of his sight. And the Holy Bishop arising, called to him his two
companions, knowing this to have been a divine Visitation, and said to them: My
Brethren, Now let us watch, for our Lord is at hand, to knock at our door: Let
us take heed he find us not unprepared. At midnight therefore as they were
devoutly busy in prayer, the two bloody executiones entered the room: Whom
as soon as the Holy Bishop saw, he said to them, Friends, Wherefore come you
hither? Do you execute what you are commanded, and we will finish our course.
As Soon as this was said, they were all three murdered, and buried in the same
place: likewise into the same grave were cast their Books and Vestments, that
no sign of their death might appear, but it should be thought that they were
traveled to some other place. The abominable Duchess likewise made a Stable
be built over the place where the Sacred Bodies had been buried, to prevent any
sign of what had been done.

8. Shortly after the Duke returning, went to the house where he had left the
Holy men: and not finding them, he enquired diligently whither they were gone:
the Duchess told him, that they being at liberty without any restraint, were
gone whither they thought good. With this answer the Duke was satisfied, and
enquired no further. But not long after one of the Murderers was suddenly
possessed by the Devil, and cried out with a loud voice, O Kilian, thou
pursuest me terribly, I am consumed with fire: I see over my head a sword
dropping with thy blood. Thus roaring out, and tearing his own flesh with his
teeth, he from a temporal torment was carried to torments everlasting. The
other likewise becoming raging-mad, cast himself on his own sword, and so in
despair dyed. At last the execrable Duchess seeing these things, was seized on
and terribly tormented by Devils, and with all her power cried out, I am
justly tormented, for it was I who sent Murderers to destroy the Holy men. O
Kilian, thou pursuest me terribly: O Koloman, thou burnst me: O Totnan, thou
addest fuel to the fire. Thus raging and blaspheming, she was so horribly
vexed, that the force of many men could scarce hold her: and in the end after
intolerable torments, she went to the place of endless inconceivable torments.

9. After these things were past, the general report is that the Duke Gozbert
was murdered by his own servants, and his Son deprived of the Dukedom, yea and
all his kindred and friends so persecuted by the inhabitants of the country,
that they were scarce permitted to live in it. But the cause of all these
disorders is not known, whether it was for their constancy in the true Faith,
or some other Motive.

10. The Martyrdom of these holy Saints happened in the year of Grace six hundred
eighty nine, Marty. Romans 8. Iulij.
three years after they returned from Rome. And their name is celebrated among
Gods Saints on the eighth of July. Their Bodies were discovered to a certain
man called Atalongus by his young scholars, who by a Divine impulse cried out,
that three Holy men were buried in such a place. For which Atalongus
reprehending them, was struck with blindness, and miraculously recovered his
sight, when the ^acred Bodies were taken up From his relation Saint Boniface
was informed of these things, who therefore caused them to be honorably
removed to another place: And in respect to them procured the Town of Wirtzburg
to be erected into an Episcopal See.

XXVI. C.
XXVI. CHAP.
1.2. Cuthred the West Saxon King frees himself from subjection to the Mercian.

6. Prince Caroloman becomes a Monk: and his Brother Pipin crowned King of
France in the room of Childeric, who is deposed.

1. AT this time began the decadence of the Mercian Kingdom, and the
advancement of that of the West Saxons. Before this year the Mercian was both
in largenes of dominion, riches and power incomparably surmounting any other in
Brittany, insomuch as except the Northumbers, all the other States, even that
of the West Saxons, were tributary to him. But God, whose Providence had
ordained that the whole English-Saxon Nation in Brittany should be reduced into
one Monarchy under the West Saxon race, inspired courage into Cuthred King of
the West Saxons, and a resolution by arms to ^ree hi^ ^elf from dependence on
the Mercian Crown. Whereupon having composed all matters at home, and received
into Grace the valiant Captain Edilhun, he assembled all the forces of his
Kingdom against Ethelbald, who met him with an equal Army at a place called
Beorsord, probably the same which his now called Bursord in Shropshire: where
the preference between them was determined. Henry of Huntingdom beyond any
other of our Historians relates most exactly the circumstances of this war: in
this manner: 2. Cuthred King of the West Saxons in the thirteenth year of his
reign, Huntingd. hic
not being able longer to support the imperious exactions and insolences of
the Mercian King Ethelbald, raised an Army and boldly met him in the field at
Beorford, choosing much rather to expose himself to death, then to suffer his
liberty to be any longer restrained. He brought with him the valiant Captain
Edilhun, whom he had lately received into grace, on whose courage and prudence
he did so much rely, that he the more confidently undertook this war. On the
other side Ethelbald, who styled himself King of Kings, came into the field
attended w^^h a potent army composed, besides his own Mercians, of Kentish-men,
East Saxons and East Angles.

3. Both these armies being ranged in Order, and marching directly toward one
another, when they were almost ready to meet, the Courageous Edilhum who went
in the front of the West Saxons, carrying the Kings Ensign, which was a golden
Dragon, struck the Enemies Standard bearer through the body: upon which the
West Saxons gave a great showt, and received great encouragement. Then the
Armies met, and the battle began with incredible fury, and a thundering noise
of clashing of arms, resounding of strokes, and crying out of wounded men
trampied under feet. Each part fought the more eagerly, because they were
assured that the Victory would for ever make either the Mercians or West Saxons
Masters of the other. One might see there two Armies which a little before had
dazeled the sight with the shining of their Armor, and which looked like two
forest^, by reason of innumerable spears erected, presently after all defild
and obscured with dust and blood, dissipated and torn asunder, and their
beautiful Ensigns so rent and defiled, that they could scarce be known to
their own party. On each side those who were most daring and courageous kept
close to their Standards, and most furiously rushed upon one another, doing
horrible execution with their swords and battell-axes: Neither of them had any
thought of yiedling, yea each party assured themselves of Victory.

4. But wheresoever the Valiant Edilhun made an impression, ruin accompanied
him on all sides, his battle-axe* like a thunderbolt clove asunder both bodies
and arms. And on the other side wheresoever the courageous Mercian King
Ethelbald rushed in, he made a horrible slaughter, for to his irresistible
sword arms were as thinn clothes, and bones as soft flesh. Whilst therefore
these two warriers, like devouring flames, wasted their enemies on all sides,
it happened that they both met one another. Each of them, then gnashing his
teeth with rage against his opposite, stretched forth their arms, and with all
their strength struck-terrible blows at one another, with little advantage for
awhile on either side. But God, who resists the proud, and from whom alone
strength, courage and magnanimity proceeds, then putt an end to his favor
formerly showed to King Ethelbald, and deprived his soul of his usual
confidence. Therefore perceiving that his customed forces and valor faild him,
a terror from heaven assaild his mind, so that he was the first in his army
who began the flight. Neither from that day to the last moment of his life did
God afford him a prosperous success in any of his undertakings.



Id ib.
5. Thus describes the foresaid Author this terrible decisive battle: and for
a conclusion adds, That from that time the Kingdom of the West Saxons became
very potent, and so continually prospered, till it brought all the rest into
subjection to it. But this was not till the beginning of the following Century,
when King Egbert became Monark of the whole Kingdom, charging its Name into
England. Thus passed matters in Brittany.

6. And at the same time a far greater change was made in France. For the
worthy Prince Caroloman having the year before quitted his Principality, and
out of a strange fervor of Divine Love retired himself into the Monastery of
Saint Benedict at Mount Cassin, there to serve God the remainder of his Life in
poverty and solitude: the Nobility of France contemning their effeminat King
Childeric, with one consent determined to raise Prince Pipin, in whose only
hand the whole power and management of the State remained, into the Throne: And
to give a greater authority to the Change, they thought good to consult Pope
Zacharias, to whom they represented the impotency and vicious effeminacy of
their King, and the admirable courage, prudence and all Royal endowments of
Pipin, withal the necessity in which that Kingdom stood of an able supporter
against the Saracens and other terrible enemies, which threatened the
destruction of it. Hereupon the Pope gave his sentence according to their
desires, Regin^. A. D. 750.
and appointed S. Boniface to anoint and set the Crown on the Head of Pipin:
which he accordingly performed in the City of Soissons. As for Childeric, who
was the last of the Merovingian race, after his deposition he was thrust into a
Monastery.

XXVII. CHAP. A. D. 755.

XXVII. C



1. The Britains invade the West Saxons: and are repelled.

2.3. etc. King Cuthred dying, Sigebert a Tyrant succeeds: and raigns but one
year.

1. THE year next following the terrible battle between the Mercians and
West Saxons in Brittany, A. D. 753.
the Britains, thinking this a fit season for them to enlarge their Dominion,
when the West Saxons, though conquerours, had much diminished their forces to
get a bloody victory, with a great Army made an impression into the Western
parts: But their success was not according to their expectation: for as
Huntingdon relates, Huntingd. l. 4.
Cuthred in the fourteenth year of his reign fought against the Britains, who,
not being able to resist him who had lately conquered King Ethelbald, presently
began to fly, and for their folly and cowardice deservedly suffered a great
slaughter, without any dommage done to the West Saxons.

2. This was the last exploit of this Noble King: A. D. 754 Id. ib.
for as the same Historian writes, the great and renowned King Cuthred after so
great prosperities and victories, the next year by the cruelty of death was
taken out of this world, leaving a successor unworthy to fill his Throne. This
his Successor was his kinsman Sigebert, who held the Crown a very short time.
For swelling with pride because of his Predecessors victories, he became
insolent and intolerable to his own subjects, whom he treated ill all manner of
ways, and for his particular proffit depraved all his Laws. Hereupon a
principal man among his Nobles called Cumbra, was enduced by the general
complaints of the people to intimate their greivances to their New King: Which
he faithfully performed, earnestly beseeching him to make his government easier
to his subjects, and quitting his former inhumanity to show himself amiable
both to God and men. But these exhortations were so far from producing a good
effect, that he commanded Cumbra should cruelly and uniustly be putt to death:
yea and increased the insupportable fiercenes of his Tyranny.

3. This behavior of his did so inflame with rage the minds of the
West Saxons, A. D. 755.
that within the space of one year they deprived him both of his kingdom and
life. The manner whereof the same Writer thus proceeds to declare. Sigebert
being incorrigible both in his pride and other vices, the Nobility and common
people assembling themselves together, with prudent deliberation and unanimous
consent drove him out of his Kingdom, and chose for their King an excellent
young man of the Royal family called Kinewolf. As for Sigebert after he was
thus expelled by his Subjects, and fearing yet greater punishment for his
former demerits, he in great fear hidd himself in a vast forest called
Andreadswald: where a certain Swineheard of Cumbra, (who had been so unworthily
slain by him) finding him, he revenged on him the unjust death of his Lord.
Thus ended his unhappy life King Sigebert, Malmsb. de Reg. l. 1. c. 2.
a man, says William of Malmsbury, horribly cruel to his subjects and
contemptibly cowardly to his Neighbors.

4. Yet among the vices and impieties of Sigebert, one good action of his is
recorded, which was his charitable liberality to the ancient Monastery of
Glastonbury. For in an Appendix to the life of Saint Patrick and in the
Antiquities of the same Monastery we read, App. ad Vit. S. Patric. Antiquit.
Glaston.
how the Danes at this time cruelly wasting the Northumbers, a certain Abbot
called Ticca who lived in those parts, fled the country, and coming among the
West Saxons, there he retired himself into the Monastery of Glastonbury. Where
after he had for some time lived with much edification, he was chosen Abbot
this year. A powerful mean whereby he gaind the love and favor of the Monks,
was his enriching that place with many precious Relics which he brought with
him out of the Northern parts, as the Sacred Bodies of Saint Adrian Bishop,
Saint Ceolfrid, Saint Benedict Biscop, Saint Efterwin and Saint Sigfrid Abbots
of Wiremouth and Girwy, of Saint Beda Priest, of Saint Ebba, Saint Bega and
Saint Hilda Abbesses, of Saint Boisil, and Saint Idan Brother to Saint Fursey,
of Saint Vltan Bishop, and Oil from the Tomb of Saint Nicholas, some Relics
likewise of S. German Bishop of Auxerre.

5. To this Abbot Ticca (or Tictan) and to the Monks of Glastenbury did King
Sigebert for the value of fifty pieces of Gold bestow two and twenty Hydes of
land in Pohelf. The Same Abbot likewise at the fame price bought of this King
six hydes of land remaining there in the Western part.

XXVIII. CHAP. A. D. 752.

XXVIII. CHAP.



1.2. etc. Saint Boniface preparing his journey to the Frisons, become
Apostates, resigns his Arch bishopric of Mentz to S. Lullus, etc.

1. NOthing illustrated this present year so much as the last labors and
blessed Martyrdom of S. Boniface. Baron. hic.
Thirty years had he now spent in cultivating our Lords vineyard, employing all
his strength and vigor both of mind and body in so laborious a work. He had
often petitioned the Sea Apostolic in vain to allow him in his old age to
appoint a Successor in his See of Mentz, that he might enjoy a quiet repose in
his Monastery of Fulda. But of late hearing that the barbarous Nation of the
Frisons had renounced the Christian Faith, which had been so diligently taught
them by S. Willibrord and his Disciples, the zeal of Gods house did so burn in
his heart, that instead of seeking repose, he resolved to renew his former
labors, and to expose himself to the extremest dangers among those ungrateful
Frisons, whilst he endeavored to rebuild Gods Church there demolished.

2. But before he would execute this New purpose, he judged necessary to
provide for the Security and quietness both of his Church of Mentz and Monastery
of Fulda. For the former he wrote a Letter to Pope Steven signifying to him his
intention of endeavoring to replant the Faith among the Frisons: and least by
his absence his Church of Mentz, should be deprived of a head and directour, he
begged his permission that he might resign it to his faithful companion and
assistant in his labors, Lul or Lullo, a man both for his learning, piety and
prudence most eminent among his Disciples.

3. It seems it was the Divine Will that this Apostolic Bishop should conclude
his life in the laborious exercise of his Charge: For though his hitherto so
often renewd requests for this favor would never be granted him, when the
motive thereto was a quiet retirement: Now as soon as he demanded it to the end
he might more freely engage himself in new travells and dangers, the Pope
easily granted his request. Whereupon he immediately consecrated Lul Archbishop
of Mentz: whom also he enjoined to be diligent and faithful in preaching to
the people and doing all other Offices belonging to his charge of so many
souls. He required him likewise to finish the building of the Church which he
had begun at Fulda, and there to bury his body, wheresoever it was Gods will he
should dye. A. D. 755.
Moreover to provide all things necessary for his journey, and particularly
that in a chest of his Books he should enclose a Sheet to enwrapp his body
after his death. For by many tokens he signified that his death was
approaching: the apprehension whereof did not at all discourage him
notwithstanding from this his dangerous journey.

Magdeb. cent. 9. f. 80.
4. Now this Lul, say the Centuriators of Magdeburg, was by nation an
Englishman, of a City called Maldubia: brought up in learning and piety by the
holy Abbot Eata, and had for his Surname Irtel, as appears by an Epistle of
Hereca to him. He was one of the twelve Monks which Egbert Archbishop of York
sent into the country of the Frisons. From whence Saint Boniface as soon as he
was delegated into Germany called him: Who made no delay to attend him; He
planted several Churches in Hassia, Thuringia and Erford: and instituted in
Regular Discipline Monks in the Monastery of Fulda. Notwithstanding in this
Narration there is a mistake: for Saint Lullo was not sent by Egbert. but
called out of England with many other devout Priests by Saint Boniface in the
year of Grace seven hundred twenty five as has been declared.

Bonif. Ep. 92.
5. Now Saint Boniface having thus ordained Lullo by the consent of Pope Steven,
as likewise of King Pipin and the Nobility of the country: he further wrote a
Letter to a certain Priest called Fulrad who was Chaplain to King Pipin, and
had great power with him. Him he earnestly desired to obtain from the King his
Protection of this his Son and now fellow-Bishop, as likewise of all the people
committed to his charge, that after his death they might not by the rage of
confining Pagans be dispersed and loose the Faith they had embraced.

Ib. Ep. 151.
6. In the next place for the security of his beloved Monastery of Fulda, he had
recourse to King Pipin for his protection of it: that the Secular power might
be joined to the Ecclesiastical which he had formerly obtained of the Sea
Apostolic. And accordingly the devout King gave him a lage Charter, ratifying
all the Immunities and Privileges which the Pope had formerly granted to the
said Monastery. A Copy of which Charter is still extant among the Epistles of
Saint Boniface: In which likewise the said King confirmed for ever the
possession of all the lands with which his Brother Caroloman had endowd it.

7. Such preparation being made, S. Boniface was ready with an undaunted
courage inspired by the Grace of Gods holy Spirit to begin his journey, when
one obstacle more presented it self, Ib. Ep. 97.
a removal whereof he was forced to beg of Pope Steven, in a Letter which is
the last that ever he wrote. That Obstacle was, a pretention which the Bishop
of Colen made to the Church of V^recht, the principal See of the Country of
the Frisons, as belonging to his Province, and consequently that S. Boniface
had no right to enter into it. In opposition hereto S. Boniface informed the
Pope, that though indeed anciently King Dagobert had bestowd the Castle of
Vtrecht with a Church there demolished on the Bishopric of Colen, yet it was
with a condition annexed, that he should undertake the charge of preaching and
converting the Nation of the Frisons: which he had never done: but that people
remained Pagan till the coming of S. Willebrord and his companions, sent
thither and ordained Bishop by his Predecessor Pope Sergius, who built there
an Episcopal Church consecrating it to the honor of our Savior. And after
his death Prince Caroloman had recommended the same See to himself, desiring
him to take it into his care and constitute a Bishop therein, as he thought
fit. Therefore he concluded that the said See did of no right belong to the
Bishop of Colen, but was immediately subject to the Sea Apostolic. In
conclusion he besought the Pope that search might be made in the Archives at
Rome for the writing and Commission given by Pope Sergius to Saint Willebrord,
by which might appear the insufficiency of the pretentions of the Bishop of
Colen.

8. The Answer hereto from Rome is not now extant: but by the proceedings of S.
Boniface it appears that the cause went on his side: For he administered the
affairs of the Sea of Vtrecht, without any dependency on the Bishop of Colen.

9. Being ready to begin, Rodolph. in vit. S. Liob^.
his journey, he sent for the Religious Virgin S. Lioba (one of those which he
had invited out of England to establish Regular Discipline in Germany) and
exhorted her earnestly not to desert this country in which she was a stranger,
nor to faint in a vigorous pursuit of her holy employment, but to perfect the
good work begun by her: He told her, that bodily weakness and infirmities were
not considerable, neither was an age, esteemed by us long, to be regarded if
compared with eternal Rewards which shall crown all our good endeavors.
Having said this, he commended her earnestly to Bishop Lullus and the Seniour
Monks of the said Monastery, admonishing them to show all care and respect to
her: Telling them with all that it was his resolution that after both their
deaths her bones should be laid near to his in the same grave, that they may
expect the day of Resurr^ction together, since they had served our Lord with
the same desire and affection. When he had said this, he bestowd on her his
Monastical Cowle; once more admonishing her not to forsake that Land of her
pilgrimage. Thus all things being prepared for his journey, he went into
Friseland. These things are extracted out of the Life of S. Lioba written by
Rodolphus, at the request of Rabanus Maurus.

XXIX. C.
XXIX. CHAP.
1.2. etc. The last Gests and Martyrdom of S. Boniface and his Companions.

11.12. etc His Body translated from Vtrecht to Mentz, and thence to Fulda.

15.16. That S Boniface was an Englishman: not a Scott.

1. WE are now come to the last and best passage of this glorious Saints life,
which was, his willing offering of it to our Lord as a Sacrifice of sweet
smelling Savor. The manner of it we will here set down as we find it
extracted out of the Gests, of S. Boniface, by the illustrious Cardinal
Baronius.

Baron. hic.
2. After the holy Bishop had set all things in order in Germany, he, attended
by such persons as he had made choice of, entered the boat, and descending by
the Channel of the R^ene, arrived safe into the region of the Frisons: Where
from place to place he preached the word of God with great fervor, and
carefully built Churches. And so great success did God give to his labors,
that within a short time he, assisted by Saint Eoban, converted and baptized
many thousands of men and women. Now the said Eoban he ordained Bishop of
Vtrecht, to the end that in his old age he might have one to ease him by
sustaining a great part of his burden* There were present likewise and
assistants to him several Priests and Deacons; Among the Priests the
principal were Wintruge, Walter and A^alher: and among the Deacons, Strichald,
Hamunt and Boso. Moreover there were certain Monks also, Waccar, Gunderhar,
Williker and Adolf, which attended him. All these unanimously labored with him
in preaching the Gospel, and with him also attained the crown of Martyrdom.

3. Now all these after they had passed through several parts of that
country, and were come to the River Bortna in the confines of East Friseland.
S. Boniface having none with him but his own companions, commanded their Tents
should be pitched: because there he intended to expect the coming of those who
after Baptism were to receive Confirmation: For the day appointed thereto was
at hand.

4. But when it was come, and the Sun was mounted to its height, all those
which were expected by him with the same tenderness of attention that children
are expected by their fathers, were become utterly unworthy to receive the
Grace of Gods Holy Spirit which that day was to have been conferred on them by
the Sacrament of Confirmation: For of friends they were turned into enemies,
and of Neophytes into Sergeants and Executioners. They came running then with
great rustling of armor to the Tents of these defenceles Saints: Which when
the Servants saw, they betook themselves likewise to their weapons,
endeavoring to defend the holy men against the rage of that furious multitude.

5. But Saint Boniface when he heard the noise of this tumult, in the first
place he had recourse to his Spiritual Sanctuary and fortress, for he took
the Sacred Relics, which in all his iourneys he carried with him: and then
calling to him all his Ecclesiastics, he went with the^ out of the Tent, and
restraind the servants who were ready to resist, saying to them, My children,
abstain from fighting, d^e not combat with your adversaries, but rather render
them good for evil. Now the long wishd for day is come, in which we are from
this miserable world invited to eternal ioys. Why would you then debar your
selves from so great a grace and happiness? On the contrary be courageously
cheerful in our Lord, and with thankful minds receive the inestimable gifts
of Divine Grace now offered to you. Put your trust in our Lord, and he will
deliver us out of all danger. With such speeches as these he withheld his
servants from setting upon their enemies.

6. Then addressing himself in a fatherly manner to the Ecclesiastics of each
degree, My most dear Brethren, said he, if the memory of my former admonitions
be not utterly defaced out of your minds, show now that you have not forgotten
them. Call to mind those words of our Savior, Fear not those who kill the
body, but can not hurt the soul. Fix the anchor of your Hope in God only,
who after this momentany life will give you an eternal Crown among his
heavenly Saints. Do not, I beseech you, in this point of time loose the
everlasting rewards of Victorious souls: Be not therefore either corrupted
with the flatteries of these Pagans, or terrified with their threatenings: but
courageously and manfully suffer this present danger of death for his love who
for us suffered infinitely more, that you may for ever rejoice with him in
heaven.

7. The holy Bishop had scarce ended this exhortation, when the furious
multitude armed with swords and all kinds of weapons rushed upon them, and with
bloody hands in a barbarous manner murdered them all. Having done this, they
hastily ran into their Tents, and took with them all their Books and coffers in
which were enclosed the Sacred Relics, thinking they should find in them great
treasures of Gold and silver. Thence with have they went to their Boats, laden
with all the provisions of meat and wine, of which they drank with great joy.
After this they fell into debate about dividing the treasure which they vainly
hoped they had found. And when after long and earnest disputes they could not
come to an agreement, on a sudden a furious quarrel arose among them, which
became so inflamed, that with the same madness, and with the same arms with
which they had slain the Holy Martyrs who came among them only to save their
souls, they now destroyed one another.

8. This slaughter being at an end, those which remained alive, moved with the
same hope of treasure, ran to the coffers: which when they had broken up,
instead of gold and silver, they found nothing but books and other papers of
Spiritual Doctrine. This failing o^ their expectation did so enrage them, that
they threw away the Books in the field, and among the fenns, and other
incommodious places: Yet notwithstanding through a marveylous Providence of
God, and for a Proof of the sanctity of his servants, the same Books and
papers* a long time after, were found entire and undefaced: and so carried to
the Churches, where they remain to this day.

9. Among the rest there was found one Book of the Gospells which the Holy
Bishop for his comfort always carried with him: This Book though it was cut
quite through with a sword, as may still be seen, yet with such cutting not one
letter of it was abolished; which truly was a wonderful Miracle. It is
reported that S. Boniface, when the murdrer was ready to strike him with his
sword, held up that Book to defend his ^ead, as nature su^gests in such a
danger: by which means it came to be cut thorough. The Murderers being thus
frustrated of their hopes, went sorrowful to their hom^s.

10. But when the N^ighbouring Christians heard of the Martyrdom of these holy
men, they with armed forces entered the country of those barbarous Murderers,
who preparing themselves for defense, were so oppressed with the guilt of their
crime, that they could nothing resist, but fled away and were slain by the
Christians, so suffering a double destruction, of their bodies in this world,
and their souls in Hell

11. Not long after, the Ecclesiastics of Vtrecht came and took the Sacred
Body of S. Boniface, which they carried back and honorably buried in their
Church. This being known to S. Lullo Archbishop of Mentz, he called together a
great number of his Clergy and of secular men of a higher condition, and
declared to them the death of S. Boniface, and how his Body was enterred at
Vtrecht, contrary to the express order which he had given. He desired them all
therefore to ioyn with him in executing the holy Bishops last will. Hereupon
they all went to Vtrecht, and having receiv^d the Sacred Body, they ^rought it
back with great pomp and solemn Processions to Mentz, from whence to the great
grief and vexation of Saint Lullo, it was conveyed to Fulda, where with great
honor and veneration it was reposed.] Thus writes Cardinal Baronius from the
Author of Saint Boniface his life taken out of Saint Willebalds Narration:
Where likewise is a declaration of many wonderful Miracles wrought there by
his Intercession: Which the devout Reader at leisure may peruse. He with his
Companions suffered this year on the Nones of June, thirty six years after he
had received the Charge and Apostolical Office of preaching to the Pagans.

12. Concerning the place where these holy Martyrs suffered, Miraeus calls it
Ostracha, in the Eastern Friseland. And as for the Number of them, a different
account is given by several Authors. He who prosecuted the Epitome of Saint
Beda's History reckons fifty three: Hu^baldus fifty two: R^xfrid Bishop of
Virecht, fifty one: and the Gallican Martyrologe only two and twenty: but
perhaps there we are to understand, that only so many Names of them have been
recorded by ancient Writers.

13. The foresaid Author of S. Bonifaces his li^e among these Mart^rs names
only two Bishops. S. Boniface himself and S. Eoban: but in the Gallican
Martyrologe it is expressly said, that S. Adelbar was also a Bishop, Martyr.
Gal 20. April.
probably ordained after they parted from Mentz. For thus we find his
commemoration, In P^^seland on the twentieth of April is celebrated the
Translation of S. Adelbar Bishop of Erford and Martyr, who was consecrated
Bishop by S. Boniface, and together with him crowned with an illustrious
Martyrdom on the fifth of June. Miraeus in ^ast Belg. 5. Iunij.
His Body says Miraeus, in a manner entire is at this day with great
veneration kept as Erford in the Cellegiat Church of Canons dedicated to the
most Blessed Virgin: where they celebrate anniversarily his Memory on the
twelfth day before the Calends of May.

14. Though the Body of S. Boniface was for the greatest part of it entombed at
Fulda, yet that some considerable Relics of it were deposed at Bruges in
Flanders is testified by the Gallican Martyrologe on the thirteenth of March in
these wards, Marty. Gall. 13. Martij.
At Bruges the deposition of S. Boniface Bishop and Martyr, a man truly
Apostolical whose glorious Trophee, together with that of S Eoban Bishop and
other twenty (two) servants of God, is yearly colebrated by the Catholic
Church on the Nones of June, being the day in which they finished their happy
conflict.

15. Now whereas some Writers will make it a doubt whether S. Boniface was of
the English-Saxon blood, Bonif. Ep. 10.
to justify which they endeavor to make a collection of some to themselves
seemingly probable proofs that he was a Scott: The contrary is expressly
declared by S. Boniface himself in his Epistle written in his own of name and
seven other Bishops in a Synod at Mentz to Heresfrid a Priest and Chapleyn to
King Ethelbald, where he says that they were all of the English Nation: so that
they also who affirm that Abel a Bishop one of the same Synod was a Scott, are
manifestly mistaken. In anoter Epistle likewise of Saint Boniface to Pope
Zachary we read this passage, A. D. 752. Ib. Epist. 10.
In the Church wherein I was born and had my education, that is, in Transmarin
Saxony (so England was anciently called, for distinction from the other Saxony
in the continent) a Synod at London was assembled by S. Augustine Archbishop,
by S. Laurence, S. Iustus and S. Mellibus Bishops, Disciples of S. Gregory, in
which, etc. Ib. Epist. 6.
Yea he writes plainly that he was (Vernaculus Gentis Anglorum) a Native of the
English Nation: and that the Saxons were wont to tell him, We are of one and
the same blood.

16. These Testimonies sure are more then sufficient to disprove the impudence
of Dempster the Scottish Historian, Dempst. Hist. Scot. l. 2. c. 130
who affirms that in a Book a little before published by him he had by nine
most firm arguments demonstrated out of Marianus and twenty other Authors,
Marian. ad A. D. 717.
that Saint Boniface was no Englishman, but a Scott. Whereas the same Marianus
in express words writes, that he was (Natione Anglus) by Nation an Englishman.
Simpson. l. 2. Cent. 8.
And Simson a Scottish Protestant Historian shows far greater sincerity then
Dempster, who says, Boniface was born in England, not far from Exceter:, at a
town anciently called Cridiadunum, now Kirten.

THE FOUR AND TWENTIETH BOOK. OF THE CHVRCH-HISTORY OF BRITTANY.
I. CHAP.
I. CHAPTER.
1.2. An Anniversary Commemoration of the Martyrdom of S. Boniface, etc.
ordained by a Synod in England.

3.4. etc. Letters out of Brittany to Saint Lullus Successor of S. Boniface.

A. D. 756.
1. A Year was scarce passed after the Martyrdom of Saint Boniface and his
devout Companions, when the English-Saxon Church in Brittany by a common Decree
ordained an Anniversary Commemoration of them. For as soon as Cuthbert
Archbishop of Canterbury heard of their said Martyrdom he assembled a Synod of
the Bishops and Abbots of his Province: in whose Names he wrote a Synodicall
Letter to Lullus the Successor of S. Boniface in the Archiepiscopall See of
Mentz* which to this day remains among the Epistles of E. Boniface:

Ap. Bonifac. Ep. 70.
2. In which Epistle he acquaints him: 1. With their sincere affection to him
and his fellow-bishops in those barbarous new-converted Regions: how joyful
they all were of their prosperity, and how great a part they took in any
calamity befalling them. 2. He adds that it was a great subject of joy to them
that their Nation of Brittany should have the Happiness to send forth so many
illustrious Preachers and Apostles, endued with such Spiritual courage as not
to fear to encounter with Nations so feirce in their superstition; and with
such spiritual Wisdom and knowledge as to persuade and induce them to forsake
their ancient Idolatry. 3. He tells him that in this their General Synod they
had unanimously decreed to celebrate with an annual Feast the fifth day of
June, in commemoration of the glorious Martyrdom of Saint Boniface and his
companions, whom they chose, together with Saint Gregory and Saint Augustine, as
their special Patron, and Intercessour with our Lord. 4. He desires that the
same Charity and propinquity may continue between both their Churches, which
was begun in the life time of S. Boniface, and that mutual Prayers, and
celebration of Masses on both sides may daily be made for one another, both
living and dead. 5. He admonishes him, that whereas in many places of late the
State of Religion began to shake by the rising of New-Sects, whilst unconstant
and sensual men deserting and contemning the Decrees of Ancient Fathers and
Ecclesiastical Laws, A. D. 755.
invent and according to their own inventions publish new Doctrines,
prejudicial to souls: therefore he and his Churches together with them ought
to beg the intercessions of the Holy Apostles and Martyrs of Christ, that he
would give them grace to continue constant in the Orthodox Faith, and Unity of
the Church. A good pattern and example of which constancy ought to be the late
Famous Doctor and Martyr of our Lord S. Boniface, who willingly suffered all
incommodities and dangers for the Faith: and who being now admitted as an
household servant into the presence of God, as he will be a powerful Defender
of those who follow his example, so on the contrary he will be a terrible
accuser before the Supreme Judge of all such as shall forsake that Rule and
Communion with the Roman and Apostolic Church, which he allways followed.



Ap. Bonif. Ep. 74.
^. Other Letters likewise out of Brittany were written ^t this time to the same
Holy Archbishop Lullus: one from his kinsman Kineara Bishop of Winchester, who
two years before this succeeded in the place of Humfrid: In which he desires
him that the same Communion of Prayers and charitable Offices may continue
between then which had intervened between Saint Boniface and S. Daniel and
Humfrid his Predecessors. Ib. Ep. 78.
A second from Milret Bishop of Worcester, signifying how a little before he
had passed over into Germany to enjoy the conversation o^ S. Boniface, and
presently after his return heard the news of his death: for which though at
first he wa^ sad, yet the consideration of the great glory which he now
enioyes, and what a glorious Patron and Pillar to all of his country he is now
become, his sorrow was quickly turned into joy and thanks giving. He further
exhorts him that the same mutual Charity which S. Boniface had conciliated
between them, may still continue, and that he would afford him his
instructions, and Prayers, promising all Obedience to his commands, etc.

II. CHAP.
II. CHAP.
1.2. etc. The unhappy death of Ethelbald King of the Mercians: and several
judgments touching his future State.

5 6. Beornred, his murderer succeeds: and is expelled by Offa.

1. THE same year Ethelbald King of the Mercians after a reign of forty one
years with great vicissitude of fortune, was taken out of the world by a
violent death. Huntingd. f. 342.
Huntingdon writes that Ethelbald fighting a second time against the
West Saxons at Secundune, A. D. 757. Westmon. A. D. 756.
a wonderful slaughter was made of his Army, and he disdaining to fly, was
slain. Another Historian says, that though he fled, he could not avoid being
slain. Now this place of the Battle then called Secundun, is seated in the
borders of Staffordshire and Warwickshire, about three miles from Tamworth, and
is now called Serkington. Epit. Bed. A. D. 757.
Notwithstanding the Author of the Epitome at the end of S. Beda's History
affirms, that he was by treachery miserably slain in the night time by his own
guards: So that it is probable this misfortune happened to him after his flight
from the said battle.

2. Being thus unhappily slain, his Body was buried at Repandun in the County
of Darby: Camden in Darby f b.
Which Town, says Camden, we now call Repto^, which in ancient time was very
ample and renowned, but now is straightened to a small village. It was formerly
famous as having been the buriall-place of Ethelbald the good King of the
Mercians, who by the treachery of his own servants was slain. Ingulf. f. 858.
And Ingulfus adds that there was then at Ripedune a most famous Monastery
where this Kings body was buried: But what became of his soul, the judgments
of God are uncertain to us.

3. The judgments of men likewise concerning him are uncertain. Huntingd. ^. 4.
f. 3.2.
Huntingdon judges hopelesly of his future state: For after he had related the
sad, but just death of the Tyrant Sigebert, he ioyns him thus with Ethelbald,
Behold (says he) the manifest judgment of God: Behold how our Lords justice
retributes worthy punishments to man's demerits, not only in the world to come*
but even in this life also. For setting up wicked Kings for the punishment of
their subjects: one he suffers to rage a long time for their longer vexation,
and that such a King becoming by so long a continuance in wickedness more
depraved, he may in Hell be more sharply tormented: as the forementioned King
Ethelbold: Another he quickly exterminates, etc.

4. Yet other Writers pass a more favorable judgment of his state. Camden
calls him a good King: and certain it is that he showed great signs of
Repentance. Hence William of Malmsbury after he had produced S. Boniface his
sharp letter to him, Malmsb. de Reg. l. 1. c. 4.
adds: Neither could the Letters of so great a Saint want effect which with so
much circumspection and zeal he sent to him, as became the duty of an
Apostolic Legate, and his Charity to his countrymen.

5. There succeeded in his place Beornred, A. D. 757.
who yet by others is not reckoned among the Mercian Kings, because he
impiously slew King Ethelbald, and uninstly usurped his place: from which he
was cast by his worthy Successor King Offa. This is briefly thus related by
Hoveden: Hoved. hic.
In the year of Grace seven hundred fifty seven a civil war was raised in
the Kingdom of the Mercians, between the usurping Tyrant Beornred and Offa. But
coming to a battle, Beornred was compelled to fly, and Offa by this victory
became King.

6. Beornred being thus deposed, could find no security among the Mercians, who
all hated him, both high and low. He seems therefore to have fled into the
Kingdom of the Northumbers: For twelve years after this we find him acting the
last exploit of his cruelty in that country, which was the burning of the
City called Cataract (now Catteridge.) But himself escaped not punishment long:
for the same year he through the just judgment of God, perished likewise by
fire: Thus writes Matthew of Westminster.

III. CHA.
III. CHAP.
i 2. Pope Paul's Letter to Egbert King of the Northumbers.

3 4 King Egbert becomes a Monk.

1. THE same year Pope Steven dying* there succeeded in his place Paul first of
that name: From whom we find an Epistle not yet published, directed to the two
Northumbrian Brethren, Egbert (or Eadbert) King of that country, and Egbert
Bishop of York. In which he signifies to them how a certain Abbot called
Fordred was lately come from thence to Rome, where he made his complaint to
him, that whereas a certain Abbess^ had bestowed three Monasteries upon him,
the names of which were Staning, Frago or Cuchawald, and Donemade, the said
King had violently taken them from him, and bestowed them on his Brother the
Prince Mol. In case this complaint was true, he desired the King to consider
how great a crime and how dangerous to his soul it was, to invade places
dedicated to the service of God, taking them from him who was ready to perform
that service, and bestowing them on another who was wholly immersed in worldly
cares.

2. What success this Epistle had, it does not appear Only this is certain,
that at this time the Kingdom of the Northumbers was full of disquiets. The
year before this, the King with the help of the Picts had taken from the
Northern Britains, or Cumbrians, the Strong Castle of Dunbritton, as he had a
little before, from the Scotts, the Territory of Coil, or Ki^e* by which means
probably his treasure being exhausted, he was forced to reward his Brother
Mollo's services out of Church revenews. However it is not to be doubted but
that a King so pious as Egbert was, would not resist the Fatherly admonitions
of so worthy a Pope.

3. An irrefragable proof that he would not persist in such injustice was this,
that presently after he heroically contemned all worldly glory to serve God in
solitude and devotion. Which is thus related by Huntingdon (with whom generally
all other Histori^ns agree.) In the third year of the reign of Kernulf King of
the West Saxons (says he) Eadbert King of the Northumbers seeing the unhappy
lives and miserable deaths of the two Kings Ethelbald and Sigebert, Huntingd.
Westmon. hic. Wigorn. hic.
and with them comparing the landab^e life and glorious death of his
Predecessor Ceol^olf, he wisely chose the better part, which shall never be
taken from him. For relinquishing his Kingdom (which he resigned to his son
Osul^) and receiving a Monastical Tonsure which would procure for him an
eternal Crown, clothing himself likewise with dark simple raiment, for which
he should afterward receive vestments ^hining with a heavenly splendor, he
retired into a Monastery. This now is the eighth of those Saxon Kings who for
the Love of Christ quitted, or to speak more truly, for the hope of an
infinitely more glorious celestial Kingdom willingly exchanged an earthly
throne: And no doubt the eight Beatitudes shall be their rewar^s which are
promised to voluntary Poverty. Now the Tonsure which he received is by the
Author of the Epitome of S. Beda's History called the Tonsure of S. Peter:
Epit. S. Bed. hic.
from whence some would infer that he did not become a Monk, but a secular
Clark. But besides that all our Historians almost affirm expressly that he
lived afterward and happily dyed in a Monastical Profession: That phrase of
the Tonsure of S. Peter signifies that it was not the Scottish, but Roman
Tonsure which he received, and which then was common both to the Se^^lar Clergy
and Religious persons also. Yet withal that in his Monastery he was adopted to
an E^clesiasticall State and order is testified by H^veden.

4. Ten years this good King lived in his solitude and poverty: after which he
received the re^ompence of his Piety. His memory remained in benediction with
posterity: Martyr. Ange 11 Iunij. Ap Capgr. in vit. Saint Cuthbert.
and his Name is in our Martyrologe commemorated among the Saints on the
eleaventh day of June. We read in the Author of S. Cuthberts life in
Capgrave, that there was a great freindship between this good King and the
famous French King Pipin, who likewise sent many Royal presents to him.

IV. CHAP. IV. CHAP.

1.2. Of S. Agatha a devout English Abbess in Germany.

^ 4 etc The G^sts of the Holy Virgin Saint Lioba, an Abbess also there.

14 Blasphemies of the Lutheran Centuriators.

15.16 etc Of Saint Tetta an English Abbess of Winburn: Mistress of S. Lioba.

1. THE same year two Holy Virgins Disciples of S. Boniface, happily followed
him to Heaven. A. D. 755.
These were S. Agathe and S. Lioba: both of them educated in the Monastery of
Winburn, and both esteemed fit to be invited out of Brittany to establish
Monastical Discipline and piety in Germany, where they were likewise both of
them constituted Abbesses of the same Monastery successively.

2. The name indeed of S. Agatha is not found among those who at S. Boniface's
invitation went into Germany in the year seven hundred twenty five: so that it
seems she was sent afterward. Little is spoken of her in ancient Writers, but
only that she was Abbess of the Monastery of Bischosheim after that S. Lioba
had resigned that Office, to undertake another nearer to Mentz. It is a
sufficient Proof of her piety that her Name is commemorated among the Saints on
the twenty eighth of June. Martyrolog. Angl 28. Iun


3. But the Name and Sanctity of S. Lioba was much better known in the Church.
Her Life was first written by Mogon a Monk of Fulda, and afterward better
digested by Rodolphus another Monk there, at the command of his Abbot, Rabanus
Maurus. And out of him Haraeus thus compendiously recounts her Gests: Haraeus
28. September.
4. At the time when the Venerable Abbess Tetta Sister to King ( Ethelhard,
Kinsman and successor of Ina in the kingdom of the West Saxons) governed the
Monastery of Religious Virgins at a place called Winburn (in Dorcetshire) there
lived in the same Monastery a spiritual daughter of that devout Mother, called
Lioba: Whose Gests my purpose is briefly here to relate.

5. The parents of S. Lioba remained a long time after their marriage without
children. Her Fathers name was Dimo, her Mothers Ebba: both of noble race, and
both of great piety. At length God bestowed on them this daughter: ( to whom
they gave the name Truthgeba: but her ordinary surname was Lioba which in the
Saxon tongue signifies Beloved: Which surname continuing, made the other
forgotten.) As Soon as she came to mature years her mother recommended her to
the education of the foresaid Venerable Abbess Tetta: under whom she employed
her self entirely in the studies of heavenly Discipline. She was diligent also
in imitating what soever virtues and graces she observed in any of her
Religious Sisters. Hereby she attained to that Perfection, that in succeeding
time God was pleased to honor her with a celestial Vision* signifying to her
under the semblance of a purple thread issuing out of her mouth (in such
abundance, that she wound it into a large bottom, as much as her hands could
contain) that the Doctrine of Divine Wisdom should by her be communicated to
many souls abroad.

6. At that time S. Boniface laboriously spread the Gospel among the people of
Germany: Who among other works of Spiritual industry had an intention to erect
a Monastery of Religious Virgins in that Region. And being desirous to
constitute Superior and Abbess of it a Spiritual Mother of eminent piety, he
sent messengers with Letters to the foresaid Abbess Tetta, A. D. 750.
desiring amon^ others that this Religious Virgin Lioba might be sent, being
one whose Sanctity and learning was in great esteem. Her Spiritual Mother was
very unwilling to have her depart from her: Notwithstanding for accomplishing
the foresaid Vision God inclined her mind to send her honorably to the Blessed
Bishop. He with great veneration received her, and appointed her Abbess of a
Monastery in a place called Biscoffsheim: where a considerable congregation of
Religious Virgins was gathered together, which by the example and instructions
of so holy a Mistress diligently gave themselves to the study of heavenly
Discipline, in which by her assistance they so much proffited, that scarce any
other Monasteries of Virgins were founded, which did not desire from this some
of her disciples to be Mistresses of spiritual and Regular Discipline.

7. For indeed S. Lioba was a woman of admirable virtues, eminent in prudence,
boundless in Charity, and for her aspect of Angelical beauty She allways had
a cheerful smiling look yet never so as to break forth into unseemly laughter.
Never did any one hear proceed from her lips a word of reproachful or bitter
speech against any. Though she was very kind and liberal in her allowance of
meat and drink to others, yet to her se^f she was extremely sparing: insomuch
as the little Cup which contained her measure of drink was by her Sisters
commonly called the Small Cup of the Beloved ( for so the name of Lioba in the
Saxon tongue signifies) But withal it was wonderful to observe the diligence
which she always showed in reading. From her infancy she was perfectly
instructed in the knowledge of Grammar and other Liberal Sciences. And
afterward she in a manner incessantly with great sharpnes studied and medicated
on the Sacred Books of the Old and New Testament, diligently committing to her
memory the divine Precepts therein contained. Moreover for a plenitude of
perfect knowledge she added thereto the Sayings of the Holy Fathers, the
Decrees of Synods and the entire Ecclesiastical Laws. She was a mistress to
all, and yet bot^ in heart she esteemed, and in behavior showed her self as
the meanest of all.



8. It cannot be doubted but such a spectacle of all virtue and piety was most
grievous to the Enemy of all good, and that it horribly inflamed his envy and
malice. He used all his arts to corrupt the purity both of such a Mistress and
her Disciples. And that no^ succ^eding, he endeavored to cast a stai^ upon
them in the worlds opinion: For which purpose this Infernal Tempter incite a
certain poor woman who had had a child by fornication, ^d. ib.
to cast it into a river which passed through the said Monastery. But this
being discovered what does that chaste Congregation do? They al^ betook
themselves to prayer, unanimously and earnestly beseeching God to remove that
infamy from them. Every one of them lifting up their arms in manner of a
Cross, stood unmovable till they had recited the whole Psalter in order: Th^^
they did when all the neigbouring people were gathered to see that horrible
spectacle of the murdered infant And our merciful God did not delay to discover
and punish the injury and scandal done to his devout Handmaids. A. D. 757.
For presently after, that wretched woman possessed by the Devil whose captive
she had made her self, ran among them, and loudly calling the Holy Abbess by
name, openly confessed the crime which she had committed. At which the whole
multitude astonished made great clamours, and the Religious Virgins wept for
joy. In a word the merit and Sanctity of the Holy Virgin Lioba was celebrated
by all.

9. In the mean time the Blessed man of God S. Boniface by a Martyrdom, much
desired by him, putts an end to all his labors. Notwithstanding the want of so
worthy and Venerable a Master does not discourage this holy Virgin, who
continued unmovable, fixing her hope in the assistance of God alone.

10. She was held in great reverence by all that knew her, even Princes also,
Pipin King of France and especially his illustrious son Charles, who often
invited her to his Court, and honored her with many magnificent presents. The
Queen Hildegardis likewise respected her with a pure affection, and ^as earnest
with her to make her abode at her Court. But she detested the tumult of a
Palace, as poison. Princes loved her, Nobles honored her, Bishops with great
joy vencrated her: yea moreover considering her prudence in counsel, and
perfect knowledge in Scriptures and Sacred learning, they often consulted her
about Divine Mysteries and Ecclesiastical Instituts.

11. But she employed her principal solicitude about matte^s belonging to her
own charge which she had undertaken. Therefore as became a spiritual Guide of
souls, she diligently visited the Monasteries under her care, inciting her
Religious Virgins to a holy emulation in aspiring to the glory of Perfection
This was her continual exercise and employment, till being weakened with old
age, after she had putt into good Order all the Monasteries commended to her
care, by the advice of the Holy Archbishop Lullus Successor to Saint
Boniface, she retired her self to a Monastery called Schoversheim, four miles
distant from the City of Mentz southward: Where she abode till her death, with
devout Virgins there serving our Lord, spending nights and days in fasting and
prayers.

12. This Blessed Virgin dyed on the twenty eighth day of September: and the
Monks of Fulda receiving her Sacred Body, carried it in solemn Procession, at
which many Noble persons attended, to their own Monastery, where according the
order formerly given by the Holy Martyr S. Boniface, they entombed it and there
it became glorious by many Miracles. Notwithstanding whereas S. Boniface had
commanded that her Body should be laid in his own Sepulcher, the said Monks his
Disciples not thinking it expedient to open his Tomb, and discover his Sacred
bones, durst not presume so far to obey him: for which reason they reposed her
Body in a Tomb near adjoining thereto. And this was the only Body of that Sex
which ever was permitted to enter into that Monastery. Her Memory is celebrated
both in the English and Roman Martyrologe on the fourth day before the Calends
of October, Martyrolog. Romans and Ang. 28. Sept. Bonif. Ep. 31. Ib. Ep 36.
on which day she dyed.

13. Her name is also written Liobgytha, and so S. Boniface writes it in a
short Epistle to her, and herself also in an answer to him, in which she shows
that he had formerly been joined in a great league of freindship with her
Father, whom she calls Tin, who lived in the Western parts of Brittany; and
that he was also a kinsman to her Mother Ebb.

14. This is the Sum of what we find recorded concerning this Blessed Virgin,
the miracle of her age for her learning and sanctity, the object and universal
admiration and affection of Princes, Queens, Nobles, Bishops and all that knew
her: Only envied and hated by the Devil because she was a Virgin consecrated
to God: this incited him to endeavor, but in vain, to cast a spott upon the
opinion of her Chastity: and the same likewise has of late incited his
Ministers the Lutheran Centuriatours of Magdeburg to renew his calumny, yea and
to enwrap S. Boniface also in the same suspicion. Magdeb. cent. 8. f. 796. and
801.
Because he erected Monasteries and taught Prayer for the dead, they call him a
Minister and slave of Satan: And because he brought Religious Virgins out of
Brittany into Germany, they write thus: He drew out of England with him a flock
of women: among whom the prin^ipall were Chunitruda Aunt to Lullus Archbishop
of Mentz, and Valdopyrga, these he placed in Bavaria: Then Chynilda and
Beregitha, whom he left in Thuringia: lastly Tecla and Lioba, whom he settled
in France: to the end that in all his perambulations up and down, he might
every where find lascivious Mistresses. What a horrible Religion must that be
which such men as these profess, which even acknowledges it self to be odious
to God and man, unless the Teachers of it can demonstrate, that the
consecrating of souls to Gods service in continual fasting and prayer, the
mortifying of all lustful passions, the dedicating both soul and Body to
devotion and chastity, and such Chastity attested by Divine Miracles, the
converting of many Nations to Christ from abominable Idolatries, and lastly the
offering of ones life to God by Martyrdom be sinful crimes, and proofs that
such persons are slaves of Antichrist!

15. We have placed the Gests and death of S. Lioba in this year, therein
complying with our Martyrologe though certain it be that she ourlived it many
years: as appears by the freindship she had with King Charles the Great, and
his Queen Hildegardis, who long after this began his reign and was married.

16. Before we take off our pen from writing of this Holy Virgin, we will
add some thing in relation to her concerning her Venerable Mistress the
devout Abbess Tetta: The little we know of her name, and that to her was
committed the instruction of S. Lioba, we have not received from our own
Monuments, but we are obliged to strangers who wrote her daughter and
Disciples Gests, for it: particularly to the forenamed Religious Priest Mog^,
who had particular knowledge of her Disciples, Agatha, Tecla, Nana and Lioba,
from whose relation he received what he wrote of her.

17. From him therefore shall here be related only two particulars concerning
her: the first is the special Institut of her Monastery: the Second, a worthy
example of her Charity to her daughters after they were dead and her care of
the living.

Vit. S. Liobae ap. Sur. 28 Sept.
18. As touching the first: Whereas at Winburn there had anciently been built by
the West Saxon Kings two Monasteries, one for men, and the other for women: and
in that age of innocent simplicity and fervor of Devotion mutual free society
between persons of different sexes did not render them exposed to tentations,
or suspicions: Yet in her Monastery an inviolable Law was observed that no
access was permitted for either to the others enclosure. And this special
Institut the Venerable Abbess Tetta so rigorously observed, that she would not
so much as admit the Bishops entrance among them.

19. In the next place among many examples of the Devout Abbess Tetta's
virtues, her daughter Lioba related this one to her Disciples for their
instruction: There was, said she, in the Monastery of Winburn a certain
Religious Virgin, which for her extraordinary strictnes in Regular Observance
was often made the Mistress of the younger Virgins. But in that Office she
showed such indiscreet rigor, that thereby she incurred an extreme aversion
and hatred from them* which she never endeavored to qualify by meeknes: but on
the contrary persisted to her death in her obstinacy to contemn their bitter
displeasure against her, and not to remitt any thing of her severity toward
them. In this pertinacy she dyed, without seeking any reconciliation with them.
But their passions did not dye with her: on the contrary they could scarce look
on the place where she was buried without expressions of hatred to her memory:
yea some of them would not abstain from showing their indignation by trampling
upon her grave.

20. This being come to the knowledge of the Venerable Abbess Tetta, she
called them together about the grave, where she with vehement sharpnes reproved
their uncharitable presumption. But withal observing that the loose earth
covering the dead Virgins body was unmeasurably sunk below the pavement, she
was much affrighted at it, fearing that such depression against the ordinary
course of Nature, argued no good state of her soul: She renewed her rebukes
therefore against those implacable Virgins, A. D. 758.
and enioynd them to cast out of their hearts all bitterness against her Memory:
Yea she required the whole Congregation to ioyn with her in earnest and
assiduous Prayers for their departed Sister, that God would forgive her all her
offenses committed by indiscretion or obstinacy. She moreover ordaind among
them a three-days Fast, adiuring them to employ that time in watching, Prayers
and Psalmody. On the third day she with all her spiritual children lying
prostrate before the Altar in devout Prayers with many sighs and tears, as soon
as they rose up they saw the earth upon the grave raised up to its natural
height: which they did not doubt but was a sign that their Prayers were granted.

V. CHAP. V. CHAP.

1. Troubles among the Northumbers.

2.3. etc. The Gests of Offa King of the Mercians.

1. IN the kingdom of the Northumbers, A. D. 758.
as soon as the pious and devout King Eadbert had hid himself in a Monastery,
all virtue and piety seemed to disappear with him: and in the place to succeed
nothing but tumults, rage and treasons. His young son Osulf to whom he had
surrendered the kingdom, in the space of one year, Hoved. hic.
says Hoveden, held it and lost it: For on the ninth day before the Calends of
August the year after his Father had instituted him in it, he was impiously
slain by his own family: His tender age and innocence rendering him obnoxious
and exposed to treachery. His Successor was his Uncle Edilwald, surnamed Mul
or Mollo, mentioned before: who is said to have contributed to his Nephews
murder. And though he was a man of great courage and prudence, yet he found
there could be no security in power obtaind by crimes: for not long after he
likewise came to a tragical end.

2. But among the Mercians a far more prosperous fate attended the new King
Offa, who had driven the Tyrant Beor^red out of the kingdom, and was by the
unanimous consent of the people placed in his Throne, which he held the space
of thirty nine years. His Royal descent is thus described by Huntingdon:
Huntingd. l. 4.
The most Noble Prince Offa (says he) was the son of Wingferd, the son of
Eanulf, the son of Osmod, the son of Epus, the son of Wippa, the son of Creada,
the son of Kinewal, the son of Knibba, the son of Icel, the son of Eomer, the
son of Agelthen, the son of Offa, the son of Weremond, the son of Withald, the
son of Woden. Matthew of Westminster stops not here in his Genealogy, but goes
on till he brings him up to Adam.

3. As for Matthew a Monk of Saint Albans, Math. Alban. Mon.
his fictions either contrived or believed by him we will neglect, A. D. 759.
who out of a partial affection to Offa the founder of his Monastery recounts
how he being the only son of his Father was born blind and dumb, for which
cause he was at first called Pinered: But afterward God miraculously restored
his sight, and gave liberty to his tongue, moreover bestowing on him a
beautiful wife, happy children and great triumphs over his enemies: In
acknowledgment for which blessings he founded the said Monastery. M. Paris in
Offa. 2. f. 11.


4. As soon as King Offa was crowned and established in his Throne, says Matthew
Paris, peace and prosperity flourishd again among the Mercians: the people were
eased of their former pressures, the Regal Blood was restored, Laws for public
tranquillity were enacted, and the Nobles formerly banished out of the Kingdom
by Beornred, were recalled.

5. We shall have occasion very frequently to treat of the actions of this
Noble King. Therefore at present we will only adioyn the Character in general
given to him by William of Malmsbury: Malmsb. de Reg. l. 1. c. 4.
King Offa (says he) the great grand child of Penda was a man of mighty
courage and magnanimity, who resolutely undertook whatsoever design he once
conceived in his mind: and he reigned the space of nine and thirty years. When
I revolve in my mind his Gests, in which there was great variety, I am in great
doubt whether I should reckon him among the Good or evil Kings, such an
interchangeable vicissitude there was of virtues and vices in him, who like
another Proteus was always changing his form and features.

VI. CHA.
VI. CHAP.
1.2.3. Cuthred Archbishop of Canterbury dying, gave order that his body
should be buried in the Archiepiscopall Church: to the prejudice of Saint
Augustins Monastery.

4. Bregwin succeeds him.

5.6. S. Eadburga Abbess. Six Saints of the same name.

Malmsb. l. 1. f. 198.
1. THE same year Cuthred Archbishop of Canterbury, after he had administered
that See seaventeen years, dyed. When he was ready to dye, says William of
Malmsbury, he commanded his servants to bury him privately in his
Archiepiscopall Church which was built within the walls of the City. And
because the Monks of S. Augustine, whose Monastery was seated without the said
City, by an Ancient custom which they were stubboraly constant to observe, did
challenge as their undoubted right that the Bodies of the Archbishops should
be buried in their Church, in so much as they would probably endeavor even by
violence to take away with them his Body after he was dead: therefore he enioynd
his family, as soon as he was dead to abstain from any noise in bewayling his
death, both in the City and Palace, so that no notice of his death being given
abroad, there might be no concourse of people, and by that means they might
without disturbance bury him in the Archiepiscopall Church, and not apprehend
any danger that the Monks would take him out of the ground, when they should
perceive how they had been overreached by cunning.

2. But B. Godwin relates, Godvv. de Archiep. Cantuar.
that the Tradition was that the Body of Archbishop Cuthbert was not buried in
the Archiepiscopall Church it self, called Christ-Church, but in another lesser
Church seated near it and dedicated to S. John, which he had built on purpose
for baptizing infants: and which both himself and his successors used in their
life time for a Consistory, and for a place of burial after they were dead.
Moreover that this Church in after ages having been consumed by fire together
with the Cathedral Church, was never after rebuilt.

3. The motive inducing the Archbishop to make this change, Spelm. de Synod l.
1. f. 2^9.
was, in the judgment of Sir Henry Spelman, a kind of indignation that his
Cathedral Church should be deprived of the honor of being a sepulcher of
eminent persons, and particularly of Archbishops who had performed all
Episcopal duties in it. Therefore in as much as till that time there had no
burial places been permitted within Cities, Ib. f. 11.
he had recourse to the Pope for a dispensation from that obligation: and to
the King for a change of the place of burial both for Archbishops and Kings.
Notwithstanding if the foregoing relation be true, what need was there of that
subtilty to circumvent the Augustinian Monks, who doubtless would not have had
the boldness to contradict the Orders both of the Pope and King?

4. The year following there was substituted to Cuthbert in the Archiepiscopall
See, A. D. 759. Godvv de Arch. Cant.
Bregwin, who was consecrated on the Feast of S. Michael the Archangel. This
Bregwin, according as we read in the Antiquities of Brittany, Antiq. Brit. in
Bregvvin.
was born in old Saxony of noble parents: After he had passed his childhood he
betook himself to the study of sacred learning: to which he had so great an
affection, that for advantaging himself in his studies he passed over into
Brittany, quite forsaking his native soil. After some abode in Brittany, he
was for his modesty and virtue so much in general esteem and favor, that he
had the privilege of naturalization. And he made so great progress in sacred
knowledge, that he alone was esteemed worthy to be the successor to Cuthbert
in the Archbishopric. After which he did so excel in all good works, that not
any in his time approached within many degrees to him.

5. At that time the Holy Virgin and Abbess Eadburga, surnamed Buggan, also
dyed, It is no wonder there should be some confusion in Writers touching her
and other Saints of the same name: Of which no less then six are recorded in
our Ecclesiastical Monuments. The first was S. Eadburga of Winchester,
commemorated on the fifteenth of June: The second S. Eadburga the Elder of
Kent: the Third, S. Eadburga of Peterborough: the Fourth S. Eadburga of
Gloucester: the Fifth S. Eadburga of Aylsbury: And this sixth Saint Eadburga
surnamed Buggan, of whom we now treat. There will follow still another Saint
Eadburga, the daughter of King Edward the elder.

6. It is hard to discover who were her parents. Probably this may be the
Buggan who was daughter to Kentwin King of the West Saxons, and who is
mentioned by Al^uin in his Poems as a great Benefactrice to the Abbey of
Glastenbury, where she built an Altar dedicated to the twelve Apostles. The
same likewise who sent to S Guthlac a Coffin of lead, in which his body was
deposed: To her S. Boniface being then a Priest, wrote concerning the strange
Visions of one who had been dead and was restored to life, among which Visions
one was touching the damnation of King Coenred. And another in which he
requested her to send him the ^pistles of S. Peter in golden Letters. Her
Mother Eangitha who was Abbess of a Monastery in Kent in a Letter written to
the same S. Boniface in the year of Grace seven hundred twenty five, gave him
an account of the great persecutions which her self and her daughter suffered,
as likewise the poverty of their condition, having neither Father, Brother, Son
nor uncle to support her. And she not long after dying, her daughter Saint
Eadburga, or Buggan, was constituted Abbess in her place. Once, with the
permission of S. Boniface her Spiritual Father, she undertook a pilgrimage of
devotion to Rome, where also she found him, who from thence returned to
Germany, and she to her Monastery in Brittany.

7. Most of these particulars we have in passing touched already: and little
more is to be found of her but her death, which was like her life precious in
the sight of our Lord. In her last sickness she seems to have been assisted by
the new consecrated Bishop Bregwin, of whom the Holy Virgin earnest^y requested
his prayers for her after her death, and that he would recommend the same
request to S. Lullus the successor of S Boniface in the Archrepiscop^ll See of
Mentz: Ap. Bonif. ep. 103.
which he faithfully performed, as appears by an Epistle of his to the same
Lullus, to the conclusion of which this Postscript is added: We do now
celebrate the day of the deposition of the Religious servant of Christ Buggan*
which is the sixth before the Calends of January. Before she dyed she desired
me with great earnestnes that I would transmitt this to your holiness. Martyr.
Ang. 18. Iulij.
Therefore as she hoped and believed, I beseech you be careful to perform, in
consideration withal that her Spiritual Father and Patron in Christ was the
Holy Bishop Boniface. In our Martyrologe she enioys a place among the Saints on
the eighteenth of July: A. D. 760.
if this be the same S. Eadburga who gave the name to a Village called
Eadburton near Ailesbury.

VII. CHAP. VII. CHA.

1.2 etc. The Gests and happy death of S. Liebwin an English Apostolic
Missioner in Germany.

14. Gregory Archbishop of Vtrecht dying Alberic succeeds him.

1. WE formerly declared how among the twelve Apostolic Pre^sts which in the
year of Christ six hundred and ninety by the exhortations of S. Egbert passed
over into Germany, A D. 760.
one was called Liebwin. Besides whom there was a second of the same Name, who
with the same design followed, about the time of S. Boniface his Martyrdom: who
after a zealous discharge of his Apostolic Office, dyed with great sanctity in
the year of Grace seven hundred and sixty: Whose Life was anciently written by
a Monk of the Monastery of Marchien (Elnonensis) at the request of Baldric
Archbishop of Vtrecht, and much commended by Peter Archdeacon of Cambray.
From whom we will here adioyn an account of his Gests.

2. He was born of English Parents in Brittany, H^cbald vit. S. ^^^bain. ap.
Sur. 12. Nov.
whose names are not recorded, but their piety was showed by his good education
in learning and virtue. He was in his younger years adopted into an
Ecclesiastical condition, having received the Clericall Tonsure: Afterward in
due time he was exalted to Preist-hood; to the end he might communicate to
others such graces and gifts as God had bestowed on him. And considering the
greater necessity which other foreign Nations, particularly Germany, had of the
fruits o^ his knowledge and zeal, then his own country, and invited thereto
by that which would deter a less courageous servant of God, which was
danger: he left his kindred and friends and passed over to Vtrecht, anciently
called Wittenburg.

5. The time of his arrival there, was presently after the Martyrdom of S.
Boniface: and there finding a Venerable man, the third Bishop of that place
named Gregory, who had been newly ordained there, having been a Priest and
disciple of S. Boniface, he declared to him the occasion and design of his
journey. Whereupon the Holy Bishop much rejoicing in our Lord to see the
operation of his Grace, encouraged him to be constant, and giving him for a
Companion the Venerable Disciple of S. Willebrord, Marcellin, he directed them
to a place designed by Almighty God near the R^ver Isel, in the confines
between the Saxons and French.

4. Being come thither, he lodged some space of time with a certain Widow
called Abachilda: and there with touch charity and confidence preached the
Gospel to the neighboring Pagans: many of which he induced to forsake their
Idolatry, and embrace the Christian Faith. By the assistance of these new
Converts he built a little Oratory at a place called Wilpa, on the Western bank
of the River Isel. And not long after, the multitude of Beleivers increasing*
he built another greater Oratory on the East side of the same River, together
with a convenient habitation adjoining. There the Man of God with great
devotion and chearfullnes celebrated Masses, and mortifyed himself with
assiduous watching and Fasting: and withal entertained with much chearfullnes
all that came to him, feeding their souls with the Word of Grace; by which
means he wan the affection of persons of higher condition living near that
place.

5. But the Dewill enraged to see the number of his adorers diminished,
suggested and communicated to his servants, devoted to him, a great proportion
of his envy and malignity: who first complaining, afterward conspired to
destroy the Man of God, and to burn the Sacred House, which they called a Scene
of Magical Superstitions. And this they effected: for rushing on him in great
multitudes, they set fire to his Oratory and house: But God would not permit
them to execute their malice upon him, but preserved him unhurt for the
salvation of many.

6, The Holy man was so far from being disheartened by this, that he attempted
an exploit far more Hero^call. The Nation of the Saxons had no King or general
Supreme Governor, but consisting of three degrees or orders, the Nobles, whom
they call Edlingen: Freemen, whom they called Frilingen: and Servants whom
they called Lass^: every Borough or District was governed by a Noble man to
whom the Freemen and Servants were Subjects. Now every year once, their custom
was to hold a general Assembly of all these Boroughs and all degrees of
Inhabitants. The place of their meeting was called Marklo nea^ ^he River Weser.

7. Now this great Assembly being ready to meet, the Man of God S. Leibwin had
a resolution to present himself before it, and there either to gain a good
number of Converts to God or Martyrdom to himself. It happened that at this time
he was entertained in the house of a certain Noble man of great Power, to whom
he communicated his intention. But the said Noble man (whose name was Folbert)
endeavored to dissuade him, telling him that though there were some to whom he
was very dear, yet the greatest part would show themselves enemies, and
endanger to take away his life. He besought him therefore during the time of
the Assembly either to return home, or to go to the house of his dear friend
Davo: after which he might come and visi^ him again. But the Holy man replied,
That he neither ought nor durst neglect to perform the work which our Lord
Jesus Christ had commanded him to do. The Noble man hearing this opposed no
further, but remained very sad.

8. The Assembly then being met, the courageous soldier of Christ, taking all
his Spiritual Armor, and withal clothing himself with his Preistly
Vestments, and taking a Crucifix in one hand, as our Lords Ensign-bearer, and
in the other a Book of the Gospells, presents himself in the midst of the
Assembly, where they were offering Idolatrous Sacrifices and devotions to their
false Gods. Which the Holy man seeing, with an inflamed zeal and loud voice
condemned their Superstitions, telling them that they were Devils which they
worshipped, which would reward them with eternal torments. Whereas if they
would turn to the only true God the Creator of all things and Savior of men,
and repenting of their Idolatries embrace the true Faith and be baptized to the
remission of their Sins, he would grant them tranquillity and plenty in this
world, and everlasting glory in the next. He added hereto, That if they
neglected to follow his wholesome and saving counsel, God had preordained for
their present punishment a King not far distant from them, of wonderful
prudence, courage and power, who would avenge the cause of God by their
destruction.

9 When they heard these words, they be came inflamed with rage against him,
calling him Seducer and Impostour: and not content with this, they snatchd out
of the hedges stakes of wood, which they sharpened, intending to ki^l him with
them: for they wore no weapons at such assemblies. But the Holy man protected
by Supernatural assistance, passed through the midst of them undiscerned, and
so escaped.

10. Yet among them some there were whose ^earts A^mighty God touched with his
Grace* Of which the principal was one called Bu^o, who ascending to an eminent
place, boldly told them, that since they never refused to receive and hearken
to Ambassadors sent from their barbarous neighbors: much less ought they to
stop their ears against the speeches of an Ambassador sent from the Supreme
God, who to procure their good was willing to sacrifice his own life. That they
might judge of the power of that God, since he had delivered his servant from
the fury of so great a multitude. Therefore no doubt the threatening which in
the name of his God he had made against them, would certainly be executed. The
mind of the Multitude hearing these things, was deeply struck with fear: and
thereupon they decreed by common consent, That none should hurt or disquiet
that Messenger of God, but suffer him freely to pass whithersoever he thought
fit.

11. Saint Liebwin therefore seeing such a visible proof of Divine protection
over him gave due thanks to God: though he was not without some grief that the
blessing of Martyrdom was denied him. But since he could not suffer from
others, he spared not to afflict himself, mortifying and crucifying the flesh
and sensual affections of it with Watching, Fasting and Prayer: by which mean
without persecution he suffered a long Martyrdom. And as for the Apostolic
Office enioynd him, he incessantly employed his time in teaching, exhorting and
baptizing great multitudes which daily gave up their names to Christ. This he
ceased not to do till Almighty God this year thought meet to call him to
receive the reward of a good and faithful servant, on the day before the Ides
of November: on which day his memory is celebrated both in the English and
Gallican Martyrologe. Martyr. Augl 12. November.


12. After his death certain malicious Pagans among the Saxons envying so great
a Congregation of Christians as assembled in his Oratory, first despoyled the
place, and then set it on fire. They had a great desire to exercise their rage
by some indignities to his Sacred Body, but with all their diligence in seeking
it, they could never find it.

13. Not long after the said Oratory was again restored. It was built in the
haven of the City called afterward Daventry: Which name it took from the
forementioned person Davon, a Noble man of Saxony, and most cordial friend and
Disciple of S. Liebwin.

14. In the mean time the devout servant of God Gregory dyed, and Alberic
succeeded him in the Archiepiscopall See of Vtrecht. By his directions and
command a certain Priest, (afterward a Bishop) named Ludger was sent to seek
out the Sacred Relics of this Holy man of God: which at last by a vision in
sleep he was directed to find: and having taken them up, he with great
veneration deposed them in the Church new built. Many years after this, Bertulf
accounted the twentieth Bishop of Vtrecht, is said to have been the founder of
another Magnificent Church in the same Town, which was consecrated to the
honor of God and his faithful servant Saint Liebwin.

VIII. CHAPTER
VIII. CHAP.
1.2. etc. The Gests of Saint Winnebald.

5. And of Saint Sola.

1. THE same year likewise gave an end to the labors of two Disciples of S.
Boniface, S. Winnebald and S. Sola. As touching the former, he was, as has
been said, Son to Saint Richard the English King; and Brother to S. Willebald.
There little remains in Ecclesiastical Monuments recorded of him, but that he
was one of those Priests which in the year of Grace seven hundred twenty five
were called out of Brittany to assist S. Boniface in preaching to the Frisons.
He was by the same Saint afterward made Abbot of the Monastery of Heildesham.
Which Office did not so wholly employ him, but that he traveled the country
about to root out Idolatrous superstitions.

2. The greatest difficulty he found was in reprooving and correcting the
errors and vices of false Christians, especially such as took on them the
title and Office of Priests: Many of which were most horribly depraved, and
defiled with all manner of uncleannes These were so impatient of reformation,
that they endeavored many ways to destroy him, who spared no labors to save
them. But God defended his servant from their malice.

3. After many years spent, and divided between the exercises of Martha and
Mary, sometimes attending in the solitude of his Monastery to Prayer and
Contemplation, as likewise to the establishing perfect Regular Observance: and
sometimes traveling abroad to win souls to Christ: At last a grievous
infirmity seized on him, nowithstanding which he would needs undertake a
journey to visit his fellow Disciple Megingant then Bishop of Wizteburg, with
whom he stayed only three days: For returning homeward, his infirmity
increasing he retired to a Monastery in the way dedicated to S Benedict. Being
there, he sent to his Brother S. Willebald who was a Bishop, and to other his
friends, desiring them to visit and assist him in his last sickness. Who being
come, exhibited to him all requisite Offices of Christian Charity. At last the
Holy man perceiving his last hour to approach, after many pious exhortations
made to all that were present, quietly yielded up his soul to God.

4. S. Ludger who wrote the life of S. Gregory the third Bishop of Vtrecht,
Ludger. invit. S Gregor. ap. Sur.

Marty. Angl. 24. Sep.


his Master, affirms that S. Winnebald was very dear to him, who by many
Miracles after his death, showed how great the sanctity of his life had been.
His memory is celebrated in our Martyrologe on the four and twentieth of
September: but in the Gallican on the first of May: Where mention is made of
his Relics translated to Furnes a town in Flanders.

5. The other Disciple of S. Boniface was S. Sola, an English-Saxon likewise:
who emulating the piety of his Master, taught the Counsels of Christian
Perfection to such as S. Boniface had converted to the Faith. He accompanied S.
Winnebald and S. Willebald in their pilgrimages to Rome: And was afterward the
first Abbot of a Monastery founded by himself, Ap. Sur. 10. December.
in a place from him called Solenhoffen. His Life is extant written above eight
hundred years since by Ermenold a Deacon and Disciple of Rabanus Archbishop of
Mentz: A. D. 762.
Wherein we read how he became a Father of a great congregation of devout
Monks: and after many blind, lame, dumb and deaf miraculously healed by him in
the name of Jesus, he at last full of all virtues in a good old age gave up his
Spirit to God. About a hundred years after his death, Altimus Bishop of Eys^at
obstained of Pope Gregory the fourth, that his name should be written among the
Saints. Molanus affirms that his Feast is celebrated on the third of December.

IX. CHAPTER
IX. CHAP.
1. 2. etc. A Rebellion among the Northumbers, etc.

4.5. Bregvin Archbishop of Canterbury dying: Iambert succeeds.

6.7. etc. Several Episcopal Sees vacant, supplied.

A. D. 761.
1. IN the year of Grace seven hundred hundred sixty one, which was the third
of the Reign of Ethelwald Mol King of the Northumbers, Hoved. hic.
a certain Nobleman of that kingdom named Oswin raised a rebellion against the
said King: and Armies on both sides being brought into the field, a terrible
battle was fought at a place called Edwinscliff: in which Oswin was slain.

A. D. 762.
2. The year following the same King in the City of Cataract took to wife his
Queen called Edilthrida. As touching the City where this Marriage was
celebrated Camden writes, Camd. in Richmond.
that at this day nothing remains of it great, but its name, being a very small
village called Ca-Catarick, and Catarick bridge: The antiquity whereof is
demonstrated by the large Roman way and old broken monuments there dug up.

3. No more is found touching the forenamed Queen Edilthrida: unless this be
the same to whom an Epistle of Alcuin is found directed with this inscription,
Alcuin. Ep. 30
To the devout servant of God, formerly a Queen, now a most beloved Religious
Sister Aedilthrydis, the humble Levite Alchuin wishes health. Which Epistle is
full of pious exhortations and instructions suitable to the state professed by
her: and likewise of thankfullnes for her munificent liberality to him then
living in France.

4. The same year Bregwin Archbishop of Canterbury after he had governed that
Province only three years dyed. Concerning whom this Elegy is found in
Capgrave, Bregwin was appointed by God as a Mirror, Capgrav. in Bregvvin.
so brightly shining with all virtues, that in his life every one might find
what he ought to imitate. A. D. 764.
At length in the third year of his Bishopric being full of good works and
examples of virtues, he departed this life to eternal happiness, on the
seventh day before the Calends of September: and was buried in the Church of
S. John adjoining to the Cathedral Church. Marty. Ang. 12. August.
But in our Martyrologe his Deposition is commemorated on the ninth day before
the said Calends. In B. Godwins Catalogue of Bishops we read that the Monks of
S. Augustine with armed men entered the Archiepiscopall Palace, endeavoring by
force to take away the dead Body of Bregwin: and that their Abbot Lambrith, or
Iambert went to Rome to make complaint of the wrong done to that Monastery.

5. But besides that none other of our Historians mention this: the relation is
probably disproved, because the same Iambert was by the City Monks elected to
succeed in the Archiepiscopall See: who two years after either went to Rome, or
from Rome received the Archiepiscopall Pall.

6. The year following the Episcopal See of Candida Casa, A. D. 763.
or Witern, being vacant by the death of Frithwald, Pectwin was immediately
ordained his successor. As yet that Bishopric pertained to the Jurisdiction
of the English, and was subordinat to the Metropolitan See of York: Malmsb. de
Pont. f. 272.
and so it remaind (says William of Malmsbury) all the time of Pectwin,
Ethelbrith and Beadulf the succeeding Bishops: after whom no more can be found,
because the said Bishopric quickly failed, being seated in the utmost Northern
coast of the English Territory, and exposed to the violence of the Scotts and
Picts.

7. As Soon as Iambert Archbishop of Canterbury had received his
Archiepiscopall Pall, A. D. 764.
he consecrated four Bishops the same year: One in Kent, and three in the
kingdom of the Mercians. In Kent, the Sea of Rochester being vacant by the
death of Dunn, there was substituted in his place Eardul^. From whom, together
with a Kentish Prince of the same name there is among the Epistles of S.
Boniface found one directed to the Holy Archbishop of Mentz, Ap. Bonif. Ep. 77.
Lullus, to renew a charitable correspondence, which had past between him and
the others his Predecessors. Withal as a testimony of such Charity he desired
him in his holy Prayers and Sacrifices to be mindful of three Religious
Virgins lately dead in Kent: their names were Irmigy, Northry and Dulicha.

8. There intervened a great communication of affections and Christian Offices
between Saint Lullus and our English Bishops, yea Kings also: For we find an
Epistle likewise sent to him from Kenulf King of the West Saxons, by a
Messenger formerly directed from Saint Lullus upon some affairs.

9. In the Kingdom of the Mercians Sees now vacant, were Lichfeild by the death
of Hemel: A. D. 766.
Lindissa by the death of Eadulf, and Leicester by the death of Totta: To the
first was substituted Cuthfrid: to the second Ceolulf, and to the third Edbert.
Westmon. hic.
But whereas Matthew of Westminster affirms that he cannot find the names of the
Cities where the said Bishops sat: It cannot be denied but that anciently
those Episcopal Sees were moveable: yet in this age by the munificence of
Kings, they seem to have been fixed: As that of Lichfeild, where many Bishops
had already successively remained. Likewise the Sea of Leicester was
established. But as for Lindissa, the Sea was ordinarily at Dorchester, a Town
(says William of Malmsbury) in the Country of Oxford, Magdebur. de ^ont. l. 4.
small and unfrequented: But the Majesty of the Churches, either of old or
lately built, was great. In that See after Hedhead there sat Ethelwin, Edgar,
Kinebert, Alwi, Ealdulf and Celnulf. Yet true it is that these Bishops
sometimes sat at Sidnacester, a place the memory of which has faild.

X. CHAP.
X. CHAP.
1.2. The (unhappy) death of Ethelwald Mol King of the Northumbers.

3.4. etc. Also of Egbert Arch bishop of York: at which Alcuin was present.

10. A strange Charter of King Kenulf to the Church of Wells.

11. Several Episcopal Sees vacant: and supplied.

1. IN the year of Grace seven hundred sixty five Ethelwald surnamed Mul, A.
D. 765.
King of the Northumbers dyed, after he had reigned six years: though William
of Malmsbury assigns to him eleaven years. Hoveden relates certain terrible
apparitions in the air which happened in the beginning of this year, presaging
the unhappy death of this King, who on the twenty seventh of October was slain
by the treachery of Alred at a place called Wircanheate.

2. The condition of these Kings in this age was very sad: few of them dyed
natural deaths: This Ethelwald got the Kingdom by the murder of Osulf: and by
the like means lost it: And the same fate will attend his successor Alred.

A. D. 766.
3. The year following gave an end to the worthy actions of Egbert Archbishop
of York, after he had nobly administered that See the space of one and thirty
years. A person he was descended of Royal progeny and imbued with divine
knowledge: Epit. Bed.
Of whose virtues and memorable actions we have treated already. Our Historians
do vary in the account of the years in which he continued Bishop: the ground
of which uncertainty is because it does not appear whether the time be to be
reckoned from the resignation or death of his Predecessor Wilfrid the younger.

4. There was present and assistant at his death his famous Disciple Alcuin,
whom a little before he had made Deacon: and who having hitherto all his life
composed all his actions by his rule and order, was desirous to receive his
commands and instructions at his death also, for the future disposing of his
actions. Thus we read in the Life of the said Alcuin, prefixed before his
Works, and taken out of an ancient Manuscript belonging to the Church of
Rhemes: whence we will here extract the following passage: S. Albinus (or
Alcuinus) proceeding from one virtue to another, Vit. Alcuini.
was consecrated Deacon on the day of the Purification of our Blessed Lady: for
before on the same Feast he had received the Clericall Tonsure. And perceiving
that his Blessed Father Egberts infirmity increasing showed that his death was
at hand: having hitherto done all things by his counsel, he was earnest to
enquire of him what his pleasure was he should do, and how he should dispose
of him self, after that death should separate them.

6. Hereto the Holy Bishop returned this Answer, suggested to him, as the event
showd, by a supernatural direction of God: I would have you (said he) first
go to Rome, and in your return to visit France. For I know that there you will
produce much good. Our Lord shall be the Guide of your journey, and will bring
you back in safety. Be diligent in impugning the late abominable Heresy which
endeavors to assert that Christ is only an adoptive Son of God: and be a
constant defender of the Mystery of the Holy Trinity: this Doctrine cease not
clearly and solidely to preach. After he had spoken thus, he gave him his
fatherly Benediction, commending him to our Lords safe protection: and
presently after he with chearfullnes departed to our Lord on the sixth day
before the Ides of November.



7. He was buried in the Porch of the Church of York: Malmsb.
and near to him was also laid the Body of his Brother King Egbert (or Eadbert)
who exchanged his Royal Purple for a poor Monastical habit, and dyed two
years after him.

8. The Archbishop left behind him several Monuments of his learning, to
enrich the Noble Library which he made at York. Among which are reckoned A Book
of Penitential Canons, likewise Collections out of the Canon Law of the
Church, and others mentioned by Sir H. Spelman. To those we may add, A Dialogue
of Ecclesiastical Institution, lately printed with an Epistle of S. Beda to
him: and other Treatises, by the care of Sir James Ware.

9. His successor in the Archiepiscopall See of York was Aldebert, Ap. Bonif.
Ep. 109. Ib. ep. 99.
otherwise called Coena: To whom, by this latter name, remains an Epistle from
Saint Lullus Bishop of Mentz, with his Answer to it. The subject whereof is
only the renewing of Ancient Freindship, sending of presents and entreating of
Prayers for dead friends. A. D. 769.


Godvv. in episc. Bathe Wellens.
10. There is extant a Charter of Kenulf King of the West Saxons by which he
this year gave to the Church of Wells and College, formerly built there by
King Ina, certain Lands there adjacent, the bounds whereof he setts down. These
possessions he gave for the love of God, for the expiation of his si^s, and for
some vexation to his enemies of the Cornish Nation. These are the words of the
Charter. What he meant by this last Motive, I leave to the Reader to judge.

A. D. 767.
11. This year dyed Frithebert Bishop of Hagustaldt: whose Successor was
Al^mund: a Prelat of great piety and prudence. And shortly after Cuthwin Bishop
of Dumwhich dying, his place was supplied by Aldbert: Like as upon the death of
Ethelfrid Bishop of Helmham, there was substituted Lansert. I know not by what
fate these two Episcopal Sees of the East Angles for the most part loose and
get new Bishops at the same time: at least so we are informed by the
Ecclesiastical Chronicles of that Church And the following year Edbrith, A. D.
768.
who is reckoned the ninth among the London Bishops, after he had governed that
Church eight years, dying, left it vacant to his Successor Eadgar.

XI. CHAP.
XI. CHAP.
1. 2. etc. The beginning of the Reign of the Charlemagne, etc

4 Of two learned English Virgins.

A. D. 769.
1. THE year of Grace seven hundred sixty nine is notable through the whole
Church, for the beginning of the Reign of that most famous King, and afterward
Emperor, Charles surnamed the Great: Hungtingd. f 341. Hoved hic.
Huntingdon and Hoveden do thus write o^ it: In the said year, which was the
fifteenth of the Reign of Kenulf King of the West Saxons, began a great change
of the right hand of the most High: For then did Charles the Great King of
France upon the death of his Father King Pipin, beg^n his reign: to whom thirty
years after the Roman Empire which had been glorious so many ages, became
subject: and continues so to his Successors to these times.

2. We declared before how a great league of freindship and Royal presents
intervened between the two late Kings Pipin and Egbert King of the Northumbers:
The like freindship and society did Al^ed now King of the Northumbers demand of
Charles the glorious Successor of King Pipin. This we collect from a Letter
written by him and his Queen Og^^fu to S. Lullus Arch-bisop of Mentz. Ap.
Bonif. ep 90.
In which he desires him to assist with his counsel and favor the
Ambassadors which he had sent to his Lord and Patron the most glorious King
Carl, that peace and freindship many be established between them.

3. In the same Epistle likewise which is an answer to one sent him from S.
Lullus in behalf of the disquietted Churches in his dominion, A. D. 772. Ibid.
the same King and Queen not only humbly beg the Holy Bishops prayers for
themselves, but likewise send him a Catalogue of the Names of their special
kindred and freind^ lately dead, of whom they desire him to be mindful at the
Holy Altar: assuring him that the same Charity shall be extended to all his
relations in their Churches. Indeed we can scarce meet with any Epistle^
written in the^e times* but this is generally on^ clause and part of the
business.

4. About this time says Harpsfeild, A. D. 770. Harpsf saeci 8 c 6.
there flourished in Brittany two Religious Virgins, famous for their piety and
learning called Rictrudis and Gisla, Disciples of the famously learned Alcuin,
who taught very many a^ this time in Brittany. He was not unmindfull of the
advice given him by his Master, Archbishop Egbert, of going to Rome and thence
returning into France: But seeing how useful and even necessary his abode was
in Brittany, he delayed the said journey, till a fit opportunity was presented
him, as we shall declare. And as touching the foresaid Illustrious Virgins we
shall in due time mention the kind and learned Letters which passed between
them and their Master, when he lived in France.

XII. CHAP. XII. CHAPTER

1. Succession of Bishops.

2. Of Pope Adrian: to whom the King of the Northumbers sends Ambassadors

5. The Church of S Boniface miraculously preserved from fire.

6 7 etc Offa King of the Mercians invades and subdues several Principalities.
Fictions of Matthew Paris.

1. IN the year of our Lords Incarnation seven hundred seaventy one the two
Bishops of the East Angles luckily again dy^ together, A. D. 771.
and to Aldebert Bishop of Dumwich is substituted Eglafe to Lanfe^t Bishop O^
Helmham, Athelwolf. In the next following age these two Sees were united into
one, which first remaind at Helmham, thence wa^ translated to Thetford, and
lastly to Norwich.

2. The year following to Pope Steven succeeded the worthy and learned Pope
Hadrian first of that name: A. D. 772.
to whom Alfred King of the Northumbers sent an Ambassador to congratulate his
assu^ption, and for other Ecclesiastical affairs, not recorded. To this
Ambassador Alcuin gave an Epistle dire^ted to the same Pope full of humble
respect to him, and congratulation to the Church for enjoying the happiness of
so worthy a Pastor. The Embasadours name was Angilbert, whom Alcu^^ calls his
most beloved Son* to w^om he c^^mitted certain requests to be presented by word
of mouth. A. D. 774.


Antiquit. Glast.
3. The same year Kenulf King of the West Saxons added to his former liberality
toward the Ancient Monastery of Glastonbury, the Manor of Compton. This he
gave to the Abbot thereof called Waldun who newly succeeded to Guban.

A D. 773.
4. Afterward the Sea of London being vacant by the death of Eadgar, in his
place succeeded Kenwalck: Nothing remains of the Gefts of either: Neither can
any account be given more of the names of Cuthrid Bishop of Lichfeild who dyed
at the same time, to whom was substituted Bert^^n. Hoveden calls them by other
names, as likewise the Episcopal See too. It is a difficulty not worth the
penetrating.

5. It will not be impertinent in this place to relate how miraculously God
gave testimony to the Gests, Doctrine and Sanctity of S. Boniface of late happy
memory by defending his Church of Fritzlar from the fury of the Saxons. They
making an invasion into the confines of the French dominions, Baron hic.
besieged a certain Strong Castle called Barimburg. During which siege they
wasted with sword and ^^e the country circumjacent. Their principal rage was
directed against the Church of Fritzlare built by S. Boniface, and concerning
which he had prophesied that it should never be consumed by fire. Whilst the
furious Pagans were exe^cising their utmost diligence to make this a false
Prophecy, and were heaping wood and casting firebrands to set it on fire*
there appeard to several Christians in the foresaid Castle, and to some Pagans
likewise, two men in white shining raiments, who protected the Church from
fire: so that by no diligence or pains taken within or without the Church could
the Pagans effect their desire: On the contrary, a terror from heaven seizing
on them, they fled away, none pursuing them. When they were gone, there was
found one Saxon Soldier stark dead, upon his knees, with fire and wood in his
hands, bowing down in the posture of one blowing the fire with an intention to
burn the said Church. Thus did God show his power and favor to his faithful
servant. And though shortly after he permitted the Church of S. Swibert at
Werda to be consumed by fire yet so terrible a punishment he inflicted on the
Authors, that it became evident that the said Blessed Bishop preached the true
Orthodoxe Faith.

6. In the year of Grace seven hundred seaventy four Offa King of the Mercians
a Prince of high Spirits, A D. 774. Hoved. ad A. D. 771.
began troubles which in success of time endangerd the ruin of several petty
kingdoms of Brittany. For having three years before this subdued the Nation of
the Hestings in the Southern parts of the Island, or Sussex; he extended his
ambition to add also the kingdom of Kent to his conquests. And because Lambert
(or as some Copies write, Lambert) then Archbishop of Canterbury endeavored to
defeat his ambition, he turned his indignation against that Church also, the
dignity and revenews of which ^e sought to diminish: Gerva^. D^ robor^-
For he took from it several Manors, as Cherring, Seleberts, Chert and
several others: which were afterward restored.

7. This wart between Offa and Alric is thus briefly described by Huntingdon:
In the twentieth year of Kenulf King of the West Saxons, Huntingd. f 342.
says he, Offa King of the Mercians fought against the Kentish men at place
called Ottanford where the slaughter was most horrible, especially on the
Kentish part^* So that King Offa by this victory became famous and terrible.
William of Malmsbury adds, that Alric King of Kent by this unhappy battle
against the Mercians, did cast a great clowd upon the glory of his times.

8. It is probable that by such great success and enlargement of power which
this victory gave to Offa, the other Saxon Kings might be so terrified as to
seek assistance from abroad, especially from Charles the illustrious King of
the French. But sure^y there is small truth in the relation made by Matthew
Paris, M. Paris hic
how not only Alric King of Kent was slain in this battle, but that thereupon
five Kings of Brittany should in a pompous manner writ a common letter to the
said Charles in which calling themselves the most powerful Kings of Brittany,
they demanded his aid and strict society, giving him the Title of Imperial
Majesty and that he in his Letter to King Offa should style himself the most
potent of all Kings: These seem to be groundles fictions borrowd by that
Author from some such fabulous Writers as began to abound in this age. However
certain it is that King Charles had not the Title of Emperor given him till
many years after this time.

9. And as groundless is another Story of the same Author, Id.
how after the conquest of Kent the same King Offa subdued all the other Saxon
Kings, and particularly Alred King of the Northumbers, whom he compelled to fly
into Wales: And that thereupon some hostility began between Offa and the French
King Charles, who is said to have written to Offa a threatening Letter,
containing imperious demands and that King Offa should answer What have I do
with Charles the Beyond Sea King I^ he offer any injury to me, I will in
hostile manner invade him, and endeavor to make him tributary to my Crown.
These are trivial inventions which the said H^storian borrowd from some
obscure Writer, who straind his wit to sound forth in an immodest, indiscreet
manner the praises of King Offa.

10. As for that clause which regards Alred King of the Northumbers, it is true
that this year in Easter-week his subjects compelled him to fly out of York,
Huntingd f. 242. Hoved. hic.
and afterward out of his Kingdom, as Huntingdon relates* And Hoveden more
expressly declares that King Alred by the unanimous consent of the Northumbers
was deprived of all power and privilege of a King, A. D. 776.
and that he changed the Majesty of a Prince into the miserable condition of a
banished person. First he fled into the City Bebban attended with a very small
train* and afterward he had recourse to Cynotha King of the Picts. This
misfortune therefore was not brought upon King Alred by Offa, as the foregoing
fabulous narration pretends: Neither did he fly into Wales, but into the
Province of the Picts.

^amd. in Dorsetsh.
11. Alred being thus compelled to forsake his kingdom, there was chosen in his
place Ethelred son to the late King Edilwald Mul. But neither did Ethelred sit
quiet any long time in his throne: but by another faction of his Subjects was
expelled, and the same misfortune happened to several succeeding Princes there,
by a fatal giddines then possessing the minds of that Northern Nation.

12. This same year Kenulf King of the West Saxons extended his liberality to
the Church of Shirborn, upon which (as Camden from his Charter declares) he
bestowed a possession of one Mansion seated on the Westside of the River Lym,
not far from the place where it enters the Sea. This land he gave to the end
that salt might there he made for the necessity and manifold use of the said
Church.

XIII. CHAPTER
XIII. CHAP.
1. The Monastery of Bathe founded by King Offa

2. Succession of English Bishops.

3 4 etc. The happy death of S. Walburga Virgin and Abbess.

A. D. 775. Malmsb. de (...). l. 2.
1. THE following year Offa King of the Mercians founded a Monastery at Bathe.
This Monastery being afterward burnt and utterly ruined by the Danes, was
restored by King Edgar, being delighted with the magnificent situation af the
place: and because there he first received the Crown of his Kingdom.

Godvv. in epist. Roff.
2. The same year Eadulf Bishop of Rochester dyed, and was succeeded by Diora,
to whom a certain Noble man in Kent named Egbert gave so much land, as ten
ploughs could labor, besides certain woods. To Milred likewise Bishop of
Worcester was substituted Weremund: And to Efna Bishop of Hereford, Ceolmund.

A. D. 776.
3. In the year of Grace seven hundred seaventy six the Blessed Virgin Walburga
made a happy change of a mortal life for an immortal. We have a ready showed
that she was daughter to Richard by right a King, and Sister to S Wintbald, and
S. Willibald: and that together with them she went into Germany to S. Boniface.
She was constituted Abbess of a Monastery at Heydenham, the same town where
her Brother S. Winnebald governed a Monastery of Religious men. There she lived
with wonderful Perfection, both by her words and example teaching her
spiritual children to live the life of Angels.

4. Her Life was written by Wolfhard a devout Priest who lived in the next
Century, W^^fhard. ap. S^r. 10. Maij.
and who recounts many wonderful Miracles wrought by her intercession: to whom
I refer the devout Reader. But one ought not to be omitted, since it is related
by an Author that writes what happened to himself. This is Philip Bishop of
Eystadt, who also wrote her Life. Phil^p. Eystad^ns in vit. S Walburg.
He relates how her Sacred Body was first buried in her own Monasteay of
Heydenham, and afte^ward translated (at least a great part of it) to Eystadt,
and reposed in a Monastery consecrated to her Name. There says he, to this day
(which was five hundred years and more after her death) there flows from her
chaste Relics a precious Oil of sovereign and universal virtue to cure all
manner of diseases. The wonderful virtue whereof I my self had experience of.
For being cast down by a vehement disease, of proof against all Art of Physic
or natural remedies, I commanded some of that Sacred Oil to be brought to me,
which with earnest Prayers to God, and begging her intercession, I drunk: Which
was no sooner done, but to the admiration of all I presently recovered my
perfect health.

5. Her Sanctity was so famed, that many Churches ambitiously sought and
obtaind some portion of her Relics. Thus in the Gallican Martyrologe on the
fourth of August we find a commemoration of the receiving the Relics of S.
Walburga Virgin and Abbess, Martyr. Gall. ^. August.
which with great honor were brought out of Germany to Furnes in Flanders, by
Baldwin surnamed Ferreus, Count of the same country. And in the same place,
Haraeus 2 Maij.
says Haraeus, there was built a Monastery of the Order of S. Benedict to her
honor, wherein since has been placed a College of Canons.

6. Again in the Gallican Martyrologe on the second of May there is at An^werp
said to be an anniversary celebration of the memory of this Holy Virgin,
Martyr. Gall. 2. Maij.
from whose tomb does flow an oyely liquour, which restores health to very many
who desire her assistance and intercession. A particular reason why her
veneration is great in that City, Miraeus dd 2 M^^j.
is given by Miraeus, Because, says he, it is a constant Tradition of that
Church that this same holy Virgin in her way from England into Germany made
some abode in Antwerp And to this day there is seen in the most ancient Church
of that City a certain Grott, in which she was wont to pray: for which reason
the same Church formerly called the Castle Church, was afterward by our
Ancestors dignifyed with the Title of S Walburgis. And indeed before the
receiving of the Roman Office there, the same Church was accustomed to
celebrate the memory of S. Walburgis as their peculiar Patroness four times
every year but since that time they keep her Feast but once.

7. It is very probable that this Holy Virgi^ was entertained for some time at
Antwerp by the Disciples of S. Willebrord, as being of the same Country. For
it appears by the Testament of the same Holy Bishop that he possessed to his
death the Church built in the Castle of Antwerp near the River Scald, together
with a third part of the custom or tribute belonging to it, A. D. 778. Id. ib.
as we have before declared.

8. The same Author adds, that in the forementioned vault of that Church there
is preserved a part of S. Walburga's ^awbone, which, says he, in the year of
Christ sixteen hundred and fifteen, was visited and reverently kissed by the
pious Archdukes Albert and Isabella.

XIV. CHAPTER
XIV. CHAP.
1.2. Succession of Bishops.

3. The Northumbers rebellious.

4.5. King Offa's victory over the West Saxons.

A. D. 777
1. PEctwin the Bishop of Witern (or Candida casa) dying in the year of Christ
seven hundred seaventy seven, after he had administered the same See seven
years, there was substituted in his place Ethelbert: who twelve years after was
translated to the Sea of Hagustald.

A D. 778. Godvv. in Catal.
2. The year following in the place of Ethelmod Bishop of Shirborn, Denefrit was
ordained in the same See. Of these two Bishops, says B. Godwin, besides their
names I can find nothing in our Ecclesiastical monuments.

3. The Northumbers still persist in their seditious tumults: For Ethelred whom
they had five years before this placed in the throne, out of which they had
eiected Alred, they now also drive into exile, or, as some write, detain i^
prison, and in his place substitute Alfwold. The principal movers of this
sedition were two great Northuusbrian Dukes, concerning whom Matthew or
Westminster thus writes: Westhem. hic.
Ethelwald and Herebert (says he) who were Dukes in the kingdom of the
Northumbers, rebelled against their King, and at a place called Kings-clive,
they slew Ealdulf who was General of King Ethelreds army: and a while after
the same Dukes in a great battle slew two other Generals of the same King,
Kenulf and Eggen: As for King Ethelred he was forced to fly out of the Kingdom,
in whose place they constituted Alfwold King, a Prince of great piety and
justice who reigned ten years. After which time Ethelred was again restored.

4. In the Western parts likewise there arose great commotions. For anciently
the West Saxon kingdom had extended as far as Oxfordshire: Where among other
strong places a Castle had been built at a place anciently called Bensigetun,
Huntingd. f 343. Malmsb. de Reg. l 1. c. 2.
now Benson. But Offa king of the Mercians unwilling any longer to suffer his
neighbor Prince to enjoy such an advantage to incommodate his country, raised
an Army, and besieged the said Castle. To raise this siege Kenulf King of the
West Saxons approached with other forces: So that they came to a battle: In
which Kenulf was defeated and compelled to fly. By which means King Offa took
and possessed the Castle. This was the only misfortune which hitherto had
befalln Kenulf: who was a Prince renowned both for his virtues and warlick
exploits. But after this, continual calamities oppressed him, till his death,
which was also very unhappy.

5. Kenulf after this defeat endeavored by the assistance of the Brittain^ to
repair his losses: But Offa to prevent the intercourse between the West Saxons
and Britains caused a mighty trench for the space of ninety miles between the
Rivers Dee (Deva) and Wey (Vaga) to be made: which though it was the occasion
of many contentions, yet in them all Offa had the advantage.

XV. CHAP. XV. CHA.

1.2. etc. Miraculous Judgments of God against the Pagan blasphemers of Saint
Swibert, and Sacrilegious destroyers of his Church and Monastery at Werda.

9.10. etc The Writer of that Narration is Saint Ludger: whose Holiness,
together with the Doctrine of the Veneration of Saints, is asserted.

1. WHilst these troubles afflicted Brittany. Almighty God in Germany fought
for the defense of the Faith planted there by the English-Saxons, miraculously
punishing the Sacrilege committed by the Saxons and Westphalian Pagans against
the Monastery or Werda built by his servant S. Swibert: as we find written in
an Epistle of S. Ludger Bishop of Munster written to Rixfrid Bishop of Vtrecht.

2. Whilst the glorious King of the French, Append. ad Sur. 1. Mar^.
Charles surnamed the Great was fighting in the Southern parts of France
against the Saracens then reigning in Spain, the feirce and perfidious Saxons
and Westphalians judging this to be a fit time to revenge themselves of the
losses which they had formerly suffered from the Christians, raised a mighty
army, with which they wasted all the countries as far as the Rhene, expressing
their ra^e principally against the Churches of God, and sparing neither sex
nor age. With this fury they came to Werda where was the Church of S. Swibert.
There they utterly destroyed and burnt to the ground both the Town and Church:
all the inhabitants and Priests they killed which had not escaped by flight:
and all the Sacred Books and ornaments they burnt. Only the Sacred Body of S.
Swibert was preserved from their fury, though with all possible diligence they
made search for it. Yea many of those Saxons who were Christians, had a desire
to express their hatred against this Holy Bishop, because many years before
this, by his intercession the French had gaind a memorable victory against
them.

3. In this detestable Army there was not any one so execrable in his malice
and cruelty as a certain Officer called Ogell Osterbach of Paderborn. This man
was the principal instrument of the Devil in all mischeifs committed, in
which he took excessive pleasure: And particularly he it was who with great
labor and diligence heaped wood for burning the said Church, which with much
ado at last by Gods permission he performed.

4. After he had among many other abominable actions executed this, being at
dinner with his companions in a meadow adjoining to the same place, he with
great joy and triumph recited to them what he had done, particularly insulting
upon S. Swibert the Protector of the French, and blaspheming God: But behold
in the middst of his laughter and joy the heavy wrath of God came upon him, so
that he fell backward before them all upon the plain ground; and broke his
neck: by this horrible death paying a fit punishment for his sacrilegious
cruelty.

5 Neither did Almighty God judge this a sufficient testimony of the honor
which he would do to S. Swibert in the sight of the Pagan Army. For three
hours after the accurted body had lain on the ground covered with a garment, a
trumpet sounding to the remove of the Army, certain kinsmen of this execrable
Ogell and others his associates in mischeife carye^ it into the Churchyard of
S. Swibert, to bury it there. But they could not effect it by any means: For
as soon as ever they had dug a grave, presently the earth would fall into it,
and no sign of a trench would appear. Again and again they made trial in other
places there, but still the ground became plain and even immediately. This
caused a wonderful astonishment in them: and they all concluded that he was
unworthy of burial there, who had so sacrilegiously profaned the place and
burnt the Church. Moreover when they took the garment off from his face, it
app^ard so horrible to them* that in a grievous fright they left the body, not
knowing what to do with it: When some other Saxons of that Army heard this,
they with indignation took the carkeyse and cast it into the Rhene.

6 This prodigious accident being by some of these companions with much grief
told to the two principal Rulers of the Army, Nothelin and Occo: they answered,
This was an accident to be imputed to chance, and not to any power of S.
Swibert, who was not able to defend his own Church. After many the like
blasphemous speeches the said Noble men departed from one another, and Nothelin
as he was boasting of the mischief done to the Christians, was immediately
struck blind, and tormented with unsufferable pains in all his members: Which
continued and increased upon him; till by the advice of certain sober men, he
with many sighs and tears acknowledged the crimes which out of pride and
malice he had committed against God and his Saint: Moreover he upon his knees
in the sight of his army made a vow that if God would please by the
intercession of that Holy Bishop to restore his sight, and take away his
torments, he would humbly visit the Shrine of S. Swibert, and employ his riches
for rebuilding the Church. He had no sooner publicly made this vow, but
immediately he recovered his sight and health. And shortly after attended by his
whole family, he accomplished his vow.

7. As for the other Noble man called Occo, he returning nomewards, not knowing
any thing which had happened to Nothelin, as he was beasting in the way of his
exploits against the Christians, and especially how they had been revenged upon
S. Swibert, in whose protection the Christians had put so much confidence: He
presently in the presence of his whole troop was by Almighty God struck both
deaf and dumb. In which case he was carried to his house: and a good space of
time after, recalling to mind his cruelties and blasphemies against God, he
acknowledged himself justly punished, of which he heartily repented, and hoped
by Prayers and Alms to obtain a removal or that punishment. Notwithstanding
his Prayers and Alms had not that effect which he expected.

8. But when he was informed how Nothelin by the intercession of S. Swibert had
been cured of his blindness and pains, he presently conceived a great hope in
God and his Saint: and in like manner vowed that he would visit the Saint at
Werda, and addict himself wholly to his service, if he likewise might recover
his speech and hearing. The same hour he also was healed by the Heavenly
Physicion: and setting his house in order, he with his whole family solemnly
went to Werda to the Church of S. Swibert, and with great devotion and
rever^nce performed his Vow. Moreover disdaining to return home to worldly
employments, he remaind there and joining with the foresaid Nothelin and other
devout persons to furnish costs, he the next year rebuilt the Church which had
been burnt, so that it was more beautiful then it had been before. Yea
moreover renouncing his Government and dignity, he spent the rest of his life
at the Monastery of S. Swibert at Werda, with great fervor serving our Lord
and S. Swibert..

9. Thus writes the Holy Bishop Ludger, relating the affairs of his own age.
Now what will the Sectaries of our age oppose hereto, those I mean, who are as
great enemies to the veneration due to Saints and honor to their Shrines, as
Ogell or the two Noble men had been? They will perhaps say, that Saint Ludger
was too credulous, or not rightly informed in the occurrents of those times.

Baron. hic.
10. Let Baronius then inform them what a person S. Ludger was: S. Ludger (says
he) was by birth a Frison, descended from Christian parents, and bred up under
the discipline of Saint Gregory disciple of the holy Martyr S. Boniface, in the
Church of Vtrecht. As Soon as he was adopted into the Clergy, he was by him sent
into England, where Alcuin did publicly profess the teaching of Sacred
learning. He staid then only one year with him: after which he returned to S.
Gregory, by whom he was ordained Deacon. Then he went back into England, where
during the space of three years and a half he heard the Lectures of the same
famous Doctor, well known to Charles the Great, insomuch as Letters passed
frequently between them. From thence, after the death of S. Gregory, he was in
a vision called by S. Lebwin who had preached the Gospel at Daventry:
Whereupon thither he went, and repaired the Church which had been burnt by the
Saxons. From Daventry he was sent by Albinus the Successor of S. Gregory into
the country of the Frisons, where he Zealously preached the Christian Faith,
and destroyed many profane Temples of Idols, even when the Idolatrous Pagans
were present, and withheld by a Divine hand from opposing or hurting him: so
that he may truly be called the Apostle of the Frisons. This testimony does
Baronius give of S. Ludger, which he collected out of his ancient Acts written
by the Monks of Werda.

11. But though it were supposed that Saint Ludger was misinformed: and the
like may be said of S. Gregory the Great, S. Augustine, S. Gregory Nazianzen and
other Fathers who write such like Stories, confirming the Doctrine so much
opposed by Sectaries, of Invocation and Veneration of Saints: It may be they
were credulous a little too much, at some times. But the Miracles, of which
they profess themselves to have been eyewitnesses, cannot be suspected. And
however, this may be said in general, that how incredulous soever any one may
pretend to be of the special stories related by them, yet none can be so
unreasonable to affirm that they related any Stories which contradicted or
destroyed the Faith which they maintained: and which appears likewise to have
been the common Faith of the Church in their respective ages, since their
Writings have been generally approved and admired, and not any but professed
Heretics, such as Vigilantius and Iovinian, ever opposed the Doctrines
confirmed by such Stories.

XVI. CHAP. A. D. 780.

XVI. CHAPTER



1.2. etc. Several Successions of English Bishops.

4.5. etc. The Gests and Death of S. Sturmis first Abbot of Fulda.

1. THE year following several Episcopal Sees were vacant in Brittany: A. D.
779
In the kingdom of the East Angles Eglaf Bishop of Dumwi^h and Athelwolf of
Helmham, as it were by an ancient Law, dying at the same time, to the former
was substituted Eadred, and to the other, Hunfert. Again the Sea of Hagulstadt
being vacant by the death of a Prelat of eminent virtue, Alcmund, Tilbert, or
Tilher, or as some call him Gilbert, was ordained in his place: And Kenulf
Bishop of Lindesfarn dying, his Successor was Higbald. Lastly in our ancient
Catalogue of the Succession of Bishops we find that another Tilher was
consecrated Bishop of Worcester, in the place of Weremund who dyed this year.

2. Not long after Albert or Aldebert surnamed Coena, A. D. 780.
Archbishop of York, as Hoveden writes, departed this life to our Lord: but a
little before he dyed Eanbald was ordained in his room. Some affirm that this
Eanbald was a Disciple of S. Alcuin. But they are mistaken: for it was not
this, but an other of the same name who sixteen years after this was his
immediate Successor in the said Archbishopric that was Alcuins Disciple.

3. Moreover Kineard Bishop of Winchester at this time ended his life, to whom
succeeded Aethelard Abbot of Meldun, or Malmsbury, who was afterward assumed to
the Sea of Canterbury. And in the place of Bertun Bishop of Lichfeild was
substituted Higebert.

4. We shall not much transgress the bounds of this History if we
commemorate the death of Sturmis the first Abbot of Fulda: who by the
Centuriators of Magdeburg is affirmed to have been an English-Saxon, but more
truly a German of the Province of Noricum, Aegila vit. S. Sturm. ap. 16. Decmb.
as we read in his Life written by Aegila the fourth Abbot of the same
Monastery of Fulda. He was in his childhood offered to S. Boniface, who
recommended him to the care of his devout Priest Wigbert, Abbot of the
Monastery of Fritzlar: by whose inspection he was in his tender years brought
up in piety and learning: in so much as that being yet but a child, he
committed to his memory the whole Psalter, and a great part of the Gospells and
other Lessons of Holy Scripture.

5. In due time he was ordained Priest, and with great zeal preached the
Gospel among the Pagans, Almighty God confirming his Doctrine by frequent
Miracles, as casting out of Devils, restoring many to health by imposition of
his hands with prayer. Many seduced Christians he recovered to the Orthodox
Faith: and many discords and dissentions he composed, teaching all his hearers
to practice meeknes, humility, longanimity and Charity.

6. After three years thus piously employed, he was by insp^ration moved to
undertake a life of solitude, austerity and contemplation. Which having
discovered to Saint Boniface, he was by him appointed to find out in the
Province called B^chonia a convenient retired place for a Monastery, to which
quiet state S. Boniface himself had an intention in his old age to betake
himself, though he could never effect his desire. After a long search, at last
his Disciple Sturmis found out the most proper and in all respects most
convenient Seat of Fulda, where as has been declared, S. Boniface by the
munifi^ence of the Noble Princes Caroloman and Pipin built that famous
Monastery.

7. When it was built, he committed the care and government of it to S. Sturmu:
to whom he gave instructions how he should direct such as were committed to his
care: adding likewise Precepts concerning obedience and Humility to be
practiced by the Monks, conformable to the Rule of S. Benedict, which he
established among them. Among other Instructions he told them that he could not
find in any Writings of the ancient Institutours of Caenobiticall Profess on
that Wine or Strong drink were becoming the Discipline of a Monastery: he
therefore forbad the same to them. But some years after, in the reign of King
Pipin, this custom by the Decree of a Synod was altered in consideration of the
weakness and infirmities of many among them: though some persisted in the
ancient austerity to their deaths.

8. But for a more perfect Instruction in Monastical Discipline, S. Sturmis
four years after he had been constituted Abbot, with the consent of S.
Boniface, went to Rome, where for a years space he perfectly informed himself
in the Regular practices and Traditions of the Monasteries there and several
other parts of Italy: And having made a collection of the best and most
perfect, returned homewards: and first informing Saint Boniface of of all, by
his advice he established the practices of them in his Monastery of Fulda.
Hence it came to pass that many seeing the innocence and piety of those
Religious men, were induced to heap possessions on the said Monastery.

9. After S. Boniface's Martyrdom, the Holy Abbot Sturmis, to whom S. Boniface
had given order that his body should be buried at Fulda, went into Friseland,
attended with a great multitude, to fetch the Sacred Body, which after earnest
contention with S. Lullus Archbishop of Mentz, at last he obtained, and with a
most solemn Procession brought to his Monastery. By occasion of which the
devotion of many to that holy place increasing, the Monastery became much
enlarged and enriched.

10. Not long after the Devil enviously looking on the prosperity of the said
Monastery, suggested to the minds of three malevolent Monks to accuse their
Holy Abbot to King Pipin, obiecting to him that he was an enemy to the King.
The Holy man did not express much earnestnes to refute this accusation, saying
only: I have a witness in heaven of the falsenes of this imputed crime:
Whereupon by the Kings command he was banished from thence with a few other
Monks, and retired to a Monastery called Vanedi^h, where he remained two years,
with all kindness entertained by the Abbot. As for the Monastery of Fulda the
care or it was committed to Lullus, who had conceived a bitter passion against
the Holy Abbot Sturmis, upon occasion of the contention about S. Boniface his
body. Lullus thereupon appointed over them a certain Monk called Marc: whose
government the Monks could by no means support: insomuch as when they were
ready unanimously to forsake the Monastery, Lullus quietted them by permitting
the choice of an Abbot to themselves: This pleasing them, they elected one of
their breth^en, a true servant of God named Freszold, one who from his infancy
had been brought up by S. Sturmis and was tenderly loved by him; who accepted
of the Orrice of Abbot only out of a desire and intention to ioyn with his
brethren in endeavoring to restore their good Spiritual Father Sturmis: For
which purpose they demanded the Prayers of all the neighboring Monasteries.

11. By virtue of which Prayers, God moved the heart of King Pipin to call to
mind the servant of God S. Sturmis, and to give order that he should come to
his presence. Being then brought to the Palace, and several days expecting
when he should be called to the Kings presence, It happened one morning early
that the King intending that day to hunt, went according to his custom to
prayers into his Chapel, where the Holy man after the Mattin office still
remained: Who seeing the King, presently took a light which he carried before the
King, till he came to the Altar, where after he had prayed, he said to the Holy
Abbot, God has once more brought us together: What was that which your Monks
accused you of, and which moved my displeasure against you? I have quite
forgotten it. The Holy man answered, Though I have often of^fended God, yet I am
free of all offense against your Majesty. The King replied, However the matter
stands, If you have imagined or done any thing to my prejudice, God forgive
you* as I likewise (...). In saying which words he drew out of his garment a
thread of silk which he threw on the ground, saying, Let this be a token that I
have cast away all displeasure against you. And presently after knowing how
much his return was desired, he sent him back honorably, confirming the
Privilege given by the Pope, by which that Monastery was exempted from the
Jurisdiction of Lullus Archbishop of Mentz. The report of his return being
divulged, he was solemnly met by all the Religious Monks in those quarters,
who with singing of Psalms and great joy attended him to his Monastery.

12 The Blessed Abbot then employed his whole time in correcting all disorders
in his Monastery, in adorning the Church, and repairing the decayed buildings
about it. And particularly to the end all occasions of going abroad might,
according the S. Benedicts Rule, be taken away, he took care that all necessary
Manufactures should be exercised within the Convent, and for a general
commodity he caused trenches to be made by which he conveyed water within the
Monastery, to the inestimable benefitt of his Religious. He also made a
sumptuous Shrine for the Sacred Body of S. Boniface, enriched with gold and
silver, which remains to this day. And so great favor and familiarity he had
with King Pipin that he obtained of him a Manor called Omunstat belonging to
the Crown, with all that depended on it.

13 The like favor he enjoyed with King Charles after his Father King Pipins
death, who often sent for him, and bestowd another Mann^r on the said Monastery,
called Hamelenburg: In consideration of which, Prayers are said to this day by
the Monks for him. After this the said Most Christian King began to think
seriously how to induce the barbarous Nation of the Saxons to embrace the Faith
of Christ: Which design he recommended to the prayers of all Gods servants.
Then gathering a great Army, and taking with him many Ecclesiastical persons,
he partly by terror, and partly by their preaching and exhortations withdrew a
great part of that Nation hitherto captived by the Devil, from Idolatry, and
caused them to submitt themselves to the easy yoke of Christ. After which he
divided the country into Parishes, appointing Priests to preach and baptize
among them.

14. Notwithstanding after the King was departed with his army, most of the
Saxons renouncing Christianity returned to their old Idolatries: and not
content with that, they raised forces, killing all Christians among them, and
wasting the whole country as far as the River Rhene. When they came near to
Fulda, the Holy Abbot knowing that they had sent a band of soldiers to burn the
Monastery and to kill all they found in it, gave notice to his brethren of the
danger: Whereupon they all taking the holy Martyrs body with them, went toward
Hamelenburg. But the Holy Abbot went to a place called Weisereth, endeavoring
to gather soldiers to repress the cruelty of the barbarous Saxons. A. D. 781.
Which was also effected. And when the Saxons were compelled to retire home,
the Monks returned with the Holy Martyrs body to Fulda.

15. After this King Charles brought a second time his Army against the Saxons:
and commanded the Holy Abbot Sturmis with his Monks to remain in a strong town
called Heresbury. And after the war, which was prosperously ended by the King,
he sent him being sick to his Monastery, atte^ded by his own ^hysicion called
Winter: who mistaking his disease, applied Physic to him which instead of
qualifying, much increased it. Whereupon the man of God perceiving that death
approached, commanded all his Monks to be assembled, whom he earnestly exhorted
to persevere in the same Regular observance which he had instituted among them:
And then recommending himself to their prayers, he begged pardon of every one
who thought himself any way iniurd by him, and professed that he cordially
forgave all his persecutours, particularly the Archbishop Lullus, who had
always been his adversary. Then he took leave of them all: and presently after,
his sickness coming to extremity, we who assisted him besought him with tears
that he would be mindful of us, and pray for us in heaven. He suddenly turning
himself toward us, said. Make your selves worthy that my Prayers may do you
good, and I will not fail to do what you desire. After this his pious Soul
was delivered out of the prison of the Body, and being plentifully enriched
with all divine virtues and graces departed to our Lord, to live forever in his
heavenly kingdom. Amen.

16. Thus writes the Devout Abbot Aegila successor and Disciple of this
blessed man: Marty. Ro^ 16. December
who was an eye witness of many things here related. He was canonized by
Innocent the second in a Council of Lateran celebrated in the year eleaven
hundred thirty nine. His Memory is celebrated on the sixteenth of December.

XVII. CHAP. XVII. CHAPTER

i.2. etc The Gests and happy death of Saint willebald, an English Apostolic
Bishop in Germany.

1. THE year following another Disciple and Companion of S. Boniface in his
Apostolic Office received the reward of his labors. A. D. 781.
This was S. Willibald Son of King Richard and Bonna (who is said to have been
sister to S. Boniface) and Brother to S. Winnebald and Saint Walburga. His Life
remains written by a kinswoman of his, a Religious Virgin, who lived in his
Sister Walburga's Monastery at Heidenham in Germany: The sum whereof is this:

2. When he was but three years old a certain grievous infirmity seized on him
by which all his members were so contracted and benumbed, Vit. S. Willibald.
ap. Sur. 7. Iulij.
that he became as in a sort dead, so that his parents almost despaired of his
recovery. Where with being greivously afflicted they took him and offered him to
our Lord, to whose service they designed him in case he would please to restore
him his health. Now it was a custom among the Saxons that instead of Oratories
they would erect in the feilds or near their houses Crosses of stone or wood,
to which they would repair for performing their devotions. Before such a
Cross they laid the infant, vowing him to Gods service. Which they had no
sooner done, but his health was immediately restored to him.

3. Two years after therefore they, being mindful of their Vow, delivered him
to a venerable person named Theodoret, who according to their order presented
him to a devout Abbot named Egbald who governed a Monastery called Waltheim He
with the advice and consent of his brethren, received him as a Member of their
Religious Congregation: where he was bred up in all modesty piety and humility,
and withal according to his capacity was instructed in all Sacred learning.

4. When he was arrived at a mature age he by earnest prayers obtaind
permission to accompany his Father and Brother in a pilgrimage of devotion
which they undertook to Rome. In their return their Father S. Richard dyed at
the City of Lucca, where also he was buried with great honor, as has been
else where declared. After whose death, an earnest desire took him to prolong
his pilgrimage as far as the Holy land, there to visit and perform his
devotions in all the places where the principal Mysteries of our Salvation
were wrought. And accordingly, being accompanied by two devout persons only, he
returned back, and taking ship at C^^eta, they sailed to Cyprus: and from
thence into Syria, where arriving at a City called Emesa, he with his
companions, who were now seven, was taken prisoner, and in danger to loose his
life upon a suspicion that they were Spies. Being thus made captives, God
disposed the heart of a certain old man who was a Sara^en, to pity them:
insomuch as he often visited them and ^ent them daily sufficient nourishment in
their prison. Not long after a Spanish merchant who had a Brother a servant of
the Prince of that Ci^cy, in great favor with him, by his intercession obtaind
the freedom of these Captives.

5. From thence therefore they went into the Holy Land, which they passed quite
through, scarce omitting any place that was memorable, or recorded in Holy
Scripture. A particular account of all their proceedings, with ^he names of
each place in order may be read in the History of the said Religious Virgin,
who professes that she received the relation from S. Willibalds own mouth.

6. When they were come to Gaza, S. Willibald being present at Mass solemnly
sung to the honor of S. Mathias the Apostle, lost his sight, and for the space
of two months continued blind: whereupon he returned to Jerusalem, and entering
into the Church where the Holy Cross was found, his sight was again restored
to him. After this, passing through several cities and places of devotion,
they took ship again and returned into Italy, arriving at Naples: From whence
S. Willebald with one companion traveled to the famous Monastery of S.
Benedict, called Mount Cassin, where they found very few Monks under the
government of their Abbot called Petronax, a man of great mildnes and prudence.
There S. Willibald made his abode the space of ten years, during which he was
some times appointed Sacristan of the Church, afterward a Dean, and lastly the
Porter.

7. In this place having perfectly instructed himself in all duties belonging
to Regular Observance, at last with permission of his Abbot he returned to
Rome, where he was with great kindness received by Pope Gregory the third, who
took great delight in hearing him recount the marvellons variety of accidents
which befell him in his long voyages. And awhile after, the said Pope told him
that his kinsman S. Boniface had earnestly requested him to command him to
quitt the Monastery of Mount Cassin, and to send him into Germany to assist him
there in preaching the Gosp^ll. To which command S. Willibald humbly submitted,
and accordingly leaving behind him his companion in the Monastery, be began his
voyage into Germany, and at last arrived at a place called Linthruth, where he
found S. Boniface: who not long after sent him to a place called Eystat: Which
place had been given to S. Boniface by a devout person called Suitgar, who
accompanied S. Willebald thi^her. The Region thereabout was in a manner wast,
scarce any house to be seen, but a small Church dedicated to our Lady Now after
these two devout persons h^d chosen a place convenient to be the Seat of a
Monastery, they went to S. Boniface to give him notice thereof: who returned
thither with them: and there ordaind S. Willibald a Priest. A year after this
S. Boniface called him into Thuringia, whither being come he went to
Heidenheim, where his Brother was Abbot of a Monastery, by whom he was with
very great joy received, after so many years of separation. To the same place
shortly after S. Boniface came with two other Bishops, S. Burchard and S. Wizo
By whom S. Willibald was consecrated also Bishop: and sent back to Eystat,
which Saint Boniface bestowed on him to be an Episcopal See, giving it the
preeminence next to the Metropolis of Mentz

8. There he built a Monastery, instituting the Monks in the Observa^ces which
he had learnt at Mount Cassin. And there leading an Angelical Life among men,
A. D. 783.
dividing his employment between a quiet repose of Contemplation in the
Monastery, and charitable solicitudes in governing his Diocese, he at last full
of merits and Graces this year rendered happily his soul into his merciful
Creatours hands and was honorably buried in his own Church. where his Memory
is in great veneration, and his Sanctity testified by many Miracles, which are
registered by Philip his Successor in the same Bishopric. Two hundred and
eight years after his death he was solemnly Canonized by Pope Leo the Seventh:
Martyrolog. ^om. 7. Iul.
And both in the Roman and English Martyrologe his Memory is celebrated on the
seventh of July.

XVIII. C.
XVIII. CHAP.
1. The death of S Werburga.

2. Succession of English Bishops.

3. 4 etc. A great miracle of a Soldier recovered by the Intercession of S.
Bruno.

A. D. 782.
1. ABOUT the same time is recorded the death of S. Werburga: she had formerly
been wife to Ceolred King of the Mercians, after whose death, which happened in
the year of Christ seven hundred and sixteen, she complying with a divine
inspiration entered a Monastery, where like the good Widow, Saint Anna the
Prophetess, she never departed from our Lords Temple, serving God night and
day in abstinence and prayer the space of sixty five years, partly as a simple
Religious woman under Obedience, and partly as Abbess of the same Monastery,
with as much humility governing others, as she had formerly obeyed.

A. D. 783.
2. Then the Sea of Worcester being vacant by the death of Tilher, it was
supplied by the substitution of Adored in his place. Ce^lmund likewise Bishop
of Hereford dying, there was ordained in the same his Successor named Vtell,
in the year of Grace seven hundred eighty three.

3. Little else occurring the same year in Brittany, S. Ludger will inform us
how wonderfully Almighty God glorified his servant Swibert in Germany, so
recommending the Faith which he had taught. Vid. Append. ad Act. S. Svvib. ap.
Sur. 1. Mar^.
That year (says he) the most victorious King Charles having destroyed all the
forts of the rebellious Saxons and Westphalians, came to a place called Drom^,
which having likewise subdued, he left it to be kept by his Son* called Charles
also, whilst himself went further into the midst of Saxony. In his absence the
Westphalians came with strong forces purposing to drive the young Prince out of
that country. Thereupon a battle being sought, the Prince with his horse
quickly defeated the Enemies.

4 Now among the Westphalians there was a certain soldier called Bruno, a
devout Christian, who had been compelled by the Noble man who governed that
territory where he lived, to be present in the battle: His name when he was a
Pagan had been Eldack: he was a man of great courage and wealth. This man
having been present at the miserable death of the Sacrilegious Ogell, and
knowing how the forementioned Noble man, Occo and N^thelin had for their
sacrilege and cruelty been divinely punished, and again upon their repentance
restored, thereupon became a Christian, and moreover in devotion to S. Swibert,
he besides his other prayers, every day recited Our Lords Prayer, and the
Angelical Salutation, earnestly begging that by his intercession he might
obtain mercy in his last ^ower.

5. Now this Bruno fighting valiantly in the front of the army, was at last
oppressed by the French horse, and among other wounds, was struck into the
breast with a lance, so that falling to the ground he was trodden under the
horses feet. Thus weltring in his own blood, and being ready to expire, he
inwardly prayed S. Sw^bert to assist him in the present extremity: vowing that
if he escaped that danger he would devore himself to his service the remainder
of his li^e. As Soon as he had made this prayer and vow, being in an Ecstasy, S
Swibert in a glorious shape, adorned with his Pontifical vestment: appeared to
him, and touching him with his Crosier, told him, that he had obtained of God
that he should be freed from the present danger: therefore he should be
mindful of his Vow: Having said this, and making the sign of the Cross upon
him, he vanished out of sight

6. In the mean time certain of the French conquerours saw the brightness in
which S. Swibert had appeared and thereupon ran to the place, conjecturing that
it was a sign that some person of eminent holiness was either dead, or at least
in an Agony there. Bruno seeing them, with a soft mournful voice begged their
charitable ^ssistance. The Soldiers seeing his horrible wounds wo^dred he was
not dead. Then he informed them concerning the apparition of S. Swibert, and
the Vow he had made: as likewise how by compulsion, and against his conscience
he had fought in that war. Hereupon they compassionatly bound up his wounds,
and carried him to a commodious lodging, where care might be taken for his
recovery.

7 The fame of this being spread came to the ears of the King, who then was at
a great distance in a place called Stoming^ He commanded therefore that the
soldier should be carefully brought to him: and having viewed all his wounds
then not perfectly healed, and heard a particular relation of his Vision from
his own mouth, he for the honor of S. Swibert gave him his freedom: Who as soon
as he was recovered went to Werda with liberal oblatio^s, and there served our
Lord the remainder of his Life. And as for the glorious King Charles, calling
likewise to mind how great a victory his Father King Pipin had obtaind by the
intercession of S. Swibert he honored him ever after as his Special Patron,
A. D. 784.
and recalling all the Monks of the Monastery of Werda who had during the war
been dispersed, he gave them many gifts and possessions: and magnificently
adorned the Church of S. Swibert. Yea moreover many among the Saxons and
Westphalians bore a peculiar honor and veneration to the same glorious Saint.

8 This Narration commended to posterity by a Bishop of so great Holiness, as S.
Ludger has been showed to be, written likewise in the same age wherein this
wonder happened and such public marks of the truth thereof appearing, seems to
be warranted from all possibility of falsehood. And yet our late Lutheran
Centuriators have the immodesty to write, Swibert was in great fame for working
miracles but yet not any of them can be demonstrated. As if a thing publicly
seen, confirmed by the writings, Charters, oblations and lasting Monuments of
Princes did want sufficient testimony. But men who wilfully shutt their eyes,
cannot see a mountain, when they dash their heads against it.

XIX. CHAPTER
XIX. CHAP.
1.2. etc The Gests and happy death of Saint Gregory, Successor to S Boniface
in the Bishopric of Vtr^cht.

5. Of S. Albericus an Englishman, Successor to S Gregory.

A. D. 784.
1. IN the year after our Lords Incarnation seven hundred eighty four dyed S.
Gregory Bishop O^ Vtrecht, a disciple of S. Boniface, worthy such a Master.
Some Writers notwithstanding affirm that he was only elected but never
confirmed Bishop, his modesty and humility resisting: so we read in the
Annotations to our Martyrologe. Martyr. Ang. 25. August.
Or it he were Bishop there, he either resigned, or admitted as his Coad^utour
Alubert. His Life is written by S Ludger Bishop of Munster: Where it appears
that he was by birth a German yet by reason o^ his relation to S. Boniface
deserves to be commemorated in our History.

Vit. S. Gregor. ap Sur 25. August.
2. One example or two of his piety we will here briefly relate. Two of his
Brethren traveling unwarily through a forest, were met, robbed and murdered by
thieves; Whereupon a strickt s^arch being made, the murderers were apprehended*
and brought to this Holy man, to be punished according to his pleasure and
order. But he being a Disciple of him who loved and dyed for his enemies, not
only commanded they should be set free, but likewise entertaind them with all
humanity, affording them both mea^ and clothes: contenting himself with
admonishing them to abstain for the future from such injustice and cruelty.

3. The same meeknes and patience he showed in injuries done immediately to
himself. For he wanted not such as calumniated and sought to deprave his best
actions. These he was so far from hating, or revenging himself on them, that he
rather increased his kindness and tenderness to them. Yet God took his cause in
hand: insomuch as not any one of them escaped panishment, but by some judgment
or other were compelled to acknowledge their malice and injustice

4. His last si^knes was a Palsy, which yet neither deprived him of a power to
walk, nor to continue his pious exhortations to his Disciples. This disease
continued three years before his death, and it purified him as gold in the
fire. Yea God was pleased to show by a visible sign how pure his soul was: For
when he was brought to that feeblenes that he could not be removed out of his
bed, all the members or his body became like clean white wool. Being ready to
dye, he would needs be carried into the Church, where having received the Body
of our Lord, he gave up his spirit to him, Martyr. Ang 25. Aug.
looking toward the Altar. His Memory is celebrated on the twenty fifth of
August.

5. As touching his Successor Albericus, he was by birth an Englishman: and is
named in the Gallican Martyrologe with this elogy. Martyr Gallic. 25 Aug.
On the one and twentieth of August is celebrated at Vtrecht the deposi^ion of
S* Albert^, Bi^hop of the same City an^ Confessor. He was born in Brittany in
the Diocese of York, from whence he came into Germany to preach the Gospel:
and for his excellent endo^ments in piety and eminent learning he was made
Canon of the Church of Vtrecht. Afterward when S. Gregory through weakness and
old age was disabled to administer the same See, S. Alberic was appointed a
di^^enser of the whole Diocese, to govern both the Clergy and people, and S.
Gregory himself by inspiration of the Holy Ghost foretold that he should
^uccee^ ^im in the Bishopric. Therefore after the Holy Bishop was freed from
the chains of his flesh, S. A^^eric was according to the desires of all exalted
to his Epi^^copall throne. After which not contentin^ himself with the
solicitudes of his particular Diocese and Province, he extended his care to the
adjacent regions, and sent S. Ludger, who was afterward Bishop of Munster, into
the country of the Frisons, there to spread the Gospel* and root out
Idolatrous superstitions At l^n^th after he had governed the Church of Vtrecht
many years with admirable Sanctity, this blessed servant of God who was wholly
celestial* forsook the earth, to which his heart never had been fixed and
departed to his heavenly country. He was honourabl^ bu^ied near to his holy
Predecessor, accompany (...) him (...) in his Tomb and reward, whom he has
always f^llowed in order and merit.

A. D. 785.

XX. CHA


XX. CHAP.
1.2. Succession of Bishops in England.

3.4 etc. The unhappy death of Kenulphus King of the West Saxons.

6. Brithric succeeds him.

7. Of Rictritha, a Holy Queen and Abbess.

1. AT the same time in Brittany the Episcopal See of London being vacant by
the voluntary resignation of Kenwalch (as it is said) it was supplied by
Eanbald, or Eadberch. And after the death of Edbert Bishop of Leicester, Vnwona
was ordaind in his place.

A. D. 785.
2. The year next following the two Bishops of the East Angles dye again
together, and to Eadred Bishop of Dumwich succeeded Alphun: to Hunfert Bishop
of Helmham, Bibba. And within two years; both these agree to dye together, and
to leave their Sees to new Bishops.

3. This was the last year of the Reign of Kenulf King of the West Saxons: a
Prince who had given many examples of virtue and piety, but yet ended his life
unhappily. The length of his reign, and circumstances of his death are thus
declared by William of Malmsbury: Malmsb. de Reg. l. 1. c. 2.
Kenulf, says he, was a Prince illustrious both for his virtues and warlick
exploits. In one only battle which in the four and twentieth year of his reign
he fought against Offa King of the Mercians, he was overcome. And after that he
was afflicted with many calamities, and in conclusion came to a dishonorable
and unhappy end. For after he had governed the kingdom of the West Saxons the
space of one and thirty years neither cowardly nor immodestly: at last whether
it was out of a proud confidence that none durst resist him, or out of a
provident care of the security of his Successor, he commanded Kineard the
Brother of the Tyrant Sigebert, whom he saw to increase daily in power and
wealth, to depart his kingdom. Kineard judging it best to yield to the tempest,
went away with a show of willingness: But presently after by private meetings
and unsinuations he assembled a body of men given to all manner of villainy,
with which he watched an opportunity against the King. And having been informed
that he was for his recreation and lustful pleasure retired with a small
retinue into a certain country dwelling, he came suddenly upon him with some
light armed soldiers, and encompassed the house where the King was securely
attending to his unlawful luxury. Who perceiving the danger he was in, advised
with his servants what he should do. At first he barricadoed the doors, hoping
either by fair speches to winn, or by threatenings to terrify the soldiers
without: But finding neither way to succeed, in a furious rage he suddenly
leaps forth upon Kineard, A. D. 786.
and wanted very little of killing him. But being compassed by the multitude,
and thinking it inglorious to fly, after he had well avenged himself by the
death of many of the Traitors, he was slain: And those few servants with
attended him, scorning to yield, and earnest to avenge their Lord, were killd
likewise.

4. Presently the fame of so execrable a Tragedy was spread abroad, and came to
the knowledge of certain Noble men, not far distant, with the Kings Guards.
Among whom Osric, who was most eminent both for age and prudence, encouraged
the rest not to suffer the death of their Prince to pass unrevenged to their
perpetual infamy: Whereupon they all drew their swords and rushed upon the
traiterous murderers. Kineard at first endeavored to justify his cause, to
promise great matters, and to challenge kindred: But when all this proffited
nothing, then he inflamed the minds of his companions and fellow soldiers to
resist boldly. A good while the combat was doubtful, one side fighting for
their lives, and the other for glory. At last victory having a good space
hovered uncertainly, turned her self to the iuster cause. So that wretched
Traitor after a courageous but vain resistance, left his life, having enjoyed
the success of his treachery a very short time. The Kings body was carried to
Winchester, where it was buried in a Monastery, in those times very
magnificent, but in this age almost desolate.

5. Other Historians mention the name of the village where King Kenulf was thus
unfortunatly slain: Wigorn. hic.
Thus Florentius writes: It happened (says he) that Kenulf at that time went to
a certain village which in the English tongue is called Meretum, for a certain
wanton woman's sake, etc. This village is in the Province of Surrey and is now
called Merton, of old, says Camden, Camden in Surrey.
famous for the fatal end of the West Saxons.

6. There remaind in that Kingdom two Princes of the Royal family, which might
pretend to the succession, Malmsb. de Reg. l. 1. c. 2.
Brithric and Egbert. Brithric was preferred, perhaps for his mild and modest
disposition: For he was a man more studious of peace then war: he was skillful
in reconciling friends when dissenting: foreign Princes he civilly courted,
and was indulgent to his own servants, yet so as not to prejudice the vigor of
his government.

7. As for Egbert, he was to attend sixteen years, before the scepter would
fall to his lot. Which having once got, he managed it gloriously: for he it
was who dissolved all the petty governments, and reduced the whole kingdom
into a Monarchy, as it has ever since continued: and moreover obliged all the
other Provinces to call themselves English, and the whole kingdom England, as
shall be showed hereafter.

8. In those days, A. D. 786. Hoved. hic
as Hoveden writes, Rictrith, who long before had been a Queen, and was then an
Abbess, departed this life to our Lord. It does no where appear of what
Province this Lady was Queen, A. D. 787.
nor of what Monastery Abbess: But her piety deserves that her name and memory
should not be abolished.

XXI. CHAPTER
XXI. CHAP.
1.2 etc Pope Hadrian sends Legates into Brittany: Their Gests there.

1. IN the year of Grace seven hundred eighty seven, A. D. 787.
great care was taken both by Princes, and Bishops in Brittany for the settling
of Ecclesiastical affairs: For the better composing of which Pope Adrian sent
his Apostolic Legates, George, Bishop of Ostia, and Theophylact Bishop of
Tudertum. Whether this proceeded from the said Popes voluntary care and
solicitude, least the errors and disorders by which the Oriental Churches
were defiled, should infect the Western likewise: Or that he was solicited
thereto by the Bishops in Brittany, and some Princes too, to the end that
provision might be made against the aspiring attempts of Offa King of the
Mercians, who of late not only sought the oppression of some of the weaker
Princes, but had also usurped the revenews of the Church of Canterbury, and
sought likewise to depresse its dignity, it cannot certainly be determined: But
this seems most probable: as may be collected from the proceedings of the said
Legates.

Ap. Spelm. Reg^eb. C^nt
2. When they were come into Brittany, they were received both by the Kings,
Clergy and people with great honor. They landed in Kent, as appears by the
Letter of George Bishop of Ostia to the Pope in which he gives him an account
of all their proceedings. The first person who entertained them was Iaenbrach
(so he calls the present Archbishop of Canterbury who is by our Historians
named Iambert or Lambert.) After they had admonished the said Archbishop
concerning such matters as they esteemed necessary, they proceeded in their
journey Northward, and came to the Court of Offa King of the Mercians: who for
the great reverence which he bore to S. Peter and the Pope his Successor,
received with wonderful joy and respect both the Legates and Epistles which the
said Pope by them had written to him.

3. At the same time the King of the West Saxons ( Brithric) also came to
advise with Offa concerning the common affairs of the Church, to whom they
likewise presented the Popes Letter directed to him: in which Letters were
mentioned certain disorders in Ecclesiastical matters, about which, it seems,
those Kings themselves were faulty: which disorders they promised to amend.

4. After some consultation with those Kings, the Legates divided themselves:
For George Bishop of Ostia, who seems to have been the principal Legate,
thought fit to leave his companion Theophylact among the Mercians, and other
more southern Provinces, to reform disorders there: and for himself he went
into the Northern parts, to Alfwold King of the Northumbers and Eambald
Archbishop of York: In which journey he took with him as an assistant Wighod
an Abbot and Priest, a man of approved fidelity, whom Charles the Great had
sent with him into Brittany.

5. When he was come as far as York, he found that King Alfwold at that time
remained at a place a great way distant from thence Northward. The Archbishop
therefore thought fit to send Messengers to him to give him notice of the
Legates arrival, and intention to assemble a Synod for rectifying abuses. The
King received this information with much joy, and immediately appointed a day
when the Synod should meet: commanding all Princes both Ecclesiastical and
Secular to give their attendance at it.

6. It is not in the Legates Epistle mentioned where this Synod met: but since
our Ecclesiastical Writers do speak of two Synods this year and the next
assembled in the Kingdom of the Northumbers: the one at a place called
Fincenhale (not Wincenhale, as some corruptly write it, it is now called
Finkeley.) The other at Acley: both which places are in the Province now called
the Bishopric of Durham: it is very probable that the Legate went so far
Northward, to preside in both those Synods, as being most commodiously
assembled in the midst of the Northumbriam Kingdom.

7. When the Synod was met: One of the prime things which the Legate did, was
to deliver Popes Adrians Epistles to be publicly read: Which being done, both
the Princes and Bishops unanimously professed that they would obediently
observe the Decrees contained in them. What those Decrees were the Legates does
not declare. But we find that the year before this, Vid. Tom. 3. Con^^l.
Pope Adrian had made a Collection of certain Heads of Ecclesiastical
Discipline out or both the Greek and Latin Canons, the Roman Synods, and Decrees
of Ancient Popes, which he sent by his Legates to several Churches to be
received in their respective Synods, as the Common Law of the Church. Such a
Collection we read sent to Ingelramnus Bishop of of Metz in Germany: and very
probably the same was also directed to the Bishops of Brittany, to the end that
there might be an uniformity of Discipline through the whole Western
Patriarchat.

8. Besides these Epistles sent from the Pope, the Legate advising with the
Bishops and Princes found that great disorders and irregularities were spread
through those Churches: A. D. 774.
which, said he, was no wonder, considering that, since the time of Saint
Augustine no Bishop had been sent from Rome to make inspection into those
Churches; and to reform abuses, To rectify which he with advice compiled a
Capitular, or Writing containing the several points to be reformed: Which
having caused to be read publicly: there followed a general profession of
subjection and obedience to the orders and regulations prescribed by him, with
humble thanks for his seasonable admonitions.

XXII. CHAPTER
XXII. CHAP.
i. 2. etc. The Capitular, containing twenty Ecclesiastical Decrees: proposed
by the Popes Legate in a Synod o^ the Northumbers, and Subscribed to by the
Bishops, Abbots and N^bles.

1. THE Capitular here mentioned contained several Ordonnances and Admonitions
prescribed by the Legate, in order to the correcting of abuses which had crept
into the Churches of Brittany. They were twenty in number, the sense of which
we will here briefly set down.

The First admonished them to hold fast the Faith and Decrees established in
the Council of Nicea and the five following General Councils: and that every
year Bishops in their Synods should examine diligently their Priests whether
they taught the people Decrees. 2. That Baptism should be administered according
to the Canonical Sta^^ts and at the due times appointed: and that God fathers
and Godmothers according to their obligation instruct their God-children,
teaching them Creed and our Lords Prayer. 3. That Bishops every year visitt
their Dioceses, and twice assemble Synods, to prevent abuses rising: Likewise
that they appoint Congregations whither the people might resort to Gods word
preached. 4. That Bishops take great care that Canons live Canonically, and
Religious men and women regularly, as well in their diet as Clothing: that so
a distinction be made between Canons, Monks and Seculars in their habits:
Wherein the two former were to conform themselves to the grave fashions observed
in the Eastern parts, avoiding light-colourd and That when any Abbot or Abbess
dies, care be had, with the counsel of the Bishop, that fit Superiors be
chosen in their places, out of their respective Convents: or in case none be
found there, they That none be ordained Priests or Deacons but such as are of
approved lives and can perform their Charges: and that they persevere in the
Titles to which they are consecrated.

3. The.7. was, that all Public Churches Hours Canonical with reverence
observe their Course, or Ecclesiastical Office. 8. That Privileges conferred
by the Apostolic See on any Churches and Monasteries in Brittany be preserved
inviolate: and in case any prejudice has been done to them by wicked men, that
such injury be taken away. 9. That Ecclesiastical persons eat their meat in
common, that it may be Hypocrites and Saracens. 10. That Priests Altar for
decencies sake under their Sacerdotall Vestments wear other clothing, as it
was commanded in the Old Law. Also that Oblations should be bread, not Crusts.
And that no C^alices be made of Horn. Likewise that Bishops meddle not in
Secular Iudicatures. 11. Kings and Princes were admonished Bishops, who also
are commanded confidently, without fear or flattery to tell them their duty.
12. That in Kings regard be had to such as are not born of adultery or incest:
and that the Electours should be, not the common people, but the Nobles and
Bishops: And Kings being once constituted, that none should resist or detract
then, much less conspire against their lives, under pain of an eternal
Anathema.

4. The 13. was: That Great men and judges That no unjust Tribut^ Church, not
any greater then were according to the custom of pious Emperors and Kings, or
as the Roman Law app^ints: And that such Prince^ should especially abstain from
this violence as do communicate with the Roman Church. 15. That all Marriages
incestuous with near consecrated Virgins be utterly forbiden. 16. That
bastards, or children of Religious That Tithes be duly paid without God may
bless them. For it often happens, that he who pays not tithes, is reduced to
tithes. Usury is utterly prohibited. And just, equal weights and measures
ordained. 18. That all vows made either in prosperity That all superstitious
Paganism be rooted out: And particularly that men abstain from dying and
coloring their bodies, or painting figures on them (as the Heathen^^h
Britains of old did,) Likewise that none should cut off their horses ears,
slitt their nostrills, curtall their tales, or eat their flesh: for all these
are according to the practices of Pagans. 20. All are admonished to Penance:
A. D. 787.
and Pennace: Not approaching to the Holy Eucharist but according to the
judgment of the Priest, after Satisfaction imposed according to the measure of
their faults: And that if any one departed this wo^ld without Confession and
Penance, none should pray for him.

5. In these Decrees there are some passages which require our consideration:
For whereas in the fourth Canon, Bishops are required to take care that Monks
in their clothing conform themselves to the grave fashion of those in the
Eastern parts. Some may pe^haps from hence infer, that the Lega^ by the
Orientalls intended the Grecians, and consequently that Monachism came to us
from the Eastern Church, and perhaps Religion also. It is not to be doubted but
that by that phrase he meant the Orders of Religion observed in Kent, the most
Eastern Province of the Kingdom and the most civilized part of the Island.
Which is confirmed by the like expression in the nineteenth Canon, where he
forbids the eating of horseflesh, a custom not practiced in the Eastern
parts: For surely he hid no need to have recourse to Greece or the Eastern
Church for decrying that barbarous custom.

6. Again, whereas in the said ninetenth Canon he enveighs against painting
their Bodies: it seems that ancient rude fashion of the Old Britains and Picts
was not altogether disused: Yet not so as if the Northumbers practiced it as in
old times, over their whole naked bodies, but only on some parts which were
discovered, as the face, arms, or thighs: which savoured of some relicke of
Gentilisme.

7. Lastly, whereas in the Seventh Canon mention is made of the
Ecclesia^ticall Course, o^ Office: we are to observe that though some Churches
had their peculiar Office for Divine Service; Yet that in Brittany, and
principally among the Northumbers, they con^orm^d themselves to the Roman
pra^tise, introduced by S. Benedict Biscop, Bed. Hist. l. 4. c. ^^.
as S. Beda declares.

8. These Decrees were by the Legate proposed in Council, and withal devotion
^ubmitted to both by the Bishops, Abbots and all the Noble^^ And thereupon
confirmd by the Legate in the Popes name with making the sign of the Cross: and
in like manner signed by the Bishops and Nobles there present. As touching the
Subscriptions* there are found several names both of Bishops and Episcopal
Sees which are no where else to be found: and therefore the false Writing of
them is to be imputed to the unskillfullnes of Tr^nscribers.

XXIII CHAP. XXIII. C.

1.2. etc. The same Capitular received in a Synod of the Mercians.

3.4. etc Offa King of the Mercians to the prejudice of the Sea of Canterbury,
raises Lichfeild to an* Archiepiscopall See.

6.7. King Offa makes his Son Egfrid King with him: Of his Queen Quendrida.

1. AFter this Synod in the Kingdom of the Northumber^, Ib^d.
the Legate attended by the Kings Ambassadors and certain Bishops, went back
into the kingdom of the Mercians. With them also went Malvin and Pit^e^
Lectours, who carried with them the Decree^ of this Synod. And being arrived
there, they called another Synod at a place by our Historians called
Cealchithe, Florent. Westmonast. Hunting. Antiquit. Brit. Camd. in ^rinob.
^pelman. ib.
Cealtide, Calthuthe, and Calchuch. (Where this place is seated none of them
determine. Probably we may understand Chelsey, which, says ^amden, in ancient
Records is found written Chelchehith, which was o^t a fear of the Mercian
Kings.

2. In this Synod there were present King Offa and the Nobility of the
country: Likewise lambert or Lambert Archbishop of Canterbury, with the other
Bishops of that Province. There in the presence of the Council the foresaid
Decrees were read with a loud distinc^ voice, and moreover explaind both in
Latin and English, that all might understand. Whereupon all who were present
unanimously gave thanks to the Legates, promising their obedience to the Popes
admonitions, and that they would faithfully observe the said Decrees. And
consequently both the King, Archbishop, Bishops A^bots and Nobles confirmed
them by their Subscriptions.

3. Besides this, Malmsb. de R^g. l. 1. c. 4
King Offa had a desire to promote one of the Episcopal Sees of his own
kingdom to a Metropoliticall Dignity, partly out of a consideration of the
co^mmodity redounding thereby to his own subjects: and partly out of displeasure
conceived against the Archbishop of Canterbury, who being desirous to preserve
the ancient Privileges of his own See, opposed earnestly this design of King
Offa, producing the frequent Edicts, both old and new, of the Sea Apostolic in
confirmation of the Supereminent Dignity of his Church. This resistance did so
displease King Offa that he deprived him of all the lands seated in his kingdom
which belonged to the Sea of Canterbury.

4 A certain Monk of S. Albans in a Writing published under the name of Matthew
Paris touching the Life of King Offa, De vit. Offic. 2. dif. 21.
affirms that the said Iambert Archbishop of Canterbury was accused before the
King of conspiring against him, and that by reason of the vicinity of his See
to France, he had promised to Charles the Great that in case he would invade
Brittany he would give him free entrance into his Archbishopric, and all
assistance likewise.

5. This Controversy being earnestly prosecuted on both sides, Malmsb. ib.
at last the King sent wise Messengers to Rome, and partly by reasons, partly
by gifts so wrought in that Court that Pope Adrian condescended to his request,
and exalted the Episcopal See of Lichfeild to an Archbishopric, to which were
subject all the Bishops of the Mercian Kingdom, namely Denebert Bishop of
Worcester, Werenbert Bishop of Leicester, Edulf Bishop of Sidnacester,
Wolpheard Bishop of Hereford, as likewise the Bishops of the East Angles,
Alheard Bishop of Elmham, and Tidfrid Bishop of Dumwich. (Now the name of the
Bishop of Lichfeild, who was made Archbishop was Adulf.) So that there remained
to the Archbishop of Canterbury only four Bishops subject, to wit, of London,
Winchester, Rochester and Selesey (or as others write, Shirborn.) From whence
appears that though King Offa this year labored to effect this design, yet it
was not effected till some years after: because Aldulf was not at this time
consecrated Bishop: the Bishop of that See now being Hygbert.

6. This same year King Offa thought fit to assume his Son Egfrid to a
participation of his kingly dignity, for which purpose he caused him to be
solemnly crowned, probably whilst the Synod was sitting. This is insinuated in
an Epistle of Alcuin to him, in which he styles him King, Alcuin Ep. 48.
and gives, him good instructions for the discharge of that high Office, though
he say withal, that his admonitions were not necessary, since he might
sufficiently at home learn authority from his Father, and piety from his Mother.

7. This Mother of Egfrid and wife of King Offa was called Quendrida, and as
Matthew Paris affirms, was kinswoman to Charles the Great, and before she came
into Brittany was named Drida. She was banished out of France for some unknown
fault: and being arrived in Brittany so wrought upon the affections of King
Offa, perhaps by a show of Piety (for which Alcuin commends her) that he made
her his Queen. But that her Piety was only in show appeard by her impious
murdring of the most pious Prince Kenelm: Of which hereafter.

XXIV. CHAP. XXIV. C.

i.2.3 Iambert Archbishop of Canterbury being wrongfully oppressed by King
Offa, would quitt his See: but is dissuaded by Alcuin. His death.

1. IAmbert Archbishop of Canterbury took very heavily this unjust deminution
of his See. He omitted nothing, he spared neither cost nor labor to assert the
dignity of his Church, Malmsb de Pontif. l. f. 199.
and to repress the greedy covetousnes of his adversaries. Several Appeals to
Rome he interposed, and when he saw that King Offa's power and gifts prevayled,
he determind to desert his See. Notwithstanding le^st men should judge that he
took such a resolution out of passion and a sudden discontent, he consulted
with his friends about it.

2. There is among Alcuins Epistles extant one, directed to a nameles person,
containing an Answer to the same person (which doubtless was this Archbishop,
who signified to him the Mo^ives inducing him to a purpose of forsaking his
Episcopal charge:) Which Answer was sent by a Disciple of Alcuin called
Candidus. Alcuin. Ep. 97.
And therein Alcuin utterly dissuaded him, telling him that he could not have a
more justifiable motive then his Predecessor S. Laurence had, which was the
return of Idolatry, and the danger of death and torments in case he opposed
himself thereto. Yet he, after he had been chastised by the Apostle S. Peter
himself, repented of his purpose. It seems that when this Letter was written,
Iambert was already retired into France, because Alcuin exalts the happiness of
the Church in which Iambert then lived, under the protection of so glorious and
so orthodoxe a King as Charles the Great was, whom he there and else where
calls David.

3. Iambert hearkened to Alcuins advice, and returned to his See: where two
years after he dyed on the twelfth of August, and was buried after the ancient
manner of his Predecessors in the Church of S. Peter and S. Paul: For thus we
read in the Antiquities of Brittany: Antiquit. Brit. in Lamberte.
Iambert after he had the space of many years maintained the Dignity of his
Prelacy with great constancy and no less labor: when he foresaw that his
death approached, desiring to abolish the la^e decrees of his Predecessors
touching the burial* place of the Archbishops, and to reduce it to the ancient
primitive custom, commanded that when he was dead, his body should be carried to
be buried in the Church of S. Peter and S. Paul in the Monastery of S.
Augustine. Which command was accordingly without any opposition performed: and
he was honorably buried in the Chapter House of S. Augustine. Concerning his
Successor we shall treat in due place.

XXV. CHAPTER
XXV. CHAP.
1. Brithric mary's the daughter of King Offa.

2.3. The Danes begin to invade Brittany, etc.

4 5. Lands given to the Monastery of S. Denis in France.

A. D. 788. Huntingd. f. 343.
1. IN the year after the forementioned Synods, Brithric King of the
West Saxons, says Huntingdon, demanded and received for his Wife Eadburga
daughter of Offa King of Mercians. By which alliance he was so much strengthened
in his kingdom, that he became haughty and proud.

2. At the same time began the Prologue of all those inexpressible miseries
which our Island in following times suffered from the rapines and cruelty of the
Danes: of which we shall oftentimes have but too just occasion to treat and
recount most horrible tragedies acted by those barbarous in humane Pagans. For
the ^ame Author immediately after mention o^ that Marriage, thus proceeds: ^b.
ib.
In those days, says he, there arrived three ships of Da^es in Brittany, who
came only to ^obb, and spoil Which the Governor of that Province where they
landed knowing, he went with too much negligence and security to meet them,
intending to apprehend them and lead them captives to the Kings Court. This he
did, not well informing himself, who and how many they were, nor for what cause
they were come. Therefore unadvisedly falling in among them, he was slain. This
was the first Englishman which the Danes slew: but afterward many thousands
suffered the like fate: And these were the first Danish ships which aborded in
England.

3 The same year two new Bishops were (according to custom) together
consecrated in the Kingdom of the East Angles, T^dfred to the Church of
Dumwich, and Alherd to that of Helmham. And about the same time Wulfhard
succeeded to Vtel in the Sea of Hereford. These were the first Bishops
consecrated by the late ordained Metropolitan of Lichfeild.

Iac. Dublet in Antiquit. Monast. S. Dionys.
4. We read among the Antiquities of S. Denis in France compiled by a Monk of
the same Monastery, a certain Charter, in which, the Author of it, Berthwald a
Duke in the Kingdom of the South Saxons in Brittany relates, how having falln
into a disease judged by Physicians incurable, he had been informed that in
France at the Monastery of Saint Dionysius, S. Rusticus and Saint Eleutherius,
of which the Venerable Florad was Abbot, many miraculous cures were wrought by
the intercession of the said Saints: Whereupon having demanded and obtained
leave of King Charles, he went thither. And there after he had for the space of
a very few days lain sick, he was restored to perfect health through Gods
mercy obtained by the intercession of those Blessed Saints. Therefore according
to a Vow which he had made to God and the said Saints, some Relics of whom he
brought back into Brittany, he built a Church dedicated to their honor at a
Mansion house of his seated in a village called K^^reseld upon the River Saford
in a territory called Cutfesta in which lies the City of Chichester: For the
maintaining of the Monks belonging to the said Church, he by the consent of his
Brother Eadbald gave the same Village with all its dependencies, and moreover
the benefit of the two havens near adjoining, Hastings and Pevensel, with the
Sal^pits, etc. that they might pray for his soul. This Charter was accepted by
a Monk called Deodatus in the name of the said Saints Dionysius, etc.

5. This donation made by Duke Berthwald to the Monastery of S. Denis in France
was confirmed by a Charter of King Offa dated the second year following: Ibid.
In which Charter there is likewise a ratification of another Donation to the
same Monastery by two Brethren, Agonowa^a and Sigren, o^ certain lands seated
in a haven called Lundonwic: To which the said King likewise adds a gift of all
the rents and customs due to himself out of the same Haven and land And this at
the Petition of Maginarius Abbot of S. Denis who sent a Monk of his called
Nadetharius to receive in his Abbots name this Charter from the Kings hands.
And Subscribers thereto are King Offa, Higbert Archbishop of Lichfeild,
Kinidred the Queen, Vnwona a Bishop and others.

6. In the next Century likewise upon occasion of a complaint made by the Abbot
of S. Denis to Ethelwolf Monarch of the English, of injuries done by a certain
Officer of the King called Togred, to the Tenants of that Monastery in
Ridrefeld, in the Havens, Saltpits etc. the said King renewed a confirmation of
the foresaid Donation and Charter. The like did also King Edgar upon such a
complaint above a hundred years after that.

XXVI. C.
XXVI. CHAP.
1.2. etc. The Gests of S. Lullo, Archbishop of Mentz.

6. The sudden and happy death of S. Witta Bishop and Abbot.

7.8. etc. The Blessed death of Saint Lullo.

10. S. will hade first Bishop of Bremen.

1. IN the same year dyed S. Lul or Lullo, the Successor of S. Boniface in the
Archbishoprik of Mentz. Serrar. vit. S. Lulli.
His parents were Noble, for he was kinseman to Kineard Bishop of Winchester,
and, as some write, to S. Boniface. He was educated in the Monastery of
Malmsbury (Maldubia.) When he was Deacon he went over into Germany with other
Apostolic Priests in the year of Christ seven hundred twenty five, at the
invitation of S. Boniface, by whom he was ordained Priest, and employed in the
great charge of preaching to the Pagans in Hassia and Thuringia. Afterward he
was sent to Rome to procure the erection of the Church of Mentz into a
Metropolitan See, as likewise Privileges to the Monastery of Fulda: which he
easily obtained.

2. When S. Boniface undertook his last journey into the country of the
Frisons where he was martyrd, he obtained permission to consecrate S. Lullo his
Successor in the Sea of Mentz, as has been declared, and withal recommended
him to the protection and favor of King Pipin and other Princes: and least
they should forget this recommendation, he wrote to a certain Priest named
Fulrad Chaplain to King Pipin, Ap. Bonif. Ep. 92.
desiring him earnestly to take him into his care: in which Epistle he gave S.
Lullo this Character, which showed his esteem and particular affection to him, I
desire you, says he, and in the name of God do earnestly beseech you that you
will so order matters that my Son and Fellow-bishop Lul may be constituted in a
power to compose the affairs of the People and Churches and be made a Teacher
of Priests. And I confidently hope through Gods grace that the Priests will
find in him a Master, the Monks a Regular Doctor, and the people a faithful
Preacher and Pastor.

3. S. Lullo worthily made good this commendation given of him by his Master:
for as soon as he was gone he in person visited his Province, teaching,
exhorting and correcting all abuses. But shortly hearing of the Martyrdom of
his dear Father, he did not so wholly ^eild to grief for his loss, but that he
employed his thoughts how to honor his Memory: And therefore calling his Clergy
together, he, attended by a great multitude of Ecclesiastics and Nobles also,
went to the place where the Holy Bishop had been martyred, and with great
solemnity, singing of Psalms, and lighted torches he brought the Sacred Body to
Mentz, where he earnestly desired it might be buried in the Archiepiscopall
Church founded by him. But herein he was strongly opposed by S. Sturmis Abbot
of Fulda, who bid him call to mind that the last words almost which he had
spoken to S. Lullo himself, were a command that his body should repose in his
Monastery of Fulda. Hereto S. Lullo was compelled to yield, but yet the love
and incomparable respect which He bore to the memory of his dear Master kindled
in his heart such a passionate displeasure against S. Sturmis, for depriving
him of so beloved and so sacred a pledge, that he scarce ever ceased afterward
to do him any disp^easure, and even to persecute him with a violence not
beseeming his Profession. Notwithstanding the Holy Martyrs bowell, he placed in
a Church at Mentz, where they are held in great veneration.

4. Moreover in a further expression of his love and regard to his blessed
Masters memory, he exhorted S. Willebald his Nephew to write the Holy Martyrs
Life, to the end that posterity might know, honor and imitate the heavenly
virtues which shone so brightly in him.

5. Several Monasteries he founded, as that of Heresfeild in Hassia, not far
from Mentz, which he endowd with ample revenews, and adorned it with many
Relics, translating likewise thither from Fritzlar the Body of S. Wigbert, for
which a magnificent shrine was made by the contribution of King Charles the
Great. Another Monastery likewise he erected at a place called Bleidenstat
about two miles from Mentz: Which afterward by his Successor Bertold was
changed into a College of Canons. Thither also he translated the Relics of S.
Ferruth from Kassel. In a word his whole life was employed in nothing but the
advancement of piety and virtue: either in converting Pagans from Idolatry to
the Christian Faith, or in promoting devout Christians in the ways of
Perfection.

6. When his last sickness seized on him, he sent for the Holy companion of his
Apostolic Office S. Witta, who had been consecrated by S. Boniface Bishop of
Birburg, and after that Town was destroyed, was made Successor of S. Wigbert in
the Monastery of Fritzlar. Him being come, he desired to say Mass, after which
he intended to direct him to his Monastery of Heresfeild. The good Bishop after
he had with great devotion prepared himself for celebrating that most dreadful
Sacrifice, not then perceiving in himself any bodily infirmity at all, went to
the Holy Altar, where he had no sooner performed that Divine Liturgy, and
communicated, but immediately he expired. His Body Saint Lullo, presently caused
to be carried into a boat, conveying it himself to Heresfeld, where he buried it
with great honor. This Holy Bishop is by some German Writers called Albuinus,
according to the Saxon signification of his name Witta or White.

7: Presently after S. Lullo himself followd him, Martyr. Ang. 16. October.
partaking together the eternal rewards of his labors, on the sixteenth day
of October. His Body was there likewise in the same Monastery buried with all
religious piety and solemnity. And about threescore years after being taken up,
it was found with as fresh a color, as due proportion and softnes of all the
members, yea and covered with vestments as free from any decay, as if it had
been then newly buried.

8. The said Monastery of Heresfeld having been ruined by the rebellious
Lutherans, Mirae. Fast. Belg. 16. Oct.
it is not known whither that Sacred body was removed: But his Head was carried
to the Monastery of S. Godard, the Abbot whereof Herman in the year of Christ
sixteen hundred and three gave it to the Jesuits of Mentz to be placed there in
their College.

9. Many Miracles are recorded as performed by him both in his life and after
his death: I will only mention one. Is the year of Grace eight hundred forty
seven when his Body was taken up, as the Monks there were removing a huge
Stone which lay over it, it fell from their hands upon the foot of one of their
Brethren, so crushing and breaking it, that it quite lost the shape of a foot.
Whereupon the Religious Monks being much contristated, had recourse to God in
Prayer, begging likewise the Saints intercession: And the night immediately
following it was so perfectly restored, that the said Brother assisted at the
next Mattins not retaining any mark of the least bruise at all.

10. A little before his death he by the appointment of Pope Adrian ordained S.
Willehade Bishop of Bremen. Which City was then newly erected into an
Episcopal See by the same Pope, and richly endowed by the munificence of
Charles the Great: Whose Charter, describing the limits of the Territory
whereof, and likewise of the lands conferred on it, is extant in Baronius. As
touching S Willehade, the first Bishop thereof, we shall deliver his Gests in
the occurrents of the year of Christ seven hundred ninety one, in which he
dyed.

THE FIVE AND TWENTIETH BOOK. OF THE CHVRCH-HISTORY OF BRITTANY.
I. CHAP.
I. CHAPTER.
1. 2. etc. Alfwold the pious King of the Northumbers, murdered: to whom Osred
succeeds: and presently after, Ethelred.

7.8 Ethelred Bishop of Hagulstad: the magnificence of that Church.

1. NOTWITHSTANDING all the care which the Legates of Pope Adrian in the late
Synod, with the unanimous consent of the Bishops and Nobles had taken for the
preventing seditions and rebellions in the Kingdom of the Northumbers, yet such
an unquiet, tumultuous Spirit had taken so fixed a possession of the minds of
that people, that scarce any King could be permitted to sit upon that throne
but by the murder of his Predecessor, and the unjust usurper by his own
destruction made way for his Successor. Which restless, turbulent disposition
since it could not be cured by the Laws and authority of Gods Church, God took
the revenge into his own hands, and sent the terrible Nation of the Danes first
to lay wast that kingdom, and afterward to be a most tearfull scourge to the
whole Island. A. D. 789.


2. In the year of Grace seven hundred eighty nine Alfwol^ the good pious King
of the Northumbers after that he had with the great joy of virtuous men
governed that kingdom the space of eleaven years, was by a tempestuous sedition
of wicked men deprived of it, and his life also. The Head of the faction
against him was S^gga a Noble man of that Kingdom, Hoved. f. 404
who gathering a troop of desperately wicked men murdered this most innocent King
in a place called Silcester near the Picts wall. (This was an ancient Station
of the Romans, where the Asturian Wing quartered, to oppose the irruptions of
the barbarous Picts and Caledonians: and it was then called Cilurnam: but is
now much more celebrated for the death of this pious King) In the place where
he was slain a heavenly light was frequently seen, Huntingd. f. 343.
says Huntingdon.

3. His Body was carried to the Cathedral Church of Hagustald, where it was
with great honors and devotion buried: Hoved. ib. Harpsf. saec. 8. c.
which Church had been built to Gods honor, and the memory of his Saints,
Saint Cuthbert and S. Oswald King and Martyr. Of how great merit this innocent
King was with God, the miracles performed at his Tomb, and elswere do declare
abundantly.

4. Moreover the Divine justice gave a yet greater testimony of his Sanctity by
the terrible revenge with which God expiated this execrable murder, which
though committed by a few, was punished with a common calamity. Hoved. ibid.
For not only Sigga who defiled his hands with his blood, the same year out of
despair became his own executioner and murderer: But likewise dire Prodigies
terrified the whole Nation: Horrible thunders and fiery dragons in the air
foretold a most grievous famine shortly ensuing; and an unexpressible slaughter
of men. Thus writes Hoveden. And Matthew of Westminster adds* Westmon. hic.
as a prodigy of great wonder, that on men's clothes were seen the sign of the
Cross: which he conceived to have been intended by God for a warning against
the coming of the Danes, which shortly followed.

5. In the place of Alfwold there was substituted Osred, son to King Alred who
a little before reigned in the Kingdom of the Northumbers. But this Osred
enjoyed but a short time the fruit of the treason committed against Alfwold: For
within a years space the Northumbers according to their natural inconstancy,
grew weary of him: So that he was circumvented by the treachery of his Nobles,
Hoved. A. D. 790.
and deprived of his kingdom* after which he had the Monastical Tonsure in the
City of York: and yet not finding security there, he was compelled to fly out
of the Kingdom.

6. After the deposall of Osred, the Northumbers recalled out of banishment
Ethelred the son of Ethelwold, Id. ib.
who was a second time exalted to the throne. Among the Epistles of Alcuin
there is extant one directed to this King Ethelred after his restitution,
Alcuin. Epist 29.
as likewise to Osbald and Osbert two of his Principal Nobles, in which he
with great affection admonishes them to set before their eyes the great
calamities lately befailn that Kingdom by the injustice, rapines and uncleannes
of former Princes: which vices if they did not avoid, they must expect the like
judgments. Particularly he exhorts them to apprehend the scourge which lately
afflicted the Church of S. Cuthbert, a place enriched with the holy Relics of
many Saints, but now miserably wasted by Pagans Before which Letter was sent,
it seems King Ethelred was slain, as appears by the destroying the Church of
Lindesfarn.

7. The same year in which King Alfwold was slain, Tither (or as Hoveden styles
him, S. Gilbert) Bishop of Hagustald dying, Hoved. hic.
Ethelbert a little before consecrated Bishop of Witehern, or Candida casa,
relinquishing that See, was translated to the Church of Hagustald.

^leuin Ep. 32
8. To this Ethelbert newly Bishop of Hagustald, and to the Congregation of
Monks there serving God in the Monastery dedicated to S. Andrew, there is ^ound
an Epistle also of the same Alcuin, in which after congratulation for his
assumption to that Bishopric, he humbly recommends himself to his and all
their Prayers: and exhorts them to be careful in the pious education of young
Religious, that they may be worthy successors of the honor which they had
obtained in other Churches, and likewise that they might be intercessours for
them when they were dead: For (says he) the prayers of the living are
proffitable to the dead, to obtain for some the pardon of their sins, and to
others an increase of their happiness. In the same Epistle likewise he magnifies
the beauty and sumptuousness of that Church and Monastery at Hagustald, built
long before by S. Wilfrid: Which according to the testimony of William of
Malmsbury, was so magnificent, Malmsbur.
that in no country on this side of the Alps could be found a Church which
might deserve to be compared with it: Insomuch as those which came from Rome
seeing it, imagined they saw the Roman ambition in Brittany. And indeed it was
from Rome that S. Wilfrid called the Architects and Masons which built it.

II. CHAP. II. CHAP.

1.2. etc. Succession of Bishops in England: Ethelard an illustrious
Archbishop of Canterbury

5. Two young Northumbrian Princes murdered.

6. Osred after his deposall, and Monastical Ton^ure slain

6. Ethelred mary's the daughter of Offa.

1. EThelbert having relinquished the Episcopal See of Candida casa, A. D.
790. Hoved. f. 404.
it was supplied by Eadulph or Baldulj, who was ordained in a place called
Hearvahalah, which may be interpreted, a place of Lords. About the same time
likewise after the death of Higbert Bishop of Lichfeild, and lately called
Archbishop, there succeeded in the same See Aldulf, who was the only
Archbishop of that See which received a Pall from Rome: for not long after
this See was reduced to its primitive state, simply Episcopal. Moreover
Alubert Bishop of Selesey in the kingdom of the South Saxons, dying, in his
place was substituted Osa, by some called Bosa.

2. The Archiepiscopall See of Canterbury had been a good space vacant after
the death of Iambert: A. D. 79i.
and in the year of Christ seven hundred ninety one was supplied by the
translation of Ethelard thither from the Sea of Winchester, Vid. l. 24. c. i6.
Malmsb. de Pontif. l. 1. f. 199.
to which he had eleaven years before been ordained. He was a man to be
compared, yea prefered above the most famous Prelates of this Island, if we
except the first Apostolic Doctors of it. For he restored unto the primitive
splendor the dignity and Privileges of his Church, which had been depressed
by King Offa: and in what esteem he was for his Sanctity will appear by the
Epistle of Pope Leo to King Kenulphus, of which hereafter.

Alcuin. Ep. 28
3. A little after his assumption to this supreme See, Alcuin wrote a letter of
congratulation to him, in which he exhorted him to imitate the virtues of his
glorious Predecessors, the Doctors and lights of Brittany, by whose prayers
he should certainly be assisted, if he would reclame their intercession, with
whose Sacred Bodies and Monuments he was compassed. Which Epistle seems to have
been an answer to one which this worthy Prelat wrote to him to demand his
counsel and instructions, as one perfectly versed in all sacred and
Ecclesiastical learning, touching the discharge of his New sublime Office.

4. To the Sea of Winchester, from which this illustrious Bishop Ethelard had
been taken, was promoted Egbald, who is reckond the tenth Prelat of that Church.

Hoved. hic.
5. At this time was performed an impious fact by King Ethelred lately restored
to the Kingdom of the Northumbers. For whereas two children of the pious King
Alfwold fearing the cruelty of King Ethelred, had fled for security to the
Church of York, as to an inviolable Sanctuary, they were by deceitful promises
withdrawn from thence, and miserably slain by the said King in a place called
Wonwaldremere: The names of those two Princes were Elf, and Elfwin.

6 The death of Osred presently after this following, did not deserve to be so
much lamented, because though he had been violently deposed from his throne, to
which King Ethelred was restored, yet having been in some sort engaged in the
security of a Religious life, of which he had received the Tonsure, it was not
so glorious for him to aspire to a Crown to which Ethelred had a right
preferable to his. Id. ib.
However he was about this time privately recalled from his banishment in a
place called Enfania, by certain Princes of the Northumbers discontented with
King Ethelred, who interposed their oaths to be loyal to him: But afterward
his own soldiers deserting him, he was taken prisoner by King Ethelred, and
upon his command slain in a place called Dingburch (or as others call it,
Cunburg.) His body was carried to the mouth of the River Tine, and buried in the
famous Monastery seated there.

6. King Ethelred not thinking himself as yet secure, to confirm his kingdom
yet more strongly, sought the freindship and association of Offa King of the
Mercians, the most powerful of all the English Saxon Princes at this time. And
to knitt more strictly the league between them, he demanded his daughter, named
Elfleda, for his wife: which he likewise obtained, having cast off his former
wife. But that which he contrived for his security, was the occasion of his
ruin: for his Subjects abhorting such impiety, deprived him of his kingdom,
and afterward of his life. And with him ended the Nortumbrian Kingdom, though
the Name of King was given to some few others. Notwithstanding by the invasion
and horrible depopulation made by the barbarous Danes, those Titular Kings of
the English blood were scarce taken notice of by any.

III. CHAP. III. CHA.

1.2. etc. The Gests and happy death of Saint Burchard, Bishop of Wirtzburg

10.11. etc. Likewise of his Suceessour Saint Megingand.

1. THE same year, in which Ethelard was assumed to the Archiepiscopall See of
Canterbury, is marked with the death of two English Apostolic Bishops in
Germany, S. Burchard and S. Willehade, the former Bishop of Wirtzburg, and the
other of Bremen.

2. The Life of S. Burchard has been written by Egilward a Monk of his own
Monastery near Wirtzburg, Vit. S. Burchard. ap. Sur. 14. Oct^b.
as Trithemius testifies: Some affirm, says that Author, that S. Burchard and
S. Swithun (concerning whom we will treat in the next Century) were brethren,
born of Noble parents in the Kingdom of the West Saxons in Brittany: and that
they were kinsmen to S. Boniface. Certain it is that S. Burchard was one of
those who were called out of Brittany in the year of Christ seven hundred
twenty five, to assist S. Boniface in his Apostolic Office in Germany.

3. As Soon as S. Burchard was arrived there, S. Boniface destined to him, in a
prophetical manner, the flock of Christ which had been gathered by S. Kilian
and his companions, and for which they had suffered Martyrdom. But to fit him
for so high an employment, he lived some years in the society of several
devout and learned Priests under the Conduct of S. Boniface. After which S.
Boniface joining to his own, Letters also written by King Pipin to Pope
Zacharias, requested that the City of Wirtzburg might be erected to an
Episcopal See. To which request the Pope easily condescended, after he had
been informed that the said Church was endowd by S. Boniface himself with
sufficient revenews to sustain the necessities of the poor, as well as of the
Clergy. And upon the testimony given by S. Boniface, S. Burchard, his Disciple,
was consecrated the first Bishop of that Episcopal See.

4. These things being happily effected at Rome, Saint Boniface conducting his
now fellow Bishop to Wirtzburg, recommended him to his flock, by whom he was
most joyfully received. At which time the bounds of the said Diocese were
limited. And S. Burchard being left in his New See, omitted no duty of a
worthy Prelat, being assiduous in reading, affable in conversation, powerful
in preaching, exemplary in life, liberal in almes-giving, tenderly loving and
beloved by his flock,

5. In the second year after he was consecrated Bishop, by the advice and with
the assistance of S. Boniface, he made diligent search for the Sacred Bodies of
S. Kilian and his companions the holy Apostolic Martyrs of Christ, which
having found, he with great devotion took them out of the place into which they
had been ignominiously cast by their murderers the Idolatrous Pagans. As Soon as
the earth was opened, a celestial fragrancy was breathed from thence, and
though their flesh was already resolved into dust, yet the vestments and books
which had been cast with them into the pit, were found entire, nothing at all
defaced. They were in a most solemn Procession carried to the Church of
Wirtzburg, where by a world of miracles they so increased men's devotion, that
by means thereof the Church became enriched with great possessions. S Burchard
himself gave a village called Michelnstat, which Prince Caroloman had formerly
bestowed on him. King Pipin afterward gave a certain Castle called Karelburg
with several other ample possessions.

9. Near the said Castle there was a small Monastery which had been built by a
Holy Virgin named Gertrudis. This Monastery being much retired did another
devout Virgin called Immina beg of Saint Burchard: and in exchange gave him a
place called The Mount of Saint Mary, or Old Wirtzburg, of far greater value.
To this place were the Sacred Bodies of Saint Kilian and his companions
translated. There likewise did Saint Burchard build a magnificent Monastery,
and placed there his Episcopal See. And thither did he often retire, whenever
he could obtain any vacancy from the solicitudes of his charge and conversation
of men: and there did he attend to God and celestial things only.

7. Forty years did this Holy Bishop spend in the exercises of perfect Charity,
either to God in Prayer and contemplation; or to men in advancing their souls
in the same Divine Charity. And after such incessant labors in our Lords
Vineyard, his corporal strength diminishing, he called his Clergy together, to
whom he declared his desire to see his Episcopal See provided of a person able
to sustain the weighty employments of it: for which purpose he proposed to them
his Disciple and companion Megingand, well known to them for his eminent
virtues and piety: who was immediately by common consent elected to be after
his death his Successor, and during his life his assistant. A confirmation of
this Election he easily obtained from his Metropolitan the Archbishop of
Mentz, Charles the Great King of France consenting thereto.

8. Having discharged his mind of so great a care, he took with him only six of
his Disciples, and by boat descended to a certain Castle called Hohenburg,
where he employed the remainder of his days in great austerities, in watching,
fasting and incessant Prayer. He had a desire to have continued his journey to
Michelnstat, where his purpose was to build another Monastery: But his
infirmity increasing upon him would not permit him to accomplish his desire.
For within a few days after his coming to Hohenburg he gave up his soul into
his Redeemers hands, having before secured his last passage by the Sacraments
of Holy Church, which he received with admirable fervor and Spiritual joy.

9. His Sacred body was by the affectionate care of his Disciple and Successor
Mengingand transported to his Cathedral Church of Wirtzenburg, where it was
reposed near to the Sacred Relics of Saint Kilian, all the Nobility and in a
manner all the inhabitants of the Country being assembled to honor the
funerals of their beloved Pastor. Who as in his life time he had been an
instrument of great benedictions to them, so after his death likewise they
experienced many effects of his Love, by frequent deliverances and consolations
obtained by his intercession. The day of his death is marked o^ the fourth day
before the Nones of February: But his principal Feast is obserserved on the
fourteenth of October, Martyr. Ang 14. October.
the day of his Translation.

10. His Successor Saint Megingand, who was one of those which Saint Boniface
had called out of Brittany, was come to a great age at the death of Saint
Burchard: yet he administered that See the space of fifteen years, in all things
conformable to the good example of his Blessed Predecessor. And ^t last being
oppressed with age, by the consent of his Clergy he elected for his Successor
a certain Disciple and Monk of his Monastery called Bernwelf, to whom he
resigned the whole care of his Bishopric, consigning into his hands all the
possessions and goods left by Saint Burchard. And attended by a few disciples
he retired to a certain place given to him by a devout person named Hatto.

11. But in this his choice he was not so happy as his Predecessor had been:
for instead of kindness and respect due to him, he found extreme ingratitude and
persecution from his Successor. Insomuch as whereas in the Monastery of Saint
Kilian he had left fifty Monks laudable in their observance of Regular
Discipline, A. D. 790.
all these did Bernwelf with injuries drive out of the Monastery, and compelled
them to have recourse to his Master Mengingand. And not content with that, he
most greivously and incessantly vexed the good old man with frequent clamorous
accustions of having detained certain Vestments and Books left by Saint
Burchard. So great and insupportable unquietnes and troubles he caused to his
Master who had made him Bishop, that he was compelled to forsake that place of
his retirement called Korinlathe, and afterward Nieustat* which he gave up to
the patronage of King Charles, and betook himself to another further distant
Monastery by the same King bestowed upon him and his Monks. Where living in all
freedom from secular molestation under the protection of the illustrious King
Charles, in all things being acceptable to God and men, he in a short time full
of good works departed this life to receive his eternal reward.

IV. CHAP.
IV. CHAP.
1.2. etc. The Gests and blessed death of Saint Willehade, first Bishop of
Bremen.

Ap. Sur. ^ November.
1. AS for Saint Willehade he likewise came out of Brittany presently after
Saint Boniface his Martyrdom, and arrived at a place called Dockum, where the
said Holy Martyr received his Crown. There he remaind a good space, not
deterred by the so late cruelty of the barbarous Pagans from boldly preaching
the Gospel: and God so blessed his labors that many were converted and
baptized by him. From thence passing over the River Lavinca he went to a place
called Huchmark, where endeavoring likewise to withdraw those barbarous people
from their Idolatry, they in a great rage cried out, that such a profane
seducer ought to be killed. And when they were ready to putt this in execution,
certain men among them more moderate, told them that they ought to make a
trial, according to the ancient custom of their country, by casting of Lotts
whether his death would be acceptable to their Gods or no: And being hereto
persuaded, through Gods Providence he escaped: so that they gave him free
permission to go out of their country.

2. Leaving them therefore he went to a place called Drente, where by his
preaching many were converted and baptized. But when his Disciples moved with
zeal began to destroy the Heathen Temples, A. D. 791.
the barbarous people became incensed, and had a resolution to kill them. Saint
Willehade was sore bruised with clubbes, and one among them ran upon him with
his sword purposing to cut off his head. Lifting up therefore his sword, he
with all his force smote him on the neck. Now the Holy man had at that time a
case full of Relics tied about his neck. The sword then curt a sunder the
string only, and did not at all enter into the flesh. The Pagans therefore
astonished at this Miracle, let both him and his Disciples depart without any
further harm done them.

3. Now the Victorious King of France Charles having heard report of this Holy
man's sanctity and zeal, encouraged him much to be constant in preaching the
Gospel. He went therefore into a Territory called Wigmode, where he converted
many, and built Churches: Yea the greatest part of the Frisons inhabiting
thereabout promised they would embrace the Christian Faith. But not long after
Wittekind Duke of the Saxons rebelled against King Charles, and raising an army
began a great persecution against the Christians. The holy man therefore after
he had escaped an imminent danger went to Rome: Where being much comforted and
encouraged by Pope Adrian, he returned back into Franconia.

4. Moreover at the command of the same King the man of God went again into
Wigmode, where he openly and boldly preached the Faith, and repaired the
Churches which the Pagans had demolished. And God did so prosper his labors
that the Frisons once more embraced the Faith which they had renounced: Yea
Duke Wittekind himself, the Author of all the mischief, submitting himself to
King Charles, was persuaded to receive Baptism.

5. The said King seeing so many Christians converted, thought good that a New
Episcopal See should be erected: for which purpose he made choice of a place
called Bremen in the country of Wigmode: there he caused a Church to be built:
and with the advice of Lullo, he sent to Pope Adrian to demand that this Holy
man Willehade should be consecrated Bishop of Bremen: which was accordingly
performed. Baron. ad A. D. 783.
There is in the Annalls of Baronius extant the Charter of King Charles for the
erection and endowment of this Episcopal See, in which after thanks given to
God for his many victories over the Saxons, he declares the limits of this new
Diocese, what possessions and Tithes were annexed to it, as likewise to a
Monastery adjoining, all which were committed to the care of the Holy servant
of God, Willehade. Which Charter was dated in the year of our Lords Incarnation
seven hundred eighty eight:

Ap. Sur 8. November.
6. In this function Saint Willehade behaved himself with wonderful piety, and
increased his diligence in the practice and progress in all virtues. And
falling into an infirmity of body, he was commanded by Pope Adrian to eat fish:
for formerly out of a rigorous abstinence he forbore the use of them. Scarce
any day passed in which he did not with great contrition of heart celebrate
Mass, and besides that, he would some days recite the whole Psalter twice or
thrice. Thus the blessed man did wonderfully adorn his Doctrine, and by his own
example confirm that which with his tongue he preached to others.

7. At length after he had several times with great zeal visited his Diocese,
he came to a certain place called Bleckensee, now Plexem: Where so violent a
feavour took him, that his Disciples despaired of his recovery. And one of them
being more familiarly conversant with him, could not forbear to testify his
grief by tears and complaints, saying, Holy Father, do not so soon forsake
your tender flock, least when you are gone, the wolves seize upon it. The
Blessed man, answered him, My son, do not you desire to detain me from the
sight of my Savior: These my sheep he gave me, and to him I commend them of
whose goodness the whole earth is full. Thus piously affected, and always intent
upon God was this Blessed servant of his to the hour of his death, which
befell on the sixth day before the Ides of November. To his funerals all the
people on all sides made have, and with hymns and praises to God carried the
Sacred Body of their most dear Father and Teacher to the Church of Bremen,
which himself had built, and dedicated to the Apostle Saint Peter. He sat in
the same See only two years, three months and twenty six days: having been a
laborious Preacher since the death of S. Boniface the space of thirty five
years.

V. CHAP. A. D. 792.

V. CHAP.



1.2. etc. A falsely supposed Book against Images, said to be sent from Charles
the Great to King Offa: Alcuin's judgment touching Images.

7.8 etc. It was upon misinformation that the Council of Francfort censured
the Eastern Church in that Point.

1. THE year of Grace seven hundred ninety two is much celebrated by modern
Protestant Writers, A. D. 791.
because, as they suppose, it affords them a great advantage to question, yea
condemn the Roman Catholic Faith touching Images, and the Veneration due to
them. Sir Henry Spelman thus briefly gives an account of the business: Spelm. de
Council. f 305
That year, says he, Charles the Great King of the French sent into Brittany
to Offa King of the Mercians a Book of the second Council of Nicea, in which a
Decree is made that Images are to be adored. But the English reject this.

2. To justify this Device he first produces a Letter pretended to be written
by King Charles to Offa, thereto annexing a passage out of the Author by whom
the said Letter is recorded, to wit, the Compiler of the Life of this King
Offa the second, lately published under the Name of Matthew Paris. As touching
the Letter, there is nothing in it relating to the Controversy about Images:
Ib^d.
But thereto the said Author adioyns, That among others marks of extraordinary
freindship between the two Kings, Charles, who as he was the most powerful, so
also the most meck and kind of the Eastern Kings, sent to Offa the greatest and
most pious of the Western Kings, certain Epistles, and together with them
Synodall Statutes, as it were certain rudiments of Catholic Faith, for
informing the minds of the English Prelates, whom he believed to be rude,
unlearned and irregular. These things he sent to King Offa for perpetuating the
freindship begun happily between them. And this present Offa received with joy,
as a blessing sent him from heaven.

3. This foundation being thus laid, though as yet not a word touching Images
be found, yet Sir Henry Spelman to prove that at this time the English-Saxons,
as to the Point of Images, were Protestants, that is, Iconomachi, will needs
collect from hence that the Synodall Statuts here mentioned as sent to inform
the unlearned disorderly Prelates in Brittany, was the same Book of which
Hoveden thus writes: The same year Charles King of the French sent a Synodall
Book into Brittany, Hoved. hic.
which had been directed to him from Constantinople. In which Book, alas! were
found many things disagreeing, yea directly contrary to true Faith: and
principally one Point confirmed by the unanimous consent of almost all the
Eastern Doctors, and not so few as three hundred Bishops, That Images ought to
be adored: which is an assertion which the Church of God does altogether
abominate. And against this Point Albin (or Alcuin) wrote an Epistle admirably
established upon the Divine authority of Scriptures: which together with the
forementioned Book he himself carried to the King of the French, in the name of
our Bishops and Princes.

Harpsf. saec. 8 f. 126.
4. Harpsfeild taking Notice of the like passages, as he judges, frudulently
interposed in the writings of some of our ancient Authors, esteems the whole
Narration to be a foolish, unsavory fable: not worth the trouble of confuting.
And indeed, Sir. H. Spelman himself after he had produced these things, Spelm.
ib. f. 308.
foreseeing that it would be a difficult tax to justify these allegations, is
content to repress himself, and only in ge^nerall to affirm, that hitherto he
could find no ground to judge that as yet the English Church had admitted the
adoration of Images. Thus writes he, Vid. sup l. 2^. c. ^^.
and yet in the same Book he before had with great earnestnes endeavored to
justify a pretended Synod of London assembled almost fourscore years before
this time, in which a Decree is made by the English-Saxon Clergy and Nobility
for admitting the adoration (that is, veneration) of Images, as we have already
showed.

5. And as touching the pretended Epistle in confutation of the said Doctrine
written by Alcuin, and by him carried into France, besides that it neither
appears in the volume or his Epistles published by himself, nor in any other
Author: Let the indifferent Reader judge how unsavory a fable the imputing of
this to Alcuin is, when he shall read what Alcuin himself writes concerning
this Point.

Alcuin. de Devin. Offic. c. 18.
6. In his Book of Divine Offices treating of the Ceremonies appointed by the
Church to be observed on Good Friday, he writes thus: Toward evening in all
Churches of Priests, Bishops and Monasteries a Cross is prepared before the
Altar, which is sustained on both sides by two Acolytes, and a cushion laid
before it. Then comes the Bishop alone, and having adored the Cross, kisses
it: The same also is done by the Priests, Deacons and other Clarks, and lastly
by the people. The Bishop sitts in his Seat, whilst all salute the Cross. The
two first Priests having saluted the Crrsse, enter into the Sacristie, etc.
Moreover the same Alcuin, not content with this, further teaches why and how
this Ceremony is to be performed: Id. ib.
When we adore the Cross, says he, let our whole body lie prostrate on the
ground, and with our mind let us look upon him whom we adore, as hanging on the
same Cross, and we adore the virtue it self which it received from the son of
God. In body we are prostrated before the Cross: in mind before our Lord. We
venerate the Cross by which we are redeemed: and we pray to him who redeemed
us. Yea further for exploring Alcuins mind touching this matter, these
following words of his are remarkable, Id. ib.
Those who cannot have any part of the very wood of our Lords Cross, do
without any prejudice to Faith adore that Cross (or Image of it) which they
have. Such a Protestant Iconoclast was Alcuin thus does he confute by the
Divine authority of Scripture the veneration of Images asserted by the Council
of Nicea.

7. Notwithstanding what ever becomes of this Story touching King Charles his
Syn^^dall Book sent into Brittany (which is no other but his Capitulare,
containing a great number of Ecclesiastical Ordonnances) or of Alcuins
supposed Epistle: This is undoubted that about this time a great scandal was
given to the Western Churches upon occasion of the Doctrine touching Veneration
of Sacred Images asserted a little before this time in the Seventh General
Council assembled at Nicea. In which Council three hundred and fifty Eastern
Bishops restored the Sacred use and Veneration of Images, which had been with
horrible cruelty impugned by several preceding Emperors. In the Decrees
concerning which, they taught the very same Doctrine and practice which King
Charles and the French Church, as likewise King Offa and the English-Saxon
Bishops, conformably to Pope Hadrian, both believed and practiced.
Notwithstanding which, two years after this in a Council assembled by command
of King Charles at Frankfort the said Council of Nicea was sharply and bitterly
condemned.

8. It may seem strange that the Eastern and Western Churches should so well
agree and so sharply disagree at the same time, and upon the same Point. But
the wonde^ will cease when it shall evidently appear that it was upon a most
malicious and false misinformation that King Charles and his Bishops entertaind
a prejudice against the Eastern Church, being told that they maintained a
doctrine which they expressly disclamed.

9. To the end this may be demonstrated, we will produce from the Western
Council or Frankfort what judgment they made of the Council of Nicea (which
upon misinformation is there called the Council of Constantinople:) There was
brought into the Synod to be publicly debated a Question concerning a late
Synod of the Greeks, which was held at Constantinople touching the adoration of
Images: in which was found written this clause, That an Anathema should be
denounced against all such as would not exhibit the same service or adoration
to the Images of Saints, as they do to the Divine Trinity. Such an adoration
and service our Holy Fathers have with contempt renounced to Images, A. D. 793.
and unanimously condemned it.

10. This was indeed a just and necessary condemnation of so blasphemous a
Doctrine: and no doubt both Alcuin and the English Bishops would not refuse to
ioyn in the like condemnation. But the Doctrine so worthily condemned is so far
from being approved or asserted in the Council of the Greeks at Nicea, that in
the very Decision concerning the Veneration of Images, they do expressly
renounce it: as will appear by their Decree here following: Synod. 2. Nicena
definit.
11. We insisting on the Doctrine of the Holy Fathers, observing likewise the
Tradition of the Catholic Church, Do define that venerable and Sacred Images
commodiously framed in colors, marble or any other matter according to the
manner and form of the Venerable and like-giving Cross, are with all diligence
and care to be dedicated in Churches, in Sacred Vessels and Vestments, in
walls and tables, in private houses and public ways: and especially the Image
of our Lord God and Savior Jesus Christ, next of the Divine Virgin Mother, of
the glorious Angels and Saints: To the end that by an inspection of such
images, all that look upon them may be brought to the remembrance and desire of
the principal objects represented by them, and exhibit reverence and
respectfull adoration to them, yet by no means any true Divine Worship ((...))
which according to our Faith is only due to the Divine Nature: We therefore
intend such a veneration as we show when we reverently burn incense, or light
candles to the Type of the venerable and lifegiving Cross, to the Holy
Gospells and other oblations, as has been and i^ the custom received from our
predecessors.



12. Whence appears how innocent the Bishops of that Synod were of the impiety
condemned by the Western Bishops at Francfort. So that we may conclude that
this false information was given them from the Heretics Iconoclasts condemned
by the same Council. And therefore the same Sir Henry Spelman writes truly and
ingenuously saying, Spelman. ib. f. 707.
I do confess that I do not find that prodigious sentence concerning
deifying of Images in the Exemplar of the Nicene Synod which is published by
Binius.

VI. CHAP. VI. CHA.

i.2. etc. The Body of Saint Alban the Proto-martyr of Brittany, miraculously
discovered to King Offa: who causes it to be translated: and builds a
magnificent Church and Monastery to his honor.

1. THE year following Offa King of the Mercians residing then at the City of
Bath, A. D. 793. Westmonast. A. D. 794. Ap. Capgr. in vit. Saint Alban.
was in sleep admonished by a Divine Oracle to take up out of the earth the
Sacred Body of Saint Alban, and place it more honorably in a shrine. He
therefore sending for Humbert Archbishop of the Mercians declared unto him his
vision. Then the said Archbishop attended by Ceo^ulf and Vnwona his two
Suffragan Bishops with an innumerable multitude of both sexes met the King at
Verulam upon a day appointed. There did the said King behold a Light from
heaven darting its beams over the place where the Holy Martyr had been buried:
by which sign seen of them all they became assured of the truth of the former
vision. Then were all the people commanded to purify themselves by fasting,
alms and prayers, and the Bishops adorned with their Sacerdotall Vestments
begged the assistance of the Blessed Martyr. For the place since the coming of
S. Germanus and Lupus two French Bishops into Brittany to root out the Pelagian
Heresy about three hundred forty four years before this, had been quite defaced
by the Pagan Saxons, English and Iutes who conquered the country, and
destroyed all sacred places, and among the rest the Church which after the
death of the Holy Martyr had been magnificently built to his honor by the
Britains, as Beda testifies.

2. The said Bishops therefore after fasting and prayers, Bed. l. i. c 18.
Westmon. ib.
opening the ground, found the Blessed Martyrs body in a wooden Coffin,
together with the Sacred Relics of the Apostles and Martyrs which Saint
Germanus had placed there. This Invention drew tears of joy and devotion from
the eyes of all the Clergy and people present: and the Bishops with great
reverence and fear took out of the ground that precious Treasure which had been
a long time hid, and with a solemn Procession, with Hymns and Canticles they
transported it to a certain Church which had anciently been built to the honor
of the said Holy Martyr without the gates of the City Verulam, where in a
shrine curiously wrought of gold and silver and adorned with precious stones
they deposed it.

3. In the same place to this day divine miracles are frequently wrought, for
in the sight of many, hearing is restored to the deaf, walking to the lame,
sight to the blind, and death both of mind and body to all who with confidence
in the Divine mercy through the intercession of his Saint implore it. These
things were acted in the five hundred and seventh year after the suffering of
the Holy Martyr, the three hundred forty fourth year after the coming of the
English into Brittany, the first Indiction and the first day of August.

4 King Offa not content with preparing a sumptuous shrine for the honor of
this glorious Martyr, added also a most magnificent Monastery, for obtaining of
Privileges, for which by advice of the Bishops recourse was had to the Pope.
Concerning which Monastery, Matthew of Westminster writes, that as S. Alban was
the Prime among the British Martyrs and Saints, so his Monastery excelled both
in possessions and liberties all the other Monasteries of the Kingdom.

Monast. Anglic. p. 177.
5. To this day is preserved the Charter which King Offa made to this
Monastery: in which he mentions the foresaid miraculous discovery of the holy
Martyrs body: adding that since Honor given to God, and pious devotion to his
Saints is the stability of an earthly kingdom, the prosperity of long life, and
will undoubtedly be rewarded with eternal happiness, therefore he gave such
lands and possessions there named to the said Monastery, freeing it likewise
from all tributs and burdens: Apponting withal over it as Abbot Willigoda a
Priest to govern it according to the Rule of S. Benedict for ever: Lastly
requiring that daily prayers should continually be offered there for the souls
of himself and his friends.

I^gulf. f. 854
6. At the same time the Abbot of Croyland called Patrick successor to the
first Abbot thereof Kenulph, seeing the devotion and piety of King Offa to Gods
Saints, and his kind inclination to the Prayers of Religious men, obtained from
him a Charter likewise, by which he took into his Protection the said
Monastery, confirming all the possessions and Privileges formerly given to the
same, freeing the Monks thereof from all secular burdens and impositions, as he
had newly done his brethren the Monks of S. Alban: (such is his expression.)

VII. CHAPTER
VII. CHAP.
i.2. etc. The Gests and Martyrdom of S. Ethelbert King of the East Angles.

1. COncerning this King Offa, the Character given him by William of Malmsbury
is very proper, Malmsb. de Reg. l. 1. c. 2.
saying, In one and the same man sometimes vices did palliate themselves with a
show of virtue, and sometimes virtues did succeed vices, that a man would be
uncertain in what shape to represent such a changeable Proteus. For the same
year in which he showed himself so pious toward the Holy Martyr S. Alban, he
showed himself most impious in cruelly killing an innocent Prince and making him
a Martyr.

2. This Prince was Ethelbert the Son of Ethelred and Leofrana by whom he was
carefully instituted in piety and all virtues. Malmsb. de Pont. l. 4. Io. Angl.
Ap. Capgr. in Ethelbert. Westmonast. A D. 794. Polyd. Virg. l. 4.

Harpsf. saec. 8. c. 9.

Molan: in Addit.


He had now governed the Kingdom of the East Angles forty four years with such
justice and moderation that he was tenderly loved by all his subjects. All
which time he had never admitted any proposal of marriage: but now yiedling to
the importunity of his Mother and Nobles who earnestly desired to see a
Successor, he remitted to their judgments to propose to him a fit Consort.

3. When they were therefore to consult about the person, in the first place
they generally turned their thoughts upon a Princess among the South Saxons
whose name was Seledrida, and her Fathers, Egeon, by whose death she was
possessed of a very considerable Province, besides other great riches.
Therefore they advised the King to make choice of her, whose Treasures and
territory would be a great strength and accession to his Kingdom. But the King
whose judgment was directed by better Rules then humane policy and interests,
rejected the proposal, because that Province which Egeon had left unto his
daughter was procured by unjust and fraudulent means, and therefore he could
not expect a benediction from God upon the possession of it.

4. Some few others therefore whose counsels were guided by Principles more
sublime and not so worldly, proposed to the King a daughter of the most potent
King Offa, whose name our Historians generally call Alfreda, only by Ingulfus
she is named Etheldrita: a Virgin endowd withal Graces, against whom no
exception could be made: Yea moreover such affinity contracted with her Father
would be an absolute security to the Kingdom. To this therefore King Ethelbert
consented, and thereupon Ambassadors were dispatched to King Offa to demand of
him this grace: which he willingly granted, so that conditions on both sides
were readily agreed on.

5. When the time appointed for the marriage drew near, King Ethelbert thought
fit to go to the Mercians, thereby to show more affection and respect in
conducting his espoused Lady home. But when he began his journey there happened
to him many terrible prodigies port^nding a fatal success. Among which this
was one: When he mounted on horsback, attended by a great multitude of his
loving Subjects who earnestly prayed for his happiness, on a sudden, besides a
great earthquake, the Sun became wholly darkened, insomuch as one could not
discern another, neither durst they remove by reason of the trembling of the
earth, All were astonished at this, and falling prostrate on the ground,
earnestly besought God to avert his wrath from them. But the King, more
devoutly then the rest, humbly begged of God at least an internal Light by
which he might discern whether that journey and the occasion of it were
acceptable to him, and for the benefit of his own soul: in token of which he
besought him to cease the trembling of the earth, no to restore the Suns Light.
As Soon as he had ended his Prayer all these prodigies immediately ended.
Thereupon the King confidently prosecuted his journey, though his Mother
terrified by such ominous signs earnestly endeavored to dissuade him.

6. As Soon as he was entered into Mercia attended by a small guard, God was
pleased in a vision by night to signify to him his approaching death, and the
immense glory which should follow it. For First it seemed to him that the roof
of his Palace fell upon him, and that his Mother seeing it, let fall from her
eyes tears of blood. Afterward he saw a wonderfully great and most beautiful
Tree, which certain persons feircely endeavored to hew down, and out of the
wounds made in it flowed a torrent of Blood eastward. Then a pillar of Light
from the South more bright then the Sun seemed to rise up: and himself in the
shape of a Bird having the extremities of his wings shining like gold, had a
great desire to embrace that glorious pillar: so that mounting to the top of
it, he heard a most celestial Harmony, to which he with infinite pleasure
attended, till his sleep ending, all vanished away.

7. The next morning he recounted this Dream to his friends, at which their
astonishment and fears were renewed with great increase, considering such
fearful signs, as the falling down of a house, his Mothers bloody tears, a
fair tree cut down, and blood issuing out of it. Thereupon they attempted to
persuade him to return, and not to tempt God after so manifest a warning given
him of danger. But the King thinking it both dishonorable and unsafe to
publish a suspicion of any treachery in so great a King as Offa, and withal
considering that though in his Vision there were many ominous signs, yet the
end seemed glorious and happy: Therefore resigning himself into Gods hands he
cheerfully pursued his journey.

8. King Offa at that time had his residence at a certain town now called
Sutton-Wallis in Herefordshire, seated upon the River Lugge* (Lugus:) There the
King received him with demonstrations of kindness and joy, the like did the
Queen, whose name was Quendreda. But whether this kindness on the Kings part was
sincere or no, it is left doubtful. But certain it is, that the impious Queen
presently after his arrival most execrably contrived her Son in Law's murder,
whereby without any danger or trouble she might procure to her family the
accession of a new kingdom. A. D. 794.
This horrible design, it is said, she discovered to her husband King Offa, who
at first expressed a detestation of it: but at length was persuaded by the
Impious Queen if not to ioyn in the execution, at least to suffer her to do it
alone.

9. She had before this laid the execrable design, and provided a fit
executioner: His name was Winebert, and to him was assigned the Office of
conducting King Ethelbert, whenever he was to treat about the accomplishing
the Marriage. One day therefore after he had excused to him King Offa's meeting
him, upon a pretense of indisposition, he lead the innocent King through
certain obs^ure passages of the Palace, where with the help of his associats
there attending, he murdered him. And so was fullfilld his vision of a
beautiful tree cut down, and a stream of blood issuing from it. Yea withal
the other part of the vision likewise was accomplished, in which was
represented a glorious Pillar of Light, and a Bird with golden wings mounting
to the top of it, and there entertaind with celestial Music: Which Bird was
the soul of this pious King and Martyr received into heavenly joys.

10. Some of our Historians relate the fact after another manner: Westmonast.
A. D. 794.
That in the Kings Bedchamber a chair sumptuously adorned was placed upon
planches which at pleasure might sink down, and draw the person after. And King
Ethelbert having, after a day spent in feasting, been conducted into this his
Bedchamber, and sitting in the said Chair, fell down into a hollow place,
where being over whelmed with bed-cloaths and pillows he was stifled. However
the crime was performed, all consent that it was principally by the Queen
Quendreda's contrivance that this pious King was murdered: though all do not
charge King Offa with the guilt of conspiring, or so much as knowing of it till
it was executed.

11. The Blessed Kings body being taken out of the Cave was by the command of
King Offa buried privately at a place called Marden near the River Lugg: whither
whilst it was carried, it was found so light, as if it had been already ennobled
with the Dotes of a glorified Body. But it lay not long in that ignoble
Sepulcher: for the night following was seen a Pillar of Light sparkling its
beams to the place where the Sacred Body lay: And the third night after, S.
Ethelbert appearing in a vision to a simple husbandman, commanded him to
transport his body to a Monastery built on the banks of the River Wye: which he
accordingly performed, and by the way a blind man was restored to sight by the
merits of this Holy Martyr: for so is he generally called in all ages since, by
reason of the frequent Miracles wrought by his intercession: and this Title is
expressly justified by William of Malmsbury.

12. The place where he was buried, was by the Saxons called Fernley, but now
Hereford, where a fair Church had formerly been built: To which King Offa in
testimony of his Repentance gave very rich Presents. There also he built a
magnificent tomb for him: and in succeeding times the opinion of the holy
Martyrs Sanctity did so increase, that Milfrid one of the following Kings of
Mercia much enlarged the same Church, dedicating it anew to the honor of S.
Ethelbert. For thus writes Leland, Leland.
From the time of King Offa the City of Hereford received great augmentation
by occasion of the Monument of the glorious Martyr Ethelbert King of the
East Angles: and it is deservedly esteemed the prime Seat of that Province.

13. Out of the place where the Body of S. Ethelbert was first buried issued a
fountain of most clear water, called S. Ethelberts well, over which now stands
a Church, no doubt built to his honor. For what other motive could the builder
have, since it is placed so near the River Lugg, which every flood being
overflown by the muddy waters of the River, never diminishes any thing of its
own purity. This wonderful effect to this day the neighbors, even
Protestants, take notice of, and impute it to the Sanctity of the Saint, yet
think it an impiety to honor the Saint so highly honored by God. His Memory
is celebrated in our English Martyrologe on the twentieth day of May. Martyr.
Ang. ^0. Ma^j.


VIII. CHAPTER
VIII. CHAP.
1.2. etc. King Offa's devout Pilgrimage to Rome and pious actions there.

4. Great Privileges granted to the English by the Pope.

5. His Queen Quendrida justly punished for the murder of S. Ethelbert.

1. KIng Offa by the testimony which God gave to the Sanctity of King Ethelbert
perceiving the enormity of his own crime: (for though it were true that his own
hand had not been defiled with the Martyrs innocent blood, yet a great crime it
was to permit so horrible a crime to pass unpunished:) He thereupon conceived
great remorse for it, and sought all ways how to pacify Gods displeasure. Some
Writers impute the founding of that magnificent Monastery of S. Alban to his
desire of making some manner of satisfaction for that Offense, which therefore
they conceive to have preceded that building. However certain it is that the
remaining years of his life he employed in memorable works of Charity and
devotion.

2. Besides this, the year following he undertook a devout Pilgrimage to Rome*
A. D. 794. Westmon. hic.
there to beg pardon of God at the shrines of the two Princes of the Apostles.
There also he with great fervor visited most other places dedicated to the
honor of Saints.

3. During his abode at Rome he confirmed through his whole kingdom, Id. ib.
Math. Paris hic.
containing one and twenty Provinces or Shires, that Contribution called S.
Peters-pence, or Rome-Scott, which King Ina had before imposed on his Kingdom
of the West Saxons. And moreover he endued with large possessions the School
of the English formerly founded also by the same King Ina at Rome, for the
sustentation of such his English subjects as should repair thither, either out
of devotion only, or a desire also to perfectionate their minds with the Study
of Sacred learning. This School, says Matthew Paris, by reason of the great
confluxe of strangers thither to seek comfort and sustenance, was turned into
an Hospital, called the Hospital of the Holy Spirit.

4. Lastly he supplicated Pope Hadrian not only to confirm by Apostolic
authority the large possessions which he had lately and should hereafter bestow
on his New-founded Monastery of S. Alban, but likewise to confer spiritual
Privileges and exemptions on it. To which request the Pope willingly
condescended, for he adopted that Monastery to be a Special Daughter of the
Roman Church, exempted from all Jurisdiction Episcopal and Archiepiscopall, as
immediately subject to the Sea Apostolic. He granted likewise that the
Territory belonging to that Monastery should be the only place in his Dominions
free from the general contribution of Peter Pence. Yea moreover that the Monks
of S. Alban should be the Collectours of the same Contribution through the
whole Province of Hertford: which having collected, they should reserve it to
their own use for keeping hospitality. To these he added this general Grace,
that he enjoined King Offa for the remission of his sins at his returning home
to call a Synod of his Bishops and Nobles, and whatsoever possessions or
Privileges he with their advice should bestow on the said Monastery he
promised that he would himself confirm such his Charter by his own authority.
And lastly in testimony of his great esteem of King Offa's piety, he gave this
general Privilege to all the subjects of his Kingdom, That no public
Penitent should be obliged, in execution of his Penance enjoined, to go out
of the kingdom: that is. Whereas in several cases of enormous crimes men were
obliged to seek Absolution at Rome, he gave a general Indulgence that for all
sins, men might be absolved at home.

5. Thus did King Offa omit no expedient whereby to expiate his crime touching
the murder of the blessed Martyr King Ethelbert. He returned not into his
kingdom till the year following. In the mean time several occurrents happening
in Brittany require a place here. As for his impious Queen Quendreda, she
enjoyed but a very short time the fruits of her cruelty: for in the space of
three months after she suffered a miserable death, but well beseeming her wicked
life. And her Son Egfrid a virtuous and pious Prince, for whose advantage
especially she executed that horrible murder, he was taken away by an untimely
death after a few months reign: by which means the Mercian Crown was translated
from the family of King Offa to the posterity of King Penda. And lastly her
Daughter Alfreda designed to be the Spouse of the Holy Martyr, she had such a
horror of her parents crime, that out of a general distaste of the world she
retired herself to a solitary devout life among the fenns of Croyland, where
she spent many years in aspiring to the embraces of a yet more glorious
Bridegroom. Concerning her we shall treat further when we arrive to the year
of her death.

IX. CHA.
IX. CHAP.
1. The decay of Kentish Kings.

2.3. etc. The Scandalous Rebellions and Treasons of the Northumbers: justly
punished by God: Their miseries bewailed by Alcuin.

1. THE same year which King Offa spent at Rome in his Devotions and Charities,
Alric King of Kent, who was Tributary to King Offa, ended his life after a
reign of thirty four years. He was the third and last of King Withreds
children, who succeeded him in that kingdom, not any of them leaving heyrs
behind them. And after them (says William of Malmsbury) the Noble stock of the
Kentish Kings withred away, Malmsb. de Reg. l. 2. c. 1.
and their generous blood lost all its vigor and Spirits. Then any one who had
impudence enough, who either by fraud could make himself rich and popular, or
by faction terrible, aspired to Tyranny there, and unworthily adorned his head
with the Regal Diadem. Such an one was Edilbert, surnamed Pren, who after
Alric invaded the Kentish throne, and after he had the space of two years
tyrannised in that kingdom, he had the foolish boldness to provoke the Mercians,
by whom he was taken prisoner, and forced to submitt his hands to chains, and
his body to captivity.

2. The same decay likewise at this time befell the kingdom of the Northumbers:
for this being the fifth year after King Ethelred had been recalled from
banishment to govern that Kingdom, he was also slain by his Subjects. And his
death gave an end to the Kingdom of the Northumbers: Fasti. A. D. 794.
and after thirty three years vacancy and want of a Lawful King it was seized
upon and possessed by Egbert King of the West Saxons. Yet in the mean time
there are named some few petty Kings there, during the time of the Danish
incursions. Thus we read in the Books of the Succession of Saxon Kings. The
first who after the death of Ethelred usurped the place and title of King, was
Oswald: and he after a short show upon the stage for twenty eight days, was
compelled by the Northumbrians to fly to the King of the Picts: so leaving
place for Ardulf. But the memory of these and some other like Kings following
has been in a sort obliterated by the tempestuous rage of the Danes wasting
those parts at this time, and putting all things in confusion.

3. A most just punishment that was, sent by God to plague that rebellious
Province, the inhabitants whereof had no regard to the Majesty of their Princes
but freely defiled their hands with their blood: by which they became odious
both to God and man. Yea the infamous scandal of their rebellions passed into
foreign countries likewise: as appears by a letter of Alcuin, who at this time
lived in France, into which he was invited by King Charles the Great to assist
by his learning the Church now combatted by New Heresies. That Letter was
written by him to Offa King of the Mercians: the tenor whereof is as
follows: 4. Ap. Malmsb. f. 26.
Your Majesty may please to know that King Charles does oftimes speak to me of
you with much affection and sincerity, and you have in him a most faithful
friend. And to express his kindness, he has given order that presents should be
sent to your Majesty, and your Bishops, as likewise to King Ethelred and the
Episcopal Churches in his Dominions. But alas! alas! These presents together
with letters were no sooner delivered into the Messengers hands, but certain
men out of Scotland which passed through your Country, brought us a most sad
Message concerning the unhappy death of that King of the Northumbers by the
infidelity of his own subjects. Hereupon King Charles presently in great anger
drew back his presents intended thither, calling them a perfidious, perverse
and rebellious Nation, which so often murdered their own Kings, esteeming them
therefore worse then Pagans: And if I had not interceded for them, he would not
only before this have hindered them from any good, but likewise have done them
all the micheif which lay in his power.



5. Notwithstanding though Alcuin by his intercession with King Charles could
avert the effects of his displeasure against the treacherous Northumbers, he
could not suspend the indignation and severity of Gods judgments upon them:
Hoved. f. 40
For the same year a navall army from the Northern coasts, like sharp stinging
hornets, A. D. 795.
invaded the kingdom of the Northumbers: and the barbarous soldiers like dire
half-famished Wolves ran up and down the country, wasting, killing not only
beasts, as oxen and sheep, but Priests, Deacons and Quires of Religious men and
women They came to the Church of Lindisfarn, where they miserably spoiled all
the country about: they trod under foot the most sacred things, they
demolished Altars, and carried away all the treasures and ornaments of the
Church: several of the Monks they killed, some they took for slaves, and most
of them after shameful usage they drove out naked, and exposed to starving by
cold and hunger: some likewise they drowned in the Sea.

6. Alcuin having been informed of the desolation of his country (for by many
proofs in his Writings it appears that he was born in the Province of the
Northumbers) wrote many bewayling sad letters to his friends there to condole
with the^ in their miseries: One he wrote to the Monks of the Monasteries of
Wiremouth and Girwy, Alcuini. Ep.
in which he seriously exhorted them to sanctity of life, Id Ep. 50.
and to tread in the steps of their Predecessor, Saint Beda etc. Another to
the same effect he sent to his Brethren in the Church of York, in which he
called himself a Son of that Church. Ap. Malmsb. f. 275.
And a third to Higbald Bishop of Lindesfarn and the whole Congregation there,
whom he styles the C^ildren of Saint Cuthbert, and tells them that he iustfull
feared the same misery would befall the whole Island, since Saint Cuthbert and
so many Saints reposing there did not defend his own Church. He concluded, that
as soon as King Charles should return with victory over his enemies, he would
go to him, and take care of redeeming the Northumbrian children which the
Danish Pagans had sold into France, and of other their necessities recommended
to him.

A. D. 795.
7. Moreover in a Letter to Offa King of the Mercians he signified that he was
prepared to carry himself the presents of King Charles sent to him, and thence
to go into his Native Province of the Northumbers. But on better consideration
he thought it more convenient to abide still in France, and there to serve his
country by doing all good offices: since he knew not what benefit he could
bring to a place where none could remain in any security, where the Holy Altars
are demolished by Pagans, Monasteries polluted by adulteries, and the whole
land stained with the blood of their Princes.

Ap. Baron hic Hoved. hic
8. What those presents were will appear in an Epistle which King Charles sent
to King Offa, as likewise in Hoveden who writes thus: The magnanimous King
Charles with a potent army had lately subdued the Nation of the Hunns, their
country he wasted, putt to flight their King and destroyed his army. From
thence he brought home fifteen carts so loadned with gold, silver and precious
vestments of silk, that four oxen could scarce draw each of them. All which
spoils the same King in thankfullnes to God for his victory, commanded to be
distributed among the Churches and poor, not only in his own kingdom, but at
Rome also, and in Brittany etc.

X. CHAP. X. CHA.

1.2. Displeasure of Charles the Great against the English: which is afterward
composed.

3 A Scottish Priest banished for eating flesh in Lent.

4.5. Pope Adrian dies: and Leo the third succeeds

6.7.8. A Synod at Verulam: wherein the Privileges of the Monastery of S.
Alban are confirmed.

9 Successions of Bishops.

1. KING Offa was now returned from his pilgrimage to Rome. Malmsbur. Westmon.
ad A. D. 775.
Some years before his going thither King Charles had taken some displeasure
against him, the occasion whereof seems to have proceeded from English
Merchants, which defrauded the French of their customs; In so much as a breach
had like to have been made between the two Kings: So forward it was, that King
Charles forbad trading between the two Nations, neither was it safe for English
men to pass through France in devotion to Rome. But King Offa who by his
invasions and usurpations had made almost all the Kings in Brittany his
enemies, much apprehended the displeasure of so powerful a King as Charles,
and therefore by many Embassages and Presents endeavored a reconciliation with
him, which at length with much solicitation he obtained. After which followd
not only frequent intercourse or Letters between them, but many other
expressions of kindness. Ap. Alcuin. Ep. 61.


2. There is extant a Letter of King Charles to Ethilhard Archbishop of
Canterbury and Ceolulf a Bishop of the Mercians, in which he informed them that
a certain man a Subject of King Offa, who had incurred his displeasure, had
fled into France with his whole family, to seek protection and security there.
Now this man's family being desirous to return home after the Masters death,
whose name was Vmrinstan, desired King Charles his Letters of Recommendation,
which he most willingly granted them, desiring these two Bishops to intercede
in their behalf with King Offa: and in case they could not qualify his
displeasure, he desired them to send them back to him.

3. Two Letters did King Charles this year write to King Offa in the one
informing him that a certain Priest, by nation a Scott, had made some abode in
the Diocese of Colen, where he had been accused of eating flesh in Lent. But
because the accusers Proofs were not absolutely convincing, therefore the
Bishops in those parts would not pronounce sentence against him.
Notwithstanding they thought not fit he should stay any longer among them, by
reason of the scandal given by such an Offense, and least others should by his
example learn to neglect that holy Fast. So they thought best he should be sent
into his own country, to be judged by his own Bishops. To facilitate his
journey therefore King Charles desired King Offa to take care for his safe
conveyance into Scotland from whence he first came, where he hoped that the
Ecclesiastical Canons were well observed.

4. In a second Letter he signified to him that free leave should be given to
all English pilgrims to pass through France to Rome, Ap. Baron. hic.
but if any upon a pretense of devotion shall bring prohibited merchandise into
France, or defraud the Kings customs there, that should not be suffered. He
further told him that he had sent sacred Vestments to several Churches in
Brittany, desiring that in consideration thereof there should be made Prayers
for Pope Hadrian then newly dead: for though he did not doubt but his soul was
in rest, yet he desired this to testify his cordial affection to his most dear
friend.

Id. ib.
The same day that Pope Hadrian dyed, there was chosen his Successor Pope Leo*
the third of that name. The suddennes of his election, and the unanimous
consent of his Electours argued an eminent esteem of his sanctity and
abilities. He was chosen both to do and suffer many things. By him the Empire
was restored to the Western parts.

6. A little before Pope Hdrian dyed, King Offa being safe returned from Rome,
according to his order assembled a Synod at Verulam, near which place he had
built the famous Monastery of Saint Alban. What was acted in that Synod is
briefly related by Sir H. Spelman out of an ancient Manuscript of the Life of
S. Alban in this manner; Spelm. f. 314.
King Offa having then assembled at Verulam a Council of his Bishops and
Nobles, by their unanimous consent and out of his great affection to Saint
Alban, he conferred on that Monastery very large possessions, considering that
great hospitality was to be kept there: Because near thereto lies the broad
high way called Watlingstrete, by which men came from the Northern parts and
returned. Therefore he esteemed it a pious thing that travellours might find
there a house to be entertaind freely. For this reason he addicted that place
to the Monastery, which he dignified with many Privileges and immunities.
Moreover he gathered a Congregation of Monks out of several houses where
Regular Observance was kept with best care, especially from the Monastery of
Becc in Neustria (or Normandy in France) and ordained an Abbot over them named
Willigode, a man who was indeed according to his Name, A. D. 799.
of good Will: He was descended of the Royal family, being near of kin to King
Offa.

7. The particular possessions given by the King at this time to the said
Monastery are specified in his Charter which remains to this day. Ap. M. Paris
in Anctario.
And besides the Privileges before related he added these, that what soever
exactions or for feytures due to the King from any criminal person within the
liberties of the same Monastery, Westmon. ad A. D. 794.
should be paid thereto. That the Abbot or Monk who was Arch deacon, under him
should exercise Episcopal Jurisdiction over all persons, both Priests and
Laymen living within their possessions: and that they should pay subjection
neither to Archbishop nor Legate, but to the Pope alone. In a word the said
Church as it had all Royal rights from the King, so did it likewise enjoy
Episcopal ornaments from the Pope.

8. This Charter the King sent to Rome to be confirmed by Pope Hadrian: and
this seems to have been one of the last actions performed by the same worthy
Pope. Who having sat in S. Peter's chair twenty three years, ten months and
seaventeen days, was notwithstanding esteemed by all good men to have quitted
the government of the Church immaturely. Baron. hic.
Particularly King Charles for the respect which he bore him, distributed alms
not only through the Churches in Provinces subject to him, but also in foreign
countries for his soul, as we have declared in his Letter sent to King Offa.

9. The same year Higbert, or Humbert the first Archbishop of Lichfeild dying,
there succeeded him Aldulf, to whom a Pall was sent from Rome: notwithstanding
before he dyed he was obliged to lay aside that Archiepiscopall ornament, and
to content himself with the simple Title of Bishop. Likewise to Eadbald Bishop
of London the same year succeeded Heathobert, and to Egbald Bishop of
Winchester, Dudda.

IX. CHAP. IX. CHAPTER

1.2. etc. The death of King Offa: and his Children.

4.5. etc. Egfrid his pious Successor dies shortly after him: being ready to
restore the Rights to the Sea of Canterbury.

9. Eanbald Archbishop of York dies: to whom another Eanbald succeeds.

1. THE year of Christ seven hundred ninety six was the last of the reign and
life of Offa the illustrious King of the Mercians, A. D. 796.
after he had reigned thirty nine years. He left a noble memory of his courage
in three victories obtained against the Kings of Brittany, the King of Kent, of
the West Saxons and Northumbers: And of his Piety in founding the famous
Monastery of S. Alban, and charitable contribution to the Sea Apostolic,
besides many other Monuments of his Charity and devotion.

A. D. 796.
2. The memory of his name he left to several places: For in Warwickshire
having built a Church, a town thereto adjoining was called Off-Church: and in
Suffolck another town was called Offton: Lastly he dyed in a village named
Offley: From whence his Body was removed to the Town of Bedford, where it was
buried in a Chapel without the Citty-walls with Royal solemnity. But in
process of time, Camden in Bedford.
his Sepulcher was swept away by a violent inundation of the River Vsk.

3. He left behind him by his Queen Quendreda several children. His eldest son
and Successor was Egfrid, who succeeded to his Fathers virtues, but not the
years of his reign, for he governed the Kingdom not a full half year. In
Capgrave we read of another Son of his called Fremond, slain afterward by the
Danes: but the story related of him does so disagree from Chronology, that it
is manifest the Author of it mingled together the Occurrents of several ages.
He had two daughters the one, named Ethelburga, who in her vices ressembled her
impious Mother Queen Quendreda: for she not only left a stain upon her own
country by poisoning her husband King Brithric, but upon France also as we
shall declare. The other much unlike her sister, and truly the daughter of her
fathers Piety (...) Alfleda, whom the Holy Martyr King Ethe^^^rt had demanded
for his wife, and who after his death preferred the fenns of Croyland before
her Fathers Palace.

4. His eldest son Egfrid had been assumed by his Father into a society in his
Throne nine years before this: yet this is called the first and only year of
his reign, for he did not outlive his Father more then five months. Yet in
that short time he left many and lasting Monuments of his piety, wholly
employing the few days of his reign in adorning and amplifying Monasteries and
Churches. He was a Prince, says William of Malmsbury, who studiously avoided
the steps of his Fathers cruelty. He restored all the Privileges of Churches
which had been prejudiced by his Father. Moreover a possession which his Father
had taken from the Monastery of Malmsbury he willingly returned into the hands
of Cuthbert then Abbot thereof, upon the exhortation of the worthy and
courageous Archbishop of Canterbury.

5. Above all he most favored the Monastery of S. Alban, to which he not only
confirmd all the possessions and liberties given by his Father, but himself
added new, in a place called Pinnelesfeld, as appears by his Charter recorded
at the end of Matthew Paris, and subscribed by the Queen Cynedrida, his Bishops
and Nobility. In a second Charter likewise to the same Monastery, in like
manner subscribed, he added another possession called Thyrefeld. The place
where this was written and confirmed in a Synod, is named Celchyed.

6. Athelard Archbishop of Canterbury perceiving the pious disposition of this
young King, suggested to him his obligations to repair the injuries done by his
Father to the Mother Church of Brittany, Canterbury, which by all Princes since
the beginning of Christianity had been esteemed the only Metropolitan Church of
that part of Brittany, but lately had been diminished by the unjust exaltation
of the Sea of Lichfeild. With which suggestion of the worthy Archbishop King
Egfrid was mollified, Malmsb. f. 287
and had restored the honor of the Archiepiscopall See of Canterbury, if death
had not too hastily taken him away. But what Athelard could not effect by
reason of the too short reign of this King (since a business of that importance
required many messages and returns from Rome, serious agitation on both sides,
and reasons to be given by the two contrary pretendants) His Successor in the
Archbishopric, Kenulf at last perfected after the death of King Egfrid.

7. This good King therefore being accomplished, in a short time fullfilled a
long age, and after five months paid his debt to nature: He was taken away,
says Alcuin, not for his own sins, but because his father for the establishing
his kingdom, had shed much blood. But how unsecure a foundation blood is for
the establishing of kingdoms, was showed in this example: for Offa was so far
from confirming his Throne to his posterity, that five months after his death
it was transferred to another family, a quite stranger to his.

8. The same year dyed also Eanbald Archbishop of York, and in his place was
chosen and consecrated another Eanbald a Priest of the same Church, and
Disciple of Alcuin. The place where his Predecessor dyed was called Edere: and
his body attended by great multitudes was conveyed to the Church of York, where
it was honorably buried.

9. This second Eanbald joined courageously with Ethelard Archbishop of
Canterbury to nullify the invasion which Offa King of the Mercians had made on
the Archbishop of Canterbury, which they also effected, as shall shortly be
declared. And this endeavor of Eanbald was much commended by his Master
Alcuin, as appears by part of his Letter cited by William of Malmsbury.

XII. CHAP. XII. CHAPTER

1.2. etc. Alcuin, famous for learning: teaches at York and is called into
France.

1. WE have often made mention of Alcuin as making his abode in France. It will
not be impertinent to declare what occasion drew him into France, and obliged
him to spend the remainder of his life there. Twice he had passed into France
before: the first time upon some business, for which his Master Egbert
Archbishop of York sent him to King Charles: What that special business was,
it does no where appear. The second time when he was sent by Alfwold King of
the Northumbers to Rome to demand and bring the Archiepiscopall Pall to Eanbald
the first of that name Archbishop of York, in the year of Grace seven hundred
eighty one. In this journey both going and returning he passed through France.
But neither of these times did he make any long abode there. However his second
journey was the occasion of his going a third time thither never to return.
Because at his coming from Rome he me^t K. C^arles the Great at Pavia, who
being much delighted with his discourse and behavior, earnestly entreated him
that as soon as he had finishd the present affair for which he had undertaken
that voyage to Rome, he would return to him into France.

2. The answer which Alcuin gave him was, That without the order of his King
and Archbishop he could not dispose or himself. And in effect his stay in
Brittany was esteemed so necessary, that twelve years more passed before he
could comply with this request of so great a King. But to speak more properly,
it was not in compliance to this request that he then went, but he was obliged
thereto by the emergent necessities of the Church, which was combatted by a New
Heresy, for repressing of which none was ^ound more sufficiently enabled then
Alcuin, considering his eminently famous piety and learning.

3. That which detained him so long in Brittany, was for the instructing the
youth thereof in all manner of learning, both sacred and secular: For since S.
Beda's time Brittany had never enjoyed so universally a knowing Master. Some
Writers pretend that he was a Disciple of S. Beda: But the long space of time
which intervened between them takes away all probablity from such an assertion:
and those Writers mistake is grounded upon a confounding of two persons unto
one, for they suppose that this Alcuin or Albin is the same with that Albin who
many years before was Abbot of S. Augugustins Monastery at Canterbury. The
Master and Instructour of this Alcuin was Egbert the Noble and learned
Archbishop of York, as not only the Author of Alcuins life, but Alcuin himself
declares.

4. The twelve years which Alcuin employed in Brittany in teaching, produced a
wonderful happy effect, for out of his School were produced almost all the
able Bishops, Priests, Abbots and other Religious persons which adorned this
Island in the present and following Age. Yea not a few came out of France and
Germany to enrich themselves and their countries with those treasures of
knowledge which Alcuin communicated to them at his School which he kept open
at York in his own Native Province, where he was furnished with a most
plentiful Library instituted there by his Master, Egbert the Archbishop: whose
Successor Eanbald the second of that Name was one of the most eminent among
Alcuins Scholars.

XIII. CHAP. XIII. CHAPTER

1.2. etc. Of two holy and learned English Virgins, Gisla and Rictrudis (or
Columba) Disciples of Alcuin: Their Letter to him in France: and his Answer,
etc.

1. AMong Alcuins scholars in Brittany we must not omit two illustrious
Vir^ins, Gisla and Rictruda: concerning whom our Learned Pits gives this short
account: Pits ad A. D. 770.
Rictruda and Gisla (says he) English Nunns of the Order of S. Benedict were
for their extraction Noble, but much more for their virtues and learning. From
their chilhood they were instructed in the purity of the Latin tongue and other
good l^tterature by their learned Master Alcuin. After whose departure out of
Brittany it is reported that they made great progress both in the studies of
learning and exercises of virtues in their Monastery at Canterbury. They
diligently imitated both S. Mary Magdalen in contemplation, and S. Martha in
actions of Charity. They with continual watchfullnes attended to the
perfectionating their own souls by Mortification and Spiritual Meditations:
and next, to benefits their neighbors by external works of Charity,
espe^cially comforting the afflicted. These two Virg^ns were renouned in
Brittany during the time of Al^ric King of Kent. But this suspicion that they
lived at Canterbury seems to be grounded on the forementiond mist^ke that
Alcuin was Abbot in the same City. Whereas it is not to be doubted but that
they were Northumbrian Virgins, living in their Monastery at York, where Alcuin
taught.

2. There has lately been rescued from the dust of oblivion one Epistle written
by these devout Virgins to Alcuin, which alone may be a proof sufficient both
of their piety and learning. Ante Opera Alcuini.
In which Epistle they signify to him their earnest desire to receive from him
out of France sometimes letters of instru^ction and consolation: and that he
would therein imitate S. Hierome, who living in his Monastery at Bethleem did
not disdain to write Epistles to several Noble Virgins at Rome,
notwithstanding the great distance between, in which Epistles he did moreover
explicate to them many obscure passages in the Prophetical Books of Scripture:
Adding, that the distance between Brittany and Tours in France (where Alcuin
lived) was in no comparison so great as between Betthleem and Rome. More
particularly they humbly requested of him an Explication of the Gospel of
Saint John, the Mysteries of which they earnestly desired to understand. And
though they had already the Treatises of S. Augustine upon that Gospel, they
were too difficult to be understood by them.

Alcuin Prefat. ad Evangel. S. Ioann.
3. This request of theirs he charitably condescended to, as appears by a
prolixe Epistle of his placed before his Explication of S. John's Gospel,
directed to them: In which he informs them in the time and occasion of S John's
writing his Gospel for the confutation of Marcion, Cherinthus, Ebion and other
Heretics, who denied the Divinity of our Savior. He further observes for
their instruction the difference in the style between S. John, and the other
three Evangelists: For they are most copious in relating the external actions
and speeches of our Savior, which serve to direct Christian manners in this
life: Whereas S. John is very brief in relating the facts of our Lord, and
chiefly insists on such speeches of his as regard the Unity of the Trinity, the
felicity of eternal Life, and such Mysteries as are more proper for a
Contemplative Life. He adds that in explaining this Gospel he durst not rely
on his own judgment, but followed therein the Expositions of Catholic
Doctors, S. Ambrose, Saint Augustine, Saint Gregory, Saint Beda and others, out
of whom with an humble heart and profound submission he had gathered variety of
flow^rs, and like a good Physicion out of many ingredients had composed a
spiritual Medecin which might be healthful to their souls.

Id. ad 6. lib. praefat.
4. There is extant moreover another shorter Epistle upon the same subject
prefixed before the sixth Book of his Annotations on that Gospel, importing
that he had sent them for their present use and devotion during the time of
Lent, certain Extraits out of his explications on that Gospel proper for their
present use, by meditating whereon they might be disposed with more spiritual
joy to celebrate the ensuing Paschal Solemnity,

5. This Latter Epistle is inscribed to his Sister in Christ Gisla, and his
devout daughter Columba: And whereas therein he acquaints them that he directed
to them the whole exposition of the said Gospel: thereby it is evident that
the same person was intended by the two names of Rictrudis and Columba. Both
these Holy Virgins are commemorated among the Saints in our Martyrologe on the
ninth of April. Martyr. Ang 9. April.


XIV. CHAP. XIV. CHAPTER

1. 2. etc. Alcuin sent for by Charles the Great into France.

4.5. etc. He disputes with, convinces and converts Felix a Spanish Bishop an
Arch-heretick, who denied the Divinity of our Savior, etc.

1. CHarles King of France was deservedly styled Great, both for his victories
in war, and his zeal to advance Learning and Catholic Truth. He not only
willingly and liberally entertained all learned men who addressed themselves to
him, but invited them with great rewards to accept his bounty. Brotom. Chron.
col 8 7.
On a certain time (says Bromton) two Scottish (that is Irish) Monks, learned
both in secular and Sacred knowledge, came out of Ireland with certain British
Merchants into France. These hav^ng no wares to sell, were wont to cry aloud
among the people who came to the fair, If any one be desirous of wisdom, let
him come to us: for we have it to sell. This they did several times: Insomuch
as many thought them out of their wits. But the report of this coming to the
King, he sent for them: and demanded whether they had wisdom to sell: Their
answer was, Yes, Sir, we have it, and in the name of God are ready to impart it
to those who shall desire it. He again asked them, what they demanded in
recompense? They replied, We demand three things: Commodious places to teach,
Scholars of towardly disposition, and such necessary nourishment and clothes
as humane life requires. Hereat the King was much ieyed, and retaind them both
with him. Afterward when he went to war he left one of them, named Clement, at
Paris in a convenient lodging, and commended to his care certain Noble
children, with order that he should be furnished with all commodities. The
other he took with him into Italy, and bestowed on him the Monastery of Saint
Augustine at Pavia, to the end he might there teach all that would apply
themselves to him.

2. But there was none so highly esteemed by him as our famous Alcuin, whom
about this time he earnestly invited into France, upon two special Motives:
Quercet. Praefat. in Opera Alcuini.
The former is thus expressed by Quercetan in his Preface to Alcuins Works: The
most glorious King Charles (says he) who by experience was acquainted with the
learning and Wisdom of Alcuin, both in France when he was sent thither to
make a league of peace between the King of the Northumbers and King Charles: as
likewise at Pavia, whilst he abode there: He therefore in an honorable manner
called him out of the remote parts of Brittany to assist his affectionat desire
to promote the studies of true Wisdom, and restore to light the Liberal
Sciences, which at that time were in a manner extinguished in France. And the
same is testified by Alcuin himself in an Epistle which he wrote to the same
King Charles.

Alcuin. Ep. 23.
2. But the other more important Motive of Alcuins coming into France was the
same which his Master Egbert lately Archbishop of York had prophetically told
him a little before his death: That he should go into France where he should
produce much fruit beneficial to Gods Church, by opposing a new pestilent
Heresy endeavoring to maintain that Christ was only the adoptive son of God.

3. This Prediction was fullfilld when King Charles called Alcuin out of
Brittany. For then Elipandus Bishop of Toledo and Felix Bishop of Vrgel
(Vrgelitanus) endeavored to poison the Church with their blasphemies injurious
to the Divinity of our Savior. This Alcuin testifies himself in a Book written
against the former of these two Arch-hereticks. Alcuin. in praefat. ad l. 1.
cont. Elipand.
I never entertained a servant to minister to me, says he, but I much rather
affectionatly desire to do service to all the servants of Christ: And for this
purpose by Divine ordination, as I believe, I came out of Brittany to the most
illustrious King of this Nation, Charles. For that it was Gods will I should
do so, was foretold me by a most holy man in my country, who was endued with
the Spirit of Prophecy: Yea the same my most Venerable Master enioynd me by
his last command, that wheresoever I heard of the rising of any new Sects
contrary to Apostolic Doctrines, I should addict my self entirely to the
defense of the Catholic Faith.

4. Presently after he was come into France, the first thing he did was to
write an Epistle to Felix exhorting him to return to the Unity of the Church,
In answer whereto Felix returned not a Letter, Alcuin. Ep. 8. ad K. Carol.
but large Book, in which (says Alcuin) I found greater blasphemies then in
any of his former Writings, for he affirmed plainly, That Christ Jesus was not
the true son of God, nor true God, but titular.

5. To combat this Heresy, Alcuin desired of the King that others might be
adioynd to him: And accordingly upon the first sounding of the trumpett to
battle there appeard several Champions of the Orthodox Faith, among whom the
principal were Paulinus Patriark of Aquileia, Ethereus a Bishop of Osma in
Spain (Vx^mensis) and a certain Abbot called Beatus. Quercet. in Praefat. ^d
Alcuin.
Paulinus the most learned of these wrote three Books to confute this Felician
Heresy, which he presented to King Charles, humbly desiring they might be sent
and delivered into the hands of the most reverend man, most skillful in divine
knowledge, Albin (or Alcuin: Alcuin. Ep. 81
) which was accordingly done. And Alcuin writing back to Paulinus highly
commended both the sweetness and elegancy of his style, and vigor of his
reasoning, encouraging him withal to be constant in defense of Gods house.

6. But none fought more prosperously in Gods cause then Alcuin himself: A. D.
797.
For he utterly strangled the Felician Heresy in the beginning, and converted
the Arch-heretick himself to the Catholic Faith. This is not taken notice of
by any of our Historians, as having passed in a foreign country. Quercet. ib.
But Quercetan from Felix his own Confession relates, How the said Heretic
being presented before King Charles at Aquisgran by Laidrad Archbishop of
Lions, obtained leave to set down in writing the Sentences of former Saints to
prove that Christ was only an adoptive Son of God, to be presented to such
Bishops and Abbots as the King should cause to be assembled. Which was
accordingly granted him. And in answer to those, Alcuin produced many Sentences
of Holy Fathers, S. Cyrill, S. Gregory, S. Leo and other Authors formerly
unknown to Felix: and to these was added the authority of a late Synod at Rome
which condemned, not by violence, but strength of reason the errors contained
in Felix his Reply to Alcuins Epistle. So great an authority of truth, and so
unanimous a consent of the Church did so convince the judgment of Felix, that
as he writes in his own Confession, I professed in the presence of many Bishops
and Monks that I did heartily repent of my former error: and that I would from
thenceforth never believe nor teach the adoption of the flesh in the son of
God, Or that he had only the name and title of God given him in his Humanity:
But according to the Doctrine of the Holy Fathers. That the same our Lord Jesus
Christ was the proper and true son of God in his two Natures, That he was the
only begotten son of the Father, without prejudice to the respective Propriety
of each Nature.

7. This Conversion of Felix did so enrage his former companion Elipandus, that
he wrote a Book against Alcuin in a most bitter furious style, calling him a
Filthy, rotten false Prophet, a son of Hell, a New Arius, an Arch-heretick,
foul, pitchy Albinus: and moreover he charged Alcuinus that by torments he had
made Felix a Martyr, so forcing him to renounce his former Opinions. To whom
Alcuin thus answer, Alcuin. cont. Elipant. l. 1.
Neither did I, nor Ruffinus make Felix a Martyr: But through Gods mercy I made
Felix, formerly a partner in your error, to become a good Catholic: I
persecuted indeed, not his person, but that impious Doubt of him, who tempting
our Lord, said, If thou be the son of God, command that these stones be made
bread.

8. After this Victory Alcuin returned to his Monastery at Tours: For as a Monk
of Sangall testifies, Sangall. de Gest. Car. M. l. 1.
King Charles gave to Alcuin the Abbey of Saint Martin near Tours: to the end
that when he was absent abroad with his Army, he might rest there, and instruct
such as should repair to him. And such plentiful fruits did his teaching
produce, that the modern Frenchmen may deserve to be compared with the ancient
Romans or Athenians. Thus as Almighty God in the beginning of this age sent out
of our Island seated in the extremities of the world such Apostolic men as
Saint Swibert, Saint Boniface, etc. to settle the Christian Faith in Germany:
So he thought good at the end of it to send the learned Alcuin to restore the
same Orthodoxe Faith in France and Spain. But of Saint Alcuin, for so hereafter
he deserves to be called, more shall be said in this and the following Book. We
must now attend to the affairs of Brittany,

XV. CHA.
XV. CHAP.
1.2. Kenulf King of the Mercians.

3.4. etc. He solicites and obtains from Pope Leo a restitution of the Primacy
of the Sea of Canterbury, etc.

A. D. 797.
1. EGFRID the son of Offa King of the Mercians after a short reign of scarce
five entire months, dying, he named for Successor Kenulf, having regard rather
to his virtues and merits, then title or proximity of blood. Yet he was
descended from a Brother of King Penda called Chenalch father to Kentwin, who
begot Cuthbert the Father of this Kenulf.

2. The excellency of this Prince is well described by William of Malmsbury,
Malmsb. f. 33.
who affords him this Character, Kenulf was a magnanimous person, whose virtues
over-went his fame. He never did any thing that envy could carpe. At home he
was Religious, in war Victorious: He was a Prince whose praises will never be
silenced as long as there lives in England a person ingenuous and sincere. He
is to be exalted for the sublimity of his State, and Humility of his mind:
Which virtue did then shine most bright, when he restored the injured dignity
of the Archiepiscopall See of Canterbury. For this good King did little value
the worldly haughtines of his own Province, when it could not be established
without transgressing the ancient Ordonnance of Ecclesiastical Canons.

3. In this first year of his reign therefore Athelard Arch bishop of
Canterbury encouraged by the justice and piety of this King represented to him
the injurious oppression which by King Offa had been brought upon the Prime See
of Brittany, desiring him that the order instituted by Holy Progenitors might
not be depraved by the ambition of particular persons. In which request Embald
Archbishop of York likewise joined. Whereupon the King being satisfied in the
justice of his demand, to the end the matter might be more maturely pondred,
commanded a Synod to be assembled at Clovesh^ (or Cliff:) where by the votes of
the Bishops and Nobility Messengers with Letters were sent to Rome to Pope Leo,
desiring him to employ his spiritual authority also to rectify the disorders
introduced lately into the Churches of Brittany.

4. But this Embassage had not the good success expected: and the fault seems
to have been in the Messenger, which was an Abbot called Wada, who, as we read
in a second Letter to the same Pope from the same King Bishops and Nobles,
behaved himself in thate Legation slouthfully negligently and imprudently.
Perhaps it might be by the suggestions of the Archbishop of Lichfeild, who was
principally interessed in the business, that he willingly made the message
unsuccessefull.

5. This Second Letter, sent by Byrne a Priest, and by Fildas and Ceolberth
servants to the King, Baron. ad A. D. 796.
is recorded by Baronius* and is indeed a Letter well beseeming the piety of
this good King: In which after the expression of his joy that so worthy a
person had succeeded to the Venerable Hope Hadrian, he with great submission
begged his Fatherly Benediction, and that he would accept him for his Son,
promising all duty and Obedience to him: In the next place he represented to
him, how his Predecessor King Offa out of an enmity which he bore to the late
Archbishop of Canterbury Iambert and to the Kingdom of Kent, had divided that
Archiepiscopall Province into two Provinces, so making a Schism in the Churches
of Brittany, contrary to the express Ordonnance of the most Blessed Father
Pope Gregory the Great, who had decreed that to the Sea of Canterbury twelve
Episcopal Sees should be subject. Now though he would not condemn either King
Offa for procuring this change, or Pope Hadrian for condescending to it, since
he did not know all the Motives which might induce them thereto: Yet since it
seemed to him and the Synod most just that that Mother Church, in which reposed
the Sacred Body of Saint Augustine who brought Christianity into the King^dom,
should enjoy the honor of Metropolitan, he desired his Holiness to advise with
wise men about this matter, and to search the Archives of the Sea Apostolic,
where the ancient Ordonnances touching the establishment of the Churches of
Brittany were preserved, and to give his judgment and Sentence in the cause
accordingly. He besought him withal seriously to peruse a Letter sent by the
same Messengers from Aethelard Archbishop of Canterbury touching several
other causes and necessities of the Churches of Britta^y, and to make known to
them his will concerning them. With this Letter the King sent likewise certain
presents, to wit, a hundred and twenty ( Mancusas) marks. A. D. 796.


6. Now though in this Letter the Names of the Messengers by whom it was sent
be expressed: Yet certain it is that Aethelard Archbishop of Conterbury, whose
cause was discussed, either himself went with them, or at least immediately
followed them. Saint Alcuin indeed endeavored to dissuade him from that
journey, but the good Archbishop esteeming it his duty to omit nothing that
might be advantageous for so just a cause* Ap. Malmsb. da Pont. l. 1. Ethelard.
Saint Alcuin in a short Letter sent from his Monastery at Tours, wished him a
prosperous iurney. And moreover knowing that the said Archbishop was desirous
to salute King Charles by the way, he wrote another to the same King, whom he
calls King David, Alcuin. Ep. ad K. Carol.
and himself Flaccus Matricularius, in which he earnestly recommended to his
favorable reception the same Archbishop: as likewise other persons of quality
which it seems attended him, to wit, Ceilmund who had been a servant to Offa
late King of the Mercians, and Torchmund a faithful Officer to Edilred
formerly King of the Northumbers, a man of approved zeal for the Faith, and of
stout courage, who had valiantly avenged the death of his Master.

Westmon. hic.
7. Now what success this journey had is thus briefly declared by Matthew of
Westminster: Kenulf King of the Mercians in his own Name, and in the Names of
all the English Bishops sent Messengers and Leters to Leo Successor to Pope
Adrian: the Archbishop of Canterbury himself undertaking the Charge of
general Ambassador: and obtaind of him what he requested. Ep. Leon. P. ad K.
Kenulf.
But this appears more expressly and fully by the Letter of Answer written by
Pope Leo himself: in which, after many high commendations both of the Kings
piety, and the Archbishops excellent virtues, he signified that after diligent
search into the Sacred Roman Archives he found that his Predecessor Saint
Gregory had to the Archiepiscopall See of Canterbury, and to Saint Augustine
Archbishop thereof subjected twelve Bishoprics, granting to him only the
power of Consecrating the said Bishops: Therefore by Apostolic authority he
decreed a restitution of the same Ordinations and Consecrations to Athelard and
his Successors: A confirmation of which Privilege he had given to the said
Archbishop, which he required should be observed under the penalty prescribed
by the Sacred Canons.

XVI. CHAP. A. D. 797.

XVI. CHAPTER



1.2. etc. Pope Leo the third inhumanely tormented by two Assassins, who pluckd
out his eyes and tongue, etc.

3 4. His sight and speech miraculously restored.

5.6. etc. Charles the Great testifies this in Letters to S. Alcuin.

1. THERE is one Clause in the foresaid Letter of Pope Leo to Kenulf, which
argues that the said Kings Letter was written two years after this time, as
implying a knowledge of a great calamity which befell this good Pope: though
some of our ancient Historians refer it to this year. The said clause is
conceived in these words: In one of your Epistles, Id. ib.
said the Pope, we do find a pro^estation of your Majesty, that such is your
respect to our Apostolic function, that if you had been present with me at
Rome, you would willingly and affectionatly have laid down your own life for us.

2. Now the calamity happening to the Pope was this: Anastas Bibloth. Baron. ad
A. D. 7^9. Hantingd. f. 344.
Though for his virtues and piety he was by the unanimous consent of the Roman
Clergy and people chosen Pope the same day in which his Predecessor dyed: yet
some there were which bore excessive malice and envy toward him, the
principal of which were two Nephews of the former Pope, named Paschal and
Campulus. It does not appear upon what provocation these two wicked persons
should conceive displeasure against the Pope: but their rancour and fury was so
implacable that on a certain day when the Pope was publicly celebrating the
great Litany, they delivered him to certain troops of soldiers laid in ambush
near the Monastery of Saint Steven, who barbarously seizing on him cast him on
the ground, and there inhumanly plucked out his eyes, cut out his tongue, and
so left him blind and dumb upon the pavement. Yea moreover those two inhuman
wretches not content with this, drew him from that place into the Church it
self before the Altar of Saint Steven, where they again tore out whatsoever
remaind of his eyes and tongue, and tearing all his flesh with whipps, they
left him there wallowing in his own blood. But afterward fearing least some
good men should take him from thence, they sent some of their party, who carried
him to the Monastery of Saint Gerasime, where they shutt him up in close prison.

3. But God who patiently suffered the malice of these barbarous men thus far,
in a moment destroyed all their wicked designs: For Pope Leo, presently after
he was conveyed to the said Monastery, perfectly recovered both his sight and
speech. Which miraculous mercy being made known to his friends, and
particularly to Albin his Chamberlain, they came by night, and by force took
him out of the Cloister, and transported him to the Church of Saint Peter,
where generally all the Romans gave praise to God for this wonderful
deliverance of his Servant. But the Conspiratours not being able to execute
their malice any further against the Pope, went to vomit their rage upon the
house of Albin, which they lacked and utterly demolished.

4. The fame of this prodigious Miracle was in a short time spread through all
Christendom. And Winegise Duke of Spoleto, accompanied by the Ambassadors of
King Charles, came to Rome, and from thence conveyed the Pope to Spoleto. From
whence afterward he went into France to King Charles, by whom he was with all
honor and kindness received: and during all his voyage the high ways were
filled with devout people, which with great joy and devotion congratulated with
him for the goodness which God had so wonderfully showed to him, and to the
whole Church in his regard.

5 King Charles as soon as he was informed of this barbarous cruelty executed on
this good Pope, wrote a Letter to Saint Alcuin, demanding his advice what
became him to do in such a coniuncture. Alcuin. ep. 11.
To whom Saint Alcuin answered, that it was his duty as being supreme Governor
of Gods people, an avenger of crimes, a comforter of the afflicted and an
exalter of such as are good, to punish severely those examples of extreme
impiety committed at Rome, where formerly piety did most flourish, but where of
late wicked men through the blindness of their hearts pluck out the eyes of
their own head, etc. And accordingly King Charles shortly after conducted Pope
Leo to Rome, where the crimes falsely imputed to him by his enemies were
cleared: but what became of the two forementioned Assassins, we do not read.

6. Another Epistle likewise King Charles wrote to the same Saint Alcuin, in
which he declared to him the miraculous recovery of the same Pope, Id. Ep.
to whom God by his Divine operation had restored his sight and speech: To
which Saint Alcuin answered that it was the duty and obligation of all good
Christians to rejoice in such Clemency of the Divine Protection, and to praise
the name of our God, who never forsakes such as putt their trust sincerely in
him. And whereas the said King had invited him to quitt for some time the
smoaky lodgings of his Monastery at Tours to accompany him in his voyage to the
golden palaces at Rome: A. D. 798.
Saint Alcuin excused himself, saying, that the sight of swords and armor
would do more harm to his eyes then the smoaky chambers at Tours: and that he
should more serve his Majesty by daily praying for him in his Monastery, then
attending him in his ^edious journey, too burdensome to his weak infirm body.

1.2. Succession of Bishops.

3.4 etc. Edilbert Pren King of Kent subdued by Kenulf the Mercian King.

6. The Monastery of Winchelcomb.

1, A Thelard returning from Rome seems to have brought with him the
Archiepiscopall Pall for Eanbald Archbishop of York, Hoved f. 406
who this year received it and thereby was instated in the plenitude of his
Pontifical power. The first exercise whereof was expressed in the Ordination
and consecration of Eadred to the Sea of Hagustald, who succeeded to Ethelbert.
In which ordination he was assisted by Higbald Bishop of Lindesfarn: and the
solemnity was performed at a place called Wodford. Dudda likewise the Bishop of
Winchester dying, in his place was substituted Kinebert.

2. The year following Eathored Bishop of Worcester in the Kingdom of the
Mercians, A. D. 798.
dying, in his room succeeded Denebert. And about the same time the Church of
Shirborn also being deprived of its Pastor, Denefrid, received Wibert for his
Successor.

3. At the same time Edilbert surnamed Pren after he had reigned two years in
Kent, Malmsb. f. 11.
taking the boldness to provoke the Mercians much exceeding him in power, was
taken prisoner by them, and was for some time held captive in chains. But
afterward being set free by his enemies, his own Subjects refused to admit
him: so that it is uncertain how and where he ended his life.

4. But Hoveden recounts this calamity of King Edilbert Pren more tragically:
At this time, Hoved. hic.
says he, Kenulf King of the Mercians with all his forces united invaded the
Province of Kent, which he wasted most terribly, almost to the destruction of
the inhabitants. During which invasion Edilbert King of Kent was taken
prisoner, whose eyes the Mercian King commanded to be plucked out, and his
hands cut off, for his former pride and treachery. Then he adjoined that
Kingdom to his own, putting the crown thereof upon his head, and the Scepter in
his hands.

5. Such inhumanity as this seems much disagreeing from the merciful nature of
this good King. Therefore the Narration of Matthew of Westminster is far more
credible: In the year of Grace seven hundred ninety eight (says he) Kinulf
King of the Mercians in a hostile manner wasted the Province of Kent, and took
prisoner Edilbert, surnamed Pren, who was much inferior to him in power, whom
he carried in a triumphant manner bound in chains to his own kingdom. But not
long after when he caused a Church, lately founded by him at Winchelcomb, to be
dedicated, on the day of the Consecration he took the chains from off the
captive King before the Altar, and dismissed him free. There was then present
Cuthred, whom in the place of Edilbert he had made Governor of Kent. The
Church sounded with acclamations, and the streets with the Kings praises, and
because in a meeting of thirteen Bishops and ten Dukes assembled for that
Solemnity he refused to none the marks of his liberality: so that all went home
much richer then they came: For besides Presents of inestimable value in rich
garments, choice horses and other furniture which he gave to his Nobles: to
every particular man then present he gave a pound of silver, to every Priest a
Mark of gold, to every Monk a piece of money: So that not one person there
present failed to partake of his bounty. And he enriched the Monastery with so
large possessions, that in this age it seems incredible.

Monast. Ang. p. 189.
6. In the Annals of this Monastery of Winchelcomb is recorded the Charter of
this King, confirmed in a Synod at which were present two other Kings his
Tributaries, Cuthred King of Kent, and Sired King of the East Saxons: in which
he signifies that his intention was that his body should be buried in the same
Church. But this Charter was of a later date, because it is subscribed by
Wulfred Archbishop of Canterbury who succeeded six years after this to
Athelard. In the same Annals likewise is declared that at the first building of
this Monastery three hundred Monks were placed in it. What particular Maunors
the King gave to them is unknown, Registr. W^nchel.
by reason all the ancient Records were burnt in the time of King Steven.

XVIII. CHAP. XVIII. C.

1.2. A Synod at Bacanceld, against Usurpers of Church revenews: and for
restitution of the Rights of the Sea of Canterbury.

3. Another Synod of the Arch^bishoprick York.

1. A Little after Athelard was returned from Rome, Spelm. de Council. f. 317.
a Synod was assembled by the Kings command, in which himself and Athelard
presided. The place where the Synod was held was called Bacanceld: In which the
A^ch-bishop in the name of Pope Leo, by the consent of the whole Synod
published this Prohibition, adiuring all men by the most dreadful judgment of
God from that day forward, not to infringe the liberties, nor usurp the
revenews of Gods Churches and Monasteries: denouncing against all
transgressors excommunication in this world, and damnation in the next.

2. At the same time likewise the dignity, of late empaired, was restored to
the Metropolitan Church of Canterbury. And Aldulf formerly stiling himself
Archbishop of Lichfeild, submitted himself to the Popes command, and to the
jurisdiction of Athelard: in this Synod subscribing himself by the simple Title
of Bishop. Yet all matters were not so cleared in that Controversy, but that
upon new emergent difficulties Athelard was obliged once more to have recourse
to the Sea Apostolic.

3. In the Kingdom of the Northumbers likewise a Synod was called at Finchal
(now Finkley) in which Eanbald Archbishop of York presided, Hoved. f. 406 Ib.
Stubbu^ de. Act. Pont. ^b^rac.
and at which were present many persons of high rank, both Ecclesiastical and
Secular. In this Synod many Ordonnances were made, proffitable to the Church of
God and the whole nation, touching the Observation of the Paschall solemnity,
the regulating of Iudicatories both Ecclesiastical and Secular, the
introducing of good order among Clarks and Religious persons, and many other
like Ordonnances, by which the general state of that Province was excellently
composed. Eanbald likewise the Archbishop commanded that the Faith of Gods
Church explained by the five General Councils should be publicly recited:
whereto all unanimously consented. (The same as we have before declared, had
been practiced in the Synod of Hatfeild under Theodore Archbishop of
Canterbury.)

A. D. 779.

XIX. Chapter


XIX. CHAP.
1.2. etc. Pope Leo conducted to Rome by King Charles the Great.

1. THE year following King Charles with great pomp conducted Pope Leo back to
Rome. DA.. 779. Anast. Biblio. in Lem. 3.
Among other expressions of joy at his reception testified by Anastasius, this
was one, That all the Schools of Strangers in that City, to wit, of the
Franks, Frisons, Saxons and Lombards joining together in one body with Crosses
and flaggs, singing likewise spiritual Canticles, received the Pope, leading
him to the Church of Saint Peter, where he solemnly celebrated Mass. Now by
the School of the Saxons he certainly means that of the English, instituted by
King Ina and amplified in revenews by King Offa. For the Name of Brittany began
now to grow out of use. Shortly we shall have it by Regal authority changed
into England: In the mean time it was most usually called Saxony beyond the
Sea, to distinguish it from the Old Saxony in the Continent. Hence in the last
Letter written by Pope Leo to Kenulf King of the Mercians, he styles him King
of the Province of Saxony.

2. It is probable that Athelard Archbishop of Canterbury, and Kinebert Bishop
of Winchester accompanied their countrymen in this Procession: For at this
time those two Bishops were at Rome, as Florentius testifies. Flore^^. hic.
The occasion of Athelards second journey thither was to clear some
difficulties arising from the change made lately in the Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction in Brittany. Which difficulties were so many and of such
consideration, that all opposition could not be quieted, nor all impediments
removed till four years more were passed.

3. And as for Kinebert, the Motive of his going to Rome was either devotion,
or to offer in the name of Brithric King of the West Saxons the yearly
contribution, called Romescot, which was collected our of his Dominions.

XX. CHAP. A. D. 780.

XX. CHA.



1.2. etc. Charles the Great solemnly crowned Emperor of Rome by Pope Leo the
third.

6. Saint Alcuin's congratulation to him.

1. THE last year of this Century was rendered illustrious by the New erection
of the Western Empire. A. D. 800.
The Emperors of Constantinopl^, besides that for several ages they had been
the Protectours of Heresy, they were become unable to defend the Western
Regions from the assaults which the Sarac^n^ made in several parts, especially
the Islands: and Rome particularly was exposed to many oppressions from the
Lombards and other petty Princes tyrannising in Italy, yea from the Nobility of
the City it self and of the Territory adjoining, who often compelled the Popes
to fly into France and Germany: So that it was necessary to seek out a common
Protector abroad. Now not any Christian Prince could enter into competition
with the Kings of France either for power or inclination to defend the
Apostolic See, or to secure Italy it self from the Saracens abroad, and
Tyrants within the bowels of it. The obligations which Rome, and especially
the Sea Apostolic had already to the Predecessors of King Charles, not only
for quelling the Tyrants who oppressed it, but for raising it from poverty and
weakness to wealth and power, to be envyed even by Princes, were so fresh and so
excessive, that to seek a Protector from any other Kingdom had been folly. And
among the Kings and Princes governing in France, none hitherto approached to
King Charles the Great, either for power, or for affection to the Church, a
proof whereof he at this time gave to the present Pope, in his care to secure
him from his malicious enemies by retiring into France, his tender,
affectionate and respectfull entertainment of him there, and his restoring him
with far greater splendor then ever to his See, with power to execute justice,
and if he pleased, any revenge upon his barbarous enemies.

2. These things considered, both gratitude and interest strongly moved Pope
Leo to resent the inestimable benefitts which he had so lately received from
King Charles. And since his abilities could stretch no further then to exalt so
great a King by Words and Titles, and no Title was either more easy for him to
bestow, or more becoming King Charles to receive, then that of Emperor of the
West, or of Rome: For these reasons the said Pope at this time made choice of
that way of expressing his gratitude. A. D. 800.


3. Now that this new Honor might be conferred as it were in a Legal manner
and due Form, according to the ancient custom, he caused the Nobility and chief
among the Clergy at Rome and neighboring places to assemble together, as
constituting a resemblance of the ancient Roman Senate: And by their unanimous
Votes and suffrages was this illustrious King nominated and chosen Emperor of
Rome: Which election was presently signified to the Common people of Rome and
other Regions of Italy assembled in infinite multitudes from all parts, by whom
it was with loud acclamations ratified and confirmed. Which being done, Pope
Leo, as Prince of the Senate did in all their names, with the greatest solemnity
and glory imaginable, joining in the ceremony both Civil and Spiritual
authority, set the Imperial Crown upon his head on the day of the great
Solemnity of our Lords Nativity.

4. The fame of this being spread abroad, as it caused both envy and terror to
the Eastern Emperor and Empire, so it was received with great applause and
congratulation in the Western Provinces and Kingdoms, from whence many
testimonies of joy, and many rich presents were sent from all parts to the New
Emperor.

5. Among others none was more eminent either in the way to testify his joy, or
the pretiousnes of his present then our Country man Saint Alcuin. Alcuin. Ep.
20.
His Epistle is to this day extant, full of cordial expressions of affection
and congratulation. So likewise does his Present remain in the Church, as a
common benefit and treasure. Concerning it Cardinal Baronius thus writes:
Baron. ad A. D. 778
6. Among the many obligations in which posterity is engaged to celebrate the
memory of this glorious Emperor, the most eminent is that famous elaborate
Work compiled by Alcuin, or Albin, who with incredible pains published a
corrected Copy of Holy Scriptures both of the Old and New Testament. For by
occasion of the multiplicity of exscribed Copies, it was become so wholly
contaminated with errors and corruptions, that it had in a manner lost its
esteem among Catholics. King Charles was much troubled at this, and thereupon
resolved to employ his care that the Scripture might be restored to its
primitive integrity. But that task required both such wonderful labor and
judgment, that all those to whom he recommended it excused themselves out of a
consciousnes of their inability, At last he obliged Alcuin to undertake it. Who
thereupon employing his utmost diligence, and having recourse to the most
ancient and most true fountains, he at last compiled a perfect corrected Copy
of the whole Scripture, which he presented to the Emperor Charles. And of this
the same Emperor takes notice in one Section of his Capi^^lar, in these words,
Our pleasure is, and such command we have given by our Messengers, that true
Copies of Canonical Books of Scripture be provided and read in all Churches.



XXI. CHAP. XXI. CHAPTER

1.2. etc. That S. Alcuin was Charlemagns Master.

4.5. By his suggestion the Feast of the Holy Trinity was instituted

1. ABout the same time Saint Alcuin having likewise finished his Books
concerning the Blessed Trinity, Alcuin in Praefat. ad. l. 1. de Trinit.
which he undertook in opposition to the forementioned Heretic Elipandus,
dedicated them to the same Emperor, as appears by the preliminary Epistle to
him. And the particular reason given by him why he inscribed them to him was,
Because, said he, it became me to perform the Office employed in the Title
which is commonly given me, though beyond my desert, of being your Master and
instructour: as likewise to convince those who do not much approve your
Majesty's intention of understanding the nice subtilties of Logic which the
Holy Father Saint Augustine in his Books of the Holy Trinity showed to be
necessary in the explication of this Mystery, the profound Questions whereof,
he says, can no other waybe manifested but by the subtilties of the Categories.

2. Cardinal Baronius is the only considerable Writer who denies S. Alcuin to
have been the Emperors Master and Teacher: Baron. ad A. D. 718.
grounding his assertion on this, That Alcuin himself sometimes consulted the
Emperor in points of difficulty, as in one for example, Why the three Sundays
before Lent should have the Titles given them of Quinquagesima, Sexagesima and
Septuagesima? And thence he concludes, that when the Emperor calls him Master,
he intended thereby only a Title of honor, and not as if he had really been
his Disciple.

3. Notwithstanding though it be most true that the said Emperor was more then
ordinarily learned in sacred knowledge, yet that S. Alcuin at least in
inferior litterature was his Master, Eginard. in vit. Caroli.
is testified by Writers of the same age, and the immediately following. Thus
Eginardus, who is called by Baronius the inspectour and recorder of the Gests
of Charles the Great, writes thus in the said Emperors life, In learning
Grammar Charles had for his Master Peter of Pisa a Deacon and old man: In other
Disciplins his Teacher was Albin, surnamed Alcuin, a Deacon likewise and most
learned man in all kinds of knowledge, who was of a Saxon offspring and came to
him out of Brittany. Under him the Emperor employed much time and diligence in
learning Rhetoric, Logic and especially Astronomy. The like is affirmed by
the Monk of S. Gall, who having called Saint Alcuin an English man exercised in
all the latitude of Scriptures above all in his time, Sangall. de Gest. Caroli
M. l. 1.
adds, That Charles retained him with him continually to the end of his life,
except when he went forth with his Armies: insomuch as he would have himself
styled his Disciple, and Alcuin his Master. Radulf. l. de Ca^^^-Observant.
And Radulfus Dean of Tungres writes thus, In diverse countries through all the
Paschall time only three Psalms are recited at Matins: and for this custom it
is alleged that Alcuin, Master to Charles and his Son Ludovicus, at the
entreaty of Boniface Archbishop of Mentz, instituted this order, with the
approbation of a Synod at Mentz. To these may be added the testimonies of many
other Authors cited by Quercetan. And for as much as concerns Baronius his
allegation to the contrary from Saint Alcuins proposing a Question to King
Charles touching Quinquagesima, etc. an answer may be given from Alcuin himself
writing to the same King, where he says, That to propose a Question wisely,
Alcuin. Ep. 6. (...) Carol.
is to teach. But this is more then sufficient touching this Point, upon
occasion of S. Alcuins Books of the Blessed Trinity.

4. These Books did S. Alcuin write to the Emperor Charles to inflame his
zeal to the Mystery of the Blessed Trinity. And moreover to the end that the
Belief and Reverence thereto might be communicated to all Christians, he at
this time also moved the same Emperor to deal with Pope Leo that the Holy
Trinity might be honored with a peculiar Feast, for which a proper Office and
Mass should be instituted: Which was also effected, and the said Office and
Mass were complied by S. Alcuin himself. This is testified by Frederick Nausea
Bishop of Vienna, who putts this among the praises of Charles and S. Alcuin,
saying: Fr. Na^sea Conc. 12.
5. For a long time there was no special Feast instituted to the Honor of the
Blessed Trinity, the Catholic Church contenting her self with that daily Form
of Praise where with we use at the end of every Psalm, Hymn and Canticle to
glorify the same, saying, Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the
Holy Ghost, etc. Which order was instituted by Pope Damasus at the proposal
made by S. Hierom. But at length in the year of our Lord eight hundred at the
request of the Victorious, holy Emperor Charles the Great, incited thereto by
his Master and Preceptour Alcuin, a man of eminent learning and piety, an
Ord^nnance was made by the command of Pope Leo That the Blessed Trinity should
be honored by a peculiar Feast on the next sunday after Pentecost, being the
Octave thereof.



XXII. CHAP. XXI.I CHAPTER

1.2. etc. A Synod at Clovesho: and the Acts of it.

1. WE will conclude this Book and Century with a short view of the state of
Gods Church in Brittany at this time. Sp^lm. f. 318.
Sir Henry Spelman has published another Synod held this year at Clovesho: In
which, after a public attestation of the Uniformity of their Faith with the
same which Saint Gregory the Great caused to the taught here at the first
Conversion of the Nation: with a Profession that what they believed they would
also in their lives practice, a Decree was made for the restitution of all
lands and goods which had been usurped by Lay-persons, and violently taken from
Churches and Monasteries.

2 More specially Athelard Archbishop of Canterbury presiding in the same,
represented to the Synod, how Ethelbald King of the Mercians had given formerly
to the Church of our Savior in Canterbury a certain Monastery called Cotham
with all the Lands and possessions belonging thereto: and that such his
Donation might be of perpetual force he sent by Cuthbert then Archbishop a
Turf of the said land, together with all Writings per^aining to the same
Monastery, which he required him to lay upon the Altar of our Saviors Church.
But after the death of the said Archbishop, two men who had been educated by
him, named Ve^head and Osbert, by the Devils instigation stole away those
Writings, and carried them to Ceolulf King of the West Saxons: who thereupon
took to his own use the said Monastery and land, notwithstanding any thing that
the Archbishop could allege. His Successors likewise in the Archbishopric,
Bregwan and Iambert, in several Synods made complaints of this injury done to
the Church of our Savior, both to the King of the West Saxons and to Offa King
of the Mercians who had subdued many Cities, and particularly that Territory
in which the said Monastery of Cotham was seated, which he annexed to his own
Dominion. But now at last Kenulf King of the Mercians repenting of his
injustice, had restored all the said Writings, adding withal a great sum of
money, humbly requesting that he might be absolved from the Excommunications
denounced against Sacrilegious usurpers of Churchlands.

3. Matters standing thus, the said Archbishop Athelard, together with his
principal Officer Cuba, brought the foresaid Writings into the Synod, which
were publicly read and approved. A. D. 780.
Then he acquainted the Synod that by a mutual agreement between himself and a
certain Abbess named Cynedritha, she should possess the said Monastery of
Cotham with all lands belonging to it, giving in exchange land of one hundred
and ten Mansions, and Sixty Hides ( Cassatarum) in a place named Fleot, and
thirty in another called Tenaham, and twenty in a third named Creges Ennulina,
all which lands King Offa had formerly given to her and her heyrs, and after
their decease to the Church of Beodford. This agreement touching an exchange,
with a mutual surrendry of all Writings on both sides, the Archbishop desired
might be approved and confirmed by the Synod, that no difference might
hereafter happen between his Successors and the heyrs of King Offa. He
moreover gave to the same Abbess another Monastery seated in a place called
Pectonege, which the devout King Egfrid had bestowd on him to be possessed by a
right of inheritance.

XXIII. C.
XXIII. CHAP.
1.2 etc. The Martyrdom of S. Alcmund a Northumbrian Prince.

4.5. etc. Brithric King of the West Saxons murdered by his Queen Eadburga: For
which it was ordained that the wives of succeeding Kings should never have the
Title of Queens.

Westmon. hic.
1. THE Kingdom of the Northumbers at this time was again most greivously
plagued by the Danish Pirates: for a most horrible army of them landing in the
Northern parts cruelly spoiled the Churches of Hercenes and Tynmouth.

2. The same year also Alcmund son of Alred who had been there King, was
apprehended by the guards of the present Usurping King Eardulf, and by his
command was slain, together with all those who had been his companions in
banishment.

3. This Prince Alcmund was son of that King Alred who in the year of Christ
seven hundred seaventy four was by a rebellion of his Subjects driven out of
his kingdom* and fled to the Picts. This Prince willingly followed his Father
into banishment, the incommodities whereof he bore with a Christian equanimity.
By such afflictions God disposed this pious Prince for a far richer crown For
though by the relation of Matthew of Westminster he is said to have been slain
by the cruelty of King Eardulf: yet in our Martyrologe he is commemorated in
the quality of a Martyr, Martyr. Ang. 19. Mart.
made a sacrifice to God by the inhumanity of the Danes. Certain it is that he
dyed a violent and unjust death, and by posterity has been a^ways venerated as
a Saint: which God approved by many Mi^racles. In the City of Darby a
magnificent Church was built to his honor, called to this day the Church of S.
Alcmund. Another likewise was erected in Shrewsbury, as our Martyrologe
testifies, Id. ib.
where his Name is celebrated among Saints on the nineteenth of March. And in
former times a great concourse thither was made, especially from the Northern
parts, to pay their devotions to God in honoring his Saint their injured
countreyman.

4. This Century concluded with the death of Brithric King of the West Saxons
by the treacherous cruelty of his Wife. The manner thereof is thus described by
Matthew of Westminster. King Brithric, says he, had taken to wife Eadburga
daughter to Offa King of the Mercians. Westmon. h^c.
This woman being exalted to so great honors, did not content her self, but
was restless in her ambition to enjoy alone all wealth and power. Therefore
with a tyrannous malice she was w^nt to accuse before the King and persecute
all the Nobles of the Kingdom and all others who favored justice. By which
means she became the Object of the Universal hatred both of the Princes and
inferior subjects: Because that wicked woman by her flatteries had so
insinuated her self into the Kings affection and esteem, that whosever she
accused, were presently either banished or slain: Or if she could not obtain
this, her custom was privately to destroy them by poison.

5. Now there was at that time a certain young man of a Noble family and deeply
in the Kings favor: against whom the Queen not having any thing of which she
could with any pretense of justice accuse him, she provided poison with which
she killed him. And a part of this poison the King unawares taesting,
immediately dyed. Her purpose then was not that the poison should be given to
the King, but only to the young man his favorite: but by mishap they both
drank of it, and both presently dyed.

6. The King being thus unhappily slain, the Queen knowing how universally she
was hated, in great fear fled away privately, carrying with her inestimable
treasure. And passing the Sea, she went to the Emperour-Charles, to whom she
presented many rich gifts. On a certain time, (...) she was among other Ladies
standing in his presence, being though a most wicked, yet a woman of wonderful
beauty, the Emperor said thus to her, Take your choice, Madame, whether you
will have me, or my Son who stands where at the window, for your husband. She
without any deliberation, and being incited by her lust, answered thus, If the
choice be left to me, I would much rather choose your son then you, because he
is younger. Then the Emperor perceiving that the satisfying her lust suggested
this answer to her tongue, returned her this quick and elegant reply, If you
had chosen me, I would have given you my Son: But since you have chosen him,
you shall have neither him nor me.

A. D. 800.
7. Notwithstanding upon her importunity, and also in regard of her beauty the
Emperor bestowd on her a Noble Monastery of Religious women into which she
retired, and there hypocritically laying aside her secular habit, she took the
habit of a Religious woman. having in her heart no sense of the duty to which
that Profession obliged her, and for some few years exercised the Office of
Abbess there.

8. Her memory was in such execration in Brittany, that by an unanimous
agreement of the Nobility and Commons in the Kingdom of the West Saxons a
Decree was made, that from that time the wives of those Western Kings should
never enjoy the Title of Queens, nor partake of any prerogative of Regal
dignity.

9. To Brithric there succeeded in that kingdom Egbert, the first founder of
the Saxon or English Monarchy, and the first who commanded the Island to be
called by a new Name, England: Concerning whom more in the following Book. This
I will conclude with the Chronologicall account of this time given by Ethelwerd
a Noble Historian of the Royal blood of the Saxons, who lived in the following
Age: In the year when Egbyrht began his reign there passed from the Creation of
the world six thousand years wanting five: Ethelvverd. hist. l. 3. c. 2.
from our Lords Incarnation, eight hundred: from the coming of the Saxons
Hengest and Horsa into Brittany, three hundred and fifty years: and from the
first entrance of S. Augustine sent by S. Gregory to convert this Nation, two
hundred and four years.


