Psalm. 137. 2. In conspectu Angelorum psallam tibi et adorabo ad Templum
sanctam tuum.


STEPS TO THE TEMPLE, THE DELIGHTS OF THE MUSES, AND CARMEN DEO NOSTRO

By Ric. Crashaw, sometimes Fellow of Pembroke Hall, and late Fellow of St
Peter's College in Cambridge.

The 2d Edition.

In the SAVOY, Printed by T. N. for Henry Herringman at the Blew Anchor in the
Lower Walk of the New Exchange. 1670.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
Learned Reader,
THe Authors friend will not usurp much upon thy Eye; this is only for those,
whom the name of our Divine Poet has not yet seized into admiration, I dare
undertake, that what Jamblicus (in vita Pythagorae) affirms of his Muster, at
his Contemplations, these Poems can, viz. They shall lift thee Reader, some
yards above the ground; and, as in Pythagoras School, every temper was first
tuned into a height by several proportions of Music, and spiritualized for one
of his weighty Lectures; so, may thou take a Poem hence, and tune thy soul by
it into a Heavenly pitch; and thus refined and born up upon the wings of
Meditation, in these Poems thou may talk freely of God, and of that other
state.

Here Is Herbert' s second, but equal, who has retriv'd Poetry of late, and
returned it up to its Primitive use; Let it bound back to Heaven Gates, whence
it came. Think ye St Augustine would have steyned his graver Learning with a
book of Poetry, had he fancied their dearest end to be the vanity of
Love-Sonnets, and Epithalamiums? No, no, he thought with this our Poet, that
every foot in a highborn Verse, might help to measure the soul into that
better world: Divine Poetry; I dare hold it, in position against Suarez on the
subject, to be the Language of the Angels; it is the Quintessence of Fantasy
and discourse centered in Heaven; it is the very outgoings of the soul; it is
what alone our Author is able to tell you, and that in his own Verse.

It were profane but to mention here in the Preface those under-headed Poets,
Retainers to Seven shares and a half; Madrigal fellows, whose only business in
Verse, is to rhyme a poor Sixpeny Soul, a Subburb sinner into Hell; -- May such
arrogant pretenders to Poetry vanish, with their prodigious issue of tumorous
heats and flashes of their adulterate Brains, and for ever after, may this our
Poet fill up the better room of man. Oh! when the general arraignment of Poets
shall be, to give an account of their higher souls; with what a triumphant brow
shall our Divine Poet sit above and look down upon poor Homer, Virgil, Horace,
Claudian, etc. who had amongst them the ill luck to talk out a great part of
their gallant Genius upon Bees, Dung, Frogs, and Gnats, etc. and not as himself
here, upon Scriptures, Divine Graces, Martyrs and Angels.

Reader, we style his Sacred Poems, Steps to the Temple, and aptly, for in the
Temple of God, under his wing, he led his life in S. Mary's Church near St.
Peter's College; there he lodged under Tertullian' s roof of Angels; there he
made his Nest more gladly then David' s Swallow near the House of God: where
like a Primitive Saint he offered more Prayers in the night, then others
usually offer in the day; there he penned these Poems, Steps for happy Souls to
climb Heaven by.

And those other of his pieces, entitled, The Delights of the Muses, (though
of a more Humane mixture) are as sweet as they are innocent.

The praises that follow are but few of many that might be conferred on him, he
was excellent in Five Languages (besides his Mother Tongue) viz. Hebrew, Greek,
Latin, Italian, Spanish, the two last whereof he had little help in, they were
of his own acquisition.

Amongst his other accomplishments in Academick (as well Pious as Harmless)
Arts, he made his skill in Poetry, Music, Drawing, Limming, Graving,
(exercises of his curious invention and sudden fancy) to be but his subservient
recreations for vacant hours, not the grand business of his soul.

To the former Qualifications I might add that which would crown them all, his
rare moderation in Diet (almost Lessian Temperance) he never created a Muse out
of distempers, nor (with our Canary Scriblers) cast any strange mists of
Surfets before the intellectual beams of his Mind or Memory, the latter of
which he was so much a master of, that he had there under Lock and Key in
readiness, the richest Treasures of the best Greek and Latin Poets, some of
which Authors he had more at his command by heart, then others that only read
their Works, to retain little, and understand less.

Enough Reader, I intend not a volume of praises, larger then this Book, nor
need I longer transport thee to think over his vast perfections, I will
conclude all that I have impartially writ of this Learned young Gentleman (now
dead to us) as he himself does, with the last Line of his Poem upon Bishop
Andrews 's Picture before his Sermons.

Verte paginas. -- Look on his following Leaves and see him breath.

The Authors Motto.
Live Jesus, Live, and let it be
My life to dye for love of thee.
THE TABLE.
THe Weeper. Page 1 O The Tear. p. 6 On the Water of our Lords Baptism. p. 8
On the Baptized Ethiopian p. 8 On the Miracle of the multiplied Loaves* p. 8
Upon the Sepulcher of our Lord, p. 8 The Widow's Mite. p. 9 On the Prodigal. p.
9 On the still surviving of our Savior's wounds. p. 9 The Sick implore St.
Peter's shadow. p. 10 The Dumb healed, and the people enjoined silence. p. 10
Come see the place where the Lord lay. p. 10 To Pontius washing his hands. p.
10 To the Infant Martyrs. p. 11 On the Miracle of Loaves. p. 11 Why are ye
afraid, O ye of little faith? p. 11 On the Blessed Virgins bashfulness. p. 12
Upon Lazarus his Tears. p. 12 Two went up into the Temple to pray. p. 12 Upon
the Ass that bore our Savior. p. 13 I am not worthy that thou should come
under my Roof. p. 13 Upon the Powder day. p. 13 I am the door. p. 13 The blind
cured by the word of our Savior. p. 14 And he answered them nothing. p. 14 To
our Lord upon the Water made Wine. p. 14 Neither durst any man from that day
ask him any more questions. p. 15 Upon our Savior's Tomb wherein never man was
laid p. 16 It is better to go into Heaven with one Eye, etc. p. 16 Upon the
dumb (...) (...) out, and the slanderous (...) put to silence. p. (...) And a
certain Priest coming that way looked on him and passed by. p. 17 Blessed be
the Paps which thou have sucked. p. 17 To Pontius washing his blood-stained
hands. p. 17 Ye build the Sepulchers of the Prophets. p. 18 Upon the Infant
Martyrs. p. 18 Verily I say unto you, ye shall weep and lament. p. 18 Upon our
Lord's last comfortable discourse with his Disciples. p. 19 Dives asking a
drop. p. 19 Give to Caesar and to God. p. 19 But now they have seen and heard.
p. 20 Upon the crown of Thorns taken from our blessed Lords head all bloody. p.
20 She began to wash his feet with Tears and wipe them with the hairs of her
head. p. 20 On St Peter cutting off Malchus his ear. p. 21 But men loved
darkness rather then light. p. 21 I am ready, not only to be bound but to dye
p. 21 On St Peter's casting away his Nets at our Savior's call. p. 21 Our Lord
in his Circumcision to his Father. p. 22 On the wounds of our crucified Lord.
p. 22 On our crucified Lord, naked and bloody. p. 23 Easter day. p. 23 On the
bleeding wounds of our crucified Savior. p. 24 Sampson to Dalilah* p. 26 Psalm
23. p. 26 Psalm 137. p. 28 A Hymn on the Nativity, sung by the Shepherds. p. 29
Sospetto d'Herode. p. 33 On a Prayer book sent to Mistress M. R. p. 56 On Mr. G.
Herbert's Book entitled, The Temple of sacred Poems sent to a Gentlewoman. p.
60 A Hymn to the Name and Honor of St. Teresa, that sought an early Martyrdom.
p. 61 An Apology for the precedent Hymn. p. 67 On a Treatise of Charity. p. 68
On the Glorious Assumption of the Blessed Virgin. p 70 A Hymn on the
Circumcision of our Lord. p. 72 On Hope by way of Question and Answer, between
A. Cowley and R. Crashaw, p. 74 Musick's Duel. p. 81 Upon the death of a
Gentleman. p. 86 Upon the death of Mr. Herris p. 87 Another on the same. p. 89
Another. p. 91 His Epitaph p. 93 An Epitaph upon Husband and Wife who died and
were buried together. p. 95 An Epitaph upon Dr. (...) p. 95 Upon Mr.
Staninough's death. p. 96 Upon the Duke of York's birth, a Penegyrick* p. 97
Upon Ford's Two Tragedies. p. 100 On a foul morning being then to take a
journey. p. 101 Upon the fair Ethiopian sent to a Gentlewoman. p. 102 On
Marriage. p. 102 To the morning, satisfaction for sleep. p. 102 Loves Horoscope
p. 104 Out of Virgil in praise of the Spring. p. 106 With a picture sent to a
friend. p. 107 In praise of Lessius his rule of Health. p. 108 The beginning of
Heliodorus. p. 109 Out of the Greek, Cupid's Crier. p. 110 On Nanus. p. 112
Upon Venus putting on Mars his Arms. p. 115 Upon the same. p. 115 Upon Bishop
Andrew's Picture before his Sermons. p. 115 Out of Martial p. 116 Out of
Italian, a Song. p. 117 Another out of Italian. p. 119 Another. p. 119 On the
Frontispiece of Isaacson's Chronology. p. 120 Another. p. 121 An Epitaph upon
Mr. Ashton, a Conformable Citizen. p. 122 Wishes to his supposed Mistress p.
124 In Picturam reverendissimi Episcopi D. Andrews. p 129 Epitaphium in Dominum
Herrisium. p. 129 Principi recens natae omen Maternae Indolis. p. 131 In
Reginae partum hyemalem. p. 133 Ad Reginam. p. 134 In faciem Regis a morbillis
Integram. p. 135 Rex Redux. p. 136 Ad Principem nondum natum. p. 137 Crashaw
the Anagram, He Was Car. p. 141 To the Countess of Denbigh, persuading her to
resolution, etc. p. 143 To the Name above every name, the Name Jesus, a Hymn*
p. 146. A Hymn on the Epiphany sung as by the Three Kings. p. 153 To the Queen
upon Twelft-day. p. 161 The Office of the Holy Cr^h p. 162 For the hour of
Prime. p. 164 The Third. p. 165 The Sixth. p. 167 The Ninth, p. 169 Even-song.
p. 170 Compline. p. 172 The Recommendation. p. 173 Vexilla Regis, The Hymn of
the Holy Cross. p. 174 Charitas Nimia, Or the dear Bargain. p. 176 Sancta Maria
dolorosa, or, The Mother of sorrows. p. 178 The Hymn of St Thomas, in Adoration
of the Blessed Sacrament. p. 183 The Hymn Lauda Sion, etc. p. 187 The Hymn in
meditation of the day of judgment. p. 191 The Hymn, O Gloriosa Domina. p. 194
The Flaming heart, upon the Book and Picture of St. Teresa. p. 196 A Song. p.
197 Second part. p. 197 To Mistress M. R. Council concerning her Choice. p. 198
Alexias. The complaint of the forsaken wife of Saint Alexis. The First Elegy.
p. 200 The Second Elegy. p. 201 The Third Elegy. p. 202 Description of a
Religious House and condition of Life. etc. p. 204 Deaths Lecture, the Funeral
of a young Gentleman. p. 206 Temperance, or the cheap Physician, upon the
Translation of Lessius. p. 207
The Weeper.
1
HAil Sister Springs,
Parents of Silver-forded rills!
Ever bubling things!
Thawing Crystal! Snowy Hills!
Still spending, never spent; I mean
Thy fair Eyes sweet Magdalene.
2
Heavens thy fair Eyes be,
Heavens of ever-falling stars,
It Is seed-time still with thee,
And Stars thou sow'st whose Harvest dares
Promise the earth to countershine
What ever makes Heavens forehead fine.
3
But we 're deceived all,
Stars they 're indeed too true,
For they but seem to fall
As Heavens other spangles do:
It is not for our Earth and us,
To shine in things so precious.
4
Upwards thou do weep,
Heavens bosom drinks the gentle stream,
Where the Milky Rivers meet,
Thine Crawls above and is the Cream.
Heaven, of such fair Floods as this,
Heaven the Crystal Ocean is.
5
Every morn from hence,
A brisk Cherub something sips
Whose soft influence
Adds sweetness to his sweetest Lips.
Then to his Music, and his Song
Tastes of this breakfast all day long.
6
When some new bright guest
Takes up among the stars a room,
And Heaven will make a Feast,
Angels with their Bottles come;
And draw from these full Eyes of thine,
Their Masters Water, their own Wine.
7
The Dew no more will weep,
The Primroses pale Cheek to deck,
The Dew no more will sleep,
Nuzzel'd in the Lillies Neck.
Much rather would it Tremble here,
And leave them both to be thy Tear.
8
Not the soft Gold which
Steals from the Amber-weeping Tree,
Makes Sorrow half so Rich,
As the drops distilled from thee.
Sorrows best Jewels lie in these
Caskets of which Heaven keeps the Keys.
9
When Sorrow would be seen
In her brightest Majesty,
(For she is a Queen)
Then is she dressed by none but thee.
Then, and only then she wears
Her richest Pearls, I mean thy Tears.
10
Not in the Evenings Eyes
When they red with weeping are,
For the Sun that dies,
Sits Sorrow with a Face so fair.
No where but here did ever meet
Sweetness so sad, sadness so sweet.
11
Sadness all the while
She sits in such a Throne as this,
Can do naught but smile,
Nor believes she sadness is:
Gladness it self would be more glad
To be made so sweetly sad.
12
There is no need at all
That the Balsome-sweating bough
So coyly should let fall,
His med'cinable ^ears; for now
Nature has learned t'extract a Dew,
More Sovereign and Sweet from you.
13
Yet let the poor drops weep,
Weeping is the case of Woe,
Softly let them creep
Sad that they are vanquished so,
They, though to others no relief,
May Balsome be for their own grief.
14
Golden though he be,
Golden Tagus murmurs though,
Might he flow from thee,
Content and quiet would he go;
Richer far does he esteem
Thy Silver, then his Golden stream.
15
Well does the May that lies
Smiling in thy Cheeks, confess,
The April in thine Eyes,
Mutual sweetness they express.
No April ever lent softer Showers,
Nor May returned fairer Flowers.
16
Thus do thou melt the year
Into a weeping motion,
Each minute waits here;
Takes his Tear and gets him gone;
By thine Eyes tinct enobled thus
Time lays him up: he is precious.
17
Time as by thee he passes,
Makes thy ever-watry Eyes
His Hour-Glasses;
By them his steps he rectifies.
The Sands he used no longer please,
For his own Sands he will use thy Seas.
18
Does thy Song lull the Air?
Thy Tears just Cadence still keeps time,
Does thy sweet breathed Prayer
Up in clouds of incense climb?
Still at each sigh, that is each stop:
A Bead, that is a Tear does drop.
19
Does the Night arise?
Still thy Tears do fall, and fall.
Does night loose her Eyes?
Still the Fountain weeps for all.
Let Night or Day do what they will,
Thou have thy Task, thou weepest still.
20
Not, so long she lived,
Will thy Tomb report of thee,
But so long she grieved,
Thus must we date thy memory.
Others by Days, by Months, by Years
Measure their Ages, Thou by Tears.
21
Say watery Brothers
Ye simpering Sons of those fair Eyes,
Your fertile Mothers.
What has our World that can entice
You to be born? what is it can borrow
You from her Eyes swollen wombs of Sorrow.
22
Whither away so fast?
O whither? for the sluttish Earth
Your sweetness cannot taste,
Nor does the Dust deserve your Birth.
Whither haste ye then? O say
Why ye trip so fast away?
23
We go not to seek
The darlings of Aurora's Bed,
The Roses modest Cheek
Nor the Violets humble head.
No such thing; we go to meet
A worthier Object, Our Lords Feet.
The Tear.
1
WHat bright soft thing is this?
Sweet Mary thy fair Eyes expense?
A moist spark it is,
A watery Diamond; from whence
The very Term, I think, was found
The water of a Diamond.
2
O it is not a Tear,
It Is a Star about to drop
From thine Eye its sphere;
The Sun will stoop and take it up.
Proud will his Sister be to wear
This thine Eyes Jewel in her Ear.
3
O it is a Tear,
Too true a Tear; for no sad Eyne,
How sad so e're,
Rain so true a Tear as thine;
Each Drop leaving a place so dear,
Weeps for it self, is its own Tear.
4
Such a Pearl as this is,
(Slipped from Aurora's dewy Breast)
The Rose-buds sweet Lip kisses;
And such the Rose its self when vexed
With ungentle flames, does shed,
Sweating in too warm a Bed.
5
Such the Maiden Gemme
By the wanton Spring put on,
Peeps from her Parent stem,
And blushes on the watery Sun:
This watery Blossom of thy Eyne
Ripe, will make the richer Wine.
6
Fair Drop, why quak'st thou so?
'Cause thou straight must lay thy Head
In the Dust? O no;
The Dust shall never be thy Bed:
A Pillow for thee will I bring,
Stuffed with Down of Angels wing.
7
Thus carried up on high,
(For to Heaven thou must go)
Sweetly shall thou lie,
And in soft slumbers bath thy Woe;
Till the singing Orbs awake thee,
And one of their bright Chorus make thee.
8
There thy self shall be
An Eye, but not a weeping one,
Yet I doubt of thee,
Whither the had rather there have shone
An Eye of Heaven; or still shine here
In the Heaven of Mary's eye, a Tear.
Divine Epigrams.
On the water of our Lords Baptism.
EAch Blessed Drop on each Blessed Limb,
Is washed it self, in washing him:
It Is a Gemme while it stays here;
While it falls hence it is a Tear.
Act. 8.
On the Baptized Ethiopian.
LEt it no longer be a forlorn-hope
To wash an Ethiope:
He Is washed, his gloomy skin a peaceful shade
For his White Soul is made:
And now, I doubt not, the Eternal Dove,
A black-fac'd house will love.
On the Miracle of multiplied Loaves.
SEe here an easy Feast that knows no wound,
That under Hungers Teeth will needs be found:
A subtle Harvest of unbounded bread,
What would ye more? Here Food it self is fed.
Upon the Sepulcher of our Lord.
HEre, where our Lord once laid his Head,
Now the Grave lies Buried.
The Widows Mites.
TWo Mites, two Drops, (yet all her House and Land)
Falls from a steady Heart, though trembling Hand:
The others wanton wealth foams high, and brave,
The other cast away, she only gave.
Luke 15.
On the Prodigal.
TEll me bright Boy, tell me my Golden Lad,
Whither away so frolic? why so glad?
What all thy Wealth in Council? all thy State?
Are Husks so deer? troth it is a Mighty Rate.
On the still surviving Marks of our Saviors Wounds.
WHat ever story of their cruelty,
Or Nail, or Thorn, or Spear have writ in Thee,
Are in another Sense
Still Legible;
Sweet is the difference:
Once I did spell
Every red Letter
A wound of thine,
Now, (what is better)
Balsome for mine.
Act. 5.
The Sick implore St. Peter's shadow.
UNder thy shadow may I lurk a while,
Death's busy search I Will easily beguile:
Thy shadow Peter, must show me the Sun,
My Light's thy shadow's shadow, or it is done.
Mar. 7.
The Dumb healed, and the People enjoined silence.
CHrist bids the dumb Tongue speak, it speaks, the sound
He charges to be quiet, it runs round,
If in the first he used his fingers Touch:
His hands whole strength here, could not be too much.
Mat. 28.
Come see the place where the Lord lay.
SHow me himself, himself (bright Sir) O show
Which way my poor Tears to himself may go,
Were it enough to show the place, and say,
Look, Mary, here see, where thy Lord once lay.
Then could I show these Arms of mine, and say,
Look, Mary, here see, where thy Lord once lay.
To Pontius washing his hands.
THy Hands are washed, but O the water's spilt,
That labored to have washed thy guilt:
The Flood, if any can that can suffice,
Must have its Fountain in thine Eyes.
To the Infant Martyrs.
GO smiling Souls, your new built Cages break,
In Heaven you will learn to sing ever here to speak,
Nor let the milky Fonts that bath your Thirst,
Be your delay;
The place that calls you hence, is at the worst
Milk all the way.
On the Miracle of Loaves.
NOw Lord, or never, they will believe on thee.
Thou to their Teeth have proved thy Deity.
Mark 4.
Why are ye afraid, O ye of little faith:
AS if the storm meant him;
Or 'cause Heavens face is dim,
His needs a Cloud.
Was ever froward wind
That could be so unkind,
Or wave so proud?
The Wind had need be angry, and the Water black,
That to the mighty Neptune's self dare threaten wrack.
There is no storm but this
Of your own Cowardice
That braves you out;
You are the storm that mocks
Your selves; you are the Rocks
Of your own doubt:
Besides this fear of danger, there is no danger here,
And he that here fears Danger, does deserve his Fear.
On the blessed Virgins bashfulness.
THat on her Lap she casts her humble Eye,
It Is the sweet pride of her Humility.
The fair Star is well fixed, for where, O where
Could she have fixed it on a fairer Sphere?
It Is Heaven, it is Heaven she sees, Heavens God there lies,
She can see Heaven, and never lift up her Eyes:
This new Guest to her Eyes new Laws has given,
'Twas once look up, It Is now look down to Heaven.
Upon Lazarus his Tears.
RIch Lazarus! richer in those Gems, thy Tears,
Then Dives in the Robes he wears:
He scorns them now, but O they will suit full well
With the Purple he must wear in Hell.
Two went up into the Temple to Pray.
TWo went to pray? O rather say
One went to brag, the other to pray:
One stands up close and treads on high,
Where the other dares not lend his Eye.
One nearer to Gods Altar trod,
The other to the Altar's God.
Upon the Ass that bore our Savior.
Has only Anger an Omnipotence
In Eloquence?
Within the Lips of Love and Joy does dwell
No Miracle?
Why else had Balaams Asse^a Tongue to chide
His Masters Pride?
And thou (Heaven-burthen'd Beast) have never a word
To praise thy Lord?
That he should find a Tongue and vocal Thunder,
Was a great wonder.
But O methinks it is a far greater one
That thou find'st none.
Matt. 8.
I am not worthy that thou should come under my Roof.
THy God was making haste into thy Roof,
Thy humble Faith and Fear keeps him aloof:
He Will be thy Guest, because he may not be,
He Will come -- into thy house? no, into thee.
Upon the Powder-day.
HOw fit our well-rank'd Feasts do follow,
All mischief comes after. All-Hallow.
I am the Door.
ANd now thou art set wide open, the Spear's sad Art,
Lo! has unlockt thee at the very Heart:
He to himself (I fear the worst)
And his own hope
Has shut these Doors of Heaven, that durst
Thus set them open.
Matt. 10.
The Blind Cured by the word of our Savior.
THou speak the Word (thy Word's a Law)
Thou Spak'st, and straight the blind man saw.
To speak and make the Blind man See,
Was never man Lord spoke like Thee.
To speak thus, was to speak (say I)
Not to his Ear, but to his Eye.
Matthew 27.
And he answered them nothing.
O Mighty Nothing! unto thee,
Nothing, we owe all things that be,
God spoke once when he all things made,
He saved All when he Nothing said.
The World was made of Nothing then;
It Is made by Nothing now again.
To our Lord, upon the Water made Wine.
THou Water turn'st to Wine (fair Friend of Life)
Thy Foe to cross the sweet Arts of thy Reign,
Distills from thence the Tears of Wrath and Strife,
And so turns Wine to Water back again.
Matthew 22.
Neither durst any man from that Day ask him any more Questions.
MIdst all the dark and knotty Snares,
Black Wit or Malice can or dares,
Thy Glorious Wisdom breaks the Nets,
And treads with uncontrouled steps.
Thy quel'd Foes are not only now
Thy Triumphs, but thy Trophies too:
They, both at once thy Conquests be,
And thy Conquests Memory.
Stony Amazement makes them stand
Waiting on thy Victorious hand,
Like Statues fixed to the Fame
Of thy renown, and their own shame*
As if they only meant to breath,
To be the Life of their own Death.
'Twas time to hold their Peace when they
Had never another word to say:
Yet is their silence unto thee,
The full sound of thy Victory.
Their silence speaks aloud, and is
Thy well pronounced Panegyris.
While they speak nothing, they speak all
Their share, in thy Memorial.
While they speak nothing, they proclaim
Thee, with the shrillest Trump of Fame.
To hold their peace is all the ways,
These Wretches have to speak thy Praise.
Upon our Saviors Tomb wherein never man was laid.
HOw Life and Death in Thee
Agree?
Thou had a Virgin Womb
And Tomb.
A Joseph did betroth
Them both.
It is better to go into Heaven with one Eye, etc.
ONe Eye? a Thousand rather, and a Thousand more,
To fix those full-fac't Glories, O he is poor
Of Eyes that has but Argus store,
Yet if thou wilt fill one poor Eye, with thy Heaven and Thee,
O grant (sweet Goodness) that one Eye may be
All, and every whit of me.
Luke 11.
Upon the dumb Devil cast out, and the slanderous Jews put to silence.
TWo Devils at one blow thou have laid flat,
A Speaking Devil this, a Dumb one that;
Wa'st thy full Victories fairer increase,
That the one spoke, or that the other held his peace?
Luke 10.
And a certain Priest coming that way looked on him and passed by.
Why do thou wound my wounds, O thou that passest by
Handling and turning them with an unwounded eye,
The calm that cools thine eye does shipwreck mine, for O!
Unmoved to see one wretched, is to make him so.
Luke 11.
Blessed be the Paps which Thou have sucked.
SUppose he had been Tabled at thy Teats,
Thy Hunger feels not what he Eats:
He Will have his Teat ever long (a bloody one)
The Mother then must suck the Son.
To Pontius washing his Bloodstained hands.
IS Murder no sin? or a sin so cheap,
That thou need'st heap
A Rape upon it? till thy Adult'rous touch
Taught her these sulled Cheeks, this blubbered Face,
^he was a Nymph, the Meadows knew none such,
Of honest Parentage, of unstained Race,
The Daughter of a fair and well-fam'd Fountain
As ever Silver tipped, the side of shady Mountain.
See how she weeps, and weeps, that she appears
Nothing but Tears;
Each drop's a Tear that weeps for her own wast;
Hark how at every touch she does complain her.
Hark how she bids her frighted Drops make haste;
And with sad Murmurs* chides the hands that stain her.
Leave, leave, for shame, or else (Good judge) decree,
What water shall wash this, when this has washed thee.
Matthew 23.
Ye build the Sepulchers of the Prophets.
THou trim'st a Prophet's Tomb, and do bequeath
The Life thou took'st from him unto his Death.
Vain Man! the stones that on his Tomb do lie,
Keep but the score of them that made him die.
Upon the Infant Martyrs.
TO see both blended in one Flood,
The Mothers Milk, the Childrens Blood,
Makes me doubt if Heaven will gather,
Roses hence, or Lillies rather.
Joh. 16.
Verily I say unto you, ye shall weep and lament.
WElcome my Grief, my Joy; how dear's
^o me my Legacy of Tears!
I Will weep, and weep, and will therefore
Weep, 'cause I can weep no more:
Thou, thou (Dear Lord) even thou alone,
Giv'st joy, even when thou give none.
Joh. 15.
Upon our Lords last comfortable Discourse with his Disciples,
ALl Hybla's Honey, all that sweetness can
Flows in thy Song (O fair, O dying Swan!)
Yet is the joy I take in it small or none;
It is too sweet to be a long-lived one.
Luke 16.
Dives asking a drop.
A Drop, one drop, how sweetly one fair drop
Would tremble on my Pearl-tipt fingers top?
My Wealth is gone, O go it where it will,
Spare this one Jewel; I Will be Dives still.
Mark. 12.
(Give to Caesar --) (And to God -- --)
ALl we have is God's, and yet
Caesar challenges a Debt,
Nor has God a thinner share,
What ever Caesar's payments are;
All is God's; and yet it is true,
All we have is Caesar's too;
All is Caesar's; and what odds
So long as Caesar's self is Gods?
But now they have seen and hated.
SEen? and yet hated Thee? they did not see,
They saw Thee not, that saw and hated Thee:
No, no, they saw thee not, O Life, O Love,
Who saw ought in Thee that their Hate could move?
Upon the Crown of Thorns taken from our Blessed Lords Head all bloody.
Know thou this Soldier? it is a much changed Plant, which yet
Thy Self did set,
It Is changed indeed, did Autumn ever such Beautys bring
To shame his Spring?
O! who so hard an Husbandman could ever find
A Soil so kind?
Is not the Soil a kind one (think ye) that returns
Roses for Thorns?
She began to wash his Feet with Tears and wipe them with the Hairs of her Head.
HEr Eyes Flood licks his Feets fair stain,
Her Hairs Flame licks up that again.
This Flame thus quenched has brighter Beams*
This Flood thus stained fairer Streams.
On St. Peter cutting off Malchus his Ear.
WEll Peter do thou wield thy active Sword,
Well for thy self (I mean) not for thy Lord.
To strike at Ears, is to take heed there be
No witness, Peter, of thy Perjury.
Joh. 3.
But Men loved Darkness rather than Light.
THe Worlds Light shines, shine as it will,
The World will love its Darkness still;
I doubt though, when the World's in Hell,
It will not love its darkness half so well.
Act. 21.
I am ready not only to be Bound but to Dye.
COme death, come bands, nor do you shrink, my ears,
At those hard words Man's Cowardice calls Fears.
Save those of Fear, no other Bands fear I;
Nor other Death then this; the fear to Die.
On St. Peter casting away his Nets at our Saviors Call.
THou have the Art on it Peter, and can tell
To cast thy Nets on all occasions well.
When Christ calls, and thy Nets would have thee stay;
To cast them Well's to cast them quite away.
Our Lord in his Circumcision to his Father.
TO thee these First Fruits of my growing Death
(For what else is my life?) lo I bequeath.
Taste this, and as thou like this lesser flood
Expect a Sea, my heart shall make it good.
Thy wrath that wades here now, ever long shall swim
The Flood-gate shall be set wide open for him.
Then let him drink, and drink, and do his worst,
To drown the wantonness of his wild Thirst.
Now Is but the Nonage of my Pains, my Fears
Are yet both in their hopes, not come to years.
The Day of my dark Woes is yet but Morn,
My Tears but tender, and my Death newborn.
Yet may these unfledged griefs give fate some guess,
These Cradle-torments have their towardness.
These Purple buds of blooming Death may be,
Erst the full Stature of a fatal Tree.
And till my riper Woes to Age are come,
This Knife may be the Spears Praeludium.
On the wounds of our crucified Lord.
O These wakeful Wounds of thine!
Are they Mouths? or are they Eyes?
Be they Mouths, or be they Eyn,
Each bleeding part some one supplies.
Lo! a Mouth, whose full-bloom'd Lips
At too dear a rate are Roses.
Lo! a blood-shot Eye! that weeps
And many a cruel Tear discloses.
O thou that on this Foot have laid
Many a Kiss; and many a Tear,
Now thou shall have all repaid,
Whatsoever thy Charges were.
This Foot has got a Mouth and Lips,
To pay the sweet sum of thy Kisses:
To pay thy Tears, an Eye that weeps
Instead of Tears such Gems as this is.
The difference only this appears,
(Nor can the change offend)
The Debt is paid in Ruby-Tears,
Which thou in Pearls did lend.
On our crucified Lord Naked and Bloody.
THE have left thee Naked Lord, O that they had;
This Garment too I would they had denied.
Thee with thy self they have too richly clad,
Opening the Purple Wardrobe of thy Side.
O never could be found Garments too good
For thee to wear, but these, of thine own Blood.
Easter Day.
RIse, Heir of fresh Eternity,
From thy Virgin-Tomb:
Rise Mighty man of Wonders, and thy world with thee
Thy Tomb, the universal East,
Natures new Womb,
Thy Tomb, fair Immortalities perfumed Nest,
Of all the Glories make Noon gay
This is the Morn.
This Rock buds forth the fountain of the streams of day.
In Joys white Annals live this hour,
When life was born*
No Cloud scoul on his radiant Lids, no Tempest lowre.
Life, by this Light's Nativity
All Creatures have.
Death only by this days just Doom is forced to dye,
Nor is Death forced; for may he lie
Throned in thy Grave;
Death will on this condition be content to dye.
On the bleeding Wounds of our crucified Lord.
JEsu, no more, it is full Tide
From thy Hands and from thy Feet,
From thy Head, and from thy Side,
All thy Purple Rivers meet.
Thy restless Feet, they cannot go,
For us and our Eternal good
As they are wont, what though?
They Swim, alas, in their own Flood.
Thy Hand to give, thou can not lift;
Yet will thy Hand still giving be;
It gives, but O it self's the Gift,
It drops though bound, though bound it is free.
But Oh thy Side! thy deep dig'd Side
That has a double Nilus going,
Nor ever was the (...) Tide
Half so Fruitful, half so Flowing.
What need thy fair Head bear a (...)
In Tears? as if thine Eyes had none?
What need they help to drown thine Heart,
That strives in Torrents of its own?
Watered by the showers they bring,
The Thorns that thy Blessed Brows encloses
(A cruel and a costly Spring)
Conceive proud hopes of proving Roses.
Not a Hair but pays his River
To this Red Sea of thy Blood,
Their little Channels ^an deliver
Something to the general Flood.
But while I speak, whither are run
All the Rivers named before?
I counted wrong; there is but one,
But O that one is one all over.
Rain-swoln Rivers may rise proud
Threatening all to overflow,
But when indeed all is overflowed
They themselves are drowned too.
This thy Bloods deluge (a dire chance
Dear Lord to thee) to us is found
A deluge of deliverance,
A Deluge lest we should be drowned.
Never was it thou in a Sense so sadly True,
The Well of living Waters, Lord, till now.
Sampson to his Dalilah.
COuld not once blinding me, Cruel, suffice?
When first I looked on thee, I lost mine Eyes.
Psalm, 23.
HAppy me! O haypy Sheep!
Whom my God vouchsafes to keep,
Even my God, even he it is
That points me to these ways of Bliss;
On whose Pastures cheerful Spring,
All the year does sit and Sing,
And rejoicing, smiles to see
Their Green Backs wear his Livery:
Pleasure sings my Soul to rest,
Plenty wears me at her Breast,
Whose sweet Temper teaches me
Nor wanton, nor in want to be.
At my Feet the blub'ring Mountain
Weeping, melts into a Fountain,
Whose soft silver-sweating Streams
Make high Noon forget his Beams:
When my waiward Breath is flying,
He calls home my soul from dying,
Strokes and tames my rabid Grief,
And does woo me into life:
When my simple weakness strays,
(Tangled in forbidden ways)
He (my Shepherd) is my guide,
He Is before me, on my side,
And behind me, he beguiles
Craft in all her knotty wiles:
He expounds the giddy wonder
Of my weary steps, and under
Spreads a Path clear as the Day,
Where no churlish rub says nay
To my joy-conducted Feet,
Whilst they gladly go to meet
Grace and Peace, to meet new lays
Tuned to my great Sheapheards praise.
Come now all ye Terrors, Sally,
Muster forth into the Valley,
Where Triumphant darkness hovers
With a sable Wing, that covers
Brooding Horror* Come thou Death,
Let the damps of thy dull Breath
Overshadow even the shade,
And make darkness self-afraid;
There my Feet, even there shall find
Way for a resolved mind.
Still my Shepherd, still my God
Thou art with me, Still thy Rod,
And thy Staff, whose influence
Gives direction, gives defense.
At the whisper of thy Word
Crowned abundance spreads my Board:
While I Feast, my Foes do feed
Their rank Malice, not their Need,
So that with the self-same Bread
They are Starved, and I am Fed.
How my Head in Ointment swims!
How my Cup o're-looks her brims!
So, even so still may I move
By the Line of thy dear Love;
Still may thy sweet Mercy spread
(...) shady Arm above my Head,
About my Paths, so shall I find
The fair Center of my mind
Thy Temple, and those Lovely walls
Bright ever with a Beam that falls
Fresh from the pure glance of thine Eye,
Lighting to Eternity.
There I Will dwell for ever, there
Will I find a purer Air.
To feed my Life with, there I Will sup
Balm and Nectar in my Cup,
And thence my ripe Soul will I breath
Warm into the Arms of Death.
Psalm 137.
ON the proud Banks of great Euphrates Flood,
There we sat, and there we wept:
Our Harps that now no Music understood,
Nodding on the Willows slept,
While unhappy captived we
Lovely Sion thought on thee.
They, they that snatched us from our Countries Bres^
Would have a Song carved to their Ears
In Hebrew numbers, then (O cruel Jest!)
When Harps and Hearts were drowned in Tears:
Come, they cried, come Sing and Play
One of Sions Songs to day.
Sing? Play? to whom (ah) shall we Sing or Play
If not Jerusalem to thee?
Ah thee Jerusalem? ah sooner may
This Hand forget the Mastery
Of Musicks dainty touch, then I
The Music of thy Memory.
Which when I lose, O may at once my Tongue
Lose this same busy speaking Art
Unpearcht, her vocal Arteries unstrung,
No more acquainted with my Heart,
On my dry Pallats roof to rest
A withered Leaf, an idle Guest.
No, no, thy good, Sion, alone must Crown
The head of all my hope-nurst Joys.
But Edom cruel thou! thou cry'dst down, down
Sink Sion, down and never rise,
Her falling thou did urge and thrust,
And haste to dash her into Dust.
Do laugh? proud Babels Daughter! do, laugh on,
Till thy ruin teach thee Tears,
Even such as these, laugh, till a venging throng
Of woes too late do rouse thy fears.
Laugh till thy Childrens bleeding Bones
Weep precious Tears upon the stones.
Quem vidistis Pastores, etc. A Hymn of the Nativity, sung by the Shepherds.
Chorus. COme we Shepherds who have seen
Days King deposed by Nights Queen.
Come lift we up our lofty Song,
To wake the Sun that sleeps too long.
He in this ou^ general Joy,
Slept, and Dreamt of no such thing
While we found out the fair-ey'd Boy,
And kissed the Cradle of our King;
Tell him he rises now too late,
To show us ought worth looking at.
Tell him we now can show him more
Then he ever showed to Mortal sight,
Then he himself ever saw before,
Which to be seen needs not his Light:
Tell him Tityrus where the have been,
Tell him Thyrsis what the have seen.

Tityrus. Gloomy Night, embraced the place
Where the Noble Infant lay:
The Babe looked up, and showed his Face,
In spite of Darkness it was Day.
It was thy Day, Sweet, and did rise,
Not from the East, but from thy Eyes.

Thyrsis. Winter chid the World, and sent
The angry North to wage his Wars:
The North forgot his fierce intent,
And left Perfumes instead of Scars:
By those sweet Eyes persuasive Powers,
Where he meant Frosts, he scattered Flowers.

B^th. We saw thee in thy Balmy-Nest,
Bright Dawn of our Eternal Day;
We saw thine Eyes break from the East,
And chase the trembling Shades away:
We saw thee (and we blessed the sight)
We saw thee by thine own sweet Light.

Tityrus. I saw the curled Drops, soft and slow
Come hovering o'r the places head,
Offering their whitest sheets of Snow,
To furnish the fair Infants Bed.
Forbear (said I) be not too bold,
Your Fleece is white, but it is too cold.

Thyrsis. I saw the Officious Angels bring,
The Down that their soft Breasts did strew,
For well they now can spare their Wings,
When Heaven it self lies here below,
Fair Youth, (said I) be not too rough,
Your Down though soft's not soft enough.

Tityrus. The Babe no sooner 'gan to seek,
Where to lay his Lovely Head,
But straight his Eyes advised his Cheek,
'Twixt Mothers Breasts to go to Bed.
Sweet choice (said I) no way but so,
Not to lie cold, yet sleep in Snow.

All. Welcome to our wondering sight
Eternity shut in a Span!
Summer in Winter! Day in Night!

Chorus. Heaven in Earth! and God in Man!
Great little one, whose Glorious Birth,
Lifts Earth to Heaven, stoops Heaven to Earth.
Welcome, though not to Gold, nor Silk,
To more then Cesar's Birthright is.
Two Sister-Seas of Virgins Milk,
With many a rarely-temper'd Kiss,
That Breaths at once both Maid and Mother,
Warms in the one, cools in the other.
She sings thy Tears asleep, and dips
Her Kisses in thy weeping Eye,
She spreads the red Leaves of thy Lips,
That in their Buds yet Blushing lie.
She against those Mother Diamonds tryes
The points of her young Eagles Eyes.
Welcome, (though not to those gay Flies
Gilded in the Beams of Earthly Kings
Slippery Souls in smiling Eyes)
But to poor Shepherds, simple things,
That use no Varnish, no oiled Arts,
But life clean Hands full of clear Hearts.
Yet when young Aprils Husband Showers,
Shall Bless the fruitful Mai^'s Bed,
We'll bring the firstborn of her Flowers,
To Kiss thy Feet, and Crown thy Head.
To thee (Dread Lamb,) whose Love must keep
The Shepherds, while they feed their Sheep.
To thee meek Majesty, soft King
Of simple Graces and sweet Loves,
Each of us his Lamb will bring,
Each his pair of Silver Doves.
At last, in fire of thy fair Eyes,
We Will burn our own best Sacrifice.

Sospetto d' Herod. Libro Primo.
Argomento.
Casting the times with their strong signs,
Death's Master his own his own death Divines;
Struggling for Help, his best Hope is,
Herod's suspicion may heal his;
Therefore he sends a Fiend to wake,
The sleeping Tyrants fond mistake,
Who fears (in vain) that he whose Birth
Mean's Heaven, should meddle with his Earth.
1
MUse, now the servant of soft Loves no more,
Hate is thy Theme, and Herod, whose unblest
Hand (so what dares not jealous Greatness?) tore
A thousand sweet Babes from their Mothers Breast,
The Blooms of Martydome. O be a Door
Of Language to my Infant Lips, ye best
Of Confessors: whose Throats answering his swords,
Gave forth your Blood for Breath, spoke Souls for Words.

2
Great Anthony! Spains well-beseeming pride,
Thou Mighty Branch of Emperors and Kings,
The Beauties of whose dawn what Eye may bide,
Which with the Sun himself weighs equal Wings,
Mapp of Heroic worth! whom far and wide
To the believing World Fame boldly sings:
Deign thou to wear this humble Wreath that bows,
To be the sacred Honor of thy Brows.
3.
Nor needs my Muse a Blush, or these bright Flowers
Other then what their own blessed Beauties bring,
They were the smiling Sons of those sweet Bowers,
That drink the Dew of Life, whose deathless Spring,
Nor Sirian Flame, nor Borean Frost deflow'rs:
From whence Heav'n-labouring Bees with busy wing,
Suck hidden Sweets, which well digested proves
Immortal Honey for the Hive of Loves.
4.
Thou, whose strong Hand with so transcendent worth,
Holds high the Rein of fair Parthenope,
That neither Rome, nor Athens can bring forth
A Name in Noble Deeds Rival to thee!
Thy Fames full noise, makes proud the patient Earth,
Far more then Matter for my Muse and me.
The Tyrrh^ne Seas and Shores sound all the same,
And in their Murmures keep thy Mighty Name.
5.
Below the bottom of the great Abyss,
There where one Center reconciles all things,
The Worlds profound Heart pants; there placed is
Mischiefs old Master, close about him clings
A curled knot of embracing Snakes, that kiss
His correspondent Cheeks: these loathsome Strings
Hold the perverse Prince in Eternal Ties
Fast bound, since first he forfeited the Skies.
6.
The Judge of Torments, and the King of Tears:
He fills a burnisht Throne of quenchless fire:
And for his old fair Robes of Light, he wears
A gloomy Mantle of dark Flames, the Tire
That Crowns his hated head on high appears;
Where seav'n tall Horns (his Empires pride) aspire.
And to make up Hells Majesty, each Horn
Seav'n Crested Hydra's horribly adorn.
7.
His Eyes the sullen Dens of Death and Night,
Startle the dull Air with a dismal Red:
Such his fell Glances as the fatal Light
Of staring Comets, that look Kingdoms dead:
From his black Nostrils, and blew Lips, in spite
Of Hells own stink, a worser stench is spread.
His Breath Hells Lightning is: and each deep groan
Disdains to think that Heaven Thunders alone.
8.
His Flaming Eyes dire exhalation,
Unto a dreadful Pile gives fiery Breath;
Whose unconsum'd Consumption preys upon
The never-dying Life, of a long death.
In this sad House of slow Destruction,
(His shop of Flames) he fries himself, beneath
A mass of Woes, his Teeth for Torment gnash,
While his Steel sides sound with with his Tails strong lash.
9.
Three Rigorous Virgins waiting still behind,
Assist the Throne of th'Iron-Sceptered King:
With whips of Thorns and knotty Vipers twined
They rouse him, when his rank Thoughts need a sting:
Their Locks are Beds of uncomb'd Snakes that wind
About their shady Brows in wanton Rings.
Thus Reigns the wrathful King, and while he Reigns,
His Scepter and himself both he disdains.
10.
Disdainful wretch! how has one bold Sin cost
Thee all the Beauties of thy once bright Eyes?
How has one black Eclipse cancelled and crossed
The Glories that did Guild thee in thy Rise?
Proud Morning of a perverse Day! how lost
Are thou unto thy self, thou too self-wise
Narcissus? foolish Phaeton? who for all
Thy high-aim'd hopes, gain'dst but a Flaming fall
11.
From Death's sad shades to the Life-breathing Air,
This mortal Enemy to Mankinds good,
Lifts his malignant Eyes, wasted with care,
To become Beautiful in humane Blood.
Where Jordan melts his Crystal, to make fair
The Fields of Palestine, with so pure a Flood,
There does he fix his Eyes: and there Detect
New matter, to make good his great suspect.
12.
He calls to mind the old quarrel, and what spark
Set the contending Sons of Heaven on fire:
Often in his deep Thought he revolves the Dark
Sibills Divining Leaves: he does enquire
Into the old Prophesies, trembling to mark
How many present Prodigies conspire*
To Crown their past Predictions, both he lays
Together, in his pondrous mind both weighs.
13.
Heavens Golden-winged Herald, late he saw
To a poor Galilean Virgin sent:
How low the Bright Youth bowed, and with what awe
Immortal Flowers to her fair Hand present.
He saw the old Hebrews womb, neglect the Law
Of Age and Barrenness, and her Babe prevent
His Birth, by his Devotion, who began
Betimes to be a Saint, before a Man.
14.
He saw Rich Nectar Thaws, release the Rigor
Of the Icy North, from Frost-bound Atlas hands
His Adamantine Fetters fall: green Vigor
Gladding the Scythian Rocks and Libian Sands.
He saw a vernal smile, sweetly disfigure
Winters sad Face, and through the flowery Lands
Of fair Engaddi Honey-sweating Fountains
With Manna, Milk, and Balm, new broach the Mountains.
15.
He saw how in that Blessed Day-bearing Night,
The Heaven rebuked shades made haste away;
How bright a Dawn of Angels with new Light
Amazed the midnight World, and made a Day
Of which the Morning knew not, Mad with Spite
He marked how the poor Shepherds ran to pay
Their simple Tribute to the Babe, whose Birth
Was the great Business both of Heaven and Earth.
16.
He saw a threefold Sun, with rich increase,
Make proud the Ruby Portals of the East:
He saw the Temple Sacred to sweet Peace,
Adore her Princes Birth, flat on her Breast:
He saw the falling Idols, all confess
A coming Deity: He saw the Nest
Of poisonous and unnatural Loves, Earth-nurst;
Touched with the Worlds true Antidote to burst.
17.
He saw Heaven Blossom with a newborn Light,
On which, as on a Glorious stranger gazed
The Golden Eyes of Night: whose Beam made Bright
The way to Beth'lem, and as boldly blazed,
(Nor asked leave of the Sun) by Day as Night.
By whom (as Heavens illustrious Handmaid) raised
Three Kings (or what is more) three Wise men went
Westward to find the Worlds true Orient.
18.
Struck with these great concurrences of things,
Symptoms so deadly, unto Death and him;
Fain would he have forgot what fatal Strings,
Eternally bind each rebellious Limb.
He shook himself, and spread his spacious Wings:
Which like two bosomed Sails embrace the dim
Air, with a dismal shade, but all in vain,
Of sturdy Adamant is his strong Chain.
19.
While thus Heavens highest Counsails, by the low
Footsteps of their Effects, he traced too well,
He tossed his troubled Eyes, Embers that glow
Now with new Rage, and wax too hot for Hell.
With his foul Claws he fenced his ^urrowed Brow,
And gave a ghastly shreek, whose horrid Yell
Ran trembling through the hollow vaults of Night,
The while his twisted Tail he gnawed for spite.
20.
Yet on the other side fain would he start
Above his Fears, and think it cannot be:
He studies Scripture, strives to sound the heart,
And feel the Pulse of every Prophecy,
He knows (but knows not how, or by what Art)
The Heaven expecting Ages, hope to see
A Mighty Babe, whose pure, unspotted Birth,
From a chaste Virgin womb should bless the Earth.
21.
But these vast Mysteries his Senses smother,
And Reason (for what is Faith to him?) devour,
How she that is a Maid should prove a Mother,
Yet keep inviolate her Virgin Flower;
How Gods Eternal Son should be man's Brother,
Poseth his proudest Intellectual Power;
How a pure Spirit should incarnate be,
And Life it self wear Death's frail Livery.
22.
That the Great Angel-blinding Light should shrink
His Blaze, to shine in a poor Shepherds Eye;
That the unmeasured God so low should sink,
As Prisoner in a few poor Rags to lie;
That from his Mothers Breast he Milk should drink,
Who feeds with Nectar Heavens fair Family;
That a vile Manger his low Bed should prove,
Who in a Throne of Stars Thunders above;
23.
That he whom the Sun serves should faintly peep
Through Clouds of Infant flesh: that he the old
Eternal Word should be a Child, and weep:
That he who made the Fire should fear the Cold:
That Heavens high Majesty his Court should keep
In a Clay-cottage, by each Blast controlled:
That Glories self should serve our Griefs and Fears:
And free Eternity submit to years:
24.
And further, that the Law's Eternal Giver,
Should bleed in his own Law's obedience:
And to the circumcising Knife deliver
Himself, the forfeit of his Slaves offense.
That the unblemisht Lamb, blessed for ever,
Should take the mark of Sin, and pain of Sense:
These are the knotty Riddles, whose dark doubt
Intangles his lost Thoughts, past getting out.
25.
While new Thoughts boiled in his enraged Breast,
His gloomy Bosoms darkest Character,
Was in his shady Forehead seen expressed.
The Forehead's shade in Griefs expression there,
Is what in sign of joy among the blessed
The Faces lightning, or a smile is here.
Those stings of care that his strong Heart oppressed,
A desperate, Oh me, drew from his deep Breast.
26.
Oh me! (thus bellowed he) Oh me! what great
Portents before mine Eyes their Powers advance?
And serves my purer sight, only to beat
Down my proud Thought, and leave it in a Trance?
Frown I; and can great Nature keep her seat?
And the gay Stars lead on their Golden dance?
Can his attempts above still prosperous be,
Auspicious still, in spite of Hell and me?
27.
He has my Heaven (what would he more?) whose bright
And radiant Scepter this bold Hand should bear
And for the never-fading Fields of Light,
My fair Inheritance, he confines me here,
To this dark House of shades, Horror, and Night,
To draw a long-lived Death, where all my Cheer
Is the solemnity my sorrow wears,
That Mankinds Torment waits upon my Tears.
28.
Dark, dusky Man, he needs would single forth,
To make the partner of his own pure Ray:
And should we Powers of Heaven, Spirits of worth
Bow our bright Heads before a King of Clay?
It shall not be, said I, and clomb the North,
Where never wing of Angel yet made way
What though I mist my blow? yet I struck high,
And to dare something is some victory.
29.
Is he not satisfied? means he to wrest
Hell from me too, and sack my Territories?
Vile Humane Nature, means he not to invest
(O my despite!) with his Divinest Glories?
And rising with rich spoils upon his Breast,
With his fair Triumphs fill all future stories?
Must the bright Arms of Heaven rebuk these Eyes?
Mock me, and dazzle my dark Mysteries?
30.
Art thou not Lucifer? he to whom the droves
Of Stars, that guild the Morn in charge were given?
The nimblest of the Lightning-winged Loves?
The fairest, and the firstborn smile of Heaven?
Look in what Pomp the Mistress Planet moves
Rev'rently circled by the lesser seven;
Such, and so rich, the Flames that from thine Eyes,
Oppressed the common people of the Skies.
31.
Ah wretch! what boots thee to cast back thy Eyes,
Where dawning hope no beam of comfort Shows?
While the reflection of thy forepast joys,
Renders thee double to thy present woes;
Rather make up to thy new Miseries,
And meet the mischief that upon thee grows.
If Hell must mourn, Heaven sure shall sympathize;
What force cannot effect, fraud shall devise.
32.
And yet whose force fear I? have I so lost
My self? my Strength too with my innocence?
Come try who dares, Heaven, Earth, what ever do bo^
A borrowed Being, make thy bold defense:
Come thy Creator too, what though it cost
Me yet a second fall? we'd try our strengths:
Heaven saw us struggle once, as brave a fight
Earth now should see, and tremble at the sight.
33.
Thus spoke the impatient Prince, and made a pause,
His foul Hags raised their Heads, and clapped their Hand^
And all the Powers of Hell in full applause
Flourisht their Snakes and tossed their Flaming Brands.
We (said the horrid Sisters) wait thy Laws,
The obsequious Handmaids of thy high Commands
Be it thy part, Hells mighty Lord, to lay,
On us thy dread Commands, ours to obey.
34.
What thy Alecto, what these hands can do,
Thou made bold proof upon the brow of Heaven,
Nor should thou bate in pride, because that now,
To these thy sooty Kingdoms thou art driven:
Let Heavens Lord chide above louder then thou
In language of his Thunder, thou art even
With him below: here thou art Lord alone
Boundless and absolute: Hell is thine own.
35.
If usual Wit and Strength will do no good,
Virtues of Stones, nor Herbs: use stronger Charms,
Anger, and Love, best hooks of Humane blood:
If all fail, we'll put on our proudest Arms,
And pouring on Heavens Face the Seas huge Flood,
Quench his curled fires, we'll wake with our Alarms
Ruin, where ever she sleeps at Natures feet;
And crush the World till his wide corners meet.
36.
Replied the proud King, O my Crowns defense?
Stay, of whose strong hopes, you of whose brave worth,
The frighted Stars took faint experience,
When against the Thunders mouth we marched forth:
Still you are prodigal of your Love's expense
In our great Projects, both against Heaven and Earth:
I thank you all, but one must single out,
Cruelty, she alone shall cure my doubt.
37.
Fourth of the cursed knot of Hags is she,
Or rather all the other three in one;
Hells shop of slaughter she does oversee,
And still assist the Execution:
But chiefly there does she delight to be,
Where Hells capacious Cauldron is set on:
And while the black souls boil in their own gore,
To hold them down, and look that none sees over.
38.
Thrice howled the Caves of Night, and thrice the sound*
Thundering upon the Banks of those black Lakes
Rung, through the hollow vaults of Hell profound:
At last her listening Ears the noise o'rtakes,
She lifts her sooty Lamps, and looking round
A general hiss from the whole Tire of Snakes
Rebounding, through Hells inmost Caverns came,
In answer to her formidable Name.
39.
Amongst all the Palaces in Hells Command,
No one so merciless as this of hers.
The Adamantine Doors, for ever stand
Impenetrable, both to Prayers and Tears,
The Walls inexorable Steel, no hand
Of Time or Teeth of hungry Ruin fears.
Their ugly Ornaments are the bloody stains,
Of ragged Limbs, torn Sculls, and dashed out Brains.
40.
There has the Purple Vengeance a proud seat,
Whose ever-brandisht Sword is sheathed in blood:
About her Hate, Wrath, War, and Slaughter swea^
Bathing their hot Limbs in Life's precious Flood.
There rude impetuous Rage does storm, and fret:
And there, as Master of this murdering brood,
Swinging a huge Since, stands impartial Death,
With endless business almost out of Breath.
41.
For Hangings and for Curtains, all along
The Walls, (abominable Ornaments!)
Are Tools of Wrath, Anvils of Torments hung;
Fell Executioners of foul intents,
Nails, Hammers, Hatchets sharp, and Halters strong,
Swords, Spears, with all the fatal instruments
Of Sin, and Death, twice dipped in the direstains
Of Brothers mutual Blood, and Fathers Brains.
42.
The Tables furnished with a cursed Feast,
Which Harpyes with lean Famine feed upon,
Uufill'd for ever. Here among the rest,
^nhumane Erisicthon too makes one;
Tantalus, Atreus, Progne, here are Guests:
Wolvish Lycaon here a place has won.
The Cup they drink in is Medusa's Scull,
Which mixed with Gall and Blood they quaff brim full.
43.
The foul Queen's most abhorred Maids of Honor,
Medaea, Jezabel, many a meagre Witch
With Circe, Scylla, stand to wait upon her;
But her best Huswives are the Parcae, which
Still work for her, and have their Wages from her;
They prick a bleeding Heart at every stitch.
Her cruel Clothes of costly Threads they Weave,
Which short-cut Lives of murdered infants Leave.
44.
The House is hers'd about with a black Wood,
Which nods with many a heavy headed Tree:
Each Flower's a Pregnant poison, tried and good:
Each Herb a Plague: The Winds sighs timed be
By a black Fount, which weeps into a Flood.
Through the thick shades obscurely might you see
Minotaures, Cyclopses, with a dark drove
Of Dragons, Hydraes, Sphinxes, fill the Grove.
45.
Here Diomed's Horses, Phereus Dogs appear,
With the fierce Lions of Therodamas;
Busiris has his bloody Altar here,
Here Sylla his severest prison has;
The Lestrigonians here their Table rear;
Here strong Procrustes plants his Bed of Brass;
Here cruel Scyron boasts his bloody Rocks,
And hateful Schinas his so feared Oaks.
46.
What ever Schemes of Blood, fantastic frames
Of Death Mezentius, or Geryon drew;
Phalaris, Ochus, Ezelinus, names
Mighty in Mischief, with dread Nero too,
Here are they all, here all the Swords or Flames
Assyrian Tyrants, or Egyptian knew.
Such was the House, so furnished was the Hall,
Whence the fourth Fury, answered Pluto's call.
47.
Scarce to this Monster could the shady King,
The horrid sum of his intentions tell;
But she (swift as the momentary wing
Of Lightning; or the words he spoke) left Hell:
^he rose, and with her to our World did bring,
Pale proof of her fell presence, the Air too well
With a changed Countenance witnessed the Fight
And poor Fowls intercepted in their Flight.
48.
Heaven saw her rise, and saw Hell in the sight.
The Fields fair Eyes saw her, and saw no more
But shut their flowery Lids for ever Night,
And Winter strew her way; yea, such a sore
Is she to Nature, that a general fright,
An universal Palsy spreading over
The face of things, from her dire Eyes had run,
Had not her thick Snakes hid them from the Sun.
49.
Now had the Nights Companion from her Den,
Where all the busy day she close does lie,
With her soft wing, wiped from the brows of men
Day's sweat, and by a gentle Tyranny,
And sweet oppression, kindly cheating them
Of all their Cares, tamed the rebellious Eye
Of sorrow, with asoft and Downy hand,
Sealing all Breasts ina Lethaean band.
50.
When the Eryn^s her black Pineons spread,
And came to Bethlem where the cruel King
Had now retired himself, and borrowed
His Breast a while from care's unquiet sting.
Such as at Thebes dire Feast she showed her head,
Her Sulphur-breathed Torches brandishing,
Such to the frighted Palace now she comes,
And with soft feet searches the silent Rooms.
51.
By Herod -- -- now was born
The Scepter, which of old great David swaid.
Whose Right by David's lineage so long worn,
Himself a stranger to, his own had made:
And from the head of Judahs house quite torn
The Crown, for which upon their necks he laid
A sad yoke, under which they sighed in vain,
And looking on their lost state sighed again.
52.
Up through the spacious Palace passed she,
To where the Kings proudly-reposed head
(If any can be soft to Tyranny
And self-tormenting sin) had a soft bed.
She thinks not fit such he her face should see,
As it is seen by Hell; and seen with dread:
To change her face's style she does devise,
And in a pale Ghost's shape to spare his Eyes.
53.
Her self a while she lays aside, and makes
Ready to personate a mortal part.
Joseph the King's dead Brother's shape she takes,
What he by Nature was, is she by Art.
She comes to the King, and with her cold hand slakes
His Spirits, the sparks of Life, and chills his Heart,
Life's forge; feigned is her voice, and false too be
Her words, Sleep'st thou fond man? Sleep'st thou? said she.
54.
So sleeps a Pilot whose poor Bark is pressed
With many a mercyless o'r-mastring Wave;
For whom (as dead) the wrathful Winds contest,
Which of them deep'st shall dig her watery Grave.
Why do thou let thy brave soul lie suppressed
In Death-like slumbers; while thy dangers crave
A waking Eye and Hand? look up and see
The Fates ripe, in their great Conspiracy.
55.
Know thou not how of the Hebrew's Royal stem
(That old dry stock) a despaired Branch is sprung
A most strange Babe (...) who here concealed by them
In a neglected Stable lies, among
Beasts and base Straw: already is the stream
Quite turned: the ungrateful Rebels this their young
Master (with voice free as the Trump of Fame)
Their new King, and thy Successor proclaim.
56.
What busy Motions, what wild Engines stand
On tiptoe in their giddy Brains? the have fire
Already in their Bosoms; and their hand
Already reaches at a sword: they hire
Poisons to speed thee; yet through all the Land
What one comes to reveal what they conspire?
Go now, make much of these; wage still their wars,
And bring home on thy Breast more thankless scars.
57.
Why did I spend my Life, and spill my Blood,
That thy firm hand for ever might sustain
A well-pois'd Scepter? does it now seem good
Thy Brothers blood be-spilt life spent in vain?
Against thy own Sons and Brothers thou have stood
In Arms, when lesser cause was to complain:
And now cross Fates a watch about thee keep,
Can thou be careless now, now can thou sleep?
58.
Where art thou Man? what cowardly mistake
Of thy great self, has stolen King Herod from thee?
O call thy self home to thy self, wake, wake,
And fence the hanging sword Heaven throws upon thee:
Redeem a worthy wrath, rouse thee, and shake
Thy self into a shape that may become thee.
Be Herod, and thou shall not miss from me
Immortal stings to thy great Thoughts, and thee.
59.
So said, her richest Snake, which to her Wrist
For a beseeming Bracelet she had tied
(A special Worm it was as ever kissed
The foamy Lips of Cerberus) she applied
To the Kings Heart, the Snake no sooner hist,
But Virtue heard it, and away she hy'd,
Dire Flames diffuse themselves through every vein,
This done, home to her Hell she hy'd amain.
60.
He wakes, and with him (never to sleep) new fears:
His Sweat-bedewed Bed had now betrayed him,
To a vast field of Thorns, ten thousand Spears
All pointed in his Heart seemed to invade him:
So mighty were the amazing Characters
With which his feeling Dream had thus dismayed him,
He his own fancy-framed Foes defies:
In Rage, My Arms, give me my Arms, he cries.
61.
As when a Pile of Food-preparing fire,
The Breath of artificial Lungs embraves,
The Caldron-prison'd waters straight conspire,
And beat the hot Brass with rebellious waves?
He murmures and rebukes their bold desire;
The impatient Liquor, frets, and foams, and raves;
Till his o'rflowing pride suppress the Flame,
Whence all his high spirits, and hot courage came.
62.
So boils the fired Herod's blood-swoln Breast,
Not to be siak'd but by a Sea of Blood.
His faithless Crown he feels loose on his Crest,
Which on false Tyrants Head never firmly stood.
The Worm of jealous Envy and unrest,
To which his gnawed heart is the growing Food
Makes him impatient of the lingering Light,
Hate the sweet peace of all-composing Night.
63.
A Thousand Prophecies that talk strange things,
Had sown of old these doubts in his deep Breast;
And now of late came Tributary Kings,
Bringing him nothing but new Fears from the East,
More deep suspicions, and more deadly stings.
With which his Feav'rous Cares their cold increast
And now his dream (hells firebrand) still more bright,
Showed him his fears, and killed him with the sight.
64.
No sooner therefore shall the morning see
(Night hangs yet heavy on the Lids of day)
But all his Counselors must summoned be,
To meet their troubled Lord: without delay
Heralds and Messengers immediately
Are sent about, who poasting every way
To th'Heads and Officers of every Band;
Declare who sends, and what is his Command.
65.
Why art thou troubled Herod? what vain fear
Thy Blood-revolving Breast to Rage does move?
Heavens King, who doffs himself weak flesh to wear,
Comes not to rule in Wrath, but serve in Love:
Nor would he this thy feared Crown from thee Tear,
But give thee a better with himself above*
Poor jealousy! why should he wish to prey*
Upon thy Crown, who gives his own away.
66.
Make to thy reason Man; and mock thy doubts,
Look how below thy Fears their Causes are;
Thou art a soldier Herod; send thy Scouts
See how he is furnished for so feared a War.
What Armor does he wear? a few thin Clouts.
His Trumpets? tender cries: his men to dare
So much? rude Shepherds. What his Steeds? alas
Poor Beasts! a slow Ox, and a simple Ass.
Il fine del Libro primo.
On a Prayer Book sent to Mrs. M. R.
LO here a little Volume, but great Book,
(Fear it not, sweet,
It is no Hypocrit)
Much larger in it self, then in its look.
It is in one rich Handful, Heaven and all
Heavens Royal Hosts incampt, thus small;
To prove that true Schools use to tell,
A thousand Angels in one point can dwell.
It is Loves great Artillery,
Which here contracts it self and comes to lie
Close coucht in your white Bosom, and from thence
As from a snowy Fortress of defense
Against the ghostly Foe to take your part:
And fortify the Hold of your chaste heart.
It is the Armory of Light,
Let constant Use but keep it bright,
You Will find it yields
To Holy Hands and Humble Hearts,
More Swords and Shields
Then Sin has Snares, or Hell has Darts.
Only be sure,
The Hands be pure,
That hold these Weapons and the Eyes
Those of Turtles, Chaste, and True,
Wakeful, and Wise.
Here is a Friend shall fight for you.
Hold but this Book before your Heart,
Let Prayer alone to play his part.
But OF, the Heart
That studies this high Art,
Must be a sure Housekeeper,
And yet no sleeper.
Dear Soul be strong,
Mercy will come ever long,
And bring her Bosom full of Blessings,
Flowers of never fading Graces;
To make immortal dressings
For worthy Souls whose wise embraces
Store up themselves for him, who is alone
The spouse of Virgins, and the Virgins Son.
But if the Noble Bridegroom when he comes
Shall find the wandering heart from home,
Leaving her Chaste abode,
To gad abroad:
Amongst the gay Mates of the god of Flies
To take her pleasures, and to play
And keep the Devils Holy day;
To dance in the Sunshine of some smiling but beguiling.
Spear of Sweet and Sugered Lies,
Some slipery pair,
Of False perhaps as Fair
Flattering but ^orswearing Eyes.
Doubtless some other Heart
Will get the start,
And stepping in before,
Will take possession of the Sacred store
Of hidden Sweets, and holy Joys,
Words which are not heard with Ears,
(These tumultous shops of noise)
Effectual whispers whose still voice,
The Soul it self more feels then hears.
Amorous Languishments, Luminous Trances,
Sights which are not seen with Eyes,
Spiritual and Soul piercing Glances:
Whose Pure and Subtle Lightning, flies
Home to the Heart and sets the House on fire;
And melts it down in sweet desire:
Yet does not stay
To ask the Windows leave, to pass that way.
Delicious Deaths, soft Exhalations
Of Soul; Dear, and Divine annihilations;
A thousand unknown Rites
Of Joys, and rarefied Delights.
An hundred thousand Loves and Graces,
And many a mistick thing,
Which the Divine embraces
Of the dear spouse of Spirits with them will bring;
For which it is no shame,
That dull Mortality must not know a Name.
Of all this hidden store
Of Blessings, and ten thousand more;
If when he come
He find the Heart from home,
Doubtless he will unload
Himself some otherwhere,
And pour abroad
His precious Sweets,
On the fair Soul whom first he meets.
O fair! O fortunate! O rich! O dear!
O happy and thrice happy she
Dear Silver-brested Dove
Who ere she be,
Whose early Love
With winged Vows,
Makes haste to meet her morning Spouse:
And close with his immortal kisses,
Happy Soul who never misses,
To improve that precious hour:
And every day,
Seize her sweet Prey;
All fresh and fragrant as he rises,
Dropping with a Balmy shower
A delicious dew of Spices.
O let that happy Soul hold fast
Her Heavenly Armful, she shall taste
At once ten thousand Paradises,
She shall have power,
To Rifle and Deflower
The rich and roseal Spring of those rare sweets,
Which with a swelling Bosom there she meets,
Boundless and infinite, bottomless Treasures
Of pure inebriating pleasures,
Happy soul she shall discover,
What joy, what bliss,
How many Heavens at once it is,
To have a God become her Lover.
On Mr, G. Herbert's Book, entitled, The Temple of Sacred Poems, sent to a
Gentlewoman.
KNow you Fair, on what you look?
Divinest Love lies in this Book:
Expecting Fire from your Eyes,
To kindle this his Sacrifice.
When your Hands unty these strings,
Think you 've an Angel by the wings.
One that gladly will be nigh,
To wait upon each morning sigh.
To flutter in the balmy Air,
Of your well perfumed Prayer.
These white Plumes of his He Will lend you,
Which every day to Heaven will send you:
To take acquaintance of the Sphere,
And all the smooth-faced kindred there.
And though Herberts Name do owe
These Devotions, fairest; know
That while I lay them on the shrine
Of your white Hand, they are mine.
A Hymn to the Name and Honor of the Admirable Saint TERESA, Foundress of the
Reformation of the Discalced Carmelites, both Men and Women; a Woman for
Angelical height of speculation, for Masculine courage of performance, more
then a Woman; who yet a Child, out ran Maturity, and durst plot a Martyrdom.
LOve thou art absolute, sole Lord
Of Life and Death -- To prove the Word,
^e need to go to none of all
those thy old soldiers, stout and tall
^ipe and full grown, that could reach down,
^ith strong Arms their Triumphant Crown:
^ch as could with lusty breath,
^eak loud unto the face of Death
^eir great Lords glorious Name, to none
^f those whose large Breasts built a Throne
^r Love their Lord, glorious and great,
^e'll see him take a private seat,
and make his Mansion in the mild
^d milky Soul of a soft Child.
Scarce had she learnt to Lisp a name
Of Martyr, yet she thinks it shame
Life should so long play with that Breath,
Which spent can buy so brave a Death.
(...) never undertook to know,
^at Death with love should have to do.
Nor has she ever yet understood,
Why to show Love she should shed Blood;
Yet though she cannot tell you why,
She can Love and she can Dye.
Scarce had she Blood enough, to make
A guilty Sword blush for her sake;
Yet has she a heart dares hope to prove,
How much less strong is Death then Love.
Be love but there, let poor six years,
Be posed with the maturest Fears
Man trembles at, we straight shall find
Love knows no nonage, nor the Mind.
It Is Love, not Years, or Limbs, that can
Make the Martyr or the Man.
Love touched her Heart, and lo it beats
High, and burns with such brave heats:
Such thirst to die, as dare drink up
A thousand cold Deaths in one Cup:
Good reason, for she breaths all fire,
Her weak Breast heaves with strong desire,
Of what she may with fruitless wishes
Seek for, amongst her Mothers Kisses.
Since it is not to be had at home,
She Will travel to a Martyrdom.
No home for her confesses she,
But where she may a Martyr be.
She Will to the Moors, and Trade with them.
For this unvalued Diadem;
She offers them her dearest Breath,
With Christ's name in it in change for Death:
She Will bargain with them, and will give
Them God, and teach them how to live
In him, or if they this deny,
For him, she will teach them how to die.
So shall she leave amongst them sown,
Her Lords Blood, or at least her own.
Farewell then all the World, adieu,
Teresa is no more for you:
Farewell all pleasures, sports, and joys,
Never till now esteemed toys:
Farewell, whatever dear may be,
Mothers Arms, or Fathers Knee:
Farewell House, and Farewell Home
She Is for the Moors and Martyrdom.
Sweet not so fast, Lo thy fair Spouse,
Whom thou seek'st with so swift vows
Calls thee back, and bids thee come,
TO embrace a milder Martyrdom.
Blessed powers forbid, thy tender life
Should bleed upon a barbarous knife.
Or some base hand have power to raze,
Thy Breasts chaste Cabinet; and uncase
A Soul kept there so sweet; O no,
Wise Heaven will never have it so:
Thou art Love's victim, and must dye
A death more mystical and high:
Into Loves hand thou shall let fall,
A still surviving Funeral.
He is the Dart must make the death,
Whose stroke wall taste thy hallowed Breath;
A Dart thrice dipped in that rich flame,
Which writes thy Spouses radiant name:
Upon the roof of Heaven where ay
It shines, and with a Sovereign ray,
Beats bright upon the burning faces
Of souls, which in that names sweet graces,
Find everlasting smiles: so Rare,
So Spiritual, Pure and Fair,
Must be the immortal instrument,
Upon whose choice point shall be spent,
A life so loved, and that there be
Fit Executioners for thee.
The fairest, and the firstborn Loves of fire,
Blessed Seraphims shall leave their Quire,
And turn Loves soldiers upon thee,
To exercise their Archery.
O how often shall thou complain
Of a sweet and subtle pain?
Of intolerable joys?
Of a death in which who dies
Loves his death, and dies again,
And would for ever so be slain!
And lives and dies, and knows not why
To live, but that he still may dye.
How kindly will thy gentle Heart,
Kiss the sweetly -- killing Dart:
And close in his Embraces keep,
Those delicious wounds that weep
Balsome, to heal themselves with thus;
When these thy Deaths so numerous,
Shall all at once dye into one,
And melt thy souls sweet Mansion:
Like a soft Lump of Incense, hasted
By too hot a fire, and wasted,
Into perfuming Clouds, So fast
Shall thou exhale to Heaven at last,
In a dissolving sigh, and then
O what! ask not the Tongues of men;
Angels cannot tell, suffice,
Thy self shall feel thine own full joys,
And hold them fast for ever there,
So soon as thou shall first appear
The Moon of Maiden Stars; thy white
Mistress attended by such bright
Souls as thy shining self shall come,
And in her first ranks make thee room.
Where amongst her snowy Family,
Immortal welcomes wait on thee.
O what delight when she shall stand,
And teach thy Lips Heaven, with her hand,
On which thou now may to thy wishes,
Heap up thy consecrated Kisses.
What joy shall seize thy Soul when she
^ending her Blessed Eyes on thee
Those second smiles of Heaven shall dart
Her mild Rays, through thy melting heart:
Angels thy old friends there shall greet thee,
Glad at their own home now to meet thee.
All thy good Works which went before
And waited for thee at the Door
Shall own thee there: and all in one
Weave a Constellation
Of Crowns, with which the King thy spouse*
Shall build up thy triumphant Brows.
All thy old Woes shall now smile on thee,
And thy pains set bright upon thee:
All thy sorrows here shall shine,
And thy sufferings be Divine.
Tears shall take Comfort, and turn Gems,
And wrongs repent to Diadems.
Even thy deaths shall live, and new
Dress the soul, which late they slew.
Thy wounds shall blush to such bright scarrs,
As keep account of the Lambs wars.
Those rare Works, where thou shall leave Writ,
Loves Noble History, with Wit
Taught thee by none but him, while here
They seed our souls, shall cloth thine there.
Each Heavenly Word, by whose hid flame
Our hard hearts shall strike fire, the same
Shall flourish on thy Brows; and be
Both Fire to us, and Flame to thee:
Whose Light shall live bright, in thy face
By Glory, in our Hearts by Grace.
Thou shall look round about, and see
Thousands of crowned Souls, throng to be
Themselves thy Crown, Sons of thy Nows:
The Virgin Births with which thy Spouse
Made fruitful thy fair soul; Go now
And with them all about thee, bow
To him, put on (he will say) put on
My Rosy Love, that thy rich Zone,
Sparkling with the sacred Flames,
Of thousand souls whose happy names,
Heaven keeps upon thy score, thy bright
Life brought them first to kiss the Light.
That kindled them to stars, and so
Thou with the Lamb thy Lord shall't go.
And where so ever he sits, his white
Steps walk with him those ways of Light.
Which who in death would live to see,
Must learn in life to dye like thee.
An Apology for the precedent Hymn, as having been writ when the Author was yet
a Protestant.
THus have I back again to thy bright name,
Fair sea of Holy fires, transfused the Flame
(...) took from reading thee, it is to thy wrong
(...) know that in my weak and worthless song
Thou here art set to shine, where thy full day
^carce dawns, O pardon, if I dare to say
^hine own dear Books are guilty, for from thence
(...) Learnt to know that Love is Eloquence:
that Heavenly Maxim gave me heart to try
(...) what to other Tongues is Tuned so high
^hy praise might not speak English too forbid
By all thy Mysteries that there lie hid;)
^orbid it Mighty Love, let no fond hate
^f Names and Words so far prejudicate;
^uls are not Spaniards too, one friendly Flood
^f Baptism, blends them all into one Blood.
^hrists Faith makes but one body of all souls,
and loves that Bodies Soul; no Law controuls
^ur free Trafick, for Heaven we may maintain
^eace sure with Piety, though it dwell in Spain.
that Soul soever in any Language can
^eak Heaven like hers, is my Souls countryman.
O It Is not Spanish, but it is Heaven she speaks,
It Is Heaven that lies in Ambush there, and breaks
From thence into the wondering Readers Breast,
Who finds his warm heart hatch into a nest
Of little Eagles and young Loves, whose high
Flights scorn the Lazy Dust, and things that dye.
There are enough whose Draughts as deep as Hell
Drink up all Spain in Sack, let my Soul swell
With thee strong Wine of Love, let others swim
In puddles, we will pledge this Seraphim
Bowls full of richer Blood then blush of Grape
Was ever guilty of, change we our shape,
My soul, some drink from Men to Beasts; O then,
Drink we till we prove more, not less then Men:
And turn not Beasts, but Angels. Let the King,
Me ever into these his Cellars bring;
Where flows such Wine as we can have of none
But him who trod the Wine Press all alone:
Wine of Youths life, and the sweet deaths of Love,
Wine of immortal mixture, which can prove
Its Tincture from the Rosy Nectar, Wine
That can exalt weak Earth, and so refine
Our Dust, that in one Draught, Mortality
May drink it self up, and forget to dye.
On a Treatise of Charity.
RIse then, immortal Maid! Religion rise!
Put on thy self in thine own looks: to our Eyes
Be what thy Beauties, not our blots, have made thee,
Such as (ever our dark sins to Dust betrayed thee)
Heaven set thee down new dressed; when thy bright Birth
Shot thee like Lightning to the astonished Earth.
From the dawn of thy fair Eyelids wipe away
Dull Mists and melancholy Clouds: take day
And thine own Beams about thee: bring the best
Of whatsoever persum'd thy Eastern Nest.
Girt all thy Glories to thee: then sit down,
Open this Book, fair Queen, and take thy Crown.
These learned Leaves shall vindicate to thee
Thy Holiest, Humblest, Handmaid, Charity;
She Will dress thee like thy self, set thee on high
Where thou shall reach all hearts, command each Eye.
Lo where I see thy offerings wake, and rise
From the pale Dust of that strange Sacrifice
which they themselves were; each one putting on
A Majesty that may beseem thy Throne.
The Holy Youth of Heaven whose Golden Rings
Girt round thy awful Altars with bright wings
Fanning thy fair Locks (which the World believes
As much as sees) shall with these sacred Leaves
Trick their tall Plumes, and in that garb shall go
If not more glorious, more conspicuous tho.
-- Be it enacted then
By the fair Laws of thy firm-pointed Pen,
Gods services no longer shall put on
A sluttishness, for pure Religion:
No longer shall our Churches frighted stones
Lie scattered like the Burnt and Martyred bones
Of dead Devotion; nor faint Marbles weep
^n their sad Ruins; nor Religion keep
A melancholy Mansion in those cold
^rns; Like Gods Sanctuaries they looked of old:
Now seem they Temples consecrate to none,
Or to a new God Desolation.
No more the Hypocrite shall the upright be
Because he is stiff, and will confess no Knee:
While others bend their Knee, no more shall thou
(Disdainful Dust and Ashes) bend thy Brow;
Nor on Gods Altar cast two scorching Eyes
Baked in hot scorn, for a burnt Sacrifice:
But (for a Lamb) thy tame and tender Heart
New struck by Love, still trembling on his Dart;
Or (for two Turtle Doves) it shall suffice
To bring a pair of meek and humble Eyes
This shall from henceforth be the Masculine Theme
Pulpits and Pens shall sweat in; to redeem
Virtue to Action, that Life-feeding flame
That keeps Religion warm: not swell a name
Of faith, a Mountain word, made up of Air,
With those dear spoils that wont to dress the Fair
And fruitful Charities full Breasts (of old)
Turning her out to tremble in the cold.
What can the Poor hope from us? when we be
Uncharitable even to Charity.
On the Glorious Assumption of the Blessed Virgin.
HArk she is called, the parting hour is come,
take thy farwell poor world, heaven must go home
A piece of Heavenly Light purer and brighter
Then the chaste stars whose choice Lamps come to lig^ (...)
While through the Crystal Orbs clearer then they
She climbs and makes a far more Milky way;
She Is called again, hark how the immortal Dove
Sighs to his Silver Mate: rise up my Love,
Rise up my fair, my spotless one,
The Winter's past, the Rain is gone:
The Spring is come, the Flowers appear,
No Sweets, since thou art wanting here.
Come away my Love,
Come away my Dove, cast off delay:
The Court of Heaven is come,
To wait upon thee home;
Come away, come away.
She Is called again, and will she go;
When Heaven bids come, who can say no?
Heaven calls her, and she must away,
Heaven will not, and she cannot stay,
Go then, go (Glorious) on the Golden wings
Of the bright youth of Heaven, that sings
Under so sweet a burden: go,
Since thy great Son will have it so:
And while thou go, our song and we,
Will as we may reach after thee.
Hail Holy Queen of humble Hearts,
We in thy praise will have our parts;
And though thy dearest looks must now be light
To none but the blessed Heavens, whose bright
Beholders lost in sweet delight
Feed for ever their fair sight
With those Divinest Eyes, which we
And our dark World no more shall see.
Though our poor joys are parted so,
Yet shall our Lips never let go
Thy Gracious Name, but to the last,
Our loving Song shall hold it fast.
Thy sacred Name shall be
Thy self to us, and we
With Holy cares will keep it by us,
We to the last
Will hold it fast,
And no Assumptiyn shall deny us.
All the sweetest Showers,
Of our fairest Flowers
Will we strew upon it:
Though our sweetness cannot make
It sweeter, they may take
Themselves new sweetness from it.
Maria, Men and Angels sing,
Maria Mother of our King.
Live rarest Princess, and may the bright
Crown of a most incomparable Light
Embrace thy radiant Brows, O may the best
Of everlasting joys bath thy white Breast.
Live our chaste Love, the Holy Mirth
Of Heaven, and Humble Pride of Earth:
Live Crown of Women, Queen of Men:
Live Mistress of our Song, and when
Our weak desires have done their best,
Sweet Angels come, and sing the rest.
An Hymn on the Circumcision of our Lord.
RIse thou best and brightest morning,
Rosy with a double Red;
With thine own Blush thy Cheeks adorning,
And the dear Drops this day were shed.
All the Purple pride of Laces,
The crimson Curtains of thy Bed;
Guild thee not with so sweet Graces,
Nor sets thee in so rich a Red.
Of all the fair Cheekt-Flowers that fill thee,
None so fair thy Bosom strows,
As this modest Maiden Lilly
Our Sins have shamed into a Rose.
Bid the Golden God the Sun,
Burnisht in his Glorious Beams
Put all his Red eyed Rubies on,
These Rubies shall put out his eyes.
Let him make poor the Purple East,
Rob the rich Store her Cabinets keep,
The pure birth of each sparkling nest
That flaming in their fair Bed sleep.
Let him embrace his own bright Tresses
With a new morning made of Gems;
And wear in them his wealthy dresses,
Another day of Diadems.
When he has done all he may,
To make himself Rich in his rise,
All will be darkness, to the day
That breaks from one of these fair eyes.
And soon the sweet Truth shall appear,
Dear Babe ever many days be done:
The Moon shall come to meet thee here,
And leave the long adored Sun.
Thy Nobler Beauty shall bereave him,
Of all his Eastern Paramours:
His Persian Lovers all shall leave him,
And swear Faith to thy sweeter powers.
Nor while they leave him shall they lose the Sun,
But in thy fairest Eyes find two for one.
On Hope.
By way of Question and Answer, between A. Cowley and R. Crashaw.
Cowley.
HOpe, whose weak being ruined is
Alike, if it succeed, and if it miss.
Whom Ill and Good does equally confound,
And both the horns of Fate's dilemma wound.
Vain shadow! that does vanish quite
Both at full Noon, and perfect Night.
The Fates have not a possibility
Of Blessing thee.
If things then from their ends we happy call,
It Is Hope is the most hopeless thing of all.
Crashaw.
Dear Hope! Earth's Dowry, and Heaven's Debt,
The Entity of things that are not yet.
Subt'lest, but surest Being! Thou by whom
Our Nothing has a Definition.
Fair cloud of Fire, both Shade and Light,
Our Life in Death, our Day in Night.
Fates cannot find out a capacity
Of hurting thee.
From thee their thinn Dilemma with blunt Horn
Shrinks, like the sick Moon at the wholesome morn.
Cowley.
Hope, thou bold taster of Delight,
Who, instead of doing so, devour'st it quite.
Thou bring'st us an Estate, yet leave us poor,
By clogging it with Legacies before.
The joys which we entire should wed,
Come deflour'd Virgins to our Bed:
Good Fortunes without Gain imported be,
So mighty Custome's paid to thee.
For Joy, like Wine kept close, does better taste:
If it take Air before its spirits waste.
Crashaw.
Thou art Loves Legacy under Lock
Of Faith: the Steward of our growing stock.
Our Crown Lands lie above, yet each Meal brings
A seemly Portion for the Sons of Kings.
Nor will the Virgin-joys we wed
Come less unbroken to our Bed,
Because that from the Bridal Cheek of Bliss,
Thou thus steal'st down a distant Kiss;
Hopes chaste Kiss wrongs no more joys Maidenhead,
Then Spousal Rites prejudge the Marriage Bed.
Cowley.
Hope, Fortunes cheating Lottery,
Where for one Prize an hundred Blanks there be.
Fond Archer Hope, who take thine aim so far,
That still, or short or wide, thine Arrows are.
Thine empty Cloud the Eye it self deceives
With shapes that our own Fancy gives:
A Cloud, which Gilt and Painted now appears,
But must drop presently in Tears.
When thy false Beams o'r Reasons light prevail,
By ignes fatui not North Stars we sail.
Crashaw.
Fair Hope! our earlier Heaven by thee
Young Time is taster to Eternity.
The generous Wine with Age grows strong, not sower;
Nor need we kill thy Fruit to smell thy Flower.
Thy Golden Head never hangs down,
Till in the Lap of Loves full noon
It falls and dies: oh no, it melts away
As does the dawn into the day:
As lumps of Sugar lose themselves, and twine
Their subtle Essence with the soul of Wine.
Cowley.
Brother of Fear! more gaily clad,
The merrier fool of the two, yet quite as mad.
Sire of Repentance! Shield of fond desire,
That blows the Chymicks, and the Lovers fire,
Still leading them insensibly on,
With the strange Witchcraft of Anon:
Bythee the one does changing Nature through
Her endless Labyrinths pursue,
And the other chases woman, while she goes
More ways, and turns, then hunted Nature knows.
Crashaw.
Fortune alas above the Worlds Law wars:
Hope kicks the curled Heads of conspiring Stars.
Her Keel cuts not the Waves, where our winds stir,
And Fate's whole Lottery is one blank to her.
Her shafts and she fly far above,
And forage in the Fields of Light, and Love.
Sweet Hope! kind Cheat! fair Fallacy! by thee
We are not where, or what we be,
But what, and where we would: thus art thou
Our absent presence, and our future now.
Crashaw:
Faith's Sister! Nurse of fair desire!
Fears Antidote! a wise, and well stayed fire
Tempered 'twixt cold despair and torrid joy:
Queen Regent in young Loves Minority.
Though the vexed Chymick vainly chases
His fugi^ve Gold through all her faces,
And loves more sierce, more fruitless fires assay
One Face more fugitive then all they,
True Hope's a glorious Huntress, and her chase
The God of Nature in the Field of Grace.
THE DELIGHTS OF THE MUSES. OR, Other Poems written on several occasions.

By RICHARD CRASHAVV.

Mart. Dic mihi quid melius desidiosus agas. THE DELIGHTS OF THE MUSES.
Musick's Duel.
NOw Westward Sol had spent the richest Beams
Of Noons high Glory, when hard by the streams
Of Tiber, on the Scene of a green Plat,
Under protection of an Oak; there sat
A sweet Lutes-Master: in whose gentle Airs
He lost the Days heat, and his own hot cares.
Close in the covert of the Leaves there stood
A Nightingale come from the Neighboring Wood:
(The sweet Inhabitant of each glad Tree,
Their Muse, their Siren, harmless Siren she)
There stood she listening and did entertain
The Musick's soft report: and mold the same
In her own Murmures, that what ever mood
His curious fingers lent, her voice made good:
The man perceived his Rival, and her Art,
Disposed to give the Light-foot Lady sport
Awakes his Lute, and against the Fight to come
Informs it, in a sweet Praeludium
Of closer strains, and ever the War begin,
He lightly skirmishes on every string
Charged with a flying touch; and straight way she
Carves out her dainty voice as readily,
Into a thousand sweet distinguished (...) ones,
And reckons up in soft divisions
Quick Volumes of wild Notes; to let him know
By that shrill Taste, she could do something too.
His nimble hands instinct then taught each string
A cap'ring che^rfulness; and made them sing
To their own dance; now negligently r^sh
He throws his Arm and with a long drawn dash
Blends all together, then distinctly trips
From this to that, then quick returning skips
And snatches this again, and pauses there.
She measures every Measure, every where
Meets Art with Art; sometimes as if in doubt
Not perfect yet, and fearing to be out,
Trails her plain Ditty in one long spun Note,
Through the sle^k passage of her open Throat:
A clear unwrinkled song, then does she point it
With tender Accents, and severely joint it
By short dimunitives, that being reared
In controverting warbles evenly shared,
With her sweet self she wrangles; he amazed
That from so small a Channel should be raised
The Torrent of a voice, whose melody
Could melt into such sweet variety,
Strains higher yet, that tickled with rare Art
The ^atling strings (each breathing in his part)
Most kindly do fall out, the grumbling Base
^n surly Groans disdains the Trebles Grace;
The high-perch't Treble chirps at this, and chides,
Until his Finger (Moderatour) hides
And closes the sweet quarrel, rousing all
Hoarse, shrill at once; as when the Trumpets call
Hot Mars to the Harvest of Deaths Field, and woo
Men's hearts into their hands; this Lesson too
She gives him back, her supple Breast thrills out
Sharp Airs, and staggers in a warbling doubt
Of dallying sweetness, hovers o'r her skill,
And folds in waved Notes with a trembling Bill,
The plyant Series of her slippery Song;
Then starts she suddenly into a Throng
Of short thick sobs, whose thundering Volleys float,
And roll themselves over her Lubrick Throat
^n panting Murmurs, stilled out of her Breast
That ever-bubling Spring, the sugared Nest
Of her delicious soul, that there does lie
Bathing in streams of liquid Melody;
Musicks best Seed-plot; when in ripened Airs
A Golden-headed Harvest fairly rears
His Honey-dropping tops, plowed by her Breath
Which there reciprocally labors.
In that sweet soil it seems a Holy Quire
Founded to the Name of great Apollo's Lyre;
Whose Silver-roof rings with the sprightly Notes
Of sweet-Lip'd Angel-^mps, that swill their Throats
In Cream of morning Helicon, and then
Prefer soft Anthems to the Ears of Men,
To woo them from their Beds, still murmuring
That Men can sleep while they their Mattens sing:
(Most Divine Service) whose so early lay
Prevents the Eyelids of the blushing day.
There might you hear her kindle her soft voice,
In the close murmur of a sparkling noise;
And lay the groundwork of her hopeful song,
Still keeping in the forward Stream, so long
Till a sweet whirlwind (striving to get out)
Heaves her soft Bosom, wanders round about,
And makes a pretty Earthquake in her Breast,
Till the fledged Notes at length forsake their Nest;
Fluttering in wanton shoals, and to the Sky
Winged with their own wild Eccho's prattling fly.
She opes the Floodgate, and lets loose a Tide
Of streaming Sweetness which in State does ride
On the waved back of every swelling strain,
Rising and falling in a pompous Train;
And while she thus discharges a shrill Peal
Of flashing Airs; she qualifies their Zeal
With the cool Epode of a graver Noat
Thus high, thus low, as if her Silver Throat
Would reach the Brazen voice of Wars hoarse Bird;
Her little soul is ravished: and so poured
Into loose ecstasies, that she is placed
Above her self, Musicks Enthusiast.
Shame now and Anger mixed a double stain
In the Musicians face; yet once again
(Mistress) I come; now reach a strain my Lute
Above her mock, or be for ever mute.
Or Tune a Song of victory to me,
Or to thy self sing thine own Obsequie;
So said, his hands sprightly as Fire he flings,
And with a quavering coyness tastes the strings:
The sweet-Lip'd Sisters Musically frighted,
Singing their fears, are fearfully delighted:
Trembling as when Apollo's Golden Hairs
Are fan'd and friz^d in the wanton Airs
Of his own Breath, which married to his lyre
Does Tune the Spears and make Heavens self look higher;
From this to that, from that to this he flies,
Feels Musicks pulse in all her Arteries,
Caught in a Net which there Apollo spreads,
His Fingers struggle with the vocal Threads,
Following those little Rills, he sinks into
A Sea of Helicon; his Hand does go
Those parts of sweetness which with Nectar drop,
Softer then that which pants in Hebe's Cup:
The humourous strings expound his Learned touch
By various Glosses; now they seem to grutch,
And murmr in a buzzing dinne, then gingle
In shrill-tongu'd Accents, striving to be single;
Every smooth turn, every delicious stroke
Gives life to some new Grace; thus does h'invoke
Sweetness by all her Names; thus, bravely thus
(Fraught with a Fury so harmonious)
The Lutes light Genius now does proudly rise,
Heaved on the surges of swollen Rapsodies,
Whose flourish (Meteor like) does curle the Air
With flash of highborn Fancies here and there
Dancing in lofty measures, and anon
Creeps on the soft touch of a tender tone,
Whose trembling Murmurs melting in wild Airs
Runs to and fro, complaining his sweet Cares;
Because those precious mysteries that dwell
^n Musick's ravished soul he dare not tell,
But whisper to the World: thus do they vary,
Each string his Note, as if they meant to carry
Their Masters blessed soul, (snatched out at his Ears
^y a strong Ecstasy) through all the Spears
Of Musicks Heaven; and seat it there on high
^th' Empyraeum of pure Harmony.
At length (after so long, so loud a strife
Of all the strings, still breathing the best life
Of blessed variety attending on
His Fingers fairest Revolution,
In many a sweet Rise, many as sweet a fall)
A full-mouthed Diapason swallows all.
This done he lists what she would say to this,
And she, although her Breath's late exercise
Had dealt too roughly with her tender Throat,
Yet summons all her sweet powers for a Note;
Alas! in vain! for while (sweet soul) she tries
To measure all those wild diversities,
Of chatt'ring strings, by the small size of one
Poor simple voice, raised in a Natural Tone;
She fails, and failing grieves, and grieving dies;
She dies, and leaves her life the Victor's prize,
Falling upon his (...); O fit to have
(That lived so sweetly) dead, so sweet a Grave!
Upon the Death of a Gentleman.
FAithless and fond Mortality,
Who will ever credit thee?
Fond and faithless thing! that thus,
In our best hopes beguilest us*
What a reckoning have thou made,
Of the hopes in him we laid?
For Life by Volumes lengthened,
A Line or two, to speak him dead.
For the Laurel in his Verse,
The sullen Cypress o'r his Hearse.
For a silver-crowned Head,
A durty Pillow in Death's Bed.
For so dear, so deep a Trust,
Sad requital, thus much Dust!
Now though the blow that snatched him hence,
Stopped the Mouth of Eloquence,
Though she be dumb ever since his Death,
Not used to speak but in his Breath;
Yet if at least she not denies,
The sad Language of our Eyes,
We are contented: for then this
Language none more fluent is.
Nothing speaks our Grief so well
As to speak nothing: Come then tell
Thy mind in Tears who ever thou be,
That ow'st a Name to Misery:
Eyes are Vocal, Tears have Tongues,
And there be words not made with Lungs;
Sententious showers, O let them fall,
Their cadence is Rhetorical.
Here Is a Theme will drink the expense
Of all thy watery Eloquence;
Weep then, only be expressed
Thus much, He Is Dead, and Weep the rest.
Upon the Death of Mr. Herrys.
A Plant of Noble stem, forward and fair,
As ever whispered to the Morning Air,
Thrived in these happy Grounds, the Earths just pride,
Whose rising Glories made such haste to hide
His Head in Clouds, as if in him alone
Impatient Nature had taught Motion
To start from Time, and cheerfully to fly
Before; and seize upon Maturity:
Thus grew this gracious Plant, in whose sweet shade,
The Sun himself often wished to sit, and made
The morning Muses perch like Birds, and sing
Among his Branches, yea, and vowed to bring
His own delicious Phoenix from the Blessed
Arabia, there to build her Virgin Nest
To hatch her self in, amongst his Leaves: the Day
Fresh from the Rosy East rejoyc't to play.
To them she gave the first and fairest Beam
That waited on her Birth, she gave to them
The purest Pearls, that wept her Evening Death,
The balmy Zephirus got so sweet a Breath
By often kissing them, and now begun
Glad time to ripen expectation:
The timorous Maiden-Blossomes on each Bough,
Peept forth from their first blushes: so that now
A Thousand ruddy hopes smiled in each Bud,
And flattered every greedy Eye that stood
Fixed in Delight, as if already there
Those rare Fruits dangled, whence the Golden year
His Crown expected, when (O Fate, O Time
That seldom lett'st a blushing youthful Prime
Hide his hot Beams in shade of silver Age;
So rare is hoary virtue) the dire Rage
Of a mad storm these bloomy joys all tore,
Ravished the Maiden Blossoms, and down bore
The Trunk; yet in this Ground his precious Root
Still lives, which when weak Time shall be poured out
Into Eternity, and circular joys
Dance in an endless round, again shall rise,
The fair Son of an ever-youthful Spring,
To be a shade for Angels while they sing,
Mean while, who ever thou art that passest here,
O do thou water it with one kind Tear.
Upon the Death of the most desired Mr. Herrys.
DEath, what do? O hold thy blow,
What thou do thou do not know.
Death thou must not here be cruel,
This is Natures choicest Jewel.
This is he in whose rare frame,
Nature labored for a Name;
And meant to leave his precious Feature,
The pattern of a perfect Creature.
Joy of Goodness, Love of Art,
Virtue wears him next her Heart:
Him the Muses love to follow,
Him they call their Vice- Apollo
Apollo Golden though thou be,
The art not fairer then is he.
Nor more lovely lift'st thy head,
Blushing from thine Eastern Bed,
The Glories of thy Youth never knew
Brighter hopes then he can show;
Why then should it ever be seen,
That his should Fade while thine is Green?
And will Thou, (O cruel boast!)
Put poor Nature to such cost?
O 'twill undo our common Mother,
To be at charge of such another:
What? think we to no other end,
Gracious Heavens do use to send
Earth her best perfection,
But to vanish and be gone?
Therefore only give to day,
To morrow to be snatched away?
I Have seen indeed the hopeful Bud,
Of a ruddy Rose that stood
Blushing to behold the Ray
Of the new saluted Day,
(His tender Top not fully spread)
The sweet dash of a shower now shed,
Invited him no more to hide
Within himself the Purple pride
Of his forward Hour, when lo,
While he sweetly 'gan to show
His swelling Glories, Auster spide him,
Cruel Auster thither hy'd him,
And with the rush of one rude blast,
Shamed not spitefully to wast
All his Leaves, so fresh, so sweet,
And lay them trembling at his feet.
I Have seen the Mornings lovely Ray,
Hover o'r the newborn Day,
With Rosy wings so richly Bright,
As if he scorned to think of Night,
When a ruddy storm whose scoul
Made Heavens radiant face look foul,
Called for an untimely Night,
To blot the newly blossomed Light.
But were the Roses blush so rare,
Were the Mornings smile so fair
As is he, nor Cloud nor Wind
But would be courteous, would be kind.
Spare him, Death, O spare him then,
Spare the sweetest among men:
Let not pity with her Tears,
Keep such distance from thine Ears;
But O thou will not, can not spare,
Haste has never time to hear;
Therefore if he needs must go,
And the Fates will have it so,
Softly may he be possessed,
Of his monumental Rest.
Safe, thou dark home of the dead,
Safe O hide his loved head.
For Pitties sake O hide him quite,
From his Mother Natures sight:
Lest, for the Grief his loss may move,
All her Births Abortive prove.
Another.
IF ever Pity were acquainted
With stern Death, if e're he fainted,
Or forgot the cruel vigor,
Of an Adamantine rigor,
Here, o here we should have known it,
Here or no where he would have shown it.
For he whose precious memory,
Bathes in tears of every eye:
He to whom our sorrow brings
All the streams of all her springs,
Was so rich in Grace and Nature,
In all the gifts that bless a Creature,
The fresh hopes of his lovely Youth
Flourisht in so fair a grouth.
So sweet the Temple was, that shrin'd
The Sacred sweetness of his mind.
That could the Fates know to relent;
Could they know what Mercy meant?
Or had ever learnt to bear,
The soft Tincture of a Tear?
Tears would now have flowed so deep,
As might have taught Grief how to weep:
Now all their steely Operation,
Would quite have lost the cruel fashion:
Sickness would have gladly been,
Sick himself to have saved him:
And his Fever wished to prove
Burning only in his Love;
Him when wrath it self had seen,
Wrath its self had lost his spleen;
Grim destruction here amazed,
In stead of striking would have gazed;
Even the Iron-pointed Pen,
That notes the Tragic Dooms of men
Wet with Tears stilled from the Eyes,
Of the flinty Destinies,
Would have learnt a softer style,
And have been ashamed to spoil
His Lives sweet story, by the have,
Of a cruel stop ill placed.
In the dark Volume of our Fate,
Whence each Leaf of Life has Date,
Where in sad particulars,
The total sum of Man appears;
And the short clause of Mortal Breath,
Bound in the period of Death:
In all the Book if any where
Such a Term as this, spare here,
Could have been found, 'twould have been read,
Writ in white Letters or his head:
Or close unto his name annexed,
The fair gloss of a fairer Text.
In brief, if any one were free,
He was that one, and only he.
But he alas! even he is dead
And our hopes fair Harvest spread
In the Dust; Pity now spend
All the Tears that Grief can lend:
Sad Mortality may hide,
In his Ashes all her pride,
With this inscription o'r his head;
All hope of never dying here lies dead.
His Epitaph.
PAssenger who ever thou art,
Stay a while and let thy Heart
Take acquaintance of this stone,
Before thou passest further on;
This stone will tell thee that beneath,
Is entombed the Crime of Death;
The ripe endowments of whose mind,
Left his years so much behind,
That numbering of his Virtues Praise,
Death lost the reckoning of his Days;
And believing what they told,
Imagined him exceeding old;
In him perfection did set forth,
The strength of her United worth;
Him his wisdoms pregnant growth
Made so Reverend, even in Youth,
That in the Center of his Breast
(Sweet as is the Phaenix Nest)
Every reconciled Grace
Had their general meeting place;
In him goodness joy'd to see
Learning learn Humility;
The splendour of his Birth and Blood,
Was but the Gloss of his own Good;
The flourish of his sober Youth
Was the pride of Naked Truth:
In composure of his Face
Lived a fair, but Manly Grace;
His Mouth was Rhetorick's best Mold,
His Tongue the Touchstone of her Gold;
What Word so ever his Breath kept warm,
Was no Word now but a Charm:
For all persuasive Graces thence
Sucked their sweetest Influence;
His Virtue that within had root,
Could not choose but shine without;
And the Heart-bred Luster of his worth,
At each corner peeping forth,
Pointed him out in all his ways,
Circled round in his own Rays:
That to his sweetness all men's Fyes
Were vowed Loves flaming Sacrifice.
Him while fresh and fragrant Time
Cherisht in his Colden Prime;
E're Hebe's Hand had overlaid
His smooth Cheeks with a Downy shade;
The rush of Deaths unruly Wave,
Swept him off into his Grave.
Enough, now (if thou can) pass on,
For now (alas) not in this stone
(Passenger who e're thou art)
Is he entombed, but in thy Heart.
An Epitaph upon Husband and Wife, who die^ and were buried together.
TO these, whom Death again did Wed,
This Grave's the second Marriage Bed.
For though the hand of Fate could force,
'Twixt Soul and Body a divorce:
It could not sever Man and Wife,
Because they both lived but one Life;
Peace, good Reader, do not weep;
Peace, the Lovers are asleep;
They (sweet Turtles) folded lie,
In the ^st knot that Love could tie.
Let them sleep, let them sleep on,
Till this stormy night be gone,
And the Eternal Morrow dawn;
Then the urtains will be drawn,
And they wake into a Light,
Whose Day shall never dye in Night.
An Epitaph upon Doctor Brook.
A Brook whose Stream so Great, so Good,
Was Loved, was Honored as a Flood,
Whose Banks the Muses dwelt upon,
More then their own Helicon,
Here at length has gladly found
A quiet passage under ground;
Mean while his loved Banks, now dry,
The Muses with their Tears supply.
Upon Mr. Staninough's Death.
DEar Relics of a dislodged soul, whose lack
Makes many a mourning Paper put on black;
O stay a while e're thou draw in thy Head,
And wind thy self up close in thy cold Bed:
Stay but a little while, until I c^ll
A summons, worthy of thy Funeral.
Come then Youth, Beauty, and Blood, all ye soft Power*
Whose silken Flatteries swell a few fond hours
Into a false Eternity, come Man,
(Hyperbolized nothing!) know thy span;
Take thine own Measure here, down, down, and bow
Before thy self in thy Idaea, thou
Huge emptiness contract thy Bulk, and shrink
All thy wild Circle to a point! O sink
Lower, and lower yet; till thy small size,
Call Heaven to look on thee with narrow Eyes;
Lesser and lesser yet, till thou begin
To show a Face fit to confess thy Kin
Thy Neighborhood to nothing! here put on
Thy self in this unfeigned refexion;
Here gallant Ladies this impartial Glass
(Through all your painting) shows you your own face*
These Death-scal'd Lips are they dare give the lie,
To the proud hopes of poor Mortality.
These Curtain'd Windows, this self-prison'd Eye,
Out-stares the Lids of large-lookt Tyranny:
This posture is the brave one; this that lies
Thus low, stands up (me thinks) thus, and defies
The World -- All daring Dust and Ashes, only you
Of all Interpreters read Nature true.
Upon the Duke of York's Birth. A Panegyric.
BRitain, the Mighty Ocean's lovely Bride,
Now stretch thy self (fair Isle) and grow, spread wide
Thy Bosom and make room; thou art oppressed
With thine own Glories: and art strangely Blessed
Beyond thy self: for lo! the Gods the Gods
Come fast upon the, and those Glorious ods,
Swell thy full Glories to a pitch so high,
As sits above thy best Capacity.
Are they not Ods? and Glorious? that to thee
Those mighty Genii throng, which well might be
Each one an Ages labor, that thy days
Are Gilded with the Union of those Rays
Whose each divided Beam would be a Sun,
To glad the Sphere of any Nation.
O if for these thou meanst to find a seat,
Thou Have need, O Britain to be truly Great.
And so thou art, their presence makes thee so,
They are thy Greatness; Gods where e're they go
Bring their Heaven with them, their great footsteps place
An everlasting smile upon the face,
Of the glad Earth they tread on, while with thee
Those Beams that ampliate Mortality,
And teach it to expatiate, and swell
To Majesty and fullness deign to dwell;
Thou by thy self may sit, (Blessed Isle) and see
How thy Great Mother Nature doats on thee:
Thee therefore from the rest apart she hurled,
And seemed to make an Isle, but made a World.
Great Charles! thou sweet Dawn of a Glorious day,
Center of those thy Grandsires shall I say
Henry and James, or Mars and Phoebus rather?
If this were Wisdom's God, that War's stern Father,
It Is but the same is said, Henry and James
Are Mars and Phoebus under diverse Names.
O thou full mixture of those mighty souls,
Whose vast intelligences tuned the Poles
Of Peace and War; thou for whose Manly Brow
Both Laurels twine into one Wreath, and woo
To be thy Garland; see (sweet Prince) O see
Thou and the lovely hopes that smile in thee
Are taken out, and transscrib'd by thy Great Mother,
See, see thy real shadow, see thy Brother,
Thy little self in less, read in these Eyne
The Beams that dance in those full Stars of thine.
From the same snowy Alablaster Rock
These hands and thine were hew'n, these Cherrys mock
The Coral of thy Lips. Thou art of all
This well-wrought Copy the fair Principal.
Justly, Great Nature, may thou brag and tell
How even thou have drawn this faithful Parallel,
And matched thy Masterpiece: O then go on
Make such another sweet comparison,
See thou that Mary there? O teach her Mother
To show her to her self in such another:
Fellow this wonder too, nor let her shine
Alone, Light such another Star, and twine
Their Rosy Beams, so that the Morn for one
Venus, may have a Constellation.
So have I seen (to dress their Mistress May)
Two Silken sister Flowers consult, and lay
Their bashful Cheeks together, newly they
Peep't from their Buds, showed like the Gardens Eyes
Scarce wak't: like was the Crimson of their joys,
Like were the Pearls they wept, so like that one
Seemed but the others kind reflection.
But stay, what glimpse was that? why blushed the day?
Why ran the started Air trembling away?
Who Is this that comes circled in Rays that scorn
Acquaintance with the Sun? what second Morn
At Midday opes a presence which Heavens Eye
Stands off and points at? is it some Deity
Stepped from her Throne of Stars deigns to be seen?
Is it some Deity? or is it our Queen?
It Is she, it is she: her awful Beauties chase
The Days abashed Glories, and in face
Of Noon wear their own Sunshine, O thou bright
Mistress of Wonders! Cynthia's is the Night,
But thou at Noon do shine, and art all Day,
(Nor does the Sun deny't) our Cynthia,
Illustrious sweetness! in thy faithful Womb,
That Nest of Heroes, all our hopes find room;
Thou art the Mother Phaenix, and thy Breast
Chaste as that Virgin Honor of the East,
But much more fruitful is; nor does, as she,
Deny to Mighty Love a Deity;
Then let the Eastern World brag and be proud
Of one coy Phaenix, while we have a brood,
A brood of Phenixes, and still the Mother;
And may we long; long may thou live, to increase
The House and Family of Phaenixes.
Nor may the Light thar gives their Eyelids light,
E're prove the dismal Morning of thy Night:
Never may a Birth of thine be bought so dear,
To make his costly Cradle of thy Beer.
O may thou thus make all the year thine own,
And see such Names of joy sit white upon
The brow every Month; and when that is done
May in a Son of his find every Son
Repeated, and that Son still in another,
And so in each Child often prove a Mother,
Long may thou laden with such clusters lean
Upon thy Royal Elm (fair Vine) and when
The Heavens will stay no longer, may thy Glory
And Name dwell sweet in some Eternal story.
Pardon (bright Excellence) an untuned String,
That in thy Ears thus keeps a murmuring;
O speak a lowly Muses pardon; speak
Her Pardon or her Sentence; only break
Thy silence; speak; and she shall take from thence
Numbers, and Sweetness, and an Influence
Confessing thee; or (if too long I stay)
O speak thou and my Pipe has naught to say:
For see Apollo all this while stands Mute,
Expecting by thy Voice to Tune his Lute.
But Gods are Gracious: and their Altars* make
Precious their offerings that their Altars take;
Give them this Rural Wreath Fire from thine Eyes,
This Rural Wreath dares be thy Sacrifice.
Upon Ford's Two Tragedies. Love's Sacrifice and The Broken Heart.
THou cheat'st us Ford, make one seem two by Art
What is Love's Sacrifice but the Broken Heart?
On a foul Morning being then to take a journey.
WHere are thou Sol, while thus the blindfold day
Staggers out of the East, loses her way
Stumbling on Night? Rouse thee Illustrious Youth,
And let no dull Mists choke the Lights fair growth.
Point here thy Beams, O glance on yonder Flocks,
And make their Fleeces Golden as thy Locks.
Unfold thy fair Front, and there shall appear
Full Glory, flaming in her own free Sphere.
Gladness shall cloth the Earth, we will instile
The face of things, an universal Smile:
Say to the sullen Morn, thou come to Court her;
And wilt demand proud Zephirus to sport her
With wanton Gales; his Balmy Breath shall lick
The tender Drops which tremble on her Cheek;
Which rarefied, and in a gentle Rain
On those delicious Banks distilled again,
Shall rise in a sweet Harvest which discloses
To every blushing Bed of newborn Roses.
He Will fan her bright ^ocks teaching them to flow,
And frisk in curled Maeand^rs: he will throw
A fragrant Breath sucked from the Spicy Nest
OF the precious Phaenix, warm upon her Breast:
He with a dainty and soft hand, will Trim
And brush her Azure Mantle, which shall swim
In silken Volumes, wheresoe'r she will tread,
Bright Clouds like Golden Fleeces shall be spread.
Rise then (fair blew-ey'd Maid) rise and discover
Thy silver Brow, and meet thy Golden Lover,
See how he runs, with what a hasty flight
Into thy Bosom, bathed with Liquid Light.
Fly, fly, profane Fogs, far hence fly away,
Taint not the pure streams of the springing day.
With your dull influence, it is for you,
To sit and scoul upon Nights heavy Brow;
Not on the fresh Cheeks of the Virgin Morn,
Where naught but smiles, and ruddy joys are worn,
Fly then, and do not think with her to stay;
Let it suffice, she will wear no Mask to day.
Upon the fair Ethiopian sent to a Gentlewoman.
LO here the fair Chariclia! in whom strove
So false a Fortune, and so true a Love.
Now after all her Toils by Sea and Land,
O may she but arrive at your white hand;
Her Hopes are Crowned, only she fears that than
She shall appear true Ethiopian.
On Marriage.
I Would be Married, but I Would have no Wife,
I would be Married to a single Life.
To the Morning. Satisfaction for Sleep.
WHat succor can I hope the Muse will send
Whose drowsiness has wronged the Muses friend?
What hope Aurora to propitiate thee,
Unless the Muse sing my Apology?
O in that Morning of my shame! when I
Lay folded up in sleeps Captivity;
How at the sight did thou draw back thine Eyes,
Into thy modest veyl? how did thou rise
Twice Died in thine own Blushes, and did run
To draw the Curtains, and awake the Sun?
Who rowzing his illustrious Tresses came,
An seeing the loathed Object, hid for shame
His Head in thy fair Bosom, and still hides
Me from his Patronage; I pray, he chides:
And pointing to dull Morpheus, bids me take
My own Apollo, try if I can make
His Lethe be my Helicon: and see
If Morpheus have a Muse to wait on me*
Hence it is my humble Fancy finds no wings,
No nimble Raptures, starts to Heaven and brings
Enthusiastic Flames, such as can give
Marrow to my plump Genius, make it live
Dressed in the glorious Madness of a Muse,
Whose Feet can walk the Milky way, and choose
Her Starry Throne; whose Holy heats can warm
The Grave, and hold up an exalted Arm
To lift me from my lazy Urne, and climb
Upon the stopped shoulders of old Time;
And trace Eternity -- But all is dead,
All these delicious hopes are buried
In the deep wrinkles of his angry Brow,
Where Mercy cannot find them; but O thou
Bright Lady of the Morn, pity does lie
So warm in thy soft Breast it cannot dye:
Have Mercy then, and when he next shall rise
O meet the angry God, invade his Eyes,
And stroke his radiant Cheeks; one timelly kiss
Will kill his Anger, and revive my Bliss,
So to the Treasure of thy pearly Deaw,
Thrice will I pay three Tears, to show how true
My grief is; so my wakeful lay shall knock
At the Oriental Gates; and duly mock
The early Larks shrill Orizons to be
An Anthem at the Days Nativity.
And the same Rosie-finger'd hand of thine,
That shuts Nights dying Eyes, shall open mine.
But thou, saint God of sleep, forget that I
Was ever known to be thy votary.
No more my Pillow shall thine Altar be,
Nor will I offer any more to thee
My self a melting-Sacrifice; I Am born
Again a fresh Child of the Buxome Morn,
Heir of the Suns first Beams, why threat'st thou so?
Why do thou shake thy Leaden Scepter? go,
Bestow thy Poppy upon wakeful woe,
Sickness and Sorrow, whose pale Lids never know
Thy Downy Finger, dwell upon their Eyes,
Shut in their Tears; shut out their Miseries.
Loves Horoscope.
LOve, brave virtues younger Brother,
Erst has made my Heart a Mother,
She consults the conscious Spears,
To c^lculate her young Sons years.
She asks if sad, or saving powers,
Gave Omen to his Infant hours,
She asks each ^tar that then stood by,
If poor Love shall live or dye.
Ah my heart, is that the way?
Are these the Beams that rule thy Day?
Thou know a Face in whose each look,
Beauty lays open Loves Fortune-Book,
On whose fair Revolutions wait
The obsequious Motions of Loves Fate,
Ah my Heart, her Eyes and she,
Have taught thee new Astrology.
How ever Loves Native hours were set,
What ever Starry Synod met,
It Is in the Mercy of her Eye,
If poor Love shall live or dye.
If those sharp Rays putting on
Points of Death bid Love begone
(Though the Heavens in Council sat,
To crown an uncontrouled Fate,
Though their best Aspects twined upon
The kindest Constellation,
Cast amorous glances on his Birth,
And whispered the confederate Earth
To pave his Paths with all the good
That warms the Bed of Youth and Blood)
Love has no plea against her Eye
Beauty frowns, and Love must dye.
But if her milder infltence move;
And guild the hopes of humble Love:
(Though Heavens inauspicious Eye
Lay black on Loves Nativity;
Though every Diamond in Joves Crown
Fixed his forehead to a frown,)
Her Eye a strong appeal can give,
Beauty smiles and Love shall live.
O if Love shall live, O where
But in her Eye, or in her Ear,
In her Breast or in her Breath,
Shall I hide poor Love from Death?
For in the life ought else can give,
Love shall dye although he live.
Or if Love shall dye, O where,
But in her Eye, or in her Ear,
In her Breath or in her Breast,
Shall I build his Funeral Nest?
While Love shall thus entombed lie,
Love shall live although he dye.
Out of Virgil, In the praise of the Spring.
ALL Trees, all Leavy Groves confess the Spring
Their gentlest Friend, then, then the Lands begin
To swell with forward pride and seed desire
To generation; Heavens Almighty Sire
Melts on the Bosom of his Love, and powrs
Himself into her Lap in fruitful showers
And by a soft insinuation, mixed
With Earths large Mass, does cherish and assist
Her weak Conceptions; No loan shade, but Rings
With chatting Birds delicious murmurings.
Then Venus mild instinct (at set times) yields
The Herds to kindly meetings, then the Fields
(Quick with warm Zephires lively breath) lay forth
Their pregnant Bosoms in a fragrant Birth
Each body's plump and jucy, all things full
Of supple moisture: no coy twig but will
Trust his beloved Bosom to the Sun
(Grown lusty now;) No Vine so weak and young
That fears the foul-mouthed Auster, or those storms
That the South-west wind hurries in his Arms,
But hastes her forward Blossoms, and lays out
Freely lays out her Leaves; nor do I doubt
But when the World first out of Chaos sprang,
So smiled the days, and so the tenor ran
Of their felicity. A spring was there,
An everlasting spring, the jolly year
Led round in his great Circle; no winds Breath
As then did smell of Winter, or of Death;
When life's sweet Light first shone on Beasts, and when
From their hard Mother Earth, sprang hardy men;
When Beasts took up their Lodging in the Wood,
Stars in their higher Chambers: never could
The tender growth of things endure the sense
Of such a change, but that the Heavens indulgence
Kindly supplys sick Nature, and does mold
A sweetly tempered Mean, nor hot nor cold.
With a Picture sent to a Friend.
I Paint so ill, my Piece had need to be
Painted again by some good Poesy,
I write so ill, my slender Line is scarce
So much as the Picture of a well-Lim'd Verse:
Yet may the Love I send be true, though I
Send not true Picture nor true Poesy:
Both which away, I should not need to fear,
My Love, or Feigned, or Painted should appear.
In praise of Lessius, his rule of Health.
Go now with some daring Drugg,
B^it the disease, and while they tug
Thou to maintain their cruel strife,
Spend the dear Treasure of thy life:
Go take Physic, dote upon
Some big-nam'd Composition,
The Oraculous Doctors mistick Bills,
Certain hard Words made into Pills;
And what at length shall get by these?
Only a Costlyer disease.
Go poor Man, think what shall be,
Remedy against thy Remedy.
That which makes us have no need
Of Physic that is Physic indeed.
Hark hither, Reader, would thou see
Nature her own Physician be;
Would see a man all, his own Wealth,
His own Physic, his own Health?
A Man whose sober Soul can tell,
How to wear her Garments well?
Her Garmetts that upon her sit,
As Garments should do, close and sit?
A well-cloath'd soul that is not oppressed,
Nor choakt with what she should be dressed?
A Soul sheathed in a Crystal shrine,
Through which all her bright Features shine?
As when a piece of wanton Lawn,
A thin aereal Vail is drawn
O'r Beauties Face, seeming to hide
More sweetly shows the blushing Bride.
A Soul whose intellectual Beams
No Mists do Mask no lazy steams?
A happy soul that all the way,
To Heaven, has a Summers day?
Would thou see a Man whose well warmed blood,
Bathes him in a genuine flood?
A Man whose Tuned humors be,
A set of rarest Harmony?
Would see blithe Looks fresh Cheeks beguile
Age, would see December smile?
Would see a nest of Roses grow
In a bed of reverend Snow?
Warm Thoughts, free Spirits, flattering
Winters self into a Spring?
In sum, would see a Man that can
Live to be old and still a Man?
The beginning of Heliodorus.
THe smiling Morn had newly wak't the Day,
And tipped the Mountains in a tender Ray:
When on a Hill (whose high Imperious Brow
Looks down, and sees the humble Nile below
Lick his proud feet, and haste into the seas
Through the great Mouth that is named from Hercules)
A band of men, rough as the Arms they wore
Looked round, first to the Sea, then to the Shore.
The Shore that showed them what the Sea denied.
Hope of a Prey. There to the main Land tied
A ship they saw, no men she had; yet pressed
Appeared with other lading, for her Breast
Deep in the groaning waters wallowed
Up to the third Ring; o'r the shore was spread
Death's purple Triumph, on the blushing ground
Life's late forsaken Houses all lay drowned
In their own Bloods dear deluge some new dead,
Some panting in their yet warm ruins bled:
While their affrighted souls now winged for flight
Lent them the last flash of her glimmering Light
Those yet fresh streams which crawled every where,
Showed, that stern war had newly bathed him there:
Nor did the face of this disaster show
Marks of a fight alone, but feasting too,
A miserable and a monstrous Feast,
Where hungry War had made himself a Guest;
And coming late had eat up Guests and all,
Who proved the Feast to their own Funeral, etc.
Out of the Greek, Cupid's Crier.
LOve is lost, nor can his Mother
Her little fugitive discover:
She seeks, she sighs, but no no where spies him;
Love is lost; and thus she cries him.
O yes! if any happy Eye,
This roaving wanton shall descry:
Let the Finder surely know
Mine is the Wagg; it is I that own
The winged wanderer, and that none
May think his Labor vainly gone,
The glad descryer shall not miss,
To taste the Nectar of a Kiss
From Venus Lips; but as for him
That brings him to me, he shall swim
In riper joys; more shall be his
(Venus assures him) then a kiss;
But lest your Eye discerning slide,
These marks may be your judgments guide:
His Skin as with a Fiery blushing
High-colour'd is; His Eyes still flushing
With nimble Flames, and though his Mind
Be never so cursed, his Tongue is kind:
For never were his Words in ought
Found the pure issue of his thought.
The working Bees soft melting Gold,
That which their waxen Mines enfold,
Flow not so sweet as do the Tones
Of his I un'd Accents; but if once
His anger kindle, presently
It boils out into cruelty,
And fraud: he makes poor mortals hurts,
The objects of his cruel sports;
With dainty Curles his froward face
Is Crowned about; but O what place,
What farthest nook of lowest Hell
Feels not the strength, the reaching spell
Of his small hand? yet not so small
As it is powerful therewithal;
Though bare his Skin, his Mind he covers
And like a saucy Bird he hovers
With wanton Wing, now here, now there,
'Bout Men and Women; nor will spare
Till at length he perching rest,
In the Closet of their Breast.
His weapon is a little Bow,
Yet such a one as (Jove knows how)
Never suffered yet his little Arrow,
Of Heavens highest Arches to fall narrow.
The Gold that on his Quiver smiles,
Deceives men's fears with flattering wiles:
But O (too well my wounds can tell)
With bitter shafs it is sauc't too well;
He is all cruel, cruel all;
His Torch imperious though but small
Makes the Sun (of Flames the Sire)
Worse then Sunburned in his Fire:
Wheresoe'r you chance to find him
Seize him, bring him, (but first bind him)
Pity not him, but fear thy self,
Though thou see the crafty Else,
Tell down his Silver drops unto thee,
They Are counterfeit, and will undo thee;
With baited smiles if he display
His fawning Cheeks, look not that way
If he offer sugared Kisses,
Start, and say, the Serpent hisses
Draw him, drag him, though he pray
Woo, entreat, and crying say
Prithee, sweet, now let me go,
Here Is my Quiver, Shafts and Bow,
I Will give thee all, take all, take heed
Lest his kindness make thee bleed.
What ever it be Love offers, still presume
That though it shines, it is Fire, and will consume.
HIgh mounted on an Ant Nanus the tall
Was thrown alas, and got a deadly fall
Under the unruly Beasts proud feet he lies
All torn; with much ado yet ever he dies,
He strains these words; B^se Envy, do, laugh on,
Thus did I fall, and thus fell Phaethon.
Upon Venus putting on Mars his Arms.
WHat? Mars his sword? fair Cytherea say,
Why art thou Armed so desperately to day?
Mars thou have beaten naked, and O then
What needst thou put on Arms against poor men?
Uupon the same.
PAllas saw Venus armed, and straight she cried,
Come if thou dare, thus, thus let us be tried.
Why fool! says Venus, thus provok'st thou me,
That being nak't, thou know could conquer thee?
Upon Bishop Andrews his Picture before his Sermons.
THis Reverend shadow cast that setting Sun,
Whose Glorious course through our Horizon run,
Left the dim Face of this dull Hemisphaere,
All one great Eye, all drowned in one great Tear;
Whose fair illustrious Soul, led his free Thought
Through Learnings Universe, and (vainly) sought
Room for her spacious self, until at length
She found the way home with an Holy strength,
Snatched her self hence, to Heaven: filled a bright place
Among those immortal Fires, and on the Face
Of her great Maker fixed her flaming Eye,
There still to read true pure Divinity.
And now that grave Aspect has deigned to shrink
Into this less appearance; if you think,
It Is but a dead face, Art does here bequeath;
Look on the following Leaves, and see him breath.
Out of Martial.
FOur Teeth thou had that ranked in goodly state
Kept thy Mouths Gate.
The first blast of thy Cough left two alone,
The second, none.
This last Cough, Aelia, Cought out all thy fear,
The have left the third Cough now no business here.
Out of Italian. A Song:
TO thy Lover
Deer, discover
That sweet blush of thine that shameth
(When those Roses
It discloses)
All the Flowers that Nature names.
In free Air,
Flow thy Hair;
That no more Summers best dresses,
Be beholden
For their Golden
Locks, to Phoebus Flaming Tresses.
O deliver
Love his Quiver,
From thy Eyes he shoots his Arrows,
Where Apollo
Cannot follow;
Featherd with his Mothers Sparrows*
O envy not
(That we dye not)
Those deer Lips whose Door encloses
All the Graccs
In their places,
Brother Pearls, and Sister Roses.
From these Treasures
Of ripe pleasures
One bright smile to clear the weather.
Earth and Heaven
Thus made even,
Both will be good friends together.
The Air does (...) thee,
Winds cling to thee,
Might a Word once fly from out thee;
Storm and Thunder
Would fit under,
And keep silence round about Thee.
But if Natures
Common Creatures,
So dear Glories dare not borrow:
Yet thy Beauty
Owes a Duty
To my loving, lingering sorrow.
When to end me
Death shall send me
All his Terrors to affright me;
Thine Eyes Graces,
Guild their Faces,
And those Terrors shall delight me,
When my dying
Life is flying;
Those sweet Airs that often slew me
Shall revive me,
Or reprive me,
And to many Deaths renew me.
Out of the Italian.
LOve now no Fire has left him,
We two betwixt us have divided it,
Your Eyes the Light has reft him;
The Heat commanding in my Heart does sit,
O! that poor Love be not for ever spoiled,
Let my Heat to your Light be reconciled.
So shall these Flames, whose worth
Now all obsoured lies
(Dressed in those Beams) start forth
And dance before your Eyes.
Or else partake my Flames
(I care not whither)
And so in mutual Names
O Love, burn both together.
Out of the Italian.
WOuld any one the true cause find
How Love came nak't, a Boy and blind?
It Is this; listening one day too long,
To the Sirens in my Mistress Song,
The ecstasy of a delight
So much o'r-mastring all his might,
To that one Sense, made all else thrall,
And so he lost his Clothes, Eyes, Heart and all.
On the Frontispiece of Isaacsons Chronology explained.
IF with distinctive Eye and Mind you look
Upon the Front, you see more then one Book,
Creation is Gods Book, wherein he writ
Each Creature, as a Letter filling it.
History is Creations Book; which shows
To what effects the Series of it goes.
Chronologie's the Book of History, and bears
The just account of Days, of Months, and Years.
But Resurrection in a Later Press,
And New Edition is the sum of these:
The Language of these Books had all been one,
Had not the Aspiring Tower of Babylon
Confused the Tongues, and in a distance hurled
As far the Speech, as men, of the new filled World.
Set then your Eyes in Method, and behold
Times Emblem, Saturn; who, when store of Gold
Coined the first Age, Devoured that Birth he feared;
Till History, Times eldest Child appeared;
And Phaenix-like, in spite of Saturns rage,
Forced from her Ashes; Heirs in every Age.
From the Rising Sun, obtaining by just Suit,
A Springs Engender, and an Autumns Fruit.
Who in those Volumes at her motion penned,
Unto Creations Alpha does extend.
Again Ascend, and view Chronology,
By Optic skill pulling far History
Nearer: whose Hand the piercing Eagles Eye
Strengthens to bring remotest Objects nigh.
Under whose Feet, you see the Setting Sun,
From the dark Gnomon, o'r her Volumes run,
Drowned in Eternal Night, never to rise;
Till Resurrection show it to the Eyes
Of Earth-worn men; and her shril Trumpets sound
Affright the Bones of Mortals from the ground:
The Columns both are crowned with either Sphere,
To show Chronology and History bear
No other Culmen; then the double Art,
Astronomy, Geography impart.
Or Thus.
LEt hoary Time's vast Bowels be the Grave.
To what his Bowels Birth and Being gave;
Let Nature die, and (Phaenix like) from death
Revived Nature take a second Breath;
If on Times right hand, sit fair History;
If, from the seed of empty Ruin, she
Can raise so fair an Harvest: let her be
Never so far distant, yet Chronology
(Sharp-sighted as the Eagles Eye, that can
Out-stare the broad-beam'd Days Meridian)
Will have a Perspicil to find her out,
And, through the Night of error, and dark doubt,
Discern the Dawn of Truth's eternal Ray,
As when the Rosy Morn buds into Day.
Now that Time's Empire might be amply filled,
Babels bold Artists strive (below) to build
Ruin a Temple; on whose fruitful fall
History rears her Pyramids more tall
Then were the Egyptian (by the life, these give,
The Egyptian Pyramids themselves must live:)
On these she lifts the World; and on their base
Shows the two Terms and Limits of Time's Race:
That, the Creation is; the Judgment this;
That, the Worlds Morning, this her Midnight is.
An Epitaph upon Mr. Ashton a Conformable Citizen.
THe modest front of this small floor,
Believe me Reader, can say more
Then many a braver Marble can,
Here lies a truly honest man;
One whose Conscience was a thing,
That troubled neither Church nor King.
One of those few that in this Town,
Honor all Preachers; hear their own.
Sermons he heard, yet not so many
As left no time to practice any.
He heard them reverendly, and then
His practice preached them o'r again.
His Parlour-Sermons rather were
Those to the Eye, then to the Ear.
His Prayers took their price and strength
Not from the loudness nor the length.
He was a Protestant at home,
Not only in despite of Rome:
He loved his Father, yet his Zeal
Tore not off his Mothers Veil.
To the Church he did allow her Dress,
True Beauty to true Holiness.
Peace, which he loved in life, did lend
Her hand to bring him to his end:
When Age and Death called for the score;
No surfets were to reckon for;
Death tore not (therefore) but fans strife
Gently untwin'd his thread of Life.
What remains then, but that Thou
Write these Lines, Reader in thy Brow,
And by his fair Examples light,
Burn in thy imitation bright.
So while these Lines can but bequeath
A Life perhaps unto his Death.
His better Epitaph shall be,
His Life still kept alive in Thee.
Out of Catullus.
COme and let us Live my Dear,
Let us Love and never Fear,
What the sowrest Fathers say:
Brightest Sol that dies to day
Lives again as blithe to morrow,
But if we dark Sons of sorrow
Set; O then, how long a Night
Shuts the Eyes of our short Light!
Then let amorous Kisses dwell
On our Lips, begin and tell
A Thousand and a Hundred score,
An Hundred and a Thousand more,
Till another Thousand smother
That, and that wipe of another.
Thus at last when we have numbered
Many a Thousand, many a Hundred;
We Will confound the reckoning quite,
And lose our selves in wild delight:
While our joys so multiply,
As shall mock the envious Eye.
Wishes to his (supposed) Mistress.
WHo e're she be,
That not impossible she
That shall Command my Heart and me;
Where e're she lie,
Locked up from mortal Eye,
In shady Leaves of Destiny:
Till that ripe Birth
Of studied Fate stand forth,
And teach her fair steps to our Earth;
Till that Divine
Idaea take a shrine
Of Crystal flesh, through which to shine:
Meet you her my wishes,
Bespeak her to my blisses,
And be ye call d my absent kisses.
I wish her Beauty,
That ows not all its Duty
To gaudy Tire, or glistring shoo-ty.
Something more than
Taffata or Tissew can,
Or rampant Feather, or rich Fan.
More then the spoil
Of shop, or silkworms Toil
Or a bought Blush, or a set smile.
A Face that is best
By its own Beauty dressed,
And can alone command the rest,
A Face made up
Out of no other shop,
Then what Natures white hand sets open.
A Cheek where Youth,
And Blood, with Pen of Truth
Write, what the Reader sweetly ru^th.
A Cheek where grows
More then a Morning Rose:
Which to no Box his Being owes.
Lips, where all day
A Lovers Kiss may play,
Yet carry nothing thence away.
Looks that oppress
Their richest Tires, but dress
And cloth their simplest Nakedness:
Eyes, that displaces
The Neighbor Diamond, and out-faces
That Sunshine by their own sweet Graces.
Tresses, that wear
Jewels, but to declare
How much themselves more precious are.
Whose native Ray,
Can tame the wanton Day
Of Gems, that in their bright shades play.
Each Ruby there
Or Pearl that dare appear,
Be its own blush, be its own Tear.
A well-tam'd Heart,
For whose more Noble smart,
Love may be long choosing a Dart.
Eyes, that bestow
Full Quivers on Loves Bow;
Yet pay less Arrows then they owe.
Smiles, that can warm
The Blood, yet teach a Charm,
That Chastity shall take no harm.
Blushes, that bin
The burnish of no sin,
Nor Flames of ought too hot within.
Joys, that confess,
Virtue their Mistress,
And have no other Head to dress.
Fears, fond and flight,
As the coy Brides, when Night
First does the longing Lover right.
Tears, quickly fled,
And vain, as those are shed
For a dying Maidenhead.
Days, that need borrow,
No part of their good Morrow,
From a fore spent night of sorrow.
Says, that in spite
^f Darkness, by the Light
^f a clear mind are Day all Night.
^ights, sweet as they,
^ade short by Lovers play,
^et long by the absence of the Day.
^ife, that dares send,
(...) challenge to his end,
and when it comes say Welcome Friend.
^ydneian showers
Of sweet discourse, whose powers
^an Crown old Winters head with Flowers.
^oft silken Hours.
Open Suns; shady Bowers,
love all; Nothing within that low'rs.
What ever Delight
^an make Days forehead bright,
Or give Down to the Wings of Night.
^n her whole frame,
Have Nature all the Name,
^rt and Ornament the shame.
Her flattery,
^icture and Poesy*
Her Counsel her own Virtue be.
(...) wish, her store
Of worth, may leave her poor
Of wishes; and I wish -- no more.
Now if Time knows
That her whose radiant Brows,
Weave them a Garland of my vows;
Her whose just Bays,
My future hopes can raise,
A Trophy to her present praise;
Her that dares be,
What these Lines wish to see:
I seek no further, it is she.
It Is she, and here
Lo I uncloath and clear
My wishes cloudy Character.
May she enjoy it,
Whose Merit dare apply it,
But Modesty dares still deny it.
Such Worth as this is,
Shall fix my flying wishes,
And determine them to kisses.
Let her full Glory,
My Fancies, fly before ye,
^e ye my fictions; but her story.
In Picturam Reverendissimi Episcopi, D. Andrews.
HAec charta monstrat, Fama quem monstrat magis,
Sed and ipsa nec dum fama quem monstrat satis,
Ille, ille totam solus implevit Tubam,
Tot ora solus domuit and famam quoque
Fecit modestam: mentis igneae pater
Agilique radio Lucis aeternae vigil,
Per alta rerum pondera indomito Vagus
Cucurrit Animo, quippe naturam ferox
Exhausit ipsam mill Foetus Artibus,
Et mill Linguis ipse se in gentes procul
Variavit omnes, fuitque toti simul
Cognatus orbi, sic sacrum and solidum jubar
Saturumque coelo pectus ad patrios Libens
Porrexit ignes: hac eum (Lector) vides
Haec (ecce) charta O utinam and audires quoque.
Epitaphim in Dominnm Herrisium.
SIste te paulum (viator) ubi Longum Sisti
Necesse erit, huc nempe properare te scias quocunque properas.
More praetium erit
Et Lachrymae,
Si jacere hic scias
Gulielmum
Splendidae Herrisiorum familiae
Splendorem maximum:
Quem cum talem vixisse intellexeris,
Et vixisse tantum;
Discas licet
In quant as spes possit
Assurgere mortalitas,
De quantis cadere.
Quem Infantem, Essexia -- Juvenem, Catabrigia
Vidit
Senem, ah infelix utraque
Quod non vidit.
Qui
Collegii Christi Alumnus
Aulae Pembrokianae socius.
Utrique, ingens amoris certamen fuit,
Donec
Dulciss. Lites elusit Deus,
Eumque caelestis Collegii,
Cujus semper Alumnus fuit socium fecit;
Qui and ipse Collegium fuit,
In quo
Musae omnes and gratiae,
Nullibi magis sorores,
Sub praeside religione.
In tenacissimum sodalitium coaluere.
Quem Oratoria Poetica Utraque Christianum
Oratorem Poetam Philosophum Omnes
Agnovere.
Qui Fide Spe Charitate Humilitate
Mundum Coelum Proximum Seipsum
Superavit.
Cujus
Sub verna front senilis animus,
Sub morum facilitate, severitas virtutis;
Sub plurima indole, pauci anni;
Sub majore modestia, maxima indoles adeo se occuluerunt ut vitam ejus
Pulchram dixeris and pudicam dissimulationem:
Imo vero and mortem,
Ecce enim in ipso funere
Dissimulare se passus est,
Sub tantillo marmore tantum hospitem,
Eo nimirum majore monumento quo minore tumulo.
Eo ipso die occubuit quo Ecclesia
Anglicana ad vesperas legit,
Raptus est ne malitia mutaret intellectum ejus;
Scilicet Id: Octobris, Anno S. 1631.
Principi recens natae omen maternae indolis.
CRefce, O dulcibus imputanda Divis,
O cresce, and propera, Puella Princeps,
In matris propera venire parts.
Et cum par breve fulminum minorum,
Illinc Carolus, and Jacobus inde,
In patris faciles subire famam,
Ducent fata furoribus decoris;
Cum terror sacer, Anglicique magnum
Murmur nominis increpabit omnem
Late Bosporon, Ottomanicasque
Non picto quatiet tremore Lunas;
Te tunc altera nec timenda paci,
Poscent praelia. Tu potens pudici
Vibratrix oculi, pios in hosts
Late dulcia fata dissipabis.
O cum slos tener ille, qui recenti
Pressus sidere jam sub ora ludit,
Olim fortior omne cuspidatos
Evolvet latus aureum per ignes;
Quique imbellis adhuc, adultus olim;
Puris expatiabitur genarum
Campis imperiosor Cupido;
O quam certa superbiore penna
Ibunt spicula, melleaeque mortes,
Exultantibus hinc and inde turmis,
Quoque jusser is, impigre volabunt!
O quot corda calentium deorum
De te vulnera delicata descent!
O quot pectora Principum Magistris
Fient molle negotium sagittis!
Nam quae non poteris per arma ferri,
Cui matris sinus atque utrumque sidus
Magnorum patet officina Amorum?
Hinc sumas licet, O puella Princeps,
Quantacunque opus est tibi pharetra.
Centum sum Cupidines ab uno
Matris lumine, Gratiasque centum,
Et centum Veneres: adhuc manebunt
Centum mill Cupidines; manebunt
Tercentum Veneresque Gratiaeque
Puro font superstites per aevum.
In Senerissimae Reginae partum hyemalem.
SErta puer: (quis nunc flores non praebeat hortus?)
Texe mihi facili pollice serta, puer.
Quid tu nescio quos narras mihi, stulte, Decembres
Quid mihi cum nivibus? da mihi serta, puer.
Nix? and hyems? non est nostras quid tale per or as;
Non est: vel si sit, non tamen esse potest
Ver agitur: quecunque trucem dat larva Decembrem,
Quid fera cunque fremant srigora, ver agitur.
Nonne vides quali se palmite regia vitis
Prodit, and in sacris quae sedet uva jugis?
Tam laetis quae bruma solet ridere racemis?
Quas hyemis pingit purpura tanta genas?
O Maria! O divum soboles, genitrixque Deorum!
Siccine nostra tuus tempora ludus erunt?
Siccine tu cum vere tuo nihil horrida brumae
Sydera, nil madidos sola morare notos?
Siccine sub media poterunt tua surgere bruma,
Atque suas solum lilia nosse nives?
Ergo vel invitis nivibus, frendentibus Austris,
Nostra novis poterunt regna tumere rosis?
O bona turbatrix anni, quae limite noto
Tempora sub signis non finis ire suis!
O pia praedatrix hyemis, quae tristia mundi
Murmura tam dulci sub ditione tenes!
Perge precor nostris vim pulchram far Calendis:
Perge precor menses sic numerare tuos.
Perge intempestiva atque importuna videri;
Inque uteri titulos sic rape cuncta tui.
Sit nobis sit saepe hyemes sic cernere nostras
Exharedatas floribus ire tuis.
Saepe sit has vernas hyemes Majosque Decembres,
Has per te roseas saepe videre nives.
Altera gens varium per sydera computet annum,
Atque suos ducant per vaga signa dies.
Nos deceat nimiis tantum permittere nimbis?
Tempora tam tetricas far Britanna vices?
Quin nostrum tibi nos omnem donabimus annum:
In part us omnem expende, Maria, tuos.
Sit tuus ille uterus nostri bonus arbiter anni:
Tempus and in titulos tanseat omne tuos.
Namque alia indueret tam dulcia nomina mensis?
Aut qua tam posset candidus ire toga?
Hanc laurum Jun^s sibi vertice vellet utroque;
Hanc sibi vel tota Chloride Majus emet.
Tota suam (vere expulso) respublica storum
Reginam cuperent te, sobolemve tuam.
O bona sors anni, cum cuncti ex ordine menses
Hic mihi Carolides, hic Marianus erit!
Ad Reginam.
ET vero jam tempus erat tibi, maxima Matter,
Dulcibus his oculis accelerare diem:
Tempus erat, ne qua tibi basia blanda vacarent;
Sarcina ne coll^ sit minus apta tuo.
Scilicet ille tuus, timor and spes ille suorum,
Quo primum es felix pignore facta parens,
Ille ferox iras jam nunc meditatur and enses
Jam patris magis est, jam magis ille suus.
Indolis O stimulos! vix dum illi transiit infans;
Jamque sibi impatiens arripit ille virum.
Improbus ille suis adeo negat ire sub annis:
Jam nondum puer est, major and est puero.
Si quis in aulaeis pict as animatus in iras
Stat leo, quem docta cuspide lusit acus,
Hostis (io!) est; neque enim ille alium dignabitur hostem;
Nempe decet tant as non minor ira manus.
Tunc hasta gravis adversum furit; hasta bacillum est:
Mox falsum vero vulnere pectus hiat.
Stat leo, ceu stupeat tali been fixus ab host;
Ceu quid in his oculis vel timeat vel amet,
Tamtorvum, tam dulce micant: nescire fatetur
Mars ne sub his oculis esset, an esset Amor.
Quippe illic Mars est, sed qui been possit amari;
Est and Amor certe, sed metuendus Amor:
Talis Amor, talis Mars est ibi cernere; qualis
Seu puer hic esset, sive vir ille Deus.
Hic tibi jam scitus succedit in oscula fratris,
Res (ecce!) in lusus non operosa tuos.
^asia jam veniant tua quant acunque caterva;
Jam quocunque tuus murmr ludat amor.
^n! Tibi materies tenera and tractabilis hic est:
Hic ad blanditias est tibi cera satis.
^alve infans, tot basiolis, molle argumentum,
Maternis labiis dulce negotiolum,
^salve! Nam te nato, puer auree, natus
Et Carolo and Mariae tertius est oculus.
In faciem Augustiss. Regis a morbillis integram.
MUsa redi; vocat alma parens Academia: Noster
En redit, ore suo noster Apollo redit.
^ltus adhuc suus, and vultu sua purpura tantum
Vivit, and admixtas pergit amare nives.
Tune illas violare genas? tune illa profanis,
Morbe ferox, tent as ire per or a notis?
Tu Phoebi faciem tentas, vanissime? Nostra
Nec Phoebe maculas novit habere suas.
Ipsa sui vindex facies morbum indignatur;
Ipsa sedet radiis O been tuta suis:
Quippe illic Deus est, coelum que and sanctius astrum;
Quippe sub his totus ridet Apollo genis.
Quod facie Rex tutus erat, Quod caetera tactus:
Hinc hominem Rex est fassus, and inde Deum.
Rex Redux.
ILLe redit, redit. Hoc populi bona murmura volvunt
Publicus hoc (audin'?) plausus ad astra refert:
Hoc omni sedet in vultu commune serenum;
Omnibus hinc una est laetitiae facies.
Rex noster, lux nostra redit; redeuntis ad ora
Arridet totis Anglia laeta genis:
Quisque suos oculos oculis accendit ab istis;
Atque novum sacro sumit ab ore diem.
Forte roges tanto quae digna pericula plausu
Evadat Carolus, quae mala, quosve metus:
Anne perrerati male fida volumina ponti
Ausa illum terris pene negare suis:
Hospitis an nimii rursus sibi conscia tellus
Vix been speratum reddat Ibera caput.
Nil horum; nec enim male fida volumina ponti
Aut sacrum tellus vidit Ibera caput.
Verus amor tamen hac sibi falsa pericula fingit:
(Falsa peric'la solet fingere verus amor)
At Carolo qui falsa timet, nec vera timeret:
(Vera peric'la solet temnere verus amor)
Illi falsa timens, sibi vera pericula temnens,
Non solum est fidus, sed quoque fortis amor.
Interea nostri satis ille est causa triumphi:
Et satis (ah!) nostri causa doloris erat.
Causa doloris erat Carolus, sospes licet esset;
Anglia quod saltem discere posset, Abest.
Et satis est nostri Carolus nunc causa triumphi:
Dicere quod saltem possumus, Ille redit.
Ad Principem nondum natum.
NAscere nunc; O nunc! quid enim, puer alme, moraris?
Nulla tibi dederit dulcior hora diem.
Ergone tot tardos (O lent!) morabere menses?
Rex redit, Ipse veni, and dic bone, Gratus ades.
Nam quid Ave nostrum? quid nostri verba triumphi?
Vagitu melius dixeris ista tuo.
At maneas tamen: and nobis nova causa triumphi
Sic demum fueris; nec nova causa tamen:
Nam, quoties Carolo novus aut nova nascitur infans,
Revera toties Carolus ipse redit.
CARMEN DEO NOSTRO, Te Decet HYMNUS. SACRED POEMS, COLLECTED, CORRECTED,
AUGMENTED, Most Humbly PRESENTED, TO MY LADY THE COUNTESS OF DENBIGH.

By her Most devoted Servant RICH. CRASHAW.

In hearty acknowledgement of his immortal Obligation to her Goodness and
Charity.

CRASHAWE, THE ANAGRAM HE WAS CAR.
WAs Car then Crashaw, or was Crashaw Car,
Since both within one name combined are?
Yes, Car's Crashaw, he Car; it is Love alone
Which melts two hearts, of both composing one,
So Crashaw's still the same: so much desired
By strongest Wits; so honored so admired;
Car Was but He that entered as a friend
With whom he shared his thoughts, and did commend
(While yet he lived) this Work; they loved each other:
Sweet Crashaw was his friend; he Crashaws Brother:
So Car has Title then; 'twas his intent
That what his Riches penned, poor Car should Print;
Nor fears he check, praising that happy one
Who was beloved by all; disprais'd by none.
To wit, being pleased with all things, he pleased all:
Nor would he give, nor take offense; befall
What Might; he would possess himself: and live
As dead (devoid of interest) to all might give
Disease to his well composed mind; forestalled
With Heavenly Riches: which had wholly called
His thoughts from Earth, to live above in the Air
A very Bird of Paradise. No care
Had he of earthly trash. What might suffice
To fit his soul to Heavenly exercise.
Sufficed him; and may we guess his heart
By what his Lips bring forth, his only part
Is God and Godly thoughts. Leaves doubt to none
But that to whom one God is all; all is one.
What he might eat or wear he took no thought,
His needful food he rather found then sought.
He seeks no Downs, no Sheets, his Bed's still made
If he can find, a Chair or Stool, he is laid,
When day peeps in; he quits his restless rest;
And still, poor soul, before he is up he is dressed.
Thus dying did he live, yet lived to dye
In the Virgins Lap, to whom he did ayply
His Virgin thoughts and words, and thence was styled
By foes, the Chaplain of the Virgin mild
While yet he lived without: his Modesty
Imparted this to some, and they to me.
Live happy then, dear soul; enjoy thy rest
Eternally by pains thou purchasedst,
While Car must live in Care; who was thy friend
Nor cares he how he live, so in the end,
He may enjoy his dearest Lord and thee;
And sit and sing more skilful songs Eternally.
THOMAS CAR.

TO THE Noblest and best of LADIES, THE COUNTESS OF DENBIGH:
Persuading her to Resolution in Religion, and to render her self without
further delay ino the Communion of the Catholic Church.

WHat Heaven-intreated Heart is this?
Stands trembling at the Gate of Bliss;
Holds fast the door, yet dares not venture
Fairly to open it and enter,
Whose Definition is a doubt
'Twixt Life and Death, 'twixt in and out.
Say, lingering fair! why comes the birth
Of your brave Soul so slowly forth?
Plead your pretenses (O you strong
In weakness) why you choose so long
In labor of your self to lie,
Nor daring quite to live nor die:
Ah linger not, loved Soul! a slow
And late consent was a long no,
Who grants at last, long time tried
And did his best to have denied,
What Magic bolts, what Mystic Bars
Maintain the Will in these strange Wars!
What fatal, what fantastic Bands,
Keep the free Heart from its own Hands!
So when the year takes cold, we see
Poor Waters their own Prisoners be,
Fettered, and lock d up fast they ly
In a sad self-capti^ity*
The astonished Nymphs their floods strange fate deplore
To see themselves their own severer shore.
Thou that alone can thaw this cold,
And fetch the Heart from its strong Hold;
Almighty Love! end this long War,
And of a Meteor make a Star.
O fix this fair Indefinite
And among thy shafts of Sovereign light
Choose out that sure decisive Dart
Which has the Key of this close Heart,
Knows all the corners often, and can control
The self-shut Cabinet of an unsearcht soul.
O let it be at last, Love s hour;
Raise this tall Trophee of thy Power;
Come once the conquering way; not to confute
But kill this Rebel-word, Irresolute,
That so, in spite of all this peevish strength
Of weakness, she may write Resolved at Length.
Unfold at length, unfold fair Flower
And use the season of Love's shower,
Meet his well-meaning wounds, wise Heart*
And haste to drink the wholesome Dart;
That Healing shaft, which Heaven till now
Has in Loves Quiver hid for you,
O Dart of Love! Arrow of Light!
O happy you, if it hit right,
It must not fall in vain, it must
Not mark the dry regardless dust.
Fair one, it is your Fate* and brings
Eternal Words upon its Wings.
Meet it with wide-spread Arms; and see
It Is seat your soul's just center be.
Disband dull fears; give faith the day,
To save your life, kill your delay;
It is Loves Siege, and sure to be
Your triumph, though his Victory.
It Is cowardice that keeps this Field,
And want of Courage not to yield.
Yield then, O yield, that Love may win
The Fort at last, and let Life in.
Yield quickly, lest perhaps you prove
Death's prey, before the prize of Love.
This Fort of your fair self, if it be not won,
He is repulst indeed, but you are undone.
To the Name above every Name, the Name of JESUS, A Hymn.
I Sing the Name which none can say
But touched with an interior Ray;
The name of our new Peace; our Good:
Our Bliss, and supernatural Blood:
The name of all our Lives and Loves.
Hearken, and help, ye Holy Doves!
The highborn Brood of Day; you bright
Candidates of blissful Light,
The Heirs Elect of Love; whose Names belong
Unto the everlasting life of Song;
All ye wise souls; who in the wealthy Breast
Of this unbounded Name build your warm Nest.
Awake, my Glory, Soul, (if such thou be,
And that fair Word at all refer to thee)
Awake and Sing
And be all Wing;
Bring hither thy whole Self; and let me see,
What of thy Parent Heaven yet speaks in Thee.
O thou art Poor,
Of Noble Powers, I see,
And full of nothing else but empty Me,
Narrow, and low, and infinitely less
Then this great Mornings mighty business.
One little World or two
(Alas) will never do;
We must have store.
Go, Soul, out of thy self, and seek for More,
Go and request
Great Nature for the Key of her huge Chest
Of Heavens, the self-involving Set of Spears
(Which dull Mortality more feels then hears)
Then rouse the nest
Of nimble Art, and traverse round
The Airy shop of Soul-appeasing sound:
And beat a summons in the same
All-Soveraign Name.
To warn each several kind
And shape of sweetness, be they such
As sigh with supple wind
Or answer Artful touch,
That they convene and come away
To wait at the Love-Crowned Doors of that
Illustrious Day.
Shall we dare this, my Soul? we will do it and bring
No other Note for it, but the Name we sing.
Wake Lute and Harp
And every sweet-lipp'd thing
That talks with Tuneful string;
Start into life, and leap with me
Into a hasty fit-tun'd harmony.
Nor must you think it much
TO obey my bolder touch;
I have authority in Love's Name to take you
And to the work of Love this morning wake you;
Wake; in the Name
Of Him who never sleeps, all things that are,
Or what is the same,
Are Musical;
Answer my Call
And come along;
Help me to meditate mine immortal Song.
Come, ye soft Ministers of sweet sad mirth,
Bring all your Household Stuff of Heaven on Earth;
O you, my Soul^s most certain Wings,
Complaining Pipes, and prattling strings,
Bring all the store
Of Sweets you have; and murmur that you have no more.
Come, never to part,
Nature and Art!
Come; and come strong,
To the conspiracy of our spacious song.
Bring all the Powers of Praise
Your Provinces of well-united Worlds can raise;
Bring all your Lutes and Harps of Heaven and Earth;
What ever cooperates to the common mirth
Vessels of vocal joys,
Or you, more Noble Architects of intellectual noise,
Cymballs of Heaven, or Humane spears,
Solliciters of Souls or Ears;
And when you are come, with all
That you can bring or we can call;
O may you fix
For ever here, and mix
Your selves into the long
And everlasting series of a deathless Song;
Mix all your many Worlds, above,
And loose them into One of Love.
Cheer thee my Heart!
For thou too have thy part
And place in the great Throng
Of this unbounded all-imbracing Song.
Powers of my Soul, be proud!
And speak loud
To all the dear-bought Nations this Redeeming Name,
And in the wealth of one rich Word proclaim
New Similes to Nature.
May it be no wrong
Blessed Heavens, to you, and your Superior song,
That we, dark Sons of Dust and Sorrow,
A while dare borrow
The name of your Delights and our Desires,
And fit it to so far inferior Lyres.
Our Murmurs have their Music too,
Ye Mighty Orbs, as well as you,
Nor yields the Noblest nest
Of warbling Seraphim to the ears of Love,
A choicer Lesson then the joyful Breast
Of a poor panting Turtle-Dove.
And we, low Worms have leave to do
The same bright business (ye third Heavens) with you.
Gentle Spirits, do not complain;
We will have care
To keep it fair,
And send it back to you again.
Come, lovely Name! appear from forth the bright
Regions of peaceful Light;
Look from thine own illustrious home,
Fair King of Names, and come:
Leave all thy Native Glories in their gorgeous Nest,
And give thy self a while the gracious Guest.
Of humble Souls, that seek to find
The hidden Sweets
Which man's heart meets
When thou art Master of the Mind.
Come, Lovely Name; life of our hope!
Lo we hold our Hearts wide open!
Unlock thy Cabinet of Day
Dearest Sweet, and come away.
Lo how the thirsty Lands
Gasp for thy golden showrs! with long stretched hands:
Lo how the laboring Earth
That hopes to be
All Heaven by Thee,
Leaps at thy Birth.
The attending World, to wait thy Rise,
First turned to Eyes;
And then, not knowing what to do;
Turned them to Tears, and spent them too,
Come Royal Name; and pay the expense
Of all this precious patience.
O come away
And kill the Death of this Delay.
O see, so many Worlds of barren years
Melted and Measured out in Seas of Tears.
O see the weary Lids of wakeful Hope
(Love's Eastern windows) all wide open
With Curtains drawn,
To catch the Daybreak of thy Dawn.
O dawn, at last, long-look't for day!
Take thine own wings and come away.
Lo, where aloft it comes! It comes, among
The conduct of adoring Spirits that throng
Like diligent Bees, and swarm about it.
O they are wise:
And know what Sweets are sucked from out it.
It is the Hive,
By which they thrive,
Where all their hoard of Honey lies.
Lo where it comes, upon the snowy Doves
Soft back; and brings a bosom big with Loves.
Welcome to our dark World, thou
Womb of Day!
Unfold thy fair Conceptions; and display
The Birth of our bright joys.
O thou compacted
Body of Blessings: Spirit of Souls extracted!
O dissipate thy spicy Powr's
(Cloud of condensed sweets) and break upon us
In balmy showrs;
O fill our senses, and take from us
All force of so profane a Fallacy
To think ought sweet but that which smells of thee.
Fair, Flowery Name; in none but thee
And thy Nectareal fragrancy,
Hourly there meets
An universal Synod of all Sweets;
By whom it is defined Thus
That no Perfume
For ever shall presume
To pass for oderiferous,
But such alone whose sacred Pedigree
Can prove it self some kin (sweet name) to Thee.
Sweet Name, in thy each Syllable
A thousand Blessed Arabias dwell;
A Thousand Hills of Frankincense;
Mountains of myrrh, and Beds of Spices,
And Ten thousand Paradises.
The Soul that tastes thee takes from thence
How many unknown Worlds there are
Of Comforts, which thou have in keeping!
How many thousand Mercies there
In Pity's soft Lap lie a sleeping!
Happy he who has the Art
To awake them,
And to take them
Home, and lodge them in his Heart,
O that it were as it was wont to be!
When thy old friends of fire, all full of thee,
Fought against frowns with smiles; gave Glorious chase
To persecutions; and against the Face
Of Death and fiercest dangers, durst with brave
And sober pace march on to meet a Grave.
On their bold Breasts about the World they bore thee
And to the Teeth of Hell stood up to teach thee,
In Center of their inmost souls they wore thee,
Where Racks and Torments strived in vain to reach thee.
Little, alas, thought they
Who tore the fair Breasts of thy Friends,
Their Fury but made way
For thee; and served them in thy Glorious ends.
What did their weapons but with wider pores
Enlarge thy flaming brested Lovers
More freely to transpire
That impatient fire
The heart that hides thee hardly covers,
What did their weapons but set wide the doors
I or thee: fair purple Doors, of Love's devising;
The Ruby windows which inrich't the East
Of thy so often repeated Rising.
Each wound of theirs was thy new morning;
And reinthron'd thee in thy Rosy Nest,
With blush of thine own blood thy day adorning:
It was the wit of Love oreflow'd the bounds
Of Wrath, and made the way through all these wounds,
Welcome Dear, All-Adored Name!
For sure there is no Knee
That knows not thee.
Or if there be such Sons of shame,
Alas what will they do
When stubborn Rocks shall bow
And Hills hang down their Heav'n-saluting Heads
To seek for humble Beds
Of Dust, where in the bashful shades of night
Next to their own low Nothing they may lie,
And couch before the dazeling light of thy dread
Majesty.
They that by Love's mild dictate now
Will not adore the,
Shall then with just Confusion, bow
And break before thee.
In the Glorious Epiphany of our Lord God, a Hymn sung as by the Three Kings.
1. KING. BRight Babe, whose awful Beauties make
The morn incurr a sweet mistake;

2. For whom the officious Heavens devise
To disinherit the Suns Rise,

3. Delicately to displace
The Day, and plant it fairer in thy Face;

1. O thou born King of Loves,

2. Of Lights,

3 Of Joys.

Cho. Look up. Sweet Babe, look up, and see
For love of thee
Thus far from home
The East is come
To seek her self in thy sweet Eyes.

1. We, who strangely went astray,
Lost in a bright
Meridian night,

2. A Darkness made of too much Day,

3 Becken'd from far
By thy fair Star,
Lo at last have found our way.

Cho. To Thee, thou Day of Night; thou East of West!
Lo we at last have found the way
To thee, the Worlds great Universal East;
The general and indifferent day.

1 All-circling point, All-centring sphere,
The World's One, Round, Eternal year.

2 Whose full and all-unwrinkled face
Nor sinks nor swells with time or place;

3 But every where, and every while
Is one consistent solid smile;

1 Not vexed and tossed.

2. 'Twixt Spring and Frost,

3 Nor by alternate shreds of Light
Sordidly shifting hands with Shades and Night.

Cho. O little all, in thy embrace
The World lies warm, and likes his place;
Nor does his full Globe fail to be
Kissed on both his Cheeks by thee:
Time is too narrow for thy year
Nor makes the whole World thy half Sphere.

1 To thee, to thee
From him we flee

2 From him, whom by a more illustrious lie,
The blindness of the World did call the Eye;

3 To him, who by these mortal Clouds have made
Thy Self our Sun, though thine own Shade.

2 Farewell, the World's false Light;
Farewell, the white
Egypt, a long farewell to thee
Bright Idol; black Idolatry.
The dire face of inferior darkness, kissed
And courted in the pompous Mask of a more specious Mist.

2 Farewell, farewell
The proud and misplac't Gates of Hell,
Perch't, in the morning's way
And double-guilded as the doors of Day;
The deep Hypocrisy of Death and Night
More desperately dark, because more bright.

3 Welcome, the World's sure way;
Heavens wholesome Ray.

Cho. Welcome to us; and we
Sweet to our selves, in thee.

1 The deathless Heir of all thy Fathers day;

2 Decently born,
Embosom'd in a much more Rosy Morn,
The Blushes of thy all-unblemish't Mother.

3 No more that other
Aurora shall set open
Her Ruby Casements, or hereafter hope
From mortal Eyes
To meet Religious welcomes at her Rise.

Cho. We (precious ones) in you have won
A gentler Morn, a juster Sun.

1 His superficial Beams Sun-burn't our skin;

2 But left within

3 The night and Winter still of Death and Sin.

Cho. Thy softer yet more certain Darts
Spare our Eyes, but pierce our Hearts.

1 Therefore with his proud Persian spoils

2 We court thy more concerning smiles.

3 Therefore with his disgrace
We guild the humble Cheek of this chaste place;

Cho. And at thy Feet pour forth his Face,

1 The doting Nations now no more
Shall any day but thine adore.

2 Nor (much less) shall they leave these Eyes
For cheap Egyptian Deities.

3 In whatsoever more Sacred shape
Of Ram, He-Goat, or Reverend Ape,
Those beauteous ravishers oppressed so sore
The too-hard-tempted Nations.

1 Never more
By wanton Heyfer shall be worn

2 A Garland, or a gilded Horn.
The Altar-stall'd Ox, fat Osyris now
With his fair Sister Cow,

3 Shall kick the Clouds no more; but lean and tame.

Cho. See his horned Face, and die for shame,
And Mithra now shall be no name.

1. No longer shall the immodest Lust
Of adulterous Godles dust

2 Fly in the face of Heaven; as if it were
The poor World's Fault that he is fair.

3 Nor with perverse Loves and Religious Rapes
Revenge thy Bounties in their beauteous shapes;
And punish best things worst; because they stood
Guilty of being much for them too good.

1 Proud sons of death that durst compel
Heaven it self to find them Hell;

2 And by strange wit of madness wrest
From this World's East the other's West.

3 All-Idolizing worms, that thus could crowd
And urge their Sun into thy Cloud;
Forcing his sometimes eclipsed face to be
A long deliquium to the light of thee.

Cho. Alas with how much he avier shade
The shamfac't Lamp hung down his head,
For that one Eclipse he made,
Then all those he suffered!

1 For this he looked so big, and every morn
With a red face confessed this scorn;
Or hiding his vexed cheeks in a hired mist
Kept them from being so unkindly kissed

2 It was for this the day did rise
So often with blubbered Eyes.
For this the Evening wept; and we never knew
But called it Dew.

3 This daily wrong
Silenc't the morning Sons, and dampt their song

Cho. Nor was it our deafness, but our sins, that thus
Long made the Harmonious orbs all mute to us.

2 Time has a day in store
When this so proudly poor
And self-oppressed spark, that has so long
By the lovesick World been made
Not so much their Sun as Shade,
Weary of this Glorious wrong,
From them and from himself shall flee
For shelter to the shadow of thy Tree;

Cho. Proud to have gained this precious loss
And changed his false Crown for thy Cross.

2 That dark day's clear doom shall define
Whose is the Master Fire, which Sun would shine*
That sable iudgement-seat shall by new laws
Decide and settle the Great cause
Of controverted light,

Cho. And natur's wrongs rejoice to do thee right.

3 That forfeiture of noon to night shall pay
All the idolatrous Thefts done by this night of day;
And the great Penitent press his own pale Lips
With an elaborate Love-eclipse
To which the low world's Laws
Shall lend no cause

Cho. Save those domestic which he borrows
From our sins and his own sorrows.

1 Three sad hours sackcloth then shall show to us
His penance, as our fault, conspicuous.

2 And he more needfully and nobly prove
The Nation's terror now then erst their love,

3 Their hated loves changed into wholesome fears.

Cho. The shutting of his Eye shall open theirs.

2 As by a fair-ey'd fallacy of day
Misled before they lost their way,
So shall they, by the seasonable fright
Of an unseasonable night,
Loosing it once again, stumble on true Light,

2 And as before his too-bright eye
Was their more blind idolatry,
So his officious blindness now shall be
Their black, but faithful perspective of thee;

3 His new prodigious night,
Their new and admirable light;
The supernatural Dawn of thy pure day,
While wondering they
(The happy converts now of him
Whom they compelled before to be their sin)
Shall henceforth see
To kiss him only as their rod
Whom they so long courted as God,

Cho. And their best use of him they worshiped be
To learn, of him at lest, to worship thee.

2 It was their Weakness wooed his Beauty;
But it shall be
Their wisdom now, as well as duty,
T'injoy his Blot; and as a large black Letter
Use it to spel thy Beauties Better;
And make the night it self their torch to thee.

2 By the oblique ambush of this close night
Couch't in that conscious shade
The right eyed Areopagite
Shall with a vigorous guess invade
And catch thy quick reflex; and sharply see
On this dark Ground
To descant thee.

3 O price of the rich Spirit! with that fierce chase
Of this strong Soul, shall he
Leap at thy lofty Face,
And seize the swift flash, in rebound
From this obsequious Cloud;
Once called a Sun;
Till dearly thus undone,

Cho. Till thus triumphantly tamed (O ye two
Twin-Suns!) and taught now to negotiate you.

1 Thus shall that reverend Child of light,

2 By being Scholar first of that new night,
Come forth Great Master of the mistick day;

3 And teach obscure Mankind a more close way
By the frugal negative Light
Of a most wise and well-abused Night,
To read more legible thine original Ray,

Cho. And make our darkness serve thy day;
Maintaining 'twixt thy World and ours
A commerce of contrary powers,
A mutual Trade
'Twixt Sun and Shade,
By confederate Black and White
Borrowing Day and lending Night.

1 Thus we, who when with all the Noble powr's
That (at thy cost) are called, not vainly, ours;
We vow to make brave way
Upwards, and press on for the pure intelligential prey;

2 At lest to play
The amorous spies
And peep and proffer at thy sparkling Throne;

3 Instead of bringing in the blissful Prize
And fastening on thine Eyes,
Forfeit our own
And nothing gain
But more ambitious loss, at lest of brain;

Cho. Now by abased Lids shall learn to be
Eagles; and shut our Eyes that we may see.
The Close. Therefore to thee and thine auspicious ray
(Dread sweet!) lo thus
At lest by us,
The delegated Eye of Day
Does first his Scepter, then himself in solemn Tribute pay.
Thus he undresses
His sacred unshorn Tresses;
At thy adored Feet, thus, he lays down

1 His gorgeous tire
Of Flame and Fire,

2 His glittering Robe,

3 His sparkling Crown,

3 His Gold,

2 His Mirrh,

3. His Frankincence,

Cho. To which he now has no pretense.
For being showed by this days light, how far
He is from Sun enough to make thy Star,
His best ambition now, is but to be
Something a brighter shadow (Sweet) of thee;
Or on Heavens azure forehead high to stand
Thy Golden Index; with a duteous Hand
Pointing us home to our own Sun
The World's and his Hyperion.

To the Queen's Majesty on Twelfth-day.
MADAM,
Amongst those long rows of Crowns that guild your
Race.
These Royal sages sue for decent place.
The daybreak of the Nations; their first ray;
When the dark World dawned into Christian day.
And smiled in the Babes bright face, the purpling Bud
And Rosy dawn of the right Royal Blood;
Fair first fruits of the Lamb; sure Kings in this;
They took a Kingdom while they gave a kiss,
But the World's Homage, scarce in these well blown,
We read in you (Rare Queen) ripe and full grown.
For from this day's rich seed of Diadems
Does rise a radiant crop of Royal stems,
A Golden Harvest of Crowned heads, that meet
And crowd for kisses from the Lambs white feet.
In this illustrious throng, your lofty flood
Swells high, fair confluence of all highborn Blood*
With your bright head whose groves of Scepters bend
Their wealthy tops; and for these feet contend.
So swore the Lambs dread Sire, and so we see it,
Crowns, and the Heads they kiss must court these Feet.
Fix here fair Majesty! may your heart never miss
To reap new Crowns and Kingdoms from that kiss;
Nor may we miss the joy to meet in you
The aged honors of this day still new.
May the great time, in you, still greater be
While all the year is your Epiphany,
While your each day's Devotion duly brings
Three Kingdoms to supply this days three Kings.
The Office of the Holy Cross: For the hour of Matins.
The Versicle. Lord, by thy sweet and saving Sign,

The Responsory. Defend us from our Foes and Thine.

Ver. Thou shall open my Lips, O Lord.

Res. And my mouth shall declare thy praise.

Ver. O God make speed to save me.

Res. O Lord make haste to help me.
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.
As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be, world without end, Amen.
THE HYMN.
THe wakeful Matines haste to sing,
The unknown sorrows of our King,
The Father's Word and Wisdom, made
Man, for Man, by Man's betrayed;
The world's price set to sale, and by the bold
Merchants of Death and Sin, is bought and sold;
Of his best Friends (yea of himself) forsaken,
By his worst foes (because he would) besieged and taken.

The Antiphon. All hail, fair Tree.
Whose Fruit we be.
What Song shall raise
Thy seemly praise.
Who broughtst to light
Life out of Death, Day out of night.

The Versicle. Lo, we adore thee,
Dread Lamb! and bow thus low before thee,

The Responsor. 'Cause by the Covenant of thy Cross,
Thou have saved at once the whole World's loss.

The Prayer. O My Lord Jesu Christ, Son of the living God! interpose, I pray
thee, thine own precious death, thy Cross and Passion, betwixt my Soul and thy
Judgment, now and in the hour of my death. And vouchsafe to grant me thy Grace
and Mercy; to the living and dead, remission and rest; to thy Church peace and
concord; to us sinners life and glory everlasting. Who live and reignest with
the Father, in the Unity of the Holy Ghost, one God, world without end, Amen.


For the hour of Prime.
The Versicle. Lord by thy sweet and saving Sign.

The Responsor. Defend us from our foes and thine.

Ver. Thou shall open my Lips, O Lord.

Res. And my mouth shall declare thy praise.

Ver. O God make speed to save me.

Res. O Lord make haste to help me.
Glory be to, etc.
As it was in, etc.
THE HYMN.
THe early Prime blushes to say
She could not rise so soon, as they
Called Pilate up, to try if he
Could lend them any Cruelty.
Their Hands with lashes armed, their Tongues with lies,
And loathsome Spittle blot those beauteous Eyes,
The blissful springs of Joy, from whose all-chearing ray
The fair Stars fill their wakeful fires, the Sun himself drinks day.

The Antiphon. Victorious Sign
That now do shine,
Transcribed above
Into the Land of Light and Love;
O let us twine
Our Roots with thine,
That we may rise
Upon thy Wings and reach the Skies.

The Versicle. Lo we adore thee
Dread Lamb! and fall
Thus low before thee

The Responsor. 'Cause by the Covenant of thy Cross
Thou have saved at once the whole world's loss.

The Prayer. O My Lord Jesu Christ, Son of the living God! interpose, I pray
thee, thine own precious death, thy Cross and Passion, betwixt my Soul and thy
Judgment, now and in the hour of my death. And vouchsafe to grant me thy Grace
and Mercy; to the living and dead, remission and rest; to thy Church peace and
concord; to us sinners, life and glory everlasting: Who live and reignest
with the Father, in the unity of the Holy Ghost, one God, world without end,
Amen:


The Third.
The Versicle. Lord, by thy sweet and saving Sign

The Responsor. Defend us from our foes and thine.

Ver. Thou shall open my Lips, O Lord,

Res. And my mouth shall declare thy praise.

Ver. O God make speed to save me.

Res. O lord make haste to help me.

Ver. Glory be to, etc.

Res. As it was in the, etc.
THE HYMN.
THe Third hour's deafen'd with the cry
Of Crucify him, Crucify.
So goes the vote (nor ask them, why!)
Live Barabbas! and let God die.
But there is wit in wrath, and they will try
A Hall more cruel then their Crucify,
For while in sport he wears a spiteful Crown,
The serious showers along his decent Face run sadly down.

The Antiphon. Christ when he died
Deceived the Cross,
And on Death's side
Threw all the loss.
The captive World awak't, and found
The Prisoner loose, the Jailer bound.

The Versicle. Lo we adore thee
Dread Lamb, and fall
Thus low before thee

Tht Responsor, 'Cause by the Covenant of thy Cross
Thou have saved at once the whole World's loss

The Prayer. O My Lord Jesu Christ, Son of the living God! interpose, I pray
thee, thine own precious death, thy Cross and Passion, betwixt my Soul and thy
Judgment, now and in the hour of my death. And vouchsafe to grant me thy Grace
and Mercy; to the living and dead, remission and rest; to thy Church, peace and
concord; to us sinners, life and glory everlasting, Who live and reignest
with the Father, in the unity of the Holy Ghost, one God, world without end,
Amen.


The SIXTH.
The Versicle. Lord by thy sweet and saving Sign,

The Responsor. Defend us from our foes and thine.

Ver. Thou shall open my lips, O Lord,

Res. And my mouth shall declare thy praise.

Ver. O God make speed to save me,

Res. O Lord make haste to help me.

Ver. Glory be to, etc:

Res. As it was in, etc.
The HYMN.
NOw is the Noon of sorrow's night;
High in his patience as their spite.
Lo the faint Lamb, with weary Limb
Bears that huge Tree which must bear him,
That fatal Plant, so great of Fame
For fruit of sorrow and of shame,
Shall swell with both for him; and mix
All woes into one Crucifix.
Is tortured Thirst it self, too sweet a cup?
Gall, and more bitter mocks shall make it up.
Are Nails blunt Pens of superficial smart?
Contempt and scorn can send sure wounds to search the inmost Heart.

The Antiphon. O dear and sweet dispute
'Twixt death's and Love's far different Fruit!
Different as far
As Antidotes and Poisons are.
By that first fatal Tree
Both Life and Liberty
Were sold and slain;
By this they both look up, and live again.

The Versicle. Lo we adore thee
Dread Lamb! and bow thus low before thee;

The Responsor. 'Cause by the covenant of thy Cross.
Thou have saved the World from certain loss.

The Prayer. O My Lord Jesu Christ, son of the living God! interpose, I pray
thee, thine own precious death, thy Cross and Passion, betwixt my soul and thy
judgment, now and in the hour of my death. And vouchsafe to grant me thy grace
and mercy; to the living and dead, remission and rest; to thy church peace and
concord, to us sinners, life and glory everlasting. Who live and reignest
with the Father, in the unity of the Holy Ghost, one God, world without end.
Amen.


The NINTH.
The Versicle. Lord by thy sweet and saving Sign,

The Responsor. Defend us from our foes and thine.

Ver. Thou shall open my lips, O Lord,

Res. And my mouth shall declare thy praise.

Ver. O God make speed to save me,

Res. O Lord make haste to help me
Glory be to, etc.
As it was in, etc.
The HYMN.
THe Ninth with awful horror hark'ned to those groans
Which taught attention even to Rocks and Stones.
Hear, Father, hear! thy Lamb (at last) complains
Of some more painful thing then all his pains.
Then bows his all-obedient head, and dies
His own Lov's, and our sin's great Sacrifice.
The Sun saw that; and would have seen no more
The Center shook, her useless veil th'inglorious Temple tore.

The Antiphon. O strange mysterious strife
Of open death and hidden life!
When on the cross my King did bleed,
Life seemed to die, Death died indeed.

The Versicle. Lo we adore thee
Dread Lamb! and fall thus low before thee

The Responsor. 'Cause by the covenant of thy Cross
Thou have saved at once the whole world's loss.

The Prayer. O my Lord Jesu Christ, son of the living God! interpose I pray
thee, thine own precious death, thy Cross ^d Passion, betwixt my soul and thy
judgment, now and in the hour of my death: and vouchsafe to grant me thy grace
and mercy; to the living and dead, remission and rest; to thy Church, peace and
concord; to us sinners, life and glory everlasting: who live and reignest
with the Father, in the unity of the Holy Ghost, one God, world without end,
Amen.


Even-Song.
The Versicle. Lord, by thy sweet and saving Sign

The Responsor. Defend us from our foes and thine.

Ver. Thou shall open my Lips, O Lord,

Res. And my mouth shall declare thy praise.

Ver. O God make speed to save me.

Res. O Lord make haste to help me.

Ver. G^ory be to, etc.

Res. As it was in, etc.
The HYMN.
BUt there were Rocks would not relent at this.
Lo, for their own hearts they rend His,
Their deadly hate lives still, and has
A wild reserve of wanton wrath;
Superfluous Spear! but there is a Heart stands by
Will look no wounds be lost, no death shall die,
Gather now thy grief's ripe fruit, Great Mother-maid!
Then sit: thee down* and sing thy Ev'n-song in the sad
Trees shade.

The Antiphon. O sad, sweet Tree!
Woeful and joyful we
Both weep and sing in shade of thee,
When the dear Nails did lock
And graft into thy gracious Stock
The hope, the health,
The worth, the wealth
Of all the ransomed World, thou had the power
(In that propitious hour)
To poise each precious Limb,
And prove how light the World was when it weighed with Him.
Wide may thou spread
Thine Arms; and with thy bright and blisful head
O'r look all Libanus. Thy lofty crown
The King himself is; thou his humble Throne.
Where yielding, and yet conquering he
Proved a new path of patient victory.
When wondering death by death was slain,
And our Captivity his Captive taken.

The Versicle. Lo we adore thee
Dread Lamb! and bow thus low before thee;

The Responsor. Cause by the covenant of thy Cross
Thou have saved the World from certain loss.

The Prayer. O My Lord Jesu Christ, son of the living, etc.

COMPLINE.
The Versicle. Lord by thy sweet and saving Sign.

The Responsor. Defend us from our foes and thine.

Ver. Thou shall open my lips, O Lord.

Res. And my mouth shall declare thy praise.

Ver. O God make speed to save me.

Res. O Lord make haste to help me.

Ver. Glory be to, etc.

Res. As it was in. etc.
The HYMN
THe Compline hour comes last, to call
Us to our own Live's funeral.
Ah hartless task! yet hope takes head;
And lives in him that here lies dead.
Run, Mary, run! bring hither all the Blessed
Arabia, for thy Royal Phenix' nest;
Pour on thy Noblest sweets, which, when they touch
This sweeter Body, shall indeed be such,
But must thy bed, Lord, be a borrowed Grave
Who lendst to all things all the life they have.
O rather use this Heart, thus far a fitter Stone,
'Cause, though a hard and cold one, yet it is thine own.
Amen.

The Antiphon. O save us then
Merciful King of men!
Since thou would needs be thus
A Savior, and at such a rate, for us;
Save us, O save us, Lord.
We now will own no shorter wish, nor name a narrower word,
Thy blood bids us be bold.
Thy wounds give us fair hold.
Thy sorrows chide our shame.
^hy Cross, thy Nature, and thy Name
Advance our claim
And cry with one accord,
Save them, O save them, Lord.

The Versicle. Lo we adore thee
Dread Lamb! and bow thus low before thee.

The Responsor. 'Cause by the covenant of thy Cross,
Thou have saved the world from certain loss.

The Prayer. O My Lord Jesu Christ, Son of, etc.

The RECOMMENDATION.
THese Hours, and that which hovers o'r my end,
Into thy Hands, and Heart, Lord, I commend.
Take both to thine account, that I and mine
In that hour and in these, may be all thine.
That as I dedicate my devoutest Breath
To make a kind of Life for my Lords Death,
So from his living, and life-giving Death,
My dying Life may draw a new, and never-fleeting Breath.
VEXILLA REGIS, The Hymn of the Holy Cross.
1.
LOok up, languishing soul! Lo where the fair
Badge of thy Faith calls back thy care,
And bids thee never forget
Thy Life is one long Debt
Of Love to Him, who on this painful Tree
Paid back the Flesh he took for thee.
2.
Lo, how the streams of Life from that full Nest
Of Loves, thy Lord's too liberal Breast,
Flow in an amorous Flood
Of Water wedding Blood.
With these he washed thy stain, transferred thy smart,
And took it home to his own heart.
3.
But though great Love, greedy of such sad gain
Usurped the portion of thy pain,
And from the Nails and Spear
Turned the steel point of Fear,
Their use is changed, not lost; and now they move
Not stings of Wrath, but wounds of Love.
4.
Tall Tree of Life! thy Truth makes good
What was till now never understood,
Though the prophetic King
Struck loud his faithful string.
It was thy wood he meant should make the Throne
For a more then Solomon.
5.
Large throne of Love! Royally spread
With purple of too rich a Red.
Thy crime is too much duty;
Thy burden too much Beauty;
Glorious or grievous more? thus to make good
Thy costly Excellence with thy Kings own Blood.
6.
Even balance of both Worlds! our World of sin,
And that of Grace Heaven weighed in Him,
Us with our price thou weighedst,
Our price for us thou payedst;
Soon as the right hand scale rejoyc't to prove
How much Death weighed more light then Love.
7.
Hail, our alone Hope! let thy fair Head shoot
Aloft; and fill the Nations with thy Noble fruit.
The while our hearts and we
Thus graft our selves on thee;
Grow thou and they; and be thy fair increase
The sinner's pardon and the just man's peace.
Live, O for ever Live and Reign
The Lamb whom his own Love has slain!
And let thy lost sheep live to inherit
That Kingdom which this Cross did merit. Amen.
Charitas Nimia. Or the dear Bargain.
LOrd, what is Man? why should he cost thee
So dear? what had his ruin lost thee?
Lord, what is Man? that thou have over-bought
So much a thing of naught?
Love is too kind, I see, and can
Make but a simple Merchant man.
'Twas for such sorry Merchandise,
Bold Painters have put out his Eyes.
Alas, sweet Lord, what were to thee
If there were no such Worms as we?
Heaven ne'rtheless still Heaven would be.
Should Mankind dwell
In the deep Hell,
What have his Woes to do with thee?
Let him go weep
O'r his own wounds;
Seraphims will not sleep
Nor Spears let fall their fatihful rounds.
Still would the youthful Spirits sing,
And still thy spacious Palace ring.
Still would those beauteous Ministers of Light
Burn all as bright,
And bow their flaming heads before thee,
Still Thrones and Dominations would adore thee,
Still would those ever-wakeful sons of fire
Keep warm thy praise
Both nights and days,
And teach thy loved name to their Noble Lyre.
Let froward Dust then do its kind;
And give it self for sport to the proud wind.
Why should a piece of peevish Clay plead shares
In the Eternity of thy old cares?
Why should thou bow thy awful Breast to see
What mine own madnesses have done with me?
Should not the King still keep his Throne
Because some desperate Fool's undone?
Or will the World's illustrious Eyes
Weep for every Worm that dies;
Will the gallant Sun
Ever the less Glorious run?
Will he hang down his Golden head
Or ever the sooner seek his Western bed,
Because some foolish Fly
Grows wanton, and will dye?
If I were lost in misery,
What was it to thy Heaven and thee?
What was it to thy precious blood
If my soul Heart called for a flood?
What if my faithless soul and I
Would needs fall in
With guilt and sin,
What did the Lamb that he should dye?
What did the Lamb that he should need?
When the Wolf sins, himself to bleed?
If my base Lust,
Bargained with Death and well-beseeming Dust
Why should the white
Lamb's bosom write
The purple name
Of my sin's shame?
Why should his unstained Breast make good
My blushes with his own heart-blood?
O my Savior make me see
How dearly thou have paid for me
That lost again, my Life may prove
As then in Death, so now in Love.
Sancta Maria dolorum, Or the Mother of sorrows; a Pathetical descant upon the
devout Plainsong of Stabat Matter dolorosa.
1.
IN shade of Deaths sad Tree
Stood doleful she,
Ah she! now by no other
Name to be known, alas, but Sorrow's Mother.
Before her Eyes
Here Is and the whole World's joys,
Hanging all torn she sees; and in his woes
And Pains, her pangs and throes.
Each wound of his, from every part,
All, more at home in her own heart.
2.
What kind of Marble than
Is that cold man
Who can look on and see,
Nor keep such Noble sorrows company?
Sure even from you
(My Flints) some drops are due
To see so many unkind swords contest
So fast for one soft Breast.
While with a faithful, mutual, flood
Her Eyes bleed Tears, his wounds weep blood.
3.
O costly intercourse
Of deaths, and worse
Divided Loves: while Son and Mother
Discourse alternate wounds to one another;
Quick Deaths that grow
And gather, as they come and go:
His Nails write swords in her; which soon her heart
Pays back, with more then their own smart;
Her swords, still growing with his pain,
Turn Spears, and straight come home again;
4.
She sees her Son, her God,
Bow with a load
Of borrowed sins; and swim
In woes that were not made for him.
Ah hard Command
Of Love! Here must she stand
Charged to look on, and with a steadfast Eye
See her life dye:
Leaving her only so much Breath
As serves to keep alive her death.
5.
O Mother Turtle-dove!
Soft sourse of Love,
That these dry Lids might borrow
Something from thy full seas of Sorrow!
O in that Breast
Of thine (the noblest Nest
Both of Love's Fires and Floods) might I recline
This hard, cold, Heart of mine!
The chil lump would relent, and prove
Soft Subject for the siege of Love.
6.
O teach those wounds to bleed
In me; me, so to read
This Book of Loves, thus writ
In lines of death, my life may copy it
With Loyal cares.
O let me here claim shares;
Yield something in thy sad prerogative
(Great Queen of griefs) and give
Me to my Tears; who, though all stone,
Think much that thou should mourn alone.
7.
Yea let my life and me
Fix here with thee,
And at the Humble Foot
Of this fair Tree take our Eternal Root.
That so we may
At least be in Loves way;
And in these chaste wars while the winged wounds flee
So fast 'twixt him and thee,
My Breast may catch the kiss of some kind Dart,
Though as at second hand, from either Heart.
8.
O you, your own best Darts,
Dear doleful hearts!
Hail; and strike home and make me see
That wounded bosoms their own weapons be.
Come Wounds! come Darts!
Nailed hands! and pierced hearts!
Come your whole selves, Sorrow's great Son and Mother.
Nor grudge a younger Brother
Of grief's his portion, who (had all their due)
One single wound should not have left for you.
9.
Shall I set there
So deep a share
(Dear wounds) and only now
In sorrows draw no dividend with you!
O be more wife,
If not more soft, mine Eyes!
Flow, tardy Founts! and into decent showrs
Dissolve my Days and Hours.
And if thou yet (faint soul!) defer
To bleed with him, fail not to weep with her.
10.
Rich Queen, lend some relief;
At least an alms of Grief
To' a heart who by sad right of sin
Could prove the whole sum (too sure) due to him.
By all those stings
Of Love, sweet bitter things,
Which these torn hands transcribed on thy true Heart;
O teach mine too, the Art
To study him so, till we mix
Wounds, and become one Crucifix.
11.
O let me suck the Wine
So long of this chaste Vine,
Till, drunk of the dear wounds, I be
A lost thing to the World, as it to me.
O faithful friend
Of me and of my end!
Fold up my life in Love; and lay't beneath
My dear Lord's vital death.
Lo, heart, thy hopes whole Plea! her precious breath
Powered out in Prayers for thee; thy Lord's in death.
The Hymn of St. Thomas, in Adoration of the Blessed Sacrament.
WIth all the powers my poor Heart has
Of humble Love and Loyal Faith,
Thus low (my hidden life!) I bow to thee
Whom too much Love has bowed more low for me.
Down, down, proud sense! discourses dye,
Keep close, my soul's inquiring Eye!
Nor touch nor taste must look for more,
But each sit still in his own door.
Your Ports are all superfluous here,
Save that which lets in Faith, the Ear.
Faith is my skill; Faith can believe
As fast as Love new Laws can give.
Faith is my force; Faith strength affords
To keep pace with those powerful words:
And words more sure, more sweet then they
Love could not think, truth could not say.
O let thy wretch find that relief
Thou did afford the faithful Thief;
Plead for me, Love! Allege and show
That Faith has farther, here, to go,
And less to lean on; because than
Though hid as God, wounds writ thee Man,
Thomas might touch; none but might see
At least the suffering side of thee;
And that too was thy self which thee did cover,
But here ev n that is hid too which hides the other.
Sweet consider then, that I
Though allowed not Hand nor Eye
To teach at thy loved Face; nor can
Taste thee God, or touch thee Man;
Both yet believe and witness thee
My Lord too, and my God, as loud as he.
Help, Lord, my Hope increase;
And till my portion in thy peace.
Give Love for Life, nor let my days
Grow, but in new powers to name thy Praise.
O dear memorial of that Death
Which lives still, and allows us Breath!
Rich, Royal Food! Bountiful Bread!
Whose use denies us to the Dead;
Whose vital gust alone can give
The same leave both to Eat and Live;
Live ever Bread of Loves, and be
My Life, my Soul, my surer self to me.
O soft self-wounding Pelican!
Whose Breast weeps Balm for wounded Man:
Ah this way bend thy benign Houd
To a bleeding Heart that g^spes for Blood;
That Blood, whose least drops sovereign be
To wash my Worlds of sine from me.
Come Love! Come Lord! and that long day
For which I languish, come away.
When this dry soul those Eyes shall see,
And drink the unsealed sourse of thee.
When Glory's Sun Faith's shade shall chase,
Then for thy veil give me thy Face, Amen.
The Hymn for the Blessed Sacrament. Lauda Sion Salvatorem.
1.
RIse, Royal Sion! rise and sing
Thy Soul's kind Shepherd, thy Hearts King.
Stretch all thy powers; call if you can
Harps of Heaven to hands of man,
This Sovereign subject sits above
The best ambition of thy Love.
2.
Lo the Bread of Life, this day's
Triumphant Text. provokes thy praise
The living and life-giving Bread.
To the Great Twelve distributed
When Life himself at point to die,
Of Love, was his own Legacy.
3.
Come, Love! and let us work a Song
Loud and pleasant, sweet and long;
Let Lips and Hearts lift high the noise
Of so just and solemn joys,
Which on his white brows this bright day
Shall hence for ever bear away.
4.
Lo the new Law of a new Lord,
With a new Lamb blesses the Board.
The aged Pascha pleads not years
But spies Love's dawn, and disappears.
Types yield to Truths; shades shrink away;
And their Night dies into out Day.
5.
But lest that die too, we are bid,
Ever to do what he once did.
And by a mindful, mystic breath,
That we may live, revive his Death;
With a well-blest Bread and Wine
Transum'd, and taught to turn Divine.
6.
The Heav'n-instructed house of Faith
Here a Holy Dictate has,
That they but lend their Form and Face,
Themselves with reverence leave their place
Nature and Name to be made good
By a Nobler Bread, more needful Blood,
7.
Where Nature's Laws no leave will give,
Bold Faith takes heart, and dares believe
In different species, name not things
Himself to me my Savior brings,
As Meat in that, as Drink in this;
But still in both one Christ he is.
8.
The receiving Mouth here makes
Nor wound nor breach in what he takes.
Let one, or one Thousand be
Here Dividers, single he
Bears home no less, all they no more,
Nor leave they both less then before.
9.
Though in it self this Sovereign Feast
Be all the same to every Guest,
Yet on the same (life-meaning) Bread
The child of death eats himself dead.
Nor is it Love's fault, but Sins dire skill
That thus from Life can Death distill.
10.
When the blessed signs thou broke shal't see,
Hold but thy Faith entire as he,
Who, howsoe'r clad, cannot come
Less then whole Christ in every crumme.
In broken forms a stable Faith
Untouched her precious Total has.
11.
Lo the Life-food of Angels then
Bowed to the lowly mouths of men!
The Childrens Bread; the Bridegroom's Wine,
Not to be cast to Dogs or Swine.
12.
Lo, the full, final, Sacrifice
On which all Figures fixed their Eyes,
The ransomed Isack, and his Ram;
The Manna, and the Paschal Lamb.
13.
Jesu, Master, Just and true!
Our Food, and faithful Shepherd too!
O by thy self vouchsafe to keep,
As with thy self thou feedst thy sheep.
14.
O let that Love which thus makes thee
Mix with our low Mortality,
Lift our lean Souls, and let us up
Convictors of thine own full cup.
Coheirs of Saints, that so all may
Drink the same Wine; and the same Way.
Nor change the Pasture, but the Place,
To seed of Thee in thine own Face. Amen.
The HYMN. Dies irae dies illa. In Meditation of the day of Judgment.
1.
HEars't thou, my soul, what serious things
Both the Psalm and Sybil sings
Of a sure Judge, from whose sharp Ray
The World in Flames shall fly away.
2.
O that fire! before whose face
Heaven and Earth shall find no place:
O these Eyes! whose angry light
Must be the day of that dread Night.
3.
O that trump! whose blast shall run
An Even round with the circling Sun,
And urge the murmuring graves to bring
Pale mankind forth to meet his King.
4.
Horror of Nature, Hell and Death!
When a deep groan from beneath
Shall cry we come, we come, and all
The Caves of Night answer one call.
5.
O that Book! whose Leaves so bright
Will set the World in severe Light.
O that Judge! whose Hand, whose Eye
None can endure; yet none can fly.
6.
Ah then, poor Soul, what will thou say?
And to what Patron choose to pray?
When Stars themselves shall stagger; and
The most firm Foot no more then stand.
7.
But thou giv'st leave (dread Lord) that we
Take shelter from thy self in Thee;
And with the wings of thine own Dove
Fly to thy Scepter of soft Love.
8.
Dear, remember in that day
Who was the cause thou came this way.
Thy sheep was strayed, and thou would be
Even lost thy self in seeking me.
9.
Shall all that labor, all that cost
Of Love, and even that loss, be lost?
And this loved soul, judged worth no less
Then all that way and weariness?
10.
Just Mercy then, thy reckoning be
With my price, and not with me;
'Twas paid at first with too much pain,
To be paid twice, or once in vain.
11.
Mercy (my Judge) Mercy I cry
With blushing Cheek and bleeding Eye,
The conscious Colors of my sin
Are Red without and pale within.
12.
O let thine own soft Bowels pay
Thy self; and so discharge that day.
If sin can sigh, Love can forgive.
O say the word, my Soul shall live.
13.
Those Mercies which thy Mary found
Or who thy Cross confessed and Crowned,
Hope tells my heart, the same Loves be
Still alive and still for me.
14.
Though both my Prayers and Tears combine,
Both worthless are; for they are mine.
But thou thy bounteous self still be;
And show thou art, by saving me.
15.
O when thy last frown shall proclaim
The flocks of goats to folds of flame,
And all thy lost sheep found shall be,
Let come ye Blessod then call me.
16.
When the dread Ite shall divide
Those Limbs of death from thy left side,
Let those Life-speaking Lips command
That I inherit thy right hand.
17.
O hear a suppliant heart; all crush't
And crumbled into contrite dust.
My hope, my fear! my Judge, my Friend!
Take charge of me, and of my end.
The HYMN. O Gloriosa Domina.
HAil, most High, most humble one!
Above the World; below thy Son
Whose blush the Moon beauteously marres
And stains the timorous light of Stars.
He that made all things had not done
Till he had made himself thy Son.
The whole World's host would be thy guest
And board himself at thy rich Breast.
O boundless Hospitality!
The Feast of all things feeds on thee.
The first Eve, Mother of our Fall,
Ever she bore any one, slew all.
Of her unkind gift might we have
The inheritance of a hasty Grave;
Quick buried in the wanton Tomb
Of one forbidden bit;
Had not a better Fruit forbidden it.
Had not thy healthful womb
The Worlds new Eastern window been
And given us Heaven again in giving him.
Thine was the Rosy Dawn that sprung the Day
Which renders all the Stars she stole away.
Let then the aged World be wise, and all
Prove Nobly, here, unnatural:
It Is gratitude to forget that other
And call the Maiden Eve their Mother.
Ye redeemed Nations far and Near,
Applaud your happy selves in her,
(All you to whom this Love belongs)
And keep't alive with lasting songs.
Let Hearts and Lips speak loud, and say,
Hail, door of Life, and sourse of Day!
The Door was shut, the Fountain sealed;
Yet Light was seen and Life revealed;
The Fountain sealed, yet Life found way.
Glory to thee, great Virgin's son
In bosom of thy Fathers bliss.
The same to thee, sweet Spirit be done;
As ever shall be, was, and is, Amen.
The Flaming Heart, upon the Book and Picture of the Seraphical Saint Teresa,
as she is usually expressed with a Seraphim beside her.
WEll meaning Readers! you that come as friends
And catch the precious name this piece pretends;
Make not too much haste t'admire
That fair-cheek't fallacy of fire,
That is a Seraphim, they say
And this the great Teresia.
Readers be ruled by me; and make
Here a well-plac't and wise mistake;
You must transpose the picture quite,
And spell it wrong to read it right;
Read Him for Her, and Her for Him;
And call the Saint the Seraphim.
Painter, what did thou understand
To put her Dart into his hand!
See, even the years and size of him
Shows this the Mother Seraphim.
This is the Mistress flame; and duteous he
Her happy fireworks, here, comes down to see:
O most poor-spirited of men!
Had thy cold Pencil kissed her Pen,
Thou could not so unkindly err
To show us this faint shade for her.
Why Man, this speaks pure mortal frame;
And mocks with female Frost, Love's manly flame,
One would suspect thou meanst to print
Some weak, inferior, Woman Saint.
But had thy pale-fac't purple took
Fire from the burning checks of that bright Book
Thou would on her have heapt up all
That could be found Seraphical;
What ever this youth of fire wears fair,
Rosy Fingers, Radiant Hair.
Glowing Cheek, and glistring Wings,
All those fair and flagrant things,
But before all, that fiery Dart
Had filled the Hand of this great Heart.
Do then as equal right requires,
Since his the blushes be, and here is the fires,
Resume and rectify thy rude design;
Undress thy Seraphim into Mine.
Redeem this injury of thy Art;
Give him the Vail, give her the Dart.
Give him the vail; that he may cover
The red Cheeks of a rivall'd Lover;
Ashamed that our worl'd, now, can show
Nests of new Seraphims here below.
Give her the Dart for it is she
(Fair youth) shoots both thy shaft and Thee:
Say, all ye wise and well-pierc'd hearts
That live and die amidst her Darts,
What is it your tastful spirits do prove
In that rare life of her, and Love?
Say and bear witness, Sends she not
A Seraphim at every shot?
What Magazins of immortal Arms there shine,
Heavens great Artillery in each'love-spun line.
Give then the Dart to her who gives the flame;
Give him the veil, who gives the shame.
But if it be the frequent fate
Of worst faults to be fortunate;
If all is prescription; and proud wrong
Hearkens not to an humble song;
For all the gallantry of him,
Give me the suffering Seraphim.
His be the bravery of all those bright things.
The glowing Cheeks, the glistering wings;
The Rosy hand, the radiant Dart;
Leave her alone the Flaming Heart.
Leave her that; and thou shall leave her
Not one loose shaft but Love's whole Quiver.
For in Love's Field was never found
A Nobler weapon then a wound.
Love's Passives are his Activ'st part;
The wounded is the wounding heart.
O Heart! the equal poise of Love's both parts,
Big alike with Wounds and Darts;
Live in these conquering Leave's; Live all the same;
And walk through all Tongues one Triumphant flame;
Live here, great Heart; and love, and dye, and kill;
And bleed and wound, and yield, and conquer still.
Let this immortal Life where ever it comes
Walk in a crowd of Loves and Martyrdomes.
Let mystic Deaths wait on it; and wise souls be
The Love-slain witnesses of this life of thee.
O sweet incendiary! show here thy Art,
Upon this Carcass of a hard cold Heart;
Let all thy scattered shafts of Light, that play
Among the Leaves of thy large Books of day,
Combined against this Breast at once break in
And take away from me my self and sin;
This Gracious Robbery shall thy bounty be
And my best fortunes such fair spoils of me.
O thou undaunted Daughter of Desires!
By all thy Dower of Lights and Fires;
By all the Eagle in thee, all the Dove;
By all thy Lives and Deaths of Love;
By thy large draughts of intellectual day;
And by thy thirsts of Love more large then they;
By all thy brim-fill'd Bowls of fierce desire;
By thy last mornings draught of liquid Fire;
By the full Kingdom of that final kiss
That seized thy parting Soul, and sealed thee his;
By all the Heavens thou have in him
(Fair Sister of the Seraphim)
By all of Him we have in Thee;
Leave nothing of my Self in me.
Let me so read thy life, that I
Unto all life of mine may die.
A Song.
LOrd, when the sense of thy sweet Grace
Sends up my Soul to seek thy Face.
Thy Blessed Eyes breed such desire,
I dye in Love's delicious Fire.
O Love, I am thy Sacrifice,
Be still Triumphant, Blessed Eyes
Still shine on me, fair Suns, that I
Still may behold, though still I dye.
Second part.
Though still I dye, I live again;
Still longing so to be still slain,
So gainful is such loss of breath,
I dye even in desire of death.
Still live in me this loving strife
Of living Death and dying Life.
For while thou sweetly slayest me,
Dead to my self, I live in thee.
To Mistrses M. R. Council concerning her Choice.
DEar, Heav'n-designed Soul!
Amongst the rest
Of Suitors that besiege your Maiden breast,
Why may not I
My fortune try
And venture to speak one good word
Not for my self, alas! but for my dearer Lord;
You'ave seen already in this lower sphere
Of Froth and Bubbles, what to look for here.
Say, gentle Soul, what can you find
But painted shapes,
Peacocks and Apes,
Illustrious Flies,
Gilded Dunghils, Glorious Lies,
Goodly surmises
And deep disguises,
Oaths of Water, Words of Wind?
Truth bids me say, it is time you cease to Trust
Your Soul to any son of Dust.
It Is time you listen to a braver Love,
Which from above
Calls you up higher,
And bids you come
And choose your room
Among his own fair sons of fire,
Where you among
The Golden throng
That watches at his Palace doors
May pass along
And follow those fair Stars of yours;
Stars much too fair and pure to wait upon
The false smiles of a sublunary Sun.
Sweet, let me Prophecy that at last 'twill prove
Your wary Love
Lays up his purer and more precious vows,
And means them for a far more worthy Spouse
Then this world of Lies can give you,
Even for him with whom nor cost,
Nor love, nor labor can be lost;
Him who never, will deceive you.
Let not my Lord, the Mighty Lover
Of souls, disdain that I discover
The hidden Art
Of his high stratagem to win your heart,
It was his Heavenly Art
Kindly to cross you
In your mistaken Love,
That, at the next remove
Thence he might toss you,
And strike your troubled heart
Home to himself; to hide it in his Breast
The bright ambrosial Nest,
Of Love, of Life, and everlasting Rest.
Happy mistake!
That thus shall wake
Your wise soul, never to be won
Now with a love below the Sun.
Your first choice fails, O when you choose again,
May it not be among the sons of men.
ALEXIAS. The Complaint of the forsaken wife of Saint Alexis.
The First ELEGY.
I Late the Roman Youth's loved praise and pride,
Whom long none could obtain, though thousands tried,
Lo here am left (alas,) For my lost mate
TO embrace my Tears, and kiss an unkind Fate.
Sure in my early woe, Stars were at strife,
And tried to make a Widow ever a Wife.
Nor can I tell (and this new Tears does breed)
In what strange path my Lord's fair footsteps bleed.
O knew I where he wandered, I should see
Some solace in my sorrow's certainty;
I Would send my woes in words should weep for me.
(Who knows how powrful well-writ prayers would be)
Sending's too slow a word, my self would fly:
Who knows my own heart's woes so well as I?
But how shall I steal hence? Alexis thou,
Ah thou thy self, alas, has taught me how.
Love too, that leads thee, would lend thee the wings
To bear me harmless through the hardest things:
And where Love lends the wing, and leads the way,
What dangers can there be dare say me nay?
If I be shipwrack^t, Love shall teach to swim;
If drowned, sweet is the death endured for him;
The noted sea shall change his name with me,
I, amongst the blessed Stars a new name shall be;
And sure where Lovers make their watery Graves,
The weeping Mariner will augment the waves.
For who so hard, but passing by that way
Will take acquaintance of my woes, and say,
Here't was the Roman Maid found a hard fate
While through the world she sought her wandering
Mate;
Here perished she, poor heart; Heavens, be my vows
As true to me, as she was to her Spouse.
O live, so rare a love! live! and in thee
The too frail life of femal constancy.
Farewell and shine, fair soul, shine there above
Firm in thy Crown, as here fast in thy Love.
There thy lost fugitive thou have found at last;
Be happy; and for ever hold him fast.
The Second ELEGY.
THough all the Joys I had fled hence with thee,
Unkind! yet are my Tears still true to me;
I Am wedded o'r again since thou art gone,
Nor could thou, cruel, leave me quite alone.
Alexis's Widow now is sorrow's wife,
With him shall I weep out my weary life.
Welcome my sad sweet Mate! Now have I got
At last a constant Love that leaves me not.
Firm he, as thou art false, nor need my cries
Thus vex the Earth, and tear the Skies.
For him, alas, never shall I need to be
Troublesome to the World, thus, as for thee,
For thee I talk to Trees; with silent Groves
Expostulate my woes and much-wrong'd loves.
Hills and relentless Rocks, or if there be
Things that in hardness more allude to thee;
To these I talk in Tears, and tell my pain;
And answer too for them in Tears again.
How often have I wept out the weary Sun?
My watery Hourglass has old time outrun.
O, I am Learned grown, poor Love and I
Have studied over all Astrology.
I Am perfect in Heavens state, with every Star
My skilful grief is grown familiar.
Rise, fairest of those fires; what ever thou be
Whose Rosy beam shall point my Sun to me;
Such as the Sacred Light that er'st did bring
The Eastern Princes to their infant King.
O rise, pure Lamp! and lend thy Golden ray
That wary Love at last may find his way.
The Third ELEGY.
RIch, churlish Land! that hid'st so long in thee,
My Treasures, rich, alas, by robbing me.
Needs must my Miseries owe that man a spite
Who ever he be was the first wandering Knight.
O had he never been at that cruel cost
Nature's Virginity had never been lost.
Seas had not been rebuk't by saucy Oars
But lain locked up safe in their sacred shores
Men had not spurned at Mountains; nor made wars
With Rocks; nor bold hands struck the World's strong bars,
Nor lost in too large bounds, our little Rome
Full sweetly with it self had dwelt at home.
My poor Alexis, then in peaceful life,
Had under some low roof loved his plain wife:
But now, ah me, from where he has no foes
He flies; and into wilful exile goes.
Cruel return or tell the reason why
Thy dearest Parents have deserved to dye;
And I, what is my crime I cannot tell,
Unless it be a crime to have loved too well.
If Heats of Holier Love and high Desire
Make big thy fair Breast with immortal Fire,
What needs my virgin Lord fly thus from me,
Who only wish his virgin Wife to be?
Witness, chaste Heavens! no happier vows I know
Then to a virgin Grave untouched to go.
Love's truest knot by Venus is not tied;
Nor do embraces only make a Bride.
The Queen of Angels, (and men chaste as you)
Was Maiden-Wife, and Maiden-Mother too.
Cecilia, Glory of her Name and Blood
With happy gain her Maiden vows made good.
The lusty Bridegroom made appoach, young man,
Take heed (said she) take heed Valerian;
My bosom Guard, a Spirit great and strong,
Stands armed to shield me from all wanton wrong.
My Chastity is Sacred; and my Sleep
Wakeful, her dear vows undefiled to keep.
Pallas bears Arms, forsooth, and should there be
No fortress built for true Virginity?
No gap^ Gorgon this, none like the rest
Of your learned Lies: here you will find no such jest.
I Am yours, O were my God, my Christ so too,
I Would know no name of Love on Earth but you.
He yields, and straight Baptized, obtains the Grace
To gaze on the fair soldier's Glorious face.
Both mixed at last their Blood in one rich Bed
Of Rosy Martydome, twice Married.
O burn our Hymen bright in such high Flame,
Thy Torch, terrestrial Love, has here no name.
How sweet the mutual yoke of Man and Wife,
When Holy fires maintain Love's Heavenly life!
But I, (so help me Heaven my hopes to see)
When Thousands sought my Love, loved none but
Thee.
Still, as their vain Tears my firm vows did try,
Alexis, he alone is mine (said I)
Half true, alas, half false, proves that poor Line,
Alexis is alone; but is not mine.
Description of a Religious House and condition of Life. (Out of BARCLAY.)
NO roofs of Gold o'r riotous Tables shining,
Whole Days and Suns devoured with endless
Dining;
No Sails of Tyrian Silk proud pavements sweeping;
Nor ivory couches costlyer slumbers keeping;
False Lights of fl^iring Gemms; tumultuous joys;
Halls full of flattering Men and frisking Boys;
Whate'r false shows of short and slippery good
Mix the mad sons of Men in mutual blood.
But Walks and unshorn Woods; and Souls, just so
Unforc't and genuine; but not shady tho:
Our Lodgings hard and homely as our Fare,
That Chaste and Cheap, as the few Clothes we wear.
Those course and negligent, as the natural Locks
Of these loose Groves, rough as the unpolisht Rocks.
A hasty portion of prescribed sleep;
Obedient slumbers that can wake and weep,
And Sing, and Sigh, and Work, and Sleep again;
Still rolling a round Sphere of still-returning pain,
Hands full of hearty labors, do much, that more they may,
And work for work, not wages; let to morrows
New drops wash off the sweat of this days sorrows.
A long and daily dying-life, which breaths
A respiration of reviving deaths,
But neither are there those ignoble stings
That nip the bosom of the World's best things
And lash Earth-laboring souls;
No cruel guard of diligent cares, that keep
Crowned woes awake; as things too wise for sleep:
But Reverent Discipline, and Religious Fear,
And soft obedience find sweet biding here;
Silence, and sacred Rest; Peace, and pure joys;
Kind Loves keep house, lie close, and make no noise,
And room enough for Monarchs while none swells
Beyond the Kingdoms of contentful Cells.
The self-remembring Soul sweetly recovers
Her kindred with the Stars; not basely hovers
Below; but meditates her immortal way
Home to the original source of Light and intellectual
Day.
Deaths Lecture, the Funeral of a young Gentleman.
DEar Relics of a dislodged Soul, whose lack
Makes many a mourning Paper put on black!
O stay a while ever thou draw in thy head
And wind thy self up close in thy cold bed.
Stay but a little while until I call
A summons worthy of thy Funeral;
Come then, Youth, Beauty and Blood;
All the soft powers
Whose Silken flatteries swell a few fond hours
Into a false Eternity. Come man;
Hyperbolized Nothing! know thy span;
Take thine own measure here, down, down, and bow
Before thy self in thine Idea; thou
Huge emptiness! contract thy self, and shrink
All thy wild Circle to a point, O sink
Lower and lower yet; till thy lean size
Call Heaven to look on thee with narrow Eyes;
Lesser and lesser yet; till thou begin
To show a Face, sit to confess thy Kin,
Thy Neighborhood to Nothing.
Proud Looks, and lofty Eyelids, here put on
Your selves in your unfaign'd reflection,
Here, gallant Ladies; this unpartial Glass
(Though you be painted) shows you your true face:
These death-seal'd Lips are they dare give the lie
To the loud boasts of poor Mortality:
These Curtain'd windows, this retired Eye
Out-stares the Lids of large-look't Tyranny:
This posture is the brave one, this that lies
Thus low, stands up (methinks) thus and defy,
The World; all-daring Dust and Ashes! only you
Of all interpreters read Nature true.
Temperance, or the cheap Physician upon the Translation of Lessius.
Go now; and with some daring drug
Bait thy disease, and whilst they tug,
Thou to maintain their precious strife
Spend the dear Treasures of thy life.
Go take Physic, dote upon
Some big-nam'd Composition,
The Oraculous Doctors mystic Bills;
Certain hard Words made into Pills,
And what at last shal't gain by these?
Only a costlier disease,
That which makes us have no need
Of Physic, that is Physic indeed.
Hark hither, Reader, will thou see
Nature her own Physician be?
Wilt see a man, all his own wealth,
His own Music, his own Health;
A man whose sober soul can tell
How to wear her Garments well,
Her Garments, that upon her sit
As Garments should do close and fit;
A well-cloth'd soul that is not oppressed
Nor choked with what she should be dressed.
A soul-sheath'd in a Crystal shrine;
Through which all her bright features shine;
As when a piece of wanton Lawn,
A thin aerial veil, is drawn
O'r beauties face, seeming to hide,
More sweetly shows the blushing bride.
A soul, whose intellectual beams
No Mists do Mask, no Lazy steams,
A happy soul, that all the way
To Heaven rides in a Summers day.
Would see a man, whose well-warm'd Blood
Baths him in a genuine Flood!
A man whose tuned humors be
A seat of rarest harmony?
Would see blithe looks, fresh Cheeks beguile
Age? would see December smile?
Would see Nests of new Roses grow
In a bed of reverend Snow?
Warm Thoughts, free Spirits flattering
Winter's self into a Spring.
In sum, would see a man that can
Live to be old, and still a man?
Whose latest and most leaden hours
Fall with soft wings, stuck with soft flowers;
And when Life's sweet Fable ends,
Soul and Body part like friends;
No quarrels, murmurs, no delay;
A kiss, a Sigh, and so away.
This rare one, Reader, would thou see?
Hark hither; and thy self be he.
FINIS.

