Isagoge ad Dei Providentiam: OR, A PROSPECT OF DIVINE Providence.

By T. C. M. A.

Come and see the works of God --

Psalm. 66. 5. That they may see, and know, and consider, and understand
together, that the hand of the Lord has done this, and the Holy One of Israel
has created it,

Isa. 41. 20. And I saw, when the Lamb opened one of the seals, and I heard as
it were the noise of thunder, one of the four beasts saying, Come and see,

Rev. 6. 1. LONDON, Printed by A. Maxwell for Edward Brewster, at the sign of
the Crane in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1672.

To the READER.
BEFORE (thou) enter into the Parlour, give me leave to salute thee with a few
words in this Porch. There are two Books which deservedly call for the serious
perusal, both of Ministers and People; Teachers, and those who are taught:
Those Books are, the Two Volumes of the Sacred Scriptures, and Divine
Providence: And these are Comments on, or Expositions of each other. I grant
the former to be determinative, and yet the later I adjudg to be inductive to,
and so harmoniously illustrative of the former. The Moon has its light for the
use of man, though the light thereof be borrowed from the Sun in part, as say
the Learned. Divine Providence is a Torch set up in the World, and is lighted
at the same fire, viz. The Will of God, with the Scriptures: A difference there
is, and yet not such, but that both Scripture and Providence do concenter in
the glory of God, the use of man, and the mutual elucidation of each other.

I have in the following Treatise labored to present thee with a Draught or
Picture of Divine Providence; and have cast my weak eye on the Sacred
Scriptures in drawing this Picture. I look on the holy Scriptures, as the
living and lively Face, and whosoever neglects them, will do the work by halves, as
it is vulgarly phrased. More particularly; in the prosecution of this Subject,
I have (or at leastwise would have) consulted three things.

1. A pertinent Variety, for the Matter; and this as founded on the Scriptures,
and amplified from some intermix't Histories, some whereof are found on record
in Authors; others are rehearsed by me: and though I have not so particularly
set them down for Time, Place, and Persons; yet they are no Fictions, but
Realities, commended to me from those who would not tell a lie for Providence.
Far be it from me to affect lying-Legends; and as far be it from me (because of
lying-Legends in the World) to bury the Works of God in the grave of a
contemptuous Oblivion! Extremes in matters, are of dangerous consequence. An
holy Prudence teaches to beware, lest whilst we essay to run from sin, we do
not run into sin. And thus for the first thing here consulted.

2. A Clearness for Method. That Method pleases me, which may be most useful
for the common Reader, whose good is intended in the Subject to be treated of.
I like not that humor of some, who will not travel the easiest and plainest
Road, because of the company of such who indeed are honest and plain men, and
will commit no robbery, unless it be on the lusts of men, by a facil access to
their souls in the way of Teaching; and let such honest Robbers be forgiven
this wrong. Here, if I mistake not, I have kept pace with that Method which not
only the common Reader's capacity may admit of; but the Subject here handled
does in a sort resolve it self into. It matters not by what appellation this
Method is termed, so it be suitable to the nature of the subject, and the
Reader's capacity. If any list to be contentious, I say no more, but, That we
have no such custom in our Country to cavil about the color of a Cow which
gives down her Milk with ease, and that too good for such who scorn it because
of the mixed color of the Beast. And thus for the Method here.

3. An ordinary Plainness for the Phrase or Language. I affect not high and
long lines; but rather short Sayings and plain Similitudes. The one best suits
with a weak memory, and the other with a low understanding. Similitudes, or
popular Allusions, have a further advantage; for as they are borrowed from
things in and about which Providence does work, so they bring to remembrance
the Works of Providence. The Water of Life may be called to mind at a Jacob's
Well. If the phrase then here used run not smoothly, remember I study Things,
not Words. A Diamond, though not polish't, is not to be thrown by, as a
peeble-stone.

If in the reading thou object, (1.) That some places of Scripute are more than
once mentioned. (2.) That the same matter is in some places of this Treatise
repeated. I must crave thy patience to hear, before thou condem. And to the
first of these take the Reply as follows.

1. The same places of Scripture may be quoted, and yet the same Scriptures not
needlessly repeated. One and the same place of Scripture has diverse things
wrapped up in it. There are more Jewels than one in the Casket. If one be taken
out at one time, another at another season, thou must blame thine own eyes in
looking merely on the Casket, and not on the distinct Jewel.

2. Though the same Scriptures may be repeated, yet thou may find them
perhaps so repeated, as may wipe off the calumny of a vain repetition. It is
well observed by one in reference to Solomon's Proverbs, That though the same
Proverb be here and there scattered, yet we have it with interest.

To the second Objection, consider the following Reply. (1.) Distinguish
between the material, and formal or precise consideration of a thing. An old
Truth may be found a new one; new, in regard of the Principle from which it is
deducted; and old, for that the same, for the matter, was before intimated. The
Doctrine of the Resurrection is a Truth known from diverse places of Scripture;
but this, as rationally inferred by our Savior from Exodus 3. 6. may well
be-speak the funerals of foolish cavils, and the resurrection of an holy
admiration. But (2.) if this suffice not, remember, the Writer may be forgetful
as well as others. I could mention worthy Authors, in whose Writings some
things occur once and again. I attribute this not to their barrenness, but
forgetfulness, and loathness to dissever the Links of the Chain, being joined
in a friendly neighborhood. Have charity then in this case, if not for others,
yet for thy self: for it may be the same thing that may occur, is willing to
confer a-fresh with thy soul, being not so fully understood, or practically
improved by thee, as it should be, To write the same things to you, to me
indeed is not grievous; but for you it is safe, says the Apostle to the
Philippians, chap. 3. 1.

Having thus far been thy Guide, lest thou may lose thy way; it is time now
to leave thee to thy journey. I hope thou will not meet with mire and dirt
here. What is so, if any, I must own: what is not so, Providence will own. I
must confess, the Subject may call for a Quill plucked from the wing of a
Seraphim; and though that be so, yet that is no apology to have Padlocks on our
Tongues or Pens: for the Tongue ought to be the Pen of a ready writer; and the
Pen the Tongue of a ready speaker, to publish the wonderful works of him who is
the blessed and only Potentate, the King of kings, and Lord of lords; who only
has immortality dwelling in the light which no man can approach unto, whom no
man has seen, nor can see: to whom be honor and power everlasting, Amen. 1 Timothy 6. 15, 16.

PREFACE.
THE word [ Providence] has its various imports or significations; sometimes
it is taken in a bad sense, and so notes an unhappy forecast or contrivance in
order to men's gratifying some lust or other: so Romans 13. 14. But put ye on the
Lord Jesus Christ, and make not provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts
thereof. Sinners are provident for their darling-corruptions; They are wise to
do evil; but to do good they have no knowledge, Jer. 4. 22.

2. Other-while the word is taken in a good sense; and so it is applied or
accommodated, (1.) To men. (2.) To God.

1. As it is applied to men; it notes or points at a Moral Virtue, a Political
Endowment, and a Spiritual Grace. A prudent man in ordering his affairs, is all
one with the provident man. Paulus Sergius is styled a prudent man, Acts 13. 7.
Tertullus in his Oration does politically use, if not through flattery abuse,
the term [ Providence]. Very worthy deeds are done unto this Nation by thy
Providence, says he to Felix, Acts 24. 2. The Apostle Paul does call for the
exercise of Pre-consideration, Prudence, or Providence, as a Theological Virtue
or Grace to be made conscience of by Christians, Romans 12. 17. Provide things
honest in the sight of all men. And in 1 Timothy 5. 8. But if any provide not for
his own, and especially for those of his own house, he has denied the faith,
and is worse than an Infidel. And thus, as the word is applied to men.

2. The term is transferred to God; and so it is,

1. Decretal, Original, Ordinative, and is nothing else but the eternal
Platform of things, the original Draught or Copy of them, Isa. 40. 12, 13, 14.
Acts 2. 23. Acts 4. 28.

2. Actual or Executive, which is the Counterpane or Copy of that Copy, and
notes more than a mere inspection or looking through the wood or bushes of
Second Causes and Contingent Events. Abraham's belief does note more than a
mere insight, when he says to Isaac, God will provide himself a Lamb for a
burnt-offering, Gen, 22. 8. According therefore to this later acceptance of
the word, I may thus describe it, as the description is founded on the Sacred
Scriptures, viz.

Providence is a work of God, whereby he sustains, governs, orders, all the
Creatures, according to the good pleasure of his will, to his own glory.

It is a work] As there are the works of Creation, so there are the works of
Providence. It is said Deuteronomy. 32. 4. His work is perfect. And Psalm. 44. 1. We
have heard with our ears, our fathers have told us, what work thou did in
their days, in the times of old. So Psalm. 77. 12. I will meditate also of all
thy work, and talk of thy doings. And Isa. 28. 21. That he may do his work, his
strange work, and bring to pass his act, his strange act. My Father works,
says Christ, John 5. 17.

Of God] So it is said, Psalm. 111. 3. His work is honorable and glorious. No
Person of the blessed Trinity is excluded: My Father works hitherto, and I
work, asserteth our Savior in the place forementioned, John 5. 17. The Spirit
of God moved upon the face of the waters, Genesis 1. 2. And ^ thus in the Creation
there was an agency of the Spirit; so in the works of Providence, Isa. 48. 16.
-- and his Spirit has sent me. And Mat. 4. 1. Then was Jesus led up of the
Spirit.

Whereby he sustains] So Psalm. 50. 12. Uphold me with thy free Spirit. And
Psalm. 66. 9. Which holds our soul in life. And Heb. 1. 3. Upholding all
things by the Word of his Power.

Governs and orders] So Job 25. 2. Dominion and fear are with him. Psalm. 22.
28. For the kingdom is the Lord's, and he is the Governor among the nations.
Isa. 9. 7. Of the increase of his government and peace there shall be no end,
upon the throne of David, and upon his kingdom, to order it, and to stablish
it, with judgment and with justice from henceforth even for ever. The zeal of
the Lord of Hosts will perform this. Jude v. 25. To the only wise God our
Savior be glory, and majesty, dominion and power, from henceforth for ever.

All the Creatures] Unto me every knee shall bow. Isa. 45. 23. All the
Creatures are his hosts who is the Lord of Saboath. Jam. 5. 4. For of him, and
through him, and to him are all things, Romans 11. 36.

According to the good pleasure of his will] He has done whatsoever he
pleased, Psa. 115. 3 I, even I am the Lord, Isa. 43. 11. My counsel shall
stand, and I will do all my pleasure, Isa. 46. 10. Who works all things after
the counsel of his will, Ephesians. 1. 11.

To his own glory] God's glory is nothing else but the irradiation or sparkling
forth of his divine excellency. He consults the glory of his Attributes in his
work of Providence. His work is honorable and glorious, Psalm. 111. 3. As then
God acts from himself, and from no other; so for himself, his own glory
ultimately. For of him, and through him, and to him are all things, to whom be
glory for ever, Amen, Romans 11. 36.

Having thus pointed at the Scriptures on which, with the like others, as a
firm basis or bottom, the Description stands: I shall now with my Coal draw
out the lineaments of the ensuing Discourse, which may be branched forth into
Five Parts. The First contains the Scripture-Arguments for the proof of what is
here supposed, namely, That there is a Providence. The Second takes in the
various Considerations or Distinctions of Providence. The Third treats of the
Object or Extent of Providence, in regard of the several things it is
conversant about. The Fourth presents, with Miscellaneous Aphorisms or
Observations on the Providence of God. The Last comprehends Directions for the
better improvement of God's Providential Dispensations. These are the Five
general Parts; and of these in their order, according to that Providential
phrase, Heb. 6. 3. And this will we do, if God permit.

A PROSPECT OF Divine Providence.
PART I.
THAT there is a Providence, (1.) appears from those Sacred Hieroglyphics,
Pictures, or Representations thereof in Sacred Scripture. He that shall climb
Jacob's Ladder in his Meditations, may behold the God of Providence at the top
thereof; Behold, the Lord stood above it, Genesis 28. 13. He that was above, had
an eye on what was beneath. I saw the Lord (says Micaiah) sitting on his
throne, etc. 1 King. 22. 19, etc. God's Providence is there Visioned-forth, or
set out to Micaiah. In the first Chapter of Job, there is a Providential scheme
or draught of what was to take place in Job's case there. Ezekiel's Vision of
the Wheels, is a confutation of the Wheel of Fortune. They who know God, have
the Wheel of Providence to meditate and discourse of.

2. From positive Assertions in Scripture: The Lord looks from heaven, he
beholds all the sons of men: from the place of his habitation, he looks
upon all the inhabitants of the earth: he fashioneth their hearts alike; he
considers all their works, Psalm. 33. 13, 14, 15. The eyes of the Lord are in
every place, beholding the evil and the good, Prove. 15. 3. Behold the fowls of
the air, for they sow not, neither do they reap, nor gather into barns: yet
your heavenly Father feeds them. Are ye not better than they? Mat. 26. See
also Mat. 10. 29.

3. From Divine Assumptions and Appropriations of the work of Providence to God
himself. When the Lord answered Job out of the Whirlwind, how does he
challenge to himself a supreme Agency in and over the Creatures? Who (says he)
provideth for the Raven his food? Job 38. 41. And in Isa. 45. 7. I form the
light, and create darkness: I make peace, and create evil: I the Lord do all
these things.

4. From Expostulations, Checks, Comminations, bottomed on the consideration of
Divine Providence. So Psalm. 50. These things have thou done, and I kept
silence: thou thoughtest that I was altogether such a one as thy self: but I
will reprove thee, and set them in order before thine eyes. Now consider this,
ye that forget God, lest I tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver, v.
21, 22. And so likewise in Psalm. 94. Understand, O ye brutish amongst the
people; and ye fools, when will ye be wise? He that planted the ear, shall he
not hear? He that formed the eye, shall he not see? He that chastises the
heathen, shall he not correct? He that teaches man knowledge, shall he not
know? v. 8, 9, 10.

5. From the Religious forms of speech: by which are implied the verity of
God's Providence, extending to affairs in the world. Thus says the Lord of
Hosts, the God of Israel, As yet they shall use this speech in the land of
Judah, and in the Cities thereof, when I shall being again their captivity, The
Lord bless thee, O habitation of Justice, and Mountain of Holiness, Jer. 31.
23. For that ye ought to say, If the Lord will, we shall live, and do this or
that, James 4. 15. I trust (says Paul) to tarry a while with you, if the Lord
permit, 1 Cor. 15. 7.

6. From Prayers made to God. The Scripture has no Altar for an unknown God.
We are not taught to pray to Fortune, to our own Wills, Saints or Angels: None
of these are the Father which is in Heaven, whose is the Kingdom, the Power,
and the Glory. The Orthodox Prayers of Saints, are demonstrations that they
were not Heterodox in the point of Providence; they acknowledged a Providence
on earth, who were ever and anon looking up in prayer to the God of Heaven. See
Ezra 8. 21, 22, 31. Neh. 2. 4, with 18. Romans 1. 10.

And thus I have showed how there is a Providence; This was an old Article of
the Saints Creed. I shall for further clearing up the point, 1. Lay down other
Arguments. 2. Reply to some Objections. 3. Draw some Consectaries or
Inferences. Of these in their order.

CHAP. I.
1. FRom God himself: And so observe, 1. That the appellations or titles given
to Him, are implications of the thing. He is Jehovah, who gives the Creatures
their being and operation, Acts 17. 28. He is the Judge of all the earth, Genesis
18. 25. He is the King of all the earth, Psalm. 47. 7. He is the First Cause; I
will hear the heavens, and the heavens shall hear the earth, etc. Hos. 2. 11.
Non sane multum interesse, utrum quis Deos esse neget, an eos omni procuratione
atque action privet; mihi enim, qui nihil agit, esse omnino non videtur.
Cicer. lib. 2. de not. Deor.
To deny then his Providence, is to take up the Bucklers against these no less
glorious, than true Appellations of his. But, 2. His glorious Attributes of
Power, Goodness, Wisdom, Justice, are as so many demonstrations of his
Providence: for all these, the World existing, are not dormant: These
Attributes are richly interwoven in the works of Providence. The Scripture
says unto Pharaoh, Even for this same purpose have I raised thee up, that I
might show my power in thee, and that my Name might be declared throughout all
the earth. Romans 8. 17. Thou art good, and do good. Psalm. 119. 68. O Lord, how
manifold are thy works! in wisdom have thou made them all: the earth is full of
thy riches. Psalm 104. 24. But God is the Judge; he puts down one, and sets
up another. Psalm. 75. 7. Lastly, The Lord's creation of the World does,
according to the Logic of the Scripture, infer his Providence: For, 1. He is
called, the faithful Creator, 1 Pet. 4. 19. The Lord leaves not the stately
House of the World, after he has erected it. 2. Considerations or Motives for
supportation and consolation, are couched in God's creation of the World: so
that they who have an interest in God, may hope for a display of his Attributes
in his government of the World: so in Isa. 40. Have thou not known, have thou
not heard, That the everlasting God, the Creator of the ends of the earth,
faints not, neither is he weary? etc. v. 28, 29. 3. There is an indissoluble
or firm knot knit betwixt the Lord's creating and governing the World: for,
what is Providence but a kind of continued Creation? and therefore that word is
used to set forth Providence by in Scripture; see Psalm. 51. 10. and 104. 30.
Isa. 43. 7. Again, to acknowledge God the Creator, and some other the Governor,
is, to rob the Lord of his glory; against which robbery he vehemently
protests, as in Isa. 42. 8. Lastly, observe, in Isa. 45. the same God there,
who made the Earth, and created Man upon it, in v. 12; raised up Cyrus, and
prospered him, in v. 13. There is no reason then to break the band of amity or
alliance betwixt Creation and Providence, which the Lord so conjunctively
owneth and appropriateth to himself, see Jer. 27. 5, 6.

2. From Providence it self. There is an intrinsecal or inbred light in
Providence, by which it is seen. But ask now the beasts, and they shall teach
thee; and the fowls of the air, and they shall tell thee: or speak to the
earth, and it shall teach thee, and the fishes of the sea shall declare unto
thee; Who knows not in all these, the hand of the Lord has wrought this? Job
12. 7, 8, 9.

There are four things observable; the first whereof is general; the other
three more special: but all of them corroborate or confirm the testimony of
Providence. That which is general, is the admirable and wise disposition of
things. The Creatures know their ranks and files; so in Psalm. 74. The day is
thine, the night also is thine; thou have prepared the light and the sun: thou
have set all the borders of the earth: thou have made summer and winter, v. 16,
17. Simul etiam a facili argumentatur: Cum talia praestes quotidie, quanto
facilius potes nos liberare? Molleras in loc.
Note here, how the words do not only declare an exact and constituted order in
naturals; but do likewise imply a rich display of Wisdom, in the vicissitudes
and successions of distresses and deliverances, which are wisely timed by the
Providence of God for his people. And to this purpose tends the scope of the
Psalmist here.

The things special in the Providence of God, are, 1. The transcendency or
extraordinary visibility of it in some matters. Providence oftentimes mounts
aloft above the reason of second Causes. Thus the Centurion, and they that were
with him, watching Jesus, when they saw the Earthquake, and what was done, they
feared greatly, saying, Truly this was the Son of God, Mat. 27. 54. 2. The
wonderful adaequateness and proportion of a dispensation. An instance for this
is that in Judge. 1. 6, 7. As I have done (says Adonibezek there) so God has
requited me. 3. The correspondency or accord of a disp^nsation with Divine
Predictions and Comminations. So the raising up of Cyrus, Ezekiel. 1. 1, 2, 3, 4.
compared with Isa. 44. 28. and 45. 13. And so likewise the Jews under their
calamities might behold the convincing-hand of Providence; when their language
is, Like as the Lord of Hosts thought to do unto us, according to our ways, and
according to our doings; so has he dealt with us, Zech. 1. 6. And not only the
crushing-dispensations by the Babylonian, considered in conjunction with the
threatenings of the Prophets, carry the more of a conv^ncing-light in them; but
likewise those by the Romans, foretold by Daniel, and more nearly intimated by
our Savior, Mat. 24. 15, 16. Luke 23. 28, 29, 30. I shall here annex what
Josephus a Jew has as pertinent to the matter in hand, Antiq. lib 10. c. 11.
and so pass to the next Argument.

At the same time Daniel wrote as touching the Empire of the Romans, how it
should destroy our Nation; and has left all these things in writing, according
as God declared unto him; so that they who read and consider those things that
have happened, admire Daniel for the honor God has dignified him with; and
find thereby that Epicures err, who drive all Providence from human life, and
affirm, That God governs not the affairs of the World; or, that the World is
administered by an happy and incorruptible essence, which causes all things to
continue in their being: but say, that the World is managed by it self, by
Casualty, without any Conductor, or such an one as has care thereof: for if it
were so, and that it were destitute of a Sovereign Governor (as we see Ships
destitute of their Pilots, to be drowned by the Winds; and Chariots, that have
no Drivers to conduct them, to beat one against another; even so should it
ruinate it self). By these things therefore that Daniel has foretold, I judge,
that they are far estranged from the truth, that affirm, That God has no care
of human affairs: for it we see that all things happen casually, then happen
they not according to this Prophecy.

3. From the Absurdities on the contrary. 1. The World, in regard of the comely
economy or administration of it, which takes place, would not be a World,
whilst it is a World: for if there are evil Angels, and these so malicious and
mischievous as the word of God affirms; these would mar the beauty of all,
and turn all into heaps of confusion, were there not a curbing-Providence, as
is fully declared from Job, chap. 1 and 2. and Mat. 8. 31, 32. In both which
places men may behold Beelzebub with his Companions in the Chains of Providence.

2. The Checks of conscience, and fears on the spirits of men, would be but a
false fire, and groundless fancy, if there were not a Providence; and this is
contrary to that of the Apostle in Romans 2. 15. where he speaks of an accusing
and terrifying Conscience in the Heathens, who stood in some awe of a Deity, or
a Providence controlling them and punishing them for their mis-deeds. The
barbarous people of Melita had an observation of Vengeance pursuing Murder, as
may be collected from Acts 28. 24.

3. A gap to Atheism, Brutality, and all manner of profaneness, would be opened
by a Si providentia Dei non praesideat rebus humanis, nihil est amplius de
religione satagendum. August. Si autem homo eo devenit, ut secum cogitet nullam
esse providentiam, and Deum nostra nihil curare, patefecit jam sibi januam ad
omnem nequitiam, audet quid vis tam dicere, tam facere, nec ullum repriprimit
affectum, quaere and diabolus ejus rei non ignarus, contendit omnibus viribus
hominem eo inducere, ut divinam providentiam neget. Lavat. in Job c. 22.
denial of God's Providence: If this deep be broken up, no wonder if a deluge
or flood of ungodliness follow. What the Apostle does infer from the denial of
the resurrection, will be the first use of such a wicked doctrine, 1 Cor. 15.
32. Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we dye: but surely Humanity, much more
Christianity, dictates otherwise.

CHAP. II.
THough the Doctrine of Providence be written with a Sunbeam, yet there are
some mists and fogs, by reason whereof, some are at a puzzle, and ready to
question the truth of God's Providence.

The great and common Objection is, The seeming confusion in the World by
reason of the fury and tyranny of some wicked ones, who prosper in their
attempts on others, better than themselves; and not only Heathens of the wild
Common of the World, but others of the enclosed Garden of the Lord, have
hereupon been staggered; as Psalm. 73. v. 2, 3.

I shall not here fall in with a large discourse by way of reply to this
Objection: In short then, let it be considered,

1. Whatever there is of proper ataxie, disorder, or confusion, is not to be
charged on the Lord, who is not the author of confusion, 1 Cor. 14 33.

2. There is a wise and righteous method of God in all the disorders and
confusions of men. Providence is in the head of the Creatures, observing a
goodly order, when the Creatures to our apprehension keep neither rank nor
file. A serious search then being made into the disorders and barbarous
insolences of men, it will be so far from dismantling the Throne of
Providence, as that it will clear up the eye of faith, to behold the Lord
sitting there, and sceptring it over the proudest and most outrageous Monarchs
of the World. I saw the Lord sitting upon a throne, says the Prophet, Isa. 6.
1. and yet in the same Chapter we read how Cities were to be wasted, without an
Inhabitant, and the houses without men, and the Land to be utterly desolate, v.
11. The same Prophet has a Divine Treatise on this subject, in the tenth
Chapter, where indeed the Prophet plays the Casuist, and gives satisfaction to
the doubt, Isa. chapter 10.

There are some other Objections, which the weakness or perverseness of man does
start from places of Scripture: I shall name them, and so reply.

First, From that passage of David, 1 Samuel 24. 14. Let us now fall into the
hand of the Lord; and let me not fall into the hand of man.

Ans. 1. The meaning of David is not to deny the Providence of God as reaching
to the Swords and Spears of an Enemy; he had not so learned Providence: for he
who was a man of war, was also a pious Soldier, and observed God's Providence
in the field. See Psalm. 18. 31, 32, 33, 34. Psalm. 78. 62.

2. The sense then must be otherwise; and that either, 1. By way of a
comparative opposition between the righteous and eminent hand of God in the
Pestilence, (as 2 Samuel 24. 16.) and the wicked hands of men, who will, with
their victories, insult over Religion, and blaspheme God with their tongues,
which upon this account cut deeper on the tender Consciences of Saints, than
Swords and Battle-axes do on their flesh. See Psalm. 74. 18. and 137. 3, 4, 5,
6. Isa. 37. 1, 14, 15, with 23, 24. According then to this interpretation,
David may be understood: and if not so, though not excluded; then, 2. By way of
popular allusion: David speaks after the manner of men, as Benhadad, 2 Kings
20. 31. or as a Child, who having incurred his Father's displeasure, is
desirous to be corrected by his Father, and not to be turned over to some base
Slave for correction: and the rather he desires this, because he has to do
with a Father. After this sort, David's phrase of speech may be understood; and
that, 1. Because he renders this as a reason for his choice, For very great are
his mercies, 1 Chronicles. 21. 13. 2. Because in other places of Scripture God is
set forth as a Father, whose bowels turn whilst the rod is in his hand, Psalm.
103. 13. with Hos. 11. 8.

Another place of Scripture is Zech. 1. 15. For I was but a little displeased,
and they helped forward the affiiction.

Ans. Nothing else can rationally be inferred ^nce, but an aggravation of the
fury and cru^y of the Church's Enemies; they intended, hoped, and endeavored,
an utter extirpation of the Church, when God intended a purgation. This (says
a modern Divine) made God as angry with those he set a-work, as them against
whom they were employed: So hateful is cruelty and ambition to him, and so
different is his mind and man's in inflicting the same punishment. Compare with
this, Isa. 47. 6. and 10. 5. 2 Chronicles. 28. 9. Psalm. 69. 26. Ezekiel. 25. 12. Obad.
v. 10. Ezekiel. 26. 2.

Another objection may be from 2 Cor. 4. 4. where Satan is called the God of
this world.

Ans. He, who is worshipped, obeyed, dreaded by some as a God, is still a
limited Devil. He who has sinners at his nod, is still at the beck of the
Lord. The common Hangman has not the power of life and death, because he is
the Sherif's under-officer. The Devil is an Executioner of Divine Wrath, but no
absolute Lord. Paul never meant otherwise; for he acknowledges the Lord as
Supreme; who, though he permit Satan to work in the Qua persuasione suffultus
Paulus, profectionem suam quam in uno loco (1 Thessalonians. 2. 18.) dixerat a Satana
impeditam fuisse: alibi (1 Cor. 16. 7.) in Dei permissione statuit. Calv.
world, is still above him; yea, therefore above him, because he does permit
him.

Lastly, That in 1 Cor. 9. 9. Does God take care for Oxen? may be objected.

Ans. The Apostle does not deny the Providence with respect to Oxen; (for that
is plainly asserted in Scripture, Exodus 9. 3. Psalm. 8. 7. Psalm. 114. 14.) but
his purpose is to back the Doctrine of Ministerial maintenance from thence; and
that, as mystically or typically held forth by the labouring-Oxe, who had the
privilege to be without a muzzle; or rather by arguing a fortiori, thus: Does
God take care for Oxen? he does: and therefore, if the Lord would have equity
observed toward the labouring-beast, much more should they, who labor in the
Lord, have their double honor. See 1 Timothy 5. 17, 18. The Lord values a good
Minister more than Oxen; though some men, worse than Beasts, value their Oxen
more than their Minister. The place then being thus understood, is a proof for
the Doctrine of Providence: for the great Lord of the World has an eye, in his
Providence, on the very dumb Beasts, who have God for their speaker.

CHAP. III.
THE Consectaries or Inferences from the Doctrine of Providence, now follow;
which, in short, shall be pointed to: A larger amplification is here waved,
seeing occasion will be offered to say more in the other Parts of this Treatise.

First then; It is no less dangerous, than erroneous, to deny the Providence of
God; for, Conniventia Dei non est caecitas. Calv.
the connivence or winking of Providence, is not blindness. They who will not
see God in his Providence, may justly feel him to their woe. If the Meditation
of Providence be not a Lo^d stone ^ draw men from Sin to Virtue; God may justly
make some dispensations of Quod si Providentia mundus regitur and unius Dei
nutu gubernatur, non nos debet antiquitas imperitorum, fabellis suis delectata
vel capta, ad errorem mutui rapere consensus; cum Philosophorum suorum
sententiis refellatur, quibus and rationis and vetustatis assist it authoritas.
Minucius Eelix, in suo Oct. p. 61.
his to become a Millstone: Apposite and full for this purpose, is that in
Zeph. 1. 12, 13. And it shall come to pass at that time, that I will search
Jerusalem with candles, and punish the men that are settled on their lees, that
say in their hearts, The Lord will not do good, neither will he do evil:
therefore their goods shall become a booty, and their houses a desolation: They
also shall build houses, but not inhabit them; and they shall plant vinyards,
but not drink the wine thereof. See more by way of Commination for their
Atheistical Reasonings about Providence, in ver. 14, 15, 16.

2. Behold the Foundation-stone for a religious acknowledgment of the hand of
God both in prosperity, and in adversity! The pleasant streams of the one, and
the bitter rivulets of the other, flow from the Spring-heads of Providence.
Agur acknowledges this in that prayer of his, recorded Prove. 30. 8. And so Job
in his doxology or thanksgiving, Job. 1. 21. yea, God himself does attest this
in his contest with Israel, saying, For she did not know that I gave her corn,
and wine, and oil, and multiplied her silver and gold, which they prepared for
Baal: therefore behold, I will return, and take away my corn in the time
thereof, and my wine in the season thereof; and will recover my wool and my
flax given to cover her nakedness, Hos. 2. 8, 9.

3. There is a proper and full object for faith and meditation to be conversant
about, Videmus ergo non posse fidem nostra stare firmam. nisi semper occurrat
nobis Providentia Dei; quod scilicet in rebus confusis sciat, cur tantum
permittat licentiae reprobis: deinde quorsum evasuri sint eorum conarus, and
quis tandem futurus sit exitus. Nisi ergo hoc nobis persuasum sit, Deum arcana
Providentia moderari res turbatas, centies quotidie, imo singulis momentis
Satan excuteret nobis fiduciam, quae debet quiescere in Deo. Calv. in Hab. 1.
v. 12.
in order to the tranquillity of the soul, and that in the midst of all the
great concussions, terrible aspects of second-causes, windings and turnings of
affairs that are or shall be in the world. Let it be considered in whose hand
the government of the world is, and then though Heaven and Earth do come
together, a gracious heart, and solid quiet, will not be far asunder. God is
our refuge and strength, a very present help in time of trouble: therefore will
not we fear though the earth be removed, and though the mountains be carried
into the midst of the sea; though the waters thereof roar and be troubled,
though the mountains shake with the swelling thereof. Selah. Psalm. 46. 1, 2, 3.
The Lord is good, a strong-hold in the day of trouble, and be knows them that
trust in him: but with an overrunning flood he will make an end of the place
thereof, and darkness shall pursue his enemies, Nahum 1. 7, 8. See more, Rev.
2. 10. and 7. 2, 3.

PART II.
THE various Considerations or Distinctions of Providence (so termed for our
better apprehension) come now to be spoken unto; and these may be ranged into
several orders: as,

1. In respect of the Parts (as some call them), or Form (as others term it),
namely, supportation or upholding, and gubernation.

2. In respect of the Object about which Providence is conversant.

3. In respect of the Mode or Manner how Providence is conversant about matters.

4 In respect of the End, Issues, or Event of Providence.

Of these a little in their order.

CHAP. I.
PROVIDENCE, as upholding the Creatures, may be considered,

1. With respect to their Beings: Neh. 9. 6. Job 33. 4. Psalm. 104. 30. Act. 17.
28.

2. With respect to their Well-beings: Psalm. 105. 37. Psalm. 144. 12, 13, 14.

Now opposite unto this Consideration of Providence, is Providence considered
as deserting: As there is Providence upholding, so there is Providence
withholding its influence: Thou (says the Psalmist) hidest thy face, they are
troubled: thou take away their breath, they dye, and return to their dust,
Psalm. 104. 29. and 102. ver. 26.

Deserting- Providence respects, (1.) the beeings of things as such, Psalm. 90.
5. Jer. 52. 13. Dan. 5. 30, 31.

2. The well-being: Egypt to be a Kingdom, but a base or low one, Ezekiel. 29. 14.
Mephibosheth a Man, but a maimed or lame one, 2 Samuel 4. 4.

Again, Providence as Governing or ruling, may be considered,

1. By way of Motion, direction, and ordination of the Motion to such ends and
uses as God intends, Acts 17. 28. 1 Kings 11. 14. Ezra 1. 1. Genesis 50. 20.

2. By way of Inhibition, or checking the Creatures in their operations; and
this is,

1. Absolute, or eminently controlling them, Exodus 11. 7. Exodus 14 22. 2 Kings
19. 32. Dan. 3. 29. and 6. 22, 23. John 19. 36.

2. Comparative, partial, or in part, 2 Chronicles. 12. 7, 8. Rev. 2. 10.

CHAP. II.
PROVIDENCE, in regard of the Object, is,

1. General, as it respects the whole world, Psalm. 135. 6. Prove. 15. 3. Heb. 1.
3.

2. Special, as it respects, (1.) Persons, or intelligent natures. (2.) Things.

1. As it respects Persons, or intelligent Natures; and so it comprehends,

1. Angels; and that (1.) Good, Heb. 1. 7. Acts 12. 11. (2.) Bad, who are
subjected to Providence, 1 King. 22. 21, 22. Job 1. 9, 10, 11. Mat. 8. 31.

2. Men; and that (1.) singly or particularly, as Genesis 28. 12, 13. Exodus 2. 6.
(2.) Conjunctively or relatively; and that (1.) in regard of Family-relation, 2 Samuel 23. 5. 1 King. 14. 10. (2.) In regard of a Political combination, as
persons are united under this or that form of Civil Government; all the
Governments in the world are under a higher Government: See Jer. 25. 15, to 27.

3. In regard of an Ecclesiastical or Spiritual Society, Providence does
signally and more peculiarly respect the Church of Christ, Deuteronomy. 26. 48. Psalm.
135. 4. 1 Timothy 4. 10.

Again, Providence respects Things, as well as Persons; and that,

1. Animate, which have life; as Trees, Herbs, Fishes, Fowls, Beasts of the
field, Psalm. 104. Jonah 1 17. and 4 6. Mat. 6. 26, 28, 30.

2. Inanimate, without life; Job 38. 22, 23, etc. Psalm 48. 8.

CHAP. III.
PROVIDENCE, in regard of the manner, how conversant about its objects; is
variously distinguished: In the first place, it is Effective, or Permissive.

The former respects the production or bringing forth of whatever has a real
or proper being, whether natural, moral, spiritual, as James 1. 17.

The later respects the anomy, irregularity, warping aside from the Rule of
Righteousness; and this as inherent, or adherent to the natures, motions,
actions, of intelligent natures, whether Angels or Men. This Permissive
Providence is not a moral concession, or legitimation, or warranting from
Heaven what is done: but a not-hindring by way of physical or natural
interposition, or not-putting forth of a force inhibitive or curbing. Neither
is it a mere beholding the evils; for there is an efficacy of Providence,
though not an efficiency (as the Orthodox term it) with respect to the sins of
men; and there is more in Permission, than an idle contemplation of matters.
See Heb. 6. 3. 2 Samuel 12. 11.

Again, Providence is (1.) ordinary, which keeps the usual road or instituted
order both in naturals and spirituals: See Psalm. 19. 4, 5. 6. Jer. 31. 35, 36,
37. Romans 10. 17.

2. Extraordinary, which is opposite to the former, as John 10. 12, 13. 2 Kings
20. 9, 10, 11. Acts 9. 3, 4, 5.

Here if I might (though I affect not innovations in Divinity) I would
distinguish Extraordinary Providence into that which is (1) Really and properly
miraculous. (2.) Eminently and remarkably wondrous. I may set forth this by an
allusive Instance: For a Child to throw a strong Man to the ground, and that by
grappling with him hand to hand, may well be interpreted miraculous; there
being no proportion of strength in the Child to that of a Mighty man. And yet
suppose the man is sitting according to a tottering posture in a Chair, so that
his body is in equal po^ze, a small push of a child sends him headlong to the
ground. In like manner Providence, by a wonderful conjunction of weak means in
themselves, and by opportune application of means, brings forth a work very
glorious. See Judges 4. 21. and 7. 16, 17, 18. 2 Chronicles. 24. 23, 24.

Lastly, Providen^e is distinguished into immediate and mediate. Immediate
excludes the interposition or intervening of means; instruments which God uses
at other times: as, when the Lord himself preached to Adam, Genesis 3. 9. Moses
lives, but not by the use of the creatures, Exodus 34. 28.

2. Mediate, when the Lord uses means, (1.) more common or general, as the
Angels for their ministry; the Heavens and the Earth for Corn, Wine, and Oil.
See Psalm. 148. and Hos. 2. 21, 22. (2.) More peculiar, and particularly
destinated for such ends and purposes, Isa. 38. 21. Acts 10. 5, 6. the Angel
will not there take away Peter's work; he wills Cornelius to send for Simon
Peter (not Simon the Tanner) for his Teacher.

Moreover, Means in order to Effects and Consequents, are,

1. Necessary, or definite; which ordinarily work this way, and no other; as,
for the Sun to shine and give forth heat, Psalm. 19. 4, 5, 6.

2. Contingent and indefinite; whose effects, before they exist, might not so
have been, as considered with their next Causes; though otherwise in respect of
God, his will to the contrary, the said effects are necessary; So the bones of
Christ were not broken, John 19. 31, 32, 33, with 36.

CHAP. IV.
PROVIDENCE, in regard of the End, Issues, and Events, has its considerations.

1. The End is ultimate, or last; and that is the Glory of God, Romans 11. 32,
33, 36. or intermediate, which is the creatures serviceableness and usefulness,
according to its place or station, in order to the former. So the Heavens and
the Earth are Caterers for Jezreel, and that to the Lord's glory, whose bounty
and mercy are displayed in hearing the Heavens and the Earth for Jezreel, Hos.
2. ver. 21, 22.

Again, the Issues of Providence respecting matters, are sometimes by way of
furthering and succeeding things, so that the ordinary particular End is
attained: so when God hears the Heavens, the Heavens the Earth, the Earth the
Corn, and the Wine and Oil, and they hear Jezreel, Hos. 2. 21, 22.

Or, secondly, By way of dashing things, notwithstanding a probability of such
and such Ends, though not of such Ends as Providence intends, where and when
the Lord crosses, disappointeth, or thus dasheth in his Di^pensations. See
Isa. 7. 5, 6, 7. Hag. 1. 6. 9, 10 11.

Lastly, The Events of Providence are,

1. Joyful; which terminate in the good, comfort, happiness of the Creature,
Exodus 14. 30, 31. Esth. 9. 22.

Or, secondly, Mournful; or by way of smart, distress, tribulation; as Exodus
14. 27, 28. 2 Samuel 1. 12.

Thus I have marshalled up the several Distinctions or Considerations of
Providence: There are other subordinate Considerations of it, yet reducible to
some of the forementioned Heads of Distinction or Consideration. What those
other Considerations are, I may only point at.

Providence then may be considered as direct and collateral: An instance for
the former, is the Lord's stirring up Cyrus in order to the delivery of his
people, Ezra 1. An illustration for the later, may be the Philistines invading
the Land; which (at least in regard of any such thing intended by them) was a
by-blow for David's deliverance, 1 Samuel 23. 26, 27.

Again, Providence may be considered as more plain and obvious, so that he who
runs may read; or more dark and intricate. Moreover, It may be considered as
single or in part; and as copulative, as when the whole of a business is laid
together.

Lastly, It may be considered, as concealing for a time; or revealing, bringing
things to light. These and the like Considerations being exemplified in the
following pages, I forbear enlargement here, and so pass on to the Third Part
of the Treatise.

PART III.
THE Extent of Providence has been touched by an enumeration of Creatures to
which it extends, as in the former Part of this Treatise has been showed. To
avoid then prolixity and repetition, I shall here (1.) Prove the extent of
Providence to all the Creatures. (2.) Improve this Doctrine of General Extent,
by giving the Consectaries or Inferences from thence: and under this later,
shall launch forth into some particular arms of this Sea, where the passage may
seem more difficult by reason of the noise of the Water-spouts, the swelling of
the waves and billows to the contrary. And first then of the first.

CHAP. I.
THE proof for the Extent of Providence, appears diverse ways, as here briefly
to be insisted on, follows.

1. From express assertions in Scripture: The assertions have their latitude;
they know no bounds of man's restriction: so Neh. 9. 6. Thou even thou art Lord
alone; thou have made heaven, the heaven of heavens with all their host, the
earth and all things therein; and thou preservest them all, and the host of
heaven worshippeth thee, say that godly company there on their solemn Day of
Humiliation, v. 1, 4. In the Ark God not only took care of Noah, but of the
creatures: It Is an observable expression which is in Genesis 8. 1. And God
remembered Noah and every living thing, and all the cattle that was with him in
the Ark. To this add^, what the Lord himself asserteth to this purpose in the
38, 39, 40, 41 chapters of Job.

2. From God; without whose will, and against whose will (the will of Purpose;
nor of Precept, discovered in his Law-giving Rules for man), nothing comes to
pass. Are not two sparrows (says Christ) sold for a farthing? and one of them
shall not fall on the ground without your Father, Mat. 10. 29. Who is he that
says, and it comes to pass, when the Lord commands it not? Lam. 3. 37.

3. From the Creatures; which because they are Creatures, are not independent,
or exempted in point of dependency, from the first Cause. These (says the
Psalmist) wait all upon thee, that thou may give them their meat in due
season, Psalm. 104. 27. See further other places of Scripture, which are quoted
upon other particular accounts, though upon the general account of Providence
they are repeated, as Hos. 2. 21, 22. Acts 17. 28.

4. From the cognation or kinship of Providence with Creation, Providence (as
was before intimated) is a kind of continued Creation. God not only gives the
creatures their beds to lie on, but (bear with the phrase) makes their beds. As
Creation therefore is extensive to the creatures without exception, as Genesis 1.
25. so likewise is the Lord's upholding them and governing them to his own
glory. See Psalm. 89. 12, 13, etc.

CHAP. II.
FIRST then, from the Doctrine of the Universal extent of God's Providence, it
may be evinced, That vain and false is the conceit of those, who though they
allow a Providence, yet narrow it in regard of the Object; as if so be
Providence reached to some of the more noble of the creatures, and not to
others. Whatever the Philosophy, or rather the extravagancy of Philosophy,
dictates, true Divinity lessoneth otherwise. Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that
did he in the heaven, and in the earth; in the seas, and in all deep places,
Psalm. 135. 6. Nam ex creatione colligit Deum actualiter moderari quicquid in
coelo and terra agitur: quia absurdum esset, coelos a Deo creatos fortuito nunc
volvi; and res vel hominum arbitrio, vel temere and casu misceri in terra; quia
proprium Dei est tueri and gubernare quicquid condidit: Ne cum profanis
hominibus imaginemur pulcherrimi hujus theatri conspectu otiosum frui. Calv. ad
locum.


In the second place then; Here is a large field for contemplation of, and
meditation on, the Providence of God. Providence, which reaches to all things,
teaches man to eye God in every thing, and to beware of slighting him in any
thing. There are five tracks or paths of Providence which here I shall point
out at, and so encourage the Christian to set foot in them for his good and
benefit.

The first is, the path which Providence beats out through the heads and hearts
of men, in Civils as well as Sacreds.

2. The cleanly way of Providence through the dirt and mire of men's sins.

3. The straight road of Providence, notwithstanding the many lanes, windings,
and turnings of contingencies.

4. The Church-yard-way, or the sable walk of Providence to Golgotha, or the
place of skulls:

5. That lesser, trivial, and scarce a way of Providence (to carnal reason) in
matters of smaller moment.

All these I may well call the beaten paths of Providence. I see no reason why
we should not eye the Almighty in these paths. Be not therefore (O Christian)
at a stand here, as they were at the place where Asahel fell down, 2 Samuel 2.
23. Here is no bloody Asahel; I mean, no such black and bloody notions in
asserting the walk of the Lord in these paths.

SECT. 1.
That the Providence of God reaches to the Wills of men, is questioned by
some; but truly asserted by others, and that according to the sacred
Scriptures: For,

1. They who seem to be most arbitrary in the world, are yet asserted to be in
subjection to Providence: the Great-ones of the World owe homage to the Great
Lord of the World; though they are Lords of men, yet not of Providence.
Solomon, who says of a King, He does whatsoever pleases him, Eccles. 8. 3.
says also, The Kings heart is in the hand of the Lord, as the rivers of water;
he turns it whithersoever he will, Prove. 21. 1. Christ averreth to Pilate's
face, saying, Thou could have no power at all against me, except it were
given thee from above, John 19. 11.

2. The reason why men take this or that course, is in some respect attributed
to the Providence of God, as overruling. Sampson is for a Timnah-Damosel; his
Parents knew that it was of the Lord, that he sought an occasion against the
Philistines, Judge. 14. 4. Saul went home to Gilead, and there went with him a
band of men whose hearts God had touched, 1 Samuel 10. 26. See more 1 Samuel 11. 5,
6. Mat. 21. 2, 3.

3. The Prayers of Saints do imply the truth of this assertion. God Almighty
give you mercy before the man, that he may send away your other brother, and
Benjamin, says Jacob to his sons, who were now setting forward to Egypt, Genesis
43. 14. See also Neh. 2. 4. with the following verses, which give to understand
Nehemiah's belief in this point; and so likewise that of the Apostle, 1 Timothy 2.
1, 2.

4. There are clear instances of God's inclining, winding and turning the
hearts of men, and that contrary to their natural bias and probable
inducements which might sway them another way. Laban lays not violent hands on
Jacob, though covetousness and fury might edg him on so to do. See Genesis 31. 7.
29. Esau had an inveterate hatred against Jacob; and howbeit he is kind and
complemental, Genesis 33. 4. The Lord gave the Israelites favor in the sight of
the Egyptians, Exodus 12. 36. Cyrus let go the captives without price and
reward, Isa. 45. 13.

5. The Providence of God is conversant about the senses of men. The
hearing-ear and the seeing-eye, the Lord has made even both of them, Prove. 20.
12. Notable instances there are of the mavelous extent of Providence to the
eyes and ears of men! Witness the Sodomites blindness, or want of discerning
Lot's door, Genesis 19. 11. The Syrians were led in a dance by the Prophet to
Samaria, 2 Kings 6. 18. In like sort the Lord is said to make the Host of the
Syrians to hear a noise of Chariots, and a noise of Horses, even the noise of a
great Host, 2 Kings 7. 6. Now Providence, which thus walks in the Porch of
men's senses, walks from thence into the Parlour of the nobler faculties of
men's Understandings, Wills, Affections. There is a natural intercourse betwixt
this lower and upper house of man. Reason not only takes a true, but even a
false alarm of the Senses, as in the place last mentioned; The King of Israel
(said the Syrians one unto another) has hired against us the Kings of the
Hittites, and the Kings of the Egyptians, to come upon us: wherefore they arose
and fled, 2 Kings 7. 6, 7.

6. The considerable revolutions, changes, issues of matters in the World, turn
in, and turn out at the doors of men's hearts. What is stated and accorded at
this Council Board, has a considerable influx on the affairs of Nations and
Kingdoms. Ahasuerus his heart is toward Esther, chap. 5. 3. and 7. 3, 4. and
what a change follows both in Court and Country, after, the following History
declares. Let a Darius be partially won to own Daniel's God, and what a change
is there in his Dominions? Dan. 6. 26, 27. Augustus Caesar is resolved on a
Tax, and what an influence has that throughout the Roman Empire? Luke 2. 1.

Lastly, The Objections to the contrary, namely, That Providence does not thus
reach unto the hearts of men; have no weight in them.

First, It Is objected, Where is then man's liberty?

Ans. Where is, on the other hand, the Lord's Prerogative-Royal over all men,
and all of men? Is not the Lord, King of kings, and Lord of lords? Has not he
the supreme Agency in and over the hearts of men? Do not men think, advise,
determine thus and thus? and yet the answer of the tongue is from the Lord, see
Prove. 16. 1.

2. Let the Objectors reconcile man's liberty with the fore-knowledg of God
(which is not denied); and the like reconciliation may be found with the Will
and Providence of God. Look at what door the fore-knowledg of God goes out at,
without a justle at the wills of men: at the same door the Will and Providence
of the All-wise God can and do go forth.

3. The Scripture has plain and full instances of accord betwixt man's liberty
and Divine Providence. Saul acted freely in seeking his Father's Asses; and yet
the Lord had told Samuel before, I will send thee a man out of the land of
Benjamin, 1 Samuel 9. 16. The King of Babylon resolves, and that freely (having
used his divination), to go against Jerusalem; and this holds correspondence
with the threatenings of God by the Prophet, against the Inhabitants of
Jerusalem, Ezekiel. 21. 18.

4. Man therefore acts freely, because God has constituted in him a freedom
from coaction and brutish determination. The Lord has embellisht the foul of
man with the noble faculties of Reason, and Election, so as that he differs
from a Beast; and has a liberty in acting, though not a liberty of absolute
independency. He who learns to swim, puts forth his hands and feet freely,
though another hold and guide his head. And this may serve by way of reply to
that first Objection.

2. It may be asked by some, Would not this Doctrine make God the Author of sin?

Ans. 1. Would not a denial of God's Providence about the Wills of men, make
them the Authors of Grace? Surely such Doctrine which robs the Lord of his
glory in working on, changing, and renewing the hearts of men, is not of God,
Isa. 26. 12. Phil. 2. 13. 1 Cor. 4. 7.

2. It may be replied then to the Objection, with that of the Apostle to the
like; God forbid; for then how shall God judge the world? Romans 3. 6. The holy
God, who made the house of man's soul, and the several rooms thereof, knows all
the nasty corners of the sinner, and can go in and out in his Providence,
without defiling the garment of his Holiness. The Sun shines on the Dunghill,
and is not therefore a Dunghill-light. Whatever the Assyrian was, and his
design was, all bad enough; yet God himself distinguishes betwixt his own
work, and the Assyrians barbarous Villainies, Isa. 10. 12. We are not then to
make a confusion, where the Lord makes a distinction. What is proper to sinful
and sinning man, let man have: what is proper to a Wise, Just, Powerful God,
let God have. He that holds a stone and a piece of Cork under water, is not
because he withdraws his hand, the proper intrinsecal cause of the one its
sinking, and the others its swimming; for both stone and cork do equally
participate in the hand: the stone does not therefore sink, because the hand is
withdrawn; for then the cork should sink too: and the cork does not therefore
swim; for then the stone should swim too. This may a little illustrate the
matter to weaker capacities. It Is a mystery, and has its knots; yet it is
unreasonable therefore still to dispute, and not to believe. The Scripture does
plainly lay before us, how God, Men, and the Devil, had a concurrence in Job's
case; a work of Providence there was, though not for the like end, and in the
like manner, with a malicious Devil, and plundering Sabcans and Chaldeans:
Providence knows how to do cleanly work by the foul hands of sinners.
Caiaphas was the Trumpet of a glorious Prophecy: He is like a servant who
broacheth a barrel in a drunken humor: the Master of the house may well punish
the servant for his lust, and yet wisely order the vessel to be drawn forth for
the use of the family. It Is wonderful indeed to consider, how the Lord's arrows
are shot in men's bows! and how he throws a Jewel in their Slings! But so it
is, as it appears notably from that instance of Caiaphas. See John 11. 50, 51.
with 47, 48, 49, 53.

The Consectaries from the Doctrine of Providence, as here respecting the
hearts of men, are these:

1. Absurd then is the conceit of those who would have men exempted from the
influx and conflux of Providence. The Creatures of a lower form are under the
Law of Providence, and that too in reference to man, Psalm. 104. 14. And are not
men much better than they, as Christ argues, Mat. 6. 26. There is little
reason, and less divinity, to deny the subjection of the greatest of men to the
controlling Providence of God. Daniel preached no such Doctrine at Court; he
asserts before Belshazzar, saying, The God in whose hand thy breath is, and
whose are all thy ways, have thou not glorified, Dan. 5. 23.

2. There is reason to eye God's Providence even then, when men's hearts are
hardened and filled with fury toward persons. True it is, God instilleth no
venom of sin into their hearts; but yet there is a wise and righteous hand of
Providence in this case, -- He turned their heart to hate his people, to deal
subtly with his servants, Psalm. 105. 25. Men would do well therefore, not
only to look upward to God, but also inward on their souls, and backward on
their lives; and may they not cry out then, Men have done us wrong, but God
has done us right? The sons of Belial are injurious, but the hand of
Providence is righteous; righteous, righteous!

3. It is a pious and prudent course to begin with God, when we have to do with
men, especially in matters of greater consequence. So did Esther; she fasts,
and her Maidens, the Ladies of Honor fast; and the Jews in Shushan, the
Metropolitan City, fast, before she makes her address to Ahasuerus, Esth. 4.
16. and surely there is encouragement so to do; for the Lord can work more ways
than we can imagine, on the hearts of men: sometimes he knocks out sparks of
pity from flinty hearts, Psalm. 106. 46. He made them also to be pitied of all
those that carried them captives. At other times he awes, startles, and does
bring to pass great things by fears, which take hold on men's souls with their
tenter-hooks. See Josh. 2. 11. Act. 22. 29.

4. Know to whom the tribute of praise and thankfulness is due for what of
Providence is displayed in the conveyance of mercies by a touch from Heaven
this and that way, on the hearts of men on earth. David has a song for God's
delivering him out of the hand of Saul, 2 Samuel 22. chap. Now one way of David's
delivery, was by an access of Providence to Readiness heart, 1 Samuel 26. 25, etc.
with chap. 27. v. 4. The same man of God has left records of God's Providence
in his deliverance from Achish, who looked on David as a madman, and so
slighted him without trial made, or making sure work with him, who though he
had been under a frenzy for the present, might after become a sober Captain
to lead an Army against the uncircumcised; see Psalm. 34. with 1 Samuel 21. 14,
15. Austin relates, how by Euchirid.
the loss of his way, he found his safety in escaping the bloody Donatists, who
had waylaid him. There was a good man, who traveling on the road, and
intending for a certain place, meets with one party, and asks the way to
another place for which he intended not, and which place he very well knew. The
man sets forward, and meets with another party, and demands alike from him,
and puts forwards to the place he intended for, but not the place he so asked
for. A while after, an Officer unknown to him, was following him on the scent;
and meeting with the first party, describes the man whom he hunted for, asking
whether the party saw such an one? who replies, Yea, and he asked the way to
such a place. The like answer was given him by the next party, who met him. And
so upon this light given, the man groped in the dark, and the poor Minister
escaped the snare, having had a kind of Providential Comment with Austin on
that Text, Prove. 20. 24. Man's goings are of the Lord.

SECT. 2.
That the Providence of God reaches to the sins of men; yet so, that it cannot
truly be impeach't with pollution (for as wicked men participate not in the
righteousness of God, though he uses them, their lusts, in a righteous way,
for his glory: so Providence participates not in men's unrighteousness, though
they are the righteous instruments of Providence, as Jehu, and the Aslyrian
King) has ber fore occasionally been intimated: the less here may therefore be
spoken; and that the rather, seeing more will be in another Part of this
Tr^atise I shall then lay down some Argument in the general for the proving of
it; and then adjoin some proper instructions from thence. The Arguments from
Scripture are as following.

1. The punishing of sin with sin, or sin as a righteous judgment of God, is
ascribed to God, and owned by Him. Thus Ezekiel. 14. 9. And if the prophet be
d^ceived when he has spoken a thing, I the Lord have deceived that prophet;
and I will stretch out my hand upon him, and will destroy him from my people
Israel. Romans 1. 24. Wherefore God also gave them up to uncleanness, through the
lusts of their own hearts, to dishonor their own bodies between themselves. 2
These. 2. 11. And for this cause he shall send them strong delusions, that they
should believe a lie. Causa igitur obdurationis est voluntas avertens and haec
initiat, voluntas resistens and haec continuat; Culpa promerens and haec
confirmat: Deus gratiam non dans; and haec non liberat. Deus just puniens and
haec ordinat. Gerson in 2da part Operum. p. 349.


2. The handing good in and through the sins of men, is the work of Providence.
The good handed, is (1.) Spiritual: So the death of Christ, with the
inestimable benefits flowing from thence, is set forward by the sin of the
Jews; Him being delivered (says Peter) by the determinate counsel and
fore-knowledg of God, ye have taken, and by wicked hands have crucified and
slain, Act. 2. 23. The conversion of souls, and the exercise of converted ones
graces, are set forward by the furies of men, through an overruling
Providence; see Act. 8. 5, 6, 7, 8. Phil. 1. 12, 13, 14. (2.) Good temporal; or
as it refers to the outward man, is brought about this way. Joseph
acknowledges so, Genesis 45. 7, 8, 9. We read in 1 Samuel 30. 13, 14, 15. how the
barbarous cruelty of an Amalekite toward his sick servant, was an introduction
to the recovery of captives and goods, which the Enemy there had carried away
from Ziklag. I have read how the Protestants of Beziers in France, were
wonderfully preserved on this wise: A drunken Drummer going to his Quarters in
the midnight, rings out the larum-bell of the Town, and at that very instant
the Enemies were at the Wall seeking and ^ssaying for a surprisal of the Town.

3. If God's Providence be knocked off from sinners, his Government will be
little, or no Government: for, the greatest part of men in the world are such,
in whose hearts sin has its regency: see 1 John 5. 19. Ephesians. 2. 2. this then
were to narrow the supreme regency of Christ, Scriptura ostendit non solum
bonas renatorum voluntates, quas ipse facit ex malis; verum etiam illas, quae
conservant saeculi creaturam, ita esse in Dei potestate, ut eas, quo voluerit,
quando volueri faciat inclinari, vel ad beneficia quibusdam praestanda, vel ad
poena; quibusdam ingerendas, sicut ipse judicat; occultissimo quidem judicio,
sed sine dubitatione just issimo. August. de great. and lib. arbit. cap. 20.
who rules in the midst of enemies, according to that in Psalm. 110. 2.

4. God has his various ways of access to men's sinful and sinning
dispositions, judgments, Manisestum est, operari Deum in cordibus hominum ad
inclinandas eorum voluntates quocunque voluerit, si^e ad bona pro misericordia:
sive ad mala pro meritis eorum, indicio utique sno aliquando aperto, aliquando
occulto, semper autem justo. August. de great. and lib. arbit c. 21.
and affections; some of these ways are explicable, others inexplicable, yet
all righteous. We may safely wade in these waters, having the Scripture for a
guide. Three ways, amongst others, as explicable in comparison of other
footsteps of Providence without footsteps to be seen and traced by the weak
eye of mortal man, the Scripture points out: as, (1.) That way of Providence in
the denial and substraction of such help, assistance, prosperous influence,
which the Lord is not obliged to give or continue. Thus the Lord, in times
past, suffered all Nations to walk in their own ways, Acts 14. 16. and so the
Spirit of the Lord departed from Saul; and no wonder then if the spirit, in
regard of political influences, breathes not as formerly, that both Family and
Kingdom go down the wind. See 1 Samuel 16. 14. 1 Chronicles. 10. 13, 14. Moreover,
another way how Providence is concerned here, is, by letting loose Satan this
and that way to work. Satan is a skilful Engineer, to go through with the black
work which by a Divine permission and commission he undertakes: so its said,
There came forth a spirit, and stood before the Lord, and said, I will persuade
him* and the Lord said unto him, Wherewith? and he said, I will go forth, and I
will be a lying spirit in the mouth of all his prophets: and he said, Thou
shall persuade him, and prevail also: go forth and do so, 1 King. 22. 21, 22.

Lastly, There are occasions offered, whereby wicked ones, yet through their
own lusts, are ensnared. The waters of the Sanctuary are pure and good; men's
lusts, like lime, are inflamed, when these waters are providentially cast on
them. Amaziah is causlesly offended with wholesome counsel. The bridle to check
sin, becomes a spurr to edg him on in the road-way of sin, where he meets with
a break-neck fall at last, 2 Chronicles. 25. 15, 16. Pertinent for this purpose is
that in Isa. 6. 10. Make the heart of this people fat, make their ears heavy,
etc. and that in Isa. 28. 13. The word of the Lord was unto them precept upon
precept, precept upon precept; line upon line, line upon line; here a little,
and there a little; that they might go and fall backward, and be broken, and
snared, and taken. And thus for the Arguments; the Instructions follow.

1. Take no encouragement to sin, because God's Providence is righteously
versant about sin. Some there were in Paul's days, who did fly-blow his
Doctrine, and pretend absurdities from thence, Romans 3. 8. On what hindg their
corrupt reasoning did hang, is intimated, v. 5. The Apostle does reply there,
as one well observes, Dr. Sclater
(1.) by way of caution, I speak after, or according to man; that is, not in
mine own person, as if I either approved or devised such a deduction. 2. By way
of detestation, G^ forbid! that shows his abhorrency 3. By way of confutation,
else how shall God judge the world? The manner of answer may in Logic seem
absurd, but is in Christianity the best that can b^ shaped to deniers of
Principles; neither was it want of skill that made the Apostle deny the
conclusion; but wisdom rather, to direct God's children how to carry themselves
toward such as question undoubted Principles: still hold evident truths; yea,
though thou know not how to assayl doubts raised by men of corrupt minds, and
destitute of the truth -- The direct answer is not here expressed by the
Apostle; partly, for the cavil is so odious, that it required rather
detestation than answer; partly, because the answer was so obvious, that any
man might frame it: See what it is; the answer is on this manner; That it
follows not, because the illustration of God's glory flows not from our sins,
either by the nature of them, or by the intention of the committer; but by
accident rather.

2. Make not apologies and defenses for sin committed, by way of reflection on
the Providence of God. There is an evil this way. Adam says, The woman whom
thou gave me to be with me, she gave me of the tree, and I did eat, Genesis 3.
12. Aaron does little less than glance at Providence, in giving a form to the
Calf, I said unto them (says he to Moses) whosoever has any gold, let him
break it off: so they gave it me, then I cast it into the fire, and there came
out this Calf, Exodus 32. 24.

3. Eye the Providence of God in and about sin; so as to admire, love, and
thank him, who is wonderfully gracious, even when men are monstrously vicious.
Joseph did look through the villainies of his brethren, to the All-wise
Providence of God, Genesis 50. 20. Peter, who arraigns the Jews of Murder, in Acts
2. 23. breaks forth into Doxology, or large Encomion of the free grace of God,
displayed in the death and resurrection of Christ, whom the Jews had so
barbarously murdered. See 1 Pet. 1. 3, 4.

SECT. 3.
What is meant by Contingents here, may be demanded by some of a weaker
understanding. I shall therefore premise a few things, before I close in with
the proof of the extent of Providence to these. Contingents then in the general
are such, which according to their proper nature in themselves considered, have
an hability, propensity, or inclination, to act this way or that, and to fall
out this way or that; and may here be considered three ways.

1. Contingents are considered, (1.) in equal balance; so that the effect and
consequent, before it is, is not determinable more one way, than another. (2.)
As having a propendulous and approaching propensity to one way, more than
another.

2. Contingents are considered, (1.) in regard of natural things; these may for
distinction sake be termed Casual. (2.) In regard of voluntary Agents: Thus the
acts of the Will are accounted Contingent, in respect of the different objects
about which they are taken up; and also in respect of one and the same object,
but as differently versant about it, whether as willing, or nilling.

3. Contingents are considered as single; or implicated, so that there is a
combination or conjunction of them as casual, or voluntary, or both. An
exemplification hereof is in Joseph his case; there was an heap of
Contingencies, if we consider, his Father's sending him to his brethren, or not
sending him; his brethren's so acting as they did, or not so acting; the
Ismaelites passing by at that time, or not passing by; their buying him, or not
buying of him: moreover it is said, Joseph was cast into the pit, and the pit
was empty, there was no water in it, Genesis 37. 24. that there was a pit there
nigh at hand; and that this pit, which was receptive of water, and probably
destinated for that end, was now without water, is all contingent. Here we have
a Chain of Contingencies, some links whereof will contribute to the proof of
the matter in hand in what now follows, both by way of argument and
instruction.

First then, the Scripture plainly asserts the extent of Providence to
contingent matters. Solomon, who had made a deep search both into the works of
Creation and Providence, attesteth this; and that, (1.) with respect to
voluntary Contingents. Prove. 16. 1. The preparations of the heart in man, and
the answer of the tongue, is from the Lord. Men think to bring forth this and
that dish on the table, and in this or that order; but there is a wise
controlling Providence; Saepe apud se constituunt homines politici quid in
confessu judicum, ad milites, ad populum, apud principes dicturi sint: sed
responsionem linguae, Deus pro sua Providentia temperat. Exempla extant
oratorum, qui in magna frequentia hominum turpiter obmutuerunt. Concionatores
saepe rem aliquam, diligenter meditantur: postquam vero suggestum conscendunt
and omnium oculos in se conversos vident, trepidant: and quae diligenter
meditati sunt, quemadmodum optarent, proferre non possunt. Mala etiam sibi
dicendi homines proponunt, sed, nisi Deus justo judicio eos loqui permittat
quod volunt, nequaquam possunt. Exemplo res crit manifesta. Balaam ariolus,
corruptus pecunia regis Ammonitici, devovere Israelitas statuerat: sed velit,
nolit bona imprecari eis cogitur Quod de sermon dicitur, multo magis de sactis
est intelligendum. Lavat. Com. in locum.
such and such dishes come not on the table, the Council Table; or not in that
order are they placed, as was intended.

Again, (2.) with respect to Contingents natural, or casual; and so in the same
Chapter it is said, The lot is cast into the lap; but the whole disposing
thereof is of the Lord, v. 33. What is more contingent in it self, than a Lot?
yet here is the disposing-hand of Providence seen. Exemplifications there are
for this in Achan: the tribe of Judah was taken, then the family, and then the
person of the family, Josh. 7. 16, 17. and so likewise in Saul, see 2 Samuel 10.
21, 22. Thus we have the testimony of Solomon; and yet behold a greater than
Solomon does witness the same: for, what more contingent, than for a Sparrow to
be taken in net, or killed otherwise; and yet says Christ, Are not two
sparrows sold for a farthing? and one of them shall not fall to the ground
without your Father: Mat. 10. 29.

Secondly, If Contingents were without the bridle of Providence, God should be
some petty Lord, not an Absolute and Universal Governor over the World: yea,
remove Contingents, and farewell to the Government of the World. Let these be
dumb Ciphers in the Table of Providence, and the speaking Figures will become
silent ones. To judge by way of proportion; let there be a survey taken of the
Providence of God in the case of Joseph; set by the Contingencies, and what
becomes of that Map or Landscape of Providence? Certainly the Province of
Contingents is of vast extent; so much may be gathered from that passage,
whether of the wise man, or the foolish man, brought in by the Wise man, yet
speaking truth in regard of the extent of Contingencies, Eccles. 9. 11. Time
and chance happens to all.

Thirdly, Matters of considerable and great consequence, hang on this nail of
Contingencie: As,

1. The prevention of great dangers. A contingent-dispensation does set a guard
to wonder. Joseph his life was in an ordinary way (if not somewhat
extraordinary) saved by the empty pit, and the Merchants, who did traffic with
his brethren for such living Goods. And so Moses his life did hang on the cord
of Contingencies, see Exodus 2. 5, 6.

2. An inlet to great stirrs, tumults, and combustions, is by virtue of a
Contingency. The coal of an intestine war was blown by Sheba, who happened (as
it is said) to be there: 2 Samuel 20. 1. see also Judge. 8 1, 2, 3.

3. Great advancements are brought about by Contingencies. The Butler opens his
mouth at Court for Joseph; he was before silent; ingratitude had set a Padlock
on his lips, as himself acknowledges, Genesis 41. 9. Esther passed to her Royal
Palace through several doors of Contingencies. Mordecai likewise he finds
Contingencies to be the golden stirrup to his Honors: see Esth. 2. 21, 22, 23.
and chap. 6. 1, 2, 3.

4. The invention of Arts, and things of considerable consequence, have drawn
their first breath by Contingency. The invention of Guns, that deadly
instrument in war, which some think to be hinted in that of Rev. 9. Brightm In
locum.
17. is reported to be ushered into the world by a spark of fire falling into a
Mortar of sulphurous matter, and so gave an occasion for an essay what Powder
would do in a more exact Engine. Acosta relates how the Golden History of the
Indies, lib. 3. c. 6
Mines of the Mountain Potozi, were found out by an Indian going to hunt for
Venison; in the pursuit of the Beast, the Indian labored to ascend a steep
place, and laying hold on certain Plants, which yiedling, he espied in the
hole, or root, metal; and so by this means that Golden Mountain was discovered.

5. By Contingent-dispensations the Lord afflicts the sons of men as he
pleases. The blustering wind of distress gets in at this hole. Jonah's Wind,
Whale, Gourd, Worm, were all Contingents. Job in like sort drank deep of the
Lord's bitter cup; Contingent- Providence held forth the cup to that servant of
the Lord. Thou breakest (says the Psalmist) the ships of Tarshish with an
east wind, Psalm. 48. 7.

Lastly, Notable exploits, victories, are hereby brought about. That Egyptian
(by whose discoveries made, David became so victorious, 1 Samuel 30) might not
have been so left by his Master, or else have had some killing-potion of
Soldier-like Physic administered to him to put him out of pain: his not being
knocked on the head, proves the means for David's knocking down the Amalekites,
who (as it happened) were eating, drinking, and dancing, when David falls foul
on them, 1 Samuel 30. 16, 17. It is observable, how in Naval-fights, the Wind,
which is a Contingent at such a nick of time, is of great consequence. And not
only at sea, but at land, does Victory hang on Contingency. The Prophet Isaiah
gives a description of an happy concurrency of Contingencies, in order to a
triumphing-conquest; and all this with subordination to Divine Providence. And
he will lift up an ensign to the nations from afar, and will hiss unto them
from the end of the earth; and behold, they shall come with speed swiftly: none
shall be weary, nor stumble amongst them; none shall slumber nor sleep; neither
shall the girdle of their loins be loosed; nor the latchet of their shoes be
broken, Isa. 5. 26, 27.

Fourthly, In the glass of Contingent-dispensations, may be seen the Attributes
of God in a glorious equipage: As,

1. The Power of God, which is notably displayed in the Winds, Seas, etc. Psalm.
147. 18. 2 Chronicles. 20. 37.

2. Mercy of God, as in the preservation of Joseph, Moses, and David, with
others.

3. The Justice of God; as when the two Bears came out of the Wood, and
devoured forty and two Children, 2 King. 2. 23, 24.

4. The Verity or Truth of God. Samuel anoints Saul Captain over the Lord's
Inheritance, 1 Samuel 10. 1. After this, the Lot finds out Saul, though he hid
himself amongst the stuff, v. 20, 21, 22. The Land of Canaan was divided by
lot; and the division holds correspondence with the Prophecy of Jacob before,
as may be instanced in Zebulun, Genesis 49. 13. with Isa. 9. 1. Josh. 9. 10, 11.

5. The Wisdom of God: By unthought-of Contingencies matters are brought to
pass in God's time. In Joseph's case all the Contingents were the Bridge of
Providence for the Dreams to pass over into the Land of Egypt for their real
accomplishment.

Having thus given the proof for the extent of Providence to contingent
matters; there are these Lessons or Instructions which are of use.

1. There is no reason to slight Contingent-dispensations. The same Will of God
is the foundation of Contingents, which is of Necessaries, or things which are
not so in themselves considered as Contingent. A Sparrow has not the like
principle of life as an Angel, or Man; and yet the Sparrow falls not to the
ground without the will of the Father, Mat. 10. 29. Moreover, as has been
intimated, God does notably display his glory by a confederation or
concatenation of Contingents. Make not leight then of the least link of the
Chain. Remember who couples all together, and how he uses it.

2. Here is a check for the proud and insulting Adversaries of the Church. How
easily can God, by a Contingent-dispensation, present them with such a snarled
knot which shall be too hard for mortal fingers to unty? Haman was wonderfully
baffled in his Projects, and that by a juncture of Contingencies. The proudest
Child of Haman has no reason to boast of to morrow; for the morrow may bring
forth the death of the Plot, and the burial of the Plotter. There are
Contingencies, which to man's apprehension, at the first, seem no otherwise
than so many loose straws; but with these straws, artificially twisted together
by the hand of Providence, a Rope is made no less strong to bind, than Chains
and Fetters of Iron.

3. There is great encouragement to live in dependence on God for provision and
protection. Contingent-dispensations are oftentimes the Saints Exchequer and
Lifeguard. If one had asked a godly Israelite in the Wilderness, saying, Where
is your food? He must have answered, Above in the Clouds (a very high Cupboard,
out of the Children's reach), but on the morrow it will be had out from thence.
Again, if it had been said, What if an Enemy shall fall on you? It might have
been replied, That such a blow happened to the Egyptians behind, as no need to
fear them for one Forty years: and such fears had fallen in upon the hearts of
the Canaanites, before them; so that there is little ground to be dismayed.
Thus, through Providence, the Egyptians Frenzy at the Red Sea, and the
Canaanites Palsy, was the means of the Israelites safety.

4. Take notice of Mercies conveyed on the wings of Contingent-dispensations.
In this Treasure-house are Mercies of all sorts. The woman of Samaria happened
to come in a good time to Jacob's Well, where the Fountain of Life was open for
her, Joh. 4. 6, 7. Ruth goes a gleaning, and her hap was to light on a part of
the field belonging to Boaz, as it is said, Ruth 2, 3. and from a Gleaner she
becomes a Mistress in Boaz his Family, to whom she married, and at marriage
has the prayers of the good people in Bethlehem; which prayers of her
neighbors had a glorious issue; no less than Grandfather to a King is born to
the joy of Naomi, Boaz, Ruth, and the rest of the people of Bethelehem: See
Ruth 4. 11. to the end.

SECT. 4.
That the Providence of God extends to the deaths of men, may be illustrated,
1. More generally. 2. Particularly.


First, In the general, It appears from these and the like Arguments.

1. God gives life; and no longer than he upholds life, does it last. Thou
(says Moses) carriest them away as with a flood, Psalm. 90. 5. The Jews went
about to kill Paul, yet their design was ineffectual; as Paul gives the
reason, saying, Having therefore obtained help of God, I continue unto this
day, Acts 26. 21, 22.

2. If the Providence of God stoops to a Sparrow's falling on the ground, why
not to the grave of a Man? and yet Sparrows are not long-lived birds, as
Naturalists observe: they are birds of little value too. To deny then the
inference from Sparrows to Men, is to asperse our Savior's Logic, for so is
the scope of the Argument urged, Mat. 10. 29. with 31.

3. Death is an Evil of smart; and shall there be any evil in the City, and the
Lord has not done it? Amos 3. 6.

4. On the death of some persons, the adversity of a whole Nation is ushered
in: that is a significant place of Scripture for this purpose, in Lam. 4. 20.
The breath of our nostrils, the anointed of the Lord was taken in their pits,
of whom we said, Under his shadow we shall live among the heathen. And thus
briefly in the general.

Secondly, In the next place, more particularly, Consider the extent of
Providence, 1. To the Kinds of death. 2. To the Timing of death.


First, As for the Kinds of death, they may be distinguished thus:

1. Natural; as being affixt to nature since the fall of our first Parents,
Genesis 3. 19. By natural death here, is understood the dissolution of man from
Principles of Mortality within, though there should not be any violence from
without: Thus some, according to the Providential disposition of the Almighty,
come to the grave in a full age, like as a shock of corn comes in his season,
Job 5. 26. see for this, Deuteronomy. 34. 5. Psalm. 90. 10.

2. Violent; when the candle of life burns not out, but is puffed out, and that
by the hot breath of a raging Enemy, or the sentencing-mouth of the Magistrate.
Job's servants were slain by the Chaldeans and Sabeans, but not without the
Providence of God, as Job acknowledges, chap. 1, 15, 17, 21. Achan is stoned
to death; and yet glory is due to the Lord whom Achan had offended, Josh. 7.
19, 25, 26.

3. Casual; which though it may be violent, yet is here considered as not
intended by men as Agents, or Instruments. God's Providence reaches to
Chance-medly. The slaying of man accidentally, is said to be God's delivering a
man into the hand of the slayer: see Exodus 21. 13. Deuteronomy. 19. 5.

Secondly, The timing of the deaths of men, has its reference to the
Providence of God: for as he sets bounds to the sea, Job 38. 8. and has
determined the bounds of men's habitations, Acts 17. 26. so he has not left the
lives of men boundless. The truth of this will appear,

1. From plain places of Scripture affirming so. Job 7. 1. Is there not an
appointed time to man upon the earth? Are not his days like the days of an
hireling? Job 15. 5. Seeing his days are determined, the number of his months
are with thee, thou have appointed his bounds that he cannot pass. Eccles. 1.
1, 2. To every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under
heaven; a time to be born, and a time to dye. According here to Solomon's
Divinity, time or season for things fall under the Providence of God, and
particularly, birth and death are in the front of the catalogue of the
instances there: which we are (as one observes) to understand only according
to the event, what things fall out after God's appointment; not the lawfulness
or unlawfulness of them, what things should be by God's commandment.

2. From the reason rendered in Scripture, why some are not sooner removed out
of the world by the hands of violence, notwithstanding promissory, or rather
comminatory probabilities. John 7. 30. Then they sought to take him: but no man
laid hands on him, because his hour was not yet come. The same reason is
repeated John 8. 20. Christ backs the same reason as solid and true, when he
said to his apprehenders, When I was daily with you in the Temple, ye stretched
forth no hands against me: but this is your hour and power of darkness, Luke
22. 53.

3. From the verity of God in timing the deaths of persons according to
particular predictions. So in Isa. 7. 16. For before the child shall know to
refuse the evil, and choose the good, the land that thou abhorrest shall be
forsaken of both her kings. Pekah the son of Remaliah, was one of those Kings,
and his death is recorded 2 King. 15. 30. It is said of the Assyrian, Isa. 37.
7. I will cause him to fall by the sword in his own land. Here was a prediction
of death, the kind of it, and the place where; and accordingly it was
fulfilled, as it is recorded in the 37, 38 verses of the same Chapter.

4. From the peculiar Prerogative of God, as he is (1.) the God of Mercies, and
so he hands Mercies to men, 1. by their own deaths; they are taken away from
the evil to come. God houseth them in Heaven before the black storms fall out
on the earth. See 2 King. 22. 20. Isa. 57. 1. 2. By the deaths of others, who
are thorns in the sides of his people; the burning up of these thorns is a
joyful bonfire. So in 2 King. 13. 22. Hazael oppressed Israel; in ver. 23. The
Lord was gracious to them, and had compassion on them, etc. Now how the Lord
shows himself thus gracious and compassionate, we have in v. 24. So Hazael the
King of Syria died. Thus the Lord is a God of Mercies even in the deaths of
men. But then (2.) as the God of Judgment; and so not only wrath, but great
wrath, comes forth on the stage of the World in timing the deaths of persons.
The glorious terribleness of Justice is here seen; as (1.) when Providence
suddenly snatcheth a man from his fancied Paradise; Thou fool, this night thy
soul shall be required of thee, etc. Luke 12. 20. Death, as Providence does
judicially time it, has a sting in its sting: so in that Monarch, who was
slain in his Royal City by his own Sons, and while at his devotions in the
House of Nis^och his god. Isa. 37. 37, 38. (2.) When the deaths of many
thousands are timed together: The Lord is known by the judgment which he
executes, Psalm. 9. 16. We read of Seventy thousand men who dyed of the Plague
in three days time, 2 Samuel 24. 15. And in 1 King. 20. 29. the children of
Israel slew of the Syrians an hundred thousand footmen in one day. Now if
there were not a Providence in the timing the deaths of persons, the glory of
Divine Justice would have its grave with the vast multitudes who fall by
Famine, Sword, or Pestilence; all which are the Lord's Arrows, as the Prophet
Gad informs David in 2 Samuel 24 12, 13.

5. From the success and non-success of means used in order to the proroguing
or lengthning forth of life. The preservatives of life are conservative of it
no otherwise than as the Lord pleases. This may be evidenced in three things.

1. In the use of Medicinal means, which sometimes (very improbable to reason),
avail to the recovery of health, and that though the person were mortally sick
in the judgment of the most accurate Physicians. There seems to be something
of Providence by way of proportion to that Cure wrought on Hezekiah by the lump
of Figs, as Isa. 38. 21. I acknowledge that Cure extraordinary, and shall not
dispute the question, Whether the lump of Figs might not have something of
natural tendency by way of cure? This is that I contend for, That Providence is
very much seen, if not in elevating improbable means, in themselves considered,
in order to a cure; yet in bringing to light such means which are improbable to
man's reason, though very proper for the recovery of the Patient, who, like
Epaphroditus, was sick, nigh unto death; but God had mercy on him, Phil. 2. 27.
And as the Lord's mercy, and Providence is displayed in the raising of persons
from the grave; so no less may the hand of Providence be seen in rendering the
means used for health succesless A College of Physicians are Physicians of no
value, when, and where the Lord, the great Physician, withdraws his
manutenancy, or succeeding hand of Providence: witness this in Asa, who had his
Physicians, but not his cure; dye he must; his disease lodges him in his
grave, 2 Chronicles. 16. 12, 13.

But, 2 dly, in the matter of Diet; some Creatures have more of a restorative
virtue than others; and yet some are healthier, fairer, live longer with their
Pults, than others who eat their portion of the King's meat. Dan. 1. 12, 15.
Whence is this? the word does plainly lesson, Exodus 23. 25. He shall bless thy
bread, and thy water; and I will take sickness away from thee. And Mat. 4. 4.
Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceeds out of the
mouth of God.

Lastly, In the greatest caution or circumspection men use to preserve
themselves in dangers. The King of Israel disguiseth himself, and has his
Armor; yet an Arrow finds its passage between the joints of his Harness, 1
King. 22. On the other hand Jehosaphat, who was in the same fight, and in
greater danger than King Abab, is preserved* It came to pass (says the Text)
when the Captains of the Charives saw Jehosaphat (in his Royal Robes) that they
said, It is the king of Israel; therefore they compassed about him to fight:
but Jehosaphat cried out, and the Lord helped him: and God moved them to depart
from him, 2 Chronicles. 18. 31.

6 thly, and lastly, From the absurdity which would otherwise follow. For if
the timing of men's lives here in the world, be not according to the bounds
which the Lord sets; then to whom shall the glory in point of preservation be
attributed? Shall men think themselves, or acknowledge Fortune, in
contradistinction to Providence? The Scripture otherwise teaches, Psalm. 31.
15. My times are in thy hand: deliver me from the hand of mine enemies, and
from them that persecute me. And Psalm. 68. 20. He that is our God, is the God
of salvation: and unto God the Lord belong the issues from death.

In the next place it remains, that some reply be made to the Objections which
look, and do but look, the matter here asserted in the face; and they are as
follows.

1. Fifteen years are said to be added to the days of Hezekiah, Isa. 38. 5.

Ans. The addition there is no new Addition, as it respects the Purpose of God;
it is rather a new Edition of the Purpose of God; a discovery of what lay hid
before, and is now made manifest, notwithstanding the contrary might be
concluded in respect of the malignity of Hezekiah's disease. To assert, that
there was a new Purpose of God, because of the declaration of the Prophet
there, were to make a new God, who is still the Ancient of days, and with whom
is no variableness, neither shadow of turning, as the Scripture affirms Him to
be, Dan. 7. 9. James 1. 17.

2. It may be objected, That in Psalm. 55. 23. Bloody and deceitful men shall
not live out half their days.

Ans. The days of men are considered according to the course of nature, Psalm.
90. 10. The days of our years are threescore years and ten, etc. and according
to the course of Divine Providence, which holds an exact accord with the
Purpose or Determination of God. I know (says the Prophet to Amaziah) that God
has determined to destroy thee, because thou have done this, and have not
hearkened unto my counsel, 2 Chronicles. 25. 16. Men live not then half their days,
according to the probable course of Nature, though they dye according to the
number of days fore-known or determined by God.

3. It may be objected, That some are the cause of their own death, and so dye
before their time, according to what is said, Eccles. 7. 17. Why should thou
dye before thy time?

Ans. 1. The same will hold, if it had strength, as to others being the cause
of the death of others, as the Jews, who killed Christ; and yet this horrid
fact of theirs was consistent with the stated time of Christ's Ministry on
earth, as was before proved, John 7. 30. John 8. 20. John 13. 1.

2. However some are the cause of their own death, yet not without the wise
Providence of God, either as righteously punishing them, 1 Samuel 31. 4 2 Samuel
17. 23. or graciously chastizing them, 1 Cor. 11. 30. For this cause many are
weak and sickly among you, and many sleep. So Josiah is in a sort accessory to
his own death; and yet he dies in peace, whilst he dies in war: his death was
but a sanctified flea-biting in comparison of the evil to come on his Kingdom;
he is removed from being a heart-broken Spectator of them, and lives not to be
the object of a barbarous and insulting Adversary's reproach and cruelty. See 2
King. 22. 20. with 2 Chronicles. 35. and 36: chap.

Now from what has been said as touching the extent of Divine Providence to
the death of persons, these four following Consectaries or Lessons may be
commended.

1. There is no reason to give way to anxious and disquieting thoughts, from
the consideration of difficulties, dangers, casualties, which may attend our
selves, or those related to us, in the way or calling in which God by his
Providence engages in according to his word, warranting the way or calling.
There is an irregular fear and disquiet, which leaps objectively from the black
face of second causes, into the hearts of men and women. Our Savior intimates
so much in Mat. 10. 28. the disease there, is Fears about the body; and the
cure of this disease, is by going into the Shop of Divine Providence, where a
remedy may be had, v. 29. the sweet and serious meditation on Divine
Providence, is the best Cordial under all fears and disquiets of this nature.
It comes to be the death of fears and disquiets which referrs to death. There
is a story of an Husbandman and Seaman communing together: The Husbandman asks
the Seaman, Of what Civil Profession his Father was? He replies, A Seaman as
he was, and so likewise was his Grandfather too. The Husbandman enquires, where
his Father died? Answer is made, At Sea, and so did his Grandfather too.
Hereupon says the Husbandman, Are you not afraid to go to Sea? The Seaman
asks the Husbandman, of what Profession was his Father? and after, his
Grandfather? and it being answered, They were both Husbandmen; he further
asks, where they died? Answer is made, At home in their beds. And are not you
(says the Seaman) afraid to go to bed? The application of this story is
easy, and needs not a screw.

2. It Is wisdom then for persons to interest themselves in the God of
Providence. Happy is that people whose God is the Lord, Psalm. 145. 15. there
are two great encouragements to look after an interest in God, as reconciled to
the soul in and through Jesus Christ.

(1.) None go with so strong a guard, as they who have thus the Lord for their
God. Christ tells his Disciples, that the very hairs of their head were all
numbered, Mat. 10. 30.

(2.) Whatever distresses Saints meet withal, suppose a violent death, they
have a counterpoyson or remedy against the evil of the evils. The Lord's John
Baptists lose their heads, but not an hair; they are then gainers when they
seem to be losers. There is enough by death to make amends for death: Blessed
are they which dye in the Lord, etc. Rev. 14. 13.

3. It may quiet the spirit, when God takes away, by death, Friends, Relations,
acquaintants: These dye not at hap-hazzard. The God of Wisdom places and
displaceth persons in the World, and all wisely and righteously. If Children
are with us like Jonah's Gourd, for a night; and then a Worm eats them to a
withering. There is no reason to quarrel with the Lord, who has variety of
wise Ends in the Gourd-dispensation of this Nature; We have reason to quarrel
with our unreasonable quarrellings at the Lord's bereaving us of Relations.
There was never a Marriage, but a Funeral as consequent: And yet does not the
Funeral of Relations usher in the Funerals of quietness and thankfulness to God
for the loan of comfortable Relations so long? If one lend us an hundred pounds
for some years freely, and after calls for it; Is there ground for disquiet and
fullenness, as if so be there had been no courtesy at all for diverse years?
How often do we forget our selves as men, and much more as Christians, in
matters of this nature! The Apostle Paul does caution against irregular sorrow
for death of persons, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 13. and an excellent Illud quoque, qua
justitia in omnibus rebus es, necesse est te adjuvet, cogitantem, Non injuriam
tibi factam, quod talem fratrem amisisti, sed beneficium datum, quod tam diu
pietate ejus tibi uti fruique licuit. Seneca de consolatione ad Polybium.
Copy is left for us to write by, when Death sets its cold hand on any of our
friends, 2 Samuel 12. 22, 23.

4. What ground is here for a mortified frame of spirit both to things and
persons in the world? Our days, and the days of others, will have their period.
We and others are like passengers in a Ship; who, whether they sit, walk on the
Decks, or sleep in the Cabins, are in motion toward the Haven. The World is
rather an Inn, than an accustomed Home-Stall, or Dwelling House: one generation
passes away, and another comes, Eccles. 1. 4. It Is folly then for the sons of
men to be elbow-deep in the thick clay of the world; as if so be they and their
wealth, their pomp and their pleasures, were to abide here for ever. Oh that
what the Apostle Paul advises, were engraven on the heart with a pen of Iron,
and the point of a Diamond! But this I say, brethren, The time is short; it
remains that both they that have wives, be as though they bad none; and they
that weep, as though they wept not; and they that rejoice, as though they
rejoiced not; and they that buy, as though they possessed not; and they that
use this world, as not abusing it: for the fashion of this world passes away,
1 Cor. 7. 29, 30. 31.

SECT. 5.
That the Providence of God extends to the meanest creatures, and things
trivial or of less moment in human apprehension, comes in the last place to be
insisted on; and this appears to be so from the following Arguments.

1. The Lord made creeping things as well as the Whales and Elephants. This is
plain from the History of the Creation, as is made manifest in Genesis 1. 24, 25.
Now if the Creation be comprehensive of things which move in a less sphere of
activity; Why should the said things be looked on as below the Providence of
God in point of gubernation, and ordering them to his own glory?

2. These are a part of the Universe, and so fall under the Providence of God.
The little-finger is not excluded from the influence of the Soul, because it is
not of equal bigness with a limb of the body-natural: if so in Man, the little
World, as he is termed by some; Why should it not hold, by the like parity of
reason, in the greater World?

3. We find how the Lord has condescended to give informations and directions
about meaner matters. The Laws given to the Jews have instances enough to
evidence Res erat parva, capellasiniri ab hireis compunctis and maculosis:
veruntamen Deus eo usque extendit suam Providentiam, monens ea de re Jacobum
per infominum Genes. 31. 12. ut Jacob disceret sidere Deo in magnis, videns eum
etiam ad haec minuta curam extendere. Moli^aeus in Enod. grav. quaest. p. 24.
this; and why should it then be thought beneath Providence in governing
matters of lesser consequence, when Laws have been enacted referring to lesser
matters.

4. The Scripture has frequent instances of God's Providence as versant about
the meanest and most inconsiderable matters: if we cast an eye at sea, there
shall we find, that the Providence of God not only respects the Tarshish-fleet
of ships, but also a single ship, and the broken pieces of that ship, Acts 27.
22. with 24. Not only a shoal of fish, Luke 5. 9. but a single fish, Mat. 17.
27. And if the eye, from its Sea-voyage, return, and walk at Land; there may be
seen the same God in his Providence on the shore. God's Providence reaches to
a Birds-nest, Psalm. 104. 17. and to Birds in the nest, Job 38. 4. Whether the
provision for the young Ravens, spoken of in that place of Job, be by worms out
of the dung in and about their nests, or by flies crossing over the heads of
the young ones, which flies are taken captive, and so serve for food; I shall
not largely discuss: it is enough to note, that they are cherished, and that
both ways, as is observed by some. And not only are the Birds, but Trees, where
they nest, and sing, within the verge of Providence. So the Fig Tree which our
Savior cursed, Mat. 21. 19. the Sycamore tree on which Zacheus climbed up to
see Christ, Luke 19. 4, 5. the Fig Tree under which Christ saw Nathaniel, Joh.
1. 48. All these were upon supposition of divine knowledge, so under the secret
Law of Providence, as that they were not to be cut down, ere such moral
references as these Trees had, were accomplished. Not only Trees, but Houses,
(beholding to the Trees for their materials) are subjected to the Providence of
God: Thus the Winter-house and the Summer House, the Palace and the College,
are liable to the gunshot of Providence, Amos 3. 15. and 6. 11. Yea, to say no
more, the Providence of God (with reverence be it spoken) stoops so low as to
concern it self in the shoes that are in House; the Angel said to Peter, Gird
thy self, and bind on thy Sandals, Acts 12. 8.

5. The meanest things considered in their uses, connexions, references, do
abundantly testify the Providence of God as extensive to them. Sampson's
Feast, and Riddle propounded at the Feast, are introductions to matters of
grand weight and importance, Judge. 14 The flying of an Arrow in battle is a
leight thing, yet this kills a King, and so the whole Army is routed, 1 King.
22. In our English History it is recorded of Richard the first Speed's History
of Britain.
how a Castle was offered him, if he would save the lives of the besieged: He
would not, but threatened to hang them: Hereupon a^ Arbalaster charged his Bow,
and with a square Arrow; making first his prayer to God, That he would direct
that shot, and delver the innocence of the besieged from oppression, it struck
the King, whereof he dyed. Mention is made likewise, how the Antistitis
praeclariindustria ad custodes captivi Principis literae componuntur in haec
verba, Edvardum occidere, etc. Advertite amphiboliam; si iste modo legantur
haec verba -- coedem prohibent: si vero sic -- jubent. God w. de praesul. Angl.
p. 283.
life of Edward the second, hung on the doubtful answer of Travistone not being
pointed: Edvardum occidere nolite timere bonum est, To kill King Edward you
need not to fear it is good. If the stop be placed at [ not], its sense is
different from the stop being set at the word [ fear]. Loyalty and Treason in
this point, are at a point. I might give other instances; as in a person's
stooping down to tie the shoe, and upon a sudden alteration of the posture, an
Horse at that nick of time comes by, is frighted, throws the party on Horseback
before; and what is consequent upon falls oftentimes, most know -- I have known
the life of a Child to be preserved by means of a thwart or bonding stick,
which has checked a board of weight from so falling down directly, as
otherwise the Child might have perished. And not only in matters of this life
have smaller matters their connexions and references; but also in matters of
Religion. Thus that man's bearing a Pitcher of water, Luke 22. 10. What is
(says a learned man Dr. Holdsworth in Ser. 2. on Luke 22. ^1, 12 [if that may
pass for the Doctor's with the others.]
) of less moment, than for a man to bear a Pitcher of water? What is a Pitcher
of water to God's Providence? Yes, God guided it to a good end to the
Disciples; showing them hereby, where they might eat the Passover.

6. If God's Providence should be denied to smaller matters; then,

1. Might it not as well be denied to greater matters? For smaller matters,
considered in their connextions, become greater matters. Who knows what are the
notable products, it may be, of things, little heeded by some for the present
season? Besides, a fair way is laid open to deny God's Providence in greater
matters; which become not so great circumstantially considered, as was before
intimated. Austin tells a story, how when one had said, That the Fly was made
by the Devil; a certain Manichee insinuates, That then by the same Devil is
made the Be, Locust, Lizzard, Ox, Elephant, and so Man --. Knock off
Providence in lesser matters, and a way is laid open for one to play the
Manichee in greater.

But 2 dly, To deny God's Providence in lesser matters, is to break that series
or chain whereby Divine Wisdom has ordered all. As in the workmanship of the
Tabernacle, there were Loops and Taches, and these had their use; and without
these, What would become of the Tabernacle? So here, Providence takes in a
Loop, a Tach, as well as the Purple, Blew, and Scarlet, of greater matters.

3. To deny God's Providence in lesser matters, Omnia gubernare, est Deo
gloriosum.
were to derogate from the glory of God, (1.) More generally, seeing its
glorious for God to have all at his check and control. (2.) More particularly,
seeing his glory does notably shine forth in and about smaller matters, as was
in the Miracle of the Lice, that the Magicians cry out, This is the finger of
God, Exodus 8. 19. No work indeed so little, but if Nullum est tam minutum Dei
opus, quod non in se contineat aliquid miraculi, ubi repuratur sicut decet.
Calv. in Zach. c. 8. v. 6.
looked into, bespeaks a great God.

Now from what has been said, I may briefly commend two things, seeing more
may be said of this nature in the following part of this Treatise.

1. There is no reason to judge the care of meaner matters as without the circle
of Divine Providence. It Is enough that our Savior Christ has decided the
controversy to an hair, and the natural color of an hair, Mat. 10. 30. with
Mat. 5. 36. if this satisfy not persons, I know not how to satisfy them. If
they knew what it were to Providence it over the meanest of creatures but for
one moment, they would Si tamen aliquis existimet istiusmodi (scilic. parvarum)
gubernationem parum convenire Majestati Dei is faciat periculum in re
abjectissima, number forte possit illam it a regere, ut ipsi sit ad nutum, and ab
ipso pendeat in omnibus, quae ad curam and gubernationem creaturae pertinent.
Fatebitur ille profecto, se in rei vilissimae gubernatione talia observare,
quae long sint majora, quam ut ab homine, imo ab hominibus in unum conflatis
praestari queant. Alsled. Theol. Cas. c. 54
see reason sufficient to acknowledge the Creator in all; and that as they
cannot make a Fly, so not providentially hold it up in its being, and govern
it.

2. There is the more hand-fast for faith Non se subducit Deus, ut cadas; sed
and de ipsis capillis nostris securitatem nobis dedit; quid times hominem homo
in sinu Dei postitus? j^cta in Deum curam tuam. August. Ser. 6. in Mat.
to lay hold on God for greater matters, seeing his Providence is versant about
smaller. Thus Christ teaches, Mat. 6. and so Mat. 10. 30, 31. And so I have
done with the Third Part of this Treatise: The Fourth now is to be prosecuted.

PART IV.
HAVING thus far launched into the Sea of Providence, where the Christian may
behold the wondrous works of God: Come we now to give a recital of the Sacred
Maxims or Observations which this Voyage will afford. And here I shall,

1. Prefix the Observation.

2. Affix the Illustration or Confirmation; together with the Accommodation or
Improvement of the Observation illustrated or confirmed.

OBSERVATION I.
The knowledge men have of the Providence of God, is imperfectly apprehensive,
not comprehensive.
CHAP. I.
THE truth of this appears, (1.) From positive assertions in Scripture, Eccles.
3. 11. He has made every thing beautiful in his time: also he has set the
world in their hearts, so that no man can find out the work that God makes
from the beginning to the end. (2.) From the Lord's posing parties about his
Providence: When he takes the matter in hand, as in the case of Job, How did
the Lord argue him into a modest silence? See chap. 38, 39, 40, 41. with chap.
42. v. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. (3.) From errors and mistakes about God's Providence;
which have more or less seized on not only men, but the best of men. Job's
Friends were no Atheists, but good men; yet says the Lord unto Eliphaz the
Temanite, My wrath is kindled against thee, and against thy two friends: for ye
have not spoken of me the thing that is right, as my servant Job has, Job 42.
7. (4.) From the ingenuous confessions or b^moaning acknowledgments of godly
ones. Lo (says Job) these are the paths of his ways; but how little a portion
is heard of him! Job 26. 14. So foolish was I (says the Psalmist) and
ignorant; I was as a beast before thee, Psalm. 73. 22. Surely I am (says Agur)
more brutish than any man; and have not the understanding of a man: I neither
learned wisdom, nor have the knowledge of the Holy: Who has ascended up into
heaven, or descended? Who has gathered the wind in his fists? Who has bound
the waters in a garment? Who has established all the ends of the earth? What
is his name? Or what is his Son's name, if thou can tell? Prove. 30. 2, 3, 4.

Moreover, the truth of this will further be evidenced, if we consider,

1. The Object, viz. Providential dispensations.

2. The Subject, Man under this or that dispensation.

To begin with the first of these. The Scripture does inform how that the Lord
is wonderful in counsel, and excellent in working, Isa. 28. 19. and he only
does wondrous things, Psalm. 72. 18. Look as what comes out of Heaven's shop,
bespeaks the skill of the great Workman of Heaven and Earth; so there are some
divine pieces of Workmanship (if I may so speak after the manner of men) which
hold men at an amazing or astonishing-gaze. More particularly: Two things in
Divine dispensations of Providence do notably gravel the sons of men. (1.) The
unusualness of a Dispensation. Rebeccah's War in her bowels makes her say, If
it be so, why am I thus? and she went to enquire of the Lord, Genesis 25. 22.
Job's afflictions in such sort, and befalling such an one who keeps up
communion with God; yea, prays for his Children, lest in their regular solace
of themselves together, they should be irregular; must in all likelihood
startle himself and his friends; who probably observing how God did then
ordinarily bless the Tabernacle of the righteous in regard of outward
prosperity, were the sooner induced to pass wrong censure on that holy man of
God. But in the next place, The intricacy of a Dispensation does likewise
contribute to the non-plussing or baffling of a party under the Dispensation.
We read in Ezekiel. 1. 16. of a wheel within a wheel: Whether that be to be
understood inclusively, as one wheel within being out of ken, and so there is a
secret winding of matters which the eye of reason discerns not: or, whether
in a transverse sense; and so it notes the thwart or cross-turnings of things;
when one while matters go this way, and another while that way, I determine
not: either of the interpretations give us the thing here contended for. To
this we may add some exemplifications of the intricacy of Providence. That in
Judge. 20. where the children of Israel had a good Cause and a Divine Warrant to
fight Benjamin; and yet they were worsted and put to the rout. Jacob had
warrant to return to his Country; a promise that God would deal well with him
in that return, Genesis 32. 9. and yet behold a Providence which seemingly clashed
with the Promise! Is this (might Reason be ready enough to prompt Jacob in the
ear) to be dealt well with? What! to have thy throat cut by Esau's Ruffians!
Here is a returning to thy Kindred indeed, by returning to thy dust! And yet
Jacob's black cloud blows over, and the Promise and the Providence do more
sweetly kiss each other than the two Brethren do.

In the next place consider, consider the Subject; and so man is not much
unlike Seneca's Harpesten, who complained the room was dark, when she was
blind. The light of Providence is not so taken in; partly, by reason of
darkness in the understanding; for, we know but in part, 1 Cor. 13. 9. and
partly, by reason of turbulent passions; which being crossed in this or that
dispensation, do raise a sog or mist, which cloud the understanding. How is
David transported on the death of Absalom! 2 Samuel 18. 33. How does Jonah's
pride and passion hinder him from subscribing to the Wisdom and Mercy of God in
sparing Niniveh! see Jonah chap. 4. Men had need therefore watch against
charming lusts and passions, which otherwise will join their additional issue
with the intrinsic darkness of the understanding; and so, like the Earth,
interpose between them and the light of Providence.

CHAP. II.
1. NO ground to throw by the observation of the Lord's Dispensations, because
our knowledge of them is not a comprehensive knowledge. It is a dangerous
inference from that of Peter speaking of Paul's Epistles, in which are some
things hard to be understood, 2 Pet. 3. 16. to reject therefore the reading of
the Sacred Scriptures. The like inference here from the things hard to be
understood in the course of God's Providence, is of dangerous consequence. What
is said of the Scriptures, how it is a River wherein the Elephant may swim, and
yet the Lamb may wade; the same, by way of proportion, may be said as touching
the Lord's Providential Dispensations; some of which, gravel the profoundest;
others are understood by the meanest for their instruction. Haman's
Counselors, and his Wise Zeresh, learned a cautionary lesson in the School of
Providence, they bid him beware how he engage against a Mordecai, a Child of
Providence: Esth. 6. 13. The Apostle Paul informs, how there is a common
Catechism of Providence for the World, Romans 1. 20. Moreover, it may be well
remembered here, That some Dispensations of Providence which are dark for a
time, may after become light to the industrious and waiting Christian on his
God. When I thought to know this, it was too painful for me; until I went into
the Sanctuary of God: then understood I their end, Psalm. 73. 16, 17. Lastly,
Such mysteries and riddles of Providence, the depth whereof we are not able to
fathom; yet by the light of God's word we are taught to subscribe unto, and to
rest contented, by way of admiration, where we cannot reach by way of
comprehension; Even so Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight, Mat. 11. 26.

2. No reason for any mortal man to pride himself in his seize. Though a
man be got up on the Mountain of Providence, and others are in the Valley, yet
that man is far enough from touching the sky. Two things may check pride upon
the account of knowledge here. (1.) The Angels in Heaven may learn by the
Providence of God on earth. That Heavenly Academy admits of an addition of
experimental knowledge; see Ephesians. 3. 10. 1 Pet. 1. 12. No man therefore knows so
much, but he may know more; and to be lifted up with high apprehension of man's
apprehensions, is so far from being wise as an Angel of God, as that the man
lies open to the condemnation of the Devil, as the Apostle teaches, 1 Timothy 3.
6. But (2 dly) he who has an high conceit about his knowledge in Divine
Dispensations, may quickly be mistaken in matters, and pay deer for his
mistake. We find how a good Prophet, by a pretended Providence of an Angel's
appearing, is prevailed on to do otherwise than he should have done, and that
to the loss of his life, 1 King. 13. 18, 24. Though a man therefore have made
more progress in the search of Word and Providence, than others; yet let him
remember, his knowledge is rather a twilight-one, than Meridian; and let him,
according to that in Psalm. 2. 11. serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with
trembling.

3. From this, learn to bid an hearty welcome to such means, helps,
furtherances, as God vouchsafes for the better understanding of his
dispensations. This inference is rational from the premised Theses or
Positions. The Cripple needs his Crutches, and no reason to throw them away
till he can go without them. There are two moving Considerations here:

1. It is dis-ingenuous to do otherwise. Shall God offer thee Spectacles for
thy weak sight, and will thou throw them against the wall, or trample them
under thy feet? It was the aggravating sin of the Gentiles, That they did
imprison the notions of Providence, which God had sent as guests into their
hearts: They held the truth in unrighteousness, says Paul, Romans 1. 18. Pharaoh
had Moses and Aaron, together with Catechising-Plagues; and yet he continues as
block-headed a King as ever sat upon Egypt's Throne; and just it was with God,
that such a Block should float on the waters, where Israel saw the great work
which the Lord did upon him and his Egyptians, Exodus 14. 31.

2. Herein is a display of Wisdom, To use kindly these Guests, I mean H^lps and
Furtherances for the better taking in of the mind of God in his Dispensations.
Abraham was no loser by entertaing the Angels as his Guests. He learnt that in
their company, which otherwise he had been ignorant of, Genesis 18. 17. It Is
wisdom then to set open the window-leaves for Heaven's light to come in on our
Understandings. Whosoever is wise, and he shall understand these things; prudent,
and he shall know them: for the ways of the Lord are right, and the just shall
walk in them, Hos. 14. 9.

OBSERVATION II.
Gods Decree, Will, or Purpose, is the original bottom, or foundation, of his
Dispensations in the world.
CHAP. I.
THE truth of this may be cleared on this wise:

1. There are Allusions or Similitudes it Scripture, which according to their
proper scope and drift, declare this. In Psalm. 139. 16. In thy book all my
members were written. Jer. 18. 4. So he made it again another vessel, a seemed
good to the Potter to make it. And it Zech. 6. 1. the Chariots there come out
from between two Mountains. This Text i^ Et hic aptissime nobis pingitur
consilium Dei quoniam antequam res in actum erumpant, sunt quasi inclusae inter
montium angustias: quod enim Deus decrevit, non apparet, sed est absconditum,
quasi lateret in altis montibus. Tunc ergo incipimus agnoscere Dei consilium,
ubi ipsa experientia nos docet hoc vel alio modo fuisse decretum quod prius nos
latebat.
a picture of the process of Providence. Things, before they come to pass, are
latent between these Mountains, as Calvin interprets.

2. Matters in Scripture are insisted on, as having a reference to God's Decree
or Will. (1.) Some things are referred to God by way of proper efficiency. Paul
speaks of vessels of mercy which the Lord had before prepared unto glory, Romans
9. ver. 23. What this preparing of the Lord is, the same Apostle does give to
understand, not only in that Chapter, but elsewhere, as Ephesians. 1. According as he
has chosen us in him before the foundation of the world, that we should be
holy, and without blame, before him in love; having predestined us unto the
adoption of children, by Jesus Christ, according to the good pleasure of his
will, v. 4, 5. and not only good supernatural, as Vocation, Justification, and
the like, center in the Purpose or Will of God, as the Apostle here shows:
but likewise, good natural and moral; for he has made a decree for the rain,
Job 28. 26. The fire and hail, snow and vapors, stormy wind, fulfill his word,
Psalm. 148. 8. Every good and every perfect gift is from above, and comes down
from the father of lights, James 1. 17. (2.) Other matters have a reference to
the Decree or Will of God, by way of a wise, righteous permission. It may be
observed how the Apostle speaks differently of the vessels of mercy, and the
vessels of wrath, Romans 9. the vessels of mercy the Lord is said to prepare unto
glory, v. 23. the vessels of wrath, are said only to be fitted to destruction,
v. 22. God infuseth no evil into them; and yet the evil of sin cannot be
without his Will so permitting; not by way of approbation, but physical
non-impedition, There is indeed a curious and spotless artifice of the Holy One
of Israel, even in and about the sins of men. He never acts deficiently from
the Rule of his Eternal Righteousness; and therefore the Lord's Willing sin in
a sense, is not to be ignorantly jumbled together with man's not-hindering, who
is under a Law to hinder it. I see no reason then to deny the reference that
sin has to the Will or Purpose of God. The Necdubitandum est, Deum facere
been, etiam sinendo fieri quaecunque male: non enim hoc nisi justo judicio
sinit, and profecto bonum est, omne quod justum est: nam nisi hoc esset bonum,
ut essent and mala, nullo modo esse sinerentur ab Omnipotente Bono, cui procul
dubio, quam facile est, quod vult, facere, tan facile est, quod non vult esse,
non finere. August. in Enchirid. cap. 96.
hand of Providence writ the Copy of Eternal Love in Christ's Sufferings; the
Pen had its hair, and that its blot, a very great and black one; and yet what
says Peter? Acts 2. 23. Him being delivered by the determinate counsel and
fore-knowledg of God, ye have taken, and by wicked hands have crucified and
slain. Add to this, that in Acts 4. 27, 28. which seems to be a full and clear
confession of the Church in this point.

3. Matters are insisted on in Scripture, not only by way of m^er Reference,
but also by way of Inference, from the Purpose or Will of God as declared. An
instance full for this, is, the not breaking the legs of Christ, John 19. 33,
36. The Apostle Paul does also inter calling, etc. from predestination, Romans 8.
30. yea, he does infer a patient bearing of afflictive dispensations, on this
wise, saying, that no man should be moved by these afflictions; for your selves
know, that we are appointed thereunto, 1 These. 3. 3.

4. Instruments, in their actings, have a subserviency to the Purpose or Will
of God. In Ezekiel's vision, the wheels are moved by the living creatures; they
go whither the Spirit was to go, Ezekiel. 1. 12. And not only Instruments
ministerial, who act knowingly and regularly; but others, who intend no
conformity to the Will or Purpose of God in matters brought to pass, do yet pay
a kind of tribute to the Lord's Will; as in the selling of Joseph into Egypt,
and the crucifying of Christ, Genesis 50. 20. Acts 4. 27, 28.

5. If the Lord's Will be not the foundation of Dispensations, then something
else must take place; and if men, as the noblest of creatures here below, shall
have the Chair of State, then to sacrifice to their own net, and to burn
incense unto their drag, will be found good divinity, which the Prophet
censures as bad, Hab. 1. 16. But Christians have not so learned Christ; for he
teaches to resolve their mercies ultimately into the good pleasure of God,
Mat. 11. 25, 26.

6. The Scripture does plainly assert this truth, Psalm. 115. 3. But our God is
in the heavens, he does whatsoever he pleases. Isa. 46. 10. My counsel shall
stand, and I will fulfill all my pleasure. Dan. 4. 29. This is the
interpretation, O King; and this is the decree of the Most High, which is come
upon my Lord the King. Mat. 10. 29. Are not two sparrows s^ld for a farthing?
and one of them shall not fall to the ground without your father. Ephesians. 1. 11.
Who works all things after the counsel of his own will.

CHAP. II.
1. BE the more confirmed in the truth of this Observation. Look not on the
Will or Purpose of God as a Plant of Time, but as the Eternal Root of what
comes to pass in Time. And good reason is there so to do; for, (1.) The
Scripture carries the Purpose of God with respect to matters beyond their
present existencies in the world, Jer. 1. 5. Mat. 25. 34. Romans 9. 11. (2.) The
glorious Attributes of God speak another language than so, as if he were not
resolved on the government of the world, till things have their existencies:
for, (1.) He is Omniscient from all eternity: He knows matters before they
exist, or have an actual being, Psalm. 139. ^. Thou understandest my thoughts
afar off. Acts 15. 18. Known unto God are all his works from the beginning.
(2.) He is Omnipotent; nothing resists his will. He spoke, and it was done,
Psalm. 33. 9. Power belongs to him, Psalm. 62. 10. (3.) He is Independent in
his operations: He lacquies not after the Creatures; none of the Creatures give
to him, so that a new Purpose hereupon is originally framed, which was not
before, although not declared. God is no such debtor to any of the Creatures.
Find out the Creature to whom God is such a debtor, and the debt shall be well
paid, Romans 11. 35. (4.) He is Unchangeable; there is not the least change in
Him. He is not a yesterday God purposing, and to day a God not purposing, and
to morrow a God purposing, or on the contrary, a yesterday not purposing, and
to day purposing, and to morrow not purposing: no, no; He is the same
yesterday, and to day, and for ever, Heb. 13. 8. The gifts and calling of God
are without repentance, Romans 11. 19. The counsel of the Lord stands for ever:
the thoughts of his heart to all generations, Psalm. 33. 11.

2. Look not on man's [ I will] so, as to forget that God's Will or Purpose
must take place. How many live as if Men were God, and God but Scito autem
homo. nullum tibi adversari potuisse, nisi Deus potestatem dedisset, nec
potestatem habuisset in te adversarius, nisi permitteret Deus. Universa, quae
accidunt tibi, absque Dei non veniunt voluntate. Iniquorum potestas super te,
ex Dei datur licentia: qui tibi adversantur, Dei faciunt consilium. Isidor.
Hispal. lib. 1. Soliloq.
Man! The Lord takes notice of this, and rebukes for it, in Isa. 50. 12. I,
even I, am he that comfort you: who art thou, that thou should be afraid
of man, that shall dye; and the son of man, which shall be made as grass; and
forgettest the Lord thy Maker, etc. There are two things worthy of the
Christian's meditation here: (1.) That man's [ I will] without God's [ I will],
is but a sounding brass or tinkling cymbal. It makes a noise in the ear of
sense and reason, and it is but a noise. Men's Decrees prove often smoke and
bubbles. The enemy said, I will pursue, I will overtake, I will divide the
spoil; my lust shall be satisfied upon them: I will draw my sword, mine band
shall destroy them, Exodus 15. 9. Here is earth's [ I will] upon [ I will]: But
what is Heaven's [ I will]? That we have in the next verse, Thou did blow
with thy wind, the sea covered them, they sank as lead in the mighty waters.
(2.) That though man's [ I will] may be co-incident in part with God's [ I
will] in regard of afflicting the Lord's people; yet God intends otherwise than
man, who is his rod, and is after thrown into the fire. A full place for this,
is that in Isa. 10. 5, 6, 7.

3. Rush not into sin, nor plead for it upon a pretense of the Divine Will or
Decree. Shall Adam plead thus with the Lord, If thou had not decreed to make
the woman, and accordingly to give her to me to wise, I had not had forbidden
fruit from her; 'twas the woman thou gave to be with me, she gave me of the
tree, and I did eat, Genesis 3. 1^. Adam might blame himself; the Lord had
forbidden him to eat; that Law of Prohibition was a Rule, according to that in
Deuteronomy. 29. 29. The secret things belong unto the Lord our God: but those things
which are revealed, belong unto us, and to our children for ever, that we may
do all the words of this law. Look then to what God lays forth before thee by
way of duty: say not as the Heathen Servant to his Master, in excuse of his
fact, That the gods had decreed be should do so: To whom the Master replied,
That the gods had likewise decreed he should be beaten for so doing.

4. Learn from hence, thou whose Bucket has gone down into Well of God's
Eternal Love in Christ;

1. To view thy spiritual mercies in the Springhead of them: so does Paul,
Gal. 1. 16. But when it pleased God, who separated me from my mothers womb, and
called me by his grace, to reveal his son in me --. Christ teaches to eye the
Father's good pleasure in giving a kingdom, Luke 12. 32.

2. To rejoice in the Lord, seeing his Purpose, as declared, bodes good to
godly ones, according to that of the Apostle, Romans 8. 28. And we know that all
things work together for good to them that love God, to them who are the called
according to his purpose. Observe here; it is not said, To them who are
purposed as they are called; as if the Election did lacquy after a Calling,
which may vanish after, and that sort of Election with it: such a gloss is to
make Paul's Cordial here to become a venomous Potion.

3. To be watchful against sin: For God has chosen us (says the Apostle) in
him, that we should be holy, Ephesians. 1. 4. And where sin is indulged, there smart
will be ushered in. Who knows what black dispensations of affliction are wrapped
up in the Lord's Purpose, for Children who play the wanton! Though the Lambs
are not thrown into the mouth of the roaring Lion of Hell; yet there are Dogs,
that may not only bark, but bite them: Eli, David, Hezekiah, are lamentable
instances for this. See chap. 3, 4, of the first Book of Samuel; and 2 Samuel 12.
and Isa. 39.

4. To calm and quiet the heart from the Quin si viderimus fractum ruere orbem
cum omnibus elementis, and imminere cervicib us nostris; tamen diceremus, etiam
ruendo non rues, nisi Deus velit, etsi capiti incumberet, nihil nocebis, nec
opprimes me diceremus, aut si sic visum est Deo, ut obruar mole tua: fiat sane
quod bonum est in oculis Domini. Luth.
meditation of the Purpose of God; besides which, or contrary to which, men and
devils can do nothing. Hence is that glorious triumphancy of the Apostle, Romans
8. 38, 39.

OBSERVATION III.
The Lord's Will is not only the ground why things are, but why they are not.
CHAP. I.
THE truth of this appears: For,

1. There is a sufficiency of Power to bring about what is not, and may never
be; and what is not, and yet may be, when the Lord shall see it good to be, and
after this or that sort to be. The Lord is described in Scripture as the great
Potter of the world, Isa. 45 9. Romans 9. 21. and so he has a liberty for
possible vessels, not to be; and for such vessels as are intentionally to be,
not to be of this fashion or shape, of such a bigness, and not to be at such a
time, but when he pleases. The Apostle Paul has well stated this point, Why
all flesh is not the same flesh; Why one Starr has not the like glory for
degree that another has; Why the grain sown thrives; and so consequently, why
when it thrives not: He resolves all into the good will of God, as that passage
of his imports; but God gives it a body as it has pleased him, 1 Cor. 15. 38.
The Baptist tells the Pharisees and Sadduces, That God is able of the stones
present before their eyes, to raise up children unto Abraham, Mat. 3. 5. Why
the stones are not multiplied into children unto Abraham, is from the Lord's
will: the Israelites they had Manna in the wilderness, which neither they nor
their fathers knew before, as Moses says, Deuteronomy. 8. 3. and whence is this, but
from the Lord's will, not to give it in Egypt?

2. The reason rendered in Scripture, why things are not, is plain and positive,
if an eye be had to the Lord's Dominionship. Thus in 2 Chronicles. 15. where it is
said, There was no peace to him that went out, nor to him that came in, etc. v.
5. And how so? for God did vex them with all adversity, v. 6. Like unto this,
is that in Jer. 47. 6, 7. O thou sword of the Lord, how long will it be ere
thou be quiet? put up thy self into thy scabbard, rest and be still. How can it
be quiet, seeing the Lord has given it a charge against Ashkelon and the
seashore? there has he appointed it. The Lord could, if he had pleased, have
given to the people existent in those black times, better hearts, and so they
had had better times; or might have vouchsafed fat times of prosperity and
plenty, and so they might be spiritually punished with blindness of mind, and
hardness of heart. That therefore there is no peace, the sword is not still and
quiet, is from the Lord, though sin does intervene as the procuring-cause of
such sad dispensations.

3. The verity or faithfulness of God is concerned herein, why things are not,
as well as why they are. There are predictions which reach the denial of this
or that to be. All flesh shall not be cut off any more by the waters of a
flood; neither shall there any more be flood to destroy the earth, spoke the
Lord to Noah, Genesis 9. 11. No success for an Ahab at Ramoth-Gilead, 1 King. 21.
28. Shall he prosper, shall he escape that does such things? or shall he break
the Covenant, and be delivered? Ezekiel. 17. 15. So not a bone of Christ to be
broken, because the Scripture so foretold. John. 19. 36. So Christ was once
offered to bear the sins of many, Heb. 9. 28.

4. There is a rich Treasure-house of Mercy in this seemingly empty house of
Things not to be. It Is not beyond infinite Power, and affronted Justice, and
contriving Wisdom, to elevate the most smarting troubles that are in the world,
above what they are. The Lord knows how to find out new ones, and to put more
teeth, and sharper ones, into the old ones. Yea, the worm that dies not, and
the fire that goes not out, can be made to bite deeper, and burn fiercer. Not
only is there mercy in the non-constitution of new smarts, or heightning old
ones; but in keeping off such smarts for the kind of them, as others are made
the subject of. That Judgments which have an existence, have not a respective
existence to thee, is from the Lord's mercy. Moses notes this in his speech to
the Israelites, Deuteronomy. 7. 15. And the Lord will take away from thee all
sickness, and will put none of the evil diseases of Egypt (which thou know)
upon thee, but will lay them upon all that hate thee.

5. The Prayers of Saints do objectively respect things which are not, but to
be; and things which are, but not to be. So Daniel prays for the release from
the captivity: Now therefore, O our God, hear the prayer of thy servant, and
his supplications, and cause thy face to shine upon thy sanctuary that is
desolate, fe^ the Lords sake, Dan. 9. 17. see more Psalm. 51. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11,
12. Rev. 6. 10.

6. If God has not the Negative voice, who has? Find him out truly, that we
may come and worship him: But who is the that says, an^ it comes to pass,
when the Lord commands i^ not? Lam. 3. 37. To deny the Lord's Prerogative in
Negatives, is to pull the Crown from his head, or to make him a God of the
Hills, not of the Plains; because victory is not in the Plains, he has nothing
to do there, he may get him gone to the Hills, and there be positive in his
actings: But away with this Syrian language, 1 King. 20. 23.

CHAP. II.
1. CHARGE not the Lord foolishly with want of power, when things are not thus
and thus brought to pass. Think thou (says Christ to Peter) that I cannot
now pray to my Father, and he shall presently give me more than twelve legions
of angels? but how then shall the Scriptures be fulfilled, that thus it must
be? Mat. 26. 53, 54.

2. Look more to God, and less to the Creatures, when they give not down their
Milk. If there be a lock set upon their virtues, forces, operations, remember
in whose hand the key is. If some, who should be, and sometimes have been
Melchizedecks, bringers forth of bread and wine for refreshment, Genesis 14. 18.
become Nabals, hide-bound ones, and insulting-ones, 1 Samuel 25. 10, 11, 12. be
not startled at it; eye God in all: their hearts are hardened to soften thine;
their ears are shut, that so thy mouth may be the more opened to pour out thy
prayer at a Throne of Grace to God, who has wise ends in such a Dispensation.
Be humbled then for sin before the Lord, who has all the Creatures at his
beck, and at whose girdle hang all the keys for unlocking any Creature
whatsoever: see Isa. 59. 1, 2.

3. Bless God for Negative Mercies. If the Lord were not the cause why things
are not, what had been your case in regard of miseries? All the temporal evils
inflicted on others, are Memorandums for thy thankfulness. The Lord's
withholding Satan from falling in on thee with this or that temptation, at such
a nick of time, does call for thy acknowledgment. There is, besides a
withholding Providence, a limiting one, when Satan is let loose, as in Job his
case: All this may lesson to say as David, Bless the Lord, O my soul, Psalm.
104. 1. That Psalm is a Meditation on the Providence of God; and the Psalmist
there observes the Providence of God in Negatives. There are four observables
there. (1.) Why things are, and consequently are not, in regard of their
continued beeings: for if God withold his influences, the Creatures are a
nigrum nihil, an empty nothing: this in v. 30. Thou sended forth thy spirit,
they are created: and thou renewest the face of the earth. (2.) Why things are
not, in regard of their operations. The Water is a fluid body, and would
quickly diffuse it self: And why not? Thou have set a bound, that they (the
Waters) may not pass over, that they turn not again to cover the earth, v. 9.
(3.) Why things are not in such a conjunction. The beasts of prey are not
ordinarily abroad when man is: this in v. 22, 23. the Sun arises, they gather
themselves together, and lay them down in their dens: man goes forth unto his
work and to his labor until the evening. (4.) Why things are no longer in
regard of duration or time for their existencies. This we have in v. 29. Thou
hidest thy face, they are troubled: thou take away their breath, they dye and
return to their dust.

OBSERVATION IV.
There is a wise Platform of things drawn forth by God: or, The administration
of things in the World, is according to the Draught of Divine Wisdom.
CHAP. I.
THAT there is an intermixture of Wisdom in the Dispensations of the Lord, the
Psalmist does solemnly profess, saying, O Lord, how manifold are thy works! in
wisdom have thou made them all; the earth is full of thy riches; Psalm. 104. 24.
This will more fully appear, if we consider three things: 1. Whose Platform it
is. 2. How it is described in Scripture. 3. With what it may be compared.


1. Every thing, so far as it comes from God, has an Excellency stamped on it;
and if a beam of the Sun be glorious, what is the Sun it self? God being then
wise, Job 9. 4. yea, only wise, Jude 25. his management of matters in the world
has an harmony with the Ideal draught of his Wisdom.

2. Observe how Paul describes God's working of all things, Ephesians. 1. 11. it
is after the counsel of his own will. There are two observables in this Text:
(1.) The term [ counsel]; which as it implies some defect in the creature, as
not seeing by and by into the bottom of a business; and so there is
deliberation; so it is not applicable to God, but as it notes the height or top
of rational contrivement; and so, after the manner of men, it is accommodated
to God for our better understanding. Counsel, in this sense, is nothing else
but the result of Wisdom and Understanding Sapientia est virtus, qua celeri and
expedito animi motu and ratiocinatione res alioqui amplas and magnas
complectimur. Intelligentia est virtus, qua longo rerum usu and experientia
edocti de futurorum successu decernimus. Consilium est animi designatio ex
duabus illis virtutibus prognata. Cartwright in Prove. Sol.
(as a learned man observes): and when attributed to God, it notes his
glorious Perfection in ordering all things, according to that in Job 12. 16.
With him is wisdom and strength, he has understanding.

(2.) The other thing in the Apostle's description, is, the order or
disposition of the words; it is not said, He works all things according to
the will of his counsel; as if so be the Lord did first consult, advise, and so
a Will did follow, as in human affairs: but, he works al things according to
the counsel of his will; to note (as one observes on the place) that the
Lord's At vero aliquid facere ex solo consilio voluntatis, ubi voluntas in
obliquo casu consilio subjungitur, denorat solan ejus voluntatem qui ita
aliquid operatur, ipso consilii loco esse, consilii vicem praebere: adeo ut
illi consultare vel deliberare de re aliqua, nihil sit aliud, quam solum velle:
quippe quod ejus sola voluntas omnem in se sapientiam, sanctitatem, justitiam
ac rectitudinem includens, justitiae omnis atque sapientiae sit regula, etc.
Bodius.
Will is his Councellor: That includes Wisdom, Holiness, rectitude, and is the
Rule of all Righteousness and Wisdom.

3. Compare the Wisdom of God with the wisest: Go to the Angels of Heaven, who
are the wisest of creatures; as that in 2 Samuel 14. 20. My Lord is wise,
according to the wisdom of an Angel of God, to know all things that are in the
earth; does import: Yet what are Angels in comparison of God! How quickly does
their Mountain of Wisdom vanish into a Molehill, their Wisdom into Folly,
before the All-wise God! So it is said Job 4. 18. And his Angels he charged
with folly. Their line cannot reach the bottom of Divine Wisdom in the mystery
of Redemption; they are at a gaze with the Plot of the manifold Wisdom of God,
as the Apostle intimates in Ephesians. 3. 10.

CHAP. II.
1. CENSURE not the All-wise God for misgovernment of the World. He rules
wisely, whatever Sense and Reason do object to the contrary. Wisdom and might
are his, Dan. 2. 20. Instead of shooting the fool's bolt, acknowledge thine own
folly. Vain man would be wise, though man be born like a wild asse's colt, Job
11. 12. Here is an Ass, a wild Ass, and the Colt of the wild Ass; all which
may abase man, and give a check to his controlling-thoughts of the Lord's
Dispensations. Luther has a very pertinent passage, which Thesaurus explic. de
Deo.
here may be inserted. I (says he) have often essayed to prescribe certain
Instructions to God, which he should follow in the administration of the Church
and other Affairs: O Lord, I said, I would have this so done, in this order,
and with such success, etc. But God did contrary to that which I did petition
for. Then I began to muse, Surely my counsel is not disagreeing from the glory
of God, but makes very much for the sanctifying of thy Name, the gathering and
increasing of thy Kingdom, the spreading of the knowledge of the word; bri^fly,
it was most beautiful, and excellently thus thought on: Sed risit haud dubie
Dominus hanc sapientiam; But God did without doubt laugh at this wisdom, and
said, Go to, I know thee to be prud^nt and learned; but this is never my
manner, that either Peter, or Doctor Martin, or any other, should teach, frame,
govern, lead me. I am not a passive God, but active; who am wont to lead, rule,
and fashion, as I please.

2. Submit to his Dispensations, though afflictive. When God puts Worm wood
into thy Cup, beware of disgorging thy Gall. Be silent when Providence makes a
noise. Aaron held his peace, when God did wage war from Heaven against his two
sons, Levit. 10. 3. Thou art taught to say, Thy will be done, Mat. 6. 10. that
not only respects the Will of his Precept, as to obey in what he commands:
but likewise the Will of God declared in Quicquid enim fit in toto mundo and in
Ecclesia, quicquid nobis accidit, certum est non fieri sine voluntate Dei, Mat.
10. 29. vel operante, vel permittente. Quia vero illam Dei voluntatem, vel
disputando non probamus, vel per impatientiam de ea querimur, contra eam
murmuramus and obluctamur: petimus igitur patientiam, ut reverenter and
obedienter nostram voluntatem divinae voluntati subjiciamus, vel certe
subjicere conemur, ac contra impatientiam luctemur; non malign de iis, quae
Deo volente ac permittente nobis eveniunt, judicemus, sed dicamus, Sicut Domino
placuit, ita factum est. Chemnit. Harm. Evang. c. 51.
his Providence: And so it is [ thy will be done] by way of submission, in
opposition to impatiency and murmuring.

3. Give not way to anxious and perplexing thoughts about futurities. There is
One who will govern the world well enough, and knows what He has to do,
without calling you to the Council Table of Heaven. Let not your heart be
troubled, said Christ to the Disciples, John 14. 1. When Christ the Pilot was
about to leave their Ship in regard of his bodily presence, their hearts, like
the Sea, was ready to work, and cast up some mire and filth; Christ therefore
seasonably bespeaks them, saying, Let not your heart be troubled; and withal,
bids them look to the calming-grace of Faith, the exercise of that: Ye believe
(says he) in God, believe also in me. The way then to have more of quiet, is
to get and exercise more of faith, as respecting the Lord in his Dispensations.

4. Imitate the All-wise God, in acting wisely according to thy sphere of
activity. God's example is not in some cases a Copy for the Creature to write
by: Howbeit, inasmuch as the Lord has his Platform of Wisdom, his Will: Man
may learn not to be as the horse, or as the mule, which have no understanding,
Psalm. 32. 9. but to direct his course according to the revealed will of God.
The Testimonies of the Lord are to be a man's Counselors, Psalm. 119. 24. To
have an eye ever and anon on this Sacred Model of the Lord's prescribing, is
wisdom indeed. Behold (says Moses to the Israelites) I have taught you
statutes and judgments, even as the Lord my God commanded me, that ye should do
so in the land whither ye go to possess it: keep therefore, and do them, for
this is your wisdom, etc. Deuteronomy. 4. 5, 6.

OBSERVATION V.
God is Unchangeable, and his Providence holds correspondence with his
Unchangeable Will.
CHAP. I.
TO illustrate this: 1. There are Emblems, Pictures, Similies, which do notably
declare this in Scripture. Ezekiel 1. 12. the living creatures went every one
straight forward; whither the spirit was to go, they went; and they returned
not when they went: that passage in the 14 th verse is no contradiction: for
whereas (as Calvin notes) the Angels are diligent in their work; it is no
wonder if the Prophet says, they ran and returned; and yet says, they
returned not: this well agrees, because they do not return till they have
discharged their office, or done the work undertaken. To this of Ezekiel, add
that in Zech. 6. 1. the Mountains are said there to be Mountains of Brass. By
these Brazen Mountains (says learned and pious Pemble) all understand God's
Provident Decrees and Counsels; which as they are most firm and immutable in
themselves, like unremovable Mountains of Brass or Steel; so are they the
beginnings of all Actions and Effects in the world: and therefore these
Chariots are said to come forth from between these Mountains; God's Providence
appointing them their course.

2. The opposition that is made between the Creator and the Creatures, does set
forth the unchangeableness of God. God is not a man that he should lie: neither
the son of man that he should repent. Has he said, and shall he not do it? or
has he spoken, and shall he not make it good? Numb. 23. 19. The words were
uttered by Balaam; he was the leaden pipe for their conveyance, and they are
nevertheless pure Sanctuary-water: for the Lord met him, and put a word in his
mouth, as it is said v. 16. To this may be added what we have Psalm. 102. 25,
26, 27.

3. The Scripture does far and wide remove any thing of real change from God. I
am the Lord, I change not, Mal. 3. 16. -- with him is no variableness, neither
shadow of turning, Jam. 1. 17. God (as one comments on the place) is a Sun ^us
in ^tice fi^ and re^g. p. 61.
always bright, a most pure Light, and immutably Good; he never suffers an
eclipse or change; never is obscured with darkness, but abides the same for
ever.

4. God is All wise, and therefore second-thoughts are not better with him. He
being infinite Wisdom, there can be no addition to His Understanding. The Lord
is not to seek of his design as man is, who cannot foresee matters. They are
the princes of Zoan who become fools, the princes of Noph that are deceived,
Isa. 19. 13. The Lord he is only wise. Jude 25. v. The Lamb only was worhty to
receive wisdom, Rev. 5. 12.

5. Nothing from without that can properly change the Almighty. All the united
forces of the Creatures cannot obstruct his will from taking place. I will
work, and who shall let it? Isa. 43. 13. My father which gave them me, is
greater than all, says Christ, Joh. 10. 29.

6. The changes that are in the world, do pay their homage to the unchangeable
Will or Purpose of God. God's Will was, That Joseph should be the Grandee, or
Honorable amongst the Brethren, according to the prophetical dream, Genesis 30.
7, 8, 9. Now all those changes or variety of conditions which befell Joseph, did
providentially contribute to bring about, in the Lord's way of Wisdom, the
Lord's Will in regard of Joseph's advancement: so he tells his brethren, Genesis
50. 20. Jonah has a commission to go to Niniveh, and denounce the wrath of God
against them; and this his denunciation is blessed to their reformation: and so
the Lord's will in the suspension of Judgment is ushered in, which before lay
latent or hid. God does often threaten, not that what is threatened is to take
place, but the contrary; the threatening being a sanctified means as the Lord
orders it. God wills a change, and yet changes not his Will. The
Looking-glass is still the same, though one while the face is not seen, and
another while it is seen.

CHAP. II.
1. THERE is ground then to reject such Opera mutas sed non consilium August.
in Medit. c. 29. Opus non consilium apud Deum credimus mutari: nec variari eum
quia per varia Tempora diversa praecipit; sed manens idem incommutabilis and
aeternus, quid cuique congruum esset tempori ab ipsa aeternitate in ejus mensit
dispositione consilii. Isidor. Hisp. lib. 1. Sent. c. 1.
Doctrine as expressly, or by necessary consequence, asserteth a mutability in
God. The Lord's Will is not as the Sea, which has its accesses and recesses.
He is not another God from what he was. The sons of Jacob change, but the God
of Jacob changes not. His Righteousness is not like the morning-cloud, and the
early-dew; but like the great Mountains, as the Psalmist describes it, Ps. 36.
6.

2. How may wickedly-impenitent ones, or impenitently-wicked ones, tremble at
the consideration of God's unchangeableness in his Providence, as keeping
accord with his Purpose! Their present prosperity is no argument of impunity.
The pride of their heart deceives them. Though they exalt themselves as the
eagle, and set their nests amongst the stars, yet thence will Providence bring
them down, Obad. 3 4.

3. How should Christians aspire after a kind of immutability in point of
holding to what is good and praiseworthy. The will of a Christian should be
for his God. I have sworn, and I will perform it, That I will keep thy
righteous judgments, said David, Ps. 119. 106. Be ye perfect (says Christ)
even as your father which is in heaven is perfect, Mat. 5. 48. Well then, it
becomes the children of such a Father, to be good, eminently good, and to hold
on in what is good, lest otherwise it be said, as of old, O Ephraim, what shall
I do unto thee! O Judah, what shall I do unto thee! for your goodness is as the
morning cloud, and as the early dew it passes away, Hos. 6. 4.

4. What ground of support is there from hence for the Church of God under all
threats, contrivements, attempts, of men and devils. God will have a people,
let men and devils say and essay the contrary. No weapon that is formed against
thee, shall prosper, Isa. 54. 17. The gates of hell shall not prevail against
it, Mat. 16. 18. God is not changeable in his Purpose, Prediction, An plus
existimemus ad impugnandum posse humana conamina, quam quod ad protegendum
praevalet divina tutela, Cypr. lib. 1. Epist. 3.
Promise: and though men may rage, and be as the great Mountain, as it is said
Zech. 4. 7. yet the Christian has Mountains to oppose against the worlds
Mountains: what the Christians Mountains are, the place before quoted, Zech. 6.
1. does give to understand; they are Mountains of Brass, and so afford two
Meditations:

1. That wicked ones will find these Mountains of Brass too firm for their weak
shoulders to overturn.

2. That the Arrows which the sons of Belial shoot against these Mountains,
will recoil back, and mischief themselves in the end. The Doegs of the world,
whose fingers itch to be meddling with God's David's, will have their hands full
of Woe one day. A black prophecy there is for such, Psalm. 52. 5, 6, 7. and they
themselves take the course to have it accomplished, as Doeg did: for if the
Lord did not pour forth wrath on Doeg before David came to the Throne; what
could Doeg expect from a David, but to be the instrument of God's wrath toward
him, who had belied David, and murdered the Priests of the Lord, as 1 Samuel 22.
It is often to be observed, That the way wicked men take to ruin others, ruins
themselves. Pharaoh, who will kill the Israelites, or down them, perishes with
his Host in the waters, Exodus 14. 23, with 28.

OBSERVATION VI.
God has His Secrets or Depths: but is never unjust in His Providential
Dispensations.
CHAP. I.
THAT the Lord has his Secrets, may be made manifest if we consider,

1. How this is symbolically or mystically insinuated in Scripture. That of God
to Moses Exodus 33. 23. Thou shall see my back-parts; but my face thou shall not
see: does intimate, we have not full view of the Lord, as when a man comes up
face to face; but see him in part, at a distance, as the Apostle Paul has it,
1 Cor. 13. 9. We know but in part. We read, how when the Lord appeared, he
veiled himself with a cloud, Exodus 16. 10. 1 King. 18. 10, 11. And in Isa. 6.
1. there is mention made of the train or skirts, nothing of the upper
ornaments, Nec caret ratione, quod nihil meminit Propheta de superioribus
Divinae Majestatis ornamentis, sed de simbriis tantum. Exprimitur consternatio
animi religiosi, qui in visionibus divinis non superiora, sed vix insima
contemplatur. Et admodum essemus soelices, si vel simbrias Divinae Majestatis
pie ac religiose contemplaremur. Musculus.
as one observes: and what may this import, but our seeing of the Lord after a
poor, low, imperfect sort, in comparison of what He is.

2. How otherwise were there such ground for admiration, if the Lord had not
His Secrets or Depths to be admired? If there were no knots to unty, how could
it be so said, O the finger of God? The Angels are said to cover their faces
with their wings, Isa. 6. 2 Paul cries out, O the depth of the riches both of
the wisdom and knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his judgments, and his
ways past finding out! Romans 11. 33. Here by the way let it be noted, That if so
skilful a Pilot as Paul cries out, O the depth! shall such who may be scarce
reckoned common Foremast-men, pretend to find out a Northwest passage, a new
way in the Decrees of God, and the Providence of God; and such a way, as that
it may be said, Behold the Plains according to their model; which yet is a
Labyrinth, where they lose themselves; and whilst they labor to Tinker up one
hole, they make two.

3. The Scripture plainly asserts, how it is the glory of God to conceal a
thing, Prove. 25. 2. For the better understanding of this place, I shall annex
what pious and judicious Cartwright says: God verily is to be honored,
inasmuch as he has revealed his counsel and will in many things. But such
mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, whose causes and reasons are unsearchable,
yield to him the richer crop of honor; such are the Mysteries of the Trinity;
The threefold distinction of Persons in one Essence; The eternal generation of
the Son; The procession of the Holy Spirit; The eternal predestination of some
to life, others to death; The incarnation of the Son of God; or the assumption
of our frail flesh into the unity of his Person: Of God, all things whatsoever
are done, both decreeing, and his Providence so ruling, that out of the evil
which is done, he contracts no guilt: Of Parents sins to be punished on
posterity to many generations: Of just judgment to be executed by the unjust:
Of the burning of the Wife for the Husband's sin, and the Children for the
Parents, Josh. 7. 25. Of which, and all such kind, it may be truly affirmed,
They do each afford to men a large field of praising and glorifying God; yea,
he is the more amply, and with fuller mouth in these to be extolled, than in
other matters, whose causes and principles with our minds and understanding we
do in some measure take in: for first of all, it is apparent from hence, That
God's Wisdom is infinite and unsearchable to the Creature: Moreover, That God
is to be believed upon his own testimony, and according to his pleasure may do
whatever he will; and so far condescends from his right, when he vouchsafes to
render a reason of his doings or sayings.

That though the Lord has his Secrets, Depths; yet he is never unjust in his
Dispensations. The Lord has his Throne of righteous Judicature; The judgment
was set, and the books were opened, as Daniel beheld in that Vision, chap. 7.
10. It is said there, v. 9. that the Ancient of days did sit, whose garment was
white as the snow, and the hair of his head like pure wool: there is not the
least spot or taint of injustice in his management of matters; for so much may
be denoted by this description: though I deny not but the whiteness of the
garment may likewise betoken supreme dignity, as being an Ensign of Honor, as
is observed by Junius on the place. Besides this graphical description
Majestati Dei proponuntur ista, (1.) quod antiquissimus diebus est, ad notandam
aeternitatem illius. (2.) Quod vestimentum ejus nivei coloris esse dicitur,
quem colorem, insigne fuisse regni, veteres Historiae sacrae and prophanae
docent. (3) Quod capillus ejus similis dicitur fuisse lanae purae, i. e. ab
omni part purissimus and simplicissimus, adeo ut ne in ea quidem part, quae
in homine a natura vacare sordibus non potest, vel minimum vitium aut vestigium
ejus deprehendi potuerit.
of the Lord as righteous, according to Daniel's Vision, there are not wanting
plain assertions in Scripture: that in Dan. 32. 4. He is the rock, his work is
perfect, for all his ways are judgment: a God of truth, and without iniquity:
just and right is he. And that in Psalm. 105. 17. The Lord is righteous in all
his ways, and holy in all his works.

Moreover, let it be considered here, (1.) That some of God's Saints who have
been stumbled at some passages of Providence, have had satisfaction when the
Lord has let forth his light into their judgments or understandings; they have
seen their folly, and given him the glory of his Dispensations: So Job 42. 2,
3. So that Prophet, Psalm. 73. 16, 17, 22. (2.) That considering who the Lord
is; He, whose Will as declared to man, is for a Rule; and who borrows not a
rectitude from the Creature: it is wisdom to hold to this, That his ways,
though they are above our Reason, yet never against Right. We find this to be
the path wherein we are to walk, when objections to the contrary offer
themselves by way of diversion from the said path. So Jer. 12. 1. Righteous art
thou, O Lord: yet let me talk with thee of thy judgments, etc. So Paul, What
shall we say then? Is there unrighteousness with God? God forbid, Romans 9. 14.
Nequaquam autem injustum possumus dicere, in quo divinum esse judicium non
possumus denegare, quia summa justitia est voluntas Dei. Neque enim id eo non
justum est quod Divinitas agit, quia capere vim divinae justitiae homo non
valet. Salv. de guber. Dei, lib. 1. p. 23.


CHAP. II.
1. FROM the Lord's having his Secrets or Depths, learn (1.) To reverence so
high and glorious a God. Shall the reputed Oracles Si scire vis quid tenendum
sit, habes literas Sacras: perfecta ratio est hoc tenere. Qua causa autem Deus
haec de quibus loquimur ita faciat? nolo a me requiras. Homo sum, non intelligo
secreta Dei, investigare non audeo; and ideo etiam attentare formido, quia and
hoc ipsum genus quasi sacrilegae temeritatis est, si plus scire cupias, quam
sinaris: sufficiat tibi quod Deus a se agi ac dispensari cuncta testatur. Salv.
de guber. Dei, lib. 3. p. 64.
for Wisdom be cried up in the world? and shall not the God of Infinite Wisdom
be acknowledged? Paul was high in knowledge, and caught up into Paradise, 2 Cor.
12. 4. and yet has ground enough to admire the Lord's wisdom, whose judgments
are unsearchable, and his ways past finding out, Romans 11. 33. (2.) To be
thankful for the Lord's discovering himself in and about such a Dispensation,
which otherwise for want of light antecedent or consequent, might, by reason of
the darkness of the understanding, have had a black improvement. It was a
condescension of the Lord to Abraham, in that, what he was about to do to
Sodom, was not hid from Abraham, who has a debate with the Lord concerning the
process of Providence against Sodom; see Genesis 18. 17, etc. There is something
by way of proportion to the Lord's discoveries to Abraham, in God's
intimations, preparations, as they respect a future dispensation, as some
Christians have experienced in some matters. And not only is thankfulness due
to God for an antecedent light about matters; but also for consequent
discovery, when this or that dispensation has its actual existence. Joshua
was startled at the ^i* Providence; God satisfied him abundantly, see Josh. 7.
Let it then be remembered, That if the Lord discover himself to any as unto
friends, the greater obligation is on them by way of a thankful deportment,
considering they are but servants, as Christ teaches, John 15. 15.

2. From the Lord as righteous in all his ways, learn,

1. To reject or cast out the bill of black complaints against the Lord's
dealings. Providence is not a Ship laden with injustice; the^e are no such
wares in this bottom, however some passengers in the Ship of Fools say the
contrary: It was an old slander, or blasphemy rather, The way of the Lord is
not equal, Ezekiel. 18. 25. The confutation of this is annexed there, (1.) more
generally; and that 1. by way of contra-position, or implied assertion, Hear
now, O Israel, is not my way equal? That interrogation is a strong affirmation.
2. By way of retortion; the Lord turns the Cannon about, and fires it on
themselves, saying, Are not your ways unequal? that is, they are. And this is
the reply in the general. (2.) There is a reply more particularly in the
following verses, where we have the Lord's condescending-apology or defense
about his sparing some, and punishing others, in his Providence. But not to
enlarge on that; in the next place it follows:

2. Hold to this, That the Lord is righteous. Veruntamen de hac altitudine
discretionis Dei non conturbabitur cor nostrum, si firma and stabili side omne
judic^um Dei Justum esse credamus, nec appetamus habere cognitum, quod voluit
esse secretum, ut, ubi investigari non potest, quare ita judicet, sufficiat
scire quis judicet. Ambros. lib. 2. de vocat. Gent.
Let not only the tongue, but the heart, and sweetly-silent conversation, keep
up a correspondence with this truth. And to this end consider,

1. Have Princes their Reason of State? Generalissimo's their Designs in war
allowed them according to a charitable construction? as in Gideon's case, whose
stratagem in falling upon the Midianites with Trumpets, earthen Pitchers, and
the Lamps in them, is not rejected by the Soldiers as a merry or mad frolic of
their Leader, Judge. 7. And shall not the All-wise God (who abuses not Reason
of State as a covert for wickedness, as men do sometimes) be owned as Wise,
Just, Holy, in his Administrations, though we see not for the present the
bottom of his designs?

2. Is it not to be observed, how they were discontented spirits, unclean ones,
who did mutter against Christ, saying, What have we to do with thee, Jesus,
thou Son of God? an thou come hither to torment us before the time Mat. 8. 29.
The Devils here have their plea, an^ would fasten injustice on Christ.

3. Is not a cavilling spirit at the Lord's dispensations, bad both in its
roots and fruits? What are the roots of it, but (1.) Ignorance, Psalm. 73. 22.
(2.) Pride, this lifts up, H^. 2. 3, 4. (3.) Impatiency, or want of waiting
on God to see issues of matters; so in Jonah 4 8, 9, 10, 11. (4.) Forgetfulness
who the Lord is, and who man is that grumbles at his Maker, Lam. 3 39. Romans 9.
20. And as for the fruits they are none of the best, but bad enough Men are
ready to flag in duty, yea, to thro^ Ergo ne nobis for^e contingat impingere
adversus Deum and quasi cum ipso* confligere, discamus cohiber^ nostram
temeritatem, and id tempestive antequam forociat: si^ ergo atque nobis obrepunt
cogitationes, quae Deo aspergant aliquam notam ignominiae, eas citissime
compescamus: quia si admittimus, paulatim nos irretient, donec nos pertrahant
ad extremam hanc vesaniam, ut nulla religio, vel pudor nos teneat* quin palam
blateremus adversus Deum. Calv. praelect. in Ezekiel. c. 18.
it off, Psalm. 73. 13. Mal. 3. 14. yea, in the way to blaspheme God, see Job 2.
9. Mal. 3. 13. Rev. 16. ^*

OBSERVATION VII.
God's Sovereignty displayed in his Dispensations, should be a golden Bitt to
check man's corruption, and a sacred Goad to quicken to the exercise of Grace.
CHAP. I.
THE Sovereignty of God, whereby, as Absolute Lord, he does whatsoever he
pleases, Psalm. 115. 3. has its latitude or extent: it is like the Sun, which
is not confined to one part of the Zodiac, but his going forth is from the end
of the heaven, and his circuit unto the ends of the earth. I shall therefore
consider it largely, as it is expressly or implicedly, absolutely or
respectively, in some particulars displayed. A view then we may take of it,
(1.) In Spirituals. (2.) In Temporals. In Spirituals, and so,

1. In Election of a person to life and glory by Jesus Christ. Was not Esau
Jacobs brother, says the Lord? Mal. 1. 2. Yea, it may be answered, and his
elder brother too; and yet the children being not yet born, neither having done
good or evil, that the purpose of God according to election might stand, not of
works, but of him who calls, Jacob have I loved, and Esan have I hated.
Neither is there unrighteousness with God in passing by the one, and choosing
the other: for be says unto Moses, I will have mercy on whom I will have
mercy; and I will have compassion o^ whom I will have compassion, Romans 9. 11,
13, 14, 15. Thus the Apostle in that Divine Tract of Predestination, asserteth
Replies to Objections, and wades farther on in the Controversy in the
following Verses, and speaks particularly of the Sovereignty of God, in v. 20
21. On which Aquinas comments, saying, About the election of the good, and the
reprobation of the bad, a twofold question may be moved: One in the general,
Why God will harden some, and have compassion on others? The other is special,
or particular, Why he takes compassion on this, and harden that man? There may
be a reason of the former assigned; but not so of the later, unless The mere
will of God. An illustration of which, we have in human affairs: for if any
willing to build an house, should have many stones alike and equal gathered
together, ther^ may some reason be assigned, why he placet^ some above, some
below, from the End intended; Because to the perfection of the House which he
intends to build, there is required a Foundation, which has stones below,
and likewise the top of the Wall, which has stones above the others: but why
he dot^ place these stones above, and these below, hat^ not any reason, unless,
Because the Artificer ^ Mason will have it so. Thus Aquin.

2. In the conveyance of the means of grace to some, and not so to others. He
shows his word unto Jacob, his statutes and his judgments unto Israel: he
has not dealt so with any nation: and as for his judgments, they have not
known them; praise ye the Lord, Psalm. 147. 19, 20. And this is not only
Old Testament Doctrine, but also New; the Lord directs Paul and Timothy, where,
and where not, they are to preach the Gospel. Now when they had gone
thoroughout Phrygia, and the region of Galatia, and were forbidden of the Holy
Ghost to preach the word in Asia, after they were come to Mysia, they assayed
to go into Bythinia, but the Spirit suffered them not: and they passing by
Mysia, came down to Troas; and a vision appeared to Paul in the night: there
stood a man of Macedonia, and prayed him, saying, Come over into Macedonia, and
help us: and after we had seen the vision, immediately we endeavored to go
into Macedonia, assuredly gathering, that the Lord had called us for to preach
the Gospel unto them, Acts 16. 6, etc.

3. In conferring gifts and endowments on some, and not on others. All are not
alike subjects of such and such qualifications. Balaam prophesies, Numb. 23.
Ahitophel is a reputed Oracle for wisdom and counsel in Israel, 2 Samuel 16. 23.
Many will say to Christ in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy
name, and in thy name done many wonderful works, Mat. 7. 22. The Apostle Paul
supposes, That some, like Lead, may have a very specious stamp of some gifts,
and yet be Lead still, 1 Cor. 13. 1, 2.

4. In planting saving-grace in the hearts of some, not so in the hearts of
others. It is given unto you (says Christ to the Disciples) to know the
mysteries of the kingdom of heaven; and to them it is not given, Mat. 13. 11.
Our Savior speaks of two sorts of branches, some fruit-bearing ones, others
not so, John 15. 2. The Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, does tacitly
distinguish of professors, when he says, But beloved, we are persuaded better
things of you, and things that accompany salvation, Heb. 6. 9.

5. In calling home by his grace some at one time of their life, and in a
different way in point of circumstances, others not so. Some, their ship
arriveth sooner at the Port of Grace, and are brought in with gentle gales;
others after a long coursing up and down, meet with rough winds, and so are
landed at last. Josiah, Jeremiah, John the Baptist, Timothy, may serve as
instances on the one part: Manasseh, Paul, with others, may be exemplifications
on the other. Some are sweetly won into the Vinyard; others are driven, and (as
it were) hunted in, and at different seasons: for we read of the morning, the
third hour, the sixth, ninth, and eleventh, Mat. 20.

6. In giving larger measures of grace to some, not so to others. Some are
smoking flax, and bruised reeds, Mat. 12. 20. Others grow as the Lilly, and
cast forth their rootslike Lebanon; their branches spread, and their beauty is
as the Olive Tree, and their smell as Lebanon, Hos. 14. 6, 7. John rangeth
Christians into little children, fathers, and young men, 1 John 2. 12, 13. Why
they who are the children, are not the young men; the young men the fathers;
and why the fathers are not the young men, and young men the children, the one
in one place, the others in the other; is supreamly from the Sovereign Will of
God, who could have wrought otherwise.

7. In carrying on some in their journey heavenward, without such falls by the
way as others have had. David, Jonah, Peter, did splinter their bones, though
they brake not their necks: they fell into the mire, though they wallowed not
in it as swine of the Devils Herd. We do not find that Paul, with others, had
such plunges after their primitive or first acquaintance with Jesus Christ: I
know (says Paul) nothing by my self; yet am I not hereby justified, 1 Cor. 4.
4.

8. In landing some at the Port of Heaven, as it were, with top and
top-gallant, pennents streaming, and flags flying: They go out of the world
triumphantly; they are in Heaven before they are in Heaven: a sight they have
of the Beatifical Vision, on earth. Stephen being full of the Holy Ghost,
looked up steadfastly into beaven, and saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing
on the right hand of God, Acts 7. 55, 56. Others, though they may have as much
of inherent grace, yea sometimes more, yet go out of the world in a cloud,
though not in a stinking snuff. Christ himself, upon the Deity's suspension of
his operation, goes off the stage of the world with a My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me? Mat. 27. 46.

2. In Temporals, or matters referring to this life, the Lord's Sovereign Will
is displayed.

1. In giving such a being for kind. That the Efficiency of God was not
otherwise employed, in regard of the object, at such a season; or in some other
way, as Adam was made out of the dust of the earth, Eve not so immediately, but
out of a rib of Adam, is from the Lord, who acts as he pleases. It was replied
by the weeping Shepherd to the two Cardinals going to the Council of Constance,
and demanding of the Shepherd why he was so pathetical? I admire (says he) the
Lord, that I was not made as yonder Toad. Job takes notice of the Lord's
Providence in his being, and the mode of it, saying, Have thou not poured me
out like milk, and crudled me as cheese? thou have clothed me with skin and
flesh, and have fenced me with bones and sinews: thou have granted me life and
favor; and thy visitation has preserved my spirit, Job 10. 10, 11, 12.

2. In bestowing all the integral parts of the body, in regard of their
respective functions, offices, and operations. Thine eyes (says David) did see
my substance, yet being imperfect: and in thy book all my members were written,
which in continuance were fashioned, when as yet there was none of them, Psalm.
139. 16. That thou wast not a Creeple from the womb, or blind (as the man, John
9. 6.) is from God's Sovereign good pleasure.

3. In being birthed into the world at such or such a time. The time might have
been such, when the women did eat their fruit, and children of a span long,
Lam. 2. 20. Our Savior speaks of some black days, when he says, Woe unto them
which are with child, and to them that give suck in those days, Mat. 24. 19.
see moreover there, v. 21, 22.

4. In portioning forth the places of habitation. There is a wise sovereign lot
of Providence in God's disposal of parties to their respective places of abode.
God (says Paul) has determined the times before appointed, and the bounds of
their habitation, Acts 17. 26. Some in regard of places for accommodation,
whether for the outward man, or inward, or both, may say, The lines are fallen
unto me in pleasant places; yea, I have a goodly heritage, Psalm. 16. 6.

5. In calling some to one employment, others to another. Bezaleel is a skilful
Artificer, Exodus 31. [beginning of the Chapter.] He chose David his servant,
and took him from the sheep-folds from following the ews great with young: he
brought him to feed Jacob his people, and Israel his inheritance, Psalm. 78. 70,
71. Jeremiah was ordained a Prophet, Jer. 1. 5. I thank Christ Jesus our Lord
(says Paul) who enabled me: for that he counted me faithful, putting me into
the ministry, 1 Timothy 1. 12.

6. In giving to some such and such Relations. When Esau lifted up his eyes,
and saw the women and children, Who are these with thee, says he to Jacob? and
he said, The children which God has graciously given thy servant, Genesis 33. 5.
Job was bereft of his children, God gives him posterity again; for he had seven
sons and three daughters, Job 42. 13. These living-goods came out of God's
Treasure-house. That reply of Jacob to Rachel, saying, Give me children, or
else I dye; does attest the sovereign will of God, Am I (said Jacob) in God's
stead? who has withheld from thee the fruit of the womb? Genesis 30. 2.

7. In giving and continuing to some as long as he pleases, Land, Wealth,
Health, Friends, Liberty; to others not so. He makes peace in thy borders, and
fills thee with the finest of the wheat, Psalm. 147. 14. Others cut up Mallows
by the bushes, and Juniper-roots for their meat, Job 30. 4. The rich man
feasteth, and has his Purple and fine Linen; Lazarus is laid at his gate full
of sores, Luke 16. 19, 20. Pharaoh has his liberty to gallop up and down
Egypt: Joseph was sold for a servant, whose feet they hurt with fetters; he was
laid in irons, Psalm. 105. 17, 18.

8. In taking some out of the world in the morning of their age, others at
midday, others in the evening. Many Candles are puffed out, ere they burn out to
the socket of old age: yea, some no sooner lighted, but are extinguished; and
many with one breath are blown out together, as in a Plague-time, and season of
War. Shall any (says Job) teach God knowledge, seeing he judges those that
are high? One dies in his full strength, being wholly at ease, and at quiet,
his breasts are full of milk, and his bones are moistened with marrow: and
another dies in the bitterness of his soul, and never eats with pleasure:
they shall lie down alike in the dust, and the worms shall cover them, Job 21.
22, etc. A young Abijah, in whom is found some good thing toward the Lord God
of Israel, dies; when wicked ones survive him, see 1 Kings 14. 12, 13.

Now, that the Sovereignty of God displayed, should be a golden bitt to check
man's corruption, appears,

1. If due respect ought to be had to Superiors, much more ought it to be
yielded to God, who is absolute Lord. Elihu harps on this string, Job 34. 17,
18, 19. Nebuchadnezzar is taught this lesson, Dan. 4. 34, 35.

2. Otherwise, what is it but to exalt Clay to the Pottership? He that
quarrelleth with God's Dispensations, does so far forget that confession of
says, Isa. 64. 8. But now, O Lord, thou art our Father; we are the clay, and
thou our Potter; and we all are the work of thy hands. Si reputarent homines
sibi negotium esse cum Deo, puderet ipsos contra suum opificem insurgere, neque
enim lutum figulo suo obstrepit: atqui nos centuplo minus sumus, quam lutum.
Calv. praelect. in Ezekiel. c. 18.


3. What are parties like to get by contending, but blows? Woe unto him that
striveth with his Maker; let the potsherd strive with the potsherds of the
earth, etc. Isa. 45. 9.

The same Sovereignty of God should be a sacred goad to quicken to the exercise
of grace: For,

1. The influences that Sovereignty has had on Saints in Scripture, are
recorded to this end and purpose, That others should write after so good
Copies. It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good, 1 Samuel 3. 18. I was
dumb, I opened not my mouth, because thou did it, Psalm. 39. 9.

2. God's Sovereignty casts its particular aspects on the graces of Christians.
As there is Sovereign Justice, so there is Sovereign Mercy, and each bespeak
the exercise of grace according to the nature of the dispensation. More
particularly, there are these Graces, on which (as on the Christians Garden)
Sovereignty (like the North Wind and South Wind) may blow, that the Spices
thereof may come forth; to allude to that in Cant. 4. 16.

1. A sweet submission of spirit, in opposition to our own judgment, or
prescribing to God. The will of the Lord be done, said they, Acts 21. 14.

2. Contentation, in opposition to discontent at our own condition, and envy at
others who may have more gifts of the mind higher degrees of graces, or more of
the good things of this life, than we have. That is a remarkable passage, Mat.
20. 15. Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with mine own? Is thine eye
evil, because mine is good?

3. Hopefulness of spirit under the greatest distresses, whether outward or
inward. May not God exalt Sovereign Mercy? Are there dry bones? yet may they
not live? Ezekiel 37. 12, 13. Is the heart as low as Hell in regard of fears,
sorrows, etc? yet will not he who dwells in the highest Heavens, take up his
habitation in the lowest heart? Isa. 57. 15, 16.

4. Love and thankfulness; and that (1.) with respect to smiling-dispensations,
whether they respect soul or body. Who am I, Lord, (said David upon a view of
his mercies)? and what is my house, that thou have brought me hitherto? 1 Chronicles. 17. 16. See moreover, Psalm. 116. 1, 2, 3. and 1 Timothy 1. 12, 13. (2.)
With respect to frowning ones: That there is any mitigation and sanctification
of them, is ground of love and thankfulness: for God might have exalted Justice
to its height in thy afflictive-dispensarions. It is of the Lord's mercies that
we are not consumed, because his compassions fail not, Lam. 3. 22.

CHAP. II.
1. LET the meditation of God's Sovereignty, be a sovereign allay to the
breakings forth of ingratitude, pride, discontent, envy, dejection under his
Administrations. Consider, (1.) Is there not a ^wo unto them that go in the way
of Cain? Jude v. 11. And what was that which led Cain on in his way, if it were
not the first part of his way? Was it not discontent at the Lord's
Dispensation? But unto Cain and to his offering he had not respect: and Cain
was very wroth, and his countenance fell, Genesis 4. 5. (2.) Whose judgment shall
take place in matters? the Lord's, who is infallible, righteous, supreme? or
man's, who is made up of wants and weaknesses? I know (says Job) it is so of a
truth: but how should man be just with God? if he will contend with him, he
cannot answer him one of a thousand, Job 9. 1, 2.

2. Exercise graces proper to be exercised, with respect to God's Sovereignty.
Let the holding up of the finger of Sovereignty, hush all noise, and quicken
you to your Lesson. Be silent, O all flesh, before the Lord, Zech. 2, 13.
Consider here three things:

1. Is there any rational ground for a contrary carriage? Behold, he takes
away, who can hinder? who will say unto him, What do thou? Job 9. 12.

2. Go down to the potter's house, Jer. 18. 2, 3, 4. And what may you learn
there? Is not the Clay ductile, pliable, obediential, to the hand of the
Potter? And should not a Christian labor more and more to have his Will
molded or fashioned to the Will of his Maker in point of holy submissions?
Carry back (says David to Zadock) the Ark of God into the City: if I shall
find favor in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me again, and show me both
it and his habitation: but if he thus say, I have no delight in thee; behold
here am I, let him do to me as seems good to him, 2 Samuel 15. 25, 26.

3. The way to have God to be gracious, is to exercise grace with respect to
the Lord's Sovereignty to be displayed as he pleases. There is a way of order,
though not of merit; a way of our Duty, though God does sometimes notably exalt
Sovereign Mercy when duty is neglected. The Israelites provoked God at the sea,
even at the red sea; nevertheless he saved them for his Name's sake, that he
might make his mighty power to be known, Psalm. 106. 7, 8. And though this be
so, yet men have no ground to neglect their duty. Job his captivity is turned,
and God exalts kindness to a wonder; yet Job is reasoned first into an holy
silence and sense of his failings; see Job 42.

OBSERVATION VIII.
There is a glorious display of the Power of God in the management of matters
in the World.
CHAP. I.
THE Power of God may here be considered four ways. 1. In regard of God
Himself. 2. In regard of Human Power. 3. In regard of the manner of being
displayed. 4. In regard of its extent, or the various objects about which it is
conversant.


First, In the first place, The Power of God may be viewed in regard of God
himself; and that,

1. As a glorious Attribute of God. As God is said to be Love, 1 John 4. 16; so
He is Power infinite. God has spoken once, twice have I heard this, That power
belongs to God, Psalm. ^2. 11. Touching the Almighty, we cannot find him (...)
^s excellent in power and in judgment, Job 37. ^3. The Apostle Paul speaks of
the exceeding greatness of his Power, Ephesians. 1. 19.

2. As conjoined with Wisdom. According to this Consideration, in regard of our
apprehension, God's Power is glorious in bringing matters to pass. He is mighty
in strength and wisdom, Job 36. 5. Wisdom and might are his, Dan. 2. 20. It is
said, That, in Warlike affairs, Policy surpasses Power: What cannot then both
infinite Power and Wisdom accomplish, though the Wisdom of Myriads of
Achitophels, assay the contrary!

Secondly, The Power of God in regard of Human Power, will appear the more
transcendent, if it be considered,

1. That Human Power is derivative, or borrowed from Him who is the blessed and
only Potentate, the King of kings, and Lord of lords, 1 Timothy 6. 15.
Nebuchadnezzar was a great Monarch, he had Kings subordinate to him; yet said
Daniel to him, Thou, O king, art king of kings: for the God of heaven has
given thee a kingdom, power, and strength, and glory, Dan. 2. 37. All
Nebuchadnezzar's Power wa^ but a Slip taken out of Heaven's Garden. He was
beholding to God, who placed not only the Crown upon his Head, but his Head
also upon his Shoulders. And not only the Power, but the exercise of it also,
is mutatitious, or borrowed. So Christ to Pilate, Thou could have no power at
all against me, except it were given thee from above, John 19. 10. But,

2. The Power of God is seen as glorious, in compare with Human Power; in that
the Lord can, and does, when he pleases, dethrone the greatest Potentates of
the World. How quickly is a Nebuchadnezzar hurried from the Palace to the Park,
Dan. 4. 32. God is Judge, he puts down the one, and sets up another, Psalm.
75. 7. And hence Moses, speaking of the two Kings, Sihon and Og, whom God had
caused to fall before his people, Deuteronomy. 3. 21. annexeth a pertinent description
of the Lord's Power, saying, O Lord God, thou have begun to show thy servant
thy greatness, and thy mighty hand; for what God is there in heaven, or in
earth, that can do according thy works, and according to thy might? v. 24.

Thirdly, The Power of God is to be considered in regard of the manner of its
display; and that three ways:

1. Immediately, or without means. If there be wanting means, yet there is
never wanting power to bring about matters, where and when God pleases,
without means. He that made the World without a Tool, can act without an
Instrument. If there be not an human arm to crush a Laban, yet there is not
wanting an hand from Heaven to restrain him: so he acknowledges, saying, It is
in the power of my hand to do you hurt: but the God of your father spoke unto
me yesternight, saying, Take thou heed that thou speak not to Jacob either good
or bad, Genesis 31. 29.

2. Mediately, by means; and these though weak and improbable. God checked
Egyptian-insolency by Frogs and Lice. The blowing of the Trumpets of
Rams-horns, is as effectual to level the Walls of Jericho, as if a thousand
barrels of Gunpowder had been mined in under them, Josh. 6. 20. Gideon with
his Three hundred men, routeth the Army of the Midianites, as well as if his
Army had consisted of Three hundred thousand, Judge. 7. 19, etc. The Apostles,
being delegated by Christ to the preaching of the Gospel, what multitudes are
drawn into Christ by them? who were to confront the world in that work, as it
was then adjudged, Acts 16. 21. and 17 6. and 24. 14.

3. Contrary to the nature of means is the Power of God displayed. He made the
fluid Waters to stand up as a solid Wall for his people to pass by, Exodus 14.
22. Fire shall flame, and not burn, Dan. 3. 26. Lions shall be hungry, and yet
not devour a Daniel, Dan. 6. 22, 23. An harsh and cruel Jailer to a Paul and
Silas, shall become all kindness, Acts 16. 23, 24, 33.

Fourthly, The Power of God in regard of the extent of it, has its
consideration. Thou have (says the Psalmist) a mighty arm: strong is thy hand,
and high is thy right hand, Psalm. 89. 13. With God all things are possible,
Mar. 10. 27. For with God nothing shall be impossible, Luke 1. 37. And not only
in the general is the Power of God mavelous, but likewise more particularly,
if we view it with respect to, 1. Spirituals. 2. Temporals.


1. The former, the Apostle speaks of in 1 Ephesians. 1. 19. -- the exceeding
greatness of his power to usward who believe, according to the working of his
mighty power. As the Power of God was richly displayed in making the Heavens
and the Earth; so likewise is it in creating the new Heavens and new Earth,
Isa. 65. 17. Look we into the new World, and observe what a golden thread of
Power is drawn through these following Pearls.

1. Conversion-work, regeneration, or the new creature, declares the Power of
God. Thy people shall be a willing people in the day of thy power, Psalm. 110.
3. That the Wolf dwells with the Lamb, and Leopard lies down with the Kid, is
from the Power of God, Isa. 11. 6. compared with Acts 9. 5. and 1 Cor. 6. 9,
10, 11.

2. The forgiving of sin, and the mortification of it more and more, do
likewise hold forth the Encomiums and Praises of God's Power. Who is a God like
unto thee, that pardons iniquity, and passes by the transgression of the
remnant of his heritage? he retains not his anger for ever, because he
delights in mercy: he will turn again, he will have compassion upon us: he
will subdue our iniquities; and thou will cast all their sins into the depths
of the sea, Mic. 7. 18, 19. But that ye may know (says Christ to the Scribes)
that the Son of Man has power to forgive sin, etc. Mat. 9. 16. For sin shall
not have dominion over you; for ye are not under the law, but under grace, Romans
6. 14.

3. The raising up of parties to a sense of God's love, especially after a
spiritual languishing, falls, slips, conflicts with their darkness and
cloudiness of spirit; does bespeak the Power of God in so doing. Create in me a
clean heart (says David), and renew a right spirit within me; restore unto me
the joy of thy salvation, Psalm. 51. 10, 12. I create the fruit of the lips,
peace, peace, Isa. 57. 19.

4. The vigorous sustentation of parties in the exercise of graces under
sufferings, does proclaim the Power of God. Be not thou (writes Paul to
Timothy) therefore ashamed of the testimony of our Lord, nor of me his
prisoner; but be thou partaker of the afflictions of the Gospel, according to
the power of God, 2 Timothy 1. 8. See more, Acts 4. 8, 13. Rev. 2. 13.

5. The conflict of Saints with Satan, does witness the Power of God. The God
of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly, Romans 16. 20. The Devil is
a roaring Lion, 1 Pet. 5. 8. and yet he is not an irresistible Adversary; for
v. 9. it is said, Whom resist, steadfast in the fuith.

6. Perseverance in grace, even unto glory, does exhibit a large testimonial of
the power of God; so 1 Pet. 1. 5. Who are kept by the power of God through
faith unto salvation.

2. In the next place, The Power of God is seen in Temporals. What is the World
but an Hall hung with this Cloth of Arras? We may behold the Power of God in
the meanest or least of Creatures. Amongst other things, observe the sparklings
of this Diamond in two things.

1. In point of Provision for parties: How did God feed so many thousand, and
for many years, and in a Wilderness, of old! See Numb. 11. 21. Deuteronomy. 8. 2, 3,
4. As the Power of God was then seen, so it is seen in a larger Wilderness, the
whole World, in feeding the sons of men, as shall after be spoken unto; and the
same Power of God is seen as it respects persons, families, in their particular
Wilderness. But,

2. In point of Protection, notwithstanding dangers. It would fill a Volume to
rehearse the many remarkable preservations which some have had, whilst the Lord
had wise Ends subordinate to his glory, for their existence here in the world.
It may suffice that Christ points out the Power of God in preserving, when he
says to his Disciples, Behold I send you forth as sheep in the midst of
wolves, Mat. 10. 16. What a notable draught have we of the Power of God in the
rescue of Peter (one of the Church's Bell-weathers) from the Paw of that Lion
Herod, Acts 12. Neither Quaternions of Soldiers, nor Chains, nor Iron-gate,
shall hold him whom God will set free. It is a truth, God's Peter's are immortal
till their work be done.

CHAP. II.
1. THERE is no ground to be despondent or dejected in and under troubles.
Despondency of spirit is an evil of sin, which steals in on parties under their
evil of smart. David said in his heart, I shall now perish one day by the hand
of Saul, 1 Samuel 27. 1. and yet Readiness day of death was then nearer, and David
lived to see the day, for a confutation of his black imaginations; for so is it
recorded 2 Samuel 22. 1. And David spoke unto the Lord the words of this song in
the day that the Lord had delivered him out of the hand of all his enemies, and
out of the hand of Saul. Let not the Christian then be sinking under his Saul*
like difficulties, but ask his soul this question, Can I find out an Omnipotent
Distress? If my Religion say, nay; and tell me there is but one Omnipotent in
the World; Why does my dejected practice say, yea? or tacitly proclaim the
contrary?

2. Distrust not the truth of God's word, as if the Lord could not be as good
as his word for defect of Power. 'Twas Zachariah's fault, that he looked too
much to Second-causes, and did not consider, as he should, the Power of God,
which had Nature (though decayed) at his beck, Luke 18. 19, 20. If therefore
there be as great an unlikelihood of things spoken of in Scripture, in point of
being fulfilled, as there was that Zachariah and Elizabeth, being old, should
have a son; yet give no way to cavilling-unbelief; but take a view of matters
in conjunction with the Power of God; and so indeed we are taught in Scripture,
as in the case of the Jews, who have lien in a forlorn estate for so many
Centuries of years. Romans 11. 23. God is able to graff them in again. And so
likewise in the case of Antichrist, Rev. 18. 8. Therefore shall her plagues
come in one day, death, and mourning, and famine; and she shall be utterly
burnt with fire: for strong is the Lord who judges her. And so in any other
difficult case, let that be remembered, Genesis 18. 14. Is there any thing too hard
for the Lord?

3. Be encouraged to go on in such work as God calls you unto in his
Providence. He that has a God of Power to set him on work, and pay him wages,
may take the more encouragement to follow his work. If God be with Moses, as he
promises, saying, Certainly I will be with thee, Exodus 3. 12. Moses may take
heart notwithstanding all blocks in the way. Heaven's Warrant will bear God's
Moseses out, notwithstanding all the fury of the sons of the earth, and the
sons of hell too: See Josh. 1. 6, 7. Jer. 1. 17, 18, 19. Mat. 28. 19, 20. Acts
18. 9, 10.

4. Resolve on the exercise of faith more and more on the Power of God. Let not
so glorious a Jewel lie by, without taking frequent views of it by the eye of
Faith. Consider two things:

1. Hereby you glorify God, in giving him a due estimate of his Power. A clear
and full exemplification for this, we have in Abraham, who being not weak in
faith, considered not his own body now dead, when he was about an hundred years
old; neither yet the deadness of Sarah's womb; he staggered not at the promise
of God through unbelief: but was strong in faith, giving glory to God, and
being fully persuaded, that what he had promised, he was able also to perform,
Romans 4. 19, 20, 21.

2. Hereby you consult your own good and quiet. Had men more of Faith, they
would have less of disquiet. Let not your hearts be troubled; ye believe in
God, believe also in me; was a word spoken in season by Christ for the calming
of the hearts of his Disciples, John 14. 1.

If it be said here, I question not the Power of God. It may be replied,

1. It is well if you do not; as good as you have had their reflections on the
Power of God. Moses questions how Six hundred thousand footmen should be
provided for flesh for a Month in the Wilderness, Numb. 11. 21, 22. God tells
him, saying, Is the Lord's hand waxed short? thou shall see now whether my
words shall come to pass unto thee, or no, v. 23.

2. Is there not a deceit of heart here? God's Will is pretended, but is not
the Power of God questioned? A reason to evidence this, is thus: Because when
the distress is greater, the party is the more disquieted. Disquiet rises with
the difficulty. The Israelites at the Red Sea were made up of unbelief, Exodus
14 11, 12. They might have considered, that the Power of God, which had made a
passage through Pharaoh his stony heart for their egress from Egypt, could make
a passage for them through the Red Sea. Martha is questioning the resurrection
of her brother, though Christ had said the word for the encouragement of faith;
and what is that which staggereth her faith? it is because Lazarus had been
dead four days; see John 11. 39, 40.

3. In reference to the Will of God about matters, that there shall be no
defect on God's part. What he promises absolutely, shall be made good; what
conditionally, is made good likewise; yea, not only when the Condition is
performed on our part, but sometimes when failing on our part: as in Martha her
case; Christ had told her, If she believed, she should see the glory of God
displayed, John 11. 40. yet she questioneth, as v. 39. and Lazarus is raised,
v. 44. True then is that, Heb. 10. 23. Faithful is he who has promised.

OBSERVATION IX.
God never has his Vacation-time; though he may seem to do little or nothing
sometimes in His administration of matters in the World.
CHAP. I.
THAT Providence is not idle, though it Deus nunquam feriatur. Calv.
seems to sit still, will be evidenced,

1. From positive assertions in Scripture. So Prove. 15. 3. The eyes of the Lord
are in every place, beholding the evil and the good. Eyes here are attributed
to God, to note not only his knowledge of, or inspection into the affairs of the
World; but his wise ordering of all things, in all places, and at all times:
for these eyes are never shut; the Lord is not a sleepy Watchman: Behold, he
that keeps Israel, shall neither slumber nor sleep, Psalm. 121. 4. My Father
(says Christ to the Jews, who were stumbled at the Miracle wrought on the
Sabbath Day) works hitherto, and I work, Joh. 5. 17. The sense is, Though God
rested the seventh day from his work of Creation; yet he has not been at rest
ever since; and perpetually works hitherto in his Providence; and yet none of
you durst entitle Him a violater of your Sabbath; and why then am I adjudged a
violater for a doing my Father's work. This I conceive, with others, to be the
intendment of that place of Scripture; and it plainly gives to understand,
that God's Providential care in and over the World, is permanent. The Lord
withdraws not his manu-tenency; He upholds all things by the word of his power,
Heb. 1. 3.

2. From exemplifications in Scripture. For if we cast an eye on this or that
special draught of Providence, we may trace the foot-steeps of the Almighty
even there, where we cannot see Him so visibly walk for a time. Draughts of
Providence are of two sorts:

1. Some respect persons singly, as in Joseph's and Job's case.

2. Others respect parties collectively, or the Body of a people, a Community
of a people, as the Church of God in Egypt and Babylon, and in times of the
New Testament under persecution. Whosoever shall take a right view of the cases of
Saints thus instanced in, will find the result to be commensurate to the Truth
asserted. He who diggeth the foundation for an house, the deeper he digs, the
less visible he is to those who cast an eye toward the place where the
digging-work is managed; and whilst this work is on foot, Is nothing done, or
doing, because the sidewalls are not reared, and tile-stones are not hung?
There is a manifold working-hand of Providence. God does ripen persons for
mercies, and mercies for persons. There is not only a work of the Shoo-maker,
whereby a Shoo is made of this or that proportion; but there is a work of the
Physician, whereby the swollen, hydropical foot is reduced to its regular
shape, and is fitted for the shoo. If God under some dispensations carry on a
work upon us, though he do not this or that work for us, till he see fit, he is
still at work; and the work he intends, is in its Second-causes; it is latent
there, and comes forth from between the Curtains of antecedent preparations,
when the Lord's time is come. The Israelites are in Egypt's Furnace, where they
must be melted; and the hotter the Furnace is, the nearer Moses is with his
Pails of water to extinguish the Egyptian fires, though the Israelites know no
such matter: see Exodus 2. 23, 24. with Exodus 3. v. 7, 8, 9, 10. Job in like
sort is put into Heaven's Mortar, where he is pounded and beaten, to the end
the sweet fragor or smell of his graces might come forth: and after God has
taught him many a good lesson, a prosperous condition is on the hand-gallop
toward him; it had its foot in the stirrup before; he had friends, they were
not impoverish't as Job was; they had hands to help, and have hearts to help or
set up a broken man in his estate, when the time for so doing is come; Every
man also gave him a piece of money, and every one an earing of gold, Job 42. 11.

And we have not only exemplifications of Saints, but likewise of Sinners; and
that both singly considered, as well as in a Body or Community. Sinners ripen
for Judgments, and Judgments ripen for Sinners. They, by their sinning, are
digging their own graves with their own nails. The pit is a digging for them,
though it be not quite finished: there is an [ until the pit be dug for the
wicked, Psalm. 94. 13.] What a Bogg or Quag-mire then do sinners dance on! the
surface or top-turf breaks, and what becomes of them, with their insultations,
projects, designs? Then she that is mine enemy (says the Church) shall see it,
and shame shall cover her, which said unto me, Where is the Lord thy God? Mine
eyes shall behold her: now shall she be trodden down as the mire of the
streets, Mic. 7. 10.

CHAP. II.
1. KNOW how to understand those passages in Scripture, as to the Lord's
forgetting his people, Psalm. 13. 1. Psalm. 77. 9. and that in Psalm. 44. 23.
Awake, why sleep thou, O Lord? These are not to be understood as to an
universal and absolute forget-getting, and sleep of Providence; for God has
not his Vacation-time: He still holds the reins of Government in his hand, all
the world over. Neither do they infer an absolute cessation of Providence in
reference to that object-matter which the Lord to our apprehension seems to
forget, and lies dormant: for there is a promoting-work of Providence, which we
see not, and are not so sensible of for the present, as has been showed, and
may further be showed in the next Observation. Besides, such forgetting and
sleep of Providence, as it is such, bespeaks the beauty of Providence in the
way of bringing things to pass. It is so far from inferring an inter-regnum, or
letting fall the Scepter of Government, as that it is a glorious demonstration
that God orders matters, and that wisely, whilst he seems to forget, and be as
one asleep. As the Night, as night, falls under the Providence of God, as well
as the Day; for there are the Ordinances of Heaven for the Night-season, Jer.
31. 35. so the dark Night, when as to matters the Lord seems to sleep, is
reductive to His All-wise Model of Government. The Seventy-years Captivity was
a long Night of the Church's distress; and yet thus it must be according to
Ordinance of Providence, Jer. 29. 10.

2. Let Saints be encouraged to work out their salvation with fear and
trembling, Phil. 2. 12. To be always abounding in the work of the Lord, 1 Cor.
15. 58. and that, because in so doing, they in a sort resemble their Heavenly
Father, who has not his Vacation-time, and works one way, though not another,
in ordering and bringing matters about in the World. A Christian should be
spiritually industrious. He should be sometimes in one Duty, sometimes in
another: If it be not a ploughing season for work without-doors, yet it may be
a threshing-one for work within-doors. If he cannot pray as he would, yet if he
seriously sigh and groan at a Throne of Grace, read a verse of Scripture, think
on it, talk of it; here is work, and good work too; and leight gains this way,
will make an heavy Purse.

OBSERVATION X.
God does some thing, yea much, whilst He seems to do little or nothing: and
does little or nothing, whilst men are in expectation of great matters to be
done.
CHAP. I.
THAT Providence speaks, whilst it is in a sort silent; and works, whilst the
work intended is at a stand, may be thus evidenced:

1. From the secret and invisible agency of Angels, about that work which
Providence in time brings forth on the stage. The living Creatures are said to
have the hands of men under their wings, on their four sides, Ezekiel. 1. 8. Hands
are the instruments for action; and these are veiled over with wings. These
hands are at work, though men see them not. And thus the Angel informs Daniel
how he had been hard at work in the Court of Persia, though Daniel knew no such
matter, Dan. 10. 12, 13.

2. From some underground foundation laid of matters. There is a seed sown,
but it is yet under the clods. Little does mortal eye see how Providence will
bring both the sticks ends together, which at present lies straight. Who of the
Israelites thought, that when Moses was born, and preserved by Pharaob's
Daughter, a rescue from Egyptian insolency, was remotely born with him, and
bred up with him in Pharaob's Court?

3. From Prognostics, or rather Forerunners of a work; which as they have a
reference to a work, so they hasten it more or less. Consider here a work of
Providence, (1.) As a work of Mercy. (2.) As a work of Wrath, or Judgment. As a
Work of Mercy, and so conviction of sin, humiliation, serious supplication,
have their influences. The work may in some respect be said to be done, whilst
these are doing. The provend'ring of the Horse, the trimming and tackling the
Ship, the whetting of the Sithe, do contribute to the journey, voyage, and
mowing of the grass When the Jews consider their ways, hearke^ to the Prophet
Haggai, set on Temple-work, the work of blessing of them is ^ hand, Hag. 2. 19.
From this day, will I bless you Again, as a work of Justice, and so irruptions
of sin, insolency in men's wicked courses, taunting at Zion's Songs,
Lethargical security, horrid blasphemy, do set forward a work of vindictive
Justice, which though it seem to take a nap, yet wi^ awaken to the terror of
the sons of Beli^ See Ezekiel. 16. 49, 50. Psalm. 75. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 Psalm. 137. 3.
with 8, 9. Zech. 1. 11, 15, 18, 19, 20, 21. Mic. 7. 10.

In the next place, God does little or nothing whilst men are in expectation of
great matters to be done: And this holds,

1. In regard of the kind of things. Atque itain diem hodiernum neg ant venisse
Christum suum, quia non in sublimitate venerit, dum ignorant in humilitate
primo fuisse venturum. Tert. lib. adversus Judaeos.
The Jews had a conceit of a Temporal Monarchship which the Messiah should
erect; and hereupon Jesus the Son of Mary is rejected. A spice at least of this
Opinion had taken the Heads of the Disciples, Acts 1. 6. they ask a question
there, which an answer given to Pilate might well resolve, John 18. 36. The
Papists have a conceit of Antichrist to come of the Tribe of Dan, who shall do
wonders; and so overlook Antichrist to a wonder. It Is pity they are so
sharp-sighted, as not to see wood for trees. As John told the Levites and
Priests, in reference to Christ, saying, There stands one among you, whom ye
know not, John 1. 26. the same may be said, but in a contrary sense, to
Papists. The Anabaptists of Germany, said they had converse with God; and a
command from Him, Sleid. com. lib. 3. p. 44.
That, all wicked ones being slain, they should constitute a new World, in
which only the godly and innocent should live and bear the sway. But what was
the monstrous and bloody birth of that Conceit, is not unknown to those who
know any thing in History. Men had need then be very cautious what foundation
they build on for matters expected: for they who look for I know not what to
take place in the World, will see it I know not when. And this leads to the
next particular.

2. In regard of Time: It is supposed that the thing expected has solid
foundation; but yet persons are out in the timing of the thing, Moses is to
deliver God's Israel out of Egypt, but it is not then when in the vigor of his
age he slew the Egyptian, Acts 7. 24, 25, 30. Christ is to come to judgment;
but not when the Thessalonians (through an erroneous conceit taken up) did
expect, as Paul gives them to understand, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 1, 2, 3. Some have
vented their opinion about the downfall of Antichrist, the Calling of the Jews,
etc. but the time expired when it should be, according to their imagination,
has been a confutation sufficient. Reason there is therefore to beware of
Pretorian assertions in this kind, lest otherwise Religion be damnified, and
exposed to derision.

3. In regard of the manner or way of God's doing what is to be done, and in
his time for doing. It becomes not persons to confine the Lord to this or that
way of working. David is to conquer a Goliath, but it is not by fighting in
Readiness Armor, but with his Sling, and stones taken out of the Brook, 1 Samuel
^7. Naaman is to be cleansed, but not in Naaman's fancied way, 2 Kings 5. 11.
God does great things for his distressed ones: sometimes he takes one way,
sometimes another. There is more than one Staircase to the Chamber where he
feasts his friends. His infinite Power and Wisdom brings about matters beyond
the shallow apprehensions of men. Hear what he says; I will bring the blind by
a way they knew not; I will lead them in paths that they have not known: I will
make darkness light before them, and crooked things straight: these things will
I do unto them, and not forsake them, Isa. 42. 16.

CHAP. II.
1. FROM God's doing something, whilst he does nothing, Learn,

1. To do something, by doing nothing against God. Let not the silence of
Providence be an occasion of crying-sins. That servant who said in his heart,
My Lord delayeth his coming; and began to beat the Man-servants and Maidens,
and to eat, and to drink, and to be drunken; was cut in sunder, Luke 12. 45,
46. And,

2. As to do nothing against God; so to do something positively for God, to His
glory, and in obedience to Him. It behooves persons under such a position of
Silent Providence, to consider of their sins, to be humbled for them, turn from
them, and so sweetly to wait the issues of Providence. Our God shall come, and
shall not keep silence, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 50. 3. and what improvement
is made of that assertive Doctrine, you may see, (1.) By way of terror to those
who abuse the silence of Providence, in v. 21. These things have thou done,
etc. and in v. 22. Now consider this, ye that forget God, lest I tear you in
pieces, and there be none to deliver. (2.) By way of implicit Exhortation and
Consolation, to such who keep close to God, in the way of holy walking with
Him, and before Him, v. 23. Whosoever offers praise, glorifieth me: and to him
that orders his conversation aright, will I show the salvation of God.

2. From God's doing nothing, whilst men are in expectation of great matters to
be done: Learn,

1. What reason there is for men to look to the ground of their Expectations.
To expect other-what, other-when, and otherwise than the Lord has purposed, or
made some discovery of such a purpose, is to build Castles in the air, not in
the Heavens; and what has not its foundation in Heaven, as the Lord is the
Founder of it, will not have its superstruction on Earth. For ever, O Lord, thy
word is seated in heaven, Psalm. 119. 89. Who is he that says, and it comes to
pass, when the Lord commands it not, Lament. 3. 37.

2. In the second place, Learn from hence to view the folly of wicked men's
purposes, presumptions, designs, in their prosecution and persecution of the
Saints of God. O how often are they disappointed! The greedy Dogs often catch
not the morsel; and when they do, they vomit it up again. They pay deer for
their lust here, or hereafter in Hell. They have their gnashing of teeth in
regard of disappointments, before they gnash them in the other World. Herod, to
please the Jews, will murder Peter; the Lamb is taken, but not to be slain till
after the Passover; and not then: for now I know (says Peter) of a surety,
that the Lord has sent his Angel, and has delivered me out of the hand of
Herod, and from all the expectation of the people of the Jews, Acts 12. 12. It
is reported, how Julian the Emperor Theod. lib. 3. c. 23.
intending, the Persians being conquered, to fall in on Christians with his
Army at his return; and that one Libanius the Sophister, spoke to a
Christian-School-master of Antioch, saying, What is the Son of the Carpenter
now a doing? To whom reply was made, how the great Carpenter of the World was
making a Coffin. And not long after, the slain body of Julian was brought to
Antioch. A good lesson for the Libaniusses and Julians of the World to ponder
on!

OBSERVATION XI.
There is an admirable adaptation or connection of things with things, whereby
this or that is Midwifed or Birthed into the world. Or, Providence has its
Chain, the several Links whereof are set together by an Overruling Hand.
CHAP. I.
THE truth of this may be evidenced diverse ways.

1. This is emblematically described in the Situ vero demonstratur harum
conditio, quod aliae in aliis dicuntur fuisse, id est, non solum cohaerentes
sed etiam adunatae Providentia Dei: adeo ut quemadmodum ex causa una inferiore
procreantur effecta plurima; sic contra, ad effectum unum causae plurimae
pertineant plurimum. Junius.
word. We have a most exquisite picture of this, in Ezekiel. 1. the Wheels there
are asserted to have a near neighborhood, v. 16. a wheel in the middle of a
wheel, to note their implication or connection; and the living creatures are
coupled with the wheels in regard of influences: for when the living creatures
went, the wheels went by them; and when the living creatures were lift up from
the earth, the wheels were lifted up, v. 19.

2. God does expressly own such an adaptation Docemur etiam, Creaturas omnes
esse convenientissimo ordine collocatas, ita ut una ab altero pendeat, and ex
earum connexione, constituatur sua vis illa and concinna mundi harmonia;
frumentum ut nascatur, opus habet terra, terra pluria; pluvia est a coelo, and
omnia sunt a Deo, qui solus independens, rerum omnium concentum efficit and
moderatur. Rivetus in locum.
or connection of things with things. So in Hos. 2. 21, 22. And it shall come to
pass in that day, I will hear, says the Lord; I will hear the heavens, and
they shall bear the earth, and the earth shall hear the corn, and the wine, and
the oil, and they shall hear Jezreel.

3. There are clear exemplifications of this adaptation or connection, (1.) In
Naturals: so in the place mentioned, Hos. 2. 21, 22. so Ps. 104. 10, 11, 12,
13, 14. (2.) In Civils: Magistrates are to rule, and people to be ruled, Romans
13. 1. And where it is not so, there is an adaptation of things in way of
punishment, Judge. 17. 6. (3.) In Sacreds: There is a constituted order in the
Church, 1 Cor. 12. 18. Heb. 13. 17. And not only is there an adaptation this
way, but likewise in regard of the means of Grace, and Grace by the means. A
connection there is, but yet arbitrary, according to the good pleasure of God,
when, and to whom Grace is conveyed by the Means. The Apostle Paul asserts a
connection, when he thus stateth the matter, saying, So then faith comes by
hearing, and hearing by the word of God, Romans 10. 17.

4. This adaptation or connection may be more particularly evidenced, if we cast
an eye, 1. On Organs or Instruments. 2. Occasions or Inducements. 3. Means. 4.
Opportunities for the management of matters.


1. There is an adaptation in regard of Instruments ministerial. In the shop of
Providence there are tools of all sorts and sizes. If the Lord will punish the
Nations, he can find an Hammer to knock them down. Thou art my battel-ax and
weapons of war, for with thee will I break in pieces the nations, etc. Jer.
51. 20, etc. If the day of visitation be come for an Ahab's Family, and Baal's
worshippers: there is a Jehu, a rough Captain General, who drives furiously, 2
Kings 9. 20. If God will vouchsafe good days to a people, he can raise up
Political Shepherds, such as David, of whom it is said, he fed them according
to the integrity of his heart, and guided them by the skilfulness of his hands,
Psalm. 78. 72. And as there is an adaptation in regard of Political Instruments,
so likewise in regard of Ecclesiastical. There is a zealous Elijah in times of
apostasy and declining from God's Worship; and a John the Baptist, of whom the
Angel says, He shall go before him (i. e. Christ) in the spirit and power of
Elias, to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the disobedient
to the wisdom of the just, to make ready a people prepared for the Lord, Luke
1. 17. There is an admirable adaptation, in the Church's having not only
Elijahs, John Baptists, but likewise others, whose endowments are useful to
confute Adversaries, as Apollos, Acts 15. 28. and to comfort distressed, and
build up souls in practical way of converse with God. See Job. 33. 23. 2 Cor.
1. 4.

2. There is an adaptation, or suiting of things in regard of occasions, or
kind of in lets into this or that. Both the son's and father's discontents, are
inducements to Jacob to mind a removal from Laban, Genesis 31. 1, 2. A report
sounds in Pharaoh's ears, that Israel fled; probably he conceived the
Israelites to fly like Hares, such who might easily be hunted back again to
Egypt; and so is himself thrust on to his own ruin, Exodus 14. 5. David his good
service done for Israel, has an influence on the Elders of Israel, to bring
them to Hebron: Also, say they, in time past, when Saul was King over us, thou
wast he that leddest out and broughtest in Israel, 2 Samuel 5.

3. There is an adaptation or connection of Means in order to this or that which
comes to pass. And that as the Means are proper or suitable in order to the End
intended, as Noah's Ark is proper to prevent drowning by the Flood, Genesis 6. 14.
or as the Means are not so proper in order to the End intended by the Agent,
though proper and effectual to bring about what the Lord righteously had
determined. The Wisdom of God is seen in the follies of men. Rehoboam, in
following the c^unsel of young raw-headed Courtiers, (...) of clucking the
Chickens under the Royal (...), pecks them from him. See 1 King. 1^. 14, 15.

4. There is an adaptation, in regard of Opportunities for matters. Abraham
falls in opportunely on Chedorlaomer, Genesis 14. 15. Saul looks after the Seer;
the Maidens said, Behold, he is before you, make haste now, etc. 1 Samuel 9. 12.
David charge upon the Amalekites, when behold they were spread upon all the
earth, eating, and drinking, and dancing, because of all the great spoil that
they had taken out of the land of the Philistines, and out of the land of
Judah, 1 Samuel 30. 16. There was a wonderful concourse of circumstances in the
slaying of Ishbosheth; the Cutthroats took the season for their design; it is
said, they went, and came about the heat of the day to the house of Ishbosheth,
who lay on a bed at noon: and they came thither into the midst of the house, as
though they would have fetched wheat; and they smote him under the fifth rib, 2 Samuel 4. 5, 6. Occiditur Ishbosethus ab istis sicariis, idque voluntate Dei: ita
enim solet malos punire per malos. Non quod Deus suggerat hominibus peccata,
sed quod illis cum sua sponte erumpant abutatur. Pet. Mart. in locum. Ad-haec.
Cogitare debemus, quoties Deus vult aliquid fieri, omnes occasiones statim ejus
voluntati inservire. Adsunt in tempore frumentarii, omnium animi erant in eo
solo negotio occupati, rex deseritur solus in cubiculo. Ibidem.


CHAP. II.
1. TAKE notice of an Argument to prove Providence, from the adaptation or
connection of things. The admirable adaption of matters, may silence Atheistical
cavils. It is said of Galen, That upon the view of the wonderful adaptation and
connection of the parts in a Body defected, he was much affected; yea, pens a
Tract in commendation of the Author of Nature. What then may be observed in the
little World MAN, as he is termed by some; may as well be observed in Item, si
nulla Providentia sit, quomodo animalium corpora tam providenter ordinata sunt,
ut singula quaeque membra mirabili ratione disposita sua officia conservent?
Lact. Instit. lib. 3. c. 17.
the great World, to the praise of God, who wisely orders all in all. The
Psalmist takes notice of the wonderful disposition of things, Psalm 4. he begins
and concludes with an O Lord, our Lord! how excellent is thy Name in all the
earth!

2. Learn what to judge of Contingencies, or of this or that which happens in
a business. These are links in the Chain of Providence. They are Scouts of
Heaven's Army, though we are apt to look on them as straglers. In the History
of Joseph, it may be observed, how the brethren took occasion from the dreams
to malign him; they had him now off from his Father's House, and Joseph is a
confined man in the Pit, his Prison; and whilst there, the Midianites pass by,
and they Merchants, who did not it seems scruple the bargain, but gave Twenty
pieces of silver for him. Here is an adaptation of Agents, Occasions, Means,
Opportunity, and all concur to bring about what the Lord had wisely and
righteously determined. The Dreams were now on Horseback in order to
fulfilling, when Joseph is posted away to Egypt. All these Contingencies, like
the sheafs in the Dream, do obeisance to Providence.

3. Resolve, by way of Moral practice, on an adaptation or connection of your
duty, according to Scripture, with the good End propounded. If you would go to
Heaven, turn not your backs upon the path which leads thither. Holiness is the
road-way to Happiness; without it, no man shall see the Lord, Heb. 13. 14. He
that believes, shall be saved, Mar. 16. 16. The man will be found a foolish
builder, who builds on the sand, not on a rock; so teaches our Savior, Mat.
7. 24, 25, 26, 27. Moreover, in reference to Civil Affairs, a connection is
there to be observed: -- An honest Calling is to be followed honestly. A man
must keep his shop, if he would have his shop keep him. The Drunkard and the
Glutton shall come to poverty; and drowsiness shall clothe a man with rags,
Prove. 23. 21.

4. Meditate on the rich display of the Divine Attributes in the adaptation or
connection of things. Here is a large field for an Isaac's walk. Isaac; who went
out into the field to meditate, might see, and did after hear a story of a
wonderful adaptation of matters in the Marriage-journey, see Genesis 24. The
adaptations or connexions of things here to be meditated on, are not only
personal, which refer to the Lord's ordering our particular concernments, how
he provides, protects, directs, supports, and the like; but also public. There
are National adaptations or connexions of things, in which God's glory does
shine forth. These the godly heretofore have noted, as in Neh. 9. there is a
large Catalogue there of such adaptations and connexions. The Book of Esther
presents us with a notable draught of such connexions; What a wonderful
overruling Providence was there in the marriage of the King with one of his
honest Subjects? in the treachery of Bignatha and Teresh, intended against the
King? Mordecai's discovery of the Plot? the King's not sleeping, etc.? God kept
Court at the Court; his Providence was waking whilst the King cannot sleep: the
Lord reads his Church a Lecture of Providence, whilst the King has the Book of
Records of the Chronicles read before him; and knows how and when to make use
of the Hamans at Princes Courts, to promote godly Mordecai's, for the good and
welfare of his Church or People.

OBSERVATION XII.
There is a liberty of God to salve up some other way what is wanting in regard
of a visible and proportionable adaptation and connection of things: or, There
is an Extraordinary Walk of Providence in the World, as well as an Ordinary one.
CHAP. I.
THE Lord keeps not always within the pales of an ordinary and visible
dispensation of things; such a Walk is too narrow for an Infinite Sovereign and
All-wise God. Look we abroad into the world, and we cannot well overlook a
display of Providence on this wise; and that in regard of 1. Instruments. 2.
Occasions. 3. Means. 4. Opportunities, in point of bringing about things.


First, As for Instruments, the Lord is not confined to these. If Thieves do
not break in on Nabal, and so become Instruments of divine wrath; the Lord
smites him that he dies, 1 Samuel 25. 38. And if unlikely Agents for this or that
work, be brought forth on the stage; yet nothing hinders, as God is pleased to
concur, but the effect is proportionable to a likely and promising cause of
such an effect. This may be seen in Spirituals and Politicals. God (says the
Apostle) has chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise, 1
Cor. 1. 27. A little Maid is an Handmaid indeed, whereby a Naaman may come to
the knowledge of the true God, 2 King. 5. 2, 3. It is written of Mr. Peacock,
how that under his agonies of conscience, when some Ministers asked him,
Whether they should pray for him; He replied, By no means; do not so dishonor
God, as to pray for such a reprobate as I am. But his young Pupil standing by,
said (with tears in his eyes), Certainly a reprobate could never be so tender
of God's dishonor. Which he well weighing, was thereby comforted and restored,
when neither he with his Learning, nor any other sons of the Prophets, could
prove sons of consolation to him. Again in Politicals: The Sacred History
informs of the noble acts of Solomon, though young and tender, 1 Chronicles. 29. 1.
with 1 Kings 3. 28. And of Josiah, who was but eight years old when he began to
reign, 1 King. 22. 1. Each of their green years were well made up by the
Ancient of days, as the Lord is termed, Dan. 7. 9. The Fathers of Trent gave
History of the Council of Trent, lib. 2. p. 260.
thanks to God when Henry the eighth was dead; saying, That it was a miracle
that he had left a Son behind him of but Nine years old, that he might not be
able to tread in the Father's steps. Thus these good Fathers, for their
gravity, if not some of them for their levity, according to the probable issue
of their Doctrine in forbidding Marriage, did soon shoot their bolt; they might
have held their pop a while, and so have learnt this lesson tru^r than their
Canons, That Edward the Child is more than a Child, when Providence by him
shall confront the Man of Sin.

Secondly, Occasions for matters have not sometimes that influence by way of
birthing-f^th what in likelihood might be. The Ephramites quarrel with Gideon
for not calling them forth when he fought with the Midianites: their sharp
chiding (recorded Judge. 8. 1, 2.) did not end in a bloody battle, as it did at
another time, when the like contending had its closure in the death of Forty
and two thousand of the swaggering Ephramites: See Judge. 12. 1, 6.

Thirdly, The Means for help are sometimes invisible, unlikely, and casual. Ye
shall not (says Elisha to the distressed Kings for lack of water) see wind,
neither shall ye see rain, yet that valley shall be filled with water, that ye
may drink, both ye, and your cattle, and your beasts, 2 Kings 3. 17. Or if the
Means do appear, yet they promise nothing to sense and reason. Are not Abana
and Pharphar, rivers of Dam^scus, better than all the waters of Israel, says
N^man? may I not wash in them, and be clean? 2 King. 5. 12. yet Jordans waters
cleanse the Leper. God works by what means he pleases. Parties see a Jordan
before them, and sometimes see neither wind, nor rain, and yet have water, a
help, a supply: As that Woman reported of in the late Irish Rebellion, who
being driven into the Mountains, her Milk was gone, and her Child like to
perish; and then is found a Suck-bottle full of Milk, by the good Providence of
God: Which teaches us, by such Experiments, not to consine God to wind, or
rain, or to warm breast-milk. God can provide for his Children without these;
And little helps, through gracious Providence, become great ones.

Fourthly, Opportunities for action take not, accordingly as God in his
Providence does inhibit. David in the night enters Readiness Camp, finds Saul
asleep; he slays him not, but brings away the Spear and the Cruse of water, as
testimonies of his loyalty, 1 Samuel 27. 1. Ishbosheth's sleep cost him his head,
as was before exemplified. There are like opportunities for action, and yet not
like consequent actions. That of Christ is pertinent, Mat. 26. 55. In that same
hour said Jesus to the multitudes, Are ye come out as against a thief, with
swords and staves, for to take me? I sat daily with you, teaching in the
Temple, and ye laid no hold on me.

CHAP. II.
1. BEWARE of slighting ordinary dispensations of Providence. There is a
foolish gaping after extraordinary ones. God ^a enim ^mpositi (...), ut (...)
quo^ (...) quae^ re^, si (...) litae ^die^i^t, spe^taculum dulc^ fiat. Hic
itaq: coetus astrorum. quibus immensi corporis pulchritu^ distinguitur, populum
non convocat; at cum aliquid ex mo^ mutatum est, omnium vultus in coelo est.
Sol spectatorem ni^ cum desicit, non habet; nemo observat Lunam nisi laborantem
Soneca in lib. 7. quaest. nature.
may justly suffer such to starve, who list not to feed on the ordinary bread
of Providence, but are for the fine Manchet of Miraculous Displays. The chief
Priests, Scribes, and Elders, said, He saved others, himself he cannot save: if
he be the King of Israel, let him now come down from the cross, and we will
believe him, Mat. 27. 42. Here is a flying to an extraordinary Providence, or
else no Faith, no Christ, and no Heaven. Beware then of this Jewish leaven;
highly value what food God serves in on the ordinary Board-cloath of
Providence, as well as what is laid forth on a rich Diaper-one.

2. There is little ground for the enemies ^ the Church to be confident, and
wickedly secure in their ways and designs against the Church. What though there
be not four Carpenters for the four Horns which have scattered Judah, Israel,
and Jerusalem, to allude to that in Zech. 1. 18, 20. yet God knows how to ^ay
and to cast them out by the Carpenter's Boy. A Jael with an Hammer and a N^il,
shall fasten Lord-general Sisera so to the ground, as that at her feet he
bowed, he fell, he lay d^wn at her feet, he bowed, he fell: where he bowed,
there he fell down dead, Judge. 5. 26, 27.

3. Bear up against unbelief, or distrust of God under great distresses. Say
not, O my case, and the Church's case, is sad indeed; behold, the ground is not
a leight mold, but thick, heavy, stubborn clay, and withal very dry; how shall
it be broken up? Where are the Oxen strong for the labor? Say not so, in way
of unbelief, The great God can moisten the earth, provide the Oxen, do all in a
moment. Remember that great man, in whom unbelief was regent, 2 Kings 7. He
talks of Windows in Heaven, and yet the Shop windows on earth were open the
next day, according to the Prophet's words, v. 16. the great man saw the
Market, but it was no fair one to him, for he was trodden to death, v. 20.
Remember his example, not by way of imitation, but caution.

4. Treasure up more than ordinary dispensations of Providence, in which thou
have had a share. Has thy Barrel of Meal wasted not, nor thy Cruse of Oil
failed not? according to that, 1 Kings 17. 16. O forget not that hand of
Providence, which by that time that thou had taken out one handful, and spent
it, did cast in another handful! Has God at any time checked a Laban, calmed
an Esau, crush't an Herod intending mischief? O let such displays be written on
the heart with a Pen of Iron, and point of a Diamond!

OBSERVATION XIII.
As there is a general Order or Connection of things; so there is a more special
or signal Method of Providence in and about some Matters.
CHAP. I.
THIS special Method may be considered,

1. In regard of God's afflicting men for sin. Men have their Method in
sinning, God has his in punishing. The blushing sinner at first, after has a
brow of brass. The walking in the counsel of the ungodly, makes way for
standing in the way of sinners, and so for sitting in the seat of the scornful,
Psalm. 1. 1. Sin is progressive; fresh-men, or Novices in the Devil's School,
quickly aspire after the Doctor's Chair. And as the sinner has thus his walk
of vanity; so the Lord does ordinarily warn before he strikes. There is a
fiting of the Beacons, before the Host or Army of Judgments is landed. S^e Genesis
6. 3. Luke 13. 34.

2. In regard of exalting, parties; and so there is an humbling and abasing
work upon their hearts, which is preambulatory, or goes before. As pride goes
before destruction, and a haughty spirit before a fall, Prove. 16. 18. so the
fear of the Lord is the instruction of wisdom, and before honor is humility,
Prove. 15. 33. Humble your selves in the sight of the Lord, and he shall lift
you up, James 4. 10. The humbling-dispensations which did betide Joseph, David,
with others, did lead the dance to exalting-ones.

3. In regard of conversion from a state of nature to a state of grace; and so
there is conviction-work, which, like the needle, enters the cloth. Men leap
not out of the warm bed of their Lusts, into the lap of Evangelical Comforts.
The Israelites were stung with fiery Serpents, ere there was a looking to the
brazen Serpent, Numb. 21. 8. They who are not sensible of the bitings of sin,
will not regard a Savior. The pricking at the heart awakens men to
consideration-work, Acts 3. 37.

4. In regard of some more than ordinary service, unto which God calls
persons, whether for Church or State. God is pleased to vouchsafe more than
ordinary encouragement, when he calls persons to more than ordinary
employment. God was at the cost and charges of Miracle after Miracle, when he
sends Moses to bring his people out of Egypt, Exodus 4. Joshua is told by God,
As I was with Moses, so I will be with thee; I will not fail thee, nor forsake
thee, Josh. 1. 5. Isaiah had an hard Chapter to read unto a stubborn people; he
was sensible of his own pollution; difficulties there were not merely in
fancy's brow; the Lord helps and encourages him, Isa. 6. 5, to the end. Paul
had an hard task, but the Lord sweetens all, See Acts 9. 15, 16. Acts 26. 15,
16, 17, 18.

5. In regard of some afflictions with which, by way of trial, God may exercise
some; and so there is a previous or preparatory work of Providence. God is
beforehand with some Cordial against some fainting-fit. He strengthens the
back before he lays on the burden. Christ is transfigured on the high Mountain
before Peter, James, and John, Mat. 17. initio. and this to corroborate them,
when he shall shortly be crucified and transfixed with a Spear on Mount
Calvary: they needed this display of Providence, as bladders, to bear up, when
they were like to be plunged even to a questioning whether Christ were the
Messiah, for so we read Luke 24. 21. but we trusted that it had been he which
should have redeemed Israel. In 2 Cor. 12. 4. mention is made how Paul was
caught up into Paradise; and in v. 7. there is a relation of one, no good one,
who did catch at Paul's Comforts. 'Twas well for Paul that he was feasted in
the Lord's Dining Room, before he was had down into Satan's Dungeon of
Temptations: Had not the Coat of Mail been first put him on him, the thorn in
the flesh would have pierced and sorely grieved him. To conclude this, the
Christian's Sun does shine very gloriously before some notable Eclipse at hand.

CHAP. II.
1. SEE from whence it is that some judicious Christians do give a notable
guess at the issues of matters. They live nigh (in point of communion) to the
great Landlord of the World, and so know some of his ordinary walks hither and
thither: one while he uses to walk up the hill, another while down into the
valley; this they know and take notice of. Besides, the great God is pleased
sometimes to tell them whither he is a going, Genesis 18. 17 And the Lord said,
shall I hide from Abraham that thing which I do? And Amos 3. 7. Surely the Lord
will do nothing, but he reveals his secret unto his servants the Prophets. It
is said of Luther, That he had a foresight of the Calamities to come on
Germany. The Reverend Usher foretold the time of the late Tragedy in Ireland.
The Sermons of some pious Ministers have been better understood by their
Hearers some years after. They who seemed to talk in the Clouds, have been
acknowledged to speak from Heaven, as to what has fallen out on Earth.

2. Beware of crossing and thwarting with such special Methods of Providence;
and that these ways:

1. In not heeding warnings, which is the too common sin of men, who are as the
deaf Adder, as the Psalmist describes, Psalm. 58. 4.

2. In not being abased under humbling-dispensations. Some are humbled, but not
humble. Pharaoh had a proud heart notwithstanding all the Plagues. Too much of
Pharaoh-like heart is to be found where the Rod of God has lighted. For the
iniquity of his covetousness was I wroth, and smote him; I hid me, and was
wroth; and he went on frowardly in the way of his heart, Isa. 57. 17.

3. In not improving Convictions. Some break Prison from them; they, with Cain,
build Cities; or, with Saul, are for Music; few, with Paul, are wrestling at a
Throne of Grace under them, Acts 9. 11. Behold he prays.

4. In a backwardness to set upon such particular work as God calls unto.
Moses had encouragement to a miracle; yet he draws back, pleads his
insufficiency; yea, when that is answered by God, he has nothing else to say,
and that indeed was too unmannerly to be said, Send, I pray thee, by the hand
of him whom thou will send, Exodus 4. 10, 11, 12, 13.

5. In not heeding and improving some foregoing Providence in order to a
grapple with some future difficulty. It is said of the Disciples, They cried
out, and were sore amazed in themselves beyond measure, and wondered, Mar. 6.
49, 51. What was the ground of their disquiet, Fear? Was there no Antidote to
have checked their trouble? Yea, there was; for Christ had done that before at
land, which might have quieted them at sea; the Miracle of the Loaves might
have fed their faith, which would not then have been so sea-sick; this seems to
be intimated in v. 52. For they considered not of the loaves, for their heart
was hardened

We see then, that there is fault in crossing with the Methods of Providence;
and it has been showed particularly, how persons do thus cross. What remains,
but to be on our watch? and that the rather, considering these two things:

1. Satan has his Methods, which are wily ones; for so the Apostle Paul
asserteth, Ephesians. 6. 11. Satan's design is to pervert and subvert. He will be
busy to make a man unprofitable under the Methods of the Lord He labors to
make men slight warnings, storm under afflictions, stifle convictions, to be
backward to any good work God calls them unto; and to be forgetful of special
Providence, which may have their future reference for support under
Difficulties.

2. It Is man's wisdom to comply with the Methods of the Lord. Ephraim is called
an unwise son; and why? for he should not stay long in the place of breaking
forth of children, Hos. 13. 13. To be stupid and blockish under the Lord's
Dispensations; not to eye God in them, and to have a recourse to Him, and to
improve them for good, is to be the unwise son with Ephraim.

OBSERVATION XIV.
Jesus Christ, as Mediator, is the Father's Vicegerent, Plenipotentiary, or
Supreme Moderator of things in the World.
CHAP. I.
WHAT foundation this has in the Word, may appear diverse ways:

1. There are types of this, before Christ assumed the human nature. This is he
that was in the Church in the wilderness with the angel, which spoke to him in
the Mount Sinai, and with out fathers who received the lively oracles to give
unto us; to whom our fathers would not obey, but thrust him from them: so
Stephen, Acts 7. 38, 39. To this, add that in Dan. 10. 16. Zech. 1. 12. And as
there are sacred Draughts or Pictures of this, so Predictions of it, Deuteronomy. 17.
15. with Acts 7. 37. A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of
your brethren, like unto me, him shall ye hear, Psalm. 110. 1. with Mat. 22. 44.
The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand, until I make thine
enemies thy footstool. Daniel had a predictory Vision: I saw (says he) in the
night visions; and behold, one like the Son of Man came with the clouds of
heaven, and came to the Ancient of days, and they brought him near before him,
and there was given him dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, that all people,
nations, and languages, should serve him: his dominion is an everlasting
dominion, which shall not pass away; and his kingdom that which shall not be
destroyed, Dan. 7. 13, 14.

2. There seems to be a notable praeludium or preface to this, in Christ's
sitting in the midst of the Doctors, both hearing them, and asking them
questions; and in his reply to Mary. Wist ye not that I must be about my
father's business, Luke 2. 46, 49. And before this, in the Wise-men's coming
from the East, enquiring after him who was born King of the Jews, and doing
their homage to him, as Mat. 2. 1, 2, 11.

3. The solemn voice from Heaven, when Christ inaugurated or entered on his
public Ministerial work, does witness to this, Mat. 3. 17. And lo a voice from
heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. And so in
Luke 9 35. There came a voice out of the cloud, saying, This is my beloved Son,
hear him.

4. There are plain and positive Assertions on this wise; Mat. 28. 18. All
power is given unto me both in heaven and in earth, Ephesians. 1. 22. And has put
all things under his feet, and gave him to be head over all things to the
Church, Mat. 13. 41. The Son of man shall send forth his angels, John 5. 27.
And has given him authority to execute judgment also, because he is the Son of
man. Compare this with v. 22. For the Father judges no man, but has committed
all judgment to the Son. This is (says Musculus) as if so be we should speak
of the Sun; the Sun burns not any one, but has given all burning to his beams.
This kind of speech does not exclude the Sun from a virtue or efficacy to burn
or illuminate; but ascribes the work of burning and enlightening to his beams,
in and by which the Sun does burn and enlighten; for what heat and splendour the
beams have, they have it from the Sun, After this sort the Father is said to
judge no out, but to have committed all judgment to the Son, when he judges all
things in the Son.

CHAP. II.
1. SEE what ground there is for honoring Christ. This inference Christ
himself deducteth, That all men should honor the Son, even as they honor the
Father. He that honors not the Son, honors not the Father which has sent
him, John 5. 23. with 22. Honor Christ then in his Natures, in his Offices, as
King, Priest, and Prophet; in his Ordinances, in his Gospel-day for worship, in
his Ministers and People. Honor Him both in judgment and practice, with due
respect had to Him according to the forementioned ways.

2. What a bold Adventure is it for the sons of men, to affront Christ, or rage
against Him! This is an Evil cautioned against; and the attempts of men, as
they will be fruitless, so no less dangerous to themselves, if they desist not.
What do sinners but take a great deal of pains to get a Stone of vast bigness
up the hill; and when it is nigh up, back it returns, and crusheth themselves.
The Psalmist is pertinent to this purpose, Psalm. 2. there is a Why do the
heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain thing? v. 1. The interrogation has
its dehortative considerations; No reason so to do. And as it is horrid sin, so
no less folly in regard of the issue: The Lord laughs at such foolish
Children's play, v. 4. Christ is on the holy hill of Zion, v. 6. there is no
beating him off that hill; Thou shall break them with a rod of iron: and dash
them in pieces like a potter's vessel, v. 9.

3. Here is ground for support and consolation in the Wilderness of this World.
Christ relgneth, is good news to Zion's friends. There are four props for
sinking-spirits under black clouds: (1.) Jesus Christ has his glorious Titles,
which are not empty ones. His Name shall be called, Wonderful, Counselor, the
Mighty God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace, Isa. 9. 6. He is the
Prince of the kings of the earth, Rev. 1. 5. (2.) The Holy Spirit, as an
Omnipotent Agent, sweetly concenters in, or joins issue with Christ in the
ordering and management of matters: see Zech. 4. 7. John 14. 26. and 16. 7, 8.
(3.) All the promises of God are yea and amen in Christ, 1 Cor. 1. 20. There is
a promised presence of Christ with his people, Mat. 28. 20. Rev. 1. 13, 20.
(4.) Notwithstanding all the furies of men and devils, the sad face of things.
Christ will gloriously discharge the Supreme Office of governing the World, and
bring all to an issue every way glorious: see 1 Cor. 15. 24. Rev. 19. 11, 12,
etc.

OBSERVATION XV.
The Angels are capacious Wheels, which move in the great Clock of the World:
or, There is a subordinate Agency of Angels, in bringing about Matters in the
World.
CHAP. I.
THAT the Angels have their influences, appears,

1. From Titles, Appellations, Descriptions, given to and of them. These are
they whom the Lord has sent to walk to and fro through the earth, Zech. 1. 10.
Are they not all ministering Spirits, sent forth to minister for them who shall
be heirs of salvation, Heb. 1. 14? The Devil likewise, with his Attendants, are
set forth as busy Peripateticks, walkers to and fro the earth, Job 1. 7. 1
Pet. 5. 8.

2. From the Effects, or work done by them. There is a transcendency of
operation to be noted. The Bed of ordinary Second Causes, is shorter than that
this or that Effect can stretch it self on it. The Egyptians are witnesses for
this; for the Lord cast upon them the fierceness of his anger, wrath, and
indignation, and trouble, by sending evil angels among them, Psalm. 78. 49. An
Angel of the Lord in a night smote in the Camp of the Assyrians, an Hundred
fourscore and five thousand, 2 Kings 19. 35.

3. From Exemplifications, and that in matters of public concernment, and also
personal. What an influence good Angels have on the public Affairs of the
world, may be proved from Ezekiel. 1. Dan. 4. 23. and 10. 13. Mat. 1. 19. And that
evil Angels have their influences, yet not absolute arbitrary ones, may be
collected from 1 Kings 22. where the Prince of darkness is a lying spirit in
the mouth of the false prophets, and so the war there goes on. The Agency of
Angels is extensive to persons singly considered. Jacob sees Angels ascending
and descending his Ladder, Genesis 28. 12. These winged Coursers attend the
meanest Saint. The Angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear him,
and delivers them, Psalm. 34. 7. and well for Saints it is so: for the evil
Angels are for playing small games, as well as greater ones. We read of two men
possessed of Devils, Mat. 8 28. The woman of Canaan cries out, Have mercy on
me, O Lord, thou son of David: my daughter is grievously vexed with a devil,
Mat. 15. 22.

4. From the particular work specified, about which Angels are versant.
Intimations there are in Scripture, both as to good and bad Angels: they have
each their shops, where they may be found hard at work in this world.

First, The good Angels may be considered with respect to good and bad ones in
the world. Their work is to do the Lord's work, and that as it respects the
Lord's people, diverse ways.

1. Good Angels promote Gospel-work in order to persons being brought to the
means of grace, or the means of grace to them. Cornelius was willed by an Angel
to send for Peter, Acts 10. 3, 5. A Vision appeared to Paul in the night; There
stood a man of Macedonis, and prayed him, saying, Come over into Macedonia, and
help us, Acts 16. 9. The Angels know the state of the Country, and have th^i^
influence on the Gospel-Seeds-men, for the casting of the Seed in this or that
plat of ground. Yea,

2. The good Angels become truly Angelical Doctors, in discovering or
intimating the will of God about matters, and comforting the troubled spirits
of his servants. Instances there are to this purpose, 2 Kings 1. 3, 15 Dan. 7.
16. Rev. 17. 7. Mat. 1. 20. Acts 27. 23, 24.

3. Good Angels are Saints Guardians, Defenders under God. Lot had experience
of this. Genesis 19. 11, 16. My God (says Daniel) has sent his Angel, and has
shut the Lions mouths, that they have not hurt me, Dan. 6 22. Their
preservation, as the Lord pleases, is a part of the Angels commission: as it
is asserted, Psalm. 91. 11, 12. This Satan knew, and therefore urged it, though
in a majmed sense, and to a bid end, Mat. 4. 6.

4. Good Angels are encouragers and helpers on of God's Saints in that work
unto which God calls them. So in Elisha his case, 1 King. 19. 5, 6, 7. So
Paul, encouraged to appear before Caesar, Acts 27. 24. Abraham tells his
fervant, saying, He shall send his angel before thee, Genesis 24. 7.

5. Good Angels may sometimes be employed in afflicting God's professed people;
they, as Heaven's Surgeons, are taken up in launcing, and cutting-work. When
thousands fell by the Pestilence, an Angel of the Lord is seen with a drawn
sword, 1 Chronicles. 21. 14, 15. An Angel threatens Zacharia, saying, Tbou shall be
dumb, Luke 1. 20. It Is probable the Angel might smite him with dumbness, as the
Angels smote the Sodomites with blindness.

Lastly, Whatever other work the good Angels do, they are not wanting at death,
and after death. Lazarus dies, and is carried by the Angels into heaven, Luke
16. 22. And whether their care be not versant about the carcass, yea, the dust
of a believer, is not to be denied. A contention we read of about the body of
Moses, Jude v. 9. At the resurrection the Angels gather together the Elect from
the four winds, from one end of Heaven to another, Mat. 24. 31.

In the next place, The Ministry of good Angels respects bad or wicked ones in
the world; and that,

1. By way of inhibition, check, or reproof. The Angel of the Lord said unto
Balaam, Wherefore have thou smitten thine ass these three times? Numb 22. 32.

2. By way of compassion, or doing some office of kindness. There is a voice of
distressed nature, as well as the voice of grace, which comes up before the
Lord. Ismael has a share in Angelical kindness, when like to perish for want
of water, Genesis 21. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.

3. By way of smart and punishment for defaults. They are executioners of
divine wrath. The Sodomites were smitten with blindness; Syrians destroyed by
an Angel of the Lord: And though human creatures shall be instruments to burn
the Whore of Babylon, yet that may include the Ministry of Angels; they may
prepare the ^ewel, and blow the bellows: for seven Angels are said to pour out
the vials of the wrath of God upon the earth, Rev. 16.

The second branch of the discourse of the Ministry of Angels, respects the
evil ones. These have their shops in the world, and their shops are dark ones.
The evil Angels are Rulers of the darkness of this world, Ephesians. 6. 12. Now how
the evil Angels have their influences both as to godly and ungodly men in the
world, I shall in brief touch, and so pass to the accommodation or improvement
of the whole that has been said.

First, The Devil has his design against pious ones, and that diverse ways:

1. In tempting them to sin. He has his wiles, Ephesians. 6. 11. He labors not only
to catch young birds, but old ones too with his chaff net, and lime-twigs.
David was an experience^ Saint, yet Satan stood up against Israel, an^ provoked
David to number Israel, 1 Chronicles. 21. 1. the sad success of that temptation,
(...) have there recorded in the after-verses.

2. In disquieting them one way or other, though he has not matter of just
charge to draw up up against them. The Devil is the trouble-house of the
Christian's quiet. He is the accuser of the brethren, Rev. 12. 10. both he, and
those who are acted by him, are false witnesses risen up, and lay things to a
Saint's charge that he knew not, Psalm. 35. 11. Go we to that good Apostle Paul,
and he will tell us, he cannot be quiet for a buffeting devil, 2 Cor. 12. 7.

3. In impeding and hindering them in some particular good work intended by
them. The Devil throws blocks in their way. He has his turn-pikes and
barricado's to obstruct the Christian in his course. Wherefore we would have
come unto you (even I Paul) once and again, but Satan hindered us, 1 These. 2. 18.

4. In afflicting of them in their outward man, body, relations, estate: when
God sees fit to chastise, and exercise his people on this wise. A clear and
full exemplification for this, we have in the first and second chapters of Job.
God is wise in such dispensations. He knows how to make a bright Saint, by the
Devil's dusky Cinders; and to fetch out a spot of a Saint's Garment, by Hell's
Black-Soap.

Secondly, Satan has his design on wicked men, or such who are destitute of a
principle of Grace within; and that,

1. In staving them off from what is good. He works with might and main, that
they may not come to the knowledge of God, as God ought to be known. But if our
Gospel be hid, i^ is hid to them that are lost, in whom the god of this world
has blinded the minds of them which believe not, lest the light of the
glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the image of God, should shine unto them, 2
Cor. 4. 3, 4. The Devil holds up his monstrous and uglifying-glasses before the
sinner's face; he fills their heads with prejudices against the good ways of
God, his Messengers, People, who shall be looked on as troublers of a Nation,
City, Parish, Family, that are only the wakeners thereof, 1 Kings 18. 17, 18.

2. In posting them on in what is evil. He will have them be positive as well
as negative sinners; not only not to act for God but against him; though in not
acting for God, there is an acting against him, but not such an aggravated
acting. The Masters of the Pythoness-Damsel become Persecutors of Paul and
Silas, Act. 16. 16, 19, etc. Judas becomes the betrayer of his Lord and Master,
Joh. 13. 27. Satan entered into him; and many Grandees of this world become
Satan's Hang-men. He has his influences on them; for he does not in men's shape
cast Gods Servants into prison, and yet is said to do it, Rev. 2. 10.

3. In being ready and forward enough to hasten the destruction of them,
theirs, what they have. The Devil is for making men more twofold Children of
Hell, and cares not how soon he can secure most of his Agents in the prison of
Hell. Satan has his end, if he can double men's guilts, under the smarts of
which he is an instrument in inflicting. He delights in mischief, and needs
not a motive to persuade an Ahab to go up and fail at Ramoth-Gilead: see 1
Kings 22. 20, 21, 22.

CHAP. II.
1. LOOK after an interest in Jesus Christ. For, (1.) Hereby the evil Angels
need not be dreaded. Christ, the victorious one, breaks the bow and spear of
Hell. Satan had experience of the Power and Valor of the Christian's
Generalissimo, in that Wilderness-Conflict, Mat. 4. The Devil with all his
Forces, shall not tread down the weakest Soldier in Christ's Army, to the
nethermost Hell. I give unto them (says Christ) eternal life, and they shall
never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand, Joh. 10. 28.
(2.) As the evil Angels need not be dreaded as enemies; so the good Angels, the
glistering Courtiers of Heaven, may be looked on as friends. It is said of
Jacob, He went on his way, and the Angels of God met him, Genesis 32. 1. The good
Angels will be found good and faithful friends to those who are good: they were
Jacob's Guard; and the way to have a Jacob's Guard, is to have a Jacob's God.

2. Believe more, and live more, the Orthodox Doctrine of the agency of Angels.
It may put most to the blush, that they live as if so be there were neither
good nor bad Angels. The practice of most, holds little correspondence with
their belief. It concerns then persons to mind their duty, and that in respect
both of good and bad Angels.

1. In respect of good Angels: and so (1.) bless God for the Ministry of good
Angels. If sheep, oxen, with other creatures ordained for the use of man, do
oblige man by way of thankfulness to God; why not the good Angels, who are
ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of
salvation? Heb. 1. 14. It well becomes men to praise God for angels, though we
are not to pray to angels; for, as good as they are, they like not such a
service, Judge. 13. 16. Rev. 19. 10. 'Twas the evil angel who would be a
worshipful Devil, Mat. 4. 9.

If it be said here, There is not such an appearance of good angels, as of old;
and therefore, I^ there an agency of good angels?

A. 1. There is no reason to be stumbled at the different dispensation of
things then and now. Jesus Christ, the Prince of angels, is come, Heb. 1. 1, 2.
We have the Scriptures, the Canon of them, enlarged, 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17. If a
Master set down his will for the management of such or such a Farm, what if he
do not ever and anon send messengers for signifying this or that about the
Farm. The Church is not now in its nonage, and so stands not so in need of
visible helps, as a pillar of cloud and of fire, as of old, Exodus 13. 21. Heb.
12. 18. The Lord will teach now to exercise faith more: It is not for a
Christian to believe no further than he can see. This was the fault of Thomas,
for which he was checked, John 20. 25, 27, 29.

2. To argue from the not visible appearance of good angels, to a non-agency of
good angels, is absurd: for by the same reason the evil angels are no agents
unless they have a visible shape. I do not think that Job saw the Devil, and
yet he felt him to his sorrow in his sufferings. Good angels are at their work,
though neither good nor bad men see them. Daniel had no ground to believe that
the angel neglected the Church's affairs, because he saw him not for the one
and twenty days spoken of Dan. 10. 12, 13.

3. It is not denied, as if there were not some angelical display more than
ordinary. It is true, the good angels bring no new doctrine; for that were to
incurr the Apostolical Curse, Gal. 1. 8. Howbeit this infers not, but the
Lord may at times, after a more than ordinary way, by them help the
understanding in the right perception of some Scripture, direct about the
prevention of dangers at hand, and relieve others under sinking-distresses.
Zuinglius had a passage of Scripture in a Vision suggested to him, which did
clear up the meaning of that phrase, This is my body; and that at a very
seasonable nick of time. Scultetus relates a story of Gryneus, which happened
at Spires: There comes one of such a port, presence, and beauty, which did
bespeak singular dignity; he comes to Melancthon's Lodging, asks for Gryneus,
who was then absent; and withal signifies, how there were snares preparing for
Gryneus, into which he would not have that good and learned man fall; and so
departs. Gryneus by and by returns, whom Melancthon bids forthwith be gone from
Spires to Heidelberge; and not long after Gryneus his departure, an armed
company comes to apprehend Gryneus. Luther tells, how at Eiliben a woman with
two children suffered extreme want and need in time of dearth: they go toward
a Well, and meet with a man (an Angel) who ask't, Whether she thought to get
something to eat at the Fountain? She said, Why not? for all things are
possible to God, and easy to be done; he that sed the great multitude of the
Israelites forty years with Manna, he can preserve me and mine with drinking
water. The Angel says, Go home, and thou shall find three bushels of Meal. And
so it was. And thus in answer to the Objection from the nonappearance of good
angels, as of old, to the non-agency of angels.

2. There is no reason to be despondent about the succeeding of personal and
public matters. There are invisible friends, who want neither will nor skill
to promote what may make for the best. What though there are letts in the way?
they know how to remove blocks, or place the wedg so, as that the blocks shall
be shattered to pieces. Abraham's servant objects, Peradventure the woman will
not be willing to follow me unto this land, Genesis 24. 5. he has an answer in v.
7. He shall send his angel before thee. Those pious Matrons, Mark 16. 1. said
among themselves, Who shall roll us away the stone from the door of the
sepulcher, v. 3. that work they sound done, v. 4. and how and by whom, Mat. 28.
2. does fully mention.

3. Exercise more of faith and hope in God under dangers. Here is no reason why
the Christian should be hopeless and heartless in the lack of visible means.
The servant of the Man of God, when the Host compassed the City both with
Horses and Chariots, said unto Elisha, Alas my Master! what shall we do! But
what says the Master? He answered, Fear not; for they that be with us are more
than they that be with them: and Elisha prayed, and said, Lord, I pray thee
open his eyes, that he may see. And the Lord opened the eyes of the young man,
and he saw; and behold the mountain was full of horses and chariots of fire
round about Elisha, 2 Kings 6. 15, 16, 17.

4. Demean we our selves after a reverend manner in solemn approaches to God in
duties. Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sin: neither say thou before
the angel, that it was an error, Eccles. 5. 6. If Christ, the Angel of the
Covenant, be there meant; yet the angels are Super-visors, Spectators,
Witnesses, of persons deportment. And hence the Apostle dehorteth women from
immodest and uncomely behavior (according as the throwing aside of the vail
may there import) because of the angels, 1 Cor. 11. 10.

5. Imitate the good angels in point of Humility. They disdain not the meanest
Saint, nor the meanest service about the meanest Saint. They go on many an
errand for those who are below them. Christ treats of humility, Mat. 18. he
called there a little Child unto him, and set him in the midst of them, and
presses the Disciples to be as little Children, and withal, in v. 10. he
speaks of the angels; they (as the speech does comprehend little Children as to
the letter) are their angels, that is, to take care of them. The angels watch
the Cradles, though they rock them not; and preserve little ones from and in
many dangers, ere they come to riper years: this office the angels indefinitely
discharge toward them, whose Lifeguard they are; and that without a proud
grudging, or grudging pride to be so meanly employed.

In the next place, in reference to evil angels.

1. Admire the Lords free grace, in being brought out of a state of spiritual
bondage to them. This lesson is pressed by the Apostle on the Ephesians, who in
time past walked according to the course of the world, according to the Prince
of the power of the air, the Spirit that now works in the Children of
disobedience, Ephesians. 2. 1, 2, 3, etc. See 1 John 3. 1.

2. Be watchful against evil angels. Come not near their banks, lest they get
you into their boat, and ferry you over the other side of sin and danger. The
Devil is vigilant to prey on souls, and therefore the Christian should be
watchful, 1 Pet. 5. 8.

3. Dread that God who can let loose Satan in a moment. The Lord has both good
and bad angels at his beck; they quickly step forth to execution-work; see
Psalm. 35. 5, 6.

Lastly, Be thankful, in that evil angels are restrained from doing mischief.
That God ties up the dogs of hell is no small mercy: they being let loose might
be biting ones.

1. In regard of soul-disquiets, 2 Cor. 12. 7.

2. In regard of bodily diseases. A daughter of Abraham, we read of, whom Satan
had bound (lo!) eighteen years, Luke 13. 16.

3. In regard of relations, whom Satan might molest, by casting into the fire
and water, as Mark 9. 22. or utterly destroy, as Job. 1. 12. and 18. 19.

4. In regard of estate. Job felt the claw of Satan in those plundering
Caldeans and Sabeans, and the fire which burnt up the sheep, Job 1. 14, 15, 16,
17. The Gadarens Swines Traditur utile non pro voluntate daemonum sed ut tali
facto innotescat, quomodo in homines saeviunt, quomodo quaerunt mortes hominum,
qui sic porcos ut perderent, quaesierunt. Chrysologus Ser. 9.
miss a good market, when the Devils become their drivers: and though the
owners of the Swine had a loss, yet had they improved the Lords taking off the
bridle of restraint, they had been gainers, see Mat. 8.

OBSERVATION XVI.
Not only Angels, but likewise other Creatures are at the beck or control of
Divine Providence.
CHAP. I.
THAT the Angels both good and bad are at the check of the Almighty, has been
collaterally at least evidenced in the foregoing Observation. What has been
said of their ministry is to be understood in way of subserviency to the Lord:
The evil Angels, though they act evilly, yet act not absolutely without the
permission of the Holy One. The Lord has them in the chain of Providence, and
though they are at times prisoners at large, yet prisoners still, see 1 King.
22. 22. Job 1. 12. and 2. 6. Mat. 8. 32. Luke 22. 31, 32. 2 Cor. 12. 7. Rev. 2.
10. And as for the good Angels, they are the winged coursers of heaven, ready
to do the will of their Lord. Ezekiel. 1. 6, 11, 14. Dan. 10. 11. Luke 1. 19. They
have a connatural principle within, confirmed by grace, which renders them
obsequious to Gods command; and hence we are to propound them as patterns for
ready compliance with the will of God, as that passage, Thy will be done on
earth, as it is in heaven, does imply, Mat. 6. 10. There is no need then in
further dilating on this. Now, that other Creatures are at the powerful beck
and control of God, is to be spoken to: And this appears diverse ways.

1. From the appellation attributed to God in Scripture: He is styled Lord of
Hosts, and that some hundreds of times, as some observe. The often repetition
of this Title, may import the transcendent verity, and the usefulness of this
Meditation, namely, That all the Creatures are under His command, to be lorded
over by Him when and how he pleases.

2. From the consideration of the Creatures as Creatures. What are the
Creatures in their Beeings and Operations, but results, ebbings and flowings of
his Divine Will: for he spoke, and it was done; he commanded, and it stood
fast, Psalm. 33. 9. The words of men are wind in comparison of what the Lord
says. 'Twas but a word and a world, of old. The same powerful speech of the
Almighty is heard still in the world.

3. From an exemplary induction: for consider the Creatures as thus
distinguished.

1. Some are without sense; and yet these have the sense to obey the Lord: for
he says to the snow, Be thou on the earth; likewise to the small rain, and to
the great rain of his strength, Job 37. 6. Mine hand also has laid the
foundation of the earth, and my right hand has spanned the heavens: when I
call unto them, they stand up together, Isa. 48. 13. See Psalm. 35. 7. Psalm.
147. 15. Mat. 8 27.

2: Other creatures of corporeal existence, which have sense, are at the beck
of God: and these may be distinguished (1) into such which have sense only,
without the addition of a rational principle, being swayed by natural instinct.
(2.) Into such, which together with sense, have reason or understanding as man
has. Now not only the creatures of the former rank or order, whether they be
flying-fowls after their kind, or fishes moving in the waters after their kind;
or beasts, cattle, creeping things, after their re^pective kind, but also Man,
as the top and flower of the Creation; are within the verge of Divine
Providence. The Psalmist does not only observe the Providence of God with
respect to Angels, Psalm. 104. 4. but likewise with respect to creatures without
sense, v. 10, 14, 16, 19. and the creatures which have sense only, as the fowls
of heaven, v. 1^. 17. fishes or water-creatures, v. 25, 26. the beasts of the
field, v. 11, 14, 18, 21. yea, Man, that noble piece of the Creation, and
Center to which the creatures (in regard of their services) as lines are
directed to; is there taken notice of, v. 14, 15. And thus, according to the
Psalmist here, the creatures are not without their bridles, and these bridles
are in the han^ of Divine Providence.

CHAP. II.
1. LEARN from hence, what a God the Lord is. He is such an One, whose Dominion
is extensive all the World over. The greatest in the World are at his check or
control. With him is strength and wisdom, the deceived and deceiver are his:
he leads Counselors away spoiled, and makes the Judges fools. He loses
the bond of kings, and girdeth their loins with a girdle. He leads princes
away spoiled, and overthrows the mighty. He removes away the speech of the
trusty, and takes away the understanding of the aged. He pours contempt upon
princes, and weakneth the strength of the mighty, Job 12. 16, etc.

2. See the vanity of Idolaters. Are there any among the vanities of the
Gentiles, that can cause rain? Or can the heavens give showers? Art not thou
he, O Lord our God? therefore we will wait upon thee: for thou have made all
these things, Jer. 14. 22. See 1 Cor. 8. ver. 4, 5, 6.

3. Observe an Argument for the proof of Christ's Deity. He lords it over the
Creatures; they give homage to Him. The winds and sea obey him, Mat. 8. 26, 27.
The fig tree withers at the blast of his lips, Mat. 21. 19, 20. The owner of
the Colt straightway sends him, if Christ has a purpose to use him, Mat. 11.
3, 5, 6. Jesus Christ is the spiritual Joseph, to whose sheaf all the sheafs of
the world bow or do obeisance: See Phil. 2. 10.

4. Take notice whence it is that the worm Jacob is not crushed to pieces by the
wild beasts of the world. The Lord is he who curbs and restrain^ ^s he
pleases. The Psalmist notes this, saying, When they were but few men in
number, yea, very few, and strangers in it (the Land of Canaan); when they went
from one nation to another, from one kingdom to another, he suffered no man to
do them wrong; yea, he reproved kings for their sakes, saying, Touch not mine
anointed, and do my prophets no harm, Psalm. 105. 12, etc.

5. Despond not in spirit as touching the conversion of the vilest and most
wretched ones, whether they are Relations or others. God can, and in his due
time will, make them throw down their weapons, if they do belong to the
election of grace. Barren sinners may become fruitful Saints. The Lord can turn
Lions into Lambs. Matthew the Publican becomes an Apostle of Christ, Luke 5.
27, 28. Brutish Corinthians are washed, sanctified, justified, in the Name of
the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God, 1 Cor. 6. 11.

6. Be the more encouraged to mind such work as God calls unto, and that
notwithstanding wants and exigencies which present themselves. The Lord has
ways enough to help and provide meat for laborers in his vinyard. He can
prevent wants, supply them, sanctify them. When I sent you (says Christ to
his Disciples) without purse, and scrip, and shoes, lacked ye any thing? and
they said, Nothing, Luke 22. 35.

7. What ground is there for sinners to consider of their ways, and to turn
unto the Lord with all their heart? How quickly can the Lord of Hosts draw
forth a file of dextrous Marksmen, who shall gall them with a slight of Arrows!
In Deuteronomy. 28. there is an Armory of Divine Vengeance; All these curses (it is
said v. 15.) shall come upon thee, and overtake thee. And if the sinner thinks
he'^ fly from the curse, and get into the City, and so be safe there; or into
the Country, and have all well there; all this will not secure: for, cursed
shall thou be in the city, and cursed shall thou be in the field, v. 16. God
who is every where, can find out sinners any where.

Lastly, What foundation is there for support and consolation to all pious
ones, who keep close to God in ways of Faith, Love, and Obedience? They have
the Father Almighty Maker of heaven and earth, for their Father. Some reckon
themselves happy to have the countenance of great ones, who often prove like
Job's Brook, that passes away, Job 6. 15. They are the happy ones, who have
the benign aspect of the great God; and therefore godly ones have ground to
bear up cheerfully, having an interest in a Kingly Friend, or Friendly King.
Let Israel rejoice in him that made him. Let the children of Zion be joyful in
their King, Psalm. 149. 2.

OBSERVATION XVII.
One and the same Creature may prove a Cordial or a Corrosive, a Friend or Foe,
as God in his Providence orders.
CHAP. I.
BEFORE has been showed how the Creatures are at the beck of God; Here is a
further illustration of that in the general, but a more particular discovery
how one and the same Creature is, after a different sort, at the beck of
Providence. The truth of this Observation appears,

1. From assertions in Scripture. So Job 37. Also by watering he wearieth the
thick cloud, be scatters his bright cloud, and it is turned about by his
counsels, that they may do whatsoever he commands them upon the face of the
world, in the earth. He causes it to come, whether for correction, or a rod,
or for his land, or for mercy, v. 11, 12, 13. And as this holds in things
natural, so also immoral agents: so Prove. 16. 7. When a man's ways please the
Lord, he makes his enemies to be at peace with him. An Enemy (as the Lord when
and where he pleases to exert his will) becomes a Friend, and a Friend an
Enemy.

2. From Exemplifications. So the same waters which were Israel's Fortress, are
a Sepulcher or Grave for the Egyptians, Psalm. 135. 13, 14, 15. The Egyptians
deal with the Israelites at their going out of Egypt, rather as with sons and
daughters, than as slaves; they give them their portions. The Lord gave the
people favor in the sight of the Egyptians, so that they lent unto them such
things as they required, Exodus 12. 32. It is said of Nebuchadnezzar, They shall
drive thee from men, Dan. 4. 32. Who were those Drivers, but those that were
his Restorers? for so it is said, v. 36. My Counselors and my Lords sought
unto me, and I was established in my kingdom, and excellent majesty was added
to me. Paul, from a Persecutor of the Christians, becomes a solid Preacher to
them, Acts 9. 20, 21.

3. From particular Demonstrations; and that from the Creatures proving, (1.)
Friends. (2.) Foes.

First, Whosoever shall consider God as Almighty, need not question the Creatures
becoming Friends: for,

1. Though the Creatures have their noxious qualities, yet God can and does
inhibit them from hurting, when he sees good so to do. A Lion slew the Prophet,
and not the Ass which stood by the Carcass, 1 King. 13. 24. The Lions devour
not Daniel, but they have the mastery of his accusers, and break all their
bones in pieces ere ever they came to the bottom of the Den, Dan. 6. 24. A
Viper fast'ned on Paul's hand, and he shook off the beast into the fire, and
felt no harm, Acts 28. 3, 5. Daniel's Lions and Paul's Viper become negative
friends, for they hurt them not. And positive friends, occasionally; inasmuch
as these Creatures, being served with a Divine Writ of Inhibition. Both King
Darius and the barbarous people are induced to show kindness to these servants
of God, Dan. 6. 23, to the end; and Acts 28. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.

2. As God does inhibit Creatures from being hurtful, so he does to a wonder
render them helpful and useful. They were the barbarous people that showed no
little kindness to Paul, and that before the Viper-Providence happened, Acts
28. 2. Elijah had a notable experiment of this: I have (says the Lord)
commanded the ravens to feed thee, 1 King. 17. 3. The Ravens brought him bread
and flesh in the morning, and bread and flesh in the evening, v. 6. one would
have thought the Ravens were not fit Trustees for bread and flesh; they would
rather have eaten it, than brought it to be eaten; but what shall they not do,
if the great [ I] of Heaven and Earth has so appointed. I could tell here a
story from a very good hand, How a good man was in very great distress for want
of food; and at the very nick of such a pinching want; a strange Dog, unknown
to belong to any of his neighbors, comes in to his house with a shoulder of
Mutton, which he fairly lays down, and gets him away, having discharged the
office of a good Market man for those who could eat that Commons, hunger being
their best sauce.

3. Suppose the Lord do not work according to the forementioned ways; yet He,
according to his Infinite Power, Wisdom, and Mercy, can and does in his
Providence render the Creatures as Friends another way. We may distinguish
Friends into intentional ones, and eventual ones. Joseph's Brethren acted as
enemies; and whilst they thus act, they are eventually, as the Lord
over-ruleth, his friends, Genesis 45. 5. I make no question but diverse can say,
How their greatest enemies have in some respect been their greatest friends;
whilst others have played the Turks with them, they have become the better
Christians.

Secondly, The Creatures become enemies, as the Lord shall make use of them for
wise and righteous ends or purposes.

1. Some Creatures have their natural defensive and offensive arms, which they
quickly make use of when the sign of battle is given by the Lord of Hosts.
David tells of the paw of the Lion, and the paw of the Bear, 1 Samuel 17. 37. We
read of two she-bears which came forth out of the Wood, and tare Forty and two
Children which mocked the Prophet of the Lord, 2 Kings 2. 23, 24. Those new
Colonies placed by the King of Assyria in the Cities of Samaria, feared not the
Lord; therefore the Lord sent Lions amongst them, which slew some of them, 2
Kings 17. 24. Deborah and Barak, in their song of Victory, descant on this
wise: They fought from heaven: the stars in their courses fought against
Sisera: the river of Kishon swept them away, that ancient river, the river of
Kishon. O my soul, thou have trodden down strength, Judge. 5. 20, 21.

2. Other Creatures, wherein they are defective in regard of annoyance, by
virtue comparatively to other Creatures; may notwithstanding, in regard of
co-incident circumstances, prove very afflictive. Balaam's Ass was none of the
wildest; for the Ass said unto Balaam, Am not I thine ass upon which thou
have ridden ever since I was thine, unto this day? Was I ever wont to do so
unto thee? And he said, Nay, Numb. 22. 30. We have here the appeal of the Ass,
and the acknowledgment of the Master, both accord in the truth of the premises;
and yet we find an harsh conclusion, for she crushed Balaam's foot against the
wall, v. 25. So calm a Creature as Balaam's Ass, at such a place where a wall
being on this side, and a wall on that side, together with the Angel of the
Lord standing in the path of the Vineyards, v. 24. becomes a scourge to the
Rider.

CHAP. II.
1. FROM the Creatures being made friends to us, (1.) Forget not whence it is
that the Creatures smile on thee, and do not frown. It Is from the pleasure of
their Lord or Master, that these servants in the general, and those of them
which are of rough temper in particular, do bespeak you fairly, and run to and
fro willingly to do you service. I will (says the Psalmist) both lay me down in
peace, and sleep, for thou Lord only make me to dwell in safety, Psalm. 4. 8.
The Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want, Psalm. 23. 1. The Lord hears the
heavens, ere the corn, wine, and oil, hear Jezreel, Hos. 2. 21, 22. (2.) Labor
to demean thy self in all godliness and honesty, suitably to thy mercies. There
is good reason for such to serve God, who have the Creatures as so many good
servants to wait upon them. There is an obligation on man to obey his God; and
the more his mercies are, the stronger is the obligation. He has showed thee,
O man, what is good: and what does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly,
to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God? Micah 6. 8.

2. From the Creatures being Corrosives or Scourges one way or other:

1. Observe, How the sweetest Wine may become the sharpest Vinegar; and this,
1. With respect to Things. 2. With respect to Persons.


1. With respect to Things. The good things of this life may be matter of
affliction. Because thou servedst not the Lord thy God with joyfulness, and
with gladness of heart, for the abundance of all things; therefore shall thou
ser^e thine enemies which the Lord shall send against thee, in hunger, and
thirst, and in nakedness, and in the want of all things, Deuteronomy. 28. 47, 48.
Hezekiah, a good Prince; yet what a thundering-message was sent him? Behold the
days come, that all that is in thine house, and that which thy fathers have
laid up in store until this day, shall be carried to Babylon; nothing shall be
left, says the Lord, Isa. 39. 6.

2. With respect to Persons, as Magistrates, Ecclesiastical Ministers,
Family-relations, choice Friends or Acquaintants: All these, instead of Roses,
may become pricking-briers some way or other, as may be instanced in.

1. Magistrates, who are the Ministers of God for good according to their
institution, Romans 13. 4. these may be snatched away by death to the grief of a
People who sat under their refreshing-shadow. Their deaths and burials become
the resurrection of the Subjects sorrows. Witness this in the case of good
Josiah, who dies and is buried, and all Judah and Jerusalem mourned for him,
and Jeremiah lamented for him, as is recorded, 2 Chronicles. 35. 24, 25. Or if they
be not seized on by death, they may prove the death or bane of a Nation by
their follies. Instances enough there are for this in Holy-Writ, and History.

2. Ecclesiastical Ministers become afflictive; and that many ways. When sins
abound amongst a people, pride, barrenness under the means, slighting
Ministers, and idolizing of them (for these are sad extremes), do, with others
sins, provoke the Lord to afflict in and by Ministers. Sometimes they are taken
away by death. John's Disciples had too high thoughts of their Master: they
began (it seems) to make a party against Christ himself, John 3. 25, 26. it is
observable, ver. 24. John was not yet cast into prison. Afterward he was, and
beheaded too. Sometimes, though God continue them in the world, yet he may make
their tongues cleave to the root of their mouths. They shall be dumb, and not
be reprovers, as Ezekiel. 3. 26. The pipes shall be stopped, and the Conduits in the
Towns shall not run as formerly with that plenty of the Water of Life. There is
a time when the Prophets of the Lord are in their caves, and not upon the
housetop, 1 King. 18. 4. Again, some may become afflictive by their slips,
falls, apostacies. Tertullian turned a Montanist, and flies out against the
Orthodox. Scult. Annal. dec. 1 p. 161.
One Speicer in Germany was so powerful in preaching, that Whores left the
Stews, and betook themselves to another course of living; and yet after, he
returned to the Tents of the Papists, and miserably perished. Ibid. p. 269.
It is said of Swenckfield, who did beguile many with great swelling-words of
illumination, revelation, deification of the inward and spiritual man, that he
had a well-meaning heart, but a very irregular or erroneous head. God is
righteous, as in the digging of a grave for some in the Vineyard, and the
binding of others hand and foot; so in the permission of others to leap over
the hedge of the Vinyard, and to be be-wilder'd in wild and extravagant fancies
and conceits. See Acts 20. 30. 1 Cor. 3. with 2 Cor. 11. 13, 14.

3. Family-relations become Gall and Wormwood. (1.) The Husband is sometimes a
Nabal, and folly is with him, 1 Samuel 25. 25. or if he be otherwise, his death
gives life to the Wife's sorrows, as 2 Kings 4. 1. Thy servant my husband (said
that Widow to Elisha) is dead, and thou know that thy servant did for the
Lord; and the Creditor is come to take to his my two sons for bondmen. (2.)
The Wife, if she be not more or less a chiding- Zipporah, Ezra 4. 25. a
mocking-Michol, 2 Samuel 6. 20. a sullen Vashti, Esth. 1. 12. or some otherway
afflictive; yet there was never a Marriage, but there must be a Funeral; and a
virtuous beautiful Sarah must away out of an Abraham's sight, Genesis 23. 4. (3.)
Children are often the sluices of sorrow. Dinah was ravished, Genesis 34. ^. Simeon
and Levi make their Father Jacob to stink among the Inhabitants of the Land,
Genesis 34. 30. Reuben lay with his Father's Concubine, Genesis 35. 22. Joseph is
hated of his brethren, and pack't away into Egypt to the grief of the old man;
who, taking it for a concession that Joseph was dead, refused to be comforted,
Genesis 37. 35. (4.) Servants prove vile and abominable. Good Mephibosheth's
servant was a false accuser of his Master, and hook't away half of his Lord's
Estate, 2 Samuel 16. 3, 4. with 2 Samuel 19. 24, to 30. (5.) Superiors, as Parents
and Masters, with Mistresses, are sometimes curst-creatures: Jonathan is called
by his Father, Son of a perverse rebellious woman; yea, a Javelin is cast at
him from the hand of a Father, 1 Samuel 20. 30, 31. Nabal, a Master of servants,
and a slave to frowardness, 1 Samuel 25. 17. Sarai, though a good woman, yet had
a pang of frowardness, Genesis 16. 5, 6.

4. Choice Friends bring up the rear of sorrows. Death cuts the knot of
Friendship. I am distressed for thee my brother Jonathan, said David, 2 Samuel 1.
26. If the Worm feed not on them in the grave, yet some Ear-wig does hurt. A
Whisperer separateth chief friends, Prove. 16. 28. yea, there is some
unmortified lust, by reason whereof the friend is metamorphosed into a bloody
enemy: so Psalm. 41. 9. Yea, mine own familiar friend, in whom I trusted, which
did eat of my bread, has lift up his heel against me.

Secondly, As it concerns to observe when the Creatures become Corrosives; so,
to improve this corroding-Dispensation. Let it be a means to eat out the
proud-flesh of some sin or other, which is the procuring-cause of all. The
Creatures frown; but does not God frown on some sin, in their frowning. It
would better become persons who cry out of Superiors, to consider, how the
taking cold in the feet, is often the cause of disorder in the head. The sins
of people, Wives, Children, Servants, are the cold Vapors which cause a
Distemper. The head-ake of some above others, becomes an heart-ake to and from
those below others. Eye then sin, so as more to be abased for it; and creatures
less, in way of disquiet. So does the Prophet teach, Lam. 3. 40. The overtaking
of sin with Hue-and-Cry, is the best Remedy under such Maladies.

OBSERVATION XVIII.
The great God is greatly to be seen in the meanest or least of His Creatures.
CHAP. I.
1. THE meanest or least of the Creatures set off more the beauty of the
Universe. A Giant is the more conspicuous, when a Dwarf is brought forth on the
stage with him. Behemoth, or the Elephant, is said to be the chief of the ways
of God, Job 40. 19. the vast extensions of the Elephant are the more
illustrious, when compared with the small dimensions of a Worm or Fly.

2. The very smalness or littleness of the Sicut enim artifices illi
peritissimi and ingeniosissimi habentur, qui in arctissimo spatio, plurimum
artis ostendunt (ut qui sub muscae umbra currum and equos repraesentavit): sic
Deus si non tantam in minutis animaleulis potentiam, quantam in majoribus
ostendir; at sapientiae certe majus specimen edidit. Cartwright in Prove. p.
1466.
Creatures does set forth the Wisdom of God. The curious workmanship about a
Watch or some lesser piece of Artifice, does commend the skill of the
Artificer. Creeping things, and Birds flying, as well as Beasts and Cattle, do
bear a part in the Quire, to sound forth the praises of their Maker and
Preserver, Psalm. 148. 10. with v. 7.

3. The Creatures by reason of their meanness, did not hold back the sentence
of approbation at their creation, or when they were first ushered into the
world. The History of the Creation comprehends little fishes, birds, and
creeping things; God saw what was then created, that it was good, Genesis 1. 20,
21, 25.

4. The meanest Creatures have their ordinary use for which they serve. They
are not dumb Ciphers in the World's Arithmetic. The Herb is said to be for the
service of man, Psalm. 104. 14. Even Serpents and Vermin are serviceable, in
attracting to themselves that Venom which otherwise might be of dangerous
consequence to man. Worms and Flies are baits for Fishes, and food for Birds.

5. What is wanting in the meanest of Creatures one way, is salved up another.
There be four things which are but little upon the earth, but they are
exceeding wise: The Ants are a people not strong, yet they prepare their meat
in the summer: the Conies are but feeble folks, yet make they their houses in
the rocks: the Locusts have no king; yet go they forth all of them by bands:
the Spider takes hold with her hands, and is in the kings palaces, Prove. 30.
24, etc.

6. There is a display of the glorious Attributes of God in and about the
meanest of Creatures; and that in a more than ordinary way, as He is pleased to
make use of them. We may behold as in a glass, (1.) The Goodness or Mercy of
God. (2.) Wisdom. (3.) Power. 4. Justice or Severity.

1. The Goodness or Mercy of God is seen, as when he uses them for the help of
man. The Ravens in a time of famine bring Elijah bread and flesh, 1 Kings 17.
6. The stories are known, how Moulin at the time of the Parisian-Massacre, was
cherished for a fortnight by a Hen, which came constantly, and laid her Eggs
there where he lay hid. And at Cales, how an Englishman who crept into an hole
under a pair of Stairs, was there preserved by means of a Spider, which had
woven its Web over the hole, and so the Soldiers slighted the search there.
There are other stories which I have m^t withal, as that of Aristomenes, who
being thrown into a ditch for dead with others, found out his way for egress by
means of a Fox which came thither, and pointed a passage. The Lord Mountjoy
coming from Ireland, had likely perished, with his company in the ship, had not
Providence befriended them to a wonder, and that by means of certain Seabirds.
The story thus. Fynes Morryson. Itinerary, Part 2. p. 296.
The sky being overcast with a thick fog, and we bearing all sails, we fell
suddenly upon the Skirvies, an hideous great black Rock; where after so many
dangers escaped in the Wars, it pleased God miraculously to deliver us from
becast away (as it were) in the very Haven: for certain Birds called Gulls,
seeing our ship ready to rush upon them, and their desart-habitation, with full
sails; rose crying and fluttering round about us; whereat the Governor of the
Pinace being amazed, looked out, and beholding that terrible spectacle, cried
to the Steer-man, Aloof for life: which fearful voice might have daunted him,
as it did most in the ship: but he stoutly did his work, answering, Helm a
board; which done, the ship by force of the stern, and by the help of the tide
coming in between it and the Rock, turned about with strange swiftness, and
swam along by the Rock, so near to it, as the Boat, hanging at the stern,
dashed against it. Hither may likewise be referred that in Exodus 23. 20. And I
will send Hornets before thee. These creatures (as some observe) by their
stings cause a Fever. These were Israel's Forelorn-hope, and did notable
execution, as Joshua intimates, Josh. 24. 12. Camerarius relates, how some who
were besieged, and were hard put to it by the Turks, having store of Bee-hives
on the walls of the place besieged, and furiously assaulted by the Turks,
tumbled down the Bee-hives on the enemies, who were sorely stung, their long
loose Garments opening a passage for the Bees: and so gave off in a pang of
indignation, to the joy of the besieged Christians, who were helped by these
new and wonderful recruits. And thus for Mercy displayed in the meanest
creatures.

2. The Wisdom of God is displayed: for in and by the meanest creatures He
exalts His Wisdom to check the pride of the greatest of men. Zebah and Zalmunna
say to Gideon, Rise thou, and fall upon us. They looked on it as a dishonor to
be slain by a Boy, Jether, Gideon's Son, Judge. 8. 20, 21. The Lord takes down
the swelling-humour of men, by means contemptible, and yet not to be contemned.
Frogs and Lice shall teach a Pharaoh, who is the Lord to be obeyed. The
Magicians, who would not see the hand of God in the Frogs, acknowledge the
finger of God in the Lice, Exodus 8. 18, 19. Herod, who is voiced up for a god,
is found to be a mortal man; Worms lay his honor in the dust, Acts 12. 23.
Thus as the Wisdom of God is seen in unbracing the rattling Drums of the world,
and cutting sometimes the heads of them out by Means inconsiderable: so
likewise in helping distressed ones. They were not the Captains of fifties,
hundreds, and thousands, that did help Israel out of Egypt. God does with weak
and contemptible tools in the eye of reason, erect the stately house of some
gracious dispensation, for his people to shelter themselves in. Theodoret
tells, how Sapor King Hist. Eccl. lib. 2. c. 30
of the Persians besieged the City Nicibis, in the which the Christians were
fore distressed: On a sudden a vast company of Wasps and Flies came, get into
the snouts of the Elephants, and the ears of the Horses and other Beasts, so
that Elephants and Horses brake their Harness, cast their Riders, and force the
disordered ranks to fly. The King hereupon beholding the hand of God, is
necessitated to withdraw the siege.

3. The Power of God is wonderfully seen in matters of this nature. The Lord
exalted his Power in the slaughter of Goliath by a stone cast out of a Sling.
Goliath is stoned for a Blasphemer, whom the trembling Israelites reached not
with their Swords and Spears. The Trumpets of Rams-horns, if the Lord breathe
forth his Power in and by them, shall quickly blow down the Walls of Jericho,
Josh. 6. 20.

4. The Justice and Severity of God may be viewed, as in the foregoing
instances: for the Attributes of God do concenter, or notably meet, in one and
the same Dispensation. God does by one Dispensation stroke his people, and
strike the adversaries of his people. The Saints Crutches are the Sinners
Thunderbolt. The Lord writes bitter things by the hand of the meanest
creatures, when he will make use of such amanuenses. The Palmer-worm, Locust,
Canker-worm, Caterpillar, shall lay desolate and wast the Country, if he so
dictate in his Providence, Joel 1. 4, 5, 6, 7. Amos 4. 9. Nam iidem Canes
accensi rabie, ipsos Dominos suos quasi latrones, sancti Corporis reos, dente
vindice, tanquam ignotos and inimicos laniaverunt.
yea, Dogs shall tear their own Masters, as Optatus relates the story of some,
who in contempt threw the Elements in the Lord's Supper to Dogs, and so were
torn by them.

CHAP. II.
1. BEWARE of slighting Providence with respect to the meanest of creatures.
God, who is the highest, has regard to the lowest of creatures. Solomon was a
great Hic videmus abjectum vermiculum in suggestum a Salomone sublatum and
subvectum, ut homines inertes ad industriam erudiat, eundemque non tantum
doctorem constitutum, sed and judicem, ut sententiam contra illos pronunciet.
Cartw.
searcher into the Works of God; he speaks of the Ant; which as little a
creature as it is, creeps into Solomon's Pulpit, as a subject fit enough to be
spoken of, Prove. 5. 6.

2. Observe the display of Providence in and about the meanest of the
creatures; and the rather, seeing God may otherwise afflict by them. A Worm
does remotely bite a Jonah to the quick. It Is an instrument, according to the
position of circumstances, for his no little smart and vexation, Jonah 4. 7, 8.
(2.) Much of kindness both negatively and positively, is handed by these
creatures, as the great Creator does extend his Providence in and about them.
How much are men beholding to God, not only in the daytime, but in the
night-season, in defending them from perils by reason of the least or meanest
of the creatures. Pope Adrian was choked by a Fly or Gnat. A Spider might
creep into the nostrils whilst one is asleep, and so a man might sleep the
sleep of death. And as for positive kindness handed by these, instances have
been given, and others might be made mention of. The great God, who made use of
a great fish to preserve a Jonah, Jonah 1. 17. can make use of little fishes
for the help and relief of persons. The Inhabitants of Rochel (a known story)
were as well supplied by a multitude of shellfish in the time of their
scarcity of provision,on, as if so be a Whale had been cast a-shoar amongst
them. Yea, a little fish may, at some times, be more subservient for the help
of distressed ones, than a greater one. I remember a pertinent story, which a
worthy Minister, now with God, told me: Some pious passengers were in a ship
which had sprang a leak; they pray, whilst others labor at the Pump, and that
to little purpose; till at length they espy the water within to be at a stand,
and then take heart to ply the Pump, and so get into an Harbor; the ship
after, in the dock, is searched, and there is found a certain hole, with a fish
commensurate to, or exactly filling the said hole. Thus, whatsoever the Lord
pleased, that did he in heaven, and in earth, in the seas, and in all deep
places, Psalm. 135. 6.

3. Live such moral instructions as God is his Providence whispereth into our
ears from the mouths of the meanest of his Creatures. There are two things,
amongst others, which the Scripture does lesson man here.

1. An industrious and prudent pursuit of such work as God calls unto in his
Providence. Go to the Ant, thou sluggard, consider her ways, and be wise; which
having no guide, overseer, ruler, provideth her meat in the summer, and
gathers her food in the harvest, Prove. 6. 6, 7, etc. To consider the Ant, and
play the Earthworm, is not to consider and be wise; but to consider her
industry, the timing of her work, yea, her manner (as some observe) in
following her work, as she dries her grain in Praecipuus igitur, creaturum usus
in eo versatur, ut in investigatione naturae earum proficiamus ad pietatem, tum
ut Dei virtutes in illis scintillantes, tum nostras ipsorum corruptelas cum
praedicandis illarum ingeniis comparatas, discamus. Cartw.

Hic enim finis est inter alios propter quos con^ita sunt animalia, ut ex iis
varia discamus: defendunt multi idola and Simulachra in templis hoc nomine,
quod sint velut libri laicorum, quodque ex iis multa discamus: sed profecto in
Formicis and aliis animalculis, plura multo habemus, quae discamus ut miremur,
quam in omnibus sculptis, fictis, susis, pictisve simulachris. Lavat. in locum.


the Sun, and breaks them, so as to prevent the growth of the grain gathered;
for otherwise she would starve in a long Wintersiege, if her Provision should
not be thus hoarded up. To consider the Ant in a wise management of our own
affairs, to God's glory, and our own good, is to consider, and be wise.

2. Dependence upon God both for provision for a mortal life, and protection,
as God shall be pleased to vouchsafe one, or the other. This Lesson Christ
teaches, Behold the fowls of the air, for they sow not, neither do they reap,
nor gather into barns; yet your heavenly Father feeds them: Are ye not much
better than they? Mat. 6. 26. And, Fear not them which kill the body, but are
not able to kill the soul: but rather fear him which is able to destroy both
soul and body in hell. Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing? and one of
them shall not fall to the ground without your father. But the very hairs of
your head are all numbered. Fear ye not therefore, ye are of more value than
many sparrows, Mat. 10. 28, 29, 30, 31.

OBSERVATION XIX.
Wonderful is the Providence of God in making provision for the large Family of
the World: or, Providence is the great Steward of, and for, the Household of
this World.
CHAP. I.
BEFORE has been showed the Lordship of God as it respects the Creatures,
how they are at his beck, in different manner, the meanest of them not
excluded: Now it may fall in the next place, To show what provision the Lord
makes for the sustentation of the Creatures, that stand in need of Providence
as a Caterer for them, especially of Mankind; for other Creatures lose their
lives as means to preserve or maintain the life of Man: And here the Providence
of God is wonderful, considering the vast extents of the Family of this world:
and this appears so, two ways.

First, There is plain assertion, or positive concession, of this in Scripture.
The Word is not silent in commending to us the Goodness, Wisdom, Power, of God,
in providing for the Creatures which are different for Kind, and many for
number of each Kind. So in Psalm. 104. 27, 28. These wait all upon thee, that
thou may give them their meat in due season: that thou give them, they
gather. Thou openest thy hand, they are filled with good. And so in Psalm. 148.
15, 16. The eyes of all wait upon thee, and thou give them their meat in due
season: thou openest thine hand, and satisfiest the desire of every living
thing.

Secondly, There are particular demonstrations of this, grounded on experience
of God's Providence more or less wonderfully displayed, as to his way of
providing for multitudes of persons. The Israelites in the Wilderness for forty
years are there provided for. Their number, the place where, and the time of
their being there, do all bespeak the glorious display of Providence, as Moses
does intimate, in pressing the remembrance thereof, Deuteronomy. 8. 2, 3, 16. Our
Savior Christ, in feeding the multitude in a desert-place, and that with five
loaves and two fishes, gives a taste of God's Providence in feeding vast
multitudes in the world, Mat. 14. 15, to 22.

If it be said here, That these Experiments be more than ordinary.

It may be answered, (1.) These instances however, as taking place in the world
in their respective times, fall in as a part or parcel of the stewardship of
Providence; and so are not only as Gold-lace on the Garment of Providence then,
but a skirt; which, as the Lord used it, did cover the body of those multitudes.

2. Providence is notwithstanding wonderful at other times, when bread is
provided, and that enough for so vast an Household. If Christ had put forth his
Power in visible proportion of bread and fish for the multitude, whether by
creation, or by an inclination of the hearts of persons to have brought in
provision at a nick of time when to be used, there had been a glorious display
of Providence these ways, though the bread and fish did not increase in the
breaking, distribution, and eating, as it did probably in Christ's way of
feeding the multitude. That the World is provided for, is wonderful; though the
manner how, be different, as the Lord pleases.

3. Whether the Providence of God do not hold some kind of correspondence with
those instances of the Israelites, and the multitude fed by Christ; may more
safely be affirmed, than denied. There are reasons which may turn the scale:
for,

1. If there be a display of Providence in a Canaan's becoming a Wilderness;
why not of a Wilderness becoming a Canaan, as the Lord shall exalt the glory of
his Attributes both as to the one, and to the other? If God withdraw his
blessing, the full Barns become empty ones. There are ways how food is made
foodless: So Hag. 1. 6. Ye eat, but ye have not enough: ye drink, but ye are
not filled with drink: ye clothe you, but there is none warm: and he that
earneth wages, earneth wages to put it into a bag with holes. It is wonderful
to observe how some have penury in their plenty, as others have a kind of
plenty in their penury. That which is the ground of this wonderful variety, is
the Providence of God. Job tells of the secret of God upon his Tabernacle, Job
29. 4. There is a secret blessing, and a secret curse, which may be noted in
the Lord's Dispensations.

2. What God has done heretofore, may be a pledge of what he will do, though
not after the like sort in all particulars. God fed the Israelites in the
Wilderness with Manna; he provided for them then, that way: if others have
their Wilderness, his Providence may wonderfully be seen in taking care of
them. Thus under more than ordinary difficulties, there may be more than an
ordinary display of Providence; and this extraordinary display, may be said to
be ordinary, when difficult and pinching-cases do occurr. Others, beside the
Widow of Sarepta, can tell stories by way of some kind of equivalent
proportion, as touching the Meal in the Barrel and the Oil in the Cruse not
wasting and failing, 1 King. 17. 14. they have been helped along in their
particular Wilderness; their little has gone a great way with them: the little
Buttery has been instead of a large Larder and Cellar.

3. If due consideration were had to the World, one may say, That it is a large
Wilderness or Desert, where the footsteps of the old Wilderness-Dispensation in
Moses days, and the feeding of the multitude in the Desert by Christ, may be
traced. I verily believe (says Luther) Non desunt viri docti and prudentes qui
putant plures homines in orb terrarum vivere, quam quotannis manipuli frugum
crescant and numerentur in agris. Neque hoc vero est absimile. Maxim si
inspiciantur urbes maritimae, quae quidem sunt populosissimae, and interdum ne
minimum quidem agri possident ex quo frumenta sumaut. Unde vero hi homines
omnes aluntur ut comedant, and supersit, juxta verbum Domini, 2 Reg. 4. 44* ex
hac benedictione filii Dei, quae facit, ut non tantum sem in a in agris, sed
etiam frumentum in horreis, in granariis; quin and farina in vasculo, panis in
furno, in mensa, in ore and ventriculo manducantium, mirabiliter and
invisibiliter crescat and augeatur. Lib. 4. Harm. Evang. c. 76.
that there do not grow so many sheaves of Corn, as there are people in the
world; and yet we are all fed. To this accords the judgment of Leiser, who
withal relates this story: Frederick the third, the Emperor, at an Assembly of
people at Colen, when a vast multitude out of many Nations were there met, and
he doubting provision would come far short for the relief of such a multitude,
commanded both Men and Loaves to be numbered; and when the number of the Men was
found far to exceed, he feared many would perish with famine: but it was
otherwise; for no one perisht', they had food to the full, and great plenty did
remain. And thus in answer to the Objection, and consequently for the
evidencing the wonderful Providence of God in feeding the sons of men.

CHAP. II.
1. SEE the unbelief and atheism of those who can see no other way than a
bloody one for a Nation's subsistence! In the History of the Civil-warrs of
France, it is recorded, that when complaints were made of barbarous and
cutthroat outrages; the Duke of Guise answered, There is no remedy; we have
too much people in France: I will deal so, as victuals may be good-cheap. This
Man-of-blood little considered of God's Providence, which is the Storehouse of
Provision. Had he cast an eye back on Providence toward Canaan a lesser
Country than France, he might have replied, O pray, pray, that the sword may
be turned in the plough share, and the spear into a pruning-hook. Let
Atheistical Politicians talk then of their bloody way; let Christians remember
the milky-one of obedience to God. So Deuteronomy. 28. 1. And it shall come to pass,
if thou shall hearken diligently unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to observe
and to do all his commandments, etc. the Lord shall open unto thee his good
treasure, the heaven to give thee rain unto thy land in his season, and to
bless all the work of thine hand -- v. 12.

2. Observe the Providence of God in his wise-ordering the affairs of the great
House of the World. It is said, that when the Queen of Sheba had seen all
Solomon's wisdom, and the House that he had built, and the meat of his Table,
and the sitting of his servants, and the attendance of his ministers, and their
apparel, and his Cup-bearers, and his ascent by which he went up unto the House
of the Lord, there was no more spirit in her, 1 King. 10. 4, 5. There is indeed
greater ground for admiration and astonishment, in beholding the order and
provision of the great House of the World: for Solomon's wisdom by which he
managed the affairs of his house, was but a derived drop of that Providence by
which God governs the World.

3. Secure a special interest in the great Steward of the World, I mean the
Providence of God. It is said of pious Mr. Hieron, that when his Wife was
making her moan to him, by reason of a large Family of Children, whom now he
was about to leave to the wide world, the time of his dissolution drawing near;
that then no less graciously than wittily he replied, saying, God, who
provideth for the young Ravens, will provide for the young Herons. Thus said
that Man of God; and his Family had experience of God's gracious Providence
toward them. It well becomes Christians then to be acting faith on God's
Providence for them and theirs. This is a point that our Savior insists on,
Mat. 6. 26, etc. There are two general Arguments by which this duty is backed:
The one is from the lesser to the greater; If God take care for the fowls of
the air, which sow not, neither do reap, nor gather into barns: will he not
feed the children? The other is drawn from the greater to the less: If God be a
heavenly Father, gives a Kingdom, spares not his own Son; will he not take care
for lesser matters, so far as they are needful here in this state of
pilgrimage? This later Argument we have implied there, and more express in Luke
12. 32. to which add that of the Apostle in Romans 8. 32.

If it be objected here, That many of God's children have their hardships; yea,
some have been starved in prisons: and therefore what does it avail to secure
an interest in God's Providence, or to act faith thereon?

A. 1. A Truth is not to be thrown by, as a Pebble, because of some exception.
It is a good rule given for the understanding of Solomon's Proverbs, how diverse
of them are to be understood as often, or frequently, thus: The ordinary way of
having Corn, is by plowing and sowing; shall men throw aside all, because they
have not a good-year of Corn at times. David acknowledges God's Providence
toward him from the womb, and from the breast, Psalm. 22. 9, 10. yea, he had
experience of God's bounty in preparing a Table for him, Psalm. 23. 5. yet a
time of straits he had, when he sent to Nabal for provision, 1 Samuel 25.

2. Providence is a wise Steward. It is the order of the great House, that some
be put out of Commons, or kept short at least for a time. My wants (says one)
kill my wantonness. It Is a hard matter not to have the heart swell when the
bags swell. The fat pastures make way for exalted hearts and forgetting of God,
Hos. 13. 6. And though this be not the case of others, yet God has wise ends
in their debasements. See 1 Cor. 4. 11, 12. Rev. 2. 9.

3. They who have a care to please God, have experience of God's care over
them, notwithstanding their straits. David, though denied by a surly Nabal, yet
had provision brought in by means of a wise Abigail. Jeremiah finds fair
quarter amongst the Chaldeans, Jer. 39. 11, 12. The brethren which dwelt in
Judea, had relief sent to them in the time of the great dearth, Acts 11. 28,
29. God's Providence is seen, as in straits, so in the helps handed in under
them.

4. Suppose some are starved by enemies; yet what is this more (if the Lord
take them out of the world this way) than to dye on their beds; when a man's
life abhors bread, and his soul dainty meat, Job 33. 20. A man dies who has
victuals but no stomach, as he dies who has a stomach but no victuals.
Moreover God knows how to salve up this sharp dispensation.

1. He can abate the pain and torment of hunger; as one said, If you take away
my meat, God can take away my stomach. See Exodus 34 28.

2. The Lord may then feast them with other kind of meat, as Christ speaks,
John 4. 32.

3. They are honored by God to be starved Non fovetur in metallis lecto and
culcitris corpus, ^d refrigerio and solatio Christi. Humi jac nt fessa
laboribus viscera, sed poena non est cum Christo jacere. Squalent sine balneis
membra situ and sorde deformia, sed spiritualiter intusabluitur, quod foris
carnaliter sordidatur. Cyprian. lib. 3. Epist. 25.
as well as others to be burnt for his sake. Suffering for Christ any way is
honorable. See Mat. 5. 11, 12. Phil. 1. 29.

4. They will not look like Starvelings one day; the vile body will become a
glorious body, Phil. 2. 21.

OBSERVATION XX.
The Lord bears up the World, by bearing down Sin in the World.
CHAP. I.
AS God's Providence is seen in making provision for the world: so in bearing
down sin in the World. The World would quickly be resolved into a Chaos or heap
of confusion, did not the Providence of God exert it self, and that
particularly in and about the sins of men; who having since the fall of our
first Parents destructive Principles wrapped up in their natures, would certainly
give the product of such Principles in black and bloody Conclusions, were there
not a Providence which did counter work them, by bearing down sin; and these
ways, amongst others.

First, By ushering in good tidings of a Savior, for whose sake the World is
spared from destruction; for time is now vouchsafed for the ingathering of a
chosen generation. Adam, and so all mankind, were dead in law; Judgment was to
take place; Christ, the Seed of the Woman, steps in, becomes a Surety, and
bruiseth the head of the Serpent, Genesis 3. 14, 15. He shall (said the Angel to
Joseph) save his people from their sins, Mat. 1. 21. the tares then are spared,
till the Wheat be gathered, Mat. 13. 29, 30.

Secondly, By an inward work of sanctification promoted in the hearts of
redeemed ones by Christ, who (says the Apostle Paul) gave himself for us, that
he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar
people, zealous of good works, Tit. 2. 14.

There is a twofold bearing down of sin here to be considered:

1. A bearing of it down in Saints: for they are justified by Christ, and
sanctified by the Spirit, 1 Cor. 6. 11. a stop is put to sin in them; yea, to
such sins which were destructive to human society; for such sins were to be
found amongst the Corinthians before conversion, in regard of their reigning
power, v. 9, 10, 11, of the same Chapter.

2. Bearing of it down by Saints; and that,

1. In regard of their common and general Calling, as Christians: so they do,
or at leastwise are to live it down, and pray it down in others. The best Saint
may contribute something as a polish't shaft in the hand of the Lord to wound
sin. The Lord in his Providence has cast Saints as Salt up and down the World;
and were it not for this Salt, there would be such an ill savor, that it would
be time to set the World on fire. See Mat. 5. 13, 14, 15, 16. Phil. 2. 15. 1
Pet. 2. 11, 12.

2. In regard of some Calling special: and so,

1. As Magistrates: These, as Saints, are to use their authority and power for
Christ. Job brake the jaws of the wicked, and plucked the spoil out of his
teeth, Job 29. 17. When I (says David) shall receive the congregation, I will
judge uprightly, Psalm. 75. 2.

2. As Ecclesiastical Ministers, who may be said to bear down sin,

1. In regard of the real conversion of some. Sin receives a killing-blow from
the preaching of the word; see Acts 26. 18. Romans 10. 17.

2. In regard of moral illumination of others, whereby some, for a time at
least, are curbed, Mark 6. 20. Notorious evils are the proper fruit of the Tree
of Ignorance, Genesis 20. 11. 1 Pet. 1. 14. with chap. 4. v. 3, 4. The very
checking in of vile lusts, may give a check to terrible Judgments, which break
in on persons and places otherwise. The filthy lust of some of the Benjamites,
made soul work amongst their Tribe. Their burning-lusts ended in the burning of
their City: see Judge. 19. 25. with Judge. 20. 40.

Thirdly, By way of prevention. Though men have a seed-plot of sin in their
hearts, yet some of the seeds at some times lie there as dead. So in Exodus 34.
24. I will cast out the nations before thee, and enlarge thy borders: neither
shall any man desire thy land when thou shall go to appear before the Lord thy
God thrice in the year. God has variety of ways to hush and still the cry of
Robbery, Spoil, and Cruelty. He who made the Soul of man, knows how to have
access to the door of every affliction, and so to set a lock and key on it.

Fourthly, By way of inhibition. There are the stirrings of sin, but they are
but stirrings. The shackles of restraint are clapped on by Providence. Lust has
conceived, but it brings not forth, to allude to that in James 1. 15. The
birth of the Project is an abortive. Now how Providence does block up the lusts
of men, so that though there be consultation and resolution, yet the design
walks not abroad into the field, but is confined within doors, may call for our
admiration rather than discussion. A comprehensive recital of the many ways
which Providence has to lay siege to the hearts of men, is not to be expected.
It Is not for a Cock-shell-understanding to take in the Ocean. A few drops then
of that River which Providence cuts a channel or trench for the keeping in of
sinners, so that they sally not out, and do that mischief which might be done,
may here be put together, and that in the Vessel of the Sanctuary, I mean
according to Scripture.

1. There is a way of inhibition, which I may term excentrical, or
extraordinary. And that there is an inhibition, is clear; but how, is as dark
to be understood. He who forms the spirit of man within him, Zech. 12. 1. can
and does bias it as he pleases. The Lord has secret and immediate accesses
to the hearts of men.

2. There is a way which is more ordinary, as in some measure apprehended or
understood by men. And this way whereby God does often inhibit sin, is by some
impressions or other, which are made on the spirits of men. And here it may be
observed, (1.) An impression is made by the light of Nature, being blown up
into a flame at such an instant by some common work of God. The Heathens having
not a law, were a law to themselves, Romans 2. 14. They were Heathens who showed
no little kindness, Acts 28. 2. they did not knock the shipwrack't persons in
the head, but their compassion was drawn forth toward them. (2.) An impression
is sometimes made by means of a conviction of a party's honesty or innocence,
against whom fury was armed. David gives Saul to understand, that he was no
such Malcontent and enemy to him, as he was traduced by a pack of Claw-backs
and Sycophants about Saul: he lets him know, as a demonstration of his good
affection to Saul, That he had opportunity to have killed his Majesty; but far
was it from him to do so, though near enough to have done so: far, in a moral
sense; near, in a local sense. And hereupon says Saul, I have sinned: return,
my son David, for I will no more do thee harm, because my soul was precious in
thine eyes: behold, I have played the fool, and have erred exceedingly, 1 Samuel
26. 21.

3. An impression is made by reason of fear; and that (1.) From the Laws or
Constitutions of the Country where persons live. The Gallows, more than
Conscience, is a Lion in the sinner's way. Good Laws in a Nation, are the hedge
and fence which keep off many a wild beast from making a prey on others; they
who are lions couchant, would be Lions rampant otherwise. Take heed what thou
do (said the Centurion to the chief Captain, of Paul) for this man is a
Roman, Acts 22. 26. (2.) From the displeasure of friends and relations. Some
would keep up a greater friendship with some sins, were it not that their
friends smiles would be turned into frowns. Micah continues not on his theft,
but makes peace with his Mother, whom he had wronged, and whose curse he
feared, Judge. 17. 1, 2, 3. (3.) From remarkable instances or examples of Divine
severity. God in his Providence singles out some in a way of punishment, and so
they become a terror to others. Ananias and Saphira are struck dead; great fear
came upon all the Church, and upon as many as heard these things, Acts 5. 11.
In some places, where people have not had such means of illumination by the
full and clear opening of the Scriptures; yet there is a standing at a distance
from some sins, even to a wonder. And what is the bridle, but remarkable
punishments which have befallen Adulterers, Murderers, and Perjured persons,
and the like? There is much of a Catechizing-Providence to be observed this
way. (4) From what may after be repaid home by parties themselves, or their
friends, in case persons take not wit in their anger against such. David wills
Readiness Courtiers to leave off their lying insinuations, as is probable in Psalm.
4. 2. the wind might set at another point, and then what becomes of them?
Gideon tells Zebah and Zalmunna, They (who were slain by them at Tabor) were my
brethren, even the sons of my mother: as the Lord lives, if ye had saved them
alive, I would not slay you, Judge. 8. 18, 19. Some are awed this way, as
Gideon's speech may imply, though others are not. Abuer had a sense of this in
that speech of his to Asahel, Turn thee aside (said he) from following me;
wherefore should I smite thee to the ground? how then should I hold up my face
to Joah thy brother? 2 Samuel 2. 22.

Fifthly, Providence bears down sin by way of limitation. The Lord sets bounds
unto the raging-sea of corruption. An arm of it flows in, and it is but an arm;
righteously so permitted, and yet wisely limited by the hand of God.
Achitophel's counsel takes effect in Absolom's defiling his father's
Concubines, 2 Samuel 6. 21. Providence herein makes good the truth of the word
spoken, 2 Samuel 12. 11. Howbeit, Achitophel's counsel takes not in pursuing
after David, 2 Samuel 17. 14. Shimei had malice enough in his heart to have
stained his hands with the blood of a good King, by way of assassination; but
he only rails, and throws stones at David and his servants, 2 Samuel 16, 6, 7.

Sixthly, By way of detection, which puts a stop sometimes in some cases. Esau
hated Jacob, and said, The days of mourning for my father are at hand, then
will I slay my brother Jacob; and these words of Esau her elder son, were told
Rebeccah, Genesis 27. 41, 42. Jacob hereupon is sent away from his father's house,
v. 43, 44, 45. but more of this in the next Observation.

Seventhly, By way of regulation, or converting even the sins of men to a good
use. As there is a mystery of iniquity; so there is a mystery of Providence in
and about sin. Physicians know how to make use of a Viper for the good of their
Patients. The All-wise God knows how to make use of the Vipers of the world,
with their venom. Surely the wrath of man shall praise thee, says the
Psalmist, Psalm. 76. 10.

Eighthly, By way of destruction, (1.) Of the Power of men. (2.) Of Men in
power. It may be observed how the ability to hurt is broken, absolutely, or
comparatively. Shebna the Treasurer is to be discarded, Isa. 22. 19. Arise, O
Lord, (says the Psalmist) for thou have smitten all mine enemies upon the
cheek, thou have broken the teeth of the ungodly, Psalm. 3. 7. Providence hands
them a shaming-blow, for that seems to be meant by smiting on the cheek. They
are box't and kick't to their disgrace. Their teeth are broken; and no need to
fear their teethless jaws. Or if they are not formally or properly so broken,
yet equivalently. Suppose they have Power, Wealth, with Malice enough; yet all
avails not, for they are checked by a greater Power. Thus the Decree of Darius
for building the Temple, silenceth whatever prejudices and hatred might be
amongst the underofficers of the King, Ezra 6. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Hither may
be referred inflicted diseases, as hereby men are more or less disabled or
incapacitated for the commission of sin, Genesis 20. 6, 17.

Again, As Providence destroys the Power of men, so Men in power. When men
become monstrous in sinning, no wonder if God become prodigious in punishing.
Providence consults the good of Societies of men, in making those to breathe
their last, who have made others to groan under their insolent Oppressions, or
oppressing Insolences.

There are three ways how Providence bears down sin by bearing down the sinner
to his grave:

1. By his own hands. The Lord arms sinners judicially against themselves. They
become their own Executioners. Achitophel hangs himself, 2 Samuel 17. 23. So
Judas too, Mat. 27. 5.

2. By the hands of others. One wild beast gores another to death. Belshazzar
is slain, and Darius the Median took the Kingdom, Dan. 5. 30, 31.

3. By a more immediate hand of God. Dead they are; and a Jury say something,
by saying nothing as to any visible-creature-hand by which death came. God who
gave life, has many ways to take what is given. He has his Quiver full of
Arrows. Not only a silent Arrow, but a sudden one, does execution. Psalm. 64. 7.
God shall shoot at them with an arrow, suddenly shall they be wounded.

CHAP. II.
1. LEARN to whom the glory of hearing up the World, is due. God's Providence
is the true Atlas which support the World, that does shoulder up the World,
whilst it treads on sin and sinners. Upon a serious view taken of Providence on
this wise displayed, we may say as they said, The Lord he is the God; the Lord
he is the God, 1 King. 18. 39.

2. Observe an Argument to confirm the truth of God's Providence in governing
the World, from the restraints put upon sin and sinners in the World. The
restraints do then bespeak the more remarkable hand of God, (1.) When parties
restrained have power in their hand. A wonder it was, that none of Pharaoh's
Lifeguard did not knock in the head those saucy and busy fellows Moses and
Aaron, as they were looked on in the judgment of the Court, Exodus 5. 4, 5. (2.)
When there is an old grudg against parties. Anger becomes cankered malice; and
yet the Canker eats no farther. As in Esau's inveterate hatred against Jacob,
Genesis 37. 41. with Genesis 33 (3.) When God shall step in in a nick of time, and
clap on the shackles of restraint. The God of your fathers (said Laban to
Jacob) spoke unto me yester-night, saying, Take thou heed that thou speak not
to Jacob either good or bad, Genesis 31. 29. so in Esau's case, who comes forth
against Jacob with his four hundred men, Genesis 32. 6. (4.) When the Dogs are not
only muzled, but shall fawn upon the Children. Esau ran to meet Jacob, and
embraced him, and fell on his neck, and kissed him, and they wept, Genesis 33. 4.
God in his Providence does wonderfully affect the hearts of Aliens from
Religion, so as they are kind Nostro quoque tempore factum est interdum, ut
praefecti, alieni a nostra religione, melius se gesserint erga Evangelicos,
quam illi ipsi, qui eandem nobiscum doctrinam professi sunt. Lavat. in lib.
Eld. Homil. 16.
to the religious. Tatnai and Sethar-bozni, are not as the former Officers,
Ezra 5. compared with chap. 4.

3. Have recourse to the great God in prayer, for the bearing down of sinners.
The Lord has two Bitts; the golden-one of Regenerating-grace, and the iron-one
of Restraints. Stephen prays, and Paul is converted, Acts 7. 60. with Acts 9.
Hezekiah prays, and he has tidings of an iron Bit: there is an hook for the
nose, and a bridle for the lips of a menacing and thundering Senacherib, 2
Kings 19. 14, 15. with 28.

4. Take thankful-notice of God's restraining-Providence. (1.) The neglect may
provoke God to let slip the Bridle of Restraint. The Lord may teach the worth
of a Mercy by the want of the said Mercy. If the Lord do but hiss for the Fly
of Egypt, and for the Be of Assyria, they quickly come to the annoyance of
people, who were before free from annoyance, Isa. 7. 18, 19, 20. (2.) There is
much of God to be seen in the restraint of persons. This Jewel is worthy of
more than a single cast of the eye. Saints owe their Estates, Lives, to
restraining-Providence. Jacob could see the face of God in the face of his
brother Esau, Genesis 33. 10.

5. Secure a share in Regenerating-grace. For, (1.) This is the kernel and
cream of blessings. Without Grace a man is but a tame Devil at the best. Corn,
and Wine, and Oil, make men joyll; but it is the light of God's countenance
which makes truly glad, Psalm. 4. 6, 7. (2.) He who has Regenerating-Providence
for his portion, will not be without a large share in Restraining-Providence
for his protection. I will (says David) both lay me down in peace, and sleep;
for thou, Lord, make me to dwell in safety, Psalm. 4. 8. Unde etiam justi
taberna, tygurium and tentorium ad omnem adversam and noxiam vim propulsandam
plus virium habet, quam improborum robustissimum and firmissimum palatium,
arces, propugnacula: justorum papyracei parietes improborum ferreis and aeneis;
illorum straminea lectorum integumenta, horum laminis ac tegulis; illorum
ligamina, horum seris and pess^sis. Cartw. in Prove. p. 623.


OBSERVATION XXI.
PROVIDENCE is the Bird of the Air, which whistles deeds of darkness to light.
CHAP. I.
BEFORE, was showed how Providence bears down sin in the world; and one way,
amongst others, was by way of detection or discovery. Hereby, sin intended, is
sometimes prevented; as the killing of Paul by certain of the Jews, who had
banded together to do the fact, Acts 23. 12, etc. Hereby some are made examples
of shame, that so others may be deterred from giving way to like abominations,
as in Ananias and Saphira's case; great fear came upon all the Church, and upon
as many as heard these things, Acts 5. 11. Providence then is very remarkable
in the dis-vizzarding men; and this appears two ways:

1. From express and implied assertions, or cautions bottomed on assertions.
Job 12. 22. He discovers deep things out of darkness: and brings out to
light the shadow of death. And Eccles. 10. 20. Curse not the King, no not in
thy thought; and curse not the rich in thy bedchamber: for a bird of the air
shall carry the voice; and that which has wings shall tell the matter. So Luke
8. 17. For nothing is secret, that shall not be made manifest; neither any
thing hid, that shall not be known and come abroad.

2. From Exemplifications; which may be distinguished according to deeds of
darkness; which are so termed; as sin within is compared to darkness, and Satan
the Prince of darkness, are both Mother and Nurse to such deeds in the general:
But more particularly, and to the matter in hand, in regard of secrecy, as
affecting the dark, Ephesians. 5. 11, 12. These deeds of darkness do respect the
first Table and second, in a way of violation of duties commanded. Now each of
these sort of deeds of darkness are brought to light.

1. Examples there are of the first sort. Our first Parents sinned against God
in eating the forbidden fruit; the Lord himself plays the Anatomist, and lays
open the bowels of that fact, Genesis 3. 8. etc. Achan's transgressing the
Covenant, is found out, Josh. 7. 11, 17, 18, 19, 20. Judas his Hypocrisy ends
in notorious Apostasy, Mat. 26. 14. 15. Ananias and Saphira's Sacriledg has
the Curtain drawn from before it, by the hand of Peter, Acts 5. Simon Mag^s his
Sorceries and painted Atheism are unmasked, Acts 8.

2. Examples of the later sort there are likewise. The eye that mocketh at his
father, and despises to obey his mother, the ravens of the valley shall pick
it out, and the young eagles shall eat it, Prove. 30. 17. Cain's murdering his
brother Abel, is found out by the Lord, Genesis 4. 8, 9, 10. Judah's Uncleanness
has a Signet, and Bracelet, and Staff, to discover it, Genesis 38. 16, 24, 25.
Joseph was stolen out of the Land of the Hebrews, as it is said Genesis 40. 15. the
Plagiarism or Theft of the Brethren is laid open. The wicked forgery and
perjury in the case of Naboth, is left on record, 1 King. 21. These instances
of both sorts may suffice. It were easy to enlarge here from History. I pass
to the accommodation or improvement.

CHAP. II.
1. OBSERVE an Argument to prove Providence, from the wonderful discoveries
which are made of the deeds of darkness. Though all deeds of darkness do not
come to light in this world; yet this may suffice, Diverse do: some are
discovered to prove a Providence; others reserved from a discovery, to intimate
a day of general Judgment. There are several Observables, which, if they are
seriously considered, do abundantly commend to us the Providence of God in
matters of this nature.

1. The small and various threads on which a discovery does sometimes hang.
Unless the hand of Providence did fasten these together, and keep them from
being broken, the sinner had not been drawn out of his Dungeon by them. How
many windings and turnings were there of Providence, ere the horrid fact of
Joseph's brethren comes to their father's knowledge?

2. The long distance of time sometimes between the perpetration of some fact,
and the discovery of it. One would think such or such a deed of darkness were
dead, buried, and never like to rise again in this world. There were diverse
years past ere Joseph's brethren were taken to task by Providence in order to a
discovery. I could instance in a woman who lived thirty years after a Murder
committed; and the House where she lived being after to be altered, in regard
it was not convenient for the making of Gunpowder, being twice blown up; in
digging, bones were found: and the Woman, who had changed her habitation, was
apprehended, and convicted out of her own confession.

3. The notable sagacity and quick-sightedness of some who are concerned to
search into matters. There is sometimes much of Providence to be noted. Counsel
in the heart of man is like deep water, but a man of understanding will draw it
out, Prove. 20. 5. In the controversy of the Harlots about the living-child,
Solomon's Judgment was more sharp than his Sword, 1 King. 3. 16, to the end.

4. Angelical Ministry, which Providence does often use in order to
discoveries. Joseph is warnned by an Angel of the Lord, how Herod had a design
to murder Christ, Mat. 2. 13. I make no question, but the Angels who cover
their faces before the Almighty, do invisibly uncover many a deed of darkness.
They are the Intelligencers in matters of this nature. And though they do not
appear in places of Judicature, yet they may assist there, and promote
(invisibly) Discoveries. I have heard of one who had an Apparition, which
willed him to accuse a certain party of Murder committed; and withal, bid the
man ask certain questions; and in case the proof did not take, the Spirit would
appear in the place of Judicature: On the rumor of this, a great concourse
there is of people to behold the Apparition; and out of the Crowd, Witnesses
are found to evince the murderous fact; for the questions referring to the
Murder, as going through such an hedge, washing his shoes at such a place,
being denied, some there did on the contrary attest, being thus providentially
drawn together with others; and so the Judge condemns the man, not because of
the Apparition, but upon proof made secundum allegata and probata.

5. The variety of ways which Providence has to lay open the deeds of
darkness. Providence does sometimes blow off the paint by the warm breath of
the guilty parties themselves. Their own consciences, words, carriages, witness
the evils committed. Many came, and confessed, and showed their deeds, Acts 19.
18, 19. Again, sometimes by the breath of others, who if they were not
Associates, yet were some way or other privy to such deeds. A Jehu tells
stories of Ahab's Court, and what past before, 2 King. 9. 25, 26.

Moreover, Providence does make good the charge against the guilty, sometimes
by some one single demonstrative or passage. Tamar sends a greeting to her
father, saying, By the man whose these are, am I with child, Genesis 38. 25.
Again, sometime by a concurrency of matters. A bundle of sticks is not broken,
though taken apart they are easily snapt asunder. Providence is wonderful, in
bringing forth the several links of the Chain, which pull the Guilty out of
their close Coverts, to their blush and confusion of face.

2. Give not way to Abominations upon presumption of secrecy. It is folly, and
a delusion of Satan, to consent to temptations, because of secrecy.

1. Suppose the guilts of some escape the eye of men in this world, Art thou
sure that thine shall? The Lord sees all, and may give others to see what thou
do. And I will come near to you to judgment; and I will be a swift witness
against the sorcerers, and against the adulterers, and against false swearers,
and against those that oppress the hireling in his wages, the widow and the
fatherless, and that turn aside the stranger from his right, and fear not me,
says the Lord of Hosts, Mal 3. 5. And Psalm. 44. 21. Shall not God search this
out? for he knows the secrets of the heart.

2. There is an heavy judgment on parties, in their uncontrollable liberty
which they take in the Vaults of darkness. The hand of Providence lies heavy on
them in a judiciary way, whilst the finger of Providence does not point out to
the world their sins, for which they might take an holy shame, and amend. 'Twas
a mercy to David, that Nathan was sent to him, 2 Samuel 12. with Psalm. 51. On the
other hand, Providence does punish, when it does not punish, Hos. 4. 14. To go
on in the broad-way to destruction without check, is the suburbs of damnation.

3. A day will come when all will out before Angels and Men. In Romans 2. 16. In
the day when God shall judge the secrets of men according to my Gospel. And 1
Cor. 4. 5. Therefore judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who
will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the
counsels of the hearts; and then shall every man have praise of God. To this of
the Apostle, add what Solomon has as pertinent for a period here; and oh that
it might put a period to further deeds of darkness: Fear God, and keep his
commandments, for this is the whole duty of man: for God shall bring every work
into judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be
evil, Eccles. 12. 13, 14.

OBSERVATION XXII.
PROVIDENCE runs parallel with the line of man's life: Or, Providence reaches
from the Grave of the Womb, to the Womb of the Grave.
CHAP. I.
AS there is a general inspection of God over all the Creatures, as has been
before showed: so there is a more special over Man, the Flower of the Creation,
next to Angels. And this more special Inspection, Care, or Providence, is
co-extensive to the life of man; which may be evidenced from the Scripture, as
follows.

1. It is plainly and positively asserted. The Lord looks from heaven, he
beholds all the sons of men from the place of his habitation. He fashioneth
their hearts alike: he considers all their works, Psalm. 33. 13, 14, 15. To
every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under the heaven, a
time to be born, and a time to dye, etc. Eccles. 3. 1. See Mat. 10. 29, 30, 31.
Coelum non est otiosum palatium. sed Dei regia, e qua Imperium suum per omnes
mundi parts cum summa ratione and sapientia exercet. Mollerus.


2. It Is acknowledged by the Lord's people in their addresses to him. But thou
art he that took me out of the womb; thou did make me hope when I was upon my
mothers breast: I was cast upon thee from the womb: thou art my God from my
mothers belly, Psalm. 22. 9, 10. O God, thou have taught me from my youth: and
hitherto have I declared thy wondrous works: now also when I am old, and
gray headed, O God forsake me not, Psalm. 71. 17, 18.

3. Otherwise that Principle of undoubted Verity, In him we live, and move, and
have our being, Acts 17. 28. would expire before man breathe out his last. If
there be not a constant motion of Providence from life to death, the sense must
be, In him we live not, move not, and have not our being.

4. The Scripture descends particularly, (1.) To the Actions of man. (2.) To
what befalls man, and that by way of reference to the Providence of God:

First, The Actions of man fall under a threefold consideration:

1. As Natural, as eating, drinking, walking, talking, sleeping, these are
subjected to the Providence of God. They are like to make but a poor meal, who
have both mouths and meat, if they find not grace in the eyes of the Lord.
While the flesh was yet between the teeth of the Israelites, yer it was chewed,
the wrath of the Lord was kindled against the people, Numb. 11. 33. O Lord, I
know that the way of man is not in himself: it is not in man that walks, to
direct his steps, Jer. 10. 23. But I will come shortly to you, if the Lord
will, 1 Cor. 4. 19. The answer of the tongue is from the Lord, Prove. 16. 1. On
that night could not the King sleep, Esth. 6. 1. For so he gives his beloved
sleep, Psalm. 137. 2.

2. As Civil or Political; such are ploughing, buying, selling -- It is said of
the Husbandman, his God does instruct him to discretion, and does teach him,
Isa. 28. 26. The Apostle James reads to buyers and sellers a good and savoury
lecture; he wills them to eye Providence; for though they are Masters of
their own Trade, yet not Masters of their own Lives; and what becomes of the
intentional bargains then in a moment? yea, of what they have gotten through
succeeding. Providence, when they are swept away by death, which proves at
times the death of their Wealth; their Estates, and Affairs, lying raw, and
undigested, and being left in the hands of Fools, or Knaves? See James 4. 13,
14, 15.

3. As Moral; and that whether good or bad. As for actions good; no man, unless
he he forget himself to be a man, will appropriate that to himself as a
Fountain, of which he is but a Cistern: for who makes thee to differ from
another? and what have thou that thou did not receive? now if thou did
receive it, why do thou glory as if thou had not received it? 1 Cor. 4. 7.
See James 1. 17. And as for actions bad, which are vulgarly so termed; though
Providence be not an author of them, yet it is a spotless actor in and about
them: the foul acts in a man's lame-foot, and yet lameness is not chargeable on
the soul. God is an holy God, notwithstanding the displays of Providence in and
about the Sins of men, as has elsewhere been discovered.

Secondly, What befalls man, is reducible to the Providence of God. Not only
the Honey, but the Gall of man's life, has its being from Him. I form the
light, and create darkness: I make peace, and create evil: I the Lord do all
these things, Isa. 45. 7. Job, in that Doxology of his, acknowledges this, The
Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, Job 1. 21.

CHAP. II.
1. LOOK back how Providence has dealt with thee in time past. Jacob did so,
as is left on record, Genesis 48. Moses, the Man of God, in the book of
Deuteronomy, which may may be termed the book of Moses Farewel-Sermons,
preached a Month before his death (as some observe), does commend to the
Israelites a survey of God's Providence toward them; he wills them
particularly to take a view both of Mercies and Afflictions. Thy raiment (says
he) waxed not old upon thee; neither did thy foot swell these forty years: thou
shall also consider in thine heart, that as a man chasteneth his son, so the
Lord thy God chasteneth thee, Deuteronomy. 8. 4, 5.

2. Take encouragement for time to come, to trust in God. Some are miserably
baffled with temptations for futurity; How shall they do! What may befall them,
and the like! here is both an Antidote and a Remedy against this Disease.
Providence runs parallel with the line of life; and this may quiet and compose
the spirit, if well thought on and improved, But more particularly consider
here three things.

1. Providence is not tired. It is a mighty Giant, not wearied with
half-racing. Have thou not known? have thou not heard, that the everlasting
God, the Lord, the Creator of the ends of the earth, faints not, neither is
weary, Isa, 40. 28.

2. The experience of an hitherto-Providence, may sweetly invite to wait on God
for futurity. So David reasons, Thou art my Lamp, O Lord: and the Lord will
lighten my darkness: for by thee I have run through a troop: by my God have I
leaped over a wall, 2 Samuel 22. 29, 30. So Paul too, 2 Cor. 1. 9, 10.

3. The Promises are not empty breasts. There is enough in them to keep faith
from starving. Remember that, Heb. 13. 5. Let your conversation be without
covetousness, and be content with such things as you have; for he has said, I
^ill never leave thee nor forsake thee.

OBSERVATION XXIII.
There are the signal Sallies, remarkable Excursions or Displays of Providence,
as they respect the sons of men in the course of life.
CHAP. I.
BEFORE was showed, how Providence runs hand in hand, as it were, with man,
from the Cradle to the Crutch of old age; a Race there is from the birth, even
to death. Here now something offers it self to be spoken unto as remarkable in
this Race; and this is termed forth under the notions of signal Sallies,
remarkable Excursions, or Displays of Providence: And that there are such
Sallies, Excursions, etc. appears,

1. From God's manner of appearing to, and for, the Patriarchs of old. There
were some certain and eminent seasons for such appearances. So Noah had a
discovery to make an Ark when the Flood was to be brought, Genesis 6. 13, 14.
Abraham experienceth solemn visits of Providence, Genesis 12. 1, 7. Genesis 13. 14.
Genesis 14. 13. with Isa. 41. 2. Genesis 15. 1. Genesis 17. 1. Genesis 18. 1. Genesis 21. 12.
Genesis 22. As God did appear to him, so for him, and that wonderfully, according
as his case was: so Genesis 20. 3. Psalm. 105. 14. Others, as Jacob, Joseph, Moses,
might be instanced in, whose lives are recorded in the Scriptures; and passages
to this purpose in their lives are obvious, and may be touched in the following
discourse, and therefore I forbear further amplification.

2. From Promises, which do seminally contain such signal Sallies, Excursions,
or Displays of Providence. Such as the Tree, such the fruit. If there be a
promise to Abraham, That God will give his posterity a visit in Egypt, as Genesis
15. 14. what follows, but as is said Psalm. 80. 8. Thou have brought a vine out
of Egypt. Are there Promises referring to Spirituals and Temporals? Accordingly
will be the Disphy^ of Providence, as shall make most for God's glory, and the
good of parties who are concerned in such promises.

3. From the Attributes of God, the glory whereof in an eminent manner the Lord
consults at some seasons. All the Israelites nights were not nights of
observation, in comparison of that night when the stars of God's Attributes
did so gloriously shine in their going forth from Egypt, Exodus 12. 41, 42. So
in Psalm. 102 16. When the Lord shall build up Zion, be shall appear in his
glory. There are seasons for the Lord's Attributes to have on their Festival
Robes.

4. From the object-matter of such Sallies, Excursions, or Displays of
Providence. The object may be considered in regard of temporals and spirituals.
The Providence of God, like a glorious Sun, casts its beam on each of these. We
may here consider the Sallies of Providence according to the subsequent
miscellaneous order.

First, There are the Nativity-Cradle-Minority-Dispensations. Thou are he that
took me out of the womb, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 22. 9. He does not say the
Midwife, though she might be the ministring-Instrument. Benjamin is born, and
his Mother dies: when he comes into the world, his Mother goes out, Genesis 35.
18, 19. Moses is born when a bloody-Statute was on foot against the Males of
the Israelites: there was an Ark of Providence as well as an Ark of Bullrushes
for his preservation. A conjunction there was of many gracious acts of
Providence, as well as an artificial conjunction of the Bullrushes, as the
story declares, Exodus 2. Our Savior Christ in his minority as man, had an hedge
of Providence set about him to keep off a pushing and goring-Herod, Mat. 2. 13.
That eminent servant of God Peter Du Moulin, was Utque mirabili Dei Providentia
quando puer ad necem quaerebaris, inhorrenda clade Bartholomaea, servatus
ancillae maxim industria fuisti. Doct. Hornbeck Sum. Controv. Epist. Dedic. ad
Moli^.
wonderfully preserved, being a little one in the time of the Parisian
Massacre. The murdering Papists shall not stop the breath of him who must live
to serve God with his Tongue, and cut the throat of the Popish Cause with his
Pen.

Secondly, There are some signal Sallies of Providence with respect to the
Calling or Employment of parties. So in Joseph, who is a Nonesuch for wisdom
and trust in Pharaoh's eye, Genesis 41. 38, 39, 40. Amos relates the story of
God's Providence in his call to the Lord's work, and that after a signal sort,
Amos 7. 14, 15. Wonderful is the Providence of God, sometimes in a strong
byassing of a Parent's spirit to intend such or such a Child for the Sacred
Ministry; otherwhiles the Providence of God is wonderful, in so wheeling
matters, as that a Child otherwise intended, is like the Flower-de-luce in the
Mariners Card, in motion, till it settle toward the North Pole. The Lord will
find a way, or make one, to the Pulpit, or Professors chairs of Divinity.
Junius was designed for: Court-life; his Father was willing his Son should be
godly, but not a Preacher of godliness; but yet he is both: for so it fell out,
that before a supplicatory Letter sent from the Son in order to his abiding
longer at Geneva, comes to the hands of the Father, his Father was slain by the
hands of the Popish-party in a tumult, as that eminent servant of the Lord does
declare in the History of his own Life.

Thirdly, There are remarkable Displays of Providence with respect to some
particular Affairs and Negotiations of persons; and that,

1. By way of prospering them. Thus Abraham's servant in that clause of his
prayer, O Lord God of my master Abraham, if now thou d^ prosper my way which I
go, intimates, Genesis 24. 42. The Lord was with Joseph, and he was a prosperous
man, and he was in the house of his Master the Egyptian, and his Master saw
that the Lord was with him, and that the Lord made all that he did, prosper in
his hand, Genesis 39. 2, 3. David behaved himself wisely, and the Lord was with
him, 1 Samuel 18. 14. The seventy (Disciples) returned again with joy, saying,
Lord, even Devils are subject unto us through thy name, Luke 10. 17. The hand
of the Lord was with them (who were scattered by reason of persecution), and a
great number believed, and turned unto the Lord, Acts 11. 21. For I (says
Paul) will not dare to speak of any of those things which Christ has not
wrought by me, to make the Gentiles obedient by word and deed, through mighty
signs and wonders, by the power of the Spirit of God; so that from Jerusalem,
and round about unto Illyricum, I have fully preached the Gospel of Christ,
Romans 15. 18, 19. Ita mihi omnibus in rebus, omnibusque modis adfuit Christus ut
etiamsi maxim velim, tamen dicere non possim, quod per me non effecerit ut
gentes Evangelio obedirent. Beza ad locum.


2. By way of crossing them, and cursing too, as the Lord sees fit. And in
those times (when Israel for a long season had been without the true God, and
without a teaching-Priest, and without the Law) there was no peace to him that
went out, nor to him that came in; but great vexations were upon all the
inhabitants of the countries; and nation was destroyed of nation, and city of
city; for God did vex them with all adversity, 2 Chronicles. 15. 3, 5, 6. Why (said
Z^chariah to the people) transgress ye the commandments of the Lord, that ye
cannot prosper? Because ye have forsaken the Lord, he has also forsaken you, 2 Chronicles. 24. 20. They were, in the Prophet Haggai's time, for their Cieled
Houses, and neglected the House of the Lord; and what says the Prophet? Ye
have sown much, and bring in little: ye eat, but ye have not enough; ye drink,
but ye are not filled with drink: ye clothe you, but there is none warm: and he
that earneth wages, earneth wages to put it into a bag with holes, Hag. 1. 4,
6. Scultetus reports a memorable Annal. Dec. 2. p. 393.
passage of Ferdinand the Emperor; who, when battles were unhappily fought,
said (being very sad) to his Counselors: I wonder how it comes to pass that
all my designs fall out very unhappily! To him one of Austria courageously
replies, saying, That which in all ages happens to Kings and Emperors, the
same, O Emperor, happens to thee, Call to mind the History of the Kings of
Israel and Judah, and thou shall find, that for their spilling human blood, and
winking at sins; grievous enemies by Divine Judgment were stirred up, whom they
were not able to resist. If at any time they did purpose to fight the enemy,
they fought unhappily. Neither therefore may thou expect any other fortune,
unless thou desist from thy purpose in oppugning Religion. Thus he to
Ferdinand. And it would be well then, when persons meet with
clashing-excursions of Providence (a series, or chain of them) they would think
on that of Rebeccah, If it be so, why am I thus? and she went and enquired of
the Lord, Genesis 25. 22. Or that of Jeremiah, Let us search and try our ways, and
turn again unto the Lord, Lam. 3 40.

Fourthly, There are the signal Sallies of Providence in regard of Marriages.
House and riches are the inheritance of fathers: and a prudent wife is from the
Lord, Prove. 19. 14. What is said of a prudent Wife, does by a rational
proportion hold of a prudent Husband; both are from the Lord by way of a signal
Dispensation of Providence; and are so, comparatively, before Riches and
Inheritance. Non quod domus, etc. simpliciter and pure non sit etiam Dei donum
deinde quod major quaedam and oculatior sit Dei in Uxorum piarum consecutione
Providentia, quam in haereditatis consequendae ratione. Cartw.


More particularly, there are four things here observable:

1. The party or parties considered. This man, and not another, notwithstanding
(it may be sometimes) probabilities in regard of another; and so this woman,
and not another, and that though born and bred at a distance, Ruth 1. 16. with
Ruth. 4 6. 10.

2. The occasion, way, or means, how brought together. Moses flies into the
land of Midian, and there he marries Zipporah, see Exodus 2. 21. Ruth was drawn
off from her own Country; and in the way of pious and industrious poverty,
ascends from a Gleaner in the field, to be the Mistress in the house; see Ruth
2. There is a wonderful connection of things, by way of an introduction to
marriage of parties, to be observed sometimes.

3. The time when some (at least) enter on this state of Matrimony. Some who
seem to pass the flower of their age, meet with a good Match. Delays of
Providence are recompensed with the comfortable returns of Providence. Isaac
had a good Wife in Rebeccah; and it is said of him, he was forty years old when
he took Rebeccah. Though the like age be not now required, in regard they were
longer-liv'd in that age of the world; yet it were well if persons would play
the Isaacs, be pious, solid, know the duties of a married estate, before
marriage. No wonder if Christ be not at the Weddings of some, when Mammon,
Pride, Rashness, Discontent of heart, and the like, lead the Bride to Church.

4. The wonderful sympathy and consonancy Rari sunt quibus non obrepant
fastidia uxorum. Calv.
of affection between parties, and that though, there are other men and other
women, which in regard of beauty, parts, and wealth, may rather commend them.
The two are one flesh ( Gen 2. 24.) not only in regard of the Lord's
Institution, but love and affection, for the main kept up. To these things may
be added the signal displays of Providence in regard of Children, the fruit of
Marriage. There is a remark display of Providence sometimes in not having them.
So Jer. 22. 30. This says the Lord, Write this man childless, etc. And there
is, on the other hand, as remark a display in the having of them; as in Sarah
having an Isaac, Genesis 18 14. Hannah a Samu^l, 1 Samuel 1. 20. with chapter 2.
Elizabeth a John the Baptist, Luke 1. 13. with 18.

Fifthly, There are the sallies of Providence in order to the conversion of
parties to God, or goodness. Paul makes a narrative how the good Shepherd
brought home the lost sheep, Acts 26. He declares there what he was by nature,
and what he is by grace. He who was the High-Priest's Blood-hound, becomes a
Lamb of Christ's Fold. Free Grace was eminently displayed in his conversion;
for the very time of his rage and madness against the people of God, was the
time of God's dropping grace into his heart. Christ then planted him on Zion's
ground, when he intended to root up Christians. Here I might insist on, (1.)
The occasion, means remote and near. (2.) The time when. (3.) The manner how
Providence is conversant about the calling home of parties. But this might
prove too large an Excursion in this place.

Sixthly, There are the sallies of Providence in regard of mortification-work,
or progress in the ways of God. The House of the Christian is not built as soon
as the foundation is laid. There is growth in grace, and in the knowledge of our
Lord Jesus Christ, required, 2 Pet. 3. 18. How the Lord does promote this work,
may in brief be touched in three things:

1. By way of discovery of slips and sinful imprudencies, even after
conversion. Even a David needs a Nathan to alarm him, 2 Samuel 12. and though
some do not fall so foully as David did, in regard of heinous sins; yet the
sinful imprudencies after conversion, are matter for humiliation. The breakings
forth of spiritual pride, rashness, censoriousness, and such like evils, unto
which young Converts or weak Christians are incident, have a day of reckoning
in the Court of Providence. The brighter and clearer the Sun breaks in at the
Window, the better is discerned a small object, as a pin on the ground. At
first, when the Christian's Sun did not shine so clear, he discerned grosser
evils; but now he comes to behold more inward and spiritual evils.

2. By exercising them with variety of conditions. These Soldiers know what it
is to be in garrison, and what it is to be in the field. They have had both
calms and storms on the Sea of this World. Witnesses hereof, are Abraham,
Jacob, Moses, David, Job, Paul, with others. These had their diverse temptations
or trials, as is said James 1. 2.

3. By quickening them to the use of means, in order to progress. As new born
babes, desire ye the sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow thereby, said
Peter, 1 Pet. 2 2. The Spouse seeks him whom her soul loves, Cant. 3. 1, 2.
And for her spiritual laziness and drowsiness, Christ had withdrawn himself;
and then she is the more secretly stirred up to seek after him, Cant. 3, 5, 6,
7, 8. Pertinent to this, is that of Jude's direction for progress; But ye
beloved, building up your selves in your most holy faith, praying in the Holy
Ghost, keep your selves in the love of God, looking for the mercy of our Lord
Jesus Christ, unto eternal life, Jude v. 20, 21.

Seventhly, There are the sallies of Providence in regard of Temptations which
befall persons. There are certain buffeting seasons when Satan is let loose,
and that not without a wise and righteous hand of God. Thus in David's numbering
the people, 2 Samuel 24. 1. with 1 Chronicles. 21. 1. It is said, Then was Jesus led
up of the Spirit into the wilderness to be tempted of the Devil, Mat. 4. 1. And
as there is a buffeting-season; so there is a relieving sally of Providence
more than ordinary, when the temptation is so. The Lord said unto Simon, Simon,
behold Satan has desired to have you, that he may sift you as wheat: but I
have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not, Luke 22. 31, 32. Though Peter
fell, and that foully; yet, as he fell by his rising too high in his own
confidence, v. 33. so he rises from his falling, v. 62. and by his falling; for
he becomes a more humble Christian afterward, Joh. 21. 15, 16, 17. To this
instance of Peter, add that of Paul, 2 Cor. 12. 7, 8, 9.

Eighthly, There are the sallies of Providence in regard of Calamities. These
are not the birth of Heathenish Fortune or Chance. See now (says God) that I,
even I, am be; and there is no God with me: I kill, and I make alive; I wound,
and I heal: neither is there any that can deliver out of my hand, Deuteronomy. 31. 39.
The black Horse, and the red Horse, and the pale Horse, Rev. 6. were (if I may
so phrase it) sadled in the Stable of Providence, ere Providence rid circuit in
way of Judgment on them. Divine Providence may be styled the Master of these
Horses; for upon the opening of the seals, away gallop these Horses, that is,
wrathful Dispensations, to take place in the World, according to the Contents
of the sealed Book there.

Ninthly, There are the sallies of Providence in regard of external Mercies; of
which, persons are in an eminent way made the subjects of. There is a plain
stamp on this Coin; the image or superscription of Providence is very legible.
Abimilech, and Pichol the chief Captain of his Army, come to Isaac, and said,
We saw certainly that the Lord is with thee, etc. Genesis 26. 28, 29. It is said
of David, He went on, and grew great, and the Lord God of Hosts was with him.
Hiram, King of Tyrus, sends messengers to him; yea, he perceived that the Lord
had established him King over Israel, and that he had exalted his Kingdom for
his people Israel's sake, 2 Samuel 5. 10, 11, 12. When the Lord turned again the
captivity of Zion, we were like them that dream; then was our mouth filled with
laughter, and our tongue with singing: then said they among the heathen, The
Lord has done great things for them, Psalm. 126. 1, 2.

Tenthly, There are the sallies of Providence in regard of Habitation. Now the
Lord had said unto Abraham, Get thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred,
and from thy father's house, unto a land that I will show thee, Genesis 12. 1.
Jacob has a call to leave Laban, to be gone from him, whose countenance was
not toward him as before, Genesis 31. 2, 3. Moses must no longer keep the Flock of
his Father Jethro; he must look after another Flock, the Lord's people, Exodus
3. 10. Then spoke Elisha to the woman (whose son he had restored to life)
saying, Arise, and go thou and thy household, and sojourn wheresoever thou can
sojourn: for the Lord has called for a famine, and it shall also come upon the
land seven years, 2 King 8. 1. The Angel of the Lord apppeareth to Joseph in a
dream, saying, Arise and take the young child, and his mother, and flee into
Egypt, and he thou there until I bring thee word: for Herod will seek the young
child to destroy him, Mat. 2. 13. Thus there is a display of Providence in the
change of Habitation; and they who change their places according as there is a
warrant or rational ground so to do, have experience, that though they change
their places, yet not their God. Jacob, though he left his Father's Family, yet
met with his Father's God elsewhere, Genesis 28. 16.

Eleventhly, There are the sallies of Providence in regard of Journeys. This is
of some kin to the former, and yet a difference there is. The Be goes abroad,
yet keeps to the old Hive. Some are not so cooped up at their accusiomed homes,
but there are occasions and rational inducements to be abroad. Now Providence
is on its journey, whilst they are on theirs. A wonderful Providence there was
in the journey of Jacob's sons into Egypt, Genesis 42. 1, 2. ^hey go down into
Egypt for Corn, and so the Sheaf-dream is fulfilled, and they are there
threshed from their chaff, v. 9, and 21. Joseph by a good Providence is found
by a man, when behold he was wandering in the field, Genesis 37. 15, 16, 17. Moses
in his journey to Egypt, meets with a startling- Providence, Exodus 4. 24.
Elisha in his journey at Shunem, meets with courteous entertainment, 2 Kings 4.
8, 9, 10. Ezra's journey of Prayer, proves a journey of Providence, Ezra 8. 21,
23. It is said of Christ, he must go through Samaria, John 4. 4. As there might
be reason for his going through Samaria, in regard of the situation of Samaria,
that being the way to the place intended; so there might be another reason,
namely, his will for the conversion of the woman there, together with her
neighbors, v. 39. Thus from these and the like Scriptures it may be evidenced,
how there is much of Providence in journeys, and that both as to Temporals and
Spirituals, Afflictions and Mercies. It Is wisdom to take God along with one in
journeys on earth, and to mind the great journey toward Heaven.

Twelfthly, There are the sallies of Providence in regard of some glorious
Discovery of God to the Soul by way of consolation. Every day is not in this
sense a Christian's gaudee-day. Jacob had a golden dream indeed, when in it,
Behold I am with thee, and will keep thee, says the Lord to him, Genesis 28. 15.
That passage of signal Providence was never to be forgotten by Jacob; it was of
use to him through his whole life: it was not an every-day's Providence, though
he had experience of God's Providence every day. In 1 Kings 12. 9. God's
appearing twice to Solomon is there taken notice of. Paul was caught up into
the third Heaven, 2 Cor. 12. 2. I make no question but diverse Saints of God
have had somewhat like experience of God's outgoings toward their souls.
There are some high-days of Providence, if I may so term them; and oh that such
high-days (where and when they are) may not puff up persons.

Lastly, There are the sallies of Providence in regard of Death; and that as
they respect,

1. The fore-running, warning, preparatory-intimations of Death. Moses and
Joshua sang sweetly, like Swans, before their death. Christ observes that
Providence in the woman's anointing his feet with ointment of Spikenard; Let
her alone (said he to grumbling Judas): against the day of my burying has she
kept this, Joh. 12. 7. Memorable service of English-Generals under Sir John
Norrice. p. 46.
It is recorded of Sir Anthony Wingfield, slain at Breast in Britain, in the
year 1594, That at his last going into Britain, he so disposed of his Estate,
as if he were never to return; and the same day, or day before his death, took
such order for his debts, as if he had a presage of his end. Some have
foretold the day of their death: others have dropped such passages at times,
when no visible signs of death then, as after have been better understood by
their sorrowful Friends.

2. These Death-sallies respect the kind of death. The Lord takes some out of
the world in way of Martyrdom, as Stephen, Acts 7. 59. James, Acts 12. 2.
Others dye a natural death, and that notwithstanding all the attempts of men to
the contrary. This was Luther's case, who dies in his bed, do Emperor and Pope
what they can to the contrary.

3. These Death-fallies respect assistance against Satan then. The Devil is
busy then. I have always (says a pious Divine) observed, Mr. John Barlow in
his Ser. on Psalm. 73. 24. page 50.
that when Satan most tempts the truly religious, they seldom recover that
sickness: he has great skill to discover how nature is weakened, and therefore
takes the fittest time for the purpose. It Is reported of Mr. Pemble, how the
Tempter assaulted him by way of syllogism on his deathbed, as was understood
by Pemble's denying sometimes the Major, other-whiles the Minor-Proposition.
Our Savior Christ, when the time of his Passion drew nigh, said to his
Apprehenders, This is your hour and power of darkness, Luke 22. 53. And what
darts Satan shot at him in the bows of People, Soldiers, the Malefactor, may be
understood, Luke 23. 34, to 40. As the temptations may be more than ordinary
then, so are the sallies of Providence in a way of assistance. It is said in
reference to Christ, when the bitter Cup was in his hand, there appeared an
Angel from Heaven, strengthening him, Luke 22. 43. The Lord helps his people in
shooting this gulf. They will be out of gunshot in a little time, and Death
will be the death of temptations. The Sheep shall not be plucked out of
Christ's hand, though Satan catch at them, John 10. 28.

4. And lastly, These Death-sallies respect Comforts at death, which are
dispensed after a more than ordinary sort to some, as in Stephen's case, Acts
7. 55. The learned and pious Rivet in his last hours, seems to have had a turf
of the Heavenly Inheritance, a first-ha^sel of Heaven, a dawning of the joyful
day of Eternity. And thus far of the Sallies of Providence in regard of Death,
and other matters, as has been insisted on. The Improvement of such Sallies
follows.

CHAP. II.
1. OBSERVE and note well the Sallies of Providence. If Gold-filings are with
care paper'd up, much more are the Wedges of Gold to be choicely laid up under
Lock and Key. It is observable how there is a note of attention or observation
prefixed to the Narratives of the Sallies of Providence, in the Sacred
Scripture: see Genesis 28. 12. Genesis 37. 15. 1 King. 14. 10. 2 King. 19. 7. Psalm.
78. 20. Acts 10. 19.

2. Be thankful to God for what share you have had in the signal Sallies of
Providence on your behalf. Has Providence stepped in for thy help? holp up thy
Cart when it was overturned, or suddenly supplied thee with a firm Wheel for a
broken one? What remains now, but the celebrating the Name of God with
Halelujahs? The Israelites had their Song for that Sally at the Red Sea, Exodus
15. 1. We read of the Writing of Hezekiah King of Judah, when he had been sick,
and was recovered of his sickness, Isa. 38. 9. Paul is affected with the Lord's
delivering him out of the mouth of the Lion, 2 Timothy 4. 17.

3. Learn from the meditation of the Sallies of Providence, to trust God both
for thy self and Relations. God's Saints have so done; their faith in running
backward, has fetched a leap forward. So David in 1 Samuel 17. 37. So Paul, 2 Timothy 4. 18. Abraham had an eye to the Sallies of Providence for his Son's
marriage, Genesis 24. 6, 7. he uses the means, sends his servant on a
Nuptial-Embassie, and so acquiesceth in God's Providence. The Sallies of
Providence on the behalf of Children, are the best portion. They who can leave
little or nothing to Children, yet if they leave them an interest in the
Sallies of Divine Providence, do leave them enough; what is wanting one way,
these Sallies of Providence make up another way. Oh that Parents therefore
would take less care, by taking more care; less care for the Earth, and more
for Heaven! The way to have things go well, is for Parents and Children to have
God for their God, or to be reallly godly. But of this in the next Meditation.
Nititur ergo Abraham promissione, and docet omnia gerenda esse in (...) fidei,
sive magnum, sive exile appareat. Sic nos quoque discamus Deo reddenda and
committenda esse omnia, sive singularia, sive usitata, summa and infima, ut
laetemur and fortes simus in Domino, omnem solicitudinem in eum projicientes.
Videtur res sordid^ and obscoena propemodum apparare filio nuptias: sed in
quanto pretio and honor est in oculis Abrahae! adeo ut non dubitet de
Angelorum praesentia, cura and praesidio. Lut^. ad locum.


OBSERVATION XXIV.
PROVIDENCE has its Courts, in which the sons of men have their different
stations.
CHAP. I.
AS in the Temple of old there were diverse places appropriated to persons; so
in the great House of Providence: some are the Children, and have their
lodgings; others Servants and Scavengers, who though they have some relation to
the House, yet are not members of the House comparatively with others. There
are three Courts or Circles in which men may be considered.

1. There is the large and outmost Circle of common or general Providence: Here
all men, the worst of men, even the Pagan-Pagans, may be placed. The Lord
makes his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sends rain on the
just and on the unjust, Mat. 5. 45. Nevertheless he left not himself without a
witness, in that he did good, and gave us rain from heaven, and fruitful
seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness, says Paul to the Paganish
people at Lystra, Acts 14. 17.

2. There is the intermediate Circle of special or limited Providence, which
respects members in common of the visible Church. Unto the Jews were committed
the Oracles of God, Romans 3. 2. they are called the children of the Kingdom,
inasmuch as God honored them with his Worship and Ordinances, Matthew. 8. 12.

3. There is the inmost Circle of peculiar and singular Providence. In this
Circle are the Elect of God, and Called of him in Christ Jesus. The former
Circle is a visible one; this invisible: the former of larger circumference
than this later; for many are called, but few are chosen, Mat. 22. 14. The
Apostle Paul does describe this by the notion of an house, in which are vessels
of diverse sorts, not only vessels of gold and silver, but also of wood and of
earth; some to honor, and some to dishonor, 2 Timothy 2. 20.

To what has been said of these different Courts, may be added what does
further appear from Romans 2. where two things are observable:

1. The different descriptions of parties there. The Gentile is set forth in
his colors, v. 14, 15. the Jew or formal Professor in his, v. 17, 28. the
sincere Saint in his, v. 28, 29.

2. The different aggravation of sin there. The Gentile's sin is aggravated, in
that he fights against the displays of a Deity in his Conscience, which
accuses him, v. 15. The Jew or Formalist has his sin aggravated, in that he
oppugneth higher discoveries from Heaven, v. 21, 22, 23, 24. And consequently,
He who has the highest Discoveries, has sin in that respect aggravated the
more, as in David his case, 2 Samuel 12. compared with Psalm. 51.

CHAP. II.
1. QUARREL not with God, because all are not within the inmost Circle of
Providence. Corrupt Reason is ready to enter its plea against God, as the
Apostle intimates Romans 9. 19. But whatever the pleas of Reason are, yet they
are without reason: for reason it is that the discoveries of God in Scripture
should be decisive in matters. And here, to silence Cavils, there are Four
things considerable:

1. Is there ground to dispute with the Almighty for his not making all the
Creatures of one or two specifical Kinds? The Lord needed not direction from
man in the creation of several sorts of creatures, according as they are
brought forth on the Stage of the World, Genesis 1. His Will and Wisdom is to
check man's Peevishness and Folly. The Lord (says Solomon) has made all
things for himself, yea, even the wicked for the day of evil, Prove. 16. 4. It
is true, that the Lord has not made the wicked as wicked, by way of positive
efficiency; yet he has consulted with the glory of his Justice in the wicked's
existency, and that by way of antecedent permission, or permissive antecedency.
It is not from a defect of Power in God, as if Stones could not be turned into
Children unto Abraham, as the Baptist asserts, Mat. 3. 9. The Lord's Will is
the Supreme reason why the Creatures are different both in regard of their
natural and moral consideration. No reason is there then for man to cavil at
the difference there is (natural or moral) amongst the Creatures.

2. Has mortal man, without the least impeachment of cruelty, a liberty to
appoint such and such young beasts, some for the Plough, others for the Pail,
and others for the Shambles? And shall it be denied to the Almighty, if he
shall appoint, not all, but some, to obtain salvation by Jesus Christ? 1 Thessalonians.
5. 9. There is unquestionably a distance by Myriads of Myriads, between Man and
an Infinite God. That distance between Man and the Beasts, is but as the Tenth
thousand part of an Atom in comparison of the whole World; yea, not that, in
comparison of the other distance between Man and the Lord Jehovah. To quarrel
then at the Lord's Prerogative, is for a man to allow that in himself, which he
will not on the other hand allow to his Maker and Sovereign Disposer.

3. What if the Lord had wholly excluded men from his grace and favor; and
instead of them, magnified his grace toward the lapsed Angels? Had he been
unjust, cruel, partial therefore? No, no: and if so, then it follows, that he
who might pass by all the sons of men without wrong done to them, is not to be
censured because he takes compassion only on some, and the rest are hardened:
see Romans 11. 5, 7.

4. Men come not into the inmost Circle of Divine Providence, because they
cannot, but because they will not. A man is told, That if he travel on in such
a road, his throat will be cut, for there the Cutthroats are in ambush; if
this man will on, his own perverse will is in fault. A man is sick, and this or
that Remedy is prescribed, and he will not make use of it; he dies of the
disease, but the moral disease of his wilfulness may be rather termed the cause
of his death. This is the Sinner's case. He is a resolved man for his own ways.
How long, ye simple ones, will ye love simplicity? and the scorners delight in
their scorning? and fools hate knowledge? Prove. 1. 22. And, Ye will not come
unto me that ye might have life. To wave then disputes about the Lord's
Purpose; There is enough in man to apologize for God in regard of man's not
being within the inmost Circle; for go to the Gentile who never heard of Jesus
Christ, and so by way of proportion make a judgment of the cases of others,
whose ears the joyful sound of the Gospel has filled, but their hearts are
empty of grace or goodness; and there will be no reason to multiply words
without knowledge: for what says the great Apostle of the Gentiles? Romans 1. 21.
Because that when they knew God, they glorified him not as God, neither were
thankful, but became vain in their imaginations, and their foolish heart was
darkened. We have here the judgment of the great Doctor of the Gentiles, who had
taken cognizance of the matter: and his decision will the better appear, if a
Comment, which a learned man has on this Text, be alleged. Doct. Chaloner in
Sermon entitled, God's Bounty and the Gentiles Ingratitude.


The alleging of God's bountiful declaring of himself, in my Text (says he),
was to remove an objection which the Gentiles might urge in their own defense;
it is not expressly set down, but tacitly implied, in that it is refuted: (...),
because, being a rational particle, and here used as instructive: so that
whereas the Gentiles would perhaps have pleaded ignorance to excuse their
Idolatry; the Apostle shows them, that their ignorance was crassa and
affectata, gross and affected, such as the Pope now a days enjoins his
subjects; and such, as by the tenures of Philosophy, does augment rather than
diminish an offense: for besides that to excuse ignorance, is required, First,
That it be not gotten by man's own fault, as theirs was in Adam 's
transgression. Secondly, That they bewail their own ignorance, and acknowledge
it, and desire to be enlightened by the Spirit of God. Thirdly, That God be
obliged by Covenant to restore them to that light which they wilfully lost: It
is further exacted, That they make good use of that light of nature which is
left them, and suffer it not grossly to be extinguished, i^ which the Gentiles
most of all offended.

Secondly, Look after a place then in the inmost Circle of Providence. An
interest in God, as reconciled in and through Jesus Christ, is the Pearl of
great price to be looked after. The Merchant in the Parable parts with all for
the Pearl, Mat. 13. 45, 46. As this Pearl is worth a man's looking after, so a
man should not be discouraged from seeking it: for,

1. The Grace of God is extensive to the Plough as well as Scepter: neither
Prince nor Peasant are excluded. That direction of Peter, Give diligence to
make your calling and election sure, 2 Pet. 1. 10. concerns men of all ranks;
there is neither Greek nor Jew, circumcision nor uncircumcision, Barbarian,
Scythian, bond nor free, but Christ is all and in all, Col. 3. 11.

2. What objection a person makes as a pull-back from looking after this Pearl,
because of vileness and unworthiness, may be answered, if consideration be had
how they who are in the inmost Circle of Providence, might have made the like
objection, yea, had greater show of discouragement. The woman of Canaan had a
treble seeming repulse, and yet is a prevailer. She who was called Dog, gathers
up some crumbs of comfort under Christ's Table, Mat. 15. 22, etc.

Lastly, There is a necessity of getting into this inmost Circle. Neither
Civility, nor Common-gifts, will bring the soul to Heaven, without the new
birth, and then without the inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, that fades
not away, reserved in heaven, as 1 Pet. 1. 3, 4. the sounding brass, and the
tinckling cymbal, will make no music in the Heavenly Quire, 1 Cor. 13. 1, 2,
3. From the consideration then of the danger of abiding in a state of
unregeneracy, reason as the Lepers in another case, Why sit we here until we
dye? 2 Kings 7. 3, 4.

If it be enquired here, What concerns persons in order to their getting into
the inmost Circle of renewing-Providence? I answer in brief, negatively and
positively.

1. Pass not a false judgment about this Circle; distinguish betwixt Lamps, and
Oil in the Lamps, Mat. 25. 3. Self-conceit and Deceit did undo the Pharisees,
John 9. 49. Put not therefore Presumption for Faith; a few of Esau's Tears for
Repentance; a Civil-life for sound Reformation; Formality for Religion.

2. Resist not the motions of God's Spirit. This was the sin of the Jews: Ye
stiff-necked and uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye do always resist the Holy
Ghost, said Stephen to them, Acts 7. 51. Many turn the deaf ear unto the
whisperings of the Holy One. There is a striving of the Spirit both immediately
and mediately in the Ministry of the Word, with the spirits of men: so Genesis 6.
3. Oh take heed then of fighting against Heaven this way!

In the next place positively: and so,

1. Be inquisitive after the way of salvation. Whither is thy beloved gone! O
thou fairest among women, whither is thy beloved turned aside! that we may seek
him with thee, say the Daughters of Jerusalem, Cant. 6. 1. Sirs, what must I do
t^ be saved? said the Keeper of the Prison to Paul and Silas, Acts 16. 30.

2. Take time to consider of your ways. When God carries on a good work on men,
they consider and bethink themselves of their courses: see Jer. 8. 6. with Jer.
31. 18, 19. H^s. 14. 1, 2, 3. Luke 15. 17* 18.

3. Improve all awakening and rouzing Dispensations of Providence. Some, if
they are sick, or otherwise afflicted, are for an Ekron-message, 2 Kings 1. 2.
they talk of Witches, but eye not God, nor have recourse to his servants.
Suppose Satan be let loose on them; yet there is a voice of God in the roaring
of the Devil. An evil spirit in the daughter of the woman of Canaan, is an
occasion of good both to Mother and Daughter, Mat. 15. 22.

4. Follow Convictions with an eye had to God to period them in sound
Conversion. Paul was convinced of his sins; and what is said of him? Behold he
prays, Acts 9. 11. Paul is now striking on the Anvil whilst the iron is hot.
He soars aloft now at a Throne of Grace, and so avoids temptations. Larks,
whilst they sing above in the air, are not in danger of the Fowler's Net. There
are four Nets with which and in which the Devil labors to entangle persons
under convictions.

1. The Net of Worldly Cares. Cain builds houses, Genesis 4. 17. The care of this
world, and the deceitfulness of riches, choke the word, Mat. 13 22.

2. The Net of Carnal Fears. It is said in the Parable of the seed, Mat. 13.
21. when tribulation or persecution arises because of the word, by and by he
is offended. Satan has his art in scaring persons from godliness, and that by
aggravating the displeasure of persons, great ones, the multitude, and friends
or near relations. He thus becomes a roaring Lion in the way.

3. The Net of Carnal Jollity. Some sing, and drink, and play away the
Convictions of Conscience. Saul is for his Music, when Conscience jarrs, 1 Samuel 16. 17.

4. The Net of vain Opinions. It Is no new thing for persons looking after God,
to be disquieted by reason of tares sown by some: so Acts 15. 1. It has been
observed how the Sectaries in Germany did dog at the heels the fresh reception
of the Gospel in places. Galeacius Carracciolus was in danger of seducers in
his first looking after the ways of God. Let then those who have escaped these
Nets, and so recovered into the inmost Circle of Regenerating and
Stablishing-Grace, be thankful to God; and let others, who have any of these
Nets before them, look up to the God of all Grace for wisdom to avoid them. A
Praying Paul has Orthodox and good Ananias sent to direct him and confirm him
in the way of God, Acts 9. 17, 18.

OBSERVATION XXI.
The Motions, Stirrs, Alterations in the World, have oftentimes the Concerns of
God's People at the bottom of them: or, There is a subserviency of the Civil
Affairs of State, to the Affairs of God's Church or People.
CHAP. I.
BEFORE, the Circles or Courts of Providence were spoken of: here, we have a
display of Providence as it refers to those who are, or may in time come to be,
in the inner and inmost Circle of Providence. And that the motions in the World
have a reference primarily to those who are called out of the World, or to be
called, appears,

First, From plain Assertions in Scripture. Thus says the Lord, your Redeemer
the Holy One of Israel; For your sake I have sent to Babylon, and have brought
down all their Nobles and the Chaldeans, whose cry is in their ships, Isa. 43
14. And except (says Christ) those days should be shortened, no flesh should be
saved; but for the elects sake those days shall be shortened, Mat. 24. 22.

2. From the interwoven types and Historical passages in Scripture to this very
end and purpose. Thus God instructed Abraham by the smoking Furnace, what
would be the case of his people, and what would be the issue of all, Genesis 15.
Ezekiel's Vision of the Wheels, runs hand in hand with the former, times being
distinguished; both agree as to the motions in Egypt and in Babylon; and that
as the Jews are concerned in those motions of State, Ezekiel. 1. Daniel by various
types is lesson'd of the Monarchies, what Beasts they are; and how it would be
with the Sheep of the Lord's pasture, Dan. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. John in the
Revelation is informed Quemadmodum enim in Veteri Testamento Daniel secundum
Imperiorum successiones, tum Christi adventum praesignavit, tum Ecclesiae
Judaicae fata digessit: ita rem Christianam Apocalypsis, Romani quod adhuc post
Christum superfuturum esset, Imperii, rationibus admetiri, censenda est, nec
eventus abnuit. Mede in Apoc. Com. page: 12.
of the state of the Church under the Roman Power. These types are in a sort an
History of things; and besides these, there are passages by way of narrative,
which prove the thing here aimed at: for, look we into the motions of State, As
Domestic and Foreign; and the truth of this will appear. Saul is laid aside,
and David advanced to the Throne; and what is intended in this, see 1 Samuel 15.
28. with 1 Chronicles. 13. 3. Cyrus is advanced; but to what end, the Lord informs,
saying, For Jacob my servant's sake, and Israel mine elect, I have eve^ called
thee by name, Isa. 45. 1. and how Cyr^ did answer this Prophetical History, or
Historical Prophecy of himself (if it may be so called), see Ezra 1. where we
have the actual History. Again consider, not only of Historical passages
referring to the members; but of such which refer immediately to Christ the
Head, and so to the Church; and which are the truth of this Observation. Two
things may be noted here:

1. The previous Alteration at that time when Christ came. He was born in the
days of Herod the King, Mat. 2. 1. Who this Herod was, and how the Prophecy of
Jacob, Genesis 49. 12. was accomplished, is known to those who list not to be
contentious.

2. The great Tax imposed by Augustus, is another thing observable. This made
way for Christ's birth at Bethlehem, and that as foretold to be, see Luke 2.
Augustus in this Tax pays Tribute to the King of Heaven, He brings stones to
build God's Temple, whilst he intends the raising of his Exchequer. His
Political Action has its Ecclesiastical Aspect.

3. From particular Demonstrations: Political motions have their references to
the people of God diverse ways:

1. By way of castigation for their sins. When the children of the Kingdom wax
wanton, no wonder if some become Scourges for the afflicting of them. Moses
prophetically speaks of this; But Jesurun waxed fat, and kicked, etc. Deuteronomy. 32.
15. What follows then? see v. 23. I will heap mischiefs; I will spend mine
arrows upon them. And in v. 25. The sword without, and terror within, shall
destroy both the young man and the virgin, the suckling also, with the man of
gray hairs. Moses, who thus descants, was no false Prophet; the Israelites
might find how a Prophet had been amongst them, 2 Kings 17. 6, 7. 2 Chronicles. 36.
14, 15, 16, 17. If we look into following Ages, we shall find, that the house
has been foul, ere the Lord of the house has taken the Besom in hand, and
providentially delivered it into the hands of persecuting ones. Thus Eusebius
relates: Eccles. Hist. lib. 8. c. 10.
But after that our affairs through in much liberty, ease, and security,
degenerated from the natural Rule of Piety, and after that one pursued another
with open contumely and hatred, and when that we impugned our selves by no
other than our selves, with the armor of spite, and sharp spears of
opprobrious words, so that bishops against bishops, and people against people,
raised sedition, etc. then persecution came on. It was wholesome advice
therefore, which Bradford in the Marian-days gave to the City of London, Let
the anger and plagues of God most justly fallen upon us, be applied to every
one of our deserts, that from the bottom of our hearts every one of us may say,
It is I Lord that have sinned against thee; it is my hypocrisy, my vainglory,
my covetousness, uncleanness, carnality, security, idleness, unthankfulness,
self-love, and such like, which have deserved the taking away of our good King,
of thy Word, and true Religion, of thy good Ministers, by exile, prisonment,
and death; it is my wickedness that causes success and increase of Authority
and Peace to thine enemies.

2. By way of subversion or vindictive punishment for affronts and injuries
offered to the people of God. God orders some to be Scourges to others who have
been Scourges to his people. Nebuchadnezzar is the Sword of the Lord against
Egypt, Ezekiel. 29. 18, 19, 20. and what Egypt was to the House of Israel, we have
in v. 6. where it is said, All the inhabitants of Egypt shall know that I am
the Lord, because they have been a staff of reed to the house of Israel. The
Kings of the earth are to hate the Whore, and to make her desolate and naked,
eat her flesh, and burn her with fire, Rev. 17. 16. If it be asked, Why the
Whore of Babylon is so roughly to be handled? A reason there is v. 6. I saw
(says John) the woman drunken with the blood of the saints, and with the blood
of the martyrs of Jesus Christ. It is observed how the Turks have fallen in on
some places, and possessed themselves of such places, from whence the Protestants
have been expelled by the Papists. Bloody Popery has vengeance belonging to
it. The more catholic and repeated are the insolences and cruelties of
Papists, the greater ground of support and comfort have godly Protestants, and
that because the Lord has his time to make inquisition for blood: see Psalm. 9.
11, 12.

3. By way of Diversion. God does sometimes in his Providence fill both the
heads and hands of men full with work, and so they are not at leisure to
persecute his people. Saul cannot follow his game in hunting David as a
Partridg on the Mountains; there was another hunting-match provided, the
Philistines had invaded the Land, 1 Samuel 23. 27. with 1 Samuel 26. 20. Both
ancient and modern Histories do furnish with exemplifications to the like
purpose. Providence has thrown in a bone of contention, and so there has been
a diversion, and that without sometimes of an utter subversion of persons.

4. By way of Conversion of parties, or propagation of the truth in and by such
motions, stirrs, or alterations, as fall out in Kingdoms. The Romans had the
Jews under their yoke, and that makes way for Christ's yoke to be put on the
necks of some of the Soldiers; for the Soldiers demanded of the Baptist,
saying, And what shall we do? Luke 3. 14. Cornelius was a Centurion of the band
called the Italian band, Acts 10. 1. In the Commotions of Germany, some of the
Spanish Soldiers became Gospellers, as Lavater reports. Ex Hispanis Militibus,
qui armis Germaniam religionis causa superioribus annis vexarunt, non pauci ad
fidem conversi, and quidem Martyrs Christi facti sunt. In lib. Prove. Sol. Com.
c. 16. v. 17.


2. By way of purgation from sin, and higher measures of sanctification. God
knows how to carry on his work, whilst other kind of work is carried on by men.
They who are good, become better by the sanctified evils of smart which befall
them. By this therefore shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged: and this is all
the fruit, to take away his sin, Isa. 27. 9. The motions in the Babylonian
State, and after in the Persian, as they were the Lord's Hammer to knock down
the Babylonians who held captive the Lord's people, had this tendency, namely,
the cautioning of the Jews against sin, and that because the Lord had frowned
on them in the Babylolonian, and smiled on them in the Persian. So intimates
Ezra, saying, And after all that is come upon us for our evil deeds, and for
our great trespass, seeing that our God has punished us less than our
iniquities deserve, and have given us such deliverance as this: should we again
break thy commandments? etc. Ezra 9. 13. 14.

CHAP. II.
1. TAKE notice of the care and love of God toward his people. God forgets not
the good of his people in the motions and commotions that are in the World.
Saints under their black clouds see not this, and are ready to say otherwise.
But Zion said, The Lord has forsaken me, and my God has forgotten me, Isa.
49. 24. But what says God, Can a woman forget her sucking-child, that she
should not have compassion on the son of her womb? yea, they may forget, yet
will not I forget thee, v. 25.

2. Learn how Divinity will see beyond State Policy. A right view of matters
taken as to the Church, is a prognostic, how things may probably go in the
general as to the State. As there are different motions in the Affairs of
State; so these different motions have their correspondency with the different
temper of a people professing godliness. If hypocrisy instead of serious
piety, and other sins, spread as a Gangrene, no wonder if there are
frowning-aspects one way or other, Isa. 10. 6. If serious prayer to God,
together with humiliation and reformation, are made conscience of, then hopes
there are, that he who has torn will heal; and he who has smitten, will bind
up, Hos. 6. 7.

3. Give not way to inordinate fears, unbeliefs, and despondencies of heart, in
the midst of all the tossings and tumblings of affairs of the world. Let
persons mind their duty, and let God alone to govern the world. There are these
quieting considerations.

1. All the Affairs of the World are subjected to Christ, who is the Head of
the Church, Ephesians. 1. 22. Now if Christ be thus the Head, he is not without eyes,
he sees, yea, foresees what is to be done; and he is not without sense;
sensible he is what is done in way of affront to his Members. Whilst Saul was a
persecuting, he says, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Acts 9. 4. Suppose
a man's head did reach up so high as the Heavens, he would feel the injury
offered not only to a limb, but to the least of his toes. Though Christ the
Head, in regard of his bodily-presence, be above the Clouds; yet he has a
sense and feeling of what is done to the least of his Saints.

2. The Christian has a very large Charter or Grant, of all things to work for
good, Romans 8. 28 The Church has a very large Jointure; not only the pleasant
Vineyards, but the wild Copses of the World, bring in a very rich Income to
her. All is hers for good, 1 Cor 3. 22. and God thinks nothing too good for
her. I am the Lord thy God, the Holy One of Israel thy Savior. I gave Egypt
for thy ransom, Ethiopia and Sheba for thee: since thou was precious in my
sight, thou have been honorable, and I have loved thee: therefore will I give
men for thee, and people for thy life, Isa. 43. 3, 4.

3. God has made that which is a Saint's Privilege (namely, an holy quietness
of heart under the stirs of the World) to be a Saint's Duty, in Psalm. 112. 7.
He shall not be afraid of evil tidings: his heart is fixed, trusting in the
Lord. Compare this with Luke 21. 9. But when ye shall hear of wars and
commotions, be not terrified. And that in John 14. 1. Let not your hearts be
troubled: ye believe ^ God, believe also in me. See further, Phil. 4. 6.

OBSERVATION XXVI.
PROVIDENCE outwits the Church's Enemies in their Policies or Contrivances
against the Church.
CHAP. I.
HOW God's Care is over his people in the Motions and Commotions that are in
the World, has been touched. Here it will not be impertinent to make an
inquisition into an outwitting work of Providence, as it respects the
Adversaries of the Lord's people. And the truth of the present Observation will
appear three ways:

First, From Comparisons in Scripture, the scope of which are to set forth the
Providence of God as baffling and be-fooling men's Policies and Devices against
his people. So Psalm. 124. 7. Our soul is escaped as a bird out of the snare of
the fowler: the snare is broken, and ^e are escaped. And in Psalm. 7 Behold he
travelleth with iniquity, and has conceived mischief, and brought forth
falsehood: he made a pit, and i^ fallen into the ditch which he made: his
mischief shall return upon his own head, and his violent dealing shall come
down upon his own pa^, v. 14, 15, 16.

2. From Exemplifications of such, whose sinful Policy has eventually proved
notorious folly. Come on (says the King of Egypt) let us deal wisely with
them, Exodus 1. 10. That Wisdom was steeped in the blood of the Israelites; and
that Court-Sophism had another kind of conclusion than intended. The Israelites
are multiplied, get out of Egypt, carry away wealth with them; and the Egyptian
Prince, with the Chivalry of Egypt, perish in the Red Sea. Achitophel is a
reputed Oracle for Policy; and yet his Policy, like a Musket, recoiling, beats
him, with his earthly wisdom, to the earth; so that it might be said at his
funeral, Earth to earth: he was first entangled in the working of violent
affections; as Pride, in that his counsel was refused; and black fears,
sorrows, despondencies, in that, his counsel being refused, Absolom's Design
would miscarry; And what would become then of the great Abettor of such an
horrid Design? No Clemency for himself, might be the Conclusion: and being thus
entangled in the black thoughts of his heart, no wonder if he be further
ensnared with an halter, as is recorded 2 Samuel 17. 23. Herod plays the
Politician; a fair Glove is drawn over a foul hand; Bring me word (said he to
the Wisemen) that I may come and worship him, Mat. 2. 7, 8. However he is
defeated; for the Wisemen are not such fools as to give him notice, being
warned of God in a dream to the contrary. Neither has Herod reason to storm at
the Wisemen: for if there were a Promise, the Promise was made to a
Worshipper, not a Murderer; and no Contract of men must exclude the Lord, who
is to have his negative voice; and this sounded loud enough in the Wise-mens
heads, though they were asleep; for being warned of God in a dream, that they
should not return to Herod, they departed to their own Country another way.

3. From Demonstrations; and that, (1.) In the general. (2.) In particular.

1. In the general. Whosoever shall place in the one Scale God's Wisdom, and in the
other the Quintessence, Extracts, Abridgments of men's deepest Policies, shall
find all the Policies of men too leight to counterbalance Infinite Wisdom. True
is that of Solomon, There is no wisdom, nor understanding, nor counsel against
the Lord, Prove. 21. 30.

2. In particular; let a view be taken, (1.) Of the Agents. (2) Of the Action,
Medium, or Way, which is taken to accomplish the end intended by men. As for
the Agents, these are of two Orders: (1.) Principal or Primary. (2.)
Ministerial or under-Agents; and each of these fall, and that in another sense
too, under consideration.

1. The principal or primary Agents have oftentimes Providence so
counterworking them, as that there is a suspension of action: what is
propounded, is as it were thunderstruck; and the Plot stumbles at the
threshold: and this comes to pass diverse ways:

1. By the interposition of some one or other, who in regard of civil station
is amongst them; and so wisely knocks in the head that Project, which otherwise
might knock down some professors of the truth. An instance for this, we have in
John 7. An assembly there is of the chief Priests and Pharisees, v. 45.
Nicodemus interposeth, saying, Does our law judge any man before it hear him,
and know what he does, v. 51. Hereupon Nicodemus has a check given, v. 52. and
the Assembly is broken up; for every man went to his own house, v. 53.

2. By means of some calming-counsel dropped by one or other who is of the same
feather with the parties themselves. Principles of Humanity and Ingenuity are
not banished from all; and these check bloody-conclusions, which otherwise had
been the birth of Debates and Consultations. Gamaliel stopped the Process from
coming forth against the Disciples: However his advice were for the Christian's
ease, yet it was not consonant to the constitution of the Jews Church; for a
wild Toleration was no Slip in that enclosed Garden. Whatever Principles
Gamaliel did act from, I determine not; the issue of his speech is recorded,
for to him they agreed, Acts 5. 40. It may be observed, how some of the Heathen
have interceded for the Christians, and so there has been a stop more or less
put to the persecution of the Christians.

3. By reason of a sharp division or contest amongst the parties themselves.
Two men with a long beam carry it not a-thwart into the house; if they shall
essay to carry it cross over, they both sit down as fools without doors: Even
so it is with the Adversaries of Lord's people, they are not at an accord with
themselves. This man (as it was said by some) is not of God, because be keeps
not the sabbath day: others said, How can a man that is a sinner, do such
miracles? and there was a division amongst them, Joh. 9. 16. So a bone of
contention is thrown amongst the Pharisees and Sadduces: There arose a
dissension between the Pharisees and Sadduces: and the multitude was divided,
Acts 23. 6, 7.

4. By means of men's own fears. Some would be more mischievous; but they fear
where the wind may sit. Herod holds his hands from slaying the Baptist for a
while; fear cramps them, when he would have been doing; he feared the
multitude, because they counted him as a prophet, Mat. 14. 5. The chief Priests
and Pharisees storm at Christ's Sermon: but when they sought to lay hands on
him, they feared the multitude, because they took him for a prophet, Mat. 21.
45, 46.

5. By reason of some diversion, their hands being full of other work. The
Child is going to school, and by the way a dog grins, and is ready to fall on
the Child; another Dog happens to come by, and together the Dogs are by the
ears, and so the Child passes by unhurt. That instance of the Philistines
invading the land, by means whereof Saul was diverted from the pursuit of
David, is full proof, 1 Samuel 23. 27, 28. The Protestants in Germany had a Writ
of Ease, and that by reason of the Turks finding work for the Emperor.

6. By the death's of persons. Here the action falls to ground with the person.
Death is the death of men's Projects and Designs. In that very day his thoughts
perish, Psalm. 146. 4. The Angel tells Joseph, saying, They are dead which
sought the child's life, Mat. 2. 20.

7. By means of some other course which Providence takes, when it does not take
away the chief Agents by death. Thus when God works a wonderful change on
persons, whether by the infusion of grace, or some notable conviction. The
Heathen-fury had a stop put to it, by Constantine becoming Christian.
Nebuchadnezzar's frowns are turned into smiles on Shadrack, Mesech, and
Abednego, Dan. 3. And thus for Agents principal, how in regard of them the
Design falls to the ground.

2. Agents Ministerial, or under-Agents, which are as hands employed to
mischief; others become handless, and that diverse ways too.

1. By the position or implantation of grace in the hearts of such. He who
becomes a man of other Principles, is a man of other Conclusions. He sees
enough of his former course of life, and so will not do as formerly. Paul lets
fall his Commission against the Disciples at Damascus, and so the
Mountain-expectations of the High Priest at Jerusalem, vanish into nothing;
yea, become something by way of vexation, whenas the Persecutor turns Preacher,
Acts 9. 19, 20.

2. By some conviction upon the Conscience, though it end not in conversion.
God has more ways than one in speaking to the hearts of men. The hearts and
hands of men may fail to do their work, and yet a savingwork of grace is not
done upon the heart: so probably in Job. 7. 45, 46. Then came the Officers to
the chief Priests and Pharisees, and they said to them, Why have ye not brought
him? the Officers answered, Never man spoke like this man.

3. By some external baffling Providence, which puts by the Design intended.
The King of Syria sent to Dothan Horses, and Chariots, and a great Host, and
all this is done to seize on Elisha; and yet their work is not done: for they
came on a blind message; as the story at large is recorded, 2 King. 6.

4. By drawing forth the affection of parties, as founded on some relation to
them, or kindness received from them. Saul was politic in the bestowing his
Daughter on David, that the might be a snare unto him, 1 Samuel 18. 21. But this
device of his takes not; for she deceives the Deceiver: Her love to David is
seen when the Messengers of death were sent for him, and she then becomes
David's Lifeguard, as in 1 Samuel 19. 11, etc.

5. By the deaths of such who are employed. They who envy others their lives,
may quickly lose their own. Providence can soon provide graves for those whose
throats are open sepulchers against God's servants. That surly Captain with his
Fifty, and the second with his, did experience this: their words were stout
against the Prophet; Thou man of God, the King has said, Come down, says the
first. O man of God, thus has the King said, Come down quickly, said the
other; and instead of the Prophet's coming down, fire came down, and consumed
them and their Fifties. Had they been of another spirit with the third Captain
sent, they might have had better success in their business, as the other had:
see 2 King. 3.

6. By some extraordinary display of Providence, where death does not intercept
the under-Agent. Balaam is sent for to curse Israel: He brake not his neck by
the way: We read how the Ass crush't his foot against the wall, Numb. 22. 25.
on he goes, but the work is not done; a miraculous overruling hand of
Providence is seen, as Numb. 24. 10. And Balak's anger was kindled against
Balaam, and he smote his hands together; and Balak said unto Balaam, I called
thee to curse mine enemies, and behold thou have altogether blessed them these
three times. And thus for the Agents ministerial, or under-Agents, how they
become vain in their attempts or service in which they are versant.

2. In the next place, The Action, Way, or Means, in order to the End, is to be
spoken to: And this may be considered diverse ways.

1. As absurd, and improper to bring about the End. The Action is like that of
the men, who are said to make an hedge to keep in the Owl; and to seek for a
River to drown the Eel in. Men's unruly passions are in-lets of folly: a mist
is raised by these, and so they see not their way. There is a judicial
infatuation to be observed. No wonder if they have a soft place in their heads,
who have a hard one in their hearts. The wise man's eyes are in his head: but
the fool walks in darkness, Eccles. 2. 14. Surely the Princes of Zoan are
fools; the counsel of the wise counselors is become brutish -- Isa. 19. 11.

2. If the Way or Means pitched on to atchieve the End, be unhappily adequate,
apt, or fit, in a sort, to bring about the End intended; then a display of
Providence there is, in that the Means are not closed with. A two-edged Sword,
sharp enough to make a fatal divorce between the head and shoulders, is laid
forth on the Council Board; but it appears to be but a Woodden-dagger, and so
it is not made use of. Thus the good Certe effecit Deus ut ea consilia, quae
astuta erant, Absolomo fatua viderentur. Pet. Martyr.
Counsel of Achitophel (good, not morally, but politically, in order to the End
intended by Achitophel) takes not with Absalom, 2 Samuel 17. 14. Absalom, and all
the men of Israel, said, The counsel of Hushai the Archite, is better the the
counsel of Achitophel: for the Lord had appointed to defeat the good counsel of
Achitophel, to the intent that the Lord might bring evil upon Absalom.

3. Though the Means be liked, yet all is dash't by some discovery made, and
that by means extraordinary or ordinary. The King of Syria his design where he
would have his Camp, is discovered by the Prophet to the King of Israel, who
saved himself thence not once, nor twice, 2 Kings 8. 9, 10. Zerubbabel and the
chief of the Fathers smell a design of the Adversaries of Judah and Benjamin,
when they said, Let us build with you, Ezra 4. 1, 2, 3. Nehemiah perceived that
God had not sent Shemaiah, but that Tobiah and Samballat had hired him, Neh. 6.
12, 13. Black designs are unmasked by Providence: So the Powder Plot in King
James his days: Let the Man at Rome canonize the Under-agents for Saints; the
Canon of Scripture will evidence them to be Sinners: They may be reputed good
sons of St. Peter, amongst Papists; but shall pass for Saltpeter-men, amongst
good Catholic Protestants.

4. Suppose the Means fail not by reason of discovery; yet it is marred in the
mode or manner of using. Men make more haste than good speed. The counsel of
the froward is carried headlong, Job 5. 3. Now men's counsels (says a good
Interpreter) are carried headlong, Mr. Caryll.
when they go too fast forward, and make so much haste on in their way, that
they tire, and are out of breath, or stumble, or break themselves, before they
can attain their journey's-end.

5. If men miscarry not with their Design in the manner of managing it; yet
they hit not the season for effecting it. Whether the man trot or gallop on
Horseback to speak with another, it matters not, if that be the day when the
man is from his home. Readiness Messengers come with their Net to catch David, but
the Bird was fled, 1 Samuel 19. 12, 14.

6. If there be a seasonable application of Means, according to human
apprehension; yet the End is not attained, by reason of some check given at the
very nick of time. Man knows not that which shall be: for who can tell him
when it shall be? Ezekiel. 8. 7. Caesar Borgias, who thought Caesar Borgias mihi
dixit, se ad omnem rerum eventum, quem a patris morte futurum putaret, long in
posterum prospexisse, atque remedia comparasse: illud unum duntaxat se
praeteriisse, quod scilicet nunquam putaret sub ejus morte, sibi etiam cum
morte esse confligendum. Nichol. Machiav. Prin. c. 7.
how to manage all to his own interest on his Father's death, little thought of
his own sickness at that very time, whereby all his other politic provision
made, did avail nothing. It Is worthy of observation, how there is a check given
at the nick of the intended application of Means, and that sometimes by some
single emergency of one thing or other; and sometimes by a throng of
contingents and occurrencies. God will be known to be supreme; man points, and
the Lord disappoints. Providence has many ways to overturn the Politicians
Cart. Little does the Driver imagine what may happen by the way,
notwithstanding he may pretend great skill in driving: an Ass with her long
ears, or some other object, may fright his Team of Horses, and all the tackling
is rent to pieces; yea, it may be, a Cart-wheel goes over our Politic Drivers,
and what then becomes of all Political Skill, or Skilful Policy?

7. Suppose the application of Means are not thus checked; yet how is all
overruled, and has another issue than was merely intended? The Bowl hits the
Jack, yet lies at such: distance from it, that it wins not the Cast. Here we
consider the issue of the application of the Means, two ways: (1.) In respect
of Saints. (2.) In respect of Sinners: or, The Designed, and the Designers.

1. In respect of the Designed, or those who are made at by wicked ones. The
worst that wicked men can do, is ordered for the best. The dirt and dung of the
World shall contribute to the goodly Field of the Lord. Shimei his lying and
reproaches; yea, the drunken dr^lery of others in David's days, shall do a
David good, 2 Samuel 16. and Psalm. 79. 12, 13. There was a Court-Project to cast
Daniel into the Den of Lions; the King was circumvented in that business: no
help for a Daniel, but from God: the Plot which took, was broken by its
success. Had not Daniel been thrown in, what had been become of those signal
Dispensations of Providence toward Daniel, as consequents thereon? see Dan. 6.
26, 27, 28. Suppose the Plot of these Courtiers, as for the utmost end of it,
the ruin of Daniel, had taken? yet Daniel had been no loser to dye for his God;
they had (no thank to their pride, envy, murder), been instruments for the
promoting of Daniel in an higher Court than that of Darius; For blessed are
they which dye in the Lord, from henceforth, yea says the Spirit, that they
may rest from their labors, and their works do follow them, Rev. 14. 13.

2. In respect of the Designers; and so what they have done, is a foundation
for checking what they after attempt to do another way. As it is said of
Mithridates, that he had so inured his body to counter-poysons to prevent
poison, that when he would poison himself, then it was the more difficult to
effect it. And as it happens to the Carpenter, he wimbles an hole, and a piece
of the Wimble is left behind, which obstructs the pin, so that it has not firm
footing: Some who are deluded by Jesuits, and intended to be Instruments to
check the progress of the Gospel; after may become sturdy resistants of
Jesuitical Designs, another way being taken to obstruct the Gospel. And thus
the Hedge of Thorns may become (through an overruling Providence) a good fence
to the bed of Roses. God is wise, who makes the earth, even that which brings
forth briers and thorns, to help his people; to allude to that in Rev. 12. 16.

Again, What men after do, lays foundation for confusion and vexation, in
reference to what they have done. They may be said to dance in a net, for the
more they are entangled. The chief Priests and Pharisees come to Pilate desire
the Sepulcher be made sure, let Christ's Disciples come by night, steal him
away, and say unto the people, He is risen from the dead; and so the last error
should be worse than the first, Mat. 27. 62, 63, 64. Here we have their
Petition; and in v. 65, 66, Pilate's Concession, Indulgence, or Grant: But what
is the issue of all? Christ rises, to the terror of the Keepers, shame of the
Priests and Pharisees, and the consolation of the Disciples; see Mat. 28.

Lastly, What men do to ruin God's people, ends often in the ruin of them and
theirs. That day in which the enemies of the Jews hoped to have power over
them, was turned to the contrary; so that the Jews had rule over them that
hated them, Esth. 9. 1. Haman and his ten sons perish, v. 10. They who accused
Daniel, they, their children, wives, are cast into the Den of Lions, Dan. 6.
24. The bloody Massacre at Paris was paid home with blood for blood: for as is
related, Cossin the Field-Marshal, with Twenty-thousand, is slain at the
Rochel- siege. Charles the ninth wallowed in his own blood, which issued out of
all parts of his body: The Duke of Guise murdered in the King's own Chamber:
the Duke of Anjou, who succeeded his Brother Charles the Ninth, was stabbed by
a Monk; and the Queen Mother with grief broke her heart. Men have little
encouragement to play the Achitophels or Doegs against the Lord's David's: let
them remember the Halter of the one, and Curse denounced against the other,
Psalm. 52. 5. God shall likewise destroy thee for ever: he shall take thee away,
and pluck thee out of thy dewlling place, and root thee out of the land of the
living. Selah.

CHAP. II.
1. LEARN what folly it is for men to set their Wits on work against the Lord's
people. Surely there is no inchantme^ against Jacob, neither is there any
divination ag^st Israel, said Balaam of old, Numb. 23. 23 It were well then if
they who go in the way of Balaam, the thick-clay-way of worldly Interest, would
seriously consider Jude v. 11. Woe unto them, for they have gone in the way of
C^in, and ran greedily after the error of Balaam, for a reward, and perished in
the gainsaying of Core.

2. There is no reason for those who truly fear God, to be disquieted, though
sinners set their heads together, and dig as deep as Hell for their plots
against the Church of Christ. Two things here are worthy of consideration:

1. A Saint shall do more by his plain prayer to God, than a Sinner by his
intricate policy shall do against a Child of God. O Lord, I pray thee (said
David) turn the counsel of Achitophel into foolishness, 2 Samuel 17. 31. David by
a short and pathetical petition to God, prays a wise Multos Achitopheles hodie
Antichristus habet secum, quod intelligimus ex illis quae astute agit; abundat
Papatus copiis and Principum armis, sed astuta consili^ magis timenda sunt.
Imitemur ergo Davidem, oremus Deum, ut infatuet consilium Achitophelis. Martyr.
man into a fool.

2. There is a notable description of outwitting- Providence in regard of the
devices of men against the Church. He that sits in the heavens, shall laugh:
the Lord shall have them in derision, Psalm. 2. 4. This laughter here, after the
manner of men, is attributed to God. It may point at three things:

1. Sedateness or Tranquillity. God is not affected in the least, by way of
perturbation, with the devices and politic contrivances of men. An Army of
expert Soldiers is not moved to behold a company of Children making toward
them with Reeds in their hands. They therefore who have composed spirits, when
wicked ones are busy in their Cobweb-work, do the more resemble Him who sits
in the Heavens, and thus laughs.

2. Ability, or Facility to dash their designs. A wise man who laughs at the
project of an Adversary, sees the vanity of the project: He needs not enter
into a deep contemplation how to counterwork so shallow an Invention.

3. Perspicacity, or insight into the case of the Snarers snared by the very
course they take. A wise man, who sees in some measure the end of business at
the beginning of it, well may laugh when the Adversary shall make a rod for his
own back. The Lord gives sinners line, and so they are entangled to their own
sorrow. Thus he that sits in the Heavens laughs: no reason for them who have
the Lord of Heaven for theirs, to weep, unless it be for sinning against their
Lord.

OBSERVATION XXVII.
Whilst men go on their own Errands, they do God's Business: or, Men in
pursuing their own Ends, bring about the Ends of Providence.
CHAP. I.
THE truth of this appears: (1.) From God's threatening and punishing of men for
such matters, the doing whereof (though not the so doing in regard of the
Agents) had its warrant from the Lord. Jehu was the Sithe-man of Providence to
mow down the House of Ahab: Thou (said the Prophet to him) shall smite the
house of Ahab, 2 Kings 9. 7. Jehu has a bloody-commission, yet righteous in
regard of God, but sinfully executed by Jehu, whose end was selfish; and
therefore the Lord threatens, saying, I will avenge the blood of Jezreel upon
the house of Jehu, Hos. 1. 4.

2. From Exemplifications: and that, (1.) In Civils: Men have their Aims, Ends;
the Lord has his. Saul seeks the lost living goods of his Father; and in
seeking, is brought to Samuel, according as God had before spoken to the
Prophet, saying, To morrow about this time I will send thee a man out of the
land of Benjamin, 1 Samuel 9. 16. Cyrus is a ravenous bird; yet what is said of
him, see Isa 46. 1. -- calling a ravenous bird from the east, the man that
executes my counsel from a far country. (2.) In Sacreds, God has his end,
and men have theirs: the Action is one and the same, the End different. Some
prophecy in Christ's name, and yet are rejected at the great day. Christ
distinguishes between gold and dross; prophesying in his name, and for their
own names; doing good, and working iniquity whilst they do that which is
materially good: see Mat. 7. 22, 23.

Again, Exemplifications there are of this, wherein we may behold the work of
Providence carried on sometimes more immediately, sometimes more remotely:
There is work managed at first-hand, and at second and thirdhand. The
Philistines have their End in invading the Land; they intended not the relief of
David at that nick of time; neither the making way for David to the Throne in
the slaughter of Saul at another time: see 1 Samuel 23. 26, 27. 1 Samuel 31. with 2 Samuel 2.

Lastly, Exemplifications there are, (1.) Of Utitur ergo Deus in salutem suorum
irrationabili and item insensibili creatura tanquam jumento vel instrumento,
quae jam expleto opere nusquam erunt. Utitur creatura rationali sed malevola,
quasi disciplinae virga, quam correcto filio in ignem projiciet tanquam
farmentum inutile. Utitur and angelis and hominibus bonae voluntatis tanquam
commilitonibus and coadjutoribus suis: quos peracta victoria amplissime
munerabit. Bernardus de gratia and libero arbitrio.
such who mind no such thing as the Lord's work in what they do. They think on
what lies before them. A Lust, and not a God; or rather a Lust which is their
God, dictates to them. The Assyrian means not so, neither does his heart
think so: but it is in his heart to destroy and out off nations not a few, Isa.
10. 7. (2.) Of such who mind directly the dashing of what is to take place
according to God's will. Joseph's brethren, whilst they endeavor the crossing
of the divine dream, do cross their crossing, Genesis 37. 19, 20.

CHAP. II.
1. OBSERVE hence, how men act freely, without compulsion, and yet infallibly,
as the work to be done holds correspondence with the purpose of God, whether
secret, or declared. We may say truly in this case, as the High Priest in
another, What further need have we of witnesses? Mat. 26. 65. behold their own
confessions and acknowledgments do witness their spontaneous actings. Who talks
more of his liberty, and what he does and will do, than the Assyrian, Isa 10.
8, to 15? And yet what is said of tho Assyrian Sovereign Monarch? There is the
Lords, I will send him against an hypocritical nation, v. 10. yea, this great
Axe and Saw, is but an Ax and Saw, and in the hand of the great God, v. 15.

2. Despond not, how this or that shall be brought about, which shall make for
God's glory, and his distressed people's good. Providence can find tools enough
in the world to do the work of Providence. Many a man works blindfold in the
Shop of Providence; and whilst they strike aside the Anvil, they shall hit
right strokes on it. It may be observed how men's interests are so interwoven,
as that they shall do that, or forward that, which otherwise would not be done.
In Charles the fifth's days (Emperor of Germany) the case of the Protestants
was very low; the grave was made; there only seemed nothing else but the
tolling the Bell for the Funerals: Maurice on a sudden, like a great Bell, is
raised, and the thundering-noise hereof frights Charles the fifth out of
Germany. See Fynes Moryson Itinerary part 3. p. 184.
And if we would know what hands were at the Bell-rope, even the hands of
Ferdinand the Emperor, his own brother; who being chosen King of the Romans,
that is, the ordinary Successor of the Emperor, and like to be forced to resign
the same to Philip the Son of Charles, is said to have encouraged Maurice in
that attempts, whereby Charles the fifth was conquered after all hi^ Conquests,
the Protestants relieved, and Ferdinand promoted to the Empire, his Brother
Charles resigning to him, and be taking himself to a Monastry.

3. Observe how God can and does out-wit men in their Policies, by their
Policies. Providence knows how to make men dig their graves with their own
nails. It had been better for Achitophel he had never given that politi^k
direction to Absalom, to go in unto his fathers Concubines: this fact of
Absalom might strengthen the hands of them with Absalom, as is said 2 Samuel 16.
21. but the counsel of Achitophel in this fact was (as has been before
intimated) gunpowder to blow up Achitophel, when he was sensible what was like
to be the issue of all, 2 Samuel 17. 23.

4. Learn to mind the ultimate declared End, God's Glory. Do all (says the
Apostle) to God's glory, 1 Cor. 10. 31. To seek God's glory in God's way, is
for men to consult their own honor. As men in minding their corrupt Ends,
bring about the End of Providence: so in serious eying the Lord's glory, men
are no losers. Them that honor me (says God) I will honor; and they that
despise me, shall be leightly esteemed, 1 Samuel 2. 30. But seek ye first the
kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto
you, Mat. 6. 33. Men will have Gold, or Golds-worth, if God be their Gold, and
not their Gold their God.

OBSERVATION XXVIII.
Hastes and Delays about matters, are the two great Hinges on which do move the
considerable issues of PROVIDENCE.
CHAP. I.
WHAT a Portal or Introduction both to the House of Feasting, and to the House
of Mourning, Hastes are, does appear, if an eye be cast on Exemplifications
following.

In the first place then; Success, preservation, deliverance from dangers, the
participation of positive good, are brought on the wings of Haste, or a quick
dispatch about matters. Abraham is quick in the pursuit after the four Kings
who carried Lot away captive, and so rescueth the Lamb from the paw of the
Lions, Genesis 14. 14, 15, 16. Alexander the Great flies like Lightning against
the Persian, and prevails. So Dan. 8. 5. it is said, That the He-Goat touched
not the ground. And in ver. 6. he ran unto him, ( i. e. to the Persian-Ram) in
the fury of his power. History makes mention of Alexander's H^c igitur de
Scriptionis part, significatur summa celeritas: quemadmod^m legimus apud
Curtium de Alexandro Magno, Eum roganti cuidam, quomodo res tantastam brevi
tempore perfecisset, respondi^e his verbis (...). Arrian^s refert, Parmenio^e^
cum proelium esset ineundum ad Granicum flumen, suasisse rationibus allatis
Alexandro, ut illud deferret ad posterum diem, sed Alexandrum non obsecutum
Parmenioni mox Granicum transivisse, and faeliciter conflixisse. Polanus Com.
in Dan. c. 8.
Celerity as the inlet of his Conquests. Jehu his Haste, was a key to open the
Royal Palace-door for himself to get in, and so to throw out the Family of
Ahab, 2 Kings 9. 13, 15, 20. The men of Jabesh-Gilead are helped by Readiness
coming speedily for their help, 1 Samuel 11. 6, 7, etc. Abigal hastens to David,
cools his passion, and so preserves her own coal from being quenched in
Israel, 1 Samuel 25. 18. The chief Captain immediately took Soldiers, and ran
down unto the people who were about to kill Paul, and so delivers him, Acts 21.
32.

2. On the other hand, Hastes do sometimes Homines nimio festinandi studio
saepe aberrant, and sero iter propositum perficiunt. Docet haec sententia,
cavendam esse temeritatem and praecipitantiam, cui juvenes maxim sunt obnoxi^:
cogitent igitur nihil sine consilio, ac temere esse suscipiendum. Lavat.
throw open the door to the House of Sorrows and Destruction. He that hastes
with his feet, sins, says the Wiseman, Prove. 19. 3. An hair-brain
Abimelech has his skull broken to pieces, Judge. 9. 52, 53. The wanton rash
young man goes after the fair-tongu'd Whore straightway, or suddenly, as an ox
to the slaughter, Prove. 7. 22. Josiah made more haste than good speed, in his
going forth against Necho King of Egypt, 2 Chronicles. 20. 21, 22, 23, 24. Jonah
rashly flies to Tarshish, and so the Whale's belly is his house of mourning.

In the next place, Delays are of consequence, and that as three ways
considered: 1. As ushering in Evils. 2. As preventive of Evils. 3. As bringing
in some positive Good.


1. Delays are doors, or in-lets to Evil: Joab cautions David against a Delay.
Now therefore arise, go forth and speak comfortably unto thy servants: for I
swear by the Lord, If thou go not forth, there will not tarry with thee one
this night; and that will be worse unto thee than all the evil that befell thee
from thy youth until now, 2 Samuel 19. 7. The Delay of the Levite is the occasion
of his being be-nighted, and so he stops at Gibeah; where what followed, is
recorded. That long chain of Evils, of burning lusts, cutting up the Concubine
in pieces, the deaths of many thousands in the War, has a Delay for the first
link thereof, Judge. 19. 8. We find in History, how the Emperor Mauricius
delaying to execute the Traitor Phocas, by reason of the Festival-season of the
Nativity of Christ, Phocas escapes in that interval of time, becomes the bloody
Murderer of Mauricius, and so usurps the Royal Throne. Lot's sons-in-law are
warned to get them gone out of Sodom; they who were so cold in heeding Lot's
admonition, perish in the hot flames of Sodom; yea, it is said of Lot, While he
lingered, the men laid hold upon his hand, and upon the hand of his wife, and
upon the hand of his two daughters, the Lord being merciful unto him: and they
brought him forth, and set him without the City, Genesis 19. 16.

2. Delays are sometimes preventive of Evil. Joseph is cast into the pit; the
brethren sat down to eat and to drink; the Ismaelites draw nigh to them, and
so the Lamb is not butchered; he is sold, being reserved for a rich Leese in
the Land of Egypt, Genesis 37. 23, 24, 25, 26. Delay prevents a murderous act of a
wrathful King, and saves the life of a Prophet, 2 Kings 6. 32.

3. Delays are Handmaids to some positive Good. A Good becomes a double Good
by a sanctified Delay of Providence. The Butler delays to remember Joseph, Genesis
40. 23. he remembers him then, when a distress at Court might render Joseph the
more welcome thither, Genesis 41. 9, etc. David makes haste to the Throne by
Delays: for sanctified steps were good steps to the Throne. In great
Achievements sober Delays strike a great stroke. David is not to bestir
himself in falling on the Philistines, till he hear the sound of going in the
tops of the Mulberry-trees. He, in fetching a compass behind them, takes the
straightest course for the Philistines falling before him, 2 Samuel 5. 23, 24, 25.
Fabius the Romanae Reipub. plus profuit Fabii cunctatio quam Mi^ii praeceps
temeritas: plus consilio and ingenio quam robore eff^citur. Curandum autem est,
ne nimia cunctatione rerum gerendarum occasiones perdamus. Lavat.
Delayer became victorious by his prudent and politic Delays. Soft and fair
goes far sometimes in Mars his field.

CHAP. II.
1. LEARN, how wicked men are outwitted and out-work't by Providence. They are
Snails when they should be Dromedaries, and Dromedaries when they should be
Snails. They conceive mischief, but bring forth falsehood, Psalm. 7. 14. If there
be not a sudden abortion, there is a passing the time of delivery. Thus
according to the common forms of speech, they come a day after the fair; or,
their hasty Bitches puppy blind whelps.

2. Beware of sinful Hastes and Delays. He that believes, shall not make
haste, Isa. 28 16. Jacob was too hasty in catching after the blessing by the
use of undue means, Genesis 27. And on the other hand, rememember David, Psalm.
119. 60. I made haste, and delayed not, to keep thy commandments. Eccles. 12.
1. Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth. John 12. 35. Walk while
ye have the light, lest darkness come upon you.

If it be enquired, What Rules are of use here, as they respect Hastes and
Delays? It may be answered in three Directions:

1. Be well acquainted with thy constitution or temper; wisely suspect it, and
accordingly moderate it. Some are of an hasty temper; they are like fire in
straw; have a Gunpowder disposition; it is probable Peter was so, Mat. 26. 35,
etc. John 18. 10. Others are of a slow temperament: The Cretians are said to be
slow bellies, Tit. 1. 12. Wisdom then must have its spur or curb, and use one
or other as there is occasion.

2. Take a rational surveigh of matters. Consider things with their
circumstances. So Cum diu cogitaveris, tunc fac quod probaveris. Nihil ex
praecipiti magnum. Consilii mora melior: in rebus autem certis been agendi
tardita^ removeatur a te. Toll moras, in crastinum nihil differas. Isidor.
Hisp. lib. 2. Synon. c. 12.
teaches Solomon in the case of rash Suretiship, Prove. 6. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. And
in Eccles. 8. 5. A wise man's heart discerns both time and judgment. A due
view of matters is of great importance, when to be swift, and when to be slow.

3. Eye God for direction and success. O Lord, I know that the way of man is
not in himself: it is not in man that walks, to direct his steps, Jer. 10.
23. Here Jeremiah bolts forth a Doctrine, and Solomon gives us a good practical
Use of the point, Prove. 3. 6. In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall
direct thy paths.

3. Bless God for what of mercy is conveyed by Hastes or Delays. It is said,
Abigail made haste, 1 Samuel 25. 18. and David takes notice of the Providence;
for says he, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel which sent thee this day to
meet me, v. 32. O how much is there of a glorious display of Providence both in
Hastes and Delays! The Church of God does experiment this: The wind of
Providence blows good to the Lord's people, and that though at different points
of the Compass. Sometimes they who are Pirates, and seek to make a prey of
God's people, are wind-bound: and sometimes a fair wind they have, but the gust
are so strong and vehement, as that the Ship of Fools is swallowed. A notable
story for illustration may be here set down, which has been recommended to
diverse from the learned and pious Usher; whose Uncle (as I have been informed)
telling the story (but not knowing the person) at Christ's Church in Oxford, at
the Table there, a Gentleman blush't, and confessed himself to be the man.
Doct. Fuller, the History of the Worthies of England, Westmerland, p. 137.
And seeing the story is in print now, I shall set it down as it is related by
one of our own worthy Writers; and pass to another Aphorism or Observation.

About the third of the reign of Queen Mary, a Pursevant was sent with a
Commission into Ireland, to empower some eminent persons to proceed with fire
and faggot against poor Protestants. It happened, by Divine Providence, this
Pursevant at Chester lodged in the house of a Protestant-Inn-keeper, who having
gotten some inkling of the matter, secretly stole his Commission out of his
Cloak-bag, and put the Knave of Clubs in the room thereof. Some weeks after he
appeared before the Lord's of the Privy Council at Dublin (of whom Bishop Coren
a principal) and produced a Card for his pretended Commission. The black Box,
it seems, wherein the bloody Commission was at first, was tied up with an
hold-fast knot till opened in Ireland.
They caused him to be committed to prison for such an affront, as done on
design to deride them. Here he lay for some months, till with much ado at last
he got his enlargement. Then over he returned for England; and quickly getting
his Commission renewed, makes with all speed for Ireland again. But before his
arrival there, he was prevented with the news of Queen Mary's death, and so the
Lives of many, and the Liberties of more, poor Servants of God, were preserved.

OBSERVATION XXIX.
PROVIDENCE has its various or several aspects in matters: or, The Eye of
PROVIDENCE looks more ways than one.
CHAP. I.
IN Ezekiel. 1. every one of the living creatures had four faces, v. 6. and the
wheels there, or rather the rings of them, as the more immediate subject, are
said to be full of eyes, v. 18. What may these passages in the vision import,
but probably the manifold aspect of Providence in matters? However, the truth
of the Observation may be considered two ways:

1. Exemplifications there are in Scripture to this purpose. That Providence in
the Brethren's going down to Egypt, had its various aspects: it did look
backward on their guilt, for that is brought to remembrance, Genesis 42. 21. and
it did look forward to their preservation in the time of Famine, as Joseph does
inform them, Genesis 45. 7. The borrowing of the Egyptians Treasure, Exodus 12. 31,
36. respects the Egyptians in a way of punishment, in the Lord's transferring
the property of the goods borrowed, to the Israelites, who are now well paid
for their hard service, and are furnished with materials for the Tabernacle,
such as gold, silver, brass, blue, purple, and scarlet, Onyx-stones, etc. Exodus
25. The taking of the Ark by the Philistines, 1 Samuel 4. 11. seems to confute a
conceit of God's protecting Presence, because of the outward symbol or sign of
his presence in which the Israelites rested, as 1 Samuel 4. 3, 4. and not only
so, but to punish the Israelites for their Ark-removing sins or provocations,
as 1 Samuel 2. 22. Neither does that Providence stop here, God vindicates the
honor of the Ark thus taken; the Philistines shall be overcom'd; when they do
overcome: The Ark of God amongst them, that Sacred Chest, becomes in a sort a
large Coffin for the burial of many of them: for there was a deadly destruction
thorowout all their Cities; the hand of God was heavy on them, as is recorded 1 Samuel 5. 6, 9, 11. The slaying of Saul by the Philistines, respects not only
Readiness punishment for his sins, but the exaltation of David, according to God's
promise, on which the Providence cast an aspect in order to its gradual
fulfilling: for now David goes up to Hebron. 2 Samuel 2. 1. In Mat. 2. 1, 2. the
Wisemen came from the East: that journey of theirs did respect their own good,
the alarumning of the Jews to consider of the Messiah's being born; the
confirmation of Joseph and Mary their faith in Christ. In Mat. 8. 24. Christ
was asleep in the Ship: This sleep, as it was demonstrative of his Human
Nature, and probably an effect of weariness a sinless infirmity, see John 4. 6.
So also did it serve for the trial of the Disciples, as v. 25. In v. 28. of the
same Chapter, we read of two possessed with Devils. That Providence in the
possession there, had its manifold aspects: the various ends for which it might
serve, may in brief be indigitated; as, (1.) To punish and chasten for sin the
possessed, and others afflicted by the possessed; for it is said, v. 28. they
were exceeding fierce, so that no men might pass that way. (2.) To exercise the
Disciples: for no sooner are they escaped the sea-storm, but a land-one waits
for them: before there were fears of drowning; now an occasion for fears lest
they should be torn in pieces by the possessed with devils. (3.) To illustrate
the power and goodness of Christ, who frees the house of evil tenants, and
puts reason, if not grace too, into possession; see Luke 8. 35. (4.) To make
way for the punishment of the Hoggish- Gergesenes, whose Swine were dearer to
them than the Lamb of God, see v. 34. And thus for Exemplifications: more might
be instanced in; but these may suffice, and that the rather, seeing others will
be couched in what follows.

2. There are distributions, distinctions, or considerations of the Aspects of
Providence. These may be diversified or branched diverse ways.

1. The Aspect of Providence sometimes looks upward after a more signal sort,
and not so downward on the party, the subject of the Dispensation. So in the
man who was blind from his birth: Master (say the Disciples), who did sin, this
man, or his parents, that he was born blind? Jesus answered, Neither has this
man sinned, nor his parents; but that the works of God should be made manifest
in him, John. 9. 1, 2, 3. Had there been no sin in the World, there had been no
blindness. The blindness of this man was an afflictive evil both to the man and
his Parents: It cannot then be denied, Natus est itaque caecus, ut per Christum
in caeco declaretur opus Dei. Musculus.
as if Providence did overlook sin, and the affliction of Son and Parents
absolutely: its aspect there is downward in a sense, but more signally another
way, viz. That by Christ in the blind man the work of God might be declared, as
one notes.

2. The face of Providence looks on others as well as the parties who are the
immediate subjects of it. And this, (1.) By way of caution or warning to take
heed of sin, for which such and such have been the subjects of smart. They in
Jeremiah's time are willed to note the Shiloh-Providence: But go ye now unto my
place which was in Shiloh, and see what I did to it for the wickedness of my
people Israel, Jer. 7. 12. Remember Lot's Wife, says Christ, Luke 17. 32. (2.)
By way of imitation, in regard of the exercise of grace. Job's trials may
lesson others, who have little of Job's afflictions, and less of his patience
under them. God did set him up as a stately Monument for the display of grace
to the ages to come, James 5. 11. (3.) By way of particular encouragement to
look up to God, and wait on him for help, and that because of the intervention
of special Providence; which though in the first place it centers in, or falls
on one; yet reaches another's case. A clear instance for this, we have in Mark
5. where Jairus besought Christ for his daughter at the point of death, v. 23.
By the way a stop is made; an intervening-Providence there is in the cure of
the woman which had an issue of blood twelve years, v. 25, to 34. Now this
Providence in the cure of the woman, may serve for the cure of Jairus his
faith; it might encourage him who met with such an encouraging-dispensation.
Christ says to him, Be not afraid, only believe, v. 36. Christ here, like the
Husbandman, neglects not the Vine, whilst he goes aside a little to seek for a
prop for its support.

3. The Aspect of Providence is sometimes frowning, but after a different sort.
There is the wrinckled brow of Displeasure, but different, as it respects
slaves and children in the family. The same Providence which has sharp teeth
for sinners, has its filed or blunted ones for Saints. So in that
overflowing-scourge Isaiah speaks of, Isa. 28. Some shall be trodden down by
it; a woe there is to the mockers there, see v. 18, to 23. Others they have
ground and direction for support; and they might eye Christ who was to come,
and so conclude there would not be an utter exmpation of the Nation, and for
his sake there would be mitigation; see v. 16. yea, that though they who were
the good corn, met with the wheel; yet it is not a breaking-wheel, as is there
allegorically intimated, v. 28. see somewhat a parallel-place, which may serve
both for a proof of what is here intended, and a comment or exposition on this
of Isaiah's Prophecy, Amos 9. 9, 10.

4. The face of Providence looks sometimes on what is past, present, and to
come. Nebuchadnezzar's expulsion from the Royal Seat, looks back on the
Prophetical Vision as interpreted by Daniel, chap. 4. 25. It stares
Nebuchadnezzar in the face; looks big on him, when Nebuchadnezzar is swollen
big with pride: For while the word (a proud one) was in the King's mouth, there
fell a voice from heaven, etc. V. 31. The same hour was the thing fulfilled
upon Nebuchadnezzar, and he was driven from men, etc. v. 33. And this his being
driven from men, looks forward, inasmuch as the proud flesh being eaten out by
this Corrosive, he is restored again to his Power and Dignity, v. 34, 35, 36,
37. Jonah is thrown overboard into the sea, Jonah 1. 15. Here, by this
Providence, as the Mariners are lessoned to know more of the God of the Winds
and Sea; so Jonah is catechized by the rough Messenger which pursued him: The
sea wrought, and was tempestuous, v. 11. The points of Jonah's Catechism were
two: What an Evil he had committed, v. 12. and, What good the Lord intended by
making him ductile and pliable to go to Niniveh, and preach unto them the
preaching that God bid him, as it is said Jonah 3. 2.

5. The Aspect of Providence may be considered as primary and secondary. There
is a primary or chief Errand which Providence has to a man under this or that
Dispensation; as he who goes to a Prince's Court, intends principally the sight
of the Prince, and yet beholds others there. Sometimes an afflictive
Dispensation may be primarily, by way of castigation for some special sin; and
secondarily, by way of probation, trial, or exercise of grace. Thus in David's
case, when Absolom's wild and horrid pranks are the Remembrancers of David's
folly in the matter of Vriah, see 2 Samuel 12. Again, otherwhiles a Dispensation
of Providence may principally respect the trial of grace, and not some signal
guilt foregoing. So in Job his case, Providence might cast there an eye on the
sins of his youth, as that passage Job 13. 26, may import; and yet it might
primarily intend and point out the sparkling-graces of his riper years: for we
read of Job's precious piety, and rare or admired circumspection, before the
Devil was let loose on him; and likewise the Lord's approbation of him: and
nothing does Satan charge against Job, but a falsely supposed guilt of
selfishness in serving God, see Job 1. These and the like Reasons may sway,
That though correction for sin is not excluded, yet the display of grace was
primarily intended in that startling Dispensation of Providence.

CHAP. II.
1. WHAT stupidity, dullness, and inadvertency, is abroad in the World!
Providence, like the Sun, scatters its beams, and and few they are who see
them. The most of persons, if they see any thing, it is like that man in Mat. 8.
24. I see men (says he) like trees walking. It Is often to be noted, how men
have general and confused apprehensions of a frowning aspect of Providence; It
is for our sins, say they, that this or that judgment is: Here is a stop; they
are not by a frowning- Providence frowned into an holy loathing of such sins
which Providence frowns on. The Aspects of Providence are little seen, and less
improved. Israel does not know, my people does not consider, Isa. 1. 3.

2. Take heed of slandering Providence in its Aspects. Make not that an
encouraging-Aspect of Providence, which God does not so make, constitute, or
appoint. There is a Negative-Aspect of Providence, where man sometimes fancies
a Positive-one. He that shall follow the false Prophet because of a sign given,
and that sign comes to pass, abuses Providence in a pretended Aspect of it;
see Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 2, 3.

3. Labor to be verst in the Aspects of Providence. For want of an holy
dexterity this way, a man wrongs God, others, and himself: He fastens, by a
wrong construction, that on God, which the Lord approves not; and is injurious
to others and himself, as others or himself are concerned in the wrong
Conclusions drawn from the Aspects of Providence. Here some Directions might be
insisted on; I shall touch on a few.

1. Take heed of an erroneous judgment. If the light that is in a man, be
darkness, how great is that darkness? Mat. 6. 23. The Jews, who took themselves
to be in the right, and withal judged Christ to be a Deceiver, how do they
misapply the Aspect of Providence toward Christ on the Cross? It Is true, the
Aspect was a frowning one; but not in such sort as they blasphemously asserted
it to be, see Mat. 27. 39, 40, 41, 42, 43. The two Witnesses are slain; and
what befalls them, is otherwise, than according to truth, interpreted by them
who did rejoice over them, and make merry, Rev. 11. 10. Luther, whilst a
zealous Papist, had other thoughts of the Inter hos autem occurrebant and isti
fratres, quos Pighardos vocabant, jam mihi non ita invisi, ut antea erant in
Papistate mea.
Dissentients from the Romish Synagogue, than afterward when his judgment was
set right, as he declares in his Preface to the Confession of Faith of the
Barons and Noblemen of Bohemia.

2. Consider how a benign Aspect may be a frowning one; and a frowning one, a
favorable one. The prosperity of a sinner, is his misery; and the adversity of
a Saint, is his mercy, as the Lord orders the matter in the course of his
Providence. Want of wisdom to see a mystery in God's Providence on this wise,
is the reason why men are out in their apprehensions about the Aspects of
Providence. The Psalmist speaks fully to this, saying, O Lord, how great are
thy works, and thy thoughts are very deep! a brutish man knows not, neither
does a fool understand this: when the wicked spring as the grass, and when all
the workers of iniquity do flourish; it is that they shall be destroyed for
evermore, Psalm. 92. 5, 6, 7.

3. Be not too quick or hasty in passing a judgment on an Aspect of Providence.
The Wind of Providence is up, but how soon, and where, or in what quarter it
may set, man knows not. The Barbarians censure Paul for a Murderer, because
Vengeance in its frowning aspect pursues him; but when Paul shook off the Beast
into the fire, and felt no harm, they changed their minds, Acts 28. 3, 4, 5, 6.

4. Remember how the Aspects of Providence have a different consideration.
Sometimes a Providence respects the Person, but not the Action. So in Abraham's
case; God preserves his Wife, which was like to be defiled in Abimilech's
Court. God had a respect to Abraham as he was Abraham the Saint, Abraham the
Prophet, not Abraham the distruster of Providence in that matter. The Aspect of
Providence does not countenance Abraham's miscarriage in that business: Abraham
is spoken of there as a Prophet, not a Dissembler, Genesis 20 7.

Again, Providence may respect the substance of the action, business,
management, not the circumstances, or irregularity coupled with the intention,
disposition, endeavor to do this or that. It is said, God dealt well with the
Midwifes, Exodus 1. 20. Suppose they had told a lie, yet God dealt not well with
them because they lied; but because they were merciful to the people of God, as
Austin observes, or because they feared God, as it is said v. 21. Whatever
were their slips, it seems they did act from a virtuous principle, which God
graciously takes notice of, and recompenceth, as is said in the verse
mentioned. Lot has a share in a signal Providence, by way of rescue or
deliverance from the hands of rude neighbors, Genesis 19. 9, 10, 11. He had made
a fair, or rather a foul, proposal of Articles for accommodation, v 8.
Providence does not countenance that proffer of his; it must not be construed
so, but as it it respects Lot a Saint, or his pious disposition and endeavor
to preserve his Guests: Providence keeps him, who was willing to have the Laws
of Hospitality kept unviolated, as he professes, saying, Only unto these men
do nothing; for therefore came they under the shadow of my roof, ver. 8.

Lastly, Providence respects neither Person nor Action; but something else
which is the primary object of its aspect. Joash is only saved alive, when all
the Seed-Royal is destroyed by Athaliah, 2 Chronicles. 22. 10, 11, 12. He proved bad
enough afterward, notwithstanding so signal preservation, and exaltation to the
Throne: God's Providence in the preserving of him, and exalting him, did not so
much respect him, unless to aggravate his sin; as the promise made to David,
whose line was not quite to be extinguish't; for so it is intimated in 2 Chronicles.
23. 3. Behold the kings son shall reign, as the Lord has said of the sons of
David. Ismael is a great man; and whence is this? The Prayer of a good Father,
and the Promise of the great God, are the stilts on which Ismael's Greatness
mounteth aloft, as is expressed Genesis 17. 20.

OBSERVATION XXX.
Some Passages of PROVIDENCE are Preludes, Harbingers, or Forerunners of a
Train of Providence behind.
CHAP. I.
AS there are prefix't Passages or Prefaces to what the Lord commends to
man's consideration in the Sacred Scripture, as, Hear, O Israel, thus says the
Lord: whosoever has ears to hear, let him hear: So there are Prefaces to God's
Providential Dispensations. Before, in the Aspects of Providence, it was
touched how some did look forward to matters; these Aspects, which may be
termed Proemial, or Precursory, are like Scouts of the Army, or the
Forlorn-hope, which engage first, ere the body of the Army come up to grapple
with the Enemy. Now that there are Providential passages of this nature,
appears,

1. From Increpations or Reproofs for not heeding them. So Hos. 7. 9. Strangers
have devoured his strength, and he knows it not: yea, gray hairs are here and
there upon him, yet he knows it not. And so Mat. 16. Christ checks the Jews,
in that they could observe a foregoing work of Providence in Naturals, but not
so in Spirituals: When it is evening (says he) ye say it will be fair weather,
for the sky is red; and in the morning, it will be foul weather, for the sky
is red and lowering. O ye hypocrites! ye can discern the face of the sky, but
ye cannot discern the signs of the times, v. 2, 3. The Jews did not so take
notice of Prophecies referring to Christ; The Scepter's departing from Judah;
The coming of John the Baptist that Gospel- Elijah; The Miracles of Christ done
amongst them: All which, not so heeded, might be proemial signs too, of
approaching judgment. They, it seems, were better verst in their Almanacks,
than in their Bibles, and the accommodation of what is in their Bibles to their
present condition; and for this their stupidity, they are checked by Christ,
and that sharply too.

2. From Admonitions or Exhortations to take notice of such Prefaces of
Providence to matters. There is a Treatise of antecedent signs penned by a
Divine-hand, Mat. 24. Those percursory signs spoken of there, may be considered
with respect to the destruction of Jerusalem, and the World. An Admonition to
consider of the one, we have in v. 15. When ye therefore shall see the
abomination of desolation spoken of by Daniel the prophet; whosoever reads, let
him understand, etc. An exhortation to improve the other, yet not excluding the
former sort of approaching signs of calamity, we have in v. 32. Now learn a
parable of the fig tree, when his branch is yet tender, and puts forth
leaves, ye know that summer is nigh: so likewise ye, when ye shall see all
these things, know it is near, even at the door.

3. From Exemplifications of such Prefaces of Providence, and that as they have
a reference (1) To persons good; and (2.) bad.

For the first sort. Moses slays the Egyptian smiting an Hebrew, Exodus 2. 21.
This fact of Moses seems to be a presage of Moses, as one who would be the
Hammer of Providence to knock down the Egyptians, as he afterward proved.
Before Moses, Joseph had that in a dream which was afterward fulfilled, as
Genesis 37. 5, 6, etc. Sampson rent the young Lion as one would have rent a Kid,
Judge. 14. 5, 6. He afterward makes renting-work amongst the Philistines. David
slays the Lion and the Bear; and after that, a Metaphorical Lion or Bear,
namely, Goliath the Philistin, 1 Samuel 17. These Acts were preambulatory to noble
and royal Acts of Valor performed by him afterward. Our Savior in his
minority is found sitting in the midst of the Doctors, both hearing them, and
asking them questions; and all that heard him, were astonished at his
understanding and answers, Luke 2. 46, 47.

Again, There are some Prefaces of Providence which respect the Bad, whom
Providence may use for black work to be done in the world. It is said, Sarah
saw the son of Agar the Egyptian, which she had born unto Abraham, mocking,
Genesis 21. 9. Here is an early discovery of Ishmael, whose posterity were cruel
mockers indeed, as Psalm. 83. 6. they were of that Juncto there spoken of; and
did persist on in the old antipathy of their father, who, born after the flesh,
persecuted him that was born after the spirit, Gal. 4. 29. Jeroboam was to be a
scourge to the house of David: He was an active man, whom Solomon takes
cognizance of, 1 King. 11. 28. His new Garment is rent into twelve pieces, and
ten of them are delivered him by the Prophet, Ahijah, and that as a presage of
the ten Tribes to be headed by him, v. 30, 31. Solomon sought to kill Jeroboam,
but Jeroboam escapes into Egypt, there he lurks till the seed of Sedition is
up, and toward its harvest, as v. 40, with the next Chapter compared. Judas
betrays his Master; besides a typical presage of this, Psalm. 41. 9. with Acts
1. 16. there were some other presages, which after his horrid treachery, might
be better understood by the Disciples. That in John 6. 70. Have not I (says
Christ) chosen you twelve, and one of you is a devil? was a tinckling of the
Larum-bell amongst the Disciples. Whether Judas did then spet some of his
venom, yet more secretly, amongst the Disciples which there went back, and
walked no more with Christ; and so opened, or helped to hold open, the door of
their apostasy: or whether, upon their apostasy, he begun to make a stir
amongst the eleven, and so was a Mutineer in that small company left, is not so
expressed in the Chapter; yet whether the one or the other, or both, may not be
implied as the occasion of Christ's speech, may not peremptorily be denied. We
find how the same Judas was a Makebate, a Quarrelle^ at another time, John 12.
Why was not (says he) this ointment sold for three hundred pence, and given to
the poor? v. 5. This he said (says the Text, v. 6.) not that he cared for the
poor, but because he was a thief, and had the bag, and bare what was put
therein. Judas his heart was as full of covetous projects, as the bag of
treasure which he bare. His heart was betrayed by this World's goods, ere he
betrays his Lord and Master. The Devil knows how to hew an Hypocrite, a
Traitor, a Murderer, out of the Mammon of unrighteousness. A worldly heart will
be any thing than what it should be. The prognostics or presages of Apostasy,
may be seen in an inordinacy of affection to the things of this life. So in
Judas here, that Lion which is known by his griping-paw.

4. From the Distinctions of Proemial Dispensations, or Presages of Providence.
These may be considered, 1. In respect of the Mode or Manner, how they are by
way of Presage. 2. In respect of the Matter, to which they have reference. 3.
In regard of the Subjects or Persons concerned in them.


First, In the first place then, Presages are considered, (1.) By way of mere
significancy; and that, (1.) Negatively, as to that which shall not be. So the
Bow in the Cloud is a significant Pledge or Token that the waters shall no more
become a flood to destroy all flesh, Genesis 9. 13, 14, 15. See Isa. 7. 5, 6, 7.
with 11, 14, 15. (2.) Positively, as to that which thus or thus falls out. So
the shooting of the Arrow by Jehoahaz, and the smiting upon the ground with the
Arrows, were a presage, though an extraordinary instituted one, of the smiting
of the Syrians, 2 King. 13. 17, 18, 19. The crowing of the Cock was a presage
of what Christ had said to Peter, Mat. 26. 34. with 74, 75.

2. By way of real Causality; And so David's noble Exploits had an influence to
his being received as King by the Tribes of Israel, who came to him, saying,
Behold, we are thy bone, and thy flesh: also in time past, when Saul was king
over us, thou wast he that leddest out, and broughtest in Israel: and the Lord
said to thee, Thou shall feed my people Israel, and thou shall be captain over
Israel: so all the elders of Israel came to the king to Hebron; and king David
made a league with them in Hebron, before the Lord; and they anointed David
king over Israel, 2 Samuel 5. 1, 2, 3.

3. By way of significancy and causality. There are Presages mix't. Gideon goes
to the Midianites Tents, hears one of the Soldiers telling his dream to his
fellow; and likewise the interpretation thereof given by his fellow: and
hereupon Gideon is quickened to says, prayer, and courage to set on the Army of
the Midianites, who are worsted, as Judge. 7. 10, etc.

Hither may be referred Comets, or Blazing-Starrs as vulgarly termed: which as
they have often an experienced significancy, so some causal influence: for (as
is observed by some) the matter of these being hot and dry exhalations, no
wonder if there follows, (1.) Barrenness of the Earth, and so the fruits
thereof more or less sail. (2.) The reduction of the Humors in men's bodies to
an hot and dry intemperature. (3.) From this intemperature of the Humors, what
can be expected but an epidemical spreading of acute Diseases. (4.) From the
hot and dry intemperature both of Bodies and the Air, the Minds of men, which
have a sympathy with the Body, are easily provoked to wrath, contentions,
brawls, and fights: and whereas Kings and Princes are more delicate or tender
than others, and naturally more elated, and have the Humors more accommodated
and easy for inflammation, than others, it may easily happen, that in these
hot and dry years, than at other times, Princes are sooner and more vehemently
stirred up to Contentions, Revenges, and the waging of War in the World; and
these Wars oftentimes bring with them the changes of Government or Kingdoms.
Thus the learned Zanchy. All I have to say here, is: None of the Works of God
are to be slighted: and though there be some foundation in Second Causes, yet
we are not to forget the First Cause. We read of fearful sights and great signs
that shall be Canunt undique galli, quando privatim, and public nos Deus per
verbum suum per prodigia and signa ac horribiles insolitosque rerum casus
admonet. Gualtherus in Marc c. 14. Hom. 126.
from Heaven, Luke 21. 11. If then the Cocks (to use a learned man's phrase) do
crow, and these may be judged such; Oh that they might awaken from the sleep of
sin, to repenting-work!

Secondly, The Presages of Providence may be considered in respect of the
Matter to which they have a reference. And so they are, (1.) Joyous, or by way
of mercy. Noah's Dove came in to him in the evening; and lo, i^ her mouth was
an olive-leaf plucked off: so Noah knew that the waters were abated from off the
earth, Genesis 8. 11. So Hos. 2. 15. And I will give her vineyards from thence,
and the valley of Achor for a door of hope. (2.) Doleful, or by way of
fore-boading wrath. So the death of Abijah, the taking away of him from evil to
come, was a sad presage of wrath to come on Jeroboam's Family, as is declared
at large in 1 King. 13. The falling of Dagon before the Ark, was a forerunner
of the falling of the Lord's heavy hand on the Philistines, 1 Samuel 5. Other
Exemplifications for both these, namely, Presages Joyous and Doleful, are
couch't in the foregoing Instances, though not alleged under the notion of
this particular Consideration, but under the notion of Presages in the general.

Thirdly, Presages may be considered in regard of the Subjects or Persons
concerned; and so persons may be considered,

1. Singly, or in regard of private capacity, as they respect a person, or
particular family, relating to the head of the family. So in Readiness case, to
whom Samuel said, The Lord has rent the kingdom of Israel from the^ this day,
1 Samuel 15. 28. Other Instances mentioned, fall in here.

2. Conjunctively, or as they respect a Community of persons, a people, who,
according as the Presages are, may be the subjects of joy or woe. There are
National Mercies, and National Judgments, and Presages to or of each. The
distinct handling of each sort of Presages, will fall in with Mercies and
Afflictions, which are not here particularly to be insisted on. I pass
therefore to the Accommodation or Improvement of the Observation.

CHAP. II.
1. LEARN from whence some do give a notable guess at future matters. A due
observance of foregoing Dispensations, is a key to unlock the door for an
insight into future ones. As some creatures are more sensible of an approaching
storm; they are the Husbandman's natural Almanac, and truest one too, Job 36.
31. So they who observe the outgoings of God in the world, may see further
than the Politicians of the world. Great ones, who cannot see day at a little
hole, are strangely be-nighted in their designs and undertakings.

2. Observe Providence by way of presage; and that the rather, considering,
(1.) That so God's Saints have done. As we are not to make presages where no
ground is so to do; so we are not to pass by that, the observance whereof may
be consistent with wisdom. Jacob put not off Joseph's dreams, because dreams,
and the dreams of a boy; he gives him the hearing, and observes something more
in them than the workings of a childish fancy, Genesis 37. 11. (2.) The not
heeding of Providence in its Proemial displays or presages, may in some cases
prove to be of dangerous consequence. John the Baptist was the Elias to come,
he was the forerunner of the Messiah; for so said he, Luke, chap. 1. v. 17. He
shall go before him in the spirit and power of Elias. The Jews did not heed the
Providence of God in the Baptist, Mat. 17. 12. But I say unto you, that Elias
is come already, and they knew him not, but have done unto him whatsoever they
listed. Likewise shall also the Son of Man suffer of them. Thus the King's
Harbinger being not regarded, no wonder if the King himself be not welcomed. He
came unto his own, and his own received him not, John 1. 11.

OBSERVATION XXXI.
Past and present Passages of Providence, lay foundation, more or less, for
future matters: or, What falls out after, is the result or issue of Providence
before, as effecting or righteously permitting.
CHAP. I.
THIS Observation being akin to the former, the less may be said: yet if the
more be said, each of these, like two Glasses, may reflect on each other; and
things reflected in them, will the better be taken cognizance of. Before, we
considered Providence rather as an eye looking forward; here we may look on it
as an hand, throwing up the earth, and laying in stones for superstruction-work
to go on. There are three Generals to be spoken to here: 1. The various Mode or
Manner how past or present passages of Providence lay a foundation. 2. The
interval of time between the Foundation and after-Superstruction. 3. The
Latitude or Extent of this with respect to Matters.


First, To begin then with the first; and so past and present things, in order
to what follows, may be considered,

1. According to their intrinsecal and proper nature, their usual manner of
working, qualification for what is the ordinary result, as Providence is
conversant about them. Thus it is said, that the heaven was black with clouds
and wind, and there was a great rain, 1 King. 18. 44. And so Eccles. 7. 7.
Surely oppression makes a wise man mad, and a gift destroys the heart: that
is, impatiency and vexation of mind (as one says) Cartwright in locum.
is a kind of madness, which oppression with its force and nature brings,
unless a man well principled with piety, fly unto God for shelter and refuge;
and after the like sort, bribery blinds the eyes of a wise man --

Again, things may be considered according to a supernatural causality
attending them in regard of their issues: and here the said things may be
considered (as overruled by Providence) three ways:

1. As indifferent in their own nature for the production of this or that
effect. The Ax cuts the wood, and cuts a man's leg: the same Ax which fells the
tree down for fuel or some other use, kills a man at another time, as Deuteronomy.
19. 5.

2. As having some tendency, inclination, or propensity, for this or that
effect; but not proportionable, in it self considered, for the product thereof.
Gideon's Three hundred men rout a vast Army, and so lay a foundation for their
Countrey's quier, and respit from the Midianitish fury, Judge. 7.

3. As averse and contrariant in all likelihood to what follows. Thus Joseph's
brethren rid their Father's house of Joseph; which act of theirs, by an
overruling Providence, contributes for the preservation of the Family
afterward, as is asserted by Joseph, Genesis 45. 9, 10, 11.

There is another consideration of things past and present, in order to
futurity; and that is,

1. By way of natural causality; as things according to their very natures
physically considered, work thus, as for fire to burn the houses of Ziglag,
being applied to them, 1 Samuel 30. 3.

2. By way of moral causality or order which the Lord has set. Thus the
Corinthiant did profane the Lord's Supper: and this lays a moral foundation
for a future House of Correction to be erected amongst them: For this cause
(faith the Apostle) many are weak and sickly among you, and many sleep, 1 Cor.
11. 30. On the other hand, when the Temple work was minded by them in the
Prophet Haggai's time, the laying of the foundation of the Temple, was through
grace the laying of a foundation of future Mercies; as is plainly declared in
Hag. 2. 18, 19.

3. By way both of natural and moral causality. Both these streams meet in one
channel sometimes. The drunkard and the glutton shall come to poverty: and
drowsiness shall clothe a man with rags, Prove. 23. 21. These sins have not only
a moral provocation in them, by reason whereof God does righteously punish the
sinners; but likewise according to a natural tendency, are an inlet to
poverty. Drunkenness (as one says) turns man, his family, yea his house too,
out at the Wicket. Some sins are costly, and are Moths to men's Estates. Men do
not only fight against God with their Mercies, but also against their own
Estates, Peace, and Comfort. They take the link-stock, fire the Cannons, and
have no ground to quarrel with Providence, if the Chain-shot, or Wedg heated
red-hot in the fire of their lusts, light on their own houses, to the burning
of them. And thus for the first general propounded.

Secondly, The interval or space of time betwixt Causes, Effects, and
Consequents, comes next to be insisted on. And here, as there is a
Winter-grain; and Spring-seed, as Oats, Barley, which are earthed after the
former: so some things come to pass after, which were founded in their Causes
before. There is a Treasure-house of Providence; Mercies and Judgments are laid
up in this Treasure-house. The opening of this Treasure-house belongs to God*
He times the opening of it.

1. Sometimes there is but a little distance between the issues of Matters, and
their Causes. The House is soon up, and covered, whether it be an House of
Feasting, or Mourning. A word, and good word, there is for Jehosaphat, with the
people, when they are fasting and praying upon the account of that great
Multitude which came against them, 2 Chronicles. 20. 17. To morrow go out against
them, for the Lord will be with you. Elijah sends word to Ahab after a long
drought, saying, Prepare thy Chariot, and get thee down, that the rain stop
thee not: and it came to pass, that in the mean while, that the heaven was
black with clouds, etc. 1 King. 18. 44, 45. Boast not thy self of to morrow;
thou know not what a day may bring forth, Prove. 27. 1.

2. Otherwhile the distance is wider; Causes and Effects do not shake hands by
and by. Joseph's brethren made a Rod for their backs, which hung up by the wall
of Providence for some years, ere they were lash't by in it Egypt; and Joseph's
being sent into Egypt, had a reference to the future good of his Father's
Family. The Tree was transplanted long before Jacob, with his sons, eat of the
fruit thereof: for Joseph was seventeen years when sold into Egypt, Genesis 37. 2.
and he was thirty years old, when he stood before Pharaoh King of Egypt, Genesis
41 16. and he tells his brethren, after they find him Lord-Treasurer in Egypt,
how that two years has the Famine been in the land, Genesis 45. 6. yea, moreover,
Joseph's going down into Egypt, laid foundation for the Israelites going up out
of Egypt to Canaan, according to the prophecy, Genesis 15. 13, 14.

Thirdly, The latitude or extent of a foundation for future matters, is next to
be spoken unto; and may be considered two ways: 1. In respect of Things. 2. In
respect more immediately of Persons.


1. In respect of things: and so there is a large harvest of Temporals and
Spirituals from seed before sown. Not to be large here, seeing Instances which
may serve have been mentioned materially, and may easily here formally be
insisted on. Thus Joseph is the man sent before, when the Lord called for a
Famine upon the Land, and brake the whole staff of bread, as is said Psalm. 105.
16, 17. Wisemen from the East bring gifts, Gold, Frankincense, and Myrrh,
Mat. 2. 11. This their Present is of great use for the Egypt-Journey at hand:
for Joseph and Mary being low in the world, are now the better provided-for in
a strange Country. The Eye of Providence fore-sees future Exigencies; and the
Hand of Providence is sometimes beforehand by way of provision for the children
of Providence. Other things might here be instanced in, as in Marriage, Health,
Liberty: but I pass to things of spiritual concernment; and so to avoid
repetition of what elsewhere is here reducible, I shall only touch on two
things: (1.) Conversion to the Faith. (2.) Confirmation in the Faith. There are
passages of Providence which pave a way to each. God in his Providence raises
up Instruments, whom he sends and blesses in their Ministry, so that faith
comes by hearing, as the Apostle does declare, Romans 10. 15, 17. Words spoken at
one time, lay a foundation for confirmation at another: So John 2. 22. When
therefore he was risen from the dead, his disciples remembered that he had said
this unto them; and they believed the Scripture, and the word which Jesus had
said.

2. In respect of Persons: And here we may take a view of the
All-wise-founding-Providence, as it respects persons Political and
Ecclesiastical; or Magistrates and Ministers in God's holy Ordinances.

1. There are passages which refer to persons under a Political consideration:
and these may be distinguished, (1.) As they respect the advancement,
promotion, exaltation of persons to places of Power and Dignity. (2.) As they
respect the dejection of persons, the clipping their Power and Dignity. That
there are matters which may lay some foundation more or less both as to the one
and the other, is apparent out of the History (to go no further) of Paul and
David. What these matters in particular are, is subject matter for a Treatise
of Providence referring to Politicals.

2. There are passages of Providence which respect Ecclesiastical persons; whom
God takes near to himself in his service, as was said of the Tribe of Levi,
Numb. 3. 6. These may be distinguished into such which are, 1. More remote. 2.
More near.


To instance in the first, God's preserving of them in the foregoing part of
their life, is observable. Musculus, when a little one, had the Plague: he dies
not, God having work for him to do: he is plague-proof, till the work be done.
Moses the Lord's Prophet in the Old Testament, Christ in the New, are
exemplifications of this. Neither Pharaoh the bloody Wolf, nor Herod the old
Fox, choke these Lambs in their Infancy, as has elsewhere been noted upon
another Observation.

Again, there are passages of Providence more near; as preparation or fitting
for the work, and actual calling and disposing them according as God in his
Providence sees best Timothy was nurtured in the knowledge of the Scriptures
from a Child, 2 Timothy 3. 15. To be well verst in the Scriptures, is a good
preparative for Divinity. He is after solemnly set apart for public work of
the Ministry, 1 Timothy 4. 14. The Disciples of Christ were Hearers of Him, before
they were Speakers. They had an extraordinary Call as Apostles; and this their
receiving the Lord's Press-mony, had a respect to future Service.

More might be said here, as it refers to Persons Ecclesiastical, who as they
are Officers in the Church, so may they be spoken of in a Treatise of
Providence referring to God's Church or People.

CHAP. II.
1. SEE ground for Saints hopes and Sinners fears. There is a Seed-plot both
for the Afflictiones Ecclesiae veluti sationes quaedam sunt, quae tandem dulcem
justitiae, gratiae, and favoris Dei gustum proferunt; dum videlicet tyrannos
reprimit, and suos a servitute liberat. Moll.

Quemadmodum semen telluri insinuatum and abditum suo tempore prodit, and terra
non obtegitur amplius, sed revelatur: sic sanguis innoxius in terram effusus,
and corpora piorum occisa, ac tellure adoperta, semen sunt, tempore Domini
visitationis ad judicium and condemnationem impiorum proditura. Musculus ad
locum Isai.


one and the other. They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy. He that goes
forth and weepeth, bearing precious seed, shall doubtless come again with
rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with him, Psalm. 126. 5, 6. Even as I (says
Eliphaz the Temanite) have seen, They that plow iniquity and sow wickedness,
reap the same: by the blast of God they perish, and by the breath of his
nostrils are they consumed, Job 4. 8, 9. The Prophet Isaiah comprehends both
Seed-plots, Isa. 26. 20. 21, 21. Come my people, enter thou into thy chambers,
and shut thy doors about thee: hide thy self as it were for a little moment,
till the indignation be over-past: for behold the Lord comes out of his place
to punish the inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity: the earth also shall
discover her blood, and shall no more cover her slain.

2. Observe Foundation-Dispensations of Providence. The way to profit more by
after-Dispensations of Providence, is to take notice of previous or foregoing
ones. The reading of the Preface to the Book, will conduce to the better
understanding of the Book. One skilful in Architecture, will the better judge of
the Superstruction, by taking a view how the Foundation of the House is laid.
We too often pass by the work of God, as a heap of rubbish at a distance;
little considering what the Lord is doing, till afterward we find an House
built there, where nothing but an heap of earth lay. It Is our wisdom then to
observe the display of God's Attributes, in bringing water from this and that
Springhead, by many windings, over many Hills, and through diverse Vales; and
that to refresh some, and drown others: see Psalm. 46. 4. with Isa. 8. 7.

OBSERVATION XXXII.
PROVIDENCE singly considered with respect to Matters, is an hard Chapter to be
understood: but conjunctively, is a good Commentary, or a clear Exposition on
this hard Chapter.
CHAP. I.
THAT the comparing of some single act or acts of Providence, with an after-act
or acts of Providence about matters, is the opening of the Casement for light
to come in on the understanding, does appear as follows.

1. Some have been startled, staggered, nonplust, disquieted, whilst they have
been held at a gaze of some act or acts of Providence about matters; but, on
the other hand, quieted, composed, satisfied, when they have taken a view of
the whole of a Dispensation. Jacob upon the supposed loss of Joseph, talks of
nothing but his grave, Genesis 37. 35. but when he saw the Wagons which Joseph
had sent to carry him, his spirit revived; he said, It is enough, Joseph my son
is yet alive; I will go and see him before I dye, Genesis 45. 27, 28. What an
eye-fore was the prosperity of the wicked, solely considered, to the Psalmist?
But as for me (says he) my feet were almost gone, my steps had well-nigh
slipped, when I saw the prosperity of the wicked, Psalm. 73. 2, 3. And in v. 21.
Thus my heart was grieved, and I was pricked in my reins: But after, these
pangs of disquiet have an end, when he can say, Then I understood their end;
surely thou did set them in slippery places; thou castedst them down into
destruction, v. 17, 18. The two Disciples going to Emaus, were nigh tired with
sorrow and disquiet, which had almost rid them off their legs of Faith; and
that while they cast back an eye on Mount Calvary, where their Lord and Master
was lately crucified: We trusted (say they) that it had been he which should
have redeemed Israel Luke 24. 21. but after, they are taught a lesson to
consider that Golgotha-Dispensation as a copulative one, v. 26. Ought not
Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter into his glory? They might
have been stumbled, if the Golgotha-Dispensation had not been: for how
otherwise should Christ have risen from the grave, triumphed over enemies,
fulfilled the Scripture, according as he intimates, v. 27.

2. The taking a view of the whole of Providence in matters, does after a
natural sort contribute to the better understanding of matters. He that comes
into an Artificer's or Joyner's Shop, and sees here and there some pieces for a
Box, or into a Taylor's Shop, and b^holds here a Skirt, there a Sleeve; may at
present, through his want of thorough consideration, be at a loss what to make
of these somethings-nothings: but after, when all is set together, there is a
proof of the Workmen's skill, and a confutation of the man's ignorance, who
knew not what belongs to the Box or Garment. Even thus it is in reference to
Providential-Dispensations. Or as the Types of old are better understood when
considered in conjunction with what is typed forth by them, as Numb. 21. 9.
with John 3. 14. so this or that act of Providence may better be apprehended
after, than at present. So Christ tells Peter, What I do, thou know not now:
but thou shall know hereafter, John 13. 7.

CHAP. II.
1. SEE one way to prevent guilt of sin under the Dispensations of God, whether
they respect our selves or others; and that is by a copulative or conjunctive
consideration of Providence as to matters. Had Jonah waited a while, he need
not have been so pettish and froward upon the account of the blasting of his
Guord. Then said the Lord, Thou have had pity on the guord for which thou have
not labored, neither made it to grow; which came up in a night, and perished
in a night: and should not I spare Nineveh, that great city, wherein are more
than six-score thousand persons, that cannot discern between their right hand
and their left, and also much cuttel, Jonah 4. 10, 11. The Psalmist likewise
acknowledges his fault, which the non-consideration of Providence
conjunctively, was an inlet or door to, Psalm. 73. 22. So foolish was I, and
ignorant: I was as a beast before thee.

2. Look after a sweet waiting-frame of heart under this and that Dispensation
of Providence. Yea, in the way of thy judgments have we waited for thee, O
Lord, Isa. 26. 8. I will stand upon my watch, and set me upon the tower, and
will watch to see what he will say to me, and what I shall answer when I am
reproved, (or, when I am argued with, as the Margin has it) Hab. 2. 1. Could
persons be so composed when they first set foot on the borders of a
Dispensation, as they are, or ought to be, when they have footed it through to
the other end; they would foot it cheerfully without faintness and stumbling by
the way. We should then in patience possess our selves, till the Lord's work be
over. Copulative Providence is the Silver Trumpet of God's Praises. Joseph
beholds a glorious display of the Divine Attributes in God's Dispensation
toward him. Suppose him as brought into the great Hall of Egypt, hung with
Cloth of Arras; at first entry, he sees a Leg or Arm of a man in the Hangings,
but after, when he has liberty to walk up and down there, he sees a beautiful
piece of Workmanship: Even so, when Joseph looks not to the violent hand of his
Brethren in the Hangings of Providence, but considers all together, he sees the
curious Artifice of Providence in all, and so tells his Brethren; But as for
you, ye thought evil against me; but God meant it unto good, to bring to pass
as it is this day, to save much people alive, Genesis 50. 20. Job, who has his
Scene, and that a sad one too, experienceth all for good in the end. So James
5. 11. Ye have heard of the patience of Job, and have seen the end of the Lord;
that the Lord is very pitiful, and of tender mercy. Non est judicandum de
Providentia Dei ante quintum actum. Pet. Mart.


OBSERVATION XXXIII.
PROVIDENCE has its Harmonies.
CHAP. I.
THOUGH Providence seem to sound Discords; yet it has its Correspondencies or
sweet Accords; and that, with 1. The Purpose or Decree of God. 2. The Sacred
Scriptures. 3. With the Prayers of Saints. 4. With it Self.


First, There is an Harmony of Providence with the Purpose or Decree of God.
Known unto God are all his works from the beginning of the world, Acts 15. 18.
The process of Providence, in the sixth Chapter of the Revelation, is according
to the Book of the Divine Decree spoken of in the fifth Chapter and seventh
verse. I enlarge not here, having spoken distinctly and largely to this in a
foregoing Observation.

Secondly, There is an Harmony of Providence with the Sacred Scriptures. It is
said, Amos 3 3. Can two walk together except they be agreed? The Scripture and
Providence do walk together; they are agreed in the journey's end, where to
meet; albeit one of them may seem to leave the company of the other for some
miles. Providence, in regard of its correspondency with the word, may be termed
a visible Bible, or a Commentary on it. It may be observed how Providence
passes not by this or that as inconsiderable in the word. In Isa. 34. there is
mention made of the Cormorant, Bittern, Owl, Raven, Vultures, and all these as
symptoms or tokens of desolation, v. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. Now observe what
follows in v. 16. Seek ye out the book of the Lord, and read: no one of these
shall fail; none shall want her mate: for my mouth it has commanded, and his
Spirit it has gathered them.

Now more particularly, The Word may be considered,

1. By way of prediction, or foretelling matters so strictly or pr^cisely.

2. By way of positive assertion; there are such and such propositions in which
this and that are predicated of the subject; as instances frequently do occur
in the Proverbs of Solomon, referring to the righteous and the wicked.

3. By way of Commination or Threatening.

4. By way of Promise.

According to all these Considerations Providence does harmonize. Let the Word,
according to the forementioned ways, be understood a-right, and Providence
will not be found a-wrong. The Word and Providence are like two sticks in the
water, which seem crooked by reason of the Medium, or the waters in motion; and
yet neither of them are really so. There is a misapprehension on man's part too
often, both in reference to the Word, and Providence. These do accord: witness
those passages in the word, That it might be fulfilled which was spoken, Ezra
1. 1. That he might perform his saying which the Lord spoke, 1 King. 12. 15.
and the like. There must needs indeed be an accord between the Word and
Providence, seeing Infinite Power, Wisdom, Truth, Justice, do make up the
match. God will not be wanting in his Providence to maintain the reputation of
his Word: yea, the harmony of Providence is sometimes so audible, that a Pagan*
ear can discern it. The Captain of the guard took Jeremiah, and said unto him,
The Lord thy God has pronounced this evil upon this place: now the Lord has
brought it, and done according as he has said, Jer. 40. 2, 3. See Deuteronomy. 29.
24, 25.

Thirdly, There is an Harmony of Providence with the Prayers of Saints. So 1 John 5. 14. And this is the confidence that we have in him, That if we ask any
thing according to his will, he hears us. There are many Exemplifications for
this both in the Old and New Testament. Mention may after be made of
Exemplifications, and likewise somewhat be spoken concerning the answer to
prayers, in a distinct following Observation. Here it may suffice, that the
accord of Providence with Prayer, may be distinguished,

1. Into a Negative one, and yet without a contradiction. Foundation for this,
we have in Amos 7. the Prophet there has a Vision of Grasshoppers; and hereupon
he prays, O Lord forgive, I beseech thee; by whom shall Jacob arise! for he is
small. The reply to this prayer we have v. 3. The Lord repented for this: it
shall not be, says the Lord.

2. There is a positive accord of Providence with Prayer; not only what shall
not be, but what shall be, has its accord with Prayer. Elias prayed earnestly
that it might not rain, and it rained not on the earth by the space of three
years and six months: and he prayed again, and the heaven gave rain, and the
earth brought forth her fruit, Jam. 5. 17, 18.

Fourthly, There is an Harmony of Providence with it self. Providence, for the
main, is the same in all Ages. A man's head and face are still the same, though
his hair be cut, and his beard be shaven, and his apparel or garb different.
There is a substantial Harmony of Providence with Providence. If the Harmony be
not a literal one, or for kind the same; yet there is an Harmony in regard of
the general nature, as it is either frowning or smiling. Otherwise, To what end
are the Dispensations of God in former Ages commended to the serious meditation
of others in after-ages? Now these things (says Paul) were our examples, to
the intent, we should not lust after evil things, as they also lusted: neither
be ye idolaters, as were some of them; as it is written, The people sat down
to eat, and to drink, and rose up to play. Neither let us commit fornication,
as some of them committed, and fell in one day three and twenty thousand.
Neither let us tempt Christ, as some of them also tempted, and were destroyed
of serpents. Neither murmur ye, as some of them also murmured, and were
destroyed of the destroyer. Now all these things happened unto them for
ensamples; and they are written for our admonition upon whom the ends of the
world are come, 1 Cor. 10. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.

Moreover, here let it be weighed, how Providential Dispensations are streams
issuing from the Word; whether considered as unwritten before Moses his days,
or written as after. Smiling Dispensations, and frowning ones, are the births
of Promises and Threatenings. If then the Word of God be Heaven's standing-rule
for man's use, and that as it has both Promises and Threats annexed, Psalm. 19.
7, 8. 2 Timothy 3. 16. the Providence of God then must have its standing-harmony
with Providence. Some difference there may be as the state of man is considered
before the fall of our first Parents; and as God of old did prescribe some
Rules to the Jews, with which his Providence did keep pace; and likewise in
respect of the Lord's more immediate owning and ruling that people: A
difference there is in these and such like respects; but yet not such as does
overturn the Harmony of Providence with Providence: Providence now has its
Harmony formal in some things; equivalent in other things with Providence in
times of the Old Testament.

CHAP. II.
1. WHAT a vanity and folly is it then for persons to busy themselves about
other pretended Harmonies? If there be such bread in the Father's House, what
have the Children to do with husks? There are a sort of bastard-Harmonies cried
up, and doted on, which want a Scripture-legitimation. These, like Worms, eat
away the kernel of men's thoughts and affections from better things, and so
leave an empty shell; which, though it do not break the teeth in cracking, yet
defiles the mouth by the putrifi'd stuff in it.

1. There is the pretended Harmony of things with Judicial Astrological
Predictions, Porro Astrologi and quicunque alii divinatores, qui quasi simiae
Dei videri volunt, omnino deridendi sunt. Nec enim fieri potest ut de rebus
futuris contingentibus ac praesertim liberis vera praedicent, nisi forte
aliquando casu veritatem attingant; nam cum omnibus causis necessariis,
contingentibus, liberis, voluntas Dei praesideat and prae-emineat, and poffit
causas inferiores, quando libuerit impedire; nemo vera praedicere potest, nisi
cui Deus voluntatem suam manifestare voluerit, ut saepe prophetis suis
manifestavit. Bellar. in opusc. de ascensione mentis ad Deum. qu. 12.
which are not founded on right Reason, or general Experience. Some make bold
to bring forth the Decrees of the Starr-Chamber as touching the bent of men's
minds, the deaths of persons, etc. as if so be there were not a secret
Council Table within the be-spangled Canopy of Heaven. There is little reason,
and less grace, for men to be curiously searching after some Fopperies in
Almanacks, and this to the neglect of their Bibles, which will never be out of
date. If men would search into the later, as they do into the former, they
might read of an Esau and a Jacob, twins-born, but of a different character,
Genesis 25. 23. They might read of many thousands dying a violent death nigh one
and the same time, Judge. 8. 10. and if an Astrologer had been consulted, is it
likely that he had made such a difference as to Esau and Jacob, and such an
Harmony of the deaths of an Hundred and twenty thousand, as the last Scripture
mentions? Again, they might read, that promotion comes neither from the east,
nor from the west, nor from the south, Psalm. 75. 6. Furthermore, they might
read a Sacred insulting Irony, Let now the astrologers, the starr-gazers, the
monthly-prognosticators, stand up, and save thee from the things that shall
come upon thee, Isa. 43. 13. Lastly, They might peruse a Dehortatory Lesson;
Thus says the Lord, Learn not the way of the heathen, and be not dismayed at
the signs of heaven, for the heathens are dismayed at them, Jer. 10. 2.

2. There is another bastard Harmony in regard of particular blind Prophecies
cast forth from Wizards and Witches, the Oracles of the Devil. There is in some
a wicked Curiosity to know their Fortune, as it is phrased. If such would know
their Fortune, they might take a shorter and surer course by reading the 28 chapter
of Deuteronomy: or, if they like not so large a Discourse, they may have it in
short from Christ, who tells them, He that believes not, shall be damned, Mark
16. 16. It is often a suspicious sign of hardness of heart, and a judiciary
deserting by the Lord, when thus the Oracles of the Devil are in request with
parties. Seek me out (said Saul to his servants) a woman that has a familiar
spirit, that I may go to her, and enquire of her, 1 Samuel 28. 7. and what got
he, but further sorrow and woe? see ver. 20.

Perhaps it will be objected here by some, That Prophecies, so termed, do fall
out true; and therefore why are they not to be looked after?

To this threadbare Objection, note the following Reply, and that in diverse
particulars.

1. Why are not things observed to fall out otherwise ordinarily? Sciunt illi
(daemones) quidem futura multa, sed non omnia, quippe quibus penitus consilium
Dei scire non licet: and ideo solent responsa in ambiguos exitus temperare.
Lact. lib. 2. Instit. cap. 15.
An Astrologer or Starpeeper (says Luther) is to be likened to one who sells
Dice, and says, Behold here I have Dice that always run upon Twelve; the rest
of the fifty Casts upon 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Even thus it is with
Astrologers: When once or twice their Conceits and Fantasies do hit and happen,
then they cannot sufficiently extol and praise the Art; but touching the other
so oftentimes failing, they are altogether still and silent. Thus Luther. And
indeed it is no wonder if sometimes that which is spoken (and yet it may be in
the general, or in an ambiguous sense) do thus or thus fall out. Suppose diverse
in Israel had had recourse to Witches, or others, to enquire what weather
should have been on the morrow, when Samuel said, Is it not wheat-harvest to
day? I will call unto the Lord, and be shall send thunder and rain, 1 Samuel 12
17. Perhaps, none had hit right: suppose one had amongst many (for some kind of
weather must be); now this one speaks the truth, but not truly; having no
ground, but as the blind man shoots the Hare.

2. Whether some kind of Predictions may have some influence by way of a kind
of natural causality, to bring about what is said. A true Prophecy may have
some influence in an ordinary way to further the accomplishment of it self: so
2 King. 9. the Prophecy there was the occasion at least for the Army-men to set
up Jehu. And so, on the other hand, some passages heeded may be inductive of
the thing. A man has a strong conceit of death, he is foretold so; and this
fancy may, through Providence righteous Amen, have its deadly operation.

3. Satan can give notable intelligence to some who are his Oracles: For,
Angeli in verbo Dei cognoscunt omnia, antequam in re siant: and quae apud
homines adhuc futura sunt, Angeli jam revelante Deo, noverunt; praevaricatores
Angeli etiam sanctitate amissa, non tamen amiserunt vivxis creaturae Angelicae
sensum: triplici enim modo praescientiae acumine vigent; scilicet subtilitate
naturae, experientia temporum, revelatione superiorum potestatum. Isid. Hisp.
lib. 1. sent. c. 12.


1. He is an Angel, and so has a deeper insight into matters. Though there may
be some crack in his natural intellectuals by his fall; yet, as an Angel, he
sees further into matters: see 2 Samuel 14. 17.

2. He has had long experience as to matters in the world: He is an old
Serpent, Rev. 12. 9.

3. He can quickly take cognizance of the position of matters, how things are
in their precedent Causes both Natural and Moral. Thus supposing that it was
the Devil in Samuel's Mantle, no wonder if he speaks as he does: for David was
anointed, Saul grows worse and worse; and now the top-stone-Sinne, was laid on,
namely, his going to a Witch, and a battle was at hand to be sought.

4. The Devil has a great stroke in matters brought about in the World. He
that is then an Agitator, may the better be an Intelligencer. See 1 King. 22.
21, 22. Job 1. 12. Satan could know what would befall Ahab and Job, when he had
a Commission, or rather a Permission, what to do.

4. God has wise Ends in the verification of what is sometimes foretold. That
place in Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 2, 3. is a full one for this purpose. Providence forbears
not to go the journey, because Satan does so probably guess, and give it out:
yea, Providence sets forward the rather for the trial of persons. And therefore
let that pertinent instruction be remembered, Isa. 8. 19, 20. And when they
shall say unto you, Seek unto them that have familiar spirits, and unto
wizards, that peep and that mutter: should not a people seek unto their God?
for the living to the dead? To the law, and to the testimony: if they speak not
according to this word, it is because there is no light in them.

3. There is a specious expected Harmony of Providence with Scriptures
misunderstood. It may be said here to some, as Christ said, Mat. 22. 29. Ye do
err, not knowing the Scriptures. The Jews look for a Messiah; they are zealous
for Moses, and hot against Christ. What the Apostle said of the Jews in his
days [ But even unto this day, when Moses is read, the vail is upon their
heart, 2 Cor. 3. 15.] the same may be said of their posterity. Others there
are, who (through error) fasten that on Providence to make good, which may
never be. A pertinent passage for this purpose, we have John 21. 23. Then went
this saying abroad among the brethren, That that disciple should not dye: yet
Jesus said not to him, He shall not dye; but if I will that he tarry till I
come, what is that to thee? This then is another false Harmony of Providence;
and of this matter more is said elsewhere.

II. Learn to depart from evil, and do good, according to that in Psalm. 34. 14.
The moving-consideration is drawn from the Harmony of Providence, which is
twofold: 1. Joyous, sprightful, or gracious. 2. Doleful, or grievous.


This double Harmony of Providence seems to be pointed at in the Psalm now
mentioned: for in the fifteenth verse it is said, The eyes of the Lord are upon
the righteous, and his ears are open to their cry. They then who would have the
eye of God on them for good, and his ear open to their prayer, must see they
depart from evil, and do good: they are not to have a deaf ear to this voice of
the Lord. Again in verse 16 it is said, The face of the Lord is against them
that do evil, to cut off the remembrance of them from the earth. Providence
will frown on such who smile on sin.

There is then encouragement from the Harmony of Providence, both in a way of
Mercy and Wrath, to depart from evil, and do good. And whatever
seeming-contrariety there is in regard of the prosperity of sinners, and the
adversity of pious ones; yet it is a standing-truth, That Joyous or Gracious
Providence is the portion of godly ones; and Doleful or Grievous Providence is
the lot of wicked ones. The one have smiles in their frowns; and the other,
real frowns in their smiles. Consonant to this is that in the eighth of
Ecclesiastes, and the twelfth verse; Though a sinner do evil an hundred times,
and his days be prolonged; yet surely I know, that it shall be well with them
that fear God, which fear before him. To this of the Preacher, add that of the
Prophet: Say unto the righteous, That it shall be well with him: for they shall
eat the fruit of their doings. Woe unto the wicked, for it shall be ill with
him, for the reward of his hands shall be given him, Isa. 3. 10, 11.

OBSERVATION XXXIV.
PROVIDENCE has its Contraries: or, There is a Checker-Table of Providence,
wherein are the Whites of Serenity, and the Blacks of Adversity.
CHAP. I.
THAT there is such a neighborhood of Whites and Blacks in the Dispensations
of the Almighty, may be proved, if consideration be had to the following heads
of Discourse.

First, There are Similies, Allusions, or Illustrations of this in Scripture.
The Wind of Providence keeps not at one point of the Compass. So Eccles. 1. 6.
The wind goes toward the south, and turns about toward the north; it
whirleth about continually, and the wind returns again according to his
circuits. I saw (says Daniel) in my vision by night, and behold the four winds
of the heaven strove upon the great sea, Dan. 7. 2. That notion of a Wheel,
Ezekiel. 1. 15. does set forth the rolling or turning-condition of things in the
World. How often likewise is there an allusion to the Sea, Dan. 7. 2. Rev. 15.
2. We read of two notable Sea-voyages of the Disciples of Christ, in which they
might learn how the Church of Christ may have storms and calms, Mat. 8. 24. and
Mat. 14. 22.

Secondly, There are Cautions, Dehortations, Comminations, on the one hand; and
Exhortations, Encouragements, Promises, on the other; which do imply this
neighhourhood of Whites and Blacks of Providence. So in Isa. 1. 19, 20. If ye
be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the land: but if ye refuse
and rebel, ye shall be devoured with the sword: for the mouth of the Lord has
spoken it. I might be large here: it may suffice to point at places: see Deuteronomy.
28. Josh. 24. 1 Samuel 12. 24, 25. Psalm. 34. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. ^uke 13. 34,
35.

Thirdly, The Prayers of God's People in Scripture do declare this. The 90 th
Psalm is styled, A Prayer of Moses the man of God. Observe passages there.
Return O Lord, how long: and, Let it repent thee now concerning thy servants. O
satisfy us early with thy mercy, that we may rejoice and be glad all our days.
Make us glad, according to the days wherein thou have aff^cted us, and the
years wherein we have seen evil, ver. 13, 14, 15. Daniel's prayer, chap. 9.
looks backward on the Jews past both prosperous state, and afflicted state, for
seventy years; and looks forward on a merciful Dispensation at hand.

Fourthly, There are certain Doxologies in Scripture, which take in this as
matter of celebration or acknowledgment: So 1 Samuel 2. The bows of the mighty
men are broken; and they that stumbled, are girt with strength: they that were
full, have hired out themselves for bread, and they that were hungry, ceased:
so that the barren have born seven; and she that has many children, is waxed
feeble. The Lord kills, and makes alive; he brings down to the grave, and
brings up. The Lord makes poor, and makes rich: he brings low, and
lifts up: he raises up the poor out of the dust; and lifts up the beggar
from the dunghill, to set them among princes, and to make them inherit the
throne of glory: for the pillars of the earth are the Lord's, and he has set
the world upon them. Thus Hannah in her Song of Thankfulness. See likewise the
Doxology of Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4. 34, 35, 36, 37. and of Mary the Mother of
Jesus, Luke 2. 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54.

Fifthly, There is something as an adjunct oftentimes coupled with Adversity,
and with Prosperity; by reason or order of which, as precedaneous, a door is
thrown open both for the one and the other. Here is indeed a Shop of Exchange.
Adversity, through a gracious Providence, makes way for Prosperity; and
Prosperity, through a righteous Providence visiting for Prosperity-sins, makes
way for Adversity. Manasseh, a King, sins himself from his Throne: in his
affliction he sought God, was humbled greatly: the Lord was entreated of him,
and brought him again to Jerusalem into his Kingdom, 2 Chronicles. 33. 11, 12, 13.
Pertinent for this purpose, is that in Ps. 107. Fools, because of their
transgression, and because of their iniquities, are afflicted: their soul
abhors all manner of meat; and they draw nearer to the gates of death: then
they cry unto the Lord in their trouble, be saves them out of their
distresses, v. 17, 18, 19.

Sixthly, There is a Divine Constitution of Heaven for wise Ends, why this is
so, and shall be so. Solomon tells of a day of Prosperity, and a day of
Adversity; and moreover affixeth this, saying, God also has set the one over
against the other, to the end that man should find nothing after him, Eccles.
7. 14. Adversity (says one) is set opposite to Prosperity, Mr. Pemble
a Vale against a Hill, in a continual vicissitude and succession; and this is
done to the end, or in such order and manner, that man should, or shall, find
nothing after him, viz. of those things that may come upon him in the course of
his life, and aftertimes: he cannot by wit foresee, nor by policy prevent,
ensuing changes; and therefore it is a great part of his wisdom to arm himself
with patience for all adventures.

In this Constitution of Heaven for an intermixture Si tristia semper
acciderent, quis fustineret? si semper prospera, quis non contemneret? sed
rerum tanta gubernatrix sapientia horum pernecessaria vicissitudine eo
moderamine electi, suis cursum vitae temporalis alternat, ut nec adversa
frangant, nec laeta dissolvant, cum potius and ista ex illis gratiora, and illa
ex his tolerabiliora reddantur. Bern. in Epistola ad Pe^ Popiensem.
of Dispensations, three things are observable:

1. Here is a display of the Divine Attributes intended. Not only is Wisdom
seen in the allay of Prosperity by Adversity, and of Adversity by Prosperity;
but likewise Goodness, Power, Justice, have their glorious Manifesto's or
Displays, according to particular concernments of persons, whose day is a
black-cloudy, or a bright Sunshine one. Not only the Word, but Providence, and
that in Dispensations of this nature, do witness, that the Lord is
long-suffering, and of great mercy, forgiving iniquity, and transgression; and
by no means clearing the guilty: visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the
children, unto the third and fourth generation, Numb. 14. 18.

In the next place, The Lord by this intermixture of Whites and Blacks in the
course of his Providence, will make trial of persons. They shall have change of
pastures. One while the grass is very low; another while a fresh leeze is
broken up for them. The Israelites in the Wilderness are suffered to hunger,
and yet are fed with Manna; and all this to prove them, Deuteronomy. 8 2, 3.

Lastly, God will hereby put a distinction between Earth and Heaven. This World
rings Changes. Heaven's Serenity is never overcast with a black Cloud. The
Apostle Paul is admirable in the antithesis or opposition he makes, on this
wise; here, affliction; there, an exceeding and eternal weight of glory. Here,
an earthly house of this tabernacle; there, a building of God, an house not
made with hands, eternal in the heavens, 2 Cor. 4. 17. and chap. 5. v. 1. Yea,
wicked men will find a difference between their state here, and their state
hereafter: so Luke 16. 25. But Abraham said, So^ remember that thou in thy
lifetime receivedst thy good things, and likewise Lazarus evil things; but now
he is comforted, and thou art tormented.

CHAP. II.
1. BE not secure because of a present Nos vero sic laetari debemus, ut non
immergamur, sed servemus partem cordis Deo, qua etiam far possimus diem
malum; sic fiet, ut mala praevisa minus discrucient nos. Luth. in Eccles. cap.
7.

Sed nos immergimur penitus vel laetis vel adversis; pii vero ubi boni and mali
vicissifudinem patiuntur, dicunt: Hic Dei ordo sive mos est, neque frangantur.
Ibid.


Tranquillity, or Sunshine of Providence in matters. The Horse goes well over
the Plain; a rough way is at hand, where it may stumble, and dismount the
Rider: yea, it may happen, the Horse may trip on the Plain; some little
hillock, or loose stone in the way, may occasion a fall. And in my prosperity I
said (but God said not so, though David said so) I shall never be moved. Lord,
by thy favor thou have made my mountain to stand strong: thou did hide thy
face, and I was troubled, Psalm. 30. 6, 7.

2. Give not way to a despondency under Adversity. Though the man stand in the
Black, he may by-and-by be in the White. Note here four things: (1.) There is
an evil of Despondency under evils of Smart. (2) Good persons, yea, eminently
good, are incident to some grumblings or touches at least of this Disease. (3.)
Parties notwithstanding their black Conclusions from the Position of their
Affairs, may experience God's kindness. (4.) Persons may even then be nearest
Mercy, or Mercy nearest them, when they deem it furthest off. So 1 Samuel 27. 1.
And David said in his heart, I shall now perish one day by the hand of Saul.
Observe here, (1.) Who said? David, a Saint, and an eminent one too. (2.) What
did he say? I shall perish one day by the hand of Saul. Did this [ one day]
ever come? No; for David lived to see the day of Readiness death. (3.) When was it
that David said as he did? Even then when Readiness glass was nigh done, a few
sands to run: so that he who did conclude his life would be concluded by Readiness
violence; he that talks of falling by the hand of Saul, hears tidings of Readiness
falling by the hand of the Philistines, 1 Samuel 30. with 2 Samuel 1. chap.

3. Take a view of the Checker-Table of Providence; observe the revolutions
that are in the world; let not the Whites and Blacks be passed over without a
good improvement. It is said, Deuteronomy. 8. 2. And thou shall remember all the way
which the Lord thy God led thee these forty years in the wilderness -- Note
here, how it is the Israelites duty to call to remembrance, or keep up in memory
the way, and all the ways of God's Dispensations toward them: they, in their
Wilderness-journey, had ups and downs; Mercies and Judgments were attendants;
and they are not to forget what might profitably be learned in the company of
such attendants on them in the Wilderness.

There are, moreover, two inducements, why persons should take a view of this
Checker-Table: (1.) It Is plain or obvious to men's eyes. The Whites and Blacks
of the Lord's Dispensations are the more visible. The walk of Providence from
one point to a diametrically opposite point, or from the Hill to the Vale, and
from the Vale to the Hill, be speaks men to be sand-blind, or pur-blind, if it
be not noted. Thus it is implied in Luke 1. He has put down the mighty from
their seats, and exalted them of low degree; he has filled the hungry with
good things, and the rich he has sent empty away, v. 52, and 53. They then are
very deaf, or have an injudicious ear, who hear not the loud Bell of Providence
in such changes which befall themselves or others. (2.) As this Checker-table is
plain or obvious to the eye; so is it a large one. There are many whites and
blacks. There are not only the whites and blacks in regard of Temporals, but
also in regard of Spirituals. Our Savior tells the Jews, saying, The kingdom
of God shall be taken from you, and given to a nation bringing forth the fruits
thereof, Mat. 21. 43. A wonderful change! and that reciprocal or mutual, as it
respects different subjects, there is this way; according to that in Hos. 1.
10. -- And it shall come to pass, that in the place where it was said unto
them, Ye are not my people, there it shall be said unto them, Te are the sons
of the living God. Again, these whites and blacks not only in respect of
persons singly considered; but in respect of a Community or Society of persons.
That passage, -- that there be no complaining in our streets, Psalm. 144. 14.
does imply the different state of a Nation in regard of Temporal Mercies. We
read in Acts 9. 31. Then had the Churches rest thorowout all Judea, and
Galilee, and Samaria, -- And we read likewise, how the Rest there was not an
everlasting one, Acts 12. 1.

4. Long then for an Heaven, or the Everlasting Rest. There is no such
Checker-table there. Be willing, however, that this Sacred Game of Providence
be at an end. Beware of foolish passion, and irregular desires of death. Let
God alone to time all. The longest Game of Providence here in matters, will
have its end. Meditate on that of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5. 4. For we that are in
this tabernacle, do groan, being burdened; not that we would be uncloathed, but
clothed upon; that mortality might be swallowed up of life.

OBSERVATION XXXV.
One and the same Providence has sometimes its Blacks and Whites: or, There is
both Honey and Gall wrapped up in a Dispensation, considered as a mixed one.
CHAP. I.
THIS Observation, however it may seem a Paradox; yet is such an one, which may
be cleared up as Orthodox; and that if we consider, 1. Exemplifications from
Scripture. 2. The various wise Ends which God has in mix't Dispensations.


1. There are many Exemplifications of this Verity. Noah must change his
habitation, he shut up in the Ark as in a Prison: There are beasts within, for
his Fellow Prisoners; and sad desolations without, amongst the Beasts, and Men,
the worse Beasts in a moral sense: all this is afflictive. But yet his being in
the Ark in order to his preservation, was a signal favor; for so the Lord
gives him to understand, Genesis 7. 1. with Genesis 6. 8. Lot is taken prisoner, but
not slain, Genesis 14. 13. Joseph had a Prison-palace, or a Palace-prison, for the
Lord was with him, and showed him mercy, and gave him favor in the sight of
the keeper of the prison, Genesis 31. 21. Moses is cast as an Exile into the Land
of Midian, and there God provides for him, Exodus 2. 21. God takes away David's
Child by death, who might have proved as an upbraiding Monument of David's
shame, so an occasion of War in the Kingdom, 2 Samuel 12. Jonah is swallowed by
a Whale, Jon. 1. 17. the fish's belly is his house of prayer; and Jonah's
prayer is a prevailing-one: he who had a providential ingress, has a glorious
egress; The Lord spoke unto the fish, and it vomited out Jonah upon the dry
land, Jon. 2. 10. Our Savior tells his Disciples, saying, It is expedient for
you that I go away; for if I go not away, the Comforter shall not come unto
you: but if I depart, I will send him unto you, Joh. 16. 7. Paul must suffer
shipwreck, and yet none of their lives in the Ship are lost, Acts 27. 44. The
same Man of God has a thorn in the flesh, a Messenger of Satan to buffet him;
yet this thorn is to open a passage for whatever Imposthumed-pride was gathered
to an head: The Devil, an unclean Spirit, becomes providentially a
sanctifying-one in a sense. God knows how to make the Devil do a good choar for
a Saint, whilst the Devil intends his own work. Paul was of this belief, as he
professes, 2 Cor. 12. 7.

2. There are various wise ends in such mix't Dispensations: Amongst others, we
may cast an eye on these. (1.) Sometimes he makes a display of fatherly
displeasure. There is a Rod, but it is a gentle one; Thou shall not dye; but
the child shall surely dye, said Nathan to David, 2 Samuel 12. 13, 14. (2.) God
will hereby wisely exercise the graces of his people, as their faith and
patience, by the bitter part of the Dispensation; and their love to him,
admiration of him, and thankfulness for favor by the sweeter part of the
Dispensation. Thus Epaphroditus sickness, yet not death; and Paul's danger of
being devoured by the Roman Lion, had their influences on their graces,
according to the interwoven mixture in these Dispensations, Phil. 2. 27. 2 Timothy
4. 16, 17. (3.) Hereby the Lord wisely consults an Antidote and Remedy against
two Evils, namely, Pride and Despondency. Jacob is not to be dejected; he is a
Prevailer: he is not to be elated; for he halted upon his thigh, Genesis 32. 28,
31. God's Dispensations are like well-levell'd Cannons, which beat upon Pride
and Despondency, and so make sweeping-work with each of these files at once.
(4.) The Lord teaches the correspondency of his Providence with his Word. We
are lesson'd not to slight Heaven's Rod, which has its smarting-blow: and not
to faint; for its blow is from a Father, not an implacable Enemy, see Prove. 3.
11, 12. (5.) Hereby God will put a difference betwixt Earth and Heaven. Paul
will have no need of a Thorn in the flesh, when he is taken Tenant to the
Heavenly Inheritance. The joys of Saints in Heaven will run like a Crystal
River, without mixture of mud or dirt. God shall wipe away all tears from their
eyes, Rev. 7. 17.

CHAP. II.
1. LEARN what a wise God the Christian has for his God. The great Physician
of Heaven so attemperateth the Physic, as that it shall bear upon various ill
humors. With one and the same Beesom Providence sweepeth the Saints house
clean, to the joy and rejoicing of the Saint. The Ship is so managed, as that
it neither overturns for want of ballast, nor sinks into the sea by reason of
burden. God does balance the hearts of men, as well as balance the clouds over
the heads of men, as is said Job 37. 16. He is excellent in power and in
judgment, and in plenty of justice: he will not afflict, v. 23. And in Jer. 10.
24. O Lord, correct me, but with judgment; not in thine anger, lest thou bring
me to nothing.

2. Beware then of fixing an eye only on the more ghastly part of a
Dispensation. View the bright side as well as the dark side of thy Cloud. There
are two things here considerable:

1. It is very rational or equitable, that a proportionable surveigh should be
taken of a Dispensation. Hezekiah, after he had heard the Prophet's heavy
tidings, says, Good is the word of the Lord which thou have spoken, for there
shall be peace and truth in my days, Isa. 39. 8.

2. As there is a robbing of the Lord in respect of his goodness and mercy in
eying only the bitter part, as bitter, in Dispensation; so a person in so doing
stands in the light of his own support and comfort. He that can read Love,
Mercy, Wisdom, in the Characters of Providence, though written with the
intermixture of Gall in their black Ink, will not tear in pieces the Letter
sent from Heaven. The Prophet Jeremiah gives a large description of Miseries,
Lam. 3. from v. 1. to 21. and in v. 22. what says he? It is of the Lord's
mercies that we are not consumed, because his compassions fail not. Here is a
sense of Mercies, as well as before a sense of Miseries; and a good use is made
of this in v. 26. It is good that a man should both hope and quietly wait for
the salvation of the Lord.

OBSERVATION XXXVI.
There is a Retaliating-work, or work of rendering like for like, observable in
God's dealing with the sons of men.
CHAP. I.
THIS Retaliating-work of Providence may be considered both by way of frown and
smile; or, as grievous in a way of smart, and gracious in a way of favor. Each
of these have a correspondence with what is foregoing either by way of
proportion literal (if I may so term it), there is a Copy or Counterpane of the
former Deed; or (as is vulgarly said) the same bread which men break to others,
is broken to them again: or by way of proportion equivalent, or in value. God
does sometimes pay persons in the like coin; sometimes the payment is made in
Bullion, which though it have not the like Image or Superscription on it, yet
it comes out of the same Mine, though not the same Mint. There is a general
accord with what did precede, and that (as was said) by way of frown and smile.
For the further clearing up of this Meditation or Observation, the following
Heads of Discourse offer themselves to consideration.

First, There are Assertions in Scripture on this wise: These Assertions are,
1. General. 2. Particular.


1. The Assertions general which do point at this, are to be spoken to. And
here, not to be large, hear what He asserteth, whose word may well be taken,
Christ himself: Judge not, that ye be not judged: for with what judgment ye
judge, ye shall be judged: and with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured
to you again, Mat. 7. 1, 2. Compare this Scripture with Luke 5. 37, 38. and we
have the Text, or Subject Matter, enlarged: for thus it is said, Judge not, and
ye shall not be judged; condemn not, and ye shall not be condemned: forgive,
and ye shall be forgiven: give, and it shall be given unto you good measure,
pressed down, and shaken together, and running over, shall men give into your
bosom: for with the same measure that ye mete withal, it shall be measured to
you again.

2. There are Assertions in particular, and that as they point at
frowning-Dispensations and smiling-ones. The first sort of Assertions in
particular, as they respect wrath, we have scattered up and down in Scripture.
So Isa. 33. 1. Woe to thee that spoilest, and thou wast not spoiled; and dealest
treacherously, and they dealt not treacherously with thee: when thou shall
cease to spoil, thou shall be spoiled; and when thou shall make an end to deal
treacherously, they shall deal treacherously with thee. Rev. 13. 10. He that
leads into captivity, shall go into captivity: he that kills with the
sword, must be killed with the sword.

The later sort of Assertions in particular we have likewise on Sacred Record.
So Psalm. 41. Blessed is he that considers the poor; the Lord will deliver him
in time of trouble: the Lord will preserve him, and keep him alive, and he
shall be blessed upon the earth, and thou will not deliver him to the will of
his enemies: the Lord will strengthen him upon the bed of languishing; thou will make his bed in sickness, v. 1, 2, 3. To this add one Scripture more,
Psalm. 18. 25. With the merciful thou will show thy self merciful: with the
upright thou will show thy self upright. And that in Mat. 5. 7. Blessed are the
merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.

Secondly, The Prayers that are in Scripture recorded, do imply a
Retaliating-work of Providence. There are Sacred or Divinely-inspired
reflections on the evil and good deeds of persons; and these reflections have
reached Heaven for an answer: so in Psalm. 137. 7. Remember, O Lord, the
children of Edom, in the day of Jerusalem; who said, Raze it, raze it, even to
the foundation thereof. So likewise, Lam. 1. 22. Let all their wickedness come
before thee; and do unto them as thou have done unto me for all my
transgressions: for my sighs are many, and my heart faint. And Rev. 6. 7. And
they cried with a loud voice, saying, How long, O Lord, holy and true, do
thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth?

Again, there are passages in Prayer of another aspect or reflection. Boaz
answered and said to Ruth, It has fully been showed me, all that thou have
done unto thy mother-in-law since the death of thy husband; and how thou have
left thy father, and thy mother, and the land of thy nativity; and art come
unto a people which thou knew not heretofore. The Lord recompense thy work,
and a full reward be given to thee of the Lord God of Israel, under whose wings
thou art come to trust, Ruth 2. 11, 12. The Lord (said Paul) give mercy unto
the house of Onesiphorus, for he often refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my
chain, 2 Timothy 1. 18.

Thirdly, There are Exemplifications of a Retaliating-work; and that, 1. By way
of Wrath, or Judgment, or Severity. 2. By way of Mercy.


1. To begin with the first sort: The firstborn of Egypt were slain, and that
very righteously, if consideration be had to the bloody Edict for the
destroying the male-children of the Israelites; and look, as Orders were issued
out to drown the children of the Israelites in Egypt's River; so Pharaoh with
his Host are drowned in the Red Sea, Exodus 1. 16. and v. 22. with Exodus 12. 29.
and Exodus 14. 30. Samuel tells Agag, As thy sword has made women childless, so
shall thy mother be childless among women; and Samuel hewed Agag in pieces
before the Lord in Gilgal, 1 Samuel 15. 23. Vengeance is for Edom; and why?
Because that Edom has dealt against the house of Judah by taking vengeance,
Ezekiel. 25. 12, 13, 14. O Jerusalem (said Christ) which killest the prophets, and
stonest them which are sent unto thee -- behold now your house is left unto you
desolate, Luke 13. 34, 35. It is said, Rev. 16. 6. -- for they have shed the
blood of saints and prophets, and thou have given them blood to drink, for they
are worthy. And in Rev. 18. 6. Reward her, even as she rewarded you; and double
unto her double, according to her works: in the cup which she has filled, fill
to her double. Many instances are there in Civil and Ecclesiastical History,
which do abundantly witness this. It may be observed how the sins of Fraud,
Perjury, Oppression, Blood, are written in Capital Characters on the foreheads
of after-punishments.

The next sort of Exemplifications come to be spoken to. The Midwives, who did
not set their hands to pull down the props of the Israelitish houses (I mean,
the Male-children), have houses made for them, Exodus 1. 21. God's making of
them houses there, may be understood in regard of propagation or increase of
posterity; their Vines spread, who did not destroy the young Plants: or in
regard of Honor; their Houses or Families are made illustrious: They who
honored God, and his people too, in an afflicted condition; are honored by
God. Or, lastly, in regard of wealth or prosperous estate; they are blessed with
a confluence of good things, who would not be instrumental to rob the
Israelites of their best living goods. Lot shows kindness to Angels in the
shape of men; and he who would defend his Guests, is defended by them, Genesis 19.
1, etc. David shows kindness to Mephibosheth for Jonathan's sake; having
received kindness from the Father, he makes conscience of paying of the debt of
kindness to the Son, 2 Samuel 9. 7.

There are Exemplifications of this verity in History. That relation Mr. Fox
makes of Freseobalt a Merchant of Florence, is pertinent here. He was very
bountiful to Cromwell, after Lord Chancellor of England; and found the
counterpain of his bounty in Florence, at London: for coming thither to get in
some moneys due to him in England, he being now in a low estate, finds one high
enough, namely, the said Lord, for his help and relief. By the assistance of
the Chancellor, his debts due are paid: and the money which this Merchant gave,
or rather lent, to the other, being in a mean and distressed condition, is
refunded with noble Interest, viz. Eight hundred Ducats for about Fifty,
disbursed in order to Cromwell's return to England. In the Life of that famous
Preacher in his Age, Lavater, there is a memorable story of Providence in
retaliating kindness for kindness to Lavater his Father. He being a
Military-man, had compassion on a common Soldier laboring under great
extremity by reason of thirst at a very hot season: though he were an Officer
of note, yet he took cognizance of a distressed Soldier, and liberally
refresh't him with a draught of Wine which he had by him in some vessel at that
time. It happens, about eight years after, that Lavater in a certain fight
falls into a Ditch or Trench where many had perished; neither was there any
hope that he should get out from thence: but behold, that very Soldier put
forth his hand in the very sight of the Enemies, with great danger of his life,
and plucks Lavater from the jaws of death; who is now delivered, and after
returns home to his Command, and enquires who it was that so hazzarded himself
for him, wills the man to come before him; asks him, what was the reason he so
jeoparded his life. The Soldier replies, Because thou some years heretofore,
when I was likely to perish by reason of thirst, in Italy, did relieve me in
my extremity. In the Life of learned and pious Junius, it is mentioned, how
being at a great distance from his friends, and War breaking forth in France,
so that he could not have moneys sent him; he was in very great want, so that
he was resolved to dig for a Livelihood in the City-trench of Geneva, and so
relieve himself that way, taking what time he could otherwhile to follow his
Book. Being thus distressed, one William Burdo, who was a Tailor there, having
been out in the Civil-Warrs of France, and lately escaped with his life, takes
notice of Junius going from a Sermon; and doubtful whether it were Junius, who
was now in a poor condition as to sight, asks him, who was ashamed to discover
himself, and so finds him to be his Country man, has him to his Lodging,
telling him he would work to get enough for a subsistence, knowing he should be
paid again from Junius his friends: and so he did, and was induced so to do,
considering what kindness his Mother (being a Widow-woman, and having many
Children) had received from Junius his Mother, who was a religious and
bountiful Matron, and did daily send relief to the Widow-woman and her
Children, living near her house. One of her Children was this William, who now
is an helper to him, whose Mother had been an helper. Who knows to whom he may
be beholding to one time or other! Good acts of Charity are Bills of Exchange,
when no money is in the Purse. He that has pity on the poor, lends unto the
Lord; and that which he has given, will he pay him again, Prove. 19. 17.

CHAP. II.
I. IN reference then to Frowning-Retaliations of Providence, observe these
following Documents.

1. There is ground to repent for Injuries done to others. There may be a sad
reckoning of Providence behind. They who imbitter others lives, may have their
lives imbittered by others. The King of Nineveb with his Nobles act wisely,
when it is thus enacted; Yea, let them turn every one from his evil way, and
from the violence that is in their hands, Jonah 3. 8. The success of humbling
and reforming-work, is made mention in the tenth verse.

2. Acknowledge God's righteous hand, when the evil of our sins are written thus
on the foreheads of our Smarts. An Adonibezeck feels the righteous hand of
Providence in his thumbs cut off; and the trampling foot of Providence, in
treading on, yea off, his great toes: As I have done, so God has requited me,
says he, Judge. 1. 6, 7.

3. There is hope of the Lord's helping persons under the furies of men, from
the consideration of Retaliating-Providence. So Psalm. 137. 8. O daughter of
Babylon, who art to be destroyed, happy shall he be that rewards thee as thou
have served us. Obad. v. 15. For the day of the Lord is near upon all the
heathen: as thou have done, it shall be done unto thee; thy reward shall return
upon thine own head. See also Rev. 18. 20, with 24.

4. Beware of unrighteous acts toward others, whether Magistrates, Ministers,
Parents, Husbands, Wives, Widows, Fatherless. It is storied of an aged man, who
being barbarously dragged by the hair of the head, desired his son (who abused
him) he would not drag him beyond such a place of the house, for that he did
not so to his Father. It Is said, how some second Husbands pay home the first
Husbands scores; and so of Wives too often it is experienced. The people of
Israel refused to obey the voice of Samuel their Governor, and they smarted
for it, 1 Samuel 8 19. They who slight good Ministers, may be punished with bad
ones. There may be Watchmen which may smite some for their smiting, and wound
for their wounding, Cant. 5. 7. That is a notable caution given, Exodus 22. Ye
shall not afflict any widow, or fatherless child; if thou afflict them in any
wise, and they cry at all unto me, I will surely hear their cry, and my wrath
shall wax hot, and I will kill you with the sword, and your wives shall be
widows, and your children fatherless, verse 22, 23, 24.

II. In reference to Smiling-Retaliations of Providence, remember the following
Instructions.

1. The less ground there is of dejection under straits, by how much the more
parties have been helpful to others under their straits. For God (says the
Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews) is not unrighteous, to forget your work
and labor of love, which ye have showed toward his name, in that ye have
ministered to the saints, and do minister, Heb. 6 10. Job was eyes to the blind,
and feet to the lame, a father to the poor, the blessing of him that was ready
to perish came upon him, Job 29. He has experience after his sharp
Winter-season, of Retaliating-Smiling-Providence; his Brethren, Sisters, and
all that had been of his acquaintance, afford him heart and hand for his
supportation and consolation, Job 42. 11.

2. Take notice, how God has been a gracious Play Master to you one way or
other. The debts of kindness are paid off in money, or as good, if not better,
than money. Old Barzillai, who had a loyal heart and a bountiful hand toward
David in his flight from Absalom, experienceth the King's favor to him and
his: see 2 Samuel 17. 27, 28, 29. 2 Samuel 19. 38, 39.

3. Take encouragement then, to put on bowels of mercy, kindness, humbleness of
mind, meekness, long-suffering, as is said Col. 3. 2. How many are there, of
whom it may be said, They have guts, but no bowels of compassion toward others
afflicted! Forget not, more especially, to have a respect to God's servants,
whether strictly, or generally so termed. It Is an encouraging meditation we
have in 2 Kings 8. 4, 5, 6. compared with 2 Kings 4. 8, 9, 10. the good
Prophet, though dead, is yet a virtual spokesman to the King for that woman who
had been hospitable in entertaing him at her house: her sparing the Prophet a
little room, is richly requited with the King's restoring her the whole House,
Lands, Profits or Issues thence arising from the time of her absence, to the
time of her address made to the King there. Remember then that of Christ, Mat.
10. 41. He that receives a prophet in the name of a prophet, shall receive a
prophets reward: and he that receives a righteous man in the name of a
righteous man, shall receive a righteous man's reward.

OBSERVATION XXXVII.
The Circumstances of Time and Place afford substantial Documents, or weighty
Instructions to the Observers of Providence.
CHAP. I.
TIME and Place put weight into the Scale of Moral Actions: Virtue and Vice
have an aggravation, according to the consideration of Time and Place. And as
Time and Place have their consideration in Moralities, so in the Displays of
Providence. God, who is the Author of Time and Place, does wisely govern
Matters with respect to Time and Place.

To begin then with the first of these; and so it will not be lost time to take
a view of Providence about the timing of things. And here three Positions offer
themselves.

First, It belongs to God, as his Prerogative-Royal, to Time Matters. In Isa.
60. 22. I the Lord will hasten it in his time. And in Acts 1. 7. And he said
unto them, It is not for you to know the times or the seasons which the Father
has put in his own power.

Secondly, The Lord, who is wise, does wisely Time matters. This appears, if it
be considered,

1. That the Scripture not only speaks of Time, but of a fullness of Time; which
notes the mature, exact, or fit bringing-forth of matters on the stage of this
world. Our Savior Christ came in the fullness of time, as we read it asserted
once and again, Gal. 4. 4. and Ephesians. 1. 10.

2. There is no solid reason for man to object against the Lord's Timing of
Matters. For, (1.) Hereby folly is exalted, Eccles. 7. 10. Say not thou, What
is the cause that the former days were better than these? for thou do not
enquire wisely concerning this. (2.) Men have smarted for their folly, when
they will have other times, or things timed according to their discontented
humors. The Israelites must have flesh-days; they shall have them, and enough
of them, see Numb. 11. 32, 33.

3. As there is reason, so it is man's wisdom to be calm, and not foolishly
stumbled at this or that about Times. There are two ways how times may be said
to be evil: 1. In regard of the evils of Sin. 2. In regard of the evils of
Smart.


As for evil times in regard of Sin, though it be our duty to groan, yet not to
grudg or mutter against the Lord because such times are. Times are bad; and by
an undue discontent they are not made better, but worse. There is a wise and
good Providence of God, when Times are thus bad. Diverse things might here be
insisted on; I shall only point at one, and that is, The truth of his Word
which has foretold of such times; and this, if considered, may not only break
the force of temptation, as if God did not govern the world at such times; but
likewise confirm us in the faith. In the time of Pope Clement the fifth,
Frederick King of Sicily was so far offended at the ill government of the
Church, that he called into question the truth of the Christian Religion, till
he was better resolved and settled in the point by Arnoldus de Villa nova, who
evidenced to him, That it was long since foretold of such days of defection and
abomination, when iniquity should abound, 1 Timothy 4. 1. 2 Timothy 3. 1, 2, etc.

In the next place, as for bad times in regard of the evil of Smart, there is
less ground for disquiet, if sin be considered of as ordinarily preceding such
evils of Smart. The Scarlet and Crimson Sins make way for Garments rolled and
dyed in blood. It was a pious confession in Ezra 9. 23. Howbeit, thou art just
in all that is brought upon us: for thou have done right, but we have done
wickedly. And where the days are black and bloody ones, notwithstanding they
who are killed, burned, massacred, keep their garments undefiled, being
persecuted for righteousness sake; yet God is good in such bad times as these.
Much might be said in way of an apology for Providence here. It may suffice,
That they who do suffer, are sweetly satisfied as to what is their lot and
portion in this kind. In Rev. 13. 7. It was given to him to make war with the
Saints, and to overcome them. Mr. Mede interprets this place as having
reference to the times of the Albigenses, and quotes an observable reply of
some of them to the Argument drawn from the success of the Popish party against
them, namely, That they were the conquered people of Christ. The Scripture had
foretold of what should be, and so what might make against them, makes for
them. They were overcom'd, and yet did overcome by their faith and patience.
The Wild-Boar of the Forest did chase them to their Father's House. A time
comes when Christ plays the mighty Huntsman, and so slays the slayer, to the
glory of His Vindictive Justice. Nam cum Episcopus Tolosanus stragi
intercedens, eos, qui adhuc residui intentoriis forte manserant, misso quodam
religioso, ut tanto quasi Dei irati, and contra eos pronunciantis flagello
convicti, jam tandem feritate deposita ad fidem quam vocant Catholicam
converterentur; illi vero se populum Christi victum retorquentes hoc quasi
clypeo, tentationis impetum frustrati sunt atque ad unum omnes a recurrentium
Militum manu intersecti, fortiter occubuerunt.


Thirdly, There is a glorious dissplay of Providence in timing both Mercies and
Judgments. Mercies are timed, and so timed, as that they are oftentimes
inhanced from the season for them. God did remember Joseph in the Butler's
forgetting of him; for Joseph is reserved till he be more fitted for release,
and till Pharaoh be at a loss about his dreams, for the Magicians could not
interpret them unto Pharaoh, Genesis 41. 8. The like may be observed in Daniel's
case; between whose intended slaughter and advancement there was but a little
time, Dan. 2. 13. with following verses. Moreover, the time of Mercy does
sometimes lead to, or point at, some duty, which the Lord graciously
recompenceth at such time. The day of setting upon Temple-work, is a day of
God's blessing them from thence, Hag. 2. 18, 19. It is observed, how the
English had victory given Fox Acts and Mon. in the History of Edward the sixth.
unto them on that very day and hour Images were burnt at London. And as for
Judgments, the Lord times them. The Assyrians goes not against an hypocritical
Nation, till God sends them, Isa 10. 6. God knows how to make a Calamity a
double one, in regard of the timing of it. That passage in Mat. 24. 20. does
plainly attest so much. Moreover, the day of Calamity may point out at sin
committed on the day that Calamity is inflicted. While the word (a proud one)
was in the king's mouth, there fell a voice from heaven, etc. Dan. 4. 31. Time
is sometimes a Glass to behold the sin committed then, or before, at such a
time, which has its recourse when the Judgment is inflicted. The day, week,
month of Smart, may point to the day, week, month, of Sin, before.

The Second Branch of the Observation refers to Places. And here three
Propositions likewise offer themselves to consideration.

First, Some Places are Monuments of Providence in regard of what falls out
there. Surely (says Jacob) the Lord is in this place, and I knew it not: he
set up a pillar, and called the name of the place Bethel, Gen: 28. 16, 17, 18,
19. See moreover, for this purpose, Numb. 21. 3. 1 Samuel 7. 12. 1 Chronicles. 22. 1.

Secondly, There is much of Providence in going to Places, and in absence of
parties from Places. A Levite lodges at Gibeah, Judge. 19. 14. and what falls
out there, is the desolation of Benjamin; no less than the lives of Twenty and
five thousand Benjamites pay the shot, or discharge that Levite's Quarters,
Judge. 20. 46. In 2 Samuel 20. 1. there happened to be there a man of Belial,
whose name was Sheba the son of Bichri, a Benjamite; and he blew the Trumpet of
Sedition. Nathan, Sadock, Benaiah. Solomon, are not at that Seditious Feast of
Adonijah: Abiathar, Joab, are; and they had better fasted, than thus feasted,
as the sequel of the story does declare, 1 King. 1. There was much of
Providence in Readiness coming to Jabesh-Gilead for their help, 1. Sam. 11. 11.

Thirdly, Both Mercy and Wrath may be read in legible Characters on Places, and
at Places. The Providence of God is seen in way of Mercy, as it respects the
place it self, in blessing of it, as he did the land of Canaan to the
Israelites. And the same Providence is displayed in way of mercy at places, and
that in doing good to the souls of men, and to the outward man too. Many of the
Jews which came to Mary (at Bethany) and had seen the things which Jesus did,
believed on him, John 11. 45. The blind man is in the way nigh Jericho, and
Christ there passes by, and heals him, Luke 18. 35. And as Mercy is thus
displayed, so Wrath likewise. The Lord turns rivers into a wilderness, and
the water-springs into dry grounds, a fruitful land into barrenness, for the
wickedness of them that dwell therein, Psalm. 107. 33, 34. The Brethren of
Ahaziah are on their progress to visit Ahab's children at Samaria; they are met
with by Jehu, and slain at the pit of the shearing-house, even two and forty
men, 2 Kings 10. 13, 14. King Joram is providentially drawn forth from Jezreel,
and met Jehu in the portion of Naboth the Jezreelite, 2 Kings 9. 21. he is
slain by Jehu, and his body is thrown on that very plat, according to the word
of the Lord, as Jehu makes the observation, v. 25, 26, of the same chapter.

CHAP. II.
1. FROM the Lord's timing of matters, learn, (1.) What ground there is for
wicked ones to consider of their ways. God not only times Punishment, but so
times it, as that it may become double punishment. God has turned the Glass of
his Long-suffering in Heaven; how many sands are run out, and how many are to
run out, they know not: this let them know, That God will come in way of
punishing, if they come not in way of repenting; he will come even to a sand.
When the iniquity of the Amorites is full, vengeance steps in, Genesis 15. 16.
There is a MEAN, God has numbered thy kingdom, and finished it, for a
Belshazzar, Dan. 5. 25. And as the Lord timeth Wrath, so there is a stinging
timing of it: Wicked ones have a springtide of Wrath, when they expected it
not: so it was foretold of Babylon, Isa. 47. 9. But these two things shall come
to thee in a moment, in one day; the loss of children, and widowhood: they
shall come upon thee in their perfection, etc. And in v 11. Therefore shall
evil come upon thee, thou shall not know from whence it arises; and mischief
shall fall upon thee, thou shall not be able to put it off: and desolation
shall come upon thee suddenly, which thou shall not know. (2.) What ground is
there for godly ones to wait on God in this Providence for mercy: God has his
timing of mercy, and so timing of it, as may the more commend the mercy. There
is a blessed season to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart
of the contrite ones, Isa. 57. 15. John's Disciples came to Christ in a
seasonable time, to be strengthened in the faith of the M^ssiah; Go and show
John (says Christ) those things which ye do hear and see, Mat. 11. 5, 6.
Christ knew when to fill Peter's net with fish, after they had toiled all
night, and caught nothing, Luke 5. 5, 6. Isaac has a comfortable yoke fellow
after his Mother's death, and was comforted, Genesis 24. 67.

2. From God's Providence in reference to Places: (1.) Let men be afraid of
sinning against God in places: In the very places God can alarm them, and
punish them. The King with his Carowsing-Courtiers, are appaled with the
fingers of a man's hand, which came forth and wrote upon the plaster of the
wall; yea, it is said, In that night was Belshazzar the king of the Chaldeans
slain, Dan. 5. 5, 6, 7, 30. (2.) Observe Place-Providences. Let afflictions and
mercies in respective places, have one place more, and that is the heart, to
think upon them, and improve them. Jacob was bid to mind Bethel, a mercy of old
there, and a duty incumbent on him upon the account of mercy vouchsafed, Genesis
35. 1. The same Jacob takes notice of his Wife Rachel's death, where she dyed,
and tells Joseph of it, Genesis 48. 7. Paul forgot not his Asian-trouble, and
mercy withal, which whether it were a violent fit of sickness, or hot
persecution, and deliverance from the one or other, it matters not; he observed
the Providence of God there, and improveth it, see 2 Cor. 1. 8, 9, 10, 11. the
same Apostle has brief observations on what happened in diverse places of his
Apostolical-pilgrimage, 2 Cor. 11. 23, to the end.

OBSERVATION XXXVIII.
Man's Extremity is Heaven's Time and Opportunity for Help.
CHAP. I.
IT has been discussed, How God's Providence is seen in Timing of matters:
Now, amongst other things, not only the timing, but so timing in regard of
opportune help, is to be touched. And because the Providence of God is
wonderfully displayed on this wise, so that His actings of this nature are
molded into a religious Aphorism or Sentence, as Genesis 22. 14. In the mount of
the Lord it shall be seen: It will be very pertinent to insist on the
seasonable display of Providence under Distress or Difficulty. That passage in
the Scripture quoted, may be styled, A Providential Proverb; for so the words [
as it is said unto this day] in the Text there, do imply. The occasion of this
Sacred form of speech, was the Lord's stepping in for Abraham's help. There are
three things to be noted:

1. That distress befalls a person or a people. For so it was here with
Abraham; Take now thy son, thine only son Isaac, whom thou love, and get thee
into the land of Moriah, and offer him there for a burnt-offering upon one of
the mountains which I will tell thee of.

2. That a distress proves an abiding-one so long as God pleases. Abraham
travelleth on the first and second day; no release: and on the third day he
lifts up his eyes, and saw the place afar off, v. 4. The sight of the place
must needs affect his heart; this Golgotha, or place of Skull, might make him
hang down his head with sorrow: his head might well have aked on both sides,
had he not had a hand of faith to hold it; and this he had, as the Author to
the Hebrews does affirm, chapter 11. 17, 18, 19.

3. That Providence does opportunely appear for distressed ones, by way of
release from troubles. Abraham must have the sacrificing-knife in his hand to
slay his son, ere the Angel of the Lord call unto him, saying, Lay not thy hand
on the lad, neither do thou any thing unto him, etc. What here was Abraham's
case, is by way of proportion the cases of others, who have their extremities,
as God has his opportunities for help: and that Providence has thus its
opportunities for help, will appear, if we consider, 1. Promises, which imply
so much. 2. Divine Performances or Exemplifications of this Truth. 3. The
variety of Ends which God has in matters of this nature.


First, Promises, formally and properly so termed, we have in Scripture. Genesis
15. 13. compared with Exodus 3. 7. and Exodus 5. 7, 8. does give us to
understand, That God's Promise of bringing the Israelites out of Egypt, was not
the further off from fulfilling, though the Israelites had been long under the
Egyptian yoke; and their yoke was made heavier a little before the Lord brake
it to pieces. The Promise stood still irreversible, and in its full strength,
when the Israelites were weakest: help was then nearest, when they might think
it furthest off, in regard of the bricks doubled. In Deuteronomy. 32. 36. For the Lord
shall judge his people, and repent himself for his servants, when he sees that
their power is gone, and there is none shut up or left. This is extensive to
persons or people under heavy pressures and difficulties: the more persons
evidence themselves to be God's people, the more they may find in the
accomplishment of what is here promised, Psalm. 9. 18. For the needy shall not
always be forgotten: the expectation of the poor shall not p^rish for ever.
Psalm. 12. 5. For the oppression of the poor, for the sighing of the needy, now
will I arise, says the Lord, I will set him in safety from him that puffs at
him. Psalm. 72. 12, 13. For he shall deliver the needy when he cries: the poor
also, and him that has no helper. He shall spare the poor and needy, and shall
save the souls of the needy: be shall redeem their soul from deceit and
violence, and precious shall their blood be in his sight. Zech. 14. 7. It shall
come to pass, that at evening it shall be light: that is, Mercy then shall
break forth, when little expected: they shall have a Morning of Mercy, in their
Evening of Difficulties. That of Paul in 2 Cor. 1. 9, 10. may be looked on as
at least a virtual promise. We had (says he) the sentenc^ of death in our
selves, that we should not trust in our selvee, but in God which raises the
dead, who delivered us from so great a death, and does deliver: in whom we
trust that he will yet deliver.

2. Come we next to Performances, or the Experiences of persons. God remembered
Noah after he had been shut up in the Ark, Gen 8. 1. Lot is rescued timely by
Abraham, Genesis 14. 13. Sarah was taken into house, Genesis 20. 2. and it is said,
God came to Abimilech in a dream, and said, Behold, thou art but a dead man,
for the women which thou have taken: for she is a man's wife, ver. 3.
Providence was seasonable for the preservation of Sarah's chastity. The
Israelites are at the Red Sea, and the Egyptians at their backs; they could
neither drink up the one, nor eat up the other; no ordinary way of escape: and
yet then the Lord opens a way in the sea, and a path in the mighty waters,
Exodus 14. 21, 22. Israel was sore distressed, Judge. 10. 9. then the Spirit of
the Lord came upon Jephthah, and he becomes their deliverer, Judge. 11. 29. So
it is said, The Lord saw the affliction of Israel that it was very bitter: for
there was not any shut up, nor any left, nor any help for Israel; and the Lord
said not, that he would blot out the name of Israel from under heaven: but he
saved them by the hand of Jeroboam the son of Joash, 2 King. 14. 26, 27. Joseph
was in the briars, a knotty case offers it self; and while he thought on these
things, the Angel of the Lord appeared unto him, Mat. 1. 20. The Disciples of
Christ were in the Ship, there arose a great tempest in the sea, insomuch that
the Ship was covered with the waves; they come to Christ, awake him, saying,
Lord save us, we perish: then he arose (after this storm, and check given to
them for the tempest of unbelief in their souls) and rebuked the winds and the
sea, and there was a great calm, Mat. 8. 24, 25, 26. Again, when the disciples
cried out for fear, straightway Jesus spoke unto them, saying, Be of good
cheer, it is I; be not afraid, Mat. 14. 26, 27. Christ appears timely to the
Emmaus-disciples under their heaviness, Luke 24. 17. And as the Jews went about
to kill Paul, tidings came to the chief Captain of the Band, That all Jerusalem
was in an uproar; who immediately took Soldiers and Centurions, and so rescued
Paul, Acts 21. 31, 32. Paul's Sister's son heard of the Jews lying in wait to
kill Paul, and so there was a seasonable prevention of the murderous design,
Acts 23. 16. Epaphroditus was sick unto the death; but the Lord had mercy on
him, Phil 2. 27. Thus all these are instances of seasonable help from Heaven
under extremities.

Thirdly, The variety of Ends which the Lord has in the swelling of a
distress, ere he apply the remedy; is the next thing to be insisted on. These
Ends subordinate to his will and pleasure, may be reckoned up, as follows:

1. To chasten for sin. Great sins call for grievous distresses. As men were
swift in transgressing; so Providence may justly be slow in delivering. God
will let men see by the evils of smart, how provoking their evils of lin have
been. Joseph's brethren envy him, Genesis 37. 11. had resolution to slay him, v.
20. commit Plagiary in selling their brother to the Ismaelites, for he was not
theirs to sell, v. 28. with 40. Genesis 15. They are after distressed in Egypt,
and Conscience then rings them a peal, being so distressed, Genesis 42. 21. Their
distress rises higher and higher, for behold their money is in their
Sacks-mouth, and hereupon their hearts failed them, and they were afraid,
saying one to another, What is this that God has done unto us? Genesis 42. 28.
Neither is this all, but a hard task they have to get Benjamin from their
Father, in order to the purgation of themselves from being Spies; and no going
again to Egypt without him; and if they go not, they must go down to their
graves, for the famine was sore in the Land, Genesis 43. 1, 2. At length Jacob is
prevailed with to let Benjamin go; and then their distress evades a superlative
one; the killing-part of the Tragedy is acted; the Cup is found in Benjamin's
Sack; and according to their verdict Benjamin was to dye, and they to be
bondmen, Genesis 44. 9. Now is the springtide of distress, which overflows all
the banks, as appears from the pathetical Oration of Judah, who vents his
sorrows, saying, What shall we say unto my Lord? What shall we speak? or how
shall we clear our selves? God has found out the iniquity of thy servants: we
are my Lord's bondmen, and he also with whom the cup is found, Genesis 44. 16. Now
when their distress mounts to the clouds, help comes down from the Heavens: I
am Joseph (says Joseph); I am Joseph your brother, whom ye sold into Egypt.
Genesis 45. 3, 4. To this instance add another: God did threaten the people by
Isaiah with the Assyrian flood, which was to overflow, go over, and reach even
to the neck, Isa. 8. 6. Accordingly it was accomplished: for the Assyrians,
like a deluge of water, did overflow even to the head-City Jerusalem, which,
like a man, stood up to the neck in these waters, the body of the nation being
covered with them; and then the Lord, who sets bounds, causes the waters to
return, as we have the story in Isa. 37. 36, 37, 38. the [ then there] in the
Text, has reference to the Jews doleful case when within the City; God has
then his Angel for their deliverance, when the Assyrian in his pride is
highest, and resolved in an utter riddance of the Lord's people.

2. To dis-engage or take off the heart from creature-dependency, and to call
forth the faith for exercise on God. The greater the distresses are, and no way
visible for help; the more is there a place for faith on God. Providence
narrows or straitens the conditions of parties, that so there may be more room
or enlargement for the exercise of faith. All Creature-twigs being lopt off,
there is nothing left but to hang the more on the Creator. Faith will find
somewhat to take hold on, when Sense sees nothing. I looked (says the
Psalmist) on my right hand, and behold, but there was no man that would know
me; refuge failed me: no man cared for my soul. I cried unto thee, O Lord: I
said, Thou art my refuge, and my portion in the land of the living, Psalm. 142.
4, 5. the like was Paul's case, 2 Cor. 1. 8, 9.

3. To let men know, That the Lord he is God, and can help, notwithstanding
there is a visible face of things to the contrary. The Israelites shall out of
Egypt, and over the Redsea, let Taskmasters, Horses, Chariots, the mighty
Waters, say the contrary. Now I know (says Jethro) that the Lord is greater
than all gods: for in the thing wherein they dealt proudly, he was above them,
Exodus 18. 11. That is notable in Hezekiah's days, when the case was sad at
Jerusalem, as that in Isa. 37. 3. This day is a day of trouble, and of rebuke,
and of blasphemy: for the children are come to the birth, and there is not
strength to bring forth. And yet though thus says Hezekiah, yet thus says the
Lord concerning the King of Assyria, He shall not come into this City, nor
shoot an arrow there, nor come before it with shields, nor cast a bank against
it: by the way that he came, by the same shall, he return, and shall not come
into this City, says the Lord, v. 33, 34. God is the great Arbiter or
Controller of things. He will be known amongst the Mighties of the World; and
one season when he thus will be known, is when distressed ones know not what to
do, but to sigh and pray to him, who is great, and greatly to be praised, and
feared above all gods, Psalm. 96. 4.

4. To encourage praying-work. The Church of God in Esther's time, had, as it
were, her neck on the block; the lifted-up hands hold up the lifted-up Ax from
falling down, Esth. 4. 16. Prayer was made without ceasing for Peter, Acts 12.
5. the Lord sends an Angel, who procures a timely Jail-deliver, v. 7, 8, 9,
10. As God does call forth prayer in such extremities (for our extremities call
upon us to call upon God): so his goodness is seen in the answer made unto
prayer; which may further be a Lodestone to this duty under the like
extremities. It is said in Psalm. 102. 17. He will regard the prayer of the
destitute, and not despise their prayer. O how often have praying-ones had
experience of God's regarding them, when in respect of their extremities, sense
and reason might be ready to prompt, as if the Lord had utterly rejected them!
I remember here a memorable story: There happened to be a Famine in a Ship,
insomuch that the question was started about drawing lots who should be eaten;
one of note in the Ship, and a pious man withal, desired the rest, That they
might first seek to God by prayer, before they resolved to enact so inhuman a
Butchery: and accordingly he made a prayer to God; and whilst he was praying, a
Fish of some bigness was cast out of the sea upon the place where he was
praying: this Fish they divided; and though it were but a short Commons for
hungry ones, yet it put a stop to a Flesh-dinner for that time: but however,
the belly has no ears, hunger comes on, and the old question about a bloody
Flesh-meal is started: The man who was their mouth to God in prayer, wills
them, They might look up again to God, having had experience of his gracious
Providence in the Fish: accordingly to prayer they go; and whilst at prayer, a
Fowl of considerable bigness flies a-thwart the Ship-tackling, and is
entangled, which they had, and accordingly divided; and before any further
controversy did arise, a Ship bears up toward them; and their distressed case
being communicated, provision they had out of the Ship, and that
notwithstanding the Captain of the Ship had a particular grudg against the man
of note in the other Ship, and was resolved at first to play the Esau with this
Jacob; but yet did him no harm.

5. To render His Wisdom and Power conspicuous, and that not only to persons
the immediate subjects of such relief, but likewise to others in
after-generations. So for the Wisdom and Power of God; there was more than a
few drops of these at the Red Sea: how often is that deliverance taken notice
of, and celebrated in the Sacred Scriptures! The like may be said of the
distress of the Lord's people in Esther's days: What a glorious display was
there of Power and Wisdom in that astonishing deliverance! In Psalm. 102. we
understand of the low and distressed case of persons there: for the title of
the Psalm is, A prayer of the afflicted when he is overwhelmed and pours out
his complaint before the Lord: And passages in the Psalm do imply distresses:
We have there doleful complaints, and a tragical description of distress;
express mention made of Zion's stones, and dust: and now, notwithstanding the
sore distress of the Lord's people, the Lord is not wanting; for it is said,
ver. 16. When the Lord will build up Zion, he will appear in his glory; that
is, he will exalt the glory of his Attributes, particularly, of his Power and
Wisdom; he has both Power and Skill to gather the stones and dust, and make a
glorious building, glorious to the eyes of those who shall take a view of all;
for this shall be written for the generation to come; and the people which
shall be created shall praise the Lord, ver. 18.

6. To check the pride, insultation, and malicious resolutions of wicked ones.
Come, say the Babylonians, sing us one of the songs of Zion, Psalm. 137. 3. God
can in time let the Babylonian know, there are those whom he can make use of to
make the Babylonians howl, who now call for singing one of the Lord's songs.
How were Pharaoh, Haman, Senacherih, checked at a nick of time! And not only in
former times has Providence been seen in giving a check, but also in later
days. There is a very remarkable story of Magdeburge, the Citizens whereof in
Charles the Fifth's time, Emperor of Germany, stood out heroically,
notwithstanding the Emperor had born down with force the Protestants in all
Germany; only Magdeburge is like the Pelican in the wilderness, and the Owl of
the desert, and the Sparrow alone on the housetop: and though so, yet how in
the nick of time was Prince Maurice, who besieged them, wheeled about to be
their friend, and so makes Articles of Peace with them, and with his Army falls
in upon the Emperor, who flies before him, and after forsakes the Imperial
Crown, betaking himself to a retired life, and so the Protestant Interest which
was sore depressed, has its resurrection to the baffling of Popish
expectations. Hither, or under this head, may be referred that of the witnesses
in Rev. 11. I wave debates as to parties slain, and the time when, whether at
several times in several generations: That which makes for the matter in hand,
is the Lord's raising them, notwithstanding their being slain, and that to the
shame and terror of their adversaries: for so in v. 11. After three days and an
half, the Spirit of life from God entered into them, and they stood upon their
feet, and great fear fell upon them which saw them. That in Mie. 7. 10. may
here be accommodated as a good Comment on this place, and pertinent to the
matter in hand: Then she that is mine enemy shall see it, and shame shall cover
her which said unto me, Where is the Lord thy God? Behold, mine eyes shall
behold her; now shall she be trodden down as the mire of the streets.

Lastly, To mention no more: The Lord does step in, in the depth of misery, to
endear himself unto persons helped; and to engage their hearts the more unto
him, who does exalt his mercy at such a season. So in Exodus 15. 13. Thou in
mercy have led forth the people which thou have redeemed. And Psalm. 34 6. This
poor man cried, and the Lord heard him, and saved him out of all his troubles.
And in Psalm 116. The sorrows of death compassed me, and the pains of hell gat
hold upon me; I found trouble and sorrow: then I called upon the name of the
Lord: O Lord, I beseech thee deliver my soul; gracious is the Lord, and
righteous; yea, our God is merciful.

CHAP. II.
1. SEE folly and vanity, (1.) In regard of impatiency under evils. (2.) In
regard of excursions, or steppings aside from duty to the use of means, for
which men have no warrant. There is folly both these ways. The Israelites fell
foul on Moses and Aaron, because the door for egress out of Egypt, was not
opened at first knocking. What though a double Lock seem to be set on the door
of the great working-house; yet no reason to quarrel; the Lord knows how and
when to open the door, or break it open, as he did in his own time, to his own
glory. It was Readiness fault, that he would sacrifice before Samuel came, and he
smarted for it, 1 Samuel 13. 8, 9. Let men learn from Readiness folly to be wise;
let them not force themselves to this or that as a means for help under
straits, which God approves not; remembering withal, how a Samuel may be a
coming with help from the Lord, when they are going from the Lord.

2. Watch against anxious and perplexing disquiet of heart under straits. There
is no ground for a Christian to distract his heart in the want of visible
means, or to distrust his God in the midst of visible dangers. Remember who
bids, to take no thought; that is, not to be anxious, distrustful, disquieted
under difficulties; and withal, what he says further, it shall be given you in
that same hour, Matthew. 10. 19. Not only Years, Months, Weeks, Days, but even
Hours, for Heaven's help, are contained in the Calendar of Providence.

3. Treasure up the Experiences of Divine Help under Needs and Difficulties.
David had a signal appearance of Providence for his relief, when Saul is on the
one side of the Mountain, and David on the other: and this David forgets not;
for it is vertually contained in his deliverance out of the hand of Saul; which
deliverance he celebrates, 2 Samuel 22. If thou have a Mountain-Providence, with
David, forget not the God of thy Mountain-Dispensation. Remember two things:
(1.) The more eminent thy Mercy, the more reason to value it. The depth of a
Misery may well call for the admiration of the height of Divine Mercy: see an
instance Psalm. 116. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. (2) The laying up of such an
Experience, will be of great use for aftertimes. Thou may be in regard of
temporals or spirituals, as is said Acts 27. 20. Now when neither Sun nor
Stars in many days appeared, etc. To look back on Providence in a sad Voyage
before, will be of use, when the case is sad for the present. The Meditation on
former Experience, may be a prop to the tottering-house of a weak faith: see
Psalm. 77. 5, 10, 11.

OBSERVATION XXXIX.
At or nigh the same time there is a like face of Providence showing it self in
Places.
CHAP. I.
HOW the Providence of God is displayed both as to Time and Place, and
particularly as to the so timing of Help under Extremities, has been insisted
on. The present Observation, which has some reference both to Time and Place,
is now to be spoken unto: And here, in the first place, shall be showed, how
the like work of Providence in Places may be consideredi and that three ways:

1. In regard of Premonition or discovery of what is to take place in the
world. Thus when the Lord would take up Elijah into Heaven, not only Elisha
has a discovery of what the Lord is about to do; but the sons of the Prophets
that were at Bethel, 2 King. 2. 3. and not only they, but also the sons of the
Prophets that were at Jericho, v. 5. of the same chapter. And so the hand of
the Lord was upon Ezekiel in the evening, before one that had escaped from
Jerusalem brought tidings that the City was smitten, Ezekiel. 33. 21, 22. Peter at
Joppa has a Vision which holds correspondence with a work of Providence
referring to the Gentiles, particularly, Cornelius at Cesarea, who was bid to
send to Joppa, and call for one Simon, whose fir-name was Peter, Acts 10.

2. In regard of antecedent preparation, disposition, or qualification, for
what is to come forth on the stage of the World. The Jews were awakened to
prayer-work, when the Seventy years were, or nigh, accomplished at Babylon,
Jer. 29. 12. Moses is to go on the Lord's Embassy to Egypt; he wants a
Spokesman, and God brings one to his hand, Exodus 4. 10, 14, 15, 16, 27. When
Christ was brought to the Temple, what a wonderful Providence was there in
Simeon's coming thither at that time when Mary came thither? and so in Anna's
coming in that instant, as it is said Luke 2. 27, 38? Both Simeon and Anna were
Witnesses to and for Christ; they came seasonably to the Temple, there to
testify of Him who was Lord of the Temple. Ver. 29, to the 39.

3. In regard of the work it self, which is the same, or a like, for kind. And
here we may consider it, 1. As a Work of Mercy in it self considered. 2. As a
Work of Wrath.


1. As a Work of Mercy. The Gospel of Grace was communicated to the Gentiles,
and the gift of the Holy Ghost was poured out on them, Acts 10. 45. They at
Corinth were enriched in utterance and knowledge, as well as they at Jerusalem,
1 Cor. 1. 5. In the times of the Reformation of Religion, Zuinglius at the same
time opposes the Pope's Indulgences amongst the Helvetians, at which Luther
did amongst the Germans: how did then Cities, Towns, Parishes, fall off from
Popery, as leaves from the Trees in Autumn? And so it is observed how Learning
at one and the same time began to hold up its head, and that in diverse places,
as Scultetus has it. And as for Learning, so for Peace and Tranquillity, the
Providence of God may be noted. It is said Acts 9. 31. Then had the Churches
rest thorowout all Judea, and Galilee, and Samaria. A time there is, when
Countries have their worldly Jubilee. All the earth sits still, and is at
rest, is the report made, Zech. 1. 11. Docebat hoc tempore in Tiguri Helvetiis
Ulricus Zuinglius etc. Sleid. com. lib. 1 sub finem -- Et quod mireris uno and
codem tempore in diversis mundi regionibus intermortua pridem studia in Vitam
revocabant Leo 10. Pontifex Romae: apud Hispanos Cardinalis Toleranus: apud
Anglos, Rex Henricus, ejus nominis octavus: apud Belgas Rex Catholicus,
Carolus: apud Gallos, Rex Franciscus. Annal. dec. 1. p. 3.


2. As a Work of Wrath, or Severity; and so there may be noted how a like face
of things there is in places at or nigh the same time. A time there was, when
the Lord suffered all Nations to walk in their own ways, Acts 14. 16. A time
there was, when ignorance, and lack of learning did prevail to an astonishment
at the stupidity of those in that time. And as Ignorance had its time; so
Sophistry and unprofitable Subtilty, instead of sound and savoury Divinity, did
abound in the Thirteenth Century. It is observed, how both Mahumetism and
Papism did put forth themselves at or about the same time. And as for external
calamities, they have been timed in diverse places. The Wine-cup of the Lord's
fury has passed from Nation to Nation, as Jer. 25. 15. and not only so in the
times before Christ, but after; that Rev. 6. tells a sad story of Red, Black,
and Pale Horses. What befell the Roman Empire in regard of Wars, Famine, and
Ten years Pestilence which was universal, is a Providential Comment on the
Text. Mira ratio, and digna res observatione est, quod eodem fere temporo
caeperunt in altum assurgere atque emergere Papa Romanus, supra reliquas
Christi Ecclesias sese extollens; and Mahumetana religio, Turcicaeque gentis
Imperium. Magd. Cent. 13. Epistola nuncupat. Sub dicto igitur Phoca tyranno ac
Caesaricida (quod in Papis mysterio non vacat) Papismus and Mahumetismus simul
sunt exorti, qui multis in regionibus doctrinam de Dei filio corruperunt,
obscurarunt, laberactarum. Baleus cent. 1. p. 68.


CHAP. II.
1. BEHOLD how the Lord is God in one place as well as another. He is not
confined in regard of operations to this or that Country or Kingdom. It Is said
in Ezekiel. 1. 6. Every one (of the living creatures) had four faces, and every
one had four wings; their four faces behold the four quarters of the world; and
their four wings may note their being accomplished for action in diverse places;
and take their flight at one and the same time, to bring about what the Lord
commissions to be done.

2. No reason for persons to be despondent who want Mercies of which others in
other places are participant of. The same Sun of like favors may shine upon
their habitation. Were persons more prayerful, they might have experience of
God's being merciful. Beware we then of a discontented eye at others Mercies,
and wisely improve our own wants. There is enough in the rich Exchequer of
Providence to supply all wants, whether for soul or for the outward man.
Providence knows how to comfort the waste places, to make the Wilderness like
Eden, and the Desert like the Garden of the Lord, Is^. 51. 3.

3. Great ground is there for men to shake off wretched security when
Providence frowns on others in far or near places. Who knows where the train of
Gunpowder, being once set a fire, may creep, and do its deadly execution? The
end of one place's Calamity, may be the beginning of another's. The bitter Cup,
of which some have drank, may pass through unto others, notwithstanding security
and presumption, as the daughter of Edom is informed, Lam. 4. 22.

OBSERVATION XL.
There is a dashing-work of Providence in regard of various matters, which in
way of probability offer themselves to the eye of Sense and Reason.
CHAP. I.
THAT the fair and promising-face of things is sometimes veiled, yea, hush't
into a perpetual darkness, never to see light in this world; appears,

1. From God's otherwise informing the judgments of persons about matters.
Abraham was without issue, heir-male and female. He thought Eliezer must be the
man who must heir it. But what says God? This shall not be thine heir; but he
that shall come forth out of thine own bowels, shall be thine heir, Genesis 15. 4.
Samuel is sent to anoint one of the sons of Jesse; and it came to pass, when
they were come, that he looked on Eliab, and said, Surely the Lord's anointed
is before him: but the Lord said unto Samuel, Look not on his countenance, or
on the height of his stature, because I have refused him: for the Lord sees
not as man sees; for man looks on the outward appearance, but the Lord
looks on the heart, 1 Samuel 16. 6, 7.

2. From the confessions and acknowledgments of parties. Thus in that
acknowledgment of the Church, Isa. 64. ^. When thou did terrible things which
we looked not for, etc. In Job 17. 12. My purposes are broken off, even the
thoughts of my heart, says that man of God under his black cloud: and in v.
15. Where is now my hope? as for my hope, who shall see it? and yet he and
others lived to see a confutation of his black conclusions drawn from the
present face of things; for the Lord turned the captivity of Job, chap. 42. v.
10.

3. From assertions in Scripture which imply so much. I returned, and saw under
the sun, that the race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong,
neither yet bread to the wise, nor yet riches to men of understanding, nor yet
favor to men of skill; but time and chance happens to them all, Eccles. 9.
11. And in Eccles. 10. 7. I have seen servants upon horses, and princes walking
as servants upon earth.

4. From exemplifications, and that in temporals and spirituals. Who would have
thought that Joseph, who was such a friend to the state of Egypt, should be
forgotten as he was? Exodus 1* 8. Who would have imagined in the first days of
so wise a Prince as Solomon, that a cracked Axel-tree of Government should be
transmitted to his son Reboboam? 1 King. 11. 31. with 1 King. 12. 10. Little
did Adam and Eve think, that so promising a son as Abel should have the candle
of his life puffed out by the blood-warm breath of a Cain their own son. How did
Hezekiah argue otherwise from his distemper, than it fell out eventually, Isa.
38. 10, 11, 12. Paul and Silas alter their purposed course in preaching the
Gospel in Bythinia, Acts 16. 17. The wise and prudent of the world are not wise
and prudent for a blessed eternity, Mat. 11. 25. Christ came to his own, and
they received him not, John 1. 11. they who are seeming-friends of the Church,
become real-enemies, Acts 20. 30.

CHAP. II.
1. THERE is no ground then for peremptory conclusions from a probable face of
things. How quickly may the Snowball melt? the great bubble vanish? the storm
turn into a calm, and the calm into a storm? The Disciples were much taken with
the Buildings of the Temple; and what faith Christ? See ye not all these
things? Verily I say unto you, there shall not be left here one stone upon
another, that shall not be thrown down, Mat. 24. 1, 2. In Isa. 7. 2. it was
told the house of David, saying, Syria is confederate with Ephraim: and his
heart was moved, and the heart of his people, as the trees of the wood are
moved with the wind. But yet all this promising, or rather threatening,
confederacy, ends in smoke; there is a dashing-work of Providence, as is fully
there described from v. 3, to 10.

2. Beware of rashness in acting upon a face of things which presents it self.
Many pay deer in their Credits, Purses, and Consciences, by taking an alarm,
when they might have slept quiet in the bed of an holy repose and confidence in
God. Thus says the Lord God, the holy one of Israel, In returning and rest
shall ye be saved, in quietness and confidence shall be your strength, and ye
would not: but ye said no; for we will fly upon horses; therefore shall ye
flee: and we will ride upon the swift; therefore shall they that pursue you be
swift, Isa. 30. 15, 16.

3. Quarrel not with the Lord's Government of the World, because he does thus
make and unmake; build, as it were, an house, and by and by pulls it down. If
the bringing forth of some things is like the shooting up of Mushrooms, quickly
up, and quickly down; yet sure the Providence of God reaches to these
Mushrooms, as well as to the Cedars of Lebanon. There is no reason for ^oolish
man to find fault with an All-wise God, though he presents that on the stage of
the World which has not its imagined issue. God has wise Ends subordinate to
his Glory in Dispensations of this nature.

1. To let men know how the Lord he is God; for things go according to his
thoughts, and not as men surmise and imagine, according to the outward
appearance of things. O Lord (says the Psalmist) how great are thy works, and
thy thoughts very deep? A brutish man knows not, neither does a fool
understand this: when the wicked spring as gross* and when all the workers of
iniquity do flourish, it is that they shall be destroyed for ever, Psalm. 92. 5,
6, 7. For ^y thoughts are not as your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways,
says the Lord: for as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways
higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts, Isa. 15. 8, 9.

2. To display his Sovereignty more or less as he pleases. What if the Lord
shall dash vessels made? shake off the fruit ere it be ripe, as in abortive
Infants? Is He therefore to be quarrelled with? May not he break the vessels,
as Jer. 18. 6? O house of Israel, cannot I do with you as this potter, says
the Lord? and say to the Fig Tree, Let no fruit grow on thee henceforward for
ever, Mat. 21. 19.

3. To bring to light the sins of men by a probable face of things. Shimei
discovers his rooted venom in the fruits of it, when David was made at by
Absalom, Achitophel, and their followers, 2 Samuel 16. If there be a likelihood
of this or that Error to have favor and profit annexed to it, though it be a
very gross or palpable one, yea, though a heap of them; what villainy does
appear on the deck, which before lay close under the hatches of the ship? What
coining of Distinctions, which the great Master of the Mint will censure as
false and felonious to the Crown of Heaven? The Lord then is wise in setting up
such Pumps, which being plied, throw forth black and slimy waters.

4. To exercise the graces of persons; for the graces of Saints may be both
proved and improved by a probable face of things. So it was in Abraham's
offering up of Isaac, his faith, fear, obedience, were displayed, Genesis 22. 12.
with Heb. 11. 17, 18, 19.

5. To punish men for their sins. Probabilities in matters make way for
vindictive Certainties. Pharaoh, from a Probability, is entangled into the
Lord's Net in the Red Sea, Exodus 14. 3. The red waters become bloody ones to
the Moabites, whose wrong conclusion from probable Premises, proved a bloody
one, 2 King. 3. 22, 23, 24.

6. To teach men constant dependence on God. Men point, and God disappoints.
They propose, but God disposes. The wind of Providence is variable, and
therefore men had need eye God in the voyage -- It is not so soon done as said:
We will go into such a City, and continue there a year, and buy, and sell, and
get gain: See James 4. 13, 14, 15.

Lastly, To lesson thankfulness for a display of Mercy in dashing-things likely
to take place. A Copy of Conveyance is cut in pieces, and a fresh one is drawn
by the hand of Providence for the good of the party. Ruth's marriage with the
Kinsman was dash't; and well for her, whom Providence had intended for a more
ingenuous and pious man. What is dash't, holds in many cases for the best God
has regard to his, when he seems to have none. He dams up a Well, and opens
a better Spring for them. Their business best succeeds, when it is sometimes
quite dash't. As there are blessed disappointments, so there is ground to bless
God for such disappointments, which come from the Heart as well as the hand of
gracious Providence.

OBSERVATION XLI.
There is an overruling Conduct of Providence in bringing matters to their
journey's end; and that notwithstanding letts in the way, and the length of the
way.
CHAP. I.
AS there is a dashing-work of Providence, as has before been showed; so there
is an Accomplishing-work in regard of what the Lord wills or willingly suffers
to be in the world. What the Lord will have take place, must, notwithstanding
impediments and delays for a time. And this appears to be so, if we consider,
1. The Power of God. 2. The Wisdom of God.


1. Nothing is too hard for Infinite Power to bring about. The greatest blocks
in the way, like a feather, are blown away with the breath of Providence. All
letts, like the thin film of Ice, shall be dissolved by the warm Sunbeams of
Providential Influences. The Israelites had lien long in the Egyptian Furnace;
it was too hot a work for Moses and Aaron to pluck them thence by the hand of
violence, that was not the Lord's way of delivering them; and yet the Lord
saved the people out of the Land of Egypt, Jude ver. 5. The Jews met with
opposers in the Temple-work; it is said, how upon an Order from Artaxerxes,
Rehum and Shimshai, with their companions, made them to cease by force and
power, Ezra 4. 23. and yet this work, which lay dormant for some years, was
finished at last; see Ezra 4. 24. with Ezra 6. 15. John 2. 20.

2. God, according to his Infinite Wisdom, has ways to bring about matters in
his own time, notwithstanding hindrances and delays for a time. In 1 Samuel 6. 5.
the Philistines took the Ark of God: they have it, but must not hold it; it must
be had home again; and how shall this be? Let the Lord alone; who can find out
a way for its conveyance, though it be in the Country of the Philistines seven
months, as it is related, 1 Samuel 6. 1. Suppose those Fifty thousand threescore
and ten men who were slain upon the return of the Ark, 1 Samuel 6. 19. had been
slain in battle in order to the rescue of the Ark; yet the same way God took to
bring it home, would have availed, though the difficulty of having it home had
been greater in the eyes of the men of Israel, who in this case had fought to
no purpose. And what is said in this case of the Ark, holds in other matters.
Our Cock-shell Capacity is not receptive of the Ocean of Divine Wisdom. Let
this Sun arise, and it scatters the clouds and mists that are in our eye. A
thousand ways infinite Wisdom has to effect matters, though we see never an
one.

CHAP. II.
1. SEE the reason why there is dejection and despondency. Men have both their
eyes fixed on Hindrances and Delays, and not half an one open to the Providence
of God. Whilst David pores on Readiness Power, Subtilty, and Fury, no wonder if
David be not David in point of the exercise of Faith, Patience, Hope; but say,
I shall one day fall by the hand of Saul. Christians, in cases of this nature,
are like the man who looks on the wheel turning, but not on the Fly on the
Wheel creeping in a contrary motion to the Wheel. The Fly of Providence is on
its motion, whilst the Wheel of Second Causes have their contrary motion, as
may be showed in another distinct following Observation. As in a ship sailing
directly forward, a man walks from the Fore-castle or Stem of the ship, toward
the Stern; yet he that shall conclude the motion of the ship to be the same,
will conclude amiss. The ship of Providence is setting forward toward its
Haven, though Second-Causes are walking in a contrary motion on the Deck. Let
Providence then alone to play the Pilot, and do thou in the interim pray for a
good voyage.

2. There is good reason to bear up, though the burden be heavy, and have lien
long on the shoulder, and none to take it off.

1. Is the Plea, That the burden is heavy? Consider, you may have experience of
God's kindness; and the sooner have it, by how much more it becomes heavy. The
more weary you are, the more God may strengthen in the way, and bring you to
your journey's end with joy. Remember Paul's case, 2 Cor. 1. 8, 9, 10.

2. Is the Plea, That the burden has lien long on the Conscience, Credit,
State, Body, etc.? Consider, (1.) This is no new case: Joseph, David, with
others of God's Saints, can tell stories of difficulties, and long-spun forth
ones. (2.) The question is, Who is more a Waiter? you, that you may have a
Mercy; or God, that you may be fitted for a Mercy? The Lord waits that he may
be gracious, Isa. 30. 18. (3.) The Hand of the Clock has its motion in the
dark night, though a man see it not. There was a Ram instead of Isaac in yonder
bush, when Abraham might not see it at its first instant, being caught there.
4. Though the burden continue longer, yet wait longer; for so it becomes to
do, as others have done, and thou art taught to do, Isa. 26. 8. with 3, 4.

3. Is the Plea, That there is none to help, Means, Instruments, fail: Consider,

1. Though the Arm of flesh wither, yet the Hand of Providence still
flourishes. God is God without Means and Instruments, as well as with them.
His Arm can then bring salvation, when there is none to help, Isa. 63. 5.

2. Help by Means, Instruments, fails in order to help. The way to have help,
is to be mortified to Creature-helps. God will lead men to see that in himself,
which after he may communicate by ordinary Means. Eye then God more, and Men
less, and thou may find, how Providence is then on its March, when the Drums
sound nothing but a Retreat to Sense and Reason.

OBSERVATION XLII.
Things are set forward in the World by a Collateral Influence or stroke, by
the by, of Providence. Or, God leads men by what they do see, to that which is
not seen till afterward.
CHAP. I.
THAT the great Pilot of Heaven and Earth can make use of not only a sidewind,
as here; but likewise of a contrarywind, as shall be showed in the next
Observation, and all to bring the Ship to its Port or Haven; is to be insisted
on. Sic disponuntur res humauae, divino plerunque consilio, ut occasion little
quae facienda proponimus, incidamus in ea de quibus antea nihil cogitavimus.
Musculus com. in Evang. Joh. p. 475.
The leadings of Providence by what is seen, to that which is not seen, are
wonderful. These leadings may be considered three ways: 1. In regard of the
Object. 2. In regard of the Medium or Inducement. 3. In regard of the Issue.


First, In regard of the Object; and so these side wind Influences or leadings
of Providence, respect both Temporals and Spirituals. Men whilst they mind one
matter in their Civil concernments, fall in upon another; as he who diggeth his
garden-plot finds a Treasure. Saul seeks his father's Asses, and finds a
Kingdom, 1 Samuel 9. David is sent by his father to the Camp with provision for
his brethren, and there kills Goliath, and so foundation was laid for
after-matters, 1 Samuel 17. And as in Temporals this may be noted; so in matters
of Soul-concernment. Whilst men mind Earth, they meet with Heaven. Some go
abroad to seek a service, and are by the Providence of God cast there, where
they come to be-think themselves of another kind of service, namely, the
Service of the great God, whom before they looked not after -- It Is probable
that some of those many Nations, Acts 2. 9, 10, 11. be-took themselves to
Jerusalem upon a Secular account. However they were, by an occasion offered,
drawn to be hearers of the Apostles, v 6. Whatever their End were in hearing,
God's Providence was wonderful in the Apostle's speaking; for there was added
to the Church about three thousand souls, v. 41. Peter and Andrew were casting
their Net into the Sea, and Christ says then and there to them, Follow me, and
I will make you fishers of men, Mat. 4. 18, 19. James and John were mending
their nets, and Christ in like sort meets with them when his walk was by the
sea of Galilee, ver. 18, 21, 22. The Woman of Samaria comes to Jacob's Well to
draw water: She minded water to set over the pot, or wash her dishes, or the
like; little thought she of another kind of water which Christ the Fountain of
life did there discourse of, and hand to her, John 4.

Secondly, In regard of the Inducement by which men are moved; and this may be
considered, (1.) As started in their own breasts. (2.) As suggested by others
with whom they have to do; for so we find how Saul was influenced on by his
Father's servant to go to Samuel, 1 Samuel 9. 6. Naaman hears of the Prophet, who
bid him wash and be clean, from the little Captive-maid in his Family, 2 King.
5. 2, 3. Nathaniel is induced by Philip to come to Christ, who tells him a
story of the Fig Tree, which he little thought to have heard of, John 1. 45,
46, 47, 48.

Now what may induce or draw on a man to what he does not so experiment as
after, may be further considered:

1. Sometimes a lust by an overruling Providence shall contribute to what is
subsequent, Onesimus runs away from his Master, gets to Rome, a populous City,
where in probability he might lie hid; Paul is there, who by Providence lights
on him, and sends him home a Convert to his Master Philemon. Paul before his
conversion in a mad fit rambles as far as Damascus, where was an Ananias for
him with a Cordial; Christ having met with Paul by the way, and let out the mad
blood, which filled every vein before.

2. Sometimes men's civil business or affairs, is an inlet to other matters, as
was before intimated in the woman of Samaria's coming to the Well -- So when
the Jailer was troubled about his Prisoners, then was the Lord's time to let
him see what a slave he was to Satan, Acts 16. 27, 28, 29.

3. Sometimes the observing of a Providence in way of conviction, may lead on
to further matters, as in Nicodemus his case, John 3. 2, etc.

4. Sometimes some strong impulse upon the heart sways. So likely it was in the
Shunamite-woman; go she must to the Prophet, who raises her son for her from
the dead, 2 King. 4. 22, 23. It is said of Mr. Dod, how he could not be quiet,
but must at night away to a man's house, where coming, the man was about to
destroy himself, and so a stop was put to the Tragedy.

Thirdly, In regard of the Issue, which respects, (1.) What is seen. (2.) What
is not seen till afterward. Now the issue of what is seen, may be considered,
(1.) As succesless. Saul sought the Country for the Asses, but found them not,
1 Samuel 9. 4. after he was told of them by Samuel, but he goes home without
them. They who came to apprehend Christ, were led to a conviction, but
apprehend him not, John 7. 45, 46. (2.) As succesful; and that in regard of
what was intended. Naaman comes for a cure, and has it; his flesh came again
like unto the flesh of a little child; and he was clean, 2 Kings 5. 14.

In the next place, The issue of what is not seen, may be considered, (1.)
Purely. (2.) Mixtly. If we consider it purely or singly; and so smart or
punishment is the issue of some undertakings, though men imagine no such
matter. The Philistines are for keeping holy day to their Dagon; Sampson is
called for to make them sport; and their House of Mirth becomes the House of
Mourning, Judge. 16. Again, Favor or Mercy may be the issue. So Naaman, he went
home wiser for Heaven than he came. Matthew was sitting at the Receipt of
Custom, and there Christ calls him, Luke 5. 27. Who would have thought, that
the Publican going to the Custom-house, or some standing in the Market, should
be called to be one of the Cash-keepers of Heaven's Treasure, or a Play Master
of better Riches abroad in the World. The issue in a way of mercy was
wonderful. And as the issue is singly considered by way of frown or smile; so
sometimes it is Mixed. There is both Vinegar and Honey in it. Joseph his
brethren were both afflicted and comforted in their Egypt journey for Corn for
their Families. Providence hands Gold out of the Mine, and withal some
scaring-gushes of Water may affright them who labor in the Mine of this or
that business of concernment.

CHAP. II.
1. OBSERVE the wonderful display of Providence in these leadings. Luther fell
soul at first on the filthy lucre of those of the Church of Rome in the matter
of Indulgences; after, like Ezekiel, he saw greater abominations, Ezekiel. 8. 6.
It is in this case, as with a stone glided along upon the waters; one Circle is
Dei enim Providentia causas and effecta convertit, quae alioqui natura sunt
disjunctissima: neque quicquam est, quod oculos Dei quibus omnia subjiciuntur
and ordinantur, possit fallere. Pet. Mart.
introductory to another. Man acts, but the Lord makes Connexions, and they are
wonderful in the issue.

2. Learn, how God is holy and righteous in the ordering of things,
notwithstanding the intervention of men's sins before things are brought about.
Whilst men mind their own work, they forward Heaven's design. Joseph can behold
a holy, wise, good God, in his Chain; albeit some of the links thereof were
very crooked, and had a great deal of rust adhering to them, Genesis 50. 20.

3. See how the Enemies of the Church are outwitted in their designs against
the Church: they are led by what they do see, and misled to their ruin. They
whet the knife which cuts their own throat; they are gathered together against
Zion, and yet the Lord gathers them as sheaves to be threshed in the floor:
they know their own projects, but know not the thoughts of the Lord, neither
understand they his counsel: see Mic. 4. 11, 12, 13.

4. Take notice what a prop here is for Faith, from the consideration of a
side-wind-influence of Providence. The Lord can provide for, and protect in
such a way as a person does not imagine. There is a Joseph in Egypt that
furnishes the brethren with Corn in time of Famine. There are ways God has,
whereby wicked men shall be shields to Saints against the thrusts of their own
swords. O how admirable are the leadings of God by what is seen, to what is not
seen! How do Saints sometimes stumble, and so see the Jewel which there lies
before them!

OBSERVATION XLIII.
Hindrances in matters, through Providence, when and where the Lord so
pleases, become Furtherances.
CHAP. I.
THE verity of this Assertion is seen, (1.) In Spirituals. (2.) In Temporals.
In Spirituals; and that, (1.) In matters of Personal Concernment. (2.) In
matters of Public, referring to God's Church.

1. In matters of Personal Concernment: Thus a man's own sins (and yet no thank
to sin) are a foundation for his humility, and ground for an holy watchfulness.
A Christian rises by his fall. Peter after his denial of his Master, is modest
in his profession of his love to Christ: see John 21. 15. with Mat. 26. 33, 35.
And as sin is an hindrance to spiritual good (and yet the Lord orders all for
good): so Satan means no good to a child of God. The Devil is the great
Blood-sucker, yet is Heaven's Leech. Providence knows how to use him to the
glory of Providence. That Foe of the Christian shall become in a sort the
Christian's Friend: thus professes the Apostle Paul, saying, And lest I should
be exalted above measure through the abundance of revelations, there was given
to me a thorn in the flesh, a messenger of Satan to buffet me, etc. 2 Cor. 12.
7. Sic infatuatus Satan dum obesse molitur, magis etiam prodest; and quod
impedire conatur, expeditum potius reddit, quam impeditum. Gloria haec est
Sapientiae, and Providentiae Doi. Musculus in locum.


2. In matters referring to the Church of God: There are not wanting
obstructions to the Church's peace and comfort. What through Oppositions,
Errors, Apostacies, God's people are not a little distressed; and yet their
case, though sad, is not desperate: for,

1. The Mountains of Opposition become Plains, according to that in Zech. 4. 7.
The Persian Power and Authority there intended, shall no longer mountain it
against the Church, but countenance the afflicted. A Prohibition is given from
hindering Temple-work, and a positive Act is drawn up for the furthering of it,
as is recorded Ezra 6. 6, 7, etc. And though some who do furiously oppose, do
not depose their fury; yet the wrath of man shall praise the Lord, Psalm. 76. 10
It is to be observed, that the Church of God has thriven by Oppositions. So
attests Paul, Phil. 1. 12. The things which happened unto me, have fallen out
rather unto the furtherance of the Gospel. The like Tertullian: As often as we
are mowed, we are sowed. The same Nec quicquam tamen proficit exquisitior
quaeque crudelitas vestra; illecebra magis est sectae. Plures efficimur,
quoties metimur a vobis. Tertul. in Apolog.

Quicquid enim Papa, quicqu id Caesareani molirentur contra Evangelium, id omne
Christus in Evangelii commodum convertit. Bulla Papae, sulmen Caesaris, non
consternarunt, sed animarunt homines ad Evangelium amplexandum, Scult. in
Annal. part. 1. p. 117.

Prodiit saevissima bulla a Pontifice; nihil aliud quam exacerbavit incendium,
sequutum est etiam saevius Caesaris Edictum, qui totus in hanc rem propensus
est: ea res linguas quorundam and calamos coercet, at non mutat animos. Erasmus
in Epistola. Ibidem p. 75.


correspondency of Providence in aftertimes, with foregoing-times, may be
noted. It is left on record, how the Popes Bull, and the thundering Edict of
the Emperor in Luther's days, did rather encourage to, than discourage from, a
closure with the Gospel.

2. As for Errors and Heresies with which the Church of God is often pestered:
These are an occasion, whereby the Truths of God Ita nihil obsistere divinae
gratiae potest, quo minus id quod voluerit impleatur, dum etiam discordiae ad
unitatem trahunt, and plagae in remedium vertuntur, ut Ecclesia unde metuit
periculum, inde sumat augmentum. Ambros. lib. 2. de Vocat. Gent.
shine the more glorious. It is conceived by some, The occasion of John his
writing the Gospel, was the Errors broached by Ebion and Cerinthus, who did
play the Devils with the Godhead of Christ. Paul's Pen walks to Corinth, when
Disorders and Error in that point of the Resurrection, had an unhappy rise
there. He withal informs, saying, There must be also Heresies among you, that
they which are approved, may be made manifest among you, 1 Cor. 11. 9. Truth
and Godliness, like a Torch, burn the brighter being thus beaten. We had not
had such deep searches into Truths, had not the Spirit of Error possessed the
heads of men. Scarce an Error but has had some Treatise or other written
against it.

3. Apostasies from the Church of Christ are matter of lamentation; yet the
Lord knows how to render these as useful to others for their encouragement and
confirmation in the ways of God. God's Judgments on Apostates are a Beacon set
on fire to warn others. What befell Judas ( Mat. 27. 5.), might be of great use
to the Disciples, and others at Jerusalem, as Peter intimates, Acts 1. 18, 19.
Arrius was a Firebrand; but how extinct, when he voided his bowels, History
does mention. Spira (whom I judge not as to his final state; God might carry him
to Heaven through the gates of Hell) was on the rack of a
tormenting-conscience. I make no question but his Tragedy had a considerable
influence to promote the Truth, through God's Providence. Spira's declining,
set forward Vergerius his enclining to the ways of the Gospellers. Ibi cum
esset spectator fuit hujus tam miserabilis exempli, quod diximus. Eo permotus,
quum iram Dei, qua miser ille perculsus fuit propter abnegatam veritatem coram
ipse vidisset, magisque confirmari c^epit, and tunc plane constituit relicta
patria posthabitisque rebus omnibus in voluntarium exilium abire potius, and eo
proficisci, ubi Christum libere profiteri posset. Sleid. com. 1. lib. 21.
As there was a Providence in Vergerius his being there, where poor Spira was
hung up in the chains of a tormenting-conscience; so there was no less of
Providence in his improving of that sad spectacle.

2. In Temporals, Hindrances become Furtherances. Instances there are in diverse
cases: As,

1. In Marriage: so a likely progress was made in Ruth's disposal to the
Kinsman; Boaz tells of him, and promises he will see what will be done, Ruth
3. 13, 18. and accordingly Boaz convenes the man (who providentially came by)
before the Elders of the City; the business of the Purchase is broke to him,
and by and by all is broke to pieces; howbeit this hindrance is a furtherance
of marriage with a better man, even Boaz himself, as we have the story in the
fourth Chapter of Ruth.

2. In impoverishments or losses: Men may be the better fitted for prosperity,
by sanctified adversity. The Lord who makes poor to a wonder, can make rich to
a miracle. The Lord blessed the latter end of Job more than the beginning, Job
42. 12.

3. In Sickness, which may make way for further Health, as God is pleased to
order it, and sanctify his Dispensation. Hezekiah dies not, but has a lease
of fifteen years added to his life, Isa. 37. 5. An improved sickness may both
physically and morally conduce to health. A man learns in part to be his own
Physician, and to glorify God more with his health, than formerly.

4. In Debasements and Reproaches: Joseph is advanced, and that by them who in
their actings intended his utter downfall. The sold Slave becomes a Prince in
Egypt; and his Mistress her defamation might after make for his reputation.
False aspersions do oftentimes redound to the glory of the aspersed, and the
infamy of the aspersers. The lip of truth shall be established for ever: but a
lying tongue is but for a moment, Prove. 12. 19.

5. In Defeats of Arms. It is noted in the Life of Tamerlan, That what did fall
out as probable letts, did prove a furtherance for a Victory. The loss of a
battle is sometimes a preface to a complete conquest. The Israelites are
smitten by the men of Ai, Josh. 7. 5. and their being smitten, is an inducement
to the men of Ai to be more forward than wise in the management of their next
battle, Josh. 8. 16, 17. It is then an experienced Observation, That some lose
by their Victories, and others gain by their Defeats.

6. In Journeys. Jacob was to return to his Country: there was an Esau in the
way; he comes forth with Four hundred men; and well for Jacob that the wild
Ruffians were under the command of Esau, who hurts him not. A general
Rendezvous might be preventive of plundering and butchering straglers: see Genesis
32. and 33.

CHAP. II.
1. THERE is no reason to be peremptory in concluding a nullity of matters,
because of some interponent hindrances. Unbelief and Despondency do too often
make a riot in the Soul. God's word is questioned, because there are great
blocks in the way of his Promise. Men look more to the blocks, than to God, who
can remove them; yea, so play the Sacred Carpenter with them, as to make an
hepping-stock of them for an ascent to Favors intended. What though the
Hindrances be not only single, but complicated ones? Yet is any thing too hard
for the Lord? And should it be too hard for our Faith? Remember we Abraham, of
whom, it is said, That being not weak in faith, he considered not his own body
now dead, when he was about an hundred years old; neither yet the deadness of
Sarah's womb: he staggered not at the promise of God through unbelief; but was
strong in faith, giving glory to God, Romans 4. 19, 20.

2. Beware of an irregular anger and discontent of heart, when some hindrance
in matters steps in. If persons had more of patience, they might be sensible,
how what falls in, falls out for good. The hindrance may be furtherance,

1. In regard of the thing individually considered; That matter in particular
may take place. In God's time, Joseph has such an advancement as the dreams
did foretell; and that notwithstanding all essays to the contrary by the
discontented brethren. Moses must be the man by whom God delivers Israel,
though Pharaoh sought to slay him, Exodus 2. 15.

2. In regard of the thing under that kind considered. The marriage of Ruth
with the Kinsman is dash't; yet that makes way for a better marriage.

3. In regard of the thing more generally considered; Equivalently, if not
superahundantly, an hindrance becomes a furtherance of good another way. The
hindrance in Temporass may prove a furtherance in Spirituals; or, the hindrance
in lesser matters of temporal concernment, may be a furtherance in what is of
greater consequence; namely, as to Life it self. I find an illustration for
this in Moryson's Itinerary (Part 1. Book 1. Chap. 5.); and persons may do well
to accommodate the story in other cases. The story, as that ingenious Gentleman
relates it, is thus, viz. That at what time a fair wind arising, all the Ships
gladly weighed Anchor; the Anchor of our Ship brake; so as our Consorts (seven
other little Ships) went on: but our Master, according to the Naval Discipline,
not to put to Sea with one Anchor, returned back to the Harbor of the Fly,
there to buy a new Anchor; all of us cursing foolishly our Fortune, and the
Stars. On Tuesday morning, while we sadly walked on the shore, we might see
our Consorts coming back with torn sails, and dead men, and quarters of men,
lying on the Hatches; for they had met with two Dunkirkers, who had taken them,
and spoiled their Ships, etc. Hereupon he says thus: As we had just cause to
praise the Almighty, who had thus delivered us out of the jaws of death; so had
we much more cause to bewail our rashness, yea, and our wickedness, that we had
striven, yea, and repined against his Divine Providence, which with humble and
hearty sorrow I confess, to the glory of his Sacred Name.

3. Take a view of the rich display of the Divine Attributes in the exchange of
Hindrances into Furtherances. More particularly, Observe,

1. The Power of God. A potent Hindrance stoops to Him who is Omnipotent.
Pharaoh was a very great block in the Israelites way or passage out of Egypt;
yet the Lord with one blow struck at the firstborn, opens a passage for
Israel, Exodus 12. 31.

2. The Wisdom of God, which is seen sometimes in the quality of the Hindrance,
which does well accord with the Waggoners spanning the Wheel, whereby the steep
descent is checked from being injurious. Again, The Wisdom of God is seen in
the exact timing of an Hindrance. David was disallowed by the Lords of the
Philistines, discharged by Achish, and all this at such a point of time, as
that David might behold the finger of God: As in bringing him off from going
with A^bish to battle; So in returning him to Ziglag, where a case, a sad one,
called for David's haste, see 1 Samuel 29, with 30. Lastly, The Wisdom of God is
seen in a notable adaptation of what is an Hindrance in it self, with other
matters, and so it becomes eventually a very glorious Furtherance. Daniel, with
his Religion, is made at by the aspiring and envious Courtiers of Darius, he is
accused, condemned, thrown into the Lions Den; preserved there, delivered
thence, honored by the King, and a Decree made, That men tremble and fear
before the God of Daniel. There is then a notable Chain of Providence; and
though the first link be a formal Hindrance in it self considered; yet in
conjunction with other links, it becomes a material Furtherance: And this may
teach us to admire the Infinite Wisdom of God displayed.

OBSERVATION XLIV.
As Hindrances become Furtherances in Matters: so Furtherances become
Hindrances when and where the Lord so pleases.
CHAP. I.
FURTHERANCES are considered here in their latitude or extent; as, whether such
which are so really and properly in themselves considered; or such as intended
by the Agents; though the means used are not proper for the end, at least, as
they fall under a moral consideration; and yet the end is in some sort at some
times attained, but it vanishes in the issue; as, when men by wicked ways
attempt the accomplishment of their designs, but the Lord curses all at last.
Now that Furtherances, according to a general latitude, become Hindrances,
appears, 1. In Spirituals. 2. In Temporals.


First, In Spirituals; and so to instance in the Preaching of the Word, and
rousing Dispensations of Providence, which as they are a means to soften the
hearts of men, do accidently harden them oftentimes. Pharaoh's heart is
hardened notwithstanding the Ministry of Moses and Aaron, together with the
Plagues inflicted from the Lord. The Vineyard in Isaiah's time, notwithstanding
it was fenced, the stones gathered out, planted with the choicest Vine, brought
forth wild grapes, Isa. 5. Jesus Christ, the best Preacher, met with the worst
of Hearers: they became worse, who had means to be better: though Christ had
done so many miracles before them, yet they believed not on him, John 8. 37.
Again, The consolations and supports of the Gospel, become matter of terror to
some under their distress of Conscience. There is not only a stiff recusancy in
point of comfort, as in Psalm. 72. 2 My soul refused to be comforted: but also a
door is thrown open for scaring-apprehensions. Peter cries out, Depart from me,
for I am a sinful man, O Lord, Luke 5. 8. It is no P^radox, if I say, that the
Cordial becomes corroding Vinegar; and that a kind of Hell comes forth of the
Gospel-Heaven. It is said of Mr. Bill, That he under distress of Conscience,
could see Hell in every Promise, because he did see that good he should be
deprived of. When one brought the Book to read of the Passion of Christ to
Spira, for his comfort; Spira replies, What you read, is the consolation of
God's chosen ones: they by good right may rejoice in so good tidings: but to me
a wretch, r^jected by God, the things read cannot be for comfort, but rather
for grief and torment, because I have rejected Christ the Sacrifice, his
sufferings, whilst I denied him; which when he had said, he roared like a Lion,
and tossed himself on his bed beseeching they would read no farther. So it is
related in the first lesser Narrative inserted amongst Grynaeus Theological
Theorems.

2. In Temporals; and here a Furtherance becomes an Hindrance, as it respects,
1. The being of life. 2. The well-being.


1. As for life it self, the way taken to preserve it, puts a period to it.
Physicians sometimes through an oversight, and sometimes through the folly of
the Patient, or those about the Patient, see the end of the Disease in the end
of the Party. It is observed how some, who denied the Faith to save their
lives, have been killed notwithstanding. In Sir John Temple in the History of
the Irish Rebellion, p. 109.
the late Irish Rebellion, diverse of the Parish of Ganalley were drawn to a
reconciliation with the Church of Rome; and after the Priest told them they
were in a good Faith, and for fear they should fall from it, and turn
Heretics, he and the rest that were with him cut all their throats. Henry the
fourth of France is ass^ssinated, notwithstanding what course he took in
tolerating the Jesuits for fear, and in deserting the Reformed Religion. Queen
Elizabeth of England, on the contrary, outlives the treachery of Papists. That
passage of Christ, Mat. 16. 25. is made good often to the letter of it; and if
not, yet it contains encouragement enough to lose life for him, who can pay the
debt with interest.

2. As for the well-being of life, as Wealth, Honor, and the like, the means
used for these are successess oftentimes. The Father of Constantine the Great,
disregarded the Weathercock Courtiers, who did manifest their will to leave
their Religion to keep their Places of Honor. The way some take to be rich, is
to become poor. A fire consumes the Tabernacles of Bribery, Job 15. 34. Yea,
not only the well-being of life intended, is disappointed, but death it self is
the issue of means used. The way taken to rise, is to fall; and so to fall, as
never rise again till the Resurrection-day. The Amalekite who expected reward,
lost his life, 2 Samuel 1. 15. See further, 2 Samuel 4. 9, 10, 11, 12.

CHAP. II.
1 BEWARE of irregular or undue Furtherances in matters. Nothing more common in
the World, than for men to forget their duty toward God, whilst they mind
their own Worldly Interest. So men get to their journeys end, it matters not
with them to mount the Horse of the Devil's providing. Lying, P^rjury, Cruelty,
Theft, Apostasy from Religion, are the Shooing horns for men's designs: and how
the Building is like to be finished, where such stones are in the foundation,
and side-walls, will be seen in time. That in Hab. 2, 12, 13, 14. may lesson
men, how the way taken to set the nest on high, is in the issue to consult
shame to the house in bringing it low and poor. Spira cried out, saying, I
began to know the Divine Scriptures; I knew the business of Justification; and
yet I set forward to deny all, to the end I might save my life harmless from
evils, and leave what little fortunes I had to my children: wherefore God has
chastised me, and does so heavily afflict and torment me, my life, my soul; so
as that no one ever felt greater torments: and the Lord knows what will become
of my children: I believe my house will grow worse and worse every day, and
will so fall, as that one stone shall not be left on another. Thus the Author
in the second Epistle writes of him. And it may lesson to beware of sin, which
quickly may become a Moth to the Estate, a Consumption to the Body, and gnawing
Worm to Conscience.

2. The less ground there is to fear the enemies of Religion, who lay aside all
modesty, honesty, and piety, in their attempts against Religion. These Spiders
may be wrapped up in their own webs. The way they take to further their Interest,
hinders it. The train laid to blow up others, does at first or second hand
mischief themselves. Scultetus relates, How the Command Nempe Deus omnipotens
adversariorum consiliis and opera, decretum and opus suum mirabiliter
peragebat. In Annal. dec. 2. p. 440.
of the Bishop's Deputy at Geneva for the burning of the Bibles both of the
French and German Translation, the reproaches cast on those of Bearn, being
Gospellers, and confederate with Geneva, by Furbitus a Popish Doctor; the
Murder committed by Porterius the Bishop's Secretary; who being seized on, his
Coffers brought to light deeds of darkness for suppressing the liberty of the
City; the detection, in a nick of time, of a Plot to deliver up the City; so
that many of the Popish party, being conscious of their crimes, left the City:
These, with the like passages, had an influence to shake quite off the Popish
yoke there. Thus the wicked is snared in the work of his own hands. Higgaion
Selah, Psalm. 9. 16.

3. What need is there for men to acknowledge God in all their ways? For
Furtherances pitched on, though free from obliquity, yet prove Hindrances
sometimes. Whilst in an honest and prudent sort some labor to manage affairs
with others, instead of pleasing, they do displease. Luther found his mild
Sleid. Com. lib. 6. p. 24.
writing rather to exasperate, than mitigate the spirits of Henry the Eighth of
England, Cardinal Cajetan, George Duke of Saxony, Erasmus of Roterdam. There is
an overruling Providence of God in turning the stream into what Channel he
pleases. It is recorded, how one Oltacus, having a Murderous Design, would by
all means speak with Lucullus, who then was asleep at midday. One Menedemus
tells Oltacus, That nothing was more to be regarded than the welfare of
Lucullus; and therefore he was not to be awakened. Oltacus being jealous his
treachery might be discovered, fled; and so Lucullus his mid-day-nap was
preservative of his life. Ishbosheth's laying himself down on his bed at noon,
was no such preservative, but rather an inductive to his murder, 2 Samuel 4. 5,
6, 7. Learn we then to be confident in nothing, and to eye God dependently in
every thing; for he is the Sovereign Lord, to whom belongs the issues of
Furtherances, according to His Infinite Wisdom.

OBSERVATION XLV.
There is a gradual process of Providence in bringing about of matters: Or,
Providence works things by degrees.
CHAP. I.
HOW the Lord brings about matters notwithstanding letts; and turns Hindrances
into Furtherances, and Furtherances into Hindrances, has been showed. A
further Observation as to the manner of God's working, is here to be
considered; and that with respect,

1. To Calamities, or wrathful Dispensations.

2. Mercies, or smiling Dispensations. And in each of these a gradual process
is observable.

First, To begin then with the first; and that may be illustrated three ways:

1. From Metaphorical and Allusive terms in Scriptures. Metaphors are contract
Similitudes; and Scripture-Similitudes, in regard of their proper scope, do
point out the truth of the thing, whilst they paint it out. In H^s. 5. 12.
Therefore will I be unto Ephraim as a moth, and to the house of Judah
rottenness. Both the Moth and Worm do by degrees consume the Garment and Tree,
whose corroding Tenants they are. In Rev. 16. the Angels there have the vials
of the wrath of God; these vials are poured forth not all at once, but
gradually; and each vial may have its degrees too; for so the form of a vial
imports: What is contained in a vial, is not poured forth as water out of a
Pail or Bucket, the brim whereof, in regard of its latitude, is commensurate
with its bottom.

2. From Exemplifications. Before Israel was carried away captive by
Salmaneser, 2 King. 17. they had not only warnings by the Prophets of the Lord,
v. 13. but also knocks, before the killing-blow by Salmeneser. We read of their
intestine broils, and foreign ones too, 2 Kings 15. That of Jeremiah is full;
Israel is a seattered sheep, the lions have driven him away: first the king of
Assyria has devoured him, and last this Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon has
broken his bones, Jer. 50. 17. And not only so of old, but in the Calamity
foretold by Christ, Luke 21. there were doleful harbingers and forerunners of
the destruction of the Jewish people. Josephus, a Jew, has written a
Commentary on Christ's Prophecy. Gamaliel tells of two by-blows, and they
bloody ones, which happened to their State, Acts 5. 36, 37.

3. From the various wise ends of God; as, (1.) To testify the patience and
long-suffering of God toward men. God does not by and by fall in; he bears and
forbears. There are Rods before Scorpions. O Israel, thou have sinned from the
days of Gibeah, Hos. 10. 9. How shall I give thee up, Ephraim! How shall I
deliver thee, O Israel! How shall I make thee as Admah! How shall I set thee as
Zeboim, Hos. 11. 8. The long-suffering of God waited in the days of Noah, while
the Ark was a preparing, as is said 1 Pet. 3. 20. (2.) To render men without
excuse, who notwithstanding preambulatory Dispensations of Providence, are
still vile and impenitent. The people turns not unto him that smites them,
neither do they seek the Lord of Hosts: therefore will the Lord cut off from
Israel head and tail, branch and rush in one day, Isa. 9. 13, 14. See further,
Luke 13. 7. Rev. 16. 9, 10.

In the next place; There is a gradual process of Providence in Mercies: And
this appears three ways:

1. From Promises which do imply so much. Thus Moses tells the Israelites,
saying, The Lord thy God will put out those nations before thee by little and
little, Deuteronomy. 7. 22. And so in Hos. 2. 15. I will give her vineyards from
thence, and the valley of Achor for a door of hope.

2. From Instances, and that in Temporals and Spirituals. (1.) In matters
referring to this life, there is first the blade, then the ear, after that the
full corn in the ear, to allude to that in Mark 4. 28. Riches are oftentimes
given in gradually. It is said of Jacob, The man increased exceedingly, and had
much cattle, and maidservants, and menservants, and camels, and asses, Genesis
30. 43. Joseph had two petty exaltations before the great one. God did let him
understand, that he who could exalt him in Potiphar's Family, and in the
Prison, could, when he pleased, give him favor in the sight of others. It is
noted how David waxed stronger and stronger, and the house of Saul waxed weaker
and weaker, 2 Samuel 3. 1. Abraham had first a promise of a child; after, Ismael
is born; after, an Isaac; after, a posterity like the Stars for number.
Hezekiah was sick unto death, Isa. 38. 1. a promise he has for health, v. 5.
direction for the means, v. 21. and the means prove succesful. (2.) In
Spirituals, The kingdom of heaven (says Christ) is like to a grain of mustard
seed which a man took and sowed in his field, which indeed is the least of all
seeds; but when it is grown up, it is the greatest amongst herbs, and becomes
a tree, so that the birds of the air come and lodge in the branches thereof,
Mat. 13. 31, 32. So mightily grew the word of God, and prevailed, Acts 19. 20.
I might here more particularly show the gradual process of Providence in
Spirituals: it shall suffice to point out the way, rather than travel on it. We
may observe the extent of this Observation:

1. In the conversion of man from the state of nature to a state of grace.
There is a gradual procedure in nature, though not in time distinguishable: for
as in the creation, Let there be light, and there was light, Genesis 3. so in the
spiritual creation God sets up light in the understanding; see Acts 2. 37. Acts
26. 18. Ephesians. 5. 8. Moreover, before the reception of grace in the heart, there
is much of Providence in providing the Spiritual Seeds-man, in the disposal of
persons here and there in order to their acquaintance with God; in rouzing some
by afflictive dispensations, and the like precursory dealings of Providence.
But,

2. In the mortification of sin. The Apostle sets forth this by Crucifixion, a
lingering death, Romans 6. 6. We are willed by the same Apostle to mortify the
members which are upon earth, Col. 3. 5.

3. In growth of grace. The very term does imply the thing. An Acorn is not by
and by an Oak. The Mustard Seed becomes a tree in time; and the smoking Flax,
a flame. We read of children, young men, and fathers, 1 John 2. 13. The Trees
are not all of equal height and bigness in the Lord's Lebanon.

4: In Victory over Satan. So in that last Scripture mentioned; that is said
there of young men, Ye have overcome the wicked one; which is not, at least in
like degree, applied to children; and they who are the young men in grace, are
not so well versed in Satan's methods, as the wise and sage fathers in grace
are. We are not ignorant of his devices, says Paul, 2 Cor. 2. 11. The same
Apostle speaks of bruising or treading Satan under the Romans feet shortly,
Romans 16. 20.

5. And lastly, In a perception, sense, or spiritual feeling of the love of
God; and this may be considered with respect to two sorts of persons: (1.) The
new Convert, who lately of a slave to Satan, is made a free subject to Christ.
The dust of sin raised by (...) convictions, do cover the copy of grace (...)
on his heart, by the hand of his Spirit, so that it is not by and by legible. A
sense of the party's own vileness, makes him, or her, hang the head, till
Christ revive by some passage or other, as he did that poor Woman, saying to
her, Thy faith has saved thee, go in peace, Luke 7. 50. with 44. (2.) The old
Saint, but now in a desert. Christ for wise ends stands aloof from the Saint's
doors. The Lord is a chastizing-Father, or trying-One; and no wonder if the
Child be not quiet till the Father smile. Thus David, who had defiled his
Conscience by sin, was not by and by settled. The holy Dove builds not the Nest
of Comfort amongst Thorns and Nettles; these must down, ere Consolations come
from above. David cries out of broken bones, Psalm. 51. 8. he is an humble
supplicant for the light of God's countenance, and the joy of salvation, v. 8,
9, 10, 11. and no wonder, for broken bones are not by and by healed, and the
nigh-shipwrack't vessel by and by rigged. Job's quiet and comfort was handed in
by degrees; God answers him out of a Whirlwind, chap. 38. and after
vindicates him from the calumnies of his friends, accepts his performances, and
turns his captivity, as it is declared in chap. 42.

3. From the wise Ends of God in the gradual process of Mercies. What these
are, may be touched.

1. To correct for sin. The Chariot of Providence moves no faster, because men
throw the logs of sin in the way. There is no reason for men to complain that
God is slow in delivering, when they are swift in sinning. The hand of the Lord
is not shortened, that it cannot save, etc. but your sins have separated between
you and your God; and your sins have hid his face from you, Isa. 59. 1, 2. The
Israelites Wilderness-sins made the Wilderness-journey forty years, which might
have been performed in forty days.

2. To exercise faith, prayer, patience, by this gradual process. Jacob is a
Wrestler, before he is a Prevailer. Hannah prays, believes, and waits, ere she
has a Samuel. There is a connection of Duties with Mercies, though not a
connection of Merit on our part. If Providence give in Mercies before seeking of
them, there is ground to adore Sovereign Mercy, no reason to neglect Duty for
time to come.

3. To fit for Mercies. The Scabbard must be fitted for the Sword; otherwise
the Sword, though it have a golden Hilt, will cut the Scabbard, or fall out of
it, to the danger of him who girds it on. There is the strong Wine of Mercies,
which weak heads are not able to bear. It Is hard for a man to go over the high
golden Bridge of Mercies, and not be giddy-headed. The Israelites were not by
and by fitted for Canaan, nor Joseph for Egypt's Dignity, nor David for the
Royal Diadem, no^ a Novice for ^e Ministry; lest being lifted up with pride, be
fall into the condemnation of the devil, as the Apostle says, 1 Timothy 3. 6.

4. To teach the lesson of thankfulness. For, (1.) The gradual process of
Providence in Mercies, does lay forth the Mercy by piecemeal before the eye.
God could have created the World in one day; but he took six, to the end men
might take the fuller view of the glorious work of Creation. The same method in
the work of Providence, serves to the like end. Moses, when the Israelites are
to take possession of Canaan, does rehearse the several stages of their
journey, Numb. 33. A Mercy indeed is better viewed in its walk, than in its
leap. (2.) God's bestowing things gradually, does inure to the exercise of the
grace of Thankfulness. Every little of mercy does deservedly call forth the
Lord's praises. The slaying of Sihon King of the Amorites, and Og King of
Bashan, was a preamble for further thankfulness to the Israelites, Deuteronomy. 3. 1,
2. 3. The very laying of the foundation of the Temple, was ground for the
Priests and Levites praising and giving thanks unto the Lord, as is recorded
Ezra 3. 10, 11. (3.) H^reby Parties are taught how to value the full crop of
Mercy. The Husbandman's joy in the Harvest, transcends his joy for pleasant
showers before the Harvest. His waiting makes way for his prizing what he waits
for. Behold the husbandman waits for the precious fruit of the earth, James
5. 7. Canaan after a long Wilderness-journey, is the more valued by the
Israelites:

CHAP. II.
1. FROM the gradual process of Providence in Judgments, behold the folly and
stupidity of sinners. They are secure, though Judgments have had their real as
well as verbal Preface. God has showed the Rod, and smitten with it, and yet
they promise themselves Golden Mountains, when they are ascending desolate
ones, like Agag, who said, Surely the bitterness of death is past, 1 Samuel 15.
33. It was said of Ephraim, Strangers have devoured his strength, and he
knows it not; yea, gray-hairs are here and there upon him, yet he knows it
not, Hos. 7. 9. Oh how sad is the case of stupid sinners, who consider not how
lesser Judgments are but par-boilings for greater ones!

2. From the gradual process of Providence in Mercies, learn,

1. To observe the first footsteps of Mercy. Men should be as forward in their
observation, as Providence is in operation. The way to see the great things of
Providence, is, not to despise the day of small things, Zech. 4. 10.

2. To watch against Pride and Impatiency, if a Mercy come not by and by.
Behold his soul which is lifted up, is not upright in him; but the just shall
live by his faith, Hab. 2. 4. It Is wisdom for persons to crush that which may
crush the Mercy. An head swollen with pride and vanity, will not be receptive
of the Crown of Mercy.

3. To improve the first fruits of Mercy. He that improves the dawnings of
Mercy, may behold the glorious day of Mercy. Jesus answered and said unto
Nathaniel, Because I said unto thee, I saw thee under the fig tree, believe
thou? Thou shall see greater things, John 1. 50.

OBSERVATION XLVI.
PROVIDENCE does make a sudden change of the face of things: or, There is a
Leap, as well as a soft and gentle Walk of Providence in matters.
CHAP. I.
WHAT has been before said of the gradual process of Providence, is not so to
be understood, as contradictory to the Liberty and Royal Prerogative of the
Lord in sudden alterations. Moreover, the gradual Caeterum si respicimus ad Dei
consilium, nunquam motam facit: novit enim omnes temporum articulos and in ipsa
tarditate semper accelerat, utcunque non apprehendat hoc caro. Calv. in Hab. c.
2. v. 23.
workings of Providence are consistent with sudden alterations made by
Providence. A strong wind unexpected comes; and the Trees full of ripe fruit
have their thin and lean face in a moment. Now that there are such sudden
alterations both as to Judgments and Mercies, may be evidenced as follows.

1. There is a sudden change of the face of things in regard of a black and
ruful face of things to take place: and this will appear, (1.) From the full
and elegant similitudes by which this sudden change is painted forth in its
genuine and proper colors. So in Isa. 30. 13. Therefore this iniquity shall be
to you as a breach ready to fall, swelling out in a high wall, whose breaking
comes suddenly, at an instant. Other full and pregnant allusions there are, as
to the withering of the grass when the spirit of the Lord blows on it, Isa.
40. 7. the cutting off like the foam on the waters, Hos. 7. 7. the travel of a
woman with child, whose pangs are sudden as well as sure, 1 These. 5. 3. (2.)
From Instances and Exemplifications. The old World had a new face, though a sad
and weeping one, and that in the space of forty days, Genesis 7. 17. The Sun was
risen upon the Earth, when Lot entered Zoar; then the Lord rained upon Sodom and
Gomorrah brimstone and fire from the Lord out of heaven, as it is Genesis 19 23.
24. There are seven years of Famine after seven years of Plenty in Egypt, Genesis
41, 29, 30. The house of the Lord, and the King's house, and all the houses of
Jerusalem, and all the houses of the great men, are burnt with fire, Jer. 52.
13. In a morning shall the king of Israel be cut off, Hos. 10. 15. For in an
hour so great riches is come to naught, Rev. 18 17.

2. There is a sudden change in the face of things in regard of a pleasant and
smiling-face of things to take place. And this will appear,

1. From Predictions and Intimations on this wise in Scripture. So in Isa. 66.
8. Who has heard such a thing? Who has seen such things? Shall the earth be
made to bring forth in one day? or shall a nation be bork at once? For as soon
as Zion traveled, she brought forth her children. This may refer to the Jews
release from the captivity; and Psalm. 126. may be a comment on it. If it shall
be extended further; that phrase of the Apostle in Romans 11. 15. does give us to
understand what a sudden and glorious change the Lord can make in the World by
way of addition to his Church. And as God can and will increase the number of
his people; so likewise decrease the number of their adversaries: so in Rev. 18
8. Therefore shall her plagues come in one day, death, and mourning, and
famine: and she shall be utterly burnt with fire. Again,

2. From Instances or Exemplifications. Joseph becomes an embellish't Jewel,
who a little before lay neglected in the Prison-rubbish, Genesis 41. 14. Then
Pharaoh sent and called Joseph, and they brought him hastily out of the
dungeon. The Israelites are no longer Scavengers and Drudges in Egypt, when the
Lord's time is come for their delivery; a sudden change there is for their
delivery, after some delays; the Egyptians were urgent upon the people, that
they might send them out of the Land in haste; for they said We be all dead
men, Exodus 12. 33. The Month (in E^ther's time) was turned unto them from
sorrow to joy, and from mourning into a good day, Esth 9. 22. The truly good
people of God at Damascus have no little joy, when their intended Persecutor
becomes on a sudden a good and Orthodox Preacher, Acts 9. 20. A sudden change
there was in Peter's case, they saw him, and were astonish^d, Acts 12. 16.

CHAP. II.
WHAT little reason have sinners to be bold and confident in their ways? How
soon may all their Pomp, Policy, Strength, like a stately Ship, be blown up,
when Providence shall send its fire-ball into the Gun-room? Remarkable are
passages in Scripture to this Nam malic (qui adhuc adversus justos in aliis
terrarum partibus saeviunt) quanto serius, tanto vehementius idem omnipotens
mercedem sceleris exsolvit: quia ut est erga pios indulgentissimus pater sic
adversus impios rectissimus judex. Lact. lib. 1. Inst. c. 1.
purpose. Hos. 5. 7. Now shall a month devour them with their portions. Psalm.
64. 7. But God shall shoot at them with an arrow, suddenly shall they be
wounded. Psalm. 73. 18, 19. Surely thou did set them in slippery places: thou
castedst them down into destruction: how are they brought into desolation as in
a moment! they are utterly consumed with terrors.

2. As sinners have no reason to be bold and wanton, having Providence for such
an Enemy: So Saints have no reason to be hopeless and heartless, having
Providence for such a Friend. What though there be loss of Children,
plunderings by Chaldeans and Sabeans, a body smitten with sore boils, a state
of elongation, or alienation from friends in regard of love and friendship;
yea, the terrors of God too within in the conscience, as 'twas Job his case?
yet it is but the turn of the hand of Providence, and all is made up. The Lord
turned the captivity of Job, chapter 42. v. 10. And not only in personal cases is
the Aphorism or Observation here useful; but in the public case of the Church
of Christ. So in Psalm* 46. 5* God is in the midst of her, she shall not be
move^: God shall help her; and that right early. And so in Rev. 11. the
Witnesses are slain; yet to the affrighting of the slayers, they revive again;
the spirit of life from God entered into them, ver. 11. Let no^ Christians then
be despondent under their black Clouds; the glorious Sun of Providence may
quickly throw off its sable mantle, and dart forth its Meridian beams, to the
admiration of those who have been without Sunshine for many days.

OBSERVATION XLVII.
The Use of means in matters, is man's work: the Issue or success of means, is
God's work.
CHAP. I.
WHAT has been before said as touching the Lord's bringing about of matters,
his way or manner in working, both gradually, and on a sudden, is not to be
understood, as if therefore the use of means were in vain on man's part; the
present Observation is a check to such a wrong Inference: And whereas here it
is said, The use of means is man's work: this is not so to be conceived, as to
deny a work of Providence in the very use of the means; for there is a work of
Providence in directing to the means, and abilitating to use them. The meaning
then is nothing else, but to point out man's duty, and so to leave the result
of matters to Providence. And that the use of means is thus incumbent on man,
appears:

1. Man will otherwise be found a violater of the Lord's Command. Make thee an
ark of Gopher-wood, said God to Noah, Genesis 6. ^4. Thus did Noah; according to
all that God commanded him, so did he, v. 22. Noah had been a transgressor, had
he neglected Ark-work, and expected preservation without the use of means to be
made conscience of by him. The use of means is commanded both for the outward
and inward man, in respect of temporals as well as spirituals; so teaches the
Apostle, 1 These. 4. 11. And that ye study to be quiet, and to do your own
business, and to work with your own hands, as we commanded you. And in Phil. 2.
12. Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling.

2. It Is an ill requital of the Lord's kindness, that when he honors man to be
instrumental in matters, this condescension of God is abused, slighted, and not
esteemed as it ought to be. The great God needs not the choicest Tool for any
work. It is of his goodness, that as he works in his Providence for man; so by
man, as an under-agent or instrument; for we are laborers together with God,
says Paul, 1 Cor. 3. 9. Instruments and Means are so far honored, as God is
pleased in and by them to make a conveyance of good to persons.

3. A man has the more of quietness of heart in using the means, albeit God
work some other way for help. Hezekiah had the greater ground for calmness of
spirit, having done his endeavor to check the Assyrian insolency: he took
counsel with his Princes and mighty men, to stop the waters of the Fountains
which were without the City; and they did help him, 2 Chronicles 32. 3. The
Assyrians are not forced (it seems) to leave their siege by reason of this
stratagem of War; God helps another way; the Lord sent an angel, which out off
all the mighty men of valor, and the leaders, and captains, in the camp of the
king of Assyria: so he returned with shame of face into his own land; and when
he was come into the house of his god, they that came forth of his own bowels,
slew him there with the sword, v. 21.

4. It Is a tempting of God to throw-by the use of what means are to be used.
God promises the Israelites the Land of Canaan, and they do not fling away
their Swords; for then they might be said to fight against God, in not fighting
the Enemy. And when they had Canaan for their possession, they were to look
after Corn, and not expect Manna, for Manna ceased, and the old Corn of the
Land supplies them the first year, Josh. 5. 12. When the Devil said to Christ,
Cast thy self down, Mat. 4. 6. Jesus said unto him, It is written again, Thou
shall not tempt the Lord thy God, v. 7. It is Hell's Divinity, not what is
taught in Christ's School, To run to Miracles when Means are to be used.

In the next place, The issue of means is God's work. Four things are
considerable:

1. It belongs to God as his Prerogative-Royal, to issue matters as he sees
fit. Unto God the Lord belong the issues from death, Psalm. 68. 20. The
preparations of the heart in man, and the answer of the tongue, is from the
Lord, Prove. 16. 1. The horse is prepared against the day of battle: but safety
is of the Lord, Prove. 21. 31.

2. Probable means take not, and improbable ones attain the End intended, as
the Lord is pleased. Asa his College of Physicians cure him not, 2 Chronicles. 16.
12. Some have by inconsiderable means been recovered of sickness, when others,
notwithstanding vast expenses, have slipped into their graves. It is observable,
how an handful of men do sometimes beat a vast Army: the Army of the Syrians
came with a small company of men, and the Lord delivered a very great Host into
their hand, 2 Chronicles. 24. 24.

3. Means used for matters lie dormant, and take not, till God be pleased
effectually to undertake in his Providence. Joseph was not so foolhardy as not
to use means for his liberty; But think on me (said he to Pharaoh's Butler)
when it shall be well with thee; and show kindness, I pray thee, unto me; and
make mention of me unto Pharaoh, and bring me out of this house, Genesis 40. 14.
Joseph here does his duty, yet did not the chief Butler remember Joseph, but
forgot him, v. 23. And though the Butler forgot Joseph, yet God remembers
Joseph, sends a dream into the King's head, a great noise there is at Court
hereupon; and this noise awakens the Butler from his sleepy forgetfulness: I
remember (says he) my faults this day, Genesis 41. 9. and so the old key which
lay a rusting, is now scou^'d up, and opens the Plisondoors for Joseph.

4. Means used have sometime a quite contrary issue to what they are intended,
or might in probability usher in Christ's innocence, his reply to the charge
about King-ship, John 18. 36. the distwasive by Pilate's Wife, Mat. 27. 19. the
testimony of Pilate's conscience, Mat. 27. 24. all these center not in the
absolving of Christ, but he must suffer. That means have a quite contrary
issue, has before been demonstrated in distinct Observations, how Furtherances
become Hindrances, and Hindrances Furtherances; and there ore it may suffice
here to touch on this as proof of the second branch of the Aphorism here. The
accommodation of the Whole, follows.

CHAP. II.
1. SEE the error of those, who more or less cast off the use of means. There
is a temptation this way; and a folly in closure with the temptation. The
demonstration of the folly may here be insisted on, and that two ways, besides
what has been said, and may be in next Head.

1. How repugnant is this to the dictates of common Reason. Reason dictates for
the use, and the proportionable use of means in matters. The common Proverbs do
evidence so much; as, we must not lie in the ditch, and cry God help. There is
no sailing over the sea in an Egg-shell. To set the Fox to keep the Geese, is a
wild course. There are the sparklings of Reason in these Adagies; and if there
be not light enough from these sparklings, go we to Solomon's Proverbs, and we
may learn there, how Drunkenness, Gluttony, Drowsiness, are to be abandoned,
and the Virtues contrary to these, to be followed, in order to comfortable
livelihood in the world, Prove. 23. 20, 21. And in Prove. 22. 3. A prudent man
foreseeth the evil, and hides himself, but the simple pass on, and are
punished. According then to the dictate of a wise Solomon, the use of means to
prevent evils, is according to the Rules of Prudence.

2. How contradictory is this course oftentimes to the parties own practices.
There was one who had taken up a conceit, That if God would save him, he should
be saved; and if not, the use of all means were in vain. The party falls sick,
sends for a Physician; who knowing the disease of the Patient's Mind, as well
as the Disease of the Body, replies, That if God have a purpose to recover you,
you shall be recovered; and if not, all my labor will be lost: And so, in this
Glass, gave the party a view of the ugly error he had taken up in regard of the
disuse of means for the Soul. Virel rehearses Relig. Christ: Compend. lib. 2.
c. 2.
a story of a certain Nobleman, who was on his march with a well-accoutred
Army; and it happened, that he led his Army by the house of a faithful Pastor,
well known before to this Nobleman: This honest man wills him to look up to,
and rely on God, to favor his warlike Expeditions: he, by and by, enters his
plea about Divine Providence; as if he had said, God had decreed all Events,
and therefore the Decree of God could not be altered by his prayers. That good
Pastor replies, I would advise you therefore, That you lay aside the Horses and
Arms as unprofitable, for as much as the ssue of War hangs on the Providence
of God; so that nothing can happen besides what is decreed by God. The
Nobleman answers, That Arms could not without rashness be laid aside by
those who betake themselves to War, inasmuch as they are the Instruments by
which God is wont to give victory, to whom he sees fit to give it -- The same,
says that Pastor, I can affirm of Prayer, by which God is wont to bestow on us
such things as are necessary both for the use of this life, and for eternal
salvation; and therefore it is no less rashness to neglect that, under pretense
of Divine Providence; whenas it is so often commended by God with innumerable
Promises propounded to those who frequently exercise themselves therein: and
the Son of God himself has given us an example herein, from whom likewise it
is commanded, that we pray without ceasing. With this answer, that Nobleman
was not a little edified.

2. Be encouraged to the use of means in matters. Jacob had his Presents for
Esau; and there was an honest policy in the manner of ordering the Presents
sent, Genesis 32. 13, to v. 2^. Jeremiah was earnest with the King, saying, Let my
supplication, I pray thee, be accepted before thee, that thou cause me not to
return to the house of Jonathan the Scribe, lest I dye there, Jer. 37. 20.
Besides the common practice of God's people in the use of means, there are two
things observable; That they have used means notwithstanding the promise of God
for the effecting of matters; and also, notwithstanding remarkable Providence
displayed in their precedent preservation. Jacob was under a particular promise
as to the Lord's care over him in his return to his Country, Genesis 32. 9, 12.
and yet he uses the means, as before intimated. Paul had a promise for the
lives of all in the Ship with him, Acts 27. 24. and yet they that could swim,
cast themselves first into the sea, and gat to land; and the rest, some on
boards, and some on broken pieces of the ship; and so it came to pass, that
they escaped all safe to land, v. 44. yea, a passage there is, v. 31. Except
these abide in the ship, ye cannot be saved. It seems then there is a [ cannot]
where means are not used, or so used; notwithstanding the Purpose and Promise
of God, which are so to be understood, as taking in the means to be used. And
as for the other thing intimated, we have instances: Daniel had a good Cause,
and good God, who did miraculously shut the Lions mouths; yet he is not puffed
up, to the slighting of the King's courtesy in his being taken up out of the
Lions Den, Dan. 6. 21, 22, 23. Peter had a miraculous delivery out of the
Prison, and yet withdraws for a season; he departed, and went into another
place, Acts 12. 17. To conclude this, let two things be remembered:

1. See the means be regular, or right means. Means are regular, (1.) In regard
of natural causality, or tendency to the end. He that will plow his land, must
not beat his P^ow-share into a Sword; and he that will go to battle, must not
beat his Sword into a Pruning-hook. If Jeremiah must be had up out of the
Dungeon, he is not drawn up with a twine-thred, but with cords; and not only
cords, but cast-clouts and rags are to be put under his arm-holes, Jer. 38. 11,
12, 13. (2.) In regard of a moral or instituted causality. Men must not under
difficulties and distresses, with Saul, away to an Endor-woman, 1 Samuel 28. 7,
8. To fall in with sin, is to fall out with God, his Word, which warrants no
such means to be used. Not only piety, but an holy Prudence, must guide in the
use of means. The circumstances of a case, may have very much influence on
determination what, and how to be done, as in Ezra 8. 21, 22.

2. Eye God dependently and submissively in the use of means. Jacob did mind
prayer to God, as well as the Presents sent. There was a conjunction of Piety
and Policy. He was a wrestler with God, Genesis 32 -- With many, the Means is the
speaking-Figure, and God the dumb Cipher in a business; but with Jacob it was
not so. Let Jacob's God be thy God in the use of the means, if thou will have
him be thy God in the good success of the means. Eye him therefore in all; and
say as David, Let him do to me as seems him good, 2 Samuel 15. 26.

OBSERVATION XLVIII.
A stock or store of Prayers makes way for a rich Income of Providence: Or,
Gracious Prayers usher in Glorious changes of Providence.
CHAP. I.
PRAYER being an universal means to make use of in matters; a means to be
coupled with other means; and a means, when no other means can be used; it may
very well here fall under consideration; and that, as it has reference to
Divine Providence for help. Now that it has a befriending-influence for the
good of persons not only in Temporals, but in Spirituals, may be evidenced four
ways.

First, From the Institution of the Lord. Prayer is an instituted means by God.
It is a Noah's Dove, which returns with an Olive Branch in her mouth. If it be
asked, When and where Prayer was instituted by the Lord? I may bid the party so
demanding, to go to Paradise: for though Adam in the state of innocence had no
sin to confess; yet he had a God to acknowledge. A Directory for Devotion was
engraven on his heart. There was an Arbor for Adam's Closet, as well as a Walk
for his meditation in the Garden of Eden. He might not only be a thanksgiver
for favors, but also a petitioner for the continuance of them. It may suffice
then, That the Directory for Devotion was first published in Paradise, though
it has had various editions since, with such additions as the Lord has made
in his holy word: And seeing then the Lord has instituted this means for
gracious ends, it is wisdom to make use of this Bottom or Vessel for the
transporting Commodities, this Receipt for a Cure, this Shooing-horn to draw on
the Velvet-shoo of Mercy. See 2 Chronicles. 7. 14. Psalm. 50 15. Jer. 29. 12. Phil.
4. 6.

Secondly, From the nature, or at least property of Prayer. Prayer honors
Providence in an address made to a Throne of Grace. When Mercies are begged,
Providence is acknowledged. 'Twas good Divinity, though from a bad hand, 2
King. 6. 27. If the Lord do not help thee, whence shall I help thee? said well
that King, the son of a Murderer, as the Prophet calls him, v. 32. And as
Prayer does honor God in acknowledging his Providence; so Providence has
honored Prayer, yea the shadow of it, witness Ahab's devotion, 1 King. 21. 29.
God's bounty, not Ahab's desert, was the source or rise of Ahab's mercy. If God
do then cast crumbs to Dogs who thus lie prostrate before him; what
encouragement have the children of the Kingdom to go to their Father? Ask, and
it shall be given unto you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be
opened unto you: for what man is there of you, whom if his son ask bread, will
he give him a stone? or if he ask a fish, will he give him a serpent? If ye
then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more
shall your father which is in heaven give good things to them that ask him,
Mat. 7. 7, etc.

Thirdly, From the Experience of God's people. Prayer may well be termed the
Royal Exchange, in a spiritual sense: Here is a bartering for choice
Commodities, as Gold tried in the fire, white Raiment, Eye Salve, Rev. 3. 18.
Esther, with the Jews, did labor hard at this Sacred Pump of Prayer; and their
labor was not in vain: for their hands lifted up to Heaven, did knock down
Haman with his Accomplices, Esth. 4. 16. with chap. 9. v. 25. Peter was kept in
prison; but prayer was made without ceasing of the Church unto God for him,
Acts 12. 5. Though Peter be in prison, yet the Spirit of Prayer was at liberty,
and sets Peter at liberty: for the prison, which like a Jonas his Whale had
swallowed him, gives up the prisoner at the prayers of the Church. To this
testimony of the Saints Experiences, add the testimony of God himself, Isa. 45.
19. I said not unto the seed of Jacob, Seek ye me in vain.

4. From the signal appearance of Providence at or nigh the very time that
prayer is made. There seems to be something in God's owning persons whilst they
are at their work. Abraham's servant observes this; saying, Before I had done
speaking in my heart, behold Rebeccah came forth with her pitcher, etc. Gen 24.
45. In Abijah's time they cried unto the Lord, and the priests sounded with
trumpets; then the men of Judah gave a shout: and as the men of Judah shouted,
it came to pass, that God smote Jeroboam, and all Israel, before Abijah and
Judah, 2 Chronicles. 13. 14, 15. And whiles (says Daniel) I was speaking and
praying, and confessing my sin, and the sin of my people Israel, and presenting
my supplication before the Lord my God, for the holy mountain of my God: yea,
whiles I was a speaking in prayer, even the man Gabriel, whom I had seen in the
vision at the beginning, being caused to fly swiftly, touched me about the
time of the evening-oblation, etc. Dan. 9 20, 21. So in Acts 4. 31. When they
had prayed, the place was shaken where they were assembled together, and they
were all filled with the Holy Ghost. And so, lastly, to mention no more
instances, That of Peter is pertinent; he was a prisoner, the people of God
then knock at Heaven's door; and behold Peter knocks at the door of the house
where many were gathered together praying, Acts 12. 12.

CHAP. II.
1. LEARN who are the men and women of gracious Providence; they are such who
make conscience of serious prayer to God. They who go down into this Deep, see
the wondrous works of God. Noah, Daniel, Job, are the men who can do much with
Providence, if any thing be to be done, as is intimated Ezekiel. 14. 14. And, the
effectual, servent prayer of a righteous man avails much, James 5. 16.

2. How sad is the state of those, who instead of laying up a stock of Prayers,
lay up a treasure of Guilts! They curse, blaspheme, revile, lie, oppress,
persecute those who wish well to them, and pray for them. These continuing the
old trade of sin, cannot expect that Providence should look from Mount
Gerrizzim to bless them; but from Mount Ebal, to curse them. An heavy hand of
Providence will meet with such who make light of Prayer; and trample, like
Swine, this Pearl, with other Pearls, under their feet. See Job 21. 14, 15.
with 17, 18, 19, 20, 30. Romans 2. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10.

3. Observe one ground amongst others, why pious ones are so taken up in prayer
to God. They well know their own Trade. A Merchant, who often sends his Ship to
one and the same Port, has reason for it. A Child is ever and anon in a room,
and there is an Honeycomb. God's Children find it good for them to draw near
to God, Psalm. 73. 28.

4. Know who are the best provident Parents for Children; they are such, who by
their prayers to God, engage Providence to be a Portion and Jointure for their
Children. A little, with a blessing, left to some, will out-last Farms,
Manors, yea Kingdoms, left to others with a curse. Pious Parents, in being
praying Parents, are provident Parents; they pray not in vain: God may hear
prayer for posterity one way or other: See Genesis 17. 20.

5. Wicked men then are fools in their Rages and subtle Contrivances against
pious praying-ones. How quickly may God hear the groans of his people, and so
sweep away the Bodies of wicked men to their Graves, and their Souls to Hell?
There was a prayer made for Peter, and the design against him was broken; and a
prodigious death is the lot of an Herod who had designed the death of Peter,
Acts 12. 23.

6. There is no reason to lay aside Prayer, no, not whilst in the world. We
shall still stand in need of the Providence of God. Daily- Providence calls for
daily-Prayer. It Is pride to an height of it, to think that Prayer is below a
grown Christian. When persons stand not in need of Providence to help, and
continue its help, they may not so stand in need of prayer. But alas! where are
the men, or rather monsters, who owe no debt to Providence? The holy Scriptures
do sufficiently confute this fancy: see Job 1. 5. Mat. 6. 11. Luke 11. 1. Col.
4. 2.

7. See, whence it is that the Devil makes opposition against prayer. He is a
cunning Pirate, and knows, that serious prayer is the Christian's Plate-Fleet.
He is sensible of the knocks and bruises which prayer gives his Serpent's head.
He has been an observer of what great things God has done on the prayers of
his people. No wonder then, if he throw dirt and stones into this Well; jogs
the Christian when he is ready to fire at the mark; and shakes his hand, when
he is about to write down his humble petition to God, see Zech. 3. 1. Acts 16.
16, 17, 18.

8. Look not on those as enemies, who call on you to call on God with your
Families. Shall a Physician be thanked for the Body? a Lawyer for the Estate?
And is the Body, Estate, Soul, and all, of no regard, as the concerns of all
lie at stake in another way, and that the best way too? Surely they are Friends
who antidote you against the curse of God: see Jer. 10. 25. Prove. 3. 33.

Lastly, Observe the incomes of Providence by way of return unto prayer. If it
be said here,

I have prayed, and prayed, and yet no such returns are made as the Meditation
or Observation on Providence imports.

I might at large reply, but that would be a digression. In a few things,
therefore, to stop the mouth from slandering the Observation, take notice of
what follows.

1. Is the particular thing thou prayest for, warranted for kind? Pride and
Passion make wild petitions for the kind of them: see Luke 9. 54. Mat. 20. 21,
22.

2. What is thy end in praying for things though warranted? see James 4. 3.

3. Do you pray in Christ's Name, and after a serious sort? See John 14. 13.
Luke 18. 13. James 5. 16.

4. Is not Prayer contradicted by an unworthy walking? Some are like black
clouds, still black, and that notwithstanding thunder and lightning breaks from
them: see Isa. 1. 15. Isa. 58. 4.

5. Do you not lie under some mistake about God's Providence in answer to
prayer? For hearing of prayer is not to be defined by God's doing all we wish
for; but what God sees best for us. God answers, when the thing may not be
given in for kind. Paul was heard, when not heard, 2 Cor. 12. 7, 8, 9. The
denial of one thing is the way that Providence may take for granting another. A
man prays for Health, and Mortification to the World: God, by the want of
Health, mortifies to the World.

6. The question is, W^ther Providence may not yet make a sure and full return
of the goods you have left in the hand of Providence. Wait then still on God;
let the Lord alone to answer when and how he pleases. God has answered some,
when it is probable they gave off thinking, that an answer in such sort would
have been given in: see Luke 1. 13. with 18.

OBSERVATION XLIX.
When God takes down the Scaffold of this World, the Sacred Play of Providence
will be at an end.
CHAP. I.
THAT an Income of Providence attends Prayer, has been showed; the full crop
or harvest, by way of return to prayer, will be in another world, as the
Apostle intimates, 2 Timothy 1. 18. with Mat. 25. 34, 35. Here in this World there
is a gracious display of Providence; and when this World has its period,
Providence as such, consider it viis and modis, will have its period likewise:
and this appears,

1. From the opposition of the day of God's judging the World, to the day, the
long day of Providence which men had in the World. There is a day for laboring
in the Vineyard; after comes the Even when the laborers are called, Mat. 20.
8. The son of man (says Christ) shall send forth his angels, and they shall
gather out of his kingdom all things that offend, and them which do iniquity,
and shall cast them into a furnace of fire, there shall be wailing and gnashing
of teeth; then shall the righteous shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of
their father, Mat. 13. 41, 42, 43. And would we know when this shall be? The 40
th verse resolves it; In the end of this world. Hence Paul inforceth the duty
of not abusing the day of Providence, but right improving of it from this
consideration, because God has appointed a day in the which he will judge the
world in righteousness, Acts 17. 31. with 30.

2. From the Lord (the Fountain of Providential Dispensations) who has
purposed to send forth the streams another way. This may be considered, 1. In
regard of the godly. 2. In regard of the wicked.


1. In regard of the godly: They shall immediately, and without interruption,
enjoy God in the Heavens; so 1 These. 5. 17. In this world the godly see the
Lord as in a glass, and that but darkly, 1 Cor. 13. 12. There are two glasses
in which the godly behold the Lord here: (1.) The glass of their Civil Affairs:
their food, liberty, relations, and the public concerns of temporal life. This
glass will be broken; for as Christ says, In the resurrection they neither
marry, nor are given in marriage, but are as the angels of God in heaven, Mat.
22. 30. and as the Apostle says, Meats for the belly, and the belly for meats;
but God shall destr^y both it and them, 1 Cor. 6. 13. There will ^e no need of
food, and consequently of Provdence as a Caterer: The Belly, or Body, remains
in regard of substance, though functions and offices of it, as in this life,
are served with an Eternal Writ of Ease. But, (2.) There is another glass, and
that is of Divine Ordinances, or Sacred Institutions: these are as the
Galleries to the Presence Chamber. A change there will be as to these: then
comes the end, when he (Christ, as now he lets out himself, though he abide
for ever as Lord and Head) shall have delivered up the kingdom to God, even the
father, 1 Cor. 15. 24.

2. In regard of the wicked; they are no longer now the Trustees of outward
good things, as formerly. They who thrust from them the Providence of God
wooing, and woing them to repentance, are now thrust into the prison; and no
coming from thence till the uttermost farthing be paid, Mat. 5. 26. Abraham
said to the impenitent rich man, (whether he were King, Prince, Duke, Earl,
Lord, Knight, Esquire, Gentleman, Merchant, it matters not to determine, for
all may be included, none excluded, if rich in the World's Goods, and not in
Faith) he said, Son remember that thou in thy lifetime receivedst thy good
things, and likewise Lazarus evil things: but now he is comforted, and thou art
tormented, Luke 16. 25.

CHAP. II.
1. LEARN who they are who submissively long after the change of changes, or
the great or last Change of Providence; they are those who have had experience
of a blessed change of Providence on their hearts here, and who have profited
by the various changes of Providence in this world. So the Apostle; While we
look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen:
for the things which are seen, are temporal: but the things which are not seen,
are eternal, 2 Cor. 4. 18. See also 2 Cor. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4. Rev. 22. 20.

2. It Is wisdom then to work before the night comes when no man can work, as
our Savior Christ phraseth it, John 9. 4. Two things are here considerable:

1. Secure we Spiritual Riches whilst the Gospel-Mine is open. Be not foolish
Virgins, who have their Bags and Cossers, but no Treasure in them. They had
their Lamps of Profession, but no Oil in their Vessels; they may justly be shut
out of Heaven, whose hearts were shut against the real admission of Christ by
his grace on earth, Mat. 25. 3, 11, 12. Oh! Eternity is no trifle! Men should
be in good earnest for it; The kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and the
violent take it by force, Mat. 11. 12. And now is the season, or never, to look
after the means of grace, and grace by the means: Abraham tells the rich man,
who would have a Preacher sent from Hell, They have Moses and the prophets, let
them hear them, Luke 16. 29.

2. Honor God with Temporal Riches, as you have opportunity. Are there no
Ministers of the Gospel; poor Scholars, who may be serviceable for the Church
of Christ; distressed Widows, Orphans, to taste of your bounty? What a folly is
there in the most, who have their Cave, ne intra loculos tuos includas salutem
inopum, and tanquam in tumulis sepeliac vitam pauperum. Ambros. lib. 2. de
officio. c. 16.
hands full of the World, and their hearts empty of love to Christ, his
Interest, and consequently their own good! That rich Farmer was Praemittamus,
fratres, Thesauros nostros in Coelum; sint vectores paupeperes, qui possunt
sinu suo, quae nostra sunt, ad superna portare. Petrus Chrysologus Ser. 7.
a fool to be a drudg for others; and neglect those, who if they had not given
him a lift to Heaven, might have plucked some sticks from his burning in Hell,
Luke 12. 20. Remember then that of Christ, Luke 16. 9. And I say unto you, Make
to your selves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness, that, when ye fail,
they may receive you into everlasting habitations. And that of the Apostle as
an exposition on the former, Charge them that be rich in this world, that they
be not high-minded, nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God, who
gives us richly all things to enjoy: that they do good, that they be rich in
good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate, laying up in store for
themselves a good foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold
on eternal life, 1 Timothy 6. 17, 18, 19.

PART V.
HAVING insisted on the Observations referring to Divine Providence; it remains
now, in the last Part of this Treatise, to fall in with the Directions general
for the improvement of Providential Dispensations. The Directions are of two
sorts: 1. Cautionary. 2. Positive. The first of these follow in their
respective Sections.

SECT. I.
1. MAKE not second-causes sole-causes in matters, by denying the Agency of the
First and Supreme Cause. They who kick off the First-Cause in point of a
controlling and overruling influencing on Second-Causes, rob the Lord of his
glory. Some there are (as a Reverend man says) Prideaux Ser. on Psalm. 9. 19 p.
10.
who will rather ascribe Noah's Flood to an extraordinary Aspect or concourse
of watery Planets; or the drowning of Pharaoh's Host, to the inconsiderate
venturing upon an high-tide, rather than to God's wrath for sin, who sends
such Judgments on some, to make all the rest afraid. Now whatever shifts and
put offs men have, to the darkning of the hand of Providence, the holy
Scriptures learn us otherwise. The destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah is
attributed to God as the righteous Author thereof; and yet there are not
wanting some, who impute that visible desolation (which cannot be denied) to a
mere contingency of Second-Causes; and this imputation of theirs is contrary to
the Scripture, which does in an eminent sort set forth the hand of God as
falling heavy on the said places, Genesis 19. 24, 25. Deuteronomy. 29. 23. 2 Pet. 2. 6.
It Is worthy of observation, that there are reasons given by Authors, why there
are frequent and violent tempests in the Mediterranean-Sea where Jonah sailed,
and yet there is no reason to turn Providence overboard with Jonah in his
voyage through these mighty waters; for it is said, the Lord sent out a great
wind into the sea, Jonah 1. 4. And not only does the Lord fly upon the wings
of the wind, Psalm. 18. 10. but also rides in his Chariot of Providence, through
the Cornfieldsd, where the Husbandman drives with his Dung-cart; so teaches
the Scripture, Hos. 2. 21, 22. And to this accords that of the abovenamed
Author; The wonderful events which the ignorant attribute to Fortune, the
superstitious to Saints and Idols, the Politicians to their Plots, some to
their own Worth, most to the means and the extraordinary concurrence of
Second-causes; the Penmen of the Holy Ghost ascribe ever unto the Lord: they
held it the best Analytiques, to resolve all such Effects into their first
Principle.

SECT. II.
2. ABUSE not Providence, by using it as a Shooing-horn to draw on sin, or as a
Shoo-buckle to fasten it on. Suppose some extravagant Ruffians did want a
certain sum of money, and on the road-way did leight on a man who had the exact
sum; which they seize on, and after thrive in robbery: Providence is in no wise
a Patron to their sin, though the tabernacles of these robbers prosper, as it is
said Job 12. 6. Abimelech finds a silver-stirrop, and men to hold it, in order
to his mounting up into the Saddle of an usurped Government, Judge. 9. 4. They
gave him threescore and ten pieces of silver out of the house of Baal-berith,
wherewith Abimelech hired vain men and light persons which followed him. We
read, That Antichrist's coming is after the working of Satan with all power,
and signs and lying wonders, 2 These. 2. 9. Without question, there must be the
Providence of God in sending strong delusions, for so ( v. 11.) it is affirmed;
and yet Providence is not to be charged with the foretold deceits. I have read,
how Pope Adrian confirmed (by a pretended revelation) the order of St.
Gregory's Mass, whereas unto the year 780, the Liturgy of St. Ambrose was
generally used; it was put to the decision of Providence, whether that of
Gregory, or the other of Ambrose, should continue? The manner was this: Both
were laid on the Altar, and the Church-doors shut; and resolved it was, that
they should give themselves to prayer all night, That God would reveal some
token which of the two Services he would have used in Churches. In the morning
they find Gregory's Mass Book plucked asunder, and scattered all the Church
over; but Ambrose his Book laid open in the place where they laid it. This
Adrian thus expounded the matter; That as the leaves were scattered, so should
Gregory's Mass Book be used throughout the World; and that Ambrose his Liturgy
should be observed only in his own Church at Mediolanum. And so upon this
jugling-wonder Providence is abused to countenance the Romish Mass Book. Far be
it then from good Christians to put tricks on Providence. It Is wisdom to
distinguish between a Providence which may serve by way of probation, and a
Providence by way of invitation. That Providence may be a Touchstone, which
ought not to be a Loadstone. Providence makes good the thing spoken by a false
prophet, and yet this is no ground to forsake the true God; see Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 2,
3. Moreover, it is wisdom to remember the Apostle's rule, We must not do evil
that good may come, Romans 3. 8. The Lord's bringing good out of evil, is no
warrant for a man to defile his conscience with evil. The Lord's not putting a
stop to sin, dismantles not the tower of watchfulness against sin. Conscience
must not become the Devil's Muck-heap, though Providence knows how to gather
Roses from the Dunghill of men's lusts. The Doctrine of Providence has its
good uses; men ought to beware they put not abuses for such uses.

SECT. III.
3. TAKE heed of imposing on, or tempting of Providence. There is a difference
between a modest proposal with a submission to God's disposal; and an imposal
or tempting of the Lord* The former has an Apology for it self, as in Gideon's
case, Judge. 6. 36, to the end of the chapter. The later springs from another
root, as namely, distrust of God, or presumption on his Providence, or some
other inordinate lust. The Israelites loathe Manna, and flesh (forsooth) they
must have; they lusted exceedingly in the wilderness, and tempted God in the
desert, Psalm. 106. 14. How often did they provoke him in the wilderness, and
grieve him in the desert? yea, they turned back, and tempted God, and limited
the holy one of Israel, Psalm. 78. 40, 41. It was Satan's design to have drawn
our Savior to impose on Providence by a miraculous conversion of stones into
bread when he was an hungered; and to tempt Providence for preservation, by
throwing himself down from the pinnacle of the Temple, Mat. 4 3, Qualis via
haec, de pinnaculo Templi mittere se deorsum? Non est via haec, sed ruina: and,
si via, tua est, non illius. Frustra in tentationem capitls intorsisti, quod
scriptum est ad corporis consolationem. Bern. in Psalm. Qui habitat. Ser. 15.
6, 7. It Is not becoming Christians to try needless conclusions with the
Providence of God. That way of purgation from infamous reports, called by the
name of Ordel, when the party was blind-folded, and glowing hot irons were laid
in the way where the party suspected was to go barefooted; and the escapal of
the hot irons was a testimony of innocence; may justly be reprehended as a
tempting of Providence. They may do well therefore to consider, how they
gratify the Devil, who neglect the due use of means, or venture beyond warrant
from God, and so are more bold than welcome to the house of Providence, be the
issue whatsoever it may be. An instance we have of the Israelites, who presumed
to go up to the top of the hill, and there had a bloody repulse, Numb. 14. 44,
45. I have read of Franciscus, who offered the Sultan of Babylon, to try the
truth of the Christian Religion in opposition to false Religion, by venturing
himself in the fire; and though the Sultan waved the experiment, yet that was
no ground for the Monk to wave repentance for his rashness. Let care then be
had, men tempt not, or impose on Providence in regard (1.) of what shall be
done. Man is not to prescribe, but subscribe to Providence. Man's Wit and Will
must stoop to the Wisdom and Pleasure of God; For (as the Lord says) my
counsel shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure, Isa. 46. 10. (2.) In regard
how and when this or that shall be done. Jacob is a prevailer, yet he is not a
curious enquirer, much less a peremptory prescriber how God shall deliver him
from the fury of his brother Esau: And as Jacob, now more aged, and so wise,
did act regularly herein; so was he faulty in being too hasty with his Mother
for the blessing to be given him: for though the Father lay on his deathbed,
yet he was not speechless; and if so, yet God could have opened the Father's
mouth to pronounce the blessing, without the Son's opening his mouth to tell a
lie.

SECT. IV.
4. VVATCH against discontents at, or reflexive replies on, the Providence of
God. The former evil of imposing on Providence, does make way for undue replies
against Providence. Jonah would impose on Providence the destruction of
Nineveh; and having not his humor gratified, how saucy and malepert is he!
Take heed then of a Jonah-like pettishness and frowardness under the
Providence of God. This reflexive frowardness puts forth it self,

1. In the heart, the forge of the natural spirits, and morally evil ones too.
The Devil put it into the heart of Judas to betray Christ, and so in effect to
bid Providence to take back its kindness in vouchsafing such a Master, Joh. 13.
2. It was an heart-evil that David was guilty of, and it was an interpretative
reply against Providence in not checking Saul from David's imaginary falling by
the hand of Saul, 1 Samuel 27. 1.

2. In Speech or Language. Eliphaz charges Job with this evil, saying, Why does
thine heart carry thee away? And what do thine eyes wink, that thou turnest thy
spirit against God, and let such words go out of thy mouth? Job 15. 12, 13.
The Lord tells them by the Prophet Malachy, that their words had been stout
against him: and what words they were, reflexive ones on the Providence of God,
as is expressed, Mal. 2. 13, 14, 15.

3. In Gesture, Conversation, or otherwise. Cain's discontent at the Providence
of God in having respect unto Abel and his Offering, appears in his outward
deportment, Genesis 4. 6. Why art thou wroth? and why is thy countenance fallen?
It may go for no contradiction here. Men speak aloud against Providence whilst
they are sullenly silent, or testify their discontent some other way. Some
pretend more manners than directly to fly out against God; and yet the stone
which they dare not throw against Heaven, they are ready to throw at his
servants on Earth. Thus dealt the Israelites of old with Moses, saying, Because
there were no graves in Egypt, have thou taken us away to dye in the
wilderness, Exodus 14. 11. Good Job was of another frame and temper; he did not
pour forth a flood of curses on the plunderers; neither did he fall into a
smoaking-passion with the servants who escaped, blaming them for want of
fore-light, in regard of the enemies approach; no, he eyes God in all, and so
charge not God foolishly, Job 1. 20, 21, 22. Let it be our work then to watch
the heart universally against reflexive replies on the Providence of God. We
are not to be hot and fiery against Providence, though there be a Providence
when iniquity does abound, and love of many waxes cold, as it is foretold
Mat. 24. 12. It was Jeremiah's fault in being transported beyond the bounds of
Religion, when men were so irreligious, Jer. 20. 14, to the end. To be
discontented in way of sin, though for sin, is to add to the common heap of
sins. The Lord keep every good Christian from so doing!

SECT. V.
5. RESIST not Providence. To reply upon Providence from unsound principles, is
in a sort a resisting of Providence. According to this latitude I take not the
word [ resist] here; but for a daring contradiction to Providence, or a bold
venturing on in sin, notwithstanding the vertual-wooings and warning-knocks of
Providence to the contrary. Providence may be considered, as having Corn, and
Wine, and Oil, in the one hand; and a smarting Rod in the other; and all to
little purpose, when men are headstrong in their ways. Instances in Scripture
there are of such who resist Providence; and sad experience gives us to
understand of troops of such Toreys, and Oppugners of Providence. Jesurum had a
confluence of good things, and yet waxed fat and kicked, Deuteronomy. 32. 14, 15. Saul
was advanced to a Kingship; he who was Farmer-Kish his son, is Lord of all the
Farms in Israel; and he forgets to do homage to the Lord of Lords, who had
promoted him, 1 Samuel 15. 11.

And as there are Exemplifications of such who resist Providence smiling: so
there are, likewise, of such, who oppugn Providence frowning. Pharaoh's heart
is hardened, and that notwithstanding the several plagues inflicted. Ahaz in the
time of his distress did trespass yet more against the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 28. 22.
When the fourth Angel poured forth his vial, men were scorched with great heat,
and blasphemed the name of God which has power over these plagues; and they
repented not, to give him glory, Rev. 16. 9. These Instances may suffice:
Others of both sorts of Resisters, who wage war against Heaven, might be
added. Let it be our care to depart from the Tents of these men, as Moses spoke
of Dathan and Abiram, who were Rebels against Providence, Numb. 16. 26. And to
the end we make no stay, but stye the Tents of such fighters against God,
remember we two things:

1. Other sins make men Beasts, this sin makes men Devils. The Drunkard and
Glutton fill their paunches with the Creatures; but oppugners of Providence do
more notoriously violate the Law of the Creator. Ye are (says Christ to the
stubborn Jews for whom God had done much in giving them the Land of Canaan, and
against whom Gods had lifted up his hand, for now they had the Roman yoke on
their necks) of your father the Devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do,
Joh. 8. 44.

2. What do men get by their resisting of Providence? Balaam was very near
destruction in his perverse way, as the Angel declares unto him, Numb. 22. 32,
33. And though Providence do not by and by appear in its garment dipped in blood;
yet it is folly for men to promise themselves victory over Providence; for they
may sooner sink, with Elder-guns, an Armado of strong-built Ships, and batter
down Rocks of Adamant with Snow-balls, than be too hard for Providence. God is
wise in heart, and mighty in strength: who has hardened himself against him,
and prospered? Job 9. 4.

SECT. VI.
6. VVATCH against an unmortified itch after excentrical or extraordinary
Dispensations of Providence. As there is an itch after novelties in regard of
Teachers, 2 Timothy 4 3 so there is an itch after this and that transcendent
appearance of Providence. Providence is not welcome, if it come not with a gold
ring, in goodly apparel, as James speaks in another case, James 2. 2. The Jews
(says Paul) require a sign, 1 Cor. 1. 22. And says Christ to the Jews, Except
ye see signs and wonders, ye will not believe, John 4. 48. Some there are not
unlike the Jews; they regard not Providence in the plain garment; they would
have it in such a robe, or else it is no guest for them. Luther was of another
mind: The Devil (says he) has often tempted me as he did Austin (who
deprecated lest an Angel should appear to him) that I should request some sign
from God: but far be it from me, that I should assent to this temptation. The
Martyrs, without the apparition of Angels, being confirmed by the Word of God
alone, dyed for the Name of Christ; and why should not we acquiesce? A clear
enough, and glorious apparition, is Baptism, the Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper, the power of the Keys, the Ministry of the Word; all which do not only
equal, but exceed all apparitions of Angels. Thus Luther. And he likewise
observes, how the Devil has greatly deluded parties who have been gaping
after Visions, and I know not what discoveries. Gregory the Great was a man too
credulous to fancies and apparitions, as the same Author observes. Gregorius
ut videre est in ejus Dialogis, credidit simpliciter omnibus apparitionibus.
Sicut inter reliqua de festo S. Michaeli^ multa commonti sunt; In monte
Gargoro, Michaelem templum consecrasse, and bovem confodisse, qui eo die festo
araverat. Ego dixissem: quid tibi cum monte Gargoro, cujus Dominus est Rex
Apuliae! tu non es Michael, sed Diabolus.
I find in a Spanish Writer, one Torreblanca Villalpandus, a story of one
Magdalene de la Cruz, who would break Vessels, and set them together again;
bring forth Roses in the Winter, and Snow in the Summer; yea, and that which is
more to be admired, whilst the Body of the Lord (meaning the outward Elements
used by them, or rather abused after the Popish manner) was carried about in
the streets, she would cleave into two parts the Walls of the Monastry, that
she might worship the Host; and then again would make them unite. And this
(says he, further dilating of the disjunction of the Monastry) might be done
not only by a mere delusion, or a deceit; but also by local motion: for the
Devil could open the Walls whilst the Body of the Lord did pass by, and for
that time sustain the pile, lest the stones should fall out; and after with the
same celerity and dexterity return them into their place again. Thus
Villalpandus in his second Book, (that of Operative Magic) chap. 10. He was
Doctor of Law, and Advocate for the King of Spain in one of his Courts; and
has written four Books of the invocation of the Devil; the second of which
has this Narrative.

To conclude then this sixth Caution; Let men beware of making leight of God's
ordinary Dispensations of Providence. Saul, who neglects a living Samuel, is
punished with a deadly one. The Jews, who would have Providence go out of its
road in Christ's coming down from the Cross, are justly denied; so that their
itch after an extraordinary Providence, proved a Plague-s^e to themselves. It
was the fault of Thomas, who said, Except I shall see in his hands the print of
the nails, and put my finger into the print of the nails, and thrust my hand
into his side, I will not believe, Joh. 20. 25. Let that tacit-check of Christ
given to him, be thought upon by us, v. 29. Because thou have seen me, thou
have believed: blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed.

SECT. VII.
7 TAKE heed of inferring an interest in the special favor of God, because of
some remarkable preservations and deliverances. I deny not, but external
preservations to some are argumentative of God's love. By this I know (says
David) thou favourest me, because mine enemy does not triumph over me, Psalm.
41. 11. I dare not assert David to be out in the conclusion, when I consider
the premises; for, he was a man after Gods own heart, and had an interest in
the Lord's Promises general, and particular made to himself. The waters
therefore passing through such a channel, are of another tang than other waters
which flow into the cisterns of men void of grace, and destitute of a right to
Divine Promises. Providence is good to those who are bad, and continue so.
Jehoash in his minority was wonderfully preserved from the butchering-fury of
Athaliah, 2 Chronicles. 22. 10, 11. and yet he who was so preserved to a wonder,
becomes an Apostate from God and Goodness, even to an amazement, 2 Chronicles. 24.
17, 18. I make no question, but better men in point of moral goodness than
Shimei and Joab, dyed of the Plague in David's time. The 107 Psalm is a
Treatise of Divine Providence by way of preservation and deliverance from
dangers. Judicious Calvin there extends the Providence of God to men in common,
bad as well as good; the bad are not excluded, though the good may be more
eminently included. There are four sorts of deep difficulties, out of which men
are, when Providence so pleases, rescued by an eminent hand of Providence.

1. Perilous journeys, ere men are returned to places of their habitation from
which they have been held by reason of captivity. This from v. 1, to 10.

2. Grievous imprisonments, so that little hope of life, as in Peter's case,
Acts 12. This from v. 10, to 17.

3. Sore afflictive diseases: from v. 17, to 23.

4. Dangerous storms and tempests at sea: from v. 23, to 33.

Now from this distribution or division of dangers, it may be argued, If all
such who have had God's Providence propitious toward them in Journeys,
Prisons, Sickness, Tempests at Sea, shall hereupon infer a true and undoubted
right to the distinguishing-grace of God in Jesus Christ, they will build upon
a Sandy-foundation. The best way then is, to look to this, That we be truly
good, and so all things shall work together for good, as the Apostle says,
Romans 8. 26.

SECT. VIII.
8. GIVE not way to groundless and superstitious conceits about some
Dispensations of Providence. Some are for observing a Providence as such, or
according to a gloss or construction of their fancy put on it. They are
superstitiously serious about trifles, and trifle about serious matters. Squibs
and Crackers of their own make, are more dreaded, than the thundering Artillery
of Heaven. Mr. Perkins on the Third Commandment, says thus of Superstition: It
is an opinion conceited of the works of God's Providence, the reason whereof
can neither be drawn out of the word of God, nor the whole course of Nature: As
for example; That it is unluckie for one in the morning to put on his shoo
awry; or, To put the left shoo on the right foot; To sneeze in drawing on his
shoes; To have Salt fall toward him; To have a Hare cross him; To bleed some
few drops of blood; To burn on the right ear. Again, That it is contrarily good
luck, To find old Iron; To have drink spilled on him; For the left ear to burn;
To pare our nails on some certain day of the week; To dream of some certain
things. Thus that man of God (who is said to be one of the men who taught
Englishmen how to worship God) adjudged such fancies to be far from true
worshipping of God. There is one vulgar Observation which is not by the
forenamed Author expressly nominated; but too freequently heeded by such who are
better versed in the transmitted principles of this kind of traditional
Catechism, than in the Bible, and that is this, viz. A black conclusion
inferred, from the Rats or Mice eating clothes, or wearing-apparel; no less
than the death of the party is now concluded: And because such Principles as
abovenamed are so rooted in the hearts of some; I shall in a little speak to
this last; for a mere nomination of this erroneous conceit, is not accounted a
confutation by such Ignaro's: First then, It is not denied, but that the
Providence of God reaches to the Rats and the Mice: which creatures he does
use sometimes as very remarkable scourges to the sons of men. Multis haec
quidem fabulosa habentur: at turris illa, cui a Muribus nomen est, in hunc
usque diem in Rheni flumine conspicitur, ac de tanta Episcopi immanitate
testimonium dicit. Magd. cent. 10. c. 10.
There is a received story of a Bishop in Germany, who in a time of Famine shut
up many poor Miscreants in a Barn, and so caused the fire to be kindled about
them, and pleased himself with their doleful cries, saying, Hark how these Mice
do cry; how after, this man of blood was pursued by Mice, insomuch that he
built an house in the River Rheine, to secure himself; yet there the Vermin
followed him with an arrest from Heaven, swimming through the water, and so
devoured the Devourer. In 2 Samuel 6. 4. there is mention made of Golden Mice
which the Priests and the Diviners ordered to be sent with the Ark; and the
reason we have in v. 5. where it is said, Ye shall make Images of your Emerods,
and Images of your Mice, that mar the land. By this it appears, that God
punished them in their Barns and Fields by Mice, as well as in their Bodies by
Diseases. Providence by Mice does tame the pride of the Philistin-Lords. An
Army of Mice does more than an Army of Israelites. (2.) Though Providence
extends to the Rats and Mice; yet marring and spoiling the Garment by such, is
not a prognostic of death. For (1.) it is proper and commmon to these creatures
to waste and spoil. Hunger makes them break through such soft walls. Cato, when
one made a doleful complaint, that a Rat had gnawn his Hose; replied, It was no
marvel; but much more, if his Hose had gnawn the Rat. (2.) May not that be
sometimes imputed to the Rat and the Mice, which may causally be charged on the
sloveness, and negligence of parties in point of due care had about their
garments? (3.) There may be a Catechizing-Providence for some sin in and about
the very clothes eaten. As God prepared a Worm, and ate down the Guord with
which Jonah too much pleased himself, Jonah 4. 6, 7. So it may hold here by way
of analogy; and this casualty may bring to remembrance Pride, Oppression, or
some other sin; or may be inductive of Liberality; the Garment may serve some
other: And thus an improving of the Providence may do good to the soul, and
bring on God's blessing the more; yea, to the lengthning forth of life, if
Providence see fit; and then its far from being a necessary prognostic of
death. (4) Whatever some urge as to the verifying of the thing from experience,
I have known the contrary in one, who is left only alive of the whole Family;
and yet that party so left, had his Garment eaten, to the wondering of some,
considering the circumstances, when, where, and how. The best way then is to
secure the Wedding Garment, spoken of Mat. 22. 12. No Rats, no, not the great
Rat of Hell, shall gnaw this to pieces. He need not dread a Winding Sheet, who
is clothed with Christ's Righteousness.

SECT. IX.
9. CENSURE not rashly, or wickedly, the works of Providence. It Is no less
dangerous, than foolish, to shoot arrows against the Heavens. God's works call
for man's veneration, not blasphemous aspersion. It was well spoken by Elibu on
God's behalf: Behold, God exalts by his power: who teaches like him? Who
has enjoined him his way? Or who can say, Thou have wrought iniquity? Remember
that thou magnify his work which men behold, Job 36. 22, 23, 24. Now, more
particularly, take heed of censuring,

1. The work of God's long-suffering toward the Sons of Violence and
Fraudulence. There are, who break in pieces the Lord's people, afflict his
heritage, slay the widow and the stranger, and murder the fatherless, Psalm. 94.
5, 6, 7. and yet no reason to attaque Providence, as they in Mal. 3. 15. And
now we call the proud happy; yea, they that work wickedness, are set up; yea,
they that tempt God are even delivered.

2. The work of God's distinguishing-Mercy toward some, let not this be
branded as Injustice, Partiality, or Respect of persons. The Lord is righteous
in all his ways, and holy in all his works, Psalm. 145. 17. That clause, Friend,
I do thee no wrong, Mat. 20. 13. will be fully unridled one day.

3. The remarkable irradiations, or beamings forth of Providence in matters.
Providence did notably own Nehemiah in that good work he was about; yet
Samballat, Tobiah, and Geshem, (says he) laughed us to scorn, and despised us,
and said, What is this thing that ye do? Will ye rebel against the king, Neh.
2. 19. How was Christ affronted by the Pharisees? He casts out (say they)
devils through the prince of the devils, Mat. 9. 34. Thus when the Apostles
were full of the gifts of the Holy Ghost, some mocked, saying, These men are
full of new wine, Acts 2. 13. Men would do well therefore to remember that
prohibition, Exodus 20. 16. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy
neighbor: If not against thy neighbor, then not against the God of thy
neighbor.

SECT. X.
LAstly, Beware of extremes about Providence. Extremes are of two sorts: (1.)
In Opinion. (2.) In Practice. (1.) In Opinion; and so some deny the concourse
of the first Cause with second Causes. And others, on the other hand, affirm
the first Cause alone to work at the presence of second Causes. Both these
Extremes are oppugned and expugned by those learned men who write polemically
of Providence. It Is not my purpose to be controversal. Beware then of Extremes
in practice. Some come not up to duty, referring to this or that Dispensation
of Providence. Others run beyong their duty. Men keep not the King of Heaven's
highway, but go aside on the right hand or on the left; and so Providence has
not their company. A Providence very eminent there was, in the return of those
sent to spy out the Land of Canaan: but how are the people affected? One while,
Let us make us a Captain, and let us return into Egypt, said they one to
another, Numb. 14 4. Another while say they, Lo we be here, and will go up unto
the place which the Lord has promised, v. 40. God in his Providence sets up
Saul to be King; some despised him, and brought him no Presents, 1 Samuel 10. 27.
Others were too hot and furious, and would have the King's robe dipped in blood;
Bring the men, say they, that we may put them to death, 1 Samuel 11. 12. Peter
says, Thou shall never wash my feet, Joh. 13. 7, 8. and after, Lord, not my
feet only, but also my hands and my head, v. 9. Men have ground therefore to be
watchful against extremes in matters: for, lame feet in not going after a
Providence; and Hind's feet in outrunning a Providence, become not judicious
Christians.

Having spoken to the Directions cautionary; I come in the next place to give a
draught or summary of the Directions positive: And here, without a large
Preamble, take them as following in their several SECTIONS, for the clearer
understanding of them.

SECT. I.
1. RESOLVE to take a serious view of the Lord's Providential Dispensations. A
well biassed Resolution is the Spring of Action. To the end therefore thou
may be in good earnest, consider of the Incentives or Motives, which are as
follows.

1. To note and observe the Works of God's Providence, is a commanded duty. Men
are not left to a lukewarm indifferency, whether they will observe or no. God
has otherwise discovered himself in his word. Jer. 7. 12. But go ye now unto
my place which was in Shiloh, where I did set my name at the first, and see
what I did to it for the wickedness of my people Israel. Here are two things:
(1.) What God did do. (2.) What they are to do. The Lord he works, and they are
not to be idle, but to take a view of His work, by taking a journey in their
Meditations to Shiloh. In Rev. 6. when the Book there of the Lord's Secrets is
to be opened in a way of Providential Dispensation, there is a [ Come and see];
a sight indeed not to be fl^ghted; for observe, the [ Come and see] is more
than trebled, v. 1, 3, 4, 7. R^petitions of things in Scripture, as they may
intimate our dullness, so the weight or importance of things thus repeated. But,

2. As it is commanded-work to observe the Lord's outgoings in his Providence;
so it is commended, and that three ways: (1) By the variety of terms used to
express this duty. There seems to be a depth, when so many fathom of Cordage go
to the sounding of this duty. An heap of words there are to set forth the
excellency and emphatical importance of it. Thus in Isa. 41. 10. That they may
see, and know, and consider, and understand together. (2.) It is commended to
us from the Author, whose works we are to take a view of. Come and see the
works of God, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 66. 5. What more in the World than the
curious artifice of the Divine Attributes, should court the eyes of men to
dwell on? And lastly, It Is commended from the Practice of God's Saints. It is
commendable to do, not as the most do, but as the best do. By faith the elders
obtained a good report, Heb. 11. 2. That faith there is comprehensive of
Providence for its object, as the Exemplifications given in the Chapter do give
us to understand. It Is recorded to the commendation of Mary, That she had an
observant eye on the Providence of God, Luke 2. 19.

3. In the third place, The singular advantages which attend the due
observation of Divine Providence, do invite to this duty. If a man will consult
his own good, here is the way, and this is the door: For,

1. By a wise observing God's Providence, a man is the more furthered in the
knowledge of God. Manasseh in the School of Providence is taught what he learnt
not before. Providence fetters him, and kicks him, as a Ball, as far as
Babylon; and there he is catechized, so as it is said of him, Then Manasseh
knew that the Lord be was God, 2 Chronicles. 33. 11, 12, 13. Holy Job, though a
knowing-man, has his knowledge elevated. He learnt that on the Dunghill, which
he did not in his Mannor-house: I have heard (says he to God) by the hearing
of the ear: but now mine eye sees thee, Job 42. 5.

2. Hereby a man is the better armed against sin. Providence, in a way of
mercy, is a good Rhetorician to dissuade from sin Did not thy father (it is
spoken to Shallum) eat, and drink, and do judgment, and justice, and then it
was well with him? Jer. 22. 15. And Providence in way of wrath, may serve as a
counter-poyson against sin. He may well be afraid of the black coal of sin,
knowing how Providence has made it a burning-coal to the sinner, as to Sodom
of old: see 2 Pet. 2. 6. see also Neh. 13. 25, 26. 1 Cor. 10. 7, 8, 9, 10.
Moreover, the observing of Providence does antidote against sin, as a man
deserts not sinfully his appointed station, knowing that there is a Providence
of God watching over his people. Should such a man as I flee, says Nehemiah,
chapter 6. v. 11? This good man's heart was not in his heels; for his eyes were
fixed on God's Providence, see v. 9, and 14. A like instance we have in Luke
13. 31, 32. But lastly, A man learns not to venture on sin for release from
troubles, and for the obtaining of good things, knowing the variety of ways
that Providence has to help without a man's sin. Thus David will not kill a
King for a Kingdom; the knowledge of the variety of ways which Providence had to
send Saul out of the world, is a pull-back to David. The Lord (says he) shall
smite him, or his day shall come to dye, or he shall descend into battle and
perish, 1 Samuel 26. 10.

3. A third Advantage by observing Providence, is, Calmness and quietness of
spirit in the midst of an unquiet world. As he who can swim well, is in the
midst of curled waves; he is in them, but they are not in him: so he who has
an holy dexterity in swimming in the sea of Providence, the better bears out,
and bears up; he is in trouble, but trouble is not comparatively in him, as in
others. He may sometimes take in a mouth-full of brinish-water, but not a
belly-full. In Psalm. 46. we have a description of the Churches troubles; the
heathen raged, the kingdoms were moved, v. 6. yet we will not fear, v. 2. And
what is the ground of this fearlesness, or composedness of spirit? That we have
in v. 7, and 8. The Lord of Hosts in with us: the God of Jacob is our refuge,
Selah. Come, behold the works of the Lord, etc. It Is said of David, when the
people talked of stoning him, he encouraged himself in the Lord his God, 1 Samuel
30. 6. The fiery furnace of the zealous King for his Image, sets not the
spirits of Shadrach, Mesech, and Abednego, into a combustion; they have a cool
spirit, though warm toward God; and cast themselves on the Providence of God,
being persuaded that God would one way or other period the controversy, Dan.
3. 16, 17, 18.

Lastly, Hereby the way of going out of the world, is rendered the more easy
and pleasant, by observing the gracious outgoings of Providence toward a man
in the world. He may cheerfully go through death's dark Entry, who has had
experience before of the Lord's company with him in the vale and shadow of
death. Good Jacob on his death bed looks back on the series or chain of God's
Providence toward him, and looks forward by faith to Providence, as the
Trustee for his posterity. He blessed Joseph, and said, God before whom my
fathers Abraham and Isaac did walk, the God which fed me all my life long unto
this day, the Angel which redeemed me from all evil, bless the lads, etc. Genesis
48. 15, 16. David being likewise to leave the world, has an eye on what God
had done for him, and on what he would do for his Family: so in 2 Samuel 23.
there is a recognition, or account taken of what God had done for David, v. 1.
and in v. 5. David casts an eye on the Lord's Promise, a fruitful Seed plot of
gracious Dispensations: Although (says he) my house he not so with God, yet he
has made with me an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure,
although he make it not to grow. And thus the way to dye comfortably, as well
as to live holily, is to observe God's Providence judiciously.

SECT. II.
2. SECURE an interest or propriety in the God of Providence, as reconciled to
the soul in and through Jesus Christ. What the marrow of divine blessing is,
Peter gives us to understand in that Sermon of his made to the Jews, Acts 3.
26. Unto you first God having raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to bless you,
in turning away every one of you from his iniquities. All outward blessings (as
they are commonly termed) are but dry bones, if this marrow of pardoning-grace
be wanting. Luther calls all the Turkish Magnificence, Wealth, Power, but a
crumb cast to a dog. Varnish (they say) is no color, yet it sets off colors,
puts a beauty on them: a propriety in God, that varnisheth all the outward
blessings of God. This draws a golden thread through all thy Creature Comforts.
Thy food, thy health, thy raiment, thy relations, become double blessings this
way; yea, thy wants, thy sickness, thy reproaches, have lost their stings; for
if God be thine, these are thine for thy good. The Covenant of Grace has made
an happy conversion of troubles into Medicines; and Providence has undertaken
the Cure; a Physician able enough to perform what is so undertaken. To sum up
all then, Good reason is there to look after this interest in God as
reconciled: for, (1.) Christless ones have no solid ground of any comfortable
hopes in God, Ephesians. 2. 12. (2.) They who have God for their God, have a filial
right to the Promises, which have gracious Providential dispensations in the
belly of them: they can go to God the Fountain of Providence, and have their
bottles filled. I will (says David) cry unto God most high, unto God that
performs all things for me. He shall send from heaven, and save me, etc.
Psalm. 57. 2, 3. yea, they have a pledge given them, That their very stripes
inflicted by Providence shall be healing ones: so much does that intimate in
Psalm. 89. 30, 31, 32.

SECT. III.
3. GET more and more acquaintance with the holy Scriptures, in order to
proficiency in the School of Divine Providence. Let the word of Christ dwell in
you richly, in all wisdom, is Paul's Doctrine, Col. 3. 16. If God's Word be
received as our Inmate, we shall not be such strangers to Providence as others
are; and that, (1.) Because the Scripture has a finger to unty the hard knots
of Providence. A parallel or like Exemplification, or something by way of
implication, is contained in the Scriptures which gives light to a dark
dispensation, and so gives ground to say in this sense, as is said Eccles. 1.
10. Is there any thing whereof it may be said, See, this is new? It has been
of old time, etc. (2.) The reason why some are so baffled and troubled about
some Dispensations, is from not understanding the Word of God aright. He that
shall mistake a Promise, will be upon a temptation to quarrel at a Providence.
The promise to David's seed, had its primary reference to the Messiah the Son
of David; and for lack of so considering of it, no wonder if trouble rise high
in an Israelite's breast, when David's Family in regard of external
magnificence falls low: see Psalm. 89. 35. with the following verses. The
Prophet there, or Penman of that Psalm, makes a sad complaint, whilst an eye
is had upon desolations there spoken of; not that he does accuse the Almighty
of inconstancy, but makes his moan to God by reason of a seeming clashing of
Providence with the Promise. Sense and Reason do sometimes raise a dust, but
Faith allays all; and the Prophet's storm ends in a calm, v. 52. Blessed be the
Lord for evermore, Amen, and Amen. (3.) For want of a sound and savoury
acquaintance with the Word, a Providence is little improved, yea, misimproved.
That Dispensation that should open the eyes, shuts them. Ahab charge the
troubles of Israel on Elijah; but by the light from the Word, he might have
gone into Obadiah's hiding-hole, and seen there the ejected Prophets, and then
concluded who did trouble Israel. The Heathen in the Si Tiberis ascendit ad
moenia, fi Nilus non ascendit in arva, si coelum stetit, si terra movet, si
fames si lues, statim Christianos ad leones. Tert. in Apolog.
primitive times attributed the calamities which befell the Empire, to the
Christians, and to the neglect of the worshipping their Idols, which the
Christian Religion did forbid, and so in a manner sacrificed their Heathenish
Sacrifices. In Queen Mary's days, the Heretics, (as they were termed) were
cried out on, as the cause why the Queen's Affairs did not prosper. I have read
somewhere, how the Princes in Germany at an Assembly, imputed the cause of
their calamities, t^ the not decking of their Churches, and setting up of
Images in them for excitements to devotion. A poor improvement of their
calamities! as if the finger of Providence pointed at nothing but at Besoms,
Pencils, and carving-tools! I may well therefore commend to men that of
Solomon, Prove. 19. 2. Also, that the soul be without knowledge, it is not good.
And that of David, in Psalm. 19. 8. The commandment of the Lord is pure,
enlightening the eyes. See then thy thoughts be regulated by the holy
Scriptures; for as the silvedg to the cloth keeps it from ravelling out; so
instruction from the Word will be a sacred silvedg to man's imaginations, as
they respect the Providence of God; it will prevent the ravelling forth into
vanity, error, emptiness.

SECT. IV.
4. HAVE a ready ear to hear the good warming-stories of Providence from
experienced Saints. Come (says the Psalmist) all ye that fear God, and I will
declare what he has done for my soul, Psalm. 66. 16. When it was a
stumbling-season with some at the Dispensations of Providence, then they who
feared the Lord, spoke often one to another; and the Lord hearkened and heard,
and a book of remembrance was written before him, for them that feared the
Lord, and who thought upon his name, Mal. 3. 16. Here is a book of remembrance
for such, who study the book of Divine Providence. 'Twere well if they who
profess to fear God, would more think on God, his Word, Providence, that so
their tongues might be as choice silver, and their lips feed many, as Solomon
has it, Prove. 10. 20, 21. Away we then to the rich Mine of Divine Providence,
there is Gold-Ore there; take it thence, and use it to the honor and glory of
the Lord of the Mine.

SECT. V.
5. ENQUIRE into the Ends, Uses, or meanings of Providential Dispensations. It
is said of Rebeccah, when the children strugled together within her, that she
went to enquire of the Lord, Genesis 25. 22. Show me wherefore thou contendest
with me, says that good man under the Hammer of Providence, Job 10. 2. The
works of the Lord are great, sought out of all them that have pleasure therein,
Psalm. 111. 2.

Now if it be asked here, What may be the ends or uses which Providence intends?

I may reply, That as there are variety of Dispensations, so of Ends and Uses
attending such; yea, there may be various ends in one and the same Providence
(understand the word [Ends] as vulgarly used, and in a subordinate sense to
God's glory, the great and last End.) This of the various Aspects of Providence
has been before treated of. Here it must be remembered, that whatever be said
of the Ends or Uses of Providence, is not by way of opposition to the Word.
Providence does co-witness with the Word. To fix a meaning on a Providence
which the holy Scriptures do article against, is to falsify, or be-lye a
Providence. God's Providential Dispensations then may be considered, as they
may serve diverse ways.

1. By way of Confutation of some erroneous conceit taken up. Providence is
inductive this way. Junius was startled out of his Atheism by a great Hic (O
sapientiam Dei ad mirabilem!) optimam scholam Christianitatis Dominus mihi
paraverat. Rogat Rusticus, etc. In vita Junii, p. 10.
terror, being in danger of his life; and so in his flight to preserve himself,
lighted on an honest plain man, who did further a convincing-work, as he
declares in the story of his life. Some, who would not believe the existency
of Witches, have been lash't into another belief, when God in a wise and
righteous Dispensation has let loose such Dogs on them. To hold a wrong
conceit, as [that a godly man dies not of the Plague]; what is it, but to
reproach Providence as if it abetted a Tertullus censure of God's servants,
That they who so dyed, were pestilent fellows. It may be observed, how men have
been so driven at a pinch by a wise Providence, as that their conceits about
some matters, have fallen to the ground as rotten-ripe fruit from the Tree.
When there were several contending for the Popedom-ship, what becomes then of
an infallible Supremacy? Who shall determine the case now? What is now a
General-Council in point of Jurisdiction? Gerson steps forth, and asserts the
Vicar-ship to be removable authoritatively and juridically, as he phraseth it
in his Book written De auferibilitate Papae ab Ecclesia.

2. By way of Information and Confirmation. John is informed and confirmed,
That Jesus the Son of Mary is the Christ; and that by a Providence, in the
Spirit's descending and remaining on Christ, John 1. 33. John's Disciples are
more fully informed and confirmed by what they see and hear, Mat. 11. 4, 5.
That Providence referring to Cornelius, with those at his house; the way of
Peter's coming to them, and the gifts of the Holy Spirit poured forth on them;
might well lesson, the Gentiles admission to Gospel-priviledges with the Jews,
see Acts 10. 47. Acts 11. 18. The doctrine of man's inability to
self-conversion, has its confirmation in the School of Providence. Let men
state Conversion-work aright, wherein it consists; observe the hardness of
men's hearts, notwithstanding softning-means, which are so when and where the
Lord blesses the means; let them hear the savoury and experimental Narratives
of sound Converts; and they may well be induced to give more line, than some
will allow, to that of Christ in Joh. 6. 44. No man can come unto me, except
the Father which has sent me, draw him.

3. By way of Conviction of, or rousing Excitation from some sin or other in
point of Practice. Though it be not the glass, as the Word; yet it may, as an
hand, hold up the glass before the face of the guilty. Joseph his brethren met
with an awakening-Providence in Egypt, Genesis 42. 21. That in Job 36. is very
pertinent here: And if they be bound in fetters, and be holden in cords of
affliction; then he shows them their work, and their transgressions, that
they have exceeded; he opens also their ear to discipline, and commands
that they return from iniquity, v 8, 9, 10. Providence then has a way for
access to the consciences of men; and that not only by general alarums, but by
more particular and remarkable insinuations or windings, if I may so phrase it.
An instance we have in God's Providential dealing with Jonah: Thou have had
pity (says the Lord to froward Jonah) on the guord, for the which thou have
not labored, neither made it grow; which came up in a night, and perished in
a night: and should not I spare Nineveh, etc.? Jon. 4. 10. 11. God does usher
in a conviction of Jonah's unreasonable passion, even from the guord, in and
about which there was a remarkable display of Providence both as to its growth
and withering. To this of Jonah, I shall add a story out of Luther's Postills.
We read (says he) of a certain Father, who by reason of impatience and
discontent at the provocations which did occur in the place of his abode, did
purpose to get him gone, and alone in peace live to God in a Wilderness. Where
when he lived solitary, it happened once, that his earthen drinking-cup did
overturn; which he by and by set up again: this cup in like sort falls again,
which he sets up right again: and whenas it fell the third time, he (being all
in a feud or passion) dash^th it on the ground, and it broke into small pieces:
but by and by be thinking himself, Alas (says he) I cannot have peace with my
self, I see I have sinned: and forthwith betook himself to the place of his
former abode, notwithstanding temptations there; and so made it his work to
watch against evil desires, by exercising self-denial, and not by deserting his
place and station.

4. By Exemplary Caution. The wrathful Dispensations of Providence are
Warning-monitions. The Lord is terrible in his doings, to the end he may not be
further terrible. We have the doctrine asserted once and again; God is terrible
in his works or doings toward the children of men, Psalm. 66. 3, 5. We have
also the use of this doctrine, v. 7. Let not the rebellious exalt themselves.
Selah. Remember Lot's Wife, says Christ, Luke 17 32. God spared not (says
Peter) the old world, but saved Noah the eighth person, a preacher of
righteousness, bringing in the flood upon the world of the ungodly; and turning
the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah into ashes, condemned them with an overthrow,
making them examples unto those that should after live ungodly, 2 Pet. 2. 5, 6.

5. By way of Prohibition. There is a moral prohibition from the word, Genesis 2
17. and there is a physical or natural one, when there is an impediment more or
less in the way, as Cherubims, which forbid an access to the Tree of Life, Genesis
3. 24. There is a prohibition which is mixed, partly moral, and partly
otherwise. So Balaam, his way was perverse, and withal the Angel opposed in the
way of his journey, Number. 22. 32. Now here it must be remembered, That every
seeming-prohibition of Providence, does not by and by bespeak the evil of a
man's way. Jacob met with an Esau coming forth armed against him; he was not
prohibited from, but warranted a returning into his Country, Genesis 32. 5.
However, where a man meets with Providence as checking a man's courses,
especially if a signal check, or series and chain of checks, there is great
reason to consider of a man's ways, to desist from what appears to be sinful,
and to give God the glory of such a checking-dispensation, which has its
double consideration; (1.) As it looks with a stern and full countenance on the
substance, matter, or nature of the thing about which a man is conversant: so
in Jonah's case, when he played the part of a Runagate from his God; that
Tarshish-voyage the very Heavens frown on, and leave not frowing till the Ship
is unloaded of its living burden, Jon. 1. 3, 4, 15. (2.) As it looks on the
circumstances attending the action. An instance for this in David's good
intention to bring again the Ark; the work was good and laudable, yet a
checking-Providence there is in the Lord's smiting Vzzah; and that
checking-Providence respects the omission of a weighty circumstance, or an
innovation in bringing up the Ark; for so it is said to the chief of the fathers
of the Levites: For because ye did it not at the first, the Lord our God made a
breach upon us, for that we sought him not after the due order, 1 Chronicles. 15.
13. Thus, whether Providence be prohibitive absolutely as to the matter, or
limitedly as to some circumstance or other; it concerns man, under such
frowning-aspects of Providence, to take a survey, and accordingly to demean
himself.

6. By way of Encouragement. There are encouraging Providence to duty. These
may respect, (1.) Doing-work, which may be more common or special. When God
calls to more than ordinary work, he vouchsafes more than ordinary
encouragement. So it was with Moses, Exodus 4. 2, to 9 Joshua had an encouraging
Vision by Jericho; Josh. 5. 13. So the Apostles went forth, and preached every
where, the Lord working with them, and confirming the word with signs
following, Mark 16. 20. (2.) Suffering-work. Much of God's Providence there is
by way of preparation and corroboration to be observed: so in Rev. 2. 10. there
is fore-warning given, and consequently a fore-arming.

7. By way of Supportation and Consolation under Difficulties, Distresses,
Afflictions. There are supporting-consolations, or consolatory-supportations.
This bread is broken to the sons and daughters of sorrows. The Supports and
Consolations are of two sorts (if I may so distinguish them), (1.) Internal The
Lord feasts his children, whilst wicked ones would starve them, ruin them. The
Father of Spirits makes out Himself to their spirits. Christ has his
Banqueting House for those of His who are without a certain habitation, Cant.
2. 4. with 2 Cor. 4. 11. When men frown, God smiles. A joy there is, and no one
takes it from them, John 16. 22. It is reported of Philip the Landsgrave, who
was confined by the Emperor Charles the fifth, That being asked, What supported
him, and cheered him in that condition? He answered, saying, I feel the divine
comforts of the Martyrs. But, (2.) There are Supports and Comforts External; as
when the Lord in his Providence does issue matters comfortably for them. So in
the case of enemies, when God works, and so works, even to the amazement of
wicked ones, so as they may be ready to say to Providence, as the Devils to
Christ, Art thou come to torment us before the time? Mat. 8. 29. and this is
that which is implied in David's prayer, Psalm. 86. 17. Show a token for good,
that they which hate me, may see it, and be ashamed, because thou, Lord, have
helped me, and comforted me.

8. By way of Direction. There are the leadings of Providence; but these are
subordinate to the Word, not repugnant to it. The Word is the Rule ruling;
Providence, as a Directory, is the Rule ruled. As therefore the Rule of the
Word is partly through the weakness of some on the one hand, and partly through
the perverseness of others on the other hand, too much neglected, and
disregarded: so in like sort the light of Providence, partly through the weak
apprehension of some, and the perverse perception of others, is little heeded
as it ought to be. We do not find that the chief Priests and Scribes did make
enquiry after Christ, though they were alarumed by the Wise-men's coming to
Jerusalem, so to have done; they, being consulted by Herod, point out the way
to Bethlehem to the Wisemen; who as they were awakened by the Starr they saw
in the East; so they are led by a Providence to Jerusalem; there they have
light from the Sacred Oracle, where Christ was to be born; and after, going to
Bethlehem, they have a sight of the Starr again which they saw in the East. The
leading of them by the Starr, had its amicable aspect to, and with, the Sacred
Oracle, resolving where Christ should be born. And though the Lord do not
nowadays provide Stars to guide men in their ordinary Affairs; yet there are
the becks, indigitations, the twinkling-rays of Providence in matters to be
heeded for direction. I could enlarge here on this Head; but because this
Treatise swells, it may suffice to have pointed at the pointings of Providence,
as holding a correspondence with the Word, which is the Christian-man's
Directory for his Affairs and Concernments.

SECT. VI.
6. KEEP up an holy Communion with God in his Dispensations. If Providence have
a tongue to speak, and that diverse ways, as has been showed in the foregoing
Section; then men should have an ear to hear: So had Cornelius, as he declares
to Peter, Acts 10. 33. It Is the highest piece of incivility, to slight the
Visits and Letters of Providence. As it is man's wisdom to enquire into the
ends of God's Dispensations; so it is his folly to go no farther than enquiry.
An holy conformity should be the result or issue of enquiry. To know this or
that to be the End of God in a Dispensation, and yet to stand a-loof from a
conformity to, or compliance with such an End, is double iniquity. Let it be
thy care then, O man, whoever thou art, seriously to consider what Errand or
Message this or that Dispensation has to thy soul; hear it awfully, and obey
it fully; so shall God have the glory of his Providence, and thy Soul the
comfort of thy so-performed a duty.

SECT. VII.
7. LOOK after increase of Grace, in order to the better bearing of
Providential Dispensations. The Apostle Paul calls on the Ephesians, and in
them on others, To be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might, Ephesians.
6. 10. And good reason is there to mind this: for weak Bottles are not fit for
the new and strong Wine of Divine Dispensations. A painted man bears not a real
Burden; and a real Man-child can better hold a Rattle in his hand, than carry a
Faggot on his back. Eminency, as well as reality of Grace, is the Christian's
concernment; and this appears, if an eye be had, (1.) To the eminency or height
of a Divine Dispensation. There is sometimes an Isaac-trial, and a man had need
of an Abraham's faith. A Goliath* difficulty calls for the courage and spirit of
a David. Consumptive-lungs have an hard task to follow a Providence up the
hill. (2.) To the variety of Dispensations. Prosperity and Adversity do often
take their turns. It Is no easy matter to manage wisely variety of conditions.
Job speaks of the secret of God on his tabernacle, Job 29. 4. and again, He
(God) has loosed my cord, and afflicted me, Job 30. 11. He has need of a
Job's graces, who may take a Job by the hand in point of various dispensations.
(3.) To the suddenness or unexpectedness of a Dispensation. Weak bodies are not
so capacitated to bear sudden changes in Diet, Air, Apparel, as those that be
strong and vigorous. A sudden Affliction may press a man too low; and an
unexpected Mercy may let a man too high. He had need of good eyes, and strong
brains, who is taken out of a dark Dungeon, and set on the top of a Pyramid or
high Tower. Jonah had an unexpected guord; and that which came up in a night,
perished in a night, Jonah 4. 10. How is he transported beyond sobriety under
the guord-dispensation! He who was exceeding glad, was exceeding angry; his
excessive joy is attended with inordinate sorrow and discontent of heart. Let
then the consideration of the height, variety, suddenness, of Providential
Dispensations, be an excitement to look after an increase of grace; the
exercise of grace increased, and a further increase of grace exercised.

SECT. VIII.
8. KEEP a good Conscience in following the work of the place or station
wherein Providence has set thee. It is said of Jacob, that he set pilled rods
before the flocks, and the flocks conceived before the rods, and brought forth
cattle ring straked, speckled, and spotted, Genesis 30. 38, 39. The application of
this is easy; Set before thine eyes the good examples of such who have minded
the work of their places; and imitate them: Above all examples, forget not that
of Christ, John 17. 4. I have glorified thee on earth; I have finished the work
which thou gave me to do. There is a work which every one is to make
conscience of, and so to glorify God in minding that work -- Magistrates are
to be just, ruling in the fear of the Lord, 2 Samuel 23. 3 They who are Gods in
regard of their Places, are not to be Devils in regard of their
Administrations. Nehemiah did not as others before him, because of the fear of
the Lord, Neh. 5. 15. Again, Churchmen are to mind their work: Paul had his
conversation in simplicity and godly sincerity, 2 Cor. 1. 12. He was laborious
in the Lord's vinyard, 1 Cor. 15 10. He writ as well as preached; though a
prisoner, yet his pen is at liberty for the service of the Church, Gal. 6. 11.
he gives not off driving the Gospel-Nail one way, when there was no driving of
it another. Lastly, This concerns Parents, M^sters, Children, Servants, to
consider, how they move in the Ark or Sph^re of their respective stations -- No
place so mean, but a person may glorify God in it. Obedience to God in the
place where Providence has fixed a person, is better than Sacrifice out of it.
Luther has in his Postils what illustrates the matter in hand; with which, I
conclude this Section. A certain Householder has a Wife, Daughter, Son, Maid
servant, and Manservant: He commands his Man to harness the horses, to bring
home wood, to plough, and such like work. He wills his Maidservant to milk the
Cows, make Butter, and such like. To his Wife he commits the care of the
Family, and the ordering of provision. To his daughter, the distaff, and the
making of beds. All these are the injunctions of one and the same Master. But
now if the Maid, leaving her office and task required, shall harness the
horses, and fetch home wood from the Copses: and, on the other hand, the
servant shall busy himself about the Cows and Milk-pails, which is not his
work: and the Daughter, leaving her Whorle, instead of a Spinster shall become
a Carter: the Wife, or Mother, shall make the beds, and handle the Distaff, and
forget her Cookery for the Family: and moreover, should they all say, The
Master has commanded these things to be done; this is the will of him who is
lord of all; May not this Householder now, and that deservedly too, take a
Cudgel, and beat them all? and from thence reply unto them, Though this be my
command, yet I gave it not to every one to be so done, but assigned every one
his work, which should have been followed.

SECT. IX.
9. HUSBAND well the signal Opportunities which Providence puts into thy hand
for being serviceable for the Church of Christ. Joseph by the Providence of God
is advanced in the Corn-Countrey; and he takes care then, in time of Famine,
for his Father, and Relations, the Church then in Jacob his Family, Genesis 45. 9,
10, 11. Nehemiah was no selfish Courtier; he is affected with the sad case of
his Contrymen, and prudently petitions the Persian-Monarch on the behalf of
them, Neh. 2. 5, 6, 7, 8. Mordecai is plain with his Cousin Esther, though now
Queen; Think not (says he) with thy self, that thou shall escape in the king's
house, more than all the Jews: for if thou altogether hold thy peace at this
time, then shall there enlargement and deliverance arise to the Jews from
another place; but thou and thy fathers house shall be destroyed: and who
knows whether thou art come to the kingdom for such a time as this? Esth. 4.
12, 13. Onesiphorus lets not slip the opportunity of owning a Paul then, when
others were frighted with the noise of the Apostle's Chain. He often (says Paul)
refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my chain; but when he was in Rome, he
sought me out very diligently, and found me, 2 Timothy 1. 16, 17. Let it be our
care then judiciously to observe, and accordingly to improve the remarkable
opportunities for doing good. Nothing (says a Mr. Vines in Sermon. 2 Samuel 3. 20.
worthy man of our Israel) more sads and dulls the heart, when one comes to
dye, than his neglect of such opportunities which God's Providence or his own
Place have put into his hand of receiving or doing good: nor is there a sharper
corrosive, than the reflection upon those days and times that have passed over
him, [male, aliud, nihil agentem.]

SECT. X.
LASTLY, Live holily and thankfully the Providential Dispensations which have
concentred or met in thy Person, Family, or Relations. To this end consider the
following Incentives:

1. With what patheticalness, or holy earnestness is the living of Providence
pressed in Scripture? See Deuteronomy 8. 6. with the precedent verses: Josh. 24. 14. 1 Samuel 12. 24. Ephesians. 2. 11, 12, 13.

2. The Law of Ingenuity requires holiness and thankfulness for what God has
done in his Providence for men. Thou (says David to God) have delivered my
soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and my feet from falling: I will walk
before the Lord in the land of the living, Psalm. 116. 8, 9. See Luke 1. 74, 75.

3. Sin otherwise is greatly aggravated. The Lord may say for neglect of a
responsable carriage toward his Dispensations, as David of Nabal, Surely in
vain have I kept all that this fellow has in the wilderness, 1 Samuel 25. 21. It
is made an aggravation of Hezekiah's sin, that he rendered not again according
to the benefit done unto him: for his heart was lifted up, 2 Chronicles. 32. 25.

4. The thankful and holy living of Providence, may invite the God of
Providence to do more for persons. If that had been too little for thee (says
God by Nathan to David) I would moreover have given unto thee such and such
things, 2 Samuel 12. 8. God has a rich treasure of kindness; he will not be a
barren Wilderness to those who are a Carmel for holy fruitfulness.

I conclude all with that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. 58. Therefore my beloved
brethren, be ye steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord,
for as much as you know that your labor is not in vain in the Lord.

FINIS.

