January 22, 1688.

Imprimatur, HEN. WHARTON.

THE JUDGMENT OF Archbishop CRANMER Concerning the Peoples Right to, and
Discreet Use OF THE H. SCRIPTURES.

LONDON: Printed for John Tailor, at the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1689.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
IT my seem very strange to some in the World, to consider the different Fate
of the Holy Scriptures among Christians, how very contrary their Affections are
toward that Book; yet I for my part, do no more Wonder at the Fury of the
Members of the Church of Rome against the Holy Bible, than at the Protestants
Zeal for it: Since the learned part of the Church of Rome know that their
present Religion, and the new Articles of it are not to be found in that Book;
and the Unlearned part are told and believe, That it is a very dangerous Book;
and therefore both of them, not without great Cause (as they think) have Reason
to be angry and violent against that Book: But since Protestants do find, to
their infinite Satisfaction, their Religion in the Bible, they think they
cannot express too great a Veneration for it, and believe that their Honor and
Zeal for it, ought at least to be as great as the Papists Fury and Anger
against it.

And yet as angry as those People are at the Holy Scriptures, when they were
about Converting us all here, and the new Trade of Representing Popery was set
up among us, they had so much Wit, as to perceive that abundance of Skill and
Art must be necessary to get the Bible out of the Peoples Hands; and that their
best way was not to be too severe upon the Bible it self, but to spend all
their Pains upon disparaging Our Bible.

This was none of the worst Projects; for if the Priests could but once have
gained so far upon the People, as to have made them out of Love with Our Bible,
and to have got it out of their Hands, they needed not despair of gaining so
much further upon them, as to make them altogether careless of having any Bible
at all, and far from being desirous of having another Translation instead of
ours.

The gaining of this Point was the Design of the Famous Popish Chapel in Lime
street; where it was the Jesuits Province to cast all the Dirt they could upon
our Bible, and to run down our Translation, as nothing but a mere heap of
Falsities: And some of them, Father Petre, for example, were so furious as not
only to charge our Translation with such gross Falsities and
Misinterpretations, but our Clergy with knowing it to be so, and yet not daring
(for filthy Lucre's sake) to acknowledge it.

My Business shall not be to meddle with the Scandal, which needs no other
Confutation than to say, It came from a Jesuite's Mouth; and which is more,
from Father Petre's Mouth, Brother to the late Jesuite-Privy-Counsellour: I
intend only to vindicate our Bible from those false Aspersions and Calumnies of
the Jesuits, by showing that our Translation ought not to be objected against
at all, by any Church in the World; much less by the Church of Rome; but least
of all by those People, who have undertaken to do it so liberally in our own
Nation.

Our Translation ought not to be objected against by any Church in the World;
because after the several Reviews of it, and the vast Pains of so many very
Learned Men upon it in King James the First Days, we may without Vanity say,
That it is as Perfect, and as Complete, as any Translation in use in any Church
in the World. We do not pretend that it is perfectly free from Mistakes, or the
least Error; as no Translation of the Bible ever was so perfect, So, I
believe, none ever will, or can, as long as Men not Inspired have the Charge of
Translating; but this we say, and challenge the World to disprove it, That it
is freed from all material Faults, and that it is accurate as to Matters of
Faith and Good Manners, the Errors about which can only be Dangerous to Mankind.

And as no Church now in the World ought to accuse our Translation, so much
less ought the Church of Rome to do it, whose Latin Translation of the Bible is
so full of material Faults. For not to insist upon those Numerous and Great
Differences betwixt the two Bibles of Pope Sixtus Quintus and Clement VIII.
which yet both of them, under the Pain of Excommunication are declared to be
Authentic. Isidore Clarius, a learned Spanish Bishop, does own, That the
Errors in their Vulgar Latin are almost numberless, and he himself has
observed eight thousand Places erroneous in it: And which is more, there are
not only Literal Mistakes, Omissions or Additions of single Words in their
Bibles; but in one Book of the Old Testament alone, to wit in the Proverbs,
there are not fewer than eighteen whole Verses or Sentences, which are not in
the Original Hebrew: So that the Church of Rome, of all Churches, should not
charge us with Errors in our Translation.

And if their Church should not meddle with such things, I am sure those
Priests who undertook it in the Popish Chapel in Lime-street, should, of all
Men, have been excused from such a Task. They that would be meddling with the
Corrections of Translations, ought to be perfectly skilled in the Original
Tongues, in the Hebrew and Chaldee for the Old Testament, in the Greek and
Syriac for the New. Now, how far Father Petre, or the rest of the
Lime-street-Priests, were from being thus qualified for the Noble Province of
bafling our Translation of the Bible, the World is almost as well satisfied as
their own Consciences. I am persuaded, That not only Hebrew, Chaldee and
Syriack are utterly unknown to them, but that Greek is almost as
unintelligible. Popery has been a long time an Enemy to Learning; and in our
Days, I am sure, the Jesuits have approved themselves to be the best Papists,
that is, the most ignorant Dunces: Who upon this account ought not to meddle
with Matters of Learning, especially wherein great skill in Languages is so
requisite.

After all, I am fully convinced, that all that Fury and Vehemence in the
Lime-street Chapel, was much more intended against the Holy Bible it self,
than against our Translation of it. Their Church has taught 'em a new Faith,
and therefore since the Old Bible has it not in it, they are for throwing it
aside, as Old and Useless, especially to the People; whose Right to the Use of
that Holy Book is the Subject of this Tract of the most Venerable Martyr of
Christ, Archbishop Cramner, to the perusal of which you are now invited.

The Judgment of Archbishop Cranmer, concerning the Holy Scriptures.
Concerning two sundry sorts of people, it seems much necessary that
something be said in the entry of this Book, by the way of a Preface or
Prologue, whereby hereafter it may be both the better accepted of them which
hitherto could not well bear it, and also the better used of them which
heretofore have misused it. For truly some there are that be too slow, and
need the Spur, some other seem too quick, and need more of the bridle:
some loose their game by short shooting, some by over shooting, some walk too
much on the left hand, some too much on the right. In the former sort be all
they that refuse to read, or to hear read the Scripture in the vulgar
tongue, much worse they that let also or discourage the other from the reading
or hearing thereof. In the latter sort be they which by their inordinate
reading, undiscrete speaking, contentious disputing, or otherwise by their
licentious living, slander and hinder the Word of God most of all other,
whereof they would seem to be greatest furtherers. These two sorts, albeit
they be most far unlike the one to the other, yet they both deserve in effect
like reproach: neither can I well tell whether of them I may judge the more
offender, him that does obstinately refuse so godly and goodly knowledge; or
him that so ungodly and so ungoodly does abuse the same. And as touching the
former, I would marvel much that any man should be so mad, as to refuse in
darkness, light: in hunger, food: in cold, fire: for the Word of God is
light: Lucerna pedibus meis verbum tuum. Thy word is a lantern unto my feet.
Psa. 119. 105.
It is food: Non in solo pane vinit homo, sed in omni verbo Dei. Matthew. 4. 4.
Man shall not live by bread only, but by every word of God. Luke 12.49.
It is fire: Ignem veni mittere in terram, and quid volo, nisi ut ardeat? I am
come to send fire on the earth, and what is my desire, but that it be kindled?
I would marvel (I say at this) save that I consider how much custom and
usage may do. So that if there were a people, as some write, de Cymeriis, which
never saw the Sun, by reason that they be situated far toward the North
pole, and be enclosed or ouershadowed with high mountains: it is credible and
like enough, that if by the power and will of God, the mountains should sink
down, and give place, that the light of the Sun might have entrance to them,
at the first some of them would be offended therewith. And the old proverb
affirms, that after tillage of corn was first found, many delighted more to
feed of maste and acornes, where with they had been accustomed, then to eat
bread made of good corn. Such is the nature of custom, that is causes us to
bear all things well and easily wherewith we have been accustomed, and to be
offended with all things thereunto contrary. And therefore I can well think
them worthy pardon, which at the coming abroad of Scripture doubted and drew
back. But such as will persist still in their wilfulness, I must needs judge
not only foolish, froward, and obstinate: but also peevish, perverse, and
indurate. And yet, if the matter should be tried by custom, we might also
allege custom for the reading of the Scripture in the vulgar tongue, and
prescribe the more ancient custom. For it is not much above one hundredth year
ago, since Scripture has not been accustomed to be read in the vulgar tongue
within this Realm, and many hundredth years before that, it was translated and
read in the Saxons tongue, which at that time was our mother tongue, whereof
there remain yet diverse copies found lately in old Abbeys, of such antique
manner of writing and speaking, that few men now be able to read and
understand them. And when this language waxed old and out of common usage,
because folk should not lack the fruit of reading, it was again translated
into the newer language, whereof yet also many copies remain, and be daily
found. But now to let pass custom, and to wey, as wise men ever should, the
thing in his own nature: let us here discuss what it avails Scripture to be
had and read of the lay and vulgar people. And to this question I intend here
to say nothing, but that was spoken and written by the noble doctor and most
moral divine, Saint John Chrysostom, in his third Sermon de Lazaro, albeit I
will be something shorter, and gather the matter into fewer words, and less
room then he does there, because I would not be tedious. He exhorts there
his audience, that every man should read by himself at home in the mean days
and time, between Sermon and Sermon, to the intent they might both more
profoundly fix in their minds and memories that he had said before upon such
textes, whereupon he had already preached: and also that they might have
their minds the more ready and better prepared to receive and perceive that
which he should say from thencefoorth in his Sermons, upon such textes as he
had not yet declared and preached upon: therefore says he there, My common
usage is to give you warning before, what matter I intend after to entreat
upon, that you yourselves in the mean days, may take the Book in hand, read,
wey, and perceive the sum and effect of the matter, and mark what has been
declared, and what remains yet to be declared, so that thereby your mind may
be the more furnished to hear the rest that shall be said. And that I exhort
you (says he) and ever have and will exhort you, that you (not only here in
the Church) give ear to that that is said by the Preacher; but that also when
you be at home in your houses, ye apply your selves from time to time to the
reading of holy Scriptures: which thing also I never linne to beat into the
ears of them that be my familiars, and with whom I have private acquaintance
and conversation. Let no man make excuse and say (says he) I am busied about
matters of the Commonwealth, I bear this office, or that, I am a crafts man,
I must apply mine occupation, I have a wife, my children must be fed, my
household must I provide for, briefly I am a man of the world, it is not for
me to read the Scriptures, that belongs to them that have bidden the world
farewell, which live in solitariness, and contemplation, and have been brought
up and continually nouselled in learning and Religion. To this answering, What
say thou man (says he?) Is it not for thee to study and to read the
Scripture, because thou art encumbred and distract with cares and business? So
much the more it is behovefull for thee to have defense of Scriptures, how
much thou art the more distressed in worldly dangers. They that be free and
far from trouble and intermedling of worldly things, live in safeguard and
tranquillity, and in the calm, or within a sure haven. Thou art in the
midst of the sea of worldly wickedness, and therefore thou need the more
of ghostly succor and comfort. They sit far from the strokes of battle, and
far out of gunne shot, and therefore they be but seldom wounded. Thou that
stand in the forefront of the host, and nighest to thine enemies, must
needs take now and then many strookes, and be grievously wounded, and
therefore thou have most need to have thy remedies and medicines at hand. Thy
wife provoke thee to anger, thy child gives thee occasion to take sorrow
and pensiveness, thine enemies lie in wait for theee, thy friend (as thou
take him) sometimes enuieth thee, thy neighbor misreporteth thee, or pyketh
quarrels against thee, thy mate or partner undermines thee, thy Lord, Judge,
or Justice threatens thee, poverty is painful unto thee, the loss of thy
dear and welbeloved causes thee to mourn, prosperity exalts thee,
adversity brings thee low: briefly, so diverse and so manifold occasions of
cares, tribulations, and temptations beset thee, and besiege thee round about.
Where can thou have armor or fortress against thine assaults? Where can
thou have salues for thy sores, but of holy Scripture? Thy flesh must needs be
prone and subject to fleshly lusts, which daily walk and art conversant
among women, see their beauty set forth to the eye, hear their nice and
wanton words, smellest their balm, ciuit and musk, with many other like
prouocations and stirrings: except thou have in a readiness wherewith to
suppress and avoid them, which cannot elsewhere be had, but only out of the
holy Scriptures. Let us read and seek all remedies that we can, and all shall
be little enough. How shall we then do, if we suffer and take daily wounds,
and when we have done, will sit still and search for no medicines? Do thou
not mark and consider how the Smith, Mason, or Carpenter, or any other
handicraftesman, what need soever he be in, what other shift soever he make,
he will not sell nor lay to pledge the tools of his occupation: for then how
should he work his feate, or get his living thereby? Of like mind and
affection ought we to be toward holy Scripture. For as mallets, hammers,
sawes, chesils, axes and hatchets be the tools of their occupation: so be the
books of the Prophets, and Apostles, and all holy writers inspired by the holy
Ghost, the instruments of our salvation. Wherefore let us not stick to buy and
provide us the Bible, that is to say, the Books of holy Scripture, and let us
think that to be a better jewel in our house, then either gold or silver.
For like as thieves be loath to assault an house where they know to be good
armor and artillery: so wheresoever these holy and ghostly Books be
occupied, there neither the devil nor none of his angels dare come near. And
they that occupy them be in much safegarde, and have a great consolation, and
be the readier unto all goodness, the slower unto all evil: and if they have
done any thing amiss, anon even by the sight of the Books their consciences
be admonished, and they wax sorry and ashamed of the fact. Peradventure they
will say unto me, How and if we understand not that we read, that is contained
in the Books? What then? Suppose thou understand not the deep and profound
mysteries of Scriptures, yet can it not be but that much fruit and holiness
must come and grow unto thee by the reading: for it cannot be that thou
should be ignorant in all things alike. For the holy Ghost has so ordered
and attempered the Scriptures, that in them as well Publicans, fishers, and
shepherds may find their edification, as great doctors their erudition. For
those Books were not made to vaineglory, like as were the writings of the
Gentile Philosophers and Rhethoricians, to the intent the makers should be had
in admiration for their hie styles and obscure manner and writing, whereof
nothing can be understood without a master or an expositour: But the Apostles
and Prophets wrote their Books so, that their special intent and purpose
might be understood and perceived of every reader, which was nothing but the
edification of amendment of the life of them that read or hear it. Who is it
that reading or hearing read in the Gospel, Blessed be they that be meek,
Blessed are they that are merciful, Blessed are they that be of clean heart,
and such other like places, can perceive nothing except he have a master to
teach him what it means? Likewise the signs and miracles, with all other
Histories of the doings of Christ and his Apostles, who is there of so simple
wit and capacity, but he may be able to perceive and understand them? These
be but excuses and clokes for the rain, and couerings of their own
slothfulness. But still ye will say, I cannot understand it. What marvail?
How should thou understand, if thou will not read nor look upon it? Take the
Books into thine hands, read the whole story, and that thou understand
keep it well in memory: that thou understand not, read it again, and
again: if thou can neither so come by it, counsel with some other that is
better learned. Go to the Curate and Preacher, show thy self to be desirous
to know and learn; and I doubt not but God seeing thy diligence and
readiness (if no man else teach thee) will himself vouchsafe with his holy
Spirit to illuminate thee, and to open unto thee that which was locked from
thee. Remember the Eunuch of Candace Queen of Ethiopia, which albeit he was a
man of a wild and barbarous country, and one occupied with worldly cares and
business, yet ryding in his charet, he was reading the Scripture. Now
consider, if this man passing in his journey, was so diligent as to read the
Scripture: what think thou of like was he wont to do sitting at home?
Again, he that let not to read, albeit he did not understand: what did he
then trowest thou, after that when he had learned and gotten understanding? For
that thou may well know that he understood not what he read, hearken what
Philip says there unto him, Understand thou what thou read? And he
nothing ashamed to confess his ignorance, answered, How should I understand,
having no body to show me the way? Lo when he lacked one to show him the
way, and to expound to him the Scriptures, yet did he read: and therefore
God the rather provided for him a guide of the way, that taught him to
understand it. God perceived his willing and toward mind, and therefore he
sent him a teacher by and by. Therefore let no man be negligent about his own
health and salvation. Though thou have not Philip always when thou would,
the holy Ghost which then moved and stirred up Philip, will be ready and not
fail thee, if thou do thy diligence accordingly. All these things be written
unto us for our edification and amendment, which be borne toward the latter
end of the world. The reading of the Scriptures is a great and strong
bulwark or fortress against sin: the ignorance of the same is a greater
ruin and destruction of them that will not know it. That is the thing that
brings in heresy, that is it that causes all corrupt and perverse living,
that is it that brings all things out of good order. Hitherto all that I
have said, I have taken and gathered out of the foresaid Sermon of this holy
Doctor Saint John Chrysostom. Now if I should in like manner bring forth what
the self same doctor speaks in other places, and what other doctors and
writers say concerning the same purpose, I might seem to you to write another
Bible, rather then to make a Preface to the Bible. Wherefore in few words to
comprehend the largeness and vtility of the Scriptures, how it contains
fruitful instruction and erudition for every man, if any thing be necessary to
be learned, of the holy Scripture we may well learn it. If falsehood shall be
reproved, thereof we may gather wherewithal. If any thing be to be corrected
and amended, if there need any exhortation or consolation, of the Scripture we
may well learn. In the Scriptures be the fat pastures of the soul, therein is
no venomous meat, no unwholesome thing, they be the very dainty and pure
feeding. He that is ignorant shall find there what he should learn. He that
is a perverse sinner, shall there find his damnation, to make him to tremble
for fear. He that labors to serve God, shall find there his glory, and the
promissions of eternal life, exhorting him more diligently to labor. Herein
may Princes learn how to govern their Subjects: Subjects obedience, love,
and dread to their Princes: husbands how they should behave themselves unto
their wives, how to educate their children and servants: And contrary, the
wives, children, and servants may know their duty to their husbands, parents,
and masters. Here all manner of persons, men, women, young, old, learned,
unlearned, rich, poor, priests, laymen, lords, ladies, officers, tenants, and
mean men, virgins, wives, widows, lawyers, merchants, artificers, husbandmen,
and all manner of persons, of what estate or condition soever they be, may in
this book learn all things what they ought to believe, what they ought to
do, and what they should not do, as well concerning Almighty God, as also
concerning themselus and all other. Briefly, to the reading of the Scripture,
none can be enemy, but that either be so sick that they love not to hear of
any medicine, or else that be so ignorant that they know not Scripture to be
the most healthful medicine. Therefore as touching this former part, The
Couclusion
I will here conclude, and take it for a conclusion, sufficiently determined
and appointed, that it is convenient and good, the Scriptures to be read of
all sorts and kinds of people, and in the vulgar tongue, without further
allegations or probations for the same, which shall not need, since that this
one place of John Chrysostom is enough, and sufficient to persuade all them
that be not frowardly and peruersly set in their own wilful opinion, The
Kings highness has allowed the Scripture as necessary for us.
specially now that the Kings highness being Supreme head next under Christ of
this church of England, has approved with his royal assent the setting forth
hereof, which onley to all true and obedient Subjects ought to be a sufficient
reason for the allowance of the same, without further delay, reclamation or
resistance, although there were no Preface, or other reason herein expressed.
Therefore now to come to the second or latter part of my purpose: here is
nothing so good in this world, but it may be abused, There is nothing but may
be abused. Romans 8.
and turned from unhurtful and wholesome, to hurtful and noisome. What is
there above better then the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars? Yet was there
that took occasion by the great beauty and virtue of them, to dishonor God,
and to defile themselves with idolatry, giving the honor of the living God
and Creator of all things, to such things as he had created. What is there
here beneathe better then fire, water, meats, drinks metals of gold,
silver, iron, and steel? Yet we see daily great harm and much mischief done
by every one of these, as well for lack of wisdom and providence of them that
suffer evil, as by the malice of them that work the evil. Thus to them that
be evil of themselves, every thing sets forward and increases their
evil, be it of his own nature a thing never so good: like as contrarily, to
them that study and endeavor themselves to goodness, every thing prevails
them, and profits unto good, be it of his own nature a thing never so bad,
as Saint Paul says, His qui diligunt Deum, omnia cooperantur in bonum. All
things do bring good success, to such as do love God, even as out of most
venomous worms is made triacle, the most sovereign medicine for the
preferuation of man's health in time of danger. Wherefore I would advise you
all that come to the reading or hearing of this Book, which is the Word of
God, the most precious jewel, and most holy relic that remains upon earth,
that ye bring with you the fear of God, and that ye do it with all due
reverence, and use your knowledge thereof, not to vaineglory of frivolous
disputation: but to the honor of God, increase of virtue, and edification both
of your selves and others. And to the intent that my words may be the more
regarded, I will use in this part the authority of S. Gregory Nazianzene, like
as in the other I did of S.John Chrysostom. It appears that in his time
there were some (as I fear me there be also now at these days a great number)
which were idle brablers, and talkers of the Scripture out of season and all
good order, and without any increase of virtue, or example of good living: to
them he writes all his first Book de Theologia. Wherefore I shall briefly
gather the whole effect, and recite it here unto you. There be some (says he)
whose not only ears and tongues, but also their fistes be whetted and ready
bent all to contention and unprofitable disputation, whom I would wish as they
be vehement and earnest to reason the matter with tongue, so they were all
ready and practiue to do good deeds. But for as much as they subuerting the
order of all godliness, have respect only to this thing, how they may bind
and loose subtle questions, so that now every marketplace, every alehouse and
tavern, every feasthouse, briefly every company of men, every assembly of
women, is filled with such talk: Since the matter is so (says he) and that
our faith and holy Religion of Christ begins to wax nothing else but as it
were a sophistry or a talking craft, I can no less do but say something
thereunto. It is not fit (says he) for every man to dispute the high questions
of Divinity, neither is it to be done at all times, neither in every audience
must we discuss every doubt: but we must know when, to whom, and how far
we ought to enter into such matters. First, it is not for every man, but it is
for such as be of exact and exquisite judgments, and such as have spent their
time before in study and contemplation, and such as before have cleansed
themselves as well in soul as body, or at the least endeavored themselves to be
made clean. For it is dangerous (says he) for the unclean to touch that
thing which is most clean, like as the sore eye takes harm by looking upon
the Sun. Secondarily, not at all times, but when we be reposed, and at rest
from all outward dregs and trouble, and when that our heads be not encombred
with other worldly and wandering imaginations: as if a man should mingle balm
and dirt together. For he that shall judge and determine such matters and
doubts of Scriptures, must take his time when he may apply his wits
thereunto, that he may thereby the better see and discern what is truth.
Thirdly, where, and in what audience. There and among those that have been
studious to learn: and not among such as have pleasure to trifle with such
matters, as with other things of pastime, which repute for their chief
delicates, the disputation of high questions, to show their wits, learning,
and eloquence in reasoning of high matters. Fourthly, it is to be considered
how far to wade in such matters of difficulty. No further (says he) but as
every man's own capacity will serve him, and again no further then the
weakness or intelligence of the other audience may bear. For like as too
great noise hurts the ear, too much meat hurts the man's body, heavy
burdens hurt the bearers of them, too much rain does more hurt then good to
the ground: briefly, in all things too much is noyous: even so weak wits,
and weak consciences, may soon be oppressed with over hard questions. I say
not this to dissuade men from the knowledge of God, and reading or studying of
the Scripture: for I say that it is as necessary for the life of man's soul, as
for the body to breathe. And if it were possible so to live, I would think it
good for a man to spend all his life in that, and to do none other thing. I
commend the Law which bids to meditate and study the Scriptures always
both night and day, and Sermons and preachings to be made both morning, noone,
and euentide, and God to be lauded and blessed in all times, to bedward, from
bed, in our iourneyes, and in all other works. I forbid not to read, but I
forbid to reason. Neither forbid I to reason so far as is good and godly: but
I allow not that is done out of season, and out of measure and good order. A
man may eat too much honey be it never so sweet, and there is time for every
thing, and that thing that is good is not good if it be ungodly done. Even as a
flower in winter is out of season, and as a woman's apparel becomes not a man,
neither contrarily, the man's the woman, neither is weeping convenient at a
bride ale, neither laughing at a burial. Now if we can observe and keep that
is comely and timely in all other things: shall not we then the rather do the
same in the holy Scriptures? Let us not run forth as it were wild horses,
that can suffer neither bridle in their mouths, nor sitter on their backs.
Let us keep us in our bounds, and neither let us go too far on the one side,
least we return into Egypt, neither too far over the other, least we be
carried away to Babylon. Let us not sing the song of our Lord in a strange
land, that is to say, let us not dispute the word of God at all adventures,
as well where it is not to be reasoned, as where it is, and as well in the ears
of them that be not fit therefore, as of them that be. If we can in no wise
forbear, but that we must needs dispute, let us forbear thus much at the
least, to do it out of time and place convenient: and let us entreat of those
things which be holy, holily: and upon those things that be mystical,
mystically: and not to utter the Divine mysteries in the ears unworthy to
hear them, but let us know what is comely, as well in our silence and talking,
as in our garments wearing, in our feeding, in our gesture, in our goings, in
all our other behauing. This contention and debates about Scriptures and
doubts thereof (specially when such as do pretend to be the favorers and
students thereof, cannot agree within themselves) does most hurt to ourselves,
and to the furthering of the cause and quarrels that we should have furthered
above all other things. And we in this (says he) be not unlike to them that
being mad, set their own houses on fire, and that slay their own children,
or beat their own parents. I marvel much (says he) to recount whereof
comes all this desire of vainglorie, whereof comes all this tongue itche,
that we have so much delight to talk and clatter? And wherein is our
communication? Not in the commendation of virtuous and good deeds, of
hospitality, of love between Christian brother and brother, of love between
man and wife, of virginity and chastity, and of alms toward the poor: not
in Psalms and godly songs, not in lamenting for our sins, not in repressing
the affections of the body, not in prayers to God. We talk of Scripture, but
in the mean time we subdue not our flesh by fasting, watching and weeping, we
make not this life a meditation of death, we do not strive to be lords over our
appetites and affections, we go not about to pull down our proud and high
minds, to abate our fumish and rancorous stomachs, to restrain our lust and
bodily delectations, our indiscreet sorrows, out lascivious mirth, our
inordinate looking, our insatiable hearing of vanities, our speaking without
measure, our inconvenient thoughts; and briefly, to reform our life and
manners: but all our holiness consists in talking. And we pardon each other
from all good living, so that we may stick fast together in argumentation, as
though there were no mo ways to heaven but this alone, the way of speculation
and knowledge (as they take it) but in very deed it is rather the way of
superfluous contention and sophistication. Hitherto have I recited the mind of
Gregory Nazianzene in that Book which I spoke of before. The same Author says
also in another place, that the learning of a Christian man ought to begin of
the fear of God, to end in matters of high speculation: and not contrarily to
begin with speculation, and to end in fear. For speculation (says he)
either high cunning or knowledge, if it be not stayed with the bridle of fear
to offend God, is dangerous, and enough to tumble a man headlong down the
hill. Therefore (says he) the fear of God must be the first beginning, and as
it were an A. B. C. or an introduction to all them that shall enter into the
very true and most fruitful knowledge of holy Scriptures. Whereas is the
fear of God, there is (says he) the keeping of the commandments: and where
as is the keeping of the commandments, there is the cleansing of the flesh:
which flesh is a cloud before the souls eye, and suffers it not purely to
see the beam of the heavenly light. Where as is the cleansing of the flesh,
there is the illumination of the holy Ghost, the end of all our desires, and
the very light whereby the verity of Scripture is seen and perceived. This is
the mind, and almost the words of Gregory Nazianzene, doctor of the Greek
Church, of whom Saint Jerome says, that unto his time the Latin Church had
no writer able to be compared, and to make an even match with him. Therefore to
conclude this latter part, every man that comes to the reading of this holy
Book, ought to bring with him first and foremost this fear of Almighty God,
and then next, a firm and stable purpose to reform his own self according
thereunto, and so to continue, proceed, and prosper from time to time, showing
himself to be a sober and fruitful hearer and learner: which if he do, he
shall prove at length well able to teach, though not with his mouth, yet with
his living and good example, which is sure the most lively and effectuous form
and manner of teaching. He that otherwise intermedleth withh this Book, let him
be assured that once he shall make account therefore, when he shall have said
to him as it is written in the Prophet Davuid, Peccatori dicit Deus, etc. Unto
the ungodly said God, Why do thou preach my Laws, and take my testament
in thy mouth? Whereas thou hate to be reformed, and have been partaker with
adulterers. Thou have let thy mouth speak wickedness, and with thy tongue
thou have set forth deceit. Thou satest and spakest against thy brother, and
have slaundered thin own mothers son. These things have thou done, and I
held my tongue, and thou thoughtest wickedly, that I am even such a one as thy
self: But I will reprove thee, and set before thee the things that thou have
done. O consider this, ye that forget God, lest I pluck you away, and there be
none to deliver you. Who so offers me thanks and praise, he honors me:
and to him that orders his conversation right, will I show the salvation of
God.

God be praised.
FINIS.

