^^^ctical and Polemical COMMENTARY OR EXPOSITION On the Whole Fifteenth Psalm.

Wherein the TEXT Is learnedly and fruitfully explained, some CONTROVERSIES
Discussed, sundry CASES of CONSCIENCE are cleared; more especially that (...)
USUR^E.

Many common places succinctly handled, and diverse spiritual, holy and
seasonable Observations raised.

For the increase of Christian Knowledge, and the better understanding of the
holy Scripture, the acceptations of the Original words are ^^^^^fully rendered.

By Christopher Cartwright, late Minister of Saint Martins (...) the City of
York.

The Life (...) the Reverend and Learned Author is (...)

1 Cor. 12.7. Their (...) of the Spirit is given to (...) Printed for (...) at
the Angel (...)

To the Right honorable ROBERT HORNER Lord Major of the City of York; And the
Right Worshipful the ALDERMEN.
Right Honorable, Right Worshipful;
I Really blush to appear in a work of this Nature, lest some put the gloss of
Arrogance upon my Endeavor: but the Sponge wherewith I shall wipe off this
Stain, is, by letting such know, That I was obliged in duty to the Author; a
piece of which will be, to perform what I know would have been his will, even
bequeath this his Work to you, upon whom he never thought his Labor ill
bestowed. Besides, the Book being Motherless, it pitied me it should be
Fatherless too; and therefore I thought it better to run the hazard of a harsh
censure, then that this poor Orphane should be exposed to the wide World,
without either Father or Mother to fawn upon it. I should not have presumed to
have troubled you with the Tuition of this Child, but that I know you did
Reverence and Respect the Authors Person; and therefore I hope will smile upon
this his Work. Besides, as you are Magistrates, you are Defenders of the
Faith, and therefore (I hope) will not refuse to defend this, so agreeable to
the Faith once delivered to the Saints. I need not say any thing in the behalf
of this Treatise: though it be but young, newly come into the World, I doubt
not but it is sufficient to speak for it self. One Paradox (Indeed) I find in
it: The Author writes against Usury; and none improved his Talent more then he;
yet no contradiction: his Usury was not biting: the improvement of this Talent
was not to the detriment, but advantage of others: the Church of God, I hope,
will be improved by that improvement he has made. And that your Honor and
your Worships may reap some benefit to your Souls by this his Labor, shall be
the real Prayers of him,

Who wishes all happiness to you and your City, JO. TYREMAN.
July 12. 1658.
To the Christian READER.
READER,
I Being desired to give my Testimony, concerning that Reverend Divine, and my
worthy Friend, Mr. Christopher Cartwright, and his learned Commentary on the
fifteenth Psalm; I was easily induced thereunto, there being in his lifetime an
intimate League of Friendship between us, and he being one of rare
Accomplishments.

Not long after my publishing of my first Book, of the Divine Promises, I had
the happiness to be acquainted with him; and he told me of a little mistake in
one passage at the beginning thereof, which was corrected in the second
Edition. I growing more and more familiar with him, and perceiving his great
Abilities, made him ever after, the He was a Grammarian under Ptolomy, of so
exact a Judgment, that no Verse was esteemed Homers, but what he had allowed.
Aristarchus of my Labors, and submitted them to his judicial perusal, before
I published them to the World.

Observing his great skill in the Hebrew Language, I urged him to bend his
Studies that way, for the better elucidating of some part of the Old Testament.
He sending two of his Sermons up to London to me, written with his own hand, I
caused them, unknown to him, to be printed; and in the Epistle gave Notice of a
worthy Work he had in hand on Genesis, wherein the World should perceive his
skill (said I then, for which he after blamed me) in the Oriental Tongues,
though I should have said, In the Hebrew Language and Rabbines: Of which work
he himself thus wrote to me in a Letter, as Scaliger to Drusius, Certe expedit
ut quae in libello hoc non vulgaria tractavi, non ignorari: For the New
Testament (which takes up almost half the Book) it is incomparably above any
thing in that kind. Drusius seems to have applied himself that way, yet either
saw not, or had not leisure to peruse either Bereshith Rabba, Midrash Tillim,
or Midrashin: there is one long Chapter of Proverbs and Apophthegm's found in
Jewish Writers.
which passage of mine, hastened his Annotations on Genesis; which with those on
Exodus, and also his * Mellificium Hebraicum (when it comes forth in the
Appendix of the Bibliotheca Criticorum) abundantly show his accurate Knowledge
of the Hebrew Language and Writers.

And as I was his (...), putting him on those Studies wherein his Excellency
lay; so I, by my interest in Mr. Seldom and Bishop Usher, procured him the use
of some rare Hebrew Books, very useful for the carrying on of his Design; and
also bought of Manasseh Ben Israel, three Hebrew Books for him, very beneficial
for his purpose.

As he was singularly expert in the Hebrew, so he was very skilful both in the
Latin and Greek. He wrote an Elegant Latin style, and with ease, as his
Latin Epistles frequently written by him will Evidence. For the Greek, his
Works in general show his skill therein; and there is yet a Divine Living in
Staffordshire, to whom he was used to write in Greek. His English Books are all
useful in their kinds.

For positive Divinity, the two Sermons before mentioned, his others unprinted,
and his double Exposition of the Apostles Creed, show his Ability therein; the
larger whereof would be more complete, if those Sermons he once sent up for the
supplying of some things he had omitted, were annexed thereunto. For Polemical
Divinity, not only his Rejoinder to the Marquess of Worcester, but two other
Autographs of his, which I have seen, show his Knowledge therein. For
Expository Divinity, this Learned and Laborious Work on the fifteenth Psalm,
shows him to be a good Interpreter of Scriptures; wherein (as Bishop Downham
before him, upon that very Psalm) he discusseth accurately that great and most
vexed Controversy of Usury; and both removes the several shifts and pretenses
made for it, and also shows the unlawfulness thereof by strong and evident
Arguments.

One that reads his Writings, or heard him Preach, might easily see, he was
both copious and pertinent in Scripture-Quotations; a Gift in which Mr. Arthur
Hildersham, that eminent Divine, excelled.

It was very Commendable also in my Worthy Friend, Mr. Cartwright, his great
Modesty. I having sent him my Book of Religion and Learning, wherein, amongst
others, I gave him (as there was reason) a fair Character, he, after a while,
by accident meeting with it, presently wrote me Word, that he could not but
blush at the reading of it. But the Writings of this precious Man, are
irrefragable Arguments of my own, shall I say? or Yorkshires Loss; nay of the
whole Kingdoms Loss, in the Death of so Orthodox a Divine, in such sad times.
But I will no longer detain thee from the perusal of this his last Work,
Reviewed and Corrected by himself; Wishing thee much spiritual Benefit thereby,
and subscribing my self

Thine, EDWARD LEIGH.

To the READER.
READER,
THe name of the Reverend and Learned Author prefixed to this Treatise, with
those other works of his published by himself in his lifetime, might save the
Labor of any Epistle or Preface thereunto, as being sufficient to recommend it
unto the Church of God. But because Editions of Books are liable to prejudice
and disadvantage in their entertainment, it was judged not unnecessary that
something of this nature should lead forth this Book into the world; which
service, at the desire of a Friend, I have readily undertaken, that so I might
express that true respect I always had unto the Author, in bearing his Book
after him. And first, let me assure thee, That these ensuing Sermons on the
fifteenth Psalm, are the genuine issue of him, whose name they bear; being by
himself prepared for the Press, and wholly printed before his death. And this,
those that knew him, will believe for the very works sake, which is a true
resemblance of the Author, learned and plain, critical and practical.

There are indeed other Pictures of his (for Books may be fitly so termed) as
his learned Annotations on Genesis and Exodus, his Polemical Rejoinder to the
Marquess of Worcester: But this Piece, as I conceive, renders him more to the
life, then any of the rest; for he lived this Treatise, as well as wrote it. In
this Age, wherein so many are offended, it is possible that some may stumble at
the divine Zeal of the Authors matter and Method; but let such consider, that
it was intended for a Highway to the heavenly Jerusalem, the Holy Hill. If any
be weary of its plainness, there are difficulties in the Margent to refresh
him. He that brings me good tidings, let him with Ahimaaz, Run the way of the
plain, I shall have them so much the sooner. For my own part, I look upon this
work as a religiously-learned seasonable Call from disputes to duties; from
libertine wanderings, to regular walkings: and if there were no more in it, then
the producing and applying so much Scripture upon the account of Truth and
Holiness, it were sufficient to recommend it unto a right-spirited Christian,
who rejoices in the word, as one that finds great spoil: But there is much
more, as thou will find in the perusal; to which, with a blessing, I leave
thee, and remain

Thine, EDWARD BOWLS.
York, June 22.
A brief and true account of the Author and of his Work.
IN this Age, of so many monstrous Editions of Books, he that publishes an
Author, ought to be a true friend to Piety, faithful and honest to the memory
of the Deceased; more especially if as good men, we consider how Popery and
Heresy, profaneness and carnal mindedness, by many unworthy Obtruders on the
Press, have crept into the World: for the Churches sake, these spiritual Aides
should be communicated, but not against the Church; so that it will appear, To
be excellent Wisdom in Christians that bear a true Zeal to Religion, to
consider how men have lived, as well as how they have writ. The learned Author
of this ensuing Commentary, was descended from honest and Religious Parents,
born in the Parish of Saint Michaels the Belfrank, called Belfrers, within the
City of York: he was baptized the first day of October, in the year of our
Lord, one thousand six hundred and two; his Education was under painful
Schoolmasters, from whom being accomplished for the University of Cambridge,
there he was fellow of Peter-house, and took his Degrees, and remained there
about fifteen years, behaving himself so regularly, that he purchased honor
and respect from the most learned men in his time; and when that he was called
to any public exercise, he commanded the Emulation, if not the Admiration of
all his Auditors. After some removes, as the transactions of our lives are
various, his preaching of the Word at Cambridge, Staffordshire and York, for
the space of thirty years; in the last of which places, for his happy
settlement, it pleased the divine Providence to continue this fruitful Plant of
the Lord Jesus, a painful pastor in the Church of Saint Martins, in the City of
York, where for many years he discharged his blessed employment from heaven,
with such Pious Integrity, and learned Elocution, that his death at this time
is bewailed of all good men, as the greatest loss that has for many years
befallen that County. I must not forget what Doctor Collins spoke prophetically
of him, in respect of his early proficiency in the Oriental Tongues, That if it
pleased God to bless him with years, he would be an incomparable Ornament to
the Nation: which has been verified in his since printed Works, his Exposition
of the Creed, his Electa Thargumica Rabbinica, Annotations on Genesis, as also
on Exodus, with other Works of his which at this time are extant, both in
Latin and English. And that the true love he bore to learning and the honor
of his Country, might not to be forgotten, he enlarged himself according to his
ability, for the publishing of the large Bible in the Languages lately printed.
It pleased God to bless him with life to finish this Commentary; the Sheets
whereof he constantly received from the Press, and corrected them with his own
hands: When after ten weeks more violent sickness of a Consumption, death
seized him, he was gathered to his Fathers, at six and fifty, the Climacterical
year, as he called it, of his Age. He lies buried in the Church of St. Martins,
where he continued so long in his Ministry. That learned and religious Servant
of Jesus Christ, Mr Edward Bowls, preached his funeral Sermon, which was
attentively heard, and drew tears from most of the Auditors; he gave an
honorable account of the deceased; he took his Text out of the second of
Timothy, the fourth Chapter, the seventh and eighth verses; I have fought a
good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith. Henceforth there
is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous
Judge, shall give me at that day: and not unto me only, but unto them also
that love his appearing. Amongst other admirable expressions in his Sermon, he
touched on three things which he desired himself and his Brethren might imitate
him in: his Sobriety, his Industry, and the plainness of his preaching; for
though he had read more Books then many of of us have heard of, yet he did not
crowd his Sermons so much with Quotations of Authors, as not to prefer the
blessed Scripture infinitely before them: and further alluding to the words of
his Text, he showed how he kept the faith in his learned Expository way of his
Annotations on Genesis and Exodus; in a Polemical way, by his Answer to the
Marquess of Worcester; in a practical way, by his religious Life and
Conversation.

It was likewise Mr: Carthwright's almost dying request, to some of his fellow
Laborers in the Gospel, That they would be pleased to have an eye to the
publishing of this Volume, which to the joy of all good Christians, we now see
extant. Thus much may be said of his learned studies. As touching the heavenly
frame of his spirit, his holy life and conversation was sufficiently well known
to all those that favored the ways of God: he was a burning and a shining
Light; the sparks of his Piety did fly abroad to all the corners of this
Kingdom: This blessed Elias, after he had served his Generation, being taken up
into Heaven.

For his person, though he was worn out with his studies, yet one might read
Divinity in his face. He was a man unbiassed, constant in his principles, of an
equal and well-balanced temper: he was an excellent Casuist, which from the
acknowledgment of some weak Christian Friends of his and mine, I can
confidently assert, in this blessed practice for the quieting of the
Conscience, That he did not break the bruised Reed, nor quench the smoking
Flax; but like the good Samaritan, poured Oil into the wounds of the afflicted
Saints: yet withal, he was of so austere, but rectifyed a Judgment, that where
he found a necessity, he knew how to lance and cauterize, behaving himself to
weak Christians, more like an Angel then a Man; he observed the daily passages
of his own life; and in respect of the infirmity of his Body, and troubles of
his Mind, he was much exercised with spiritual Conflicts, which I shall only
instance in one expression of his; Many men, said he, think if they live
civilly, they have no need of a Christ; I find great need of a Christ. He was
so truly sensible of his own and others miseries, that all those that rightly
knew him, did acknowledge him to be a person fitted for holy employments, in
regard of his much communion with God, and acquaintance with his own heart. He
was learned with and without Books, as he had a sharp a Wit, and a searching
Judgment: his manner of handling of Questions in this Commentary, is often by
Shool-Arguments on both sides, Pro and Con, Conclusions and Answers, in which
the Reader shall find how he could assent in lesser things, and with a weighty
and serious respect, maintain greater matters. In all, he showed an excellent
moderation. The Sons of Levi by this time, are sufficiently sensible what want
there has been of a particular Commentary on this Psalm, so few Authors having
addressed their Studies this way; which want is now fully supplied by this
Reverend, Learned, Religious Divine, who has given us both Practical and
Polemical Expositions of it, so spiritually and advisedly, that I cannot but
acknowledge that I have not met with any of our late Writers that have excelled
him in these abilities; insomuch that those that rightly knew him, believe this
to be the Epitome of his many years Studies. An eminently learned Divine, a
Friend of his and mine, perusing this Book in the Manuscript, observing how he
consulted with the Original, said, That the Lord had endued this Author with
excellent and peculiar Gifts, in a short, yet substantial way, to render the
meaning of the Scripture. To conclude: Learned and Religious Reader, my Prayers
are to God for his Blessing, that this Work of our Friend, now in Heaven, may
do good to the future Generations, that they may have cause to send up many
thanksgivings to the Father of Mercies, for the benefit they have reapt by it:
so prays the Quondam fellow Pupil of the deceased Author.

JO. BOLTON.

A Commentary on the 15th Psalm.
SERMON. I.
Psalm. 15.1. Lord, who shall abide in thy Tabernacle? Who shall dwell in thy
holy Hill?


THis Psalm (as the Title of it does show) was composed by David, The Title.
the sweet Psalmist of Israel, as he is styled, 2 Samuel 23.1. Whether David did
compose all the 150 Psalms, is a question. The more ancient Rabbines (as R.
David Kimchi does testify) say, Kimchi in Praefat. in Psa.
That besides David there were ten Composers of the Psalms, to wit, Adam,
Melchisedec, Abraham, Asaph, Heman, Jeduthun, Moses, and the three Sons of
Korah, to wit, Asir, Elkanah, and Abiasaph. The 92 Psalm, which is entitled, A
Psalm, or Song for the Sabbath Day, they say, was composed by Adam, being
created the day before the Sabbath. They make also Ethan, who is mentioned in
some of the Titles of the Psalms, to be Abraham; and the 110 Psalm they
attribute to Melchisedec as the Author of it: the other persons, to wit, Asaph,
Heman, Jeduthun, Moses, and the Sons of Korah, they make the Authors of those
Psalms, which are entitled by their names. As for this last, I should not much
contend; but for that which they say concerning Adam and Abraham, I see no
ground at all for it. (...) Kimchi would have (...) to be not, of David, but,
for David, or concerning David, contrary to the signification of the word in
other places.
And that Melchisedec was the Author of Psalm 110, we see to be both repugnant
to the Title of it, which tells us, that it is a Psalm of David; and also to
the Testimony of our Savior, who makes David to be the Author of it; for he
says, that David said, The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand,
until I make thine enemies thy footstool: which is the beginning of the 110
Psalm. Mat. 22.43, 44. And see also Acts 2.34, 35. I see no reason to dissent
from Kimchi, saying, That those Psalms which have David's name in the Title,
(...) Kimchi in Praefat.
were made by David, and so also those Psalms, that have no Inscription. For I
find not only the 110 Psalm, and so other Psalms, which bear the name of David
in the Title, attributed to David in the New Testament, but also such-Psalms as
are neither inscribed by the name of David, nor of any other. The second Psalm,
having no Title, is cited as made by David, Act. 4.25, 26.

This Psalm divides it self into two general parts: 1. A Question in the first
verse: Lord, who shall abide? etc. 2. An Answer, in the rest of the Psalm: He
that walks uprightly, etc.

In the Question we have, 1. the person to whom the question is propounded, in
the first word, Lord. 2. The thing inquired, Who shall abide in thy tabernacle?
who shall dwell in thy holy hill?

The Answer is set down, 1. more fully and distinctly, He that walks
uprightly, and works righteousness, and speaks the truth, etc. 2. more
briefly and summarily in the last words of the last verse: He that does these
things shall never fall.

In the Answer, as it is more fully and distinctly set down, the person, about
whom the inquiry is made, is described, 1. by his inward integrity of heart and
affection: He that walks uprightly. 2 By his outward conformity of Life and
Conversation; and that, 1. more generally, and works righteousness. 2. More
particularly, and that in nine Particulars: 1. And speaks the truth in his
heart. 2. He that backbiteth not with his tongue. 3. Nor does evil to his
neighbor. 4. Nor takes up a reproach against his neighbor. 5. In whose eyes
a vile person is contemned. 6. But honors them that fear the Lord. 7. He
that swears to his own hurt, and changes not. 8. He that puts not out his
money to usury. 9. Nor takes reward against the innocent.

Lord] In the Original the word is (...), which we pronounce Jehovah; and so
usually, when the word LORD is written all with great Letters, excepting some
few places, where the Original word is (...) Jah, which is taken to be a
contract of Jehovah. The word Jehovah comes of a word that signifies to be; and
God is so called, because he has his being from none, and all other things
have their being from him. So that this Name Jehovah is peculiar unto God, and
not communicable to any besides him: Thou, whose Name alone is Jehovah, art
most high, etc. Psalm. 83.18.

From hence, that the Question is propunded unto God, God is he, that must
instruct all, and teach them the things, which concern Salvation.

David here in a matter of Salvation seeks unto God, and desires to learn of
him. So Psalm. 119.33. Teach me, O Lord. And v. 34. Give me understanding. And
v. 66. Teach me good judgment and knowledge. And Psalm. 143.8. Cause me to know
the way wherein I should walk.

This may further be confirmed by these Arguments. Reasons why the Way of
salvation must be learned of God.


1. All true knowledge is from God. I say, all true knowledge; for there is
science falsely so called. 1 Timothy 6.20. Some are wise to do evil, but to do good
they have no knowledge. Jer. 4.22. But if it deserve the name of knowledge, if
it be of things meet to be known, God is the Author and Worker of it. It is he
that teaches man knowledge, Psalm. 94 10. The Lord gives wisdom; out of his
mouth comes knowledge and understanding, Prove. 2.6. The knowledge of cunning
Artificers is from God. Then wrought Bezaleel and Aholiak, and every
wise-hearted man, in whom the Lord put wisdom and understanding, to know how to
work all manner of work for the service of the sanctuary, etc. Exodus 36.1. See
also, Exodus 31.16. So the knowledge of the Husbandman, his skill in plowing,
sewing, and threshing, this also is from God. For his God does instruct him to
discretion, and does teach him, Isa 28.26. This also comes from the Lord, who
is wonderful in counsel, and excellent in working, v. 29. More especially then
that knowledge, Edocuit autem Dominus (Mat. 11.27.) quoniam Deum scire nemo
potest nisi Deo docente, hoc est, sine Deo non cognosci Deum. Iren. lib. 4.
cap. 14.
which concerns Salvation, is from God: the knowledge of God, and of the things
of God, must needs be from God. No man knows the Son, but the Father; neither
knows any man the Father, but the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will
reveal him, Mat. 11.27. If every good gift, and every perfect gift, be from
God, as it is, Jam. 1.17. then surely the more good, and the more perfect any
gift is, the more clear and evident it is, that it is from God.

2. Salvation is from God; it is called the salvation of God, Psalm. 50.23. So
Psalm. 51.12. Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation, says David unto God.
Therefore it is God, that must teach the things that concern Salvation, the way
how to attain unto it. In the first Verse of the Psalm we are in hand with,
David calls the Tabernacle, and the Hill, which he speaks of, the Lord's
Tabernacle, and his Hill; good reason therefore, why he should (as he does)
consult the Lord, and ask of him, how he should be so qualified as to be
admitted into it, and so abide and dwell in it for ever.

Quest. But (may some say) how does God teach and instruct?

Answ. I answer, God does teach and instruct both by his Word, and by his
Spirit.

1. By his Word, as the outward means. It is true, The Light of Nature may
afford some knowledge of God. The heavens declare the glory of God, and the
firmament shows his handiwork. Day unto day utters speech, and night unto
night shows knowledge. There is no speech nor language, where their voice is
not heard, Psalm. 19.1, 2, 3. That, which may be known of God, is manifest in
them; for God has showed it unto them. For the invisible things of him from
the creation of the world, are clearly seen, being understood by the things
that are made, even his eternal power and Godhead, Romans 1.19, 20. But such
knowledge, as is requisite and necessary unto Salvation, cannot be had by the
Light of Nature, but the Light of God's Word is it by which it must be
attained. In Judah is God known, Psalm. 76.1. to wit, because in Judah they had
the Oracles of God committed unto them, Romans 3.2. As for the Gentiles that were
without the word, they were even without God in the world, Ephesians. 2.12. without
the true saving knowledge of God; the Gentiles, which know not God, 1 Thessalonians.
4.5. Salvation is of the Jews, said our Savior to the woman of Samaria, to
wit, because the Jews only had the Word of God, which does show the Way of
Salvation. David therefore having said, Blessed is the man, whom thou
chastenest, O Lord; he adds, and teach him out of thy law, Psalm. 94.12. And
Psalm. 119.105. Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my paths. And
v. 130. The entrance of thy words gives light; it gives understanding to the
simple.

2. By his Spirit, as the inward and principal Agent. I will put my law in
their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, Jer. 31.33. This God does by
his Spirit; I will put my Spirit within you, says he, Ezekiel. 36.27. Ye are
manifestly declared to be the epistle of Christ, ministered by us, written not
with ink, but with the Spirit of the living God, not in tables of stone, but in
the fleshy tables of the heart, says the Apostle to the Corinthians, 2 Cor.
3.3. Christ by his Spirit did open the understandings of his Disciples, that
they might understand the Scriptures, Luk 24.45. And by his Spirit he opened
the heart of Lydia, to attend unto the things which were spoken by Paul, Act.
16.14.

This then serves first to convince all such, as think to their Pilgrimages and
Images, their praying in an unknown Tongue, and praying unto Saints; these, and
many other suchlike things as these, they set much by, and think they please
God and profit themselves by them, whenas yet God has taught them no such
matter. Justly may that be said to them, which Christ said to the Pharisees, In
vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of men, Mar.
7.7. But to let them pass, some among our selves are very precise, in observing
and practizing diverse things, as pleasing unto God, and profitable to their own
Souls, for which they have no instruction nor direction at all from God; as
their coming fasting to the Lord's Table, their abstaining from certain Meats
at certain times, and the like. Yea, although they do observe those things
which God does teach and require, yet they do it not upon that ground, but upon
the same ground, that they observe other things which God did never teach nor
require.

The most that they have to allege for what they do, is,

1. Custom, the Example of their Forefathers, and others among whom they live.
But when the woman of Samaria said, Our fathers worshipped in this mountain,
Joh. 4.20. our Savior answered, Ye worship ye know not what, v. 22. And when
the Pharisees taxed Christ's Disciples for not observing the tradition of the
Elders, Mar. 7.5. Christ taxed them, saying, Laying aside the commandment of
God, ye hold the tradition of men, as the washing of pots and cups, and many
other suchlike things ye do, v. 8. And Peter tells us that Christ has
redeemed us from our vain conversation received by tradition from our fathers,
1 Pet. 1.18.

2. Good intent and meaning; hereupon they think God will accept that which
they do, though they know no ground or warrant at all from God for it. But the
example of Uzzah may sufficiently show what a broken reed this is to lean upon.
He had a good intent and meaning in that which he did, when he put forth his
hand, and laid hold on the Ark; for he thought only to stay it, and to keep it
from falling, when he saw that the Oxen did shake the Cart wherein it was
carried; yet God was so far from being pleased with that which he did, that
immediately he smote him, that he died for it, 1 Chronicles. 13.9, 10. David shows
the reason of God's inflicting this judgment, saying, The Lord our God made a
breach upon us, because we sought him not after the due order, 1 Chronicles. 15.13.
It is not enough therefore to seek God, but we must know how we do it, we must
do it after the due order, that is, so as God himself has prescribed. Paul
confesses of himself, saying, I verily thought with my self, that I ought to
do many things against the Name of Jesus of Nazareth, Act 26.9. It was out of
his zeal, (he says) that he did persecute the Church, Phil. 3.6. But was that
therefore which he did, pleasing unto God? No, because his zeal was such as he
speaks of, Romans 10.2. where he says of the Jews, They have a zeal of God,
but not according to knowledge. So our Savior told his Disciples, that the
time would come, when they that killed them, would think they did God service,
John 16.2. Yet certainly, God would be far from accepting such service. That
service which is acceptable unto God, must be reasonable service, as it is
called, Romans 12.1. it must proceed first from the Understanding, the prime and
principal Faculty of the reasonable Soul; and then from the Will and
Affections, which are reasonable only by participation. Be ye not unwise, but
understand what the will of the Lord is, says the Apostle, Ephesians. 5.17.
Whatever service it be that is performed without Understanding, it is but the
sacrifice of fools, as Solomon terms it, Eccles. 5.1. And, as he adds, v. 4.
God has no pleasure in fools.

Secondly, This makes for the reproof of such as regard When for the time ye
ought to be teachers, ye have need that one teach you again, which be the first
principles of the oracles of God? Heb. 5.12. Yea, many are not only ignorant,
but (as Peter speaks) they are willingly ignorant, 2 Pet. 3.5. They say unto
God, Depart from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy ways, as Job says of
the wicked, Job 21.14. How do they think to be saved, who are so ignorant, and
still will be ignorant of those things which concern Salvation; who neither
know these things, nor care to know them? The Apostle tells us, that whom God
will have to be saved, them also he will have to come to the knowledge of the
Truth, 1 Timothy 2.4. so that without coming to the knowledge of the Truth, no
coming to Salvation. Knowledge is the key, as it is called, Luke 11.52. So that
if thou have no knowledge, the Gate of Salvation is fast shut and locked, there
is no entrance for thee. My people is destroyed for lack of knowledge, says
God, Hos. 4.4. The very want of knowledge is enough to cause destruction, how
much more the contempt of it? This is the condemnation of the world, (says our
Savior) that light is come into the world, and men loved darkness rather then
light, Joh. 3.19. What will they here say? That God is merciful, and will have
mercy on them? so some use to speak in this, and the like case: but what says
the Prophet Isaiah? It is a people of no understanding; therefore he that made
them will not have mercy on them, and he that formed them will show them no
favor, Isa. 27.11.



Means whereby to learn of God.
1. To acquaint themselves well with God's Word; for that is the ordinary means
whereby God does teach those things which concern Salvation, as I have showed
before. Disce cor Dei ex verbis Dei, Gregor.
Therefore consult God's Word, give heed unto it, and follow it. Thy word have
I hid within my heart (says David unto God) that I might not sin against thee,
Psalm. 119.11. And v. 24. Thy testimonies also are my delight, and my
counselors. And v. 99. I have more understanding then all my teachers; for
thy testimonies are my meditation.

2. To pray unto God for his Spirit to enlighten the mind, and to enable to
understand his Word, and to profit by it: for (as I have also showed before)
the Spirit is the principal Agent, without which the Word is of no force, of no
effect. As ordinarily without the Word, the Spirit does not work; and therefore
the Word is not to be slighted and despised: so without the Spirit, the Word
cannot possibly work; and therefore the Word is not to be rested in, but the
Spirit is to be prayed for, that so the Word may be effectual. Though the Word
be a Light, yet except our eyes be opened, what are we the better for it? This
David considered, and therefore prayed unto God, saying, Open thou mine eyes,
that I may behold wondrous things out of thy law, Psalm. 119.18.

3. To labor for such a disposition and frame of heart, as God requires in
those whom he will teach.

1. Therefore we must be humble, acknowledging our wants and imperfections, our
inability to help our selves, and our unworthiness, that God should help us. A
scorner (says Solomon) seeks wisdom, and finds it not; but knowledge is
easy to him that understands; to wit, that understands what is requisite
for the obtaining of it: Prove. 14.6. Humilitatis est totius spiritualis
fabricae fundamentum. Bern. Epist. 87.
See thou (says he) a man wise in his own conceit? there is more hope of a
fool then of him, Prove. 26.12. More hope of any fool, then of a proud
self-conceited fool. Professing themselves wise, (says the Apostle) they
became fools, Romans 1.22. And therefore he bids, Let no man deceive himself: if
any man among you seem to be wise in this world, let him become a fool, (let
him know and acknowledge himself to be so) that he may be wise, 1 Cor. 3.18.
Such a disposition Agur was of: Surely, (says he) I am more brutish then man,
and have not the understanding of a man: I neither learned wisdom, nor have the
knowledge of the holy, Prove. 30.2, 3. The want of this disposition was it that
made the Pharisees so blind, they thought that none were so acute and
quick-sighted as they were. See Mat. 15.14. and Mat. 23.16, 24, 26. with Joh.
9.34, 39, 40, 41.

2. We must be pliable and obedient, ready to do the will of God when it is
made known unto us. If any man will do his will, he shall know, etc. Joh. 7.17.
What man is he that fears the Lord? him will he teach in the way that he
shall choose, Psalm. 25.12. And v. 14. The secret of the Lord is with them that
fear him, and he will show them his covenant. This God promises, saying, To
him that orders his conversation aright, will I show the salvation of God,
Psalm. 50.23. It is true, God must first teach us before we can do any thing
aright, or have any purpose to do it: but as our Savior says, To him that
has (that is, makes good use of what he has) shall be given, and he shall
have abundance, Mat. 25.29. David therefore, praying unto God to teach him,
professes his readiness to observe and practice what he shall learn of him.
Teach me, O Lord, the way of thy statutes; and I will keep it unto the end.
Give me understanding, and I will keep thy law: yea, I shall observe it with my
whole heart, Psalm. 119.33, 34.

SERMON. II.
Psalm. 15.1. Who shall abide in thy Tabernacle? Who shall dwell in thy holy
Hill?


BY God's tabernacle here, and by his holy hill, some understand the Church,
some Heaven: some by tabernacle the Church, and by holy hill Heaven; because a
Tabernacle properly denotes a temporary place of abode; and so the word, (...)
which is translated to abide, does properly signify to sojourn, as the
margent notes. But neither is the word tabernacle always taken in that strict
sense, as I shall show anon; to dwell, as Isa 11.6. The wolf also shall dwell
((...)) with the lamb. Now for the word tabernacle, sometimes the Church is so
called, as Amos 9.11. Acts 15.16. where, by the tabernacle of David, is meant
the Church of Christ, of whom David was a type; and therefore he is sometimes
called David, as Ezekiel. 34.23. and Hosea 3.5. The Church is termed a Tabernacle,
either because from Moses unto Solomon, God was solemnly worshipped in a
Tabernacle, and in it was placed the Ark, the sign of God's special presence,
Exodus 40. and 2 Samuel 7 2. in which latter place it is said, The ark of God
dwells within curtains, that is, in a Tabernacle hung about, and covered with
Curtains: Or, because a Tabernacle is sometimes put for any Habitation, as
Psalm. 132.3. I will not come into the tabernacle of my house: and the Church is
God's Habitation, the house of God, 1 Timothy 3.15. God does dwell in it, as God
has said, I will dwell in them, 2 Cor. 6.16. In this respect, the Church may
be called a Tabernacle, as there (to wit, 2 Cor. 6.16.) it is called a Temple,
yet still (as it seems) with reference to the Jewish Tabernacle, which Moses
erected, wherein God did dwell, in that there he did in special manifest
himself unto his people. Again, the word tabernacle signifying (as we see) any
Habitation, even the House or Palace of a King (for so it is used, Psalm.
132.3.) by God's Tabernacle here may be meant Heaven, wherein God does dwell,
that is, wherein he does especially manifest and show forth his Glory. Hear
thou in heaven thy dewlling place, says Solomon in his Prayer to God, 1 King.
8.30. So v. 39, and 43. So our Savior calls Heaven his Fathers house, John
14.2. Those many Mansions also, which he says are in his Father's House, that
is, in Heaven, he calls tabernacles, Luke 16.9. though to distinguish them
from other Tabernacles properly so called, he calls them everlasting
tabernacles. And (as Kimchi observes upon the Text) by tabernacle may be
understood Heaven, because the Heavens are spread out like a Tent or
Tabernacle. See Psalm. 104.2. and Isa. 40.22. For the other word hill, or (as
the word in the Original does properly import) mountain, (...)
it may also either signify the Church or Heaven. The Church, in that the
Temple was built upon a Hill or Mountain, to wit, Sion; whence the Church in
Scripture is frequently called Sion, or mount Sion, as Isa. 28.16. Psalm. 51.21.
Heb. 12.22. or the mountain of the Lord, as Isa. 2.3. Mic. 4.2. Heaven also may
be understood by hill or mountain, in that it is above on high; therefore it is
called the high and holy place, Isa. 57.15. So then all the Expositions before
mentioned are agreeable to the words; and indeed they come all to one in
effect. For whether we understand the words of the Church, or of Heaven, or
partly of the one, and partly of the other, still the Question is in effect one
and the same, to wit, Who shall enjoy Salvation? That this is the purport and
meaning of the Question, appears by the last words of the Psalm: He that does
these things shall never be moved.

Who shall abide in thy tabernacle? Who, etc. This very Question, which is here
iterated, Who shall? who shall? this very Question, I say, does imply, that the
thing spoken of does not belong unto all. It were in vain to say, Who shall? if
all should. Observe we therefore from hence, That Salvation is not a thing
common unto all: not all, but some only shall be saved.

There are vessels of wrath fitted to destruction, as well as vessels of mercy
prepared unto glory, Romans 9.22, 23. As some are vessels to honor, so some are
vessels to dishonor, 2 Timothy 2.20. As some are good seed, children of the
kingdom, such as shall be saved; so some are tares, children of the wicked one,
such as shall be damned: Mat. 13.38, etc. Yea, Wide is the gate, and broad is
the way that leads to destruction, and many there be that go in thereat. But
on the other side, Strait is the gate and narrow is the way, that leads unto
life, and few there be that find it, Mat. 7.13, 14.

The Truth of this Point may further be confirmed by these Arguments.

1. All are not so much as outwardly called to the enjoyment of Salvation.
Before Christ's coming, the outward means of Salvation were vouchsafed to no
Nation of the World, but only one, to wit, the Nation of the Jews. He has
given his word unto Jacob, his statutes and his ordinances unto Israel: he has
not dealt so with any nation, etc. Psalm. 147.19, 20. Salvation is of the Jews,
John 4.22. In times past God suffered all nations (except the Jews) to walk in
their own ways, Act. 14.16. All that were aliens from the commonwealth of
Israel, were also strangers from the covenants of promise, having no hope, and
without God in the world, Ephesians. 2.12. After Christ's coming, though the
partition wall, which was betwixt Jews and Gentiles, was taken away by Christ's
death, Ephesians. 2.14. So that whereas before Christ said to his Apostles, Go not
into the way of the Gentiles, and into any city of the Samaritans enter ye not:
but go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, Mat. 10.5. After his
death and resurrection, he bade them, Go teach all nations, etc. Mat. 28.19. Go
into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every creature, Mar. 16.15. Yet
still (as experience shows, and has showed in all ages) many in the World are,
and have been without the ordinary means of Salvation. That, Romans 10.18. Have
they not heard? Yes verily, their sound went out into all the earth, and their
words unto the ends of the world. And so that Col 1.6. and 23. where it is
said, That the Gospel was in all the World, and was preached to every creature
under Heaven, that (I say) must either be understood thus, that the Gospel was
preached indifferently to Jews and Gentiles, of what Nation or Country soever
men were: or it is spoken hyperbolically, like that Act. 2.5. There were
dwelling at Jerusalem, Jews, devout men, out of every nation under heaven. Thus
then all are not so much as outwardly called; neither again, are all, that are
called outwardly, called effectually, they are not all called according to
purpose, as the Apostle says some are, Rom 8.28. to wit, God's purpose to save
those whom he does call. Of this calling the Apostle there speaks, v. 30.
saying, Moreover, whom he did predestinate, them he also called; and whom he
called, them he also justified; and whom he justified, them he also glorified.
All that are outwarldly called, are not thus called. No, Many are called,
(says our Savior) but few are chosen, Mat. 20.16. and 22.14. Among those that
heard the Word, there are diverse sorts of unfruitful and unprofitable hearers,
as our Savior shows in the parable of the sower, Mat. 13.

2. Only such as are in the Church, the visible Church, are in the ordinary way
of Salvation. The Lord added to the church daily such as should be saved, Act.
2.47. But all are not in the Church, so much as by outward profession: some are
without, 1 Cor. 5.12, 13. Col. 4.5. without the pale of the Church. Many there
be in the World, as Jews, Turks, and others, that do not so much as outwardly
profess the Name of Christ. And many also there be, who professing Christ, do
yet hold Doctrines quite contrary to the Doctrine of Christ; as they of the
Church of Rome, so the Socinians and others. And even of those, that profess
the Orthodox and saving Faith, many there be, who only profess it in Word and
Tongue, but not in Deed and in Truth. All are not Israel, (says the Apostle)
that are of Israel, Romans 9.6. All are not the people of God indeed, who seem to
be of the number of them. Christ pointed at Nathaniel, as a rare man, and
worthy to be taken notice of; Behold, an Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile,
John 1, 47. They went out from us, but they were not of us, (says John of some
that proved Apostates) for if they had been of us, they would no doubt have
continued with us, 1 John 2.19. In Noah's Ark there was a Cham; among Christ's
Apostles there was a Judas; in the Primitive Church there was an Ananias, and a
Sapphira: so in all Churches there are and will be some profane persons, and
some hypocrites.

The Use of this Point is first to convince such as persuade What? (says they)
has God made us to destroy us? He that made us, will also save us. Is not God
merciful to all? Has not Christ died for all? Thus (as Job speaks of some,
they rebel against the light, Job 24.13. Though these Objections be frivolous,
and not worth the answering, yet because Solomon bids, Answer a fool according
to his folly, (that is, so as that his folly may appear, and that he may be
convinced of it) lest he be wise in his own conceit, Prove. 26.5. therefore I
will vouchsafe to answer them.

To the first Objection, Has God made us to destroy us? I answer, God made all
things for himself, even the wicked for the day of evil, Prove. 16.4. Not that
God does make men wicked; but they making themselves such, God in his just
judgment does make or ordain them for the day of evil, even of wrath and
destruction, Job 21.30. Had men continued such as God at first did make them,
to wit, in Adam, the first man, they had been far enough from destruction: but
(alas) they kept not their first estate, but plunged themselves into sin, and
so into misery, being born in sin, Damnati antiquam nati. Bern.
Psalm. 51.5. and so the children of wrath by nature, Ephesians. 2.3. Thus then
whoever perish, may thank themselves for it. O Israel, thou have destroyed thy
self, Hos. 13.9.

To the second, He that made us will also save us: I answer, Not so, he that
made all, will not save all; he might in justice have damned all; for all have
sinned, and come short of the glory of God, Romans 3.23. That any are justified
and saved, it is freely by his grace, v. 24. And his Grace being free, he may
bestow it as he pleases; for who has given unto him first, and it shall be
recompensed to him again? Romans 11.35.

To the third, God is merciful to all: I answer, He is so, but not in respect
of saving mercy: No, in this respect, He has mercy on whom he will have mercy,
and whom he will he hardneth, Romans 9.18. God is just as well as merciful, and
he will have the Glory of his Justice in the deserved damnation of some, as
well as the Glory of his Mercy in the undeserved Salvation of others.

To the fourth, Christ died for all: I answer, Christ's death is not available
to the Salvation of all. I lay down my life for the sheep, says he, Joh.
10.15. And again, I pray for them, I pray not for the world, but for them which
thou have given me; for they are thine, Joh. 17.9. That 1 John 2.2. He is the
propitiation for our sins, and not for our sins only, but also for the sins of
the whole world: that (I say) is meant, not for the sins of the Jews only, but
for the sins of the Gentiles also, whoever they be throughout the whole World,
that believe in him. And so all those places of Scripture, where Christ is said
to be the Savior of the World, or to have died for all, or the like, are to be
understood in this manner. It is a light thing, that thou should be my
servant, (so speaks God unto Christ as Man) to raise up the tribes of Jacob,
and to restore the dispersed of Israel; I have also given thee for a light to
the Gentiles, that thou may be my salvation unto the ends of the earth, Isa.
49.6. Christ is there said to be God's Salvation unto the ends of the earth,
because not only the Jews, but the Gentiles also should enjoy Salvation by him.
Paul and Barnabas alleged this place of Esaias, to prove, that the Gospel was to
be preached not only to the Jews, but also to the Gentiles; Lo, we turn to the
Gentiles; (say they) for so has the Lord commanded, saying, I have set thee
for a light of the Gentiles, that thou should be for salvation to the ends of
the earth, Act. 13.46, 47. So Simeon having said, Lord, now let thou thy
servant depart in peace; for mine eyes have seen thy salvation, which thou have
prepared before the face of all people: to show how Christ is a Salvation
prepared of God, before the face of all people, he adds immediately, To be a
light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of thy people Israel, Luke 2.30,
31, 32. Thus also the four Beasts, and the four and twenty Elders, that is, the
whole Company of the Redeemed, say unto the Lamb, that is, unto Christ, Thou
wast slain, and have redeemed us to God by thy blood, out of every kindred, and
tongue, and people, and nation, Rev. 5.9. Not all of every Kindred, and Tongue,
and People, and Nation; but us, that is, some out of every Kindred, and Tongue,
and People, and Nation. That of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.22. As in Adam all die,
so in Christ shall all be made alive; is explained by the Apostle himself in
the very next verse, to be meant not simply and absolutely of all, but of all
that are Christ's, that belong unto Christ, and are his. All that believe in
Christ, shall be saved by him. For God so loved the world, that he gave his
only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have
everlasting life, Joh. 3.16. But all have not faith, 1 Thessalonians. 3.2. No, Faith is
the gift of God, Ephesians. 2 8. And God vouchsafes it not to all, but to some, as
he pleases. For unto you it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only to
believe in him, but also to suffer for his sake, Phil. 1.29. Therefore even to
believe in Christ, is a gift vouchsafed only unto some, and not unto all.

2. Therefore this may serve to rouse us up out of the Lord are there few that
shall be saved? he answered, Strive to enter in at the strait gate: for many, I
say unto you, shall seek to enter in, and shall not be able, Luke 13.23, 24.
Think not that thou ar^ safe, because thou walk in the same path, wherein
others, and i^ may be the most walk; for it may be they whom thou followest,
are out of the way that leads to Salvation: and therefore try the way thou
walk in, and choose the way of truth, as David says he did, Psalm. 119.30.
Stand ye in the ways, and see, and ask for the old paths, where is the good
way, and walk therein, and ye shall find rest to your souls, Jer. 6.16. I am
the way, the truth, and the life, (says Christ) no man comes to the Father,
but by me, John 14.6. No coming to Salvation, but by Christ. There is not
salvation in any other, neither is there any other name under heaven given
among men whereby they may be saved, Act. 4.12. Neither is there any coming
unto Christ but by Faith; for to come unto him is to believe in him. He that
comes to me shall never hunger, says Christ; and that we may know what it is
to come unto him, he adds immediately, and he that believes in me, shall never
thirst, John 6.35. But this Faith which brings unto Christ, and so procures
Salvation through Christ, this Faith (I say) does purify the heart, Act. 15.9.
it works through love, Gal. 5.6. it brings forth the fruit of good works,
and of all holy obedience, else it is a dead Faith, altogether vain and
unprofitable, Jam. 2.14-26.

Unto you it is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven (said
Christ to his Disciples) but to them it is not given, Matthew. 13.11. Lord, how
is it, that thou will manifest thy self unto us, and not unto the world? said
Judas (not Iscariot) unto Christ, John 14.22. Let us therefore give unto the
Lord the glory due unto his Name, Psalm. 29.2. Let us not arrogate any thing to
our selves, as if there were any thing more in us then in others, why God
should deal thus with us, but let us ascribe all unto God, acknowledging, that
all is merely of his Free Grace, and undeserved Mercy. Who makes thee to
differ? and what have thou that thou have not received? Now, if thou did
receive it, why do thou glory, as if thou had not received it? 1 Cor. 4.7.
By the grace of God I am that I am, 1 Cor. 15.10. Not by works of
righteousness, which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved us, Tit.
3.5. By grace ye are saved, Ephesians. 2.5. And v. 8. For by grace ye are saved
through faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God. But let us
also have a care to express our thankfulness by our Obedience: Let us have a
care to walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing, being fruitful in every good
work* Giving thanks unto the Father, who has made us meet to be partakers of
the inheritance of the Saints in light: Who has translated us from the power
of darkness into the kingdom of his dear Son, Col. 1.10, 12, 13.


Psalm. 15.1. Lord, Who shall abide in thy Tabernacle? Who shall dwell in thy
holy Hill?


THese words do yet hold out unto us another Doctrine, it is a thing which does
mainly concern every one, to know and consider how he must be qualified, that
he may be saved.

For this end David here makes this enquiry, Lord, who shall abide in thy
tabernacle? etc. He does it not out of curiosity and presumption, as seeking to
know particularly the persons that shall be saved: but out of a good and godly
care that he has both of himself and others, he asks how they must be
qualified, and what manner of persons they must be that shall enjoy Salvation.
And see how sollicitous he is, how he ingeminates the Interrogation, Who shall?
who shall? Thus also Psalm. 24.3. Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord?
and who shall stand in his holy place? And Psalm. 27.4. One thing (says he)
have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after; that I may dwell in the
house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord,
and to enquire in his temple. This was it that our Savior commended Mary for,
when Martha complained of her because she sat at our Savior's Feet to hear
his Words, and did not join with her in making preparation for Christ's bodily
Entertainment; Martha, Martha, (said he unto her) thou art careful, and
troubled about many things: But one thing is needful, and Mary has chosen the
better part, which shall not be taken away from her, Luke 10 41, 42. This is
that which our Savior teaches and requires, when he says, First, seek the
kingdom of God and his righteousness, Mat. 6.33. There is great reason for it
why it should be so.

For, 1. Salvation is a thing most precious, Reasons why all ought chiefly to
look after Salvation.
and worthy to be regarded. How shall we escape, if we neglect so great
salvation? Heb. 2.3. It is a great, exceeding great Salvation, and therefore by
no means to be neglected, but by all means to be sought after. Though a man
have all, yet if he want Salvation, what is he the better? What is a man
profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? Mat. 16.26.
All that the World can afford a man, cannot give him full content, but still
one thing or other will be wanting; and even of that which he has in greatest
abundance, he will still be desiring more, and will not be sati^fied with that
which he has already. Though Ahab had a Kingdom, Unus Pelleo inveni non
sufficit orbis. Juv. Omnis mihi copia, quae Deus m^us non est, Egestas est.
Aug. Confess. l. 13, c. 8.
yet it would not satisfy him, because he could not have Naboth's Vineyard, 1
King. 21. Though Haman were in the highest honor that the Great Monarch
Ahasuerus could advance him to, yet all would not suffice, because Mordecai did
not bow unto him, Esth. 5.11, 12, 13. He that loves silver, (says Solomon)
shall not be satisfied with silver; nor he that loves abundance, with
increase, Eccles. 5.10. So is it in respect of all worldly things whatsoever.
Ratio vanitatis verissima haec est; vanitas est quod nec confert plenitudinem
continenti, nec fulcimentum innitenti, nec fructum laboranti, Parif. 2. part.
de Universo cap. 25.
For (as he also tells us) All is vanity, Eccles. 1.2. therefore it cannot
fill, it cannot satisfy. But Salvation will fill the Soul, and satisfy the
desire of it. When I awake, I shall be satisfied with thy likeness, says David
unto God, Psalm. 17.15. So it must needs be; for there is fullness of joy, and
pleasure for evermore, Psalm. 16.11. Delight thy self in the Lord, (says he)
and he shall give thee the desires of thine heart, Psalm. 37.4. The Godly even
in this life many times have unspeakable joy, through the sense of God's Love,
and the assurance of Salvation. Whom having not seen, ye love; Et aliquando
intromittis me in affectum multum inusitatum intro sus, ad nescio quam
dulcedinem; quae si perficiatur in me, nescio quid erit, quod vita ista non
erit. Aug. Confess. l. 10 c. 40.
in whom though now you see him not, yet believing, ye rejoice with joy
unspeakable and full of glory: receiving the end of your faith, the salvation
of your souls, 1 Pet. 1.8, 9. David having lost the sense of this joy prays for
the restoring of it: Restore unto me (says he unto God) the joy of thy
salvation, Psalm. 51.12. How much greater and more unspeakable is that joy,
which the Saints have in Heaven, where they actually possess Salvation, and
have the full fruition of it? Again, if the things of this World could satisfy
for the present, yet they are transitory and fading. The fashion of the world
passes away, 1 Cor. 7.31. The world passes away and the lust thereof, 1 John
2.17. But Salvation is durable and eternal. My salvation shall be for ever,
says God, Isa. 51.6. Christ is the Author of eternal salvation to all that
obey him, Heb. 5.9. Every man that striveth for mastery is temperate in all
things: Now they do it to obtain a corruptible crown, but we an incorruptible,
1 Cor. 9.25 We look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which
are not seen: for the things which are seen, are temporal; but the things which
are not seen are eternal, 2 Cor. 4 18. Labor not for the meat that perishes,
but for the meat which endures unto everlasting life, John 6.27.

2. Salvation is a thing most difficult and hard to be obtained. The Gate of
Salvation is a strait Gate, and therefore they that would enter in at it, must
strive for it, Luke 13.24. So Paul bids, Work out your own salvation with fear
and trembling, Phil. 2.12. And Peter bids, Give diligence to make your calling
and your election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. The Life of a Christian is compared to a
Race: So run that you may obtain, 1 Cor. 9.24. Let us run with patience the
race that is set before us. Heb. 12.1. And to a Or combating or striving, as
the Greek (...) signifies.
warfare. Fight the good Fight of Faith, 1 Timothy 6 12. I have fought a good
fight, 2 Timothy 4.7. To him that overcomes will I give to eat of the tree of
life, which is in the midst of the paradise of God, Rev. 2.7. So v. 11, and 17,
and 26. These comparisons show that a Christian must stir and strive, if he
would be saved.

2. Salvation is a thing most rare, and few there are that do attain unto it;
and in this respect it concerns all the more to look after it, and to labor
for it. The way of Salvation is narrow, and few there be that find it, Mat. 7
14. The Gate of Salvation is strait, and many shall seek to enter in, and shall
not be able, Luke 13.24. Christ's Flock is a little flock, as he calls it, Luke
12.32. yea, a little little flock, as the words in the Original do import,
(...).
that is, a very little flock. Though the number of the children of Israel be
as the sand of the sea, a remnant shall be saved, Romans 9.27. I will take you,
one of a city, and two of a family, etc. Jer. 3.14. Many are called, but few
are chosen, Mat. 20.16. and 22.14.

The Use of this Doctrine is first for reproof of those Martha are troubled
about many things; but few with Mary do choose the better part, and mind that
one thing needful. Many will say, Who will show us any good? as David observes,
Psalm 4.6. But what is the good that they take thought for? Corn, and Wine, and
Oil, as David there shows, v. 7. So it is, the profits and pleasures of this
life, these are the things that the most do seek and labor for; as for
Salvation and the Life to come, they little think of it, much less labor for
it: as if either there were no such thing at all, or it were not worth the
looking after, or it were so easy to be acquired, that we need not trouble our
selves about it. Some when they are even fettered with sicknesses and diseases,
that they cannot stir abroad, yet still their minds are upon the World, and
the things of the World, and they cannot frame their hearts to think seriously
of that World which is to come. If such as come to visit them, will talk of
earthly things, this pleases them; but if they speak of spiritual and heavenly
matters, they are soon weary of such discourse, they are not for it. Yea, this
is that which makes sicknesses and diseases grievous unto them, that now they
are disabled from following their worldly affairs, and their earthly
employments; but that they are debarred from God's Ordinances, the means of
their Salvation, this little troubles them, they are little sensible of any
such matter. So old men and women, that (one would think) are past the World,
that have (as we say) one foot in the grave already, even these do little take
thought how they shall live hereafter in the World to come; but as their bodily
eyes, so the eyes of their mind also, are so much the more down to the Earth,
O cun^ae in terras animae, and coelestium ina nes. Pers.
by how much the more their age increases. O ye sons of men, how long will ye
love vanity? Psalm. 4.2. Is it not vanity, is it not folly; yea, is it not
madness, to be so careful for this life, which endures but for a moment; and so
careless for the life to come, which endures for ever? O that they were wise,
and understood this, and would consider their latter end! Deuteronomy. 32.29.



Motives to stir up to look after the things which concern Salvation.
1 Affliction will come. Man is born to trouble, as the sparkles fly upward,
Job. 5.8. And what is it that in time of affliction can afford any true and
solid comfort, but only this, a true and solid hope of Salvation? Rejoicing in
hope, patient in tribulation, Romans 12.12. We rejoice in hope of the glory of
God. Poenare de ad verses mundi ille s ntit, cui and laetitia, and glo^ia omnis
in mundo est. Ille moeret, and deflet, si sibi male sit in saeculo, cui been
non potest esse post saeculum. -- Ceterum nullus iis dolor est de incursatione
malorum praesentium, quibus fiducia est futurorum bonorun. Cyp. ad Demetr.
And not only so, but we glory in tribulations also, knowing that tr^bulation
works patience, and patience experience, and experience hope; and hope makes
not ashamed, because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the holy
Ghost, which is given unto us, Romans 5 2, 3, 4, 5. This was it that did support
Job in his greatest extremity. I know (says he) that my Redeemer lives, and
that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth: And though after my skin,
wor^s shall destroy this body, yet in my flesh I shall see God: Whom I shall
see for my self, and mine eyes shall behold, and not another, though my reins
be consumed within me, Job 19 25, 26, 27. This was it, that made the believing
Hebrews take (not only patiently, but even) joyfully the spoiling of their
goods; they knew that they had in heaven a better, and an enduring substance,
Heb. 10.34. But if we be in misery for the present, and have no sound and
well-grounded hope of a better estate hereafter, then surely we are most
miserable. If in this life only we had hope in Christ, (says the Apostle) we
are of all men most miserable, 1 Cor. 15.19. To wit, because here in this life
of all men the Godly are most apt to be afflicted.

2. Death will come. It is appointed to men to die once, Heb. 9.27. Now what
comfort and courage can we have to die, if we have no well-grounded hope of a
better Life when this is ended? One said of the Lacedemon^ans, that it was no
marvel if they were so little afraid of death, because their life was so
miserable: but experience shows, that even such as live miserably would yet
live still, and are unwilling to die, because they have small hope to exchange
this life for a better. The wicked indeed sometimes have little dread of death,
they even rush upon it; but furor est, non fortitudo, it is madness, not
valor: they are blind, and cannot see afar off, 2 Pet. 1.9. Their blindeness
is the cause of their boldness: for if they did but see the condition they are
in, they could not choose but quake and tremble to think of death. When a wicked
man dies, his expectation shall perish: O animula, vagula, blandula, quae nunc
abibis in loca?
and the hope of unjust men perishes, Prove. 11.7 What hope has the hypocrite,
though he have gained, when God shall take away his soul? Job. 27.8. The wicked
is driven away in his wickedness, but the righteous has hope in his death,
Prove. 14.32. Indeed, only the Righteous are they that can have true hope in
their death; and therefore only they can be truly undanted at the approach of
death. We know (says the Apostle) that if our earthly house of this tabernacle
were dissolved, we have a building of God, a house not made with hands,
eternal in the heavens. And thereupon he adds, Therefore are we always
confident, knowing that whilst we are at home in the body, we are absent from
the Lord. (For we walk by faith, and not by sight.) We are confident, I say,
willing rather to be absent from the body, and to be present with the Lord, 2
Cor. 5.1, 6, 7, 8. Desiring to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, which is
far better, Phil. 1.23.

3. Judgment will come. After death comes judgment, Heb. 9.27. A particular
judgment in respect of the soul immediately after death, Eccles. 12.7. Luke
16.22, 23. And at length a general judgment in respect both of soul and
body, Act. 17.31. Now how shall we be able to stand in judgment, if we do not
now whiles we are here think of it, and prepare for it, by working out our
salvation, and by giving diligence to make our calling and our election sure?
Wherefore (beloved) seeing that you look for such things, be diligent, that ye
may be found of him in peace, without spot and blameless, 2 Pet. 3.14. But be
admonished to think of this betimes, and not to procrastinate and put it off,
as we are overapt to do, until sickness or old age come, as if it were soon
enough to think of another life when we are ready to leave this. 1. This is
very preposterous to provide for earth before heaven, for things temporal
before things eternal. Our Savior bids, First seek ye the kingdom of God,
and his righteousness, Matthew. 6.33. The chiefest things should have the
chiefest of our thoughts, cares and endeavors. 2. This is very dangerous; for
if sickness and old age make us unmeet to look after the things of his life;
so they will also make us unmeet to look after the things of the life to come.
Experience shows this even in the godly themselves many times, that by reason
of the sympathy which is betwixt the soul and the body, the distempers of the
body cause a distemper in the soul also, so that they can scarce think of any
thing, but only how they may be eased of that pain, which they are in. This
is the reason why Solomon bids, Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy
youth, while (says he) the evil days come not, nor the years draw nigh,
when thou shall say, I have no pleasure in them, Eccles. 12.1. The time of old
age, and of sickness, is a time of spending, rather then of getting: and
therefore as Joseph in the years of plenty provided for the years of famine;
so should we in time of youth and health provide for the time of old age and
sickness. But besides, this life is frail and uncertain, we may be cut off
before either sickness or old age come. For what is our life? it is even a
vapor, that appears for a little while, and vanishes away, Jam. 4.14.
Therefore (as the Wise man does admonish) Beast not thy self of to morrow; for
thou know not what a day may bring forth, Prove. 27.1. To day if ye will
hear his voice, harden not your hearts, Psalm. 95.7, 8.

4. How good and gracious the Lord is, in vouchsafing yet to afford time and
means of salvation. Receive not the grace of God in vain, 2 Cor. 6.1. Yet a
little while is the light with you; walk whiles you have the light, lest
darkness come upon you: he that walks in darkness, knows not whither he
goes, Joh 12.35. If we regard not the means, when God affords them, we provoke
him to deprive us of them. The Kingdom of God (said our Savior to the Jews)
shall be taken from you, and given to a nation, that will bring forth the
fruits of it, Mat. 21.43. And 2. we aggravate and increase our condemnation.
This is the condemnation of the world, that light is come into the world, and
men loved darkness rather then light, John 3.19. If I had not come, and spoken
unto them, they had not had sin; but now they have no cloak for their sin, Joh.
15.22. See Matthew. 11.20, 21, 22, 23, 24.

3. And lastly, here is comfort and encouragement for Mical mock, and
Rabshakeh rail, and Saul hate and persecute, yet let not such be dismayed, let
them not be beaten off, nor drawn away, but let them persist, and hold on
their course; it is for salvation that they labor, it is for salvation that
they suffer; and surely salvation will make amends for all their labor, and
for all their suffering. Hearken unto me (says the Lord) ye that know
righteousness, the people in whose heart is my law: fear ye not the reproach
of men, neither be ye afraid of their revilings. For the moth shall eat them
up like a garment, and the worm shall eat them like wool: but my
righteousness shall be for ever, and my salvation from generation to
generation, Ia. 51.7, 8. And verse. 12, 13. I, even I am he that comfort you;
who art thou, that thou should be afraid of a man that shall die, and of the
son of man that shall be made as grass: And forgettest the Lord thy maker,
etc. The Apostle did comfort and encourage both himself and others with this
consideration, having spoken before of his and their sufferings; For which
cause (says he) we faint not, but though our outward man perish, yet the
inward man is renewed day by day. For our light affliction, which is but for a
moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory.
Whiles we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are
not seen: for the things that are seen are temporal, but the things which are
not seen are eternal, 1 Cor. 4.16, 17, 18. By faith Moses, when he was come to
years, refused to be called the son of Pharaohs daughter; Choosing rather to
suffer affliction with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin
for a season; esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches then the
treasures in Egypt: for he had respect to the recompense of reward, Heb. 11.24,
25, 26. So our Savior himself for the joy that was set before him, endured
the Cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of God. And
we are required to look unto him, who is the author and finisher of our faith,
and so after his example to run with patience the race that is set before us,
Heb. 12.1, 2. For if we be dead with him, we shall also live with him: If we
suffer, we shall also reign with him, 2 Timothy 2.11, 12. To him that overcomes
(says he) will I grant to sit with me in my throne, even as I also overcame,
and am set down with my Father in his throne, Revel. 3.21. Therefore my
beloved brethren, be steadfast and unmovable, always abounding in the work of
the Lord, knowing that your labor shall not be in vain in the Lord, 1 Cor.
15.58.


Psalm. 15.2. Verse. 2. He that walks uprightly, etc.


HEre now follows the answer to the question before propounded, and it is
continued unto the end of the Psalm. It contains in it, 1. the qualification
of the person inquired about, verse. 2, 3, 4. and part of 5. And 12. the
happiness of the person so qualified, in the end of v. 5. He that does these
things, shall never be moved. The qualification of the person is set down, 1.
more generally, He that walks uprightly, and works righteousness. 2. More
particularly, in the words following.

The more general description of the person spoken of, is, 1. in respect of
inward affection, He that walks uprightly. 2. in respect of outward action,
and works righteousness.

He that walks The word in the Hebrew is (...) which usually is rendered
perfect; but that is as much as upright, or sincere.
uprightly.] To walk, is a much as to order the life and conversation. Walk
in love, Ephesians. 5.2. that is, Live in love, Let all your things be done in
love, 1 Cor. 16.14. To walk after the flesh, Romans 8.1. is expressed verse. 12.
and 13. To live after the flesh. To walk uprightly, is to walk so as in all
things to have respect unto God, to do all in obedience unto his will, and for
his glory. I know also, my God, (says David) that thou triest the heart, and
have pleasure in uprightness, as for me, in the uprightness of mine heart I
have willingly offered all these things, 1 Chro. 29.17. So that uprightness
does respect the heart, that is, the affection and intention, wherewith a thing
is done.

The Doctrine hence to be observed, is this, That it is the property of all
those that shall be saved, to be of a sincere and upright heart.

Thus here in the very first place is he described, who shall abide in Gods
tabernacle, and dwell in his holy hill. So Psalm. 24.3, 4. the question being
asked, Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? and who shall stand in his
holy hill? The answer is given, He that has clean hands, and a pure heart.
The purity, sincerity and uprightness of heart, as well as cleanness of
hands, that is, holiness of life and conversation, is requisite and necessary
unto salvation. So elsewhere David having said, The Lord will give grace and
glory, he adds immediately, no good thing will he withhold from them that
walk uprightly, Psalm. 84.11. And again, Blessed are the undefiled in the way,
says he, Psalm. 119.1. Where the word rendered undefiled, (...)
is the same with that in the Text, which is rendered upright; only this in the
Text is in the singular, and the other in the plural number. Thus also our
Savior shows who they are, to whom belongs true happiness, saying, Blessed
are the pure in heart, for they shall see God, Matthew. 5.8. And the Prophet
Jeremie cries, O Jerusalem, wash thine heart from wickedness, that thou may
be saved, Jer. 4.14. Not thy face, or hands only, but thine heart also.

Reason.
Reas. Thus they must needs be qualified, who shall be saved, Why only the
upright shall be saved.
because God is the author of salvation. It is the salvation of God, Psalm.
50.23. Therefore they that obtain salvation, must be such as please God, and
approve themselves in his sight. Enoch walked with God, Genesis 5.22. He pleased
God, Heb. 11.5. Zacharias and Elizabeth were righteous before God, Luke 1.6.
that is, they were truly and sincerely righteous. Walk before me (said God to
Abraham) and be thou perfect, that is, as the Margent reads it, upright, or
sincere; it is the same word in the original with that, which in the Text is
rendered upright. A counterfeit show of holiness may serve in respect of men,
but not so in respect of God. The Lord sees not as man sees; for man
beholds the outward appearance, but the Lord beholds the heart, Vt aures
nostrae ad voces nostras, sic aures Dei ad cogitationes nostras, Prosp. in
Sent. ex Aug. Sent. 81. Thales interrogatus, (...), vere respondit. Lips. de
Constable. l. 2. c. 16. Sic cogitandum tanquam aliquis in pectus intimum inspicere
Possit; and potest. Quid enim prodest ab homine aliquid esse secretum? Deo
nihil clusum est, interest animis nostris, and cogitationibus m^diis int^uerit.
Sen. Epist. 83.
1 Samuel 16.7. My Son (says God) give me thine heart, Prove. 23.26. He loves
truth in the inward parts, Psalm. 51.6. He has pleasure in uprightness, 1 Chronicles. 29.17. The Psalmist having said, God is good to Israel; that we may know
who this Israel is, to whom God is good, he adds, even to them that are of a
pure heart, Psalm. 73.1. So the Apostle James having said, Draw nigh unto God,
and he will draw nigh unto you; to let us know how we must draw nigh unto God,
that so he may draw nigh unto us, he adds, Cleanse your hands, your sinners,
and purify your hearts you double minded, Jam. 4.8.

The use of this point is first for Examination, to try our There is a twofold
hypocrisy.
when one purposely does play the hypocrire, pretending one thing, and
intending another thing quite contrary. Such an hypocrite was Herod, who
pretended that he would go and worship Christ, when his intent was merely to
kill him, Mat. 2. Such also was the hypocrisy of Judas, who made a show of
much love and respect to Christ, saying, Hail Master, and kissing him, and yet
he sought only to betray him, Mat. 26. They that are hypocrites in this kind,
need only to abhor themselves, and to repent of their hypocrisy; there is
no need that they should examine themselves, to find out whether they be
upright or no; for they certainly know themselves to be hypocrites. But 2.
there is another kind of hypocrisy, which is more subtle and secret: when a
man speaks and acts as he thinks for the present, yet his heart is not sound
at the bottom; he is like a pond, which is fair and clear above, but
underneath is full of mud and filth. Such was the hypocrisy of Jehu, he
thought himself very zealous for God, in destroying the worshippers of Baal;
Come with me (said he to Jehonadab) and see my zeal for the Lord, 2 Kin.
10.16. But (says the Holy Ghost, verse. 31.) Jehu took no heed to walk in
the law of the Lord God of Israel with all his heart; for he departed not from
the sins of Jeroboam, who made Israel to sin. Such an hypocrite also was the
rich man, that came to our Savior, desiring to know what he should do that he
might inherit eternal life. And when our Savior told him of the commandments,
he said, All these have I observed from my youth; he spoke as he thought, but
his heart did deceive him, it was not right in him: For when our Savior bad
him go and sell that he had, and give it to the poor, and come and follow
him, and he should have treasure in heaven; he went away sorrowful, because he
had great possessions; Mar. 10.17, etc. Covetousness did reign in him, though
he was not sensible of it; his riches did rather possess him, then he them;
and therefore rather then he would part with them, he would forsake Christ, and
let go heaven and eternal happiness. Now as uprightness is opposite to this
kind of hypocrisy, it behooves us to try whether or no we be upright. Marks
of uprightness.
And if we be, 1. we will have a care to walk so, as to please God in all
things, as well in one thing as in another; We will endeavor to walk worthy
of the Lord unto all pleasing, and to be fruitful in every good work, Col.
1.10. This showed the uprightness of Zachary and Elizabeth, they walked in all
the commandments and testimonies of the Lord, Luke 1.6. By this it did appear,
that they were righteous before God, and not before men only; righteous indeed
and in truth, not in show and appearance only. Then shall I not be ashamed,
when I have respect to all thy commandments, says David unto God, Psalm. 119.6.
This having respect unto all Gods commandments, showed his heart to be sound
and upright; this showed him to be a man after Gods own heart, as for this
very reason God did term him, I have found (says he) David the son of Iesse,
a man after mine own heart, which shall fulfill all my will, Act. 13.22. Such
also Christ does term his friends, You are my friends (says he) if ye do
whatsoever I command you, Joh. 15.14. Herod went far, he did many things,
Mar. 6.20. but he went not far enough, there was one thing that he would not
do, when John told him, that it was not lawful for him to have his brothers
wife, in this he would not hear him. Herein also appeared the unsoundness of
Iehu's heart; though he rooted out the idolatrous worship of Baal, which Ahab
brought in, yet he did not turn from the idolatrous worship of the calves,
which Jeroboam set up, 2 Kin. 10.31. They that are undefiled (or upright) in
the way, and seek the Lord with their whole heart, they do none iniquity,
Psalm. 119.1, 2, 3. that is, they do not take liberty to themselves to do any
iniquity, they refrain their feet from every evil way, Psalm. 119.101. They
hate every false way, verse. 104. and 128. More particularly, if we be upright,
then 1. We will keep no darling or bosom sin, either for the profit, or for
the pleasure of it. Joseph appeared to be upright by this, that when it might
have seemed advantageous unto him in respect of the world, to consent unto the
enticement of his Mistress, yet he repelled the temptation, saying, How can I
do this great wickedness, and sin against God? Genesis 39.9. 1 Samuel 24. and 26.
So when David might have killed Saul, and have freed himself from much
trouble and danger, which by reason of Saul's persecuting of him, he was liable
to, yet he would not do it; this showed, that his heart was upright with God.
To this, his behavior toward Saul, he seems to have reference, when he
says, The Lord rewarded me according to my righteousness, according to the
cleanness of of mine hands has he recompensed me. For I have kept the ways of
the Lord, and have not wickedly departed from my God. For all his judgments
were before me, and I did not put away his statutes from me. I was also upright
before him, and kept my self from mine iniquity, Psalm. 18.20, 21, 22, 23. He
showed his uprightness in this, that he kept himself from that iniquity, which
respect unto outward and earthly advantages would especially have put him upon.
Hypocrites, and such as whose hearts are not sincere, though they will avoid
some sins, yet not such as whereby they have their gain, as Demetrius said
to his fellow crafts-men concerning the worship of Diana, Act. 19.25. Iehu
could well spare the idolatry of Baal, and theref re he put d^wne that; but he
kept up the idolatry of Ieroboams calves; for he thought if he should let the
people go to Jerusalem to worship there (as they ought to have done) then they
would fall from him to the king of Judah, and so he should lose his kingdom;
for the preventing of which inconvenience, Jeroboam first erected that
idolatry, as we read 1 Kin. 12.26, etc. So the pleasure which that sin
brought (and it may be the profit also) made Herod, that he would not leave his
Herodias, though John told him never so much that it was not lawful for him to
have her, she being his brothers wife.

2. We will have a care to observe even the least thing that God commands. As
it is gross hypocrisy to be observant of lesser duties, and to neglect the
greater: Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, for you pay tithe of mint, and
annise, and cummin, and have omitted the weightier matters of the law,
judgment, mercy, and faith: These things ought you to have done, and not to
leave the other undone. Ye blind guides, which strain at a gnat, and swallow
a camel, Matthew. 23.23, 24. So it argues want of sincerity and uprightness, to
think any thing commanded of God so small, as that it need not to be regarded;
to say, as some use to do, Is this so much? Is this so great a matter? Even
the tything of mint, annise, and cummin was not to be left undone, Matthew.
33.23. Whosoever therefore shall break one of these commandments, and shall
teach men so, (shall avow it, (...). Theophylact. ad loc.
as if it were no sin) he shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven,
Matthew. 5.19. that is indeed he shall have no place in it, no admittance into it.

3. We will have a special care to perform the duties of our special calling.
Some are like Absalom, O (said he) that I were judge in the land; I would do
every man right, 2 Samuel 15 4. When as in the mean time he heeded not his own
duty, that which his own place and calling did require of him, as the story
there shows. But he that is upright and truly godly, is like a tree, that
brings forth his fruit (his own proper fruit) in his season, Psalm. 1.3.

2. If we be upright, it will be our care to serve and please God at all times,
as well at one time as at another. Let thine heart (says Solomon) be in the
fear of the Lord all the day long, Prove. 23.17. More particularly,

1. As well in secret as in public. Job speaking of a hypocrite, says, Will
he call upon God at all times? Job 27.10. that is, as well at one time as at
another. At some times he will, namely when others may see him, and take notice
of him; but at other times when he is alone by himself in secret, he regardes
it not. Son of man (says God to Ezekiel) see thou what the ancients of the
house of Israel do in the dark? Ezekiel. 8.12. It is a shame (says the Apostle)
even to speak of those things which are done of them in secret, Ephesians. 5.12.
Such as these are far from walking uprightly; they have respect to men, and
not to God. For God sees as well what is done in secret as in public. Can any
one hide himself in secret places, that I shall not see him, says the Lord?
do not I the Lord fill heaven and earth? Jer. 23.20. If I say, Surely the
darkness shall cover me; even the night shall be light about me. Yea, the
darkness hides not from thee, but the night shines as the day: the darkness
and the light are both alike to thee, Psalm. 139.11, 12. If we have forgotten
the Name of our God, or stretched out our hands to a strange God: Shall not God
search it out? for he knows the secrets of the heart, Psalm. 44.20, 21. Joseph
showed his sincerity, and the uprightness of his heart in this, that though
none was in the house when his Mistress tempted him to folly, yet he would not
hearken to her, Genesis 39.11, etc. And that in Levit. 19.14. is very remarkable
to this purpose; Thou shall not curse the deaf, nor put a stumbling block
before the blind, but shall fear thy God. If one should curse the deaf, he
needs not to fear the deaf, because he cannot hear him. And so if one
should put a stumbling block before the blind, he needs not to fear the
blind, because he cannot see him. But he that fears God, will neither do the
one nor the other, because God is neither blind nor deaf, but sees and hears
whatsoever is done, whatsoever is spoken.

2. Not only when God does cause his face to shine upon us, and makes us to
thrive and prosper in the world, but also when he does hide his face from us,
and sends trouble and affliction upon us. Therefore afflictions are called in
Scripture, temptations, and trials, because thereby we are tried whether we be
sincere and upright or no. Now for a season (if need be) you are in heaviness
through manifold temptations; That the trial of your faith, being much more
precious then of gold that perishes, though it be tried with fire, might be
found unto praise, and honor, and glory, at the appearing of Jesus Christ, 1
Pet. 1.6, 7. Beloved, think it not strange concerning the fiery trial, which
is to try you, 1 Pet. 4.12. Behold, the devil shall cast some of you into
prison, that ye may be tried, and ye shall have tribulation ten days, Revel.
2.10. Thou, O God, have proved us, thou have tried us as silver is tried.
(How?) Thou broughtest us into the net, thou laidst affliction upon our loins:
Thou have caused men to ride over our heads, Psalm. 66.10, 11, 12. Job's
integrity and uprightness was tried by this, that although the devil slandered
him, saying, Does Job serve God for naught? Have thou not made an hedge about
him, and about his house, and about all that he has on every side? Thou have
blessed the work of his hands, and his substance is increased in the land. But
put forth thine hand, and touch all that he has, and he will curse thee to thy
face, Job 1.9, 10, 11. And again, Skin for skin, and all that a man has will
he give for his life. But put forth thine hand now, and touch his bone and his
flesh, and he will curse thee to thy face, Job 2.4, 5. Yet Job in his greatest
adversity did keep close unto God, and did not turn from him; this showed
him to be indeed a perfect (that is, sincere) and upright man, as he is styled,
Job. 1.1, 8. and 2.3. So the people of God prove their sincerity by this,
that notwithstanding all their afflictions, which they endured, yet they did
not fall off from following the Lord, as hypocrites in such a case use to do.
All this is come upon us, (say they, meaning all the affliction before
mentioned from verse. 9. to v. 16.) yet have we not forgotten thee, neither have
we dealt falsely in thy covenant: Our heart is not turned back neither have our
steps declined from thy way. Though thou have sore broken us in the place of
dragons, and covered us with the shadow of death, Psalm. 44.17, 18, 19.

3. Not only while the affliction is upon us, O utinam tales semper essemus
sani, quales nos futuros profitemur aegroti, Plin. Epist.
but also when it is remooved, and we are delivered out of it. Some, like
Pharaoh, when the afflicting hand of God is upon them, will promise and
profess much reformation; but deliverance being obtained, they perform no
such matter; when God does once remove his stroke from them, presently they
fall to their former practices, and show themselves as vile and lewd as every
they were before. The hollow-heartedness of the Israelites is demonstrated by
this, When God slew them (sent destroying judgments among them) then they
sought him, and they returned, and enquired early after God: And they
remembered, that God was their rock, and the high God their Redeemer.
Nevertheless they did flatter him with their mouths, and lie unto him with
their tongues: Their hearts were not right with him, neither were they steadfast
in his covenant, Psalm. 78.34, 35, 36, 37. David shows his uprightness by
this, that when he was delivered out of trouble, he was careful to perform
what he had promised when he was in trouble. I will go into thine house (so
says he unto God) with burnt-offerings, and will pay thee my vows, which my
lips have uttered, and my mouth has spoken when I was in trouble, Psalm.
66.13, 14.

3. If we be upright, we will be willing to be plainly dealt with, and to have
the word brought home to our consciences, and particularly applied unto us. Do
not my words do good to him that walks uprightly? says God, Mic. 2.7. When
the Prophet Nathan dealt roundly with David, telling him plainly that he was
the man, to wit, that had sinned grievously, and did aggravate his sins against
him; David humbly cried peccavi, saying, I have sinned against the Lord, 2 Samuel
12.7, -- 13. Neither did he love Nathan a whit the less for being so plain
with him, but did highly honor him even to his dying day, as appears by the
history, 1 Kin. 1.24, -- 27. So when the prophet Esaias had sharply reproved,
and severely threatened Ezekiah, for that wherein he was faulty, Ezekiah
answered, Good is the word of the Lord, which thou have spoken; Isa. 39.8. Thus
also Eli, when he percieved that the Lord had spoken concerning him unto
Samuel, though Samuel was but a child, yet he disdained not to hear him; yea
though he knew it was a very harsh message, which Samuel had to deliver unto
him, and saw that Samuel was afraid to deliver it, yet he straightly charged him
to do it: and when he heard it, he meekly submitted unto it, saying, It is the
Lord, let him do what seems him good, 1 Samuel 3.16, 17, 18. But on the other
side, when Amaziah was reprooved by the prophet for worshipping the gods of
Edom, he scorned the reproof, and taunted the reproover, saying, Art thou made
of the kings counsel? and then he also threatened him, saying, Forbear, why
should thou be smitten? 2 Chronicles. 25.15, 16. This did manifest him to be
unsound, as it is said of him, v. 2. He did that which was right in the sight
of the Lord, but not with a perfect heart. So the leaven of the Pharisees, even
their hypocrisy, appeared in this, that when they heard our Savior speak
against covetousness, they being covetous derided him, Luke 16.14, 15. And
mark this, it is a sign of an upright heart, to confess what we are guilty
of, not only to God, but also to men, when they charge us with it, and reproove
us for it. So David did to Nathan, 2 Samuel 12.13. and Jonah to the mariners,
Jon. 1.10. See also Josh. 7.19.

4. If we be upright, we will be more ready to judge and censure our selves
then others. Our Savior makes it the property of an hypocrite, to behold a
mo^e in his brothers eye, and not to consider a beam in his own eye, Matthew.
7.3. To admonish and reproove others, is not a fault, yea it is a duty, Col.
3.16. Levit. 19.17. But to tell others of their faults, and not to mind our
own; to reproove others, and nor to reform our selves, this savours strongly
of hypocrisy. Therefore, that man after Gods heart, David, says, I thought on
my ways, and turned my feet into thy testimonies, Psalm. 119.59.

5. If we be upright, we will he humble. Pride argues hypocrisy; Behold,
(says the Prophet Habakkuk) his soul, that is lifted up, is not upright in
him, Hab. 2.4. He that is upright, seeks the glory of God, see Ioh. 7.18. but
he that is proud, feeketh his own glory: therefore pride and uprightness are
inconsistent, and cannot stand together.

6. If we be upright, then Jesus Christ does dwell in our hearts by faith,
Ephesians. 3.17. For it is faith (faith in the Lord Jesus) by which our hearts are
purified, Act. 15.9. A heart of unbelief is an evil heart, Heb. 3.12.

I shall make but one use more of the point, and that is

1. That if the heart be upright, Motives to persuade unto uprightness.
God will accept of weak service, pardoning our failings, and passing by our
imperfections. I will spare them (says he) as a man spares his son that
serves him, Mal. 3.17. A man will not be over-rigid and severe with his son
that serves him, but will spare him, knowing that though he does things
weakly, yet he does them sincerely, that his desire is to please his father,
whom he serves: even so will God be indulgent and favorable to those, whose
hearts he knows to be upright with him. God will pardon every one, that
prepares his heart to seek him, though he be not cleansed according to the
purification of the sanctuary, 2 Chronicles. 30.18, 19. Asa had diverse failings, as
we read 2 Chronicles. 16. and 16. yet God spared him, and accepted the integrity
and uprightness of his heart. The high places were not taken away out of
Israel, nevertheless the heart of Asa was perfect all his days, 2 Chronicles.
15.17. On the otherside, the most glorious service is of no worth, if the heart
be not upright in it. This marred all that Amaziah did, he did that which was
right in the sight of the Lord, but not with a perfect heart, 2 Chronicles. 25.2.
God cannot endure those that draw near him with their mouth, and honor him
with their lips, but remoove their hearts far from him, Isai. 29.13.
Hollow-hearted performances may procure some outward, temporal reward, for the
encouragement of others; thus God rewarded Iehu for what he did, though his
heart was not sincere, 2 Kin. 10.30, 31. But the reward of the inheritance (as
the Apostle calls it, Col. 3.24.) such services shall not procure. Yea, though
Iehu's service in one respect was rewarded, to wit, as the thing done, the
judgment executed upon Ahab and his family was pleasing unto God; yet it was
punished, and accounted as murder, in that he was not upright in that which he
did; he sought indeed his own ends, and not the glory of God in it. Yet a
little while (says God) and I will avenge the blood of Iezreel (that is) of
Ahab and his family, slain in Jezreel, upon the house of Iehu etc. Hos. 1.4.
But if the service proceed from a heart grossly hypocritical, purposely making a
show of that which it means not, it is much more odious and abominable in the
sight of God. Ye are they (said Christ to the Pharisees) that justify your
selves before men, but God knows your hearts: for that which is highly
esteemed among men, is abomination in the sight of God, Luke 16.15. And again,
Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites; Simulata sanctitas duplex est
iniquitas.
for ye devour widows houses, and for a pretense make long prayer; therefore
ye shall receive the greater damnation, Mat. 23.14.

2. Upright walking is that, which will make us walk with comfort and
confidence. He that walks uprightly, walks surely: but he that perverteth
his ways, shall be known, Prove. 10.9. Whosoever walks uprightly, shall be saved:
but he that is perverse in his ways, shall fall at once, Prove. 28.18. For the
eyes of the Lord run to and fro throughout the whole earth, to show himself
strong in the behalf of them, (or, as the margent has it,) strongly to hold
with them) whose heart is perfect toward him, 2 Chronicles. 16.9.

3. This will afford comfort and courage in time of affliction. If our heart
condemn us not, then have we boldness toward God: And whatsoever we ask, we
receive of him, etc. to wit, so far as he sees it to be for his glory and our
good, 1 John 3.21, 22. This is our rejoicing, the testimony of our conscience,
that in all simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by
the grace of God, we have had our conversation in the world, 2 Cor. 1.12. This
was it, that did support and uphold Job in his greatest distress. Though
(says he) he slay me, yet will I trust in him: but I will maintain mine own
ways before him, (He means the integrity and uprightness of his heart in his
ways.) He also shall be my salvation; for an hypocrite shall not come before
him, Job 13.15, 16. And again, But he knows the way that I take; when he
has tried me, I shall come forth as gold, Job 23.10. The whole 31. Chapter is
also to this purpose. On the otherside, when affliction and distress comes,
then the sinners in Sion are afraid, fearfulness does surprise the hypocrites,
Isai. 33.14. Will God hear his cry (says Job, speaking of an hypocrite) when
trouble comes upon him? Job 27.9. No, If I regard inquitie in mine heart,
(says David) the Lord will not hear me, Psalm. 66.18. The sacrifice of the
wicked (says Solomon) is an abomination to the Lord; but the prayer of the
upright is his delight, Prove. 15.8.

4. If we walk uprightly, we need not fear when death comes, but may have
boldness at the approach of it. When Ezekiah was told by the Prophet Esaias, that
he should set his house in order, for he should not live, but die, though in
some respects he was desirous to live still, yet this did comfort and encourage
him, that he could say, Remember now, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked
before thee with a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in thy
sight, Isa. 38.3. But (says Job) What is the hope of the hypocrite, though he
has gained, when God shall take away his soul? Job 27.8.

5. And lastly, If we walk uprightly, that great day, the day of judgment,
which will be a day of terror and confusion unto all the ungodly, will be unto
us a day of triumph and rejoicing. Herein is our love made perfect, that we may
have boldness in the day of judgment, because as he is, so are we in this
world, 1 John 3.17. When that day comes, Then the Lord will bring to light the
hidded things of darkness, and will make manifest the counsel of the hearts:
and then shall every man (to wit, that walks uprightly) have praise of God, 1
Cor. 4.5. In this respect our Savior bids, Beware of the leaven of the
Pharisees, which is hypocrisy; because the day will come that will reveal all,
and make all manifest. For (says he) there is nothing covered, that shall not
be revealed; neither hid, that shall not be known, Luke 12.1, 2. Thus then in
many respects we may see that there is great cause to pray with David, Let mine
heart (O Lord) be sound in thy statutes, that I may not be ashamed, Psalm.
119.80.

SERMON. V.
Psalm. 15.2. And works righteousness.


THis is the next general property of one that shall abide in Gods tabernacle,
and dwell in his holy hill. The former property respects the heart and
affection, this respects the life and conversation. As the inward intention
must be sincere and upright, so the outward action must be just and righteous:
as good may not be done for an evil end, so neither must evil be done for a
good end. Hence we may observe, that, He that would obtain salvation, must
work righteousness. ascend into the hill of the Lord, and stand in his holy
place, must have clean hands, Psalm. 24.3, 4. The crown of life, as it is
called, Revel. 2.10. is a crown of righteousness, as the Apostle terms it, 2 Timothy 4 8. They that seek the kingdom of God, must also seek the
righteousness, if they would find what they seek, Matthew. 6.33. Know ye not
(says the Apostle) that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God?
Be not deceived, neither fornicatours, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor
effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind, Nor thieves, nor covetous,
nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners (no unrighteous persons
whatsoever, that both are, and continue such) shall inherit the kingdom of
God. And such were some of you; but ye are washed, ye are sanctified, etc. 1
Cor. 6.9, 10, 11. And again, For this ye know, that no whoremonger, nor
unclean person, nor covetous man, who is an idolater, has any inheritante in
the kingdom of Christ, and of God, Ephesians. 5.5.

Reas. Thus it must needs be in respect of God, salvation; and in respect of
heaven, the place of salvation.

1. In respect of God, the giver of salvation. It is the salvation of God,
Psalm. 50.23. Therefore except he give it, Reasons why only such as work
righteousness be saved.
none can have it. Now God is God of righteousness. He is of purer eyes then to
behold evil, and cannot look upon iniquity, Hab. 1.13. to wit, without a
hatred and detestation of it. Whoever therefore they be that do not work
righteousness, they must not look for salvation. For thou art not a God, that
have pleasure in wickedness, neither shall evil dwell with thee: The foolish
shall not stand in thy sight, thou hate all the workers of iniquity, Psalm.
5.4, 5.

2. In respect of Christ, the purchaser of salvation. There is not salvation in
any other, neither is there any other name under heaven given among men,
whereby they may be saved, Act. 4.12. Now Christ is the true Melchisedec, that
is, king of righteousness, Heb. 7.2. To him is that spoken, A scepter of
righteousness is the scepter of thy kingdom: Thou have loved righteousness,
and hated iniquity, Heb. 1.8, 9. Therefore none may think to obtain salvation
through Christ, except they work righteousness.

3. In respect of heaven, the place of salvation. The inheritance
incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fades not away, is reserved in heaven
for us, 1 Pet. 1.4. Now heaven is a place of righteousness; no unrighteousness
can find any room there. It is the high and holy place, Isa. 57.17. When the
Angels once sinned, presently they were thrown out of heaven, 2 Pet. 2.4. So
also was Adam presently after his trangression cast out of Paradise, which was
a type of heaven, neither was he permitted to have any access to the tree of
life, which was a type of eternal life, Genesis 3.24. To him that overcomes,
(says Christ) will I give to eat of the tree of life, which is in the midst
of the Paradise of God, Revel. 2.7. Blessed are they do his commandments, that
they may have right to the tree of life, and may enter in through the gates into
the city, Rev. 22.14.

we teach and preach, then they of the Church of Rome are very injurious unto
us, in calling us Solifidians, as if we were all for faith, and nothing for
works, as if we persuaded people, that though they live as they list, and do
what they will, yet if they believe; they shall be saved. We hold, that
although imputed righteousness, whereby we are justified, and inherent
righteousness, whereby we are sanctified, are diverse and different one from
the other, yet they are not divided, but always go together, so that where
the one is, there the other is also. We hold, that though faith alone (as the
hand receiving Christ, and applying his righteousness) does justify, yet that
justifying faith is not alone, but is ever accompanied with good works. And
therefore we observe that of the Apostle, This is a faithful saying, and these
things I will that thou affirm constantly, that they which have believed in
God, may be careful to maintain good works: these things are good and
profitable unto men, Tit. 3.8. And verse. 14. Let ours also learn to maintain
good works for necessary uses, that they be not unfruitful.

2. Away then with the horrid and damnable doctrine went out from us, but were
not of us; Atque adeo id sibi precipue proponunt, ut sopiant conscientias, quo
omni sollicitudine vacui hosts, quicquid sese offeret, quicquid appetierint,
perpetrent. Calv. advers. libert. cap. 15. Vide etiam ib. c. 18.
for if they had been of us, they would no doubt have continued with us, 1 John
2.10.) of some, I say, who with the Libertines in Calvines time, make it the
very high way to heaven, and the sure sign of salvation, for people to give
the reins unto their lusts, to work all iniquity, and to commit all
uncleanness even with greediness. But you have not so learned Christ: If so be
ye have been taught by him, as the truth is in Jesus: That ye put off (as
concerning the former conversation) the old man, which is corrupt according to
the deceitful lusts: And be renewed in the spirit of your mind: And that ye
put on the new man, which after God is created in righteousness and true
holiness, Ephesians. 4.19, -- 24.

3. This doctrine serves to convince all such as look wickedly, yet when they
die they think to be saved as others. But this is a most vain and foolish, a
most irrational and absurd imagination; as if one should sow tares, and hope to
reap wheat. Be not deceived, God is not mocked; as a man sows, so shall he
reap. For he that sows to his flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption:
but he that sows to the spirit, shall of the spirit reap life everlasting,
Gal. 6.7, 8. It was truly said by Eliphaz, though not rightly applied to Job,
whom he falsely judged wicked, because of that affliction which he was in; They
that plow iniquity, and sow wickedness, reap the same, Job 4.8. It is worthy
to be observed, that the Apostle speaking of this point, to wit, that the
unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God, nor enjoy salvation, he
diverse times admonishes Christians to take heed of being deceived; as Gal.
6.7. and 1 Cor. 6.9. and Ephesians. 5.6. This inculcating of our admonition, shows
both that it is a dangerous thing to be deceived in this case, which all will
(I presume) easily grant; and also that people herein are very apt to be
deceived. And so experience shows, that in this great and weighty business
people many ways deceive themselves, building castles (as they say) in the
air, and promising unto themselves salvation and eternal life, though they
regard nothing less then to perform this, which is required of all those that
shall be saved, to wit, to work righteousness.

1. Some presume upon this, that God is merciful. But though Gods mercy be
never so great, as it is infinite and incomprehensible, yet it nothing at all
belongs unto them that work wickedness, I mean, that continue in that course,
and will not turn from it. Let the wicked forsake his way, (says the Prophet
Esaias) and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and turn unto the Lord, and he
will have mercy on him, and to our God: for he will abundantly pardon, Isai.
55.7. David extolled Gods mercy as much as may be; yet ever shows to whom it
does belong, namely, to them that fear him, and so he excludes the wicked and
unrighteous from having any share in it. As the heaven is high above the earth,
(says he) so great is his mercy (toward whom?) toward them that fear him,
Psalm. 103.11. And verse. 13. Like as a father pitieth his children; so the Lord
pitieth (whom?) them that fear him. And verse. 17. The mercy of the Lord is
from everlasting to everlasting upon (whom?) them that fear him, and his
righteousness to childrens children, To such as keep his covenant, and think
upon his commandments to do them.

2. Christ (say some) died for us; therefore they persuade themselves, that
howsoever they live, yet through Christ they shall be saved. But Christ died
for our sanctification, as well as for our salvation. He loved the Church, and
gave himself for it, That he might sanctify it, Ephesians. 5.25, 26. He gave
himself for us, to redeem us from all iniquity, and to purify unto himself
a peculiar people, zealous of good works, Tit. 2.14. None shall be saved by
Christ, but such as are sanctified by him. As for those that work iniquity, he
will say unto them, Depart from me, I know ye not, Matthew. 7.23.

3. Some flatter themselves as if their sins were only sins of infirmity,
and therefore should not prejudice their salvation. But if they did sin of
infirmity, 1. They would not make a common practice of sin, as they do. It is
the property of the wicked, to set himself in a way that is not good, Psalm.
36.4. Noah, Lot, David, and other godly men, through infirmity fell into sin,
gross and heinous sin, but they did not make it their practice. No, thus the
godly do none iniquity, that is, they do not give themselves up to the
practice if any iniquity, Psalm. 119.3. they walk in Gods ways, as there it
follows immediately after. 2. Their sins would be more troublesome and
grievous unto them, then they are. Mine iniquities are gone over mine head, and
are a heavy burden, too heavy for me to bear, Psalm. 38.4. O wretched man that
I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death? Thus did David and Paul
complain, which shows that their sins were indeed of infirmity: but so are
not theirs, who rejoice to do evil, Prove. 2.14. Who make a mock of sin, Prove.
14.9. Such as these do not sin of infirmity, but of presumption.

4. Some build upon this, that they perform holy duties; they hear, pray,
etc. But, the sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord, Prove.
15.8. to wit, because as it follows verse. 9. The way of the wicked is an
abomination to the Lord. The Prophet Malachi, speaking of Christ, says, He
shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver; and he shall purify the sons
of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver, that they may offer unto the Lord
an offering in righteousness. Then shall the offerings of Judah and Jerusalem
be pleasant unto the Lord, etc. Mal. 3.3, 4. Then, that is, when they that
offer them, are made pure. If a man therefore purge himself from these, he
shall be a vessel unto honor, sanctified, and meet for the masters use, and
prepared unto every good work, 2 Timothy 2.21. A man of any quality cannot endure
to be served in an unclean vessel, so much less can God endure that service,
which proceeds from the wicked and ungodly. See Isai. 1.11, -- 17. and 66.3.
This David considered, and therefore he said, I will wash mine hands in
innocence, and so will I compass thine altar, O Lord, Psalm. 26.6.

These, and other such like grounds many have to build their hopes of heaven
and heavenly happiness upon; but they are false grounds, and will deceive them;
false, I say, either simply in themselves, or at least as they build upon them.

Let us then be provoked and stirred up to work righteousness. Let us consider,

Motives to stir up to work righteousness.
1. That this is pleasing unto God; The righteous Lord loves righteousness,
Psalm. 11.7. And because he loves it, therefore also we shall love and practice
it. Ye that love the Lord, hate evil, Psalm. 97.10. Hate the evil, and love the
good, Amos 5.15. Abhor that which is evil, and cleave to that which is good,
Romans 12.9.

2. That this is profitable to our selves. Indeed God loves righteousness, and
hates iniquity; but our righteousness cannot profit him, nor our iniquity do
him any prejudice. If thou sinnest, what do thou against him? or if thy
transgressions be multiplied, what do thou unto him? If thou be righteous,
what give thou him? or what receives he of thine hand? Thy wickedness may
hurt a man, as thou art, and thy righteousness may profit the son of man, Job
35.6, 7, 8. But God can neither be hurt by the one, nor profited by the other.
Now if we be righteous we our selves shall have the benefit of it; if we be
unrighteous, we our selves shall suffer for it. If thou be wise, (says
Solomon) thou shall be wise for thy self; but if thou scornest, thou alone
shall bear it, Prove. 9.12. Let us take heed therefore of being like Balaam,
who loved the wages of unrighteousness, 2 Pet. 2.15. Yet he could say, Let me
die the death of the righteous, and let my latter end be like his, Number. 23.10.
Let us live the life of the righteous, if we would die the death of the
righteous: let us work the works of righteousness, if we would obtain the
crown of righteousness, 2 Timothy 4.8. ^he wicked works a deceitful work; but
to him that sows righteousness, shall be a sure reward, Prove. 11.18. Yea if
we would enjoy the good things of this live, let us have a care to work
righteousness. For godliness is profitable unto all things, having the promise
both of the life that now is, and also of that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4.8.
First seek the kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all these (outward
and earthly) things shall be added unto you, so far forth as God sees them
needful and expedient for you, Mat. 6.33. Whether the righteous have little or
much of these outward things, they have Gods blessing with it, which is more
then all besides; and without which all is nothing. This, the wicked want
whatsoever they have besides; though the things, which they have, in themselves
considered, be blessings, yet to them they are not blessings, but curses.
Because they do not give glory unto the name of God, therefore he does curse
their blessings, Mal. 2.2. Their prosperity does destroy them, Prove. 1.32.
Their table is made a snare unto them, and that which should have been for
their welfare, is unto them an occasion of ruin, Psalm. 69.22. The curse of the
Lord is in the house of the wicked: but he blesses the habitation of the just,
Prove. 3.33. Therefore a little that a righteous man has, is better then the
riches of many wicked, Psalm. 37.16.



of his fullness we must all receive grace for grace, John 1.16. But without him
(or as the margent has it, severed from him) we can do nothing, (...).
John 15.5. Therefore our prime and principal work must be to lay hold on
Christ, that he may dwell in our hearts by faith, Means whereby to work
righteousness.
Ephesians. 3.17. When the Jews asked our Savior, saying, What shall we do that
we may work the works of God? He answered, This is the work of God, that ye
believe in him, whom he has sent, John 6.28, 29. This is that work, without
which no work can be truly good, and pleasing in the sight of God.

2. We must acquaint our selves with the word of God, and take heed unto it as
to a light shining in a dark place, 2 Pet. 1.19. Thy word (says David unto
God) is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my paths, Psalm. 119.105.
Wherewithal (says he) shall a young man cleanse his way? by taking heed
thereto according to thy word, verse. 9. And again, Order my steps in thy word,
and let none iniquity have dominion over me, verse. 133. Gods will is the rule
of righteousness; Be ye not unwise, but understand what the will of the Lord
is, Ephesians. 5.17. Be not conformed to the world, but be ye transformed by the
renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is that good, that acceptable,
and perfect will of God, It is Gods revealed will, to which we must give heed,
see Deuteronomy. 29.29.
Romans 12.2. Now Gods word is that, by which we must learn Gods will, because
in his word it is, that he has revealed his will unto us. In his word it is,
that he has showed us what is good, and what he does require of us, Mic. 6.8.
Therefore let us take heed lest he complain of us, as he did of some, I have
written unto them the great things of my law, but they were counted as a
strange thing, Hos. 8.12. Let us take heed lest he upbraide us, as he does the
wicked, saying, Thou hate instruction, and castest my words behind thee,
Psalm. 50.17.

3. We must pray unto God for his Spirit, to enable us to work righteousness.
It is God that must work all our works in us, Isai. 26.12. We are not
sufficient of our selves to think any thing, as of our selves, but all our
sufficiency is of God, 2 Cor. 3.5. It is God that works in us both to will
and to do, of his good pleasure, Phil. 2.13. And God has promised to work
that in his people, which he does require of them. This is one part of the new
covenant, I will put my law (says he) in their inward parts, and write it in
their hearts, Jer. 31.33. A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit
will I put within you; and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh,
and will give you an heart of flesh. And I will put my spirit within you, and
cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments, and do
them, Ezekiel. 36.26, 27. We must therefore pray as David does, Create in me a
clean heart, O Lord, and renew a right spirit within me, Psalm. 51.10. Teach
me, O Lord, the way of thy statutes, and I will keep it unto the end. Give me
understanding, and I shall keep thy law. Yea, I shall keep it with my whole
heart. Make me to go in the path of thy commandments: for therein do I
delight. Incline my heart unto thy testimonies, and not unto covetousness.
Turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity, and quicken thou me in thy way,
Psalm. 119.33, 34, 35, 36, 37.

But again (may some say) how must we work righteousness?

I answer, 1. We must do it sincerely: How to work righteousness.
He that walks uprightly.

2. It must be done entirely and universally, as well in one point as in
another. Thus it becomes us to follow all righteousness, said our Savior to
John Baptist, Mat. 3.15. So it behooves us to follow all righteousness;
diligently to follow every good work, 1 Timothy 5.10. To walk worthy of the
Lord, unto all pleasing, being fruitful in every good work, Col. 1.10.

3. Willingly and cheerfully, God will meet him that rejoices, and works
righteousness, Isai. 64.5. If I do it willingly, I have a reward, 1 Cor. 9.17.
If there be first a willing mind, it is accepted according to what a man has,
and not according to what a man has not, 2 Corinthians. 8.12. Evil by how much it
is done the more willingly, is so much the more evil. It was an aggravation of
the sin of Ephraim, that he willingly walked after the commandment, to wit, of
Jeroboam, who set up the golden calves to be worshipped, Hos. 5.11. So good, by
how much it is done the more willingly, by so much it is the more good. As for
me (said David unto God) in the uprightness of mine heart I have willingly
offered all these things; Nemo invitus been facit, etiamsi bonum sit quod
facit, Aug.
and now have I seen with joy thy people; that are present here, to offer
willingly unto thee, 1 Chro. 29.17. And verse. 14. But who am I, and what is my
people, that we should be able to offer so willingly after this sort?

4. Humbly. We must take heed lest we be proud, and puffed up because of any
thing that we do. When we have done all things that are commanded us, we must
say, we are unprofitable servants, we have done but what our duty waas to do,
Luke 17.10. We must take heed of resting in what we have done* and of thinking
to merit by it. Not by works of righteousness, which we have done, but
according to his mercy he saved us, etc. Tit. 3.5. Good works are the way to
heaven, Via regni, non causa regnandi, Bern.
but not the cause why we come to the enjoyment of it: The meritorious and
deserving cause they are not; because 1. It is God, that does enable us to do
good works, as has been showed before. And 2. We fail and come short in the
best things that we do, so that if God should contend with us, we could not
answer to one of a thousand, Job 9.3. Nehemiah therefore having spoken of a
good work that he had done, says, Remember me, O Lord, concerning this, and
(not reward me according to the greatness of my merit, but) spare me according
to the greatness of thy mercy, Neh 13.22.

5. Constantly. He that is righteous, let him be righteous still: and he that
is holy, let him be holy still, Revel. 22.11. Hold that fast which thou have,
that no man take thy crown, Revel. 3.11. Be thou faithful unto death, and I
will give thee the crown of life, Revel 2.10. But if any man draw back, my
soul shall have no pleasure in him, Heb. 10.38. When a righteous man turns
away from his righteousness, and commits iniquity, and dies in them; for
his iniquity that he has done shall he die, Ezekiel. 18.26. It had been better
for them not to have known the way of righteousness, then after they have known
it, to turn from the holy commandment delivered unto them, 2 Pet. 2.21.

In the last place here is comfort for all that truly set they may eat their
bread with joy, and drink their wine with a merry heart, for God now accepts
their works, Eccles. 9.7. Who is he that will harm you, if ye be followers of
that which is good? but, and if ye suffer for righteousness sake, happy are ye;
and be not afraid of their terror, neither be ye troubled. But sanctify the
Lord God in your hearts, and be ready always to give an answer to every man,
that asks you a reason of the hope that is in you, with meekness and fear:
Having a good conscience, that whereas they speak evil of you, as of evil
doers, they may be ashamed that falsely accuse your good conversation in Christ.
For it is better, if the will of God be so, that ye suffer for well doing then
for evil doing, 1 Pet. 3.13, -- 17. Blessed are they, that are persecuted for
righteousness sake, for their's is the kingdom of heaven, Matthew. 5.10. But let
none of you suffer as a murderer, or as a thief, or as an evil doer, or as a
busie-body in other men's matters: Non debet quid quisque patiatur, sed quare
^atiatur, atten^i, Aug. contra Crescon, lib. 4. cap. 46. Non poena, sed causa
facit martyrem.
Yet if any suffer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed, but let him glorify
God on this behalf. Wherefore let them that suffer according to the will of
God, commit the keeping of their souls to him in well doing, as unto a
faithful creator, 1 Pet. 4.15, 16, 19.

SERMON. VI.
Psalm. 15.2. And speaks the truth in his heart.


HEre David begins to show more particularly how he is qualified, that shall
abide in Gods tabernacle, and dwell in his holy hill, that is, that shall
inherit heaven, and enjoy salvation. He is one that speaks the truth in his
heart, that is, so as he conceives in his heart; he has not (...) one thing
in his mouth, and another thing in his heart, as R. Solomon and Kimchi note
upon the text. The observation, which I raise hence is this: He that would be a
citizen of heaven, and an heir of salvation, must have a care to speak the
truth, and to eschew lying. The Prophet Zephanie notes this as the property of
the true Israel of God, (upon whom shall be peace and mercy, Gal. 6.16.) that
they shall not do iniquity, nor speak lies, neither shall a deceitful tongue
be found in their mouth, Zeph. 3.13. And diverse precepts there are both in the
old and in the new Testament, wherein speaking the truth is required, and lying
is forbidden. Ye shall not deal falsely, nor ly one to another, Levit. 19.11.
Speak ye every man the truth to his neighbor, Zach. 8.16. Putting always
lying, speak every man truth with his neighbor, Ephesians. 4.25. Lie not one to
another, Col. 3.9. Diverse cominations and threatenings of destruction there are
in both Testaments against liars. Thou shall destroy them, that speak leasing,
Psalm. 5.6. He that speaks lies, shall perish, Prove. 19.9. Amongst others are
reckoned all liars, that shall have their part in the lake which burns with
fire and brimstone, which is the second death, Revel. 21.8. So Revel. 22.15.
among those that shall be without, that shall have no place in the heavenly
Jerusalem, is reckoned whosoever loves, and makes a lie.

For the further confirmation of the doctrine, there are these reasons:

1. Lying is repugnant unto God, and odious unto him. For God is (...), one
that cannot lie, Tit. 1.2. He is (...) the God of truth, Isai. 65.15. Amongst
those things, that are an abomination unto God, is reckoned a lying tongue,
Prove. 6.16, 17. So Prove. 12.22. Lyings lips are an abomination to the Lord.

2. Lying is a part of the old man, which al must put off, that would be saved.
The Apostle having showed, that such as have truly learned Christ, have
learned this, that they must put off concerning the former conversation the old
man, which is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts; And be renewed in the
spirit of their mind; And put on the new man, which after God is created in
righteousness, and true holiness; from thence he inferres this exhorta^^on,
Wherefore putting away lying, speak the truth every man with his neighbor,
Ephesians. 4.20, -- 25. So Col. 3.9. Lie not one to another, (says he; why?)
seeing that ye have put off the old man with his deeds.

3. Lying is the work and invention of the devil. He abode not in the truth,
(says our Savior, speaking of the devil) because there is no truth in him:
when he speaks a lie, he speaks of his own; for he is a liar, and the
father of it, to wit, of a lie, John 8.44.

Before I come to the use of the point, some things are to be observed for the
better understanding of it.

1. It is not allways necessary, nor expedient to speak all that we know, or
think of a thing, whereof we speak. A fool utters all his mind; but a
wise man keeps it in till afterward, till occasion require him to speak,
Prove. 29.11. A wise man's heart discerns both time, and judgment, both when,
and how to speak, Eccles. 8.5. But it is both expedient and necessary; that we
speak no more then we know, or think; for this is lying, though the other be
not. It is lawful and requisite sometimes to conceal what is true; but it is
never either requisite, or lawful to utter what is false; the former is no
lying, but the latter is. Abraham might be too blame in saying of Sarah his
wife, She is my sister, Genesis 20.2. In this he might show his weakness of faith,
and might expose his wives chastity to danger; but I do not well see how he
can justly be taxed for lying, because there was nothing false that he uttered,
though there were some thing true which he concealed. For Sarah, as she was his
wife, so was she also his sister, that is, his near kinswoman, which in the
Hebrew language is as much as sister. The Jewish Doctors think Iscah, the
daughter of Haran, Abraham's brother, to be the same with Sarah. Vide
Annotationes meas in Genesis 11.29.
When Abimelech understood that Sarah was Abraham's wife, and expostulated with
Abraham about it; Abraham having showed the reason why he said that she was his
sister, and concealed that she was his wife, added, And yet indeed she is my
sister; she is the daughter of my father* but not the daughter of my mother,
(he means, that she was his kinswoman by his father, but not by his mother)
and she became my wife, Genesis 20.12.

2. Figurative speeches are no lies; as metaphorical speeches, such as that is;
The pastures are clothed with flocks; the valleys also are covered over with
corn; they shout for joy, they also sing, Psalm. 65.13. So when false Prophets
are termed wolves, Mat. 7.15. Act. 20.29. And Herod is called a fox, Luke
13.32. So hyperbolic^l speeches, as that Deuteronomy. 9.1. Cities great, and fenced up
to heaven. And that John 21.25. There are also many other things (...) Jesus
^^d, which if the^ should be written every one, I suppose (...) even the world
it self could not contain the book^^ that should be written: And so parables,
which are frequent in the Scripture. These speeches (I say) are no lies,
because though a thing be not so, as they express, according to the proper
acception of the words, yet according to the figurative acception of them it
is so. Metaphorical speeches express one thing by another, because of some
remarkable similitude that is betwixt them. So also do parables, which (as
allegories) are but as it were continued metaphors. And hyperbolical
expressions are used only to set forth the greatness of a thing, not as if so
much were meant as is expressed. Ironical speeches (wherein one thing is
uttered, and another thing quite contrary is intended) of all figurative
expressions may most seem to be lies. Such was th^^ of Micaiah to Ahab
concerning his expedition against Ramoth-Gilead, Go and prosper; for the Lord
shall deliver it into the hand of the king, 1 Kin. 22.15. The Prophet meant,
that Ahab should not go up; for that if he did, he should not prosper, as a
little after he plainly told him. And Ahab (it seems) perceived, that Micaiah
did not speak seriously, or at least suspected so much, and therefore he said
unto him (verse. 16.) How many times shall I adjure thee that thou tell me
nothing but that which is true in the name of the Lord? But such speeches are
no lies, because the gesture and pronuntiation of him that speaks, do show
that he intends the contrary to what he speaks.

These things premised, I come to the Uses of the Doctrine. Hosea) God has a
controversy with the Land, Hos. 4.1, 2. Few make conscience of speaking the
truth; they are not (as Jeremie says) valiant for the truth, Jer. 9.3. And
some even make an art and trade as it were of lying. As the same Prophet there
complains, They bend their tongues like their bows for lies. And verse. 5.
They will deceive every one his neighbor, and will not speak the truth: they
have taught their tongue to speak lies, etc.

But that every one may the better perceive how far forth he is guilty, I
will speak more distinctly of the several kinds of lying. Mendacium est
triplex; Perniciosum, jocosum, officiosum.
The most usual and received division of lies, is that of the Schoolmen, who
distinguish a lie into pernicious, sportful, and officious. First there is a
pernicious lie, when a man by lying is prejudicial and hurtful to another. Now
there are many kinds of pernicious liars.

1. The covetous cosening liar, who by lying, cheates and defraudes him, with
whom he deals, and makes a prey of him. Such a liar was Gehazi, who ^^n after
Naaman the Syrian, and by forging a lie got great gifts of him, 2 Kin. 5.22,
23. This kind of lying is most rise and common among people in buying, selling
and bargaining. It is naught, i^ is naught, says the buyer: but when he is
gone, he boasts, Prove. 20.14. So on the other side the seller will be as
ready to say, It is good, it is good, Laudat venales, qui vult extrudere merces.
when he knows that it is not good, or not so good as he would make it. It is
an ordinary thing with some to say, and swear too, it may be, that a
commodity cost them so much, and they were offered so much for it, and the
like, when indeed no such matter. What fair, market, shop, house, or place
almost can one come into, but this kind of lying is to be found in it? In
respect of this one kind of lying we may take up the words of Solomon, and
say, Who can find a faithful man? Prove. 20.6. But whosoever use this kind of
lying, let them consider what the same wise man says; The getting of treasures
by a lying tongue, is a vanity tossed to and fro of them that seek death,
Prove. 21.6. It is a thing very frequent, tossed to and fro; but it is a vanity,
and they that use it, do but seek death and destruction by it.

2. The false witness-bearing liar. How pernicious a liar this is, Solomon
shows, saying, A man that bears false witness against his neighbor, is a
maule, and a sword, and a sharp arrow, Prove. 25.18. When a man being called to
give evidence in a matter, speaks, yea ^wars what he knows to be otherwise, or
at least knows it not to be so, this is likely to do much mischief. David
complains of this as a great injury that was done him: False witnesses did
rise up; they laid to my charge things that I know not, Psalm. 35.11. Therefore
the very letter of the commandment runs thus, Thou shall not bear false
witness against thy neighbor, Exodus 20.16. So Exodus 23.1. Put not thine hand
(join not) with the wicked to be an unrighteous witness. No, take heed of it;
for though hand join in hand, yet the wicked shall not be unpunished, Proverb.
11.22. Such as are wicked in this kind shall not; a false witness shall not be
unpunished, Prove. 19.9.

3. The railing and reviling liar, that openly speaks all manner of evil of
another falsely. Thus some, when they fall out, with open mouth revile one
another, and speak one of another they care not what. This kind of lying,
drunkards are more especially subject to; and therefore not without cause,
rayler and drunkard are joined together, 1 Cor. 5.11. And so drunkards and
revilers, 1 Cor. 6.10. I was the song of the drunkards, says David, Psalm
69.12. The wicked use thus to lie of the godly, railing on them, and reviling
them; as our Sa^iour intimates, when he says, Blessed are ye, when men shall
revile you, and persecute you, and speak all manner of evil against you falsely
for my sake, Matthew. 5.11. Thus Eliah was termed one that troubled Israel, 1
Kin. 18.17. Paul was called a pestilent fellow, and a mover of sedition, etc.
Act. 24.5. Christ himself was called Beelzebub Matthew. 10.25. And when the
wicked are afflicted and in distress, then especially do the wicked use to
whet their tongues against them, and to shoot forth their arrows at them.
Thus dealt Shimei with David, when he saw him fly for fear of Absalon, then he
reviled him most bitterly, saying, Come out, come out thou bloody man, and thou
man of Belial; The Lord has returned upon thee all the blood of the house of
Saul, etc. 2 Samuel 16.7, 8. Thus also was our Savior dealt with by his
adversaries, when he was crucified* they powered forth their venom upon him.
reviling hi^ all they could. See Mat. 27.39, etc, Luke 23.39. But let all such
liars as these, all railing and reviling liars, know, that railers and revilers
(that are and continue such) shall not inherit the kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6.10.

4. The tale-bearing, whispering and backbiting liar. This is also a pernicious
liar: but the sin of bac^biting is to be spoken of ex professo, when I come to
the beginning of the next verse.

5. The fawning and flattering, the perfidious and tre^cherous liar. Of all
pernicious liars, this is the most pernicious; whose words are the words of
Jacob, but his hands are the hands of Esau, his words are fair and plausible,
but his deeds are foul and deadly: He will with his mouth profess all love
and kindness, but in his heart intend all evil and mischief. Both these ki^gs
hearts shall be to do mischief, and they shall speak lies at one table, even
when they are feasting together, and pretending all friendship that may be one
toward the other, then will they lie, and plot how to destroy the other, Dan.
11.27. Take ye heed every one of his neighbor, and trust ye not in any
brother: for every brother will utterly supplant, and every neighbor will
walk with slanders, Jer 4.9. The words of his mouth were smoother then butter,
but war was in his heart; his words were softer then oil, yet were they drawn
swords, Psalm. 55.21. A notable exampl^ of treacherous lying we have Luk 20.20,
etc. Some came unto Christ, saying, Master, we know that thou savest and
teach, rightly, neither ^cceptest tho^ the person of any, but teach the
way of God truly: Is it lawfu^ for us to give tribute unto Caesar, or not? Thus
they seemed to have a very honorable estimation of Christ, and a great desire
to be resolved by him, when as indeed, they were spies, and sought to take hold
on his words, that they might deliver him to the power and authority of the
governor. Christ knew the treachery and fals-heartedness of men; for he knew
what was in man, John 2.25. And therefore when he sent his Apostles abroad to
preach, he said unto them, Behold, I send you forth as sheep among wolves: be
ye therefore wise as serpents, and harmless as doves. R. Sal. in Genesis 37.4.
But beware of men, etc. Mar. 10.16, 17. A Jewish Rabbin commenting upon that
place of Scripture, where it is said of Joseph's brethren, that they hated him,
and could not speak peaceably unto him, says that this is recorded to their
praise, that when they hated Joseph, they did not flatter and dissemble, making
a show of love with their mouths, when hatred was in their hearts. The gloss
is more acute then solid: but yet this is true, it is not so bad to profess
hatred where it is, as to profess love where it is not. A man may much more
easily beware of a professed enemy, then he can of a false friend: even as if a
dog bark and look grimme before he bite, one has fair warning to look to
himself: but if he creep, and fawn upon you, and then fly in your face, you
cannot so well avoid the danger. It was not an enemy that reproached me, then I
could have borne it, neither was it he that (openly) hated ^e, that did
magnify himself against me. But it was ^hou, a man, mine equal, my guide, and
mine acquanitance. We took sweet counsel together, and walked into the house of
God in company, Psalm. 55.12, 13, 14. This perfidiousness of men David also
complains of Psalm. 5.9. There is no faithfulness in their mouth, their inward
part is very wickedness their throat is an open sepulcher, they flatter with
their tongue. And upon this occasion he cries out, Help Lord, for the godly man
cease; for the faithful fail from among the children of men. They speak
vanity every one with his neighbor; with flattering lips, and with a double
heart do they speak, Psalm. 12.1, 2. But as he adds v. 3. The Lord shall cut
off all flatterings lips, and the tongue, etc. And Psalm. 120. having said,
verse. 2. Deliver my soul, O Lord, from lying lips, and from a deceitful
tongue, he adds, verse. 3.4. What shall be given unto thee, and what shall be
done unto thee, thou false tongue? Sharp arrows of the mighty, with coals of
juniper that is, piercing plagues he^e, and hellfire hereafter, as the Chaldee
Paraphrast and R. Solomon expound it. Burning lips (says Solomon) that is,
lips that seem to be inflamed iwith love and good affection toward one) and a
wicked heart, are like a potsheard covered with silver dross. He that hates,
dissembleth with his lips, ^^d lays up deceit within him. When he speaks
fair, believe him not; for there are seven abominations in his heart. And
having thus showed the vileness of the sin, he goes on to show the greatness of
the punishment, saying, Whose hatred is covered by deceit, his wickedness shall
be showed before the whole congregation. Whosoever diggeth a pit, shall fall
therein; and he that rolleth a stone, it will return upon him, Prove. 26.23, --
27. But as of all liars, pernicious liars are the worst, and of all pernicious
liars, fawning and flattering liars are the most pernicious, so of all fawning
and flattering liars, false and lying prophets are the most dangerous: Such
prophets as cry peace, and there is no peace, Ezekiel. 13.10. Such as lull people
asleep in their sins, and sow pillowes to their arme-holes, Ezekiel. 13.18.
People love to have it so, but what will they do in the end thereof? Jer.
5.31. When God shall bring his judgments upon them for their sins, then they
will see how pernicious and destructive such prophets have been unto them.
Jeremie notes this as the grand cause of all the misery that came upon the
Jewish people; Thy prophets (says he) have seen vain and foolish things for
thee, and have not discovered thine iniquity, to turn away thy ^^ptivity; but
have seen for thee false burdens, and causes of banishment, Lam. 2.14. See
Zach. 13.3.

SERMON. VII.
Psalm. 15.2. That speaks the truth in his heart.


I Have spoken of one kind of lying, t^ wit, pernicious lying, and of many
kinds of that lying.

2. The next kind of lying is sportful lying, when a man by lying intends no
michiefe or hurt to any, but only seeks to make himself and others merry. Some
refer to his head Joseph's dealing with Benjamin, Genesis 43.
when he caused the cup to be put into his sack, pretending as if Benjamin had
stolen it. But Joseph did not this for sport, but with a serious intent, to try
his brethren how they stood affected toward Benjamin, and what care they had
of their father, who (he knew) loved Benjamin most dearly, to see if they did
not therefore envy and hate Benjamin, as for the same cause they had envied and
hated Joseph himself: So that if that carriage of Joseph toward Benjamin were
lying, (which I see no necessity to affirm) it was rather officious then
sportful lying. However, this kind of lying in sport is such as cannot be
defended. For, if for every idle word that men shall speak, they must give an
account in the day of judgment, Mat. 12.36. then surely much more for every
false and lying word. And if foolish talking and jesting be condemned, Ephesians.
5.4. then surely much more lying talking, and such jesting as has lying mixed
with it.

Now of such liars there are especially two sorts.

1. The storie-telling liar, one that for sport-sake does tell false and
fabulous stories. Who are most commonly faulty in this kind, the very term
does show, which is usually given to such stories; for they are called old
wives tales, or old wives fables, 1 Timothy 4.7. Travelers also are commonly
noted for this kind of lying; they having been in remote countries, will tell
strange stories, mixing truth and falsehood together.

2. The news-telling liar, one that is of the Athenian humor delighting to
tell, or hear some new thing, Act. 17.21. Such will usually coin news, if
they have none that is true, and, or if they have, yet they will add unto it,
and make it more then it is. Fame (as the Poet says) crescit eundo* (...)
grows as it goes: it is like a snow-ball, the further it goes, the bigger it
grows.

3. The last kind of lying is officious lying, when a man tells a lie for some
good end, as to help himself or others in a time of need, or to prevent some
danger that is likely to ensue. This kind of lying has a fair pretense, yet
is it not therefore lawful. For though it be for never so good an end, yet it
is not lawful to lie. Will ye speak wickedly for God, and talk deceitfully
for him? said Job to his friends, Job 13.7. We must not do evil that good may
come, Romans 3.8. Good ends must be attained unto by good means, and good causes
must be handled in a good manner. Bonum oritur ex integra causa, malum ex
quolibet defectu.
If the end be evil, it is enough to make the action, though otherwise good, to
be evil: but if the end be good, it is not enough to make the action good, if
otherwise it be evil.

Some may object, that David for his own safety told a lie to Abimelech, Saul,
and Abimelech marvelling to see him come in that manner without attendants, he
told him, that Saul had sent about some urgent occasion in such have, that he
had not time to accommodate himself as otherwise he should have done, 1 Samuel
21. And that the Midwives lied unto Pharaoh, when he being wroth with them for
saving the children of the Hebrews, whom he commanded them to destroy, they
said that the Hebrew woman were not like those of Egypt, but were more lively,
and were delivered before that the midwives came unto them. So likewise that
Rahab lied, when the king of Jericho, sending unto her about the spies, which
she had entertained, and hid, she said that such men indeed came to her, but
were departed and gone she knew not whither, Ios. 2.

I answer. David did, and so most probable that the midwives and Rahab did
also, though some endeavor to excuse them, yet it does not follow that lying
in such cases is lawful. We must walk by precepts and not by examples; we must
not so follow examples, as to swerve from precepts. Good men, and good women,
are but imperfectly good, and therefore they are not simply and absolutely to
be followed, but only so far forth as they are good, Haec quando in
Scripturis Sanctis legimus, non ideo quia facta credimus, etiam facienda
credamus, ne violemus praecepta, dum passim sectamur exempla. Aug. contra Mend.
cap. 9.
and that is so far forth as they walk according to the rule, which God has
prescribed to walk by. Be ye followers of me, says the Apostle, not
absolutely without exception, but as I am of Christ, 1 Cor. 11.1. Only Christ
is to be propounded as exemplary in all things, (I mean things that concern
us to practice) because he did no sin, 1 Pet. 2.22. As for others, though
otherwise never so good, they are not to be set before us as absolute patterns
for our imitation; because the best have had, and will have their failings: in
many things (says S. James) we offend all, Jam. 3.2. It is true, David's eating
of the shewbread, which Abimelech gave him, is excused and justified by our
Savior, because it was in a case of necessity, Mat. 12.3, 4. But his lying,
whereby he obtained that shewbread, is not justified. Neither can this be
excused by reason of necessity; for this is a thing simply and absolutely evil,
which to eat the shewbread was not; and therefore this might not be done in any
case, as in some case the other might. So God blessed the midwives for that
they feared him more then man, and would not obey the king in destroying the
infants, Exodus 1.17, 20. Rahab also is commended for her faith, in that she
received the spies, and sent them away in peace, Heb. 11.31. Iam. 2.25. But
neither is she commended, neither were the other blessed for lying. This was
their weakness, which God was pleased to pardon, but we may not presume to
imitate. We must follow, not that which is evil, but that which is good, 3 John 11. If because of those, or other the like examples, we should make bold
to lie, as they did, that which was but a sin of infirmity in them, would be a
sin of presumption in us, and so we should not be so capable of mercy as they
were whom we think to imitate. Keep back thy servant from presumptuous sins,
(says David unto God) let them not have dominion over me; Then shall I be
upright, and I shall be innocent from the great transgression, Psalm. 19.13.

Thus then all lying, even the best kind of lying, is evil and unlawful.



They that observe lying vanities, forsake their own mercy, Jon. 2.8.



Cretizandum cum Cretensi, we must play the Cretians with a Creti^n, that is,
lie with a liar; and Fallere fallentem non est fraus, To deceive a deceiver is
no deceit; these proverbs, I say, are none of those, which the Spirit of God
teaches; but they have proceeded from that lying spirit, the devil. Some may
think it a high point of wisdom to circumvent those that would circumvent
them, yet S. James bids, Lie not against the truth. And immediately he adds;
This wisdom descends not from above, but is earthly, sensual and devilish,
Jam. 3.14, 15. Our Savior also bids, Be wise as serpents, but so withal he
adds, and innocent as doves, Matthew. 10.16. So the Apostle, I would have you
wise (says he) unto that which is good, and simple concerning evil, R m 16.19.
And he bids, Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good, Romans 12.21.

But some there are, who are ashamed to plead for lying, under the name of
lying; yet under some other name they will plead for it, as under the name of
an excuse, or of equivocation and mental reservation. Some will say, They hope
they may make an excuse for themselves or others, if need be. But if they know
the excuse to be false, it is a lie, and they may not make it; if they do,
neither they, nor their excuse can be excused. If thy cause be good, do not
make it bad by maintaining it ill: if it be bad, do not make it worse by
maintaining it at all, and especially by lying.

But the Jesuits are most gross this way, who have set forth books in
defense of that which is indeed lying, though they will not have it called or
accounted so, but equivocation and mental reservation. Suppose a Romish Priest
be examined by a Magistrate whether he be a Priest or no; they teach and
maintain that he may lawfully say, yea and swear too that he is no Priest,
meaning, of Jupiter, or Apollo, or the like; or no such Priest as the
Magistrate desires; or not so as to tell him. But by this device Peter might
well and truly have denied Christ, saying and swearing that he knew him not,
to wit, to be such an one as they took him to be, or to tell them, and the
like. Neither is there any truth so plain and manifest, but a man by this
reason may deny it without lying. But such fig leaves are not sufficient to
cover the shame of such lying. The patrons and defenders of it, little heed
that of the Apostle: We have renounced the hidden things of dishonesty, not
walking in craftiness, nor handling the word of God deceitfully, but by
manifestation of the truth, commending our selves to every man's conscience in
the sight of God, 2 Cor. 4 2.



1. That our profession does require this of us. For we profess that we
believe in God, and in Jesus Christ, and in the Holy Ghost, and that we embrace
the Gospel. Now God is the God of truth, Isai. 65.16. He is one that cannot
lie, Tit. 1.2. And Christ is the truth, John. 14.6. He is the Amen, the
faithful and true witness, Revel. 3.14. There was no guile in his mouth, 1 Pet.
2, 22, The Holy Ghost also is the spirit of truth, John 15.26. and 16.13. And
the Gospel is the word of truth, Jam. 1.18. and the way of truth, 2 Pet. 2.2.

2. Lying perverts and overthrowes the nature of speech. For speech is ordained
for that end, that we may make known our minds one to another: if therefore we
use lying, if we speak one thing, and think another, we abuse that faculty of
speech, which God has given us, and make it serve to a quite contrary end then
that for which God has ordained it. Let not any say or think so proudly and
presumptuously, as David shows some do; saying, With our tongues will we
prevail, our lips are our own; who is Lord over us? Psa^. 12.4. No, God is
Lord over us, our lips are not our own, he has made them, and not we our
selves; and therefore we must use them, not as we our selves think meet, but
as he does require of us.

3. Lying destroys all society among men. Man (as the Philosopher observes)
is (...), a sociable creature, now speech is a means whereby men have society
one with another. When the language of men was confounded, so that one could
not tell what another spoke, then presently their combination was dissolved,
Genesis 11.
they were forced to desist from their enterprise, and to give it over. When
one asked brick, R. Sal. on Genesis 11.
(says a Rabin) another brought clay, and then they fell together by the
ears, and one dashed out the others brains. This is more then the Scripture
records; but so much it shows, that their confederacy and aspiration was soon
broken; when once, by reason of the confusion of tongues, they could not make
known their minds one to another. Augustine says truly, Diversity of tongues
does alienate and estrange one man from another, so that a man had rather be
with his dog then with one of a strange and unknown language. Diversitas
linguarum hominem ali^nat ab homine, adeo ut lib^ntius homo sit cum cane suo
quam cum homine alieno. Aug. de Civit. Dei. lib. 16. cap. 7.


But surely a lying tongue is a far worse enemy to society then an unknown
tongue; and much better it is for a man to have no society at all, then with
such as he cannot believe what they say; or if he do, he shall be deceived by
them. Concerning such we may well take up the words of Jacob, O my soul, come
not thou into their secret; unto their assembly, mine honor, be not thou
united, Genesis 49.6. I have not sat with vain persons, (says David) neither
will I go in with dissemblers, Psalm. 26.4. Deliver my soul, O Lord (says he)
from lying lips, and from a deceitful tongue, Psalm. 120.2. And presently after
he cries out, Woe is me that I sojourne in Meshec, that I dwell in the tents of
Kedar, verse. 5. O that I had in the wilderness (says Jeremie) a lodging place
of wayfaring men, that I might leave my people, and go from them: (why so?) for
they be all adulterers, an assembly of treacherous men. And they bend their
tongues like their bow for lies, etc. Take ye heed every one of his neighbor,
and trust ye not in any brother: for every brother will utterly supplant, and
every neighbor will walk with slander. And they will deceive every one his
neighbor, and will not speak the truth; they have taught their tongues to
speak lies, and weary themselves to commit iniquity, Jer. 9.2, -- 5. Better it
were to live in the wilderness then with such as these; better to be alone,
then to have such society.

4. The fruit of truth is permanent and lasthing, but the fruit of lying is
transient and fading. The lip of truth shall be established for ever, but a
lying tongue is but for a moment, Prove. 12.19. Though a man may gain by lying
for a while, yet usually it comes to pass that ere long a liar is discovered,
his dissembling and false dealing is made manifest, and then he is hissed and
hated, exploded and abhorred of all, none will have any thing to do with him
more then needs must; Decipies alios verbis vultuque benigno.

Nam mihi jam notus dissimulator eris. Mart.


every one will be ready to say, I know him too well to trust him. Indeed this
is the benefit that liars get, when they are once known to be liars, none will
believe them though they speak the truth. Let us not therefore give heed to
those profane proverbs, He knows not how to live, that knows not how to
dissemble. Qui nescit dissimulare. nescit vivere.
And, Plain dealing is a jewel, but he may die a beggar that does use it. Let
us hear and mind what the Spirit of God does say: What man is he that
desires life, and loves many days, that he may see good? Keep thy tongue
from evil, and thy lips from speaking guile, Psalm. 34.12, 13.

SERMON. VIII.
Psalm. 15.3. He that backbiteth not with his tongue.


THis is the second particular note, whereby he is described who shall abide in
Gods tabernacle, and dwell in his holy hill. He that backbiteth not, etc.] To
backbite (as the word it self does show) is to speak evil of one behind his
back, to wit, when there is no just occasion for it. As, 1. To deny that good
to be in one, which is in him. 2. To extenuate the good which is in one, to
make it less then it is. 3. To deprave that good which is in one, as to say
that he does good with an evil intent, for an evil end. 4. To charge one with
that evil, which he is not guilty of. 5. To aggravate the evil which one is
guilty of, and to make it worse then it is. 6. To reveal ones secret faults,
or to speak of them unseasonably, when no just occasion does require it. For
in some cases one may speak of another faults behind his back, and yet be
free from the sin of backbiting. As, 1. If one be examined by lawful authority,
whether he know this or that by another. That precept, Thou shall not bear
false witness against thy neighbor, as it expressly forbids to witness that
which is false of another, whether present or absent; so it implicitly
commands to witness what is true of another, whether present or absent, if one
be lawfully called unto it.

2. One may speak of another faults behind his back, and yet be noe
backbiter, when he speaks to one that has authority over him of whom he
speaks, and therefore he speaks that he may reform him. Thus Joseph told his
father of the faults of his brethren behind their back, Genesis 37.2. And they
of the house of Chloe informed Paul of the faults that were among the
Corinthians, 1 Cor. 1.11. They were not guilty of backbiting, because they
spoke to such as might re^orme those of whom they spoke.

3. One may speak evil of another behind his back to that end, that he to
whom he speaks, may beware of him of whom he speaks, that he may be
circumvented, or infected by him; and in this case he is free from backbiting.
Thus Paul spoke evil of Alexander the Coppersmith behind his back saying,
Alexander the Coppersmith has done me much evil: but it was that Timothy might
beware of him; Of whom be thou ware also; for he greatly withstood our words, 2 Timothy 4.14, 15. So John spoke evil of Diotrephes behind his back; I wrote unto
the Church (says he) but Diotrephes, who loves to have the pre-eminence among
them, receives us not, wherefore if I come, I will remember his deeds, which
he does, prating against us with malicious words: and not content therewith,
neither does he himself receive the brethren, and forbids them that would,
and casts them out of the Church. Why did John speak thus of Diotrephes
behind his back? It was that Gaius, to whom he wrote, might take heed of
following such an evil example. Beloved, follow not that which is evil, but
that which is good, 3 John 9.10, 11. But if there be no such just occasion to
speak, he that speaks evil of another behind his back, is guilty of the sin
of backbiting. Now one kind of backbiting there is, which is called
whispering, and tale-bearing, to wit, when one speaks evil of another behind
his back in a close and secret manner, to that end that he may make variance
betwixt him of whom, and him to whom, he speaks. A whisperer separateth
chief friends, Prove. 16.28. Where no wood is, there the fire goes out: so
where there is no talebearer, the strife cease, Prove. 26, 20. Aquinas makes
whispering (or tale-bearing) another kind of sin distinct from backbiting;
Aquin. 2. 2. quaest. 74. art. 1.
but so far as I see, they differ only as genus and species, backbiting being
more general then whispering or tale-bearing; for every whisperer of
talebearer is a backbiter, but every backbiter is not a whisperer or
talebearer. Aquinas grants that a whisperer is both in respect of matter, to
wit, the thing spoken, which is some evil of another, and also in respect of
form, to wit, the manner of speaking, which is behind ones back, the same
with a backbiter; only they differ (he says) in the end, in that a backbiter
speaks evil of one behind his back to defame him; and a whisperer does it to
set him and some other at variance. But this (I think) suffices not to make
them diverse kinds of vices, but that still the one is comprehended in the
other. For as a backbiter does speak evil of a man behind his back to defame
him, so also does a whisperer; though he do it secretly, yet he does it to
defame a man, to blemish his reputation, and to make him ill thought of by him
to whom he speaks, and so by that means to sow discord betwixt them. So that
whispering (as to me it seems) is backbiting, though a special kind of
backbiting, and of the worst sort.

From the words observe, That whosoever would obtain salvation, must refrain from
backbiting.

1. All evil speaking of others is forbidden and condemned, and therefore
backbiting, which is a speaking evil of others. Thou fittest and speak
against thy brother, says God to the wicked, taxing him for this as one part
of his wickedness, Psalm. 50.20. Paul bids put Christians in mind to speak
evil of no man, Tit. 3.1, 2. Speak not evil one of another, brethren, says
James, Jam. 4.11.

2. More especially, the Scripture forbids and condemns speaking evil of others
behind their backs, which properly is backbiting. Thou shall not go up and
down as a talebearer among the people, Levit. 19 16. Cursed be he that smites
his neighbor secretly, Deuteronomy. 27.24. This is spoken of an evil tongue, says R
Solomon upon the place; (...) R. Sal. ad loc.
the smiting there mentioned is that which they speak of, who conspiring
together against Jeremie said, Let us smite him with the tongue, Jer. 18.18.
David speaking of the wicked, and of the workers of iniquity, Who (says he)
whet their tongue like a sword, and bend their bows to shoot their arrows,
even bitter words: That they may shoot in secret at the perfect, suddenly do
they shoot at him, and fear not, Psalm. 64.3, 4. So Jeremy complaining of the
people in his time, and showing how evil they were, among other things that he
taxes them for, says, Every neighbor will walk with slanders, Jer 9.4. And
the Prophet Ezekiel showing Jerusalem her abominations, Ezekiel. 22.2. says thus
unto her, In thee are men that carry tales to shed blood, verse. 9. The Apostle
speaking of the gross sins of the Gentiles, says that they were whisperers
and backbiters, Romans 1.29, 30. And he reckons backbiting and whisperings
among other sins, which the Corinthians were guilty of, and for which (he said)
God would humble him, when he comes among them, 2 Cor. 12.20, 21.

3. He that is guilty of bac^biting, that speaks evil of another behind his
back, if that which he speaks be false, is guilty of lying, which (as we have
seen before) is prejudicial to salvation. If that which he speaks be true,
yet he is void of charity, in seeking to defame another. For (as Solomon
observes) Love covers all sins, Prove. 10.12. Where there is love and charity,
there will be a covering and concealing of men's sins as much as may be. Now
where charity is wanting, there salvation is not to be expected, 1 Cor. 13.1,
etc. 1 John 3.14, 15.

Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy heart; thou shall in any wise rebuke
thy neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him, Lev. 19.17, And that which they
practice is forbidden there in the very next verse before, as was also before
cited, Thou shall not go up and down as a talebearer among thy people. Both
ways they show themselves void of that love, which they ought to bear
toward their neighbor.

Some think so much the better of themselves, by how much they speak the worse
of others; they think that as the depressing of one scale is the lifting up of
the other, so what they detract from others, they add unto themselves. But
this is a great vanity and folly. For if a man think himself to be something,
when he is nothing, he deceives himself. But let every man prove his own
work, and so shall he have rejoicing in himself alone, and not in another. For
every man shall bear his own burden, Gal. 6.3, 4, 5.

Some have an artificial kind of backbiting; Videas praemitti alta suspiria.
Doleo vehementer pro eo. Grande damnum etc. Bern. in Cant. Sermon. 24.
they will fetch deep sighs, as if it did much grieve them, that it should be
so as they speak: they will say, that they are exceeding sorry for him, whom
they speak evil of. It is great pity (will they say) for him, and the like.

Thus some understand that of Solomon, The words of a tale bearer are as
wounds, and they go down into the innermost parts of the belly, Prove. 18.8.
and 26.22. As if the meaning were, The words of a talebearer are like the
words of men that are wounded, they are uttered in a lamentable and doleful
manner, they pretend much love toward him, of whom they speak, Lxx. (...).
Vulg. qui non egit dolum in lingua sua.
that so they may make the infamy stick more close unto him. And to such
backbiters as these agree the words of the Text directly, as they are rendered
by the Greek interpreters, whom the vulgar Latin translatour does follow; for
thus they read the words, Who has not used deceit with his tongue.

Some will think to excuse themselves, saying, that they speak no more then is
true. But 1. Though the words of a backbiter simply considered be true, yet
usually they are false in respect of that intent, which he has in speaking
them, to wit, that a man may seem worse then indeed he is. Doeg said but what
was true concerning David and Abimelech, 1 Samuel 22. compared with 21. Yet
because his intent was to make Saul believe that they did conspire against him,
therefore David says that he had a deceitful tongue, Psalm 52.4. compared with
the title. 2. All that is true, is not to be spoken at all times. Charity is
requisite, as well as verity; we must speak the truth in love, Ephesians. 4.15.
Now it is certain, that though the thing be true that is spoken, yet it is not
spoken in love, if we speak evil of a man behind his back, when there is no
just occasion for it, when it tends to no other end but to defame him, and to
make others think ill of him, and it may be deal ill with him.

Some will say, that they speak only to such as will conceal that which is
spoken unto them, and so it shall spread no further. But how know they this?
what reason have they to think, that he to whom they speak evil of another,
will conceal it, when as they themselves cannot conceal it? As they tell it
to one, hoping that he will conceal it, so may that one tell it to another with
the like persuasion, and he again to another; and so the matter may pass from
one to another without end.

2. Let all be persuaded to eschew this sin of backbiting.

1. If we consider it absolutely. It wounds and kills three at once, namely, the
backbiter himself, the person spoken of, and the person or Quo^um dum au^es
inficit, animas interficit. Bern. ubi sup.
persons spoken unto. Hence some suppose that a false witness (of which kind
one of the worst is a backbiter) is compared to three destroying instruments, a
maule, and a sword, and a sharp arrow, Prove. 25.18. And for this reason also
some suppose that the tongue of a backbiter is called in the Chaldee a third
tongue, Drus. Eb^. Quaest. e libro Masar.
because it hurts three at once.

Again, this sin of backbiting makes a man especially to resemble the devil,
whose special property it is to backbite and slander, whence he has his name
both in Greek and Syriake. (...)
He is called the accuser of the brethren, that accuses them before God day
and night, Revel. 12.10. As, blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be
called the children of God, Matthew. 5.9.

So cursed are the st^ife-makers (and such some backbiters are) for they shall
be called the children of the devil.

2. Consider it comparatively. A backbiter is worse then an open railer. For,

1. A rayler speaks to a man's face, so that a man may hear what is said
against him, and may answer for himself as occasion does require: but a
backbiter speaking of a man behind his back, a man cannot so easily wipe off
the aspersion that is cast upon him.

2. A railer plainly professes his hatred against him on whom he raileth, and
so they that hear him will the less regard what he speaks: but a backbiter
(as I have noted before) will dissemble his hatred, and pretend love toward
him of whom he speaks, so that his words are the more apt to be believed;
they go down into the innermost parts of the belly, Proverb. 18.8. and 26.22.

Again 2. a backbiter is worse then a thief. For,

1. A thief only takes away a man's goods; but a backbiter takes away a man's
good name, which is of more value. A good name is rather to be chosen then
great riches, Prove. 22.1. A good name is better then precious ointment, Eccles.
7.1. A. backbiter also takes away a man's friend, the loss of whom may be worse
unto him then the loss of goods. For (as the saying is) A friend in the court,
is better then a penny in the purse.

Sometimes a backbiter deprives a man of his goods also; as Ziba by backbiting
Mephibosheth caused David to alienate all his lands from him, 2 Samuel 16. Yea, a
backbirer sometimes deprives a man of his life; so Doeg by his backbiting tongue
made Saul put Abimelech to death, and not only him, but many others also, 1 Samuel 22.

2. A thief may restore what he has taken: but a man's good name being once
taken from him, cannot so easily be restored unto him. Though the backbiter
should never so much acknowledge, Calumniare fortiter, aliquid adhaerebit.
the wrong that he has done; yet all that have heard of his defamation, will
not, perhaps, hear of his recantation; or if they do, it it may be they will
not so easi believe this as the other.

SERMON. IX.
Psalm. 15.3. He that backbiteth not with his tongue.


I Have sufficiently showed the haynousness of the sin of backbiting, which
should make us take heed, and keep our selves free from the guilt of it. Now
to this end that we may beware of backbiting, we must beware of those things,
which are the causes and occasions of it.

As, 1. Malice. Ill will (we say) never speaks well. Because people hate one
another, therefore they are so ready to backbite one another. The devil, being
Satan, full of hatred and malice, is also therefore (...), a slanderer, a
backbiter and false accuser. So also it is with men; prating against us with
malicious words, says S. John of Diotrephes, 3 John 10. his malice was the
cause of his evil speaking. Therefore as concer^^ng malitiousness be ye
children, 1 Cor. 14.20. Lay aside all malice, that so ye may lay aside all
evil speakings, 1 Pet. 2.1.

2. Envy. Envies and evil speakings, are joined together, 1 Pet. 2.1. the one
follows upon the other. Envy usually is a cause of detraction and evil
speaking. Aaron and Miriam envied Moses, and therefore they spoke against him,
Number. 12.1, 2. Therefore put away envy, if ye would be free from backbiting. If
another thrive and prosper, or excel in any gift, do not envy him for it.
Consider that in the parable, Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with
mine own? Is thine ye evil because mine is good? Matthew. 20.15. Imitate Moses,
who when some prophesied in the camp, and Joshua his servant thinking that it
would obscure his glory, said, My Lord Moses, forbid them; he answered, Enviest
thou for my sake? would God that all the Lords people were Prophets, and that
the Lord would put his Spirit upon them, Number. 11.28, 29.

3. Pride and vainegloriousness. Because men think highly of themselves, and
would be eminent above others, therefore they backbite others, detract from
them, and speak evil of them. The proud vainglorious Pharisee vaunting and
boasting of himself, spoke disdainfully of others, and namely of the Publican:
I am not (said he) as other men are, Extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even
as this Publican. I fast twice in the week, I give tithes of all that I
possess, Luke 18.11, 12. So Diotrephes, because he loved to have the
preeminence, therefor with malicious words he would prate against others,
though they were much better then himself, 3 John 9.10.

Let us not therefore be desirous of vain glory, Gal. 5.26. Let nothing be
done through strife or vain glory, but in lowliness of mind let each one
esteem another better then himself. Look not every man on his own things,
but every man also on the things of others, Phil. 2.3, 4. Let us consider, that
if we excel others one way, yet they may excel us another way. And if we be
better then others, yet let us consider we have been as bad as they. In this
re^pect, the Apostle bids, speak evil of no man, be no brawlers, (so no
backbiters) but gentle, showing all meekness unto all men. For we our selves
were sometimes foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving diverse lusts and
pleasures, Tit. 3.2, 3. Whatsoever good we have in us, we have it not from our
selves, but from God, and therefore we ought not to be proud of it, and to
despise others. For who makes thee to differ? and what have thou that thou
have not received? and if thou did receive it, why boastest thou, as if thou
had not received it? 1 Cor. 4.7.

4. Covetousness. This made Ziba backbite and slander his master Mephibosheth,
accusing him to David, as if he had conspired against him, and sought to get
the kingdom from him: he greedily gaped after Mephibosheths lands and
possessions, this was the cause of his backbiting. Behold (says David unto
him) thine are all that partained to Mephibosheth, 2 Samuel 16.4. This was it
that Ziba looked for, and which made him play the backbiter so as he did. The
Hebrew word for a talebearer ((...) rachil) comes of ((...) rochel) a word
that signifies a pedling merchant, one that goes about with wares to sell, He
buys of one, and sels to another; (says Aben Ezra) and so a tale bearer
hears of one, (...) Aben Ezra ad Levit. 19.16.
and reveals to another. But this is to be added, that as the Peddler does it
for gain, so usually does the talebearer; he makes a gain of going about
with tales, even as the Peddler does of going about with wares. The Chaldee
phrase for to backbite, is word for word, to eat accusations, ((...), though,
I know some give another reason of the phrase) For (as R. Solomon conceives)
they to whom tales were brought, (...) R Sal. ad Levit. 19.16.
used to feed those that brought them. So experience shows, that this sets
some on work to carry tales (they look to have a Fee for their labor. But
all such gain as is gotten by this means, is dishonest gain; and therefore
refrain from it, and have nothing to do with it, Take heed and beware of
covetousness, Luke 12 15. Pray with David, Incline mine heart (O Lord) unto thy
testimonies, and not unto covetousness, Psalm. 119.36.

5. Curiosity and busy meddling in other men's matters. The word, that is used
in the text for to backbite, ((...) ragal) does also signify to go about to
play the spy: and the word for a talebearer ((...) rachil) is usually joined
with a word, which signifies to walk, or go about ((...) halach,) as Lev.
19.16. Jer. 9.5. Ezekiel. 22.9. It is the property of tale-bearers and backbiters
to be thus curious and busy, to go about, and see what they can epsy in
others, that they may defame them, and speak evil of them. And withal (says
the Apostle of some) they learn to be idle, wandering from house to house, and
not only idle, but tattlers also, and busy bodies, speaking things they ought
not, 1 Timothy 5.13. Such as are busybodies, will be tattlers also, and will
speak things they ought not. Plutarch does well observe, (...) Plut. de
Curiosit.

(...). Ibid.


that curiosity, or busy meddling in other men's matters, is necessarily
attended with evil speaking. And that sycophants, or slanderers and
busybodies are very near allied, both of one tribe, and of one family.
Therefore be not curious nor busy to meddle in that which concerns you not.
When Peter was too forward this way, saying, Master, what shall this man do?
Christ sharply reprooved him for it, saying, If I will that he tarry till I
come, what is that to thee? follow thou me, John 21.21, 22. As if he should
say, Mind what thou have to do, and do not trouble thy self about that which
concerns another, and not thee. Study to be quiet, (says Paul) and to do
your own business, 1 These. 4.11. And Peter ranks busybodies in other men's
matters, with murderers, thieves and evildoers, 1 Pet 4 15. It was a worthy
answer which Plato is reported to have given to Dionysius, when Dionysius
telling him he feared, Plut. in Dion.
that when he came into the Academy among his companions, he would speak evil
of him, he answered, God forbid that there should be such scarcity of matter to
talk of in the Academy, that they should talk of thee.

And excellent is that advice of Plutarh, (...), etc. (...), Plut. de Curios.
Turn thy curiosity and busie-medling humor inward, etc. Thou have matter
enough at home to busy thy self about. Examine thy self (as the heathen man
also could admonish and say, Where have I been? what have I done? what have I
omitted, (...);
that I ought to have done? This was David's course, I thought on my ways,
says he, Psalm. 119 59. And this is the Apostles precept; Examine your selves;
prove your own selves, 2 Cor. 13.5.

6. Idleness. As curiosity does occasion backbiting, so idleness does occasion
curiosity, and so consequently backbiting. The Apostle having said first, They
learn to be idle, wandering from house to house, he adds, and not only idle,
hut tattlers also, and busybodies, speaking things they ought not, 1 Timothy
5.13, They that can find nothing to do of their own, will be busying
themselves about other men's matters. We hear (says the Apostle to the
Thessalonians) that there are some which walk among you disorderly, not
working at all, but are busybodies, (...).
2 Thessalonians. 3.11. And who use more to go about with tales, and to talk evil of
others behind their backs, then such as either have no calling, or neglect
it? And for such as otherwise are laborious enough, when are they most apt to
busy themselves in this kind, and to backbite others but when they are
vacant, and have no employment? Have a care therefore to be always well
exercised one way or other. Confer together about things which concern you,
as the two disci^les did, that were going to Emaus, Luke 24. If thou have a
family, spend such times, as thou can spare from other employments, in
catechizing and instructing, admonishing and exhorting thy children and
servants, as the Lord commands, saying, And these words, which I command thee,
shall be in thine heart: And thou shall teach them diligently unto thy
children, (...)
(In the Original it is, as the Margent notes, thou shall whet, or sharpen
them, often repeat and inculcate, that they may pierce into them) and shall
talk of them, when thou sit in thine house, and when thou walk by the
way, when thou lie down, and when thou risest up, Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7.

Now as we must take heed of backbiting any, so, in respect of some, this ought
more especially to be avoided. We must speak evil of no man, Tit. 3.2.
Especially not of such, as to whom we owe especial respect and reverence, as
subjects to their rulers, people to their Ministers, servants to their masters,
children to their parents, and wives to their husbands. Peter notes this as a
grand sin in some, they are not afraid to speak evil of dignities, those that
are in high place and authority; 2 Pet. 2.10, So also Jude in his Epistle,
verse. 8. This was the impiety of Absalom, when he aspired to the kingdom, he
traduced the king, and spoke evil of him behind his back, to draw away the
people, and to steal their hearts and affections from him. Thy matters (said
he) are good and right; but there is no man deputed of the king to hear thee:
as if the king heeded not to govern the people, and to do them justice, 2 Samuel 15.3. So for people to backbite their Ministers, is worse then if they
deal so with others. The Prophet Jeremie complains sore of the people in his
time for dealing thus with him; Come, (said they) and let us devise devices
against Jeremiah. Come, and let us smite him with the tongue, and let us not
give heed to any of his words, Jer. 18.18. Because he smote them with his
tongue by reprooving them for their sins, and denouncing the judgments of God
against them for the same, therefore they would be even with him, they would
smite him with their tongue by backbiting him, and reporting evil of him
behind his back. I heard (says he) the defaming of many, fear on every
side: report, said they, and we will report, Jer. 20.10. The Apostle bids,
Against an Elder (that is, a Minister) receive not an accusation, but before
two or three witnesses, 1 Timothy 5.19. An accusation against a Minister is not so
much as to be received, none is to be permitted to accuse him, Quum presbyter
accusatur, peculiare quiddam vult Apost. observari, nempe ut ne ad accusandum
quidem admittatur quisquam, nisi prius duobus aut tribus testibus fecerit
futurae accusationis fidem. Nempe quia nulli sunt eque omnibus calumniis
obnoxii atque pii doctores: deinde quia in presbyterum non potest privatum
quodammodo judicium constitui, quum non possit non esse cum publico totius
Ecclesiae offendiculo conjunctum: adeo ut etiamsi absolvatu^, tamen aliqua inde
infamia in totam Ecclesiam redundet, sitque non modo in judicando, sed etiam in
admittendo accusatore magna cautione opus. Beza ad loc.
except he first bring two or three witnesses, that will be ready to make good
the accusation. This the Apostle requires, both because none are usually so
obnoxious to calumny and backbiting as Ministers; and also it concerns not
only Ministers themselves, but also others, that their credit be not impaired,
that so their ministry may not be contemned. An odious thing also it is for
servants to slander and backbite their Masters, as Ziba did Mephibosheth, 2 Samuel 16 3. My servant (said Mephibosheth to David) deceived me. And he has
slandered thy servant unto my lord the king, 2 Samuel 19.26, 27. Servants ought
to show all good fidelity to their Masters, Tit. 2.10. Therefore they ought not
to traduce and slander them, to carry tales abroad, and to backbite them. So
for children to backbite their parents, is a thing most detestable. This was
Chams ungraciousness, that when he saw his father Noah drunken and naked, he
went and told others of it; for this a curse came upon him and his posterity,
Genesis 9.21, 22, 23, 24, 25. Whereas Shem and Japhet were blessed, because they
covered their fathers nakedness, Genesis 9.23, 26, 27. Thus also most heinous it
is, if wives slander and backbite their husbands. Let the wife see that she
reverence her husband, Ephesians. 5.3. A Roman Matron is highly commended by
Historians and others, for her care to conceal and cover her husbands
infirmity; he having a stinking breath, she was so far from divulging it, that
when some spoke to her of it, she answered, that truly she thought that all
other men's breath did smell in like manner as his did. It is true, Abigail did
speak evil of her husband Nabal behind his back. Let not my lord, I pray
thee, (said she to David) regard this man of Belial, even Nabal: for as his
name is, so is he: Nabal in Hebrew signifies a fool: it is so used Psalm. 14.1.
Nabal is his name, and folly is with him, 1 Samuel 25.25. But this was no
backbiting, because it was done upon just and urgent occasion, it was for the
preservation of Nabal, and all his family, when as David was so incensed
against him for his churlish and opprobrious dealing with him, that he swear he
would destroy him, and all that did belong unto him: and so he had done indeed,
if Abigail by her wife behavior had not prevented it. Others therefore must
not think to do as she did, except they have the like occasion for it as she
had.

Again, as all ought to eschew backbiting, so by how much any do the more
profess piety and religion, by so much they ought to have the more care to
keep themselves free from this sin. For,

1. If they be given to this vice, it will quite mar all their profession. If
any man among you (says S. James) seem to be religious, and bridleth not his
tongue, but deceives his own heart, this man's religion is vain, Jam. 1.26.

2. And this is one thing, which especially does open the mouths of profane
and irreligious people, to speak evil of professors and their profession,
because some professors are so prone to censure others, and to speak evil of
them behind their backs. Therefore if we would adorn our profession, and
stop the mouths of such as are ill affected toward it, let us have care to
eschew backbiting. For so is the will of God (says S. Peter) that with well
doing ye put to silence the ignorance of foolish men, 1 Pet. 2.15.


Psalm. 15.3. Nor does evil to his neighbor.


THis is the third particular property of him that shall abide in Gods
tabernacle, and dwell is his holy hill, he is one that does no evil to his
neighbor.

Nor does evil] in no kind whatsoever, viz. injuriously and unjustly. To his
neighbour] to any whomsoever. For by a man's neigbour is meant any one whosoever
he be besides himself; as our Savior shows by a parable Luke 10.29, etc. And
the Apostle instead of saying, He that loves his neighbor, has fulfilled the
law, expresses it thus, He that loves another, has fulfilled the law, Romans
13.8. By another he means the same with neighbor; for verse. 9. he says that
this, Thou shall not commit adultery, Thou shall not kill, etc. is briefly
comprehended in this saying, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. So
that by neighbor is meant another, any other whosoever. The Doctrine then
arising from the words is this;

He that would inherit heaven, and eternal happiness, must take heed of being
injurious unto others, he must beware of doing evil unto any.

1. That this is the property of such as shall be saved, we see by the Text,
and so we may see also by other places of Scripture. The Prophet Esaias speaking
of the times of the Gospel, and of the kingdom of Christ, his kingdom of
grace here, shows what disposition the true people of Chirst shall be of; The
wolf (says he) shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down
with the kid; and the calfe and the young lion, and the fatling together, and a
little child shall lead them. And the cow and the bear shall feed, their young
ones shall lie down together, and the lion shall eat straw like the ox. And
the sucking child shall play on the hole of the aspe, and the weaned child
shall put his hand on the cockatrice den. They shall not hurt, nor destroy in
all mine holy mountain: for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the
Lord, as the waters cover the sea, Isai. 11.6, 7, 8, 9. Such as before had been
like which leopards, lions, bears, aspes and cockatrices, most cruel and
devouring, most hurtful and destructive, shall become most tame and mild, most
gentle and peaceable; this is the disposition of those that belong to Christ,
that are partakers of his kingdom of grace here, and shall be partakers of his
kingdom of glory hereafter. So also the same Prophet in another place, The
wolf and the lamb shall feed together, and the lion shall eat straw like the
bullock; and dust shall be the serpents meat: they shall not hurt nor destroy
in all mine holy mountain, says the Lord, Isai. 65.25. The elect, and such as
shall be saved, are called sheep, John 10.27. and they are compared unto
sheep, Matthew. 25.33. which intimates that they are meek and quiet, innocent
and harmeless: such they are after that they are effectually called. Paul
before was a ravening wolf, and a devouring lion, he made havocke of the
Church, entering into every house, and haling men and women, committed them to
prison, Act. 8.3. He breathed out threatenings and slaugher against the
disciples of the Lord, etc. Act. 9.1. But after that he was called and
converted unto Christ, he became a lamb, one that would not do the least
harm to any. Memorable to this purpose is that speech of his to king Agrippa,
when Agrippa told him, that he did almost persuade him to be a Christian, I
would to God ^said Paul unto him) that not only thou, but also all that hear
me this day, were both almost, and altogether such as I am, except these bonds,
Act. 26.29. As he was partaker of the benefit of Christ, so he wished that all
others were like unto him, but not as he was a prisoner, and in bonds; he
wished all others the good which he enjoyed, but not the evil which he
suffered: so far was he from doing evil to his neighbor.

2. This is a thing, which God expressly requires of his people. Oppress not
the widow, nor the fatherless, the stranger, nor the poor; and let none of
you imagine evil against his brother in his heart, Zach. 7.10. Be harmeless as
doves, (...).
Matthew. 10.16. That ye may be blameless and harmeless, Phil. 2.15. The word
used in the two last places, which is translated harmeless, imports as much as
without horns; it is a metaphor borrowed from horned beasts, which push and
hurt with their horns. To such are they compared, who are injurious and
harmeful unto others. Many bulls have compassed me, (says David) strong bulls of
Bashan have beset me round, Psalm. 22.12. I lift up mine eyes (says Zachary)
and saw, and behold four horns: And I said unto the Angel that talked with
me, What be these? And he answered me, These be the horns, which have
scattered Judah, Israel, and Jerusalem, Zach, 1.18, 19. The people of God
therefore must be without horns, they must be harmless.

3. It is required of all, that they love their neighbor. Owe nothing to any
man, but to love one another, Romans 13.8. Now they that indeed love their
neighbor, will be careful to do him no harm. Love works no ill to his
neighbor, Romans 13.10.

4. All are enjoined not only to love their neighbor, but to love him as
themselves. Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self, Levit. 19.18. Matthew.
19.19. That is, every one must do to his neighbor, as he would that his
neighbor should do to him. All things whatsoever ye would that men should do
to you, do ye even so to them: for this is the law and the prophets, Matthew.
7.12. Now no man would that another should do him harm; and therefore neither
should any do harm to another.

5. Such as desire salvation must imitate Christ, and not the devil. My sheep
(says Christ) follow me: And I give unto them eternal life, and they shall
never perish, John 10.28, 29. Now Christ was harmless, Heb. 7. verse. 26. He
did no violence, Isai. 53.9. When some of his disciples were offended at the
Samaritanes for refusing to entertain them, and thereupon asked him if they
should call for fire from heaven to consume them, alleging the example of
Elias for it, he rebuked them, saying, Ye know not what manner of spirit ye are
of. For the Son of man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to save them,
Luke 9.54, 55. On the other side, the devil was a murderer from the beginning,
John 8.44. Like a roaring lion he goes about seeking whom he may devour, 1
Pet. 5.8. He is called Abaddon, that is, destruction, as being the author and
worker of it; and Apollyon, that is, a destroyer, Rev. 9.11.

Now, if this be so, then it speaks terror unto many, Homo homini lupus, One
man is a wolf to another; men tearing and devouring one another. But to speak
more distinctly,

1. Some do evil to others in respect of their name, credit and reputation,
slandering and defaming them; of which I have partly spoken before upon the
former part of the verse, and also shall (God willing) speak more hereafter
upon the last part of it.

2. Some do evil to others in respect of their goods and estate, and that many
ways.

1. By stealing; I take the word now in the more strict sense as it is commonly
used, for otherwise it comprehends all unjust getting that which is another.
But for stealing in the stricter sense, as denoting either open robbery, or
secret filching, what evil many do in this kind, the prisons every where do
show; and much more would be done, if the fear of humane laws did not prevent
it. Besides, many are guilty in this kind, who yet do little think, nor
perhaps will easily be persuaded that they are so, yea it may be will take it
ill that any should so judge of them. Such as put their cattle to feed in other
men's grounds, or wittingly trespass upon them any such way: such as break
their neighbors fences, carry away their hedges, and the like. What is all
this else, but plain stealing? But whosoever do evil to their neighbor this
way, viz. by stealing, let them consider what the Prophet Zachary denounces,
namely this, Every one that steals, shall be cut off, Zach. 5.3. And again, I
will bring it (viz. the curse) forth, says the Lord of hosts, and it shall
enter into the house of the thief, verse. 4.

2. By oppression. Thus do they evil to others, who unjustly and without cause,
or rigorously and without mercy cast them out of their houses and possessions;
who rack their tenants, and make them pay excessi^ely for what they hold of
them: who impose upon others heavy burdens, which they are not able to bear.
This s^n of oppression great ones are most guilty of, who grind the faces of
the poor, Isai. 3.15. But the poor also may be guilty of oppression; one
poor man may oppress another, and that uses to be the sorest oppression. A
poor man (says Solomon) that oppresses the poor, is like a sweeping rain
that leaves no food, Prove. 28.3. But whosoever they be, whether rich or poor,
that are guilty in this kind, let them know and consider, that oppression is a
sin, whereby God is especially provoked. This is mentioned as one of those
great abominations, for which the wrath of God came upon Jerusalem; The people
of the land have used oppression, and exercised robbery, and have vexed the
poor and needy: yea they have oppressed the stranger wrongfully, Ezekiel. 22.29.
Woe to them (says Micah) that devise iniquity, and work evil upon their beds:
when the morning is light, they practice it, because it is in the power of
their hand. And they covet fields, and take them by violence; and houses, and
take them away; so they oppress a man and his house even a man and his
heritage. Therefore thus says the Lord, Behold, against this family do I
devise an evil, from which you shall not remove your necks, neither shall ye
go haughtily: for this time is evil, Mic. 2.1, 2, 3. So the Prophet Zephanie,
Woe to her that is filthy and polluted, to the oppressing city, Zeph. 3.1. The
Prophet Esaias also shows this to be the great provoking sin, for which God
would lay his vineyard wast; He looked (says he) for judgment, but behold
oppression; In the Hebrew there is unexpressible elegancie by a double
paranomasia, (...)

Instead of mispach, judgment, there was mispach, oppression; and instead of
tsedakah, righteousness, there was tseakah, a cry.


for righteousness but behold a cry, Isai. 5.7. The Prophet Habakkuk, first
inveigheth against Nebucadnezzar for his oppression, and then foretells his
doom, showing what wrath and vengeance should come upon him for it, Who
enlarges (says he) his desire as hell, and is as death, and cannot be
satisfied, but gathered unto him all nations, and heapeth unto him all people.
Shall not all these take up a parable against him, and a taunting proverb
against him, and say, Woe to him that increases that which is not his; how
long! and to him that ladeth himself with thick clay. Shall they not rise up
suddenly that shall bite thee? and awake that shall vex thee! and thou shall be
for booties unto them? Because thou have spoiled many nations, all the remnant
of the people shall spoil thee, because of m^^s blood, and for the violence of
the land, of the city, and of all that dwell therein. Woe to him that coveteth
an evil covetousness to his house, that he may set his nest on high, that he
may be delivered from the power of evil. Thou have consulted shame to thy
house by cutting off many people, and have sinned against thy soul. For the
stone shall cry out of the wall, and the beam out of the timber shall answer
it, Hab. 2.5, -- 11.

3. By usury; but this (if God permit) is to be handled hereafter in the
following part of the Psalm.

4. By fraud and deceit in buying, selling and bargaining. When Abraham was to
buy a place to bury in, how careful was he to give the full worth of it? If it
be your mind (said he to the Hittites) that I shall bury my dead out of my
sight, hear me, and entreat for me to Ephron the son of Zohar: That he may give
me the cave of Machpelah, which he has, which is in the end of his field, for
as much money as it is worth, etc. Genesis 23.8, 9. And when Ephron told him that
the land was worth 400. shekels of silver, but yet he would freely bestow it
upon him, Abraham presently weighed (as the manner then was) to Ephron the
money, which he had named, even 400. shekels of silver, current money with the
merchant, verse. 15, 16. Few such buyers, or purchasers in these times; but
rather they will use all the craft and cunning they can to get the purchase, or
commodity as cheap as may be. It is naught, it is naught, says the buyer: but
when he is gone, he boasts, Prove. 20.14. Whiles he is about a thing,
bargaining for it, he will vilify it as if it were little worth; but when he
has gotten it, then he will boast of the good bargain that he has made. And
usually there is more deceit in the seller then in the buyer. Laudat venales,
qui vult extrudere merces.
It is ordinary with him to over-praise his commodities, that so he may the
better over-prize them, and get more for them then they are worth. Some also
sell that for sound and good which is corrupt and naught; They sell the refusfe
of the wheat, Amos 8.6. And some falsify weights and measures, making the
Ephah (the measure they sell with) small, and the shekel (the weight whereby
they receive their money) great, and falsifying the balances by deceit, Amos
8.5. But (as Solomon tells us) diverse weights, and diverse measures, oath of them
are alike abomination to the Lord, Prove. 20.10. And so also are all they, who
go beyond, and defraud their brother in any matter, 1 Thessalonians. 4.6.

5. By borrowing and not paying again. The Apostle bids, Render to all their
due, Romans 13.7. And verse. 8. Owe nothing to any man, but to love one another;
that is such a debt as can never be so paid, but it will still be due. But all
the thought that some take, is how to get into debt, they take no thought at
all how to pay it; as if all were their own, Ita nunc sunt mores, cum quis quid
reddit, magna habenda est gratia. Ter^nt
which they have once borrowed. The words of the son of Sirach are sound but
over-true; Many when a thing is lent them, reckon it to be found, and put them
to trouble that helped them. Till he has received, he will kiss a man's hand,
and for his neighbors money he will speak submissely: but when he should
repay, he will prolong the time, and return words of grief, and complain of
the time. If he prevail, he shall receive the half, and he will count as if he
had found it; if not, he has deprived him of his money, and he has gotten him
an enemy without cause: he pays him with cursings and railings, and for
honor he will pay him disgrace, Eccles. 29.4, 5, 6.

But David tells us who they be that are of this disposition, and deal thus
with their neighbor. The wicked (says he) borrows, and pays ^ot again,
Psalm. 37.21. that is, has no care to do it. For otherwise the godly may be in
such an exigent as not to be able to repay what they borrowed; but yet when
they borrow, they really intend to repay, and afterward carefully endeavor to
do it; and it is their grief, if they be disabled that they cannot do it.
When one of the young Prophets had borrowed an axe, wherewith to cut down wood,
and as he was felling a beam, the axe-head fell into the water, he cried to
Elisha, saying, Alas Master, for it was borrowed, 2 King. 6.5. So much was he
troubled lest he should not restore that which he had borrowed; and rather then
that should happen, the Prophet Elisha miraculously made the iron to swim above
the water, verse. 6. So the same Prophet having in a miraculous manner
multiplied the poor widows oil, bade her first go and pay her debt, and then
maintayn herself and her children with the rest, 1 Kin. 4 7. Such as have no
care to repay what they borrowed, are injurious not only to those, of whom they
did borrow, but also to others who have need to borrow. For (as the son of
Sirach also well observes) many therefore have refused to lend, for other men's
ill dealing, fearing to be defrauded, Eccles. 29.7.

6. By begging, when there is no just cause for it. As when they pretend want
that have none. There is that makes himself poor, yet has great riches, Pro.
13.7. So when they live by begging, who are able to take pains, and work for
their living. When we were with you, (says Paul to the Thessalonians) this we
commanded you, that if any would not work, neither should he eat. For we hear
that there are some among you that walk disorderly, not working at all, but are
busy-bodies. Now them that are such, we command, and exhort by our Lord Jesus
Christ, that with quietness they work, and eat their own bread, 2 Thessalonians. 3.10,
11, 12. They that do not work, when they are able to maintayn themselves, but
live on the labor of others, as many young lusty beggars do, they do not eat
their own bread, they get that which they eat unjustly, they have no true right
to it. Such wrong not only those of whom they receive relief, but also those
that are poor indeed, and either are not able to work, or have so great a
charge that they are not able to maintayn it by their work: that which is due
unto such as these, the other intercept. Honor widows, that are widows
indeed, says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 5.3. So, relieve the poor, that are poor
indeed. If any man or woman (says he) that believes, have widows, let them
relieve them, and let not the Church be charged, that it may relieve them that
are widows indeed, verse. 16. Such as are either able to maintayn themselves,
or have friends able to maintayn them, ought not to be chargeable unto others.

7. By gaming* as carding, dicing, and the like. Though I do not hold all
gaming (not such as wherein a lot is used) simply unlawful; ye it is not
lawful for any to venture more that way then they may lose without prejudice to
themselves, and those that are to be maintained by them. For if any provide not
for his own, and especially for those of his own family, he has denied the
faith, and is worse then an infidel, 1 Timothy 5.8. Consequently therefore it must
needs be unlawful for any to get men's goods from them by such means.

8. By causing any to spend and wast their estate by drinking, rioting, etc. As
they who draw others to tavernes and alehouses: and they who keep tavernes and
alehouses, and allure their ghests to exceed the bounds of temperance and
sobriety, or any way inveigle them, to make them spend more then is meet. Such
gain is dishonest gain, at which God will smite his hand; he will show his
displeasure and indignation against it, Ezekiel. 22.13.

SERMON. XI.
Psalm. 15.3. Nor does evil to his neighbor.


I Have showed how some are guilty of doing evil to others,

1. In respect of their name, credit and reputation.

2. In respect of their goods and estate, and that many ways. Now to proceed,
3. Some do evil to others in respect of their body, as;

1. By smiting, wounding, killing. See what a severe law God made in this
respect. If any mischief follow, then thou shall give life for life. Eye for
eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot, burning for burning, wound
for wound, stripe for stripe. And if a man smite the eye of his servant, or the
eye of his maid, that it perish, he shall let them go free for their eyes sake.
And if he smite out his man-servants tooth, or his maidservants tooth, he
shall let him go free for his tooths sake, Exodus 21.23, 24, 25, 26, 27. Where
also note, that God would not suffer the least bodily harm to be done to any,
but that abundant satisfaction to the party injured should be made for it.

2. By abusing and defiling through the lust of uncleanness. By the lust of
uncleanness men not only dishonor their own bodies, Romans 1.24. and sin against
their own bodies, 1 Cor. 6.18. But also they dishonor and sin against the
bodies of those with whom they commit uncleanness. The Apostle speaking of
doing evil to others, mentions this evil in the first place, even before
killing. Thou shall not commit adultery, thou shall not kill, Romans 13.9. And
history shows, that some having been abused in this kind, laid violent hands
on themselves, as not enduring to live any longer, when once their chas^ity was
violated and taken from them. Lucretia a Roman Matron is famous in this
respect. And it is recorded of some Christian women, Sed quaedam, inquiunt,
sancte foeminae tempore persecutionis, ut insectato^es suae pudicitiae
devitarent, in raptu um atque neceturum se flumen projecerunt, eoquo modo
defunctae sunt. Aug de Civ. Dei. lib. 1. cap. 26.

Si adultera, cur laudata? si pudica, cur occisa? Aug. de Lucret. ibid. cap 19.

Quae se occiderunt, ne quicquam hujusmodo paterentur, quis humanus affectus
eis nolit ignosci? Et quae se occid^re noluerunt, ne suo facinore alienum
flagitium d^vitarent, quisquis eis hoc crimini dederit, ipse crimine
insipientiae non carebit. Aug. ibid. cap. 16.

De his nil temere audeo judicare. -- Quid si enim hoc fecerunt non humanitus
deceptae, sed divinitus jussae; nec errantes, sed obedientes; sicut de Sampsone
aliud nobis fas non est credere? Aug. ibid. cap. 26.

N fas est profecto se occidere. -- Non itaque vobis, o fideles Christi, sit
^^dio vita vestra, si ludibrio fuit hostibus castitas vestra. Habetu magnam
v^ramque consolati^n m, si fidam conscientiam retin^^^s, non vos concensisse
peccatis ^orum, qui in vos peccare permissi sunt. Aug. ib. cap. 27.


that rather then they would suffer their bodies to be defiled by their
heathenish persecutours, they cast themselves into a river, and so were
drowned. Indeed this is no lawful course for any to take. For if we must not
do evil, that good may come, as the Apostle teaches, Romans 3.8. then surely we
may not do evil that evil may not come. We may not hurt our selves, that so we
may prevent others lest they should hurt us.

Austine therefore knew not well what to say of those Christian woman, that
drowned themselves rather then they would be defiled. He says that perhaps
they did it by some special instinct from God, as Sampson is supposed to have
killed himself after that manner. He concludes that it is not lawful (to wit,
regularly, without extraordinary warrant from God for it) for any to kill
themselves, either to prevent the violation of their chastity, or for any other
cause whatsoever. But yet such examples (namely, of those who have killed
themselves, either because they have been, or lest they should be defiled) such
examples, I say, show what an horrible injury they do others, who abuse them in
that manner. When Amnon would needs force Thamar to lie with him, Nay, my
brother (said she) do not force me: for no such thing ought to be done in
Israel: do not thou this folly. And I, whither shall I cause my shame to go? 2 Samuel 13.12, 13. And if this be done not by violence and constraint, but by
persuasion and inticement, then the injury is far greater, in that evil is
done not only to the body, but to the soul also; which particular is in the
next place to be touched.

4. Some do evil to others in respect of their soul, by drawing them into sin.
These are most injurious of all, and the most mischievous. The Apostle
magnifying the grace of God in Christ toward him, says, that he had been
injurious, 1 Timothy 1.12. And how injurious he had been, he shows in another
place; saying, Many of the Saints did I shut up in prison, etc. And I punished
them often in every synagogue, and compelled them to blaspheme, Act. 26.10, 11.
R. Solomon acutely observes, R. Sal. in Deuteronomy. 23.7. and in Hos. 12. ult.
that a severer law is made against the Moabites and Ammonites, who drew the
Israelites into sin, Number. 25. then against the Egyptians and Edomites, whereof
the one drowned the male-children of the Israelites, Exodus 1. and the other
came out against them with the sword, Number. 20.20. The Lord commanded Moses,
saying, Vex the Midianites, and smite them. For they vex you with their wiles,
therewith they have beguiled you in the matter of Peor, and in the matter of
Cozbi, etc. Number. 25. verse. 17, 18.

Guilty also this way ( viz. of doing evil to men's souls) are all open and
notorious sinners, who infect others by their evil example. A little leaven
leaveneth the whole lump, 1 Corinthians. 5.6. One sinner destroys much good,
Eccles. 9.18. One root of bitterness springing up, is enough to trouble and
defile many, Heb. 12.15. Mischievous unto the souls of others also are seducers
and false teachers. They are called ravening wolves, Matthew. 7.15. Grievous
wolves, not sparing the flock, Act. 20.29. If any one appear to be of this
stamp, a broacher of heretical and damnable doctrine, Receive him not into
your house, (says S. John) neither bid him, God speed. For he that bids him
God speed* is partaker of his evils deeds, 2 John 10. and 11. Chap. Such also
are all hinderers of the word of God, and of the means of men's salvation. When
Sergius Paulus desired to hear the word preached by Paul and Barnabas, and
Elymas a sorcerer withstood them, and sought to turn the deputy from the faith,
Paul being full of the Holy Ghost, set his eyes upon him, and said unto him, O
full of all subtilty and all mischief thou child of the devil, thou enemy of
all righteousness* will thou not cease to pervert the right ways of the Lord?
And now behold, the hand of the Lord is upon thee, and thou shall be blind,
not seeing the sun for a season. Which sentence was immediately executed; And
immediately there fell on him a mist, and a darkness; and he went about seeking
some to lead him by the hand, Act. 13.10, 11. So the Jews both refusing to
hear the Gospel themselves, and also seeking to deprive the Gentiles of it,
this brought the full vials of Gods wrath upon them. Forbidding us (says the
Apostle of them) to speak unto the Gentiles, that they might be saved, to fill
up their sins always: for the wrath of God is come upon them to the uttermost, 1 Thessalonians. 2.16. Of this sort of evil doers also are they, who do not according to
their place and calling endeavor to bring others to the truth, and to build
them up in it. They are guilty of the blood of others, even of the blood of
their souls. Son of man, I have made thee a watchman to the house of Israel:
therefore hear the word at my mouth, and give them warning from me. When I say
unto the wicked, Thou shall surely die, and thou give him not warning, nor
speak to warn the wicked from his wicked way to save his life: the same
wicked man shall die in his iniquity, but his blood will I require at thine
hand, Ezel. 3.17, 18. And v. 20. Again, when a righteous man does turn from
his righteousness, and commit iniquity, and I lay a stumbling block before him,
he shall die: because thou have not given him warning, he shall die in his sin,
and his righteousness which he has done shall not be remembered; but his blood
will I require at thine hand. So also Ezekiel. 33.7, 8. Paul therefore taking his
leave of some among whom he had lived after that he was called to the work of
the ministry, I take you to record this day (said he unto them) that I am pure
from the blood of all men. For I have not shunned to declare unto you the whole
counsel of God, Act. 20.26, 27. Neither does this only concern Ministers,
though them especially, but also others; Thou shall not hate thy brother in
thine heart, thou shall in any wise rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin
upon him, Levit. 19.17. Those who thus or any other way do evil to men's
souls, are especially like unto the devil, whose chief spite is at the souls of
men; them he chiefly labors to destroy. The devil put it into the heart of
Judas to betray Christ, John 13.2. because he knew that Judas thereby would
betray his own soul. It was Satan that filled the heart of Ananias to lie unto
the Holy Ghost, Act. 5.3. He is called the tempter, Matthew. 4.3. And 1 Thessalonians
3.5. because he is ever tempting to sin one way or other.

Now this sin of doing evil unto others, is aggravated diverse ways.

1. In respect of the persons by whom it is done. As;

1. If they be such as by their place and calling, or profession of friendship,
and trust reposed in them, ought to protect and defend others from harm. For
Ananias sitting as a judge, to cause Paul unjustly to be smitten, was far worse
then if another had done it. Sit thou (said Paul unto him) to judge me
after the law, and command me to be smitten contrary to the law? Act. 23.3.
So David aggravates the evil that was done unto him, saying, Yea, mine own
familiar friend, in whom I trusted, which did eat of my bread, has lift up his
heel against me, Psalm. 41.9. For it was not an enemy that reproached me, then I
could have borne it: neither was it he that hated me (to wit, ^penly and
professedly) that did magnify himself against me, then I would have hid my
self from him. But it was thou, a man, mine equal, my guide, and mine
acquaintance; we took sweet counsel together, and walked unto the house of God
in company, Psalm. 55.12, 13, 14. Judas by this showed himself to be a devil,
(^s Christ termed him, John 6.70.) that being one of Christ's Apostles, he
betrayed him, John 6.71.

2. Such as reproove and condemn others for doing evil to their neighbor,
and yet do so themselves. Thou art inexcusable, O man, whosoever thou art that
judge: for wherein thou judge another, thou condemnest thy self; for thou
that judge, do the same things, Romans 2.1. Thou therefore that teach
another, teach thou not thy self? thou that preachest a man should not
steal, do thou steal? Thou that say a man should not commit adultery,
do thou commit adultery? verse. 21. and 22.

3. They that have been much and often admonished to refrain from doing evil to
their neighbor, and yet do it. Thus speaks the Lord of hosts, saying,
Execute true judgment, and show mercy and compassion every man to his brother.
And oppress not the widow, nor the fatherless, the stranger, nor the poor,
and let none of you imagine evil against his brother in your heart. But they
refused to hearken, and pulled away the shoulder, and stopped their ears that
they should not hear. Yea, they made their hearts as an adamant-stone, lest
they should hear the law, and the words which the Lord of hosts has sent in
his Spirit by the former Prophets: (this was the aggravation of their sin)
therefore came a great wrath from the Lord of hosts, etc. Zach. 7.10, 11, 12.

4. Such as have been convinced of the evil which they have unjustly done unto
others, and confessed it, promising to do so no more, and yet do it. Thus Saul
was convinced of his injurious dealing with David, he did confess it, and
promise that he would desist from it. This we find 1 Samuel 24.16, etc. Yet when
he saw his opportunity, he fell to persecute David as much as ever, 1 Samuel
26.1, 2. And though again he confessed his fault, and promised amendment,
saying, I have sinned: return, my son David, for I will no more do thee harm,
etc. 1 Samuel 26.21. yet the Scripture intimates, that Saul would still have
persecuted David, but that David fled into another country and so got him out
of Saul's reach. And it was told Saul, That David was fled to Gath, and he
sought no more for him, 1 Samuel 27 4. Because he saw he had no hope to find him,
otherwise he would have sought him still; his heart was still maliciously bent
against him.

2. Evil is aggravated in respect of the persons to whom it is done. As,

1. If it be done to parents. He that smites his father or his mother, shall
be surely put to death, Exodus 21.15. And he that curses his father or his
mother, shall surely be put to death, verse. 17.

2. If evil be done to Magistrates. When David had Saul at advantage, and some
persuaded him to lay hold on the opportunity, and to free himself from ever
being molested by him any more, The Lord forbid (said he) that I should do this
thing unto my Master the Lords anointed, to stretch forth mine hand against
him, seeing he is the anointed of the Lord, 1 Samuel 24.6. And again, when upon
the like advantage Abishai desired David to let him smite Saul, David would not
give way to it, saying, Destroy him not, for who can stretch forth his hand
against the Lords anointed, and be guiltless? 1 Samuel 26.9. Curse not the king,
no not in thy thought, says Solomon, Eccles. 10.20. Curse not any, but not him
especially.

3. It is an aggravation of the evil that is done, if it be done to Ministers.
Do my Prophets no harm, says God, Psalm. 105.15. Do none harm, but
especially not them. Moses before his death blessing the several tribes, when
he comes to the tribe of Levi, he says thus: Bless Lord his substance, and
accept the work of his hands; smite thorough the loins of them that rise
against him, and of them that hate him, that they rise not again, Deuteronomy. 33.11.
When king Jeroboam being offended with the Prophet that came and spoke against
the altar that he had set up, put forth his hand to lay hold on him, the Lord
was so offended with him for it, that immediately he made his hand to dry up,
so that he could not pull it in again unto him, 1 King. 13.4. R. Solomon upon
the place observes, that God showed more zeal in revenging the injury done to
the Prophet, (...) R. Sal. in 1 Reg. 13. 4.
then in revenging the injury done (immediately) to himself. For when Jeroboam
burnt incense in an idolatrous manner, his hand did not dry up; but when he
offered to do violence to the Prophet, then it dried up. So when the people of
the Jews mocked the messengers of God, and misused his Prophets, then the wrath
of the Lord arose against them, till there was no remedy. Therefore he brought
upon them the king of the Chaldees, etc. 2 Chronicles. 36.16, 17. etc O Jerusalem,
Jerusalem, (said our Savior) thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them
that are sent unto thee: how often would I have gathered thy children together,
even as a hen gathers her chickens under her wings; and ye would not? Behold,
your house is left unto you desolate, Matt. 23. verses 37, 38.

4. So when evil is done to Masters. Judas ought not to have betrayed any, but
especially not his Master. What a faithful servant was Jacob unto Laban, though
he had a very hard Master of him? Ye know (said he to Labans daughters) that
with all my power I have served your father, Genesis 31.6. And pleading with Laban
himself, These twenty years (said he) have I been with thee: thy ewes, and thy
shee-goates have not cast their young, and the rams of thy flock have I not
eaten. That which was torn of beasts I brought not unto thee; I bare the loss
of it: of mine hand did thou require it, whether stolen by day, or stolen by
night. Thus I was in the d^y, the drought consumed me, and the frost by night,
and my sleep departed from mine eyes, Genesis 31.38, 39, 40. So the Apostle
requires that servants be obedient into their Masters, and please them well in
all things, not answering again. Not purloyning, but showing all good fidelity,
Tit. 2.9, 10.

5. The evil also that is done to others is aggravated, if it be done to those
that are professors of the true religion, such as have special relation unto
God, and in a peculiar manner belong unto him. Why do ye not rather take wrong?
why do ye not rather suffer your selves to be defrauded? Nay, ye do wrong, and
defraud, and that your brethren, 1 Cor. 6.7, 8. Though they were Jews, or
Turks, or whatsoever they were, yet they were not to be wronged, or defrauded;
much less are brethren, Christians, such as profess the true God, and Jesus
Christ, to be so used. How grievous then is their sin, who the more any appear
to be religious and godly, the more they seek to do them hurt? such especially
show themselves to be of their father the devil, who is the professed enemy of
God, Plus possidetur a diabolo, qui non solum ipse malus est, verum etiam
gratis odit servientes Deo? Aug.
and of those that have any thing of God in them. Cain was of the wicked one
(that is, the devil) and slew his brother: and wherefore slew he him? because
his own works were evil, and his brothers righteous, 1 John 3.12. How God is
provoked against such as do evil to his people, may appear by his dealing with
Amalek for this very cause. Because when the Israelites were traveling toward
Canaan, Amalek came and fought against them, God commanded Moses, saying, Write
this for a memorial in a book, and rehearse it in the ears of Joshua; for I
will utterly put out the name of Amalek from under heaven, Exodus 17.8, 14. And
verse. 16. The Lord has sworn, that the Lord will have war with Amalek from
generation to generation. And Moses a little before his death, put the people
in mind of this; Remember what Amalek did unto thee by the way, when ye were
come forth out of Egypt. How he met thee by the way, and smote the hindmost of
thee, even all that were feeble behind thee, when thou wast faint and weary:
and he feared not God Therefore shall it be, when the Lord thy God has given
thee rest from all thine enemies round about, in the land which the Lord thy
God gives thee for an inheritance to possess it, that thou shall blot out the
remembrance of Amalek from under heaven; thou shall not forget it, Deuteronomy. 25.17,
18, 19. And though God did long (even 400. years) defer to execute vengeance
upon the Amalekites, yet he did not forget the injury which they did unto his
people, but when Saul was king, he sent Samuel unto him, charging him to go,
and utterly destroy them for it. I remember (said he) that which Amalek did to
Israel, (though Amalek, it is likely, had forgotten it, yet the Lord did
remember it) how he laid wait for him in the way, when he came up from Egypt.
Now go, and smite Amalek, and utterly destroy all that they have, and spare
them not, but slay both man and woman, infant and suckling, ox and sheep,
camel and ass, 1 Samuel 15.2, 3. And because Saul did not so fully execute this
judgment as he should have done, but spared Agag the king of the Amalekites,
and the best of the cattle, therefore God would not spare him, but cast him
off, and transferred the kingdom to another.

6. If any do evil to those that have done no evil to them, this also is an
aggravation of the evil, and makes the sin the greater. Indeed though other
have done evil to us, yet we ought not therefore to do evil unto them. Say
not, I will do so to him, he has done to me: I will render to the man
according to his deeds, Pro. 24.29. Recompense no man evil for evil. -- Dearly
beloved, avenge not your selves, but rather give place to wrath: for it is
written, Vengeance is mine, I will repay, says the Lord. Therefore if thine
enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give him drink. For in so doing thou
shall heap coals of fire on his head. Be not overcome of evil, but overcome
evil with good, Romans 12.17, 19, 20, 21. Our Savior would not do evil for evil;
When he was reviled, he reviled not again; and when he suffered, he threatened
not, but committed himself to him that judges righteously, 1 Pet. 2.23. So
that man after Gods own heart, David, though Saul did hunt his soul to take it,
yet he would not avenge himself on him when he had opportunity, but said, The
Lord judge between me and thee, and the Lord avenge me on thee; but mine hand
shall not be upon thee. As says the proverb of the ancients, Wickedness
proceeds from the wicked; but mine hand shall not be upon thee, 1 Samuel 24.12,
13. But a far greater sin it is, if we do them evil who have done us none. They
devise deceitful matters (says David) against them that are quiet in the
land; such as neither meddle nor make with them, as we say, Psalm. 35.20. Woe
unto thee that spoilest, and thou wast not spoiled; and dealest treacherously,
and they dealt not treacherously with thee. Isai. 33.1.

7. Much worse yet it is if any do evil to those, who have done good to them.
Thus Jonathan pleaded with his father Saul in the behalf of David, when he
perceived that Saul intended evil against him. Let not the king (said he) sin
against his servant, against David; Because he has not sinned against thee,
(and not only so, but) and because his works have been to theeward very good.
For he did put his life in his hand, and slew the Philistine, and the Lord
wrought a great salvation for all Israel: thou saw it, and did rejoice:
wherefore then will thou sin against innocent blood, to slay David without a
cause? 1 Samuel 19. verse. 4, 5. This David complains sore of; They rewarded me
evil for good, to the spoiling of my soul, Psalm. 35. verse. 12. This made
Jeremie cry out, Shall evil be recompensed for good? for they have dug a pit
for my soul: remember that I stood before thee to speak good for them, and to
turn away thy wrath from them, Jer. 18.20. Thus Christ did aggravate the sin
of Judas, saying, He that eats bread with me, (he whom I have so respected,
so honored, as to make him sit with me at mine own table) has lift up his
heel against me, Plato called Aristotle a colt, which having sucked the damme,
lifts up the heel, and kicks her. Aelian. histor. l. 4. c. 9.
John 13.18.

8. It is an aggravation of evil, when it is done to those that are least able
to bear it. Thou shall neither vex a stranger, nor oppress him, Exodus 22.21.
And verse. 22. Ye shall not afflict any widow, or fatherless child. It is a sin
to afflict, vex and oppress any; but such especially: So Deuteronomy. 24.14. Thou
shall not oppress an hired servant, that is poor and needy. The Prophet
Ezekiel complaining of the people of the Jews, The people of the land (says
he) have used oppression, and exercised robbery, and have vexed the poor and
needy: yea, they have oppressed the stranger wrongfully, Ezekiel. 22.29.

SERMON. XII.
Psalm. 15.3. Nor does evil to his neighbor.


I Have showed how the evil that any do to others, is agravated:

1. In respect of the persons by whom it is done.

2. In respect of the persons to whom it is done.

Now to proceed, the evil that is done, is also aggravated 3. in respect of the
time when it is done. None ought to do evil to others at any time; yet it is
worse if they do it at some time, then if they do it an another. When Gehazi
had run after Naaman, and by forging a lie had gotten gifts of him, Elisha
aggravated his sin in respect of the time when it was committed. Is it a time
(said he) to receive money, and to receive garments, and olive-yards, and
vineyards, and sheep and oxen, and menservants, and maidservants? 2 King.
5.26. Surely there was no time for Gehazi, or any other to receive gifts in
that manner as he did; but least of all was it to be done at that time when he
did it. For now Naaman of a heathenish idolater was newly become a proselyte,
he was newly converted to the Jewish religion, professing that thenceforth he
would offer neither burnt-offering nor sacrifice unto other gods, but unto the
Lord, 2 King. 5.17. For Gehazi therefore now at this time to defraud and cheat
Namaan as he did, might have been enough both to alienate Naaman from his newly
embraced religion, and also to make it odious unto others, whom otherwise
Naaman, and the cure wrought upon him, might have been a means to convert unto
it. Thus also the Prophet Esaias taxes some not only for doing evil to their
neighbor, but also for doing it at such a time when especially they ought not
to have done it. Behold, (says he) in the day of your fast you find pleasure,
and exact all your labors, (or, as the marginal reading has it, Things
wherewith you grieve others.) Behold, you fast for strife and debate, and to
smite with the fist of wickedness: ye shall not fast as you do to day, to make
your voice to be heard on high, Isai. 58. verse. 3, 4.

4. The evil which some do to others, is aggravated in respect of the manner
how they do it, and that diverse ways:

1. When any Plot and study, devise and imagine evil against others. This was
an aggravation of the sin of Judas in betraying Christ, the Jewish rulers
having covenanted with him for 30. pieces of silver, from that time forth he
sought opportunity to betray him, Matt. 26.16. Thus also David aggravated the
evil that Doeg did to him and others; Thy tongue devises mischief, (said he
unto him) like a sharp rasor, working deceitfully, Psalm. 52.2. He that
devises to do evil, (says Solomon) shall be called a mischievous person,
Prove. 24.8. That indeed shows a mischievous disposition, even the disposition
of the devil, who goes about seeking whom he may devour, 1 Pet. 5.8.
Therefore Solomon speaking of a naughty and wicked person, he describes him by
this; Frowardness (says he) is in his heart, he devises mischief
continually, he sows discord. Then he adds, Therefore shall his calamity
come suddenly, suddenly shall he be broken without remedy, Pro. 6. verse. 14,
15. And immediately after, speaking of those things, which the Lord does hate,
and which are an abomination unto him, among the rest he reckons this for one,
A heart that devises wicked imaginations, v. 18. The Prophet Micah cries woe to
those that are guilty in this kind. Woe to them that devise iniquity, and work
mischief upon their beds, Mic. 2.1. When they should be sleeping, they are
studying how to do mischief. But as they devise evil against others, so the
Prophet tells them God will devise evil against them, verse. 3.

2. When any take pleasure and delight in doing evil to others. Their feet run
to evil, and make have to shed blood, Prove. 1.16. Who rejoice to do evil, Prove.
2.14. They sleep not, except they have done mischief; and their sleep is taken
away, unless they cause some to fall, Pro. 4.16. Among those things that are
odious and abominable in the sight of God, he reckons feet, that be swift in
running to mischief; because that argues a great delight in it, Prove. 6.18. He
that is glad at calamities, (says he) shall not be unpunished, Prove. 17.5.
Though he be not the author of those calamities, yet if he be glad at them, he
shall not escape punishment; much less shall he escape, if he both be the
author of them, and also be glad at them.

3. When any do evil to others under a show of love and good affection, which
they bear toward them. The words of his mouth (says David) were smoother
then butter, but war was in his heart: his words were softer then oil, yet were
they drawn swords, Psa^. 55.21. One (says Jeremie) speaks graciously to his
neighbor, with his mouth; but in his heart he lays his wait, Jer. 9.8. Thus
Saul pretended much love and respect to David, he would needs make him his son
in law; but it was that his daughter might be a snare unto him, and that by
that means he might work his ruin, 1 Samuel 18. So Absalom made as if Amnon
were very dear unto him, by all means he must have him a ghest at his table;
but it was only to this end, that so he might cause his servants to slay him, 2 Samuel 13. Thus also Joab under a pretense of love treacherously slew first
Abner, and after that Amasa, 2 Samuel 3. and 20. Chap. Joab took Abner aside in
the gate, to speak with him quietly, and smote him there under the fifth rib,
that he died. In like manner he dealt with Amasa, or rather worse; Art thou in
health, my brother? (said he unto him) and he took him by the beard to kiss
him, and then smote him in the fifth rib, and shed out his bowels to the
ground. Thus also Judas pretended love and respect to Christ, saying, Hail
Master, and kissing him; but by that means he betrayed him into the hands of
those that sought his life. Judas, betrayest thou the Son of man with a kiss?
said Christ unto him, Luke 22.48. It was too bad to betray him it all, but much
worse to do it in that manner.

4. The evil that is done to any, is aggravated, when it is done under a form
of justice. As Ahab by the Counsel of Jezabel caused Naboth to be accused,
condemned, and put to death as one that had blasphemed God and the king, when
indeed he was guilty of no such thing, but Ahab would by any means have his
life, that so he might have his vineyard, 1 King. 21. Thus also the adversaries
of our Savior dealt with him, they urged Pilate to condemn him that he might
be crucified; and when Pilate said unto them, What accusation do you bring
against this man? Quae venit indigne poena, dolenda venit. Ovid.
they answered, If he were not a malefactor, we would not have delivered him
up unto thee, John 18.29, 30. This is to turn judgment to wormwood, Amos 5.7.
to make that which should be most sweet, to be most bitter. See also Amos 6.12.

5. When any under pretense of piety and religion do evil to their neighbor,
this is a great aggravation of it. As the sons of Jacob pretending that they
might not join in affinity with such as were uncircumcised, and had not the
badge of their religion, by that means got the men of Schechem to circumcise
themselves; and then when they were sore, and not able to stand up in their own
defense, they came upon them, and slew them, Genesis 34. So Absalom, under a
color of religion, he had made a vow (forsooth,) and must needs go to Hebron,
to pay it; thus did he conspire against David, and sought to take away both
life and kingdom from him, 2 Samuel 15. Ahab also and Jezebel seeking how to get
the life and vineyard of Naboth, they pretended religion and piety; they
proclaimed a fast, that so they might accomplish their design against Naboth,
and cause him to be put to death as a blasphemer; it being the custom (it
seems) among the Israelites, in their solemn fasts to inquire more strictly
into men's ways, and to inflict punishment more severely upon transgressors, 1
King. 21. Thus also Herod, under a pretense of going to worship Christ, sought
to slay him, Mat. 2.8. And the Scribes and Pharisees for a pretense made long
prayers, that they might devour widows hou^es; for which our Savior cried woe
unto them, and said, that therefore they should receive the greater damnation,
Mat. 23.14.



1. Nature it self does teach thus much, that one ought not to do evil to
another. The very heathens, who had nothing but the light and law of nature to
direct them, had laws against murder, theft, and the like. Yea, it is said of
Alexander Severus, a heathen Emperor, Bucholcer. in Chronol.
that he was so delighted with this saying, Quod tibi non vis fieri, alteri ne
feceris; That which thou would not have done to thee, do not thou to
another, that he caused it to be written on the walls of houses, and to be
publicly proclaimed by a crier, that all might the better take notice of it
and observe it. Thus (as the Apostle says) the Gentiles which have not the
law, (not written as the Jews had, and we have) do by nature the things
contained in the law; these having not the law, are a law unto themselves, Romans
2.14. And is it not then a most gross and shameful thing, if we having not only
the dim light of nature, but the clear light of Scripture, either know not, or
regard not this duty? Shall not the very heathens rise up in judgment against
us, and condemn us? Shall not uncircumsion, (says the Apostle) which is by
nature, if it fulfill the law, judge thee, who by the letter and circumcision
do transgress the law? Romans 2.27. He that knew his Masters will (says our
Savior) and did it not, shall be beaten with many stripes, Luke 12.48. And if
any have the means of knowledge, and regard them not, but are willingly
ignorant, (2 Pet. 3.5. their ignorance does no whit excuse them, but condemn
them rather, Hos. 4.6.

2. Innocent and harmless conversation is a thing that does much grace
religion; it makes religion beauteous and lovely in the eyes of aliens, it
procures peace and quietness to the professors of it: but the contrary does
much disgrace religion; it makes religion stink in the nostrils of aliens, and
brings trouble and persecution upon those that profess it. Lego in Romanorum
Hostoriis Alexandrum Severum Imp solitum dicere, ideo Christianos sibi placere,
quod quae sibi fieri vellent, allis id ipse facerent. Non dixisset fortasse, si
nostra vixisset aetate, neque mores nostros, sed legem laudare potuisset.
Maldon. ad Matthew. 7.12.
It is recorded of Alexander Severus, that though he were no Christian himself,
yet he was favorable to them, because he saw them careful to walk innocently,
and to do no otherwise to any, then they would be done to themselves. Let us
take heed of verifying that which one supposes, viz. that if that Emperor had
lived in our age, he would have been of another mind, and might rather have
commended our doctrine then our conversation. Pliny also, Plin. lib. 10. Epist
97.
a heathen man, and Governor of a Province under Trajan, a heathen Emperor,
writing unto the Emperor concerning Christians, who then were much persecuted,
testified of them, that all that could be proved against them was this, that
they used at set times to meet together before day, to worship Christ, and to
bind themselves to abstain from theft, murder, and adulteries, to keep their
promise, and the like. Whereupon the Emperor was moved to abate the fury of
the persecution. Trajan. ad Plin. ibid.
The Apostle therefore requires Christians to be blameless and harmless, the
Sons of God, without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse nation,
among whom they shine as lights in the world, Phil. 2.15. And speaking of
servants professing Christianity, he says, They must not purloyne, but show
all good fidelity; (and why?) that they may adorn the doctrine of God our
Savior in all things, Tit. 2. verse. 10. S. Peter also exhorts Christians to
have their conversation honest among the Gentiles, that whereas (says he) they
speak against you as evil doers, they may by your good works which they shall
behold, glorify God in the day of visitation, 1 Pet. 2.12. This was doubtless
a great cause why Abraham found so much respect among the Hittites, as we read
he did, Genesis 23.6, 11. They saw him walk so unblameably, and carry himself so
justly among them. On the other side, when the sons of Jacob had dealt
perfidiously with the Shechemites, and acted great cruelty upon them, Jacob
said to Simeon and Levi, who were chief authors and actours of that tragedy,
You have troubled me, to make me to stink among the inhabitants of the land,
among the Canaanites, and the Perizzites, and I being few in number, they shall
gather themselves together against me, and slay me, and I shall be destroyed
and my house, Genesis 34.30. This had surely been the fruit and effect of their
injurious dealing, but that God was gracious to Jacob, and re^^rained the
people of those parts, and suffered them not to fall upon him and his family,
as otherwise they would have done, Genesis 35.5. So Nehemiah hearing how after the
return out of captivity some among the Jews oppressed their brethren, he
reprooved them, saying, It is not good that ye do: ought ye not to walk in the
fear of our God, because of the reproach of the heathens our enemies? Nehem.
5.9. As if he should say, If ye carry your selves in this manner, and be thus
injurious one to another, the heathens about us, that hate us, will be ready to
reproach not only you, but your religion, and your God also.

3. To refrain from doing evil unto others is a thing so pleasing unto God,
and the contrary is so odious in his sight, that if any shall think (as some
do) to honor God with that which they have injustly gotten from others, God is
so far from accepting of it, that he abhorres it. For I the Lord (says he)
love judgment, and hate robbery for burnt-offering, Isai. 61.8. How vain and
foolish then are they, who if they build an hospital, or bestow a little for
charitable uses, think it will make amends for all oppression and unjust
dealing? Honor the Lord with thy substance, says the wise man, Prove. 3.9. It
must be thine own, well and honestly go^ten, else thou must not think to honor
God with it. So he bids thee, Cast thy bread upon the waters, Eccles. 11.1.
Give to the poor, but of that which is thine own. Thus the Prophet Esaias also
speaking of the fast, Pluchreque addidit, tuum ne de rapina facias eleemosynam.
Hieron. in Isai 58.
which God has chosen, Is it not (says he) to deal thy bread to the hungry?
Isai. 58.7. Zacheus was mindful of this, and careful to observe it. For having
said that he would give half of his goods to the poor, lest any should suspect
that he having been chief among the Publicanes, did but give to the poor that
which he had wrongfully gotten from others, immediately he added, And if I have
taken any thing from any man by false accusation, I restore him fourefold, Luke
19.8.

4. Though such as do evil unto others, by their wit, wealth, power, friends,
and the like, may escape the judgment of man, yet can they not escape Gods
judgment. For God has appointed a day, wherein he will judge the world in
righteousness, Act 17.31. He will render to every man according to his deeds,
Romans 2.6. Tribulation and anguish upon every soul of man that does evil, verse.
9. Therefore (as the wise man does admonish) Rob not the poor, because he is
poor; neither oppress the afflicted in the gate. For the Lord will plead
their cause, and spoil the soul of those that spoiled them, Prove. 22.22, 23.
Let no man (says the Apostle) go beyond, and defraud his brother in any
matter, because that the Lord is the avenger of all such, 1 Thessalonians. 4.6. Though
man either cannot, or will not avenge the wrong that is done, yet God both can
and will do it. He that does wrong (says the same Apostle) shall receive for
the wrong that he has done: and there is no respect of persons, Col. 3.25.
With God there is not; and therefore immediately after, the Apostle exhorts
Masters, saying, Give unto your servants that which is just and equal, knowing
that ye also have a Master in heaven, Col. 4.1. Job considered this, and
therefore would not any way wrong his meanest servant. If I did despise says
he) the cause of my manservant, or of my maidservant, when they contended
with me: what then shall I do when God rises up? and when he visits, what
shall I answer him? Did not he that made me in the womb, make him? and did not
one fashion us in the womb? Job. 31.13, 14, 15. Thus it is, as Elihu also
observes, God accepts not the persons of princes, nor regards the rich more
then the poor: for they are all the works of his hands, Job 34.19. Job
therefore again professes, that considering the power and justice of God, he
durst not oppress any, though in respect of men he could have escaped well
enough. If I have lift up mine hand (says he) against the fatherless, when I
saw my help in the gate; Then let mine arm fall from my shoulder blade, and
mine arm be broken from the bone. For destruction from God was a terror unto
me; and by reason of his highness I could not endure, Job 31.21, 22, 23. So
Paul says, that because he believes that there shall be a resurrection both
of the just and the unjust, that all shall rise again, and be judged according
to their ways and doings; therefore he did exercise himself to have always a
conscience void of offense toward God, and toward men, Act. 24.15, 16.

5. Such as offend in this kind, viz. by doing evil unto others, God does
usually plague even here in this world, either in their own persons, or in
their posterity, or in both. Because he has oppressed, and has forsaken the
poor, because he has violently taken away an house, which he builded not:
Surely he shall not feel quietness in his belly, he shall not save of that
which he desired. There shall none of his meat be left, therefore shall no man
look for his goods. In the fullness of his sufficiency he shall be in straits:
every hand of the wicked shall be against him. When he is about to fill his
belly, God shall cast the fury of his wrath upon him, and shall rain it upon
him while he is eating. He shall flee from the iron weapon, and the bow of
steel shall strike him thorough. It is drawn, and comes out of his body: yea
the glistering sword comes out of his gall: terrors are upon him. All
darkness shall be hid in his secret places: a fire not blown shall consume him:
it shall go ill with him that is left in his tabernacle, etc. Job 20.19, etc.
Gehazi by his unjustly gotten goods got the leprosy both to himself, and to
his posterity after him; The leprosy of Naaman (said Elisha to him) shall
cleave to thee, and to thy seed for ever, 2 King. 5.27. So the king of Babylon
consulted shame to his house by cutting off many people, and sinned against his
soul, Hab. 2.10. In him the proverb was verified, De male quaesitis vix gaudet
tertius hares, The third heir does scarce enjoy that which is unjustly gotten.
For whereas Nebucadnezzar by oppression, cruelty and unjust dealing purchased a
great dominion, his sons son Belshazzar was deprived of all, and of his life
also; he was slain, and the kingdom was translated to the Medes and Persians,
Dan. 5. See Dan. 5.18. and 22. with 2 King. 25.27. and Jer. 27.7.
And that the judgment may be the more remarkable, God does often punish such
transgressors even in the same kind, rendering unto them measure for measure,
and dealing with them as they did deal with others, according to that of our
Savior, With what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again, Matthew.
7.2. Thus Pharaoh and the Egyptians drowning the male-children of the
Israelites in the river, God first turned their waters into blood, and
afterward overwhelmed them in the red sea, Exodus 1. and 7. and 14. By way of
allusion to the former judgment is that spoken, where the pouring out of the
vials of Gods wrath upon Babylon (the Romish Babylon) is prophesied; And the
third Angel powered out his vial upon the rivers, and fountains of waters, and
they became blood. And I heard the Angel of the waters say, Thou art righteous,
O Lord, which art, and wast, and shall be, because thou have judged thus. For
they have shed the blood of Saints, and Prophets, and thou have given them
blood to drink, for they are worthy, Revel. 16.4, 5, 6. Thus also God punished
Ahab and Jezabel for the evil which they did unto Naboth. First he threatened,
saying to Ahab by Eliah, Have thou killed, and also taken possession? -- In the
place were the dogs licked the blood of Naboth, shall dogs lick thy blood,
even thine, 1 King. 21.19. And of Jezabel also spoke the Lord, saying, The dogs
shall eat Jezabel by the wall of Jezreel, verse. 23. And both the one and the
other was fulfilled, as we read 1 King. 22.38. and 2 King. 9.35. Memorable to
this purpose is that of Adonibezek, who when the Israelites had taken him, and
cut off his thumbes and great toes, confessed saying, Threescore and ten kings
having their thumbes and their great toes cut off, gathered their meat under my
table: as I have done, so God has requited me, Judge. 1.6, 7. Thus God will
punish even his own children, if they be guilty in this kind. Wherefore have
thou despised the commandment of the Lord, (said he to David by the Prophet
Nathan) to do evil in his sight? thou have killed Vriah the Hittite with the
sword, and have taken his wife to be thy wife, and have slain him with the
sword of the children of Ammon. Now therefore the sword shall never depart from
thine house, etc. Behold, I will raise up evil against thee out of thine own
house, and I will take thy wives before thine eyes, and give them unto thy
neighbor, and he shall lie with thy wives in the sight of the sun, 2 Samuel
12.9, 10, 11. So because Joseph's brethren showed themselves cruel and inhumane
^^wards him, therefore God brought trouble and distress upon them; as they
would not hear him when he besought them, so neither when they pleaded for
themselves could they be heard, Genesis 42.21, 22. Yea many times God brings it so
to pass, that the evil which some intended for others, does fall upon
themselves. Haman prepared gallows for Mordecai, but was hanged thereon
himself, Esth. 5. and 7. And whereas he plotted utterly to destroy the Jews,
the destruction did light upon his own family, Esth. 3. and 9. So Saul seeking
to destroy David by the Philistines, was himself together with his sons slain
by them, 1 Samuel 18.25. with 31.6. Thus also Daniels accusers thinking to have
him devoured by the lions, were themselves devoured by them; Dan. 6. verse. 24*
Thus (as the wise man observes) Whosoever diggeth a pit, shall fall therein: and he
that rolleth a stone, it will return upon him, Proverb. 26.27. He made a pit
(says David) and dug it, and is fallen into the ditch which he made. His
mischief shall return upon his own head, and his violent dealing shall come
down upon his own pate, Psalm. 7. verses 15, 16. The heathen (says he) are
sunk down into the pit that they made, in the net which they hid, is their own
foot taken, Psalm. 9. verse. 15. And verse. 16. The wicked is snared in the work
of his own hands.

SERMON. XIII.
Psalm. 15.3. Nor does evil to his neighbor.


BUT now concerning this property of a citizen of heaven, and an heir of
salvation, to wit, to do no evil to his neighbor, though it be expressed
negatively, yet it implies the affirmation of the contrary, viz. that he does
good to his neighbor. For as these special negatives, Thou shall not kill,
Thou shall not commit adultery, Though shall not steal, Thou shall not bear
false witness against thy neighbor; as these, I say, include in them special
affirmatives, requiring us to preserve (what in us lies) our neighbors life,
chastity, goods and good name: so this general negative, not to do evil unto
others, includes in it a general affirmative, to do them good. This is
requisite as well as the other.

For 1. As the doing of evil is forbidden, so the doing of good is commanded, I
mean, expressly commanded. Depart from evil, and do good, Psalm. 34.14. Cease
to do evil, learn to do well, Isai 1.16, 17. Therefore as it is good not to do
evil, so it is evil not to do good: because as it is good not to do that which
is forbidden, so it is evil not to do that which is commanded.

2. Gods example does teach this, that all ought not only not to do evil, but
also to do good unto others. Thou art good, and do good, says David unto
God, Psalm. 119.68. He left not himself without witness, Paul) in that he did
good, giving us rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with
food and gladness, Act. 14.16. Be ye therefore (says he) followers of God as
dear children, Ephesians. 5.1. As he who has called you is holy, (says Peter) be
ye also holy in all manner of conversation, 1 Pet. 1.15.

3. Christ's example likewise does teach the same. He went about doing good, and
healing all that were oppressed of the devil, Act. 10.38. Now if we challenge
interest in Christ, and relation to him, we must imitate him. For he left us an
example that we should follow his steps, 1 Pet. 2.21. And if we be his indeed,
we will follow it. My sheep (says he) hear my voice, and I know them, and
they follow me, John 10.27. He that says he abides in him (says S. John,
speaking of Christ) ought himself to walk even as he walked, 1 John 2.6.

4. Such as shall inherit heaven and eternal life, are termed sheep, John
10.27. and compared unto sheep, Matthew. 25.33. Now sheep are not only harmless
creatures, but they are also profitable creatures. Thy teeth (says Christ to
his spouse the Church) are like a flock of sheep, that are even shorn, which
came up from the washing, whereof every one bears twins, and there is none
barren among them, Cant. 4.2. All true believers, and members of the Church,
bring forth twins, Fructum geminae charitatis, the fruit of a double love, of
love toward God, and of love toward their neighbor.

5. Justice does require this, that we should do good unto others. Withhold not
good (says Solomon) from them to whom it is due, Proverb. 3.27. that is, from
those that have need of it, as the Greek interpreters, and also Junius and
Tremell^us do express it. Lxx. (...). Jun. and Trem. Ne cohibeto bonum ab iis
qui opus habent.
Hence doing good in this kind is called righteousness, Psalm. 112.9. and 2.
Cor. 9.9. He has dispersed abroad, he has given to the poor: his
righteousness endures for ever. Cum largitatem pauperibus impensam
praemisisset, non hanc vocare misericordiam, sed justitiam maluit; quid quod a
communi Domino tribuitur justum est ut qui accipiunt, eo communiter utantur.
Gregor.
And in the Chaldee and Syriack language, (...) Tsiaka, and (...) Tsitdketha,
which properly signifies righteousness, is used for alms, and giving to the
poor. It is just and righteous, that men should do good one to another, Cum
quae libet necessaria indigentibus ministramus, sua illis reddimus, non nostra
largimur: justitiae potius debitum exoluimus, quam misericordiae opus implemus.
Idem.
that such as have to spare, should impart to those that want. For men are not
lords and owners of those things which they have, but stewards only. Nabal
therefore did argue like himself; when David being in distress sent unto him
to desire some relief of him, he answered the messengers, saying, Who is
David, etc. Shall I then take my bread, and my water, and my flesh, that I have
killed f^r my shearers, and give it unto men whom I know not whence they be? 1 Samuel 25.10, 11. Had he been any thing, but a Nabal (that is, a fool) he might
have known, that his bread, his water, his flesh, whatsoever he had, was not so
his, but that he was bound to distribute to such as stood in need. As every one
has received the gift (says S. Peter) so minister the same one to another, as
good stewards of the manifold grace of God, 1 Pet. 4.10. They are therefore
injurious unto others, and deprive them of their due, who seeing them in need,
and being able to help them, yet will not do it.

6. Such as refuse to do good unto others when they may and ought, not only
withhold their right from them, but also are guilty of all the evil that for
want of succor and relief does befall them. When some watched our Savior to
see whether he would heal a man on the Sabbath day, Pasce fame morientem, si
non paveris, occidisti?
he said unto them, Is it lawful to do good on the Sabbath days, or to do
evil? to save life, or to kill? Mark 3.4. Which words imply, that not to do
good, when ability serves, and occasion requires, is to do evil; not to save
life in this case, is to kill.

7. Life and salvation is promised to, and conferred upon such as are careful
rightly to perform this duty: and on the other side, death and damnation is
threatened to, and inflicted upon such as neglect it. Charge them that are rich
in this world (says the Apostle) that they be not high-minded, nor trust in
uncertain riches, but in the living God, who gives us richly all things to
enjoy: That they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to distribute,
willing to communicate; Laying up in store for themselves a good foundation
against the time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal life, 1 Timothy 6.17,
18, 19. As these good works are fruits of faith, which works through love,
Gal. 5.6. So they shall procure a reward, and that no less then eternal life.
Though they be not meritorious, nor properly deserve any reward, much less
such a reward. When ye have done all those things that are commanded you,
(says Christ) say, We are unprofitable servants; we have done that which was
our duty to do, Luke 17.10. The Apostle having spoken of the good that
Onesiphorus did unto him; how he often refreshed him, and was not ashamed of his
chain, but when he was at Rome, (where the Apostle was a prisoner) sought him
out very diligently, and found him; The Lord (says he) grant unto him, that he
may find mercy of the Lord in that day, 2 Timothy 1. verse. 16, 17, 18. So that the
reward of well-doing is of Gods mercy, not of man's merit. Meritum meus est
miseratio Domini. Bern.
Yet rewarded it shall be, even with the reward of the inheritance, Col. 3.
verse. 24. That inheritance, which is incorruptible, and undefiled, and fades
not away, reserved in heaven for us, 1 Pet. 1.4. Come ye blessed of my Father,
(will Christ say to the elect at the last day) inherit you the kingdom
prepared for you from the foundation of the world. For I was an hungered, and ye
fed me; I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink, etc. Matthew. 25.34, etc. They did
it to him in his members, as he presently explaines it. On the otherside, to
the reprobate he will say, Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire,
prepared for the devil and his angels. For I was hungered, and ye fed me not;
thirsty, and ye gave me no drink, etc. Matthew. 25.41, etc. And the rich man
mentioned Luke 16. was cast into hell, not (that we read) for oppressing, or
doing evil unto others; but only for not doing good unto them. So it is said,
Every tree (not only that brings forth evil fruit, but) that brings not
forth good fruit, is hewn down, and cast into the fire, Matt. 3.10. And the
barren figtree is threatened to be cut down, Luke 13.6, etc.

Now in doing good to others observe these directions:

1. Do it whiles time and opportunity serves. As we have opportunity, let us
do good, Gal. 6.10. Some when they die it may be will do something in this
kind, but while they live they will do nothing. But consider:

1. If thou put off thy doing good till thou die, thou can not tell
whether the good thou intendest, ever shall be done or no. Executours (as one
says well and wittily) often prove Executioners; that which was intended one
way, is often employed another way quite contrary.

2. Not to do good until death is not so acceptable either to God or man. Not
grudgingly, nor of necessity; (says the Apostle) for God loves a cheerful
giver, 2 Cor. 9.7. But if thou will do nothing while thou live, it appears
that thou do it grudgingly and of necessity: Munera, quae tibi dat moriens,
ea munera non sunt.
because thou can no longer hold it thy self, therefore thou partest with it
to others; if thou might live always, thou would never (it seems) do
any good to others at all. Therefore (as Solomon exhorts) in the morning sow
thy seed, Eccles. 11.6. Begin betimes to do good: be like Dorcas, of whom it is
said, that she was full of good works, and almsdeeds which she did, Act.
9.36. When she was dead, the widows showed Peter the coats and garments, which
she had made while she was with them, verse. 39.

2. Continue so doing. As we have opportunity, let us do good, Gal. 6.10. that
is, both whiles we have opportunity, and also as long as we have opportunity.
Let us not be weary of well doing; for in due time we shall reap, if we faint
not, Gal. 6.9. In the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening let not thine
hand be still, Eccles. 6. Begin betimes, and hold out unto the end.

3. Do good to all, as occasion requires, and ability serves. As we have
opportunity, (says the Apostle) let us do good unto all men, Gal. 6.10. To
some indeed more especially we ought to do it, as the Apostle there adds,
especially to those that are of the household of faith. Thus David says that
his goodness did extend to the saints, that is, to them principally, though not
to them only, Psalm. 16.3. And our Savior shows that at the last day he will
chiefly take notice of the good that was done, or not done to such, namely the
saints, and those that are of the household of faith. Verily I say unto you,
Inasmuch as ye have done it to one of the least of these my brethren, you have
done it unto me, Matthew. 25.40. And verse. 45. Verily I say unto you, Inasmuch as
you have not done it to one of the least of these, you did it not to me. So
also caeteris paribus, if other respects be alike, we are to do good to
kinsfolks, friends and acquaintance rather then to others, their necessities
being as great as the necessities of others. The Apostle having said, Honor,
that is, relieve widows that are widows indeed, that is, that are desolate,
and have none to provide for them; he adds immediately; But if any widow have
children or nephews, let them (viz. those children or nephews) learn to show
piety (or as the margent has it, kindness) at home, and to require their
parents, for that is good and acceptable before God, 1 Timothy 5.3, 4. And verse.
8. But if any provide not for his own, and chiefly for those of his own house
(or according to the marginal reading, kindred) he has denied the faith, and
is worse then an infidel. Yet our beneficence must not be confined to some, and
restramed from others, but it must be (so far as we are able, extended unto
all. Though they be wicked and ungodly, yet if need be, we must help, and
succor them. As we have opportunity we must do good, not only to those that
are of the houlshold of faith, but unto all, therefore even so such as are
aliens from the faith, and enemies unto it. Our Savior bids, Be ye merciful at
your heavenly Father is merciful, Luke 6.36. And immediately before, he shows
how merciful God is; For he is kind (says he) to the unthankful and to the
evil, verse. 35. He makes his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and
sends rain on the just, and on the unjust, Matthew. 5.45. This Chrysostom
presses with great vehemency: (...). Chrysostom.
Though he that asks relief af thee (says he) be a murderer, though he be a
robber, whatsoever he be, do thou not think him worthy of a piece of bread,
or of a little money? Yet thy Lord does even cause his sun to shine upon him. It
is not merit, but misery that is the object of mercy. (...). Chrysostom.

B^neficia impendamus non inquirentes merita, quod spectat ad justitiam; sed
subvenientes indigentiae, quod spectat ad misericordiam. Simon de Cassia.

Deus non cui detur, sed quo animo detur attendit. Aug. de Civ. Dei, lib. 21.
cap. 27.


See thou therefore any in misery? look no further, that is enough why thou
should show mercy. This also is to be considered, that the good which is
done to any, is not accepted of God according to the qualification of him to
whom it is done, but according to the affection of him that does it. Some may
here object that in 2 Chronicles. 19.2. Should thou help the ungodly, and love
them that hate the Lord? there fore wrath is upon thee from before the Lord.
But I answer, That was spoken unto Jehoshaphat, who joined, Ne pigrescant in
hoc viscera misericordiae, quia tibi homo peccator occurrit: aliud quod homo,
aliud quod peccator: quod homo, opus Dei; quod peccator, opus hominis: da operi
Dei, noli operi hominis. August. in Psalm. 102.
with Ahab a wicked man, and assisted him in a wicked enterprise, to wit, in
going up to battle against Ramoth-Gilead, when as God by the Prophet Micaiah
had expressly declared his mind against it. See 2 Chronicles. 18. Thus indeed the
wicked are not to be helped, not so as to maintain them in their wickedness,
but so as to relieve them their distress, In peccatore duo sunt, culpa and
natura. Est subveniendum peccatori quantum ad sustentationem naturae, non autem
quantum ad fomentum culpae. Aquin. 22. quaest. 31. art. 2.
they are to be helped. Again, although they be mere strangers to us, such as
we never saw before, nor it may be shall ever see again, yet if the case and
condition that they are in call for it, we ought to do them good. Our Savior
by a parable, Luke 10.30, etc. teaches us, that though one be otherwise never
so much a stranger, yet we are to account him a neighbor; and if he stand in
need, to afford him succor. Though they be such as are never likely to make
requital, yet we must not refuse to do them good. If you do good (says Christ)
to them which do good to you, what thank have ye? for sinners also do even the
same, Luke 6.33. And verse. 34. Do good (says he) and lend, hoping for nothing
again, that is, not hoping to receive again the like courtesy) and your reward
shall be great in heaven, and ye shall be the children of the Highest. The more
we do good to those that are not able to requite us, the more we resemble God,
who does good to all, but cannot be requited by any. And the less able men are
to requite us, the more will God requite us; if we do them good for his sake.
When thou make a dinner, or a supper, (says Christ) call not thy friends,
nor thy brethren, nor thy kinsmen, nor thy rich neighbors, (only such as are
able, and likely to requite thy kindness) lest they also bid thee again, and a
recompense be made thee. But when thou make a feast, call the poor, the
maimed, the lame, and the blind. And thou shall be blessed, for they cannot
recompense thee; for thou shall be recompensed at the resurrection of the just,
Luke 14.12, 13, 14.

Finally, though they be our enemies, yet if their necessities require it, and
we be able to do it, we ought to do them good. If thou meet thine enemies ox
or his ass going astray, thou shall surely bring it back to him again. If thou
see the ass of him that hates thee, lying under his burden, and would
forbear to help him, thou shall surely help with him, Exodus 23.4, 5. If thine
enemy be hungry, give him bread to eat; and if he be thirsty, give him water to
drink. For thou shall heap coals of fire on his head, (either melt him with
thy kindness, or bring more wrath upon him for his obstinacy and ingratitude)
and the Lord shall reward thee, Pro. 25.21, 22. Romans 12.20. You have heard that
it has been said, (viz. by the Scribes and Pharisees, who did put false
glosses upon the law of God) thou shall love thy neighbor, and hate thine
enemy. But I say unto you, Love your enemies; bless them that curse you; do
good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you and
persecute you, Mar. 5.43, 44,

4. Do good to others, especially in respect of their souls. Christ went about
doing good, and healing all that were oppressed of the devil, Act. 10.38. He
healed those that were oppressed of the devil corporally, but more especially
those that were spiritually oppressed of him: his chief care was for the soul.
So Paul especially labored to do good to the souls of others; I will very
gladly spend, and be spent (says he) for you, 2 Cor. 12.15. In the Original
(as is noted in the margent) it is, for your souls. Thus ought Ministers to
care for the souls of people, feeding the flock of God, which is among them, 1
Pet. 5.2. Feeding them with knowledge and with understanding, Jer. 3.15. So
ought parents chiefly to provide for the souls of their children, bringing them
up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, Ephesians. 6.4. And masters should
have special care of the souls of their servants, that both they themselves,
and their house also (even all of their family) may serve the Lord, Josh. 24.
verse. 15. And generally all should especially do good to the souls of others,
teaching and admonishing one another, Col. 3.16. and edifying one another, 1 Thessalonians. 5.11.

SERMON. XIV.
Psalm. 15.3. Nor takes up a reproach against his neighbor.


HEre follows a fourth special property of the person spoken of verse. 1. to
wit, one that shall abide in Gods tabernacle, and dwell in his holy hill; he is
one that takes not up a reproach against his neighbor.

By neighbors here, as in the words going before, is meant any other.

By reproach is meant any speech, or gesture, or action, tending to the infamy
and disgrace of another. I have borne reproach, says David; then immediately
he adds, shame has covered my face, Psalm. 69.7. So Jeremie, We are
confounded, (says he) because we have heard reproach, shame has covered our
faces, Jer. 51.51. Which words also show that reproach does consist in speech,
(We have heard reproach) yet does it not only consist in speech, but in
gestures and actions also. Thou make us a reproach to our neighbors, (say
the people of God unto him) a scorn and derision to them that are round about
us. Thou make us a byword among the heathen; a shaking of the head among the
people, Psalm. 44.13, 14. The shaking of the head at one by way of scorn, is a
reproaching of him. I became (says David) a reproach unto them; when they
looked upon me, they shaked their heads, Psalm. 109.25. Thus some reproached
Christ when he was crucified, They that passed by railed on him, wagging their
heads, etc. Mark 15.29. So by way of derision to make a wide mouth, and to draw
out the tongue against any, is to reproach them, Isai. 57.4. And to do any
thing to another whereby to expose him to shame and contempt, Hanun took David's
messengers, and shaved off the one half of their beards, and cut off their
garments in the middle, even to their buttocks, and sent them away, 2 Samuel
10.4. This was a great reproach done unto them, The men were greatly ashamed,
verse. 5. So when by way of derision they put a scarlet robe upon Christ, and
platted a crown of thorns, and put it on his head, and put a reed into his
hand instead of a scepter, Matthew. 27.28, 29. Now to take up a reproach, is
either to raise and utter a reproach, or to receive and admit a reproach. The
Hebrew word (...) nasa will bear both: and some here interpret it the one way,
some the other; Jun. Non effert, he does not utter. Lxx. (...). Vulg. Non
accepit, he has not received. So the Geneva translation, that receives not.
And our last Translation instead of takes up, in the margent has, receives,
or endures. I shall treat of the words in both senses; and first in this, nor
takes up, that is, nor raises, or utters a reproach against his neighbor.

It is the property of those that have interest in God, and should be the care
of all that would be saved, not to raise, or utter a reproach against their
neighbor.

Whosoever (says Christ) shall say unto his brother, Racha, (which is a word
of reproach and contempt) shall be in danger of the council: but whosoever
shall say, Thou fool, (which is a higher degree of reproach) shall be in
danger of hell fire, Matthew. 5.22. So Paul reckons revilers among those that
shall not inherit the kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6.10. And speaking of such as
professing Christianity, yet live so unchristianly, that their society and
familiarity is to be avoided, he mentions a railer as one of this sort, 1
Cor. 5.11.

For the further proof of this point, there is the same argument as was used
before in the point, of backbiting. For he that reproacheth another, though he
speak nothing but what is true, yet he wants love, because he seeks to
disgrace him, whom he reproacheth. Now he that says he is in the light, and
hates his brother, is in darkness even until now. He that loves his brother,
abides in the light, and there is none occasion of stumbling in him. But he
that hates his brother, is in darkness, and walks in darkness, and knows
not whither he goes, because the darkness has blinded his eyes, 1 John 2.9,
10, 11. If that which he speaks by way of reproach be false, then wanting not
only love, but truth also, he falls into further condemnation.

In vain then do they flatter themselves, and presume

Some are of Nabals disposition; there is no speaking unto them; though one do
it never so calmly, never so respectively, he shall have nothing but reproaches
from them. He is such a son of Belial, (said they of Nabal) that a man cannot
speak to him, 1 Samuel 25. verse. 17. Though David showed all respect that might
be unto Nabal both by word and deed; he commanded his messengers to speak thus
unto him, Peace be both to thee, and peace be to thine house, and peace be to
all that thou have, 1 Samuel 25.6. And Nabals own servants confessed, that David
and his men were very good unto them, they were not hurt, nor missed any thing
as song as they were conversant with them; when they were in the fields, they
were a wall unto them both by night and by day, all the while they were with
them keeping sheep, verse. 15, 16. yet Behold, (said they) David sent messengers
out of the wilderness to salute our Master, and he railed on them, verse. 14.
Indeed he railed both on them, and on David that sent them. Who is David? (said
he) and who is the son of J^ssa? There be many servants now a days that break
away every one from his Master. Shall I then take my bread, and my water, and
my flesh that I have killed for my shearers, and give it unto men whom I know
not whence they be?

Some, though they be not of such a churlish spirit, yet if they receive any
injury or affront, or conceive any to be done them, presently they fa^l foul
upon those that did it, or whom they suppose to have done it, and load them
with reproaches for it. But Christ when he was reviled, reviled not again, 1
Pet. 2.23. And him Christians ought to follow, not rendering evil for evil, or
railing for railing, but contrariwise blessing, 1 Pet 3. v. 9. Thus Paul
professes that he did: Being reviled, (says he) we bless: being persecuted,
we suffer it: Being def^med, we entreat. We are made as the filth of the world,
and are the off scouring of all things to this day, 1 Cor. 4. verse. 12, 13. So
David complaining that some did seek after his life, and lay snares for him,
did speak mischievous things, and imagine deceits against him all the day
long; But I (says he) as a deaf man, heard not, and I was as a dumb man that
opens not his mouth. Thus I was as a man that hears not, and in whose mouth
are no reproofs, much less reproaches, Psalm. 38.12, 13, 14.

The Rabbis say, (...) That is, The world cannot subsist without patient
bearing of reproaches. Kimchi in Rad. (...)
Some if they have to do with their inferiors, and such as are under them*
think they may reproach them at their pleasure. But Job shows his integrity in
this, that he did not despise the cause of his manservant, nor of his
maidservant, when they contended with him, Job 31.13. He durst not rail on
them, and revile them, as some in such cases are apt to do. What then shall I
do (says he) when God stands up? and when he shall visit, what shall I answer
him? Did not he that made me in the womb, make him? and did not one fashion us
in the womb? verse. 14, 15.

But if it be not lawful to reproach inferiors, much less superiors. Thou
shall not revile the gods, (that is, Judges and Magistrates) neither shall thou
curse the ruler of thy people, Exodus 22. verse. 28. This precept Paul bethought
himself of, when having been (it seems) transported with passion, so as to
call Ananias the high priest a whited wall, some saying unto him, Revilest thou
Gods high priest? he answered, I wist not, brethren, that he was the
high priest? for it is written, Thou shall not speak evil of the ruler of thy
people, Act. 23.3, 4. They are not afraid (says S. Peter of some) to speak
evil of dignities: Whereas angels, which are greater in power and might, bring
not railing accusation against them before the Lord, 2 Pet. 2. verses 10, 11.
So also S. Jude taxing some, whom he calls filthy dreamers, says, they
despise dominion, and speak evil of dignities. Yet Michael the archangel, when
contending with the devil he disputed about the body of Moses, durst not bring
against him a railing accusation, but said, The Lord rebuke thee, Jude verse. 8,
9. This was the wickedness of Shimei, that when David his lord and sovereign
was persecuted by Absalom, he railed on him and reviled him most grievously,
calling him a man of Belial, a bloody man, and telling him that now God did
meet with him, and pay him home for all his wickedness. But God did at length
meet with Shimei himself for this, and pay him home for it. For though David
upon his submission and entreaty spared him, yet Solomon found out a way
whereby to bring that vengeance upon him, which he had deserved, 1 King. 2.44,
46.

Such also most haynously offend, who reproach God's Ministers. When little
children mocked the Prophet Elisha, calling him bald-pate, God presently sent
two shee-bears among them, which tare in pieces two and forty of them, 2 King.
2.23, 24.

So they also that reproach Gods people. Draw near hither ye sons of the
sorceresse, the seed of the adulterer, and the whore. Against whom do you sport
your selves? against whom make ye a wide mouth, and draw out the tongue? Isai.
57.3, 4.

Yet what more common with some, then to revile, or taunt both Gods people and
his Ministers? And especially when either Ministers or others (as their place
and calling does require) reproove them for their exorbitancies and
miss-doings, then they power out reproaches upon them. I am in derision daily
(says Jeremie) every one mocketh me. For since I spoke, I cried out, I cried,
violence and spoil: because the word of the Lord was made a reproach unto me,
and a derision daily, Jer. 20. verse. 7, 8. So when the man that was borne
blind pleaded with the Pharisees in the behalf of our Savior, and let them
see how perverse they were in their carriage toward him, they reviled him,
saying, Thou wast altogether borne in sins, and do thou teach us? John 9.34.
But let such is reproach those that reproove them, consider that of Solomon, or
rather of the Lord by Solomon, Prove. 1. verse. 22, -- 31. How long ye simple
ones will ye love simplicity, and scorners delight in their scorning? and fools
hate knowledge? Turn you at my reproof: behold, I will power out my Spirit
unto you, I will make known my words unto you. Because I called, and ye
refused; I stretched out my hand, and no man regarded: But ye set at naught all
my counsel, and would none of my reproof. I also will laugh at your calamity,
and mock when your fear comes. When your fear comes as a desolation, and
your destruction as a whirlwinde, when distress and anguish comes upon you;
Then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer; they shall seek me early,
but they shall not find me. For that they hated knowledge, and did not choose
the fear of the Lord: They would none of my counsel, they despised all my
reproof. Therefore shall they eat of the fruit of their own way, and be filled
with their own devices.



1. Reproaches though lightly and easily uttered, yet are not light and easy
to be endured. Indeed they that are reproached, Motives to refrain from
reproaching.
should consider what it is for which they are reproached. If it be for sin,
they should not be so much troubled at the reproach, as at the sin which is the
cause of it. David first prayed to be delivered from his sins, and then from
the reproach of men. Deliver me (said he) from all my transgressions, and make
me not a reproach to the foolish, Psalm. 39.8. If any be reproached for that
wherein they are not faulty, they have no reason to regard it. Hearken unto me
ye that know righteousness, (says the Lord) the people in whose heart is my
law: fear ye not the reproach of men, neither be afraid of their revilings.
For the moth shall eat them up like a garment, and the worm shall eat them
like wool: but my righteousness shall be for ever, and my salvation from
generation to generation, Isai. 51.7, 8. And if (as many times it happens)
any be reproached for well-doing, they have reason to rejoice in it. If ye be
reproached for the name of Christ, happy are you; for the spirit of glory, and
of God rests on you: on their part he is evil spoken of, but on your part he
is glorified, 1 Pet. 4.44. Blessed are ye (says Christ) when men shall revile
you, and persecute you, and speak all manner of evil against you falsely for my
sake. Rejoice and be exceeding glad; for great is your reward in heaven: for so
persecuted they the Prophets which were before you, Matthew. 5. verse. 11, 12. Yet
however reproach in it self considered is very grievous, and hard to bear.
Jeremie complains sore of this, that he was mocked and derided, Jer. 20.7, 8.
Habet enim aculeum quendam contumelia, quem pati etiam prudentes difficillime
possunt. Daven. in Col. 3.21.
It made him even ready to give over the work that God did set him about,
because thereby he saw himself exposed to reproach and derision. The word of
the Lord (says he) was a reproach unto me, and a derision daily. Then I said,
I will not make mention of him, nor speak any more in his name. But his word
was in my heart as a burning fire shut up in my bones, and I was weary with
forbearing, and I could not stay, Jerem. 20.8, 9. So the people of God make
their complaint unto him, saying, Thou make us a reproach to our neighbors,
a scorn and a derision to them that are round about us, Psalm. 44.13. See also
Psalm. 123.3, 4. So David in like manner complains, Thou have known my
reproach, (says he unto God) and my shame, and my dishonor; mine adversaries
are all before thee. Reproach has broken mine heart, and I am full of
heaviness, Psalm. 69.19, 20. Mockings are reckoned among the grievous
persecutions, which the godly endured, Heb. 11.36. Ismaels mocking of Isaac is
called by the Apostle a persecuting of him, Genesis 21.9. with Gal. 4. verse. 29.

2. Such as reproach others are foolish. Make me not a reproach to the foolish,
says David, Psalm. 39.8. Why do any reproach others? Is it for well-doing? What
more ab^urd and unreasonable then to reproach any for that for which they
should praise them? Woe unto them that call evil good, and good evil; that put
darkness for light, and light for darkness; that put bitter for sweet, and
sweet for bitter, Isai. 5.20. Such as speak evil of others, and revile them
because they will not run with them to the same excess of riot, they shall be
sure to give an account to him that is ready to judge both the quick and the
dead, Nil habet infelix paupertas durius in se, Quam quod ridiculos homines
facit. Horat.
1 Pet. 4.4, 5. Do any reproach others because they are poor, and of low
estate? This also is against reason. Whosoever mocketh the poor, reproacheth his
Maker, Prove. 17.5. For it is God that both makes rich, and makes poor, as he
pleases. The rich and the poor meet together: the Lord is the maker of them
all, Proverb. 22.2. The Lord makes poor, and makes rich, 1 Samuel 2.7. God
might have made thee poor, and the other rich; yea for ought thou know he
may yet do it. So if thou re-reproachest others because of any affliction that
they are in, consider that God might have sent, and yet may send the like
affliction, or worse upon thee. Besides, such as are poor, or any way
afflicted, ought to be pitied, and succored if it may be. To him that is
afflicted, pity should be showed, etc. Job 6.14. Do not then by reproaches
add more affliction unto such as are afflicted enough already. See what bitter
imprecations David, not by his own spirit, but by spirit of God, does power out
against those that persecute him, whom God has smitten, and talk to the grief
of those whom he has wounded, Psalm. 69 22, -- 26. Is it for sin that any
reproach others? Yet even that is no just cause why they should do it. If
others sin, we should mourn and pray for them, and as we have opportunity
admonish and reproove them, but not reproach them.

For 1. This is the way to make them worse and not better. It is true, God can
bring light out of darkness, and make a reproach work for the conversion of a
sinner, as Austine relates that his mother by this means was reclaimed from a
vice with which she had been infected: Aug. Conf^ss. lib. 9. cap. 8.
but the nature of reproach is such, as that it is more apt to work a quite
contrary effect. They that are reprooved, are ready to construe it so as if
they were reproached. Master, (said one to Christ) thus saying, thou reprochest
us also, Luke 11.45. This makes people so to distaste reproof; how much more
will they distaste it, when it plainly appears that they are reproached? Solomon
therefore requires wisdom in a reproover, as well as obedience in him that is
reprooved. As an ear-ring of gold, and an ornament of fine gold, so is a wise
reproover upon an obedient ear, Prove. 25 12. Now the wisdom of a reproover
consists much in this, that he reproove so as that it may appear to be a
reproof, but not a reproach; that his aim and endeavor is to reform, not to
defame.

2. Either thou have fallen thy self into as great sin, or may fall; and this
consideration should keep from reproaching others, though it be for sin. We
ought to speak evil of no man, to be no brawlers, but gentle, showing all
meekness unto all men. For we our selves also were sometimes foolish,
disobedient, deceived, serving diverse lusts and pleasures, etc. Titus 3.2, 3.
If a man be overtaken with a fault, ye that are spiritual restore such as one
with the spirit of meekness, considering thy self lest thou also be tempted,
Gal. 6.1. Especially if it appear that one has repented of his sin, he is not
to be reproached for it, nor upbraided with it. If the wicked will turn from
all his sins, etc. all his transgressions that he has committed, they shall
not be mentioned unto him, Ezekiel. 18.21, 22. God will not mention them so as to
impute them, therefore much less should we mention them so as to reproach for
them. It is observable, that Matthew mentioning himself among the Apostles,
calls himself the Publican, Matthew. 10. verse. 3. So magnifying the grace of
Christ toward him in making him an Apostle, who had been a Publican: but Mark
and Luke rehearsing the names of the Apostles, never term him so, Mark 3.18.
Luke 6.15. lest they might seem to reproach him. So Paul after he was
converted and called to be an Apostle, for the same reason acknowledges what
he had been, namely a blasphemer, and a persecutor, and injurious, 1 Timothy 1.13.
But Peter speaking of him, says, Our beloved brother Paul, 2 Pet. 3.15. And so
Paul speaking of Onesimus who had been a fugitive, one that had run away front
his master, and (as it seems) had also purloyned from him, yet now that he
was become a convert, Paul speaks most respectively and affectionately of him:
I beseech thee (says he to Philemon) for my son Onesimus, etc. Philem. v. 10.
And verse. 12. Thou therefore receive him, that is mine own bowels. And verse.
16. Not now as a servant, but above a servant, a brother beloved, specially to
me, but how much more unto thee, both in the flesh, and in the Lord?

3. Reproaches are many times a cause of much mischief. Grievous words stir
up anger, says Solomon, Proverb. 15.1. Now reproachful words are grievous
words, and so apt to stir up anger, and consequently to cause much mischief.
For wrath is cruel, and anger is outrageous, as the wise man also observes,
Prove. 27.4. The men of Ephraim reproaching the Gileadites, and saying, Ye
Gileadites are fugitives of Ephraim, among the Ephraimites, and among the
Manassites; the Gileadites were so exasperated against them, that they slew
forty and two thousand of them, Judge. 12.4, and 6. Thus a fools lips enter into
contention, and his mouth calls for strokes. A fools mouth is his
destruction, and his lips are the snare of his soul, Prove. 18.7, 8. And
therefore there is need to resolve with David, to take heed unto our ways,
that we offend not with our tongue, Psalm. 39.1. and to pray as he did, Set a
watch, O Lord, before my mouth, and keep the door of my lips, Psalm. 141.3.

But (may some say) is it not lawful in some case to use reproachful words?

I answer, Aquinas observes) may be considered either formally, Aquin. 2. 2.
and quaest. 7. art. 2.
to wit, in respect of the mind, and intention to dishonor and disgrace,
which indeed is it that does properly make a reproach: and so reproachful words
may in no case be used. Or a reproach may be considered materially in respect
of the words themselves; and so sometimes reproachful words may be used, to
wit, to correct and amend those against whom they are used. Thus the Prophet
Esaias called the rulers and people of Israel, rulers of Sodom, and people of
Gomorrah, Isai. 1.10. And Paul cried out, O foolish Galatians, etc. Are ye so
foolish? etc. Gal. 3.1, 3. So also our Savior called some of his disciples
fools, and slow of heart to believe, etc. Luke 24.25.

But (may some say again) may not one speak against another to disgrace him?
Quaest.


I answer, may beware of being seduced, or infected, or any way prejudiced by
him. Thus Christ called the Pharisees blind guides, Matthew. 23.16. Fools and
blind, verse. 19. Serpents, and generation of vipers, verse. 33. So Paul termed
Elymas full of all subtilty and mischief, the child of the devil, the enemy of
all righteousness, Act. 13.10. And speaking of others, Such (says he) are
false Apostles, deceitful walkers, transforming themselves into the Apostles of
Christ. And no marvel; for Satan himself is transformed into an angel of light.
Therefore it is no great thing if his Ministers also be transformed into the
Ministers of Christ, 2 Cor. 11.13, 14, 15. Such words are not properly to
disgrace those of whom they are used, they are not to take away their good
name, or to blemish their just and due reputation; but to discover their fraud,
hypocrisy and wickedness, and so to prevent that hurt, which otherwise were
likely to ensue.

SERMON. XV.
Psalm. 15.3. Nor takes up a reproach against his neighbor.


THe taking up of a reproach (as I have showed before) may be understood either
of the uttering of a reproach, or of the receiving, admitting and enduring of
it. In the former sense I have already handled the words; now I shall treat of
them in the latter sense: and so the obsevation is this:

It is the property of the saints, and the duty of all, not to receive, admit
or entertain a reproach against another, if they can hinder it.

That Exodus 23.1. Thou shall not raise a false report, may also be read, Thou
shall not receive a false report. So our Translatours render it in the margent,
so also the Geneva Translation, the Chaldee Paraphrast, (...) Chald. (...) Lxx.
(...). Vulg. Non suscipies.
the Greek Interpreters, and the vulgar Latin express it.

To receive and entertain a reproach against another, is,

1. Reasons why one should not receive a reproach against another.
To partake in the sin of him that does utter the reproach; even as he that
receives stolen goods, knowing them to be stolen, does partake in the theft.
Now all partnership in sin is to be avoided, When thou saw a thief, thou
consentedst unto him, and have been partaker with the adulterers, Psalm. 50.18.
Be not ye partakers with them, Ephesians. 5.7. And verse. 11. Have no fellowship
with the unfruitful works of darkness, but reproove them rather. Paraphrasis
Hierosolymitana Decalogi quinque posteriora praecepto ita interpretatur, ut
consort^um etiam eorum, qui res ibi prohibitas perpetrant, prohibeatur. Sic
enim habet, (...) Id est, Ne estote interfectores, neque sodalitiam habete cum
inter^ectoribus. Et sic in reliquis.
In like manner he exhorts Timothy, saying, Be not partaker of others men's
sins, keep thy self pure, 1 Timothy 5.22.

2. It is to judge rashly, which Christ forbids, saying, Judge not, to wit,
rashly; Matthew. 7 1. It concerns men sometimes not to slight and despise the
reports that they hear of others: as if it be told them, that such or such
conspire against them, or go about any way to do them hurt. In this case they
have reason to heed the report, so far forth as to provide for their own
safety. Alexander the Great (as is recorded of him) showed himself very
confident, Plut. in Alexand.
when being informed that his Physician was hired by Darius to poison him, yet
nevertheless without any fear or suspicion at all, he took the potion which
the Physician brought, and drank it, giving him the letter, which contained in
it the information, to read, whiles he was drinking. One may in such a case be
more bold then wise, more secure then safe. So it fared with Gedaliah, who when
he was told that Ishmael did conspire against him, and intended to slay him,
would not believe it; and so through his too much confidence he fell unto that
destruction, which otherwise he might have escaped, Jer. 40.14, 15, 16. with
Chap. 41. verse. 1, 2. So such as have authority over others, as Magistrates,
Parents, and Masters, if they hear of the misdemeanors of those that are
under them, they may and ought to regard it so as to search into the matter,
and to find out whether it be so or no: but they may not rashly believe what
is reported. This was David's fault in the matter of Mephibosheth, he was too
hasty to admit Ziba's false accusation that he brought against him, 2 Samuel
Chap. 16. When the builders of Babel were about that proud work, it is said,
that the Lord came down to see the city, and the tower which the children of
men builded, Genesis 11.5. So the Lord speaking unto Abraham of Sodom and
Gomorrah, Because (said he) the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is great, and because
their sin is very grievou^, I will go down now, and see whether they have done
altogether according to the cry of it, which is come unto me; and if not, I
will know, Genesis 18.20, 21. The Scripture in these places (as some of the
Rabbines observe) speaks of God after the manner of men, Vide si libet
Annotationes meas in Genesin ad loca citata.
to show that none ought to judge of reports until they understand the truth
of them. This course the Lord prescribed by Moses, saying, If thou shall hear
say in one of the cities, which the Lord thy God has given thee to dwell there,
saying, Certain men, the children of Belial, are gone out from among you, and
have withdrawn the inhabitants of their city, saying, Let us go and serve other
gods, which ye have not known: Then shall thou enquire and make search, and ask
diligently; and behold, if it be truth, and the thing certain that such
abomination is wrought among you: Thou shall surely smite the inhabitants of
that city with the edge of the sword, etc. Deuteronomy. 13.12, 13, 14, 15. This rule
Job observed; The cause (says he) which I knew not, I sought out, Job 29.16.
Thus Nicodemus pleaded in the behalf of Christ, when some were very forward to
condemn him: Does our Law (said he) judge any man before it hear him, and
know what he does? John 7.51. Yea Festus, a heathen man, showed that the law of
the Romans in this did concur with Gods law. For relating unto Agrippa the
matter concerning Paul, to wit, that the Jews were earnest to have judgment
against him, To whom (said he) I answered, that it is not the manner of the
Romans to deliver any man to die, before that he which is accused, have the
accusers face to face, and have license to answer for himself concerning the
crime laid against him, Act. 25.16. It is said of Alexander the Great, that
when any came unto him with an accusation against another, he would stop one
ear, reserving it for the defendant. He that is first in his own cause (says
Solomon) seems just: but his neighbor comes, and searches him, Prove.
18.17. This is that which we use to say, One tale is good until another be
told; and therefore it is meet to hear both parties. Audi alteram partem.
Qui statuit alquid part in audita altera;
Aequum licet sta^uerit, haud aequus fuerit.
Sen. Trag.
For if a man determine any thing upon the hearing only of one party, though
he determine nothing but that which is just, yet he is not just in so doing.
These two arguments prove that none ought to receive, admit or entertain a
reproach against his neighbor. And there are also two arguments to prove that
none ought to endure or suffer a reproach against his neighbor, if he can
hinder it.

1. He is guilty of that sin which is committed, Reasons why one should not
endure a reproach against another.
who might hinder it, and does not. Thou shall in any wise rebuke thy
neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him, Lev. 19.17. If thou do suffer sin
upon thy neighbor, when thou might preven^^^t, thou bring sin upon thy
self. So there the marginal reading has it, And not suffer sin for him, that
is, for not reprooving him, and so not preventing his sin. The Original will
bear that sense; and so the Chaldee Paraphrast, Heb. (...) Chald. (...) LXX.
(...). Vulg. Ne habeas super illo peccatum. (...)
the Septuagint, and the vulgar Latin Interpreter, do express it. The Hebrew
phrase is so used Levit. 22.9. They shall therefore keep mine ordinance, lest
they bear sin for it. Thus Eli is charged with those sins, which were
committed by his sons, 1 Samuel 2.29. because he did not what he might for the
reclaiming of them. His sons made themselves vile, and he restrained them not,
1 Samuel 3.13.

2. Every one is bound, as much as in him lies, to maintain the credit and
good name of his neighbor. The end of the commandment is charity, etc. 1 Timothy
1.5. Now charity is kind, 1 Cor. 13.4. It does good as occasion requires, and
opportunity is offered. That commandment, Thou shall not kill, binds us to
preserve the life of our neighbor, if we may. So also that, Thou shall not
bear false witness against thy neighbor, requires an endeavor to preserve
our neighbors good name, and consequently not to suffer him to be reproached,
if we may hinder it.

Detrahentes atque audientes pari reatu detinentur. Bern.
that such as reproach, and they that receive or suffer a reproach, are alike
guilty. What though the devil do not possess thy tongue, so as to make thee
speak reproachfully, yet if he possess thine ear, so that thou do willingly
hear thy neighbor reproached, is not that enough to make thee the devils
captive? The true mother of the child would either have it entire, or not at
all; but the pretended mother was willing to have it divided, 1 King. 3.26. So
God will either have all or none, but the devil will be content with a part,
because he knows that so he shall have all.

Some, whatsoever reports they hear, not only entertain them, but also
declare them again unto others; and think this a plea sufficient for them, that
they are not the first authors of those reports; they speak but what they
heard before. But do thou presently believe what thou hear? If so, thou
show thy self simple, to believe a thing merely because it is reported. The
simple (says Solomon) believes every word: but the prudent man looks well
to his going, Prove. 14.15. Much more is it simplicity and folly to report a
thing again, merely because thou have heard it. If thou do not believe the
report, thou art so much the more faulty, in that not believing it thy self,
yet thou divulgest it to others, that they may believe it. Indeed though thou
did believe, yea know assuredly that it is so as is reported unto thee, yet
if it tend only to the infamy and disgrace of thy neighbor, thou ought
neither to report it again, nor to suffer it to be reported, if thou may
prevent it; for love covers all sins, Prove. 10.12. But to report that, which
thou neither know, nor beleevest, this is most gross.

Some instead of suppressing reproaches against their neighbor, provoke others
to raise them. Report, say they, and we will report, Jer. 20.10. They delight
especially in such as come with tales and reports against their neighbor; such
are most welcome ghests unto them; they will feed the bellies of those that
feed their ears in this kind. But David was of another disposition, Whosoever
privily slandereth his neighbor (said he) him will I cut off, Psalm. 101.5. And
verse. 7. He that tells lies, shall not tarry in my sight. Quisquis amat
dictis absentis r^dere famam, Hanc mensa^ vetitam noveri^ esse sibi.
So it is recorded of Austine, that over his table he used to have two verses
written, which were to this affect, that it was no table for any that would
backbite and reproach their neighbor.

Let it then be the care of every one not so much as to

Motives not to receive or endure a reproach against another.
Consider 1. It is a sign one is naught himself, when he easily entertaineth an
evil report of another. A wicked doer (says Solomon) gives heed to false
lips, and a liar gives ear to a naughty tongue, Proverb. 17.4. If we our
selves be good, we will not lightly judge others evil, not hastily believe the
sinister reports that we hear of them.

2. Almost all the evil and mischief that comes by backbiting, tale-bearing
and whispering, comes through the fault of those that receive and entertain
the tales which are brought unto them. Whereas usually the talebearer hurts
three at once, himself, him to whom, and him of whom he speaks: if ear were
not given unto him, if his reports were not entertained, he should hurt none
but himself. Wherefore hear thou men's words, (said David to Saul) Saying,
Behold, David seeks thy hurt? 1 Samuel 24.9. If Saul had not given ear to
those that slandred David, as if he had conspired against him, both he had been
freed from much sin, and David also from much trouble.

3. Even the hurt that comes to the talebearer himself, is partly through his
fault that hearkneth unto him; for by this means-he is confirmed and encouraged
in his evil course. If a ruler (says Solomon) hearken to lies, all his
servants are wicked, Prove. 29.12. Such as are otherwise so disposed, will be
the more ready to carry tales, and to raise reports, when they know others
ready to receive them. Whereas if we did stop our ears from hearing tales, we
should stop the mouths of others from telling them. If there were no receivers,
(we say) there would be no thieves. So if there were no tale-hearers, there
would be no tale-bearers. The north-winde (says Solomon) drives away rain; so
does an angry countenance a backbiting tongue, Prove. 25.23. In the margent it
is otherwise read, viz. thus, The northwinde brings forth rain, so does a
backbiting tongue an angry countenance. And in that sense do the Chaldee
Paraphrast. R. Solomon and R. Levi take it; but the other reading is followed
by Aben Ezra, and the vulgar Latin Translatour. However, the sense comes in
effect all to one, and still it is spoken (as Aben Ezra notes, (...)) by way of
instruction and admonition, not to receive, or suffer a backbiting tongue. If
thou perceivest any begin to defame and reproach others, Non minus auribus quam
lingua fugias detractionem. -- Vt discat non libenter dicere, quod didicerit
non libenter audiri. Author Epistolae ad Demetr. virg. cap. 19.

Nemo invito auditori libenter ref^^^ Sagitta in lapidem nunquam figitur;
interdum resiliens percutit dirigentem. Discat detractor, dum te videt non
libenter audi e, non facile detrahere. Hieron. ad Nepotian. de vita Clericorum.


show him no countenance, lend no ear unto him, but frown upon him, or turn
away from him; one way or other make it appear that thou art not pleased with
him, and this will stop his mouth. As Paul did shake off the viper, so do thou
shake off a backbiter.

4. He that has once entertained a reproach against another, though afterward
he come to see his error, yet he will not easily acknowledge the wrong that he
has done his neighbor, and make him amends for it. We may see this even in
David, who having once received Ziba's false accusation against Mephibosheth,
and thereupon bidden Ziba take all that did pertain unto Mephibosheth, 2 Samuel
16. Chap. when at length Mephibosheth let him understand what wrong Ziba had
done him; he put him off very coldly, saying, Why speak thou anymore of thy
matters? I have said, Thou and Ziba divide the land, 2 Samuel 19.29. The Rabbines
say, that when David said, Thou and Ziba divide the land, R. David Kimchi ad 2 Samuel 19.29.
a voice from heaven answered, Let Rehoboam and Jeroboam divide the kingdom;
as if this happened as a punishment of David's sin, in that he hearkened unto
Ziba, when he slandered Mephibosheth, and would not hearken to Mephibosheth
when he made his apology, and showed how perfidiously Ziba had dealt with him.
The Scripture shows us not this, but another cause of the division of the
kingdom, 1 King. 11.11, 12, 13. and 12.29, etc. Yet David herein was very
faulty, first to hearken to Ziba's slanderous tongue, and thereupon to give a
rash sentence against Mephibosheth; and then not to reverse the sentence so
fully as he should have done, when he was convinced of the iniquity of it. And
this example may show how dangerous it is to entertain a report against
another over-hastily; and how hard it is to do our neighbor right, when we
have once done him wrong in this kind.

Now by how much the credit and reputation of any is of greater concernment, by
so much the more all ought to be far from receiving, or enduring a reproach
against them, as against Magistrates and Ministers, and eminent Professors of
Religion. I have showed before, that such especially are not to be reproached;
and even so against such especially a reproach is not to be received, nor
endured. The people by hearking unto Absalom, when he reproached David, were
drawn into rebellion, 2 Samuel 15.3, etc. So also people are brought into a
contempt of Ministers, and the ministry it self, by entertaining the
reproaches that are cast upon them.

And therefore as Satan and ungodly men labor what they can to asperse them,
and to make them infamous; so such as fear God must endeavor to uphold and
maintain their reputation, and not to entertain, or endure a reproach against
them, if they can hinder it. The Apostle would not have an accusation received
against an elder (that is, Est long aliud condemnare (de quo Deuteronomy. 17. and
19.) and accusationem recipere. Precipit ^^itur Aposto^^s ne recipiendam quidem
esse accusationem adversus presbyterum, nisi testium quali^^^^ prius examinata.
Estius ad 1 Timothy 5.19.
a Minister) under two or three witnesses, 1 Timothy 5.19. None by the law of
Moses was to be condemned, except there were two or three witnesses produced
against him: but this is much more which the Apostle requires in respect of a
Minister, to wit, that except there be two or three to bear witness to it, an
accusation is not so much as to be received against him. Non sacile admittendam
censet accusationem presbyteri ratione status. Non enim vult ut accusatione
admissa subjaceat discrimini progressus an sint testes sufficientes, an
deficient testes, sed quod ipsa accusatio non admittatur nisi constet de
sufficientibus and idoneis testibus. Et hoc est p^^vilegium presbyterorum ex
ha^ Pauli ordinatione. Cajetan. ad 1 Timothy 5.19. See before, Sermon 9.
This (as Cajetan and others observe) is the privilege, which by the Apostles
rule does belong to Ministers. Thus also, by how much any are more eminent in
professing religion, by so much the less should a reproach be admitted against
them; because it redounds not only to the disgrace of the person, but also of
the profession. The devil is always busy to reproach the saints and servants
of God, thereby to make the truth, which they profess, odious, to withhold
from it such as are yet aliens, and to withdraw such as do but slightly
embrace it. As concerning this sect, (said the Jews to Paul, meaning those that
professed the Lord Jesus to be the Christ) we know that it is everywhere spoken
against, Act. 28.22. What reproaches soon after the Apostles times were cast
upon Christians by the Pagans, appears by the writings of those that lived in
those times. They believe those things of us, Credunt de nobis, quae non
probantur: nolunt inquir^, ne probentur non esse. Tertull. in Apologet.
(says Tertullian) which are not proved; neither will they have them examined,
lest they be proved to be false.

The devils (says Minutius Foelix) do so possess men's minds, and stop their
breasts, Sic occupant animos (daemones) and obst^uunt pectora, ut ante nos
incipiant homines odisse, quam nosse; ne cognitos aut imitari possint, aut
damnare non possint. Minut. Fell. in Octav.
that they begin to hate us before they know us, lest if they did know us,
either they might imitate us, or not be able however to condemn us. As
therefore Christians ought to walk so as to give none occasion to any to
speak reproachfully; so also they should not easily give heed to those that
speak in that manner against professors, lest thereby religion it self
become infamous, Scias hoc esse diaboli, ut servos Dei mendacio laceret, and
opinionibus falsis gloriosum nomen defamet, ut qui conscientiae suae luce
clarescunt, alienu rumoribus sordidentior. Cyprian.
this being the policy of the devil (as Cyprian observes) to traduce and
slander the servants of God, and with false reports to defame that glorious
name by which they are called; that so they who shine with the luster of a
clear conscience, may be defiled with the reproaches which others cast upon
them.

SERMON. XVI.
Psalm. 15.4. In whose eyes a vile person is contemned, but he honors them
that fear the Lord.


THis is the fifth special property of him that shall abide in Gods tabernacle,
and dwell in his holy hill; here he is described by his disposition both
toward the wicked, and toward the godly; he contemns the one, but honors
the other.

The former branch is so concise in the Original, Heb. (...) Chald. (...)
that it is somewhat obscure, and subject to diverse interpretations. Some of
the Jewish expositors understand it so, as if it set forth the humility of the
person spoken of. The Chaldee Pharaphrast renders it thus: (...) Aben Ezra ad
loc.
Who is vile in his own sight, and despised. In like manner Aben Ezra: The
sense (says he) is, that the servant of God, whatsoever precept he observes,
and whatsoever good he does, thinks it small and light in respect of what he
ought to do for the honor of his Creator.

Thus also Kimchi: Though he be upright, (says he) and work righteousness,
(...) Kimchi ad loc.
and speak the truth, yet does he not therefore vaunt himself; but is vile in
his own eyes, and despised, and thinks with himself, that he does not one
thing of a thousand that he ought to do to the glory of the blessed Creator.

This sense in it self considered is good; for it is the property of the godly
to think modestly and meanly of themselves: though they have respect to all
Gods commandments, Psalm. 119.6* Col. 1.17.
and desire to walk worthy of him to all pleasing, and to be fruitful in every
good work, yet they know and acknowledge that they fail much, and come far
short in all that they do: see Psalm. 130.3. and 143.2. Romans 7.18, etc. But by
the opposition in the next words, but he honors them that fear the Lord, it
appears that a citizen of heaven is described (as I said) by his disposition
both toward the wicked, and toward the godly; to wit, that he contemns the
one, but honors the other.

So that the meaning of the former part of the words is well expressed by our
Translatours, In whose eyes a vile person (that is, a wicked person, who is
opposed to such as fear the Lord) is contemned. Thus also the Greek
Interpreters, and the vulgar Latin Translatour render it, LXX. (...). Vulg. Ad
nihilum deductus est in conspectus ejus malignus.

(...) R. Sal. ad loc.


A wicked person is of no account in his sight. And so Christian Expositors
generally understand it: and thus also R. Solomon does expound it. He that is
vile by reason of his wickedness, is despised in the eyes of the righteous.
This being the true and genuine meaning of the words, the observation is this:

That it is the property of a citizen of heaven to contemn a wicked person.

We may see it by the example of Elisha, who when Jehoram, the son of Ahab,
king of Israel, a wicked man, sought unto him for help in his distress, said
thus unto him, What have I to do with thee? Get thee to the Prophets of thy
father, and to the Prophets of thy mother. And when Jehoram pressed still upon
him, alleging that not only he, but also two other kings, to wit, Jehoshaphat
the king of Judah, and the king of Edom together, with their armies were like
to perish for want of water, he answered, As the Lord lives before whom I
stand, surely were it not that I regard the presence of Jehoshaphat the king of
Judah, I would not look toward thee, nor see thee, 2 King. 3.13, 14*

Thus also Mordecai contemned Haman, though a great, yet a wicked person. All
the kings servants that were in the kings gate, bowed and reverenced Haman; for
the king had so commanded concerning him: but Mordecai bowed not, nor did him
reverence, Est^. 3.2. So likewise our Savior Christ showed his contempt of
Herod; for when Pilate sent Christ to Herod, and Herod questioned with him in
many words, he answered him nothing, Luke 23.9. Christ knew Herod to be a
profane scorner, one that would not regard what he should say unto him, and
therefore he would not vouchsafe to answer any of his questions. Speak not in
the ears of a fool, (says Solomon, he means a proud scornful fool) for he
will despise the wisdom of thy words, Prove. 23.9.

Reasons of this Doctrine are these:

1. There is an antiplaty and contrariety betwixt the godly and the wicked;
Reasons why a citizen of heaven does contemn a wicked person.
there is emnitie betwixt the seed of the women and the seed of the serpent,
Genesis 3.15. They have contrary parents, the one being the children of God, the
other the children of the devil, 1 John 3.10. They have contrary conditions;
the one are light, the other darkness, Ephesians. 5.8. They have contrary courses;
the one walk after the spirit, and the other walk after the flesh, Romans 8.1.
Therefore an unjust man is an abomination to the just; and he that is upright
in his ways is an abomination to the unjust, Prove. 29.27.

2. The godly are taught of God, John 6. verse. 45. Therefore they are taught to
judge of things aright, to judge of them as they are: and consequently they are
taught to judge the wicked, vile and contemptible, because so indeed they are.
Here in the Text a wicked person is called a vile person. And it is said of the
sons of Eli, who where wicked and ungodly, that they made themselves vile, 1 Samuel 3.13. Sinful affections are termed vile affections, Romans 1.26. because
they make those vile that are given up unto them. A wicked man is loathsome,
says Solomon, Prove. 13.5.

3. The wicked contemn God, Psalm. 10.13. And therefore the godly contemn the
wicked. Do not I hate them, O Lord, that hate thee? said David, Psalm. 139.21.
So does not a godly man contemn them that condemn God? Yes, it is most just
that it should be so, and God will have it so; they that despise me, (says he)
shall be lightly esteemed, 1 Samuel 2.30.

This then in the first place may show how b inde and Supra omnem monstrosi
piaculi execrationem est, summum scelus admitte^e, and pudorem sceleris non
admittere, Salv. de Gubern. l. 7.
and of their vileness, but applaud themselves, and that for those very things
for which they are so loathsome. Were they ashamed (says Jeremie) when they
committed abomination? nay, they were not at all ashamed, neither could they
blush, Jer. 6.15. And he repeates it again, Chap. 8. verse. 12. Yea, some are so
far from being ashamed of their abominations, that they even glory in them.
Their glory is in their shame, Phil. 3.19. Chrysostom does elegantly set forth
the blindness and brutishness of such persons. (...). Chrysostom.
When they lie in the mire, (says he) they think they are besmeared with some
sweet ointments: when they are full of vermin, they vaunt themselves as if
they were adorned with precious stones. Thus Austine confesses that it was
sometimes with him; Preceps ibam tanta caecitate, ut inter coetaneos meos
puderet me minoris dedecoris, quum audiebam eos jactantes flagil^a sua, and
tanto gloriantes magis, quanto magis turpes essent. --

Quid dignum vi^uperatione nisi vitium? Ego ne vituperarer, vitiosior fiebam:
and ubi non sub^rat quo aequarer perditis, fingebam me fecisse quae non
feceram, ne viderer abjectior* quo eram innocentior, and ne vitior, quo eram
castior. August. Confess. lib. 2. cap. 3.


he was stricken with such blindness, as that he thought it a shame unto him to
be less vile and wicked then his companions, whom he heard boast of their
lewdness, and glory so much the more, by how much they were the more filthy.
Therefore (he says) lest he should be of no account, he was the more vicious:
and when he could not otherwise match others, he would feign that he had done
those things which he never did, lest he should seem so much the more abject,
by how much he was the more innocent; and so much the more vile, by how much he
was the more chaste.

What fruit had you then of those things, whereof you are now ashamed? Romans
6.21. Thou shall remember thy ways, and be ashamed, Ezekiel. 16.61. Ye shall
remember your ways, and all your doings, wherein ye have been defiled; and ye
shall loath your selves in your own sight, for all your evils that ye have
committed, Ezekiel. 20.43. Then shall ye remember your own evil ways, and your
doings that were not good, and shall loath your selves in your own sight for
your inquities, and for your abominations, Ezekiel. 36.31. Surely (said Ephraim)
after that I was turned, I repented; and after that I was instructed, I smote
upon my thigh: I was ashamed, yea, even confounded, because I did hear the
reproach of my youth, Jer. 31. 19. Therefore though thou do refrain from
acting thy old sins, yet if thou can still think and speak of thy former
ways and doings without being ashamed of them, it argues that thy refraining
from sin does proceed from some other cause, (as want of power, or opportunity
to act in that kind, or the like) and not from hence, that thou have tru^y
repented of it.

Thirdly, This may teach and admonish all, if they When the wicked comes, then
comes also contempt, and with ignonimy reproach, Proverb. 18.3. It is not thy
birth or breeding, not thy wit or wealth, not thy dignity or power, not any
thing whatsoever that can preserve thee from contempt, if thou be wicked.
No, if thou live wickedly, thou shall live contemptibly; and if thou die in
thy wickedness, contempt will for ever cleave unto thee. The memory of the just
is blessed: but the name of the wicked shall rot, Prove. 10.7. When the wicked
rise again, it shall be to perpetual shame and contempt, Dan. 12.2. They shall
be an abhorring unto all flesh, Isai. 66.24.

But fourthly, if it be one character whereby a citizen

1. By endeavoring what they can to advance the wicked, to advance them (I
say) to places of honor either in Church or Commonwealth. An ordinary thing it
is with men to bestow their voices and their pains in this kind upon any,
even as they are swayed by favor, faction, or the like; never considering nor
caring what manner of persons they be whom they seek to advance, nor regarding
the precept of the Apostle, to do nothing by partiality, 1 Timothy 5.21.

2. By magnifying the wicked because they flourish in the world: therefore
people usually speak of them as if they were the only happy men. Such and
such (in their minds and mouths) are the best in the town or parish, because
(forsooth) they are the most potent, wealthy, etc. whereas it may be being the
most wicked, they are the worst. A man is to be prized according to his soul,
the principal part of him, and that indeed which makes him to be a man: Cum
voles veram hominis estimationem inire, nudum inspice. Ponat patrimonium, p^nat
honores, etc. corpus ipsum exuat, animum intuere qualis quantusque fit. Sen.
Epist. 7.6.
so much as his soul is worth, so much indeed is he worth, and not more. Now
(as the wise-m^n tells us) the soul of the wicked is little worth, Prove. 10.20.
And therefore though their house, lands and possessions are worth much, yet
they themselves are worth little. By what vile and contemptible terms are the
wicked set forth in the Scripture? They are termed Dross, Ezekiel. 22.19. Chafe,
Matthew. 3.12. Dogs and Swine, Matt. 7.6. Serpents and Vipers, Matthew. 23.33. Yea,
Devils, John 6.70.

3. By flattering the wicked in their wickedness, and extolling them even eo
nomine because they are wicked. They say still unto them that despise me, The
Lord has said, Ye shall have peace: and they say unto every one that walks
after the imagination of his own heart, No evil shall come upon you. So the
Lord complains of false Prophets, Jer. 23.17. And Solomon tells of some that
praise the wicked, Proverb. 28.4. That say to the wicked, Thou art righteous;
but he says, That the people shall curse him that does so, the nations shall
abhor him, Prove. 24.24.

4. By being familiar with the wicked. They that draw nigh unto God, (that
acquaint themselves with him, Job 22.21. and delight themselves in him, Psalm.
37.4*) they honor God, Isai. 29.13.

So they that draw nigh to the wicked, that acquaint themselves with them, and
delight in them, they honor the wicked. He that does contemn the wicked, will
say with David, Depart from me, ye wicked: for I will keep the commandments of
my God, Psalm. 119.115. Especially they honor the wicked, who join with them
in those things that are wicked. Jehoshaphat, though otherwise a good man, was
faulty in this; he joined with wicked Ahab in his wicked enterprise against
Ramoth-Gilead, God by his Prophet Micaiah having declared his will to the
contrary: for this he was taxed by another Prophet, saying, Should thou help
the ungodly? and love those that hate the Lord? therefore is wrath upon thee
from before the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 19.2.

5. By not showing such severity against the wicked as is meet. Eli is charged
with honoring his sons more then God, 1 Samuel 2.29. because his sons made
themselves vile, and he restrained them not, 1 Samuel 3.13. If thou do not
according to thy place and calling show thy self severe against the wicked,
thou art so far from comtemning them, that thou show thy self to make more
account of them then of God. If thou can hear thy children, servants or
others, curse, swear, or do wickedly in any kind, and yet not put forth that
power against them which God has given thee, it appears that thou art a
despiser of God, and not of the wicked. See David's profession what he would do
in such a case, Psalm. 101. verse 5, 7, 8. And Nehemia's practice, what he did,
Neh. 5.7. and 13.11, 17.

In the last place therefore, let us get our hearts into

1. It is an argument that we our selves are wicked, Motives to contemn the
wicked.
if we do not contemn those that are wicked. They that forsake the law, praise
the wicked: but such as keep the law, contend with them, Prove. 28.4. So to
associate ourselves with the wicked, argues that we are like unto them. Pares
cum paribus facillime congregantur.
Birds of a feather (as they say) fly together.

2. Not to contemn the wicked, is a means to make us wicked. He that does not
so despise the wicked, as to avoid all unnecessary familiarity and society with
them, (...).
is like to be infected by them, and to become like unto them. Be not among
wine-bibbers, (says Solomon) nor among riotous eaters of flesh, Prove. 23.20,
21. As if he should say, If thou be among them, thou will be one of them,
thou will conform unto them. He that walks with the wise, (says he) shall
be wise; but a companion of fools shall be destroyed, Proverb. 13.20. David
speaking of the Israelites, says, They did not destroy the nations (the
Canaanites) concerning whom the Lord commanded them: But were mingled among the
heathen, and learned their works: And they served their idols, which were a
snare unto them, Psalm. 106.34, 35, 36.

3. Not to contemn the wicked, is a means to encourage them in their
wickedness; whereas if we show a contempt of them, it may be of force to
reclaim them. As snow in summer, and as rain in harvest, so honor is not
seemly for a fool, Prove. 26.1. It is a thing very prejudicial and hurtful. As
he that binds a stone in a sling, so is he that gives honor to a fool,
Prove. 26.8. So to flatter the wicked, this does strengthen the hands of evil
doers, that none does return from his wickedness, Jer. 23.14. So also to
associate with the wicked, and to be familiar with them. Therefore the Apostle
speaking of one that is refr^ctarie and disobedient, says, Have no company
with him, that he may be ashamed, 2 Thessalonians. 3. verse. 14.

4. How apt are we to contemn those that contemn us, and lightly to esteem
those that despise us? And should we not much rather contemn those that
contemn God; and lightly esteem those that despise him? Should we not be much
more zealous for him then for our selves? Our Savior Christ was so; He gave
his back to the smiters, and his cheeks to them that plucked off the hair:
he hid not his face from shame and spitting Isai. 50.6. When he was riviled, he
reviled not again; and when he suffered, he threatened not, but committed
himself to him that judges righteously, 1 Pet. 2.23. He was led as a lamb to
the slaughter, and as the sheep before the shearer is dumb, so opened not he
his mouth, Isai. 53.7. But when he saw his Father dishonored by those that
made merchandise in his house, buying and selling in the Temple; then his zeal
and indignation against them did presently show it self, John 2.13, 14, etc. So
Moses in his own cause was the meekest man upon earth: when Aaron and Miriam
murmured against him, he held his peace, as if he had heard nothing, Number. 12.1,
2, 3. But when he saw the people dishonor God by their idolatrous worshipping
of the golden calf, then his anger waxed hot, and he cast the tables out of his
hands, and brake them beneath the mount. And he took the calf which they had
made, and burned it in the fire, and ground it to powder, and strawed it upon
the water, and made the children of Israel drink of it. He made proclamation
also, saying, Who is on the Lord's side? let him come unto me: and he caused
about 3000. of the transgressors to be slain, Exodus 32. verse. 19, 20, 26, 27,
28. But in contemning the wicked, diverse cautions are to be observed.

1. We must take heed of being rash and hasty to judge others wicked. Cautions
to be observed in contemning the wicked.
Eli was over-forward to censure Hannah for being drunk, when she was troubled
in spirit, and powered forth her heart before the Lord, 1 Samuel 1. verse. 13, 14,
15. Better it is in this case to err on the right hand, then on the left:
better to judge well of those that deserve ill, then ill of those that deserve
well. Some men's sins go before unto judgment, 1 Timothy 5.24. They declare their
sins as Sodom, they hide them not, Isai. 3.9. Such are to be judged wicked and
vile as they are. But charity thinks no evil, 1 Corinthians. 13. verse. 5. Where
it sees none, it suspecteth none.

2. Though any be notoriously wicked, yet they are not so to be contemned as to
be accounted reprobates and cast-awayes, such as of whom there is no hope.
Peter did not so contemn Simon Magus, though he saw him to be in the gall of
bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity: But he bade him repent of his
wickedness, and pray God if peradventure the thought of his heart might be
forgiven him, Act. 8. verse. 22, 23. See also 2 Timothy 2.25, 26. and 2 Thessalonians.
3.10, 11.

3. We must beware of contemning others out of a high conceit of our selves,
like those whom the Prophet Esaias taxes, Which say, Stand by thy self, come not
near me, I am holier then thou, Isai. 65.5. So when our Savior saw some, That
trusted in themselves, that they were righteous, and despised others, he
propounded the parable of the Pharisee and the Publican, for the purging out of
that humor, Luke 18.9, etc. Who makes thee to differ? (says the Apostle) and
what have thou, that thou have not received? and if thou have received it, why
boastest thou, as if thou had not received it? 1 Corinthians. 4. verse. 7.

4. We must not so contemn the wicked, as to contemn their power and
authority, but must show them such respect as by their place and calling is due
unto them. Give unto Caesar the things that are Cesars, said our Savior; though
Tiberius, a man eminently wicked, was then Caesar, or Emperor, Matthew. 22.21.
Render to all their due (says S. Paul) honor to whom honor, Romans 13.7. In
Elisha's carriage toward Jehoram king of Israel, 2 King. 3.13, 14. there was
something extraordinary, and not to be imitated by us, we not having the same
spirit which he had, as Christ told his disciples in a like case, Luke 9.55.

So also (it seems) there was in the carriage of Mordecai toward Haman. Some
of the Rabbis say, that Haman had the image of some false god about him, Abe^
Ezra.
and that therefore Mordecai would not bow to him, lest he might seem to bow
to the idol. Others of them say, that Haman did make himself a god, R. Solomon.
and required such worship as is due unto God only. So also some Christian
expositours say, Junius.
that it was more honor then did belong to a man, which they gave to Haman.
But that is most probable, that therefore Mordecai refused to bow unto Haman,
because he was an Amalekite, of that nation, with which God had especially
charged his people to have war, Exodus 17.14, 16. Deuteronomy. 25.17, 18, 19. These
examples therefore, though they prove that the wicked are to be contemned (to
which purpose I alleged them before) yet not so, but that respect is to be
showed to Magistrates, and men in authority, though they be wicked. So wives,
children, and servants, must not withstanding the wickedness of their husbands,
parents and masters, show all due respect unto them.

5. We ought not so to contemn the wicked, as to refuse to do them good. See
before, Sermon 13.

6. Nor so as to refuse good from them. Paul thought it not unmeet to appeal
to Caesar, when that did make for his safety, though Nero, who was then Caesar,
was monstrously wicked, Act. 25.11. They are therefore injurious to themselves,
and indeed to God also, who so contemn wicked Ministers, as to contemn their
ministry, and to refuse to partake of Gods ordinances administered by them.
Thus the people, because of the wickedness of the priests, the sons of Eli,
abhorred the Lords offering, 1 Samuel 2.17. but in this they did transgress,
verse. 24. Christ required the people to hear the Scribes and Pharisees,
notwithstanding their ungodliness; and to observe all that they did say, so
long as they taught the law of Moses, Matthew. 23.2, 3.

7. Neither are the wicked so to be contemned, as that we should refuse to
join with them in that which is good. So far forth as the Pharisees held the
truth, Paul held with them, and professed himself one of them, Act. 23.6. And
he bids, Come out from among them, (viz. the wicked) separate your selves: but
how? and touch not the unclean thing, 2 Cor. 6.17. that is, do not join with
the wicked in that which is evil: but must we therefore refrain from that
which is good, rather then join with the wicked in it? Where does the
Scripture teach this lesson?

Now that we may be enabled to contemnne the wicked,

Motives to enable us to contemn the wicked.
1. We must consider the odiousness of sin, and get a thorough hatred of it. I
will set no wicked thing (says David) before mine eyes: I hate the work of
them that turn aside, it shall not cleave to me. Then immediately after, A
froward heart shall depart from me; I will not know a wicked person. Whosoever
privily (says he) slandereth his neighbor, him will I cut off; him that has
a high look, and a proud heart, will not I suffer. -- He that works deceit,
shall not dwell in my house; he that tells lies, shall not tarry in my
sight. I will early destroy all the wicked of the land, etc. Psalm. 101.3, 4, 5,
7, 8.

2. We must especially beware of covetousness; for that will make us to have
men's persons in admiration, because of advantage, Jude verse. 16. This made
Pilate so to honor Caesar, as for fear of him to condemn Christ, whom he knew
and acknowledged to be innocent. When he heard the Jews say, If thou let this
man go, thou art not Cesars friend, fearing to lose Cesars friendship, which
was so advantageous unto him, presently he did that which they desired, though
it were against his conscience, John 19.12, etc.

3. We must labor for true Christian courage and magnanimity, that we may not
have the spirit of fear, (base, cowardly fear, as the word in the Original
does import) but of power, (...).
and of love, and of a sound mind, 2 Timothy 1.7. We must sanctify the Lord of
hosts himself, and let him be our fear, and let him be our dread, Isai. 8.13.

SERMON. XVII.
Psalm. 15.4. But he honors them that fear the Lord.


THe disposition of a saint and citizen of heaven toward the wicked, I have
already spoken of, viz. that he contemns such; now I am to treat of his
disposition toward the godly, and such here it is said that he honors.

But he honoureth] To honor, is as much as highly to esteem; and to testify
that high estimation, by some outward expression. In 1 Samuel 2.30. Honoring and
despising are opposed, and despising and esteeming lightly are used as terms
equivalent: honoring therefore must import as much as esteeming highly. But
this inward estimation must also be outwaadly testified and expressed: Honor
me now, I pray thee (said Saul to Samuel) before the elders of my people, and
before Israel, 1 Samuel 15.30. Honor therefore has something in it whereby it
does appear, and is seen.

Them that fear the Lord] The godly are often in Scripture described by this,
that they fear God. Obadiah feared the Lord greatly, 1 Samuel 18.3. Job was
perfect and upright, and one that feared God, and eschewed evil, Job 1. verse.
1. Cornelius was a devout man, and one that feared God with all his house, Act.
10.2. The fear of God is put for all piety. Come ye children, hearken unto me,
and I will teach you the fear of the Lord, Psalm. 34.11. He that truly fears
God, will both do what God commands, and avoid what God forbids. The fear of
the Lord is clean, that is, it makes clean, Psalm. 19.9. The fear of God
therefore is usually made the character of the godly; and the want of this
fear, the character of the wicked. The transgression of the wicked says
within my heart, that there is no fear of God before his eyes, Psalm. 36.1.
There is no fear of God before their eyes, Romans 3.18.

This may suffice for the opening of the words; the doctrine which they offer
unto our consideration, is this:

It is the property of a citizen of heaven and heir of salvation, to honor
the godly* to make good account of them, and to carry himself respectively
toward them.

Thus did Elisha honor Jehoshaphat, not because he was great, (for so was
Jehoram also, whom yet he did not honor) but because he was godly. Were it not
(said he to Jehoram) that I regard the presence of Jehoshaphat the king of
Judah, I would not look toward thee, nor see thee, 2 King. 3.14. So also did
Paul honor Onesimus, when he was converted unto Christ, though in the eye of
the world, he was of mean reputation. I beseech thee (says he to Philemon)
for my son Onesimus, Philem. verse. 10. And verse. 12. Thou therefore receive
him, that is mine own bowels. And verse. 16. Not now a servant, but above a
servant, a brother beloved, etc.

There is good reason why a citizen of heaven does (as all should) honor the
godly. Reasons why a citizen of heaven does honor the godly.


1. The godly are honorable, they are worthy to be honored, honor is due
unto them. Hold such in reputation (or as the margent reads it, honor such)
says the Apostle speaking of Epaphroditus, a man of great piety, Phil. 2.29.
Honor is due, because of excellency; for it imports (as Aquinas notes) a
testification of ones excellency. Honor testificationem quandam importat de
excellentia alicujus. Aquin. 22. quaest. 103. art. 1.
Therefore honor primarily belongs unto God, who only is excellent, Psalm.
148.13. to wit, with an independent excellency. But the godly are also
excellent by participation, with an excellency derived unto them from God; and
therefore a secondary and subordinate honor does belong unto them. David
having spoken of the saints that are upon the earth, immediately after calls
them the excellent, Psalm. 16.3. And Solomon tells us, that the righteous is more
excellent then his neighbor, Prove. 12.26. And he says, Better is the poor
that walks in his uprightness, then he that is perverse in his ways, though
he be rich, Prove. 28.6. The godly are called the precious sons of Sion,
comparable to fine gold, Lam. 4.2. They are excellent in respect of birth and
parentage. Borne not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of
man, but of God, John 1.13. They are Excellent in respect of that portion and
inheritance which belongs unto them. If children, then heirs, heirs of God,
and joynt-heires with Christ, Romans 8.17. Heirs of the kingdom which God has
promised to them that love him, Jam. 2.5. They are excellent in respect of
those gifts and graces which are in them. They are endowed with wisdom; for
true wisdom is the wisdom of the just, Luke 1.17. And wisdom makes a man's
face to shine, Eccles. 8.1. Wisdom is the principal thing, Proverb. 4.7. She
is more precious then rubies, and all the things thou can desire are not to
be compared unto her, Prove. 3.15. They are endowed with faith, they are of the
household of faith, Gal. 6.10. And faith is precious, 2 Pet. 1.1. More precious
then gold, 1 Pet. 1.7. They are endowed with righteousness and holiness, and
thereby they resemble God, in that they put on the new man, which after God is
created in righteousness and true holiness, Ephesians. 4 24. Hereby they are made
partakers of the devine nature, 2 Pet. 1.4.

2. God does honor the godly. They are precious in his sight, Isai. 43.4. He
will honor those that honor him, 1 Samuel 2.30. Because he has set his love
upon me (says God, speaking of the godly) therefore will I deliver him: I will
set him on high, because he has known my Name. He shall call upon me, and I
will answer him. I will be with him in trouble, I will deliver him, and honor
him. With long life will I satisfy him, and show him my salvation, Psalm.
91.14, 15, 16. Though God be the God of all flesh, Jerem. 32.27. yet especially
is he the God of the godly. I will be a God to thee, and to thy seed, said he
to Abraham, Genesis 17.7. God is not ashamed to be called their God, Heb. 11.16.
Though the whole world be Gods, and all that dwell therein, Psalm. 24.1. yet the
godly are his in a special manner. But now thus says the Lord that created
thee, O Jacob. and that formed thee, O Israel, Fear not: for I have redeemed
thee, I have called thee by thy Name, thou art mine, Isai. 43.1. They are his
city, Psalm. 48.8. His house, 1 Timothy 3.15. His heritage, Joel 2.17. His temple,
1 Cor 3.16. His people, Isai. 63.8. His friends, Isai. 41.8. His children, 2
Cor. 6.18. His jewels, Mal. 3.17. His peculiar treasure, Psalm. 135.4. Though
Gods providence be over all, yet especially over the godly. He is the Savior
(or Preserver) of all, but especially of those that believe, 1 Timothy 4.10. The
eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his ears are open to their cry,
Psalm. 34.15. He that touches them, touches the apple of his eye, Zach. 2.8.
The Lord is good unto all, (Psalm. 145.9.) but especially to the godly. O how
great is thy goodness (says David unto God) which thou have laid up for them
that fear thee? Psalm. 31.19. He will bless them that fear the Lord, Psalm.
115.13. They are the blessed of the Lord, which made heaven and earth, verse.
15. To them will Christ the judge of all, say at the last day, Come ye blessed
of my Father, inherit you the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of
the world, Matthew. 25.34. Yea, God does so honor the godly, as to do good to
others for their sake. I have learned by experience, that the Lord has blessed
me for thy sake, said Laban to Jacob, Genesis 30.27. It was little that thou had
before I came, (said Jacob to Laban) and it is now increased to a multitude:
and the Lord has blessed thee since my coming, verse. 30. The Lord blessed the
Egyptians house for Joseph's sake; and the blessing of the Lord was upon all
that he had in the house, and in the field, Genesis 39.5. Lo (said the Angel unto
Paul) God has given thee all them that fail with thee, Act. 27.24. For Paul's
sake God preserved all that were in the ship with him, that notwithstanding the
extreme danger that they were in, yet they all escaped.

3. Christ does honor the godly. He calls them his friends; You are my friends
(says he) if you do whatsoever I command you. Henceforth call I you not
servants: for the servant knows not what his Lord does. but I have called you
friends: for all things that I have heard of my Father, have I made known unto
you, John 15.14, 15. He calls them his brethren; He is not ashamed to call them
brethren, saying, I will declare thy Name unto my brethren, Heb. 2.11, 12. See
also John 20.17. and Matthew. 25.40. Yea, when some came and told Christ that his
Mother and brethren were without, desiring to speak with him, he answered, who
is my Mother? and who are my brethren? And he stretched forth his hand toward
his disciples, and said, Behold my Mother and my brethren. (...)* etc (...).
Theophyl. ad loc.
For whosoever shall do the will of my Father, which is in heaven, the same is
my brother, and sister, and mother, Matthew. 12.47, -- 50.

Thus our Savior preferred his spiritual kindred before his carnal kindred.
And when a certain woman having heard his words, cried out, saying, Blessed is
the womb that bare thee, and the paps which thou have sucked: he said, Yea,
rather blessed are they that hear the word of God, and keep it, Luke 11.27,
28. It was a singular honor to the blessed Virgin, that she was the mother of
Christ, (...). Theophyl. ad loc.
Luke 1.42, and 48. Yet this privilege would have availed her little, if she
had not been one that feared God. Blessed is she that believed, says Elizabeth
unto her, Luke 1.45. That she was a believer, this was it that did make her
blessed. And so she her self said, My spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior,
Luke 1.47. She rejoiced not so much that God was her Son, as that God was her
Savior, which without faith working through love, Beatior fuit percipiendo
fidem Christi, quam concipiendo carnem Christi. Nihil illi materna propinquitas
proficisset, nisi foelicius Christum in cord quam in carne gestasset. Aug.
and showing forth it self by the fruit of all holy obedience, he had not been.
It would have profited her nothing, that she conceived Christ in her womb, if
she had not conceived him by faith in her heart: her carnal relation to Christ
would have done her no good, if she had not had spiritual relation to him.

4. The Angels do honor the godly. Though they be most excellent and glorious
creatures, yet they disdain not to attend on the godly, and to minister unto
them. When Jacob returned out of Mesopotamia, the angels of God met him, viz.
to guard him, Genesis 32.1. The angel of the Lord (says David) encampeth round
about them that fear him, Psalm. 34.7. This reason our Savior gives, why all
should take heed of despising any of the meanest Saints; For I say unto you,
(says he) That in heaven their angels do always behold the face of my Father
which is in heaven, Matthew. 18.10. He calls the angels their angels, because by
Gods appointment they are attendant upon them. Are they not all ministering
spirits, sent forth to minister for them that shall be heirs of salvation?
Heb. 1.14.

For these reasons, he that is godly himself, will honor those that are godly.

But how does he honor the godly?

1. In respect of his inward esteem of them. He holds such in reputation, How
one that is godly himself, does honor those that are godly.

Heb. (...). Sym. (...). Aqu. (...).


as the Apostle exhorts, Phil. 2. verse. 29. He accounts them excellent, as
David did, Psalm. 16.3. The word in the Original signifies stately persons. One
of the Greek Interpreters renders it, great persons: another, very great
persons: such a high and honorable esteem had David of the godly.

2. In respect of outward deportment toward them. For,

1. He delights in their society; In whom is all my delight, said David,
speaking of the saints that are upon the earth, Psalm. 16.3. I am a companion of
them that fear thee, and that keep thy precepts, said he unto God, Psalm.
119.63.

2. He is ready to receive and entertain them. Mine eyes (said David) shall be
upon the faithful of the land, that they may dwell with me: he that walks in
a perfect way, he shall serve me, Psalm. 101.6. Receive him therefore in the
Lord with all gladness, said Paul, speaking of Epaphroditus, and having showed
what a good and godly man he was, Phil. 2.29.

3. He is ready also to assist and help them as they have need. My goodness
extends not to thee; (said David unto God) But to the saints that are upon
the earth, etc. Psalm. 16.2, 3. I commend unto you (said Paul to the Romans)
Phebe our sister, which is a servant of the Church which is at Cenchrea. That
ye receive her in the Lord as becomes saints, and that ye assist her in
whatsoever business she has need of you, Romans 16.1, 2. As we have opportunity,
(says he also) let us do good unto all; especially to those that are of the
household of faith, Gal. 6 10.

The Use of this point may be, first to provoke unto piety, Virtue, and another
to Honor; and that the passage to the Temple of Honor was through the Temple
of Virtue. Noveris non officiis, sed finibus a vitiis disc^rnendas esse
virtutes Aug contra Jul. lib. 4. cap. 3.
But (as Austine has well observed) it is not so much the thing done, as the
end for which it is done, that does distinguish betwixt vice and virtue.
Whatsoever you do (says the Apostle) do all to the glory of God, 1 Cor.
10.31. that must be our ultimate end in all: and if we honor him, he will
honor us, 1 Samuel 2.30. If any man serve me, says Christ, him will my Father
honor, John 12.26. So then, grace and godliness is that which will indeed
bring us to honor, even that honor, in comparison of which the honor of the
world is as nothing. And therefore if men be so ambitious of worldly honor,
how should we be ambitious of this honor? We Labor (says the Apostle) that
whether present or absent (that is, whether alive or dead) we may be accepted
of him, to wit, of the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.9. The word rendered, we labor, imports
as much as, we are ambitious, or, we ambitiously affect. (...)
This is a good ambition, we cannot be too ambitious in this kind. The honor
of the world, what is it but a bubble, light and empty, transient and fading?
In respect of wordly honor, is is with men as with a wheel, now up, and now
down; that part of the wheel, which is now highest, is by and by the lowest.
Who in more honor then Haman for a while? but his honor soon vanished away,
and turned into ignominy and reproach. How is the candle of the wicked put out?
says Job chapter 21.17. But the candle of the godly, though it may burn dim
sometimes, yet it shall never be put out. The path of the just is as shining
light, that shines more and more unto the perfect day, Prove. 4.18. This
honor, which piety procures, is solid and substantial, durable and permanent,
it is a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4.17.

Mical despised David, and scoffed at him, because in his zeal he danced
before the Arc, he answered her, saying, It was before the Lord, which chose
me before thy Father, and before all his house, to appoint me ruler over the
people of the Lord, over Israel; therefore will I play before the Lord. And I
will yet be more vile then thus, and will be base in mine own sight; and of
the maidservants, which thou have spoken of, of them shall I be had in honor,
1 Samuel 6.21, 22. By giving honor to God, we shall be sure to lose no honor.
Therefore ye that fear the Lord, Fear ye not the reproach of men, neither be
afraid of their rebukes, Isai. 51.7. Though your glory may be obscured for a
time, yet at length it shall shine forth, and appear most gloriously, namely,
When the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty angels, etc.
When he shall come to be glorified in his saints, and admired in all them that
believe, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 10. Then shall the righteous shine as the sun in the
kingdom of their Father, Matthew. 13.43. Therefore let us run with patience the
race that is set before us, looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of our
faith; who for the joy that was set before him, endured the Cross, despising
the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the throne of God, Heb. 12.1,
2. The spirit himself bears witness together with our spirits, that we are
the children of God. And if cildren, then heirs, heirs of God, and joynt-heirs
with Christ; if so be we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified
together, Romans 8.16, 17.

Here also all they that profess the fear of God, are Dead flies (says
Solomon) cause the ointment of the Apothecary to send forth a stinking savor;
so does a little folly him that is in reputation for wisdom and honor,
Eccles. 10.1. The finer the cloth is, the worse is the stain of it: so the more
any profess piety, the greater is their blemish, if they be exorbitant.
Christians must walk so, as to give none occasion to the adversary to speak
reproachfully, 1 Timothy 5.14. And so also they must take heed of giving those
that fear God occasion to think less honorably of them. To this end, we must
have our hearts in the fear of the Lord all the day long, as well at one time
as at another, Prove. 23* 17.

2. We must be holy in all manner of conversation, as well in one thing as in
another, 1 Pet. 1. verse. 15.

3. We must abstain from all appearance of evil, 1 Thessalonians. 5.22. Providing for
honest things, not only in the sight of the Lord, but in the sight of men, 2
Cor. 8.21.

4. When we are justly reproved, we must submit unto it, acknowledging what we
are guilty of, and showing our selves penitent for it. This is the way not to
lose credit, but to retain it. Because David humbly cried peccavi, when the
Prophet Nathan did reprove him, did the Prophet therefore afterward carry
himself the more contemptuously toward him? No, he did honor him as much as
ever. See 2 Samuel 12.13. with 1 King. 1.23.

SERMON. XVIII.
Psalm. 15.4. But he honors them that fear the Lord.


viz. for conviction and terror of those that vilify and despise the godly;
as (alas!) how common a thing is this? The precious sons of Sion, comparable to
fine gold, how are they esteemed as earthen pitchers, the work of the hands of
the potter? Lam. 4.2. This was Jeremies complaint in the destruction of
Jerusalem; and he found it so before, by his own experience; I am in derision
daily, (said he) every one mocket me, Jer. 20.7. Thus also it fared with David,
as he complains unto God, saying, For thy sake I have borne reproach, shame
has covered my face, Psalm. 69.7. They that sit in the gate, speak against me;
and I was the song of the drunkards, verse. 12. Thou have known my reproach, and
my shame, and my dishonor: mine adversaries are all before thee. Reproach has
broken mine heart, and I am full of heaviness, verse. 19, 20. Have mercy upon
us, O Lord (says he, speaking both in the behalf of himself, and the rest of
Gods people) have mercy upon us: for we are exceedingly filled with contempt.
Our soul is exceedingly filled with the scorning of those that are at ease; and
with the contempt of the proud, Psalm. 123.3, 4. This also was the complaint of
that elect vessel, Paul; We are made as the filth of the world, and are the
offscouring of all things unto this day, 1 Cor. 4.13. We were shamefully
entreated, as ye know, at Philippi, 1 Thessalonians. 2.2. See the story, Act. 16.22,
23. And others had trial of cruel mockings, and scourgings: yea moreover, of
bonds and imprisonment. They were stoned, they were sawne asunder, were
tempted, were slain with the sword; they wandered about in sheepskins, and
goat skins, being destitute, afflicted, tormented. Of whom the world was not
worthy: they wandered in deserts and in mountains, and in dens and caves of the
earth, Heb. 11.36, 37, 38. Such measure even our blessed Savior himself did
find, when he was in the world. I am a worm, and no man, a reproach of men,
and despised of the people. All that see me, laugh me to scorn; they shoot out
the lip, they shake the head, saying, He trusted in the Lord, that he would
deliver him: let him deliver him, seeing he delighted (or, as the margent has
it, if he delight) in him, Psalm. 22.6, 7, 8. Thus complained David, speaking in
the person of Christ. So the Prophet Esaias prophesied of him, saying, He is
despised, and rejected of men, a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief:
and we hid, as it were, our faces from him; he was despised, and we esteemed
him not, Isai. 53.3. Thus the Evangelical history shows that it fared with
him. He was called a man gluttonous, and a wine-bibber, a friend of Publicans
and sinners, Matt. 11.19. He was termed Beelzebub, Matthew. 10.25. He was
traduced as one that did cast out devils by Beelzebub the prince of devils,
Matthew. 12.24. They did spit in his face, and buffered him, and others smote him
with the palms of their hands, saying, Prophecy unto us, thou Christ, who is
he that smote thee? Matthew. 26.67, 68. They preferred Barabbas a murderer before
him, and put him to a most ignominious death, even the death of the cross,
mocking and reviling him most despitefully when he was crucified, Matthew. 27.
verse. 21, 22, 23, 39, etc. If it were thus with the Head, no marvel if it be so
with the members. If they have called the Master of the house Beelzebub, much
more will they call them of his household, Matthew. 10.25.

Who some despise the godly.
Some despise the godly, because they are poor, and of mean quality in the
world. A poor wiseman by his wisdom delivered the city; but no man remembered
that same poor man, Eccles. 9.15, Though he was wise, and had done much by his
wisdom, yet because he was poor, both he and his wisdom was despised. Then
said I, Wisdom is better then strength, nevertheless the poor man's wisdom is
despised, and his words are not heard, verse. 16. In this respect Christ was
despised; Many hearing him, were astonished, saying, From whence has this man
these things? (...). Theophyl. in Mar. 6.
and what wisdom is this which is given unto him, that even such mighty works
are wrought by his hands? Is not this the Carpenter, the son of Mary? etc. Mark
6.2, 3. S. James taxes this fault, and bids, Have not the faith of our Lord
Jesus Christ, the Lord of glory, with respect of persons. For (says he) if
there come into your assembly a man with a gold ring in goodly apparel, and
there come in also a poor man in vile raiment: And ye have respect to him that
wears the gay clothing, and say unto him, Sit thou here in a good place; and
say to the poor, Stand thou there, or sit here under my foot-shoole. Are ye
not then partial in your selves, and are become judges of evil thoughts?
Hearken, my beloved brethren, Has not God chosen the poor of this world, rich
in faith, and heirs of the kingdom, which he has promised to them that love
him? But ye have despised the poor, James 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. See 1 Corinthians. chap
1. verse. 26, 27, 28.

Some despise the godly, because they are unlearned. They are poor silly
creatures, (say some) they cannot a letter on the book, and yet they must be
so precise, forsooth. Thus the Pharisees despised those that followed Christ,
saying, Have any of the rulers, or of the Pharisees believed on him? But this
people, that knows not the law, are cursed, John 7.48, 49. Thus the
Philosophers at Athens despised Paul, calling him, a babbler, Act. 17.18. But
let not the wiseman (the wordly wiseman) glory in his wisdom, Jer. 9.23.
But let him that glories, glory in this, that he understands and knows me,
says the Lord, verse. 24. Not many wise men after the flesh are called. But God
has chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise, Surgunt
indocti, and rapiunt celum, and nos cum doctrinis nostris sine cord ecce ubi
volutamur in carne and sanguine. Aug. Confess. lib. 8. cap. 8.
1 Corinthians. 1.26, 27. I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that
thou have hid these things from the wise, and have revealed them unto babes.
Even so, O Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight, Matthew. 11. verse. 25, 26.

But here I must add a Caution, that as none ought to despise the godly,
though they be not learned, Caution.
so neither is learning it self to be despised. This Caution is needful in
these times, wherein some, not a few, decry learning, as a thing useless and
unprofitable, yea pernicious and hurtful; and do what they can to seek the
extirpation of it. And what is this else, but to seek the extirpation even of
piety it self, and religion? For though many may, and do attain unto saving
knowledge, though they are utterly ignorant of the Tongues, and of Arts and
Sciences: yet were this knowledge utterly extinguished, without extraordinary
inspirations and revelations (which some fanatical persons are not afraid to
pretend unto) what knowledge of the things that concern salvation could there
be? Were it not for the knowledge of the Tongues, how should we ever come to be
acquainted with the Scriptures, wherein the mysteries of salvation are
contained, they being originally written in Greek and Hebrew, which without
school-learning none do understand? Besides, how should the truth of Religion
be maintained against learned adversaries, without learning? And therefore that
most subtle enemy of Christians and Christian Religion, Julian the Apostate,
Illud autem inclemens, obruendum p^r^nni silentio, quod arc^bat docere
magistros Rhetoricos and Grammaticos, ritus Christiani cultores. Am. Marcell.
de Juliano, lib. 22.
thought this the most ready and effectual way whereby to destroy both it and
them, to deprive them of the benefit of good literature; which Amminnus
Marcellinus himself could not but condemn as a cruel and inhumane part, though
otherwise he were a Pagan, and one that did not a little admire Julian. Such
also as are versed in Ecclesiastical history may observe, that the decay of
learning was the advancement of the Popedom, Qui in historiarum
Ecclesiasticaerum lectione versati sunt, Christiani populi ignorantiam, and
Romanae Sedis authoritatem simul auctam animadvertere potuerunt, -- Vicissimque
ut bonarum literarum instauratione facessere caepit ignorantia, ita and
Pontificis authoritas paulatim imminui and labascere visa est, Gentill. Exam.
Con. Trid. lib. 1. sect. 7. and 8.
and so of the Popish religion; and that the restoration of learning did much
help forward the work of Reformation. It can hardly therefore be otherwise
imagined, but that this is the grand design of the Jesuits and other Romish
agents, to bring in barbarism and illiterateness amongst us; for that so (they
know) they shall soon be able to re-establish their religion, none being any
way competently able to oppose them. But to digress no further: Some despise
the godly, even eo nomine, for that very reason, because they are godly. Be
they otherwise rich or poor, noble or ignoble, learned or unlearned, if they
appear to be godly, that is enough why some will despise them. Though David
was both a Prophet and a King, yet for his zeal toward God ^e was despised,
and that by his own wife, Jam vero illud quale, quam sanctum, quod si quis ex
nobilibus converti ad Deum ceperit, statim honor nobilitatis amittit? aut
quantus in Christiano populo furor est, ubi religio ignobilem facil? Statim
enim ut quis melior esse tentaverit, deterio is abjectione calcatur: ac per hoc
omnes quodammodo mali esse coguntur, n^ vilehabeantur. -- Si bonus est
quispiam, quasi malus spernitur: si malus est, quasi bonus honoratur. Salv. de
Guber. lib. 4.
2 Samuel 6.16, 20. And it was the complaint of Salvian in his times, that if any
noble man did begin to be a convert, presently he lost the honor of his
nobility. What a madness is this (says he) amongst Christians, that Religion
does divest a man of nobility? If a man be good, he is despised as if he were
evil: if he be evil, he is honored as if he were good.

How some despise the godly, even because they are godly, does appear diverse
ways. How some despise the godly even because they are godly.


1. By taunting and mocking them, as Mical did David for dancing before the
Arc. How glorious (said she) was the king of Israel to day, who uncovered
himself to day in the eyes of the handmaids of his servants, as one of the
vain fellows shamelesly uncovereth himself, 2 Samuel 6.20. This is a great
contempt, and a grievous affliction. I am as one mocked of his neighbor, said
Job; The just upright man is laughed to scorn, Job 12.4. And Jeremie notes
this as a great misery that befell Jerusalem, The adversaries saw her, and did
mock at her Sabbaths, Lam. 1.7. So mockings are reckoned amongst the most
grievous persecutions of the Saints, Heb. 11.36.

2. By raising calumnies and slanders against them, and by casting foul
aspersions upon them. Report, say they, and we will report. Thus some dealt
with Jeremie, as he complains, Jer. 20.10. The like dealing had David from
some; False witnesses (says he) did rise up against me: they laid to my charge
things that I knew not, Psalm. 35.11. They devise (says he again) deceitful
matters against them that are quiet in the land, verse. 20. Though the godly be
quiet in the land where they live, though they meddle with nothing further then
their place and calling does require; yet some will devise deceitful matters
against them, some will traduce them as the grand incendiaries of the land, and
the main disturbers of the peace and quietness of it. This has ever been one
of Satan's chiefest engines and devices, to seek to defame the godly as
factiou^, turbulent and seditious; when as (alas!) they could wish with
Jeremy, that they had in the wilderness a lodging place of wayfaring men, that
they might leave their people, and go from them, because they can see little or
nothing, but that which causes their grief and sorrow, Ier. 9 2. T^is was
Hamans policy against the Jews; There is (said he to Ahafueros) a certain
people scattered abroad, and dispersed among the people, in all the Provinces
of thy kingdom, and their laws are diverse from all people, and they keep not
the kings laws: therefore it is not for the kings profit to suffer them, Esth.
3.8. So Tertullus the Orator pleaded before Felix the Governor against Paul,
saying, We have found this man a pestilen^ fellow, and a moover of sedition
among all the Jews thoroughout the world, Act. 24.5. And when Paul and Silas
came to Thessalonica, some informed the rulers, saying, These that have turned
the world upside down, are come hither also, Act. 17.6. Thus also did the Jews;
accuse our Savior unto Pilate, saying, We have found this fellow perverting
the nation, and forbidding to give tribute unto Caesar, saying that he himself
is Christ a king, Luke 23 2.

3. By laying traps and snares for them, whereby to bring them into danger.
Come, (said some) and let us devise devices against Jeremiah, Jer. 18.18.
Peradventure he will be enticed, and we shall prevail against him, and we shall
take our revenge on him, Jer. 20.^0. They also that seek after my life, (says
David) lay snares for me: and they that seek my hurt, speak mischievous things,
and imagine deceits all the day long, Psalm. 38.12. Every day they wrest my
words: all their thoughts are against me for evil. They gather themselves
together, they hide themselves, they mark my steps, when they wait for my soul,
Psalm. 56.5.6. Thus our Saviors adversaries dealt with him. The Scribes and the
Pharisees began to urge him vehemently, and to provoke him to speak of many
things, laying wait for him, and seeking to catch something out of his mouth,
that they might accuse him, Luke 11.53, 54. And they watched him, and sent
forth spies, which should feign themselves just men, that they might take hold
on his words, and so they might deliver him unto the power and authority of the
Governor, Luke 20.20.

4. By showing themselves glad if they can take them tripping in any kind.
They watch for my halting, says Jeremie, Jer. 20.10. When my foot slippeth,
(says David) then they magnify themselves against me, Psalm. 38.16.

5. By carping and cavilling at them, however they demean themselves.
Whereunto (said Christ) shall I liken this generation? It is like unto children
sitting in the market, and calling to their fellows, and saying, We have piped
unto you, and you have not danced; we have mourned unto you, and ye have not
lamented. For John came neither eating nor drinking, (he led an austere kind
of life) and they say, He has a devil. The Son of man came eating and
drinking, (conversing with men after a more familiar manner) and they say,
Behold a man gluttonous, and a winebibber, a friend of Publicans and sinners,
Matthew. 11.16, 17, 18, 19.

6. By mis-interpreting and perverting even their best actions. As when our
Savior by the finger of God did cast out devils, some most blasphemously said
that he did it by Beelzebub, the prince of devils, Mat. 12.24.

Thus many ways do some show their contempt of the godly, even because they
are godly. And especially when the godly (as their duty is) reprove them for
their exorbitancies and misdemeanors, then they scorn and deride, rail and
revile, calling them precise fools, and what not? This fellow is newly come to
sojourne among us, and he will needs make himself a judge; said the Sodomites
of Lot, when he went about to dissuade them from their wickedness, Genesis 19.9.
And when the Pharisees heard our Savior speak against covetousness, they being
covetous derided him, Luke 16.14.

Fifthly and lastly, let us be exhorted to labor to approve ourselves unto
God, by being careful to perform this duty of honoring those that fear God.
All the reasons pre-alledged, should be so many motives to prevail with us in
this behalf. But further let us consider:

1. That Christ has given a strict charge, saying, Take heed that ye despise
not one of these little ones, Matt. 18.10. How dangerous it is to despise the
godly, he has also showed us, saying, Whos^ shall offend one of these little
ones, which believe in me, it were better for him that a milestone were hanged
about his neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the sea, verse. 6.

2. The honor or dishonor done unto the godly, redounds to the honor or
dishonor of God himself. As Moses said to the Israelites, when they murmured
against him and Aaron, Your murmurings are not against us, but against the
Lord, Exodus 16.8. So may it be said of all that despise the godly, Their
despising is not a despising of men, but of God. He that despises (any in whom
does appear and shine forth the sanctifying grace of Gods Spirit) despises not
man, but God; 1 Thessalonians. 4.8. I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat; I was
thirsty, and ye gave me drink, etc. Verily I say unto you, Inasmuch as ye have
done it to one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me. I
was an hungered, and ye gave no meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink,
etc. Verily I say unto you, Inasmuch as ye did it not to one of the least of
these, ye did it not to me, Matthew. 25.35, -- 45.

3. To honor the godly, because they are godly, is a sure sign of a gracious
heart; and to despise the godly as such, argues a most graceless Spirit. Every
one that loves him that begat, loves also him that is begotten of him, 1 John
5.1. If a man say, I love God, and hates his brother, he is a liar. For he
that loves not his brother, whom he has seen, how can he love God, whom he
has not seen? And this commandment have we from him, that he who loves God,
should love his brother also, 1 John 4. verse. 20, 21. This is the message,
which ye heard from the beginning, that we should love one another. Not as
Cain, who was of the wicked one, and slew his brother: and wherefore slew he
him? because his own works were evil, and his brothers righteous, 1 John 3.11,
12. We know, that we have passed from death to life, because we love the
brethren, verse. 14. There is a love, viz. a love of good will, which we owe
unto all: but the love of friendship and familiarity, this we owe peculiarly to
the godly: thus to love them, is to delight in them; and that (as has been
showed before) is one thing, wherein does consist the honor that is due unto
them.

4. The godly are rare, few in comparison, a little flock, Luke 12.32.
Therefore they are the more to be esteemed. Rara cara, Things that are rare, as
pearls and precious stones, are much set by, and highly prized. The word of
the Lord was precious in those days, there was no open vision, 1 Samuel 3.1.
Because it was rare, therefore it was precious; though some by precious do
understand rare, and so interpret it.

5. To honor the godly is a means to encourage them, Chald. (...) Jun. rarus.
and to make them hold on their way with more alacrity and cheerfulness. Indeed
such as are truly godly, will be content to pass thorough honor and
dishonor, 2 Cor. 6.8. Yet this will afford some encouragement even to the
best, if they be respected and honored as it meet. When the Christians came to
meet Paul, as he was going to Rome, as soon as he saw them, he thanked God, and
took courage, Act. 28.15. On the other side, the godly themselves are sometimes
troubled at those affronts and indignities that are done unto them. The word of
the Lord (says Jeremie) was made a reproach unto me, and a derision daily.
Then I said, I will not make mention of him, nor speak any more in his Name:
but his word was in my heart as a burning fire shut up in my bones, and I was
weary with forbearing, Jer. 20.8, 9.

6. The godly are profitable to others; means to prevent evil, and procure
good, not only in respect of themselves, but also in respect of others, as was
showed before, from Genesis 30.27. and 39.5. and Act. 27.24. See also 2 King.
3.14. etc. Therefore such as do not honor the godly, are injurious not only to
the godly, but also to themselves. While Lot was in Sodom, it could not be
destroyed, Genesis 19.22. Had not the Sodomites then reason to have respected Lot
otherwise then they did?

7. God has showed himself much provoked against those that have showed
themselves despisers of his servants. Because Mical despised David, when she
saw him dance before the Arc, and scoffed at him for it, Therefore she had no
child unto the day of her death, 2 Samuel 6.23. So God caused two shee-beares to
tear in pieces two and forty children, because they mocked and abused Elisha,
2 King. 2.23, 24.

SERMON. XIX.
Psalm. 15.4. But he honors them that fear the Lord.


I Come now to give some rules and directions, which are to be observed in
honoring the godly.

Rules and Directions for the honoring of the godly.
1. We must honor the godly not in pretense, but in sincerity. It is said of
Dionysius, that whereas he maintained many Philosophers and learned men, he
stuck not to profess, that he did it not out of respect to them, but out of
respect to himself; not that he did much value them, (...). Plut. in Apothegm.
but that he himself by their means might be much valued. He supposed, that
all would take him for a rare and excellent man, who did so honor those that
^ere such. So some (though they will not so ingenuousl^ acknowledge it, as
Dionysius did) may make a show of ^onouring the godly, that so themselves may
be accounted godly; or for some other by-end, and base respect. The Scribes and
Pharisees would build the tombs of the Prophets, and garnish the sepulchers of
the righteous; as if they had been most careful to observe the admonitions of
the Prophets, and to follow the examples of the righteous; when as indeed it
was quite contrary: therefore our Savior inveighs against them, and cries woe
unto them for their hypocrisy, Matthew. 23.29. He that receives a prophet in
the name of a prophet, shall receive a prophets reward: and he that receives a
righteous man in the name of a righteous man, shall receive a righteous man's
reward, Matthew. 10.41. It is not enough to honor a prophet, or a righteous man,
but it must be done, eo nomine, in that very respect, because he is a prophet,
or a righteous man; and then, not otherwise, is a reward to be expected.
Whosoever shall give you a cup of water to drink in my name, says our
Savior) because you belong to Christ, verily I say unto you, he shall not lose
his reward, Mark 9.41. The least respect showed to the godly, because they are
godly, proceeding from a true and unfeigned love of piety* shall not be
unrewarded: on the other side, the greatest honor done to the godly, if it be
not done in simplicity and godly sincerity, it is worth nothing.

2. We must honor the godly without pa^^ialitie. The godly must be honored as
godly; and therefore all that are godly must be honored, as well one as
another.

1. As well the godly that are members of the Church militant here below, as
they that are members of the Church triumphant in heaven. The Scribes and
Pharisees showed much reverence and respect to the prophets and righteous men,
that were dead, building their tombs, and garnishing their sepulchers, Matthew.
23.29. but they despised and abused most shamefully such as were among them, as
appeared by their deportment toward John Baptist, and toward Christ himself.
So the Papists honor the Saints departed more then enough; but the Saints that
are upon earth they scorn and contemn, yea hate and persecute. But David was
not thus partial; his goodness did extend to the Saints that were upon the
earth; those he accounted excellent, and in them was all his delight, Psalm.
16.3. Certain it is, He that does not regard the Saints that are here upon
earth, whatever show he make of honoring the Saints in heaven, all is but
false and fained. For as S. John argues, He that loves not his brother, whom
he has seen, how can he love God, whom he has not seen? 1 John 4.20. So he
that honors not the Saints here, whom he has seen, how can he honor the
Saints in heaven, whom he has not seen?

2. As well the godly that are poor and of mean condition in the world, as
those that are rich, and eminent in any wordly respect. This is that which S.
James prescribes, saying, My brethren, have not the faith of our Lord Jesus
Christ, the Lord of glory, with respect of persons, Jam. 2.1. For this the
Apostle Paul commended the Galatians, that they did honor him, notwithstanding
that poor and despicable condition (as to the eye of the world) which they saw
him in. And my temptation (says he) which was in my flesh, ye despised not,
nor rejected; but received me as an angel of God, even as Christ Jesus, Gal.
4.14. In this respect also he commended Onesiphorus, saying, The Lord show
mercy unto the house of Onesiphorus, for he often refreshed me, and was not
ashamed of my chain. (Though Paul were a prisoner, and in bonds, yet
Onesiphorus showed all love and respect unto him:) But when he was at Rome, he
sought me out very diligently, and found me, 2 Timothy 1.16, 17. Be not thou
therefore (said he to Timothy) ashamed of the testimony of our Lord, nor of me
his prisoner, verse. 8. Thus did Paul himself honor Onesimus, a poor servant,
and a fugitive too, but now a convert. He makes honorable mention of him, Col.
4.9. With Onesimus a faithful and beloved brother. And the Epistle to Philemon
was written merely in his behalf. Thus also did Boaz honor Ruth, though she
were a stranger, newly come out of another country, and was so poor, that she
was glad to go a gleaning; yet he having heard of her virtue and piety, took
notice of her, and showed her much respect at the first, and within a short
time made her his wife, Ruth 2. and 3. and 4. Chap.

3. Though they be such as are weak in gifts and graces, yet appearing to be
godly, they are to be honored. Take he^d^ that ye despise not one of th^se
little ones, Matthew. 18.10. Though they be little ones, yet if they be Christ's,
they are not to be despised. Inasmuch as ye have done it to one of the least of
these my brethren, ye have done it unto me, Matthew. 25.40. Inasmuch as you have
not done it to one of the least of these, you have not done it unto me, verse.
45. Him that is weak in the faith, receive you, Romans 14.1. We that are strong
ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to please our selves, Romans
15.1. The eye cannot say to the hand, I have no need of thee: nor again the
head to the feet, I have no need of you. Nay much more those members of the
body, which seem to be more feeble, are necessary. And those members of the
body which we think to be less honorable, upon these we bestow more abundant
honor; and our uncomely parts have more abundant comeliness, 1 Cor. 12.21, 22,
23. From this similitude taken from the members of the natural body, the
Apostle shows, that in the mystical body of Christ, the Church, those members
which are more weak and feeble, yet are useful and profitable, and not to be
despised.

4. Though they differ in opinion from us, and hold some errors, yet if Christ
appear to be formed in them, we must not despise, but honor them. Let not him
that eats, despise him that eats not, Romans 14.3. Why do thou set at
naught thy brother? verse. 10. If he be a brother, partaker of the grace of God
in Christ, though he do err in some points, yet he is not to be despised, but
to be had in honor.

But here a Caution Caution.
is to be added, and a limitation, viz. That this indulg^^^e is not to be
extended unto such as subvert the very fundamentals of Religion, as too many do
in these times. Some have been over-respective of such, pleading for them as
godly, and of honest life and conversation; and therefore to be tolerated and
borne with, yea received and embraced. Indeed if any appear to err through
weakness, being desirous to learn and understand the truth, they are not to be
despised and cast off, but instructed and admonished: but if they be stiff and
obstinate, and that in pernicious and damnable errors, they are to be
exploded. A man that is an heretic after the first and second admonition,
reject, Tit. 3.10. If there come any unto you, and bring not this doctrine,
(the doctrine of the Gospel) receive him not into your house, neither bid him
God speed. For he that bids him God speed, is partaker of his evil deeds, 2
John 10. and 11. Chap. To whom we gave place by subjection no not for an hour,
that the truth of the Gospel might continue with you, Gal. 2.5. I would they
were even cut off which trouble you, Gal. 5.12. But I have a few things against
thee, because thou have there them that hold the doctrine of Balaam, etc. So
have thou also them that hold the doctrine of the Nicolaitans, which thing I
hate. Repent, or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will fight against
thee with the sword of my mouth, Rev. 2.14, 15, 16. Thus Christ taxed the
Church in Pergamos; and so verse. 20. the Church in Thyatira; Notwithstanding I
have a few things against thee, because thou suffer that woman Jezabel,
which calls herself a Prophetess, to teach, and to seduce my servants, etc.
It is said of S. John, that he would not endure to be under the same roof
where Cerinthus an arch-heretick was, but said to those that were with him, Let
us away, lest the house fall, in which this enemy of the truth Cerinthus is.
Eusebius. hist. lib. 3. cap. 25. and lib. 4. c. 14.
It is likewise recorded of Polycarpus, who lived in S. John's days, and died a
Martyr, that when Marcion, another prime Sectarie, met him, and asked him, If
he knew him, Yes (said he) I know thee to be the firstborn of the devil. Such
was the zeal that the Apostles and Apostolical men had against heretics. Thus
also Hierome writing to Ruffinus, with whom he was at variance; In uno
consentire tibi non possum, ut parcam haereticis, and me Catholicum non probem.
Si ista est causa discordiae, non possum tacere, non possum. Hieron. Apol. 2.
advers. Ruffin.
In one thing (says he) I cannot consent unto thee, that I should spare
heretics, and not prove my self a sound Christian. If this be the cause of our
difference and disagreement, I cannot hold my peace, I cannot do it.

5. Though they slip into some exorbitancies and misdemeanors, yet if in the
general they show themselves to be godly, we should not despise, but honor
them. It was the wickedness of Cham to despise his father Noah, when he was
drunken, and lay in his tent uncovered; this brought a curse upon him, and his
posterity: when Sem and Japhet obtained a blessing, because they covered their
fathers nakedness, Genesis 9.22, etc. This also is noted as an argument of Joseph's
goodness, that when he perceived Mary his espoused wife to be with child before
they came together, he not knowing how it came to pass, but fearing all was
not right with her, yet was not willing to make her a public example, but was
minded to put her away privily, Matthew. 1.19. The Apostles rule and direction in
this case is, Brethren, if a man be overtaken with a fault, ye which are
spiritual restore such a one in the spirit of ^eekness; considering thy self,
lest thou also be tempted, Gal. 6.1. God does not despise his servants and
children because of their infirmities and failings, but he spares them, as a
man spares his son that serves him, Mal. cap. 3. verse. 17. Therefore neither
ought we in that respect to despise the godly.

6. Though the godly some way or other be injurious unto us, we ought
nevertheless to honor, and not to despise them. So Joseph did Mary, though he
supposed her to have dealt injuriously with him; and she had done so indeed, if
it had been with her as he imagined. Calvin's resolution concerning Luther, was
very admirable in this respect. They differed much about the presence of Christ
in the Sacrament: and Luther being of a vehement spirit, wrote bitterly against
those that did hold otherwise in that point then himself did. This enforced
some, who were more nearly concerned in the business, to prepare to answer
Luther; which Calvin understanding, and fearing lest they being provoked by
Luthers tartness, should deal with him in the like kind, he wrote unto
Bullinger a prime man among them, persuading and exhorting him to carry the
business so, as to show all due respect unto Luther, considering what worth and
excellency there was in him, however he had demeaned himself in that
particuliar. And he adds, that he often used to say, Saep;e dicere solitus
sum, etiamsi me diabolum voca et, me tamen hoc illi honoris habiturum, ut
insignem Dei servum agnoscam. Calv. Epist. 57.
that although Luther should call him devil, yet he would do him that honor,
to acknowledge him a choice servant of God.

3. We must honor the godly discreetly, with such honor as is meet, and nor
with such honor as does not belong unto them. When Cornelius saw Peter come
unto him, he fell down at his feet, and worshipped him, Act. 10.25. This was
more honor then was meet. Quasi sui oblitus, plus homini detulit quam par
sit. Calv. ad loc.
The Papists are most gross this way, in that honor which they give unto the
Saints departed; who are indeed to be honored, but not as they honor them.

1. We are to think and speak reverently of them. All generations (said the
Blessed Virgin) shall call me blessed, How the saints departed are to be
honored.
Luke 1.48. The memory of the just is blessed, says Solomon, Proverb. 10.
verse. 7. Which words the Rabbines commonly use, when they make mention of any
of those Rabbines that were before them. (...) or using only the first letters
of the words, (...)


2. We are to praise and glorify God for them. They glorified God in me, said
Paul, Gal. 1.24. viz. the Christians that heard of his conversion. And so still
God is to be glorified in him, and for him, and for the other Saints, for the
grace that he endued them with here on earth, and for the glory that he has
conferred upon them in heaven. Christ will come to be glorified in his Saints,
and admired in all them that believe, 2 Thessalonians. 1.10.

3. We ought to imitate them, and to follow their example. Be followers of
them, who through faith and patience inherit the promises, Heb. 6.12. Take, my
brethren, the Prophets, who have spoken in the name of the Lord, for an example
of suffering affliction, and of patience, Jam. 5.10. And verse. 11. Ye have
heard of the patience of Job, viz. that so you should conform your selves unto
it.

But all this will not satisfy them of the Church of Rome, How the Papists
exceed in giving honor to the Saints departed.
but they will honor the Saints departed far more then thus:

1. They attribute to some of them more holiness then the Scripture does afford
any ground or warrant for; yea, such as is inconsistent with the doctrine of
the Scripture. For they universally hold, Council. Trid. sess. 6. can. 23.
Council. Basil. sess. 36.

Canus Loc. Theol. lib. 7. cap. 3.

Bellar. de Amiss. Great. lib. 4. cap. 15.


that the Virgin Mary was so holy, as that she was free from all actual sin,
even the least, even venial sin, as they call it. And the most of them hold
that she was also without original sin. But first, for original sin, the
Scripture makes all generally guilty of it, saying, By one man (viz. Adam) sin
entered into the world (that is, into all mankind) and by sin death, and so
death passed upon all, for all that have sinned, Romans 5.12. Bernard says, that
what David confessed of himself, is true of all, Quo (scil. Christo) excepto,
de cae^^ro universos respexit ex Adam natos, quod unus humiliter de s^ipso, ac
veraciter confitetur, In iniquitatibus, inquiens, conceptus sum, etc. Bern.
Epist. 174.
only Christ excepted: I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin has my mother
conceived me. Psalm. 51.5. Bonaventure says, that the fathers generally except
none but Christ, as not being included in that sentence, In Adam all have
sinned. And he adds more expressly, Communiter sancti solum Christum
excipiunt ab illa generalitate, qua dicitur, Omnes peccaverunt in Adam. -- Et
nullatenus ab hac gen^ralitate, B. Virgo Maria excludenda, ne dum matris
excellentia ampliatur, Filii gloria minuatur. Bonav. in Sent. lib. 3. did. 3.
art. 1. quaest. 2.
that the B. Virgin Mary is not to be excepted, lest while the excellency of
the mother is amplified, the glory of the Son be diminished. And for actual
sin, the Scripture shows, that none whiles here upon earth (except him only,
Who knew no sin, yet was made sin for us, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21.) is free from it. There is not a just
man upon earth, that does good and sins not, Eccles. 7.20. The best that
live here, must pray, Forgive us our trespasses, Matthew. 6.12. The Blessed
Virgin is no where exempted from this kind of sin more then the other.
Theophylact thinks that she showed her infirmity, (...). Theophyl. ad Mat.
12.46. vide plura.
and took too much upon her, when Christ being yet talking to the people, she
sent to speak with him. And that Christ to purge out that vainglorious humor
that was in her, said, Who is my Mother? (...). Idem ibid. ad v. 48. etc.
etc. Matt. 12.46, etc. So upon Mark 3.31, etc. where the same story is
related, he says, that she seems to have been possessed with vainglory,
(...). Theophyl. ad Mar. 3.3
and so would have the multitude to see, that him whom they so admired, she
could draw away while he was teaching. Though I see no sufficient ground
whereupon to charge the B. Virgin as Theophylact does, yet however thus much
all from hence may see, that Theophylact (who was above 1000. years after
Christ) made no question, but that the Virgin May was subject even to actual
sin as well as others.

2. They feign miracles of the Saints, to make them (as they suppose) the more
glorious. They say, that the house wherein the Virgin Mary was, when the angel
Gabriel came unto her, was many hundred years after translated first out of
Galilee into Dalmatia above 2000 miles, and thence over the sea into Italy,
Tursellin. de aede Lauretana.
where also it removed from one place to another, till at length it found a
place where to abide: and many most miraculous cures (they say) were wrought by
it; and that the very trees, when it came, did bow unto it. Infinite stories
they have of this nature, especially in the Legend of Saints, which they call,
The golden Legend, a book so full of such gross stuff, that Ludovicus Vives,
a Papist, Quam indigna est divis and hominibus Christianis illa Sanctorum
historia, quae Legenda aurea nominatur, quam nescio cur auream appellent, quum
scripta sit ab homine ferrei oris, plumbei cordis. Quid faedius dici potest
illo libro? Lud. Vives de Cause. corrup. art. lib. 2.
but learned and ingenuous, with great indignation cried out, What can be more
abominable then that book? And he wondered why they should call it Golden, when
as he that wrote it, was a man of an iron mouth, and of a leaden heart. And
Melchior Canus (a Romish Bishop) passes the same censure upon that book,
Melch. Can. Loc. Theol. lib. 11. cap. 6.
and complains (as Vives also had done before him) that Laertius wrote the
lives of Philosophers, and Suetonius the lives of the Cesars, more sincerely
then some did the lives of the Saints and Martyrs.

3. They are most vain and superstitious in the honor which they give to the
Relics of the Saints; as their dead bodies, or some parts of them, their
bones, flesh, hair; yea, their clothes that they wore, or the like. You may
now every where (says Erasmus) see held out for gain Mary's milk, Videas body
passim ad quaestum ostentari lac Mariae, quod honor propemodum aequam Corpori
Christi consecrato: prodigiosum oleum; fragmento crucis tam multa, ut si in
acervum redigantur, vix una navis oneraria vebat: hic ostentari Francisci
cucullum: illic intimam vestem Mariae Virginis; alibi pectinem Annae, alibi
caligam Joseph, alibi calceum Thomae Ca^tuariensis, alibi Christi praeputium,
quod cum sit res incerta, religiosius adorant quam totum Christum. Neque vero
haec ita proferunt tanquam toleranda, and plebeculae donanda affectibus; verum
huc fere summa religionis vocatur. Eras. in Matthew. 23.5.
which they honor almost as much as Christ's consecrated body: prodigious oil;
so many pieces of the Cross, that if they were all gathered together, a great
ship would scarce carry them: Here Francis his hood set forth to view, there
the innermost garment of the Virgin Mary: in one place Anna's comb, in another
place Joseph's stocking, in another place Thomas of Canterbury his shoe; in
another place Christ's foreskin; which though it be a thing uncertain, they
worship more religiously then Christ's whole person. Neither do they bring forth
these things, as things that may be tolerated, and to please the common people:
but all religion almost is placed in them.

4. They pray unto the Saints departed; which honor is due into God only. Call
upon me, says he, Psalm. 50.15. When ye pray, say, Our Father, etc. says
Christ, Matthew. 6.9.

5. They rely upon the merits and satisfactions of the Saints; which honor is
due unto Christ only. Was Paul crucified for you? 1 Corinthians. 1.13. No, not
Paul, nor Peter, nor any but Christ only: therefore we are to rely on his merit
and satisfaction, and of none other: If any man sin, we have an advocate with
the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our
sins, 1 John 2.1, 2.

SERMON. XX.
Psalm. 15.4. He that swears to his own hurt, and changes not.


HEre follows the sixth special property of the person spoken of verse. 1.
viz. one that shall abide in Gods tabernacle, and dwell in his holy hill, he is
here described by this, that he swears to his own hurt, and changes not.

But concerning these words, there is some difference among Interpreters and
Expositours. The Greek Interpreters, Heb. (...) LXX. (...) Vulg. Qui jurat
proximo suo, and non decipit. Symmachus, (...).
called the Septuagint, (whom the vulgar Latin does follow, and indeed
translate) render it, He that swears to his neighbor, and does not disanul
it. It seems that for (...) lehara to afflict, or hurt, they read (...)
leharea, to (his) neighbor; but so it should rather be (...) larea, then (...)
leharea. Yet R. Nathan in his Hebrew Concordances says, that in the opinion of
some, (...) R. Nathan de Psalm. 15.4.
(whom he means, I know not) the Hebrew word here in this place does signify
neighbor. In the like sense does Symmachus, an ancient Greek Interpreter,
take it; who expresses it thus: He that swears to be a friend, and changes
not. But Aquila and Theodotion, two ancient Greek Interpreters also, render
it, to afflict; Aq. and Theod. (...). Hieron. ut se affligat.
and so Hierome in his Translation of the Psalms, which he calls juxta
Hebraicam veritatem, according to the Hebrew verity: and in that sense do the
Jewish Expositours generally understand it. The Hebrew word ((...)) is as much
as to do evil. Now evil is either the evil of sin; eschew evil, Psalm. 34.14.
that is, eschew sin: or the evil of affliction; Sufficient unto the day is the
evil thereof, Matthew. 6.34. that is, the affliction which comes along with it.
So consequently, to do evil is either to sin, or to afflict: and the word here
used in the Original, is sometimes taken in the one sense, Genesis 19.17. (...)
Do not wickedly. Ruth 1.21. (...) The Almighty has afflicted me.
and sometimes in the other. But it cannot be here taken in the former sense;
for a man may not swear to sin; and if he do, he ought to change. It must
needs be therefore taken in the latter sense, Aben Ezra ad loc. (...) So
Kimchi, (...)
for to afflict: but how? Some of the Rabbines expound it thus: He that
swears to afflict himself by fasting and the like. It is not unlawful to
swear in this kind, so that it be done neither superstitiously, nor
indiscreetly; David mourning for the death of Abner, whom Joab had
treacherously slain, swear saying, So do God to me, and more also, if I taste
bread, or ought else, till the sun be down, 2 Samuel 3.35. So Moses shows, that
God did allow his people to make a vow, and a binding oath to afflict the soul,
Number. 30.13. The Chaldee Paraphrast seems to have understood it in that sense
also; Chald. (...)
he expresses it thus: That swears to do evil to (or to afflict) himself,
and changes not. But although the Phrase of afflicting the soul, or ones self,
be often applied to abstinence and fasting; and one may swear so to afflict
himself; yet I cannot take that to be here meant.

For 1. Where that kind of afflicting of ones self ( viz. by fasting) is
spoken of in the Scripture, Not (...) but (...), as Number. 30.13. Isai. 58.5. and
in other places: whence (...) for fasting in the Jewish writers.
another Hebrew word is used, and not that which David here uses.

2. That afflicting of ones self by fasting, seems not to be a matter of that
moment, as that the keeping of such an oath should be made one special property
of a man that shall go to heaven.

3. The blessed man here spoken of, is described by his care to perform the
duties of the second table, to wit, those duties, which one man does owe unto
another; Non nisi de secunda Legis tabula, and mutua inter homines rectitudine
disserit. Calvin. ad loc.

Nihil magis remotum ab illius mente. Calvin. ibid.


as Calvin does observe upon the place: and therefore he says, that the
exposition of afflicting ones self by fasting, is most far from David's
meaning. The true and genuine sense of the words is this, that the person here
mentioned is so faithful in his dealings with men, that he will perform his
promises, especially if they be confirmed by oath, although it prove to his own
hurt some way or other, as sometimes it may fall out. Thus our Translatours,
and so other Christian Interpreters and Expositours understand it. And R.
Solomon also seems to have taken it in this sense; (...) R. Sal. ad loc.
he thus glosseth upon the Text: Having sworn (so as) to do evil to (or to
hurt) himself, he changes not his oath: much less will he change it in a
matter that is not to his hurt.

The words thus opened, afford us this doctrinal conclusion, That a citizen of
heaven is one, who has a care to perform what he promises, especially what
he swears; although it so happen, that one way or other he hurt himself by it.

Though swearing only be expressed in the Text, yet it is not so to be
understood, as if promises made without an oath were not to be regarded, or
needed not to be performed. No, David before, verse. 2. noted the person that he
speaks of, It is well expressed in the Psalm that is sung: His oath and all
his promises
That keeps faithfully:
Though he does make his Covenant so,
That he does lose thereby.

to be one that speaks the truth in his heart. Therefore what he promises,
though without an oath, he intends to perform, and so will perform if he be
able. The Apostle says that he did not use lightness, that there should be
with him yea, yea, and nay, nay, 2 Cor. 1.17. He was not off and on, so that
now he would do a thing, and by and by he would not do it.

Thus some understand that of S. James, Let your yea be yea, and your nay nay,
Vult ut verac^s simus, firmiqu^ in omnibus dictis. Calvin. in loc.
James 5.12. And so that of our Savior, Let your communication be yea, yea;
nay, nay. As if the meaning of these places were, that we should be true and
faithful, firm and steadfast in our words and speeches. Thus some cite a saying
of the ancient Jews, The yea of the righteous is yea; and their nay is nay.
That is, Candorem in verbis nostris, and constantiam requirit Christus, ne sit
necesse jurare. Calv. ad loc.
If they affirm a thing or deny it, it is as certain as if they had sworn it
never so much. So that famous, though more late Rabbin, Maymonides says, that
such as apply themselves to the study of wisdom, should deal truly and
faithfully; and of yea should say yea, and of nay, nay; that is, they should
speak as the thing is, and as they intend. But swearing is therefore mentioned
in the Text, (...) Mercer. in Genesis 30.35.
because covenants and promises oftentimes have oaths added unto them, for the
greater confirmation of them: that so they to whom the promises are made, (...)
Maimonid. Can. Ethic. cap. 5. sect. 13.
may be the more assured that they shall be performed; and that they that make
them, might be the more careful to keep them. For as it is a sin to break a
promise, though it be made without an oath; so if it be confirmed by an oath,
it is the greater sin to break it.

Now because the Text does expressly speak of swearing, and the point is
principally meant of it; therefore before I come to the proof of the point, I
will speak something of an oath, for the better understanding of the nature of
it.

What an oath is.
And first what an oath is; and I define it thus. An oath is a calling on God,
to witness that which is spoken; and to plague and punish, if it be otherwise
then is spoken.

1. There is a calling on God to witness that which is spoken: God is my
witness, says Paul, Romans 1.9. The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
which is blessed for evermore, knows that I lie not, says he, 2 Cor. 11.31.
Behold, before God, I lie not, Gal. 1. verse. 20. All these speeches are oaths,
and they all contain in them implicitly (and so does every oath) a calling
upon God to testifye the truth of that which is spoken. It is not material what
the form of speech be, so there be a purpose to make God a witness. Neque enim
interest sive dicatur mihi, sive meus testis est, vel scit Deus, modo sit
voluntas adhibendi Deum test^m. Estius ad Romans 1.9.

Illi, quantum aliquos eorum audivi, quid sit jurare prorsus ignorant. ^utant
enim se non jurare, quando in ore habent, Scit Deus, and Testis est Deus, etc.
quia non dicitur, Per Deum, etc. August. Epist. 89. ad Hilarium.

Quod Pelagiam dicebant non jurasse Paulum, quia non dixit, Per Deum, etc.
ridendum potius est quam refutandum. Maldon. ad Matthew. 5.34.


Austine taxes the Pelagians as not knowing what an oath is, for that they
thought they did not swear, when they said, God knows, and God is witness,
and the like, because they did not say, By God. But to think that it is no oath
except the syllable By be used, is such a simple conceit, that (as one says)
it is rather to be derided then confuted.

But may some object,

Aquinas does well answer this objection thus; Aliud est testimonio D^i uti jam
dato, quod fit cum aliquis auctoritatem S. Scripturae inducit: and aliud est
testimonium Dei implorare, ut exhibendum, quod fit in juramento. Aquin. 22.
quaest. 89. art. 1. ad 1.
so we do when we cite Scripture: It is another thing to implore the testimony
of God to be given; so we do when we swear. So that to swear, is in effect to
invocate God, and to say, O Lord, be thou my witness; or, O Lord, do thou
witness for me: and though in swearing we do not speak thus directly unto God,
yet whenever we swear, we do in effect speak unto God in that manner. That
form of speech so frequent with our Savior, Amen, or Verily, or with an
ingemination, Amen, Amen, Doctores Catholici scribunt Amen esse juramentum,
etc. Drus. ad Apoc. 19.4. In hanc sententiam citat Auctorem operis imperfecti
in Mat. hom. 23. Chrysostom. hom. 10. in Mar. and Hieron. in Isai. 15. Sic Calvinus
in John 5.25. pro juramento occipit.
or verily verily, some both of the ancient, and also of the modern writers
take to be an oath: but properly it is not an oath, but only an asseveration,
or a vehement affirmation. The like also is to be said of these speeches, In
very deed, In faith, In truth, or In troth. And so, By my faith, Si dicam, Per
fidem meam, per existimationem meam; non tam est formula juramenti quam species
obtestationis inter homines, ut si fidem fefellerimus, non amplius inter
homines habeamur fideles, aut honesti. Chemnit. in Harm.
By my truth, or troth; properly these are not oaths, but only asseverations,
or at most obtestations. As if one should say, Let me not be accounted true, or
faithful, let no credit hereafter be given unto me, if it be not, or if I do
not intend as I speak. Per fidem (etsi ex more alicujus genti^, aut intention
dicentis poter^t esse juramentum) non est tam n juramentum ex vi verborum, sed
asseveratio tantum, vel ad plurimum obtestatio. -- q. d. examino loquor, vere
id dico quod sentio: pignero tibi fidem meam, remitase habere: si sciens fallo,
n^lla mihi in posterum fides habeatur, etc. Sanders. de Jur. P^aelect. 5. sect.
7.
Yet are not these forms of speech to be made so common as they are by many.

For 1. They are seeming oaths some of them; and they that use them, for most
part take them for oaths.

2. Our Savior did not use Amen, or Verily, but upon weighty occasion.

2. In swearing there is a calling on God to plague and punish, if the thing
be, or we intend otherwise then we speak. Aquin. 22. quaest. 89. art. 6.
Aquinas makes an oath to be either per simplicem contestationem, by a simple
contestation, a bare calling on God to witness; or per execrationem, by
execration, a calling on God to punish in case of swearing falsely. But properly
these are not several kinds of oaths, but they concur to the constituting
of an oath, as several parts of it. In every oath there is both a contestation,
and an execration; though perhaps only the one be expressed, yet the other also
is implied. Sometimes only the contestation is expressed, as in the forms
before cited. Sometimes only the execration, as 2 Samuel 3.35. Qui Deo utilur
test, simul perjurii ultorem citat, si fallit. -- Tametsi hoc non semper
exprimitur verbo, subaudiendum est tamen. Calvin. ad 2 Cor. 1.^3.
So do God to me, and more alfo, if I taste bread, or ought else, till the sun
be down. Sometimes both the contestation and the execration are expressed, as
Jos. 22.22, 23. The Lord God of gods, the Lord God of gods, he knows, and
Israel he shall know, if it be in rebellion, or if in transgression against the
Lord (save us not this day) that we have built us an altar to turn from
following the Lord, or if to offer thereon burnt offering, or meat offering; or
if to offer peace offerings thereon, let the Lord himself require it. In these
words, The Lord God of gods, The Lord God of gods, he knows, there is a
contestation, a calling on God to witness that which they spoke: and in those
words, Let the Lord himself requite it, there is an execration, a calling on
God to punish them, if it were otherwise then they spoke. So 2 Cor. 1.23. I
call God for a record upon my soul, etc. First, there is a contestation, I
call God for a record: Hoc sibi vult particula, In animam meam, ac si dicerit,
non recuso quin paenam sumat, si mentior. Calvin. ad loc.
and then there is an execration in the words following, upon my soul; which is
as much as if he should say, Let God take vengeance on me, if I lie.

2. How many kinds of oaths there be. How many kinds of oaths there be.
An oath is either assertorie, or promissorie. An assertorie oath is that
wherein a thing is by oath either affirmed, or denied to be. As that, The God
and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which is blessed for evermore, knows
that I lie not. In Damascus the governor, etc. 2 Cor. 11.31, 32, 33. And that,
I call God for a record upon my soul, that to spare you I came not as yet to
Corinth. 2 Cor. 1.23. A promissorie oath is that, wherein a thing is promised
with an oath. As that oath, wherein David and Jonathan did swear to be true
each to other, 1 Samuel 20. verse. 11, etc. So Abraham and Abimelech, Genes.
21.31, 32. And Isaac and Abimelech, Genesis 26.28, 29. Under a promissorie oath is
comprehended a comminatorie oath, wherein something is threatened with an oath.
Then king Solomon swear by the Lord, saying, God do so to me, and more also, if
Adonijah have not spoken this word against his own life, 1 King. 2.23.

3. Whether an oath be lawful or not. Whether an oath be lawful or not.
This may be resolved by what has been said already; but yet it requires
further discussion. For some (misunderstanding (it seems) certain places of
Scripture) have thought it altogether unlawful to swear. So the Pelagians of
old, and the Anabaptists of late: yea Theophylact and diverse other authors of
good account have expressed themselves so as if they were of this opinion,
Sixth. S^nens. Biblioth. S. lib. 6. Annot. 26.
though some have endeavored to interpret them so as to free them from it. But
this opinion, who ever be the authors, or abettours of it, is to be exploded.

For 1. to prove the lawfulness of an oath, we have the example of Saints, of
Angels, and of God himself. Of the Saints, and that before the law, under the
law, and after the law. Before the law, of Abraham, Genesis 14.22. I have lift up
my hand unto the Lord, (...) R. Sal. ad loc.
etc. said he, that is as much as, I have sworn unto the Lord, or by the Lord;
that phrase of lifting up the hand (as R. Solomon upon the place observes)
does import an oath, because that gesture was used in swearing, as appears,
Dan. 12.7. and Revel. 10.5, 6. We find also Abraham swearing, Genesis 21.31. and
causing his servant to swear, Genesis 24.3. So also Isaac swear to Abimelec, Genesis
26.31. And Jacob to Laban, Genesis 31.53. and he caused his son Joseph to swear,
Genesis 47.31. Thus also did the Saints that were under the law, as David, 1 Samuel
20.17. Solomon, 1 King. 2.23. And Eliah, 1 King. 17.1. And so likewise the
Saints that were after the law in the time of the Gospel, as appears by diverse
passages of Paul in the places before cited. And therefore Theophylact's
evasion is too weak, (...), etc. Theophyl. ad Mat. 5.
who says, that before indeed it was not evil to swear, but now since Christ
it is evil, even as to be circumcised, and to observe the Jewish ceremonies. We
read also of the Angels swearing, Dan. 12.7. Rev. 10.5, 6. And to this purpose
we have the example of God himself, of whose swearing we have often mention in
the Scripture; as Genesis 26.3. Exodus 13.5. and 33.1. Josh. 5.6. and so in many
other places.

2. Reason also proves an oath to be lawful;

1. If we consider an oath ex origin, in respect of the ground of it. It
proceeds from a persuasion that men have of Gods Omniscience, truth, power,
Vide Aquin. 22. quaest. 89. art. 2.
justice, that he knows whether we speak truly or no; that he is true, and
that he can and will reward those that speak the truth, and so on the other
side plague and punish those that deal falsely. And therefore to swear by Gods
name is noted as a part of that honor and worship which is due unto him, Deuteronomy.
6.13. and 10.20.

2 If we consider an oath ex fine, in respect of the end of it, this also will
show it to be lawful. For the end of an oath is to confirm truth, to clear
the innocent, and to end controversy. For men verily swear by the greater,
and an oath for confirmation is to them an end of all strife, Heb. 6.16. see
Exodus 22.10, 11. and 1 King. 8. verse. 31, 32.

But against the lawfulness of an oath may be objected that of our Savior; But
I say unto you, Swear not at all; neither by heaven, for it is Gods throne;
nor by the earth, for it is his footstool; neither by Jerusalem, for it is the
city of the great King: Neither shall thou swear by thine head, because thou
can not make one hair white or black But let your communication be yea, yea;
and nay, nay; for whatsoever is more then these, comes of evil, Matthew. 5.34
35, 36, 37. So also that of James; But above all things, my brethren, swear
not, neither by heaven, neither by the earth, neither by any other oath: but
let your yea be yea, and your nay, nay; lest ye fall into condemnation, James
5.12.

Some expound the words of our Savior, Considera quod hic Salvator non per
deum jurare prohibuerit, sed per coelum and terram, etc. Hieron. ad loc.
as by heaven, or by earth, etc. This exposition Hierome has upon the place;
and some of our late writers of good note also do embrace it; Juramenta per S.
Dei nomen concepta non prohiberi, sed concepta tantum per creaturas, ex eo
liquet, quod haudquaquam dicit Dominus, Ne juretis omnino, neque per Deum,
neque per creaturas, sed meminit tantum creaturarum, etc. Spanhem. Part. 2.
Dub. 123. sect. 2.
because our Savior did not say, Swear not at all, neither by God, nor by the
creatures, but he only made mention of the creatures as not to be sworn by.
But I cannot conceive that this was our Saviors meaning. He mentioned indeed
only the creatures, there being special reason for it, as I may show more
hereafter; but he did not therefore allow swearing by God; no, the reasons
annexed make against this. For Christ forbids to swear by the creatures,
because of that reference which they have unto God; therefore swearing by God
directly and immediately, is here much more forbidden. Neither will that
exposition consist with those words, verse. 37. But let your communication be
yea, yea; nay, nay, etc. which words do as well forbid swearing by God as by
the creatures: and so also do those, Jam. 5.12. Nor by any other oath. Some
therefore think all swearing whatsoever simply and absolutely forbidden. So
Hierome in his Commentary upon Mat. 5. says, Et hoc quasi parvulis fuerat
concessum, ut quomodo victimas immolabant Deo, ne cas idolu immolarent, sic and
jurare permitteretur in Deum, non quod recte hoc facerent, sed quod melius
esset Deo id exhibere quam daemonibus, Evangelica autem veritas non recipit
juramentum, etc. Hieron. ad Mat. 5.34.
that as it was permitted unto the Jews to offer sacrifices unto God, that so
they might not offer them unto idols: so they were permitted to swear by God;
not that they did well in so doing, but because it was better to give that
honor to God then to devils. But now the Gospel (he says) does not permit any
oath at all. In like manner does Theophylact expound it, as has been noted
before; but this interpretation also has been before confuted, it having been
proved both by example, and by reason, that both before the coming of Christ an
oath was, and also since his coming is lawful. The meaning therefore of our
Savior, and so of his Apostle, is to forbid swearing, not absolutely, as if in
no ca^^ it might be used, but so as that it is not lawful to swear either
falsely, or rashly, to wit, when there is no just occasion for it. Christ did
bend his speech against the Scribes and Pharisees, who held, that if they did
not use some certain forms of swearing, it was no matter how they did swear.
See Matthew. 23.16, 18. Therefore Christ shows all forms of swearing to be
unlawful, to wit, when there is no just cause of swearing. Again, the Scribes
and Pharisees thought, that if they did not swear falsely, all was well enough,
Mat. 5.33. Therefore Christ forbids as well rash, as false swearing; Summa huc
redit, aliis modis frustra accipi Dei nomen quam perjurio. Calvin. ad Mat. 5.
giving us to know that Gods name is taken in vain as well by the one as by the
other.

But, may some say, swearing, when he bids, Let your communication be yea, yea;
and nay, nay: and says, that whatsoever is more then these, comes of evil.

Augustine, and after him Aquinas, understand the words of our Savior thus,
that a man is not to swear, Si jurare cogeris, scias de necessitate venire
eorum, quibus aliquid suades; quae utique infirmitas malum est. Itaque non
dixit, Quod amplius est, malum est: Tu enim non malum facis, qui been uteris
juratione, ut alteri persuadeas, quod utiliter suades: sed a malo est illius,
cujus infirmitate jurare cogeris. Aug. de Sermon. Dom. in monte; and Aquin. 22.
quaest. 89. art. 2.
constrain him to it. This infirmity of another they take to be that evil
spoken of, when it is said, Whatsoever is more then these (viz. yea, yea; and
nay, nay) comes of evil. And therefore they observe, that it is not said,
Whatsoever is more, is evil; but, comes of evil, to wit, the infirmity of him,
who compells a man to swear, because otherwise he will not believe him. But
this exposition I cannot embrace; for surely Christ speaks of the evil of him
that swears, and not of him who is the occasion why he swears. For this
evil is alleged as the reason why swearing should be avoided: but the
infirmity of men, in not believing without an oath, is no reason why to avoid
an oath, but why to use it. Calvin takes this to be the meaning, that swearing
does arise from the corruption that is in men, Calvin. ad loc.
who are so false and deceitful, that except they swear, it is hard to trust
them. But the purport of Christ's words (I think) is not to show whence swearing
does proceed, but so as withal to show what the nature of it is, to wit, evil;
not simply and in all cases whatsoever, but when there is no sufficient cause
for it. Thus therefore are the words of our Savior to be understood:
Whatsoever is more then yea and nay, that is, whatsoever is affirmed or denied
not barely, but with an oath, when there is no good And just occasion for it,
comes of evil, that is, of men's corruption, who take Gods name in vain by
their rash and unadvised swearing.

SERMON. XXI.
Psalm. 15.4. He that swears to his own hurt, and changes not.


AFter the explication of the words, and the doctrine observed from them, I
have showed,

1. What an oath is.

2. How oaths are distinguished.

3. That an oath may lawfully be used.

What things are to be observed in swearing.
4. Now I come to show what things are requisite to be observed in swearing. For
what the Apostle says of the law, the same is true of an oath, It is good, if
a man use it lawfully, 1 Timothy 1.8. Now that an oath may be lawfully used,
Jeremie shows what is to be observed; Thou shall swear (says he) The Lord
lives, in truth, in judgment, and in righteousness, Jer. 4.2.

The first thing required, is to swear by God; Thou shall swear, The Lord
lives. So in many other places of Scripture. He that swears in the earth,
shall swear by the God of truth (Isai. 65.16.) Thou shall fear the Lord thy
God, and serve him, and shall swear by his name, Deuteronomy. 6.13. So also Deuteronomy.
10.20. Therefore an oath is called an oath of the Lord, Exodus 22.11. And the
oath of God, Eccles. 8.2. Thus Abraham swore lifting up his hand to the most
high God, Genesis 14.22. So Jacob swear by the fear of his father Isaac, that is,
by God, whom Isaac feared, Genesis 31.53. So Paul used to swear by God, Romans 1.9.
and 2 Cor. 1.23. and 11.31. Thus the Angels swear, Dan. 12.7. Revel. 10.5, 6.
So God having no greater to swear by, does swear by himself, Heb. 6.13. By my
self have I sworn, says the Lord, etc. Genesis 22.16. He expostulates with
Jerusalem, saying, How shall I pardon thee for this! thy children have forsaken
me, and sworn by them that are no gods, Jer. 5.7. And the Prophet Zephanie
complains of, and denounces Gods judgments against some, who did swear by
the Lord, and by Malchem, Zeph. 1.5.

There is great reason why we should only swear by God; because he, by whom we
swear, must be omniscient and omnipotent; he must know the heart and thoughts,
and be able to take vengeance on him that swears falsely; else an oath were in
vain, it could not be for confirmation of what is spoken, and to end all strife
among men; Quid est jurare, nisi ejus quem testaris fidei tuae praesulem,
divinam potentiam confiteri? Ambros. lib. 5. epist. 30.
for which end it is used, Heb. 6.16. They therefore offend greatly, who swear
by S. Peter, or S. Paul, or by our Lady, and the like, as not only Papists, but
many also among our selves do. This is to rob God of his honor, and to give
that honor, Qui per Angelos vel San^^^^ mortuos jurant, Spoliato Deo, inane
illis numem affingunt. Calv. ad Mat. 5.
which belongs unto him, unto the creatures.

But yet a question it is, whether in some sense it may not be lawful to swear
by a creature. Diverse examples seem to make for the lawfulness of it. Not to
speak of Joseph's swearing by the life of Pharaoh, because it may be said, that
this was a corrupt custom, which he learned in Egypt; Hannah swear by the life
of Eli, Of swearing by the creatures.
saying, O my Lord, as thy soul lives, etc. 1 Samuel 1.26. So David swear in
part by the life of Jonathan, saying, As the Lord lives, and as thy soul
lives, etc. 1 Samuel 20.3. The like may be seen 1 Samuel 25.26. and 2 King.
2.2.4.6. And those reasons alleged by our Savior, Matthew. 5.34, 35, 36. seem
to argue, that in some sense it may be lawful to swear by the creatures. For
else there needed not several reasons concerning several creatures, why men
should not swear by them: one general reason would have sufficed for all, to
wit, that they are creatures, and therefore not to be sworn by, if it were no
way lawful to swear by a creature. So also the words of our Savior, Mat.
23.21, 22. seem to import, that it is not simply unlawful to swear by
creatures, but that in some sense one may swear by them. But how? Not as they
are considered absolutely in themselves, but as they have reference unto God;
so that an oath must not be terminated in the creatures, though they, and they
only perhaps, be mentioned; but in God, as related unto by them. Many of our
Divines, I know, are against this: but some, and those of the chiefest, are for
it. Calvin commenting upon Mat. 5.34, etc. says, Falluntur qui exponunt has
jurandi formas a Christo corrigi quasi vitiosas, eo quod per solum Deum
jurandum sit. Rations enim quas adducit, magis in contrariam partem inclinant,
quod scil. tunc quoque juratur per nomen Dei, cum coelum and terra nominatur,
quia nulla est pars mundi, cui Deus non insculpserit gloriae suae notam.
Calvin. ad Mat. 5.34, 35.
that they are deceived who expound that place so, as if Christ did show those
forms of swearing there mentioned to be vicious, because God only is to be
sworn by. For the reasons which Christ there alleges, do rather (he says)
show, that then God is sworn by, when heaven and earth is named; because there
is no part of the world, whereon God has not engraven some mark of his glory.
And whereas it may be objected, that God commands all to swear by his name,
and complains of those as most injurious unto him, who swear by the creatures;
he answers, Respondeo corruptelam esse idololatriae affinem, cum vel judicii
potestas, vel testimonii probandi authoritas illis desertur, etc. Diversa autem
ratio est, cum per coelum and terram juratur ipsius opificis intu^tu. Neque
enim in creaturis subsistit jurisjurandi relig o sed Deus ipse solus advocatur
in testem, productis in medium gloriae ejus symbolis. Ibid.
That it is indeed a great abuse, and near unto idolatry, to swear by the
creatures so as to give them power of judgment, or authority of proving the
testimony* But that it is another case when one swears by heaven and earth
with respect to him that made them. For so the oath does not (he says) rest in
the creatures, but God himself is called to be witness, those things being
produced and held out, which are signs and tokens of his glory.

The same author writing upon Matt. 23.21, 22. says, Vnde rursus colligitur,
quomodo and quatenus per Templum jurare liceat, nempe quia seeds est and
sanctuarium Dei: sicut per coelum, quia illic refulget Dei gloria. Deus enim se
in talibus presentiae suae symbolis in testem and judicem advocari patitur,
modo jus suum salvum retineat: nam coelo Deitatem affingere, scelesta
idololatria esset. Calvin. ad Matthew. 23.21, 22.
that from thence also we gather, in what sense, and how far forth one might
swear by the Temple, to wit, as it was Gods Seat and Sanctuary: and that so
one may swear by heaven, as Gods glory does shine forth in it. For God (says
he) does suffer himself to be made a witness and a judge in those tokens of his
presence, so that his due honor be still reserved unto him, and that no divine
power be attributed to the creature. Hieron. existimat Christum hic simpliciter
damnare has formas jurandi per creatu^as tanquam impias; sed ^ationes, quae
adduntur, aliud ost^ndunt. -- Juramentum est contestatio seu invocatio Dei, qua
petimus ut sit t^stis, etc. and vindex, si fef^llerimus. Hanc invocationem,
hunc honorem, and hunc cultum Deus non vult transferri ad al^os. Et huc
pertinent sententi^e, Exodus 22.13. Jer. 5.7. Aliquando vero Scriptura in
formulis juram^nti mentionem facit creaturarum, non ut jurisjurandi religio and
invocatio dirigatur ad creaturas, vel ibi subsistat; sed oblique, indir^cte,
seu mediate refertur ad ipsum Deum, and quidem solum. Nominantur autem
creaturae in hujusmodi formulis jurandi, duobus modis. 1. Respectu Dei
createris; quia Deus praesentiam, gloriam, potentiam, and operationem suum
illustri aliqua ratione in creaturis palefacit, etc. 2. Fit aliquando mentio
creaturarum in formulis juramenti tanquam per obtestationem, vel quasi
oppignerationem, ut cum rem aliquam pretiosam, and nobis charam quasi pignus
apud Deum deponimus, ut si fefellerimus, Deus perfidiam, nostram puniat in re
illa. Chemnit. in Harm. ad Matthew. 5.34, etc.
In like manner Chemnitius on Matthew. ^.34, etc. says, That whereas Hierome
thinks that Christ does simply forbid those forms of swearing by the
creatures; the reasons which are added, show it to be otherwise. An oath (he
says) is a calling on God to be a witness, etc. and an avenger, if we deal
deceitfully. This invocation, this honor and worship God will not have
transferred unto others. And to this appertain those sentences Exodus 23.13.
Jer. 5.7. But sometimes the Scripture does make mention of creatures in oaths;
not that the religion of an oath, and invocation is directed to the creatures,
or does stay there, but obliquely, indirectly, and mediately (that is, by the
creatures) it is referred unto God, and him only. The creatures are named in
oaths two ways. 1. In respect of God the Creator, because God does in some
notable manner manifest his presence, glory, power, and operation in the
creatures, etc. 2. The creatures sometimes are mentioned in oaths by
obtestation, or as it were oppigneration; as when we deposite some precious
thing, and which is dear unto us, with God as a pledge, that if we prove
false, God may punish our perfidiousness in that thing.

Cum jurant homines per caput suum, per vitam suam, quae est singular Dei
donum, tanquam bonae fidei pignu^ in medium adducunt. Calv. ad Mat. 5.
Thus also Calvin says, That when any swear by their head or by their life,
which is the singular gift of God, they bring as it were a pawn or pledge of
their sincere and faithful dealing. This was the judgment of these learned
men, and great Divines; so that in their judgment an oath may be so expressed
in form of words, as to be by a creature; yet it must not be sunderstood as to
be terminated in the creature, but in God, who does manifest himself remarkably
in it one way or other.

Hanc sententiam ita expositam, etsi nolim atro calculo notare, etc. Rivet. in
Decal.
This, which they say, to me seems very probable by those places, Matthew. 5.34,
35, 36. and 23.21, 22. And I see, that some others will not condemn that
opinion so explained, though otherwise they are wholly against swearing by the
creatures. And so I think, that because all do not understand the distinction
betwixt swearing by the creatures absolutely, and swearing by them in reference
unto God; and because such forms of swearing may be offensive, therefore it is
better to refrain from them, and to swear (when occasion requires) so, as that
none may suspect that the honor which is due only unto God, is given unto a
creature.

2. The next thing required in swearing, is to swear in truth, not falsely or
deceitfully. Ye shall not swear by my Names falsely, says God, Levit. 19.12.
Love no false oath, Zach. 8.17. It is a sin to speak falsely, though it be
without an oath; much more if it be with an oath. What can be more monstrous
and horrid, then to call God to witness a lie? to make him who is truth it
self, a patron of lying?

3. It is required that he that swears, swear in judgment; he must judge and
discern whether the case be such as to require an oath. So that not only
false, Requiritur judicium discretionis. Aquin. 22. quaest. 89. art. 3.
but also vain and unnecessary oaths are unlawful. It is a poor plea that
some use, to wit, that they swear nothing but what is true: though it be so,
yet that is not enough to justify their common and customary swearing: every
truth is not always of such importance, as that an oath should be used for the
confirming of it. A great man will not be willing to be called on, or to have
his name made use of for every trifle: much less must the most high God be
made so bold with. The Hebrew word, which imports swearing, is passive, (...)
and properly signifies to be sworn, rather then to swear; which implies thus
much, that we should be passive rather then active in swearing; we should not
swear, but when some urgent occasion does enforce us to it.

4. They that swear, must swear in righteousness. This some refer to the
cause for which one swears, to wit, Potest dici quod justitia pertinet ad
causam, pro qua juratur. Aquin. 22. quaest. 90. art. 3. ad 2.
that it must be just and good. But that was comprehended in the former
condition, viz. to swear in judgment. Therefore to swear in righteousness is
required peculiarly in a promissory oath, (under which is comrehended a
comminatorie oath, In comparatione ad causam pro qua fit, debetur sibi
justitia. Bonavent. in Sent. did. 39.

Requiritur justitia, per quam quis juramento confirmat quod licitum est.
Aquin. loc. cit. in corp.


as was noted before) so that he that swears he will do this or that, must
have a care that it be just and lawful, which he swears. Herod did not swear
in righteousness, when he swear that he would give the damosel whatsoever she
should ask, not limiting it (as he should have done) to things lawful; but
although it were evil which she asked, evil for her to ask, and more evil for
him to give, yet he made no exception, but swore to give it whatever it were;
and when she asked John Baptists Head to be given her in a charger, because of
his oath he would do it, and did it, Mar. 6.22, 23. Such oaths ought not to be
taken, much less to be kept. For an oath must not be vinculum iniquitatis, In
malis promissis rescinde fidem. Isidor.

Quanto tolerabilis tali fuisset perjurium sacramento? Ambr. Offic. l. 3. c. 12.

Et hoc aestimatum est fidei esse, quod amentiae fuit. Ibid.

O religionem novam! Tolerabilius pejerasset. Ambros. de Virg. lib. 3.


a bond of iniquity, it must not bind to that which is unlawful. It is better
to break an unjust oath, then to keep it; but it is best of all not to take
it. It is a sin to take such an oath; and a greater sin to keep it. David
having taken an unjust oath, to wit, that he would destroy Nabal, and all that
did belong unto him, when by Abigails advertisement he came to see and consider
that he had sworn, but not in righteousness, he did not take himself bound to
keep his oath, but he took himself bound to break it; and he blessed God that
had sent Abigail, and Abigail, and the counsel which she gave him, 1 Samuel
25.22, 32, 33. It is a heinous thing to take God to witness, that we will do
that which he hates and forbids; and to require him to plague us, if we do it
not, when he has threatened to plague us if we do it. And it is much worse, if
having so sworn, we proceed to do the thing because we have sworn it, as if
out of conscience toward God we ought to sin against him. So then, that which
is unjust, Multi non otiosas tantum modo res, and aniles, sed etiam scelera
quaedam se jurant per Christi nomen esse facturos. -- Ad hoc res cecidit, ut
cum per Christi nomen juraverint, putent se scelera etiam religiose facturos.
Salvian. de Gubern. lib. 4.
is not to be sworn; and if it be, it is not to be performed. If therefore
that which one swears, afterward by some accident prove evil and unlawful, he
ought not to do it. As if one swear to restore a sword unto a man when he
shall call for it, and afterward the man prove mad, or show himself resolved to
do mischief with it, he should not restore it.

These things thus premised concerning an oath, viz. That a citizen of heaven
is one, who has a care to perform his promises, especially if they be
confirmed by an oath; though it prove to his own hurt.

First, for promises, compacts and covenants, though they be without an oath,
yet being lawful and just, they ought to be performed. This is included in that
of the Apostle, Putting away lying, speak the truth every man with his
neighbor, Ephesians. 4.25. Therefore what any promise, they ought to purpose, and
to perform if they are able. David complains of the unfaithfulness of men,
saying, They speak vanity every one with his neighbor; with flattering lips,
and with a double heart do they speak, Psalm. 12.2. So Jeremie; They will
deceive every one his neighbor, and will not speak the truth, Jer. 9.5.
Zedekiah is threatened from the Lord, because he brake the covenant which he had
made with the king of Babylon. Shall he prosper? shall he escape that does such
things? or shall he break the covenant and be delivered? Ezekiel. 17 verse. 15. The
Apostle reckons this among the great. and heinous sins of the heathens,
that they were covenant-breakers, Romans 1.31. Therefore it being a duty to
perform promise and covenant, and a sin to break it? a citizen of heaven
will, as every one ought, not break, but perform; and that though some way or
other he suffer by it, sin being rather to be avoided then suffering, and
iniquity rather then affliction, Job 36.21.

The same may also be further confirmed by these reasons:

1. God is true and faithful; therefore they that belong unto God will be so
also. Be ye followers of God as dear children, Ephesians. 5.1. As he who has
called you is holy, be ye also holy in all manner of conversation, 1 Pet. 1.15.
If in all manner of conversation, then in this, in performing promises, and
keeping covenants; for in this God is holy. He is faithful that has promised,
Heb. 10 23. He is a faithful God that keeps covenant, Deuteronomy. 7.9. Neh. 1.5. He
has remembered his covenant for ever, Psalm. 105.8. And so he will remember it;
He will ever be mindful of his covenant, Psalm. 111.5. My covenant (says he)
will I not break, Psalm. 89.34.

2. Faithfulness is one of the great and weighty things of the law, Matthew.
23.23. By faith there, is meant fidelity, as the Geneva-Translation does
express it, Fidem] i. e. dictorum and conventorum constantiam ac veritatem. --
Hic Christus agit duntaxat de mutuis hominum inter se officiis. Beza ad Matthew.
23.23.
that is, a care to deal sincerely, and to be steadfast in keeping covenant.
For (as Beza observes) our Savior there does treat only of such duties as men
do mutually owe one to another.

But 2. oaths more especially ought to be performed, and so will be by those
that fear God, what ever prejudice they sustain by it. He that fears God, is
also one that fears an oath, Eccles. 9.2. He fears to take an oath
unadvisedly; and having taken an oath, it containing nothing but what is
lawful, he fears to break it. He that shall ascend into the hill of the
Lord, and stand in his holy place, is one that does not lift up his mind to
vanity, nor swear deceitfully, Psalm. 24.4. Joshua and the princes of Israel
having sworn to the Gibeonites, though in taking that oath they were not so
well advised as they should have been, yet having taken it, and the matter of
it being just, viz. to spare and preserve the Gibeonites who did yield up
themselves unto them, they would keep it. And the children of Israel smote
them not, because the princes of the congregation had sworn unto them by the
Lord God of Israel: And all the congregation murmured against the princes. But
all the princes said unto all the congregation, We have sworn unto them by the
Lord God of Israel: now therefore we may not touch them, Josh. 9.18, 19. So
David having sworn to Shimei that he should not die, viz. for reviling him as
he had done, he kept his oath, and let shimei live while he himself lived, 2 Samuel 19.23. and 1 King. 2.8. He gave Solomon indeed an item concerning Shimei,
and Solomon at length put him to death; but it was for a new offense whereby he
made himself guilty of death, 1 Samuel 2.36, etc. Zedekiah's sin in not keeping
covenant with the king of Babylon is aggravated by this, that he had confirmed
the covenant by oath, and yet did break it. As I live, says the Lord God,
surely in the place where the king dwells, that made him king, whose oath he
despised, and whose covenant he brake, even with him in the midst of Babylon
shall he die, Ezekiel. 17.16. Seeing he despised the oath by breaking the covenant
(when lo he had given his hand) and has done all these things, he shall not
escape. Therefore thus says the Lord God, As I live, Surely mine oath that he
has despised, and my covenant that he has broken, even it will I recompense
upon his own head, Ezekiel. 17.18, 19.

There is great reason why special regard should be had of oaths, and special
care of performing them.

For 1. An oath is a most solemn and sacred bond, an oath for confirmation
being unto men an end of all strife, Heb. 6.16. What is confirmed by oath, See
Heb. 6.17, 18.
men make themselves sure of, and doubt not of the performance of what is so
promised. Therefore Abraham would have his servants to swear, when he sent him
about a wife for his son Isaac, Genesis 24 3. And Jacob requiring his son Joseph
to bury him when he was dead, not in Egypt, but in Canaan, he would not rest in
his promise except he took an oath for the confirming of it; and that being
done, he was satisfied, Genesis 47.29, 30, 31. Therefore as it is a sin to break
a simple promise, so much more a promise made with an oath.

2. As all sin whatsoever redounds to the dishonor of God, and therefore any
hurt or hinderance should rather be endured then any sin be committed; so
especially to swear falsely and deceitfully, to promise by oath and not to
perform, this (I say) especially does dishonor God, his Name being called on,
and he being made a witness of that which is so promised, and a judge to avenge
the nonperformance of it. Ye shall not swear by my Name falsely; neither shall
thou profane the Name of thy God: I am the Lord, Levit. 19.12. This is a most
heinous profaning of Gods Name, a most fearful despising of his Majesty.
Therefore the princes of Israel durst not but keep covenant with the
Gibeonites, and perform what they had promised, because they had sworn unto
them by the Lord. We have sworn unto them (said they) by the Lord God of
Israel; now therefore we may not touch them, Jos. 9.19. They knew and
considered, that it would be a great dishonor unto God, and cause his Name to
be blasphemed by aliens and adversaries, if they themselves did so profane it,
as not to regard what they had sworn by it. Surely, mine oath that he has
despised, and my covenant that he has broken, even it will I recompense upon
his own head, said God concerning Zedekiah, Ezekiel. 17.18. In the verse next but
one before, it is called the king of Babylons oath (whose oath he despised)
because Zedekiah swore to him; but here God calls it his oath, because Zedekiah
swore by him, and therefore God would be avenged on him for doing him such
dishonor, as to take such an oath, and when he had done to despise it; this
was even to despise God himself. This may suffice to prove, that covenants and
promises, especially if they be confirmed by oaths, ought to be performed, and
that although the performing of them turn to a man's hurt and prejudice;
because not to perform them is sin, great and grievous sin: and as all ought,
so they that fear God will rather eschew the evil of sin, then escape the evil
of affliction; the evil of sin being the greater evil, it is rather to be
avoided then the other.

SERMON. XXII.
Psalm. 15.4. He that swears to his own hurt, and changes not.


NOw this which has been spoken of performing promises, and oaths especially,
must be understood of such as are just and lawful: for that (as has been
showed) an oath must be in righteousness, else it ought not to be taken; and if
it be, it binds not to the keeping, but to the repenting of it.

But (may some demand) suppose it be not in a man's power to perform his
promise, or his oath, Quaest.
is he then guilty, is he faithless and perjured for the not performing of it?

I answer, If it were not in his power when he made the promise, and took the
oath, But if when he did promise and swear, he was probably able to perform,
but afterward by some accident is hindered and disabled that he cannot do it,
though when he promsed and swear he did really intend to perform, and still
would if he were able, he is not faulty, except perhaps in promising and
swearing that absolutely, which (for any thing he knew) he might prove unable
to perform. Therefore promises and promissorie oaths must always have this
limitation either expressed, In omnibus promissoriis juramentis subintelligitur
illa conditio, Si Deo placuerit. Ames. Cas. Consc. cap. 22. sect. 26.
or understood, So far forth as it shall please God to make us able. And in
this case, when a man through some intervenient cause, which he could not
prevent, is made unable to perform so much as he has sworn or promised, he
is bound to perform so much as he is able, and the whole when he is able.

Quaest.
But it may be demanded again, Suppose one be circumvented, and by craft and
subtilty be drawn to promise, and even to swear a thing: or suppose he be
through force and violence constrained to it, is he bound to perform his oath
and promise in this case?

Josh. 9.) yet having sworn, they were bound to perform what they swore, and
so did perform it. Some indeed think, Masius and Seratius in Ios. 9.
that being so deluded as they were, they might have refused to perform their
oath, as not being bound by it. But it seems otherwise; For 1. They did take
themselves bound. We have sworn unto them by the Lord; Error circa
circumstantiam aliquam, vel causam extrinsecam and accidentariam, non tollit
obligationem: qui (...) fuit Israelitarum erga Gibeonitas, Jos. 9. Ames. loc.
cit. sect. 28.
(said they) now therefore we may not touch them, Jos. 9.19. And 2. God (it
seems) did hold them bound, in that a long time after, when Saul contrary to
that oath slew the Gibeonites, he sent a famine among the Israelites, and would
not remove the judgment until justice was executed, and the Gibeonites were
satisfied, 2 Samuel 21.1, etc.

Calvin therefore upon the place in Josua does well observe, Jurisjurandi
religio cousque sancta apud nos esse debet, ut ne erroris pretextu a pactis
discedamus, etiam in quibus fuimus decepti, etc. Calvin. in Jos. 9.
that an oath ought to be of such force with us, that we ought not to violate
it even in those things wherein we have been deceived. Indeed he thinks that
the oath which they swear to the Gibeonites was not obligatorie, for that (as
he supposes) the Israelites had no power to contract in that kind with the
Canaanites, God having commanded them to destroy them, and to make no covenant
with them, Deuteronomy. 7.2. But it is strange, that both Josua and the rest of the
princes of the congregation should hold themselves bound by that oath, and God
also should many years after punish the violation of it, if it were of no
force, but was unlawful in respect of the very matter of it. Therefore I rather
subscribe to those, who hold that the Israelites were not simply forbidden to
covenant with the Canaanites, and to spare their lives, but only while they
continued in their idolatry; otherwise if they did renounce that, they might
be covenanted with and preserved. In those places of Scripture, where the
people of Israel are forbidden to covenant with the Canaanites, and are
commanded to destroy them, the reason is still given, Lest otherwise the
Canaanites should ensnare the Israelites, and draw them to be idolatrous like
themselves, Deuteronomy. 7. 2, 3, 4, 5. Exodus 34.12, 13, 14, 15. and 23.32, 33.

Now there was no fear of this danger, when the Canaanites did forsake their
idolatry, and embrace the true religion; in which case therefore (so far as I
can see) it was lawful for the Israelites to covenant with them, and not to
destroy them though they had power to do it; this also being further added,
that the Canaanites were to yield up themselves and all that they had unto the
Israelites, God having given those nations and their possessions unto his
people. That in Jos. 11.19, 20. There was not a city that made peace with the
children of Israel, save the Hivites the inhabitants of Gibeon, all other they
took in battle. For it was of the Lord to harden their hearts, that they
should come against Israel in battle, that he might destroy them utterly, and
that they might have no favor, etc. That (I say) does intimate, that if their
hearts had not been so hardened, but that they had sought peace as the
Gibeonites did, the same favor might have been showed unto them, which was
showed unto the other. And we read that in the time of Solomon there were many
of the Canaanites remaining, whom yet Solomon did not destroy, but only made
them more tributary, and exacted more service of them then of others, 1 King.
9.20, 21.

Again, for force and violence, neither does it disoblige a man from performing
what he has promised, especially if he have sworn to do it. As, if a robber
by the high way force a man, threatening otherwise to kill him, to swear that
he will give him so much by such a time; a man having thus sworn, though he
were fored to it, Calvin. in Psalm. 15.
yet is bound to perform. Calvin seems to be against this, because a robber
is publicus hostis, a common enemy. But others better resolve it thus, that it
being lawful for one to redeem his life with the loss of money, Ames. in
Psalm. 15.
and this being no prejudice to the Commonwealth, one having sworn thus to a
robber, he ought to perform it. But (say they) if besides the payment of
money, one swear to conceal the matter, except there were sure hope that the
thief would no longer follow that course, this part of the oath were not to be
kept, because it were as much as to betray the safety of others, who might also
fall into the thieves hands.

Aquinas handling the question about the validity and obligatoriness of an
oath, to this case of coaction, In juramento duplex est obligatio: una, qua
quis obligatu homini, cui aliquid promittit: and talis obligatio tollitur per
coactionem; quia ille qui vim intulit, hoc meretur, ut ei promissum non
servetur. Alia autem est obligatio, qua quis Deo obligatur, ut impleat quod per
nomen ejus promissit: and tales obligatio non tollitur in fo^o conscientiae;
quia magis debet damnum temporale sustinere, quam juramentum violare. Aquin.
22. quaest. 89. art. 7. ad 3. Similiter Rivet. in Decal. page 131.
he answers, that in an oath there is a twofold obligation; one to man, to whom
a thing is promised; and this (he says) is taken away by coaction; because he
that offers violence, thereby makes himself unworthy that a promise made unto
him should be performed. But there is another obligation, whereby one is bound
unto God, to perform that which he has promised by his name. And this
obligation notwithstanding coaction is of force, because a man should rather
suffer a temporal loss, then break his oath. After this manner also, do some
others determine. But whereas they seem to make only an oath valid and
obligatorie, although it were extorted by force, I see not but that it is so
also in respect of a promise which is made without an oath. For though he sin
that does offer violence, and so is unworthy that one should perform that
promise that was made unto him; yet that is not enough to make it no sin in him
that does break his promise; neither should we so look at another unjust
violence, as therefore not to show our selves faithful. And as they say, Magis
debet quis damnum temporale sustinere, quam juramentum violare, One should
rather sustain some temporal loss, then violate his oath: so (I think) it may
be said, Magis debet quis damnum temporale sustinere, quam fidem violare, One
should rather sustain some temporal loss, then break his word, and prove
himself unfaithful.

But concerning the binding force of oaths and promises, there are some
limitations and qualifications to be observed.

1. If a promise be made, though with an oath, conditionally, it does not
bind, except the condition whereupon it was made, Limitations and
qualifications concerning the binding force of oaths and promises.
be performed. In this sense we read of Gods breaking his convenant, and not
performing his promise, to wit, because the promise 2was conditional; and so
the condition failing, of no force, as no promise at all. See Zach. 11.10. Number.
14.34. and 1 Samuel 2.30. and Jer. 18.9, 10. If therefore two covenant together,
and swear each to other, to do so and so, but each of them upon condition
that the other perform his part; the one failing, the other is not bound any
longer. But if two parties swear mutually, yet not conditionately, but
absolutely each to perform his part, in this case they are both absolutely
bound, and the failing of one party does not dis-ingage the other.

2. If a promise be made by such as are not sui compote^, able to understand
what they do, as children, fools, madmen, and such as are drunk, it binds
not. They having no power to understand what they promise, have no power to
bind themselves by their promise. This must be understood of such children and
fools, such mad and drunken persons, as are quite void of the use of reason,
and are utterly unable to understand what they promise.

3. If such as are not sui juris, in their own power, but under the power of
others, without whose consent they cannot dispose of themselves, nor of any
thing that they have, if such (I say) promise, and swear to do this or that,
it is not binding, except the oath or promise be ratified by those that have
power over them. God would not have a vow made unto himself by a child under
age, or by a wife, to be of force, except the father and the husband did
confirm it. See Number. 30. verse. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. It is a wrong to a superior,
that such as are under him do any thing against his mind, and without his
consent, it being such a thing as wherein they are dependent upon him, and owe
subjection to him: and a promise or an oath cannot bind one to that, whereby
he shall become injurious unto another. By this rule also it appears, that if
one have first engaged himself by oath or promise, and afterward promise and
swear that which is cross and contradictorie, this latter oath and promise is
not valid, because here a man is not sui juris, not free, being pre-ingaged.
The first oath or promise, being lawful, must stand; and the latter, being
inconsistent with it, is unlawful, and does not bind. The last will and
testament indeed does bind, and the former is null; because a will and
testament is of no force while a man lives; there must first be the death of
the testatour, before the testament can be of force, Heb. 9.17. But it is
otherwise in respect of oaths and promises, which are of force as soon as they
are made: the latter oath or promise does not disanul the former, but the
former does make void the latter, when they are repugnant one to the other.

4. If he to whom a promise is made, and confirmed by oath, grant a release, in
this case one is free and dis-ingaged; he is not faithless and perjured if he
do not perform; for the other releasing him, it is as if either he had not
promised, or had performed. Abraham is said to have offered up Isaac, Heb.
11.17. Jam. 2.21. because as much as in him lay he did it: he was willing and
ready to do it, and had done it indeed, but that God who first to try him did
command it, afterward, having sufficiently tried him, did forbid it. So may a
man be said to perform his promise, when as for his part he is ready to
perform it, but that he to whom he made the promise, does acquit him. Volenti
non fit injuria. It is no wrong to him to whom a promise is made, not to
perform it, if he himself be willing that it should not be performed. But this
must be understood so far forth as it concerns him to whom the promise is
made; it must not redound to the injury of another. Every man may remit his
own right, it being merely positive; but one cannot remit the right of another
without his consent. Abraham would take nothing that was the king of Sodome's:
though by the right of war all was his; yet he would have others that were
confederate with him to have their parts, Genesis 14. verse. 21, 22, 23, 24. Hence
it is determined by the learned, Sanders. de Juram.
that two being contracted together, cannor by mutual consent break the promise
which they have made; because it concerns not only their own benefit, which
they may dispense with, but also Gods institution, which is not to be dispensed
with by them: and therefore it would be injurious unto God to break that
contract. The releasing which is of force to make a promise of no effect, is
when the promise that is made, does only concern the benefit of him to whom it
is made, who therefore has power to release him that made it.

Having sufficiently confirmed and cleared the doctrine,

1. They hold that faith is not to be kept with heretics. Some of them are
ashamed of this position, and seek to palliate it; but in vain. The words of
the Council of Constance are plain enough, and their practice more plain.
Though John Husse, and Hierome of Prague, had the Emperors safe conduct, yet
because they were heretics, as the Fathers of that Council would have them,
therefore they decreed, that the promise made unto them was not to be
performed, but that they were to be proceeded against as heretics; and so they
caused them to be burnt. But whatsoever they be to whom the promise is made, it
being otherwise lawful, ought not to be broken. Jacob covenanted with Laban an
idolater, and he took himself bound to perform the covenant that he made with
him, Genesis 31. Chap. And Zedekiah is reproved and threatened for breaking his
covenant with Nebucadnezzar a mere heathen, Ezekiel. 17. Chap. Though they be
false and faithless with whom we deal, yet ought not we therefore to be such:
though they have broken their faith with us, Cretizandum cum Cretensi. Fallere
fallentem non est fiaus.
yet ought not we therefore to break ours with them. Those sayings, We must
play the Cretians with a Cretian, that is, Lie to a liar; and, To deceive a
deceiver is no deceit; they show what men are apt to do, rather then what they
ought to do. Fregisti fidem. Quam n^que dedi, neque do infideli cuiquam. Cic.
de Offic. lib. 3.
Cicero though a heathen, yet disliked him, who when he was taxed for violating
his faith, answered, that it never was, nor should be his intent to be faithful
to any that was unfaithful. And he exceedingly magnifi^d Regulus, who kept
faith with the Carthaginians, who were most notorious for unfaithfulness. Sed
si hec sibi sumant, nullam esse fidem, quae infideli data sit, videant
n^queratur latebra perjurio. Cic. ibid.
He adds also this worthy sentence; That if men take up this persuasion, that
it is no faith that is given to one that is unfaithful, let them take heed lest
they seek how to hide their perjurie.

2. They maintain that the Pope may dispense with oaths, and absolve from
them: that he may absolve subjects from their allegiance, which they have
sworn unto their Sovereigns, and so in other cases. This history shows that
Popes have done, and it is maintained by them of that party, that they may do
it. And hereupon there was this passage in the oath of allegiance: And further
I believe, that neither the Pope, nor any other has power to absolve me from
this oath, or any part of it. This is a great usurpation, and a great injury
both to God, by whom, and to man, to whom the oath is sworn. What is this else
but to verify that of the Apostle, who speaking of the great Antichrist,
describes him thus, Who opposes and exalts himself above all that is called
God, or is worshipped; so that he as God does sit in the Temple of God, showing
himself that he is God? 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.

3. The Jesuits, who are prime men among the Romanists, assert the lawfulness
of equivocation and mental reservation, which does quite destroy the force of
an oath, and make it of none effect. But the law of God says, If a man vow a
vow unto the Lord, or swear an oath to bind his soul with a bond, he shall
not break his word, he shall do according to all that proceeds out of his
mouth, Number. 30.2. Not according to what he reserveth in his mind, but
according to what he utters with his mouth, so is a man bound to do.
According to the usual signification of words, and as they are understood by
him to whom one swears, Qua cunque art verborum quis jurat Deus tamen, qui
conscientiae t^stis est, ita h^c accipit, sicut ille, cui juratur, intelligit.
Isidor. apud Lomb. lib. 3. did. 39.
without equivocation, or mental reservation, so ought one to swear, or else
he does swear deceitfully; which a citizen of heaven will not do, Quod ita
juratum est, ut men's deserentis conciperet fieri oportere, id servandum est.
Cic. de Offic. lib. 3.
Psalm 24.4. Neither otherwise will an oath be (as it ought to be, Heb. 6.16.)
an end of all strife, but rather a beginning or increase of it.

SERMON. XXIII.
Psalm. 15.4. He that swears to his own hurt, and changes not.


David, Help Lord, for the godly man cease; for the faithful sail from
among the children of men. They speak vanity every one with his neighbor; with
flattering lips, and with a double heart do they speak, Psalm. 12.1, 2. See also
Jer. 9.2, 3, 4, 5, 8. It was the saying of a heathen man, but disliked even by
the heathen historian that does relate it, (...). Aelian. hist. lib. 7. cap.
12. refert a nonnullis Lysandro, ab aliis Philippo Macedoni dictum istud
attribui; addit autem, (...).
That children are to be deceived with hucklebones, and men with oaths. I wish
that many, who profess themselves Christians, did not too much approve and
follow this perverse sentence. I wish that some did not verify that of
Salvian, They think perjurie but an ordinary speech, and no crime. Perjurium
sermonis genus putant esse, non criminis, Salvian. lib. 4.


Some when they promise and swear a thing, never inted to perform it, but
only to delude those with whom they have to do. This is direct and downright
swearing deceitfully, and with a double heart, one in show, and another in deed.

Some perhaps intend at the present the performance of what they swear, or
promise; but afterward, either through inconstancy and lightness, or because
of some inconvenience that they are like to meet with, they fall off, and will
not perform. This is directly contrary to the Text; for instead of swearing,
and not changing, though it be to their hurts, they will change when it may be
there is no hurt to be feared; but however, rather then any hurt shall be felt
by them.

Some are like Alcibiades, of whom it is said, Omnium horarum homo.
that he was a man for all times; so they will accommodate themselves to the
times, and comply with them, whatever they be: Quo teneam nodo mutante in
Protea vultus.
with Proteus they will transform themselves into all shapes; as the times
change, so will they; whatever they have promised and sworn, they are ready to
change with the times. If one oath come, they take it: if that which is
inconsistent with the former be urged upon them, They will trust God (they say)
with their souls, rather then men with their estates. Thus they show
themselves to be of most profane spirits, to be such fools, as Solomon speaks
of, saying, Fools make a mock of sin, Prove. 14.9. Plainly they declare, that
they fear man more then God, and that they value their estates more then their
souls. They little heed that of our Savior, What is a man profited, if he
gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? Mat. 16.26. Or that of Peter,
Let them that suffer according to the will of God, commit the keeping of their
souls to him in well doing, as unto a faithful creator, 1 Pet. 4.19. Mark,
it is in well-doing, not in ill-doing, that we must commit the keeping of our
souls to God: if we do evil, wittingly and wilfully, we put our selves out of
Gods protection, we have no ground whereon to hope and trust in him. Come ye
children (says David) hearken unto me; I will teach you the fear of the Lord.
What man is he that desires life, and loves many days, that he may see good?
Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips from speaking guile. Depart from evil,
and do good: seek peace, and pursue it. The eyes of the Lord are upon the
righteous; and his ears are open to their cry. The face of the Lord is against
them that do evil, to cut off the remembrance of them from the earth, Psalm.
34.11, -- 16. Be not deceived, God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man sows,
that also shall he reap, Gal. 6.7.

Some may suppose, or pretend, that it is for Gods glory, that they violate
their oaths, and break their promises: but this is a false supposal, and a^
vain pretense; if their oaths and promises were lawful, it is for Gods glory
that they be performed: neither may we speak falsely, and deal deceitfully,
though it may seem to make for Gods glory. Will ye speak wickedly for God, and
talk deceitfully for him? said Job to his friends, Job 13.7. We must not do
evil, that good may come, Romans 3.8.

In the third and last place, if it be the property of Keep thee far from a
false matter, Exodus 23.7. If we have been overtaken in this kind, let us not
persist in it, but repent of it, and turn from it. Stand not in an evil thing,
Eccles. 8.3. He that covers his sins, shall not prosper: but he that
confesses, and forsakes them, shall have mercy, Prove. 28.13. If the oath or
promise be lawful, let us not refuse it, when we are lawfully called to it: and
having taken such an oath, or made such a promise, let us be careful to
perform it, and not start aside for fear of any detriment that may accrue
unto us by it. Thus this instruction and exhortation concerns us both in
respect of the time past, and also in respect of the time to come; that we may
consider both what we have done, and also what we are about to do.

Now to press and enforce this exhortation, we must consider what was said
before for proof of the point, the reasons and arguments that were alleged for
the confirming of it.

1. That God is true and faithful, and therefore we ought also to be so: if we
would be partakers of his happiness, we must first be partakers of his
holiness. Every one that has this hope, purifieth himself even as he is pure,
1 John 3.3.

2. That truth and faithfulness is one of the weightier things of the law, and
therefore more especially to be regarded. Let us take heed therefore of being
guilty of that hypocrisy which our Savior inveighed against the Scribes and
Pharisees for, saying, Who unto you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites: for ye
pay tithe of mint, and annise, and cummin, and have omitted the weightier
matters of the law, judgment, mercy, and faith: these ought ye to have done,
and not to leave the other undone. Ye blind guides, which strain at a gnat,
and swallow a camel, Matthew. 23.23, 24. Let us take heed lest God complain of
us, as he did of some, saying, I have written unto them the great things of my
law; but they were counted as a strange thing, Hos. 8.12.

3. That oaths are most sacred bonds; and therefore we must not think to play
fast and loose with them.

4. That as all sin, so especially the violation of an oath is a dishonouring
of God; it is a most grievous taking of his Name in vain: and therefore he will
not hold them guiltless that do it.

5. That God has many times revealed his wrath from heaven against men for
this sin of breaking covenants, and violating oaths, 2 Samuel 21. verse. 1, etc.
Ezekiel. 17.15, -- 21. There are memorable examples also to this purpose in
profane histories; I shall only mention one, viz. this. In the year 1444.
Uladislaus, king of Hungaria, made truce with Amurath, the great Turk, for ten
years; and this truce was confirmed by an oath, which they mutually swore each
to other. But the Pope disliking the covenant, absolved Uladislaus from his
oath; so that the Hungarians and the Turks fell to war presently; and having
joined battle, at first the Hungarians had the better; but ere the battle was
ended, the Turks prevailed and got the victory, Uladislaus himhimself being
slain in the fight. Aeneas Sylvius (who was afterward Pope, Victores evadunt
Turcae, qui juramenta non solum domesticis fidei, sed etiam hostibus servanda
demonstrant. Aen. Silv. Epist. 81.
and called Pius the Second) writing of this battle, says, That the event of
it does show, that Oaths are to be kept, not only with those that are of the
household of faith, but also with those that are enemies unto it. The place
where that battle was fought, was called Varna; whence one cries out, Remember
the battle at Varna; meaning, that all should take heed of perjury, and
Covenant Breaking, which cost the Christians so dear, in that battle which they
fought with the Turks at Varna. Some write, that the Turk seeing the battle to
go against him, drew out the Articles that were agreed upon betwixt him and the
Hungarian, and holding them up to Heaven, said, O Christ, if thou art God, as
Christians profess thou art, then avenge thy self on them, who have so highly
dishonored thee, by breaking their Covenant and their Oath, which they swore by
thy name: and that presently after, the battle turned, and went against the
Christians.

6. Let us consider, That the heathens have showed themselves very
conscientious in this point of keeping Oaths and Covenants, though it were to
their hurt. Marcus Regulus is famous in this respect; he being the Roman
General, and warring with the Carthaginians, was taken prisoner by them; and
being sent to Rome about the exchange of prisoners, having first taken his Oath
to return, Neque vero tum ignorabat se ad c^udelissimum hostem, and ad
exquisita supplicia proficisci: sed jussurandum cons^^vand^m pu^abat. Itaque
tum cum vigilando nec abatur, erat in meliori causa, quam si domi senex
captivus, perjurus Conlaris remansisset. Cic. de O^fic. lib. 3.
and render himself prisoner if he could not effect that which he was sent
about, he conceiving that exchange prejudicial to the Commonwealth, dissuaded
the Senate from it, and according to his Oath went back to the Carthaginians,
who put him to a m^st cruel and tormenting death, which he could not but expect
before he went; but he judged it more behoofeful for him to endure the utmost
that an enraged enemy could inflict, then to show himself a perjured person.
And Cicero writing of him, says, that He was in a better case, when he was so
tormented by the Catharginians then he would have been in, if he had escaped by
perjury. The same author adds, Quod rediit, nobis nunc mirabile videtur; illis
quidem temporibus al^ter fac^re non potuit. Itaque ista laus non est hominis,
sed temporum. Nullum enim vinculum ad astringendam fidem jurejurando majoris
arctius esse voluerunt. Cic. ibid.
That although in after times it did seem wonderful, that Regulus should so
return to the Catharginians; yet in those times wherein he lived, he might not
do otherwise. So that the praise did not belong to the man, but to the times.
For that the ancient Romans would have no bond of assurance more strict, then
that of an Oath. And so much also may appear by this, Cic. ibid. Polyb. apud
Cic.
which both Cicero and others relate, viz. That Hannibal having given a great
overthrow to the Romans, and taken many prisoners, ten of the chiefest of them
were sent to Rome about the redeeming of those that were taken, having first
sworn to return to the camp of the Carthaginians, if they did not prevayl in
that which they went about: and one of them after he was gone a little from the
camp, went back, pretending that he had forgotten something, and so thought he
had fulfilled his oath, and that he was not bound to return to the
Carthaginians any more: but the Senate hearing of it, caused him to be sent
back to Hannibal to be dealt with as a perfidious person. For (says Cicero)
fraud does confirm, Fraus enim astringit, non dissolvit perjuriam. Fuit igitur
stulta calliditas, perverse imitata prudentiam. Cic. ubi supra.
not dissolve perjury. And therefore (he says) it was a foolish policy which
was used, and a perverse imitation of prudence. Plutarch also writes of Sextus
Pompeius, Plut, in Anton.
that he having Octavius and Antonius, that were his enemies, in his ship which
he commanded, and having sworn unto them to dismiss them in peace; when the
governor of the ship came unto him, and asked him secretly, if he should cu^
the cables, and carry them away, and so make him Lord o^ the Roman Empire; he
answered him, Thou should have done it of thy self, but now let us be
content with what we have, (...), for it is not for me to forswear my self.
Shall not these heathens rise up in jud^ment against many Christians, and
condemn them, who make no conscience of those bonds, which the very heathens
did account so sacred and inviolable?

Now to this end, that we may perform our Oaths, and our promises, let us
observe these directions.

1. When we promise, and especially swear, let us be sure to understand what we
do. Be not rash with thy mouth, (says Solomon) and let not thine heart be
hasty to utter a thing before God. Eccles. 5.2. He speaks of vows, which are
promises made unto God; When thou vowest a vow unto God, (says he) defer not
to pay it, for he has no pleasure in fools: pay therefore that which thou have
vowed. ver. 4. But it holds also in respect of promises made unto men, and
especially in respect of Oaths, which though they be sworn unto men, yet they
are sworn by God. And therefore, as he there adds, v. 6. Suffer not thy mouth
to cause thy flesh to sin, neither say thou before the angel, (that is, either
Christ the angel or messenger of the Covenant, Mal. 3.1. or a created angel,
which is a ministering spirit, sent forth to minister for those that shall be
heirs of salvation) It was an error: Wherefore should God be angry at thy
voice, and destroy the work of thy hands? Ne testem facias angelum impudentiae
tuae, dum errorem tuum excusas, cumque pretexis speciosis quibusdam commentis.
S^rran. ad loc.
Let us therefore (I say) be well advised, before we engage our selves by
promise, especially, if we confirm the promise by an Oath. Abraham's servant was
very cautious in taking the Oath which his master required of him; he was very
careful to understand what he should swear, and how far forth he should stand
engaged. Genesis 24.3, 4, 5. Such care and cautiousness will all have, who fear an
oath, Eccles. 9.2. and exercise themselves to have always a conscience void of
offense both toward God, and toward men. Act. 24.16. The like we may see by the
example of the spies, when they engaged themselves by oath unto Rahab, Josh.
2.17. -- 20.

Quod dubitas, ne f^c^ris.
2. If we doubt of the lawfulness of the Oath or promise which is required of
us, we may not meddle with it; for though in it self it be lawful, yet to us it
is not lawful. Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind. Romans 14.5. I
know and am persuaded by the Lord Jesus, that there is nothing unclean of it
self: but to him that esteems any thing unclean, to him it is unclean. ver.
14. And he that doubts, is damned if he eat, because he eats not of faith;
for whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. ver. 23.

3. If we judge the oath or promise lawful, and not to be refused, let us deal
sincerely, and intend what we swear or promise. As our prayer unto God, so our
promise unto men, and especially our Oath by God, must not proceed out o^
fained lips. Psalm. 17.1.

4. After we have sworn, or promised, let us be mindful of our Oaths and
promises, and careful to perform them. David thought of the covenant that he
made with Jonathan, and the Oath which he swear unto him; when Jonathan was
dead, he remembered it, and had a care to perform it. Is there yet any (said he)
that is left of the house of Saul, that I may show him kindness for Jonathans
sake? 2 Samuel 9.1. And when seven of the sons of Saul were to be hanged up,
because of the wrong that Saul had done to the Gibeonites, David spared
Meph^bosheth the son of Jonathan the son of Saul, because of the Lords Oath
that was between them, between David and Jonathan the son of Saul. 2 Samuel 21.7.
And to this end again, that we may observe the forementioned directions, we
must observe these that follow.

1. We must get and increase, act and exercise faith. If we have faith in God,
it will enable us to keep faith toward men, whatsoever come of it. For by it
(by faith) the Elders obtained a good report. Heb. 11.2. Through faith they
wrought righteousness. ver. 33. Faith is the substance of things hoped for, and
the evidence of things not seen. ver. 1. By faith we look not at the things
which are seen, but at the things which are not seen. 2 Cor. 4.18. Therefore
faith will make us to have a good conscience in all things, and to be willing
to live honestly. (Heb. 13.18.) though in outward and earthly respects it prove
never so prejudicial and hurtful unto us.

2. We must nourish and maintain in us the fear of God; for then we will fear
an Oath, so as not to take it, if it be unlawful; nor to break it, if it be
lawful, and we have taken it. Because people are possessed with carnal fear,
and want this spiritual fear; because they have more of the fear of man then of
God in them, therefore against their conscience they promise and swear any
thing that is imposed upon them; and they make no conscience of any promises or
Oaths to perform them. Therefore sanctify the Lord of hosts himself, and let
him be your fear, and let him be your dread. And he shall be for a sanctuary.
Isa. 8.13, 14. Fear not them that can kill the body, and after that have no
more that they can do. But I will tell you whom you shall fear; fear him, who
when he has killed, has power to cast into hell; yea, I say unto you, fear
him. Luke 12.4, 5.

3. We must pray and labor for Christian fortitude and courage, to be valiant
for the truth: for want of which grace, Jeremy complained of those of his time.
Jer. 9.5. God has not given us (says the Apostle) the spirit of fear (base,
cowardly fear, (...)) but of power, and of love, and of a sound mind. 2 Timothy
1.7. If we have this spirit, we shall be able to hold both faith and a good
conscience, as he exhorted Timothy to do, 1 Timothy 1.19. Qui dicit hominem
mentiri, eadem opera dicit cum adversus Deum audacem esse, adversus hominem
timidum. Mendax enim Deo insultat, homini se incurvat. Verulam de veritate.
A liar (says a learned man) is bold against God, but fearful and
faint-hearted toward men. So more especially is he that makes no conscience of
an Oath, but will take it, though it be not lawful; and will not keep it when
he has taken it, though it be lawful. But here self-confidence must be taken
heed of; Be strong, yea, be strong, as the angel said to Daniel. Dan. 10.19.
But as the Apostle does admonish, Be strong (not in your selves, but) in the
Lord, and in the power (not of your own, but) of his might. Ephesians. 6.10.

4. And lastly, We must wean our hearts from the world, and set our affections
on things above. Col. 3.2. and lay up our treasure in heaven. Mat. 6.20. This
will enable us both to refuse unlawful Oaths and promises, and also to keep
those that are lawful, though in worldly respects it prove to our hurt.

SERMON. XXIV.
Psalm. 15.5. He that puts not out his money to usury.


HEre we have the seventh special property of him that shall abide in Gods
tabernacle, and dwell in his holy hill. He is one that puts not forth his
money to usury.

This subject, Usury, has been much spoken, and much written of; indeed so
much, that it is hard to say any thing of it, which has not been said before.
And small hope there seems to be of persuading people of the unlawfulness of
usury, and of prevayling with them to refrain from it; people in this case are
so full of prejudice and partiality, so unwilling to think that evil and
sinful, which they find profitable and gainful; so ready to catch at any
thing, though never so weak, that may seem to make for it; and so averse from
yielding to any thing, though never so strong, that does make against it. One
says, Musculus.
That Divines shall then reclaim people from usury, when Physicians cure the
gout. And another says, Mr. Rogers in his 7. Treat.
That Preachers may sooner wear their tongues to the stump, then prevayl with
people in this and the like cases, which concern their profit. That argument
which Demetrius the silver-smith used to persuade his fellow-craftsmen, to
stand for the honor of Diana at Ephesus, Ye know that by this we have our
gain, Act. 19.25. That argument (I say) is of great force, and very prevalent
with people, to make them stand for the lawfulness of usury, whatsoever be said
to the contrary.

To use no further preamble, That usury is a thing unlawful, and to be eschewed
by all that desire to find an abode in Gods tabernacle, and an habitation in
his holy hill.

Luther upon the Text, says, Non indiget expositione, sed impletione. Lut. ad
lec.
That it needs not to be expounded, but to be practiced. Indeed the common
practice of the world does show, that people do but too well know, what is
meant by Usury: it were well, if people were as careful to avoid it, as they
appear to understand the nature of it. Yet because this is now made a
controversy, whether usury be unlawful, or no; therefore it is meet to
consider what usury is, that so the controversy being rightly stated, it may
the more easily be determined. Some are apt to palliate and cloak their usury,
as if it were no usury, or not such as both Scripture and right reason condemn:
and some again seem to defend usury as not simply unlawful, when indeed that
which they defend and plead for, is so qualified and tempered, as that it is no
usury: it is therefore needful to show what usury properly so called is.

The name of Usury.
and so in other places for usury, is, (...) Neshec, which comes of Nashac to
bite, so that the word imports biting. And usury is so called, because money
lent upon usury (and so any other thing so lent) does bite and gnaw away some
of the borrowers substance, he not only repaying that which was lent, but
something also more, merely for the loan of it. Sometimes in the Scripture
where usury is spoken of, together with (Neshec) usury, there is joined some
other word as exegetical, the better to explain the meaning of it. As (...)
Tarbith, which imports increase. Levit. 25.36. Prove. 28.8. Ezekiel. 18.8, 13, 17.
and 22.12. And (...) Marbith, which comes of the same root, and signifies the
same thing, to wit, increase. Levit. 25.37. In the Greek tongue, the word for
usury is (...), Tocos, which some fetch from the Hebrew (...) Toc, or (...)
Tacac, that is, deceit. And indeed there is a deceit in usury; it seems to
benefit a man, but it does bite him. And Psalm. 72 14. for (...) Mittoc, that
is, from deceit, the Greek Interpreters called the Septuagent, have (...), that
is, Vulg. Exusuris.
from Usury. And Pro. 29.13. for (...) Ish tecacim, i. e. a man of deceits, or
a deceitful man; those Interpreters have (...) Danistes, that is, an Usurer;
and so also our Translators in the margent, render it, Usurer. But the Greek
word for usury, to wit, (...) tocos, comes of (...) ticto, which is, to bring
forth, because usury makes money to bring forth money. So in Latin the word
for usury is foenus, because it is (say some) quasi foetus, as the brood of
money. The Latin word also for usury is, usura, whence we have our English
word usury. The word usura does generally signify the use of any thing; Natura
nobis dedit usuram vitae. Cic.
but it is appropriated to signify the use of money, the lending of it for
gain and advantage. Neither is there usury of money only, but also of other
things, to wit, such as are spent and consumed in the use of them, as corn,
wine, etc. Deuteronomy. 23.19. and Levit. 25.37. usury of money and usury of victuals
are joined together, as being of one and the same nature.

Now for the thing it self, which we call usury, it is, What Usury is.
a mutuation or lending for gain.

1. Usury is a mutuation or lending. All agree in this (as a Casuist observes)
that usury is in something that is lent. In solo mutuo, v^ro vel
interpretativo, consistit usura s^cundum omn^s Doctores. Sum. Angel.
The Scripture speaking of usury, speaks also of lending upon usury, Exodus
22.25. and Deuteronomy. 23.19, 20. Now this mutuation or lending, by which usury is
defined, is, 1. Of things which are spent and consumed in the use of them, as
of money, and so of any thing that we eat or drink. Thus mutuation differs
from commodation, which is lending too, but of things which are not spent and
consumed in the use of them, as of an horse, or an house, or the like.

2. Therefore this mutuation or lending, in which usury does consist, is an
alienation, both of the use, and also of the propriety of that which is lent;
whereas in that lending which is called commodation, it is otherwise: there is
an alienation of the use of a thing so lent, but not an alienation of the
propriety of it.

3. Therefore also in this lending called mutuation, the borrower is not to
restore the same individual thing which was lent, as the very same money, or
the very same corn or wine, etc. but the same in kind and in value. Whereas in
that lending which is called commodation, the same individual thing which was
lent, as the same horse, or house, etc. must be restored.

Again, Because there may be a free mutuation or lending, therefore it is
said* That usury is a mutuation or lending for gain; tha^ is, for something
over and above that which was lent, whether it be money or money worth, and
that merely because of the loan. For if besides that which was lent, something
be received inrecompence of some damage which the lender did sustain for want
of his money, when he would and should have had it, but could not get it, this
properly is no usury; which is only when one purposely does lend for gain,
either expressly covenanting for it, or at least, having in his mind an
intention and expectation of gain, so that he would not lend, but that he
looks to have his own again with something also for the loan of it. And
therefore also if one lend freely, and the borrower having gained, bestow a
gratuity on the lender, this is no usury: because the lender did neither
covenant for, nor intend any gain to himself; only he accepts that which is
freely given him; freely, I say, in that he neither could exact, nor did expect
any such thing.

This may suffice to show what is meant by usury, when we speak of the
unlawfulness of it. And that such usury is unlawful, appears as by the text in
hand, so also by many other places of Scripture. As Exodus 22.25. If thou lend
money to any of my people that is poor by thee, thou shall not be to him as an
usurer, neither shall thou lay upon him usury. So Levit. 25.35, 36, 37. If thy
brother be waxen poor, and fallen in decay with thee, then thou shall relieve
him; yea, though he be a stranger, or a sojourner, that he may live with thee.
Take thou no usury of him, ^n increase, but fear thy God, that thy brother may
live with thee. Thou shall not give him thy money upon usury, nor lend him thy
victuals for increase. So also Deuteronomy. 23.19. Thou shall not lend upon usury to
thy brother, usury of money, usury of victuals, usury of any thing that is lent
upon usury. That of Solomon also does show the unlawfulness of usury; He that
by usury and The word rendered Unjust gain, properly signifies, Increase, as
the margent notes.
unjust gain increases his substance, he shall gather it for him that will
pity the poor. Prove. 28.8. There is threatened, That the usurers riches shall be
translated from him to others; which argues, that he has no just title to
that which he gets by usury, and so it shall bring a curse on all that he
has. See Prove. 13.22. and Job 27.16, 17. The Prophet Ezekiel also plainly
shows usury to be unlawful. He describes a righteous man by this, He has not
given forth upon usury; that he makes one property of him, Ezekiel. 18.8. And on
the other side, this is one part of the description of a wicked man, He has
given forth upon usury, ver. 13. See also ver. 17. ^o the same Prophet
reproving Jerusalem, and showing her her abominations, amongst other things
says thus, Thou have taken usury. Ezekiel. 22.12. Where we may observe, That
usury is ranked with the grossest sins, as adultery, murder, etc.

Diverse exceptions are made against the argument drawn from these Scriptures,
but they are such as are neither forcible in themselves, nor yet consistent one
with another.

Not all usury (say some) is forbidden, but only Neshec, that is, biting usury,
which some call Morsury.

But, 1. It is falsely supposed, that the word (Neshec) does only denote one
certain kind of usury, Tarbith or Marbith, which simply signifies increase, as
the notation of the word, and the interpretation of it in all languages does
show. Salmas. de usur.
Salmasius himself (though a patron of usury) grants Neshec usury, and Tarbith
increase, to be synonyma's, and to signify the same thing in diverse respects:
he says, That usury is Neshec, or biting in respect of the borrower, whom it
biteth; and that it is Tarbith, or increase, in respect of the lender, who is
increased by it. Those places of Scripture therefore which join Tarbith or
Marbith with Neshec, that is, increase with usury, they plainly show, that all
increase whatsoever is more then was lent, being taken merely for the loan, is
that usury which is condemned. Si plus expectes accipere quam dedisti,
foenerator es, and in hoc ubique improbandus. Aug. in Psalm. 36.
If thou do expect (says Austine) to receive more then thou did give, thou
art an usurer, and so to be reproved.

viz. Exodus 22.25. and Levit. 25.35, etc. do expressly mention the poor, as
those of whom usury ought not to be taken.

Rob not the poor, because he is poor, says Solomon, Prove. 22.22. May one
therefore rob the rich because he is rich? No, it is a sin to rob any, but
especily to rob the poor. So in the verses immediately before that, wherein
taking usury of the poor is forbidden: Thou shall neither vex a stranger, nor
oppress him, etc. Ye shall not afflict any widow, or fatherless child, Exodus
22.22, 23. Does it follow, that others that are not strangers, or widows, or
fatherless, may be so used? No, It is a sin to use any so, but such especially.
So neither may it be inferre^, that usury may be taken of such as are not poor;
but that it may be taken of none, and especially not of the poor.

Some again except, That the law against usury was a

But, 1. David makes the avoiding of usury the property of every one whoever he
be that shall abide in Gods tabernacle, and dwell in his holy hill; so that it
concerns us as much as it did the Jews. Besides, we may observe, that in this
Psalm there is not any thing mentioned, but that which is moral, of perpetual
and universal concernment.

But it is objected, Unto a stranger thou may lend upon usury, but unto thy
brother thou shall not lend upon usury. Deuteronomy. 23.20.

I answer, Moses because of the hardness of your heart suffered you to put away
your wives, etc. said Christ to the Pharisees, Matthew. 19.8. So also for the
hardness of their hearts, they were suffered to take usury of strangers, lest
otherwise they should be cruel to their brethren, and take usury of them also.
Some by the stranger, of whom the Jews were permitted to take usury, understand
the Canaanite, whom they were commanded utterly to destroy. Deuteronomy. 7.1, 2. And
therefore Ambrose says, Thou may take usury of him, whom it is no sin for
thee to kill. Ab hoc usuram exige, quem non sit crimen occidere. Ambros. de
Tob. cap. 15.
And surely as God did allow the Israelites to rob and spoil the Egyptians,
though that precept be moral, Thou shall not steal, Exodus 11.2, 3. and 12.35,
36. So might he also allow them to take usury of the Canaanites, though that
also be a moral precept, Thou shall take no usury, and comprehended in that
other of not stealing. All is God's, and he may do with his own, as he
pleases; he may give what he will, to whom he will, and how he will.

SERMON. XXV.
Psalm. 15.5. He that puts not out his money to usury.


HAving proved by the Scriptures, That usury (all usury properly so called) is
unlawful, and having vindicated the places alleged from the exceptions made
against them, I come now to demonstrate the unlawfulness of usury by Reason.

Reasons to prove usury unlawful.
The reasons which argue usury to be unlawful, may be reduced to these two
heads, viz. the impiety, and the iniquity of it.

1. There is impiety in usury. For piety requires us to take such courses, as
to know and acknowledge our dependence upon God, and so to pray unto him for
success in that which we take in hand, and to give him thanks when our
undertakings are successful. Trust in the Lord with all thine heart, and lean
not to thine own understanding. In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall
direct thy paths, Prove. 3.5, 6. Establish thou the work of our hands upon us;
yea, the work of our hands establish thou it. Psalm. 90.17. Thou shall remember
the Lord thy God, for it is he that gives thee power to get wealth. Deuteronomy.
8.18. But the usurer, as an usurer, takes such a course as whereby (so much as
in him lies) to have no dependence upon God. Whereas the husbandman in his
employment depends upon God for the former and the later rain, and for
temperate seasons: merchant and seafaring man, for good winds, and calm seas;
the artificer, Lawyer, Divine, and generally all, for health and strength to
follow their vocation: it is all one to the usurer whether it be fair or foul,
calm or tempestuous; yea, in respect of his usury, it is all one to him,
whether he be strong or weak, in health or in sickness; except the Sun and the
Moon stand still, and the course of the months and years be staid, his gain
still comes in, whatsoever happen. How then can the usurer, as such, look up
unto God, and acknowledge him? How can he either pray, that he may prosper in
the course which he takes, or give thanks if he do prosper in it? Surely
usurers are of the number of those that Job speaks of, saying, They say unto
God, Depart from us, Nullum genus hominum pejus de Deo sentit, quam danistarum.
we desire not the knowledge of thy ways. What is the Almighty, that we should
serve him? and what profit should we have, if we should pray unto him?

2. There is iniquity in usury. For, 1. Equity requires that every one live by
his own labor. Thou shall eat the labor of thine hands, Psalm. 128.2. Even
when we were with you, this we commanded you, that if any would not work,
neither should he eat, 2 These. 3.10. and v. 12. We command, and exhort by our
Lord Jesus Christ, that with quietness they work, and eat their own bread.
Usurers therefore do not eat their own bread, for as usurers, they do not
work, Foerore quaestuosa s^gnitia. Plin. hist. l^b. 33. cap. 3.
they take no pains for their living, but like drones live on the labors of
others. Usury (as some of the heathens have branded it) is a gainful idleness.

2. Equity also requires, that none pay something for nothing. But the usurer
makes one pay for his money, so much for so much, and something also for the
use of it, and that is indeed for nothing, I mean, nothing distinct from the
money. For in money the propriety and the use (except perhaps it be used only
for show and ostentation) cannot be severed, no more then in bread, or any
thing that is eaten or drunken; because the using of money, as of bread, or the
like, is the consuming of it; so that to make a man pay so much money as was
lent him, and something also for the use of the money, is as if one should make
one pay for meat and drink as much as it is worth, and something moreover for
the eating and drinking of it. Therefore the usury of money, and the usury of
victuals are both alike forbidden, as being both alike unlawful. Deuteronomy. 23.19.
Levit. 25.37.

3. It is also agreeable to equity, That two contracting together, one should
be liable to hazard as well as the other. But in usurious contracts the lender
is liable to no hazard: let the borrower sink or swim, gain or lose, the
usurer will be sure to gain, he will have his own with advantage. Now this is
unequal and unjust, that one should be eased, and another burdened. 2 Cor.
8.13, 14.

Thus both Scripture and reason do sufficiently evince that usury is unlawful;
but many things are objected in defense of it.

and therefore it is lawful.

But, 1. Manichees, Deum qui legem per Moys^n dedit, and in Hebraeis Prophetis
locutus est, non esse verum Deum, sed unum ex principibus tenebrarum. Aug. de
Manichaeis in lib. de haeres. c. 46.
who rejected Moses and the Prophets, saying, That the ^od which spoke by them
was not the true God, but one of the Princes of darkness. 2. If it be meant
that usury is lawful, if it be not expressly forbidden in the New Testament, the
consequence is not good; for there are diverse things besides usury, which are
not expressly forbidden in the New Testament, and yet all will acknowledge them
to be unlawful, as not to restore a pledge, and to take that for a pledge which
a man must necessarily use thereby to get his living, and the like.

3. If the meaning be, That usury is no way forbidden in the New Testament, it
is denied; for it is forbidden implicitly, and in the general, as namely in
that of the Apostle, Let him that stole, steal no more; but rather let him
labor, working with his hands the thing that is good, that he may have to give
to him that needs. Ephesians. 4.28. And so also in that of the same Apostle, Let
no man go beyond, or defraud his brother in any matter, because that the Lord
is the avenger of all such, as we have also forewarned you, and testified. 1
These. 4.6. Some allege another place in the New Testament, as being more
directly against usury, to wit, those word^ of our Savior, Lend, hoping for
nothing again, Luke 6.35. Some expound it thus, Lend hoping for nothing again
more then was lent, lend so as to look for no usury: Others suppose the meaning
of those words to be, that we should so lend, as not to hope for the principal
again, not to expect so much as was lent, to wit, if the borrower prove to be
so poor, as not to be able to repay what he borrowed. But though these things
in themselves be true, yet I conceive neither of these expositions to be
genuine, but that the true meaning of the words is this, Lend, hoping for
nothing again, that is, for no such courtesy; not hoping to borrow again of
those that now borrow of you: even as elsewhere Christ forbids those that
invite guests, to invite those that may invite them again, that is, therefore
to invite others, that afterward they may be invited by them. Luke 14.12, 13,
14. This appears to be the meaning, by the 32, 33, and 34. verses. For if ye
love them which love you, what thank have ye? for sinners also love those that
love them. And if you do good to them which do good to you, what thank have
ye? for sinners also do even the same. And if ye lend to them of whom ye hope
to receive, (to wit, the like courtesy, for otherwise it is thanke-worthy to
lend) what thank have ye? for sinners also lend to sinners, to receive as much
((...) the like courtesy) again.

Thou ought to have put my money to the exchangers, and then at my coming I
should have received my own with usury, Mat. 25.27.

Down. on Psalm. 15. Fent. of usury.
for that they were spoken to the servant that thought his master an hard man,
one that reaped where he did not sow, and gathered where he strawed not:
therefore (say they) the master speaking of himself according to that opinion
which the servant had of him, said, that he should have put forth his money to
the exchangers, that so he might have received his own with usury. This
exposition may be confirmed by that which the master also said to that servant,
to wit, that he would condemn him out o^ his own mouth. Yet the master does not
hereby acknowledge usury to be lawful, no more then he does acknowledge himself
such a hard man as the servant apprehended him. This answer is acute and witty;
but the more solid answer (as I conceive) is, That the words objected are part
of a parable; (...). Theopaylact. ad J^h. 16.21.

(...), etc. Idem ad. Luc. 16. in initio.


and a parable is not to be extended and stretched beyond the scope of it. For
otherwise one might prove cozenage to be lawful by the parable of the unjust
steward, that cozened his master, Luke 16. And so theevery, because Christ in
Rev. 16.15. and in other places compares his coming, to the coming of a thief
in the night. Our Savior in that expression shows that he will come suddenly,
when many do little think of him; and that therefore we ought to watch, and
prepare for his coming. And by that of the unju^t steward, he teaches us that
we are all stewards, and must give account unto God, and therefore ought so to
dispense things committed to our trust, that we may provide for the future,
Laying up (as the Apostle says) a good foundation against the time to come,
that we may lay hold on eternal life, 1 Timothy 6.19. So for this parable, from
whence the objection is fetched, the scope of it is to show, that all should
improve their talents so as that God may be glorified, and there is profited by
them; and that none should bury them, or let them lie dead, and do no good
with them. The manifestation of the spirit is given to every one to profit
withal, 2 Cor. 12.7.

But (say some) why may not something be taken for

I answer, Money and other things, it is not so in respect of money; the lender
of it, abides no hazard; if it any way miscarry, the borrower must make it
good. The reason is, Because (as was noted before) he that lends an horse, or
house, etc. does only part with the use of the thing lent, but not with the
propriety of it; whereas in money the use and the propriety go together. 2.
There is no fruit or benefit by the mere use of money, though by the skill and
industry of him that does use it, benefit may be made of it: but in the very
use of an horse, or house, or ground, there is some benefit, and not merely by
the skill and industry of him that uses it, though by that means the benefit
may be the greater. Therefore something may be required merely for the use of
such things, but not merely for the use of money.

Solomon is objected, Money answers all things, Eccles. 10.19. One may buy
horses, houses, lands with money* and let them for profit: Why may he not then
require something for the loan of his money?





him, I see not but that he may lawfully take it: yet it were most unjust for
him to covenant with a man, and to say, that if he will give him so much, he
will do him justice, but not otherwise.

But why should another gain by the use of my money,

And why (say I) should another lose by thy money, Down. on Psalm. 15. pa^. 247.
( viz when gain only is required of those that borrow to gain, and so gain
by borrowing) is an unconscionable partnership. For there is no lawful
partnership, where there is not a partaking in the loss as well as in the gain.
This (as another says) may suffice all conscionable men, that usury is
unlawful, Mr. Rogers in his 7. Treatis.
in that there is not a like consideration had of both parties, that both be
partners both in loss and gain.

But (say they) I might have gained by the use of my

True it is, Auditisne? hoc est quod pensari volunt, possibile lucrum quod non
acquiritur. Pensabitur vero possibile lucrum quod non acquiritur, damno quod
non incurritur. Winton. in Opusc. Post. de usuri^.
so thou might also have lost by it; and the missing of the gain which thou
might have acquired, is recompensed by escaping the loss which thou might
have suffered.

Again, It is objected, What shall they do, who have nothing but money



2. If we cannot tell what such should do, it does not therefore follow that
they may do this, which is unlawful. Fent. of Vsur. page 120.
One says well, Is there no fruit in the garden, but the forbidden fruit? Is
there no course that such can take, but only this which God does not allow?
Audent etiam foeneratores dicere, non habeo aliud unda vivam, etc. Aug. in
Psalm. 128.
Austine notes it as a great impudence in usurers to make this plea for
themselves; Usurers also (says he) dare also say, I have nothing else whereby
to live. He answers, that robbers by the high way, and breakers of houses, and
the like malefactors may plead in this manner. Tertullian does truly tell us,
That we have no necessity of sinning, Nulla est necessitas delinquendi, quibus
una est necessitas non delinquendi. Tertul.
who have only a necessity of not sinning.

3. In matters of right and wrong there is the same law for all, whether rich
or poor; one is not to be dispensed with more then another. Neither shall thou
countenance a poor man in his cause, viz. if it be not just. Exodus 23.3. The
poor are not allowed to take usury more then the rich; not orphan's, widows and
strangers more then others.

4. God has special care of such as stand in special need of help, as orphans,
widows and strangers, and has made special promises unto them. See Exodus
22.21, 22, 23, 24. Deuteronomy. 10.18. and 14.29. and 24.17, 18, 19, 20. Psalm. 146.9.
Therefore such have special reason to trust in God, and not through an evil
heart of unbelief to depart from him, as they do who tread in such paths as he
has forbidden, fearing that otherwise they shall not know how to live. Cast
all your care upon God (says St. Peter) for he cares for you, 1 Pet. 5.7. God
cares more especially (we see) for orphans, widows and strangers, in whose
behalf he has given so many precepts, and made so many promises: and shall
not they especially cast their care upon God, but use such means whereby to
maintain themselves, as if God did not at all care for them? It is well
observed by some, Fent. of Vsur. page 116.
that immediately after the Law in the behalf of strangers, widows and orphans,
Exodus 22.21, 22, 23, 24. follows the law against usury, v. 25. And shall they
for whom God has so graciously provided by a special law, think they are
allowed to transgress the very next law unto it?

5. Whereas some think it meet and reasonable that the money of widows,
orphans and strangers should be put out to usury, this indeed i^ most unmeet,
and against reason. For so such should be in a more sure and safe condition in
respect of the world, then others; strangers then natives; orphans then such
children as have parents; and widows then women that have husbands. For the one
must be subject to casualties, crosses and losses, and the other must be free
from them; so that their being strangers, widows and orphans, shall be no
affliction, but an advantage unto them.


Psalm. 15.5. He that puts not out his money to usury.


I Have showed what usury properly so called is, and have both by Scripture and
by reason proved it unlawful. I have also answered eight objections that are
made in defense of usury: there are yet diverse other objections, which must be
answered.



There is no necessity of sinning, but the only necessity is of not sinning.
2. There is no question but that many trade, and thrive by their trading,
without either lending or borrowing upon usury; and therefore there is no such
necessity of it, as is pretended. 3. If some cannot drive so great a trade as
they do, without usury; such trading is not necessary, and so neither is usury
necessary for the supporting of it. If it be said, that they cannot maintain
themselves and their relations without such trading; it may be answered, that
perhaps they cannot in that manner as they do: but there is no necessity that
they should so do it. They may carry a lower sail, live in a meaner fashion;
and so they should do, rather then venture upon unwarrantable courses. They
that will be rich, (so they that will be great and pompous in the world; that
take up this resolution, that whatever come of it, they will be such) fall into
temptation, and a snare, and many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in
perdition and destruction. 1 Timothy 6.9. 4. Though lending and borrowing be
necessary, yet usury is not necessary, further then men's corrupt minds, their
covetous and hard hearts do make it necessary.

It is objected again, That it is lawful to borrow upon

Some think both lending and borrowing in this kind to be unlawful: some
think them both lawful; Jacob did from Laban, Genesis 31. yet it is a sin to
swear in that manner: so it may be lawful for one to borrow money of him that
will not lend but upon usury; and yet it is a sin to lend in that m^nner. That
in Isai. 24.2. And it shall be, as with the taker of usury, so with the giver
of usury to him, that (I say) is nothing to the lawfulness or unlawfulness of
the things spoken of, only the Prophet shows the generality of Gods judgment,
that it should reach all, and none should escape it. In this respect he says,
And it shall be as with the people, so with the Priest; as with the servant, so
with his master; as with the maid, so with her mistress; as with the buyer, so
with the seller; as with the lender, so with the borrower; as with the taker of
usury, so with the giver of usury unto him. So that the Prophet Jeremie, Jer.
15.10. I have neither le^^ on usury, nor men have lent to me on usury, yet
every one does curse me, does only show, that the Prophet had given none
occasion to the people to hate him as they did; he had no dealings with them in
respect of worldly affairs, which usually are the occasion of strife and
contention. (...)
Besides, the Hebrew word used in those places of Esaias and Jeremie, is another
word, and not that which is commonly used for usury. Some observe, that the
word does not properly import lending upon usury, but to lend upon security, so
as to exact what was lent, though no more. Which simply considered, is not
unlawful though in some cases it may be so; and however, it may cause
contention. And this is that which the Prophet shows he was careful to avoid:
his words neither make for the lawfulness of lending, nor against the
lawfulness of borrowing upon usury. Neither are these two of like nature: for
he that borrows upon usury, being enforced to it, because he has urgent
occasion to borrow, and cannot borrow freely, he (I say) does but suffer
injury, which is his sorrow, but not his si^. Even as one that is constrained
to pay an unreasonable rent for an house, or ground, because he cannot
otherwise shift for the present, or to yield to any hard bargain for the
avoiding of some greater inconvenience; he being but a mere patient, is
guiltless, though the agent be guilty. For the oppressor sins, but the
party oppressed does only suffer, he sins not. If it be said, That he that
borrows upon usury does occasion another to lend upon usury, and therefore if
the lender sin, so does the borrower also: The answer is, that the borrower
upon usury is not actively an occasion of another lending upon usury, but
passively only. For though he pay usury, and engage to pay it, yet it is,
because he must either suffer that or a greater evil. A man falling into the
hands of robbers, for fear of losing his life, with his own hands gives them
his money; yet is not he accessory to their sin that take it. If a man in his
necessity bring for a pawn or pledge that which he cannot well subsist without,
he being necessitated to it, sins not; but he does sin, that does take it.
God in such cases threatens to punish the oppressor, but promises to succor
and relieve the oppressed. Exodus 22.26, 27.

Some object and say, that the law of the land does

But, 1. If the law of the land did allow usury, There is one Lawgiver, who is
able to save, and to destroy, Jam. 4.12. Therefore, Study to approve thy self
(not so much unto men, as) unto God, 2 Timothy 2.15.

Again, 2. It is one thing to tolerate, Nemo quod tolerat, amat, etiamsi
tolerare amat. Aug.
another thing to allow. The law of the land does set bounds to usurers, and
stint them, that they shall undergo the penalty of the law* if they
transgress and go beyond the bounds that are set them: yet does it not allow
any usury at all, though it be within the bounds that are set; only it so far
tolerates and permits it, as not to appoint a penalty for those that practice
it. This does no more justify usury, then the judicial law of Moses did
justify bills of divorce, which it suffered only for the hardness of men's
hearts; so that such divorce was not punishable by man, yet was it evil and
sinful in the fight of God. That which Magistrates, who have the Legislative
power, see that they cannot restrain without some greater inconvenience, that
they may tolerate, and only limit the practice of it: yet the thing in it
self, and in point of conscience, for all that toleration, is never a whit the
more lawful.

Some again object, That diverse godly and learned

But, 1. This is not enough to prove it lawful. The testimony of the Lord is
sure, Psalm. 19.7. But so is not the testimony of any mere man whatsoever. Let
God be true, and every man a liar, Romans 3.4. To the Law and to the Testimony:
if they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light in
them, Isa. 8.20. They searched the Scriptures daily, whether those things were
so, Act. 17.11.2. If some have pleaded for usury as not simply evil and
unlawful, they are but few in comparison of those that have declared themselves
against it. If we remove (says one) from the Text to the authority of
Interpreters, Fent. of Usury l. 2. c. 7.
I suppose we might truly aver that concerning the question, which the most
impudent adversary that ever the Church had, durst never pretend for his
assertion: That there was never any Church or Churchman, carrying the name of
a Christian, who has defended in writing any branch of usury, for the space of
1500. Vide Lut. in Psalm. 15.
years after Christ. Luther, who was after that time, was most sharp and bitter
against usury. When in his time a kind of usury was countenanced and upheld by
the Pope, though under color of another contract, he wondered that the world
could not see by this very thing, that the Pope was Antichrist. I know that
some of his followers say, Gerhard.
That in his latter days he was more moderate in the point of usury: but if it
were so, yet this may show how generally until his time usury had been held a
thing unlawful. Austines judgment concerning usury appears by those words of
his before cited, Si plus expectes accipere quam dedisti, foenerator es, and in
hoc utique improbandus. Aug.
If thou do look to receive more then thou did give, thou art an usurer,
and in this verily to be reproved. Pecuniae, si quam crediderit, non accipiet
usuram. -- Plus accipere quam dederit, injustum est. Lact. Instit. lib. 6. c.
18.

Taceo quod sicubi desunt (Judaei) pejus Judaizare dolemus Christianos
foeneratores, si tamen Christianos, and non magis baptizatos Judaeos convenit
appellare. Barn. Epist. 322.


Before him, Lactantius speaking of a righteous man, says, If he lend any
money, he will not take usury. To take more then one gave, is unjust. After
them both, Barnard complained that in his time Christians were usurers, and
doubted whether it were meet to call them Christians, and not rather baptized
Jews. In furto comprehenditur rapina, usura, etc. Idem super Salve Regina.
Sermon. 4. Quid est usura? venenum patrimonii. Quid est usura legalis? Latro
praedicens quod intendit. Idem de Reg. rei famil.
He makes usury a branch of theft, and forbidden in that precept, Thou shall
not steal: Asking, What is usury? He answers, The poison of ones patrimony. And
What is legal Usury? He answers, A robber foretelling what he does intend. Many
such sentences and sayings of ancient writers might be cited. Neither was this
the private opinion of particular men, but whole Councils have determined usury
to be unlawful.

The first general Council of Nice decreed, Si quis inventus fu^rit post hanc
definitionem usuras accipere, -- d^j^ciaque a Clero, and alienus ab
Ecclesiastico habeatur gradu. Conc. Nic. can. 18.

Obliti sunt divini praecepti quo dictum est, Qui pecuniam suam non dedit ad
usuram. Ibid.


That if any of the Clergy did take usury, he should be degraded. And that
because such did not remember Gods precept (implicitly) in these words, He that
puts not forth his money to usury; which concerns all, as well Laity as the
Clergy, if we may use that distincton. Si quis Clericorum detectus fuerit
usu^as accipere, placuit degradari, and abstinere. Si quis etiam Laicus -- in
ea iniquitate duraverit, ab Ecclesia sciat se esse projiciendum. Con. Eliber.
can. 20.
A Provincial Council at Eliberis, which was about the same time with the
Council of Nice, viz. about 320, years after Christ, punished Clergy men both
with degradation and excommunication if they took usury; and others with
excommunication if they were admonished of that sin, and yet would persist in
it. And a general Council at Vienna about 1005. after Christ, decreed, Si quis
in illum errorem inciderit, ut pertinaciter affirmare praesumat, ex^rc^re
usuras non esse peccatum, d^cernimus cum velut haereticum puni^n^um. Con. Vien.
apud Caran.
That if any did pertinaciously hold usury to be no sin, he should be punished
as an heretic. 3. Those very authors that seem to be for usury, indeed are not
for it. They deal with usury (as one observes) as the Apothecary does with
poison, Fent. of Vsur.
working and tempering it with so many cautions and limitations, as in the end
they make it no usury at all. Calvin seems not to have been altogether against
usury, yet he expresses very hard thoughts that he had of it. Upon the very
text in hand he says, That it can hardly be, that there should be an usurer
found in the world, Vix fieri potest, ut inveniatur in mundo foenerator, qui
non idem sit rapax, and iniquo turpique quaestui deditus. Call. in Psalm. 15.5.
who is not also an extortioner, and given to unjust and base gain. And
elsewhere he professes, That he would not be a patron of usury, Nolim equidem
meo patrocinio usuras fac^re: atque u^inam nomen ipsum abolitum esset in mundo.
Call. in Exodus 22.25.

Tenendum semper est, vix fieri posse, ut qui genus accipit, non gravet fratrem
suum. Et ideo optandum esset, nomen ipsum tam foenoris quam usurae sepultum
esse, and d^l^tum ex hominum memoria Call. in Ezech. 18.

Optandum esset omnes usuras, ipsumque adeo nomen e mundo pridem exulare. --
Plusquam ra^um est, eundem esse hominem probum and foeneratorem. Calv. Epist.
383.


but did wish that the very name of it were abolished cut of the world. And
again, in another place he says, That it is always to be remembered, that he
that takes usury can hardly be free from being burdensome to his brother; and
that therefore it were to be wished, that the names of usury were buried, and
blotted out of man's memory. So also in another place he says, That it were to
be wished, that all usury, and the very name of it were long since banished out
of the world: and that it is more then rare, that the same should be an honest
man, and an usurer. And though he think it a Political law, which did forbid
usury, yet he will not allow the taking of usury but upon this condition for
one, Vt qui mutuo accipit, lucretur tantundem, aut plus etiam ex ea pecunia
quam qui in mutuo dat. Call. ibid.
That the borrower gain as much or more by the money which he borrowed, as the
lender. This was the judgment of this famous man, who yet seemed more favorable
toward usury then almost any had been before him. So Zanchy, another learned
writer, seems to speak in defense of usury: but how? After all, he comes to
this conclusion, that the lender ought to be so affected, Imo hoc animo esse
debes, O creditor, ut si debitur non solum non fecit lucrum, sed etiam accepit
damnum, tu quoque damni aliquid cum illo patiaris. Hoc enim postulat aequitas
and charitas. Zanch. in Ephesians. 4.28. de usura quaest. 4.
as if the borrower do not only not gain, but lose by the employment of the
money which he borrowed, to bear some part of the loss with him: for that
equity and charity require this. Now what kind of usury is this, which is here
maintained? Truly, It is no usury at all properly so called, but it is a
contract of another nature, even mere partnership; wherein both parties, the
lender and the borrower, shall either gain together, or lose together. Who
will call this putting forth money to usury, and not rather putting forth money
to adventure? So our countryman Dr. Willet seems to defend some kind of
usury as lawful, Dr. Willet on Exodus 22.25.
but directly so as the author before mentioned. This consideration (says he)
given for the loan of money, must not be ex pacto, it must not be agreed upon
by any certain compact and covenant. -- It is not lawful to covenant with a
man to pay so much: (Why so?) He may lose by using the money, he may be in
hazard also of the principal. For the lender then to receive a certain gain,
when the borrower is in a certain loss, were not just. Such indifferency must
be used, as that the lender be contented as to be made partaker of the gain,
that comes by his money, so also proportionably to bear part of the loss.
Others also might be alleged pleading for usury after the like manner. But
these are such patrons of usury, as (I presume) no usurer in the world, not he
that is most moderate in that kind, will thank for his labor; except in this
respect, that by this means (seeing what kind of usury it is, that his
greatest advocates plead for) he comes to see the unreasonableness of that
course which he follows; and so considering his ways, does turn his feet
into Gods Testimonies.

SERMON. XXVII.
Psalm. 15.5. He that puttteh not forth his money to usury.


THat usury is unlawful, and therefore to be avoided of all that desire to live
with God, and to be partakers of his Kingdom, I have proved, and have also
answered many (and I think, all the chief) objections that are made in defense
of it: now I proceed to the use and application of the point.

Paul's sin in persecuting and blaspheming was extenuated, because he did it
ignorantly, 1 Timothy 1.13. He had sinned more grievously if he had done it
against the conviction of his conscience; this would have much aggravated his
sin, and have made him the more inexcusable: yet nevertheless he sinned in that
which he did: and so do they, who practice usury, though they suppose it to be
lawful.

That which is in it self lawful, through our error and misunderstanding may
become unlawful unto us. Romans 14.14, 23. But that which is in it self unlawful,
cannot so become lawful unto us. For error may mar that which is good, but it
cannot amend that which is evil. But again, ignorance does no whit at all
excuse, if it be affected; if we may know, and have no mind to it, but are
willingly ignorant, as St. Peter speaks of some, 2 Pet. 3.5. So also the sin is
not the less, but the greater, if the habituated custom of sinning take away
the sense of sin, and make it to be thought no sin. The Apostle aggravates the
sin of the Gentiles by this, That being past feeling, they gave up themselves
to lasciviousness, to commit all uncleanness with greediness. Ephesians. 4.19.
Caesar Commen. Plut. in Lycur.
It is said of the ancient Germans, and so of the Lacedaemonians, that theft
was so common among them, and they were so accustomed unto it, that they did
not think it to be unlawful. So by the same means it is, that some can see no
unlawfulness in usury: but this does make it nothing the more lawful; it is
indeed an aggravation of the sin, rather then an extenuation of it.

Some give themselves up to the practice of usury, never considering, nor
indeed caring whether it be lawful or unlawful; this suffices them, they find
it gainful. These are such as St. Paul speaks of, They suppose that gain is
godliness. 1 Timothy 6.5. But (says he) godlin^^s with contentment is great
gain, ver. 6. Riches (says Solomon) avail not in the day of wrath; but
righteousness delivers from death, Prove. 11.4. A little with righteousness is
better then a great deal with iniquity. Some scorn and deride whatsoever is
spoken against the lawfulness of that which they practice; like the Pharisees,
who hearing our Savior speaking against covetousness, they being covetous,
derided him. Luke 16.14. Thus it is said of an usurer, that when he heard one,
who had some dependence upon him, preach against usury, in a way of derision,
he applauded him for it, and bid him preach so still, that others being
deterred from trading in that kind, he might have the more custom. Thus (as
Solomon observes) Fools make a mock of sin. Pro. 14. 9. But (as the Prophet
Esaias does admonish) Be ye no mockers, lest your bonds be made strong. Esa.
28.22.

Some are a little touched perhaps and moved with what they hear against usury,
but they will not be thoroughly persuaded of the unlawfulness of it. As Agrippa
was almost persuaded to be a Christian, Act. 26.28. So they are almost
persuaded to leave their usury: but as Agrippa still continued an unbeleeving
Jew, so they still continue unreformed usurers.

Some being convinced by what they hear of the unlawfulness of usury, relent,
and promise reformation; but by and by being tempted with the sweetness of
gain, they practice the thing still as much as ever. These are like Saul, who
by David's words and carriage toward him, was convinced of his sin in
persecuting him, and promised to desist, and to do so no more; yet when the
good mood was over, he persecuted him again, 1 Samuel 24.16. etc. and 65.21, etc.
with 27.4. But it had been better for them not to have known the way of
righteousness, then after they have known it, to turn from the holy
commandment delivered unto them, 2 Pet. 2.21.

Some being ashamed (it may seem) of open and direct usury, palliate and cloak
it under some other name, as consideration, interest, and the like; or under
the color of some other contract, as buying, selling, letting, exchange, etc.
Calvin says of the French, and it may be said of others, That they devised a
new subtilty, Excogitarunt novam astutiam, quasi possent Deum fallere. Nam quia
nemo poterat far usurae nomen, posuerunt interesse. Jam quid significat
interesse? omne genus foenoris. Calv. ad Ezech. 18.
as if they could deceive God. For because the name of usury was odious among
all, therefore instead of Usury they would say interest: but this interest was
nothing else but all kind of usury. Woe unto them that seek deep to hide
their counsels from the Lord, etc. Isai. 29.15. And though the contract
properly be not usurious, yet if it he unequal and unjust, that is enough to
make it evil and unlawful.

In the next place, Let all suffer the word of exhortation, Nehemiah, I pray
you, let us leave off this usury, Neh, 5.10. To such as are yet free from this
practice, I say, take heed of it, and keep off from it: Consider these motives.
Motiv^s to eschew usury.
1. Usury is of evil report, and therefore to be avoided Whatsoever things are
of good report, (says the Apostle) think on these things; to wit, to embrace
them, Phil. 4.8. So on the contrary, whatsoever things are of evil report,
think not on these things, not otherwise then to eschew them. Now usury both
in Scripture, and in other writings, is generally condemned, scarce any daring
to maintain the lawfulness of usury truly and properly so called. Usurers in
former times have been very infamous, not admitted to the communion, Summa
Angel^ Winton in Opus. Post de usura.
nor vouchsafed Christian burial, nor allowed to make their wills. An Usurer
was so odious, that none would salute him, nor speak to him in the streets;
his house was called the house of Satan, and it was held unlawful for a
Christian to fetch fire at it. So infamous a thing has usury ever been, that
the greatest usurers have ever been ashamed to profess themselves usurers.
Whereas some profess themselves merchants, some lawyers, etc. who is there that
will profess himself an usurer? the odiousness of usury appears in this, That
such as practice the thing, yet decline the name, and therefore they cloak and
hide it one way or other. If the thing be lawful, Si licitum est, cur vocabulum
refugis? cur velamen obtexis? Si illicitum est, cur incrementum requiris?
Ambros. de Tob. cap. 14.
Why do they shun the word? Why do they seek to cover it? If it be unlawful,
why do they not eschew it?

2. The very heathens by the light of nature have discerned and judged usury
unlawful. Aristotle says, Arist. Pol. lib. 1. cap. 10. and Ethic. lib. 4. c. 1.
That this kind of gain, to wit, by usury, is, (...), most unnatural. And the
same author ranks usurers with (...), Bawds, and such as are addicted to
unjust and filthy lucre. Cato also being asked, What it is to take usury?
Answered, What is it to kill a man? And the law of the ancient Romans punished
an usurer twice as much as a thief; Quid e foenerari? Quid hominom occidere?
making a thief only to restore double, but an usurer fourfold.

3. If any be not so fully convinced of the unlawfulness of usury, yet the
safer course is to be followed, and that is to avoid usury. It Is good to keep
on the safer side. Blessed is the man that fears always: but he that
hardneth his heart, shall fall into mischief, Prove. 28.14. Better it is to fear
where we need not, then to make bold where we should not. We may sin in putting
forth money to usury; we cannot sin in refraining from usury: therefore this is
more safe, and rather to be chosen then the other.

For the avoiding of usury, let these directions be observed. Directions to be
observed for the avoiding of usury.
1. Take heed of rebelling against the light, as Job says some do. Job 24.13.
To him that knows to do good, (says St. James) and does it not, to him it
is sin, Jam. 4.17. to him especially. If you know usury to be evil, you know
that it is good to abstain from it; and then if you do not, your sin is the
greater.

2. Take heed of turning from the light, of being averse from hearing and
meditating of that which may discover the unlawfulness of usury unto you. It
argues the heart to be in love with sin, and unwilling to forsake it, if it be
unwilling to be convinced of it. This is the condemnation, that light is come
into the world, and men loved darkness rather then light, because their deeds
were evil. For every one that does evil, hates the light, neither comes to
the light, lest his deeds should be reproved. But he that does truth, comes to
the light, that his deeds may be made manifest, that they are wrought in God,
Joh. 3.19, 20, 21.

3. Take heed of adventuring upon usury, as if it were lawful because of the
commonness of it. If a thing be grown common, it is soon taken to be lawful.
But that is a most unsafe rule to walk by. Caepit licitum esse, quod publicum
est. Cypr.
Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil, Exodus 23.2. It may be evil
though a great multitude do it, and therefore we must take heed of presuming
that a thing is good and lawful, because generally people practice it: indeed
in that respect it is the more to be suspected. For wide is the gate, and broad
is the way that leads to destruction, and many there be that go in thereat,
Mat. 7.13.

4. Be not allured and drawn away with usury, because of the gainfulness of it.
A little that a righteous man has, is better then the riches of many wicked,
Psalm. 37.16. Better is a little with the fear of the Lord, then great treasure
and trouble therewith, trouble of conscience, which sin will bring at the last.
Prove. 15.16. Woe unto him that increases that which is not his: How long? Hab.
2.6. He that gets riches, and not by right, shall leave them in the midst of
his days, and at his end shall be a fool, Jer. 17.11.

But another inference from the Doctrine is this, That Then it shall be,
because he has sinned, and is guilty, that he shall restore that which he
violently took away, or the thing which he has deceitfully gotten, etc.
Levit. 6.4. If the wicked restore the pledge, give again that he has robbed,
etc. Eze. 33.15. Zacheus professed himself ready to restore fourfold, if he had
taken any thing from any man unjustly, Luke 19.8. This restitution ought to be
made to those of whom the gain was unjustly gotten, or to their heirs: or if
that cannot be, so much should be given to pious uses. I know this will seem
harsh to many, and we may preach it long, but few will practice it. Yet
howsoever, we must declare the truth, though few or none will regard it. Thou
shall speak my words unto them, whether they will hear, or whether they will
forbear, says God to the Prophet Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 2.7. And again, When I say
unto the wicked, Thou shall surely die, and thou give him not warning, nor
speak to warn the wicked from his wicked way to save his life; the same
wicked man shall die in his iniquity, but his blood will I require at thine
hand. Yet if thou warn the wicked, and he turn not from his wickedness, nor
from his wicked way, he shall die in his iniquity, but thou have delivered thy
soul. Ezekiel. 3.18, 19. So also Ezekiel. 33.8. the same words are repeated.
Wherefore I take you to record this day, (said Paul to some among whom he had
preached) that I am pure from the blood of all men. For I have not shunned to
declare unto you the whole counsel of God, Act. 20.26, 27.

Psalm. 34.14. Isai. 1.16, 17. It is not enough therefore not to take usury, but
it is requisite also to exercise charity, and to show mercy. To do good and to
communicate, forget not; for with such sacrifices God is well pleased, Heb.
13.16. Charge them that are rich in this world, that they be not high minded;
nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God, who gives us all things
richly to enjoy. That they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to
distribute, willing to communicate, 1 Timothy 6.17, 18. He that has pity on the
poor, lends to the Lord, and that which he has given, will he pay him
again, Prove. 19 17. Foeneratur Domino, qui miseretur pauperis, so the vulgar
Latin translation has it, that is, He that has mercy on the poor, lends
unto the Lord upon usury; so he does, for he shall receive of the Lord with
usury, that which he gave to the poor for the Lords sake. God (says Austine)
that forbids thee to be an usurer, commands thee to be an usurer: thou must
take usury of God, but not of men. Deus noster, qui te prohibet esse
foeneratorem, jubet te esse foenerator^m, and dicitur tibi, foenera Deo. Aug.
in Psalm. 36. conc. 3.
Charity also is showed in lending as well as in giving, to wit, in lending
freely. A good man is merciful, and lends, says David, Psalm. 112.5. Do
good, and lend, hoping for nothing again, says our Savior, Luke 6.35. that
is, lend to such, as are never likely to lend to you again. Now, If you know
these things, happy are you if ye do them, Joh. 13.17.

SERMON. XXVIII.
Psalm. 15.5. Nor takes reward against the innocent.


THis is the last special property of the person spoken of ver. 1. to wit, one
that shall abide in Gods tabernacle, and dwell in his holy hill, he is one that
takes not a reward against the innocent.

Nor takes reward] The Hebrew word here used, viz. (...) Shochad, is sometimes
rendered gift, as Exodus 23.8. and Deuteronomy. 16.19. Sometimes, reward, as in the
text, Mic. 3.11. Isa. 5.23. and 45.13. and Prove. 21.14. Sometimes, a present, 1
Kin. 15.19. and 2 King. 16.8. Sometimes, bribes, 1 Samuel 8.3. Psalm. 26.10. or
bribery, Job 15.34. Though the word be rendered sometimes gift or reward, or
present; and gifts, rewards and presents are sometimes lawful, yet the word
(Shochad) is seldom used in a good sense, but usually for such a present, gift
and reward as is unlawful, to wit, such as is given by way of bribery, for the
perverting of judgment and justice: and therefore the word is sometimes rendered
bribes, and bribery: and so the circumstances of the places, where the word is
used, show, that either always, or for the most part, such a present, gift and
reward is understood. That of Solomon, A gift in secret pacifieth anger, and a
reward in the bosom, strong wrath, Prove. 21.14. where the word rendered reward
is, Shochad, that (I say) may seem to be meant of a lawful reward or gift. For
(no doubt) a gift or reward may lawfully be given to pacify wrath. So Jacob
gave to Esau, Genesis 32.13. -- 20. and 33.8. And Abigail to David, 1 Samuel 25 18,
27, 28, 35. yet even that also seems rather to be understood of such a gift and
reward as is unlawful, Quod dicit, munus in abscondito, aut in sinu datum,
indicare videtur, Proverb. hoc de illis donis intelligi, quibus tanquam
corruptelis jus pervertitur. Nam honoraria munera, and strenae, and
gratulato^ia amicorum luce potius, and omnium oculis gaudent, etc. Quod etiam
confirmatur voce (...), quae rarissime in bonam partem sumitur. Thom. Cartw. in
Prove. 21.14. See Prove. 17.23.
because it is said to be given secret, and in the bosom, that intimates, that
it is given unjustly and for some corrupt end. For otherwise why should it not
be given openly, and not in such a close and clandestine manner? Truth (as they
say) seeks no corners. Indeed what is given to the poor, is rather to be given
in secret, both for the avoiding of the appearance of vainglory, and also in
respect of the modesty and shamefacedness of those to whom we give, who being
not common beggars, may be ashamed either to ask, or to receive openly. But that
place cannot be meant of such a gift: for the rich do not use to fear the
wrath of the poor, so as for the pacifying of it to bestow gifts upon them. It
may seem therefore to be meant of the just anger and indignation of
Magistrates, or others, who according to their place and calling should
endeavor to have sin and wickedness punished; but being bribed and corrupted
with gifts, they connive at it, and let it go unpunished. However, the word
Shochad, is commonly taken for an unjust gift or reward, and is certainly so
taken in the sense, because it is a reward against the innocent.

Against the innocent.] That is, such as are guiltless, and have done no wrong.
Not that any are absolutely innocent, All the world being guilty before God,
Romans 3.19. But some may be innocent in respect of that which they are charged
with, or punished for by men, so as not to deserve such dealing at their hands.
Thus it is said, That the wicked in secret places does murder the innocent,
Psalm. 10.8. And that the Jews had filled the valley of the son of Hinnon with
the blood of innocents, Jer. 19.4. Now whereas it is said, Nor takes reward
against the innocent, that is, to the prejudice and hurt of the innocent, it is
not so to be understood, as if it were always lawful to take a reward for the
innocent. It is not lawful for a Judge or Magistrate to take a reward to that
end, that he may defend the innocent, and do him justice. For he ought to do
it without a reward, for justice sake. This was the corruption of Faelix, He
hoped that money should have been given him of Paul, that he he might loose
him, Act. 24.26. He ought to have done that without money, Paul having done
nothing worthy of bonds or imprisonment. Kimchi a Jewish Rabbin, understands
the words of the text so, as if they were to be rendered, Nor takes a reward
for the innocent, (...) Kimchi ad loc.
(the particle (...) may either signify for, as Psalm. 69.7. (...) for thy
sake; or against, as Psalm. 83.5. (...) against thee.) He supposes it cannot be
meant against the innocent, to pervert his righteous cause, for that this was
comprehended in that which went before, ver. 3. Nor does evil to his neighbor.
But this reason is of no force; for that comprehends other things here
specified, as back biting, and reproaching, v. 3. and usury, v. 5. The
mentioning of that which is more general, hinders not, but that what is more
special, may be mentioned also; it being of special importance and concernment.
R. Solomon also says, that the more ancient Rabbines expound it of not taking
a reward to clear the innocent in his cause: (...) Rab. Sal. ad loc.
but he himself interprets it of taking a reward to condemn the innocent, and
to pervert his judgment. And (says he) if he will not take a reward in the
behalf of the innocent for the clearing of his innocence, how much less will he
take a reward against the innocent for the perverting of judgment? And (as
Calvin notes upon the place) although this chiefly concern Judges and
Magistrates, yet it reaches further, even to private persons, who may be
corrupted with rewards to patronize and help forward evil causes, as to betray
the innocent, and to deliver him up into the hands of his adversaries, as
Delilah dealt with Sampson, Judge. 16.4. etc. and Judas with Christ, Matthew.
26.14, 15, 16, 47, etc. or to plead against the innocent, to make his cause
seem naught when it is good, as Tertullus the Orator did against Paul, Act.
24.1, etc. Or to bear false witness against the innocent, as some did against
Naboth, 1 King. 21.13. and so against our Savior, Matthew. 26.60, 61. It is not
said indeed, that either these, or the other received any gifts and rewards for
their false witness; but it is most probable that they did, and usually
witnesses are corrupted by that means. Neither indeed is it expressed, that
Tertullus was hired to plead against Paul, yet there is little doubt of it, he
being an Orator, as he is called, and Orators not using to plead for naught.
But however, such as for any of these ends, or if there be any other of like
nature, take a reward against the innocent, they are such, as David in the Text
shows the person of whom he speaks, to be most unlike unto, for he takes
not a reward against the innocent.

Hence observe, That Bribery and unjust taking of rewards, is to be eschewed of
all that desire to inherit Gods kingdom.

1. Bribery is a thing expressly forbidden. Thou shall not wrest the judgment of
thy poor in his cause. Keep thee far from a false matter, and the innocent and
the righteous slay thou not, for I will not justify the wicked. And thou shall
take no gift, to wit, to that end that thou may pervert judgment. Exodus
23.6, 7, 8. Thou shall not wrest judgment, thou shall not respect persons,
neither take a gift, Deuteronomy. 16.19.

2. It is noted as the property of the wicked and ungodly, to take gifts and
rewards in that manner, viz. by way of bribery. A wicked man (says Solomon)
takes a gift out of the bosom, to pervert the ways of judgment, Prove. 17.23.
So David speaking of the wicked, says, In whose hands is mischief, and their
right hand is full of bribes, Psa. 26.10. The wickedness also of the sons of
Samuel, whom when he was old he made Judges in his stead, is set forth by this,
that they were given to bribery. And his sons walked not in his ways, but
turned aside after lucre, and took bribes, and perverted judgment, 1 Samuel 8.3.

3. On the other side, it is noted as the property of the godly, to abstain
from bribery. Moses professed his integrity in this respect, when Korah and his
accomplices rose up, and rebelled against him, I have not (said he) taken one
ass from them, (viz. unjustly, as by way of bribery, or the like) neither have
I hurt any of them. Number. 16.15. So also did Samuel, when the people would needs
have a King to reign over them; Behold (said he) here I am, witness against me
before the Lord, and before his anointed, (that is, Saul, who was now anointed
King.) Whose ox have I taken? or whose ass have I taken? or whom have I
defrauded? whom have I oppressed? or of whose hand have I received a bribe, to
blind mine eyes therewith? and I will restore it you, 1 Samuel 12.3.

4. Destruction is denounced against those that take bribes and unjust rewards.
Amongst other curses that were to be pronounced on mount Ebal, there was this
for one; Cursed be he that takes a reward to slay the innocent: and all the
people shall say, Amen, Deuteronomy. 27.25. And fire (says Eliphaz) shall consume the
tabernacles of bribery, that is, of those that are corrupted with bribery. Job.
15.34.

5. On the contrary, blessedness is promised to those that are careful to
refrain (as from other sins, so) from this sin of taking of bribes and unjust
gifts. Thus here in the text, and so in other places. He that is greedy of gain
(says Solomon) troubles his own house: but he that hates gifts, shall live,
Pro. 15.27. So the Prophet Esaias showing who shall escape the wrath of God, and
attain unto happiness, He that walks righteously (says he) and speaks
uprightly, he that despises the gain of oppression, that shakes his hands
from holding of bribes, that stops his ears from hearing of blood, and
shuts his eyes from seeing evil. He shall dwell on high, his place of
defense shall be the munition of rocks; bread shall be given him, his waters
shall be sure, Isai. 33.15, 16.

bribery has so corrupted places and functions, Dr. Down. upon the text.
that every petty office, whereof the stipends and lawful fees are but small,
is notwithstanding by such corrupt ways and indirect means as are found out,
sufficient to gather great wealth. I wish there were not more cause to complain
in this respect now, then there was in former times; that there were not more
corrupt Judges and Magistrates, more corrupt advocates and lawyers, more
corrupt follicitors, and more corrupt witnesses: that generally the taking of
bribes and unjust rewards were not more frequent now, then it has been
heretofore. As for treachery, and taking rewards in that respect, I think it
is no breach of charity to suppose, that in one year now more are guilty this
way then in ten years before. Surely neither we nor the generation before us,
did ever find that so verified as now it is in these times, Non hospes ab
hospite tutus; It is hard to know whom to trust, many being ready for a small
reward to betray such as most confide in them. Well may we cry out with the
Prophet, The treacherous dealer deals treacherously, and the spoyler
spoyleth, Isai. 21.2. Our Savior noted this as a forerunner of Jerusalems
destruction, Many shall betray one another, Matthew. 24.10. I wish this do not
presage the destruction of this Nation.

Secondly, Let all be exhorted to beware of taking a

1. For treachery, what more odious and detestable then this?] A grievous
vision is declared unto me, (says the Prophet Esaias, and then immediately he
adds) The treacherous dealer deals treacherously, Isai. 21.2. And he cries
out in another place, My leanness, my leanness, woe unto me: (And why?) The
treacherous dealers have dealt treacherously; yea, the treacherous dealers have
dealt very treacherously, Isa. 24 16. This also made the Prophet Jeremy so
weary of living amongst the people of the Jews, that he wished he had in the
wilderness a lodging place of wayfaring men; this (I say) was it, They were all
an assembly of treacherous men, Jer. 9.2. Among the very heathens treachery
has been accounted most vile and abominable, and treacherous dealers have been
most severely punished. Yea, such as have loved the treachery, as being some
way advantageous unto them, yet have hated the treacherous dealer. It was the
saying of Augustus Caesar, Ego proditionem amo, proditores non laudo. Augustus
apud Plutarch. in Apoptheg.
I love the treachery, but I do not commend the treacherous dealers. And the
Roman history tells of Tarpeia, that she betrayed the Capitol, the chief part
of Rome, The history is diversely related. See Livie dec. 1. book 1.
to the Sabines, upon condition that they should give her their bracelets which
they wore; but they together with their bracelets cast their targets upon her,
and so overwhelmed her that she died. But consider the example of Judas, what
little joy he had of the 30. pieces of silver, for which he betrayed his Lord
and Master; his conscience accusing him of, and tormenting him for that which
he had done, he threw the silver to those of whom he had received it, and went
his way and hanged himself. Matthew. 27.3, 4, 5.

2. For perverting of judgment, that is also a sin of a scarlet-die, a thing
which God does greatly hate and abhor. How is the faithful city (says the
Prophet Esaias, speaking of Jerusalem) become an harlot? it was full of judgment,
righteousness lodged in it, but now murderers. Thy silver is become dross, thy
wine is mixed with water. Thy Princes are rebellious, and companions of
thieves: every one loves gifts, and follows after rewards: they judge not
the fatherless, neither does the cause of the widow come unto them. Therefore
says the Lord, the Lord of hosts, the mighty One of Israel, Ah, I will ease me
of mine adversaries, I will avenge me on mine enemies, Isai. 1.21, 22, 23, 24.
In this respect especially God by the same Prophet complained of his vineyard,
that when he looked it should bring forth grapes, it brought forth wild
grapes. For the vineyard of the Lord of hosts, is the house of Israel, and the
men of Judah his pleasant plant: and he looked for judgment, In the Hebrew
there is a most elegant paranomasie or allusion of words, He looked for Mishpat
(judgment) and behold Mishpach (oppression) for Ttsedakah (righteousness) and
behold Tsaakah (a cry.)
but behold oppression; for righteousness, but behold a cry, Isai. 5.7. It does
principally concern Judges and Magistrates to beware of this sin, perverting
of judgment, and to that end to beware of bribery: they especially are called
upon in Scripture to refrain from it, and are reproved if they be guilty of
it. The heathens also used to effigiate and pourtray Judges without hands, to
show how far they should be from taking bribes, Herod in Terpsich.
and unjust gifts. And it is recorded of Cambyses (the son of Cyrus, who is
diverse times mentioned in the Scripture) that hearing of a Judge that had been
corrupted with bribes, he put him to death, and caused his skin to be flayed
off, and being cut out into thongs, to be fastened to the judgment seat, where
he made his son to sit as Judge, requiring him to consider in what seat he did
sit, meaning, that he should take warning by the example of his father, lest he
also proving corrupt, were punished in the like manner. But this duty of
refraining from bribes and unjust rewards, does also concern others. Lawyers
must take heed of looking more at the fee then at the cause, so as for the
fee-sake to plead in defense of any cause though never so unjust. Thou shall
not speak in a cause, to decline after many to wrest judgment, Exodus 23.2. So
all are to beware of soliciting and endeavoring any way to further an evil
cause, though they may have never so much reward for it. Should thou help
the ungodly? As a Prophet said to Jehoshaphat, when he had assisted Ahab in an
unwarrantable enterprise, 2 Chronicles. 19.2. Such as are called to bear witness in
any matter, must take heed of being bribed and corrupted with gifts to give in
false evidence. Put not thy hand with the wicked to be an unrighteous witness,
Exodus 23.1. All these, Judges, Lawyers, Sollicitours, Witnesses, whoever they
be that any way pervert judgment, they are such as the Prophet Amos complains
of, They turn judgment into wormwood, and into gall; and the fruit of
righteousness into hemlocke, Amos 5.7. and 6.12.

That which otherwise in it self is most sweet and wholesome, they so corrupt
as to make it most bitter and deadly. Now to keep off from this sin of
bribery, consider, 1. God, whom we ought to imitate, is set forth as most pure
and holy in this respect. Motives to take heed of, and refrain from bribery.
The Lord your God is a God of gods, and Lord of lords, a great God, a mighty
and a terrible, which regards not persons, nor takes rewards, Deuteronomy. 10.17.
Take heed what ye do, (said Jehoshaphat to the Judges) for you judge not for
man, but for the Lord, who is with you in the judgment. Wherefore now let the
fear of the Lord be upon you, take heed, and do it: for there is no iniquity
with the Lord our God, nor respect of persons, nor taking of gifts, 2 Chronicles.
19. verse. 6, 7.

2. Bribery is a bait, which such as are none of the worst are apt to be taken
with; and therefore it is the more carefully to be avoided. The gift blinds
the wise, and perverteth the words of the righteous, Exodus 23.8. and Deuteronomy.
16.19.

Bern. de Consid. lib. 4. cap. 5.
Bernard writes of Martin, a man in great place and power, but of rare and
wonderful integrity, that when as he was traveling, one gave him a horse,
which he then stood in need of; a little after finding that the man had a
business in agitation, and so came to him for his favor in it, he said unto
him, Thou have deceived me; D^cepisti me; Nesciebam tibi, imminere negotium.
Toll eeiuum titum, ecce in stabulo est: and hora eadem resignavit illi. Bern.
loc. cir.
I did not know that thou wast to have any such business. Take thy horse; lo,
he is in the stable: and presently he restored the horse unto him. The same
author also writes of another called Godfrey, who being likewise in authority,
when one came and brought him a Sturgion, he would not receive it, but so as
first to pay for it, fearing lest there might be some fraud intended, and he
might be ensnared ere he was aware.

3. It encourages the wicked to do wickedly, when they see that with gifts and
bribes they can come off well enough. A gift (says Solomon) is as a precious
stone in the eyes of him that has it; whithersoever it turns, it prospers,
Proverb. 17.8. Wicked men thinking to prevail by gifts, are the more bold to
commit wickedness.

4. Bribery is a thing that is destructive to families, cities, nations, and
not to particular persons only. Fire shall consume the tabernacles of bribery,
that is, the houses and families of such as are given to bribery, Job 15.34. In
thee they have taken gifts to shed blood; this was charged upon Jerusalem, and
alleged as one cause of her destruction, Ezekiel. 22.12. See also Mich. cap. 3.
verse. 11, 12. The king by judgment establishes the land: but he that receives
gifts, overthrows it, Prove. 29.4.

5. Though they that take bribes and rewards, may think to escape well enough
fiere, (which yet is more then they are sure of, as examples both ancient and
modern do show) yet however they cannot escape hereafter. When God shall bring
them to judgment, (as he will all) then shall that be fulfilled, Their silver
and their gold shall not be able to deliver them in the day of the Lords wrath,
Ezekiel. 7.19. and Zeph. 1.18. God is a jealous God, Exodus 20.5. and therefore (as
Solomon speaks of a jealous man) he will not spare in the day of vengeance: He
will not regard any ransom, neither will he rest content, Veniet, veniet dies
judicii, ubi plus valebunt pura corda, quam astuta verba, and conscientia bona,
quam marsupia plena: quando quidem Judex ille nec falletur verbis, nec
flectetur donis. Bern. Epist. 1.
though thou give many gifts, Proverb. 6.34, 35. The day of judgment (says
Bernard) will come, it will come: and then pure hearts will prevail more then
subtle words, and a good conscience more then full baggs: for that Judge will
neither be deceived with words, nor perverted with gifts.


Psalm. 15.5. He that does these things shall never be moved.


HEre is the conclusion of the Psalm, which contains in it summarily, the
answer to the question propounded verse 1. LORD, (says David there) who shall
abide in thy tabernacle? who shall dwell in thy holy hill? The answer follows,
He that walks uprightly, and works righteousness, etc. And here the sum
and substance of all is comprised in these words, He that does these things,
viz. before mentioned, shall never be moved, that is, he shall abide in Gods
tabernacle, and shall dwell in his holy hill.

He that does these things] That is, He that walks uprightly, and works
righteousness, etc.

Shall never be mooved] To wit, so as to be removed, he shall never fall from
that estate he is in: his estate is firm and sure, he shall never be moved
out of it; never fall from it. The Original (word for word) runs thus, He
shall not be moved for ever: (...). Rab. Salom. ad loc.
and therefore R. Solomon glosseth thus upon it; If he be moved, yet it shall
not be for ever; but he is moved, and rises again. But though this be truth,
yet it is not the whole truth. For the person here spoken of shall not only not
be moved finally, but also he shall not be moved totally, so as to be quite
out of the state of Grace; but still he shall persevere and continue in it. So
much the words do import. For as that in Psalm. 143.2. In thy sight shall not be
justified all flesh, (...)
(so the words in the Original do sound) is as much as, In thy sight shall no
flesh be justified: So this here, Shall not be moved for ever, is as much as
shall never be moved. And the Hebrew word here rendered moved, signifies so to
be moved, as when a thing is remooved out of its place, when it is subverted
and overthrown, Isai. 41.7. He fastened it with nails, that it should not be
moved, that is, remooved out of its place. Psalm. 104.5. Who laid the
foundations of the earth, that it should not be remooved for ever, that is,
that it should never be remooved. The word there is the same with that which in
Esaias and in the Text is translated moved. The earth may be moved, but yet it
is not remooved, it abides still in its place. So Psalm. 125.1. They that trust
in the Lord, shall be as mount Zion, which cannot be remooved, but abides for
ever. There likewise it is the same word in the original, which is rendered
remooved; and not remooved is further explained by those words, but abides for
ever. Psalm. 121.3. He will not suffer thy foot to be moved; that is, He will
not suffer thee to be overthrown. So Psalm. 16.8. Because he is at my right
hand, I shall not be moved. The Greek Interpreters (whom S. Luke does follow,
Act. 2.2.) there, and Psalm. 125.1. use a word which signifies to bemooved and
tossed like the waves of the sea, (...).
that are driven to and fro with the winds: the godly man is not in such a
wavering and mooveable condition, but is firm and sure.

In the words we have, 1. the person, He that does these things. 2. the
privilege, Shall never be moved. In the description of the person, we have,
1. the agent, He that. 2. The act, does. 3. The object, these things.

He that] The person is here expressed indefinitely, and it is as much as if it
were expressed universally: He that, that is, Whosoever he be that; Every one
that does these things, etc.

Hence we may observe, That Salvation is in some sort common unto all; to wit,
so as that every one whosoever he be, that is rightly qualified and prepared
for it, shall partake of it.

Salvation is not simply and absolutely common unto all, as was observed from
those words v. 1. Who shall? Yet in this sense it is common unto all; He that
does these things; not some that do them, but all, whoever they be, shall be
saved. Thus Salvation may be called Common Salvation, as S. Jude calls it in
his Epistle, verse. 3.

The promises of life and of salvation in this sense are universal, and belong
unto all. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life, John
3.16. Glory, honor and peace to every man that works good, Romans 2.10. In
every nation, he that fears God, and works righteousness, is accepted of
him, Act. 10.35.

The ground and reason of this commonness of Salvation, is Gods impartiality;
he is no respecter of persons: and therefore none shall be excluded from
Salvation that are meet to partake of it. This Reason is given by Peter, Act.
10.34, 35. Of a truth I perceive, that God is no respecter of persons: But in
every Nation, he that fears him, and works righteousness, is accepted of
him. And so by Paul, Romans 2.10, 11. Glory, honor and peace to every one that
works good, to the Jew first, and also the Gentile: for there is no respect
of persons with God. True it is, God from all Eternity did choose whom he
pleased, and refuse whom he pleased. God has from the beginning chosen you
unto Salvation, 2 These. 1.13. You, passing by many others, whom he might as
well have chosen, if it had pleased him. See Romans 9.11, 12, 13. God gave some
unto Christ, to be his, and to be saved by him, and not others. As thou have
given him power over all flesh, that he should give eternal life to as many a
thou have given him. John 17 2. Thine they were, and thou gave them me. verse.
6. I pray for them: I pray not for the world, but for them which thou have
given me; for they are thine. Verse 9. And so God gave Christ for some, and not
for others, that is, with an absolute purpose to save some, and not others. And
for their sakes! sanctify my self, etc. John 17.19. For thou wast slain, and
have redeemed us to God by thy blood, out of every kindred, and tongue, and
people, and nation, Rev. 5.9. So in time God calls and converts some, as he
pleases, and not others. He has mercy on whom he will have mercy; and whom he
will he hardneth, Romans 9.18. Yet in these things properly God is no respecter
of persons: For he looks not at any thing in the person whom he chooses and
converteth, so as therefore to choose and convert him, but he does it merely of
himself, of his own good Will and Pleasure. It is your Fathers pleasure to give
you the kingdom, Luke 12.32. Even so, O Father; for so it seemed good in thy
sight, Mat. 11.26. Men may bestow Gifts and Benefits upon some, and not upon
others, and yet not be guilty of respect of persons: Because they are not
obliged either to the one or to the other, but their acts are acts of Grace and
Favor. Much more may God bestow his Gifts and Benefits on whom he pleases, he
being much more free in his dispensations then any man whatsoever. To him
especially it appertains to say, Is it not lawful for me to do with mine own
as I will? Mat. 20.15. He is debtor to none, further then by his own free
purpose and promise he has made himself a debtor. For who has given unto him
first, and it shall be recompensed unto him again? Romans 11.35. But God has
determined to bestow Salvation upon men in a judicial way, and by way of
reward; not as a reward merited, but as a reward freely bestowed on those that
are so qualified as God requires them to be that shall obtain it. God will
bring every work to judgment, Eccles. 12.14. He has appointed a day, wherein
he will judge the world in righteousness, Act 17.31. He will render to every
man according to his deeds, Romans 2.6. Knowing that of the Lord ye shall
receive the reward of the Inheritance, Col. 3.24 Salvation and eternal life is
an inheritance, as belonging unto children, such as are adopted of God in
Christ, Romans 8.16, 17. And yet it is also a reward, as being bestowed on those
that work and labor for it, though their work and labor is far short of
deserving it. To him that sows (that is, works) righteousness, shall be a
sure reward, Prove. 11.18. Now here God is clearly no respecter of persons,
because he judges impartially, and distributeth to every one that reward which
is agreeable to his work. He will render to every man according to his deeds.
To them, who by patient contiouance in well doing seek for glory and honor,
and immortality, eternal life. But to them that are contentious, and obey not
the truth, but obey unrighteousness, indignation and wrath, Romans 2.6, 7, 8.
Whatsoever a man sows, that shall he also reap. They that sow unto the flesh,
shall of the flesh reap corruption: and they that sow unto the Spirit, shall of
the Spirit reap life everlasting, Gal. 6.7, 8. Thus God without respect of
persons judges according to every man's work, 1 Pet. 1.17.

Is there unrighteousness with God? God forbid, Rom 9 14. Is God unrighteous,
who takes vengeance? (I speak as a man) God forbid. For then how shall God
judge the world? Romans 3.5, 6. Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right?
Genesis 18.25. Far be it from God, that he should do wickedness; and from the
Almighty, that he should commit iniquity. For the work of a man will he render
unto him, and cause every man to find according to his ways. Yea, surely God,
will not do wickedly, neither will the Almighty pervert Judgment, Job. 34.10,
11, 12. O Israel, thou have destroyed thy self, Hos. 13.9. See Ezekiel. 18.2, 3,
4, 5, 9, 10, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30 God is Just and Righteous in his temporal
Judgments. Righteous art thou O Lord, and just are thy judgments, Psalm.
119.137. Though the righteousness of Gods temporal Judgments be not always so
conspicuous and evident, because the wicked often prosper and flourish in the
world, and the godly are afflicted and in distress. Whereupon some have broken
out into open blasphemy, saying; Every one that does evil is good in the sight
of the Lord, and he delights in them: or, Where is the God of Judgment? Mal.
2.17. See also Mal. 3.13, 14. And the Saints themselves have been almost
non-plust. Righteous art thou O Lord, when I plead with thee: yet let me talk
with thee of thy judgments: Wherefore does the way of the wicked prosper?
wherefore are all they happy, that deal very treacherously? Jer. 12.1. But as
for me, my feet were almost gone, my steps had well-nigh slipped: for I was
envious at the foolish, when I saw the prosperity of the wicked, Psalm. 73.2, 3.
Gods righteousness is like the mighty mountains, it is firm and unmovable:
yet his judgments are a great deep; it is not for man to sound them, to find
out the reason of them, Psalm. 36.6. The Apostle cries out, (...), O the depths
of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his
judgments, and his ways past finding out? Romans 11.33. Thus it is many times
in respect of Gods temporal Judgments, and his dealings with men here in this
world: but for that Eternal Judgment, as it is called, Heb. 6.2. that
Judgment to come, wherein every one shall receive his eternal sentence, the
righteousness of that Judgment shall be apparent and manifest unto all.
Therefore the day of Judgment is called the day of the revelation of the
righteous judgment of God, Romans 2.5. because then the righteous judgment of
God shall be revealed, so that all shall see it. Though such as are most
wicked, do but what God before determined to be done, Act. 4.27, 28. yet every
ones conscience at the last shall witness against him, Nihil fit nisi quod
Omnipotens fieri velit, vel ipso faciendo, vel permittendo ut fiat ab aliis.
Aug. in Enchir.
that he shall be forced to know and acknowledge, that he is guilty before God,
and justly condemned by him, even as Judas his conscience made him to confess
and say, I have sinned in betraying innocent blood, Matt. 27.4. Thus then they
that are saved, must thank God for it, acknowledging his Free Grace and
undeserved mercy toward them. But they that perish, must thank themselves for
it, acknowledging their own evil desert, and Gods just judgment.

Mat. 11.5. Salvation is as freely offered to the poor as to the rich. Let the
poor man (says Austine) say, Dicat pauper, Deus meus; dicat dives, Deus meus:
Minus ille habet, plus hic habet, sed argentum, non Deum. Aug. Deus omnibus
aequaliter adest: lle apud eum plus habet loci, qui plus attulerit non argenti,
sed fidei. Idem.
My God, and let the rich man say, My God: The poor man has less, and the rich
man has more, but it is in respect of silver, not of God. And again, God
(says he) is equally nigh unto all: (whether poor or rich) he has more
interest in God, who does bring not more silver, but more faith with him.
Hearken my beloved brethren, (says St. James) has not God chosen the poor of
this world, rich in faith, heirs of the kingdom which he has promised unto
them that love him? Jam. 2.5. God has chosen the poor as well as others, yea,
rather then others, that so the glory of man's salvation may the better appear
to be due not unto man, but unto God. For you see your calling brethren; that
not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called.
But God has chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise: and
God has chosen the weak things of the world to confound the things that are
mighty. And base things of the world, and things despised, and things that are
not, has God chosen, to bring to naught things that are: That no flesh should
glory in his presence, 1 Cor. 1.26, 27, 28, 29.

How shall we escape if we neglect so great Salvation? Heb. 2.3. If we have the
means whereby to attain unto Salvation, and yet neglect them, either not use
them at all, or use them negligently, what do we else but neglect salvation?
and are we not worthy to be without, if we do neglect it? Men and brethren,
children of the stock of Abraham; (said Paul to the Jews) and whosoever among
you fears God, to you is the word of this Salvation sent, Act. 13.26. Then a
little after he adds this admonition, Beware therefore lest that come upon you
which is spoken of in the Prophets, Behold, ye despisers, and wonder and
perish; for I work a work in your days, which you shall in no wise believe,
though a man declare it unto you, verse. 40, 41. It is true, we cannot be
qualified and fitted for Salvation, except God work this qualification and
fitness in us. It is he that must make us meet to be partakers of the
inheritance of the Saints in light, Col. 1.12. It is he that must work in us
both to will and to do, of his good pleasure, Phil. 2.13. Yet nevertheless we
must, yea, even therefore we must work out our own salvation with fear and
trembling, Phil. 2.12. God does work in us so as that through him we must work
also. Acti agimus, being acted by him, we act: and because of our selves
without him we can do nothing, therefore it behooves us to take heed both of
sloth, negligence and carelessness, and also of security, and presumption, and
self-confidence, and with fear and trembling, that is, in all humility, and
with all diligence to work out our salvation.

1. Therefore take heed of unbelief. Take heed, brethren, lest there be in any
of you an evil heart of unbelief, in departing from the living God, Heb. 3.12.
By Christ we come unto God. No man comes to the Father (says he) but by me
Joh. 14.6. And by faith we come unto Christ: to come unto Christ, and to
believe in him, import one and the same thing. He that comes unto me (says
Christ) shall never hunger, and he that believes in me shall never thirst,
John 6.35. Therefore we are said to be saved through faith, Ephos. 2.8. And
salvation is called the end of our faith. 1 Pet. 1.9.

2. Take heed of a false Faith. Examine your selves whether you be in the
faith, prove your own selves, 2 Cor. 13.5. See that your Faith be the Faith of
Gods Elect, Tit. 1.1. that is, Faith unfeigned, 1 Timothy 1.5. Faith that works
through love, Gal. 5.6. As many as walk according to this rule, peace shall be
upon them, and mercy, etc. Gal. 6.16.

SERMON. XXX.
Psalm. 15.5. He that does these things shall never be moved.


HAving done with the Agent, He that, and the observation arising from thence;
I come now to the Act, does. It is not said, He that hears these things, or
knows these things, or professes these things, or assenteth to these things;
but, He that does these things. Hence we may observe, That it is not hearing,
or knowing, or professing of duty, or assenting to it, but the doing of it,
that will bring a man unto salvation.

1. It is not the hearing that will do it. Blessed are they that hear the word
of God, and keep it, that is, observe and obey it, Luke 11.28. Therefore
whosoever hears these sayings of mine, and does them, I will liken him unto a
wise man, which built his house upon a rock. And the rain descended, and the
floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house, and it fell not: for
it was founded upon a rock. And every one that hears these sayings of mine,
and does them not, shall be likened unto a foolish man, which built his house
upon the sand. And the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds
blew, and beat upon that house, and it fell, and great was the fall of it, Mat.
7.24, 52 26, 27. But be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving
your own selves. For if any man be a hearer of the word, and not adoer, he is
like unto a man beholding his natural face in a glass. For he beholds
himself, and goes his way, and straightway forgets what manner of man he
was. But whosoever looks into the perfect law of liberty, and continues therein,
he being not a forgetful hearer, but a doer of the work, this man shall be
blessed in his deed, Jam. 1.22, 23, 24, 25.

Nor will knowledge serve the turn. Thou Solomon my son, (said David unto him)
know thou the God of thy father, and (not only know him, but also) serve him,
etc. 1 Chro. 28.9. If ye know these things (said Christ to his disciples) happy
are you if ye do them. Joh. 13.17.

3. Neither is profession sufficient. They profess that they know God, but in
their works they deny him, being abominable and disobedient, and to every good
work reprobate, Tit. 1.16. Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall
enter into the kingdom of Heaven, but he that does the will of my Father which
is in heaven. Many will say unto me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not
prophesied in thy name? and in thy Name have cast out devils? and in thy name
done many wonderful works? And then will I profess unto them, I never knew you;
depart from me, ye that work iniquity, Mat. 7.21.22, 23. Then shall ye begin to
say, We have eaten and drunken in thy presence and thou have taught in our
streets. But he shall say, I tell you, I know not whence you are, depart from
me all ye workers of iniquity, Luke 13.26, 27.

4. Nor is it enough to assent unto the truth: such a Faith as is not active
and operative, showing forth it self by good works, is not availiable unto
salvation. What does it profit, my brethren, if a man say he has faith, and
have not works? can faith ((...), that faith, to wit, which is without works)
save him? Jam. 2.14. Faith if it have not works, is dead, being alone, verse.
17. Such a faith is no better then the faith of devils, who believe and
tremble, verse. 19. He is a vain man, that relies on such a Faith, verse. 20. It
is not such a Faith, as whereby Abraham was justified: for his Faith did appear
and evidence it self by his works, verse. 21, 22, 23. And so did Rahabs Faith,
verse. 25.

Caution 1.
But let none so mis understand this, as if (according to the Popish Doctrine) a
man were justified by his works. By the deeds of the Law shall no flesh be
justified in his sight: for by the law is the knowledge of sin, Romans 3.20.
Therefore we conclude, that a man is justified by faith, without the deeds of
the Law, verse. 28. See also Romans 4.3, 6, 7, 8. Therefore when S. James says,
that by works a man is justified, and not by faith only, Jacobus docet, quod
non side sterili, sed fide foecunda operibus justificamur. Cajet. in Jac. 2.
Jam. 2 24. the meaning is, (as Cajetan himself does expound it) That a man is
not justified by faith that is barren, but fruitful in good works. So when he
says, verse. 21. Was not Abraham our father justified by works, when he had
offered up Isaac his son upon the Altar? by works must needs be meant a working
Faith; for he adds, verse. 23. And the Scripture was fulfilled, which says,
Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for righteousness. Now that was
spoken of Abraham long before his offering up of Isaac, as appears by Genesis 15.
and 22. so that Abraham was justified by faith long before: but that work of
obedience which he did in offering up his son, showed that his faith was a true
justifying faith indeed, and that it was not without good cause said of him,
that he believed God, and it was imputed to him for righteousness.

Caution 2.
Neither again, must the Doctrine so be understood, as if (which the Papists
also hold) good works did merit heaven, and eternal life. It is one thing not
to be saved without good works; and another thing to be saved for them.
Aliudest secundum opera reddere, aliud propter ipsa opera reddere. Greg. in
Psalm. 145.8.
God will render to every one according to his deeds, Romans 2.6. but not to
every one for his deeds. To the wicked indeed, he will render both according to
their deeds and also for their deeds; because their deeds deserve damnation:
But to the godly he will only render according to their deeds, not for their
deeds, not for the merit of them; because they do not deserve salvation. For,
1. The best works that any can do, are due; and therefore not meritorious. When
ye shall have done all these things, which are commanded you, say, We are
unprofitable servants; We have done that which was our duty to do, Luke 17.10.
Secondly, If we do any good, we do it not of our selves, by our own power, but
it is God that does enable us to do it. For we are not sufficient of our selves
to think any thing as of our selves, but all our sufficiency is of God, 2 Cor.
3.5. Therefore whatever good we do, we are beholding to God, and not he to us
for it; and consequently we cannot merit any thing at his hands by it. Thirdly,
Our good works are mixed with evil works, and are in themselves, even the best
of them, imperfect. In many things we offend all, Jam. 3.2. There is iniquity
even in our holy things, Exodus 28.38. Therefore Nehemiah, though he prayed unto
God to remember him concerning the good that he had done, yet to show how far
he was from presuming of the merit of it, he added, And spare me, according to
the greatness of thy mercy, Neh. 13.22. Fourthly, There is no proportion
betwixt our works and Salvation; no works that we can do are equal to it; Illi
namque beatae vitae, in qua cum Deo, and de D o vivitur, nullus potest aequari
labor, nulla opera comparari, presertim cum Apostolus dicat, non sunt condign
passiones hujus temporis ad futuram gloriam, quae revelabitur in nobis. Gregor.
ubi supra.
and therefore neither can they merit it. The most that we can do, is to suffer
for the Name of God, and of Christ, and for righteousness sake Phil. 1.29. Mat.
5.10, 11. But the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared
with the glory that shall be revealed in us, Romans 8.18. But as none must think
to be saved for good works, so neither must any expect Salvation without good
works. In Christ Jesus neither circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but faith, which works through love, Gal. 5.6. Circumcision
is nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing, but the keeping of the commandments
of God, 1 Cor. 7.19. Work out your own Salvation with fear and trembling,
Philip. 2.12.

Rome are, though we dare not ascribe so much unto them as they do. See Sermon.
5. Use 1.

Joh. 8.36. But how? Not free to sin, but free from sin. For whosoever
commits sin, is the servant of sin, Joh. 8.34. Know ye not, that to whom ye
yield your selves servants to obey, his servants ye are, to whom ye obey?
whether of sin unto death, or of righteousness unto life? But God be thanked,
that ye were the servants of sin: but ye have obeyed from the heart that form
of Doctrine, which was delivered unto you. Being then made free from sin, ye
became the servants of righteousness, Romans 16.16, 17, 18. For this end God sent
his Son to redeem us, that being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, we
might serve him without fear, in righteousness and holiness before him all the
days of our life, Luke 1.74, 75. For this end Christ gave himself for us. He
died for all, that they which live, might not live unto themselves, but unto
him that died for them, and rose again, 2 Cor. 5 15. He gave himself for us, to
redeem us from all iniquity, and to purify unto himself a peculiar people,
zealous of good works, Tit. 2.14 There is no hope of Salvation by Christ,
without yielding obedience unto Christ. He is the author of eternal salvation
to all them that obey him, Heb. 5.9. He is a King as well as a Priest, and a
Lord as well as a Savior: He will reign and rule over us, or else he will not
intercede for us, and save us. The Friends of Christ are they that shall be
saved by Christ. Eat O friends, and drink, (says he) yea, drink abundantly, O
beloved, Cant. 5.1. Now they that are obedient unto Christ, they only are the
Friends of Christ. You are my Friends, (says he) if ye do whatsoever I command
you, Joh. 15.14. As for such as will not subject themselves unto Christ, and be
ruled by him, they are his enemies, and must look for nothing but destruction
from him. But those mine Enemies which would not suffer me to reign over them,
bring hither, and slay them before me, Luke 19.27.

This likewise makes for the Conviction of those that Isaiah complained of; a
rebellious people, lying children, children that will not hear the the Law of
the Lord. Which say to the Seers, See not; and to the Prophets, Prophecy not
unto us right things: speak smooth things, prophecy deceits. Get ye out of the
way; turn aside out of the path; cause the holy One of Israel to cease from
before us, Isai. 30.9, 10, 11. But as Solomon tells us, He that turns away
his ear from hearing the Law, even his prayer shall be an abomination, Prove.
28.9. Some hear, but they do not heed to understand what they hear; like those
silly women, of whom the Apostle speaks, they are ever learning, but never
able to come to the knowledge of the truth, 2 Timothy 3.7. Yet they please
themselves in this, and think this will save them, that they come to the
Church, and hear Sermons, though they still remain as rude and ignorant as ever
they were. But (says our Savior) Hear and understand, Mat. 15.10. Hearing
without understanding, is no hearing at all: and therefore in the Scripture to
hear sometimes is as much as to understand. Go to, let us go down, and there
confound their language, that they may not understand one another speech, Genesis
11.7. In the Hebr. (...).
it is, that they may not hear. He that speaks in an unknown tongue speaks
not unto men, but unto God, for no man understands him 1 Cor. 14.2. In the
Greek it is, no man hears. Some both hear and also understand what the Lord
in his word does require of them; but they are so far from doing it, that they
deride it, and scoff at it. As the Pharisees being covetous, and resolving to
be so still, derided Christ, when they heard him speak against covetousness,
Luke 16.14. So Saint Peter foretells of scoffers walking after their own lusts,
and saying, Where is the promise of his coming? To wit, of Christ's coming to
Judgment, 2 Pet. 3, 4. But judgments are prepared for scorners, Pro. 19.29.
Now therefore be ye no mockers, lest your bonds be made strong, Isai. 28.

Some hear, and understand, and profess the Truth, but do not in their hearts
assent unto it, but are grossly hypocritical and deceitful. They draw near unto
God with their mouth, but remove their heart far from him, Isai. 29.13. God is
near in their mouth, but far from their reins, Jer. 12.2.

Some hear, and understand, and profess, and assent unto the Truth; but they
will not obey and practice it. Their Faith is not lively and operative, their
hearts and affections are not changed, their lusts and corruptions are not
subdued; still they remain averse from God, and disobedient unto him. Such a
one was Simon Magus; as others in Samaria, when Philip had preached unto them:
so Simon himself believed also, Act. 8.13. He so far believed, as to assent to
the Doctrine which he heard, being convinced by the miracles and signs, which
he saw wrought by Philip. Yet his heart was not right in him, verse. 21. but he
was still in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity, verse. 23.

Now let all these consider, that their hearing, knowing, professing and
believing, without obeying and practizing, is so far from being able to save
them, that it shall aggravate and increase their condemnation. Such as hear the
word, and do it not, are compared to a house built upon the sand, (...).
Theophylact. ad Luc. 6.49.
which not only falls, but the fall of it is great, Mat. 7.27. and Luke 6.49.
They that hear, and do not practice, are in a worse condition then they that
could never hear the word at all. If I had not come and spoken unto them, they
had not had sin, (to wit, in that degree and measure, as now they have) but now
they have no cloak for their sin, Joh. 15.22. The more means any have, the more
inexcusable they are, if they do not bring forth fruit answerable. For unto
whomsoever much is given, of him shall be much required: and to whom men shall
have committed much, of him they will ask the more, Luke 12.48. So, the more
knowledge any have, if they do not conform their practice unto it, they are the
more inexcusable, and liable to the greater condemnation. To him that knows
to do good, and does it not, to him it is sin; that is, to him especially, Jam.
4.17. So that they are without excuse; because that when they knew God, they
did not glorify him as God, etc. Romans 1.20, 21. That servant that knew his
Lords will, and prepared not himself, neither did according to his will, shall
be beaten with many stripes, Luke 12.47. The more also that any profess the
Truth, and assent unto it, the greater is their sin, and the sorer shall be
their punishment, if they do not yield up themselves in obedience unto it. Out
of thine own mouth will I judge thee, thou wicked servant, Luk 19.22. So out of
their own mouths and hearts will Christ judge and condemn those, whose lives
and conversations gainsay that which their mouths profess, and their hearts
assent unto.

Let all therefore have a care, as to hear and understand,

To incite us hereunto, let us consider these Motives.

1. It is for Gods glory, which is it that we ought to aim at, Motives to stir
up unto obedience.
in all and above all. Whether ye eat, or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to
the glory of God, 1 Cor. 10.31. Now we glorify God not so much by hearing,
knowing, professing, and believing Gods word, as by yielding obedience unto it.
I have glorified thee on earth, (said Christ to his Father; and to show how,
and wherein he had glorified him, he added immediately) I have finished the
work which thou gave me to do, Joh. 17.4. So speaking to his disciples,
Herein is my Father glorified (said he) that ye bear much fruit, to wit, of
holiness and obedience, Joh. 15.8. and therefore he exhorted, saying, Let your
light so shine forth before men, that they seeing your good works, may glorify
your Father which is in heaven, Mat. 5.16. On the other side, the evil
conversation of Professors does much dishonor God. Thou that make thy boast
of the Law, through breaking the Law, dishonourest thou God? for the Name of
God is blasphemed among the Gentiles, through you, Rom 3.23, 24. In this
respect therefore, it behooves us to walk answerably to our profession, that so
the name of God, and his Doctrine, may not be blasphemed, 1 Timothy 6 1.

2. And as it is for the glory of God, that we be doers of his will, so is it
for our own good. The wicked works a deceitful work, but to him that sows
righteousness, shall be a sure reward, Prove. 11.18. A reward here, and a reward
hereafter. For godliness is profitable unto all things, having the promise both
of the life that now is, and also of that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4.8, First
seek the kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all these things shall be
added unto you, Mat. 6.33. The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his
ears are open unto their cry. The face of the Lord is against them that do
evil, to cut off their remembrance from the earth. The righteous cry, and the
Lord hears, and delivers them out of all their troubles. -- Many are the
afflictions of the righteous: but the Lord delivers him out of them all. He
keeps all his bones, not one of them is broken; not so broken, but that it
shall be set again, Psalm. 34.15, 16, 17, 19, 20. But hereafter, in the life to
come, then comes the full reward, then every good and faithful servant of
Christ shall enter into the joy of his Lord, Mat. 25.21, 23. even into that joy
into which the Lord Christ is entered, Who for the joy that was set before him,
endured the Cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of
the throne of God, Heb. 12.2. And where I am (says he) there also shall my
servant be, Joh. 12.26.

SERMON. XXXI.
Psalm. 15.5. He that does these things shall never be moved.


I Have handled the Agent, He that, and the Act, does: I now proceed to the
Object, these things, to wit, before mentioned in the Psalm. Hence we may
observe, That the performances which are accepted of God, and rewarded by him,
are grounded upon, and guided by Gods word.

Not he that does what himself likes, or what others do or have done before
him, but, He that does these things, to wit, which God in his word does
require, he it is that shall never be moved. This is required in matters of
Gods Worship. Keep thy feet when thou go to the house of God, and be more
ready to hear, (viz. what God does require, and to do that) then to give the
sacrifice of fools, (to worship God after thine own foolish fancy) for they
consider not that they do evil, Eccles. 5.1. According to all the Ordinances of
the Passover, so shall they keep it, Number. 9.12. A multitude of the people,
etc. had not cleansed themselves, yet did they eat the Passover otherwise then
it was written, 2 Chro. 30.18. This was their sin, that although they did
perform the service, which God required, yet they did not perform it in that
manner as he required. The same also is required in all performances, and in
the ordering of the whole life and conversation. See that ye walk
circumspectly; not as fools, but as wise. -- Be ye not unwise, but understand
what the will of the Lord is, Ephesians. 5.15, 17. That service which is acceptable
unto God, must be reasonable service, Romans 12.1. or (as the words in the
Original may be rendered) service agreeable to the word, (...), the service of
the Word, as (...), the milk of the Word.
such as God in his word does require. Thy word is a lamp to my feet, and a
light to my paths, Psalm. 119 105. Order my steps in thy word, and let none
iniquity have dominion over me, verse. 133.

The reason of this Doctrine is clear and evident. It must be obedience that
God will accept and reward. Behold, to obey is better then sacrifice: and to
hearken, then the fat of rams, 1 Samuel 15.22. Christ is the author of eternal
salvation, to all that obey him, Heb. 5.9. Now to obey, is to do that which is
commanded; yea, and to do it, because it is commanded. Though a man do never so
much, yet if he do not those things that are commanded, and because they are
commanded, it is no obedience. To obey the Lord, is to obey his voice, 1 Samuel
15.22. it is to do what he injoyneth, and because of his injunction. Christ was
obedient unto death, even the death of the cross, Phil. 2.8. For it was the
will of his Father, that he should suffer death, even that death: and because
it was his Fathers will, therefore he did it. Therefore (said he) does my
Father love me, because I lay down my life that I may take it up again. No man
takes it from me, but I lay it down of my self: I have power to lay it down;
and I have power to take it again: this commandment have I received of my
Father, Joh. 10.17, 18.

in his word required of them. They are things of men's devising, and not of
Gods prescribing; and therefore they are so far from being profitable, that
they are prejudicial; it being superstition and idolatry to worship and serve
God with other Worship and service then he himself does appoint. In vain (says
he) do they worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of men, Mark
7.7.

This also discovers the folly of some among our selves, who do this or that,
but neither know, nor regard what warrant they have from Gods word for it.

Some rest merely in the example of their Forefathers: their Fathers before
them did so and so, and therefore they also will do so. This was the plea that
the woman of Samaria used; Our Fathers (said she) worshipped in this mountain,
Joh. 4 20. But (said our Savior to her) You worship ye know not what, verse.
22. It is not the Example of our Forefathers, but the word of God, that must be
the Rule of our practice. Be ye not as your fathers, Zach. 1.4. Further then
they conformed unto God, we must not conform unto them.

Some look no further then the custom of the times and places wherein they
live. Others generally do such and such things: and therefore they also will do
them. Thus the Messenger that Ahab sent unto Micaiah sought to prevail with
him, saying, Behold now, the words of the Prophets declare good unto the king
with one mouth, let thy word I pray thee, be like the word of one of them, and
speak that which is good. But Micaiah answered well, saying, As the Lord
lives, what the Lord says unto me, that will I speak, 1 King. 22.13, 14. So
this was Joshua's resolution: If it seem evil unto you (said he to the people
of Israel) to serve the Lord, choose you this day whom you will serve, etc. but
as for me, I and my house will serve the Lord, Josh. 24.15.

Some are apt to think, that if their Superiors, and such as are in authority
over them, enjoin any thing, it is a warrant sufficient for them to do it. But
this was the sin and the undoing of Ephraim, that is, the ten Tribes, of which
Ephraim was the chief, and therefore is put for all. Ephraim is oppressed and
broken in judgment; because he willingly walked after the commandment, Hos.
5.11. To wit, the commandment of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, (as R. David Kimchi
does well expound it) who set up the Calves at Dan and Bethel, (...). Kimchi ad
Hos. 15.11.
and commanded the people to worship them, 1 Kin. 12.28, 29. See also Mic.
6.16. Ye are bought with a price; (says the Apostle) be ye not the servants of
men, 1 Cor. 7.23. Not so the servants of men, as to forget that both you and
they are Gods servants: and therefore not so the servants of men, as simply and
absolutely to do what they enjoin, but so far forth as it is not repugnant to
Gods injunctions. Children, obey your parents, in the Lord, Ephesians. 6.1. So must
servants obey their masters, and Subjects their Magistrates in the Lord, that
is, so as in obeying them to obey the Lord; and therefore not in any thing
which the Lord does not allow. It was a worthy resolution of those three Jews,
who when Nebuchadnezzar threatened to cast them into the fiery Furnace, if they
would not fall down and worship the golden Image which he set up, answered; O
Nebuchadnezzar, we are not careful to answer thee in this matter. If it be so,
our God whom we serve, is able to deliver us from the burning fiery furnace,
and he will deliver us out of thy hand, O king. But if not, be it known unto
thee O king, that we will not serve thy gods, nor worship thy golden Image
which thou have set up, Dan. 3.16, 17, 18. So Peter and John being commanded by
the Jewish Rulers, not to speak at all, nor teach in the Name of Jesus,
answered, Whether it be right in the sight of God, to hearken unto you more
then unto God, judge ye, Act. 4.19. And when these and the rest of the Apostles
were asked why they had done contrary to this command, they made this answer,
We ought to obey God rather then men, Act. 5.29. Yea, (which I cannot but
admire) Socrates a Heathen Philosopher, and long before the Apostles times,
(...). Plato in Apolog. Socratis.
being accused of that which his Adversaries pretended to be a capital crime,
but he maintained to be a necessary duty in his Apology which he made for
himself, told the Athenians that were his judges, that if they would release
him upon condition, that he would desist from the course he followed, he would
answer them thus, O Athenians, I embrace and love you: but, I will obey God
rather then you.

Finally, some content themselves with this, that though they have no ground or
warrant from the Word of God for what they do, yet they have a good mind, and
mean well; and therefore they think God will accept what they do, and reward
them for it. But though an ill intention may mar a good action, yet a good
intention cannot amend an ill action. Uzzah's good meaning in putting forth his
hand to stay the Ark, could not secure him from Gods wrath; because the action
in it self was not good, being not agreeable to Gods Word, 1 Chronicles. 13.9, 10.
with 15.13.

But again, If Gods Word must be the Rule of men's For the Priests lips should
keep knowledge, and they should seek the Law at his mouth; for he is the
Messenger of the Lord of Hosts. Mal. 2.7. And though people ought only to
practice what Ministers ought to preach, yet they are apt to practice what the
other do preach, whether it be right or wrong; and much rather if it be wrong,
then if it be right. The Prophets prophecy falsely, and the Priests bear rule
by their means, and my people love to have it so. Jer. 5.31. And I have seen
folly in the Prophets of Samaria; they prophesied in Baal, and caused my people
to err. I have seen also in the Prophets of Jerusalem an horrible thing, they
commit adultery, and walk in lies: they strengthen also the hands of evil
doers, that none does return from his wickedness. -- They say still unto them
that despise me; The Lord has said, Ye shall have peace: and they say unto
every one that walks after the imagination of his own heart, None evil shall
come upon you. -- But if they had stood in my counsel, and had caused my people
to hear my words, then they should have turned them from their evil way, and
from the evil of their doings. Jer. 23.13, 14, 17, 22. The Prophet that has a
dream, let him tell a dream; and he that has my word, let him speak my word
faithfully: What is the chaff to the wheat, says the Lord? verse. 28. Speak
unto them all that I command thee, Jer. 1.17. And thou shall speak my words
unto them, Ezekiel. 2.7. Go ye therefore, and teach all Nations, etc. Teaching
them to observe all things that I have commanded you, Mat. 28.19, 20.

Take heed what you hear, Mar. 4.24. People must not receive and obey
whatsoever is delivered unto them, but must examine and try whether it be
agreeable to the Word of God; if it be, then they must submit unto it; but if
it be not, they must reject it. That of our Savior, The Scribes and Pharisees
sit in Moses Chair. All therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe
and do, Mat. 23.2, 3. That (I say) is to be understood, so far forth as they
sitting in Moses Chair, did deliver the law and doctrine of Moses; not that
people should otherwise without exception observe and do whatsoever the Scribes
and Pharisees did teach and require. Some of the Romish Writers, Cum jubet
servare and facere quae Scribae and Pharisaei, dum in Cathedra Mosis sedent,
dicunt, non de ipsorum, sed de Legit ac Mosis doctrina loquitur. Perinde enim
est, ac si dicat, Omnia quae lex et Moses vobis dixerint, Scribis et Pharifaeis
recitantibus, servate et facite, etc. Mal. ad Mat. 23.2, 3.
to maintain that blind odience which they would have people to perform, make
use of these words of our Savior: but the Jesuit Maldonate does let them know
that it is not to their purpose; but that our Savior speaks of the doctrine of
the Law and of Moses, not of the Scribes and Pharisees: and that his meaning is
this, Whatsoever the Law and Moses say unto you, when it is recited by the
Scribes and Pharisees, that observe and do. That our Savior meant no more then
this, is clear by that admonition which he gives in another place, saying, Take
heed and beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, and of the Sadduces, Mat. 16.6.
whereby their leaven he meant their doctrine, v. 12. Therefore though
Bellarmine stick not to say, that, if the Pope should err, so as to command
vices, or to forbid virtues, Si Papae erraret praecipiendo vitia, vel
prohibendo virtutes, teneretur Eccl^sia credere vitia esse bona, and virtutes
malas, nisi vellet contra conscientiam agere. Bellat, de Pontif. lib. 4. cap. 5.
the Church were bound to believe vices to be good, and virtues to be evil,
except it would act against conscience; Yet this is more then we may attribute
either to man or Angel. Though we or an Angel from Heaven preach any other
Gospel unto you, then that which we have preached unto you, let him be
accursed. As we said before so say I now again, If any man preach any other
Gospel unto you, then that ye have received, let him be accursed, Gal. 1.8 9.
Bellarmine in that assertion is like the Jewish Rabbin, who says that a man
was to believe the Priest, (...) R. Sal. ad Deuteronomy. 17.11.
though he told him that his right hand was the left, and his left hand the
right; because it is said, According to the sentence of the Law, which they
shall teach thee, and according to the judgment, which they shall tell thee,
thou shall do: Thou shall not decline from the sentence which they shall show
thee, to the right hand, nor to the left, Deuteronomy. 17.11. And the very next words,
to wit, And the man that will do presumptuously, and will not hearken unto the
Priest (that stands to minister there before the Lord thy God) or unto the
Judge, even that man shall die, Bell. de Pontif. lib. 4. cap. 16.
etc v. 12. Those words (I say) does Bellarmine allege to prove that the Pope
has power and authority to make Laws which bind the conscience; whereas we
see it was to be the sentence of the Law, to wit, of the Law of God, which the
Priest and the Judge were to deliver; and in that case indeed, but not
otherwise, all were bound, to obey it. S. Paul bids, Prove all things, hold
fast that which is good, 1 Thessalonians. 5.21. and, Believe not every Spirit, (says
S. John) but try the spirits, whether they be of God: for there are many false
Prophets gone out into the world, 1 John 4.1. How must people try the Spirits,
and prove all things? by the Word of God, as the Bereans did, who searched the
Scripures daily, whether those things (that were preached unto them) were so,
Act. 17.11. To the Law, and to the testimony, if they speak not according to
this word, it is because there is no light in them, Isa. 8.20.



Mo^ives to persuade all to acquaint themselves with Gods Word, and to make it
their Rule.
Consider 1. God's Word is a sure rule. The testimony of the Lord is sure, Psalm.
19.7. It is very sure, Psalm. 93.5. So is not the testimony of man; no, man may
be deceived himself, and deceive others: but God can neither deceive nor be
deceived: Let God be true, and every man a liar, Romans 3.4.

2. The Word of God is a complete Rule. The Law (that is, the Word and
Doctrine) of the Lord is perfect, Psalm. 19.7. Search the Scriptures, for in
them ye think to have eternal life, Joh. 5.39. The holy Scriptures are able to
make thee wise unto salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15.

But take heed of misunderstanding and mis-applying God's Word, as S. Peter
says, They that are unlearned and unstable, Means to prevent the
misunderstanding and mis-applying of Gods Word.
wrest the Scriptures to their own destruction, 2 Pet. 3.16.

Come therefore to the Word of God, to the reading, hearing and meditating of
it, 1. In sincerity, not for by-ends, and base respects, but with a desire to
know the will of God, and with a purpose to obey it, Many people shall go and
say, Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the
God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths,
Isai. 2.3. and Mic. 4.2. If any man will do his will, he shall know of the
doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of my self, Joh. 17.7 What
man is he that fears the Lord? him shall he teach in the way that he shall
go, Psalm. 25.12. The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, and he will
show them his Covenant, verse. 14.

2. Come in humility; have a low esteem of your selves, and a high esteem of
Gods Word, wisdom is too high for a fool, Prove. 24.7. Especially for the proud
fool, that thinks himself too high for wisdom. God scorneth the scorners,
but-giveth grace to the lowly, Prove. 3.34. God resists the proud, but gives
grace to the humble, Jam. 4.6. and 1 Pet. 5.5. The meek will he guide in
judgment, and the meek will he teach his way, Psalm. 25.9. Therefore receive
with meekness the ingrafted Word, which is able to save your souls, Jam. 1.21.

3. Pray that you may understand the Word. If thou cryest after knowledge, and
liftest up thy voice for understanding; If thou seek her as silver, and
searchest for her as for hid treasures, Then shall thou understand the fear of
Lord, and find the knowledge of God, Prove. 2.3, 4, 5. Open thou mine eyes,
that I may behold wondrous things out of thy Law, Psalm. 119.18. Make me to
understand the way of thy precepts, v. 27. Teach me O Lord the way of thy
Statutes, v. 33. Give me understanding, verse. 34.

4 Pray that you may obey the Word: O that my ways were directed, that I might
keep thy Statutes, Psalm. 119.5. O let me not wander from thy Commandments, v.
10. Make me to go in the path of thy Commandments, verse. 35. Incline mine heart
unto thy testimonies, etc. v. 36.


Psalm. 15.5. He that does these things shall never be moved.


HAving done with the Agent, He that, and with the Act, does; I have handed one
point arising from the Object, these things, to wit, That the performances
which are accepted of God, and rewarded by him, are grounded upon, and guided
by Gods Word.

But again, in that it is said. He that does these things, not some of these
things, but indefinitely, these things; that is, universally, all these things;
hence we may observe, Saving obedience is not a partial, but an universal
obedience.

Not that any can fully and perfectly observe and do all that God commands:
for in many things we offend all, Jam. 3.2. But that a respect must be had to
all that is commanded, as well in one point as in another: there must be a care
and an endeavor to perform all; we must not wave any thing that God requires of
us, but must have respect to all his commandments, Psalm. 119.6.

Now that saving obedience is in this sense not partial, but universal, may
appear by these arguments:

1. The Saints and Servants of God, whose examples are recorded and set forth
for imitation, were careful to perform such obedience. Abraham was willing and
ready to obey God in whatsoever he did require of him. When God commanded him
to leave his Country and his Fathers house, though this might seem both
unpleasing and unprofitable, yet he did it, Genesis 12. When God commanded him to
be circumcised, though it were both shameful and painful, he submitted unto it,
Genesis 17. When God commanded him to send away his Son Ismael, though when Sarah
spoke to him about it, the thing seemed very grievous unto him, yet as soon as
he saw it to be the will of God, he was obedient unto it, Genesis 21. When God
commanded him to sacrifice his Son Isaac, his only Son that was now left, and
him by whom the Promise was to be fulfilled, that his Seed should be as the
Stars of Heaven for multitude, yea, from whom he was to proceed, in whom all
the Nations of the Earth should be blessed, to wit, Christ; though this might
seem to cross both Nature and Grace, both Reason and Religion, yet Abraham was
ready to obey the will of God in this also, and to do what he commanded, Genesis
22. So David was one that would do all Gods will, Act. 13.22. And it is said of
Zacharias and Elizabeth, that they walked in all the Commandments and
Ordinances of the Lord, Luk 1.6.

2. God requires such obedience: Walk ye in all the ways that I have commanded
you, Jer. 7.23. Teaching them to observe all things that I have commanded you,
Mat. 28.20.

3. God delights in such obedience, and in those that perform it: O that there
were such an heart in them, that they would fear me, and keep all my
Commandments always, etc. Deuteronomy. 5.29. In this respect Abraham was called the
friend of God, Isa. 41.8. 2 Chronicles. 20.7. Jam. 2.3. See Joh. 15.14.
And for this very reason did God call David a man after his own heart, Act.
13.22.

4. God does promise mercy and salvation upon conditition of such obedience. If
the wicked will turn from all his sins that he has committed, and keep all my
Statutes, and do that which is lawful and right, he shall surely live, he shall
not die, Ezekiel. 18.21.

5. Without such obedience a man cannot have that hope which makes not
ashamed. Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect to all thy
Commandments, Psalm. 119, 6.

The grounds and reasons of the Doctrine are these:

1. Man's holiness must be conformable to Gods holiness. Be ye followers of God
as dear children, Ephesians. 5.1. Be ye perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect,
Mat. 5.48. Now God is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works,
Reasons why obedience must be universal.
Psalm. 145.17. And so ought all to be, and so all that desire to be saved, must
have a care to be. As he who has called you is holy, so be ye also holy in all
manner of conversation, 1 Pet. 1.15.

2. The holiness of a Christian must be conformable to Christ's holiness. Be ye
followers of me, as I am of Christ, 1 Cor. 11.1. Now Christ was holy in all
things: It behooves us (said he) to fulfill all righteousness, Mat. 3.15. He was
obedient unto death, even the death of the cross, Phil. 2.8. This should be the
care of every one that professes himself to be Christ's, even to be thus holy
and obedient as Christ was. He that says he abides in him, ought himself to
walk even as he walked, 1 John 2.6.

3. Partial obedience argues hypocrifie; if the heart be sound and upright, it
will yield entire and universal obedience. Let my heart be sound in thy
Statutes (says David unto God) that I may not be ashamed, Psalm. 119.80. And v.
6. Then shall I not be ashamed, (says he) when I have respect to all thy
Commandments. By which verses compared together, it appears, that then the
heart is sound, when there is a respect unto all Gods Commandments. [See Sermon.
4. Use 1. the first mark of uprightness.]

4. Partial obedience is indeed no obedience; it is no true obedience, except
it be universal. All that the Lord has said, will we do, and be obedient,
Exodus 24.7. They only are indeed obedient, who have a care to do all that is
commanded. For to obey, is to do that which is commanded, because it is
commanded: though the thing done be commanded, yet if it be not therefore done
because it is commanded, it is no obedience. Now if this be the nature of
obedience, then where obedience is indeed, it is not partial, but universal.
For he that does any one thing that is commanded, A quatenus ad omne valet
cons^quentia.
because it is commanded, will be careful to do every thing that is commanded;
there being the same reason for all. He that has no regard to any one thing
which he knows God does enjoin, though he do never so many other things which
are required of him, yet in doing them, he does not obey God; for he does them
not because God commands them: for then he would also do that which he
neglects, seeing he knows that God does command that as well as the other.
Hereupon Saint James says, Whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend
in one point, (to wit, so as to have no respect unto it) is guilty of it. For
he that said, Do not commit adultery, said also, Do not kill. Now if thou
commit no adultery, yet if thou kill, thou art become a transgressor of the
Law, Jam. 2.10, 11. Mark the reason: There is one and the same Lawgiver in
respect of all the Commandments; Qua ratione hos dixerit, ipse subjungit, v z.
ex idencitate legistatoris. Hanc n^ ident^tatem clare subj^ngit. Et ex hac
part qui in uno offenderit leg^slator^m, incurrit r^atum omnium; quoniam
contemnit latorem legis omnium. Cajetan. ad Jac 2.10.
he that gave one Commandment, gave also another: therefore he that observes
one Commandment in obedience unto God, whose Commandment it is, will observe
all, because all are his Commandments: and he that sleights one commandment, is
guilty of all, because he does contemn the authority of him, that gave them
all; Non est erga Deum obedientia, ubi non ^st equabile obsequendi studium,
quod Dei mandato respondeat -- Adsit ergo equabilitas, si velimus rite obedire
Deo Calvin. ad Jac 2.10, 11.
even in those Commandments which he does observe, he has no respect to the
will and authority of him that gave them. Therefore (as Calvin does well
observe upon the place) there is no obedience toward God, where there is not
an uniform endeavor to please God as well in one thing as in another. They
that walk would indeed obey God, must be uniform in their obedience.



he will spare them, as a man spares his son that serves him, Mal. 3.17.
Though a Father see his Son to fail and come short in that which he enjoins him
to do, yet knowing that his desire is to serve and please him, he will not be
rigid and severe with him, but will be indulgent unto him, and will spare him:
and so will God his Children, to wit, such as are not lying children, Isa. 30
9. but are children that will not lie, Isa. 63.8 such children as are
sincerely, though weakly and imperfectly obedient. Let none therefore be
dejected because of their wants and weaknesses, so that they be sincere and
upright. The best have had, and so will have their faults and failings, Noah,
Let, David, etc. yet God spared them, and so he will all those that are sincere
as they were.

But let none catch at this, when it does not belong unto them. Thine obedience
must in desire and endeavor be universal; thou must set thy self to obey in
Most men will proclaim every one his own goodness: but who may find a faithful
man? Prove. 20.6. Jehu boasted saying, Come see my zeal, 2 King. 10.16. Yet Jehu
regarded not to walk in the Law of the Lord with all his heart; for he turned
not from the sins of Jeroboam the Son of Nebat that made Israel to sin, verse.
31. Try therefore whether your obedience be universal.

1. Have you a care to obey God as well in the duties of the first Table as of
the second, Marks whereby to know whether obedience be universal.
and of the second Table as well as of the first? Some observe the one, some
the other; but in not observing both, they do indeed observe neither. Absalom
pretended that he had vowed a Vow, and must needs go to Hebron to pay it, 2 Samuel 15.7. It was only a pretense; but had it been so indeed, yet not regarding
his duty to David, his King and Father, his piety toward God could not be
right; If a man say (says Saint John) I love God, and hates his brother, he
is a liar: for he that loves not his brother whom he has seen, how can he
love God whom he has not seen? And this Commandment have we from him, that who
loves God, love his brother also, 1 John 4.20, 21. Now love (as Saint Paul
says) works no evil to his neighbor, Romans 13.10. Yea, it works good, for
(as he also tells us) Charity is kind, 1 Cor. 13.4. On the other side, some
are careful to deal justly with men, but neglect the duties of Gods immediate
worship and service, regard not the Word, Sacraments and Prayer: but, the first
and great Commandment is this, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the first and
great Commandment. And the second is like unto it, Thou shall love thy neighbor
as thy self, Mat. 22.37, 38, 39.

2. Are you careful to obey God, and to do his will in things that are hidden
from the eyes of the world, as well as in those things which the world does see
and take notice of? Hypocrites will perform duties in public, but not in
private, because they look at men, and not at God. All their works they do to
be seen of men, said our Savior of the Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 23.5.
Therefore they would only do things so as that men might see them, and take
notice of them. If they gave Alms, they would cause a trumpet to be blown
before them: if they prayed, it should be in the Synagogues, and in the corner
of the Streets: if they fasted, they would disfigure their faces, that they
might appear unto men to fast, Mat. 6.2, 5, 16.

3. Do ye obey in those things which the world sleighteth, and it may be hates
and persecuteth? This was Noah's commendation, that when all flesh corrupted
their ways, yet he was found righteous before God, Genesis 6.9, 12. and 7.1. So
it was the commendation of Daniel, that when the Decree was made, that
whosoever did make a request to any god, but to the King, he should be cast
into the Den of Lions, yet he would not neglect his duty unto God, but prayed
and made supplication unto him three times a day, as he had done before, Dan.
6.7, 10.

4. Do ye observe great things as well as small? The Scribes and Pharisees were
punctual and precise in lesser matters; they would pay Tithe of Mint and Annise
and Cummin; but they omitted the weightier matters of the Law, Judgment, Mercy
and Faith, Mat. 23.23.

5 Do ye observe small things as well as great? Some, if they have respect to
things of greater concernment, think they may take their liberty in lesser
matters, either to observe them, or not, as they please. But though some things
are small in comparison of other things; yet nothing is simply and absolutely
to be accounted small, that God commands; not so small, but that it ought to
be observed. These things ought ye to have done, (said Christ, to wit, the
weightier matters of the Law, Judgment, Mercy and Faith) and not to leave the
other undone, to wit, the lesser matters, as the tything of Mint, and Annise
and Cummin, Mat. 23.23. See Mat. 5.19.

6. Do ye not obey God, so as to obey some lust also? This is not indeed to
obey God at all. Ye cannot serve God and Mammon, Mat. 6.24. Thou shall worship
the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve, Mat. 4.10. Him, and him only,
none but him, and in subordination unto him, so as in obeying any other to obey
him, because it is his command that the other also should be obeyed.

Be exhorted therefore to be entire and universal in

1. It is your wisdom to obey thus. Walk circumspectly, Motives to stir up to
universal obedience.
not as fools, but as wise, Ephesians. 4 15. The word rendered circumspectly
((...)) imports as much as to come up to the top and height of what is
commanded; so our desire, study and endeavor ought to be, and it is our wisdom
to do it. It is usual with some to say of those that are more conscientious
then themselves, that, they are more precise then wise: but we cannot be too
precise in observing those things that God requires; in this, the more
precise, the more wise. This is your wisdom, and your understanding, said Moses
to the Israelites, Deuteronomy. 4.6. This is the wisdom of the just, Luke 1.17. the
wisdom of those that are wise unto salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15.

2. Servants must obey their earthly Masters not in some things only, but in
all things, to wit, that are just and lawful. Exhort servants (says the
Apostle) to be obedient to their own Masters, and to please them well in all
things, Tit. 2.9. What Master will be content that his servant should choose how
far forth he will observe and do those things which he does require of him?
Nulli servorum licet ex his quae dominus suus imperat, eligere pro arbitrio
quid velit facere, quid nolit. Salv. de Gub. lib. 3.
Much less may we think that such arbitrary and partial performances will
please God our heavenly Master.

3. Except we obey universally, and do the will of God as well in one thing as
in another, SERMON. 33. Si pro arbitr^o suo servi dominis obtemperant, ne in his
quidem, in quibus obtemperant, obsequuntur. Quando enim servus ex domini sussis
ea facit tantummodo, quae vult facere, jam non dominicam voluntatem implet, sed
suam. Salv. ibid.
we do not obey God, but our selves; and we do our own will rather then his.
For we have respect to our selves in that which we do, doing only so much as we
our selves think meet; we have not respect unto God, and to his precept: for
then our obedience would extend it self (in desire and endeavor, though not in
performance) as far as Gods Precept does extend, the ground of obedience (as
was noted before) being the same in one thing as another.

SERMON. XXXIII.
Psalm. 15.5. He that does these things shall never be moved.


I Have done with the Person, who is described in these words, He that does
these things: now I come to the privilege, which is contained in these words,
Shall never be moved.

The words I have explicated before; The Observation is this,

That the condition of a godly man is a firm and sure condition; he shall not
be moved out of it, but shall persevere and continue in it.

First, for the (...) that it is so, appears many ways:

1. By plain testimonies of Scripture, as here in the Text, and so in other
places. He shall never suffer the righteous to be moved, Psalm. 55.22. The root
of the righteous shall not be moved, Prove. 12.3. The righteous is an
everlasting foundation, Prove. 10.25. Surely he shall not be moved for ever,
Psalm 112.6. He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and
I in him, Joh. 6.56. He does not sojourn for a time, but he dwells, that is,
abides for ever. He that commits sin, is the servant of sin. And the
servant abides not in the house for ever: but the Son abides for ever, Joh.
8.34, 35.

2. By Similitudes and Resemblances, which are used to set forth the estate of
the godly. He is like a tree planted by the River side, whose leaf does not
fade, Psalm. 1.3. He is compared to a green Olive Tree, he never withers,
Psalm. 52.8. He is as Mount Sion, that cannot be moved, but abides for ever,
Psalm. 125 1. He is like a house built upon a R^ck, which notwithstanding all
storms and tempests, yet stands sure, Mat. 7.24, 25. He is compared to good
ground, that brings forth fruit unto perfection, Luke 8.15.

Some may say, That these Testimonies and Resemblances do not prove that the
godly shall certainly persevere in the estate of Grace, but only that such as
are, and continue godly, are sure to be happy.

But first, This exception has no place in respect of some of the Testimonies
and Resemblances that are alleged; as namely, those Testimonies, Joh. 6.56.
and 8. 34, 35. and that Resemblance, Luk 8 15.

And secondly, Neither is the exception of force in respect of any of the
Testimonies and Resemblances prealledged. For they all speak of the stability
and firmness of the righteous; and if the happiness of the righteous be
directly intended, yet their perseverance in righteousness is by consequence
asserted. For if the righteous should fall from their righteousness, then
should they miss of their happiness.

3. The perseverance of the Saints is proved also by the confidence, which they
being guided by the Spirit of God, have expressed. I will abide in thy
Tabernacle for ever, Psalm. 61.4. I am like a green Olive Tree in the house of
God: I trust in the mercy of God for ever and ever, Psalm. 52.8. I have set the
Lord always before me: because he is at my right hand, I shall not be moved,
Psalm. 16.8. Thou will show me the path of life, v. 10. It was spoken of the
head, Christ; but it is also true of every member, every true Christian. Who
shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation, ^r distress, or
persecution, or famine; or nakedness, or peril, or sword? (As it is written,
For thy sake we are killed all the day long, and are counted as sheep for the
slaughter. Nay, in all these things we are more then Conquerours through him
that loved us. For I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor Angels,
nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor things to come, Nor
height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us from the
love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord, Rom 8.35, 36, 37, 38, 39. We
know, that when this earthly house of our tabernacle is dissolved, we have a
building of God, a house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens, 2 Cor.
5.1. I know that this shall turn to my salvation through your prayer, and the
supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ; According to my earnest expectation, and
my hope, that in nothing I shall be ashamed, but that with all boldness, as
always, so now also Christ shall be magnified in my body, whether it be by
life, or death, Phil. 1.19, 20. And the Lord shall deliver me from every evil
work, and preserve me to his heavenly Kingdom. 2 Timothy 4.18.

4. The nature of Faith, which the godly are endued with, does prove their
perseverance. The godly have the same spirit of Faith, 2 Cor. 4.13. Now Faith
is the substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen, Heb.
11.1. But if the Saints might fall away, then Faith should rather be a shadow
then a substance; rather a blank then an evidence.

5. The perseverance of the godly is proved by the nature of that hope which
they have. We are saved by hope, Romans 8.24. And hope makes not ashamed, Romans
5.5. Therefore though the Moralist say; that hope imports uncertainty, yet it
is not so in respect of true Christian hope, it is sure and certain; it is the
anchor of the soul, Spes est boni incerti nomen. Sen. Epist. 10.
both sure and steadfast, and enters into that within the veil, Heb. 6.19. But
if the godly might fall away and perish, their hope were but a poor anchor to
stay their souls by, and they should be ashamed of it, because they should hope
for that which they should not enjoy.

6. The nature of grace in general, does prove that the godly shall persevere.
It is compared to a Well of water, springing up unto everlasting life, Joh.
4.14. It is incorruptible seed, 1 Pet. 2.23. Therefore it is said, that he that
is born of God does not commit sin, (to wit, not so as the unregenerate do, not
so as to give themselves up to the practice of sin) for his seed remains in
him: and he cannot sin, (to wit, in that manner) because he is born of God, 1 John 3.9.

7. That peace, which the godly have, is an argument of their perseverance.
Being justified by Faith, we have peace with God through Jesus Christ our Lord,
Romans 5.1. This peace is a lasting peace, and not mutable and fading as the
peace of the World is. Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you; not as
the world gives, give I unto you: let not your heart be troubled, neither let
it be afraid, Joh. 14.27.

8. The joy which the Godly have, or may have, is a persevering joy; and
therefore it also does prove their perseverance. Rejoice in the Lord always;
and again I say, Rejoice. Phil. 4.4. In whom, though now ye see him not, yet
believing, ye rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory, 1 Pet. 1.8. Your
heart shall rejoice, and your joy no man takes from you, Joh. 16.22.

Now for the (...), Grounds and Reasons of the perseverance of the Godly.
the Grounds and Reasons why the condition of the Godly is sure and stable,
they shall not be moved out of it, but shall persevere and continue in it.

1. The Godly shall persevere because of Gods power. My Father which gave them
me, is greater then all: and no man is able to pluck them out of my Fathers
hand, Joh. 10.29. Yea, he shall be holden up: for God is able to make him
stand, Romans 14.2. Nevertheless, (though I suffer these things) I am not
ashamed; for I know whom I have believed: and I am persuaded that he is able to
keep that which I have committed unto him against that day, 2 Timothy 1.12. Who
are kept by the power of God through Faith unto salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5. If the
Godly were to stand by their own strength, they would soon fall: but God by his
almighty power does uphold them: and therefore they cannot fall, not so as
utterly to fall away. Though he fall, (says David of a righteous man) he shall
not be utterly cast down: for the Lord upholdeth him with his hand, Psalm.
37.24. Now unto him, that is able to keep you from falling, etc. Jude v. 24.

2. As Gods power, so his purpose is a reason of the perseverance of the Godly:
as God is able to keep them from falling away, so he will keep them, he has
purposed and determined to do it. They are called according to his purpose,
Romans 8.28. As Gods power cannot be resisted, so his purpose cannot be
disappointed. Many devices are in the heart of a man: but the counsel of the
Lord, that shall stand, Prove. 19.21. My counsel shall stand, and I will do all
my pleasure, says he, Isa. 46.10. Whom he did predestinate, (that is, purpose
to save) them he also called, viz. effectually, so as to bring them to that
happiness unto which he does call them, as the words following do show, Romans
8.30. Fear not little flock; it is your Fathers pleasure to give you the
Kingdom, Luke 12.32. Thou have given him power over all flesh, that he should
give eternal life to as many as thou have given him, Joh. 17.2. The foundation
of the Lord abides sure, having this seal, The Lord knows who are his, 2 Timothy 2.19.

3. The Godly shall persevere, because of Gods promise. As the purpose of God
shall stand, so his promise shall be performed. For he is faithful that has
promised, Heb. 10.24. He is not as man that he should lie, nor as the son of
man that he should repent: has he said it, and shall he not do it? has he
spoken it, and shall he not make it good? Number. 23.19. Now as God has purposed
to save the Godly, and to keep them from falling away, so he has also promised
to do it. My mercy will I keep for him for evermore: and my Covenant shall
stand fast for him. -- My loving kindness will I not utterly take from him.
etc. Psalm. 89.28, 33. I will give them one heart, and one way, that they may
fear me for ever, etc. And I will make an everlasting Covenant with them, that
I will not turn away from them to do them good; but I will put my fear in their
hearts, that they shall not depart from me, Jer. 32.39, 40.

4. The Godly are Christ's purchase, and therefore they are sure to persevere.
He has purchased his Church with his own blood, Act. 20.28. And surely, he
will not suffer his blood to be spilt in vain; he will not suffer them to
perish, whom he has purchased at so dear a rate. He shall see of the travail
of his soul, and shall be satisfied, Isa 53.11. I lay down my life for the
sheep, says he, Joh. 10.15. And I give unto them eternal life, and they shall
never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand, v. 28.

5. Christ's prayer and intercession for the Godly, does also make sure their
perseverance. As Christ has paid for his members, so he has prayed for them:
and his prayer is effectual. I pray for them: See Luke 22.31, 32.
I pray not for the world, but for them which thou have given me: for they are
thine, Joh. 17.9. Keep through thine own Name those whom thou have given me,
etc. verse. 11. I pray not, that thou should take them out of the world, but
that thou should keep them from the evil, verse. 15. Neither pray I for these
alone, but for them also which shall believe on me through their word, verse.
20. Father, I will that they also, whom thou have given me, be with me where I
am, that they may behold my glory, verse. 24. Still also in Heaven does Christ
make intercession for his members, presenting himself, and his merits unto God
for them. He is entered into Heaven it self, now to appear in the presence of
God for us, Heb. 9.24. He is able to save to the utmost all that come unto God
by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them, Heb. 7.25. Who is
he that condemns? it is Christ that dyed, yea, rather that is risen again,
who also is at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession for us, Romans
8.34.

6. The Holy Ghost sanctifying and sealing the Godly, does also make their
condition firm and sure. God has chosen you unto salvation through
sanctification of the Spirit, 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. God by his Spirit does sanctify
those whom he has chosen, and so does set them apart, and seal them for his
own, and as those whom he will have a care of, and keep safe. In this respect
the Spirit is compared to a seal, whereby a thing is known to whom it does
belong, and also is preserved and kept safe. Who has also sealed us, and given
the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts, 2 Cor. 1.22. In whom also after that
ye believed, ye were sealed with that holy Spirit of promise, which is the
earnest of our inheritance, etc. Ephesians. 1.13, 14. In which places, also the
Spirit, which is given unto Believers, is compared to an earnest, which does so
confirm a bargain, and make it sure, that it is a part of it. So the Spirit,
that is, the Grace of the Spirit, which God does here give unto Believers, is a
part of that glorious inheritance, which they shall fully enjoy hereafter. For
Grace is an inchoation of glory: and glory is a consummation of Grace. And
hence Believers are sure of salvation, because they have it already in part,
though but in small part to what they shall have, yet in part they have it,
because they have the earnest of it. And that does assure them of all the rest,
(...). Oecum. ad 2 Cor. 1.22. (...). Idem ad Ephesians. 1.14. (...) Chrysostom. in 2
Cor. 1.
even as an earnest does make the whole contract sure. God should lose his
earnest, if Believers should lose their salvation: even as he that does not
perform his bargain, does lose the earnest which he gave for the confirming of
it.

The Use of this Doctrine, is, first to confute the Papists

Many (they say) who were once in the state of Grace, Alexander and Philetus,
and Hymeneus, Vide Bellar. de Justif. lib. 3. cap. 14. Syn. Rem. de Berr.
Apost. Sanct.
and Demas, Saul, Simon Magus, and Judas. They allege also the examples of
David and Solomon, as falling from Grace, though not finally, yet totally; yea,
some think that Solomon fell finally, and was damned.

1. It is true,

2. For the other Examples, neither do they prove any thing. For the persons
mentioned, either were not endued with true sanctifying Grace, or they did not
either finally or totally fall away. All of them, except David and Solomon, had
only an outward profession of Faith, or a bare Historical Faith, and some
external reformation, but no true justifying Faith, no true spiritual
sanctification. Hymenaeus and Alexander made shipwreck concerning the Faith, 1 Timothy 1.19, 20. That is, concerning the Doctrine of Faith, which they once
professed, and afterward deserted, falling into heretical blasphemies, and
blasphemous heresies. Their word will eat as does a canker (or a gangrene) of
whom is Hymenaeus and Philetus, who concerning the truth have erred, saying
that the resurrection is past already, and overthrow the Faith of some, 2 Timothy
2.17, 18. This place does clearly explicate the other, it shows how the Faith
of some may be overthrown, and consequently how some may make shipwreck
concerning the Faith, to wit, by falling from some fundamental truth formerly
professed, as in the point of the Resurrection, or the like. But mark how the
Apostle there adds immediately: Nevertheless the foundation of the Lord
abides sure, having this seal, The Lord knows who are his, verse. 19. As if
he should say, Though some Professors fall away, yet such as do indeed belong
unto Christ, and are his, are firm and stable: Saint John speaking of Apostates
and backsliders, says, They went out from us, but they were not of us: for if
they had been of us, they would no doubt have continued with us; but they went
out that they might be made made manifest, that they were not all of us, 1 John
2.19. Of such is that of our Savior meant, Every plant that my heavenly Father
has not planted, shall be rooted up, Mat. 15.13. Of this sort was Simon Magus,
whose heart was not right in the sight of God, Act. 8.21. but he was in the
gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity, verse. 23. And so Demas, who
having loved this present world more then Christ, 2 Timothy 4.10. showed himself
to be one of those, who with their mouth show much love, but their heart goes
after their covetousness, Ezekiel. 33.31. Neither was Judas ever truly righteous,
as appears by our Saviors terming him a Devil, Joh. 6.70. And his hyprocrisie
is noted, Joh. 12.6. As for Saul, one would wonder that so learned a man as
Bellarmine, Saul rex initio bonus and justus erat, etc. N^gat quidem Calvinus
Saul^m fuisse unquam vere justum: sed audi quid Spiritus S. dicat in 1 Lib. Reg
cap 9. Erat Saul electus and bonus, and non erat vir de filiis Israel melior
illo: ab hum^ro and sur^um eminebat super omnem populum. Hic plane describitur
vir animo and corpore praestans: and cum nemo esset in filiis Israel melior
illo, si non erat hic vere justus, nullus tunc fuisset in universo populo Dei
vere justus. Quod falsum esse certum est, cum adhuc viveret Samuel, etc. Bell.
de Justif. lib. 3. cap. 14. Similiter Bertius de Apost. Sanct. page 28.
should show himself so childish and so ridiculous, as to endeavor to prove
that Saul was once truly righteous, because it is said of him, that he was a
choice young man, and a goodly, and there was not among the children of Israel
a goodlier person then he: from his shoulders and upward he was higher then any
of the people, 1 Samuel 9.2. Hence Bellarmine infers, that if Saul were not truly
righteous, then among all God's people there was none truly righteous; whereas
Samuel was then alive, and so other Godly persons. But what is this else but to
dally with the Scripture? There is nothing spoken of Saul's righteousness, but
only of the goodliness of his person, and the talness of his stature, as the
words alleged do make manifest. Bellarmine was ready to take hold on the
vulgar Latin Translation, Genesis 6.2. (...) i. e. (...) pulchrae. Sic explicat
Kimchi in Rad. atque addit, ita accipi vocem (...) 1. Sam. 9.2. and exponit
(...) pulcher aspectu: ac notat Chaldaeum Paraphrasten similiter interpretari
(...)
which has bonus good, and melior better: but he was not ignorant, that the
Hebrew (...) tob, is not only good, but also goodly, fair, tall, and the like;
and so it must needs there be taken, as is clear by those words, from his
shoulders and upward he was higher then any of the people: which words are
added exegetically, to show the meaning of that which went before, to wit, that
Saul was a choice young man, and a goodly; and there was not among the children
of Israel a goodlier person then he. For David and Solomon, they fell indeed
fearfully, Bell. ubi supra.
but neither finally, nor totally. Bellarmine urges also the example of Peter,
as if he also fell from Grace, when he denied Christ, and that with Oaths and
Execrations. Yet he himself elsewhere (lest Peter's fall might seem to make
against the Popes infallibility) says that Peter denied Christ with his mouth,
Addo praeterea, Christum a Petro negatum fuisse ore, non cord: proinde
perdidisse Petrum confessionem fidei, non ipsam fidem. Bell. de Pontif. lib. 4.
cap. 8.
but not with his heart; so that he lost the confession of Faith, but not Faith
it self. And so it is true of David and Solomon, they lost the exercise of
Grace, but not Grace it self.

SERMON. XXXIV.
Psalm. 15.5. He that does these things shall never be moved.


THe point concerning the perseverance of the Godly (who shall never be moved
so as to fall from that state of Grace, whch they are in) I have already
proved; and for the vindicating of the truth, and the confuting of those that
do oppose it, I have answered one Objection that is made against it. There are
yet many other Objections,

Secondly, Therefore, the Adversaries of this Doctrine object, that some are
compared to the stony ground, to wit, such as hear the Word, and anon with joy
receive it: Yet have they no root in themselves, but endure only for a while:
for when tribulation or persecution arises because of the Word, by and by they
are offended, Mat. 13.20, 21. For a while they believe, and in time of
temptation they fall away, Luke 8.13.

But all Believers are not such as we speak of, to wit, such as are engrafted
into Christ by a living and justifying Faith. Simon Magus was in some sense a
Believer, Act. 8.13. but not such a Believer, verse. 21. and 23. So neither are
they such Believers, who are compared to the stony ground: for they are
distinguished from those who with an honest and good heart receive the Word,
Luke 8.15. The same also appears by this, that they are said to have no root;
that argues that their Faith is but superficial, it is not rooted in the heart,
as true justifying Faith is. Bert. de Apostas. Sanct.


Again, it is objected, that Gods Covenant is not such, that he will simply and
absolutely save, but that he will save those that Believe and obey, and that so
as to persevere in Faith and obedience to the end. By which also ye are saved,
if ye keep in memory, (or as the Margent has it, if ye hold fast) what I
preached unto you, unless ye have believed in vain, 1 Cor 15.2. To them who by
patient continuance in well doing, seek for glory and honor and immortality,
(God will render) eternal life, Romans 2.7. Shall he prosper that does such
things? Shall he break the Covenant, and be delivered? Ezekiel. 17.15. When I
shall say to the righteous, that he shall surely live: if he trust to his own
righteousness, and commit iniquity, all his righteousness shall not be
remembered; but for his iniquity that he has committed, he shall dye for it,
Ezekiel. 33.13. When the righteous turns from his righteousness, and commits
iniquity, he shall even dye thereby, verse. 18. The just shall live by Faith:
but if any man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him, Heb. 10.38.
Every branch in me that bears not fruit, he takes away, Joh. 15.2. It is
impossible for those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly
gift, and were partakers of the holy Ghost, And have tasted the good Word of
God, and the powers of the World to come, If they shall fall away, to renew
them again unto repentance, etc. Heb 6.4, 5, 6.

For Answer to this Objection: is not only to save those that believe and obey,
but also to make his Elect so to believe and obey, that they shall be saved: I
will put my Law in their inward part, and write it in their hearts, Jer. 31.33.
A new heart will I give unto you, and a new Spirit will I put within you: and I
will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and will give you a heart of
flesh. And I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my
Statutes, etc. Ezekiel. 36.26, 27. I will put my fear into their hearts, that they
shall not depart from me, Jer. 32.40.

2. The places objected, do not prove that any Belivers, and such as are
regenerate can fall away. That in Ezekiel. 17.15. is concerning the King of Judah,
who brake his covenant with the King of Babylon, to whom he had sworn to be
subject, yet afterward he rebelled against him. What is this to the purpose?
Does this argue, that one who is in the state of Grace and salvation, may fall
from it? These places, 1 Cor. 15.2. and Romans 2.7. show how salvation it to be
obtained, and by whom, to wit, such as persevere: but they do not show, that
any being justified and sanctified, shall not persevere. The other places also
show what shall befall back-sliders, but not that any truly righteous shall
back-slide so as to prove unrighteous and perish. It is granted, that some, who
are after a sort Believers and righteous, may fall from that faith and
righteousness, which they have: but this is denied of those who have received
Christ into their hearts by Faith, and are regenerated by his Spirit. Neither
do those places of Scripture speak of such, (if they speak of such as actually
fall away) but of such as are in Christ only by profession; as that in Joh.
15.2. or are righteous with external righteousness; as that Ezekiel. 33.13, 18. or
have some superficiarie Grace in them; as that Heb. 6.4, 5, 6.

Bert. ubi supra.
But the best are warned to take heed of apostacy and falling away. Thou
stand by Faith: be not high minded, but fear, Romans 11.20. Let him that
thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall, 1 Cor. 10.12. Work out your own
salvation with fear and trembling, Phil. 2.12. Give diligence to make your
calling and election sure: for if ye do these things, ye shall never fall, 2
Pet. 1.10.

But these admonitions and exhortations are no Arguments, that true Saints may
fall away; Paul in the ship, to save them (I mean) from drowning; and so much
he let Paul know, and Paul assured those in the Ship that it should be so: Yet
when the Ship-men were about to fly out of the Ship, Paul said to the
Centurion and Soldiers, Except these abide in the Ship, ye cannot be saved,
Act. 27.23, 24, 25, 30, 31. One answers to this place, J.G. of Redemption.
that the purpose to save those that were with Paul in the Ship was
conditional, to wit, if they did abide in the Ship. And that indeed is true;
but so also is this, that God did also purpose that they should abide in the
Ship; and so his purpose of saving them was in effect absolute, because though
a condition was required, yet the fulfilling of that condition was also
determined. So God purposed and promised to restore Ezekiah to his health, and
to add unto his days fifteen years, Isa. 38.5. Yet Ezekiah was to use means for
his recovery, verse. 21. and so (no doubt) for his preservation. Our Savior
warns all to beware of false prophets, Mat. 7.15. Yet speaking of false
prophets, he says, If it were possible, they shall deceive the very Elect,
Mat. 24.24. intimating that the Elect shall never be deceived (so as to be
wholly vanquished and overcome) by them. To this place also one answers, J.G.
of Redemption.
That the words do not import so much, because that expression [if it were
possible] is used in other places, where no impossibility of the thing spoken
of is intimated; as Act. 20.16. and 27.39. But though those words [if it were
possible] simply in themselves considered, do not imply an impossibility of
that which is spoken of, yet in that speech of our Savior, by the
circumstances of it, they do imply as much. For our Savior speaks of the
Elect, who if they should be deceived and overcome by false Prophets, Gods
purpose concerning their salvation should fail, and so the foundation of the
Lord should not abide sure, he should not know who are his, neither should his
counsel stand, and he do all his pleasure: and therefore those words, if it
were possible, etc. must needs import so much, that it is not possible for the
Elect to be so deceived.

Bert. ibid.
Some again object, that the best of the Saints have feared lest they should
fall away, and were not sure of their perseverance. I keep under my body, and
bring it into subjection, lest that by any means when I have preached to
others, I my self should be a castaway, 1 Cor. 9.27. Cast me not away from thy
presence, and take not thy holy Spirit from me, Psalm 51.11.

But 1. The perseverance of the Saints may be sure, though they be not sure of
their perseverance: they may be sure to persevere, though they be not sure that
they shall persevere: there may be a certainty of the object, though there be
not a certainty of the subject. It was sure that Peter should not sink and be
drowned, yet was not he assured of this, Mat. 14.30. It was sure that David
should not perish by the hand of Saul: yet David always had not this
assurance, 1 Samuel 27.1.

2. Paul did not doubt of his perseverance, or as if he were none of Gods
Elect. Castaway is not to be taken as opposite to Elect, but the word in the
Original, (...) adokimos, is as much as reproved, as (...) dokimos is approved,
1 Cor. 11.19. The Apostle only shows, that his care was that his life might be
conformable to his Doctrine, his practice to his preaching, that so the one
might not confound the other, and that he might not be taxed as preaching one
thing, and doing quite contrary.

For the words of David, besides that they might be spoken by him in his
desertion, in which case a man may fear that which he is most sure to avoid:
besides this, I say, his praying that God would not cast him away, does not
necessarily imply a fear that God would do it, but rather a hope and assurance
that God would not do it; as elsewhere, we find him praying for that which God
had promised unto him, and which he doubted not but God would perform, 2 Samuel
7.26, 27. Let the house of thy servant David be established before thee. For
thou, O Lord of Hosts, God of Israel, have revealed to thy servant, saying, I
will build thee an house; therefore has thy servant found in his heart to pray
this prayer unto thee. See Ezekiel. 36.36, 37. Bert. in lib. cit.


It is again objected, That he whose sins are forgiven, may yet through his own
default incurr condemnation, Mat 18.27. etc.

But this objection is drawn from a Parable: verse. 35. to wit, that if we would
have God to forgive us, we must forgive one another. To this end, our Savior
brings in the example of a King, who having forgiven his servant a great debt,
afterward hearing how cruelly he had dealt with his fellow servant, required
his debt of him, and delivered him up to the tormentors until he should pay it.
But we must not hence infer, that God having once pardoned a sinner, will
afterward condemn him. No, God is not as man, that he should repent, Numb.
23.19. and 1 Samuel 15.29. The gifts and calling of God are without repentance,
Romans 11.29. If that Parable in every point were strictly to be applied, it
would follow that God should condemn a man for those very sins, which before he
had pardoned; for so that King in the Parable, for the same debt, which before
he had remitted, caused the servant to be tormented. But that is denied even by
the Papists, though they hold falling from Grace. Non sic est accipiendum, quod
redeat proprie reatus peccatorum praecedentium semel dimissorum. Jansen.
Concord. cap. 72.
It is not so to be understood, (says Jansenius upon the place) as if the
guilt of former sins once pardoned, did properly return.

Mat. 12.43. etc.

Judas had received the sop, the Devil entered into him, Joh. 13.27. The Devil
was in him before, verse. 2. but then he entered more fully into him, and took
more full possession of him.

Percurre ad unum omnes Graecos Patres, videbis eos de perseverantia and
apostasia id quod nos docemus docuisse. -- Quid quod nullus, Latinorum ante B.
Augustinum de hac re unquam dubitavit? Quid quod Aug. ipse non nisi Pelagii
excitus disputationibus, ad oppugnanda illius Theoremata caepit thesin istam
(...)? Bert. de Apost. Sanct. in Prefat. ad Lector.
and that among the Latin Fathers none held otherwise before Austine, nor he
neither, until he was stirred up by Pelagius, for the confuting of whose
opinions he began to maintain the doctrine of perseverance.

perseverance) confess, that the Fathers that were before the Heresy of
Pelagius, who professedly opposed the necessity and efficacy of Gods Grace,
Verum est, quod S. Chrysostom. and alii Patres qui ante exortam haeresin Pelagii
scripserunt, pauca de gratia Christi, and plurima pro confirmanda arbitrii
liberate contra haeresin Manichaeorum docuerunt, quod and S. Aug advertit,
etc. Alvarez de Auxil. disp. 22. sect. 22. Itaque Augustinus exorta jam haeresi
Pelagiana, exactius and expressius locutus est de Dei gratia, etc. Jansen.
Concord. cap. 59.
did express themselves most against the Manichees for the freedom of man's
will, and spoke very little of Gods Grace; and that Austine after the rise of
Pelagius his heresy was more express and more exact in this point.

2. We build not upon Austine, further then he does build upon the Scripture:
not his authority, but his arguments and reasons sway with us. None (says he)
shall perish out of the Church, because whose perishes, Nullus ex Ecclesia
periturus est, quia qui perierit, ex illa non erat: firmum enim fundamentum Dei
stat. Aug. de catechiz. rud. cap. 11.
was not of the Church: for the foundation of God stands sure. And again,
Will thou dare to say, that though Christ prayed that Peter's Faith might not
fail, An audebis dicere, etiam roganti Christo ne deficeret fides Petri,
defecturam fuisse, si eam Petrus deficere voluisset? Quasi aliud Petrus ullo
modo vellet quam quod Christus rogasset ut vellet. Aug. de corrept. and great.
cap. 8.
yet it should have failed, if Peter would have had it to fail? As if Peter
could will any other thing then that which Christ prayed he might will. But
Cyprian also, who was long before Austine, is clear for the perseverance of the
Godly. Let none think (says he) that such as are good, can depart out of the
Church. The wind does not carry away the wheat; Nemo existimet bonos de
Ecclesia posse discedere. Triticum non rapit ventus, nec arborem solida radice
fundatam procella subvertit. Inanes paleae tempestate jactantur; invalide
arbores turbinis incursione evertuntur, etc. Cyprian. de Unit. Eccles.
neither does the storm throw down the Tree, that has taken solid root. The
empty chaff is driven with the tempest: the weak Trees are overthrown with the
whirlwind. And then he brings that of S. John, They went out from us, but they
were not of us, etc. 1 John 2.19. And again, The strength of such as are truly
faithful (says he) does remain unmovable: Manet vere fidelium robur immobile,
and apud timentes ac diligentes toto cord Deum stabiles and fortis perseverat
integritas. Cyp. Epist. 52.
and the integrity of those that fear and love God with the whole heart, does
continue firm and sure. And before Cyprian also, Tertullian does give testimony
to this truth, Neque fideles quos haereses potuerint demutare. -- Nemo
Christianus nisi qui ad finem usque perseveraverit. Tertul. de Prescript. cap.
3. vide ibidem plura.
saying, that they were never true Believers, nor true Christians, that do fall
away. By this (I hope) it may appear that our Adversaries in this point have no
such plea from antiquity, as they pretend.

SERMON. XXXV.
Psalm. 15.5. He that does these things shall never be moved.


THe Doctrine raised from these words concerning the perseverance of the Godly,
I have asserted by confirming the truth, and reselling the objections made
against it.



The Devil is the adversary of Gods people; the Devil your adversary, 1 Pet.
5.8. Therefore he is called Satan, which is as much as a hater, an enemy or
adversary. This Adversary is strong; he is compared to a strong man, Luke
11.21. And to a Lion, 1 Pet. 5.8. He is a fierce Adversary; therefore he is
compared to a roaring Lion, 1 Pet. 5.8. He is a malicious Adversary; he goes
about seeking whom he may devour, 1 Pet. 5.8. He is a subtle Adversary;
therefore he is called a Serpent, yea, the old Serpent, Rev. 20.2. Yet with all
his strength, fierceness, malice and subtilty, he shall not prevail over the
Godly. Though the Devil be strong, yet Christ is stronger, Luke 11.22. Though
the Devil be fierce, malicious and subtle, yet Christ will have a care of those
that are his; he will keep them, that Satan shall not be able to do them hurt.
Simon, Simon, (said Christ to Peter) Satan has desired to have you, that he
may sift you as wheat: But I have prayed for thee, that thy Faith fail not,
Luke 22.31, 32. And so Christ also prayed for all that belong unto him, Joh.
17.9, 20. Though this old Serpent, the Devil, bruize the heel of Gods people;
yet Christ has bruized, and will bruize his head, Genesis 3.15. Christ took upon
him our nature, That through death he might destroy him that had the power of
death, that is, the Devil, Heb. 2.14. He has vanquished Satan, and triumphed
over him on the Cross, Col. 2.15. Therefore Satan shall not vanquish those that
are Christ's; he shall not triumph over them. The Apostle comforts Believers,
saying, The God of peace shall brize Satan under your feet shortly, Rom 16.20.

The World also is the Adversary of Gods people. If ye were of the World, (said
Christ to his Disciples) the World would love his own: but because ye are not
of the World, but I have chosen you out of the World, therefore does the World
hate you, Joh. 15.19. So in his prayer, that he made for them to his Father,
The World has hated them, because they are not of the World, as I am not of
the World, Joh. 17.14. The World is a dangerous enemy, sometimes frowning and
persecuting, sometimes fawning and alluring, that if it cannot prevail one way,
it may prevail another way: yet shall it not any way prevail against the true
Saints and Servants of God. It shall not by troubles and persecutions. In the
World ye shall have tribulation, (said our Savior) but be of good comfort, I
have overcome the World, Joh. 16.33. Who shall separate us from the love of
Christ? Shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or
nakedness, or peril, or sword? (As it is written, For thy sake, we are killed
all the day long, and counted as sheep for the slaughter.) Nay in all these
things we are more then Conquerors through him that loved us, Romans 8.35, 36,
37. Neither shall the World prevail over the Godly by flatteries and
allurements. Christ has prayed for them, that though they be in the World, yet
they may not be drawn away and overcome with the evil of it. I pray not (said
he) that thou should take them out of the World, but that thou should
keep them from the evil, Joh. 17.15. Exceeding great and precious promises are
given unto them, that by these they might be partakers of the Divine nature,
having escaped the corruption that is in the World through lust, 2 Pet. 1.4.
Whosoever is born of God, over comes the World: and this is the victory that
overcommeth the World, even our Faith, 1 John 5.4.

The Flesh is likewise an adversary to the Godly, their carnal and corrupt
nature that is still in them. For in the best that are upon Earth, there is
Flesh as well as Spirit, corruption as well as Grace. For the Flesh lusts
against the Spirit, and the Spirit lusts against the Flesh, and these are
contrary the one to the other; so that ye cannot do the things that ye would,
Gal. 5.17. This being a Delilah, a bosom enemy, is therefore the most
perilous. This is that which brings the Philistines upon Sampson, which gives
Satan and the World much advantage: were we free from our own corruptions, we
were not in such danger of Satan's and the Worlds temptations. Yet neither shall
this Adversary prevail against the Godly. They that are Christ's, have crucified
the Flesh, with the affections and lusts, Gal. 5.24. Our old man is crucified
with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should
not serve sin, Romans 6 6. Sin shall not have dominion over you: for you are not
under the Law, but under Grace, Rom 6.14. I know that in me, that is in my
Flesh, no good dwells. For the good that I would, I do not: and the evil that
I would not, that I do. -- O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me fr m
the body of this death? I thank, God through Jesus Christ our Lord, Romans 7.18,
19 24, 25. Thus however the Godly are tempted, however they are troubled, they
may have comfort, they are built upon a sure foundation, and shall stand for
ever.

Some may say, It is said of the Beast, it was given unto him to make war with
the Saints, and to overcome them, Rev. 13.7.

But that is meant of overcomming the body: And all that dwell upon earth,
shall worship him, whose names are not written in the book of life, etc. Rev.
13.8. Such therefore as belong unto Christ, shall not so be overcome, as to
worship the Beast. No, it is said of them, that they overcame him (to wit, the
Dragon that gave power to the Beast) by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word
of their testimony, and they loved not their lives unto the death, Rev. 12.11.
So that the Saints, even when they are overcome corporally, do overcome
spiritually; they conquer their conquerours; yea, Nunquam majere triumpho
vicimus, quam cum december amorum stragilus vinci non potuimus Sulpit.
they are more then conquerours through him that loved them, Romans 8.37.

But, may some say, Our Adversaries are mighty,

Hear what the Prophet Elisha said, apprehend him, cried out, Alas Master, what
shall we do? Fear not, (said he) f r they that are with us, are more then they
that are with them. And the Lord opening the servants eyes, he saw the Mountain
full of Horses and Charets of fire r und about Elisha, 2 King. 6.15, 16, 17.
Consider what Christ answered Paul, when he prayed thrice that the thorn in the
Flesh, the messenger of Satan sent to buffet him, might depart from him; My
Grace is sufficient for thee; for my strength is made perfect in weakness, 2
Cor. 12 9 And so his Grace is sufficient for all that belong unto him, and in
their weakness shall his strength be made (that is, shall appear to be)
perfect. Remember that of S. Peter, Ye are kept by the power of God unto
salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5. Believers are not kept by their own power, but through
the power of God, and therefore notwithstanding all their Adversaries and
Opposers, they are safe.



We would not, brethren, have you ignorant (said Paul) of our trouble that came
unto us in Asia, that we were pressed out of measure, above strength, insomuch
that we despaired even of life. But we had the sentence of death in our selves,
that we should not trust in our selves, but in God that raises up the dead, 2
Cor. 1.8 9. But though God withold his hand from his people, so as not to
deliver them (for a while) from their troubles: yet he does not withold it
from them so as not to support them in their troubles. The eternal God is their
refuge, and under-neath are the everlasting arms, Deuteronomy. 33.27.



them for their misdoings. Yet the Lord will not cast off for ever: But though
he cause grief, he will turn again, and have compassion according to the
multitude of his mercies Lam. 3.31, 32 For a small moment (says he) have I
forsaken thee: but with everlasting mercies will I gather thee. In a little
wrath I had my face from thee for a moment but with everlasting k^ndness will I
have mercy on thee, says the Lord thy Redeemer, Isa. 54.7, 8. Therefore lift
up the hands that hang down, and the feeble knees, And make straight paths for
your feet, lest that which is lame be turned out of the way; but let it rather
be healed, Heb. 12.12, 3.

Again, promotion comes neither from the East, nor from the West, nor from
the South: But God is the Judge; he puts down one, and sets up another,
Psalm. 75.67.

And secondly, If the men of the World do obtain those things which they seek
after, yet it may be they have little joy of them. What joy had Ahab of
Naboth's Vineyard, when the Prophet Eliah said unto him, Thus says the Lord,
Have thou killed, and also taken possession? -- In the place where dogs licked
the blood of Naboth, shall dogs lick thy blood, even thine 1 King. 21.19. What
joy had Gehezi of the gifts that he got of Naaman, when the Prophet Elisha said
unto him, The leprosy of Naaman shall cleave unto thee, and to thy seed for
ever, 2 King. 5.27.

Thirdly, These things at the best, can afford no true content, no solid
comfort. He that has these things in most abundance, still finds an emptiness
in himself, and remains unsatisfied. He that loves silver, shall not be
satisfied with silver; nor he that loves abundance, with increase, Eccles.
5.10. So he that loves honor, or pleasure, or whatsoever the World does
afford. See 1 King. 21.4, 5. and Esth. 5.11, 12, 13. If the men of the World do
feel a kind of content for a while in those things which they enjoy, yet it
lasts not: when trouble and affliction comes, the things wherein they solace
themselves cannot support them, and bear up their spirits, but they sink under
the burden that is upon them. When Belshazzar was in the midst of his pompous
but profane jollity, no sooner did the handwriting appear in the Wall, but
presently his countenance was changed, and his thoughts troubled him, so that
the joints of his loins were loosed, and his knees smote one against another,
Dan. 5.6. Their silver and their gold shall not be able to deliver them in the
day of the Lords wrath, says the Prophet Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 7.19. and so also the
Prophet Zephany, Zeph. 1.18.

Fourthly, Worldly men have no sure hold of those things which they enjoy; they
may be deprived of them every hour, and must ere long be deprived of them Lo,
(says Job) their good is not in their hand. -- How often is the candle of the
wicked put out? and how often comes their destruction upon them? Job 21.16, 17.
In this respect the Mammon of this World is called (...), that which is
another, because he that has it, knows not how soon another may deprive him
of it, Luke 16.12. It is called that which is not, Prove. 23 4. because there is
no solidity, nor stability in it.

But Grace and Godliness, is quite of another nature: For 1. They that seek it,
shall be sure to obtain it: I love them that love me: and they that seek me
early shall find me, Prove. 8.17. Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after
righteousness; for they shall be filled, Mat. 5.6. God will give his holy
Spirit to them that ask him, Luke 11.13.

2. As they that seek Grace and Godliness, shall obtain what they seek; so they
shall have joy of that which they obtain. For godliness is great gain, 1 Timothy
6.6. Godliness is profitable unto all things, having the promise both of the
life that now is, and also of that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4.8.

3. They shall be satisfied with it, so as to rest content though they have
nothing besides. Godliness with contentment (bringing with it contentment) is
great gain, 1 Timothy 6.6. As having nothing, yet possessing all things, 2 Cor
6.10.

4. Grace and Godliness will support the soul, and afford it comfort in the
midst of greatest troubles and distresses. As sorrowing, yet always rejoicing,
2 Cor. 6.10. We glory in tribulations, knowing that tribulation works
patience; and patience experience; and experience hope: And hope makes not
ashamed, because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts, by the holy
Ghost which is given unto us, Romans 5.3, 4, 5.

5. Grace and Godliness is not transient and fading, but permanent and lasting.
When the woman of Samaria thought much that Christ should ask her some of the
water of that Well that she drew of, he said unto her, Whosoever drinks of
this water, shall thirst again: But whosoever drinks of the water that I
shall give him, it shall be in him a Well of water springing up unto
everlasting life, Joh. 4.13, 14. Therefore (as he also exhors) Labor not for
the meat that perishes; but for that meat that endures to eternal life, Joh.
6.27.

SERMON. XXXVI.
Psalm. 15.5. He that does these things shall never be moved.


Exhort one another daily, lest any of you be hardened with the deceitfulness of
sin, Heb. 3.13. And those very words also show, that exhortation is a means of
perseverance. Remember Lots wife, Luke 17.32. that is, Take heed of looking
back, as she did; take heed of backsliding Abide in me, Joh. 15.4. So run that
ye may obtain, 1 Cor. 9.24. Let us run with patience (or patient continuance,
as the Original word (...) hypomone is rendered, Romans 2.7.) the race that is set
before us, Heb. 12.1. Let us hold fast the profession of our Faith without
wavering, Heb. 10.23. Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling,
Phil. 2.12.

To stir up to labor for perseverance, Consider,

1. That the reward is promised only upon condition of perseverance, Motives to
perseverance.
so that without perseverance all labor is lost, all that is done is to no
purpose. Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee the crown of life,
Rev. 2.10. He that shall endure to the end, he shall be saved, Mar. 13.13.
Percunt praeterita, dum quae caeperunt, desinunt esse perfecta. Cypr. de
Patient.
But if any man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him, Heb. 10.38.
Look to your selves, that we lose not the things which we have wrought, but
that we receive a full reward, 2 John 8. O foolish Galatians, who has
bewitched you, that ye should not obey the truth? (to wit, so as to persevere
in it.) -- Are ye so foolish? having begun in the spirit, are ye made perfect
in the flesh? Have ye suffered so many things in vain? if it be yet in vain,
Gal. 3.1, 3, 4. Ye did run well: who did hinder you, that ye should not obey
the truth? Gal. 5.7. Let us not be weary of well-doing; for in due time we
shall reap, if we faint not, Gal. 6.9.

2. Back-sliders are in a worse condition then such as did never enter into the
way of holiness. If after they have escaped the pollutions of the World,
through the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they be again
entangled and overcome, the latter end is worse with them then the beginning.
For it had been better for them not to have known the way of righteousness,
then after they have known it, to turn from the holy Commandment delivered unto
them, 2 Pet. 20.21. The guilt of back-sliders is greater, because they sin more
against light and conviction. For, to him that knows to do good, and does it
not, to him it is sin, Jam. 4.27. 2. They more dishonor God, being like those
that went to spy the Land of Canaan, and brought an evil report of it.
Back-sliders are they, by reason of whom the way of truth is evil spoken of, 2
Pet. 2.2. And 3. They through Gods just judgment grow more corrupt and wicked
then they were before. The unclean spirit being gone out of a man, if he return
into him again, brings with him seven Devils worse then himself, so that the
last estate of that man is worse then the first, Mat. 12.43, 44, 45. Therefore,
4. In all these respects, back-sliders shall have the greater condemnation. The
back-slider in heart shall be filled with his own ways, Prove. 14 14. See Heb.
10, 26. -- 29.

Now to this end, that we may persevere, many things are required.

Means of Perseverance.
1. Sincerity. This is the first part of a Christians complete armor, which the
Apostle bids us take, That we may be able to withstand in the evil day, and
having done all to stand. Stand therefore (says he) having your loins girt
about with truth, Ephesians. 6.13, 14. Truth, or sincerity, is fitly compared to a
Girdle, that binds all fast, and keeps all close: without it, all hangs loose,
(...). Nazianz. Perseverari in eo non potest, quod non toto cord diligitur.
Aug.
and in time will fall off. A generation that set not their heart aright: and
whose spirit was not steadfast with God, Psalm. 78.8. When he slew them, then
they fought him, Quam non facitis est virtus? quam v to difficilis ejus
diuturna simulatio? Cic.
etc. Nevertheless, they did flatter him with their mouth, and they lied unto
him with their tongues: Their heart was not right with him, neither were they
steadfast in his Covenant. Their unsoundness was the cause of their
unstedfastness; the want of sincerity caused the want of stability. Nothing
counterfeit will continue long. Ephraim compassing God about with lies, and the
house of Israel with deceit, Hos. 11.12. their goodness was as the morning
cloud, and as the early dew that passes away, Hos. 6.4. Therefore if we would
persevere in that which is good, let us be sincere in it: if we would avoid
apostacy, let us beware of hypocrisy. Quales haberi volumus, tales simus:
Ambros.
Such as we would be accounted, let us be indeed. Let us walk as in the sight
of God, studying to approve our selves unto him; and this will make us constant
and steadfast in that which is good. I have kept thy precepts, and thy
testimonies, (says David unto God) for all my ways are before thee, Psalm.
119.168. If we serve God in righteousness and holiness before him, that is,
sincerely and unfainedly, then shall we also serve him constantly and
steadfastly, even all the days of our life, Luke 1.74, 75. They that receive the
Word in an honest and good heart, they bring forth fruit with patience, that
is, with perseverance, Luke 8.15. Let us beware not only of gross hypocrisy,
such as is in those that purposely play the hypocrites, but also of secret and
subtle hypocrisy, whereby some deceive not only others, but themselves also,
thinking that they are something, when they are nothing, Gal 6.3. Let us take
heed of giving entertainment to any lust, of suffering any corruption to bear
sway in us. Let us give up our selves wholly unto God, to be ruled and governed
by him in all things, saying with David, Search me O Lord and know my heart:
try me, and know my thoughts: And see if there be any way of wickedness in me,
and lead me in the way everlasting, Psalm. 139.23, 24.

2. A full purpose and resolution to adhere unto God and to keep close unto
him. Barnabas exhorted the Christians at Antioch, that with purpose of heart
they would cleave unto the Lord, Act. 11.23. O God, my heart is fixed, says
David, Psalm. 108.1. I have sworn, (says he) and I will perform it, that I will
keep thy righteous judgments, Psalm. 119.106. I have inclined my heart to
perform thy Statutes always, even unto the end, verse. 112. But this resolution
must be well grounded: When Peter said that he would never deny Christ, he
resolved well in respect of the object of his resolution, but not in respect of
the ground of it: he builded too much upon himself, and his own strength; which
made him fall so fearfully as he did. Therefore (as Saint Paul exhorts) Be
strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might, Quid in te stas, and non
stas? Projice te in illum, etc. Aug.
Ephesians. 6.10. Not in your selves, but in the Lord; not in the power of your own
might, but in the power of his might.

3. Premeditation of, and preparation for the Cross, this also is requisite and
needful for the attainment of perseverance. Many turn aside out of the way of
truth and godliness, because they meet with trouble and persecution in it. He
that received the seed into stony places, the same is he that hears the Word,
and anon with joy receives it: (...) Meshummad Apostata, a (...) Shamed
persequi.
Yet has he not root in himself, but endures for a while: for when
tribulation or persecution arises because of the Word, by and by he is
offended, Mat. 13.20, 21. Therefore it behooves us to think of trouble and
persecution, and to prepare for it, that so when it does come, we may not be
overcome by it. Beloved, (says S. Peter) think not strange concerning the
fiery trial, which is to try you, as if some strange thing happened unto you, 1
Pet. 4.12. If we would not think it strange, when it comes, we must think of
it before it comes. Praevisa jacula minus feriunt.
Christ did acquaint his Disciples before, with the hard measure which they
should find from men for his sake; that so when they did meet with it, they
might be the less troubled at it. These things (said he unto them) have I
spoken unto you, that you should not be offended, They shall put you out of the
Synagogues: yea, the time comes that whosoever kills you, will think that he
does God service. And these things will they do unto you, because they have not
known the Father, nor me. But these things have I told you, that when the time
comes, ye may remember that I told you of them, Joh. 16.1, 2, 3, 4. And when
great multitudes followed him, he turned unto them, and said, If any man come
to me, and hate not his Father, and Mother, and Wife, and Children, and
Brethren and Sisters, yea, and his own life also, (that is, hate all in
comparison of Christ, so as to be willing to part with all rather then him) he
cannot be my Disciple. And whosoever does not bear his Cross, and come after
me, he cannot be my Disciple. Then he propounds two Parables, to show that this
ought to be made account of, and prepared for, lest otherwise, having entered
upon the profession of Christ, and meeting with troubles which we looked not
for, we draw back, and desist from it. For which of you (says he) intending to
build a Tower, sits not down first, and counts the cost, whether he be
able to finish it? Lest happily after he has laid the foundation, and is not
able to finish it, all that behold it, begin to mock him, saying, This man
began to build, and was not able to finish. Or what King going to make war with
another King, sits not down first, and consulteth whether he be able with
ten thousand to meet him that comes against him with twenty thousand? Or else
while the other is yet a great way off, he sends an embassage, and desires
conditions of peace. And then he makes the application, saying, So likewise,
whosoever he be of you, that forsakes not all that he has, (to wit, in
preparation of heart, so as to be ready to forsake all, if for Christ's sake he
be called to it) he cannot be my Disciple, Luke 14.26. -- 31.

4 Fear also is a means of perseverance; not a diffident and distrustful fear,
but that which does proceed from a sense of our own weakness, and so makes us
fly unto God, and rely on his assistance: such a fear as is opposed to
high-mindedness, and hardness of heart. Thou stand by Faith: be not
high-minded, but fear, Romans 11.20. Blessed is the man that fears always: but
he that hardneth his heart, shall fall into mischief, Prove. 28.14 The want of
this fear was the cause of Peter's great and dangerous fall: he was too
self-confident, and too secure. Therefore pass the time of your sojourning here
in fear, 1 Pet. 1.17. Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling,
Phil. 2.12. Fear also, as it is an awful and reverential dread of Gods Majesty,
does conduce much to perseverance. I will put my fear into their hearts, (says
God) that they shall not depart from me, Jer. 32.40.

5. To this end also, is required watchfulness. Watch and pray, that ye enter
not into temptation, Mat. 26.41. Watch ye, stand fast in the Faith, 1 Cor.
16.13.

This watchfulness consists, 1. In avoiding as much as may be the occasions of
sin. We pray unto God, not to lead us into temptation: Therefore neither must
we cast our selves into temptation. Solomon tells us of the foolish young man,
that was ensnared by the Harlot, that he went the way to her House, Prove. 7.8.
He did not shun the occasion as he should have done, but did expose himself
unto temptation. Therefore he bids, Remove thy way far from her, and come not
near the door of her House, Prove. 5.8. And speaking of the way of the wicked,
Avoid it, (says he) pass not by it, turn from it, and pass away, Prove. 4.15.

2. In resisting the first motions of sin. This was Joseph's prudence and piety
both, that he would not give any way to the evil suggestion and instigation of
his Mistress. And it came to pass, as she spoke to Joseph day by day, that he
hearkened not unto her, to lie by her, or to be with her, Genesis 39.10. The wicked
are compared to the deaf Adder, that stops her ear at the voice of the
Charmer, charm he never so wisely, Psalm. 58 4, 5. But in this the Godly must be
wise as Serpents, they must stop their ears at the charming of Satan, the
World, and the Flesh; they must take heed of being enchanted by them. The first
motions of sin are like sparks falling among Hay, or Straw, or the like; if
they be not presently quenched, they will be likely to set all on fire. How
long shall thy vain thoughts lodge within thee? Jer. 4.14. Evil thoughts will
be creeping into us, but we must not give them entertainment, we must not
suffer them to lodge within us. We must expel them, and drive them away, as
Abraham did the fowls that molested his sacrifice, Genesis 15.11. Neither must we
think any sin small, so as to slight it, and make no reckoning of it, as if
there were no danger in adventuring upon it. This is one of the wiles of the
Devil, one of his methodical devices and subtilties, (...) Ephesians. 6.11. Nemo
repent fuit turpissimus. (...) Transgressio trahit transsionem.
first to draw men to lesser sins, and so by degrees to greater and greater. In
this the Devil shows himself a Serpent; if he can get in his head, he will
soon wind in the whole body. If he can draw to one sin, he will soon draw to
another, and so to another, and another, without end, except God by his Grace
prevent him. Sin naturally draws on sin; and the less will draw on the
greater. David first falling into Adultery, which was too bad, afterward fell
into murder, which was far worse. So Peter having first barely denied Christ,
afterward added Oaths and Execrations.

3. This watchfulness, which is requisite unto perseverance, consists in
repenting speedily after that sin is committed. As Soon as David's heart smote
him for numbering the people, he presently repented of it, saying, I have sinned
greatly in that which I have done: and now I beseech thee, O Lord, take away
the iniquity of thy servant; for I have done very foolishly, 2 Samuel 24.10. If
we do not thus watch against sin, but suffer it not only to seize on us, but
also to settle in us; we shall soon be hardened with the deceitfulness of it,
Heb. 3.13.

6. That we may persevere in that which is good, we must have a care not stand
at a stay, but to go on still, Non progredi est regredi.
and to grow better and better. Not to go forward, is to go backward; and not
to grow better, is to grow worse. The Lord make you to increase and abound in
love one toward another, and toward all men, even as we do toward you: To
the end that he may establish your hearts unblameable in holiness before God,
even our Father, at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ with all his Saints, 1 Thessalonians. 3.12, 13. Giving all diligence, add to your Faith, virtue; and to
virtue, knowledge; And to knowledge, temperance; and to temperance, patience;
and to patience, Godliness; And to Godliness, brotherly kindness; and to
brotherly kindness, Charity. For if these things be in you, and abound, they
make you that ye shall neither be barren, nor unfruitful in the knowledge of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. But he that lacks these things, is blind,
and cannot see afar off, and has forgotten that he was purged from his old
sins. Wherefore the rather, brethren, give diligence to make your Calling and
your Election sure: for if ye do these things, ye shall never fall, 2 Pet. 1.5.
-- 10. Beware lest ye also being led away with the error of the wicked fall
from your own stedfastness. But grow in Grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 3.17, 18. See also 1 Thessalonians. 3.12, 13.

7. To meditate of the heavenly reward, this also is a great help to
perseverance. This will quicken and stir up unto diligence: this will animate
and encourage against all difficulties. Be steadfast, and unmovable, always
abounding in the work of the Lord, knowing that your labor is not in vain in
the Lord, 1 Cor. 15.58. Let us run with patience, the race that is set before
us, Looking unto Jesus, the Author and finisher of our Faith, who for the joy
that was set before him, endured the Cross, despising the shame, and is set
down at the right hand of the Throne of God, Heb. 12.1, 2. This made Moses to
choose rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, then to enjoy the
pleasures of sin for a season; and to esteem the reproach of Christ greater
riches then the treasures in Egypt; he had respect to the recompense of reward,
Heb. 11.25, 26. See also Phil. 3.13, 14.

8. Constant attendance upon Gods Word, this is likewise necessary unto
perseverance. For the Word of God is not only to bring in, but also to carry
on, and to build up unto perfection. And now, Brethren, I commend you to God,
and to the Word of his Grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an
inheritance among all them which are sanctified, Act. 20.32. Christ ordained
the ministry of the Word for the perfecting of the Saints, Ephesians. 4.11, 12.

9. If we would persevere in Grace, we must continue in prayer, and
supplication unto God, for perseverance. For as the beginning of Grace, so also
perseverance in Grace is from God. He that has begun a good work in you, Ipse
eos facit perseverare in bono, qui facit bonos. Aug. de Corr. and Great. c. 12.
will also perform it until the day of Jesus Christ, Phil. 1 6. As of our
selves we cannot rise, Si ipse operatur ut accedumus, ipse etiam operatur ne
discedamus. Idem de bono perseverantiae.
when we are down, so neither can we stand when we are up; God must still
support us, or else we fall: he only is able to keep us from falling, Non sum
mihi sine te. Aug. Confess.
Jude, verse. 24. Therefore we must continually pray unto God to preserve us,
and to make us persevere. Unite my heart to fear thy Name, Psalm. 86.11. Let me
not wander from thy Commandments, Psalm. 119.10. Lead us not into temptation,
but deliver us from evil, Mat. 6.13. Thus praying in the holy Ghost, keep your
selves in the love of God, Jude, verse. 20. and 21.

Soli Deo gloria.
FINIS.
Courteous Reader, these Books following are Printed for Nathaniel Brook, and
are to be sold at his Shop at the Angel in Cornhil.
Excellent Tracts in Divinity, Controversies, Sermons, Devotions.
THe Catholic History collected and gathered out of Scripture, Councils, and
Ancient Fathers, in answer to Dr. Vanes Lost Sheep returned home: by Edward
Chesenhale, Esquire Octavo. 2. Bishop Morton on the Sacrament, in Folio. 3. The
Grand Sacrilege of the Church of Rome, in taking away the Sacred Cup from the
Laity at the Lords Table; by Dr. Featly, D.D. Quarto. 4. The Quakers Cause at
second hearing, being a full answer to their Tenets. 5. Re-assertion of Grace:
Vindiciae Evangelii, or the Vindication of the Gospel: a reply to Mr. Anthony
Burgess Vindiciae Legis, and to Mr. Rutherford: by Rob. Town. 6. Anabaptists
anatomized and silenced: or a dispute with Master Tombs, by Mr. J. Crag: where
all may receive clear satisfaction in that controversy: the best extant.
Octavo. 7. A Glimpse of Divine Light, being an explication of some passages
exhibited to the Commissioners of White Hall for Approbation of Public
Preachers, against John Harrison of Land Chap. Lancash. 8. The zealous
Magistrates a Sermon, by T. Threscros. Q. 9. New Jerusalem, in a Sermon for the
Society of Astrologets, Quarto, in the year 1651. 10. Divinity no enemy to
Astrology: A Sermon for the Society of Astrologers, in the year 1643. by Dr.
Thomas Swaddling. 11. Britannia Rediviva? a Sermon before the Judges, August
1648 by J. Shaw Minister of Hull. 12. The Princess Royal, in a Sermon before
the Judges March 24. by J. Shaw. 13. Judgment set, and Books opened, Religion
tried whether it be of God or Man, in several Sermons: by J. Webster. Quarto.
14. Isreal's Redemption, or the Prophetical History of our Saviors Kingdom on
Earth: K. Matton. 15. The Cause and Cure of Ignorance, Error, and Profaneness:
or a more hopeful way to Grace and Salvation. by K. Young. Octavo. 16. A Bridle
for the Times, tending to still the murmuring, to settle the wavering, to stay
the wandering, and to strengthen the fainting: by J. Brinsley of Yarmouth. 17.
Comforts against the fear of death; wherein are discovered several Evidences of
the work of Grace: by J. Collins of Norwich. 18. Jacobs Seed; or, the
excellency of seeking God by prayer, by Jer. Buroughs. 19. The sum of
Practical Divinity; or, the grounds of Religion in a Catechistical way, by Mr.
Christopher Love late Minister of the Gospel: a useful Piece. 20. Heaven and
Earth shaken; a Treatise showing how Kings and Princes, their Governments are
turned and changed, by J. Davis Minister in Dover: admirably useful, and
seriously to be considered in these times. 21. The Treasure of the Soul;
wherein we are taught, by dying to sin, to attain to the perfect love of God.
22. A Treatise of Contestation, fit for these sad and troublesome times, by J.
Hall Bishop of Norwich. 23. Select thoughts, or choice helps for a pious
spirit, beholding the excellency of her Lord Jesus; by J. Hall Bishop of
Norwich. 24. The Holy Order, or Fraternity of Mourners in Zion; to which is
added, Songs in the night, or cheerfulness under afflictions: by J. Hall Bishop
of Norwich. 25. The Celestial Lamp, enlightening every distressed Soul from the
depth of everlasting darkness: by T. Fetisplace.
Admirable and Learned Treatises of Occult Sciences in Philosophy, Magic,
Astrology, Geomancy, Chemistry, Physiognomy, and Chyromancy
26. Magic and Astrology vindicated, by H. Warren. 27. Lux Veritatis, Judicial
Astrology vindicated, and daemonology confuted; by W. Ramsey Gent. 28. An
Introduction to the Teutonick Philosophy; being a determination of the Original
of the Soul: by C. Hotham Fellow of Peter-House in Cambridge. 29. Cornelius
Agrippa, his fourth book of Occult Philosophy, Geomancy; Magical Elements of
Peter de Abano, the nature of Spirits: made English by R. Turner. 30.
Paracelsus Occult Philosophy, of the Mysteries of Nature, and his Secret
Alchymy. 31. An Astrological Discourse, with Mathematical Demonstrations;
proving the influence of the Planets and fixed Stars upon Elementary Bodies: by
Sir Chr. Heydon Knight. 32. Merlinus Anglicus Junior; the English Merlin
revived, or a Prediction upon the Affairs of Christendom, for the year 1644. by
W. Lilly. 33. Englands Prophetical Merlin; foretelling to all Nations of
Europe, till 1663. the actions depending upon the influences of the Conjunction
of Saturn and Jupiter, 1642. by W. Lilly. 34. The Starry Messenger, or an
Interpretation of that strange apparition of three Suns seen in London, the 19
of November 1644. being the Birth day of King Charles: by W. Lilly. 35. The
worlds Catastrophe: or Europes many Mutations, until 1666. by W. Lilly. 36. An
Astrological Prediction of the Occurrences in England; part of the years 1648,
1649, 1650. by W. Lilly. 37. Monarchy or on Monarchy in England; the Prophecy
of the white King, Grehner his Prophecy, concerning Charles, Son of Charles,
his greatness; illustrated with several Hieroglyphics: W. Lilly. 38. Annus
Tenebrosus, or the Dark Year, or Astrological Judgments upon two Lunary
Eclipses, and one admirable Eclipse of the Sun in England, 1652. by W. Lilly.
39. An easy and familiar Method, whereby to judge the effects depending on
Eclipses: by W. Lilly. 40. Supernatural Sights and Apparitions seen in London
June 30. 1644. by W. Lilly: as also all his Works in a Volume. 41. Catastrophe
Magnatum: an Ephemetides for the year 1652. by N. Culpeper. 42. Teratologia;
or, a discovery of Gods Wonders, manifested by bloody rain and waters; by I.S.
43. Chyromancy; or the Art of divining by the lines engraven in the hand of
man, by dame Nature, in 198 Genitures; with a Learned Discourse of the Soul of
the World; by G. Wharton Esquire; 44. The admired Piece of Physiognomy, and
Chyromancy, Metoposcopy, the Symmetrical Proportions, and Signal moles of the
Body, the Interpretation of Dreams: to which is added the Art of Memory,
illustrated with figures: by R. Sanders, in Folio. 45. The no less exquisite
than admirable Work, Theatrum Chemicum Britannicum; containing several Poetical
Pieces of our famous English Philosophers, who have written the Hermetique
Mysteries in their own ancient Language; faithfully collected into one Volume,
with Annotations thereon: by the Indefatigable industry of of Elias Ashmole
Esquire; illustrated with Figures.
Excellent Treatises in the Mathematics, Geometry, of Arithmetic, Surveying,
and other Arts or Mechanics.
46. The incomparable Treatise of Tactometria, seu Tetagmenometria; or, the
Geometry of Regulars, practically proposed, after a new and most expeditious
manner, (together with the Natural or Vulgar, by way of Mensural comparison)
and in the Solids, not only in respect of Magnitude or Dimension, but also of
Gravity or Ponderosity, according to any Metal assigned: together with useful
experiments of Measures and Weights, observations on Gauging, useful for those
that are practiced in the Art Metrical: by T. VVibard. 47. Tectonicon, showing
the exact measuring of all manner of Land, Squares, Timber, Stone, Steeples,
Pillars, Globes; as also the making and use of the Carpenters Rule, etc. fit to
be known by all Surveyors, Land-meters, Joynets, Carpenters, and Masons: by L.
Digges. 48. The unparalled Work for ease and expedition, entitled, The exact
Surveyor: or, the whole Art of Surveying of Land, showing how to plot all
manner of Grounds, whether small Enclosures, Champain, Plain, Wood-Lands, or
Mountains, by the Plain Table; as also how to find the Area, or Content of any
Land, to Protect, Reduce or Divide the same; as also to take the Plot or Cart,
to make a Map of any Manor, whether according to Rathburne, or any other
Eminent Surveyors Method: a Book excellently useful for those that sell,
purchase, or are otherwise employed about Buildings; by J. Air. 49. The gloden
Treatise of Arithmetic, Natural and Artificial, or Decimals; the Theory and
Practice united in a sympathetical Proportion, betwixt Lines and Numbers, in
their Quantities and Qualities, as in respect of Form, Figure, Magnitude, and
Affection; demonstrated by Geometry, illustrated by Calculations, and confirmed
with variety of Examples in every Species; made compendious and easy for
Merchants, Citizens, Sea men, Accomptants, etc. by Th. Wilsford Corrector of
the last Edition of Record. 50. Semigraphy, or the Art of Short-Writing, as
(...) has been proved by many hundreds in the City of London, and other
places, by them practiced, and acknowledged to be the easiest, exactest, and
swiftest method: the meanest capacity by the help of this Book, with a few
hours practice, may attain to a perfection in this Art: by Jer. Rich Author and
Teacher thereof, dwelling in Swithings Lane in London. 51. Milk for Children; a
plain and easy method teaching to read and write, useful for Schools and
Families, by I. Thomas, D.D. 52. The Painting of the Ancients; the History of
the beginning, progress, and consummating of the practice of that noble Art of
Painting; by F. Junius.
Excellent and approved Treatises in Physic, Chyrurgery, and other more
familiar Experiments in Cookery, Preserving, etc.
53. Culpepers Semiotica Uranica, his Astrological judgment of Diseases from
the decumbiture of the sick, much enlarged: the way and manner of finding out
the cause, change, and end of the Disease; also whether the sick be likely to
live or die, and the time when recovery or death is to be expected, according
to the judgment of Hipocrates and Hermes Trismegistus; to which is added Mr.
Culpepers censure of Urines. 54. Culpepers last Legacy, left to his Wife for
the public good, being the choicest and most profitable of those secrets in
Physic and Chyrurgery; which whilst he lived, were locked up in his breast, and
resolved never to be published till after his death. 55. The Yorkshire Spaw, or
the virtue and use of that water in curing of desperate diseases; with
directions and rules necessary to be considered by all that repair thither. 56.
Most approved Medicines and Remedies for the diseases in the body of Man: by A.
Read Dr. in Physic. 57. The Art of Simpling: an introduction to the knowledge
of gathering of Plants, wherein, the definitions, divisions, places,
descriptions, differences, names, virtues, times of gathering, uses,
temperatures of them are compendiously discoursed of: Also a discovery of the
lesser World, by W. Coals. 58. Adam in Eden, or Natures Paradise: the History
of Plants, Herbs, and Flowers, with their several original names, the places
where they grow, their descriptions and kinds, their times of flourishing and
decreasing; as also their several signatures, anatomical appropriations, and
particuliar physical virtues; with necessary Observations on the Seasons of
Planting and gathering of our English Plants. A Work admirably useful for
Apothecaries, Chyrurgeons, and other Ingenious persons, who may in this Herbal
find comprised all the English physical simples, that Gerard or Parkinson, in
their two voluminous Herbals have discoursed of, even so as to be on emergent
occasions their own Physicians, the ingredients being to be had in their own
fields and gardens; Published for the general good by W. Coals. M.D. 59. The
Complete Midwive's practice, in the high and weighty concernments of the body
of Mankind: or perfect Rules derived from the experiences and writings, not
only of our English, but the most accomplished and absolute practices of the
French, Spanish, Italians, and other Nations; so fitted for the weakest
capacities, that they may in a short time attain to the knowledge of the whole
Art: by Dr. T.C. with the adivce of others, illustrated with Copper figures.
60. The Queens Closet opened: incomparable secrets in Physic, Chyrurgery,
Preserving, Candying, and Cookery; as they were presented to the Queen by the
most experienced persons of our times; many whereof were honored with her own
practice.
Elegant Treatises in Humanity, History, Romances, and Poetry.
61. Times Treasury, or Academy, for the accomplishment of the English Gentry,
in Arguments of Dicourse, Habit, Fashion, Behavior, etc. all summed up in
Characters of Honor: by R. Brathwait Esquire 62 Oedipus, or the Resolver of the
secrets of love, and other natural Problems, by way of Question and Answer. 63.
The admirable and most impartial History of New England, of the first
plantation there, in the year 1628. brought down to these times; all the
material passages performed there, exactly related. 64. The Tears of the
Indians: the History of the bloody and most cruel proceedings of the Spaniards
in the Island of Hispaniola, Cuba, Jamaica, Mexico, Peru, and other places of
the West Indies; in which to the life, are discovered the tyrannies of the
Spaniards, as also the justness of our War so successfully managed against
them. 65. The Illustrious Shepherdess. The Imperious Brother. Written
originally in Spanish by that incomparable wit, Don John Perez de Montalbans;
translated at the requests of the Marchioness of Dorchester, and the Countess
of Strafford: by E.P. 66. The History of the Golden Ass, as also the Loves of
Cupid and his Mistress Psyche: by L. Alpulcius, translated into English. 67.
The unfortunate Mother: a Tragedy, by T.N. 68. The Rebellion, a Tragedy by T.
Rawlins. 69. The Tragedy Messalina the insatiate Roman Empress: by N. Richards.
70. The floating Island: a Tragic-Comedy, acted before the King, by the
Students of Christ's Church in Oxon; by that renowned wit, W. Strode: the songs
were set by Mr. Henry Laws. 71. Harvey's Divine Poems; the History of Balaam,
of Jonah, and of St. John the Evangelist. 72. Fons Lachrymarum, or a Fountain
of Tears; the Lamentations of the Prophet Jeremiah in verse, with an Elegy on
Sir Charles Lucas; by I. Quarles. 73. Nocturnal Lucubrations, with other witty
Epigrams and Epitaphs; by R. Chamberlain. 74. The admirable ingenuous Satyr
against Hypocrites.
Poetical, with several other accurately ingenious Treatises, lately Printed.
75. Wits Interepreter, the English Parnassus: or a sure Guide to those
admirable accomplishments that complete the English Gentry, in the most
acceptable qualifications of Discourse, or Writing. An Art of Logic, accurate
Complements, Fancies, and Experiments, Poems, Poetical Fictions, and All a-Mode
Letters by, J.C. 76. Wit and Drollery; with other Jovial Poems: by Sir I.M.
M.L. M.S. W.D. 77. Sportive wit, the Muses Merriment; a New Spring of Drollery;
Jovial Fancies, etc. 78. The conveyancer of Light, or the Complete Clerk, and
Scriveners Guide; being an exact draught of all Presidents and Assurances now
in use; as they were penned, and perfected by diverse learned Judges, eminent
Lawyers, and great Conveyancers, both ancient and modern: whereunto is added a
Concordance from K. Rich. 3. to this present. 79. Themis Aurea, The Daws of the
Fraternity of the Rosy Cross; in which the occult secrets of their
Philosophical Notions are brought to light: written by Count Mayerus, and now
Englished by T.H. 80. The Iron Rod put into the Lord Protectors hands; a
prophetical Treatise. 81. Medicina Magica tamen Physica; Magical, but natural
Physic: containing the general cures of infirmities and diseases, belonging to
the bodies of men, as also to other animals, and domestic creatures, by way of
Transplantion: with a description of the most excellent Cordial out of Gold: by
Samuel Boulton of Salop. 82. I. Tradiscan's Rarities, published by himself. 83.
The proceeding of the high Court of Justice against the late King Charles, with
his Speech upon the Scaffold, and other proceedings, Jan. 30. 1648. 84. The
prefect Cook; a right Method in the Art of Cookery, whether for Pastery, or all
other manner of All-a-Mode Kickshaws; with the most refined ways of dressing of
Flesh, Fowl or Fish; making of the most poinant Sawces, whether after the
French, or English manner: together with fifty five ways of dressing of Eggs:
by M.M.
Admirable Useful Treatises newly Printed.
85. The Expert Doctors Dispensatory: the whole Art of Physic restored to
Practice: the Apothecaries Shop, and Chyrurgeous Closet opened; with a Survey,
as also a Correction of most Dispensatories now extant, with a Judicious
Censure of their defects; and a supply of what they are deficient in: together
with a learned account of the virtues and quantities, and uses of Simples, and
Compounds; with the Symptoms of Diseases; as also prescriptions for their
several cures: by that renowned P. Morellus, Physician to the King of France; a
work for the order, usefulness, and plainness of the Method, not to be
paralleled by any Dispensatory, in what language soever. 86. Cabinet of Jewels,
Man's Misery, Gods Mercy, Christ's Treasury, etc. In eight Sermons, with an
Appendix of the nature of Tithes under the Gospel; with the expediency of
Marriage in public Assemblies, by I. Crag, Minister of the Gospel. 87. Natures
Secrets; or the admirable and wonderful History of the generation of Meteors;
describing the Temperatures of the Elements, the hights, magnitudes, and
influences of Stars; the causes of Comets, Earthquakes, Deluges, Epidemical
Diseases, and Prodigies of precedent times; with presages of the weather, and
descriptions of the Weather-glass: by T. Wilsford. 88. The Mysteries of Love
and Eloquence; or the Arts of Wooing and Complementing; as they are managed in
the Sping Garden, Hide-Park, the new Exchange, and other Eminent places. A work
in which are drawn to the Life the Deportments of the most Accomplished Persons;
the Mode of their Courtly Entertainments, Treatment of their Ladies at Balls,
their accustomed Sports, Drolls and Fancies; the Witchcrafts of their
persuasive language, in their approaches, or other more secret dispatches, etc.
by E.P. 89. Helmont disguised; or the vulgar errors of imperical and unskilful
practicers of Physic confuted; more especially as they concern the cures of
Fevers, the Stone, the Plague, and some other diseases: by way of Dialogue; in
which the chief rarities of Physic are admirably discoursed of, by I.T.
Books in the Press, and Ready for Printing.
1. THe Scales of Commerce and Trade: by T. Wilsford. 2. Geometry demonstrated
by Lines and Numbers: from thence, Astronomy, Cosmography, and Navigation
proved and delineated by the Doctrine of Plain and Spherical Triangles: by T.
Wilsford. 3. The English Annals, from the Invasion made by Julius Caesar, to
these times: by T. Wilsford. 4. The Fool transformed: a Comedy. 5. The History
of Lewis the eleventh King of France: a Tragi-Comedy. 6. The chaste Woman
against her will: a Comedy. 7. The Tooth-drawer: a Comedy. 8. Honor in the
end: a Comedy. 9. Tell-Tale: a Comedy. 10. The History of Don Quixot, or the
Knight of the illfavoured face: a Comedy. 11. The fair Spanish Captive: a
Tragi-Comedy. 12. Sir Kenel^ Digby, and other persons of Honor, their rare and
incomparable secrets of Physic, Chyrurgery, Cookery, Preserving, Conserving,
Candying, distilling of Waters, extraction of Oils, compounding of the
costliest Perfumes, with other admirable Invehtions, and select Experiments, as
they offered themselves to their Observations; whether her, or in foreign
Countries. 13. The Soul's Cordial in two Treatises, the First teaching how to
be eased of the guilt of sin, Second, discovering advantages by Christ's
ascension: by that faithful labor in the Lords Vineyard, Mr. Christophe Love,
late Parson of Laurence Jury: the third Volume. 14. The Saints Tombstone: or
the Remains of the blessed: A plain Narrative of some remarkable passages, in
the holy Life, and happy Death, of Mistress Dorothy Shaw, wife of Mr. John
Shaw, Preacher of the Gospel at Kingston on Hull: collected by her dearest
friends, especially for her sorrowful husband and six daughters consolation and
imitation. 15. The accomplished Cook, the Mystery of the whole Art of Cookery,
revealed in a more easy and perfect method than has been published in any
languge: Expert and ready ways for the dressing of flesh, fowl, and fish, the
raising of pastes, the best directions for all manner of Kickshaws, and the
most poinant Sauces, with the terms of Carving and Sewing: the Bills of fare,
an exact account of all dishes for the season, with other Al-a-mode
curiosities, together with the lively illustrations of such necessary figures,
as are referred to practice: approved by the many years experience, and careful
industry of Robert May, in the time of his attendance on several persons of
honor. 16. The exquisite letters of Mr. Robert Loveday, the late admired
Translator of the volumes of the famed Romance Cleopatra, for the perpetuating
this memory, published by his dear Brother Mr. A.L. 17. The so long expected
work, the New World of English words, or a general Dictionary, containing the
Terms, Etymologies, Definitions, and perfect Interpretations of the proper
significations of hard English words throughout the Arts and Sciences, liberal
or Mechanic, as also other subjects that are useful, or appertain to the
language of our Nation: to which is added the signification of proper names,
Mythology, and Poetical fictions, Historical relations, Geographical
Descriptions of the Countries and Cities of the World; especially of these
three Nations; wherein their chiefest Antiquities, Battles, and other most
memorable passages are mentioned: A work very necessary for strangers, as well
as our own Countrymen, for all persons that would rightly understand what they
discourse, write, or read. Collected and published by E.P. For the greater
honor of those learned Gentlemen and Artists that have been assistant in the
most Practical Sciences, their names are prefixed before the book. 18. The so
much desired, and deeply learned Commentary on Psalm the fifteenth, by that
Reverend and Eminent Divine Mr. Christopher Cartwright, Minister of the Gospel
in York: to which is prefixed a brief account of the Authors life, and of his
work, by R. Bolton. 19. The way to bliss, in three books, being a learned
Treatise of the Philosophers stone: made public by Elias Ashmole, Esquire. 20.
Wit restored in several Select Poems, not formerly published: by Sr. John
Mennis, Mr. Smith, and others. 21. The Judges charge, delivered in a Sermon
before Mr. Justice Hale, and Mr. Sergeant Crook, Judges of the Assize, at St.
May Overies in Southwark, by R. Parre, M.A. Pastor of Camerwell, in the County
of Surry: a Sermon worthy of the perusal of all such persons as endeavor to be
honest and just Practitioners in the Law. 23. The modern Assurancer, the Clerks
Directory, containing the practick part of the Law, in the exact Forms and
Draughts of all manner of Presidents for Bargains and Sales, Grants,
Feoffements, Bonds, Bills, Condititions, Covenants, Jointures, Indentures; to
lead the use of Fines and Recoveries, with good Provisoes and Covenants to
seized, Charter parties for Ships, Leases, Releases, Surrenders, etc. And all
other Instruments and Assurances now in use, intended for all young Students
and Practicers of the Law by, John Herne. 24. Moors Arithmetic, the second
Edition much refined, and diligently cleared from the former mistakes of the
Press: A work containing the whole Art of Arithm^tick, as well in Numbers as
Species: Together with many Additions by the Author, to come forth at
Michaelmas Term. Likewise, 25. Exercitatio Elleiptica Nova, or a new
Mathematical Contemplation on the Oval figure, called an Elleipsis; together
with the two first book of Mydorgius his Conicks Analized, and made so plain,
that the Doctrine of Conical Sections may (...) understood: a work much
desired, and never before published in the English tongue: by Jonas Moor, Survey
or General of the great Level of the Fennes. 26. Naps upon Parnassus, A sleepy
Muse Nipt and Pincht, though not awakened: such voluntary and Jovial Copies of
Verses as were Lately received from some of the Wits of the Universities, in a
frolic, dedicated to Gondiberts Mistress, by Capt. Jones and others: whereunto
is added, for demonstration of the Authors Prosaick Excellencies, his Epistle
to one of the Universities, with the Answer; together with two Satirical
Characters of his own, of a Temporizer, and an Antiquary; with Marginal Notes,
by a friend to the Reader, Printed by express order form the Wits. 27. America
Painted to the Life; a true History of the Original undertakings of the
advancement of Plantations into those parts, with a perfect relation of our
English Discoveries, showing their Beginning, Progess, and Continuance, from
the year 1628 to 1658, declaring the forms of their Government, Policies,
Religions, Manners, Custumes, Military Discipline, Wars with the Indians, the
Commodities of their Countries, a description of their Towns and Havens, the
increase of their trading, with the names of their Governors and Magistrates:
by Ferdinando Gorges Knight. For the Readers (...) understanding of the
Countries, they are Lively described in a complete and exquisite Map. 28. The
Joys of Heaven, the Saints support in Gods promises on earth, Christ's Sermons
on the Beatitudes. An exposition of the fifth Chapter of St. Matthew, delivered
in several Sermons by Mr. Jeremiah Buroughs; the last Sermons he preached a
little before his death, at St. Giles Cripple-gate. London.
FINIS.

