To all you PROTESTANT PERSECUTORS, whether Magistrates, Priests or People,
this is for you to read.
GOD Eternal who has formed us, given us breath, and brought us forth, has
said unto us, Live; He it is we serve, fear and obey: Therefore hear and give
heed unto what shall be here said unto you, from us who this day suffer under
your cruel hands, in your Prisons and nasty holes in and about this City of
London.

Known be it unto you, we neither have nor do deserve such cruel and inhumane
usage at your hands; for not any of you can justly charge us with evil, neither
have we wronged any man in his Propriety or Estate, whereby the Creation in any
kind has suffered detriment or loss; neither have we impaired any man's
Reputation, or taken his Good-name from him, but have lived in all Godliness
and Honesty, and have kept a Conscience void of offense both in the sight of
God and man.

And forasmuch as we are persecuted, Imprisoned, and evil-intreated by the men
of this Generation, who call themselves Protestants, and cover themselves under
that name, to hide their Cruelty; but it is manifest to the World, that
Persecution in Jews, Heathens, Turks, Papists and Protestants is one and the
same, the Spirit is but one in all which persecute; and the Protestant that
banisheth, is one in spirit with the Papist that burns, and the Papist is one
with the Heathen that kills, and the Heathen is one with the Jew that
crucifies, and all one with Cain that Murderer. And think ye, that we who are
of this Nation born Free, as either your selves, or your seed, must be exposed
to vassalage in strange Countries, and there to languish the rest of our days
we have to spend, and seek our sustenance among strangers? what, is it because
there is not graves in England, that we must undergo your cruel penalty of
Banishment? and is it a light thing to lacerate, tear and rend whole Families
in pieces, without any pity shown either to Age or Sex? the Husband, from Wife,
the Wife from Husband, the Children from Parents, and the Parents from
Children. O! pitiless and merciless Generation, was there ever such a thing
done in this Nation of England? Search your Records of Persecution, and see, if
a president be found in all of them for this. And is any thing so blind as
Persecution? What, to cut off a Limb of this Nation of England, for nothing
else but for the sake of your National Prayer called Common, and because we
cannot for conscience sake join with you in it, we must be destroyed; Is this
the Charity that your National Religion is grounded upon? and would you have us
join to that? Nay, nay, in vain is your imposition on Conscience: And think not
to work Conformity by coersive means; we who suffer under your will in your
cruel Goals, do in God's Dread and Fear, declare, that the True Christians
never used any other force, but Persuasion; and we do further declare, that
whosoever they are, though they be called or bear the name, Christians, whether
a Man, a People, or a Nation, and go about to compel Conscience in matters of
Religion, they are Antichrist, and out of Christ's, the Apostles and True
Christians Order and Practice; for their Force was Persuasion, and no other.

And as to you who are Ministers of that heterogeneal and unnatural Law, lately
made, and put in Execution against us, we say, and declare in God's Fear, well
would it be with you in this thing, if moderation both in words and actions did
attend your work in hand; and not to lay a heavier load of Sufferings upon the
Innocent than the severity of the Law inflicts: But behold the Barbarities and
inhumane Cruelties, and unparalled Actions of Richard Brown's carriage
toward the People called Quakers, at the Bull and Mouth.
one who is a Chief Minister of our sad afflictions at our Meeting at the Bull
and Mouth, what pulling off the hair! what smiting on the face, kicking and
spurning with his feet on the legs and body, and pinching on the arms, besides
the many scurilous words, Blaspheming God's Holy Truth in irronical and
scoffing terms, do the Innocent People, called Quakers, suffer by his bloody
hands, both Men, Women and Children, to the amazement of the Spectators! and
some of the Magistrates have themselves cried out upon his Cruelty: And let all
moderate People judge of this man's actions, and whether he be not more fit to
minister Conformity to Dogs than men? and whether such Ministers of Justice
make not a Government by such actions, loathsome and abominable to Wise Men,
and a scorn to Fools, I leave to all that are wise in heart to judge?

And that our Neighbors amongst whom we live and have commerce, must be
compelled on pain of Imprisonment, to take us by the throat for our Conscience
to God, knowing no evil at all by us: certainly this is deplorable, and to be
lamented of all (in whom the Fear of God, and the Sense of his Living Power is
not quite extinct) that a Generation of men who never received a greater Their
Miraculous Restoration.
Mercy, even from Adam to this day, as many of themselves have confessed,
should thus requite and retaliate God, infinite for his love in that thing: It
is the very grief of our souls to see things thus run retrograde, but we have
no helper on Earth, and God Eternal, who beholds our unjust sufferings, is our
Judge, whom we love, fear and obey; and we do appeal to him for Justice,
knowing right well our Persecutors do, neither can do any thing but by his
permission, and they have no power over us, except it be given them; and our
Integrity in God we hold fast, and we are assured our patience in him shall
outlive, and bring to an end all the Cruelties of men whatsoever, though they
may be permitted to heat the Furnace yet seven times hotter.

And you that are the primum Mobile, or the first Cause of this cruel
Persecution, who stir up and whet on the Magistrate to accomplish your intended
purposes, and to fulfill your malicious wills, when we certainly and infallibly
know they would not intermeddle in such matters, most of them having no
inclination thereunto, unless spurred on and stirred up by your selves, hear
and give good heed unto this Parable: In a strange Land there was a high way
which led from a City, and in that way was seen two The Priest and Magistrate.
men traveling, and after them followed great numbers of people of all sorts;
and in traveling on, these two Companions met a certain poor Travellor, who
was journying toward that City, and one of them said unto him, Whither art
thou traveling? the poor man answered, Unto the City. Then he said unto him,
Thou must go back again with us. The poor man said, I must go on my way unto
the City, for there is my Habitation and my Rest; and I have come very far, and
have passed through very many Difficulties, Dangers, and Perils both of Waters
and wild Beasts; and now being come within sight of my City of Rest, I never
intend to go back again. Then said he that spoke unto him, If thou will not go
back again with us in our way, thou must go no further on in thy way, but
rather than go forward toward the City, thou shall die: and then he spoke to
his Companion to slay the poor man, which at first he refused, and said, I know
no evil by him. But said the other, If thou do not, I do; and I should not
have asked of thee to have done it, but I am a man devoted to holy Service,
therefore I may not imbrew and stain my hands in blood, but I desire thee to do
it, and I will bear thee out in it: So with some entreaties, and many
threatenings he caused his Companion to slay the poor Travellor, and would not
suffer him to go to his City of Rest: and then he took his Body and hid it,
lest them that were traveling after should see it, and so enquire the reason.
Now he that can read, let him read: And know you this, O you Priests, you
above all men upon the face of the Earth, have little cause to stir up
Persecution against us, knowing how and in what manner we formerly suffered,
even in the day of your Probation; and who were most faithful to their
Principle then, let God, Angels and men judge; for we hold forth the same Truth
now as then, and then as now: But has it been so with you? let God's just
Witness in you speak and answer. And would you have us conform unto that as
Truth, your selves durst not publicly own in that day? And know you this, that
since your Restoring amongst the many thousands who have been imprisoned in and
about this City, did ever your Charity lead to our Prisons, to visit or
endeavor to convince us of that, behind our backs, you call Error? What do
you think, will not the Jesuits and Friars in Queen Mary's days rise up in
Judgment against you, and condemn you? For, as it stands upon Record, they did
often visit them (they falsely called Heretics) and used many endeavors to
reclaim them, and to save their lives; though God's Truth were of more value
unto them, than all their proffers of Life, Liberty, and Preferment; and chose
rather to seal their Testimonies with their Blood, than to deny the Truth of
God, manifested in their Hearts and Consciences: but you, as the Generations of
old, do beautify their Tombs, and garnish their Sepulchers, by your often
repeating their Memorials, and cry out, Protestant Martyrs, Protestant Martyrs!
We say, it is true, they were so, and we are the very Offspring of that Seed:
But what will it avail you, when by your practice you are found Protestant
Persecutors? and indeed let no man admire why no more Charity appears amongst
you, for this we have learned in God's Wisdom, that the Hawk and Dove flies
not in company together; neither does the Wolf and Sheep pasture together in
one place.

And as for us the Innocent People of God, called Quakers, who deeply suffer
for our Consciences to God, and chiefly by your means, we say, The Will of God
be done; and though we be enclosed within your Prison walls, yet the Presence
of our God is with us, and amongst us, whereby our very Lives and Souls are
refreshed in him, and one in another; and in the true sense of that, we have
bowels of compassion for our Enemies, yea the very cruelest of them; and for
such as are ignorant in what they do, our very souls mourn, pity, and pray
for them: and for those who know what they do, and manifestly sin against the
Light of God in their Consciences, as we believe even very many do in this
thing, yet we have no evil toward them, neither in word, thought or action,
but leave them to the Lord who judges righteously.

Given forth by a Servant of the Lord, whose life is bound up amongst those
that bear a Testimony for God's Living Truth, by their Sufferings in the
several Prisons and Goals in and about London. R.C.


