The New PARADISE OF GOD. OR The Regenerate, and his Fruit. Set forth In a
SERMON to the Hertfordshire-Citizens at Bow-Church in Cheapside London, July 2.
1657. being the day of their public FESTIVAL. BY ISAAC CRAVEN, Minister of the
Gospel at Aston in Hertfordshire.

Cant. 4. 13. Thy Plants are an Orchard of Pomegranats with pleasant fruits.
LONDON, Printed for J. Rothwell at the Fountain in Cheapside. 1658.

TO MY Honored Friends and Countrymen of Hertfordshire, inhabiting or
sojourning in the City of LONDON. More particularly, TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL
Sir Thomas Dacres, Knight. Edward Laurence, Esquire. Mr. Francis Kirby, Mr. Henry
Clarke, Mr. John Christian, Mr. William Brewer, John Jesson, Esquire. Mr. Blunt
Sadleir. Mr. John Howland. Mr. Dudley Short, Mr. Charles Read, and Mr. Richard
Weedon.
The worthy Stewards of their late FESTIVAL.
Honored Sirs,
AN inbred affection to my Native Country, a civil respect to your Unanimous
consent, may suffice to justify the readiness of my compliance in undertaking
this late service. Which having found the favor of your courteous acceptance,
(attested by those after-intreaties in order to a publication) inclines me to
hope that the Doctrine then delivered will be drawn into some Use by Your care
to practice it. I confess my private genius stands little affected to the mode
of appearing in print: Nor do I value my pains at so high a rate as to judge
them worthy of the public view. Howbeit, to complete my respects to those who
employed me, I have so far prevailed against all reluctancies, as to gratify
Your desires, though to my own dissatisfaction. Beseeching the Almighty to
bless the expense of that hour with success of eternity; That it may prove in
the issue as profitable to Your souls, as it was judged suitable to the season.

And now (dear Countrie-men) having met with so fair an opportunity, give me
leave to remember You that this Your earthly Country can contribute nothing of
it self to the illustration of Your persons, Nisi per te fulseris quid tibi lux
patriae praeter tenebras allatura est? Petrarch.
but waits to receive some rays of splendor from the reflections of your own
worth. Be it therefore Your holy ambition so to excel in virtue and goodness,
that as it was anciently foretold what should be said of Rahab and Babylon,
Psalm. 87. 4.
etc. [This man was born there,] so it may reflect with honor upon the places
of Your first breathing, that this and that faithful Christian was born there.

Nor will it a little advantage You to recount in Your meditations, how in the
Land of Your first Nativity Ye did but begin Your Pilgrimage: Yea, the World it
self is but the place of Your exile Quid aliud terra quam Exilium? Calv.
. Heaven only deserves to be esteemed Your Country Patriam nostram Paradisum
computamus. Cypr.
. Let Your conversation therefore be in Heaven. And that You may speed in Your
motions thither, save Your selves from this untoward generation Acts 2. 40.
; Buy the truth, and sell it not Pro. 23. 23
; Maintain good works for necessary uses Tit. 3. 14.
; Follow after the things which make for peace, and wherewith Ye may edify one
another Romans 14. 19.
.

To forbear any larger prefacing, and to give You a summarie abridgement of all
that I would say, [Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest,
Phil. 4. 8.
whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are
lovely, whatsoever things are of good report, if there be any virtue, and if
there be any praise, think of these things.] And accept the poor endeavors of

Your humble and faithful Remembrancer, IS. CRAVEN.

THE NEW PARADISE Of GOD. OR, The Regenerate and his Fruit.
PSALM. 1. 3. And he shall be like a Tree planted by the Rivers of Water, which
brings forth his fruit in his season.
THis Book of the Psalms is a little Bible, says Luther; An Epitome (says
Athanasius of the whole Scripture Ep. ad Marcellin.
; A Compendium (says Basil of all Divinity In Ps. 1.
: With such high Encomiums have diverse Expositors diversely magnified it, none
undeservedly. For as the Scriptures in general are able (...), to make a man
wise unto salvation 2 Timothy 3. 15.
. So the drift and scope of this in particular, is to teach us the way to be
truly blessed.

Insomuch as this first Psalm (which I take to be the Preface to all the rest)
begins with blessedness; yea (by the word there used) a plurality of
blessedness, as the portion (...)
of the man that walks uprightly.

A Psalm whose Author and occasion the Original has not hinted; there being no
Title prefixed for intimation of either. Indeed, the very notion of a Preface is
enough to discover the occasion. And being a precious piece of the Divine
Canon, it must have the Spirit of God for its prime Author, by whose
inspiration all Scripture is given 2 Timothy 3. 16.
. And so it has Title enough to our faith and obedience, though the Front of
the Psalm be without a Title.

Yet rather then it should absolutely pass without, Athanasius was pleased
from the first word in the Greek, [(...). blessed] to entitle the whole Psalm
(...), or a Psalm of blessedness Ep. ad Marcell.
. Not as if the proper business of it were to open the nature of blessedness;
but because, having proposed it for our encouragement in the practice of true
Religion Vt humanam infirmitatem per spem beatitudinis ad innocens religionis
studium hortaretur. Copen in Ps. 1. de Tit.
, it purposely deciphers and pourtrayes the person to whom it pertains. For to
inform us whose portion it is, the Psalmist has most exactly charactered him.

1. Negatively, or by what he abandons, ver. 1. He walks not in the counsel of
the ungodly, he stands not in the way of sinners, he sits not in the seat of
the scornful. Neither is, nor does any of these.

2. Positively, or by what he takes pleasure in, ver. 2. His delight is in the
law of the Lord. And this, not dimidiatim. with a halving partiality (like that
counterfeit mother that would have the child divided; 1 King. 3. 26.
but in a blessed juncture of Theory and practice, of contemplation and
conversation both. For first he delights in the speculative part, [ In his Law
does he meditate day and night.] And then for the practick, [ He shall be like
a tree planted by the Rivers of water, that brings forth his fruit in his
season.]

It is the wisdom of the Holy Ghost in the volume of holy Writ, to illustrate
heavenly truths by earthly resemblances, partly for their easier conveyance to
our dark understandings, and partly for their deeper impression in our hearts
and memories. And accordingly the words before us are a Similitudinary
description of a blessed man; representing him,

1. In his Regeneration [ like a Tree planted.]

2. In his accommodation [ by the rivers of waters.]

3. And lastly, in his fructification [ that brings forth his fruit in his
season.]

So that (not to burden you with any secondary distribution) the regeneration
of a sinner, the accommodation of the regenerate, and his answerable
fructification, these (with Gods assistance) shall be the boundaries of this
exercise. And first of the first particular in this description of a blessed
man, as he is represented in his regeneration [ like a tree planted.]

Not simply sicut arbor, like a tree; For a man, whether blessed or cursed, is
capable of that resemblance, Arbor inversa, (as the Philosopher calls him) a
tree with his root upwards, dilating and branching downwards; (insomuch as the
dimmest sighted may say with him in the Gospel, I see men walking like trees
Mar. 8. 24.
; but sicut arbor plantata (there lies the discrimination) like a tree that is
planted. And planted, not merely externally, as a visible disposal in the
Church, (within whose aspectable Territories many are called, few chosen Mat.
20. 16.
), but spiritually and mystically, by an invisible ingrafture into Christ. For
otherwise, that which is born of the flesh, is flesh, says our Savior Joh. 3.
6.
. And not one (says Job) that can bring a clean thing out of an unclean Job.
14. 4.
. If Adam, if any of his offspring beget a son, it is only his own likeness
Genesis 5. 3.
. Depraved nature cannot act beyond the sphere of its activity. The Gentiles
before their calling, dead in trespasses and sins Ephesians. 2. 1.
. The Jews, before their believing, children of wrath even as others Ephesians. 2. 3.
. Yea, of the lawful marriages of Gods own people, Non generantur filii dei,
says Augustine. There are not generated children of God, but of this world
Lib. 1. de nupt. and conc. cap. 17.
. Which if the Pelagian oppose with his like from like, that learned Father is
not behind for answer. The Saints (says he) beget not after the Spirit of
their renascencie, but after the flesh of their first Nativity Non gignunt
secundum spiritum, per quem renati sunt, sed secundum carnem e qua pati sunt.
. To borrow his lively illustration, the son (ye know) of a circumcised
Israelite was uncircumcised born Ser. 14. de verb. Apost.
. Of the seed of a good Olive Tree comes nothing but Oleaster, a wild one Ibid.
. So the faithful spring not up naturally (as the Oak from an Acorn, or the
Peach from a Stone) but by the gracious operation of a Divine hand. Fiunt
(says Tertullian) non nascimur Christiani Apost. cap. 17.
. Or (as Hierom) non nascimur, sed renascimur Christiani Advers. Vigil.
. True Christians are not such by their carnal birth, but as they are born
again, and made members of Christ. Nothing to speak them blessed till they be
implanted into Christ; for in him it is (and in no other name Act. 4. 12.
) that all the Nations of the earth shall be blessed Genesis 22. 18.
.

And hence you may observe by the way, that this implantation is much different
from those in our Hortyards, where Scions (commonly the better) correct the
Stocks, and reduce them to their own nature. No such matter here: We work not
an alteration in the Trunk or Stock, but are our selves transformed and renewed
by it, 2 Cor. 5. 17. If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature. Once
unprofitable, now profitable Philem. v. 11.
; once dead, now quickened Ephesians. 2. 1.
; once unclean, and (with Jerusalem) in our blood Ezekiel. 16. 6.
; now sanctified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God 1
Cor. 6. 11.
.

A Doctrine of such importance, as we may not dismiss it without a few
deductions. For,

First, if the Christians plantation be by way of insition, and this insition
so necessary in order to true felicity, it naturally ensues, that a Right and
Title to Heaven can never be grounded upon the Nobleness of a Carnal
extraction, or the natural qualities of Constitution, or the moral habit of
Education. All these (though valuable in their kind) are too light in the
balance of the Sanctuary to demonstrate a blessed condition. Yea, although
they should all be found to concenter in the same subject, yet, as it sometime
fared with Naaman the Syrian [a great man with his Master, an honorable man, a
mighty man in valor, but a Leper c] so, whether natural 2 Kings 5. 1.
abilities, or secular privileges, or moral qualifications, or their
confluence in any one, the state of irregeneracy distaynes them all.

Some indeed there have been, (and may be still for ought I know) of a judgment
extremely favorable in behalf of heathen Moralists; as if the fruit of their
fair deportment were no less then the fruition of Heaven. But it must sound
very strange in the ears of sober Christians, that such Ethnicks should be
transplanted to heaven, as were never implanted into Christ; or live by vision,
who never lived by faith; or see Gods kingdom, who were never born again.
Undoubtedly the trees of the Paradise of God are none but whom his own right
hand has planted; No arbores sylvestres, common trees to be found there. No
inheritance in heaven, but for Sons of God Romans 8. 17.
. No children of God, but by faith in Christ Gal. 3. 26.
. And such faith, not of our selves ( Ephesians. 2. 8.) it is the gift of God. Well
may we admit of Natural Theology Romans 1. 19, 20.
, but (as a grave judicious Writer) there is no Natural Christianity Dr.
Reynolds in Psalm. 110. p. 261.
; seeing they that believe in Christ, are born not of blood [of the impure
beginnings of their conception] nor of the will of the flesh [by the power of
Nature and Free-will] nor of the will of man, [by the prevalencie of a civil
education] but of God Josh. 1. 12, 13.
. And except a man be so born, by the special virtue and work of the Spirit,
he can neither see nor enter into the Kingdom of God Joh. 3. 3, 5.
.

Wherefore secondly, if the case stand thus, recount, I beseech you, how nearly
it concerns us to make this ingrafture and implantation sure. (...) (in the
words of the Apostle) Examine your selves whether ye be in the says. And
having so done, over with it again, (...), prove your own selves. Know ye not
your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be Reprobates 2
Cor. 13. 5.
. It is altogether preposterous to conclude an interest to heaven, without
assurance of this spiritual implantation. Assurance none without experience of
a supernatural change. An easy matter to pretend to a communion with Christ,
to a membership in his mystical body: but to prove it by grace for grace Joh.
1. 16.
, by a participation of the Divine nature 2 Pet. 1. 4.
, by the indument of the New man Col. 3. 10.
, hic labor, hoc opus est. O man, whosoever thou art that live in the service
of sin, that drinkest iniquity like water, and walk after the course of this
world, fulfilling the base desires of the flesh, and of the mind, its an
evidence against thee (notwithstanding all thy confidence) that thou have not
partaken of the root or of the fatness of the Olive Tree, but art hitherto
Christlesse, by that Apostolic maxim, If any man have not the Spirit of
Christ, he is none of his Romans 8. 9.
. And so (with Paul's Ephesians, while unconverted) destitute of Christ, and of
hope together Ephesians. 2. 12.
.

Whereas (contrarily) if any through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the
body Romans 8. 13.
, if they purify themselves even as Christ is pure 1 John 3. 3.
; if they yield their members as instruments of righteousness unto God Romans 6.
13.
, these need not say, Who shall ascend into Heaven? or, who shall descend into
the deep? For they bear in their own heart a Testimonial of their Regeneration,
and may resolve upon a right unto the Tree of life, with a privilege to enter
in through the gates into the City Rev. 22. 14.
. Only,

In the last place, upon sense of this blessed ingrafture, great reason trees
of righteousness should acknowledge the hand that planted them Is. 61. 3. cap.
43. 21.
, rejoice in him that made them. That they enter into his gates with
thanksgiving, and into his Courts with praise Ps. 100. 4.
. For in this great work of Regeneration it is the Lord that has made us, and
not we our selves Ps. 100. 3.
. It is the Father that has planted us, and not we our selves. He is (...),
the Husbandman; we only (...), his husbandry 1 Cor. 3. 9.
, and should y. Joh. 15. 1.
therefore show forth the virtues the praises of him who has called us to
glory and virtue; saying, Not unto us, Lord, not unto us, [not to the power of
nature, or to arbitrary choice] but unto thy Name give thou the glory Psalm.
115. 1.
. If Plato could be thankful for being a Grecian, not a Barbarian, an Athenian
among Grecians, a Philosopher among Athenians: much rather should the faithful
for that they are born of God 1 John 5. ^.
, and made partakers of his Son Heb. 3. 14.
. Especially seeing first before their ingrafture, he found them in no better a
condition then the rest of the world; all wretched and miserable, and poor, and
blind and naked. Rev. 3. 17.
Nor could any thing difference them save his own discriminating grace, Sola
gratia redemptos discernit a perditis. Aug. in Enchir.
. Even so, Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight. Mat. 11. 26.
.

Secondly, and in the thoughts of his goodness toward them, he had respect to
their disposal as well as ingrafture, tendered their accommodation as well as
planting. For that is our next particular in this description of a blessed man,
as he is represented in his accommodation, [planted by the rivers of water.]

A situation (by general consent) of choycest meetness for fruit-bearing trees,
that time after time, however the season fall out, they may have the benefit of
water to make them fruitful. And accordingly wise King Solomon (who thought it
no disparagement to be seen in husbandry) made pools of water, ( Eccles. 2. 6.)
to water the wood that brings forth trees. Yea, it is observed to be their
usual course in such hot Countries to plant their gardens near Well-springs of
water, and to derive many rivulets upon the roots of the trees for their
constant moystening and refreshing. Aynsworth on Ps. 1. 3.
.

Now allusions hereunto are not unfrequent in holy Scripture, for expression of
supplies both secular and sacred. As namely where it compares the proud
Assyrian to a tall Cedar with fair branches, whom the waters made great, and
the deep set him up on high, Ezekiel. 31. 3, 4.
. As also unthankful Jerusalem to a Spreading Vine planted by great waters,
that it might bring forth branches, and bear fruit. Ezekiel. 17. 8.
. And to intimate the same accommodations intended in my Text, it assimilates
the sincere believer to a tree planted by the water, that spreads out her roots
by the rivers Jer. 17. 7. 8.
.

So that this commodious situation of trees, is a notable illustration of God's
care over his people; by whose fatherly providence it is, that they are
graciously accommodated, supplied, and succored with all things appertayning
to life and godliness: As namely, 2 Pet. 1. 3.


1. Externally, with the administration of the Word and Sacraments, which are
as rivers of water to the thirsty soul, and (like the streams of Kidron) make
glad the City of God, Psalm. 46. 4.
. For (as the Lord in the second of Micah) do not my words do good to him that
walks uprightly? Yea, the Statutes of the Lord rejoice the heart, Psalm. 19.
8. And from the consolation of the Scriptures arises our hope, Romans 15. 4.
They are comforts in affliction, Psalm. 119. 50.
reliefs in temptation, Ps. 73. 16. 17.
means of a spiritual thriving and fructifying in Gods garden. 1 Pet. 2. 2.
.

Much rather as they are seconded with those visible words Quid sunt aliud
corporalia Sacramenta, quam quaedam quasi verba visibilia? Aug.
, the seals of the righteousness of faith Rom 4. 11.
, those blessed cherishers and fosterers of Gods Plantation. For although their
instrumentality be Moral, not Phisical, in the conveyance and exhibition of
grace, yet being of divine appointment and the ministration of the spirit, they
are ( like the Oath of God annex't to his Counsel s) means of strong
consolation to them that believe. For Heb. 6. 17, 18.
to the end they may take effect, the faithful (besides these outward
Well-springs) are accommodated in the 2. place internally, with the sovereign
influences and irrigations of Christ his Spirit. By whose gracious inhabitancy
in their souls, he becomes unto them a Fountain of Gardens, ( Cant. 4. 15.) a
well of water, and streams from Lebanon. So that God having once conveyed the
Spirit of his Son into their hearts, they have a pledge of his presence to
comfort them in their pilgrimage, a witness of their adoption to help their
infirmities, a guide of their life to keep them from falling, a faithful
remembrancer to prompt them to duty, a seal of their redemption, an earnest of
their salvation, till they behold in glory what they believe in grace.

A felicity not conceivable by the children of this world; for did they truly
apprehend, and rightly value it, they would be more in their desires and
motions toward it. If thou knew the gift of God (said our Savior to the
woman of Samaria) and who it is that says unto thee, give me to drink, thou
woulst have asked of him, and he would have given thee living water. John. 4.
10.
. But, poor sinful creature! she knew it not. Nor was it her case alone, 1 Cor.
2. Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man
the things which God has prepared for them that love him. Balaam indeed had a
kind of glympse of it in the 24. of Numbers. How goodly (says he) are thy
Tents, O Jacob, and thy Tabernacles, O Israel! As gardens by the river side, as
the trees of Lign-aloes which the Lord has planted, and as Cedar-trees beside
the waters. Yea, but the knowledge he professes hereof, was not by faiths
apprehension, or upon personal experience, or with a cordial valuation; only by
the vision of the Almighty, Number. 24. 16.
. Whereas the knowledge which the faithful have, is fiducial, experimental,
appretiative, delightful. They speak, but first they have believed, Psalm. 116.
10. I believed, therefore have I spoken. They see, but first they have tasted,
Ejus dulcedinem non cogniscitis, quia minime degustatis. Greg.
. Psalm. 34. 8. Taste and see that the Lord is gracious. And then for
appretiation and delight, O how great is the goodness which thou have laid up
for them that fear thee! Psalm. 31. 19.
. How amiable are thy Tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts! Psalm. 84. 1.
. A day in thy Courts is better then a thousand, ver. 10.
. Blessed is the man whom thou choosest and causest to approach unto thee, that
he may dwell in thy Courts. We shall be satisfied with the goodness of thy
house, even of thy holy Temple, Psalm. 65. 4.
.

The consideration whereof may serve in the first place to depretiate the
adored excellencies and perfections of this world, and to take off our spirits
from discontentative emulation at the sight of prosperous sinners. For alas! in
the greatest fullness of their external accommodations, in the height of their
glory, and the exquisiteness of their delights, yet for lack of these rivers
of water they are but a dry ignoble generation; not worthy to be compared with
the plants of Christ, even in the worst of their outward condition. For as he
in Plutarch said of the Scythians, that although they had not Music nor Vines
among them, yet they had gods, Plutarch. (...).
. So the Regenerate in their greatest want of outward supplies, yet so long as
they have the Spirit of God, and their situation by these still waters Ps. 23.
2.
, they are not destitute of true felicity. Yea, by the benefit of those holy
streams, they are happy in the exercise, happy in the increase, in the
assurance and continuance of received graces. In the due valuation whereof, the
treasures of Egypt were but trash to Moses Heb. 11. 26.
; the privileges of a Jew, but dung to St. Paul Phil. 3. 8.
; the Tents of Kedar but a prison to David Ps. 120. 5.
; I had rather (says he) be a doorkeeper in the house of my God, then to
dwell in the Tents of wickedness Ps. 84. 10.
. And accordingly the Emperor Theodosius rejoiced more in his Ecclesiastical
membership, then in all his Imperial Majesty.

Wherefore 2. say now, ye that are planted in the house of the Lord, is it not
good being here? to keep close to him that has thus disposed us and tendered
our spiritual accommodation? O let it engage us, and strengthen our resolutions
to persevere in the faith of Jesus Christ. Remember the trees in Jotham's
parable Jud. 9. 8. etc.
, which being severally courted with the proffer of a Kingdom, should I (says
the Olive Tree) leave my fatness? Should I (says the Fig Tree) forsake my
sweetness? Should I (says the Vine) leave my Wine? So against all the
allurements and temptations of the world, should we forsake these rivers of
living water, these peerlesse privileges for the momentany pleasures of sin?
No, take heed, brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief
in departing from the living God Heb. 3. 12.
; Lord (says Peter) to whom shall we go? Thou have the words of eternal life
John 6. 68.
. I will dwell (says David) in the house of the Lord for ever Psalm. 23. 6.
And, Let their money perish m In vit. Galeac. Caracc.
with them (said that noble Marquess of Vico) that esteem all the gold in the
world worth one days society with Jesus Christ and his holy Spirit.

Now in the sense of this blessed accommodation, what remains but that we
return those Rivers to their Ocean, Suae reddantur origini fluenta gratiae.
Bern.
and improve them to answerable Fruit? Who plants a Vineyard, and eats not of
the fruit thereof 1 Cor. 9. 7.
? And that is our last particular in this description of a blessed man, as he is
represented in his fructification, [that brings forth his fruit in his
season.]

Which words, although in a Grammatical Consideration, they relate to the Tree,
yet intentionally to the Regerate, compared to it. And they lie to be taken up
in a fourfold gradation.

He brings forth His fruit Brings forth fruit In his Season.

1. Edit, He brings forth] is not merely for receiving, but as well for
yielding; not barely for taking in, but jointly for giving forth; for the actus
elicitus [believing with the heart] and for the actus imperatus [confessing
with the mouth. Romans 10. 10.
] For receving by Faith of Christ's fullness, and for disbursing by Love to
Christ's glory; that as out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks
Mat. 12. 34.
, so the sap of infused grace will soon find vent for its own disclosure. In
the place before alleged [ I believed, therefore have I spoken] And in 2 Cor.
4. We also believe, and therefore speak. Howbeit, whereas verbal profession is
but the leaf of the tree, the honest sincere Christian determines not his faith
in leaves, stopps not there, but,

2. Edit fructum, He brings forth fruit] renders his faith visible by the
adjuncture of New Obedience; his profession honorable by translating the form
into Power; his graces observable by drawing them out into Works: As his faith
into the work of faith; his love into the labor of love; his hope into the
patience of hope, 1 Thessalonians. 1. That as Jacob allegorically prophecieth of Joseph
[A fruitful bough by a Well] Genesis 49. 22. So it is the prayer and care of an
Israelite indeed that (in some correspondencie to his gracious supplies) he may
be filled with the fruits of righteousness, Phil. 1. 11.
and fruitful in every good work Col. 1. 10.
. Agreeably to that of our Savior, He that abodeth in me and I in him, the
saine brings forth much fruit John 15 1.
.

And surely, all things considered, great reason he should. It is the object of
divine expectation, Isa. 5. 7. He looks for [the grapes of] righteousness. It
is the end of our Saviors passion, Tit. 2. 14. that we should be zealous of
good works. The purpose of our Implantation, Ephesians. 2. 10. Created unto Christ
Jesus unto good works. The intent of our spiritual marriage, Romans 7. 4. that we
should bring forth fruit unto God. The drift of divine forbearance, Mat. 3. 8.
that whereas the wrath of God is ira ventura, a wrath to come, and the axe but
laid to the root of the trees, we therefore bring forth fruits meet for
repentance. So that, take away fruit, and you cross them all; God's patient
expectation; Christ's death and passion; our marriage and implantation: These
can never be answered with mere leaves. It is not Lord, Lord, or The Temple of
the Lord, or a parcel of specious words, or a Baptismal initiation, or a formal
frequenting Gods house, or an eating and drinking in Christ's presence, that
can evidence our part in these. In the words of a holy Martyr John Huss.
, Vbi opera bona non apparent ad extra, ibi fides non est ad intra. The root of
faith can have no existence in our hearts, if the fruit of it be to seek in our
lives. If your lives be unprofitable under the name of Christians, your
conversation fruitless under the leaves of profession, such fig-lesse
Fig Trees do but cumber the ground, and can look for nothing but the axe and
the fire Arbor infructuosa, quae non nisi terram occupat, duo tantum expectare
potest, securita scilicet and ignem. Bern
: the one for their sudden excision the other for their endless burning.

To prevent such a woeful issue, add to your leaves Fruit, to your faith Virtue
2 Pet. 1. 5.
, and endeavor (as those ancient Christians) Non grandia loqui, sed vivere, To
be doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own souls Jam. 1.
22.
. De virtute loqui minimum est. Pers.
The easiest thing of an hundred to talk of Christianity, to discourse y Minut.
Felix in Octav.
of Religion, to hear Christ's Ministers, to give applause to their labors.
Haec sunt folia (says Aug.) modo fructus quaeritur. These are leaves indeed,
but the fruit is all. Herein (says Christ) is my Father glorified, that ye
bear much fruit, John 15. 8. And such only shall at last be glorified of him,
Romans 2. 10. Glory, honor, and peace to every man that works good. For as
Fathers observe of the trees used about the building of the Temple, that
neither post, nor spar, nor so much as a pin, but was made of the wood of some
fruit-bearing tree Bishop Andrews of the Nativ. Ser. 10.
: So none to have place in that eternal palace of glory, but fruit-bearing
Christians, abounding in the work of the Lord. For (by the verdict of the Text)
he only is the blessed man that brings forth fruit.

Where (to look more narrowly into the Metaphor) it is very observable, that in
doing the works of Righteousness,

1. Profert, non simulat; He vitally bears it, not deceitfully counterfeits
it. The works of his profession are not fruits artificially sembled, but
naturally yielded; not like Zeuxes his painted grapes which deceived the birds,
nor like Daedalus his (...), which had almost deceived men; nor like
Pygmalion's Statue, on which himself became enamoured; but the genuine and
unfeigned products of sanctifying grace; (...) 1 Timothy 1. 5. out of pure heart,
and of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned.

2. And in working Righteousness, profert, non cogitur; He acts not upon
compulsion, but of a gracious promptness and inclination; takes not up duties
as tiresome burdens, but loves and likes them as refreshing exercises. Indeed,
Virtus nolentium nulla est, says the Moralist; To do good against thy will,
is (in effect) to do ill. The service thou do uncheerfully, Fit de te magis
quam facis, says Prosper; It Is rather extorted from thee, then performed by
thee. The blessed man is of another Spirit; not haled ab externo, by the
violence of some compulsory Agent; but sweetly disposed by an inward principle
of grace, drawn with the cords of love, acted and promoted by a spirit of
ingenuity, 2 Cor. 3. Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty. This
then for bringing Forth, and for bringing forth fruit, our two first gradations.

3. Fructum suum, He brings forth his fruit. And his fruit (if we consult the
Apostle) is the fruit of the Spirit, Gal. 5. 22. Such as love, joy, peace,
long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance; to
crucify the flesh with the affections and lusts Gal. 5. 24.
; to do justly; to love mercy; to walk humbly with thy God Mic. 6, 8.
. The fruit of the spirit then, is the proper fruit of the regenerate.

Where happily some may say, How can these several Interests accord? If these and
the like be the fruits of God's Spirit, how are they ours? Must stakes be
parted between God and our selves? I answer, Upon due consideration, here is no
Inconsistencie, no clashing of Titles at all. No prejudice to Gods Interest in
affirming the fruit to be ours. It is Gods fruit, ratione praecepti, as in his
word he requires it.

Our fruit, ratione Officii, as we are bound to bear it. Gods fruit,
efficienter, as he gives virtue to yield it. Our fruit, subjective, Vt totum in
illo [libero arbitrio] sic totum ex illa, [gratia scilicet divina.] Bern. de
great. and lib. arbit.
and as he graciously imputes it. Gods fruit, in the ultimate end, as it makes
for his glory. Our fruit, in the subordinate end, as it conduces to our
benefit.
So far from prejudicing the Divine Interess, that indeed the Lord will not own
the fruit for his (so as to count it for righteousness to thee) except it be
fructus tuus, truly thine; Thine, for personality, of thine own bearing; and
thine, for correspondencie, of answerable kind.

1. It imports a Personality [He brings forth his own fruit] relies not upon
the virtues and fruits of others. Such a lazy dependence can be of no avail
for the assecuration of true happiness. The just man (says the Prophet) shall
live by his own faith Hab. 2. 4.
. And every man (says the Apostle) shall bear his own burden Gal. 6. 5.
. Insomuch as though Noah [a Preacher of Righteousness 2 Pet. 2. 5.
] Daniel [a man greatly beloved Dan. 10. 19.
] Job [so eminent in uprightness and the fear of God Job 1. 1.
] though these three men were alive upon the earth, they should deliver but
their own souls by their righteousness Ezekiel. 14. 14.
. Well may the good m Non possunt in die judicii aliorum virtutes aliorum vitia
sublevare. Hier.
lives and deeds of others be matter for thy imitation, or a relief to thy
necessities; they cannot answer for thy sinful security. Though born of
Religious Parents, disposed in a Religious Family, seated under a Religious
Pastor, of acquaintance with religious People; all this will not serve to excuse
thy barren profession. No, the righteousness of the righteous shall be upon
him, and the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon him Ezekiel. 18. 20.
; and the righteous Judge give every man according to the fruit of his own
doings Jer. 17. 10.
.

Presume not then, with those foolish Virgins, upon the oil in others vessels
Mat. 25. 8.
: Think not (says the Baptist) to say within your selves, We have Abraham to
our Father Mat. 3. 9.
. It was but a sorry commendation of Lewis the Eighth of France, that he was
son to an excellent Father, and Father to an excellent son Isaacsons Chron. ad
an. 1223.
. Nam quae non fecimus ipsi, vix ea nostra voco Ovid.
. Those things which ye have heard and seen in me, do, says the Apostle, Phil.
4. 9. So the laudable things of others, do in your own persons, and call them
not yours, till ye exemplify them in your practice. For that is the first
importment of [ Fructum suum] a personal fructification [He brings forth his
own fruit.]

2. It imports a genuine correspondencie [his fruit] that is, secundum speciem
suam, according to his kind. That as the Earth was appointed to bring forth
the Fruit-tree, yielding fruit after his kind Genesis 1. 11.
: So a good man, out of the good treasure of his heart, brings forth good
things, says our Savior Mat. 12. 35.
. And the wisdom that is from above, is full of mercy and good fruits. w Jam.
3. 17.


It Is true, the choicest Saints upon Earth have their aylings, their failings.
In many things we offend all Jam. 3. 2.
. Not a just man upon Earth that does good and sins not Eccl. 7. 20.
. Nor from the first transgression of the first man, can it be said of any save
Him who is God and Man, non nvoit pecatum, he knew no sin. Howbeit the sincere
Believer is in a different habitude to the products of Corruption, and the
proper fruits of Regeneration. Consider him according to the New Creature, or
as he is born of God, it is plain upon the Tables, 1 John 2. Whosoever is born
of God does not commit sin. Non facit peccatum, quia patitur potius, says
Bernard De not. and dignit. Divin. amoris cap. 6.
. He is rather passive then active in the business of sin. He acknowledges to
his grief peccatum inhabitans, the sin that dwells in him Romans 7. 17. 24
; but he cannot own the works thereof as his genuine and proper fruit Rom 7.
15. 17.
. No, that is of another nature, Romans 7. 25. [I my self (says the Apostle)
serve the Law of God] That Is Repentance, and Mortification, and Newness of
life, Romans 6. That Is virtue, and temperance, and patience, and godliness, and
brotherlykindnesse, and charity, 2 Pet. 1. And these, not after the rigor of
the Law, in the perfect performance of duty, but in the truth and sincerity of
a Christians desires, in the uprightness and integrity of his will and
purpose, in his careful pursuances and daily endeavors after all goodness, and
righteousness, and truth. For in these consists the fruit of the Spirit, Ephesians.
5. 9. And in the practice of a sound Believer, these only appertain to [
Fructum suum] to his suitable and proper fruit. He is born of the Spirit, and
(to answer his spiritual birth) is careful to bring forth the fruits of the
Spirit.

Now the due consideration hereof, as it should humble the holiest in the
consciousnesse of whatsoever unkindlike and unanswerable fruit, work them to a
selfconfusion for the surreptitious inordinancies of the Old Man, continue them
in a steadfast reliance upon the righteousness of the Tree of Life: So it may
serve to arm them against the proposals of the World, and provoke them to an
Examination and Trial of their fruit. For

1. Whereas the World would alienate us from the virtues and life of God, and
would gain our consent to bring forth heterogeneous fruit Qui genitoris opera
non facit, negat genus. Chrysol. Ser. 123.
(lust of the eye alleging, It will be for your Profit; lust of the flesh
suggesting, It will be for your Pleasure; pride of life pretending, It will be
for your Advancement) the truly regenerate Soul may hence be sufficiently
furnished and prompted to answer [That great God, whose I am by his grace, and
whom I serve with my Spirit, has not been as a Wilderdesse or barren heath
unto me; but having mercifully chosen me out of the Commons of the World, he
has planted me in his enclosed Garden, ingraffed me into a Noble Stock,
supplied me with Rivers of Living Water. And is it equitable, after all this,
to yield him no better fruit? Is this correspondent to the nature of so high a
Calling? Is it Fructus meus, a kindlike fruit, consentaneous to a spiritual
state? As Nehomiah Neh. 6. 11.
, Should such a man as I flee? No, the time past of my life may suffice me to
have wrought the will of the Gentiles 1 Pet. 4. 3.
, to have brought forth la^ruscas, four grapes, those wild fruits of the Old
Man. Haec vita aelios mores postulat. It must be otherwise now that I am
planted in the house of the Lord] In the words of Leo, Sermon. 1. in Nativ. Dom.
Agnosce, O Christian, dignitatem tuam, etc. Acknowledge, O Christian, thine
own dignity, and being made partaker of the Divine Nature, return not into thy
former vileness by a degenerate conversation. But then,

In the second place, whereas there may be much mistaking in the account of
kindlike fruit (a way that may seem right unto a man, when the end is the ways
of death Pro. 16. 25.
.) It therefore nearly concerns us to search and try our ways Lam. 3. 40.
, and every man to prove his own work Gal. 6. 40.
. For the fruit which thou may think to be right, say it be of likely
appearance, yet if destitute of divine allowance (either express, or by
derivation) what can it be deemed but either the fruit of an ignorant
fantasy, or an arrogant superstitious vanity? And thy greatest diligence in
bringing it forth, only (...) a laborious loss of time. Again, admit it be of
Gods commanding, yet if it arise not from a Supernatural root, from a Principle
of special grace, from faith working by love, it must either be violently
forced, or hypocritically feigned, and so of no acceptance with God, Heb. 11.
6. Without Faith it is impossible to please God. Laudo fructum boni operis, sed
in fide agnosco radicem, says Austin In Psalm. 31.
. I shall ever commend the fruit of a good work, but faith must be the root to
make it good. Lastly, if not rightly Scoped with respect to the glory of God,
and to approvable Subordinate ends (for in divine morality it is the rectitude
of the aim, not the substance of the act that carries it with God. Non
actibus, sed finibus pensantur officia. Aug.
) Such sinisterly intended fruit is no better then the apples of Sodom, or the
grapes of Gomorrah, or the fruit of degenerate Israel [fruit unto himself, Hos.
10. 1. Israel is an empty vine, he brings forth fruit unto himself.
] neither acceptable to God, nor profitable to the bearer.

Whereas (contrarily) if we work by rule, the undefiled Law of God; if we live
by faith in the merits and strength of Christ; if we act sincerely, with
intention of our Masters honor, there can be no clearer evidence of a
reasonable and spiritual service; provided that it be performed in tempore suo,
in its proper Season. Which is our last gradation observable in the Text, his
fruit [in his season.]

In his season? When is that? Is the doing of good at any time unseasonable?
Are we not all our time to continue in the service of God? True, for the
general we are (that is without controversy) and as never to give over the care
of well-doing; so to fasten upon it while it is called to day Psalm. 95. 7. 8.
; not baulking the present season with presumption upon an uncertain hereafter;
not proroguing the practice of Christianity to the bed of infirmness and
languishing, with purpose then to distribute, when thou may keep thy wealth
no longer; to cease from sinful pleasures when strength of pursuance fails thee
(a time ill chosen for repentance, when, with Issachar, thou must couch between
two burdens, the burden of sin and sickness) No, that is only to be reckoned
our day and our season, wherein God requires and expects our fruit. And that is
now (says our Savior, Joh. 5. 25.) (...). The hour is now. Behold, Now is the
accepted time; Behold, Now is the day of salvation, 2 Cor. 6. 2. And (clearly)
it is the deplorable misery of all deferrers, the hopes of grace to come make
them graceless for the present; and thoughts of what they will be regardlesse
of what they should be. It Is true, the mercies of God are great, and to be
admired; but his judgments are just, and to be feared. And though true
repentance be never too late, yet late repentance is seldom true In morte
toenitentia est sera and coacta, ideoque raro vera, seria and sincera. Corn. a
Lap. in Luc. 12.
.

The Crab in the Fable, having wounded the Serpent to death, in recompense of
his crooked life, and at last perceiving him to streak out himself; At oportuit
sic vixisse (says he) It is too late now, thou should have lived so. Ye may
easily add the Moral. Vae illis (says St. Ambrose) qui tunc habuerunt terminum
luxuriae, cum vitae. Woeful is the cae of those procrastinating sinners, whose
lives and lusts have their ends together.

Wherefore, knowing the dreadful consequents of neglected time, say, I beseech
you every one in the secret of his own soul, [If I must once reform and break
off my sins; if I must bring forth fruits meet for repentance, why not to day?
Quamdiu cras, cras? Quare non modo? Quare non hac hora finis turpitudinis meae.
Aug.
Why should I neglect the time of my visitation, and harden my heart by these
unkind delays? Why should I boast my self of to morrow, not knowing what a day
may bring forth Pro. 27. 1.
?]

When a certain City in Asia had promised King Alexander the great a part of
their Lands, and the half of all their goods: No (says he) I am not come into
Asia to accept of what ye shall allot me, but that your selves should take what
I chance to leave Sen. Epist. Lib. 7. Ep. 54.
. So it were high presumption in us, should we treat in like sort with God, who
has all our times in his own power. Nullum tempus occurrit Regi, by that old
rule in Law: So neither youth nor age can exempt from the service of God. He is
Alpha and Omega Rev. 1. 8.
, the first and the last Rev. 2. 8.
; and we, from first to last to order our lives in his fear. Thus, in a general
consideration, even all our time is the Season for bringing forth fruit.

But then if we descend to particularities, and consider them in their due
circumstantials, this seems to be the Psalmists meaning here, That it is the
property of a blessed man to be watchful in espying, and wise in observing [ ut
res, ita tempora rerum] as the matter and substance of a particular duty, so
the proper Season wherein to do it. Which (for more distinct apprehension) ye
may please to take up in a threefold expression.

1. In his Season] that is, in due place and order, upon requisite and proper
Antecedents. The non-observation whereof is enough to deprave a pretended
service, so far as to deprive it of divine acceptance. See it in some
particulars. To preach the Gospel of Christ, to hear the Word of Truth, to show
the Lords death in the Eucharist, to administer Pastoral Consolation: These,
and the like, are works of great importance. But then so to preach, as without
commission; so to hear, as without resolution; so to communicate, as without
preparation; so to comfort, as without tokens of contrition: Such preposterous
acts as these, are overhasty for hope of speed; good in themselves, but (as
Hushai of Achitaphel's counsel 2 Samuel 17. 7.
) not good hac vice, at such a time; not countable for good to the Agent, for
lack of requisite Antecedents, 1 Chr. 15. 13. The Lord our God made a breach
upon us, for that we sought him not after the due order. That Is the first
Expression.

2. In his Season] that is, answerably and suitably to whatsoever condition.
For as this present life is subject to variety of changes; so the faithful in
Christ are endued with variety of graces; and (like that Tree of life in the
last of the Revel.) enabled to bear all manner of fruit, and to yield their
fruit every month. As

In the month of Abundance, compassionate beneficence. In the month of
Poverty, submissive contentation. In the month of Health, industrious
cheerfulness. In the month of Sickness, religious patience. In the month of
Honor, the fruit of noble Atchievments. In the month of Dishonor, the fruit
of a meek spirit. In the day of Prosperity, thankfully rejoicing. In the day of
Adversity, wisely considering. Eccl. 7. 16.

Insomuch as a right-bred Christian can allege no cause, either from his
present condition, to take himself off from duty, or to perplex his soul with
thoughts of after-changes. Seeing however it fare with him, it is his season to
fructify; and whatever may befall him, he has a sap of suitable grace to
bring forth in every season.

3. And lastly, In his Season] that is, accepta quavis ansa, taking hold on
every hint and opportunity of doing good. Indeed, every time is not meet for
every purpose; and consequently every work not to be done at random in every
time. Is this a time (said the Prophet to his servant) to receive money, and to
receive garments 2 Kin. 5. 26.
? Should I weep (said the Jew) in the fifth month Zec. 7. 3.
? that is, in which the Temple was finished. In Samuel's absence no season for
Saul to offer sacrifice 1 Samuel 13. 12, 13.
: While David was overpowered, no season for Joab to be charged with
delinquencie 2 Samuel 3. 13.
. Till the wine was gone out, no season for Nabal to be reminded of his folly 1 Samuel 25. 37.
. To every thing there is a season, says the Preacher, Eccl. 3. 1. And great
difference (say our Critics) between (...) and (...), Time and Season. (...),
Opportunity is the flower of time; and a well-chosen season the greatest
advantage of any action Bishop Hall in his Contempl. lib. 21. on Haman, etc.
.

Like the golden Scepter held forth to Qu. Esther Esth. 5. 2.
. Like one days Sunshine in catching weather John 5. 4.
. Like those troubled waters to the nearest expectant d, and Like the valley of
Achor for a door of hope Hos. 2. 15.
.
The more to be lamented is the carelessness of most Christians, that make so
little use of many precious opportunities of doing or receiving good. To whom
may be justly accommodated that saying of Elihu, God speaks once, yea twice,
yet man perceives it not Job 33. 14.
. For the voice of the Lord is not only in the words of his Law, or in the
motions of his Spirit, or in the largesses of his goodness, or in the rod of
his displeasure, but in those golden opportunities, in that price which he puts
into men's hands; and yet deest animus, few have any heart to improve them. Wise
enough to take notice of natural Seasons, to discern the face of the Sky; while
(with those Jews) they care not to know (...) Luke 12. 56.
, regard not the offerture of seasonable hints for the exercise of Christian
virtue, and the furthering of their accounts with God. And hence it comes to
pass, that as Ahab lost himself by letting Benhadad go out of his hands 1 Kin.
20. 42.
, as Felix was most unhappy in putting off Paul to another time Acts 24. 25.
: So by reason of this non-advertency, this regardlesness of time and judgment,
the misery of man is great upon him Eccl. 8. 6.
, while he neglects those mollia tempora, desirable seasons for spiritual
advantages, which may (happily) in all his remainder never come about again.

Wherefore, Brethren, to prevent this misery, let it be our wisdom and care in
our several capacities, for the glory of God, for the behoof of our souls, to
beautify our services with suitable seasons; and (as the Lord in his
providence shall hold them forth) to improve them in the discharge of Christian
duty.

It may be thou have a season for some act of piety, an opportunity for prayer,
for praises, for mourning, for rejoicing, for appearing in the cause of God.

Or a season for brotherly-kindnesse, an opportunity for admonition,
exhortation, consolation, counsel, distribution to the necessities of the
Saints.

Or a season for neighbourly charity, an opportunity to compose differences, to
relieve the oppressed, to help the fatherless and widow, to consider the poor
and needy. O the preciousnesse of such seasons, the happiness of such souls as
have grace to use them! For although in their natural account they be but
particles and minutes, yet in their spiritual and prudential managing, the very
quintessence of time, and the apparatus to eternity. O Season, Thou art in this
like the City of God, I sal. 83. 7. Glorious things are spoken of thee. A word
spoken in season (so a work performed in season) is like apples of gold in
pictures of silver Pro. 25. 11.
. [Like apples of gold] such is the preciousnesse, [in pictures of silver] such
the luster, the grace and beauty of fruit in season.

Unseasonable therefore to end here, without a word or two for this Season,
which calls upon you (my honored and beloved Countrymen) in expectation of
some fruit of this your Brotherly meeting. To which purpose I shall take my
liberty from the resemblance in the Text, to look upon you as so many Trees,
whom the wise Moderator of all things has (at times) transposed from the soil
of your Nativity, that ye might go to a City of habitation Psalm. 107. 7.
; ingraffed you into the stock of an honorable Metropolis, disposed you by the
rivers and springs of water, blessed you with the upper-springs [the means of
grace] blessed you with the nether-springs [the accommodations of this life]
and graciously reserved you to the solemnity of this day, whereon to record his
mercies toward you.

And now, that this great Benefactor has done all this for you, What more
seasonable then to renew your wonted consultations in order to some thankful
return? To say among your selves in the sense and valuation of his favors,
What is to be done for God? For God? yea but (as Eliphaz answered Job) Can a
man be profitable unto God Job 22. 2.
? The earth is the Lords, and the sulnesse thereof Psalm 24. 1.
. Every beast of the forest is his, and the cattle upon a thousand hills Psalm.
50. 10.
. My goodness (says David) extends not to thee Psalm. 16. 2.
. Or (as the vulgar Translation has it) Bonorum meorum non eges. Thou have no
need of my goods. True, Non eget quoad potentiam suam (as Salvian speaks Ad
Ecclesiam Cath. lib. 4.
) God in respect of his power, of his Majesty, has no need. But then his
Gospel has, his Church has, your poor distressed brethren, yea the brethren
of Christ have Mat. 25. 40.
. O steep your thoughts in the remembrance of Gods dignations; embrace this
Season for the contrivance of some charitable benefaction. Let neither Mirth
nor Fullness cause you to forget your God, nor indispose you in the least for
the administration of such a Service, as may not only supply the necessity of
your brethren, but be abundant also (in the issue) by many thansgivings unto
God 2 Cor. 9. 12.
.

To conclude in few words (for it might savor of some jealousy to over-charge
an Ingenuous Auditory) If ye place any moment in the glory of your Maker, any
weight in the credit of your Profession, any strength in the honor of your
Country, Let these associate and accord you in your endeavors to do worthily
in Ephratah, to be famous in Bethlehem Ruth 4. 11.
. And let us all be exhorted (of whatsoever denomination) to walk in wisdom
with a holy vigilancie and circumspection, redeeming the time by yielding our
fruit in our Season. So shall we receive in due season the fruit of our fruits,
the end of our faith, even the salvation of our souls.

FINIS.

