FANATICISM Fanatically imputed to the CATHOLIC CHURCH by DOCTOR
STILLINGFLEET: And The Imputation refuted and retorted by S. C. a Catholic O.
S. B.

Psalm. LXXI. 4. Iudicabit pauperes populi* and humiliabit calumniatorem.
Proverb. XXVI. 18 19. As a madman who casts firebrarnds, arrovvs, and death:

So is the man that vvrongeth his neighbor, and says, Am not I in Sport?

M.DC.LXXII. Permissu Superiorum.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR MARC-ALBERT D'OGNATE KNIGHT, Counselor to his
Catholic Majesty, Commissary for Renewing of Magistrates in the Province of
Flanders, President of the Chamber of Commerce and Navigation, and Envoye from
the King of Spain to his Majesty of Great Britain.
SIR,
It had been to be wished that we might have concealed from Strangers the
Stains of our Nation, and that they might remain ignorant that neither Fidelity
to our Prince, nor Charity to our fellovv-Subjects can secure Catholics from
the vvorst effects of war in the midst of Peace: such is the Virulence of one
malignant Party: who though they enjoy their lives by an unmerited Pardon of
their Rebellion, will never pardon us for our Loyalty.

In most Countries of Europe there are agitated daily Disputes and
Controversies about Religion, and in Books on each side ordinarily some
sharpness is mingled. But in England our Lot must be (...), we are forced to
contend with Adversaries whose minds by our late Tumults are rendered savage
and implacable. They to spite us, resume a New war against Heaven it self,
deriding and blaspheming the Saints in Glory. And against Gods Church on earth
they frame Accusations never heard of before, making her greatest Virtues pass
for the directly opposite greatest Crimes. The most Saintly Exercises of
Persons among us consecrated to God and entirely subject to Authority are
disgracefully styled Fanaticism: Because we will not be chusers each one of
his own Faith, we are accused to have an Enthusiastic way of Religion: we
exercise Charity to our Friends Deceased, and that is called an Impediment of
Devotion: we teach (as our Savior did) that the way to Heaven is strait, and
consequently that to enter into it we must practice Confession of Sins,
Pennances, Mortifications, Praying, Fasting, Almsgiving etc. and for this we
are charged to be Hinderers of Piety and a Good Life: Our acknovvledging an
Authority in Gods Church to end Controversies is called an effectual Mean to
multiply them: If out of Compassion to persons guilty of Schism, and out of a
tender love to Unity any one among us strains his vvitts to persuade our
Adversaries that the distance betvveen us is not so vast as some of them seem
vvilling to conceive, his recompense must be contemptuous revilings: No Pagans
or Cannibals must be esteemed so blindly, so horribly I dolatrous, No Quakers
so ridiculously Frantic, No Fifth-Monarchists so dangerous both to Church and
State.

These enormous Excesses which have been lately exposed to the world in a
Style partly Burlesque and partly Tragical were never heard of in any other
Nation but England, and only of late in England, and I hope, for the credit of
our Nation, are not taken notice of by many Strangers living here, and thereby
less in danger to be published abroad. But from you, SIR, they could not be
concealed, since your zeal to Catholic Religion makes you inquisitive into all
things that concern it, and your perfect knowledge in our Language renders all
our BOOKS as intelligible to you, as if written in your own. My hope now is
that you being well acquainted with the present Temper of our Nation, will
judge aright, that a Book written in such a Style, and wholy composed of
malignant Passions and nevv-invented Calumnies against Gods Church was only
the private Design of a malicious Brain on purpose to feed the exulcerated
minds of a, malevolent Party among us, and consequently not to be imputed to
any other besides. The affection you bear to our Nation, from which you are
not quite, even in blood, a Stranger, encourages me to expect thus much
justice from you.

As for my self, I being, I hope, not the only person, engaged in the defense
of Truth and Innocence against Malice and Calumny, am desirous to address to
you this my Answer, as a Testimony of my grateful resentment of the favor
and honor you have been pleased to conferr generously on me, in allowing me
a share in your freindship: the comfortable effects whereof have likewise
been extended to an afflicted Community abroad, recommended by me to your
Protection.

But besides this, a far greater obligation both my self and all loyal English
Subjects have to honor you for your constant respect, duty, and assistance
which you have always with great zeal shevved to his Sacred Majesty and
his cause, when he was inhumanly treated by the same Party, which now so
inhumanly treats his Faithful Catholic Subjects. In which fatal Conjuncture
also, his banished friends and servants found in your house Hospitality and
kindness which with them had been banished out of England. I beseech you,
SIR, accept this Address as a gage of gratitude, honor and respect from,

SIR, Your devoted Servant in our Lord. S. C.

To the Reader.
THE report is very current that Doctor Stillingfleet wonders, and even
complains that, having made a general formal Challenge to Catholics to come
openly into the field against him being ready with weapons in his hand, he
cannot yet have the contentment to give further proof of his Skill and courage
against them. But surely it is not for the Doctors credit to make such a
Complaint, when the world knows how all passages into the field are stoppd and
even walled up, I will not say, by himself, yet at least by his Partisans; how
Stationers apprehend greater danger in publishing Answers to his Book, then any
Books of Sedition or Treason; and how during the space of a few months since
his last Book saw the light, Searches into Presses have been more sollicitously
exact, and more frequent daily and hourly, then they have been all the years
taken together since his Majesty's Restoration, Inquisitors searching into
every hole, turning over every small paper, and rigorously examining both
Masters and Servants whether any thing has been written against Doctor
Stillingfleet.

How securely now may the Doctor triumph, and as often as he pleases, multiply
his Challenges of Defiance against Catholic Adversaries so bound hand and
foot: and at how cheap a rate has he gotten (from Tradesmen and Gossips)
immortal honor by a Book, then which England never to this day saw any one,
pretending to Controversy, more harmless to the Church he professes to oppose,
nor more destructive to the Church he professes to defend. Now whether this be
not a true Character of it, I do willingly and confidently stand to the
judgment of any learned and considering Protestant Reader who shall think fit
to peruse the following Treatise.

Notwithstanding it cannot be denied but that the Doctor has used a wonderful
dexterity in mannaging this Controversy: For though his Book proves in effect
exceeding harmless to the common Cause of Catholics, and though all the
Weapons made use of by him against the Catholic Faith really want both edges
and points of Sufficient sharpnes and strength to make an entrance into the
Rock on which our Savior has built his Church, yet they pierce into the very
bowels of the Persons, fortunes and condition of English Catholics, whose
destruction he seems to design. And on the other side, though the same weapons
do draw out the very heart-blood of the English Church, yet he pretends all the
way, and seems to be acknowledged by them a Champion of its cause, and not to
intend the least harm to the Prelates and Subjects of it.

Cicero was wont to say, that he thought any one Roman Augur could not without
Smiling look upon another Augur, considering what large preferments and honors
they enjoyed by befooling the whole Roman Commonweal with their ridiculous
fopperies. The like smile of secret intelligence passes between the Doctor and
his ancient Brethren. For a great pleasure it must needs be to them to see him
in his new dress, in his Surplice and Scarlet-Hood, so Canonically defending
out of the Pulpitt the Church of England, or brandishing his Sword against her
Adversaries in printed Volumes; but so defending it, as not to do the least
harm to the old cause: Not one word falls from his tongue or pen to give his
now Prelates warning of their danger from Presbyterians, Independents,
Latitudinarians and other Sects, though all these conspiring against them had
held their Necks so many years of late under their feet.

But nothing can be more ridiculous to those Sectaries (nor truly more
deserving detestation from all loyal Subjects) then to see the same Sectaries
quondam friend Doctor Stillingfleet zealously pretending a care of the Safety
of his Majesty and the State against the seditious writings and practices of
ill-principled Subjects, and at the same time, as if he thought the world by
virtue of the Act of Oblivion had quite forgott the last twenty years troubles,
naming none but Catholics as such ill-principled Subjects, who yet alone among
all Dissenters from the English Church had all of them unanimously adhered to
his Majesty, and for his Majesty's sake had defended also the said Church
against the Doctor and his Brethren in evil, the Sectaries.

The plain truth is, the Doctors collusion and prevarication in his Book seems
to me so visible and so insupportable, that it is a shame that hitherto not one
true Prelaticall Protestant has appeared as a Defender of the English Church
and State against him: but on the contrary even some English Prelates themselves
have congratulated and boasted of his supposed succesfull endeavors against
the Catholic Church, though ruinous only to themselves. Indeed it was the
Doctors Masterpiece by his Drollery to putt Protestants into a fit of
laughing, that being in so good an humor they might drink down the Poison he
presented them. This Poison, it seems, does not yet sensibly work with them,
and therefore they neglect to provide Antidots. Well: all J can say is,
Viderint ipsi. But they may also do well to consider that to this hour they
have not from this Defender of the Church of England seen one line which was
not more to the advantage of their Enemies, the Sectaries, then of their own
Church. So that abating several hundred pounds of yearly preferments, he still
is what he was before his Majesty's return. He was pleased to style some late
Catholic Writers by the name of Ratts, for not answering line by line his
great Volume: He must give me leave to make use of his Metaphor another way,
applying it to himself. It is a common Observation among Mariners that when
they see a Ship suddenly freed from Ratts formerly abounding there, they
conclude that there are some leaks in it, unobserved by any but the Ratts
themselves, which threaten its sudden sinking. Now let any one judge wherther
the Doctor by publishing his Principles has not stolln out of the Church of
England: (yet with a Latitudinarian conscience holding fast his Preferments:)
and does not this argue that the Ratt foresees, or shrewdly suspects some
danger to the Ship, and therefore provides for his own safety, by returning to
the same Sects which uncessantly plott against it, and, it is to be feared,
against the Civil State too?

It is a sad thing therefore that not one Protestant will open his eyes, and
give warning of the dangerous proceedings of their Champion. Now whether that
task and duty deserted by them, has not been efficaciously enough undertaken
and performed by the Author of the following Treatise. J leave to all
indifferent Judges to determine. They are also hereby entreated to impute the
delay of this Answer to the true cause above mentioned, or indeed to any thing
rather then to the least guilty apprehension which Catholics may have of
encountering such an Adversary as the Doctor is supposed to be by persons who
are persuaded that an insolent confidence must needs be accompanied with Reason
and Truth. And for such persons, so qualified, no doubt, it was that the Doctor
wrote his Book, not to instruct them, but to imprint his own enormous passions
in their minds. Whereas Readers of but ordinary capacity and prudence will
easily perceive that it was a consciousness of his own inability to cast any
prejudice on the received Doctrins and Discipline of the Catholic Church
her-self that forced him to indulge to his fancy and invention to expose to
contempt and hatred of unwary Readers the Opinions and Practices of a few
particular persons among Catholics, not always faithfully related by him, and
most of them already censured by Superiors. But that which has gained to him
the most of his applauding Readers is his acting the Theological Zani, after a
fashion altogether new and unexpected, whilst he most ridiculously imputes
Fanaticism to the Catholic Church, of which never any Heretic before him
suspected her capable.

My last request to the Reader is that seeing this Treatise written in a style
so unpractised hitherto by me, and indeed so contrary to mine own inclination,
he will interpret it aright, and believe that J judged my self obliged to
neglect complements of Civility to such an Adversary. If he had written like
one that sought out Truth, J should have condemned my self if any phrases of
bitterness had escaped my pen. But in answering such a mass of Buffonry mixed
with rancour and malice, the Wise man has taught me my Duty. Proverb. xxv. 5.

OF FANATICISM
. 1. The Authors Motive of Writing this Treatise. Doctor Stillingfleets three
Heads of Accusation against the Catholic Church, etc.
1. THe Author of this following Treatise may with confidence profess, that it
was not from a resentment of several contemptuous Aspersions cast on him by
Doctor Stillingfleet in his lately published Book, that he was induced to
write this Answer. For who would not glory in suffering any scorns or calumnies,
when merited only for recommending to devout Christians instructions for the
practice of Christian Virtues and Piety in the greatest perfection that this
life is capable of? His Motives therefore of writing and publishing this
Discourse were first his Obedience to certain friends whose commands he ought
in no wise to resist: And then a just Indignation in seeing the most Sacred
things and Persons in the Catholic Church selected on purpose by him, to be
contaminated with his inck full of gall and poison, thereby imprudently
ministering new aims to Atheists (against whom as a considerable and growing
Sect among them, he and others begin to preach and write) by showing, to his
utmost ability, that all the Religion professed in the world, and that thing
that bare the name of a Catholic Church for so many Ages* before the times of
Luther and Calvin, was nothing, for their Worship, but Idolatry; for their
Devotions, but Fanaticism: and for their Doctrine and Discipline; nothing but
Faction, Ambition and Avarice.

2. The task therefore here imposed being to answer in the Doctors last Book,
not the Points of Controversy between the Catholic Church and Protestants
(reserved for a more learned pen of his worthy Antagonist) but those discourses
in his Book (and principally touching Fanaticism) in which the Doctor seems
not to have intended to employ his Talent of Reasoning, but to discharge his
excess of Spleen and choler and to give free scope to all Unchristian and even
in human Passions, the Author hopes he shall not deserve justly a Censure from
the Reader, if he endeavor here to defend the Truth with as much zeal and
confidence as his Adversary has assaulted it: So long as nothing passes from
him that any way wounds Christian Charity, nor any sharpness is used, but
such as may, through Gods Grace prove beneficial to him, and his applauding
Readers.

3. Now in the Doctors Book there are three Heads of Accusation selected by
him with intention to disgrace, and fright his Readers from the Communion of
the Catholic Church, by imputing to her. 1. That she is guilty of Several
Opinions and Practices which hinder Devotion and a good life. 2. That
Fanaticism is not only countenanced by her, but made a ground of believing some
Doctrins, of making some Ecclesiastical Ordonnanes, of erecting Religious
Orders, and ^kewise of resisting lawful Authority. 3. That there are among her
Subjects Divisions about Doctrins of great moment and no possibility of
reducing dissenting Parties to Unity or Obedience.

4. These Accusations my purpose is to refute, and for his Proofs of them, to
show the invalidity of those which are pretended by him to regard the Church
her self. But as for such as regard the Opinions or Actions of particular
persons, and which fill up the far greatest number of his leaves, some thing
shall be said to those among them which seem of any considerable moment, and
the rest shall be neglected, as needing no Answer, though never so truly
alleged by him. And having done this, I will, as I am persuaded, with much
greater confidence, retort the same Heads of his Accusations upon himself,
demonstrating that his Protestant Churches, as principled by him. 1. do
evidently undermine the foundations of Piety and a Good life. 2. That the
Essence of his Religion is mere Fanaticism, in his own sense of the Word: and
that it iustifies Rebellion against the Civil Magistrate. 3. That by the
Grounds of his Religion all manner of Divisions and Schims are not only
excusable but lawful, and withal incurable.

5. He will perhaps, when he sees his large Book pretended to be sufficiently
answered in a few sheets of paper, renew the scornful complaint made by him in
his Preface, That those who in, some small measure have attempted to answer
him, have performed it in a way that Ratts answer Books, by gnawing some of the
leaves of them, the Body and Design of them remaining wholly untouched by them.
Now who those persons are whom he is pleased to resemble to Ratts, I can only
judge by guess: and if I guess aright, particularly of one Author, I could
make it appear to the Doctor, that the very bowels and most Vital parts of
his great Volume have been eaten through and consumed by that his Adversary.

6. However, I conceive he will not have just reason to apply this Metaphor to
the Author of this present Treatise, since it was his own fault, by heaping
together a great Mass of rubbage and stuff altogether impertinent, to make a
short Answer sufficient. Does he think his Adversaries, in case they were
allowed the liberty and commodity of publishing large Volumes, so much at
leisure as to follow him step by step in examining Quotations, and answering
Objections which are of no moment whether they be true or false? He may by such
a way of writing beget in the minds of the vulgar sort of Readers a high
Opinion of the Vastnes of his unnecessary reading, and his well-furnished
Library: but his Adversaries will be much to blame if they trouble themsselves
with defending every Old Story, or personal imputations: or indeed, if
hereafter they engage themselves in any Controversy with him, except in Points
pretended by him of such consequence as to justify a necessity in Protestants
of separating from the Catholic Church* And few such Points are to be found in
his Books.

7. But moreover, as short an Answer as this is, he will have less reason to
say, That the Body and Design of his Book will remain wholly untouched in it.
He may indeed perhaps have some ill Design in publishing (as it were by
conspiracy with others) a Book so void of Christian Charity and moderation:
Which Design may remain untouched by me, because I am unwilling to declare the
grounds of my conjectures moving me to look upon it as an Ominous ill-boading
Book, fore-running some expected mischief. But for the Body of his Book, that
is, whatsoever appears to me in it of consequence, it is truly a very slender
dwarfish Body, being almost entirely contained in a few sheets at the
beginning, and in the last single sheet which enwraps his Protestant
Principles. The publishing of which Principles was truly an act of commendable
ingenuity and confidence also: For I think he is the first
Protestant-Controvertist who upou such a tender Subject has appeared barefaced
out of the Clouds. And moreover I may take leave to tell him that from a
heedfull consideration of those his Principles I do collect that He and myself
are of the same judgment in one matter of great importance, viz. That no show
of Reason or conscience can be pretended to escape from the Authority of the
Catholic Church but by renouncing entirely (as he has done in his Principles)
all Ecclesiastical (or even Civil) Authority: and by consequence that no
Churches proceed Logically in asserting the grounds of their Religion, but only
Catholics or Single-Independents. The reason hereof is, Because for any
Ecclesiastical Superiors to acknowledge any obligation lying on there is
Subjects to submitt to their Authority, and at the same time to prefer the
Authority of a particular Church before that of the Universal, which is the
fountain of all Authority, is to putt out their Subjects eyes, and to hale them
after them with chains. And above all other Congregations the Tyranny of
Presbyterians is most brutish, who after a denial of all Visible Authority
extant before them, endeavor violently to subdue men's consciences to the
Jurisdiction of their Classes, erected upon controverted Texts of Scripture, as
interpreted by themselves alone.

8. The Doctors Principles therefore being by far the most material Part of
his Book, it is not notwithstanding my business in this Treatise to examine
them apart one by one, or to trouble my self with making a settled Judgment
whether of the two forenamed Parties, Catholics or Independents has the most
solid reasons on their side. For being engaged to make Reflections on that part
of his Book which is of least importance, written in an immodest, uncivil,
petulant style, it was not fit in my Answer to mingle considerations on a
Subject so serious, and soberly expressed as his Principles are, which indeed
deserve to be examined separately with all possible calmness and
impassionateness, as being an Argument on which all other Controversies do
depend, and which one way or other makes an end of them all.

9. Yet for all this, it was not possible for me to avoid all mention of his
Principles in this Answer to a different Subject: since (as has been already
intimated, and will be seen by the Sequel) whatsoever Charge he brings against
the Catholic Church, and which I pretend here to refute, does scarce at all
touch Her, but lies most heavily and unmoveably upon his Principles, and on any
Church acknowledging or adopting them. He must therefore dispose himself, with
the greatest patience he can, to be put in mind more then once or twice of his
Principles and the fatal Consequences of them. From which Consequences till he
can effectually clear them, he will have little cause to call, as he has done,
for an Answer to his former large Volume. For if it shall appear, by the ruin
of his, that the Principles of Catholic Religion only are solid and
inexpugnable; that is, that the Catholic Church is indeed, and to be
acknowledged the Pillar and ground of Truth, from whose Authority no Appeal is
to be admitted, then both his Former and latter Books are thereby sufficiently
refuted, as far as they condemn or but question any Doctrins whatsoever
determined by her. This being once established, he will find his Books, not
having a few leaves gnawed by Ratts, but una litura entirely abolished.

. 2. A Vindication of the Honor and Sanctity of S. Benedict etc from the
Doctors contumelious imputations.
10. HAving given this Account of the Motive and Design of this Treatise, it is
time to take into consideration the forementioned Heads of Accusation laid by
the Doctor against the Catholic Church, which he thinks of sufficient weight
to deter any one from joining in her Communion. I will begin with that
touching Fanaticism, which though the Second in his Order, yet principally
concerned me to disprove, and particularly that part of it which contains an
Invective against the Life and Prayer of Contemplation commended and practiced
only in the Catholic Church, it being a State which from the infancy of the
Church has been esteemed the nearest approaching to that of Glorified Saints;
From whence notwithstanding he has taken occasion to vilify in particular the
Author of this ensuing Treatise: Who is very well content to receive his
proportion of Scorn with such companions, as Thaulerus, Suso, Rusbrochius,
Blosius etc.

11. Now the Doctor, to the end he might make an entrance into his In vective
with better grace, has prepared a way thereto, then which a more proper could
not be found for such a purpose, by producing on his Stage, antickly disgvised,
the famous Teachers and Erectours of Schools for Contemplation, Nullos esse
Deos, in ane coelum Affirmat Selius, probatque, quod se Factum, du^ negat haec,
videt Beatu^. Martial l. 4. Epigr. 21.
S. Benedict, S. Romuald, S. Bruno, S. Francis, S. Dominick and S. Ignatius: so
exposing them like blind Samson to the derision of profane Readers: for from
Such only can he expect an applause for his impiously employed Wit: And he will
find in the end, except Repentance prevent it, that Selius his argument in the
Epigrammatist will prove a dangerous Fallacy.

12. And to the end he may not too much boast of the Novelty of his invention,
and his profanely employed Wit, I do assure him that I my self, being then a
young Student in Oxford, was witness of a far greater, and if Fancy alone be
considered, far better deserved Applause given to a Preather, who in a
Repetition-Sermon to the University, descanting on the whole life of our
Savior, rendered him and his Attendants, men and women, Objects of the utmost
scorn and a version, as if they all of them had been only a pack of dissolute
Vagabonds and Cheats. This the Preacher performed, taking on him the person of
a Jewish Pharisee and Persecutour of Christ. And he performed it so to the
life, that he would have shamed Lucian, and raised envy in the Doctor himself.
But presently upon it, changing his style as became a Disciple of Christ, he
with such admirable dexterity and force of Reason answered all the Cavillations
and Invectives before made, that the loudly repeated Applauses of his Hearers
hindered him a good space from proceeding. Notwithstanding this, the Grave
Doctors and Governors of the University, though much satisfied with his
Intellectual abilities, yet wisely considering that a petulant, histrionicall
Style even in Objections, did not befitt so Sacred a Subject, and that it was
not lawful to personate too naturally a deriding Jew, obliged the Preacher to
a public Recantation-Sermon in the same Pulpit the Sunday following. And this
deservedly, For Vitium simulari non potest, Virtus potest.

13. If the Doctor would now make a second Essay of his Wit and invention on
several Stories as we find them recorded in Holy Scripture, he would perhaps
find his Fancy as inventive, and if Nature had denied him, the Devil would, no
doubt, once more furnish him with Expressions as apt to move the Spleen and
laughter of his present applauding Readers, as any are now found in his Book:
by which means he perhaps may arrive at the glory to be acknowledged the Head
of a New Sect of the Ecclesiae Malignantium. And unless Report deceives us,
there are already several Books of the Holy Bible descanted upon in a style
like to his, and it may be the unhappy Authors conceive that the same Press
may (without an Imprimatur) be allowed them also.

14. It is not now my purpose to make a particular Vindication of each Saint
traduced by him. But considering the public Interest obliging the whole
Western Patriarchat, and most especially England to be tender of the Honor of
S. Benedict, by whose Disciples, if they were Fanatics, Christianity has been
established among us, and in veneration to whom such a world of Religious
houses and Churches have been erected and enriched with vast possessions, I can
not, without renouncing my Duty as a Christian, Religious man, and an English
man, by silence conspire to his dishonor: the rather, because to my best
remembrance I never knew that any of the English Church since the Reformation
did ever cast any scornful Aspersions on his Memory: and I believe the Doctor
will scarce find any one hereafter willing to imitate his malignant Ingratitude.

15. Now what is it that the Doctor lays to the charge of S. Benedict? Page
262.
The whole Charge consists in repeating after a ridiculons manner certain
passages of S. Benedicts life written by S. Gregory: As 1. how being a child he
by his Prayers obtained a Miracle for the consolation of his Nurse, a Monument
of which Miracle remained publicly Visible many years after. 2. How he lived
three years with wonderful austerity in a cave, unknown to any but S. Romanus,
who to the Devils despite furnished him with necessary food. 3. How he rolled
himself in thorns to conquer his amorous Passions. 4. How he was enabled by
Supernatural Revelations and Lights to spy out Devils, to discover things
absent and foretell things to come, to be a Spectatour of the Soul of his
Sister S. Scholastica in the shape of a Dove going up to Heaven, and to see all
the world in uno radio Solis, etc.

16. By this brief Account of the life and actions of S. Benedict, all which
the Doctor expects that his Readers should esteem to be mere fanaticall Lies
and forgeries, his intention seems to be to convict both S. Benedict and S.
Gregory of lying against the Holy Ghost, and ascribing to a Divine Power
pretended Miracles, Visions etc. which either were not at all, or were Sleights
of Leger-de-main. But what arguments does the Doctor give to disparage S.
Gregory's relation? Will he deny that any Miracles were wrought by Gods
servants in that Age? If so, he will find it a hard task to defend himself
against so many Saints, learned and prudent men, who have testified that they
have been eyewitnesses of many. He will not surely affirm (though he is bold
enough to affirm anything) that such Miracles, if real, were Proofs that the
Workers of them were Fanatics and Deceivers. These things considered where
will he hope to find Readers who can be inwardly persuaded that what S. Gregory
relates is sufficiently confuted by his scornful manner of repeating it in the
new style of a Theological Scarron? Or to judge this a concluding argument; S
Benedict wrought Miracles, was favored with supernatural Visions and
Revelations, therefore he is manifestly convicted of Fanaticism? and upon that
Fanaticism he instituted his Religious Order, for which he framed a Fanaticall
Rule?

17. Now by Fanaticism the Doctor ays he intends an Enthusiastic way of
Religion, that is, a Religion built upon falsely pretended Inspirations,
Illuminations etc. Which Definition being approved, with what show of reason
can the Doctor accuse S. Benedict of Fanaticism? For did S. Benedict frame to
himself a New Religion? Did he make any the least alteration in the Religion
conveyed to him by Tradition, and professed by the whole Church? Had any of his
Visions or Revelations any influence on his Religion to make him introduce any
innovations? How was he then an Enthusiast?

18. But S. Gregory affirms that he had Revelations, Inspirations and the Gift
of discerning Spirits: And these things the Doctor will needs call Enthusiasms.
Surely he will not deny but that God may; yea often has conferred on his
servants, Revelations of his will, in some special circumstances, which are
not in the Doctors sense, Enthusiasms: Neither, will I on the other side deny
but many persons, even in the Catholic Church have bin seduced by the Devil,
and their own pride, to pretend to lights received from God, which were either
effects of a distempered fancy, or suggestions of the Devil. The question
therefore is, whether S. Benedicts visions, and Revelations came the former, or
the latter way. But it is no question touching the Doctors Judgment in this
case: for certainly he durst not decide them, if he thought or but suspected
that they came from God.

19. I beseech him now that he would examine his own conscience, whether, I
will not say, convincing proofs, but rational grounds may not be affoorded,
that S. Benedicts Visions and Revelations were truly divine, considering. 1.
the Innocence, purity and uninterrupted fervor of devotion conspicuous in S.
Benedict, from his Infancy, to his death. 2. The admiration in which the age
wherein he lived held him, both for his piety, and the stup^nduous favors,
conferred on him by Almighty God. Will the Doctor now say, that all that age,
and all ages following, have been deluded by an Hypocrit, and Counterfeit
Enthusiast, and that himself was the only person Clear-sighted enoug to
discover the cheat? not only all Christians living in his time, but even the
Pagan Goths had him in veneration: By what light now after above a thousand
years, has he seen that the whole world besides himself have been deluded? He
will easily give me leave to say assuredly it was not by a supernatural light,
least he himself should be suspected an Enthusiast: And for a natural light to
justify him, he has showed us none, having concealed the reasons moving him to
make a Saint so glorious in the esteem of the Christian world, the object of
his derision.

20. I verily believe the Doctor would have been easily induced to have spared
the person of S. Benedict (and so of the other Saints) had not a saying of
Cardinal Bellarmin afflicted his mind, and stirred up his choler, viz. That
Religious orders were at first instituted by S. Benedict, S. Romualdus, S.
Bruno, S. Dominick, and S. Francis by the inspiration of the holy Ghost: This
was a sayeing insupportable to a mind by education, and wordly interest
preve^ted with a strong prejudice, and therefore all books and Legends must be
searched, and every crifling passage, and circumstance, perhaps indiscreetly
inserted any where by, Authors, must be made use of to disgrace the Saints, and
to prove them Enthusiasts: Though all the world besides have them in veneration.

21. Now to enter into dispute concerning their personal qualities with such
an Adversary, will be to offend against Charity by giving him occasion, of
reviling yet more Gods most beloved perfect servants. The most commodious way
then to make a true judgment of them will be, to examine their fruits. For by
their fruits, says our Savior, they will be known.

22. Therefore to determine, whether it was by Gods Inspiration that they
instituted their respective Orders, let those who doubt, yea those who scarce
think it lawful to doubt. 1. Examine their several Rules, according to which
their Disciples oblige themselves to conform their lives and actions. And. 2.
consider whether God has acknowledged them for his servants, by making use of
them to the great benefitt of his Church, and dilatation of his honor. Now if
it shall appear that their Rules advance perfection in all Christian virtues:
And that such among them as have Squared their Actions by their Rules have in a
signal manner benefitted Gods Church, and increased his honor, It is most
certain that Bellarmin had just grounds, how angry soever the Doctor be, to
say, that such Orders were Instituted by the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost.

23. I do heartily wish for the Doctors good, that he would without prejudice
examine these two points, or at least patiently read what is here written
concerning them: Now to descant upon all their Rules, and to Enumerate the
services done by the several Orders to Gods Church would be too tedious. I
will therefore as my duty more particularly engages me, confine my self to S.
Benedicts Rule and his Disciples Actions: And in so doing the Reader will be
sufficiently informed in all the rest: Since they all agree in the Sanctity of
their Rules and glory of their actions, Though in some circumstantiall Rites,
and Observances there be some variety.

24. As touching therefore the Rule of S. Benedict, whether it was written with
a Fanatic Spirit or not, The Doctors own Judgment may be appealed to, If he
would vouchsafe to read and examine it. For what is it but a collection
skilfully made of all Evangelicall precepts, and counsels of perfection? There
the Ecclesiastical Office is so wisely ordered, that the whole Church Judged
it fit to be her Pattern. There S. Benedict teaches his Disciples to begin all
their Actions with an eye to God, begging his assistance, and referring them
entirely to his Glory. There a holy family is so ordered, with such a decent
assignation of duties proper to all offices both of Superiors, and subjects, in
their several Rancks, that a great and Wise King made choice of it for his
Rule in Managing his Kingdom. There a contempt and hatred of the world is
taught with great Energy: Religious men are enioined to hide themselves from
it, that they may in their Sequestered cells enjoy a freer conversation with
God. And because they cannot exclude themselves out of their Solitude, They are
instructed to mortify there all Sensual Passions, by prayer and Temperance.
If by Gods Providence they enjoyed plenty of Temporal goods, The poor and
strangers only reaped the fruits of it. Yea their Lawgiuer taught them not only
by his Rule, but example also, to prefer even in the times of the greatest
scarcity the satisfieing the wants of others before their own: Hospitality was
a virtue so peculiar to them, and so constantly practiced by them, that till
the Rapine and fury of a Tyrant here in England destroyed them, there was no
need of any Law among us for sustaining the Poor, who after so many Modern
Laws can scarce be preserved from Perishing. And there (which the Doctor may
do well to consider) the virtues of Humility and Peaceful obedience most
contrary to and Inconsistent with Fanaticism are of all others most copiously
and vehemently enforced, as if in them the Spirit of his Rule did Principally
consist. By these two virtues his Disciples were securely guarded from all
dangers which an external exercise of other virtues might expose them to: By
the former ( Humility) they were exempted from Pride and self complacencie, in
case God should bestow any Supernatural favors on them: And by the latter (
Obedience) which obliged them to discover even their most secret Thoughts to
their Superiors and Spiritual Directors, they were secured a Demonio
Meridiano, from false Illuminations, and Illusions of the Enemy. And lastly to
prevent all Innovations in opinions touching Religion, and disturbing of the
Churches peace by spreading abroad new invented Fancies; a most strict Silence
was inioynd them at home, and none permitted to go abroad, either for business,
or preaching, but such as the Superior esteemed fit, with the benediction and
prayers of whom, and of their other Brethren they were sent forth, and at their
Return received again.

25. Now can the Doctor believe that it was a fault in Cardinal Bellarmin to
say that it was by the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost that such a Rule as this
was instituted, and Families erected for the observing of it? And yet if he
will peruse it he will find that I have omitted many other Perfections which
shine forth in it.

26. And whereas from some mistaken expressions of S. Gregory he charges S.
Benedict with the great crime of being a hater of Human Learning: we do not
find that he forbids his Disciples the study of it in his Rule, at such times
as the Office of the Quire and Manual Labor for the benefit of the Monastery
afforded them a vacancy. And it is unquestionable that we owe to his followers
the preservation of almost all the Literature which remains in the world: For
by their care in conserving and Transcribing of books, all our Libraries are
now so richly furnished and the Doctor enabled to write against them and
their Master. This they did notwithstanding such a deluge of Barbarous Nations,
which for Religions sake hated and sought to destroy all manner of Learning:
And S. Benedicts Disciples doing so, they thought such their care to be no
Transgression of their Rule.

27. But as for S. Benedict himself Almighty God did not call him to be a
Critic, but a Teacher of Sanctity. And to enable himself thereto, we find in
the last Chapter of his Rule, that he was no stranger in the books of Holy
Scripture, in the writings of the Ancient Doctors of the Church, in the
Conferences, and lives of the holy Fathers, all which he recommends to his
Disciples. But as for the Subtilties of Pagan Philosophers, the Elegancies of
their Poets and the like (considering his Vocation) it would have been in him
the vice of Curiosity to have spent his time in them: Which S. Augustine Judges
to have been the Concupiscence of the Eyes, reckoned by S. John, as one of the
three great Temptations of the world.

28. S. Benedict therefore was not a hater of Human Learning (as the Doctor
unjustly and without warrant styles him) But for his own use and office he
preferred before it that Learning which the Wiseman styles Scientiam Sanctorum,
that learning which does not puff up the mind, but renders it Docibilem Dei,
and makes the possessors of it Saints: And I am confident that in the day of
Judgment God will never (as the Doctor does) impute this choice to him as a
fault. I would to God the Doctor, instead of deriding, would imitate him. In
this regard therefore it was that S. Gregory styled S. Benedict [ Scienter
nescium and Sapienter Indoctum] Skilfully ignorant, and wisely Unlearned: By
which Character he had no intention certainly to disparage him, but rather to
parallel him with the Kingly Prophet who writing of himself, Says: That he was
wiser and had more understanding then his Enemies, Then his Teachers, Then the
Ancients, Psalm. 118. Mem.
only by meditating on Gods law, and Keeping his Precepts.

29. Thus far concerning the several Heads of accusations of S. Benedict, in a
scornful manner represented by the Doctor to make his Readers merry at the
expenses of a Glorious Saint. But withal his Readers are desired to consider,
that all these heads are borrowed from S. Gregory who wrote the Saints life,
from the testimony of certain Holy men who had been S. Benedicts Disciples. So
that the very same things which S. Gregory wrote to prove the Sanctity of S.
Benedict, the Doctor makes use of to show him, as it were on a stage to have
been a Fanatic, a false pretender to Miracles, Visions and Inspirations, and
an Ignorant Fool: And all this without any reason or proof given to justify
such Imputations.

30. But the Readers are desired to consider, that whatever opinion they have
of S. Benedict (to the zeal and Charity of whose Disciples notwithstanding they
owe their Christianity) yet surely S. Gregory was not a person fit to make
sport for the Doctor and his Readers: S. Gregory, perhaps the most exalted and
most humble Saint, the most Illuminated Doctor, the most zealous and most
Charitable Prelat, that since the Apostles times Almighty God ever provided to
govern his Church. Thus he has always been esteemed not only through the
Western, but Eastern Churches also. And can the Doctor think he can find any
Reader who has not in his heart renounced Christianity, that will applaud him
for trampling with scorn on S. Gregory? For it is from S. Gregory indeed that
the Doctor is informed that S. Benedict was a Fanatic, if he were such an
one: It is S. Gregory who commended and confirmed his Rule, and if the Doctor
may be believed, it seems very ignorantly and foolishly styled it [ Discretione
Praecipuam] eminent for the discretion of it; which is a virtue ill suiting
with a Fanatic. It is S. Gregory who has conveyed to posterity an account of
the Graces and Supernatural Favors by God conferred on S. Benedict: the truth
of which I believe scarce any one hitherto has disbelieved, beside the Doctor:
Certain it is that a general firm belief of them, both during S. Benedicts
times and afterward, made a change in Christendom scarce ever to be paralleld
before or since, whilst incredible multitudes of well meaning Christians
wakened from a Lethargy of sin, either flocked together to take on them the
Yoke of that Rule, or if they wanted such courage, powered forth their treasures
to entertain such as consecrated themselves to Gods service. And all this the
Doctor without any proof, pronounces Fanaticism, and is desirous that men of
this Reformed Age should believe these Divine Favors communicated to S.
Benedict to have been Illusions of Satan (which Satan himself never durst own)
and that men had done more wisely if they had continued to serve the world, and
the Flesh, rather then to quitt both in following an Hipocriticall Fanatic.

31. Surely the Doctor was much to blame, and I hope he will sadly reflect on
the danger of raising mirth from such an argument as this. Or if he do not, it
will be very fit that when hereafter he mentions those two persons so
venerated by all but himself, he would abstain from calling them Saints. For in
the same breath to call S. Benedict a Saint and a Fanatic, savours something
of blasphemy. Yet it will be a hard task for him to conquer so inveterated a
custom: Men's tongues are so enured never to mention them without that Title of
Saint, that the only expedient to correct that fault in himself and others,
will be to let his Readers know that he intends the same ill thing by the terms
of Saint and Fanatic. Thus far touching S. Benedict and his Rule: by
examining whereof I conceived men might Judge whether, notwithstanding the
Doctors Raillery, God did not esteem him his faithful servant.

32. The next thing proposed in order to make the like judgment, was to
consider whether after S. Benedicts death, God did not declare the same thing,
by making choice of the Disciples of S. Benedict to procure an increase of his
honor, and considerable blessings to his Church: For if he did, surely the
Doctor himself, how bold so ever, will scarce dare to disgrace them hereafter
by the Title of Fanatics.

33. To clear this, it is to be observed that in S. Benedicts age Christians
generally were falln into such a decadence from Piety, charity among them was
become so cold and frozen, and all manner of vices reigned so impudently and
uncontrollably, that Almighty God was even forced to open a free passage among
them for Innumerable armies of barbarous Pagan Nations from the North, Getes
(or Goths) Vandalls, Francks, Hunns, Saxons, Danes, Lombards, and many others,
which like Locusts spread themselves, devouring all things through all
countries, especially of the Western Church, all which did not express their
fury so much against their Christian Enemies forces, as against their Religion.
Now what could be expected from such Conquerours, but that the Christian Faith
should be utterly extinguished.

34. Yet such was the infinite Wisdom and Goodness of God that that which was a
most terrible Plague to impious and dissolute Christians then alive, proved in
general to Gods Church and Christian Religion a most unvaluable blessing. For
in a short time, God of those stones raised up Children to Abraham: Children,
not like the former, who sluggishly contented themselves with the name of
Christians, and in their lives denied Christ: but heroically zealous servants
of our Lord: Witness innumerable Churches magnificently built, and richly
endowed, to his honor: Witness innumerable Monasteries and Schools of Piety
frequently inhabited by Emperors, Kings, Queens, Princes, and Princesses, who
preferred a voluntary life of Solitude, Poverty, and Mortification (to the end
they might more freely attend to heavenly Meditations) before Magnificent
Courts, Scepters, and Crowns. Lastly witness a numerous Army of Martyrs, not a
few of them Soueraign Kings, and Princesses and tender Virgins witness likewise
Aposticall Bishops who willingly offered their blood for the Salvation of their
Barbarous Murderers.

35. Now who were the persons who, by Gods most blessed direction, instilled
into the hearts of all these such an Heroical Faith and Divine Love? were they
not principally the Disciples of S. Benedict? Let the Records and Annals of so
many Nations in Europe be consulted: they will justify the same, and to Gods
glory will testify how his Apostolic Preachers to convert their Ancestors
have been dignified with stupendous Miracles. Yet all these are derided by the
Doctor as Fanatics, the Children of a famous Hypocrit and Fanatic: by the
Doctor, I say, who cannot show one Village converted to Christianity by any
one of his own sect, nor one Miracle pretended to.

36. Now if any thing here delivered touching S Benedict and his Disciples be
true (and if all be not true, we have been deceived by the Common Tradition of
whole Nations, besides books never hitherto contradicted) Nay if any one
Miracle has been truly reported of him or them, in what a condition has the
Doctor by his unseasonable mirth concluded himself? The Wiseman tells us
there is a time to weep, and a time to laugh God has placed them in this order,
that weeping should go before Laughing; but the Doctor has perverted the
order: He must expect therefore after his and his profane Readers mirth, a time
of weeping will succeed: God Almighty grant that his weeping time may come in
this life, and that weeping and wayling and gnashing of teeth come not together.

37. I do not know how any Adversary of the Catholic Church could with all
his study have showed himself more impotent in his passions, and less succesfull
in reasoning, then the Doctor has done in his book. Certainly it must be a
hatred horribly poisonous against the Catholic Church Militant, which will not
spare the Church Triumphant. I defy the Doctor, how bold a Champion soever for
Schism to say publicly or by writing to signify only his opinion, that S.
Benedict, S. Gregory, S. Francis and the rest are now reprobate, damned souls
in hell: Yet such they must needs be; if they were Hipocriticall Visionaires,
and false pretenders of Miracles, on purpose to gather Disciples, and withal
dyed unrepentant of these things, as most certainly they did. Now if such be
not his opinion, nay if he be not assured that they are in an accursed
condition, was not his tongue (or penn) (...)] Set on fire of hell, whilst it
uttered such Blasphemies against them, as a perpetual Monument of his rage
till the day of Judgment, when he must be answerable for all that shall be
corrupted by them.

38. But suppose that all these Accusations could really be verified, must the
whole Church be esteemed Antichristian, in which Salvation is scarce possible
to be had (for to prove that is the Doctors design) because five or six
Hipocrits have lived undiscovered in it? because a Young man notwithstanding
all his austerities, and prayers, having been inflamed by the spirit of
uncleannes, chose rather to torment his flesh by rolling himself naked among
briars and nettles, then to suffer its impure delectations? or because another
young man having been commanded to restore to his Father all the goods
committed to his care, merely to hinder his Charity to the poor, in a fit of
fervor gave up not only his goods, but clothes also, to his very Shirt? or
because another man out of some severe (or the Doctor may call it, capricious)
humor, or to procure contempt to himself, would refuse to give a civil
respect to his betters?

39. What then would the Doctor say of a Church, in which Visions, and Dreams
and Revelations far more exotic in outward appearance, are proposed to men's
belief? In which one who calls himself a Prophet professes that another sort
of Mortification was enioynd him then that which S. Benedict practiced, namely
to mix his bread with man's dung, and so to eat it? In which a Prophet by Gods
command for three years together walked naked and with his feet bare before all
the people? In which another commands his Disciple not to salute, or show any
respect to any person whosoever should come in his way? Yet not any of these
persons or actions the Doctor dares deride, or refuse to yield his assent and
approbation of them, though he has encouraged his profane Readers by his
example to deride them.

. 3. Of the Life and Prayer of Contemplation, derided by the Doctor.
40. THe Doctor, not being contented with recreating himself and others by
vnsainting, and as he hopes, plucking down from Heaven many glorious Saints,
so esteemed by Gods Church (whose company notwithstanding, where ever they are,
I wish both he and my self may forever enjoy) proceeds to represent as
ridiculously the way of devotion in greatest request among those of the
several Orders instituted by them. This is the Prayer of Contemplation taught
by Rusbrochius, Suso, Harphius, Blosius (and F. Baker reduced into a Method by
M. Cressy.) He might, if he had pleased, have cited far more ancient Authors
had he consulted Cassian, the Disciple of S. Chrisostom, in his Conferences of
Hermits of his time, and a Primitive writer, Denis the Ar^opagite, who,
whatever his true name was, was questionles an Author of the second, or at
least the third Age of the Church, and who describes the most sublime and most
purely Divine Prayer exercised by Hierotheus, a Disciple of the Apostles. It
had been a Mastery worthy of such a Champion as the Doctor to have trampled on
such Contemplatives as these, or on S. Paul the Hermit, and S. Anthony, or
rather on S. Mary Magdalen, S. Mary the Egyptian, and other inhabitants of
deserts, who it seems, wanted such a directour for Contemplation as the Doctor
is.

41. If he do acknowledge a real difference between an Active and a
Contemplative life, (in the opinion of the Ancient Fathers exemplified by the
employments of the two holy sisters, S. Martha, and S. Mary Magdalen) he might
do well to teach this Age what is meant by a Contemplative life, and what way
and Manner of Devotion peculiarly suits to it: And whether among all the Sects
which he call by the common name of Protestants, he can tell us any news of any
who have pretended to a Contemplative life, or given any Rules for such as
would perform the exercises of it: Such are, and have always been esteemed
such, Solitude, Abstraction from worldly cares, Rigorous abstinences, Cilices,
indispensable Obedience to Superiors, Continual Prayer practiced according to
the degrees of it, still more and more pure and Spiritual, a performance of
all duties and even ordinary actions in virtue of Prayer and Union in Spirit
with God etc. I do not now require of him an account of Raptures, Ecstasies,
Passive Unions with God, in which a pure soul only receives Divine influences:
For these things he derides as Fantastical Enthusiasms, and yet all ages have
mentioned them, and afforded innumerable Examples of them, and they are
recorded by persons eminent for Piety and Learning.

42. But the Doctor has one argument unanswerable, which iustifies him to call
that language unintelligible Canting, by which certain Mystic Divines
endeavor, as well as they can, to express the most pure operations of the
soul herself, and likewise of God upon the soul in Contemplative Prayer: and
this argument is drawn from a treasvre of most deep Humility. His argument is
this; I, even I the most learned, and all comprehending Doctor Stillingfleet
do not understand the language of such Mysticks, therefore it is
unintelligible Canting.

43. Yet notwithstanding this more then Herculean argument, I believe I can
oppose against him an Antagonist who will have the boldness to maintain that he
will answer this argument, and demonstrate it not to be concluding. And this is
a certain Holy man that professes of himself that in a wonderful Ecstasy he
found himself present in Paradise, and there saw and heard (as he thought) God
only knows what. Now what soever it was that he saw and heard, he was, no
doubt, willing to have communicated it to his brethren, but he had not the
power to do it. No human language could afford words to express matters so
elevated and Divine. For if it could, I am assured he, who was the greatest
master of language that perhaps ever was, had not failed to do it. Nay more,
which still increases the wonder, though he professes that he really saw and
heard these inexplicable glorious things, yet he could not determine whether all
the while his corporal senses, external or internal, were employed in this
Divine Visitation.

44. This was surely, according to the Doctors grounds, the greatest Fanatic
that ever was, yea the father of all Fanatics. Yet the Doctor dares not call
him so, 2. Cor. 12. v. 2. 3. 4.
after he is told that this was S. Paul: and that he it was who describes the
Revelations communicated to him by Gods Divine Spirit: describes them, I say,
by not describing them, but by professing that no human language could describe
them, nor humane fancy comprehend them. This certainly the Doctor will not
deny to have been a Passive Union (so derided by him) of S. Paul's soul with
God, for he contributed nothing actively either to the procuring or enjoying of
it.

45. If therefore Mystic Writers, many of them persons both of great Sanctity
and Learning, in endeavoring to describe what passed in their souls during
Unions far inferior to those of S. Paul, are forced to make Expressions, out
of the common road, and not agreeing with School Philosophy; if observing that
in pure Contemplative Prayer their own operations, and the infusions of Gods
Spirit are so in time in the soul, that it seems to them that there is as it
were a Region of it beyond the discovery of Philosophy, which they think fit to
call the Apex mentis, and Fundus animae, the Doctor might without any further
guilt have abstained from imputing Fanaticism to Ludo vicus Blosius, or M.
Cressy, for transcribing such expressions. But this is a Sycophancy inexcusable
in the Doctor, who mentions such Mystical phrases on purpose to deride them as
unintelligible Nonsense, and at the same time omitts the setting down
expressions which interpret them.

46. But there is one special Phrase which above the rest cited by M. Cressy,
exposes him to the Doctors utmost contempt. This is where it is said that, In
the supreme Degree of Contemplative Prayer the soul is so united to God as if
nothing were existent but God and the soul: P. 334.
Yea so far is the soul from reflecting on her own existence, that it seems to
her God and she are not distinct, but one only thing. This is called by some
Mysticks an Union of nothing with nothing in which the soul comes to a feeling
of her not being, and by consequence of the not being of Creatures: the which
is indeed a real Truth. True, says the Doctor, this is indeed either a real
Truth or else Intolerable Nonsense.

47. Now I suppose it is not for the Doctors interest to seem to have received
any satisfaction from persons injured by him: Therefore addressing myself to
any indifferent Reader, I do affirm, that the most supreme affirmative Notion
that we can have of God is that which is employed in his most adorable
incommunicable name of Iehova, or as himself interprets it [Sum qui Sum] I am
what I am, which imports an infinite Universal Plenitude of Being. Therefore,
as the School Doctors say, if we hold to the Notion of Being, between the
Being of God and the limited, participated Being of Creatures, there is an
infinite distance, and by consequence Creatures compared with God have more of
Not-being, then they have of Being; in which regard their denomination, so
considered, ought rather to be taken from not-being, then from being. Thus the
Sthooles: which if they speak Nonsense (for my part I think they do not) yet
surely the nonsense is not intolerable.

48. But moreover Mystic Divines though they acknowledge the Infinitenes,
Totality, and Universality of Gods Being; yet they rather choose [to which
choice the Nature of Contemplative Prayer even forces them] to reject all
distinct, affirmative Notions of God and his perfections, as coming Infinitely
short of his Divine Nature, and which indeed are falsely applied to him, if
considered as they are comprehended by us: and they frame to themselves a
Negative Notion of him, by separating from him all Attributes whatsoever
comprehended by us, because as such they are indeed imperfections. And to
instill into our minds such a Notion of God, of all others least imperfect, he
is pleased to describe himself in Scriptures to be inaccessible light, that is,
light though infinitely glorious, yet to us invisible, and invisible because of
the excess of its Visibility. Hence he is said to dwell in darkness, and to make
darkness his secret place, and his pavilion round about him to be dark waters
and thick clouds of the skies. In this darkness it is that God is contemplated
in pure Spiritual Prayer, in which, all Images and positive Notions of the
Divinity being rejected, an Incomprehensible Nothing remains, to which the
Soul is united, and in whose presence all Created Beings are annihilated. In
this darkness therefore contemplative Souls have, as it were, an experimental
perception of what Schoolmen deduce from reasoning.

49. It seems now to me that a weaker Capacity then the Doctors may perceive
in this no intolerable Nonsense. Yea I must add, that here the Doctor gives a
manifest proof of his dishonesty, in wilfully leaving out that which evide^tly
explains M. Cressy's meaning: which if it had not been concealed from the
Readers would have rendered his Assertion touching the Not-being of Creatures to
be most rational. For thus M. Cressy (in Sancta Sophia Treat. 3. p. 304.)
treating of the State of Perfection, writes: In this State the soul comes to a
feeling indeed of her Not being, and by consequence of the Not being of
Creatures: The which indeed is real Truth: Not as if the soul or other
creatures either did cease according to their Natural Being; or as if a
natural Being were indeed no real Being (as F. Benedict Canfield does seem to
determine) But because all sinful adhesion by affection to creatures being
annihilated, then they remain (as to the soul) only in that true Being which
they have in God, by dependence on him, and relation to him, so that he (alone)
is all in all. Whereas while we sinfully adhere unto them, by staying in them
with Love, we carry our selves toward them as if we thought them to have a
Being or subsistence of and in themselves, and not of God only, and that they
might be loved for themselves, without reference to God: Which is the
fundamental Error and root of all Sin.

50. Thus the Doctor deals with his Catholic Adversaries. He can at pleasure
make them write Nonsense by concealing their Sense. And thus also he treats M.
Cressy again in repeating several passages of Sancta Sophia touching
Contemplative Prayer: For selecting from several places certain abstruse Words
and Phrases made use of by Mysticks to express, as well as they can, their
conceptions, he presents them all together in a heap before his Readers eyes,
and then miscalls them Unintelligible Canting, whilst in the mean time he
leaves out the interpretation which M. Cressy gives of those words and phrases,
to make them intelligible. Truly it is not without some scruple now that I take
notice of any thing that such an Adversary as the Doctor shows himself, does
or can write on an argument so unfitt for Controversy as Contemplative Prayer
is, which cannot but he disgustfull to such a sensual Palate as he shows his to
be, being willing to corrupt the Palats also of his Readers. It may be e're
long they will see a Treatise on this Argument, demonstrating the substance of
what so ever the Doctor finds fault withal in M. Cressy's Sancta Sophia, to
be suitable to what the Fathers of Gods Church have both from Tradition, and
from their own experience also, delivered on that most Divine Subject. And the
Doctor shall have free leave (without any future Reply) once more to call what
those Holy Fathers write unintelligible Canting, and intolerable Nonsense,
though their expressions be parallelled and confirmed by numerous Texts of Holy
Scripture. In the mean time, P. 336
for the Readers sake, I will here add some Reflections upon what the Doctor
has written.

51. He proceeds further, saying That the utmost effect of contemplative Prayer
if intelligible and practicable, is gross Enthusiasm. And why? Because,
forsooth M. Cressy says that by a diligent practice of such internal
Spiritual Prayer the soul receives from God a heavenly light and Inspiration
for her direction in all her actions, according to the Psalmists words.
Accedite ad Deum and illuminamini, and according to the Prayer in his own
Churches Liturgy, borrowed from the Roman: [Fifth Sunday after Easter] Lord
from whom all good things do come, grant us thy humble servants that by thy
holy Inspiration, we may think those things that be good, and by thy merciful
guiding we may perform the same. The word Inspiration therefore needs not
trouble the Doctor: neither by it is any other thing meant, but Divine Grace,
which, says he, none denies.

52. Yet he must know that this Divine Grace obtaind by Spiritual Prayer
constantly exercised, though it be in its nature and Kind the same which every
good Christian enioyes, yet the lights and motions of it extend much farther,
even to the directing a person not only in necessary duties, but to the
sanctifiing of all his actions, otherwise in their own nature indifferent, and
improving them for the perfectionating the soul in Divine love, in so much as
those actions which are performed by ordinary good Christians merely out of an
impulse of Nature, or for some sensual satisfaction, are by these done in
obedience to the Divine Will, discovered to them.

53. And whereas to distinguish these Inspirations from those pretended to by
Fanatics, it was said, that in Contemplative persons these direct rather to
not doing, then doing, when both these seem otherwise equally indifferent, I
wonder why the Doctor should be displeased with this. He may remember that in
the time of the late Usurper, when himself was a great leading Preacher, all
the actions almost of his Brethren were pretended to come from a Divine light
and Inspiration all warranted by the Bible, which Light (more, it seems, to the
Doctors mind) directed them to nothing but doing, viz: to reform Religion, to
rebel against their King, to pluck down Hierarchy, to multiply Sects, to usurp
the office of Preaching without any Vocation, to imprison, Pillage, kill their
fellow subjects and the like: But no such effects proceed from the lights and
Inspirations of Internal livers among Catholics: they (having the same
Vocation that S. Mary Magdalen had) leave the many businesses to Martha, unless
God by their lawful Superiors, calls them to external Emploiments, which
when he does, he enables them to perform them with greater Perfection, as we
see by the Conversion of many Nations performed by such as had spent a great
part of their lives in Solitude and Contemplation.

54. It is most certain that if Luther, Calvin, Tindall and such Reformers had
by Prayer disposed themselves for such lights as these, and also followed the
direction of them, they would never have procured war and bloodshed,
destruction of Kingdoms, rebellions of Subjects, tearing asunder Gods Church
and sacrilegiously invading its revenues neither would they to satisfy their
lusts have incesttuously polluted themselves with Consecrated Virgins: in a
word they would have done all things contrary to what they have done. And if
the Doctor himself had followed the guidance of such a Light, he would never
have published such a Book, in which pretending to demonstrate that Salvation
can scarce possibly be attained in the Catholic Church, whatsoever is alleged
by him which truly concerns the Church it self, may be contained in twenty or
thirty pages, whereas the Book it self consists of five or Six hundred, all the
rest being Scurrilous buffonries, petulant revilings of Gods Saints, imputing
to the Church the Doctrins and practices of madmen or Sectaries condemned by
the Church herself, and any thing that he could take out of Dunghills which
might be serviceable for his unchristian purpose to eradicate out of his
Readers hearts Charity and all sense of humanity: and all this without any
provocation, as if, enraged to see that the same merciful indulgence is not
denied to Catholics alone, which is allowed to himself, and all Sects among us
which unanimously conspired to his Majesty's destruction, and of which not any
one to this day has renounced the Principles which led them thereto: as if, I
say, in that rage his design was to expose innocent, and peaceable subjects to
all manner of Contempts, affronts, hatred, and mischievous attempts of their
fellow Subjects, to the disturbance of the kingdoms peace and the renewing of
our public calamities and Tragedies, to which he knows that thirty years
since, such books and Sermons were made use of as a Prologue.

55. He must give me leave to add hereto, that in the Principles at the end of
his Book, giving an account of the Faith of Protestants, he has laid a
foundation to support and justify not only all manner of Sects, but the worst
effects of them, I mean, the late Rebellion, and any other that may follow
hereafter: I will not say this was his Intention, but the consequence may
easily be demonstrated.

56. For in the said Principles this being laid down by him as a ground of
Protestancy, That every sober enquirer into Scriptures may be infaillibly
certain of all necessary Truths contained in them without any obligation to
consult or however to obey, Ecclesiastical Superiors and Teachers: does it
not necessarily follow, that all Sectaries are equally justifiable, since it is
impossible, without looking into their thoughts, to evince against them that
they have not enquired soberly? What monstrous opinions now may not hereby be
justified? and what possibility of confuting them? now if among such opinions
this be one, That it is the necessary Duty of a Christian Subject to contribute
all that is in his Power, even goods and life it self, to set up the true
Religion, that is, his own Sect, and this against all Power whatsoever civil
or Ecclesiastical, which shall seek to oppress it, what will the Doctor,
standing to his own Principles, say hereto, if he had a mind to oppose it? Now
that such an Opinion may possibly spring up, and the Assertours of it may
pretend that it is grounded on evident Scripture, the Doctor himself will not
deny, since I am sure he remembers, and has reason to do so, that this was the
Architectonicall Principle, common to all Sects in the like Rebellion: this was
thundered out in Pulpits, of this all Pamphlets were full: the Bible and nothing
but the Bible was all their warrant, the Bible was the Ensign carried up aloft
before their Troops, as if the King, Bishops, and all their party had been
professed Enemies to the Bible, or had grounded their Religion upon the
Alcoran, whereas indeed all these Sects had turned Christ's Doctrine into that
bloody law of Mahomet. Yet notwithstanding all this the Doctor zealously and
furiously against the Papists still contends for putting the Bible into all
men's hands, and assures them that they are the only Legal Judges of the sense
of it in Necessaries, upon condition they will only say that they are Sober
Enquirers into it.

57. This seems to me to be an evident consequence of the Doctors Principle; a
Principle never acknowledged in Gods Church for above fourteen hundren years by
any one Orthodox Christian, or by any unless by some whom the Doctor himself
will call Heretics. If the Doctor think I do not speak truth, let him
search, and let him employ his friends to search into Libraries: let them
consult all the ancient Fathers of the Church, and all Councills: and when they
have done, and seen themselves deserted by all Antiquity, and Vertually
condemnd and Anathematized by all Councills (which pretend to have right to
teach, and to oblige Christians to yield their assent) will it not follow that
his Religion has a most pitifully unstable and sandy Foundation? But to
return from this digression to an argument more grateful to the Doctor, the
Fanaticism by him imputed to the Catholic Church, with regard to the Prayer of
Contemplation.

58. Whereas M. Cressy in his Sancta Sophia among several things by which
Liberty of Spirit may be hindered, P. 336.
reckons this for one: The doing actions merely for edification: the Doctor in
scorn adjoyns hereto these words, A most excellent and Apostolical Doctrine!
These words show that the Doctor likes not that saying: but I cannot imagine
what reason he had for it. Our Savior indeed requires that our light should
shine before men, that they seeing our good works might (being edified)
glorify our heavenly Father. But this concerns only such good works as our
Duty obliges us to do in Public. But as for other duties, such as is Prayer
and Fasting, he bids us retire into our closets to practice them there, without
an eye to the Edifiing others, and condemns the Pharisees for doing them that
they may be seen of men. In like manner those who are called to an Internal
life and Solitude, for them to quitt their proper Exercises to go abroad on
purpose to do actions good in themselves, for no other end, but Merely to give
a good example for the Edification of others was there justly esteemed a
prejudice to the liberty of Spirit necessary for their state.

59. But moreover I would ask the Doctor, whether being at Church in a public
Duty, and not having any Devotion himself at present, he would esteem it a
commendable action to pretend to much fervor, by lifting up his eyes or
beating his breast, and this merely and only to the end that others seeing him
might be edifyed, himself being nothing the better for such grimaces? or would
he give an Alms before people merely for their edification, and not out of a
Motive of Charity inherent in himself? Truly if he should do all this in such
a manner, I should be none of his admirers. And much less do I, or I think,
any good Christian admire him for his Book so full af all manner of Unchristian
affections, which surely he cannot pretend to be written merely for
edification, and for which I hope his Judgment is not so perverted as to
expect a reward from God, who little esteems wit without Charity, or rather
wit showed for the destruction of Charity, and Truth also.

60. After this the Doctor out of the same Book mentioning the Supernatural
Favors which innumerable Catholic Writers both ancient and Modern, P. 337.
do testify to have been communicated by Almighty God to his servants after a
constant exercise of Internal Prayer, and Mortification, the Doctor, I say,
would have his Reader think that his deriding of these is a sufficient
confutation. And I may more justly think that a sober Reader will Judge that
the only mentioning of a proceeding so contrary to all rules of reasoning is a
sufficient Reply.

61. What has been hitherto said is even too much touching the defense of a
Book of Prayer published by M. Cressy, in which the Church of England is so
little concerned, and which was compiled for the use of good devout humble
Souls, and not at all for persons of the Doctors temper. Those eminently
learned and Pious Fathers, and particularly R. F. Leander a S. Martino who with
great care perused the several Spiritual Treatises written by R. F. Baker,
and gave their Approbations of them, were persons in all regards for their
profound universal Learning far exalted above the censures of Malignant
Pedants: and the devout souls to whose practice they recomended those pious
Instructions, have reaped such fruits from them, such effectual helps far
their advancement in the Divine Love and Spiritual Perfection, that the
bouffoneries of such a Doctor will only produce this effect upon them, to give
God daily thanks that they have escaped from a Church in which blasphemous
Invectives against Gods Saints and the Science of Saints are not only
permitted, but applauded and rewarded.

62. None can justly wonder that a soul so manifestly void of Divine Love
should want both light and taste in such things. Daamantem and sentit quod
dicimus, says S. Augustine. But does the Doctor hope that because he
understands not and therefore proudly contemns Mystical Theology and the
Exercises of an Internal life, the Catholic Church and Governors of it will
abate their esteem of that Blessing, which manifestly proves that Gods Holy
Spirit does not communicate his most sublime and precious Gifts to Sects
divided from the Church, of which scarce any pretend to them, and those that
do so, do evidently show by their contempt of all authority, renunciation of
all Christian Charity, furious and restles attempts of new Reformations and
Seditious Combinations to the ruin of all Peace, that it is a black Spirit,
which was a Murderer from the beginning, by which they are agitated? Whereas
those humble, devout, and retired souls among Catholics, styled by the
Doctor, Fanatics, are so far from any intention of disturbing Peace, and so
entirely submitted to Lawful Authority (the Spirit of Prophets being so
indispensably Subject to the Prophets) that they are in a continual readiness
to renounce all Revelations, Apparitions, impulses and whatsoever extraordinary
Visitations, if they seem any ways to occasion in them Doubts of the Churches
Faith, or to prejudice Obedience to her Ordonnances.

63. The Doctor I am sure, considering his supposed Universal reading, cannot
be ignorant, that such Fanatics as these, though invisible to the busy World,
were yet esteemd Chariots of Israel and the horsemen thereof. That pious, wise,
and Potent Christian Emperors have consulted them in their greatest affairs,
and have acknowledged themselves obliged to them for miraculous Victories over
Tyrants, resolving upon war by their encouragement, beginning them with their
benediction, and conquering by the assistance of their Prayers: By their
Prayers, and not their Disputations, the Church has triumphed over Heresies,
and the world been freed from Plagues and Mortalities. At their Names Devils
have trembled, and by their command, though absent, those proud Spirits have
with a mixture of fear and rage quitted their habitation in the Bodies of
unhappy men. Yet these the Doctor dares deride, and because they are patient,
will not perhaps repent, till it be too lare, but will justify still his
impious boldness and petulancy.

64. It is truly a sad thing to consider with what disposition of mind persons
qualifyed, as (it seems) the Doctor is, do apply themselves to the reading of
Books of Piety written by Catholics. It is as daggers piercing their hearts
when they find no advantage to express their malignity: If in a great volume
full of most heavenly Instructions for the exercise of all virtues and duties
to God and man, they can find but a line or two into which they think they can
make their Venenious teeth to enter, by that line or two they become edified,
that is comfortable nourrishment to their minds, the whole Book besides being
nauseous to them; Would not damned souls in Hell, if Spiritual Books were
sent them, thus read and thus descant upon them?

65. Now whether the Doctor (and some other of his friends) has not showed
himself such a Reader of Catholic Books truly innocent, devout, and in which
the breathing of Gods Spirit may, as it were, be perceived, let any indifferent
Reader of his Book be judge. How many of such Books, from S. Gregory to S.
Ignatius his time, does the Doctor show that he has read, how many Lives of
Saints, how many Treatises of Devotion, and among them he will give me leave to
name Sancta Sophia, and poor Mother Iuliana? And what account does he give to
his Readers of the Spiritual Benefit reaped by him from his laborious reading?
He it seems is not able out of them all to suggest any point of Instruction in
Christian Doctrine, not one good affection to God, not the least encouragement
to a virtuous holy life. All these things are vanished out of his memory, and
evaporated out of his brain, having never affected his heart. What then does he
yield for his Readers edification? He teaches him in reading such Books to
pronounce mimically and Scornfully what he finds there concerning Miracles, how
well soever attested, and concerning Divine Favors communicated by God to his
Special Servants: and this being done, to call them Fanatics, and so doing
to esteem such relations sufficiently confuted, and such Spiritual Books
sufficiently disparaged. He teaches him to snatch out of a great Book three or
four passages lamely and imperfectly cited, to give what construction to them
he pleases, and whether he does not understand, or overunderstand them, to
pronounce them still Fanaticall, and there is an end of those Books: By the
Doctors good will no Protestant hereafter must receive the least good from
them, unless pride, malice, and contempt of godliness be good things.

66. Now having named in the last place poor Mother Iuliana, a devout Anchoret
about three hundred years since living in Norwich, I must needs Signify my
wonder, what could move his Spleen and choler against her little Book. It is
true, her language to the ears of this age, seems exotic: But it is such as
was spoken in her time: therefore she may be excused: Her expressions touching
Gods favors to her are homely, but that surely is no sin. For affections to
God are set down with great simplicity indeed, but they are withal cordial
and fervent, and apt to imprint themselves, in the heart of an unpreiudiced
Reader. The sense and taste she shows to have had of Gods Special love to his
servants, of the omnipotent efficacy of his Grace, and his impregnable defense
and watchfullnes over his Elect, to secure them finally from all dangers of
Tentations, is indeed admirable. Yet the Doctor has no eyes to see any of
these things. But through what glasses he looked when he spied out blasphemy in
her Writing, I am not able to say: Blasphemy, which never hitherto could be
observed by so many learned and Religious persons as have perused them. But it
is no wonder that Spiders should suck and digest into poison the most wholesome
nourishment.

67. What has been hitherto said of Contemplative Prayer is but even too much
to such an Adversary, it being a Subject too Sacred and Divine to be treated of
in a Polemicall Discourse against an Opponent of the Doctors temper: Who, I
think, is the first Protestant Writer that ever made that an argument of
Controversy against the Catholic Church. The only Excuse that I can devise for
so unreasonable a quarrel begun by him, is his indulgence to a froward passion
conceived by him, without any provocation, against M. Cressy, who several
years since published a Book on that Subject, called Sancta Sophia: in which
Book notwithstanding he challenges nothing to himself, but the Labor of making
Collections and the Method of it. In that regard therefore it may be permitted
him to commend the Directions for the Exercise of Internal Spiritual Prayer,
and the Practice of all Christian Virtues in Perfection contained in it. And
this, in despite of the Doctors unmerited malice, he does with such
confidence, that he dares promise to himself that if any sober; well affected
Reader, though a Protestant, and though at present one of the Doctors
admirers, shall seriously and with an humble heart peruse it, he will either
apply himself to the practice of the excellent Instructions contained in it, or
bewail his want of Spiritual courage in not daring effectually to aspire to
so glorious an Attempt.

68. We must not here forget two Notable Saints, P. 244.
which as the Doctor confidently pretends have given him sufficient advantage
so to denigrate their persons, as by them to cast an aspersion on the Church.
These are a Holy Widow and a Virgin, S. Brigit, and S. Catharine of Siena. Both
these had Supernatural Revelations: therefore says the Doctor, they were
Fanatics. But moreover, their Revelations touching the Conception of our
Blessed Lady do contradict one the other, and the Revelations of both are
allowed, and of one confirmed by the Church in a Council: and by consequence
the Doctor with assurance pronounces the Church to be a favourer not only of
Fanaticism, but Error also. To this purpose the Doctor.

69. Hereto I answer, 1. That all Catholics acknowledge both these to have
been Saints. 2. And that each of them has been favored with Supernatural
Revelations the public Office of the Church testifyes. Thus much is confessed:
but it is utterly denied that the Church does so approve them, as to forbid any
one to make just exceptions against them: as we see many Writers on both sides
have done: she judges they may in general be useful to stir up devotion in
Readers minds, but she does not confirm them as infallible. For how could it
be known to the Pope or Council that any Special Revelation made, or
pretended to be made to another, was from God, unles the person also testify
them by Miracles? And it is observable that when examination is made of
Miracles in order to the Canonization of any Saint, the testimony of women will
not be received. Naturally imagination is stronger in them then judgment, and
whatsoever is esteemed by them to be pious, is easily concluded by them to be
true. This I say upon supposition that such Revelations, were not pretended by
persons interessed on both sides of the Controversy about the Immaculate
Conception. And particularly touching S. Catharine of Siena, Suar. in 3. S Th q
27.
Suares affirms That not any who have written her life have made mention of
this Revelation. It will suffice therefore to set down here what two
illustrious Catholic Writers have declared touching this Point. The former is
S. Antoninus mentioned by the Doctor. An^on. Sum. p. 1. tit. 8. c.
If you say, says he, that some Saints, have had a Revelation of these things,
as S. Brigit: it is to be observed that other Saints who have wrought Miracles,
as S. Catharin of Siena, have had a Revelation of the contrary. And since true
Prophets do sometimes think that a thing proceeds from Divine Revelation which
they utter of themselves, there is not inconvenience to say, that such
Revelations were not from God, but human dreams. An example hereof may be
found in the Prophet Nathan speaking to David proposing to him his dessign to
build a Temple to God. For David though he answered him by a Spirit of
Prophecy, the contrary hereof after wards appeared. Baron* ad A. D. 604.
The other is Cardinal Baronius, who treating of certain Revelations of S.
Brigit and S. Mathildis, has these words: I do indeed honor and Venerate (as
is due) those two Saints: but touching the Revelations had by them, or rather
ascribed to them, I receive only those which the Church receives, which we know
cannot approve things so repugnant.

70. I am sorry I cannot impute it to so harmles a Principle as ignorance, P.
248.
that the Doctor speaking of two Writers who both of them rejected these
pretended Revelations of both these Saints as illusions and fancies, adds, What
becoms then of the Popes and Councills Infallibility, who have approved both?
By which words an unwary Reader will not doubt but that an Ecumenical Council
had made a Canon with an Anathema against all those who should not acknowledge
all the Revelations of S. Brigit to have been Divine, and the belief of them
necessary to Salvation. Whenas all that was done by the Council was, upon
occasion of Invectives made against those Revelations by many Catholics, to
require Ioannes a Turrecremata to peruse and give his judgment of them, which
being favorable, the Council, says he, approved them, that is, freely
permitted them to be read, as containing nothing contrary to Faith and good
Manners. Notwithstanding which kind of approbation, we see liberty taken, and
with leave enough from the Church, by many Writers to decry both the one and
the other, and there is scarce a Catholic alive that thinks he has an
obligation to believe either of them.

. 4. Visions etc. no grounds of believing Doctrines among Catholics.
71. THe Doctor thinks it advantageous to his cause against the Catholic
Church, P. 235.
that it should be believed that Visions, Revelations, etc. are made by
Catholics grounds of believing Several points of Doctrine, as Purgatory,
Transsubstanciation and Auricular Confession. Indeed if he could prove that any
such Points of Doctrine have been, or the Point of the Conception of our B.
Lady should hereafter be declared Articles of Faith upon no surer grounds than
modern Miracles or Revelations, it would have been the Maister-piece of all
that he has, or ever shall write. But this he durst not say explicitly, though
perhaps he is willing his Readers should understand that to have been his
meaning: For then almost all the Councils of Gods Church would have confuted
him, since they profess that the only ground of their Faith is Divine
Revelation made to the Church by Christ and his Apostles, and conveyed to
posterity in Scripture and Tradition.

72. Now this the Doctor being I am sure not able to contradict, is it to be
esteemed a prejudice to Catholic Faith that Almighty God to confound Heretics
and establish the belief of Catholics, should in several succeeding ages
afford particular Revelations, or enable his servants to work Miracles: And
that he has done so, we have such a Cloud of Witnesses, that credit must be
denied to History in general, if none of such Witnesses must be admitted. As
for the Doctor, the only expedient made use of by him to invalidate their
testimony, is to produce it in a style of Raillery.

73. As for the instituting Festivalls, for example of the Conception of our
Blessed Lady etc. it cannot be denied but it is a Lawful Church-institution:
and might at any time on any occasion be appointed: And if on some Revelation,
supposed Divine, an occasion was given to the Pope to ordain it, this can be no
prejudice to it, being a Glorifying of God for the Blessed Virgin, the Mother
of our Lord, her being either preserved, (as some Catholics say) or at least
Cleansed (as others) from the common pollution of Original Sin at her
Conception, without any determining which of these two happened to her, and so
the Festival is equally observed by Catholics of either Opinion. The like may
be said of the Feast of Corpus Christi, of S. Michael the Archangell etc. by
none of which the least alteration was made in the Common Faith.

74. But truly we have great obligation to the Doctor, though I believe he
does not expect we should thank him, for imputing to the Church the frantic
Preachings and practices of Madmen, and at the same time telling us, that they
were excommunicated and other ways punished by Popes, Princes and Bishops.
Indeed it is a terrible Argument to prove it dangerous to live in a Church,
because there Heresies, false Revelations and impure actions are condemned by
it. If Holy Institutours of Religious Orders could with their Rules give also
power and will to their Subjects not to transgress them, the world would be
even too happy. But this exceeding a Created power to do, it is even necessary
that Scandalls should follow, such as were given by a Sect of Mendicants, the
Authors of the horrible Evangelium aeternum, the Followers of Petrus Ioannis
de Oliva, the Beguini, Fraticelli, Beguardi, the Illuminati, or Alumbrados of
Spain, and such other Monsters, raised up by the Devil, in a cursed imitation
of the Graces and Gifts communicated by God to his devout and faithful
servants. But the Doctor who can (no doubt) commend Luther for opposing and
dividing God^ Church, though Luther himself tells him that he did it by the
Devils instigation, Scornfully derides and reviles any one who shall pretend
to defend the Church by Gods Inspiration or Miracles. But (...) Calvin had not
failed in his designed Miracles, by raising a man from the dead the quite
contrary way, the Doctor perhaps would have been reconciled to Miracles and
Inspirations.

75 Thus we see that nothing that God has done, or perhaps can do, for the
benefit of his Church will please the Doctor. If Catholics live abstracted
lives in the Exercise of pure Spiritual Prayer, or if God confers on any of
them Supernatural Gifts, all this must pass for mere Enthusiasme, though the
persons with perfect humility submit all to lawful Authority, and though the
Doctor alleges nothing to disprove any of these things.

76. But least we may in the end hope that he will permit and encourage us to
keep to the External Devotions and Public Liturgy. By no means: there must
nothing be thought or done by the Children of the Catholic Church, but must be
found fault with: The Liturgy, says he, is a tedious and Ceremonious way of
external Devotion as dull and as cold as the Earth it self. Hereto ( quia de
gustibus non est disputandum) all that I conceive needful to say, is that the
Doctor seems to me not yet cordially reconciled to the Ceremonies and Common
Prayer Book of his own lately adopted Church, which he knows to have been
borrowed from the Catholic Liturgy, and for that reason hated by his friends
the Presbyterians and Independents, and by them esteemed a tedious and
ceremonious way of External Dev^tion, as dull and as cold as the Earth it self.

. 5. Resisting Authority falsely imputed to Catholic Religion.
77. WE have hitherto seen the Doctors charge of Fanaticism on the Catholic
Church, and his proofs also, such as they are: But he concludes this his
accusation with an Epiphonema truly of great importance, if rightly applied,
which is The Fanaticism of Catholics, in resisting Authority under a pretense
of Religion.

78. To make this good, he very ingenuously absolves the Catholic Church her
self, and lays this fault only on the Principles and Practices of the
Jesuitical party, a party, says he most countenanced and encouraged by the
Court of Rome. And for proof of this he produces several Books written and
actions done by them in the last age.

79. Hereto our Answer must be: that Scandalls in Gods Church are unavoydable,
as our Savior tells us. But where will he find any Catholic who will be
answerable for all the actions of the Court of Rome, or all the Writings of a
single party? The Popes are absolute Princes as well as Prelates, and if some of
them have been tainted with ambiti^n and a desire to invade the rights of other
Princes (For what Courts have ever been entirely free?) Such can never want
Ministers zealous, diligent and inventive to justify all their pretentions and
designs, whatever they are. Vice will never want Instruments and supporters,
till the Devil himself be converted and become a good Christian, and it will
be long before this happen.

80. But it is well known that in this Point, Princes, and States are generally
become more clear sighted and more wise then formerly they have been, and by
consequence the Court of Rome also.

81. But to be more particular. If the Doctor will think good to consult the
Jesuits, I believe they will tell him, That if they find special favor in the
Court of Rome, it is not with regard to any such Books or Actions imputed by
him to their fore fathers and which they are far from defending: That they have
other Merits and endowments to recommend them to the Popes Favor. And
particularly that this is not reckoned among their Merits, their equally free
access and more then ordinary interest of favor in the Court of France (where,
the Doctor knows, such Doctrins are far from being admitted) will more then
sufficiently testify. They will further tell him that for as much as concerns
the unsafe Antimonarchicall Doctrins contained in the foresaid Books cited by
him, it is almost a whole Age since that they have been by their General
forbidden under pain of Excommunication and other most grievous Censures to
justify them, either in Writing, preaching or disputing: and more over (which
is very considerable) this Prohibition was not only made before the
condemnation of these Books in France, but also was known to the Pope and
permitted by him. I am moreover confident that he cannot with any tolerable
proofs make good his accusation of their being wanting in their fidelity to his
Majesty, or his Glorious Father, during the late rebellious war, which was
raised and prosecuted by the Doctors best quondam friends: And more over I may
assure the Doctor, that if an Oath were framed free from ambiguity, and
without odious phrases inserted in it (wholly unnecessary to the substance of
it) they would not make any Scruple of joining with all their Catholic
Brethren in taking it. But then what thinks the Doctor of these two
Propositions to be set in the scale against his? 1. That it is absolutely
unlawful to Subjects by arms to propagate or defend Religion against their
Lawful Prince. 2. That (I say not by the Pope; to this he and his brethren are
as forward as any, but) by no Assembly Civil or Ecclesiastical, Subjects can
be authorized by arms to oppose their Prince, upon any pretense what soever.
Are he and his quondam party ready to declare these? Will he or they damn the
execrable Covenant? Surely the Kings safety and the public Peace are far more
concernd in these then in the former. This therefore would be a task in which
his Learning and Eloquence would be worthily employed: And more over in case
himself either by Preaching or Writing has declared the contrary to either of
these, or engaged his soul in the Covenant, so great, so horrible a Scandal
as that, certainly ought not only to be repented of, but a public revocation
of it to be made. And moreover my Lords the Bishops his Superiors deal but
too mercifully in not requiring also a Recantation from him of what he has
written destructive to the Ecclesiastical Government of that Church, in whose
revenues they have now given him so great a share. But I despair of being able
to extort from the Doctor a free expression of his mind touching these two
Points, which involue a secret never to be discovered. At least then he may
with Civilitie be entreated to satisfy the world touching the sense of the two
Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance which he has taken already, as appears by the
Preferments he enioys: unles perhaps for the tenderness of his conscience he has
been dispensed with taking them. I doubt not but that in the Oath of
Alleagiance he cheer-fully renounced all Authority in the Pope or any foreign
Potentate to absolve Subjects from their Allegiance: but will he do the same
with regard to any domestic Power, Assembly, or State at home? This were worth
the knowing.

82. And next touching the Oath of Supremacy, Irenic. P. 392.
the Doctor during the late execrable Usurpers time publishing in his Irenicum
the Judgment touching Church Government of the prime Patriarch of the English
Reformation, styled by him that most worthy Prelat and glorious Martyr
Archbishop Cranmer (a Martyr indeed, if an impenitent Traitor may be called a
Martyr:) and his judgment, declared in an answer to a Petition of the Clergy in
the Convocation, was in brief, That Princes and Governors may make (Bishops
and) Priests as well as Bishops may: And that a Bishop or a Priest made by them
needs no Consecration by the Scripture. Moreover the Doctor signifies that
he had in his possession an Authentic Copy of the same Cranmers Answer in
resolution of certain doubts propounded by the same Clergy touching Doctrinall
Points, as about the Masses institution, nature, receiving etc. But this Secret
the Doctor envyed his Readers: Notwithstanding we may collect the sense of
Cranmers Answer from the Subscription to both the Resolutions, the Form whereof
is this, T. Cantuariens. This is mine Opinion and Sentence at this present,
which I do not temerariously define, but do remit the judgment thereof wholly
to your Majesty. So that it seems a final judgment both touching Government
and Doctrine is by the Prime Bishop referred to a Child of about nine years old:
a great glory surely to the English Clergy, for the knowledge of which they are
beholding to the Doctor, as the Doctor was to Cranmer for confirming the
substance of his Book touching Church Government, very advantageous to my Lords
the Bishops.

83. Now this being premised, and notice being taken that this Book,
attributing all this power to the Supreme Civil Governor, was printed in
Cromwells time: he cannot surely refuse to declare whether he intended in
taking lately the Oath of Supremacy to acknowledge as much in the King, whose
Title by Law is, Supreme Head and Governor of the Church of England: and
whether by the Church of England is to be understood only the Prelaticall
Church, so as that all the Doctors other Protestant Churches are to be
supposed exempt from his Jurisdiction. For if they be not, it is expected that
the Doctor should declare that the King as Head of the Church may ordain
Bishops and Priests for his own Church: and Presbyters for the Presbyterians,
Ministers for the Independents, Holders-forth for Anabaptists; Declarers for
Quakers and Tub-preachers for that sort of Fanatics. But this is not all: For
the Doctor, if holding to his Book, seems obliged to assert a power in the
King to appoint also Articles of Belief, a hundred ways varying and
contradicting one another, to fit the fancies of each respective Congregation.
But how would the Doctor advise him about Fifth Monarchists? Thus much at
present upon this Subject, by occasion of the Doctors requiring an account
from Catholics touching their Fidelity, which account none were less fit to
require then the Doctor. Causa patet.

84. But after all, did it become a Doctor of such reputation (though having a
design to do all the mischief he could to Catholics, who never provoked him)
to call into his aid two such Authors as the Answerer to the Apology for
Catholics, P. 346.
and the Answerer to Philanax? For touching the former, he cannot but know that
his barbarous Answer has met which a Reply already from an Honorable pen. And
for the other, where was the Doctors modesty when he styled himr a worthy
Author for belying most horribly a party among Catholics, as if they had had
an influence (and had joined with the Doctors friends) in the most barbarous
effects of Fanaticism here in the murder of a most excellent Prince? Does he
not know how often, and particularly how upon the complaint of the late
Queen Mother of most precious memory, he has been summoned to make good that
his forged calumny; but all in vain? Js that wretched Serpent to be styled a
worthy-Authour, who if he had not been warmed and thawed by English
preferments, had never been able to hiss in his own country, and much less to
disgorge his poison to the disturbance of our Island? Js any credit to be given
to him who would have that to be believed in England which all France knows to
be false, viz. That his Father was a loyal subject to his King, that is, that
he was an Apostar from Huguenotterie, where Confession of Faith obliges them to
be Traitors and Rebels whenever the Honor of God (that is, the Defense of
their execrable Religion) is concerned?

85. If the Doctor had had the patience to delay a while the publishing his
Book, he might both have cowntenanced and strengthened his cause very
considerably by imploring the succors of another of the same French Huguenot
brood of the loyal family of the Du Moulins. One by Profession of late (God
Help us) a Physician, but heretofore (as is said) for his (...) presented to
Cromwell, in which he celebrated his victories, created by him a public Reader
of History in the University, then he became a Controvertist, and Teacher of
Divinity: the Divinity doubtless then in fashion, and pernicious to lawful
Soverains. It seems the poor Snake, not th^iving by his Drugs (for he finds
very few of the English Holy Tribes weary of living long) betakes himself to
his former Trade of railing at Papists, a Trade at all times, but now
especially, which brings in as certain a Revenue, as if he had set up an
Alehouse. This doughty Controvertist to putt the world in mind of his first
Trade of Surgery, has given Catholic Religion as he alone thinks, a deadly
wound in cutting the very Iugulum causae. Jf his Book had come abroad time
enough the Doctor could not have refused to make use of it, being one of the
seauenty Patrons to whom he has written most pitifully begging Epistles,
addressed to all degrees, sects and Professions, except Bishops. And in
requital he cannot but warrant him now a sufficient Minister, in case he can
get Ordination from a Justice of Peace, or some other qualified Civil
Magistrate. Poor England! art thou so unprovided of factious spirits, that
French Calvinists must be called in, and hired to plant among us the poysonnous
roots of malicious Huguenotterie?

86 But to return to the Doctor Himself. P. 349.
J am far from being of his opinion, That the most dangerous Sect among us is
of those who under pretense of setting up the Kingdom of Christ, think it
lawful to overturn the Kingdoms of the world. Such were Venner and his
company, who (says he) acted to the height of Fanaticism among our Sectaries.
Thus far indeed J agree with him, That these Frantic Fifth Monarchists do more
professedly teach Rebellion then any other Sect: but I should renounce common
Reason, if I should affirm that such a handful of madmen, as Venner and
Riscrew, are a Sect more dangerous to the Kingdom then those numerous Armies of
sober Fanatics (Presbyterians, Independents, Anabaptists, etc.) who all
conspired to the raising and prosecuting the late Rebellion. Yet all these will
say as much for themselves as the Doctor has here done, viz. We condemn any
opposition to Government under any pretense whatsoever: P. 350.
For it was in Obedience to a Government such as it was, that the Rebellion was
upheld; a Government divided from the Kings, and usurped on purpose to destroy
him. To conclude this point, as zeal for the Kings safety and the Public
Peace is commendable in all English Subjects and in such Strangers salso whom
English Preferments have made his Subjects, yet certainly in the Doctor and
his worthy Huguenot Author it seems a preposterous and suspicious zeal, which
has been shown only against a Party, of which not one can be accused of want of
fidelity to his Majesty, whilst they speak not a word, nor so much as intimate
any apprehension of danger from those who unanimously conspired to his
Destruction, and who, for any thing to the contrary appears, cannot yet find
one word in the Scripture (or the Laws of the Kingdom) which condemns their
former Rebellion. But enough, if not too much, of this argument, which the
Doctor would needs discourse upon.

. 6. Fanaticism returneed upon the Doctor and his whole Religion.
87. THe Doctor now for the recreation of his Readers having represented
Catholics, not only such as now live, but many in glory with God in heaven,
travestis in a disguise of Ffanaticks acting a Ffarce or Interlude composed by
him, the glory of which invention he may lawfully challenge to himself alone;
for I do not find that any pattern has been given him by any other Adversaries
of Gods Church: He cannot justly take it ill, if in some degree of requital we
endeavor to show not only himself, but the whole Church, I mean all the
Churches of Protestants, as they are Principled by him in his Book, to be
really, without any vizard or disguise very Fanatics.

88. Jn pursuing this subject, we cannot hinder the Doctor from challenging
some, by him esteemed great, advantages, in which he much glories, and for
which he gives God humble thanks. For 1. we can find no Religious Orders among
them, upon the Institutours and Subjects of which we might fasten this Title,
and whom we might Stigmatize with this brand. An attempt indeed has once been
made of beginning such an Order of young men and women living promiscuously
together; But by reason of two defects it presently expired; For neither would
they be persuaded to vow continency (in such circumstances truly unreasonable:)
Neither could a Superior, he or she be found to whom they could be obliged in
conscience to profess Obedience; and no wonder, since, it seems, their own
Church cannot exact it from them. 2* We cannot hear of so much as one single
person whom we might call a Fanatic for leaving the flesh and the world to the
end he, or she might entirely consecrate themselves to God in Solitude and
Exercises of Spiritual Prayer and Mortification. 3. Jn case God should call
any one to such a state of life, there is an utter want among them of
Instructours and Instructions proper for it, unless The crumms of comfort,, The
Practice of Piety, truly for the Substance good innocent Books, with store of
pious affections: or else one, a more late one, yet better then those called,
The whole duty of man could serve their turns. But these having never been
intended for such an use, it cannot reasonably be expected from them. 4. They
all of them (except the Quakers and Fifth Monarchists, with few besides)
disclaiming all Gratuite Graces, Visions, Illuminations, Inspirations, Passive
Unions, etc. Jf upon this account we should call any of them besides these,
Fanatics, they would, and very justly, call us impudent Slanderers. 5. Not one
Miracle having been pretended to since the first Reformation not so much as the
curing a Tertian Ague to testify that Reformation was pleasing to God, we
cannot reasonably accuse them of forging any Miracles. 6. The Doctor might
have done well, even in revenge against his enemy M. Cressy and his Church
History, or as he scornfully styles it Great Legend, to have given to the world
at least a pretty little Legend of his Reformed Saints. But alas, his Records
will not furnish him with matter of that argument to fill a nutshell. So that
he has deprived us of the means of requiting him with finding Fanatics among
his Rubricated Saints. Yet if he will consult more Ancient and some even
Primitive Records, as S. Ireneus, Tertullian, and after them S. Epiphanius, S.
Augustine, and Philastrius, together with other Modern writers, as Alphonsus a
Castro, Prateolus, etc. who have compiled Books expressly touching the Lives
and Doctrins of many of his Predecessors, it will go hard if he be not able
to discover some among them whom he may call Saints (as well as Cranmer) and we
in requital, Fanatics. But he is too wise to loose his advantage.

89. And all these manifold advantages we yield up to him, to our shame, and
to the Doctors great contentment, and to the glory of his Protestant Churches.
Yet all this will not discourage us from endeavoring at least, to justify that
the Doctor and his Churches are mere Fanatics. This we confidently pronounce,
and to make this good we will not, as he has done, exemplify in the Writings or
actions of a few persons culld out, with an intention to baffle, affront and
revile them, but we will demonstrates upon his own grounds and Principles, that
the very nature and Essence of his Churches and Religion, is pure putid
Fanaticism.

90. Now a demonstrable proof of this the Doctor himself affords us in the 13.
and 15. Principles at the end of his Book. 13. Principle,
His words are these: Such a particular way of Revelation being made choice of
by God (for the means of making known his Will in order to the happiness of
Mankind) as Writing, we may justly say, that it is repugnant to the nature of
the Design, and the Wisdom and Goodness of God to give infallible assurance to
persons in Writing his Will for the benefit of Mankind, if those Writings may
not be understood by all Persons who sincerely endeavor to know the meaning of
them in all such things as are necessary for their Salvation. And consequently,
there can be no necessity supposed of any infallible Society of men, 15
Principle.
either to attest or explain those Writings among Christians.

91. What is this now but Fanaticism in the height of the Notion signified by
the word, to make every Christian Soberly enquiring into Scripture to be his
own Teacher in all necessary Points of Faith (and it is no matter what becoms
of unnecessary Points) and to be a competent Judge of the true sense of
Scripture in them: all this without any regard to all External Authority
infallible, or fallible either; for an infallible one being unnecessary, what
necessity can there be of a fallible Authority, which none is or can be bound
to Believe? If it be Fanaticism to attend to and believe certain pretended
Illuminations, Inspirations and Revelations concerning particular matters,
perhaps of no great importance, with a refusal to submitt them to any
External Authority: what is it to ground his whole Religion upon his own
fancy, enquiring into the true sense of Divine Revelation?

92. But perhaps the Doctor thinks himself and his Churches secure
notwithstanding any thing here said, and because neither himself, nor they,
pretend to any New Revelations, Illuminations, or Inspirations in this matter.
Notwithstanding he will not find an evasion by this. For besides that, J am
sure, Presbyterians at least, if not the other Sects, and likewise the
Huguenots of France in their Confession of Faith, have always professed that
they have not only the true sense of Scripture by Inspiration of the Holy
Ghost, but that thereby they are enabled to distinguish true Scripture from
Apocriphall Writings: I will take the boldness to tell him, That he himself does
the same, and if he denies it, it is because he is ignorant of what passes in
his own mind.

93. To show this, I will here propose a few Questions to him, and he not being
present to do it himself, I will suppose he gives me leave to make Answers to
them, such as J conceive he will not disavow. The. 1. Question: I. Que. Ansvv.
Does he after a sober Enquiry understand and assent to the true sense of
Scripture in all necessary Points? Answer. Yes. 2. Question. II. Qu. Ansvv.
Is his Assent* to such Points an Act of mere natural Reason or is it a Divine
Faith? Answer. A Divine Faith surely as he hopes, and is fully persuaded: For
he would be sorry if he believed not better then Devils. 3. Question. III Qu.
Ansvv.
Is a Divine Faith a Supernatural Gift of Gods Holy Spirit. Answ. Yes: the
Scripture saying so expressly. 4. Quest. IV. Qu. Ansvv.
Is this Gift of God communicated to his servants any other way, then by
Illumination, Inspiration, or the like Divine operation Equivalent? Answ. J
must answer in the Doctors place, till he better informs me, that no other way
is known. Jn the last place. 5 Q. V. Qu. Ansvv.
Does he think himself fobliged to acknowledge that he receies this Faith from,
or to Submitt this his persuasion of a Divine operation in him to the Teaching
of any Church? Answ. He will not (though J thank God J do) acknowledge any
Church, fallible or infallible, which can justly require thus much from him.
Now therefore a primo ad vltimum, does the Doctor want any necessary
qualification to make him pass for a perfect Fanatic and Enthusiast, a
Fanatic by duty imposed on him from the Essence of his Religion, and moreover
a Teacher of Fanaticism? Jf I could absolve him from this; I would very
willingly: but sincerely I cannot, since he himself has given me a distinct
notion of Fanaticism, by which he, and his party, understands an Enthusiastic
way of Religion, or resisting Authority (Civil or Ecclesiastical) under a
pretense of Religion: by which Notion, in it self true and proper, he is to be
judged without Appeal.

94. Now though the Doctor takes upon him, and is generally conceived by
others to be a Champion of the Church of England, yet perhaps it would be
rashness in me from his warrant alone to affirm that the Church of England
(that Church, J mean which is established by public Authority) does now at
last ground her Faith on such a Fanatic Principle, as the Doctor in her name
has laid: For then it might indeed be truly said, that the New Faith of the
Church of England, is the very Faith of New England. The Doctor, how learned
soever otherwise, he is but a Neophit in this Church: and therefore all he says
not to be swallowed presently without examining: if he wrong the Church of
England, J am unwilling to wrong her with him.

95. And one particular thing which I have observed from his Book, makes me
suspect that my Lords the Bishops will not avow this Principle imposed by him
on them, which is, that his Book wants an Imprimatur. Now if an Approbation was
either not demanded by him, or being demanded was refused him: it seems strange
that against order and Public command it should be permitted to be so
dispersed without any Control. But the truth is, there is a great Mystery of
late in that Formality of Approbations: for some Books want an Imprimatur for
the Reader, which was not wanting to the Printer. Perhaps the Doctors
virulence against poor Catholics was so highly approved by the grave Censor
Librorum, that rather then it should be hindered from doing mischief to them, he
was content the Principles also should pass: which utterly destroy the
foundations of his own Church. This may seem more probable, because in like
manner a License is given to the Printer for a Book of Sermons, in one of
which, composed entirely of Lying Invectives against Catholics, and by a most
horrible calumny imputing the Powder Treason to the Preaching of Catholic
Religion, there is this passage becoming a Preacher of the Gospel; I wish that
the Laws against these Foxes (the Papists) might be put in execution, as they
were anciently against Wolves. Nothing but an utter extermination of
Catholics, it seems, will content the charitable Preacher, who seems to
intimate also, that in his Judgment it is fit a price should be set on every
Catholics head as formerly on Wolves, to be paid to his murderer. Such a
Sermon as this the Printer is licenced to print; but he who gave it, being
ashamed that his Approbation of so barbarous a piece should appear to the
world, has given order that his License should be concealed.

96. What judgment therefore in this regard, to make of the Doctors Book,
truly I cannot determine. Only this I may say, That if Prelaticall Protestants
do allow him for their Champion, and approve the Grounds of his Religion, it is
one of the most Signal Victories that in any Age has been gained by a single
Doctor over a whole Church, the Governors whereof will be forced to
acknowledge that they have no Authority to teach truth, or condemn Errors;
that all the people (formerly under them) are become Prophets, and that all
their Articles, Constitutions, and Ordonances have been comp^se^ and enjoined
by an usurped Authority, of which they are not willing to be despoyled, and
perhaps, after the example of a late Scottish Bishop, to do Penance for their
fault of being Bishops. But certainly my Lords the Bishops will hardly, with
all the Doctors eloquence, be persuaded to this compliance with him: Regard
both to the Kings and Kingdoms safety, and their own Character will not permit
them to yield to an Anarchy first in the Church, and presently after in the
Kingdom.

97. Notwithstanding it cannot be denied but the Doctor may expect more then
ordinary indulgence from them, since during their late calamities, he did not
join in the clamor for destroying them. Irenic.
He was no Root and branch enemy, but on the contrary generously undertook
their defense, and with great boldness told his then Masters, that though
Episcopal government and Ordinations, as likewise Deans and Chapters (which
anciently were the Bishops Counsel) were not necessary, nor perhaps
convenient, as matters then stood, yet neither was their utter destruction:
they might, if the State pleased, be retained without sin, upon condition that
for their Maintenance the ravenous beasts then in power would be content to
vomit up three or four hundred thousand pounds of yearly ^ents. But my best
course is to leave the Doctor to plead his own cause, much better then I can
do; And I assure him I would not have touched this String, nor called to mind
these things passed, were it not that hitherto he has made no retractation of
any thing written by him, and also if his Principles newly published should
prevayle in men's minds, they would be more destructive to both Kingly and
Church government then all the Writings of Presbyters and Independents etc.

98. But perhaps after all, the said Principles, though pernicious to
Superiors, may at least produce Unity and peace among the people. For a man
would think if every sober enquirer (and who thinks not himself such anon) may
be allowed to choose a sense of Scripture for himself, what can he desire more?
Every one then surely will be quiett and contented. But I must tell him, Quid
verbo audio, cum facta videam. If indeed men could be content to enjoy their
Faith to themselves, and not think themselves obliged to propagate it; if they
could with patience see their Doctrins confuted, their actions derided, and
their designs opposed, peace perhaps might be hoped for ad Graecas, Calendas.

99. Yet I confess that (according to the Welsh Proverb, The Gospel and a
Stone will drive away a dog) the Doctors Principles and a severe Civil
government joined together, that is, a charitable indulgence to tender
consciences, with a watchful care to prevent quarrels and eager disputes
about Religion, may produce that peace, which has hitherto never been seen in
England since the Reformation, and men's minds, being enured to taste the
pleasure of such a peace, may probably in a short time become as zealous against
quarrelling, as they are now for it.

100. But there is another sort of Peace and Unity more fit to be the argument
of Writings composed by Ecclesiastical persons, that is, Unity of Faith and
Doctrine. And this Unity was intended certainly by Christ, when he left his
Church established under Spiritual governors, to continue in an orderly
Succession till the worlds end: and was Signified by S. Paul, saying, There is
one Body and one Spirit: one Lord, one Faith, and one Baptism etc. who also
declares that this one Body and one Faith is preserved by Apostles and other
Governors instituted by Christ in his Church, Ephesians. iv 4. 5.
To the end that Gods people may not be tossed to and fro, verse. 5.
and carried about with every wind of Doctrine etc. This Unity also is proposed
and professed by us in the Creed, I believe one holy Catholic and Apostolic
Church. Now this Unity the Doctor, seeing utterly chaced out of his Churches
principled by him, earnestly endeavors to prove it a stranger to the Catholic
Church also: and would seem to intimate that if it be possible to be attained,
it must be by his Principles. And the truth is, if men might enjoy their
consciences, and would be induced to abstain from quarrelling, persecuting and
hating one another; Truth in the end would probably prevail, were there not
one hindrance more, I fear, insuperable, which is, that Truth, or true
Religion has no other passions and Carnal affections to combat withal,
besides quarrelsomnes. It requires a bending, and even breaking of the Will to
the Obedience of Lawful Superiors: it requires yet further a captivating even
of the Understanding to the Obedience of Faith taught them by the same
Superiors: It requires also a free discovery of the most secret and most
difficult to be acknowledged crimes, in order to painful Satisfactions to be
undertaken for their expiation, and for obtaining Absolution and pardon of
them: It requires from many a total renouncing of all carnal Lusts, and all
External remedies of quenching them. These and many other severe exactions are
required by true Religion, and only by it^ and therefore no wonder if Sects
dispensing in these things, prevail so much against it: Yet Gods grace is
omnipotent, and can work greater and more difficult effects in the hearts of
his servants, when he is pleased to exert it.

101. It is truly an Attempt worthy so heroical a Champion to pretend to bring
proofs, from which, says he, it appears that the Church of Rome can have no
advantage in point of Unity above his Protestant Churches, which is in effect
to demonstrate that one Article of our Faith ceases to be true.

102. Let this be examined: and first let us enquire what helps for Unity (I
mean Unity of Faith and Doctrine) Protestants have, and then compare them with
those of Catholics. First, for the Doctor himself, who as yet, must pass for
the common Advocate of Protestants, till he be disavowed, surely he will not
pretend to contribute the least advantage to such Unity, unles he hopes to
persuade any one, That a license given to every Christian to choose his own
Faith out of Scripture be a probable way to make all agree in the same Faith:
which License he gives* and justifying it* is the principal Design of all his
Principles. Is not this all one as to say, Let every man in England think and
do what he pleases, and by this means all will agree to be Good Obedient
Subjects to the King? Yet the Scripture argues the contrary, saying, That
because there was no King in Israel, everyone went several ways, doing what
was good in his own eyes. So that by the Doctors way of proceeding, one would
almost believe that his meaning was, that our Savior had no intention that his
Church should be one, and consequently that General Councills, which took
great pains to procure Unity, transgressed therein our Saviors order.

103. But all Protestants are not of the Doctors mind: for though they
generally make Scripture, not only the Rule, but judge also of Faith when
controverted: Yet they do not so neglect Unity, but that they profess a
willingness to submit their judgments for the sense of Scripture to a Lawful
general Council. This the Doctor cannot do, now that he has set forth his
Principles, unless he will confess the foundation of his Protestant Religion to
be unsound. He might well enough have done it before, whilst he was a Defender
of Archbishop Lawd: but now it appears that the Archbishops Principles and his
are not the same, nor probably ever were, and I do assure my self that if the
Archbishop were alive, none could be more ready to condemn them.

104. Other Protestants therefore refuse not submission to Counsels: as may
appear by their confident demanding them. Gesner in Re Bellar. Def.
For Gesner speaking in their name thus writes. We with the loudest voice we
can, cry out again and again, and with all our power we humbly and earnestly
beg of Christian Kings and Emperors that a free, Christian and Lawful
Council may be conv^ked, in which the Scripture may be permitted to be the
Judge of Controversies. And our Countreyman Sutcliff confidently cries out that
Catholics are afraid of Councills. Yet all the world sees that if a Lawful
General Council were called, according to the order of all past lawful
Councills, even those received by Protestants, they must necessarily be
condemned.

105. This some others more wise then these loud Sollicitours for Councills
saw; and therefore when a Council was ready to be called, they, providing for
themselves, would not permit any Point to be decided by Catholic Bishops
alone, but every Minister, yea Laymen, must have votes in them: and a
plurality of Suffrages was not to prevayle, but an equal number on both sides
must dispute, and Lay Judges decide: that is, declared Heretics must enjoy
greater Privileges then Catholics, and instead of a Council there must be an
Assembly of wild beasts consulting to establish Unity in Gods Church, which, it
seems, was only to be procured by confusion, and not by Order. Therefore a
certain Lutheran said well of Calvinists calling for a Lawful Council,
Schlussc^b.
that they did imitate a well known Buffon called Marcolphus, who was wont to
say, That after all his search he could never find a fit tree upon which he
could willingly be content to be hanged: Such a tree would a Legitimate
Council prove to the Doctors Principled Protestants.

106. Yet there is one expedient for producing Unity, which the Doctor may do
well to advise upon: for if it take, it will certainly have that effect: even
the Quakers themselves and Fifth Monarchists will not refuse to be of the
Doctors Church, if they be not already. Nay, which is more, the Catholics
will come in too. This is no invention of mine, but was many years since
suggested by one of the Doctors Protestants, Robert Robertson an English
Anabaptist of Amsterdam. This surely well meaning man perceiving how little
success Scripture alone had to unite Sects, agreeing only in opposing Popery,
in the year sixteen hundred and two printed a Book in Holland, in which he
proposed to them all this means of Unity viz. That they should all ioyn in a
common Petition to the States to give them leave to assemble themselves in some
Town or field, and there each Sect severally to pray to God, one after another,
that he would show some evident Miracle for decision of their Controversies,
and declaring which among them had the Truth, (which he supposed undoubtedly
was not among Catholics) And to the end the Devil might not enter in, and
deceive them with a false Miracle, the man told them he had thought of one
allowed by Scripture, and which he was sure the Devil could not work, namely,
to make the Sun stand still for a certain considerable time: not doubting but
that God of his great Goodness would not refuse to condescend to the Petition of
such devout servants of his in a matter so just and necessary.

107. I suppose the Doctor will not deny this design (if succesfull) to be a
most powerful and unfaileable Mean of producing Unity, which his Principles
have utterly destroyed, and rendered impossible, if not unlawful. And let him
with all his wit and invention devise any other more probable, since the
Catholic Churches Authority is rejected by him and them.

108. Notwithstanding all this, the Doctor, according to his custom and
nature, is confident, that he has demonstrated, that the Church of Rome can
have no advantage in Point of Unity above his medley Church. Now to the end any
impartial Reader may be a competent Judge between us, I will briefly set down
the Instruments and Means of Unity left by our Lord to his Church, to (...) end
the Truth of this Article of our Faith, I believe one Catholic Church, may
remain to the worlds end unalterable. 1. Catholics do ground their Faith on
Gods revealed Will in Scripture interpreted by Tradition. 2. They believe that
God according to his Promise, will lead and preserve his Church in all
necessary Truth, or in the true sense of Scripture. 3. That for this purpose,
he foreseeing that Heresies and Schisms grounded on a false sense of Scripture,
would in after times come, has established in his Church an unfaileable
succession of Teachers of his Truth, with whom he will continue till the worlds
end. 4. It is his Will and Command that all Christians should obey these
Teachers, who are to give an account of their souls. 5. These Teachers
constitute the Churches Hierarchy. 6. The Universal Church is represented by
these Teachers assembled in a Lawful General Council. 7. Such a Council
therefore is the Supreme Tribunal of the Church, from whose Decisions there
must be no Appeal. 8. But because the difficulties of making such Assemblies
are extremely great, therefore it is necessary there should be a standing
Authority with power to prevent Heresies and Schisms in the intervalls of
Councills, arising and disturbing the Church. 9. This ordinary Authority is
established in the Supreme Pastor, the Bishop of Rome. 10. His Jurisdiction
therefore as to such an end, extends it self to the whole Church, and is
exercised in taking care that the Ordinances of General Councills be not by
any transgressed: and also in case any Heresies arise, or that any
Controversies in Causis Majoribus can not be otherwise ended, either to
determine the Points of Catholic Truth opposed, or at least to impose Silence
upon disputants and Litigants, till he can assemble a Council to declare
un-appealably the Truth, and to do justice upon the guilty parties. Thus the
Catholic Church is furnished against Schisms, and none of these Defensive arms
will the Doctor allow to any of his Protestant Churches, and yet he
confidently avows that Catholics have no advantage.

109. But let us consider what arguments an overweening wit can allege to
prove so strange an affection; for he might as well have said, That Government,
and such Government as obliges the conscience, has not so much force to
preserve men in Unity, as Anarchy has.

110. As touching his Proofs, which take up above an hundred pages, our answer
to them must be, that we may yield him in a manner all the Premises of his
faulty Sillogisms, and must deny the Consequence of the Conclusions he would
draw from them. He tells us many Tragical Stories of miscarriages of Popes,
how they revolted from the Empire, and upon such revolting laid the foundation
of greatness to their See: How afterward challenging to themselves a Supreme
Temporal Dominion over the whole world, they quarrelled with Emperors and
other Christian Princes, from whence followed rebellions, massacres, and a
whole Iliad of all sorts of mischiefs. Well: this being granted, what follows?
Therefore says he, Papal authority in Gods Church is no, good mean to produce
peace and order (nor consequently Kingly authority in the common wealth, since
notwithstanding it many Kings have exercised Tyranny, and could not always
prevent rebellions.) But S. Peter and S. Paul never thought of such an
argument, when the most abominable Monster that ever lived governed the Roman
world. It was to Nero that they commanded Christians to be subject, to pay
taxes, to yield honor etc. and this not only out of fear of his power, but
also for conscience sake. It was such an argument as this (as the Doctor has
reason to remember) that was made use of to the destruction of the best King
that ever governed this Island. Be it therefore granted, that after a thousand
years of excellent order produced in the Christian world by the government of
Popes, some of their Successors for about an age or two caused intolerable
disorders in the Church and Empire: What follows? Therefore a Supreme authority
in Gods Church is of no good use at all: Nay more, all manner of Authority is
useles; for if any authority, then Subordination: and if Subordination, then of
necessity a Supreme.

111. From hence the Doctor descends to a way of arguing yet less reasonable
then this: for he tells his Reader of I know not how many Schisms, yet all of
them after the Church was above twelve hundred years old (for before there were
scarce any:) and of yet later disorders since S. Bernards time, by reason of
quarrels between Bishops and Monastic orders about Exemptions and Privileges:
likewise between Regulars and Seculars the other day in England, and much more
such stuff which Popes either would not, or rather could not compose, for fear
of greater disorders by endangering Schisms yet more pernicious to the Church
then the former. And what would he conclude from hence? The very same as
before: for his argument in brief is this: Subjects are often times rebellious to
their Superiors: therefore it were better there were no Superiors at all. But
might he not as rationally argue, that God is Governor of the world: yet
notwithstanding this the far greatest part of the world, not in one or two, but
in all ages, from the beginning has been rebellious to him, therefore his
Government is of small benefitt?

112. As touching certain (truly scandalous) quarrels between Bishops and some
Regulars concerning Episcopacy and the Churches Government, the Doctor ought
to have taken notice that never any Regular pretended Episcopacy to be
Antichristian, as the Doctors friends, the Presbyterians, Independents, and
other later Sects have done; Neither have they declared a Government by Bishops
to be in it self indifferent, or that Ordination and Consecration of Bishops
and Priests is a mere Ceremony, and conferred as well and Legally by Lay
Magistrates as by Ecclesiastics, as the Doctor himself has done: The whole
controversy consisting among Catholics about restraining some part of
Episcopal Jurisdiction, and maintaining Privileges granted by some Popes to
certain Regulars. A vast difference therefore there is between Catholics and
Protestants in Disputes touching Church Government: and utterly irremediable on
the Protestants side, whereas we see it ended, or at least silenced, among
Catholics.

113. But differences of this Nature are not considerable compared to those
objected by the Doctor in the last place, P. 443.
which are touching Matters of Doctrine, and as he pretends of Faith: in which
regard he says that the Church of Rome can have no advantage in point of Unity
above others: And further, he, not content with this, adds, That the Popes
Authority being acknowledged by Catholics the fountain of Unity, and all
Catholics not agreeing in the Popes Infallibility, Whereas both Catholics and
Protestants agree in the Infallibility of Scripture, which is to Protestants a
more certain way of ending Controversy, therefore he concludes that Protestants
have a more certain and safe way of Unity, then Catholics. For that the Pope
has not a sufficient power to reduce to Unity parties dissenting in Doctrinall
Points of weight, such as are the Controversies between the Jesuits and
Dominicans about Grace and Free Will; between the Dominicans and Franciscans
about the Immaculate Conception etc. is, he says, evident, since those
quarrels have to this day continued many ages, and are prosecuted with great
eagernes.

114. In this manner argues the Doctor, whereto the Answer is obvious. For. 1.
he trifles with and abuses an unskilful Reader, in telling him that the
Scripture being acknowledged on both sides to be infallible, is a more certain
way of ending Controversies then the Popes determination, who is not by many
Catholic believed to be infallible. For how can a Writing, the sense whereof
is controverted, end a Controversy? And to say that a writing is of it self a
surer mean to end debates, then when interpreted by a Judge, to say this, and
to think to be believed, is to call his Readers brutish, irrational creatures,
and to make all Tribunalls ridiculous. 2. It is not the Popes Infallibility,
but his. Authority which ends the Controversies, either by Determining the
Point in Controversy, so as his Determination is accepted by the Church: or at
least by imposing Silence among Disputants, till himself in a Council
unappealeably decide it: By which way of imposing Silence several eager
Disputes have been ended by Popes, as this age can witness. 3. Though all
Catholics do in thesi acknowledge that they are obliged, at least, to silence
when imposed by the Pope: Yet it cannot be denied but that some have not
complied with this Obligation. But this is not to be imputed to want of
Authority in the Pope, but to the unrulines of men's passions and pride. And the
same fault we see in Secular Tribunalls, which yet does not hinder but that
Judges are reputed fit and proper to end Law suits. 4. That neither the Pope
nor the Council of Trent, have decided the fore mentioned Controversies, we
are to ascribe either to the inconsiderablenes of them; or to the want of
Sufficient clearness of Scripture or Tradition for either party; or to a just
and prudent care of preventing Schisms in the Church by such Determinations,
wherein so considerable parties in the Church are divided in opinion. 5.
Whereas the Doctor says that the Points in Controversy among Catholics, being
many of them the same agitated among Protestants, are Points of Faith, he is
manifestly mistaken: For there are among Catholics no Points controverted, but
such Doctrins where the sense of Scriptures being variously expounded by the
two Parties, the Church as yet has determined nothing which sense of them is
de Fide (though the Parties themselves would each of them have their own to be
so,) not determined, I say, so clearly, as that both sides are agreed that such
is the Churches Decision. As for Protestants, what Doctrins are esteemed Points
of Faith, and what School Disputes, I think no Oedipus can resolve. Doctor
Stillingfleet elsewhere says down right, Ration Accou. p 54.
That the Church of England holds no Points to be Articles of her Faith, but
those wherein the Church of Rome also agrees with her, and holds the same to be
such. His words are, There is a great deal of difference between the owning of
some Propositions in order to Peace, and the believing of them as necessary
Articles of Faith. The Church of England makes no Articles of Faith, but such
as have testimony and approbation of the whole Christian world of all ages, and
are acknowledged to be such by Rome it self; and in other things she requires
Subscription to them, not as Articles of Faith, but as inferior Truths, which
she expects Submission to, in order to her Peace and Tranquillity. Thus the
Doctor. But here I cannot well understand, why he says her Subjects Subscribe
them as inferior Truths, and yet maintains the Church of England to require no
Subscription to her Articles as Truths, for that surely is a requiring of
assent to them, but a Subscription of non-contradiction, or nonopposition of
them, which consists with the parties holding them Errors. Now methinks, this
the Church of England believing nothing as of Faith, but what the Popes and the
Roman Churches Faith also secures to them to be so, should sound somewhat harsh
in the ears of many of his Disciples. Again, it necessarily follows, that the
Church of Rome, notwithstanding its Idolatry, Fanaticism etc. yet fails in no
necessary Point of Faith. 6. Lastly, that which makes Disputes among Christians
about Dostrinall Points pernicious, is not the heynousnes of the Errors
themselves on either Party, but the refusal to submitt to the Churches
Authority when condemning them, from whence Schisms are inevitable, and such
Refusers then truly styled Heretics. No man will deny but that the Error of
the Photinians [or Socinians] called anciently Homuncionists, for affirming
Christ to be mere man, is a most grievous Error, incomparably exceeding any
among Catholics: Yet if one living in the Commu^ion of Gods Church, should
hold this most pernicious Error, not knowing that the Church had condemned it,
and being ready to renounce it as soon as he knew this, Aug. de Bapt. cont.
Donat. l. 4. c. 16.
S. Augustine professes he durst not call such a man an Heretic. How the
Doctor would call such an one, I know not. But this I will justify, that
according to the Doctors Principles he ought to pass for as good and as well
grounded a Protestant as himself: and therefore especially Orthodox, for not
submitting his judgment to the Church.

. 7. The Doctrine of Penance Vindicated from the Doctors mistakes.
115. NOw notwithstanding what has hitherto been said I do nothing doubt but
those popular Readers, for whom only I conceive, the Doctor wrote his Book,
will still resolutely judge every line of it unanswerable. The like they will
say concerning the other Points of accusation charged by him on the Roman
Church, as 1. many obstructions of a Holy Life. 2. Endless Divisions. How happy
are we, will they think, who have escaped out of such a Babel, were Frantic
Subjects are governed by more Frantic Superiors? where men's ears are deafned
with endless quarrels? and where Laws are made against Piety? In the former
regards Papists may deserve our pity or contempt: but in the last our hatred.
For what cruelty is not too Merciful against the Professors of a Religion
which teaches so many Doctrins hindering a good life necessary to Salvation,
that it is scarce possible any of them should be an honest man? The Doctor has
told them that these wicked men make the Sacrament of Penance joined with
Contrition (that is, P. 180.
as he interprets, a remo^se of mind for sin) sufficient for Salvation: But his
Adversary, in effect, bids him, with Contrition to join Confession and
Absolution. He is contented: but he will needs have one condition more added,
which is forsaking of sin. which they of the Church of the Rome not requiring,
notwithstanding all their Confessions and Absolutions a thousand times
repeated, they destroy the necessity of a good life.

116. Here if the Doctor were asked, Does the Catholic Church held the
Doctrine here by him reproved? He could not say she did, because then the
express Decision of the Council of Trent, disproves him: Conc. Triden. Sess.
XIV cap. 3.
Where three parts of the Sacrament of Penance are declared, Contrition,
Confession, and Satisfaction: Now in two of these the forsaking of sin are
contained. For Contrition implies a sorrow for sin proceeding from a love of
God victorious over sin, and consequently a detestation of sin. And
Satisfaction signifies yet more, viz: A holy revenge taken by the Penitent upon
himself for offending God, by denying to himself even Lawful pleasures because
unlawful ones have tempted him to sin: which is a great deal more then
Protestants require.

117. A disposition, one may say, inferior to this required by the Council,
served David's turn, who says, I said I will confess my sins unto the Lord, and
thou forgivest the iniquity of my sin. I cannot now believe the Doctor will
acknowledge that a Sinner repentant of his sins out of a love of God Victorious
over the Devil, the world and the flesh, and weho tstifies that sorrow and
that Love by submitting to severe Pennances and Mortifications, willing also to
declare to his own Confusion, his most secret sins, with a serious purpose of
amendment, will thereby be put in a state of pard^n and Salvation: Especially
having received from Gods Authorized Ministers, Absolution from his sins:
Absolution I say pronounced by Commission and Jurisdiction from Christ himself,
and not such an aerie Phantosme of an Absolution as the Doctor interprets to be
the applying the Promises of pardon in Scripture to the particular case of
dying persons, P. 183.
for this, says he, is that we mean by Absolution: and which say I, the
Silliest woman in the Doctors Parish can conferr as well and validly as
himself. But who are these We, who mean no more then this by Priestly
Absolution? I am sure not the Prelates of his Church, (But I must not say his
Church when I mean the Church of England) who all hitherto have justified this
as one essential Character of the order of Priesthood and Episcopat; unles
since the New Reformation (not yet ten years old) they have been content that
this Character should be wiped out by the Doctor, and that instead of the
Fathers of Gods Church, Master Calvin should be the universal authentic
Teacher of their Clergy. But I believe the Doctor will in vain expect this
compliance from them: And I am sure the now highest and worthiest of his
Prelates, will not be of the number of the Doctors We, who has solidly
asserted this Primitive Doctrine, and to confute whom perhaps the Doctor has
published so pitiful a sense of Absolution; to their prejudice ingratiating
himself with all other Sects, enemies to all Ecclesiastical Orders and
Ordinations, and making every one of them (as before Judges of the Scriptures
sense, so) now Usurpers of their Offices, and, as they hope, ere long of their
Revenues.

118. The Church then is manifestly free from the charge here imputed to
Catholics by the Doctor, and by him made use of to deterr any one from
joining themselves to her, because in her (not, by her) Doctrins are by some
taught destroying the necessity of a good life. All the Doctor can say is:
Some reach some such Doctrins, which some also refute, and the whole Church
disavows. This being so, with what conscience can the Doctor pretend danger
upon this account in being members of the Catholic Church, whenas in his own
Protestant Churches, for which he has laid grounds and Principles, every
Christian is allowed by himself in these Principles to choose not only what
opinions, but what Articles of Faith (after using a sober enquiry into the
Scriptures) they like best. And what most horrid Doctrins he has thereby
excused and defended, all Christendom at this time sees with amazement and
detestation.

119. Surely when the Doctor wrote this passage he conceived himself
quarrelling not with Catholics, who constantly assert against Protestants, the
necessity of good works to Salvation, and their Efficacy in it, upon
Supposition of our Lords gracious Promise to reward them, but with some of his
own Protestants (perhaps with himself) who exclude all Merit of good works from
a Christians Salvation: or with his Patriarch Luther, who said that good Works
did more harm then good; Therefore he may do well to ask them pardon after
Contrition, and Confession of his fault.

120. Certainly if he could bring himself to a willingness of informing himself
in true Catholic Doctrins, he would find that the way to Salvation there
taught is much strayter then that which is chosen by Protestants, and Holiness
of Life far more strictly required. For proof of which it were sufficient only
to repeat what was even now cited out of the Council of Trent touching the
Doctrine of Penance: But a proof visible of late to all our eyes are so many
Apostats from the Catholic Church, Apostats first from Obedience and Chastity,
and next from Faith; For do not they declare to all the world that Carnal
Liberty and Carnal Lusts drove them first out of their Monasteries, and next
out of the Church: As soon as they come into the air of Protestancy, a woman
becoms necessary to them, and Fasting insupportable, and if they can ravish
from Christ a Spouse consecrated to him, they promise to themselves a more
gainful and honorable reception. But if they will needs have Women, because
the woman is handsome and attractive, is therefore the Pope presently turned
Antichrist? does our Lord cease to be present in the Sacrament? is Purgatory
presently extinguished? do Angels and Saints no longer deserve to be
acknowledged our Protectours? in a word, have they forgotten what they formerly
believed and are they in a moment inspired to answer to a new Catechism, full
of new Articles of Faith, gravely proposed to them by a Patriarch and Pandar
for impure Apostats, out of the Pulpitt? What influence has the woman upon them
to make all this change? Truly the very same the Woman had from the Creation.
She presents an Apple to them, which wonderfully delights them to look upon
(Especially if growing in England, where they hear the fairest are to be had.)
But if besides seeing it, they get a taste of the Apple, their eyes are presently
opened, and as it were in uno radio solis they see (all) good and evil, and
nothing appears good but what the woman approves, and without which they can
not enjoy and maintain the Woman, nor make a companion and Mistress to our
noblest young Ladies.

121. But leaving these putrid Carcinomata of the Catholic Church, and
infamous stains to the Protestant, is it not apparent that the Doctrine of
Penance and Mortification has been rejected by Protestants, not because they
are hindrances of good life (as the Doctor says, and I dare say not one
understanding person in his own Parish beleives him) but for the Severity of
them, and contradiction to Flesh and Blood? Besides this, where do we hear of
Restitution of goods got by Usury and deceit among Protestants, there being
among them no obligation of confessing such sins, and by consequence of making
Satisfaction, without which Absolution cannot be granted? The Doctor will not
allow me here to name those Schools of Holiness, and Devotion, Monasteries,
though from the Primitive times esteemed a principal Ornament of Gods Church,
because he will esteem them nothing but Schools of Fanaticism.

122. But in general most certain it is, that among Catholics the Study of
ways promoting Holiness and Piety is incomparably greater, but withal more
painful, then among Protestants.

123. But this satisfies not the Doctor, P. 181.
who brings in Bishop Taylour, using the same argument with him in his
Disswasive from Popery, viz: the no-necessity of forsaking sins in the
Catholic Church, since if a man commits them again and again, he knows a
present remedy, toties quoties? it is but confessing with Sorrow or Attrition,
and upon Absolution he is as whole, as if he had not Sinned. Yea if after Sixty
or eighty years together of a wicked life, he shall do this in the Article of
his death, this instantly passes him into a state of Salvation. Yea moreover
the Doctor afterward taxes the Indulgence of the Roman Church, P. z12
because in her Rituall she ordains that Extreme Unction should be conferred on
persons unable to confess as being under a delirium, or wholly insensible, if
before it be but probable that they desired it, or gave any signs of
Contrition. And hereby, says he, if any sins have remained upon them, they are
taken of by virtue of this Sacred Unction.

124. As touching the too great facility allowed by some Catholic Writers in
giving Absolution toties quoties to sinners returning to their vomit, and
giving but small signs of their Will to relinquish sins, the Doctor does very
well to tax it, as a great hindrance indeed to a holy life. But because some
few have practiced, or perhaps taught this, he does very ill to make this a
Disswasive from joining to the Church herself, expressly condemning in the
Council of Trent such a facility in Confessors: Conc. T^id. Ses. XIV c. 8.
saying, The Priest of our Lord ought as far as his Spirit and prudence shall
suggest to enioyn wholesome and convenient Satisfactions, according to the
quality of crimes and ability of Penitents: Least if they should happen to
connive at sins, and be indulgent to their Penitents by enioyning slight
Pennances for grieveous Crimes, they themselves become partakers of the crimes
of others.

125. Besides this, the Doctor, I believe, is not ignorant, though it was not
for his purpose to take notice of it, that not very long since, among several
dangerous Positions collected out of some Modern Casuists, such scandalous
relaxations in administering the Sacrament of Penance had a principal place,
all which were not only condemnd by the Bishops of France, almost in every
Diocese: but also a Book, the Author of which undertook to defend them, was
solemnly prohibited, and condemned by the Pope: since which time such Doctrins
have been wholly restrained and silenced.

. 8. Of conferring Absolution and Extreme Unction in articulo Mortis.
126. IN the next place for as much as concerns the conferring Absolution and
administering the Sacrament of Extreme Unction to persons in Articulo Mortis,
who do, or have given any sign of Sorrow or desire of them: the Church in her
Rituall does no more then has been the practice ever since the first Council
of Nicea. And S. Augustine treating of this Subject in a Sermon, August lib. 50
hom.
tells his Auditors that out of Charity and care to dying persons, Hom. 41.
Gods Ministers upon the least testification of Sorrow in such patients
administer the Sacrament to them, though despairing that they shall live to do
works worthy of Penance, so leaving them to Gods mercy: (This they did by
warrant from the first Council of Arles, and the Declaration of Pope Innocent)
But withal he seriously exhorts them to do such works in time of health, and
not to to an Absolution conferred in such circumstances; for though they may be
confident of enjoying the full effect of that Sacrament, yet, says he, I am
not confident of i^. Yet notwithstanding such want of confidence he would not
be wanting to them, to afford them all his assistance in such a perilous hour.
And if the Doctor were seriously examined by any one of his friends, or by any
but a Catholic, whether in such circumstances he would refuse an Absolution, I
mean an Absolution according to his Mode, by applying the Promises of the
Gospel to his Patient; Sure he would not say that his custom among his
Parishioners is to bid the poor agonizant to go to the Devil, for there was
no hopes for him. He would no doubt tell him of Promises, and bid him rely upon
them, though he will not permit Catholics to do so.

127. But the Doctor in prosecuting this Subject alters his Method of
proceeding. For whereas generally in his Book he endeavored to make Catholic
Religion odious, by telling Stories of the actions and Doctrins of particular
persons, disowned by the Church: here he absolves some Catholic Doctors,
among the rest, Monsieur Arnaud, and charges the Church itself for teaching a
Doctrine (as he pretends) manifestly hindering Devotion and a Good Life, viz. in
that her Canon: Whosoever shall say, Conc. T^id. Se^. VII de Sacram. Can. 8.
that the Sacraments do not conferr Grace, exopere operato, let him be
Anathema. Now says he, if Grace be effectually conferred by the force of the
bare External action (acknowledged by all Catholics) P. 206.
what need can there be of a true preparation of the mind by the exercise of
Faith, Prayer, Repentance etc. in order to the receiving the benefitt of them?
He further adds, that thoug^ Cassander interprets this to have respect to the
worth of the Priest, as if his unworthines could hinder the Validity and
Efficacy of Sacraments, though the receivers be never so well prepared: Yet
(says he) this cannot consist with the Councills meaning, because in the
twelfth Canon following it was condemned expressly, and it is not to be
supposed that the Council would frame two Canons to condemn the same error.

128. Thus argues the Doctor, but under favor deals not fairly in not
citing the Councills Canon entirely, which had he done, would have spoiled his
inferences from it. The words are, Whosoever shall say that by the Sacraments
themselves of the New Law Grace is not conferred ex opere operato, but that a
belief alone of the Divine Promise is Sufficient for the obtaining Grace, Let
him be Anathema. Which Canon was made specially against Luthers error, who
attributed all good to Faith alone, making the Sacraments entirely useless. In
which Error I do not know that he is followed by any Sober Protestants,
except the Doctor, who by his discourse seems to renounce all benefitt from
the Sacraments themselves: he will owe Grace to nothing but his own Faith,
Prayer etc. In his opinion the Sacraments of the New Law as well as the old,
are [infirma and egena elementa] weak and beggarly elements. Gal. 4.
But Scripture and Tradition have taught the Church, and the Church us,
otherwise, viz. That by Baptism the Grace of Regeneration is conferred; that
the Holy Eucharist is Semen immortalitatis; that by Extreme Unction and the
Priests Prayers sins are forgiven etc.

129. Neither from hence can the Doctor rationally infer, that there will be
no need of a true preparation of mind by the excuse of Faith etc. since the
Church herself requires such preparation as the Doctor speaks of: And the very
term of Preparation implies that some Benefitt is expected to be received from
the Work it self, besides, and beyond what is obtained by Preparations.

130. But this being a Doctrinall Controversy and brought in only by the way in
this his present discourse, the prosecution of it ought to be reserved for his
worthy Adversary, if he think good: Yet this right I will do the Doctor, that
he has with Monsieur Arnaud justly censured one particular Writer who required
as necessary, for example, to a worthy receiving of the most holy Eucharist no
other preparation of mind but only an absence of Mortal sins, to be had by
Confession of them. But will any rational man judge that because there are
found in a Church a few Teachers of Security, and Sowers of pillows under men's
Ellbows, that therefore it is dangerous to be a member of a Church most free
from warranting that Doctrine which is scarce received by one Bishop in it.

131. Yea moreover, if he would search among Schoolmen who make the largest
allowances in this business, he will find that generally all require Faith and
Repentance in the Receivers of Baptism, and these two joined with Confession
for the Sacrament of Penance; they require also the State of Grace (that is
the habit of Faith, Hope and Charity, and so of Devotion) for the Eucharist
etc. And whosoever wants any such predispositions is reckoned by them among
such as do Ponere obicem.

. 9. Of Prayer for the Dead.
132. ANother scandalous thing for which the Doctor accuses the Church of
Rome is her Charity, Charity to the dead, who are not able to help themselves,
and which evidently has been practiced by all Churches from the beginning, till
Protestantism arose.

133. But wherein lies the fault of this Charity? P. 183.
The Doctor tells us, that the care of a good life is taken off among
Catholics by supposing an exp^ation of sin (by the Prayers of the living)
after death. Whereas we Protestants, says he, in our plain Doctrine teaching
that every impenitent Sinner must expect no less then eternal vengeance in
another world, if this will not prevail upon men to leave their sins, and lead
a good life, we cannot imagine a groundles fiction of Purgatory should ever do
it.

134. Who would not think now that the Doctor in such a way of discoursing is
willing that his Readers should believe that Catholics very seldom, if ever,
endeavored to terrify impenitent Sinners with the threatening of eternal
torments in Hell fire? And no doubt if he had plainly said so he would not have
wanted some believing Readers, it being in this age so gainful a trade to
traduce Catholics by odious, false imputations both in pulpits, presses, and
any where else.

135. Therefore though I must not expect to be believed by all, that I
understand the Doctrine of the Catholic Church so well as the Doctor, yet I
will not forbear plainly to declare it. Catholics are taught. 1. that finally
impenitent sinners, if guilty of mortal sins, shall irremediably suffer
everlasting torments of Hell. 2. That Catholics guilty of mortal or venial
sins, and repenting of them before death, unless they also undergo such
Pennances and Satisfactions as the Church imposes, or such as in any faulty
indulgence of their Spiritual Superiors herein, the quality of their sins and
the imperfection of their Contrition in Gods justice requires, and by that
means dye in perfect Charity, and their Souls entirely purged from the stains
of them, shall suffer most grievous yet temporal, punishments after death,
since no unclean thing, remaining so, can enter into the Kingdom of God. 3. We
are taught that many conditions are required of us to the end our Lords all,
sufficient Merits and Satisfactions may be applied to us, by the Charity, Alms,
and Prayers of devout Catholics.

136. Now such being the Catholic Doctrine touching this Point, with what show
of reason can any one affirm, that this Doctrine takes away the care of a good
life? It teaches all that Protestants teach touching the pains of Hell
attending a wicked life: and withal it teaches the terrible consequences of a
tepid, negligent, imperfect, though otherwise not bad life, which Protestants
do not teach: Protestants require to Repentance only a change of life: but the
Catholic Church, besides this, requires Satisfaction for past sins, herein
following Primitive Antiquity, whose Doctrine in this Point is thus declared by
S. Augustine: Aug. Hom. 50. capvlt.
It is not Sufficient for a Penitent sinner to change his manners to the
better, and to recede from evil actions, except for sins past Satisfaction be
made to God by the dolor of Penance, by humble sighs and groans, by the
Sacrifice of a contrite heart, and by Almsgiving etc. Thus it is that the
Catholic Church hinders a good life, and thus do Protestants promote it.

137. Yea but, says the Doctor, a fear of such temporal torments is in a
manner taken away by an expectation of the Charity and Devotion of living
friends, especially if the dead person had been rich, and had left means of
procuring Masses etc. for his soul. Be it so: yet how ever, some terror there
is to Catholics, restraining them from Security in an imperfect life, which
Protestants laugh at, whilst they promise imperfect Souls with all their
stains, a present possession of heaven after death, to be obtained not by
laborious Good Works, but by Faith, that is, a strong fancy that their sins are
certainly forgiven, and that they are of the number of Gods Elect, in whom God
sees no sins, though themselves and their neighbors see too too many.

138. But the Doctor pleases himself in one great advantage which he has found
against this Doctrine: which is thus expressed by him, P. 681.
How easy is it (according to this Doctrine) for a rich man to enter into the
Kingdom of God? But with his leave, such easines of being saved is not thereby
promised to rich men. Yet thus much We will allow to the Doctor, that in some
small regard rich men may enjoy an advantage, as to Salvation, which poor men
want; And this surely he will not deny, when he considers that speech of our
Savior, who though he had formerly said, How hardly shall a Rich man enter
into the Kingdom of heaven? Luk xvi. 9.
Yet speaking to Rich men, he counsels them, saying, Make to your selves
friends of the Mammon of iniquity, that when ye fail they may receive you into
everlasting Tabernacles. Which speech of his seems exactly pertinent to the
present Subject. Here it is evident that Rich men by the ir riches may procure
that which poor men for want of the Mammon of iniquity cannot.

139. Yet in many other regards it is certain that poor men have a very great
advantage above the Rich, being free from many Temptations and Snares to which
Wealth, ease and plenty exposes men. So that at least for escaping Hell and
Purgatory the Poorer are in a much fairer and easier way. The poor also are
these Friends here Spoken of by our Lord, beloved of God, who not only with
ease enter into his Kingdom, but by their credit can help to bring their rich
benefactors thither also.

140. But after all this, the application of the Churches and particular
persons Prayers and Suffrages for the Deceased, that are Procured by the Alms
of the Rich, Whether it be not Universal or whether, to recompense this, the
Poor do not share more the Common Prayers of the Church, not made with respect
to particular persons, the Church has determined nothing. And of these Common
Prayers of the Church more applied to the Poor and freindles, S. Augustine
speaks thus [J quote him because being a Father of great Reputation, he may
perhaps more safely escape the Doctors contempt and drollery] A Question being
putt to the said Father by S. Paulinus Bishop of Nola, whether it were any
benefit or advantage to the soul after death to be buried in the Memorial, or
near the Shrine or Tomb of a Martyr? he answered; it was: that so this might
mind the Kindred or friends of the Deceased to recommend such a soul to the
Martyr, whose Relics lay there, so to be helped with our Lord by his
Intercession (where it may be observed, that S. Augustine both allows Praying to
the Martyr in the behalf of such Deceased, and supposes the Martyrs hearing
such Prayers) But withal the Father tells them, that should some Deceased not
have the happiness to be buried in such a Holyplace, others are not therefore to
neglect their Supplications for such, because not so minded of them, as of
others, when they go to the Memorial of the Martyr; And then comes to our
very case, that howeuer such souls may want Kindred or friends to remember
them, as the other has: yet the Common prayers of the Church pro defunctis are
without naming any particular persons, offered up for them. His words are,
Adsupplicationes faciendas pro omnibus in Christiana and Catholica Societate
defunctis, Lib. de cura p^^ mo^tuis cap. 4.
etiam tacitis nominibus quorumcumque sub generali commemoratione suscepit
Ecclesia: Vt quibus ad ista desunt Parents aut Filij, aut quicunque cognati
velamici, ab vna eis exhibeantur pia matre Communi.

. 10. Of Indulgences.
141. BUt toward the latter end of his Book treating of Indulgences the Doctor
alleges a practice in the Church which these Catholics who pretend to justify
it, P. 183.
will, J believe, find very great difficulty in answering the Doctors proofs,
that it is really a hindrance of the care of a good life. If any therefore do
find harm by relying upon such a Practice, they may thank themselves, they
voluntarily and without any obligation procure such harm to themselves. Conc.
T^id. Ses. xxv Dec^et de Indulg.
The Council of Trent in its decision of this Point of Indulgences, expressly
Condemns a too frequent use of them, as enervating Ecclesiastical Discipline,
and desirous to correct all scandalous abuses crept in them, ordains an utter
abolishment of all unlawful gain for the obtaining of them, enioyning likewise
all Bishops in their Provincial Synods to take care that the Benefit of
Indulgences may be dispensed piously, holily and without corruption to the
people.

142. Now if after such solicitude showed by the Council, all abuses do not
yet cease, Ibid.
this must be imputed to humane frailty and corruption, and to the erroneous
Doctrine of some Schoolmen: or rather some passages of them singled out from the
context, and stripped from the necessary circumstances, and so misapplied,
whereby the power of the Donour of them is extended without its certain
limitts, and a virtue attributed to them far exceeding that which the present
Church acknowledges in them.

143. This seems plainly to appear by the words of the Council declaring,
That since a Power of conferring Indulgences has been given by Christ to his
Church, which from the most ancient times has exercised this Power, divinely
granted to her; Therefore the Holy Synod does teach and command the use of
Indulgences to be retained in the Church, as very healthful to Christian
people, and approved by the authority of Holy Councills.

144. From this Declaration of the Council the Doctor truly says, that some
Catholic Writers do make this Deduction, That Indulgences are only a
relaxation of the ancient Severity of Church Discipline according to the old
Penitential Canons. P. 516.
Which Deduction seems the less irrational, since the Indulgences inserted by
the Council are the same, which from the most ancient times have been
exercised by the Church. And such an use of Indulgences if the Doctor refuse
to the Catholic Church, he dares not to his own, Since he cannot deny but that
in the Spiritual Courts the Judges assume a power either to qualify Corporal
punishments imposed by the Laws and Canons on Special sins, or commuting them
into Pecuniary. But I must add one thing, that even these Indulgences may be
said to extend their virtue till after death: Since it is certain that being
duly administered, and taking away the obligation to the Severity of the
Penitential Canons, they do consequently abate the Sufferings after death,
which otherwise the Penitent was to undergo having neglected to make
Satisfaction in this life. In a word, Catholics are taught that Indulgences
are beneficial to none but those that are already in the state of Grace: And
that Remission of Penalty only, and not sin, is conceded by them: Likewise that
they relate to Purgatory only, not to Hell: And lastly by the form of them it
appears that the virtue of them after death is only per modum Suffragij.

145. As touching the Doctors Questions concerning Indulgences if he expect an
Answer to them, he must go into some of our Catholic Schools, where he will
not fail to receive Solutions to them all, if they were twice as many; but I
dare not assure him that these Solutions will give him Satisfaction. For my
part I have nothing to say about them, nor, I am sure, any other Catholics, as
a Catholic: Neither do I believe that ever any Protestant Controvertist wrote
a Volume against the Catholic Church, of which not near a tenth part did in
any sort concern her: and such a Book the Doctor, certainly, knows his to be:
and by consequence every ingenious prudent Reader will easily discover from how
poisonous a heart it issued, and to how unchristian an end it was directed.

. 11. Of the Churches Liturgy in a tongue not generally understood.
146. ANother Practice in the Catholic Church there is which the Doctor
esteems a notable hindrance to Piety, P. 188.
which is, the Public Ecclesiastical Office being in a Tongue under stood by
few. P. 174.
This he will not allow to be a matter of Discipline only, and consequently in
the Churches power to alter: Because the Churches power is only to edification,
for a power beyond that the Apostles themselves never challenged: Now it is
manifest, says he, that S. Paul judges Praying or Preaching in an unknown
tongue not to be of edification. Cor. 14


147. Notwithstanding, with the Doctors favor, his allegations do not prove
the matter not to be of Discipline merely. For the Case stands thus: It was far
from being the Churches Primary intention that the public Office should be in
a tongue not understood by the people; for it was at first composed in the
language generally Spoken and understood through Europe. But that Language
being changed by a mixture of the Dialects of several barbarous nations, she
thought it not prudent that the public Service of God composed with great care
and exactnes, should be exposed in every Nation to vnsskillfull Translatours,
and every age to be varied, as Dialects did alter, it not being in her power to
examine all Translations after every new Edition. And the same judgment the
most ancient and most extended Churches in the East had, all which in a manner
do to this day retain their ancient Liturgies, now not understood by the Common
ignorant people.

148. Notwithstanding to repair, as much as may be, this incommodity, the Roman
Church (at least) has taken great care in her Councills that the people in all
Nations should be furnished with Devotions in their Native Tongues, which are
for the most part taken out of the Public Liturgy, and moreover has commanded
all Pastors to interpret to the people in the administering of Sacraments,
especially the most Holy Eucharist, whatsoever they are capable of
understanding: by which means there is scarce a Rustic so ignorant but well
understands what the Priest does through the whole course of the Mass.

149. Matters standing thus, the Church esteems it more prudent and more
conducing also to edification in general, that all Catholic Churches should
serve God uniformly in a language which cannot be corrupted, especially such
provisions being made for the peoples good, then to have the Service of God
exposed to Corruptions and continual Changes. But if the Doctor think himself
wiser then the whole Western and most Eastern Churches, much joy may he take in
his great humility.

150. But after all, how can the people say, Amen, will the Doctor say from S.
Paul? 1. Cor. 14.
I answer. S. Paul in that place Speaks not of the Common Divine Service, which
was celebrated then in a language well understood: and at Corinth doubtless in
the Greek tongue: but of these Spiritual Hymns and Praises of God
extraordinary, that were delivered by some in a tongue unknown. And all that
can be deduced from it, and applied to the Public Divine servcie, is this,
that either this be performed in a known Tongue: or when the Church has
reasonable Motives (which she, not we, must judge of) not to change the
formerly used language of it, so much as is necessary for the common people to
understand, and say Amen to, be interpreted, as the Apostle says there over
and over again.) Verse. 5. 9. 13. 27 28.
Now such Prayers, Collects, Psalms, Hymns, Litanies etc. as are thought
necessary for the common people, are interpreted by the Churches order, and
they have them ready in their Primers, Manuels etc. Even all the parts also of
the Service of the Mass necessary to be known by them.

151. It is certain that it is not out of a desire that the people should be
ignorant that the Church thinks not meet to change the language of her Liturgy.
And I would to God, that were the only hindrance of reuniting England to her
once beloved Mother, for then the breach would not last long.

. 12. Of the Churches denying the Reading of the Bible indifferently to all.
152. BUt the last and greatest Hindrance of piety, P. ^15.
and (which is wonderful) of Unity likewise, in the Doctors opinion, is the
Roman Church her denying the reading of Scripture to all persons promiscuously,
without exception. This fault the Doctor will never forgive Her. And the truth
is, if ever there should be a restraint of such liberty in England, all the
Principles of his Religion would utterly go to wrack. For how then should
every Sober Enquirer into Scripture frame a Religion to himself? How much would
the number of Sects be diminished, (which is great pity?) Then Pastors and
Teachers would persuade the people that it is their duty to believe and obey
them, and not to be their own Directours: which is intolerable. Therefore in so
great a concern, the Doctors zeal in this Point above others may well be
forgiven him.

153. How much would the Doctor be beholden to that freindly man who could
furnish him with but one line out of any Ancient Ecclesiastical Writer, Father
or Council to justify the Fundamental Principle of his, and; as he pretends
of all Protestants Religion, viz. That every sober enquirer may be a Judge
infallible of the sense of Scripture in all Points necessary to Salvation? But
I can assure him, such a friend is not to be found. Nay I believe he would
thank that man who could show any Ancient Heretic an Author of that enormous
Doctrine: for as he cannot but know that he embraces several Points condemned
by the Ancient Church in Heretics, he would, no doubt, with joy adopt this
Point so beneficial and necessary to the fabric of his Protestant Churches.

154. To descend to our Modern times: Though Luther, Calvin, Zuinglius, etc.
those disturbers of the world, to gain the affections of the Common rabble,
were very earnest to put the Bible into their hands, yet does the Doctor think
that they would patiently have suffered any of their followers to choose any
other Religion out of it, but what they, as Prophets sent from God, had taught
them? Nay would the Doctor take it well of his own Parishioners if they should
do so? Yet he is angry with Catholics because we rather trust the Churches
judgment, then our own: a strange quarrel certainly. But it is a folly to
think that any of the Common sort of people seek into the Bible to find their
Religion there* not one in ten thousand among us but for his whole Faith relyes
upon the credit and supposed honesty of some zealous Lecturer, or reputed
learned Doctor. Now J would fain know of Doctor Stillingfleet with what
conscience he can suffer a whole Congregation of well meaning men, who can rely
upon nothing but authority, to prefer his authority before that of the whole
Church: For nothing can be more contrary to the Rules of Common reason in them;
and for their sinning against Reason he must be answerable to God. How does one
of the Doctors Parishioners find his whole Religion in Scripture? Thus: The
Doctor will bid him read the last verse of the 6. chap. to the Romans: (or he
will read the words to him) The Gift of God is eternal life: Here, says he,
the Papists are plainly confuted, who say that God rewards our good works with
Heaven. He will tell him again that the Papists hold that our Lords body is in
the Sacrament. How shall they be confuted? Christ indeed says, This is my Body:
What then? this must be understood as if he had said, This is the figure of my
Body. Then plain Scripture interpreted by the Doctor is against them. Again,
Look out the first Chapter to Titus, you will find that those who are called
Elders, or Presbiters in the fifth verse, are called Bishops in the Seventh:
Here our Antichristian Prelates are plainly confuted, who exalt themselves above
Elders, etc.

155. But one Point there is of main importance to these who will find all
things in Scripture, which is, A Proof that these Books which they are taught
to call Scripture, are the same which were Anciently written by men inspired by
God: That they have not been corrupted, and that they are rightly interpreted.
None of all these things they can find in Scripture: what remedy therefore for
this? None in the world, but the Doctors own authority. He will tell them
perhaps that the Universal Tradition of all Ages, which is of it self
credible, testifies this, and therefore they ought to believe it. But if they
should reply, and tell the Doctor, that for all necessary Points of belief
they were, according to his Principles, to be Judges for themselves, but of
that which they call Tradition, they know not how to judge. If any of the
Doctors Parishioners should be thus troublesome: then must he be angry, and
with a frown tell them, Will ye be Papists? Is it not fitter ye should believe
me, then like blind Papists, pin your souls upon the Authority of the present
Universal Church? This stops their mouths: Now they are fully satisfied, and
ask pardon for presuming to doubt, having such an Oracle to teach them: that
they ought to be their own Teachers.) Thus it is that ordinary people, even
boys and girls, are to be fooled, and made to believe that they see all their
Religion in Scripture: whenas in very truth they may as well be told, that they
Smell it out with their noses, as I once heard Sir Francis Wenman say in a
discourse on a subject like this.

156. Howeuer the whole Stress of the Doctors Religion lying upon it, that
every Christian is to be a judge of the sense of Scripture: hence it was
necessary for his ends to contend Manibus pedibusque that none should be
discouraged from reading Scripture: (Yet I hope he will excuse those who are
not able to read.

157. To make this good, he employes the utmost of his invention, Subtilty and
reading. He who cannot find out one single short sentence in Antiquity to help
to support the main Pillar of his Religion: Yea moreover he who has not
alleged one probable argument of reason for strengthening that tottering
Pillar, except only a Negative one, which is this, That Christians have no
obligation to believe any Church or Teacher expounding the sense of Scripture,
therefore they must if they will be believers, believe themselves alone: In
this miserable exigence this same Doctor notwithstanding to prove that
Christians in all times were indulged and exhorted to read the Scriptures,
flourishes in a Luxuriant style with demonstrations a priori, a posteriori, per
reductionem ad absurdum and impossible, which demonstrations also he backs with
an army of Ancient Fathers teaching as he himself does, viz. S. Clement, S.
Ignatius, S. Policarpus, Clemens Alexandrinus, Tertullian, Origin, S. Basil,
S. Hierome, S. Chrysostom, S. Augustine, etc. and moreover that this was their
Doctrine is (says he) acknowledged by late Catholic Divines, Espenceus and
Alphonsus a Castro, and (one more I will add,) by the unworthy Writer of this
Treatise also.

158. But this being granted, no Catholic, and, J think, no man in his right
wits will grant, that every Porter, Cobbler or Landresse is capable to instruct
themselves by reading the Scripture alone, or if they cannot read them, by
hearing them read, in this Point of main importance, that Scriptures are Gods
Scriptures, or to clear the Doctrine of the Mystery of the Holy Trinity, the
Incarnation of our Savior, the Procession of the Holy Ghost, or the Point of
Justification, as determined by S. Paul and S. James, etc. I have so much
confidence now in the Doctors ingenuity that he will also acknowledge thus
much, yea by his experience in teaching ignorant people, J am assured he has
found no small difficulty in making such and other like necessary Doctrins of
Christianity sink into the minds of the rude people, though set down in the
simplest, plainest Catechisms for infants, though also those Catechisms were
with all his skill explained by himself.

159. Now taking this for granted (till he contradict it) J would ask him, Does
he in his conscience think that the forecited Fathers, when they exhorted the
Christians of their times to the reading of Scriptures did not suppose that for
the sense of them in things any way difficult or controverted they would
submitt their judgments to the Church: which had they not supposed, they would
have been less liberal in putting the Scriptures into their hands? For hence it
is that the Bible is called by S. Ambrose, liber Sacerdotalis, because to be
dispensed to the people according us Bishops and Priests judged it might prove
beneficial to them, and in all ambiguities to be interpreted by the same
Pastors, Besides this, the art of Printing being then unknown, it was not
every ordinary Mechanic who could purchase so costly a Manuscript, as the
Bible was: every groom or Chambermaid could not carry it under their arms to
Church, unless they could spare at least two years wages to buy it, and hire
also a little Ass to carry it, so great was the bulk, considering the largenes
of Letters written in these Ancient times. The persons invited therefore by
these Holy Fathers to the frequent reading of Scriptures, were for the most
part those of the higher rank, of more ingenuous education, and so Prudence and
discretion: and especially such as they knew to be firm to the teaching of the
Church. Now to such persons the Roman Church freely allows the reading of
Scriptures: and on the other side, for such as the Doctor qualifies with the
name of Protestants according to his new Mode, that is Independents on any
Authority, the Fathers most certainly would more strictly, then they are now,
have pro-prohibited the reading of them.

160. Neither is it much to his purpose, his alleging that though in the time
of the first four General Councills the Fathers had trial enough of the
mischief of Heresies, P. 174.
yet notwithstanding they did not on that account forbid the people to read the
Scriptures. For who knows not the vast difference between the ancient and our
Modern Heresies? Anciently the In ventours of Heresies, were great learned
Prelates, and subtle Philosophers, and the object of their Heresies were
Sublime Mysteries of Faith, examined and framed by them according to the
grounds of Plato's or Aristole's Philosophy, far above the reach of Vulgar
capacities; from whence it is that Tertullian calls the Ancient Philosophers,
the Patriarchs of Heretics. And moreover their applications of Texts of
Scriptures for confirming such Heresies, were so Speculatively nice and
acroamaticall, that both great sharpnes of wit and learning too were necessary
to the discovering and unridling the fallacy. Hence it came to pass that in
those days the Scriptures might freely enough be read by ordinary Christians
without danger, especially considering their intention in reading them was not
to find out a New Religion, but to instruct themselves in Piety, and inflame
their hearts in the Divine Love.

161. Thus stood matters in the Church during the times of the first four
General Councills. But our Modern Heresies are of a quite different
Complexion. They are conversant about matters obvious to the weakest
capacities, as the external administration of Sacraments, the Jurisdiction of
Superiors, Civil and Ecclesiastical, the manner of men's Devotions, the
Institution of Religious Orders, the Obligation of Vows; the Ordonnances of the
Church teaching Fasting, Matrimony, Celibacy, Paying of Tithes, etc. Or if
about Sublime Mysteries, Men are taught to examine such Mysteries by natural
Reason and the Verdict of their outward Senses. Hence it is come to pass that
our late Heresiarcks have not been profound Subtle Philosophers, but at the
best a few Sensual incestuous Friars abroad, and Popular Preachers at home:
yea, as we have lately seen, even Mechanics, Soldiers or any other ignorant
persons actuated by the Spirit of Pride and Licentiousness to begin a Sect fit
for the palats and complexions of Seekers after Novelties.

162. Matters therefore standing thus in these later times, can any rational
man be persuaded that if any of those Holy Fathers, cited by the Doctor, had
lived among us, or if such Heresies had been spread among their Disciples, and
pretended to have been evidently deduced from Gods Word, they would have been
so zealous in their Exhortations to a promiscuous reading of Scriptures? But
how much think we, would such their zeal have been cooled, in case such an
Architect of Principles, as the Doctor is, had been in Vogue in their times?
For Principles they are which evidently contain the most pernicious,
Soule-destroying Heresy that ever assaulted Gods Church: Principles which
banish Peace, Charity, Humility and Obedience utterly from the Church and
State: Principles which if through Gods judgment they should generally
prevail, what think you would become of our Saviors Promise, for there would
not be left in the world one Church at all, true or false: Since where every
one is acknowledged the only inventer and Judge of his own Faith, there may
meet a Multitude, but it is no Church, none having right over another; error
and truth, virtue and vice being equally Justifiable. Lastly these are
Principles, the admirable vanity of which I think was never paralleld by any
Heresiarch, but a certain Rhetorius mentioned by Philastrius, Philast
who taught, That all Heresies were in their precepts of life, innocent; and in
their Doctrins true: [Omnes Hereses recte ambulare, and vera docere.]

163. Non sum ambitiosus in malis, I may with a good conscience protest that it
is only Truth and a Charitable compassion to souls miserably seduced by so
Comprehensive a Heresy as is contained in the Dostours Principles, which has
moved me to fix such a brand upon them: Not that I suspect that he would
approve such consequences: but I am confident with all his skill he cannot
avoid them.

164. Now I must acquaint the Doctor that my just indignation against these
Principles is heightened from my own unhappines, if not guilt in being the first
who gave occasion that they should be known and received into the Church of
England. This I am sure neither he, nor perhaps any one now alive, does know,
and therefore I will acquaint him with the true Story concerning them.

165. As I remember it was in the year 1638. that I had occasion to accompany a
Noble friend in a journey from Dublin to London. When we were ready to return,
I went to a Booksellers shop to search out some b^oks to be carried back into
Ireland, and among others I bought Daille du vray usage des Peers, a Book at
that time not at all taken notice of. That Book the same night I showed to my
Noble dear Lord Lucius Lord Falkland, who perusing and liking the Contents of
it, desired me to give it him, which I willingly did. About a month after my
return into Ireland, he sent me a most civil letter, full of thanks both in
his own, but especially in M. Chillingworths name for that small present,
telling me that that little Book had saved him a most tedious labor of reading
almost twenty great Volumes.

166. This Mysterious speech I easily understood. For M. Chillingworth a little
before was returned out of Flanders; where he had professed himself a
Catholic: and being sent for by Archbishop Laud, was strictly examined by him
touching his Religion, And whether he went to Mass, or Common Prayer; to whom
he gave this account, That he had entertained such scruples touching Catholic
Religion, and withal was as yet so unsatisfied with the grounds of the English
Protestant Religion, that at the present his conscience would not permit him
to go either to Mass or to Common Prayer. And therefore with his Graces leave
he was resolved to spend a year or two in a solitude, and the Study of Greek
and Latin Fathers, fully purposing to embrace that Religion which appeared to
him most consonant to what the Fathers generally taught. The Archbishop much
commended his design, and dismissed him with his blessing, and a promise also
that he should enjoy entire liberty to prosecute so laudable a Study. Very busy
in this Study I found, and left him, in England. But it was presently after
interrupted by that unlucky Book of Daille, which persuaded him to a light
esteem of the Holy Fathers, upon whose authority he would no longer rely. But
yet this did not bring him into the Church of England, so as to think himself
obliged to believe her Doctrins, and whose authority he saw was much inferior
to the other: and from all subordinate, but divided English Sects, he had a
horrible aversion and contempt. Therefore without any long demurr he fixed his
mind upon Socinian grounds, which he afterward showed in a little Book of one
of them which was an Answer to certain Theses Posnanienses, which Theses, as J
remember, asserted the Authority of the Catholic Church: in opposition whereto
the Socinian, rejecting all External Authority, laid these very grounds of his
Religion: That in all necessary Doctrins the Scripture was clear: Therefore
every sober Enquirer might with ease find them in it, without any help of a
Teacher or at least any obligation to believe him. Upon these grounds M.
Chillingworth dilated his Discourses with much art and gracefullness of Style
in his Book against a learned Catholic writer: And the same grounds so
discoursed on, Doctor Stillingfleet has contracted Methodically into his
Principles: And both these Books though manifestly destroying all Authority in
the English, or any other Church, have been patiently and quietly suffered, yea
commended by Superiors here, to their infinite damage, as is seen at this
day: which damage is J believe more sensible to them since they see no
considerable prejudice to Catholics by them, for J do not remember to have
heard of any one Established Catholic Shaken in his Faith by such grounds:
Though I confess they obctructed a good while my entrance into the Catholic
Church.

167. Now it being certain that these Princi ples came originally into England
from the Socinians (a Sect maintaining a Fundamental Heresy) it is of small
edification and less glory to the English Church (in case, as the Doctor
pretends, his Faith and hers are built on the same Principles) that she should
consequently acknowledge herself forced to desert the grounds upon which she
proceeded since the Reformation, as being grounds by M. Chillingworths
discovery found to be Sandy and ruinous, and consequently acknowledge all her
Articles of belief, all her Laws, Constitutions, Canons, etc. misgrounded. The
consideration of this, besides disreputation, cannot but raise great Scruples,
in the minds of her Disciples and Subjects, till she not only disavow this her
Champion, but likewise assert her Authority by Answering all the Discourses of
M. Chillingworth, my Lord Falkland, M. Digges, M. Whitby, Doctor Stillingfleet
and several other Doctors and Professors in the Universities, who all exalt
their Single judgments above her Authority.

168. And as for Doctor Stillingfleet there is another task to be undertaken
by him, which I believe will give him exercise enough. For he knowing that the
Socinians, as well as himself, do make the plain evidence of Scripture in all
necessaries to all Sober enquirers, a Principle of their Religion, and upon
this Principle building their Heresy, his Study must be to beat them from this
Principle, which can be done no other way, but either by confessing that the
Doctrine of Christ's Divinity is not necessary to be believed, or by
demonstrating to them that they do not understand the plainest Texts of
Scripture, not having been sober enquirers into it. This will be a task
becoming such an Hectorean Controvertist as the Doctor is esteemed to be,
considering how even among his friends the Socin^ans, among all Protestant
Sects, are acknowledged to have been very Laborious and far most exact in
interpreting the most difficult Books of Scripture, and this not without good
Success, except where their judgment has been perverted by a resolution to
defend their peculiar Heretical Doctrins. Now by this time I believe the
Doctor sees what a world of work his Principles have cut out for him, which he
is obliged to justify not only against Catholics, who abhor them, but
Socinians also who invented them as necessary for maintaining their Heresy, and
lastly against my Lords the Bishops his Superiors, as I verily believe. His
Principles therefore being of so very main importance and being the only
considerable Subject treated of in his Book, my Readers must not wonder that in
so short a Treatise I have so often put him in mind of them, since a horror of
the consequences of them forced me to look on them as mihi saepe vocandum ad
parts monstrum nulla virtute redemptum a vitijs.

. 13. The Conclusion: with Advices to the Doctor.
169. THus much I judged sufficient to make up an Answer to those parts of the
Doctors Book, which do not purposely treat of a Doctrinall Controversy: for no
more was required from me, indeed not quite so much: it being only the Section
of Fanaticism in which J was particularly concerned. But the others intruded
themselves, J know not well how: and by that means forced me also to neglect
observing the order in which they lie in his Book. Which being no very great
fault, J hope a pardon from the Doctor will without much difficulty be
obtained.

170. J shall also stand in need of another pardon for a fault, such as it is,
willingly committed, and not yet repented of, because J believe, except
himself, none will esteem it a fault. It is this. Observing in the Doctors
Book a world of Quotations out of Authors which J never saw, nor intend to
see, containing many dismal Stories, and many ridiculous passages of things
done or said by several Catholics in former, and some latter, times: if J had
had a mind to examine, and say something as in Answer to them, an impossibility
of finding out those Authors must have been my excuse. But J have a better
Excuse then that. For if the Doctor would have lent me those Books out of his
Library, I should have thanked him for his Civility, but withal I should have
refused to make use of his Offer. For to what purpose would it have been to
turn over a heap of Books to find out Quotations in which neither the Church,
nor myself were any way concerned? Not concerned, J say, though they had been
Opinions or Actions even of Popes themselves, being assured that at least,
never any Pope, how wicked soever, has brought any Heresy into the Church. It
is to me all one whether all his Allegations be true or false, as to any
advantage he can make of them against the Catholic Church: unless the Doctor
will undertake to demonstrate, That it is unlawful, or but considerably
dangerous to be a Member of a Church where any persons do, or have lived, who
have been obnoxious to Errors, or guilty of ill Actions:

171. Yet J must acknowledge that in one regard a Book written in such a Style
as the Doctour's is, may have an influence on the Whole Church, and, against
his intention, produce a good effect in it. For it may be hoped that Catholics
of the present Age will seriously consider the horrible consequences of
seditious, licentious and otherwise unwarrantable Doctrins and Practices of a
few Catholics in former times, which have not only been pernicious to the
Authors themselves, but by the Scandalousness of them have exposed the Church
her self, how innocent soever, to the detestation of such who are without: For
Sins, when Scandalous are an Universal and never ceasing Plague: which moved
our Savior to say, [ Vae mundo a Scandalis:] Woe to the whole world because of
Scandalls.

172. Hoping therefore that by occasion of the Doctors Book such a Benefit may
accrue to his Catholic Readers, as to render them more watchful over
themselves to prevent hereafter the like Scandals, J think my self obliged in
requital, seriously to advise him touching the dangerous State he is now in,
as to his Soul, in regard likewise of Scandal. He would laugh at me if I
should tell him that this danger proceeded from his not being a Member of the
Catholic Church. It is not that therefore that I now mean: though Woe unto
him, if in the day of Judgment he be found separated from our Lords Mystical
Body.

173. Not to hold him in suspense: J take leave to admonish him, that since the
world sees that he manifestly professes himself a Member of the
English-Protestant Church established by Law, his Mind must either answer to
his Profession, or he must be a shameful Hyppocrit. Now in case he be not an
Hypocrit, he is desired as a genuine English-Protestant to cast his eyes on,
and to examine several of the first Constitutions of his Church: there he will
find an Excommunication denounced ipso facto against all such as shall (in the
manner there expressed) openly oppose any thing contained in the Nine
and-thirty Articles, in the Books of Common Prayer and of Ordinations of
Bishops and Priests etc. Which Excommunication is there declared to remain in
force, till the Offender repent (not of his boldness and disrespect, but) of
his Wicked Error, which he ought to revoke.

174. After he has considered this, he may please to reflect on his Book called
Irenicum (not to mention his Sermons during the late Rebellion:) and so
comparing together the said Constitutions ratifyed with an Excommunication, and
his own Book, let him ask his conscience whether he has not incurred this
Excommunication, of the Legality and Validity whereof, he, being now supposed a
declared Protestant cannot, nor ought to doubt (though J humbly conceive, J
may.) Now his fault, in case he be guilty having been public and notorious,
and no Repentance, no retractation appearing (unless perhaps he thinks that the
accepting a thousand pounds yearly in Preferments is vertually a Retractation)
and much less any Solemn Absolution having been given him (unless perhaps also
he thinks that the Act of Oblivion reaches to Heaven, discharging the
conscience, and dispensing in foro interno from an obligation of demanding
Absolution either from Bishops, or from the Civil Magistrate, who, according to
his Teaching has received the Power of the Keys, and can Excommunicate and
Absolve as well as any Bishop:) matters, J say, standing thus, J must needs
tell him that all Prelaticall Protestants can no otherwise look upon him, but
as one (J do not say, traditum Satanae, but) excommunicated and separated from
Christ's Mystical Body. And therefore J conjure him that he would take care of
his Soul, which must needs be in great danger, even though in his heart he
believes such Excommunications to be bruta fulmina; For in that case also he
will conclude himself at least guilty of most damnable Hypocrisy.

175. It will now be seasonable, with this Act of Charity, to him, to take my
leave of him, and putt a period to this my Answer, which truly I think
sufficient, though perhaps he will impute my telling him so, to an ungrounded
confidence or presumption.

176. I have only one thing more to say to him, which is this, that I with
reason enough may accuse him that in writing his Book he has prevaricated with
his Superiors. For whereas in his Preface he tells his Readers that He was by
command publicly engaged in the Defense of so excellent a cause as that of the
Church of England against the Church of Rome, Preface page 6.
even of that Church of England, Ibid. p. 22.
which, upon the greatest enquiry he could make, he esteems the best Church of
the Christian world; I desire no other Judges but the Prelates of his own Church
whether by examining his Principles J have not demonstrated how that contrary
to Command and his public engagement, he has been so far from defending her,
that he has betrayed the cause of his Church to all the Fanatic Sects which
have separated from her, and with most horrible cruelty sought her destruction,
and with her the ruin of Monarchy: Whereby he has left her in a most forlorn
condition, tottring upon foundations and Principles, which to my certain
knowledge were not extant at least not known in England thirty years since: In
so much as if those who commanded him to defend her, will still avow him her
Champion, there will not be, nor ever was, a Prelaticall Church so miserably
divested of all Authority. And therefore let any indifferent Reader judge
between us two, Whether with better Success He has defended the cause of the
Church of England against the Church of Rome, or I, the cause of his own Church
against himself.

177. To conclude, nothing can be more irrational then for the Doctor,
holding to his Principles, to profess himself a Controvertist, till he can
demonstrate that he has the Gift of seeing into men's hearts. For since he
allows all Sober Enq^irers to be for themselves Judges of the Sense of
Scripture in necessaries, and Judges likewise what Points are necessary, till
he can disprove the allegations of any Adversary, Catholic, Protestant or
Fanatic, by demonstrating that they have either not enquired at all, or
enquired unsoberly, and that none besides himself enquires Soberly, it will be
most unreasonable in him to condemn, or but trouble any Dissenters from him.

178. But alas, the misery is, None are more eager in usurping a Magisteriall
and Tyrannical Power over other men's consciences, then such as renounce all
Authority internally obliging in the Church: Because having no tie upon men's
consciences, or security in their Subjects Obedience, they find external
violence the only Mean to support them. Which surely argues a horrible
depr^vation in the minds, especially of Ecclesiastics: which depravation can
now only be cured by the Wisdom and Power of the Civil Magistrate. Da pacem,
Domine, in diebus nostris. Amen.

FINIS.
The CONTENTS.
. I. THe Authors Motive of writing this Treatise. D. Stillingfleets three
Heads of Accusation against the Catholic Church, etc. page I.. II. A
Vindication of the Honor and Sanctity of S. Benedict, etc. from the Doctors
contumelious imputations. II. III. Of the life and Prayer of Contemplation
derided by the Doctor. 28. IV. Visions etc. no Grounds of believing Doctrines
among Catholics. 71. V. Resisting Authority falsely imputed to Catholic
Religion. 76. VI. Fanaticism returned upon the Doctor and his whole Religion.
88. VII. The Doctrine of Penance Vindicated from the Doctors mistakes. 121.
VIII. Of Conferring Absolution and Extreme Unction in Articulo mortis. 132. IX.
Of Prayer for the Dead. 137. X. Of Indulgences. 144. XI. Of the Churches
Liturgy in a tongue not generally understood. 148. XII. Of the Churches denying
the Reading of the Bible indifferently to all. 152. XIII. The Conclusion: with
Advic^s to the Doctor. 171
ERRATA.
PAge 3. line 6. read inhuman. p. 4. l. 2. read about. ib. l. 4. read or
Obedience. p. 5. l. 16. read to the. p. 7. l. 15. r. upon. p. 8. l. 4. read
their. p. 13. l. 3. r. Preacher. p. 17. l. 25. r. says. p. 47. l. 25. and 26.
r. several. p. 48. l. 14. r. but be. p. 52. l. 22. r. rake out. p. 59. l. 20.
r. helps for. p. 60. l. 7. read therefore. p. 67. l. penult. r. them. ib. l.
ult. r. both. p. 75. l. 12. r. permit. p. 76. l. 19. r. herself. p. 85. l. 5.
r. Apostat. p. 87. l. penult. r. also. p. 88. l. 17. r. returned. ib. l. ult.
r. Fanatics ib. r. Farce. p. 90. l. 8. r. flesh. p. 91. l. 17. r. nutshell. p.
92. l. 18. r. demonstrate. p. 93. in the margent. r. 15. Principle. p. 95. l.
6. r. Points. ib. l. 16. in some of the Copies, dele not. ib. l. 24. r.
receives. p. 97. l. 4. r. soever p. 100. l. 9. r. government p. 101. l. 2. r.
government. ib. l. 10. r. such an one. p. 104. l. 10. r. p. 105. l. 11. r.
because. p. 110. l. 1. at the lines and read the. p. 117. l. 4. r. Catholics.
p. 123. l. ult. read who testifies p. 136. l. 4. read. by the exercise. p.
142. l. 5. r. their. p. 145. l. 5. r. eneruating. p. 148. l. 8. r. understood.
p. 151. l. 10. r. Service. ib. l. penult. r. desire that. p. 152. in the
margent ^ead p. 215.

A Postscript to the Doctor.
IF this short Treatise shall after more then half a years struggling have the
fortune to break through all hazards, and arrive safe to the Doctors hands, the
Author of it will presume, in concluding it, to offer to him a few Requests.

The First is, That, unless he do indeed think himself obliged in conscience,
by breaking all Rules of Piety and humanity, to do all manner of despite to
his Catholic fellow-Subiects, he would, hereafter at least, please to abstain
from reviling and blaspheming Gods Saints, or traducing the most Divine
exercises of contemplative souls, more perfectly practiced only in Heaven. It
argued certainly a heart brimm full of the Gall of bitterness, that to oppose
only one single line of his Adversary (page 31.) in which all that he says is,
the mentioning new Sects and Fanaticisms, he could allow one hundred and twenty
Pages in a senceless and execrable recrimination: not considering, or rather
perhaps too much considering and intending that such a recrimination should
reflect with great disparagement on the English Protestant Church, In whose
Calendar several of those Saints to this day possess a place. Truly in all
reason his Attempt by his Socinian Principles of depriving the Governors of
that Church of all Anthority, granted by her Princes and Parliaments, ought to
have suffised him, without traducing her as a Canonizer of Fanatics. What
excuse he can make for this I cannot imagine, unless perhaps his tenderly
scrupulous conscience dictates to him that the Scottish Covenant requires all
this and more from the obligation whereof the Bishops cannot it seems and his
Brethren Presbiters will not absolve him. If so, his zeal methinks should
incite him yet further, and particularly to make use of the power and high
esteem he has by his late Book gotten in his University of Cambridge, to become
a Godfather in rebaptizing and giving a New Name to an ancient and famous
College there, which at present has two Names both of them extremely
inconvenient and prejudicial to the Design of his beloved Book being called
not only S. Benets, but likewise Corpus Christi-Colledge: For as long as these
names continue, neither will S. Benedict pass there for a Fanatic, nor the
Real presence be esteemed aground of a worse then Pagan Idolatry. But I
believe he will scarce be able, with all his Rhetoric, to obtain from them
such a compliance, or even persuade his own Parishioners to renounce Heaven,
except S. Gregory S. Benedict, S. Francis, etc. be excluded thence.

A Second Request is, that since, to his great credit, order has been taken by
his friends, more solicitous for him then their own Church, to render his Book
unanswerable, he would hasten his zealous Huguenot Brethren of the Savoy (just
such Defenders of the Church of England as himself) to enlarge his conquests
through France also by sending abroad their French Translation of his
formidable Book, the Rational Account. There will be no need to fear any
officious Searchers, nor the least obstruction to their dispersing their ware
in France, for there Catholics are so confidently secure of the invincible
Truth of their Religion, that the King himself not only permits, but invites,
yea and expressly commands the subtillest of the Huguenot Ministers to write
and publish freely whatsoever they are able to say in defense of themselves, or
against Catholic Doctrines. Now it is manifest that the Doctors friends, the
zealous Searchers and murderers of all Answers to his Book do not believe that
he has any confidence at all either in the truth or honesty of his cause. And
just reason they have: since it is a cause evidently destructive both to the
English Church and state, as has been demonstrated. And if themselves had any
regard at all either to their Church or the Civil state and peace of the
kingdom (all betrayed by him) they would see and acknowledge that their
vigilance would have been much better employed in preventing the birth of so
deformed and pernicious a monster.

My third Request is indeed, J fear, too reasonable to expect it should be
granted by an Adversary of the Doctors temper. It is this. His design being to
deterr all Englishmen from Communion with the Catholic Church from a
consideration of dangerous Doctrines and Practices in it, he is requested, that
hereafter he would not abuse the world by fathering on the Church Exotic
opinions of particular Schoolmen, and by representing the Churches Doctrines
lamely, falsely and dishonestly. His enormous faultiness in this regard (in
mitation of Doctor Tailor) committed in his last Book through every one of the
Points mentioned by him, may be visible to all heedfull Readers, and
irrefragable Proofs here^fare in a readiness to be produced, if his busy
friends the Searchers could be persuaded to rest in their beds in the night
time. He cannot complain of any difficulty to find out all necessary Doctrines
in which Catholics universally agree (as we may for Proteflant Doctrines.) The
Council of Trent alone will sufficiently furnish him. Or if he think fit to
have recourse to the interpretations of its Decisions, in all reason and
conscience he ought to content himself with such as seem to him most moderate
and rational; Christian charity and love of Peace requiring this from him. But
I fear his unconformity hereto must be pardoned. For his principal vocation
now being to be a Controvertist, to which, it seems, he is by Superiors
engaged, and to which employment Preaching, Sacraments, and all must yield: it
will be impossible for him to write volumes of Controversy his way, if he be
confined to matters only which are pertinent, or to arguments which are
Logically concluding. For how could he then delight profanc Readers with
ridiculous stories, or give scope to his own more profane Fancy in descanting
irreligiously on the actions of Saints, or fill up many sheets with nasty
occurrents raked out of dunghills, and charging them on the Church, which
abhorrs them more then himself. How could he, I say, thus play the
Controvertist, if he were to assault the Church only in her necessary Doctrines
and Discipline, exhibited in her Councills? I must therefore, I fear, prepare
my self with patience to receive a Refusal to Requests, though in my opinion
very reasonable, and which I here set down, because J believe they will be
esteemed such by ingenuous and judicious Readers, who surely will not judge the
cause of Catholics prejudiced by the Doctors confutation of a Church no where
extant in rerum natura, except in his own disordered Fancy.

Lastly, he is desired to consider that Almighty God commands us to love Peace
and Truth (Zach. 8. 19.) both these: For Peace alone, without Truth, is a
conspiracy in Error: and an imprudent zeal for Truth may be more pernicious
then Error. Both these therefore ought to be loved together. And to Hate both
Peace and Truth seems a depravation scarce consistent with Human nature, or any
Rational Agent besides the Devil himself. Since therefore the Doctor by
demolishing all Tribunalls in Gods Church which might peaceably end
Controversies, has endeavored, as much as in him lies, to banish Peace
eternally from among Christians: it is justly to be expected from him, that,
being now become by Profession a Controvertist, he should give some better
testimony to the world, that he is at least a Seeker and Promoter of Truth, and
that his Design in writing, Preaching, and Disputing is to conquer the
judgments of Dissenters to a belief of that which himself pretends to be Truth.
But can any reasonable man imagine that he had so much as a desire to convert
Catholics (who alone seem to be esteemed by him Dissenters) by such a Book as
his last is, which they cannot read without trembling at the blasphemies of it,
and without a horrible aversion from one who would make their Church and Faith
odious for Doctrines and Practices which the said Church is so far from owning
that she condemns them; and would moreover persuade them to forsake an
established Communion, without being informed whither to betake themselves?
These proceedings are so unreasonnable, that it seems manifest he had not so
much as a thought of convincing their judgments: so that he will have small
reason to wonder that not one single person can be found, whom he looks on as
an enemy, who has given him occasion to erect a Trophey: yea moreover, though
perhaps he will not believe it, that a considerable number have, against his
will, had their eyes opened by him, to see the desperate state of that cause,
which seems to seek its last refuge in the Protection of such an Advocat. A
strange fate certainly this is of a Book so boasted of, and to which such
conquests have been promised. Therefore any sober Reader who shall heedfully
reflect on the Doctor's abilities, will hardly be persuaded to believe that he
intended his last should be a Book of Controversy, but rather an Engine raised
by him, to work, during the space of a few months, some considerable mischief
against the persons of innocent Catholics, at a season, as he thought, proper
for his purpose, when he conceived thereby the whole Kingdom might happily be
incensed against them: Which holy design if he could effect, it would afterward
be indifferent to him whether his Book were confuted, or not. However, our hope
is, that Dominus iudicabit pauperes populi, and bumiliabit Calumniatorem.

FINIS.

