DR STILLINGFLEETS PRINCIPLES, Giving an Account of the FAITH OF PROTESTANTS,
CONSIDERED BY N. O.

MATTHEW. XVIII. 17. Si Ecclesiam non audierit, sit tibi sicut Ethnicus and
Publicanus. PRINTED AT PARIS, By the Widow of Antonie Christian, and Charles
Guillery.

M. DC. LXXI. PERMISSV SVPERIORVM.

A PREFACE TO the Reader.
DOctor Stilling fleet having lately published a Book entitled, A Discourse
concerning the Idolatry practiced in the Church of Rome, etc. (being a
Rejoinder to a reply of an unknown Catholic Gentleman engaged in some former
Controversy with him) at the end of the Same Book has annexed Romans Idol. p.
557.
certain Principles, drawn up, as he says, to give an Account of the
Protestant-Faith.

Now as touching the main Book, it would be inciuility and injustice in any
other to invade the Right of his worthy Adversary by, vntertaking an Answer
thereto. To his Adversaries Answer therefore, as the times permit, and to Gods
mercy I leave him: if perhaps he may repent, and endeavor some satisfaction 1.
For his accusing the whole Catholic Church of God, both Western 1.
and Eastern (for the same Practice as to Several of his Idolatries are in
both) for so many Ages before Luthers time of Idolatry, and this Idolatry as
gross as that of Heathens: Which Ib p. 69. 134. etc. 142. 159. 161.
surely must Vn-church this Great Body, and quite divorce this Adulteress from
Christ (for we cannot but think but the Doctor will maintain the Teaching so
manifold an Idolatry in this Church to 2.
be Fundamental Error) 2. For his representing the Highest Devotions
practiced from all Antiquity in the same Church, Mystical Theology,
Contemplation, heavenly Inspirations, all those Supernatural Favors and
familiar Communications of the Divine Majesty to purer souls received in
Prayer, and continued still in his Church (as also Miracles are, and so
attested in her Histories) but unknown indeed to strangers, and foolishness to
Greeks, his representing all these I say, as ridiculous Fanaticisms, and
impostures: though he knows that Catholics account themselves obliged to
submitt all these things to the judgment of Superiors: a Duty unknown to
Fanatics. And what may we expect next from such (who are to many) as make ill
use of such Books as his, but that the frequent Allocutions of Gods Holy Spirit
mentioned in Scripture, the Visions, Revelations Ecstasies and Spiritual Unions
of the Saints there, our Lords, Ego in eis, and tu in me, ut sint consummati in
unum; and S. Paul's, Viuo, non ego, sed in me Christus, will shortly become
matter of Drollery and Bouffonry? 3. For his making 3.
so many of Gods glorious Saints in Heaven [ quorum causam discernat Deus] the
subject of his scorn and derision. By all which he has fitted his Book for the
sport and recreation of the Atheist and Debauched; from whose applause, with
the regret and horror mean while of all piously disposed, he may receive his
reward.

The Reuisall of these, not very grateful, Subjects of his Book, therefore I
leave to the worthy Gentleman preengaged in these Disputes. But for the now
mentioned Principles separately adjoined at the end, as every Catholic has an
equal Right to apply himself to the examining of them; so seeing that from
these it is that such bad fruits, of forsaking first, and then censuring and
condemning their Mother the Church, do grow, it may, with Gods blessing, prove
a service not altogether vnbeneficiall, to discover their weakness: especially
since by such a discovery his whole preceding Book will be demonstrated
vnconcluding against Gods Church.

And this is here the rather, and with greater confidence undertaken, because,
since it is Impiety to deny in general that true Christian Faith has a
certain, immovable Foundation; in case therefore it shall appear that the
Foundation here laid by the Doctor is but a mere trembling Quiksand on which a
Christian cannot without a dreadful danger to his soul build his Faith,
namely, An Errability in the Guides of Gods Church, and (Inerrability in all
necessary Doctrins contained in Scripture by Him attributed indefinitely to all
sober Christians, who without any necessary consulting or depending on such
Teachers as have been instituted by God shall use their sincere endeauours to
find out such Truths] this Foundation, I say (not Scripture, but each private
man's sense of Scripture) being ruined, it will unavoidably follow, That the
only certain way not to be misled, will be the submitting our Internal Assent
and Belief to Church Authority which those who have dissented from, and refused
to stand to before Luthers time have been always marked with the name of
Heretics.

Where by Church Authority, I mean in general that Superior and more
comprehensiue Body of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy; which in any dissent and
division of the Clergy, according to the Church Canons ought to be obeyed; and
which has hitherto in her supremest and most generally accepted Councills in
all Ages from the Beginning required such Submission under penalty of Anathema,
and justly assumed to her self the Title of the only authentical Interpreter
of Scripture, and authoritatiue Teacher of Divine Verities.

A Submission this is, which no particular Church divided from this more
Universal can with the least pretense of reason challenge from her Subjects,
since she her self (and particularly the Church of England) refused the same to
all the Authority extant in the world when she separated her self.

And this being observed by Mr. Chillingworth (a scholar, herein, of the
Socinians) and by many other Divines of late upon whom hls Book has had too
must influence, they accordingly are forced to disclaim that Submission Synod.
A. D. 1603. c. 4. 5. 36. etc. Stat. 13.
which the Church of England formerly had challenged in her Canons, and
severely, even with Ecclesiastical death, Elizab. c. 12.
punished the refusers until they should repent (not their External
Disobedience or Contradiction, but) their wicked Error. The 39. Articles being
declared in the same 5, Canon to have been by this Church agreed upon for the
avoiding diversities of Opinions, and the establishing of Consent touching true
Religion.

Now that these later Divines do decline such Submission, I need go no further
then to Doctor Stillingfleets Rational Account for proof, where the Lord
Primat of Ireland is cited thus, The Ration. Account. P. 55.
Church of England does not not define any of these Questions (speaking of the
39. Articles) as necessary to be believed, but only binds her sons for Peace
sake not to oppose them. And again, We do not suffer any man to reject the 39.
Articles of the Church of England at his pleasure yet neither do we oblige any
man to believe them, but only not to contradict them. Thus they speak of late,
and thus Mr. Chilling worth has cleared the way before them, in abridging thus
the just Authority of the Primitive Chillingw p. 200.
Councills, The Fathers of the Church (says he) in after times might have just
cause to declare their judgment touching the sense of some general Articles of
the Creed. But to oblige others to receive her Declarations under pain of
damnation (or Anathema) what warrant they had I know not. He that can show,
either that the Church of all Ages was to have this Authority; or that it
continued in the Church for some Ages, and then expired; he that can show
either of these things, let him: for my part I cannot. Yet I willingly confess
the Judgment of a Council though not infallible yet so far Directive and
obliging, that without apparent reason to the contrary it may be sin to reject
it, at least not to afford it an outward submission for Public Peace sake.

Now by this way our late English Divines seem to have brought the Authority of
their Church into a great disreputation and wayning condition, and to have
excused, yea justified all Sects which have, or shall separate from her. For
indeed what fault can it be to forsake the Doctrine of a Church, whose Teaching
none is bound to believe or obey out of conscience? and which quietly suffers,
yea liberally rewards her sons, while they thus disparage her?

These Principles therefore laid by the Doctor, which, by advancing the
Clearness of the Rule so as to infer the vselesness of a Guide, do seem to
supplant what soever Authority of any Church, are here weighed in the following
Considerations. The great importance of which Subject requiring Expressions
serious, modest, and every way unlike those made use of by the Doctor in his
Book, such have been studiously endeavored here, without the least resentment
of several uncivil and vnmerited Aspersions which in the said Book the Doctor
has cast upon several among us: and the more moderate any have been the more
immoderately have they been traduced. God Almighty inspire into all our hearts
a sincere love of Peace and Truth.

Amen.
Dr. STILLINGFLEETS PRINCIPLES.
Giving an Account of the Faith of Protestants, CONSIDERED.

1. THe Principles, etc. which Doctor Stilling fleet, has thought expedient to
expose at the end of his Book, to render an Account of the Protestants Faith;
are set down in three ranks. The first consists of Six Principles, agreed on
both sides. The second contains Thirty Propositions for enquiring into the
particular ways which God has made choice of for revealing his will to
mankind: of which Propositions some are also Principles, partly agreed on, and
partly not; and some are Deductions, from them: But we, following the general
Title, will call them all, Principles. In the third rank, six Corollaries or
Inferences are deduced from the foregoing Propositions, to the advantage of
the cause of Protestants against Catholics. To all which, we here offer the
following Considerations.

I.
PRINCIPLES. Agreed on all sides.
1. That there is a God, from whom Principl.
Man and all other Creatures had their beginning. 2. That the Notion of God
does imply, that he is a Being absolutely perfect; and therefore Justice,
Goodness, Wisdom and Truth, must be in him in the highest perfection. 3. That
Man receaving his Being from God, is thereby bound to obey his Will, and
consequently is liable to punishment, in case of disobedience. 4. That in order
to Man's obeying the will of God, it is necessary that he know what it is; for
which some manifestation of the Will of God is necessary: both that Man may
know what he has to do, and that God may justly punish him, if he do it not.
5. What ever God reveals to Man, is infallibly true, and being intended for the
Rule of Man's obedience, may be certainly known to be his Will. 6. God cannot
act contrary to those essential Attributes of Justice, Wisdom, Goodness and
Truth in any way which he makes choice of, to make known his Will unto Man by.
It were impiety to question any of Confideration.
these Principles, which are, or ought to be presupposed not only to the
Christian, but all manner of Religions. We will therefore proceed to the second
Rank, consisting of 30. Propositions; which we will set down singly and
separatly, annexing to each a respective Examination, or Consideration.

II.
An Enquiry into the particular ways which God has made choice of for the
revealing his Will to Mankind.

I. PRINCIPLE.
1. An entire obedience to the will of 1. Princ.
God, being agreed to be the condition of man's happiness; no other way of
Revelation is in it self necessary to that end, then such whereby Man may know
what the will of God is.

This is granted. Consid.


II. PRINCIPLE.
2. Man being framed a rational creature, 2. Princ.
capable of reflecting upon himself, may antecedently to any external
Revelation, certainly know the Being of God, and his dependence upon him, and
those things which are naturally pleasing to him; else there could be no such
thing as a law of Nature, or any Principles of Natural Religion.

This may be granted.

III. PRINCIPLE. Consid.

3. All Supernatural and external Revelation, 3. Princ.
must suppose the truth of Natural Religion; for unless we be antecedently
certain that there is a God, and that we are capable of knowing him, it is
impossible to be certain that God has revealed his will to us by any
supernatural means.

Let this be granted. Consid.


IV. PRINCIPLE.
4. Nothing ought to be admitted for Divine 4. Princ.
Revelation, which ouerthrows the certainty of those Principles which must be
antecedently supposed to all Divine Revelation: For that were to overthrow the
means whereby we are to judge concerning the truth of any Divine Revelation.

Let this also be granted. Consid*


V. PRINCIPLE.
5. There can be no other means imagined, 5. Princ.
whereby we are to judge of the truth of Divine Revelation, but a Faculty in us
of discerning truth and falsehood in matters proposed to our belief; which if we
do not exercise in judging the truth of Divine Revelation, we must be imposed
upon by every thing which pretends to be so.

Here, if the Doctor means, That Consid.
every Christian has a faculty in him, which, as to all Revelations what
soever proposed to him, can discern the True and Divine, from others that are
not so; and when a Revelation, certainly Divine, is capable of several senses,
can discern the true sense from the false, all this exclusively to, and
independently on, the Instruction of Church Authority: This Proposition is not
true. For then none will need (as experience shows they do) to repair to any
other Teacher to instruct him, when a dubious Revelation, or when the sense of
any Divine Revelation, is controuersed, which is the true revelation or which
the sense of it.

It is abundantly sufficient, that either Additional.
We our selves, or some others appointed by our Lord to guide us, and more
easily discouerable by us, have a Faculty, aided by the Divine assistance, to
discern Truth and Falsehood in those Revelations proposed, wherein we our
selves cannot; that so particular Christians in their following these Guides,
may not be imposed upon by every thing which pretends to be Divine Revelation.

VI. PRINCIPLE.
6. The pretense of Infallibility in any 6. Princ*
person of Society of men, must be judged in the same way, that the truth of a
Divine Revelation is; for that infallibility being challenged by virtue of a
supernatural assistance, and for that end to assure men what the will of God
is, the same means must be used for the trial of that, as for any other
supernatural way of Gods making known his will to men.

Here, if the Doctor means, That by Consid.
the same way or means as we come to know the truth of other Divine
Revelations, we may come to know the truth also of this, viz: the Infallibility
in Necessaries of a Society, or Church; I consent to it. But not to this, That
by all or only the same ways or means by which we may come to know one Divine
Revelation, we may, or must come to know any other, or this, of
Church-Infallibility. For some Divine Revelation may come first to our knowledge
by Tradition; another first by Scripture; another by the Church. see below,
Consid. on the 17. Principle.

VII. PRINCIPLE.
7. It being in the power of God to make 7. Princ.
choice of several ways of revealing his Will to us, we ought not to dispute
from the Attributes of God the necessity of one particular way to the Exclusion
of all others, but we ought to enquire what way God himself has chosen: and
whatever he has done, we are sure cannot be repugnant to Infinite Justice,
Wisdom, Goodness, and Truth.

This is granted. Consid.


VIII. PRINCIPLE.
8. Whatever way is capable of certainly 8. Princ.
conveying the Will of God to us, may be made choice of by him for the means of
making known his will in order to the happiness of mankind; so that no Argument
can be sufficient a priori to prove, that God cannot choose any particular way
to reveal his mind by, but such which evidently proves the insufficiency of
that means for conueying the Will of God to us.

This likewise is granted. Consid.


IX. PRINCIPLE.
9. There are several ways conceaveable 9. Princ.
by us, how God may make known his Will to us; either by immediate voice from
Heaven, or inward Inspiration to every particular person, or inspiring some to
speak personnally to others, or assisting them with an infallible spirit in
writing such Books, which shall contain the Will of God for the benefit of
distant persons and future Ages.

To these several ways by which Consid.
God reveals his Will, the Doctor might have added this one more, as a Truth,
And in case such Writings in some things be not clear to all capacities, (as
the Writings of Moses his law were not, nor any Writings though possibly yet
hardly can be, when written at several times, by several persons, on several
and those particular occasions, in different styles, etc.) By our Lords giving
a Commission to, and leaving a standing Authority in the Successors of these
holy Penmen to expound these their Writings to the people, and by affording
them for ever such a Divine Assistance, as in nothing necessary to misinterpret
them.

X. PRINCIPLE.
10. If the Will of God cannot be sufficiently 10. Princ.
declared to men by Writing, it must either be because no Writing can be
intelligible enough for that end, or that it can never be known to be written
by men infallibly assisted: the former is repugnant to common sense, for Words
are equally capable of being understood, spoken or written, the later
ouerthrows the possibility of the Scriptures being known to be the Word of God.

This is granted.

XI. PRINCIPLE.
11. It is agreed among all Christians, 11. Princ.
that although God in the first Ages of the World did reveal his mind to men
immediately by a Voice of secret inspirations, yet afterward, he did
communicate his mind to some immediately inspired to write his Will in Books to
be preserved for the benefit of future Ages, and particularly that these Books
of the New Testament which we now receive were so written by the Apostles and
Disciples of Jesus Christ.

The Doctor declaring how God after. 6. Consid.
the first Ages was pleased to communicate his mind by the Writings (of Moses
etc.) might and ought to have added as a Truth, That he also left a Judge in
case of any Controversy arising about the sense of those Writings, to whose
sentence the people were to stand, and do according to it under pain of death,
as the same Writings inform us.

XII. PRINCIPLE.
12. Such Writings having been received 12. Princ.
by the Christian Church of the first Ages as Divine and Infallible, and being
delivered down as such to us by an universal consent of all Ages since, they
ought to be owned by us as the certain Rule of Faith, whereby we are to judge
what the Will of God is in order to our Salvation, unless it appear with an
evidence equal to that whereby we believe those Books to be the Word of God,
that they were never intended for that end, because of their obscurity or
imperfection.

Here, these words ( whereby we are. 7. Consid.
to judge) being understood not universally, of all Christians, but of those to
whom amongst Christians, this Office of judging in dubious cases, is delegated
by our Lord: Or understood universally, that is, so far as the sense of these
Scriptures is to all men clear and vndisputable, This Proposition is granted.

XIII. PRINCIPLE.
13. Although we cannot argue against 13. Princ.
any particular way of Revelation from the necessary Attributes of God, yet
such a way as Writing being made choice of by him we may justly say, that it is
repugnant to the nature of the design, and the Wisdom and Goodness of God to
give infallible assurance to persons in writing his Will, for the benefit of
Mankind, if those Writings may not be understood by all persons who sincerely
endeavor to know the meaning of them in all such things as are necessary for
their salvation.

This Principle is unsound. Because. 8. Consid.
if God (who according to the Doctors 7. Principle, may reueal his Will in, or
without Writing, after what manner he pleases) may reveal it in these Writings
so, as that in many things it may be clear only to some persons more versed in
the Scriptures and in the Churches Traditional sense of them, and more assisted
from above according to their employment, which Persons he has appointed to
instruct the rest, and these to learn it of them, in those places or Points
wherein to these persons Gods Will is obscure: then, I say, though these
Writings be not such as that every one may attain the understanding of them by
his own endeavors, yet if he may by others, namely, his Instructors, this
also consists very well with the Divine design, with his Wisdom and
Goodness, as also it would, had he left no Writings at all, but only Teachers
to deliver his Will perpetually to his Church.

Concerning these Vvritings pretended by. 9.
the Doctor to be intelligible by all Persons, etc. I find as it seems to me, a
contrary Principle advanced by Doctor Field, (a person of no small authority in
the Church of England) in his Preface to the large Volume he thought it
necessary to write on the Church.

Seeing (says he) the Controversies of Religion (that is, in things of great
consequence, as he says afterward) in our times are grown in number so many,
and in matter so intricate, that few have time and leisure, fewer strength of
understanding to examine them; What remains for men desirous of satisfaction
in things of such consequence, but diligently to search out which amongst all
the Societies of the world is that blessed Company of Holy Ones, that Household
of Faith* that Spouse of Christ and Church of the living God, which is ihe
Pillar and ground of Truth, that so he may embrace her Communion, follow her
Directions, and rest in her Judgment? Thus doctor Field; who in his last words
( rest in her Judgment) speaks home enough, and discouers the only efficacious
way of curing Sects. And see also whether this does not confront the Doctors
29. Principle, Church-Infallibility there being changed into Church-Auctority,
and the Principle being applied to private men's Practice.

And what need is there of Bishops,. 10.
Presbyters, or any Ecclesiastical Pastors among Protestants, as to the Office
of teaching or expounding these Writings, if these in all necessaries are clear
to all Persons who sincerely endeavor to know the meaning of them, I mean,
exclusiuely to their repairing to these Pastors for the learning of it?

And does not the Doctor here to euacuate the infallibility of the Churches
Governors introduce an infallibility or Inerrabillity of every particular
Christian in all points necessary, if such Christians will, that is, if only he
shall sincerely endeavor to know the meaning of them?

And moreover of the sincerity of this his endeavor also I suppose the Doctor
will allow any one may be certain (else how can the mind of a poor illiterate
Countryman be at rest, who can neither trust to the Faith of his Guides, nor
the sufficiency of his own industry) For surely this sincere, is not all
possible, endeavor; such as is learning the Languages, perusing Commentators,
etc. But as Mr Chillingworth Chilling. p. 19.
(who anchored his whole Religion upon it) states this Point, namely, such a
measure thereof, as humane Prudence and ordinary Discretion, (their abilities
and opportunities, and all other things considered) shall advise. And thus,
such a clearness in necessaries must the Scriptures have as suits with the very
lowest capacities. Such a Clearness, I say, even to all Articles of the
Athanasian Creed, if these be esteemed Necessaries; and even as to the
Consubstantiality of the Son with God the Father. In which notwithstanding the
whole Body of Socinians dares to oppose all Antiquity, upon pretense of clear
Scripture to the contrary.

But then the Doctor is desired to consider,. 11.
That if every Christian may become thus Infallible in Necessaries from 1. a
clear Rule, 2. a due Industry used, 3. and a certainty that it is so used; May
not the Church-Gouernors still much rather be allowed infallible, and so retain
still their infallible Guide-ship; and the People also, the more clear the Rule
of Faith is proved to be, the more securely be referred to their direction? And
have we not all reason to presume that the chief Guides of the Church (even a
General Council of them, or if it be but a major part of this Council, it is
sufficient) in their consults concerning a Point necessary to salvation
delivered in Scripture, use at least so much endeavor (for more needs not) as
a plain Rustic does, to understand the meaning of it; and also the like
sincerity? For what they define for others, they define for themselves also,
and their Salvation is as much concerned, as any other man's is, in their
mistakes.

And next: Why may not these Governors, upon such certainty of a sincere
endeavor and clearness of the Rule, take upon them to define these Points, and
enjoin an assent to, and belief of them to their Subjects; especially since it
is affirmed, that all those, from whom they require such Obedience, if they
please to use a sincere endeavor, may be certain thereof, as well as they? And
are we not here again arrived at Church-Infallibility, if not from
extraordinary Divine assistance, yet from the clearness of the Rule? Only we
must suppose such sincere endeavor in the Church, as the Doctor allows may be
in every private man. And thus does not his conditional Infallibility of
particular persons in necessaries, the condition being so easy, necessarily
infer a Moral Impossibility of the Churches erring in them? Which ought the
rather to be admitted by them: Since some of their Divines, to make this their
Problem the more justifiable, that the Scriptures in all necessaries are clear
to all persons*, think it a safe way in the next place to contract these
necessaries to the Apostles Creed.

But after all, supposing these Governors Tillots p. 113.
in stating some Points fallible enough: I cannot hence gather any just
relaxation of their Subjects submission of their judgment to them, upon
pretense of clearness, because such Fallibility. 12.
of their Superiors in some Points can, reasonably, be supposed to arise from
nothing else, but some obscurity in the Rule, which must be greater still to
their Subjects: and then, what more fitting and ordinary, then in matters of
consequence to follow a prudent and experienced, though fallible, persons
Direction, rather then our own?

Lastly, suppose this granted, That the Scriptures. 13.
may be understood by all persons, in all things necessary (and so an
infallible Guide vselesse;) yet I see not what advantage the Doctor can make of
this Principle for the Protestant Religion. For since the sense of Scripture is
now de facto debated between Catholics and Protestants about so many necessary
Points of Faith, the Doctor cannot with truth or charity affirm the sense of
these Scriptures clear to be understood on the Protestants side to all those
who sincerely endeavor to know their meaning, where the Major part of
Christendom understands their meaning contrary, as he must grant they do in
all those he accounts the common Errors both of the Greek and Roman Church:
(a large Catalogue of which may be found in many Protestant Authors) And will
he charge all these as defective in a sincere endeavor? But rather such
sincere endeavor being indifferently allowd to all parties, he ought to
pronounce the sense of Scripture to be clear, if on any, on that side as the
Major part does apprehend it: Which certainly is not the Protestant.

For Example: How can the Doctor rationally maintain this Text Hoc est Corpus
meum, so often repeated with out any variation of the Terms, to bear a sense
clear on the Protestants side; that is, That the Eucharist is not in a
litterall or Proper sense the Body of Christ; when as they are understood in a
litterall sense by much the Major part of the Christian world, not only the
Western but Eastern Churches also (as Monsieur Claude Claud. in his last.
Reply. l. 111. c. 13.
concedes to his worthy Adversary Monsieur Arnaud) to which also may be added
half the Body of the Protestants, namely, all the Lutherans. Now all these have
used their senses, and weighed the arguments drawn from them, as well as
Protestants.

But if the Doctor put this Text so much controuerted among Obscure Scriptures
(which therefore not containing any Point necessary to salvation, salvation is
not endangered by it) if a Christian should err or be mistaken in their sense,
then how comes this great Body of Christians merely by the mistake of its sense
in thinking that our Lord means as the words sound, that the Eucharist is his
very proper Body, and so in adoring (as they ought, should it be so) how come
they, I say, to committ such gross Idolatry, as the Doctor in his Book
charge them with, and so all without repentence, miscarry in their Salvation?

And if from a Major part of the present Church interpreting Scripture an
Appeal be made to a Major part of the Ancient Church, pretended to interpret
them on the Protestants side; neither will this relieve the Doctor, because
since this also ( on what side Antiquity stands) is a thing in Controversy, for
deciding of it we are to presume here likewise that a sincere endeavor being
allowd to all Parties to understand the sense of the former Church, this also
stands on that side as the Major part apprehends it. Now the present Catholic
Church (being a Major part) professes to follow the sense of the Ancient in
interpreting Scripture.

XIV, PRINCIPLE.
14. To suppose the books so written to 14. Princ.
be imperfect, that is, that any things necessary to be heleeued or practiced
are not contained in them, is either to charge the first Author of them with
fraud, and not delivering his whole mind; or the writers with insincerity in
not setting it down; and the whole Christian Church of the first Ages with
folly, in believing the fulness and perfection of the scriptures in order to
salvation.

The two inferences made here by Consid.. 14.
the Doctor are faulty. For 1. Neither can the first Author of scripture be
charged with fraud, if he have delivered part of his mind only by writing, and
part some other way: as the Doctor (Prop. 7. 8. 9.) acknowledges he might:
unless it be manifest that he has obliged himself by a Promise of delivering
his whole mind by writing, which is not showed. 2. Neither can the Writers of
scripture be charged with insincerity, if, so much as they were inspired with
to set down and register there, they have done it.

Meanwhile as touching the Perfection of. 15.
Holy scriptures, Catholics now, as the Holy Fathers anciently, do grant, that
they contain all Points of Faith which are simply necessary to be of all
Persons believed for attaining salvation. And of this Doctor Field may be a
Witness, who says, For matters of Field of the Church p. 377.
Faith, we may conclude according to the judgment of the best and most learned
of our Adversaries themselves, that there is nothing to be believed, which is
not either expressly contained in scripture, or at least by necessary
consequence from thence, and by other things evident in the Light of Nature, or
in the matter of Fact, to be concluded.

XV. PRINCIPLE.
15. These Writings being owned as containing 15. Princ.
in them the whole Will of God so plainly revealed, that no sober enquirer can
miss of what is necessary for salvation; there can be no necessity supposed of
any infallible society of men either to attest and explain these Writings among
Christians, any more then there was for some Ages before Christ of such a Body
of men among the Jews, to attest and explain to them the Writings of Moses or
the Prophets.

The Consequence here is good, viz. Consid*. 16*
That supposing the Will of God is so clearly revealed in these Writings, that
no sober Enquirer can miss of knowing what is necessary to salvation, there
can be then no necessity of any Infallible society. But the supposition of such
a clearenesse, fayles, as the 13. Prosiosition, on which it is grounded, does.
It fails, I say, in the sense the Doctor delivers it, who referrs his sober
enquirer only to the Writings themselves for information in all Necessaries,
Without consulting his spiritual Pastors for the right explication of them.
Nor does the Doctors Language any where run thus, That the will of God is so
plainly revealed in these Writings (for then he should say so obscurely rather)
that no sober man, not who repairs to the Writings, but who enquires of, and
learns from his spiritual Pastors the right sense of them, shall miss, etc.

But if the supposition in the Doctors sense. 17.
be allowed for true, there seems to follow something more then the Doctor
deduceth, and which perhaps he would not admit: viz. the non-necessity of any
society at all, fallible or infallible, to explain these Writings, as to
Necessaries (all Christians being herein clearly taught from God in these
scriptures, or this their Rule) unless perhaps these Teachers may be said to be
left by our Lord for others to supersede their endeauours; or for instructing
them in non-necessaries.

As touching that which the Doctor. 18.
in the clause of this Princ. speaks, of Moses and the Prophets: certain it is,
that Moses his Writings and the Law were not penned with such Clarity, But that
Doubts and Controversies 2. Chron. XIX. X.
might arise concerning the sense of it: so we find mention made of doubts,
between Law and Commandment, statutes and Judgments: And 2. such Doubts
arising, their address was to be made to the supreme Judges appointed for
deciding them. 3. Whateuer their sentence Deuteron XVII. X. XI. XII.
was, according to the sentence of the Law that these should teach them, and
according to the judgment that they should tell, and inform them, they were to
do: and that upon pain of death.

To do, I say, according to such sentence;. 19.
not only when they were to undergo some mulct, or punishment imposed by these
Judges for a fault; but when they were enjoined the observance of some Law
formerly misunderstood by them and so broken and disobeyed. This seems clear
enough from the words of the Text: for who can reasonably interpret them thus,
Thou shall not decline from the sentence which they shall show thee, to the
right hand or to the left, (verse. 11.) that is, Thou shall not decline in not
paying the mulct in which they shall fine thee, or not undergoing the corporal
punishment they shall inflict on thee: Thou shall observe to do according to
all that they shall inform thee, and according to the sentence of the Law that
they shall teach thee (verse. 10.) that is, thou shall suffer what they impose,
but not obey what they enjoin. Again they were to do according to such
sentence, upon pain of death, not then only, when the Litigants do aknowledge
their sentence to be (juxta Legem Dei) conformable to Gods Law (for then what
sentence of the Judge would stand good?) but so often as the Judge should
declare it to be conformable to Gods Law: And when will a Judge declare his
sentence to be otherwise?

Lastly, not to debate here the Infallibility of these supreme Judges as to all
necessaries in the Law of Moses, Let the like absolute Obedience be now yielded
to the supreme Ecclesiastical Courts; Let their sentence be so conformed to,
so assented to among Christians, for none is obliged to do a thing (as the
Jews were by those Judges) but is, by the same decree, obliged to assent and
believe the doing it lawful, and more is not required.

XVI. PRINCIPLE.
16. There can be no more intolerable 16. Princ.
Usurpation upon the Faith of Christians, then for any Person or society of men
to pretend to an Assistance, as infallible in what they propose as was in
Christ or his Apostles, without giving an equal degree of evidence that they
are so assisted, as Christ and his Apostles did, viz. by Miracles as great,
public and conuincing as theirs were: by which I mean, such, as are wrought by
those very persons who challenge this Infallibility, and with a design for the
conviction of those who do not believe it.

Notwithstanding the Doctors Assertion Consid.. 20.
in this Proposition, That a society see. Ap. Laud. p. 139. 140
pretending to Infallibility is obliged to confirm such a pretention by
Miracles as compared with p. 160. 195 258. 346
great as Christ and his Apostles did: yet himself and the Archbishop whom he
see also Rational
defends, do hold that there is after the Apostles times a body or society
Infallible Acc. p. 53 59. 537.
in Fundamentalls, viz. such Oecumenicall Councills as are universally accepted
by the Catholic Church; which Church, they say, from our Lord's Promise, can
never err in Fundamentalls. Now it is certain this society is not equally
assisted with miracles, as our Lord or his Apostles were. Therefore the Doctor
may do well to reuiew this Principle.

1. But its failings being of no difficult. 21.
discovery, I shall not let it pass unexamined. First, then I see no reason,
that those equally assisted by God in delivering a Truth, must also be enabled
by him to give an equal evidence of such Assistance, where there is not the
same necessity of it; as there is not, when the later deliver no new thing from
the former.

2. Again, Though none can pretend. 22.
to be Infallible, or actually not erring in what he proposes, but that he
must be as infallible, as to the truth of that wherein he erreth not, as our
Lord, or his Apostles; for one, or one persons truth, is no more true then any
others: yet in many other respects the Churches Infallibility is much inferior
to that of the Apostles; in that it is. 1. Neither for its matter so far
extended, the Apostles being affirmed infallible in all they delivered, as well
in their Arguments as Conclusions, both in their relating things heard from our
Lord, and things anew inspired by the Holy Ghost: whereas the Church-Gouernours
are acknowledged infallible only in their Definitions in matters of necessary
Faith; and, not in their receiving any new matters inspired by God, but in
faithfully delivering the Inspirations of the former. 2. Neither for the manner
are the Church-Gouernours so highly assisted, by reason of the other knowledge
and evidence they have of that Doctrine, first delivered by the Apostles, and
so from them received, which unchanged they convey unto Posterity. Of which
degrees of infallibility see Archbishop Lawd page 254. and 140.

3. And in the third place, hence it. 23.
follows, that Miracles having been wrought by the first in confirmation of
that Doctrine which both deliver, are not now alike necessary to, or reasonably
demanded of the second.

4. Yet, since our Lord and his Apostles Aug. de Ciuit. Dei 22. book. 8. Chapt.
time, Miracles have been, and are continued in the Church: of which see
irrefragable testimonies given by S. Augustine: In that Church, I say, that
pretends Infallibility; and only in that Church, not any other, departed from
it, pretending thereto: And universally to deny the truth of them is to
overthrow the faith of the most credible Histories. But these are done in these
later, as in former, times, only when, and for what ends God, and not man his
Instrument, pleases, and many times without such persons precedent knowledge,
in making his Requests, what the Divine Majesty will effect. Neither are the
Apostles themselves to be imagined to have had the Operation of Miracles so in
their power, as as to do these in any kind, when, and upon what Persons they
pleased, or others demanded. For such a thing would be of such a force upon
men's wills to compel them into Christianity, or to reduce unto the Catholic
Church Christians strayed from it, as the Divine Providence, perhaps for the
greater trial of men's hearts, and merit of their Faith, has not ordinarily
used.

5. Lastly, Miracles remaining still in this Church, though they be not
professedly done for conuincing a Dissenter in this or that particular Truth,
yet do sufficiently testify in general a security of salvation in the
Communion and Faith of this Church, if God only honors with them the Members
of this Communion, and no others that live out of it: as we see no other
Christian society divided from it that lays claim to them, or shows any
Records of them, or ever did: at least such as may be any way equalled, either
for frequency, variety, or eminency with those of this Church; I mean, although
so many of these be rejected and laid aside, where appears any rational ground
of suspicion.

That the Doctor and the Archbishop do. 24.
hold such General Councills as have an universal Acceptance from the Church
Catholic diffusiue, to be Infallible, seems to me clear from the places
forecited in them. For in those both the Doctor and Archbishop admit, That the
Church diffufiue is for ever preserved Infallible in all Fundamentalls, or
Points absolutely necessary to salvation; and this by virtue of the Divine
Promise, that the Gates of Hell shall not preuail against her, and other Texts:
And therefore such Councills whose Decrees are admitted by the whole Church
diffusiue, must be so too. I say, as to Fundamentalls, though as to other
Points not fundamental they affirm these Councills also liable to error and
fallible, because the Church Catholic diffusiue (say they) is so also.

Among the Conditions also that render any General Council obligatory they
require See. Rat. Account. p. 536.
this for one, that they be universally accepted, or have the general consent
of the Christian World. such Councills then there may be. And then, such
Lawful General Councils, and so approved, and consequently obliging the
Christian World, they confess the first four General Councils to have been; To
which Councills therefore they profess all Obedience.

Now we see what kind of Obedience it was these Councils exacted, in the
Athanasian Creed, accepted by the Church of England, which contains the sum of
their Decrees, viz. no less then assent and belief and submission of judgment,
and all this upon penalty of eternal damnation. And this, if justly required
by them, inferrs, upon the Doctors See Rat. Account. p. 50. 6.
arguing, their Infallibility. For (says he, where Councills challenge an
internal Assent by virtue of their Decrees (or, because their Decrees are in
themselves infallible) there must be first proved an Impossibility of error in
them, before they can look on themselves as obliged to give it. And therefore
He and the Archbishop, so far as any such Ib. p. 539.
Councills, are fallible, allow only an External Obedience, or silence, to
them.

Now for Obedience to these first four General. 25.
Councills in a submission of judgment to them, upon such an Universal
Acceptance of them, the Doctor in another place thus writes, The Church of
England looks upon the keeping the Decrees of the four first General
Councills as her Duty: and professes to be guided by the sense of scripture as
interpreted by the unanimous consent of the Fathers, and the fowr fist General
Councills: that is, she professes to take that which such Counciils deliver,
for the sense of scripture: Not then, to admit their Definitions, if first they
accord with the scripture taken in our own sense. So also else where he says,
The Church Ib. p. 59.
of England does not admit any thing to be delivered as the sense of scripture
which is contrary to the consent of the Catholic sense of the fowr first Ages
(that is) in their Oecumenicall Councills, as he expresses it in the preceding
page. And here also he gives the Ground of such submission, viz. a strong
presumption, that nothing contrary to the necessary Articles of Faith should be
held by the Catholic Church, whose very being depends upon the belief of those
things that are necessary to salvation. And when (says he) those
correspondencies were maintained between the several parts of it, that what
was refused by one, was so by all. In another place also speaking in general
of Councills universally accepted, he says, That both the Truth of Gods
Promises, the Goodness of God to his People, and his peculiar care of Ib. p.
537.
his Church seem highly concerned, that such a Council should not be guilty of
any notorious error.

Here you see he says, that the Truth of Gods Promises is concerned that these
Councills should not fall into any notorious Error; Therefore (such Promises
are made absolute to some Church-Gouernors after the Apostles.) Ap. Lavvd, p.
227.
And then, where the Error is not intolerable, (says the Archbishop) at
least Obedience of Non-contradiction will be due to all such Councills. Now a
notorious Error it must needs be, if an Error in Fundamentalls. And such
notorious Error in particular would this be, If they should hold themselves
(when they are not) infallible in their Decrees, and so should require a
General Assent (such as that in the Athanasian Creed) from Christians to them,
as to Divine Revelations, and make them DE FIDE, thereby, in case any Decree be
not true, obliging all the Members of the Church to an Unity in error. Thus
far then, as to Fundamental Errors, it seems Gods Providence secures both
such Councills, and their subjects: And then also for their erring in
Non-fundamentalls, both He and the Archbishop put this among the Rat. Account.
p. 535.. 26.
RARO CONTINGENTIA.

The Archbishop also is much in justifying the Catholic Church infallible not
only in Ap. Lavvd.. 37. p. 318.
its Being, but Teaching, and that must be by its Councills. Doctor White,
says he, had reason to say, That the Visible Church had in all Ages taught
that unchanged Faith of Christ in all Points Fundamental. And again It is Ib..
21. p. 140.
not possible the Catholic Church (that is, of any one Age) should teach
against the word of God in things absolutely necessary to salvation. Where the
word ( teach) shows, that he intends the Governors of the Church in every Age.
Likewise in another place, If we speak (says he) of plain and easy scripture,
Ib. 25. n. 4
the whole Church cannot at any time be without the knowledge of it. And, If A.
C. mean no Ib.
more, then that the whole Universal Church of Christ cannot universally err
in any one Point of Faith simply necessary to men's salvation, be fights against
no Adversary that I know, but his own fiction. Where it follows, Ib.
But if he mean that the whole Church cannot err in any one point of Divine
Truth in general, if in these the Church shall presume to determine without
her Guide, the scripture, then perhaps it may be said, that the whole Militant
Church has erred in such a Point. Here then the first, of the whole Church not
erring in Fundamentalls, as well as the second, are spoken of the Church
determining. Ib. p. 258.
And so is that saying of his, viz. That though the Mother Church Provincial
or National, may err, Yet if the Grand mother, the whole Universal Church
(that is, in her General Councills universally accepted controlling the other
Prouincial or National) cannot err in these necessary things, all remains
safe; and all occasions of disobedience (that is, to the Grand-mothers
commands) taken from the possibility of the Churches erring. (namely, as to all
necessaries) are quite taken away. Thus he. But safe, etc. it could not be, if
the Catholic Church, the Grand mother, as she held, so could not also witness,
all the necessary Truths against such inferior Councills.

But how these things will te reconciled Rational Account p. 154.
with what the Doctor says else where I know not: Let him take care of it: as
name ly where he writes thus: You much mistake, when you think we resolve our
faith of fundamentalls into the Church as the infallible witness of them. For
though the Church may be infallible in the belief of all things fundamental
(for otherwise it were not a Church if it did not believe them) it does not
follow thence necessarily, that the Church must infallibly witness what is
fundamental and what p. 252. The infallibility in Question.
not. And again That all infallible assistance makes not an infallible
Testimony, or makes not the Testimony of those that have it infallible see
Ration. Account p. 58. 59.
surely Teaching, declaring its consent, condemning Doctrins contrary to
Fundamentalls, is Witnessing, or giving Testimony.

XVII. PRINCIPLE.
17. Nothing can be more absurd then to 17. Princ.
pretend the necessity of such an infallible Commission and Assistance to
assure us of the Truth of these Writings, and to interpret them, and at the
same time to prove that Commission from those Writings from which we are told
nothing can be certainly deduced, such an assistance not being supposed; or to
pretend, that infallibility in a Body of men is not liable to doubts and
disputes, as in those Books from whence only they derive their Infallibility.

I. For the former part of this Principle Consid.. 27.
(viz. Nothing can be more absurd then to pretend the necessity of, etc.) If
the Doctor in the words ( at the same time to prove that Commission from these
Writings) means here, to prove such Commission or Assistance only, or in the
first place from these Writings, the truth of Which Writings are first or only
proved from such Commission, etc. the Absurdity urged by him I grant.

1. As all Articles of Faith are not by all. 28.
Persons learnt at once, so neither by all, exactly in the same order, as is
frequently observed by Catholic Writers. A Christians Faith therefore may
begin either at the Infallible Authoriry of scriptures, or of the Church; and
this Infallible Authority of either of these be learnt from Tradition; and that
of the other from it, viz. 1. either the Infallible Authority of the scriptures
from that of the Church, the Church testifying so much of the scriptures: Or 2.
that of the Church from the scriptures: Or 3. Also, the Infallibility of either
of these may be rightly proved from its own testimony. For whoeuer is proved,
or granted, once infallible in what he says, the consequence is clear (without
any Circle, or Petitio Principii, or identicall arguing) that whateuer he does
witness of himself is true. I say all these Consequences are natural and
necessary. 1. The Testimony being granted evident that the one bears to the
other, or either to its self: and 2. the infallibility of one of these, either
of the scripture, or of the Church, being, first, learnt not from its own, or
the others testimony, but from Tradition.

2. When a Catholic then first receives an 29.
assurance of the Truth, or Canon of scripture from the Infallibility of the
Church, or its Governors, he may learn first this supernatural Divine
assistance and Infallibility of these Governors (which is made known by Divine
Revelation to those first persons who communicate it to posterity) from
Tradition descending from age to age, in such manner, as the Protestant says,
he learneth his Canon of scripture from Tradition. To which tradition also may
be committed by our Lord, or his Apostles, whateuer is to scripture.

3. Neither may we think, that this Divine Assistance or infallibility of these
Guides. 30.
of the Church in necessaries, should either not have been, or not have been a
thing well known to, or believed in the Church by this (to use the Doctors
terms) Deriuatiue and perpetuated sensation of Tradition, if there had been no
Divine Writings: for so the Christian see Ration. Account p. 2^5. it. p 204.
208. 209 And the places (...) cited out of the Archbishop. Ib. p. 108.
religion Without such writings would have been no rational and well grounded,
no stable and certain Religion, which surely the Doctor will not affirm. And
this that is said here of the Churches Infallible Authority, may be also of
other necessary Articles of the Christian faith. For, as the Doctor says, It
is evident from the Nature of the thing, that the Writing of a Divine
Reuolation is not necessary for the ground and reason of Faith, as to that
Revelation. Because men may believe a Divine Revelation without it, as is
evident in the Patriarchs and Christian Beleiuers before the Doctrine written.

4. Such Infallibility in necessaries then. 31.
being so settled in the Governors and Pastors of the Church, (the Apostles and
those others ordained by them, by whom the World was converted) as that had
there been no scriptures, it should not have failed: for so the Church would
have failed too. The successors cannot be imagined to become disenabled, or
deprived of it, because the Apostles afterward wrote what they taught; but
rather by such Writings more secured in it: Because the Belief of this
Infallibility of these successors receives a second evidence from the Testimony
thereof also found in these Writings. Thus both written, and unwritten,
Tradition-Apostolicall attesting it.

5. Now that these Governors of the Church. 32.
(who having an apparent succession, their Testimony must have been
unquestionably believed by Christians in what they taught, in case there had
been no scripture) always reputed and held themselves Divinely assisted, and
infallible for all necessaries, and that this was the Traditiue Faith of the
Church (grounded on our Lords Promise) in all ages, sufficiently appears by
their inserting from time to time (as they thought fit) their Decisions in the
Creeds and by their Anathematizing Dissenters, and the Churches stiling them
Heretics. For no Authority (if we believe the Doctor) but Ib. p. 506.
that which proves it self Infallible, and therefore which is Infallible, can
justly require our internal Assent, or submission of Judgment. And Protestants
allowing only an external obedience, or silence, due to Councills Fallible,
inferrs that Councills Fallible can justly require no more: and consequently
that such Councills are Infallible as do justly require more; as did the fowr
first Councills, with the voluntary acknowledgment also and submission of their
subjects to such an Authority assumed by them. We find indeed subordinate
Councills also stating sometimes matters of Faith, censuring Heretics, and
requiring assent to their Decrees; but still with Relation to the same
Infallibility residing in the General Body of Church*Gouernors, and their
concurrence therein: They not passing such Acts without consulting the
Tradition and Judgment of other Churches, and especially of the Apostolic see:
and a general acceptance rendering their Decisions authentic and valid.

2. For the latter part of this Principle [ Nothing is more absurd, then to
pretend that Infallibility in a Body of men, is not as liable to doubts and
disputes, as in those Books from whence only they derive their Infallibility.]
If the Doctor means here (as in his Rational Account, that the sentence of a
Body of men Infallible is, he says not, in some things liable to some Doubts;
but as liable to Doubts and Disputes, as the Infallible scriptures (for there
he maintains, That the Decrees of Councills are as liable to many
Interpretations, as any other Writings. And again, If the scriptures cannot put
an End to Controversies on that account, how can General Councills do it, when
their Decrees are as liable to a private sense and wrong Interpretation, as the
scriptures are, Nay more, etc.) I say, if this be his sense, then, not to
compare Absurdities here, Is not this all one as if he said, That a Preacher or
Commentator can, or does speak or write nothing plainer, then the Text? Nor the
Judge give a sentence any more intelligible, then the Law? That Councills can,
or have decided nothing clearer, then the thing that is in Controversy? And so,
no Party is cast by them, since it appears not, for whom they declare? And that
the Decree of the Council of Trent, as to Transubstantiation remains still as
disputable, as the Text, Hoc est Corpus meum? But then, how comes it to pass,
that Protestants, when the Definitions of later Councills are urged against
them, do not contest them as dubious, but reject them, as erroneous?

From the same misarguing the Doctor elsewhere. 34. Ib. p. 101
concludes, That the argument of the Unity (in Opinion) of the Roman Party,
because they are ready to submit their Judgment to the Determination of the
Church, will hold as well (or better) for the Unity of Protestants, as theirs;
because all men are willing to submit their Judgments to scriptures, which is
on all sides agreed to be Infallible. Thus He. Now to consider it. Moses his
Law prescribed by God for an Infallible Rule, yet had Judges Deuter. 17.
appointed, when Doubts and Contentions happened about the meaning of it, to
explain the sense: Our savior, accordingly in the Gospel, when any one had a
Controversy Math.
against another, (which Controversy perhaps might be Heresy, or his Brothers
teaching something contrary to the Rule of Faith) ordered, upon such Person his
not being otherwise reclaimed, that in the last place the matter should be
brought to the Hearing of the Church, and such Person, if not hearing the
Church, to be excommunicated* Now I ask, to what end either of these, if such
persons be no nearer to Unity of Opinion, or conviction and ending their
Disputes by submitting their judgments to the sentence of these Judges, or this
Church, then before they were in the same submission of theirs to the Rule.
Infallibility alone ends not Controversies, but clearness; Clearness in the
Point controuerted: Which if the scripture has, how comes Controversy about
it? and Controversies between so great Parties, Churches, Nations? In this
sense of scripture Catholics dissenting, repair to the Decision of the Church
(which if any way obscure is capable of being made by it afterward more
intelligible) submit to its Judgment, and so become united in Opinion in all
those Points the Church decides: wherein Protestants rejoice in their Liberty
still to disagree. United in Opinion, I say; true or false, here matters not:
We speak here of Union, not of Truth. But now, when the sense of scripture is
the like matter of Controversy between two sects of Protestants, as frequently
it is, What Course do they take for Unity of Opinion? Repair they again to the
scriptures they controvert? But these can never decide which of the several
senses they take them in, is the true. Repair they to synods? So the Arminians
and Antiarminians did? Then surely this they do, because that Unity (provided
there be a submission of Judgment to both) is attainable by the sentence of the
synod or Church, which is not by that of the scripture. Which is the thing here
denied by the Doctor.

And hence it proceeds, that Catholics must. 35.
be much more united in Opinion or Judgment, then Protestants; in as much as
they all own submission of Judgment to so many Councills, which the other
reject; These not accepting the Decrees of above fowr or sieve of those
Councills, whilst the Catholics admit of fowr (or suppose, three) times so
many, and namely of one, the Council of Trent; of which Soaue affirms, That in
all the Councills Hist. of the Counc. of Trent. p. 228.
held in the Church from the Apostles times until then, there were never so
many Articles decided as in only one session of it. And Protestants aggrauate
the Tyranny of the Church of Rome in tying all her subjects unanimously to
believe, and that as necessary to salvation so many Points of Faith, wherein
the Protestants leave to all men liberty of Opinion. And moreover, as for those
Differences that remain still, or shall arise hereafter, they are also
conclusiue among them by the same way of Councills, upon the acknowledged
obligation of a common submission of their judgments. I say not, all their
differences whatsoever are conclusiue (which causes some wonder in the Doctor,
that this thing Roman Idolatry. p. 7 449. 453.
is not done in an Infallible Church) but so many of them wherein the Church
finds on any side sufficient evidence of Tradition; or, for the gravity of the
matter; a Necessity of Decision: The same Divine Providence that preserues his
Church perpetually Infallible in all things necessary to be determined,
disposing also, that for all such necessaries, there shall be a sufficient
evidence of Tradition, either of the Conclusion it self, or its Principles.

But as for several other matters of Divine 36.
Reuclation, where what is to be held as de fide is not sufficiently yet
cleared, either by reason of the sense of scripture, or of the sense of some
Conciliary Decree still disputed among Catholics, in matters that are called
indeed, by the one or other Party, de fide, as they variously apprehend this
sense of scripture, or Council; No such agreement, I say, in matters of Faith
thus taken, is at all pretended: And their accord in the rest sufficiently
transcends that of Protestants. But even these also are capable of the same
settlement, when the Church shall pass a new sentence concerning them.

Here then may be resumed that Expression Tillots. in Rule of Faith. p. 92. 93.
selected by Doctor Tillotson to make sport with, viz. That in this their Faith
(namely, as to Points thereof determined by the Church) it is impossible that
Catholics should differ one from another, and that there should be any Schism
among them. The Reason is plain, because in all such Points they unanimously
Submit their judgment to their Mother the Church: or if any does not, he
cease to be a Catholic. Whereas Protestants not acknowledging any necessary
Obligation of such Submission to any Superiors among them, it is impossible
that debates and Schisms should be avoided by them.

XVIII. PRINCIPLE.
18. There can be no hazard to any person 18. Princ.
in mistaking the meaning of any particular place in those Books, supposing he
use the best means for understanding them, comparable to that which every one
runs who belieues any person or society of men to be infallible who are not:
For in this later he runs unavoidably into one great error, and by that may be
led into a thousand: but in the former God has promised either he shall not
err, or he shall not be damned for it.

God has made no such Promise concerning Consid.. 37.
any one, who uses his best endeanours for understanding scripture, that
either he shall not err, or not be damned for it, if such endeavor be
understood exclusiuely to his consulting and embracing the expositions of the
Church: which if the Doctor includes, then Catholics also affirm, that in
necessaries such persons cannot mistake. Neither can such Promise be pretended
necessary, since God has referred all, in the dubious sense of his scriptures,
to the Directions and Doctrine of his Ministers, their spiritual Guides, whom
he Ephesians. 4. 11. 13. 14
has set over them, to bring them in the Unity of the Faith to a perfect man,
and that they may not be tossed to and fro and carried about with every wind of
Doctrine by the sleight of those that lie in wait to deceive. And, without
which Guide, S. Peter observes that in his time some persons (for any thing we
know, diligent enough, yet) through want of learning, and the instability of
adhering to their Guides, being unlearned, says he, and unstable, 2. Peter. 3.
16.
wrested some places of scripture, hard to be understood, to their own
destruction: Therefore these scriptures are also, in some great and important
Points, hard to be understood.

Now therefore let the Doctor give. 38.
me leave to put these two other Propositions in the other scale to
counterpoise his. The first, That a Person in believing any society of men to
be Infallible that are so, has a security incomparably beyond that of another
Person who is supposed to use the best other means, his condition is capable
of, to understand the scriptures, and so follows his own judgment: the capacity
of most Christians being very little, abstracting from the Directions of a
Guide their mean condition void of learning, or leisure, and it being a thing
uncertain also, when they have used a due endeavor; And this a prejudice of it
not rightly used, that they do not discern in these scriptures this Infallible
Guide, which (says S. Augustine) the scripture without any ambiguity does
demonstrate; and which Contra Crescon lib. 1. c. 33.
repaired to, may demonstrate to them what else is necessary.

The second Proposition is, That there. 39.
can be no such hazard to any person in believing a society of men to be
infallible, that are not. if this society be at least more learned and studied
in Divine matters then himself, and also ordained by our Lord to be his
Instructors in them (which Protestants, I hope, allow true of their own
Clergy:) No such hazard, I say, as is comparable to that every one incurrs in
mistaking the meaning of scriptures, though we suppose he uses his best other
means of understanding them, exclusive to his obeying the Instructions of such
a society. [Witness the unhappy Socinians, and all other grosser sects of late
sprung out of Disobedience.] For whereas, in following these Guides, such
persons may fall into some errors, and perhaps some of them great ones; in
this later way of following their own fancyes the unlearned may fall into a
thousand, and some of these much greater and grosser, then any such Christian
society or Body of Clergy will ever maintain. For God has made no Promise to
preserve in Truth those who desert their Guides; nor to reward their diligence,
who live in disobedience.

XIX. PRINCIPLE.
19. The assistance which God has promised 19. Princ.
to those who sincerely desire to know his will, may give them greater
assurance of the truth of what is contained in the Books of scripture, then it
is possible for the greatest Infallibility in any other persons to do,
supposing they have not such assurance of their Infallibility.

1. First observe, that whateuer Divine Consrd.. 40.
assistance is advanced here against the assurance that can be received from
Church-Infallibility, the same is more against any assurance that may be had
from Church Authority. Thus it happens more then once in these Principles, that
in too forward a Zeal in demolishing the one, the other also is dangerously
undermined.

2. The Doctor has all reason here. 41.
to suppose, him that repairs to, and is instructed by an Infallible Guide,
though not knowing him to be such, as well as him, who seeks for an assurance
of his Faith, without one, sincerely to desire to know Gods will, and upon this
to enjoy his promised Assistance, so far as God engages it. And then if the
Question be, which of these two takes the more prudent course, he that
consults, or he that lays aside this Guide, for his assurance of the truth of
what is contained in the Books of scripture; I should think, the former.
Whilst the one relyes on the judgment of such Guide thought wise and learned,
though not infallible; the other on his own: On the judgment of which Guide the
one has much more reason to be confident, then the other on his own, who
neglects the advice of the Wise man [ Ne innitaris Prove. 3. 5.
prudentiae tuae] Lean not on thy own Prudence. At least the Doctor must grant
the former (of the two) to be de facto in a much safer condition. For it must
be acknowledged a great benefit to have an Infallible Guide to show us our way,
though we do not know him to be Infallible: for so we keep still in the right
way, though believing only, and not infallible certain, that it is so; so we
walk in Humility and obedience. And if God has directed us, for learning our
right way, to a Guide, surely he will take no prudent course, who committing
himself to Gods immediate Assistance, shall neglect it; and break his
commandment in hope of his favor.

XX. PRINCIPLE.
20. No man's Faith can therefore be 20. Princ.
infallible merely because the Proponent is said to be infallible: because the
nature of Assent does not depend upon the objectiue Infallibility of any thing
without us, but is agreeable to the evidence we have of it in our minds: for
Assent is not built on the nature of things, but their evidence to us.

This Proposition is granted, viz. That Consid.. 42.
no person is infallibly certain of, or in his Faith, because the Proponent
thereof is infallible, unless he also certainly know, or have an infallible
evidence that he is infallible.

Only let it be here remembered, That, for begetting an infallible assent to the
thing proposed, it is sufficient if we have an infallible evidence either of
the thing proposed, or of the Proponent only: Because if we are infallibly
certain that he cannot ly in such matter who relates it to us, we are also
hence infallibly certain, that what he says is truth.

XXI. PRINCIPLE.
21. It is necessary therefore in order to 21. Princ.
an infallible assent, that every particular person be infallibly assisted in
judging of the matters proposed to him to be believed: so that the ground on
which a necessity of some External Infallible Proponent is asserted, must
rather make every particular person infallible, if no Divine Faith can be
without an infallible assent; and so renders any other Infallibility useless.

This Proposition, That therefore it is Consid.. 43.
necessary, in order to an infallible assent, that every particular person be
infallibly assisted in judging of the matters proposed to him to be believed,
is not well deduced from the precedent Proposition rightly understood: Neither
is it true: and so the Consequence also fails, viz. [ so that the Ground on
which a necessity of some external Infallible Proponent is asserted, must
rather make every particular person infallible, if no Divine Faith can be
without an infallible assent; and so renders any other Infallibility useless.]
Because (as was now said) for the yiedling an Infallible assent to the things
proposed, it is not necessary that the person have an infallible evidence of
the truth of the things proposed, that is, from the Internal Principles that
prove, or demonstrate them: But it is enough (though the things proposed remain
still in themselves obscure to him) that he have an infallible, or sufficiently
certain Evidence only of the Infallibility of the External Proponent. The
Ground therefore upon which the necessity of some external infallible
Proponent is asserted for begeting such infallible assent is, because the
Person has by no other way any infallible evidence of the things proposed:
Which if he had, then indeed the Proponents Infallibility, for such Points, is
rendered useless.

And by this, I hope, sufficiently appears. 44.
that misarguing that seems to cause a great confusion in the Doctor's
Principles: whilst, upon an infallible assent requiring an infallible Evidence
(laid down in the Twentieth Proposition, and Conceded) he concludes as
necessary to our yielding an infallible assent to all that the Church
proposes, an infallible Evidence of the things proposed; and then, hence
inferres the vselessness of such infallible Proponent.

And here note, that though the Churches Infallibility to such a person as is
not infallibly assured of it, signifies nothing as to his infallible assurance
of that which it proposes; Yet it signifies much for his having a right and
saving Faith in all those matters proposed See suarez de Fide Dispu-. 4.. 5. n.
7. 8 9 Lugo de virtute Fidei Disp p. 1.. 12. Vasquez. 1. 2. Disput. 120. n. 15.
Esti. in 3. sent. d. 25.. 13. south wall Analys. Fidei Disp. 3. c. 8.
by this Church, which cannot misguide him, (see the Consideration on the
nineteenth Principle) which right and saving Faith children and other
illiterate country people in the Catholic Church have, without any such
infallible assurance concerning the Proponent (as is abundantly declared by
Catholic writers) In like manner the Protestants also affirm, That the Holy
scriptures may signify much to the begetting a true and saving Faith even in
those who cannot from Universal Tradition certainly prove them to be the word
of God.

XXII. PRINCIPLE.
22. If no particular person be infallible 22 Prine.
in the assent he gives to matters proposed by others to him, then no man can
be infallibly sure that the Church is infallible: and so the Churches
Infallibility can signify nothing to our infallible assurance without an equal
infallibility in our selves in the belief of it.

[ If no particular person be infallible in Consid.. 46.
the Assent he gives to matters proposed, etc.] Here [ Matters] is left
indefinite. If the Doctor means, to any matters at all proposed, the
Proposition and Consequence thereto annexed, are true and granted. But on the
contrary, a particular person may be infallible in the assent he gives to some
matter proposed, viz. to this, That the Church is infallible. If he means, to
all matters proposed, then it is faulty and denied: For though no particular
person be infallible in the assent he gives to all matters proposed by others
to him, yet may he be so in this, the Churches Infallibility. And so the
Consequence also is void; and the Churches Infallibility will signify as much
as is expected to men's infallible assurance in those matters it proposes.

Here then Catholics affirm, That though every person is not so, any person
may be, and that antecedently to the testimony of scripture, at least with a
morally-infallible certainty (or what ever Certainty that may be called which
Universal Tradition can afford) assured of this Divine Revelation, the
Churches Infallibility, from such Tradition and other Motives of Credibility as
Protestants allow for a sufficiently, or morallyinfallible and certain means of
believing the scriptures to be the word of God. On which word of God, or Divine
Revelation the several Articles delivered by it, in the sense their own
private judgment apprehends the Protestant grounds his Faith: Again on which
word of God, or Divine Revelation, in the sense this Infallible Church
interprets the same Articles the Catholic grounds his Faith.

But as the Protestants except here from being primarily grounded on, or proved
by the same scriptures, this Fundamental Point of Faith, That the scriptures
are the true Word of God; so they must give Catholics also leave to except here
this their Point of Faith, the infallibility of the Church, from being
primarily, or, as to the first means of Knowing it, grounded on, or learnt from
the testimony of this Infallible Church. For this Point may first come to the
Belieuers Knowledge either from Tradition, or from the Holy scriptures (as is
explained before in the Considerations on 17. Principle.. 28.) From the
scriptures, I say, as the sense of them is now learnt, not from this Infallible
Church, but either from their own sufficient Clearness in this Point, or from
Tradition.

Nor are Catholics necessited in arguing against Protestants (who grant the
scriptures to be Gods Word) to use any other Testimony then that of these
scriptures for a sufficiently clear Proof of Church-Infallibility. For I think
I may call that a clear Proof, even according to the Doctors common reason of
Mankind, which by the most of the Christian World is taken to be so,
notwithstanding that a Party, engaged by their Reformation in an apparent
contrary interest, do contradict it. Yet whilst they deny a sufficient Evidence
of Church-Infallibility to be found in scripture, if they would allow a
sufficient Evidence of Church Authority established to decide Ecclesiastical
Controversies with Obligation to External Obedience, by this Authority they
would be cast and silenced for the former, if a much Major Part may be admitted
(as it ought) to give Law to the Whole.

In the Belief and Profession of Which Church-Infallibility, and submission of
private men's judgments, to her sentence passed in her synods the Greek Church
seems no way varying from the Roman. Jeremias the Constantinopolitan Patriarch
in his Contest with the Lutheran Protestants, is much in this, as a sure
Retreat for ending Controversies, and establishing Peace. For he tells them,
That those Points which Resp. 1. cap. de Abusibus.
have been determined or commanded synodically after a Legitimate way of
Councills, they are received by all Faithful Christians as consonant to the
Diuinely-Inspired scriptures. And in the Conclusion of that Answer, he says,
It is not lawful for us confiding in our own private Explication, to
understand, to observe or interpret any saying of Divine scripture any
otherwise then as has seemed good to those Theologues who have been approved
and received by Holy synods directed by Gods spirit; least that declining from
the right Evangelical Doctrine, the Conceptions of our minds should be carried
about hither and thither like a Proteus. But some wilt ask, How shall those
things be reformed? How? Even thus by Gods Assistance, if we take not into our
hands, nor give credit to any things besides those which have been instituted
and ordained by the Holy Apostles and Holy synods. He who observes this limit,
is our Companion in celebrating Divine Mysteries, he is of the same Communion
and Faith with us. Again in his Preface to the same answer he says, We will
give our Answer, not alleging Act. (...). l. w^rt. p. 56
any thing of our own, but from the seven Oecumenicall synods (the last of
these is that so much persecuted and befoold by Doctor Stillingfleet in his
last Book) And from the sentence of Holy Doctors Rom Idol. p. 78. etc.
interpreters of Divinely inspired scriptures, whom the Catholic Church has
by an Unanimous consent received: since the Holy Ghost has breathed forth by
them and spoken in them such things as shall forever remain unmooued, as being
founded on the Word of God. For the Church of Christ is the Pillar and ground
of Truth, against which the Gates of Hell shall never preuail, as God has
promised. Here we see in the East the same Zeal for Councills and for Fathers
(taken collectiuely) as an Infallible Guide, as is in the West, and the like
endeavor to reduce Protestants to the same acknowledgment and humble
submission of Judgment.

XXIII. PRINCIPLE.
23. The Infallibility of every particular 23. Princ.
person being not asserted by those who plead for the Infallibility of a
Church, and the one rendering the other useless (for if every person be
infallible, what needs any Representative Church be so too) and the
infallibility of a Church being of no effect if every Person be not infallible
in the belief of it, we are further to enquire what certainty men may have in
matters of Faith, supposing no External Proponent to be infallible.

The Observations made upon the three Consid.. 47.
immediately foregoing Propositions (the matter of which is repeated in this) do
show that they no way serve him for the use he would here make of them.

The sense of which Propositions, as far as they have any truth in them, may be
returned upon him, thus: since the Infallibility af any particular person, as
to the assent he either does, or may give to this Point of the Churches
Infallibility is asserted by those who plead for the Infallibility of a Church:
And since such infallibility of a particular person as to this point, does not
therefore render at all the Infallibility of a Church useless to him, viz. as
to his learning still from her all those other Points of Faith of which he has
no infallible knowledge or certainty otherwise, ( in which therefore he not
being infallible, that he may not err in them, it is necessary that the
representative Church be so:) And so since the Infallibility of the Church is
still of most important effect, both to those who have and to those who as yet
have not any infallible certainty of this her Infallibility, toguide both these
in a true, right and saving Faith, as to those Points where of they have no
certainty: Therefore there needs no Enquiry after a further Certainty for that
our Faith, in which we have one already from this Infallible Proponent, the
Church.

XXIV. PRINCIPLE.
24. There are different degrees of Certainty 24. Princ.
to be attained according to the different degrees of Evidence and measure of
Divine Assistance; but every Christian by the use of his reason, and common
helps of Grace may attain to so great a degree of Certainty, from the
conuincing arguments, of the Christian Religion and authority of the
scriptures, that on the same grounds on which men doubt of the truth of them
they may as well doubt of the truth of those things which they judge to be most
evident to sense or reason.

Here, if the Doctor means, That Consid.. 48.
every Christian by the use of his Reason and common helps of Grace (that is,
as he has expressed it already Principle 13. and 18. by his perusing the
scriptures, and sincerely endeavoring to know their meaning, exclusuely to his
necessary repair to any external infallible Guide or Proponent, as he pretends
in Principle 13. 15. 23.) may attain to so great a degree of certainty, as to
all necessary Points of Faith, ONLY from the conuincing arguments, of the
Verity of the Christian Religion and Authority of scriptures, as that such a
person may as little doubt of them, as of the things most evident to sense or
Reason; This Principle is denied.

And for the reason of this denial I referr. 49. Rat. Acct p. 58.
to what is said before to Principle 13. and 18. And I appeal also to what
Doctor Stillingfleet himself elsewhere tells us in his Rational Account, It
seems reasonable, (says he,) that because Art and subtilty may be used by
such, who seek to pervert the Catholic Doctrine, and to wrest the plain places
of scripture which deliver it, so far from their proper meaning, that very few
ordinary capacities may be able to clear themselves of such Mists as are cast
before their eyes, the sense of the Catholic Church in succeeding times may be
a very useful way for us to embrace the true sense of scripture, especially in
the great Articles of the Christian Faith: as for instance, in the Doctrine of
the Deity of Christ, or the Trinity, etc.

Now should not the Doctor, instead of saying, the sense of the Catholich
Church in succceding Ages may be a very useful way for us, have said, is very
necessary for us, if his cause would permit him? And will not the Socinian
thank him for this his mitigation?

But if, according to this Principle, every Christian without this external
Guide can (not in some perhaps, but) in all these Points of Faith attain such
certainty as he has in things most evident to sense or Reason, how does he
stand in need of consulting, or conforming to the sense of the Primitive
Catholic Church?

XXV. PRINCIPLE.
25. No man who firmly assents to any 25. Princ.
thing as true can at the same time entertain any suspicion of the falsehood of
it, for that were to make him certain and uncertain of the same thing: It is
therefore absurd to say, that those who are certain of what they believe, may
at the same time not know but that it may be false: which is an apparent
contradiction and overthrows any faculty in us of judging of truth or falsehood.

1. This Principle is evident; and Consid.. 50.
granted. But such certainty is not applicable to the belief of every Christian
as to all Points of Faith, if he be supposed not assisted by any External
Infallible Guide.

2. It is true also, that a full and firm Assent, free from doubting (as where
no Reasons offer themselves to persuade us to the contrary) may be yielded to a
thing as true, which is really false, and at the same time no suspicion be
entertained of the falsehood of it.

XXVI. PRINCIPLE.
26. Whateuer necessarily proves a thing 26. Princ.
to be true, does at the same time prove it impossible to be false; because it
is impossible the same thing should be true and false at the same time.
Therefore they who assent firmly to the Doctrine of the Gospel as true, do
thereby declare their Belief of the Impossibility of the falsehood of it.

This Proposition is granted. But one Consid.. 51.
who assents firmly in general to the whole Doctrine of the Gospel, what
ever it be, as true, and so to the impossibility of the falsehood of it, or any
part of it, does not therefore, being vnasisted by any External Guide, know
what this Doctrine is in every such Point of Faith, where the sense of the
Letter of this Gospel is controuerted and (to use the Apostles Phrase) hard
to be understood, and that in matters too hazarding damnation, if mistaken.

Therefore me thinks the Doctor should here allow thus much at least; That all
those, who after their perusing the scriptures think themselves not certain of
its sense, are obliged (notwithstanding the silence of these Protestant
Principles herein) to repair to the Direction of these External Guides, and
these too not taken at adventure, and to follow their Faith. Now such
nonpretenders to Certainty, according to the Doctors trial of it set down
below in Consid. on Princ. 29. I suppose are the greatest part of Protestants.

XXVII. PRINCIPLE.
27. The nature of Certainty does receive 27. Princ.
several names, either according to the nature of the Proof, or the degrees of
the Assent. Thus MORAL certainty may be so called, either as it is opposed to
MATHEMATICAL Evidence, but implying a firm assent upon the highest Evidence
that Moral things can receive: Or as it is opposed to a higher degree of
certainty in the same kind. so MORAL Certainty implies only greater
Probabilities of one side, then the other. In the former sense we assert the
Certainty of Christian Faith to be MORAL: not in the later.

This Principle is granted, if importing Consid.. 52.
only, that Christians have, or may have a sufficiently certain and infallible
Evidence of the Truth of their Christianity.

But notwithstanding this, Christians may be deficient in a right belief of
several necessary Articles of this Christian Faith, if destitute of that
external Infallible Guide therein. And the perpetual Divine Assistance, and
so, Infallibility in Necessaries of this Guide being declared in the
scriptures, a Catholic having once learnt this Point of Faith, from it*
Definitions and Expositions becomes secure and settled in the belief of all
those controuerted Articles of his Faith; Wherein Others, another; whilst the
scriptures in such Points (at least to persons unlearned, or of weaker
judgments, which are which are the greatest part of Christians) are ambiguous
in their sense, and drawn with much art to several interests.

XXVIII. PRINCIPLE.
28. A Christian being thus certain to 28 Princ.
the highest degree of a firm assent that the scriptures are the Word of God,
his Faith is thereby resolved into the scriptures as into the rule and measure
of what he is to believe, as it is into the Veracity of God, as the ground of
believing what is therein contained.

Both Catholics and Protestants Consid.. 53.
profess to resolve their Faith into the Word of God and Divine Revelation (or
into the scriptures, so, as is said on Principle 14. and 29.) and make Gods
Veracity the Ground of their belief of the things therein contained.

But the former resolve their Faith into this scripture, as the sense of it,
where disputed, is delivered by the Church, whose Faith the Apostle commands us
to follow and to whom Christ himself gives testimony, as S. Augustine Hebr. 13.
7.
says. As for Protestants, they resolve their De Unit. 19.
Faith into this scripture, as the sense of it is ultimatly apprehended and
understood by their own judgments: None here, to use the Doctors words
elsewhere, usurping that Royal Prerogrtiue of Heaven, in prescribing Rational.
Account. p. 133. 16. p. 58.
infallibly in matters questioned (suppose in those Points the Doctor named
before, the Doctrine of the Deity of Jesus Christ, or of the Trinity:) But
leaving all to judge (and so the Socinians) according to the Pandects of the
Divine Laws: because each member of this society is bound to take care of his
soul, and all things that tend thereto.

But here the Doctor will permit us to ask whether every one is bound to take
care of his soul, so, as under the pretense hereof to disobey their Resolutions
and Instructions in Faith or Manners, whom God has appointed to take care of
and to watch over Hebr. 13. 17.
their souls, and will require an account of them for it. Here therefore let
every one take the safest course; and, where there is no evident Certainty,
always make sure to side with the Church.

XXIX. PRINCIPLE.
29 No Christian can be obliged, under 29. Princ.
any pretense of Infallibility, to believe any thing as a matter of Faith, but
what was revealed by God himself in that Book wherein he belieues his will to
be contained; and consequently is bound to reject whatsoever is offered to be
imposed upon his Faith, which has no fundation in scripture, or is contrary
thereto: Which rejection is no making NEGATIVE ARTICLES OF FAITH, but only
applying the general grounds of Faith to particular instances, as, I believe
nothing necessary to salvation but what is contained in scripeure; Therefore no
such particular things, which neither are there, nor can be deduced thence.

1. Here first observe, That what no Consid.. 54.
Christian is obliged to believe under any pretense of Church-Infallibility, he
is (much rather) not obliged to believe under any pretense of Church -
Authority: And that the Doctors freeing the Churches subjects here from the
former, does so from the later. It concerns therefore his superiors to look to
it whether their Churches and their own Authority suffers no detriment
particularly from this Principle, I mean, so as it can be applied to private
men's practice.

2. Next observe, That the Expression. 55.
( What is revealed by God, etc.) as it is applicable to persons, must either
mean, What such person only thinks, belieues, or is persuaded to be revealed
etc. or, what such person certainly knows to be revealed: And the same may be
said of the later expressions ( what has no foundation What is contrary.)

Now as either of these two Additions are made, a great alteration is made in
the Principle, and what in the one Addition is true, in the other may be false.
As for example when a culpable Ignorance belieues something that is enjoined by
this Authority not to be revealed in Gods Word, which indeed is so, and so
rejects it, here such act is not justifiable. Very necessary therefore it seems
here to make an exact distinction, that if the Doctor means it here of the one,
viz. certain Knowledge, it may not be misapplyed by any to the other, namely, a
belief or full persuasion. For so, men set once upon examining well in such
high mysteries their own Certainty, will, I conceive, never find just cause to
reject what this Church Authority, to which they owe obedience, recommends to
them upon Her Certainty.

But to take Expressions as they lie.. 56.
For the first Part of this Principle, thus much is granted, That no Christian
can be obliged, under any pretense of Infallibility, to believe any thing as a
matter of Faith, but what is revealed by God himself in his Word, Written or
Unwritten, Rat. Account p. 162. 208. 210
both which the Doctor else where allows to be of the same Value, so it be
evident they are his Word. Where I add unwritten because though it is granted
before, on Principle 14. that the Word written, or Book of scriptures contains
all those Points of Faith that are simply necessary to be of all persons
believed for attaining salvation; Yet some Articles of a Christians Faith there
may be that are not there contained, which may be also securely preserved in
the Church by Ecclesiastical Tradition, both Written and Unwritten, derived at
first from the Apostolical; as for example, this by Protestants confessed,
That these Books of scripture are the Word of God. I say thus much is granted.
For no Church-Infallibility is now pretended, but only in declaring what this
Word of God delivers, requires, authorizeth; and a Catholics whole Faith is
grounded on Divine Revelation: And, where such pretended Infallible
Church Authority enjoins any thing to be believed merely as lawful, it grounds
it self on this Word of God, for the lawfulness of it.

The Consequence also is granted,. 57.
viz. That a Christian is bound to reject whatsoever is offered to be imposed
upon his Faith, which has no foundation in scripture, or Gods Word, as before
explained; or is contrary thereto, (that is, which is certainly known to such
Christian to be so) there being no matter of Faith enjoined by such Authority,
but what is pretended to be so founded.

But then, such Christian, where not infallibly. 58.
certain against it, ought to submit to the judgment of this Authority for the
Knowing what things are revealed in this Word, and what are contrary to, or not
founded in it, and (to use the Doctors Expression) to be guided by the sense of
Scripture, as it is interpreted by this Authority. Else a mistaken and culpably
ignorant belief herein, will no way justify his disobedience. No more then the
Socinians contrary belief justifies him against the Decrees of the Church in
those Points which yet he belieues not to be founded in Gods word, and rejects
as contrary. 59. Rational. Acc. p. 539.


And the Doctor els-where to express and curb such extrauagant and capricious
beliefs, is glad to call in, for the interpreting of Scripture to them, the
concurrant sense of the Primitive Church, the common Reason of Mankind (that
supposes Scripture the Rule of Faith) the consent of Wise and learned men. And
on their side who disbelieue this Authority, he calls for no less then
Demonstration; and this not some improbable Argument miscalled so, but which
being proposed to any man and understood, the mind cannot choose but inwardly
assent thereto, that is, that every reasonable man understanding the terms,
assents to. (But how this, and several other things which have fallen some
times from the Doctors pen, do consist with these Principles, and some other
Tene^ts of his; Or how the true sense of Scripture in all Necessaries, is so
clear and intelligible to every sincere endeauourer as that he has such
Demonstration, for it, as that no rational man hearing it, can dissent from
it, I cannot undertake to give a Satisfactory account. Mean while, such
Protestants as perhaps may cast their eyes on these Papers, may do well to
consider, whether upon such a Demonstratiue Certainty in the Points
controuerted as this, it is that they oppose Church Authority, teaching them
otherwise.

Likewise, the Common Reason of MankindChristian, the Common consent of Wise and
learned men named by him before, what are they indeed, but, where all are not
united in the same judgment, the most common Suffrage and testimony of the
present Universal Church; whom also we ought sooner to credit then any other,
touching what is the concurrent testimony of the Primitive Church, in case this
suffers any debate. And if, as he says, Particular persons are not to depart
from this judgment of Authority till they have Demonstration, that is, their
own certainty and Infallibility, as to such Point, to show against it; then we
need not seek for our Lords Patent of the Churches Infallibility for their, or
our submission to it, tell the Opposers of its judgment, for the Points they
dissent in, produce theirs.

Here then we see the Doctor getts as near to an Internal Infallible, or at
least Authentical Proponent, as his cause and interest will permit him:
Hoping by his requiring Demonstration, and introducing Common Reason, and Wise
and learned men, and Primitive Church, to shake his hands of so many
Sectarists, who molest his own Churches peace upon the account of this his
Proposition, or something like it, viz. that no Christian is bound, under what
ever pretense of Church Authority, to believe that which is not revealed in
Gods Word; and is bound to reject what ever is offered to be imposed upon his
Faith, that is contrary, or has no ground in Gods Word, etc. And you must let
them judge of both these.

For the last part of this 29. Principle. 60.
(That such Rejection is no making Negative Articles of Faith) I grant, that a
rejecting of the imposition of a Belief of such a Positive Point, or the
refusing to admit it as an Article of their Faith (which may be done whilst
they either suspend their judgment concerning it, or also acknowledge the truth
of it, supposed no Divine Revelation) if this were all the Protestants do, is
not therefore making the Negative of it an Article of their Faith. But mean
while, the rejecting any such Positive from their Faith, as not only untrue,
but contrary to the Scripture, is making or declaring the Negative of it an
Article of their Faith; because it makes this Negative a thing revealed in
Scripture, and so a matter of Faith, (though I do not say, an Article necessary
to Salvation.) And therefore perhaps it was, that the Doctor in the Reason he
annexeth ( That they only apply the General grounds of Faith to particular
instances, etc.) mentions indeed such Positiues as are neither in, nor may be
deduced from the Scripture, but warily omitts such as are pretended contrary to
Scripture.

Now that Protestants declare many of. 61*
these Positiues they reject, contrary to Scripture; See for Purgatory,
Adoration of Images, Invocation of Saints, Indulgences, in the Article of the
Church of England 22. For Works of Supererogation Art. 14. For Public Prayer
or Ministry of the Sacraments in a Tongue not understood by the people Art.
24. Sacrifice of the Mass. Art. 31. Transubstantiation. Art, 28. And to this
Belief of the Negatiues of them as contained in Scripture, all the Members of
the Church of England, or at least the Clergy, seem to be by their Canons as
strictly obliged (though some of their Divines appear not well satisfied with
it) under these terms, To See Synod 1603. Can. 36. and can. 5. Stat. 13 Eliz.
c. 12 and Title of the Act.
allow and acknowledge all the Articles (and so these forecited,) agreeable to
Gods Word. To declare their unfeigned assent to them: and this for establishing
Unity of Opinion and consent, as those of the Roman Church are obliged to the
Positiues: who are no such way obliged by that Church to such a necessary
Belief of all her Positiues, as that a Person nescient of them cannot be saved,
or that the explicit knowledge of them is necessary (though always in some
measure beneficial it is) to Salvation. But this indeed is necessary to
Salvation, that any Subject of the Church knowing them to be determined by her,
obey her Definitions, and not reject or dissent from them: Such Disobedience
being conceived a breach of Gods Command.

And from this (if I may be indulged to. 62.
trangress a little) an Answer may be given to Roman. Idol. p. 52.
that Quaere of the Doctors in his Book Roman Idolatry. p. 52. which he says he
could not hitherto procure from Catholics, though he has often requested it,
viz. Why the believing of all the Ancient Creeds, and leading a good life may
not be sufficient to Salvation, unless one be of the Communion of the Church of
Rome? Where if he will allow me here, for avoiding by disputes, to change these
Words ( Communion of the Church of Rome) into ( the Communion of the Roman
Catholic Church; and 2. will give me leave to understand a good life here,
restrained to all other duties of a Christian, save those which respect this
Communion, else if a good life be generally taken, the Doctors supposition must
not be allowed:) Then I answer, That such Believing and Leading such a life,
cannot be sufficient for Salvation, to so many persons as persist, without
repentance, either in a wilful ignorance of their Obligation to live in this
Communion, or knowing this Obligation, persist in a wilful neglect to re-vnite
themselus to it. Because all such persons live in a mortal sin, viz.
Disobedience to, and a wilful Separation from their lawful and Canonical
Ecclesiastical Superiors, whom our Lord has set over them. And this sin
unrepented of, destroys Salvation, being the same so heavily condemned by our
Savior ( Si non audierit Ecclesiam.) Now that unrepented of it is, we have
reason to fear, so long as they having opportunity, either neglect to inform
their judgment, or this being conuinc'd, to reform and rectify their practice.

And this seems a judged Case in the Donatist (who pretended some such thing
for their Aug. Ep. 48.
security) if we will admit S. Augustins sentiment of it: for thus he directs
his speech to them? Nobiscum estis in Baptismo, etc. that is, You are with us
in Baptism, you are with us in the Symbol, or Creed, you are with us in the
rest of our Lords Sacraments (and I may safely add with regard to some of them
at least, You are with us in a good life, with the former exception) But in the
Spirit of Unity and bound of peace, and lastly, In the Catholic Church you are
not with us: And so he leaves them to the punishment due to those who are out
of it, and separated from Christ its head.

To conclude, I ask this Counter-Question concerning a Christian living, for
example, In the Fifth Age of the Church, Why the believing of the Apostles Creed
(as those of the first Age did) and leading a good life, may not be sufficient
for Salvation to such a one, unless he continue in the Communion of his lawful
Ecclesiastical Superiors of his own Age, requiring of him under Anathema, or
penalty of damnation the belief not only of the Symbol of the Apostles, but of
all the Articles of the Athanasian Creed (as in the beginning and Conclusion of
that Creed it is clear they did* Here, what Answer the Doctor shall make to
this Question (supposing he will not justify such Separatist) I cannot imagine
but it must fit his own.

Here therefore such a Christians business for knowing whether he stands safe
as to his Faith and Life in order to Salvation, seems to be, That he seriously
examine, Whether those whose Communion he rejects, are the true Legal
Ecclesiastical Superiors who are set over him by our Lord, and to whom he is
enjoined Obedience, and with whom he ought to live (to use S. Augustins words)
in the Spirit of Unity and bound of peace.

XXX. PRINCIPLE.
30. There can be no better way to prevent 30. Princ.
men's mistakes in the sense of Scripture (which men being fallible are subject
to) then the considering the consequence of mistaking in a matter wherein their
Salvation is concerned: And there can be no sufficient reason given why that
may not serve in matters of Faith which God himself has made use of as the
means to keep men from sin in their lives: unless any jmagin, that errors in
Opinion are far more dangerous to men's souls, then a vicious life is, and
therefore God is bound to take more care to prevent the one then the other.

Whereas the Doctor says, That the Consid.. 63.
best way to prevent men's mistakes in the sense of Scripture is the considering
the consequence of erring in a matter wherein their Salvation is concerned: Our
daily sad Experience shows, that though our seeing or considering the dangerous
consequence of a mistake affords us, how good soever, yet no certain way to
prevent it; but our being directed by an Infallible External Guide, certainly
does. And the consideration of such Consequence, should hasten every one to
provide this only certain Remedy, I mean, in committing himself in such matters
of Faith as are much disputed, to the Guidance of men more studied and
experienced in the Divine Laws; and that are also set over him by our Lord for
this very thing to instruct him in them.

Where in case these Guides shall disagree, yet every Christian may easily know
whose judgments among them he ought to follow: namely, always of that
Church Authority that is the Superior, which in most cases is indisputable;
This Ecclesiastical Body being placed by the Divine Providence in an exact
Subordination. As here in England it is not doubted whether we are to pay our
Obedience rather to a National Synod then to a Diocesan; to the Archbishop or
Primat, then to an Ordinary Bishop or Presbiter; And then, He who has some
experience in Church affairs, if willing to take such a course, cannot but
discern what way the Major part of Christendom, and its Higher and more
comprehensiue Councills that have hitherto been, do guide him. And the more
simple and ignorant, who so can come to know nothing better, ought to follow
their example.

As touching the following Clause in. 64.
this Principle, That the same means may serve to keep men from Error in
matters of Faith, as is used by God to keep men from Sin in their lives. Hereto
I add, That here God has taken care by the same Church Authority to preserve
his Church in Truth, and to restrain it from Sin: giving them an equal
Commission to teach the ignorant, and to correct the Vicious. And since their
Doctrine directs our manners as well as Faith, their infallibility is as
necessary for things of practice, as of speculation.

Error in Opinion also may be such,. 65.
as may be much more dangerous to us, then for the present a vicious life,
supposing our persistance in a right Faith; because we have our Conscience
still left uncorrupted to reclame us in the later, but not so in the former:
And there is more hopes of his recovery, who as yet does ill with a relucting
judgment. Some erroneous Opinions or other also are the ordinary sources and
springs of evil practices; and the Doctor cannot but acknowledge this, who has
spent a considerable part of the Book, to which he has annexed these
Principles, upon pretending to show, how Roman Errors do induce an evil life,
and destroy Devotion.

III.
The Doctors Consequences, examined.

I. CONSEQUENCE.
1. There is no necessity at all, or use of 1. Conseq.
an Infallible Society of men to assure men of the truth of those things of
which they may be certain without, and cannot have any greater assurance,
supposing such Infallibility to be in them.

1. This Consequence here is voyded, Consid.. 66.
because the Supposition, if applied to Divine Revelations and matters of
Faith, in the former Principles is not proved.

2. But if the whole were granted, This concludes the vselesness as well of any
Ecclesiastical Authority to teach men, as of an Infallible, to assure men of
the truth of those things, which, by using only their own sincere endeavor
(according to the Doctors pretense, Principle 13.) they may know without them.

II. CONSEQUENCE.
2. The Infallibility of that Society of 2. Conseq.
men who call themseleus the Catholic Church, must be examined by the same
Faculties in man, the same Rules of trial, the same Motives by which the
Infallibility of any Divine revelation is.

This Consequence, couched only in general terms, is granted in the same
manner as the 6. Principle is, changing ( must) here into ( may.)

But then of many things examined and discovered by the same way or means, some
are much more easily by every one examined and discovered then some others, as
the Evidence for them in this means are greater. So Holy Scriptures believed
such from Universal Tradition, may be much clearer in some Articles of our
Faith, then in others: And some Divine Revelations may be so obscurely
expressed there, or inuolued only in their Principles, as that some weak
capacities cannot discern them, which yet in the same Scriptures may discover
the Authority of the Church and its promised Divine Assistance and
Infallibility in necessaries, and so from thence learn those other. Of which
Church and its Infallibility clear in Scriptures, for all necessaries, and for
deciding other Points more obscure therein, thus writes S. Augustine in his
Dispute with the Donatists August. contra Crescon. l. 1. c. 33
concerning the obscure Point of Rebaptization: Quoniam sacra Scriptura fallere
non potest, etc. Since the Holy Scripture cannot deceive (us) let whosoever is
in fear of being deceived by the obscurity of this Question, consult the same
Church about it, which Church the Holy Scripture does without all ambiguity
demonstrate. And before, Earumdem Scripturarum Ibid.
etiam in hac re a nobis tenetur veritas, cum, etc. That is, The truth of the
Holy Scriptures is held by us in this matter (or Point of Rebaptization) when
we do that which has pleased the Universal Church, (that is which had been
stated concerning that Point by the Church) which the Authority of the
Scriptures themselves does commend; that since, etc. Thus writes S. Augustine.
All which is false and said to no purpose, if the Scripture be not clear in
this, That this Church can determine nothing in such important Contests
contrary to the verity of the Scriptures, and that we ought to give credit to
what he decides; for then it would not be true what he says, The truth of the
same Scriptures in this matter is held by us: and, He who is in fear to be
deceived by the obscurity of this Question, is no way relieved in following the
sentence of the Church.

Now if it be further asked, Amongst those. 67.
several Modern opposite Communions, which do equally inuit men into their
Society by the Name of the Church, Which of them is so Divinely attested; there
are beside the Description made of it in Scripture, not applicable to other
pretended Churches, and frequently urged by the same Father against the
Donatists, There are, I say, sufficiently certain rational Evidences and Marks
thereof left to Christians, whereby the sober Enquirer after it, cannot be
mistaken.

I mean not here those Marks of the true Church (though true Marks also) the
quest of which men are set upon by Protestants, viz. True Doctrine, and a
right administration See. Rat. Account. p. 7.
of the Sacraments, A Quest or Trial that can never be made an end of, being a
task to know all the Truths in Christianity first, before we can know the
Church: When as the Enquirer seeks after the Church, which as S. Augustine
says, the Scripture demonstrates, that by it he may come to know the Truths.
But I mean those other Marks mentioned by S. Augustine in the Book he wrote of
the Benefit of believing the Church, viz. Sequentium multitudo, etc. The
multitude of Aug. cont. Epist Fundam. c. 4.
her followers, the Consent of Nations, her Antiquity, etc. Which Church has
descended (visibly) from Christ himself by his Apostles Id. de Vtil. creden. c.
11. 14. 16. 17
unto us, and from us will descend to posterity, etc. And which by the
Confession of Mankind from the Apostolic See by succession of Bishops has
obtained the supreme top of Authority, whilst Heretics on all sides barked
against her in vain, and were still condemned partly by the judgment even of
the common people, partly by the (venerable) gravity of Councills, and partly
also by the Majesty of Miracles, (that is, by Miracles done in this Aug. de
Ciu. D. l. xxii. c. 8.
Church after the Apostles times; of several of which, S. Augustine himself was
an eyewitness, Confess. l. 9. c. 7.
and of some an instrument. Possid. in vita Aug. ^. 29.


The same Father repeats much-what the same in another Book of his, De Vnitate
Ecclesiae against the Donatists, a Sect in Africa. Id. de Unit. Eccle. c. 25.
Non est obscura Quaestio, etc. It is no obscure Question, says he, (viz. which
is the true Church) in which those may deceive you, who according to our Lords
prediction shall come and say, Behold here is Christ, behold he is there,
behold he is in the Desert, as in a place where the multitude is not great.
(The time was, when the Reformation were constrained to use the like phrases,
and also to apply to themselves that Text, Fear not little Flock) But you have
a Church (described in in the Scripture) to be spredd through all Regions, and
to grow still (in Conversion of Nations) till the harvest: You have a City
concerning which he that was the Founder of it, said, A City built on a Hill
cannot be hid. This is the Church therefore, not in some corner of the earth;
but every where most known. Now I hope none will think fit to apply these
Scriptures more to S. Augustins time then to any other, or to the present: For,
by the same reason, the Donatists might here have counter-applied them to some
other, and not to S. Augustins times.

Much what the same is iterated again by this Father (and three Testimonies, I
hope, will establish this matter) where he tells the Manicheans what retained
him in the bosom of that Church from which they stood separated, Vt omittam
Sapientiam, etc. that is, That I may omit that Wisdom, (viz. the Mark of true
Doctrine) which you do not Idem cont. Ep. Fund. c. 4.
believe to be in the Catholic Church; there are many other things which most
justly keep me in her bosom. The consent of peoples and Nations keeps me
there. Authority begun by Miracles, confirmed by Antiquity keeps me there. The
Succession of Pastors, from the Seat it self of S. Peter (to whom our Lord
after his Resurrection recommended his Sheep to be fedd by him) unto the
present Bishop, keeps me there. And lastly, the very Name of Catholic heeps me
there, etc. Here are S. Augustins Marks to find our the Church from which men
were to learn the Truth, whilst proposed to several persons and Sects, always
the same.

And these are the Evidences in Tradition, and in those other commonly called
Motives of Credibility, which in themselves seem not justly questionable, that
will afford a sufficient Certainty to every Sober Enquirer, whereby he may try
and discern that present Church, to which now also, if in S. Augustins time,
Christ affords a testimony: and which lies not in Corners, nor starts up after
some Ages, and vanishes again, but is fixed ab Apostolica Sede per successiones
Episcoporum; a City set on a Hill in the most extended Unity of an External
Communion, which no other Christian Society can equal; a Candle on a
Candlestick; a Perpetual, erected, Visible Pillar and Monument of Truth,
frustra Haereticis circumlatrantibus. Where also according to the disparity of
several men's capacities, I suppose nothing more necessary then that this
Evidence received either from all, or only some of these Notes (to those who
have not ability to examine others) be such as that it outweigh any arguments
moving him to the contrary; and the like Evidence to which is thought
sufficient to determine us in other Elections. And then this Church thus being
found, he may be resolved by it concerning the Sense of other Divine
Revelations more dubious, and generally all other Scrupules in Religion: to
wit, so far as this Church from time to time sees a necessity of such
Resolution, and the Divine Revelation therein is to her sufficiently clear;
only if such person, not spending so much of his own judgment, will afford,
instead of it, a little more of his Obedience.

III. CONSEQUENCE.
3. The less conuincing the Miracles, the 3. Conseq.
more doubtful the Marks, the more obscure the Sense of either what is called
the Catholic Church, or declared by it, the less reason has any Christian to
believe upon the account of any who call themselves by the name of the
Catholic Church.

All this is true, upon supposition that Consid.. 68.
matters stand as the Doctor would pretend: but such supposition being
groundless, he must give me leave to inuert his Consequence, and say: The more
conuincing the Miracles (if any credit for these may be given to
Church History) the more evident the Marks (even now given by S. Augustine and
modern Catholic Writers;) the more clear and manifest (even to simple persons,
who with much difficulty in several places comprehend the Sense of
controuerted Scripture) is the Catholic Church, (whose Representative are the
subordinate Councills, and whose Governors the several Degrees of the
Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, ascending to the Prime See of S. Peter;) and the
more clear also the Points declared by it, (viz. in these Councills, whose
Decrees (suppose that of Trent) if questioned for their Truth, are not for
their perspicuity, and particularly in the Points of Controversy they assembled
to determine between Protestants and Catholics;) the more reason has any
Christian to believe upon the account of those who call themselves by the Name,
and challenge the High Privileges (which no other Separated Socityes of
Christians do) of the Catholic Church.

IV. CONSEQUENCE.
4. The more absurd any Opinions are, 4. Conseq.
and repugnant to the first Principles of Sense and Reason which any Church
obtrudes upon the Faith of men; the greater reason men still have to reject the
pretense of Infallibility in that Church, as a grand Imposture.

The Higher any Points of Faith be, and Consid.. 69.
the more remote from Sense and natural Reason, or, not comprehensiue by them,
which such Church as is named before, (and in the highest capacity of it,
General Councils) proposes to the Faith of Christians, the more noble
exercise they have of their Faith, whilst they have an abundant certainty also
that such Leaders can misguide them in nothing necessary to Salvation. And no
reason have they, upon such improbabilities or contradictions to Sense or
natural Reason, to suspect or be jealous of the Churches Infallibility as an
Imposture; which Church they see, through what ever obstacles, faithfully
adheres to the Divine Oracles, how incredible soever to Nature; and may be
thought, because it seems not swayed or hindered by these at all, to use more
integrity in her judgment, and fidelity to the Divine Revelations.

Yet this is not said, as if the judgment of. 70.
our Senses, appointed by God the Instruments (by hearing or reading them) of
conueying Faith and his Divine Revelations to us, affords not a sufficient
Natural Certainty or Infallibility, whereon to ground our belief in all those
things subject to our Senses, wherein the Divine Power does not interpose: But
only. 1. That where the Divine Power works any thing Supernaturally, that is,
contrary to our Senses, (as it may no doubt) here we are not to believe them:
And this, I think, none can deny: 2. And next, That we are to believe this
Divine Power does so, so often as Certain Divine Revelation tells us so, Though
by the same senses if tells us so, we believing our Senses, that it tells us
so, when we do not believe the same Senses for the thing which is contrary to
what it tells us; The truth of which Divine Revelation we are to learn from
Gods Church, infallibly assisted in necessary Faith.

For otherwise Lot and his Daughters were See Stilling.
not to credit the Divine Revelation (supposing Roman. Idol. p. 540.
that Divine History then written and extant) that the seeming Men who came to
It. Rat. Account p. 117. 567.
Sodom were Angels, because this was against their Senses. Now here, would he
argue well, who because Lots sight was actually Tillatson. p. 275.
deceived upon this Supernatural accident, in taking the Angels to be Men, as
certainly it was, from hence would infer, that the Apostles had no sufficient
Certainty or ground, from their seeing our Lord, to believe him risen from the
Dead? Or that no Belief could ever be certainly grounded upon our Senses? Nor
that Christians have any certain Foundation of their Faith?

For a Natural or Moral Certainty, though such as is per potentiam Diuinam
fallible and errable, and is to be believed to err where ever we have Divine
Revelation for it, not else, I say, a Certainty (though not such an one as
cannot possibly be false, but which according to the Laws of Nature and the
common manners and experience of men is not false) is sufficient on which to
ground such a Faith as God requires of us, in respect of that Certainty which
can be derived from humane Sense or Reason, and which serves for an
Introductiue to the relyance of this our Faith upon such Revelation as is
believed by us Divine; and which if Divine, we know is not possibly fallible;
In respect of its relying on which Revelation, an infallible Object, and not
for an Infallible Certainty, as to the Subject, it is, that this our Faith is
denominated a Divine Faith. Now this Natural or Moral Certainty, is thought
sufficient for the first Rational Introductiue and security of our Faith, not
only by the Doctor in his 27. Principle, but also by Catholic Divines in their
Discourses of the Prudentiall Motives.

V. CONSEQUENCE.
5. To disown what is taught by such a 5. Conseq.
Church, is not to question the Veracity of God, but so firmly to adhere to
that, in what he has revealed in Scriptures, that men dare not, out of love to
their souls, reject what is so taught.

To disown what is taught by such a Consid.. 71.
Church, as we have here represented it, will be to desert what God has
revealed in the Scriptures; the true meaning of which Revelations, when
controuerted, we are to receive from it. And so men ought not, out of love to
their souls, reject what is so taught.

VI. CONSEQVENCE.
6. Though nothing were to be believed as the 6. Conseq.
Will of God, but what is by the Catholic Church declared to be so: Yet this
does not at all concern the Church of Rome, which neither is the Catholic
Church, nor any sound part or member of it. This may suffice to show the
validity of the Principles on which the Faith of Protestants stands, and the
weakness of those of the Church of Rome. From all which it follows, that it can
be nothing but wilful Ignorance, weakness of judgment, Strength of prejudice,
or some sinful passion, which makes any one forsake the Communion of the
Church of England, to embrace that of the Church of Rome.

If nothing is to be believed as the Will Consid.. 72.
of God, but what is by the Catholic Church declared to be so: and the
Declarations of the Catholic Church be taken from her Councills; and, in
Concills dissenting, from the more Universal and General, (the constant way
of the Churches Judgment,) this Church Catholic, as to such Councills and
Courts Ecclesiastical has never been severed from the Roman and S. Peter's
Chair.

And this may suffice to show the weakness of those Principles on which the
Faith of Protestants stands, and the Validity of those of the Church of Rome.
From which it follows, that if there be no wilful Ignorance, nor sinful
Passion, nor strength of prejudice and secular interest in our Countrymen, Yet
it must be at least much neglect of examining things which most concern them,
and diuerting their thoughts upon other employments, or conuersing with such
Authors and Teachers as confirm to them those Opinions in which they were
educated, and the like, that detains them still in a Communion divided, and
this not very long since, from the Catholic.

As to the Doctors imputing only to. 73.
Ignorance, sinful Passion, etc. that any forsake the Communion of the Church
of England: It is plain that his former Principles do no more support the
Religion of the Church of England, then of any other Protestants Sect condemned
by it: All which Sects for the Doctrines they hold, and Controversies they
maintain with others, equally appeal to the Clearness of the Infallible
Scriptures, sufficiently intelligible unto their sincere endeauours, and
decline, as fallible, all other Ecclesiastical Authority.

So Wolketius for the Socinians (as the Doctor. 74. Volket. de vera
for the Church of England) says, Quae de Fide, etc. Those things which are to
be Relig. l. 5. c. 7.
established touching Faith in Christ, are manifest in the Scriptures. And
Again, Deus qui Religionem Christianam, etc. God having determined that
Christian Religion shall continue till the end of the world, has taken care
that there should be always extant such a Mean by which it may be certainly
known, as far as is necessary to Salvation, But no such Mean is extant, except
the Holy Scriptures. To the same purpose Crellius another Socinian, says, Hac
sententia, etc. This Doctrine (by which Crell. l. de vno Dei Patre. in Praefat.
Christ's Divinity is denied) is supported by very many, and the most evident,
Testimonies of Holy Scriptures. It is needless to cite more.

From whence is manifest, That such Principles as here appear only in the
Defense of the Religion established in the Church of England, make the same
Apology for all those other Protestant parties, and most blasphemous Sects,
disclaimed by it: the Doctor in the mean while omitting that by which the
former Learned Defenders of his Church usually have justified it against them,
namely, the Church of Englands adhering to the Traditionall Exposition and
Sense of Scripture received from the Primitive Church: This, I say, he omitted,
perhaps because it may be thought to relish a little of Church-Infallibility.

Neither do the Principles here laid down, afford any effectual way or means
in this Church of suppressing or conuicting any Schism, Sect, or Heresy, or
reducing them either to submission of Judgment, or Silence. For where both
sides contend Scripture clear for themselves; the Clearness of such Scripture,
how great soever on one side, can be made no Instrument of Conviction to the
other. Here therefore all things must be prosecuted further then Scripture, to
a ( Dic Ecclesiae) Tell the Church: and so to a (Si autem Ecclesiam non
audierit) But if he will not hear the Church, let him be to thee as a Heathen
and Publican.. 7.


If then it is the Churches Authority that must rectify such diversity of
Opinions, one would think that this ought to have been first established,
instead of leaving every Fancy to perspicuity of Scripture for the attaining
Unity and Peace in the Points controuerted. And the prudent may consider,
Whether the Authority of the Church of England is not much debilitated and
brought into contempt, and daily like to wane more and more by this
new-taken-vp way of its Defense; Where he thinks himself it is best Aduocat and
Defender of its Cause, who does most endeavor to set forth the Defects and
faylings of all such Ecclesiastical Societies, Prelates, and Councills, and
best proves no Scripture-Promises made to them. Nay where, to the end to
euacuate the Infallibility of any Society or Church in necessaries, is set up a
Counter-Lay-Infallibility of private men, if only sincere Endeauourers of
Understanding Holy Writ, in all the same Necessaries.

This is done, which causes still more Sects, instead of that which, if done,
would cure them, namely, The Recommending (especially to the illiterate and
less intelligent common sort of people) Humility, Obedience, Submission of
judgment to their Spiritual Pastors and Governors, whom our Lord has ordained
by due Succession to continue to the end of the world on purpose to expound the
Scriptures, and out of these to teach them all Necessaries for their Salvation,
and to heep them stable and fixed from being tossed to and fro with every wind
of Doctrine, that Capricious Fancies may imagine there, or malicious pretend:
Informing them, that they are to learn of these Pastors, the true Sense of Gods
Word according to former Church-Tradition, to follow their Faith and to rest in
their Judgment. Lastly, not to vsurp their Office, and become their own
Guides: inasmuch as the same Divine order that appoints the others to Guide,
enjoins them to be Guided. And supposing these Guides should err too; better it
is that all err one Error, which is the Error of their Guides, for there will
be at least some Unity and Peace in that, some Excuse for Inferiors; yea also,
in probability more verisimilitude; then that every one should err a several,
and his own, Error, to the utter ruin uf Peace, and a greater deuiation from
Truth.

But whilst these things are so little spoken of, it is no great wonder if
under the protection of such contrary Maxims spread abroad, which were first
made more current and common by Mr Chillingworth (forced to it as the last
Refuge left to shelter him from Obedience to a just Church Authority) the
Broachers of New Sects and extrauagant Fancies in Religion, the Contemners of
Church Authority and of the Clergy, (who first contemned and vilified
themselves) do daily in these parts so exceedingly multiply and increase) Sed
tu, pastor bone, reduc in ouile tuum istas oues perditas, vt audiant vocem
tuam: and sic fiat vnum ouile and vnus Pastor.

Amen.
ERRATA.
PRef p, 6. l. 1. his. l. his. l. 2. must. l. much. l. 20. d. not. P. 35. l.
31. te. l. be. p. 48. l. 23. incnrs. l. incurs. p. 78. by disputes. l.
by-disputes. P. 81. l. 12. consideration. l. consid. P. 99. l. 29. heep. l.
keep. P. 100. l. 14. uf. l. of.

COurteous Reader, Because the necessity of making use of a foreign Press has
so multipled the Errata of this small Piece either in Words, or Pointing, as to
render several places of it hardly intelligible, You are desired to amend with
your Pen, at least, those grosser faults that are distinguished here with a
Star; and, where else the sense may seem obscure, to repair to this Table.

PREFACE.
Page 21. Marg. read See p. 69. * Ibid. l. 6. r. cannot think Ibid. l. 9. r. be
a p. 4. l. 11. r. and unmovable p. 6. l. 2. r. much
BOOK.
Page 1. l. 2. r. Principles, Giving p, 2. l. 11. Marg.. 1. p. 4. l. 6. Marg..
2. p. 6. l. 10. Marg.. 3. * l. 17. r. and all l. 25. r. controverted p. 7. l.
13. r. or Society l. 22. Marg.. 4. * p. 9. l. 23. Marg.. 5. p. 11. l. 24. Marg.
Deuteronomy. 17. 8. 2 Chronicles. 19. 10. p. 15. l. 28. r. Christian p. 18. l. 20. Marg.
Tillots. Rule of faith p. 113. Ibid. l. 27. Marg. dele Tillots. p. 113. p. 20.
l. 30 dele,) * l. 31. r. sense) * p. 21. l. 6. r. repentance of it, l. 19. r.
present much major part of Christianity, professes l. 20. r. this Scripture *
p. 23. l. 13. r. or p. 25. l. 9. r. Judgments. 2 Chr. 19. 10. * p. 32. l. 21.
r. any can * p. 33. l. 6. r. taken in her sense * l. 10. r. Catholic Church l.
11. r. [ that is, in l. 13. r. page,] l. 18. r. salvation, And, * l. 31. r.
(Therefore such p. 35. l. 32. r. be * p. 36. l. 13. r. infallible [the
Infallibility in question.] Surely, l. 15. r. Fundamentals, and Marg. See Rat.
* l. 26. r. not as liable p. 38. l. 2. r. necessary, The * p. 39. l. 16 r. too,
these Successors p. 40. l. 10. r. And the Protestant's allowing l. 28. rendering
such their p. 41. l. 4. r. Account) * l. 9. Marg. r. Ibid. p. 512. p. 42. l.
16. r. Scripture, l. 23. Marg. r. Matt. 18. 17. p. 45. l. 9. r. in some matters
* l. 12. r. Council, but are not as yet stated such by any clear Decision p.
48. l. 2. r. Guide: their l. 16. r. are not, if p. 51. l. 8. r. infallibly
certain * p. 55. l. 17. r. matter at all * p. 56. l. 20. r. Revelation, as to
the * p. 57. l. 4. dele, their l. 13. r. Consideration * p. 58. l. 7. r.
established there, to * p. 68. l. 24. r. As for the other, the Protestants, *
p. 70. l. 4. r. as, because I p. 73. l. 13. r. so): there * l. 21. Marg. See
before. 27. * l. 28. r. contrary to it p. 74. l. 20. dele, that * p. 75. l. 15.
r. External p. 77. l. 4. dele, in the * l. 30. r. when knowing * p. 78. l. 1.
r. digress l. 2. r. Book of l. 13. r. Church] l. 16. r. ( else p. 79. l. 18. r.
and so separated p. 80. l. 13. r. bond of peace. * p. 81. l. 6. dele, though *
p. 86. l. 6. r. she decides * p. 86. l. 11. See below * l. ult. r. know these
Truths p. 87. l. 12. r. have barked * l. 29. r. as if in p. 89. l. 3. r.
Evidences, in * l. 22. r. more to be necessary * p. 96. l. 23. r. conversing
only with p. 97. l. 6. r. Protestant Sect l. 17. r. Volkelius Marg. r. uno Deo
* p. 98. l. 13. r. omitteth p. 100. l. 3. r. Judgment; Lastly l. 28. r.
increase. Sed * P. 86. l. 11. After the Church, r. Nor had St. Augustine any
reason to presume (as he does ib. c. 4.) that St. Cyprian would have corrected
his Opinion concerning this Point; or to charge the Donatists with Heresy for
dissenting from it, after the Determination of such a Council: Nor had the
Second General Council any just ground to put it in the Creed [Credo unum
Baptisma in Remissionem peccatorum] if such Universal Councils in their Stating
Matters of Faith, are errable and amendable.
ERRATA
In the Discourse concerning Devotion: (those of mis-pointing being mostwhat
omitted.)

The principal Errata (noted with a Star) the Reader is desired to Correct with
his Pen.

Pages. line 21. marg. read 8. 26. p 6 l. 27 r. became a * p 9 l. 24 r.
long-continued * p 10 l. 10 r. thus * l. 16 r. thus * l. 22 r. 2. It p 11 l. 9
r. abscondi p 13 l. 24. marg. r. Act. 16. 6, 7, 9. - 20. 22, 23. - 8. 19. - 19.
21. 1 Timothy 1. 18 - 4 14. - p 15 l. 17. r. Hysterical -- p 18 l. 25 r. this
inhabitation p 19 l 5 r. And, Phil. 3. p 21 l. 2. r Where, * after p 24. ^l.
20. marg. r. S. Thom. 1. Q. 1 Art. 8. l. penult. r. 5. But there p 25 l 22 r.
Spirit, pretends p 26 l. 21 r. ( See l. 22 r. 2. 6.) p 28 l. 2 r. sin,
especially * p 29 l. 30 r. those * p 30 l. 25 r. and it, if p 31 l. 17 r.
Counsels * p 32 l. 18 r. leaves us * p 34 l. 27 r. inconsiderable * p 38 l. 5
r. 6. Having * p 39 l. 26 r. also frequently return * p 40 l. 17 r. and rovings
about p 41 l. 21 r. thereof. Treat 3. p 42 l. 24 r. them happen to fall p 43 l.
1 r. works in us p 45 l. 22 r. left sometimes * l. 32 r. A^olatiomentis p 46 l.
16 r. primary p 48 l 16 r. mundanis) * p 50 l. 21 r. Si cui p 51 l. 3 r.
Canting p 52 l. 31 r. meae -- Suble^ a us * p 53 l. 33 r. utcunque p 55 l. 13
r. peccatis * l. 21 r. quia, si l. 34 r. immerito * p 56 l. 17 r. Elsewhere, *
-- Fortasse ne * l. 22 r. praecesserat l. 23. r. esse l. 26 r. Sanctuarium Dei,
si l. 31 r. quidem hic * p 58 l. 16 r. ellae bullienti substraxeris, p 61 l. 27
r. cogit, nec cogitur * p 62 l. 25 r. unexperienced * p 63 l. 10 r. understand
* p 66 l. 21 r. as they are -- ib. apprehends l. 31 r. Christi, And * p 67 l. 4
r. such persons, as l. 23 r. virtute * l. 28 r. retractation p 69 l. 22 r. Cand
* p 70 l. 17 r. because, to any p 74 l. 29 r. lest I should incur his censure *
p 75 l. 2 r. cited. 13 l. 13 r. ipse * p 76 l. 25 r. lumen p 77 l. 5 r.
phantasmes l. 33 r. ( for, now, p 78 l. 1 r. Contemplation) l. 5 r. when our *
l. 27 r. stamp them * l. 32 r. li^que * p 79 l. 16 r. contemplatur l. 21 r. --
Sponsa l. 22 r. ipsam l. 32 r. Beginners: and p 80 l. 1 r. the other, l. 7 r.
before. 25. p 81 l. 8 marg. r. See. 32. etc. * p 82 l. 1 r. laudable * p 83 l.
4 r. Deiforme Fund p 84 l. 3 r. 1 Cor. 13. 12. p 86 l. 13 r. by -- intentions *
l. 32 r. tuumque spiritum * p 95 l. 21 r. to God. * p 97 l. 12 r (...) * l. 30
r. (...) * p 98 l. 9 r. passage of his. * p 99 l. 3. marg. r.. 49. and 51 * p.
100. l. 20. r. gestures, * p 102 l. 28 r. (which they * p 104 l. 28 r. before.
14. * p 106 l. 2 r. lawfulness of which is l. 15 r. in two lawful p 109 l. 8
r. impulses of the p 110 l. 33 r. praying for his p 111 l. 21. r. himself to de
-- dele, indifferent p 112. l. 7 r. before. 20. etc. p 113 l. 15 r. those who
are judged
ERRATA
In the Discourse concerning Repentance and Indulgences.

PAge 43. line 7. read Third, the p. 48 l. 10. r. fragilitatem * page 78 l. 19.
read the Calf l. 31. r. purgandum p. 83. l. 27. r. superfluas Indulgentias l.
29. r. inanes, and * p. 123. l. 14. r. to Father them.

