To the Reverend the Clergy of the Dioecese of Durham.
REVEREND BRETHREN,
YOU will herewith Receive His Majesty's Brief, for the Relief of many
Thousands of our Poor Brethren that are in Extreme Want and Misery: Whose
Sufferings being wholly occasioned by their Conscientious Adherence to the
Protestant Religion, we thought it would become us to send with it our earnest
Desire, that you would, both in public and private, Stir up the People under
your Charge, to a Liberal Contribution.

We cannot but tell you, It is expected from us by all our Protestant Brethren
Abroad; who indeed have Set us a noble Example, in the large Contributions they
have already made, in their respective Churches and States. And it will appear
very strange, if the Church of England, that has always been Reputed the
Pillar of the Protestant Cause, should not Signalize her Zeal for it, on so
pressing an Occasion.

We Desire you therefore (as well for the Honor of our Church, as out of a
Christian Concern for our Suffering Brethren) to endeavor, both by your
Example and Exhortations, that this Gathering be a public Testimony of our
Zeal for the true Religion, and bear some Proportion to the Number and
Necessities of those who are now Prosecuted for it. To this End, It will be
convenient, That you represent to your several Congregations, the Greatness of
this Calamity in all its Circumstances: Of which they will have a more lively
Sense and Fellow-feeling, if you put them in mind of their own Terrors and
Apprehensions of Misery, while we were in Danger of being brought under the
Scourge of that Cruel Religion. And this will naturally lead you to Suggest to
them, their Obligations to Comfort those poor Creatures, who now Suffer what we
formerly Feared with so much Uneasiness. Our Liberality on this Sad Occasion,
will be the properest Expression of our Thankfulness for that Deliverance; as
well as the most effectual Means of Prevailing with God to Continue to us the
quiet Enjoyment of our Religion.

It is at this time, an Opinion industriously Propagated in some of the Popish
Countries, that we are here Persecuting their Brethren with the utmost
Severity; and the Priests are exceeding diligent in raising Contributions for
their Relief. How groundless an Aspersion this is on His Majesty's gracious
Government, we all know and see: But this Use however we ought to make of it,
That if they are thus ready to Support their Brethren, when there is so little
Occasion for it; much more Zealous should we be in Relieving Ours, who are
actually Groaning under a most heavy Persecution; for which their very Enemies
pretend no other Reason but their Stedfastness in the Protestant Religion.

These things being Considered, and what else will naturally occur to you; we
doubt not, you will do your utmost to Stir up the Charity of your People, not
only by your Godly Exhortations, but also by giving Liberally your selves,
according to your respective Abilities.

March 14th 1699. We heartily Recommend you, and your Pious Labors, to the
Blessing of Almighty God, and Remain Your Loving Brother, N. Duresm.

LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb deceased,
Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1699.


