Decimarum and Oblationum Tabula. A Tything Table. OR Table of Tithes and
Oblations, according to the Ecclesiastical Laws and Ordinances established in
the Church of ENGLAND, Now newly reduced into a Book. Containing As well the
very letter of the Law under which these rights be severally comprised,
together with such questions of tything, and their resolutions by the Laws
Canon, Civil, and approved Doctors opinions of the same, as be ordinarily
moved, and which do often prove to controversies herein. As also A brief and
summarie declaration of Composition, Transaction, Custom, Prescription,
Privilege, And how they prevail in Tything. Annexed hereunto Summarily, such
Statute Laws of the Land concerning these rights, as have been herein
authorized, and now do remain in their force accordingly. To the easy and
plain instructions of all the subjects Ecclesiastical or Lay, whether in these
rights to demand them, or bounden to perform the same. Compiled by W. C. Bach.
of the Civil Law.

Eccl. 25. Hallow thy Tithes unto God with gladness. Prove. 3. So shall thy
Barnes be filled with plenteousness, and thy presses flow over with sweet Wine.
LONDON, Printed by J. T. for Andrew Crook at the Green-dragon in Saint Paul's
Churchyard. 1658.

THE PREFACE.
THe Canon and Civil Laws (Christian Reader) since first King Henry of happy
memory the Eighth, dismembered their bodies, 25 He. 8. 19.
and restored to the Diadem of the Land (over the state Ecclesiastical) the
Ancient Jurisdiction of the Crown, they have and do lie hidden, such of them as
King Henry then continued, and King Edward 2. Ed, 6. 13.
that succeeded him, Entitled in his reign the Kings, and afterward were the
late Queens deceased, and as they be now termed, The Kings Ecclesiastical
Laws, (the former statutes revived by Her Majesty, 1. Elizab. 1^redge^
in the first year of her Reign) they have these Laws, and do lie hidden in
manifold, dark, and dangerous corners, in practice only familiar in
Consistories, and their knowledge to the Countries obscure: hence are the
manifold untimely Customs and Prescriptions that we have: I inveigh not
against them, neither custom or prescription, that be perfect now and in their
perfect being, I would not be taken, or rather mistaken so: but they be weeds
in their growing and all their ingendring time, wherein (only) they give place
to prevention: they be Laws of themselves (in their ripeness) inviolable.
^ledge^ Glo. and D D ^ledge^n c. vigilanti ^ledge^le praescrip.
If therefore some insight into these laws, and knowledge succeeding this long
obscurity, may work another effect in the time to come, none can say uprightly
now that he is, may be, or his posterity after him (if not benefited) damnified
thereby: happily I may be charged (in translating) to have damnified the laws,
I have shadowed (I confess) their first and original grace, such beauty have
they and Elegancy too, in the latin tongue: but I write to Englishman; and
such as not so much affect to hear of the beauty, as they be desirous to
understand the benefit of their laws, for such I have framed this Tything
Table, and replenished (as my slender skill would serve) the same, with
necessary, dispersed, and scattered laws, not hurtful, considered as they be
delivered, nor prejudicial to the Royal prerogative, nor repugnant to the
laws, Statutes, nor Customs of this land. Tithes (by sale) be turned into
chattels Art. cler. 9. Ed. 2. 1.
, and made of spiritual, temporal things: in debate (of the right of patronage)
in Tithes, and exceeding the fourth part of the value of the Church 9. Ed. 2.
2. 34. Ed. 1. 1. de conjunctim ^ledge^eosatis.
, where great wood is demanded in the name of Silva Caedua 45 Ed. 3. 3.
, in Tithes and Oblations, where there is any state of inheritance 3. Hen 8. 7.
, and where they be demanded, and be neither due nor accustomed, 13 Ed. 1.
^ledge^ire. agat.
the Kings prohibition does lie in all these cases and no consultation:
otherwise, and without such temporal mixtures, prohibition has no place Fitz
deno. turab revium Fol. 50. de consultatione.
: but the Judge Ecclesiastical has power to proceed, notwithstanding the Kings
prohibition 9. Ed. 2. circumspecte agatis. 13. Ed. 1.
. Conceiving them therefore ( Christian Reader) as they be meant, and mentioned
to be presented unto thee, viz. As they be merely spiritual Tithes and
Oblations, and without any temporal mixture, thou shall not misconstrue the
Author, nor deceive thy self. Farewell.

The Readers (ever) in the LORD. W. C.

These Books following are printed and sold by Andrew Crook at the Green-dragon
in St Paul's Churchyard.
In Folio.
A large and complete concordance to the Bible, by Samuel Newman. The Bible of
a large English or black letter, used in Churches. The Bible of a fair London
Print. The Bible in Welsh. Leviathan, or the Matter, Form, and power of a
commonwealth Eeclesiastical and civil, by Thomas Hobbs. Ben: Johnsons Works in
two Volumes. The History of Don Quixot. Doctor Kellet of the Sacrament of our
Lords Supper. All Homers Works translated by George Chapman. Orlando Furioso,
by Sir John Harrington.
In quarto.
Thomae Thomatii Dictionarium. Doctor Gauden his Defense by way of Apology for
the Ministry and Ministers of the Church of England. his three Sermons upon
several occasions. his Case of Ministers maintenance by Tithes.
The Fables of Esop paraphrased in Verse, and adorned with Sculpture by John
Ogilby. Mr Joseph Caril his Exposition on Job. Mr Rutherford his Christ dying,
on John 12. verse. 27, 28, 29, etc. his Survey of the Spiritual Antichrist,
discovering the Secrets of Familism and Antinomianism. his free Disputation
concerning pretended Liberty of Conscience. De providentia Dei.
Doctor Lightsoot his harmony on the four Evangelists. his commentary on the
Acts of the Apostles. his description of the Temple. his description of the
Service of the temple.
Ten godly and fruitful Sermons by John Gore late Minister at St Peter's in
Cornhil. Doctor Day his Treatise of the Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15, 16. Barton of
Bowing at the name of Jesus. A plain Exposition on the ten commandments by J.
Dod. The Church of England a true Church, by John Bastwick. D. D. Mr Thomas
Shepherd of New England his Treatise of Lyturgies, power of the Keys, and of
the Catholic Visible Church, in answer to Mr John Ball. Doctor Twisse of
Predestination in answer to Mr Cotton. The Swedish Intelligencer containing the
principal passages and Actions done in the best parts of Christendom. Virgil
translated gramatically by John Brinsley. A Philosophical and Chemical Treatise
of Fire and Salt. Clement (the blessed Paul's fellow-laborer in the Gospel) his
Epistle to the Corinthians. Confession sin, Doctor Flood his answer to Foster
concerning the Weapon-Salve. The Protestants Kallendar. The Mysteries of Art
and Nature, in four Parts, the first of Waterworks, the second of fireworks,
the third of Drawing, Coloring, Limming, Painting, Engraving and Etching, the
fourth of sundry Experiments by John Bate. Johannis Buridani in Arist Polit.
William Lithgow his Travels. A Sermon preached at Newport in the Isle of
Weight, October, 1648. in the time of the Treaty on Gal. 5. v. 22. 23. by
Robert Sanderson Doctor in Divinity, and Chaplayn to the late King.
In Octavo.
Virgil translated by John Ogilby. Shepherd his sound Believer. Bishop Hall
his Contemplations on the old Testament. -- Christian Moderation. -- Honor of
the Married Clergy. -- his Treatise of the old Religion. -- Remedy against
Profaness. Grotii Poemata. Rivii Historia Navalis, Fletcher of Urins. Doctor
Brown his Religio Medici. Mr Bridges Catechism on the Sacrament. The ages of
Man's life, with the Original, causes, progress, and end thereof learnedly
discussed. An hermetical banquet dressed by a Spagerical Cook, for the better
preservation of the Microcosm. Bishop Corbet his Poems complete with Additions.
The buddings of old Truth, or practical points of divinity gathered out of St.
John, chap. 3. verse. 22. by Alexander Gross. Sententiae Puerilis Translated by
Mr. Brinsley. Enchiridion duplex, Oratorium nempe and Poeticum, hoc ab
Alexandro Rofsaeo illud a Theodorico Morello concinnatum; sed ab eodem Rossaeo,
recognitum and auctum ad verborum copiam and elegantiam Phrasium Latini
Sermonis comparandam in utraque facultate haud infrugiferum. The Silver
Watch-bell. Georgii Ritchel Contemplationes Metaphysica. The charter of
Rumney-Marsh.
In duodecimo.
Sir Henry Blunt his voyage into the Levant, being a Relation of a Journey
lately performed from England by the way of Venice, into Dalmatia, Slavonia,
Bosna, Hungaria, Macedonia, Thessaly, Thrace, Rhodes, and Egypt, unto Grand
Cairo: with particular Observations of the Modern condition of the Turks, and
other people under that Empire. A Help to discourse, consisting of Witty,
Philosophical, Grammatical, Physical, Astronomical Questions and answers; as
also Epigrams, Epitaphs, Riddles, Jests, Love-toys: together with the country
man's counselor, and necessary rules for health. Mr Rouse his Art of Happiness.
Greenwood his Works. An excellent Treatise of the Interest of the Princes and
States of Christendom. Ovids Metamorphosis translated by Mr George Sands. A
Pathway to Piety, containing, 1. Christ's prayer expounded. 2 A communicant
instructed. 3. A direction to live well. 4. A Direction to die well.
Doctor Swadlin his Manual of Devotions, suiting each day with Prayers and
Meditations suitable to the works of the day, as also each man's calling, the
Nobleman, the Soldier, the Lawyer, the Tradesman, the sick man, the dying
man. Abrief of the Bibles History. The English Dictionary, or an Interpreter of
hard English words, enabling as well Ladies and Gentlewomen, young Scholars,
Clearks, Merchants, as also strangers of any Nation to the understanding of the
most difficult Authors in our Language, and the more speedy attaining of the
English Tongue, both in reading, speaking and writing. The Poor man's Rest,
founded upon Motives, Meditations, and Prayers, expressing the inward means of
true consolation. The Mothers Blessing, or the godly counsels of a Gentle woman
not long since deceased, left behind her for her children, containing many good
exhortations and good Admonitions, profitable for all Parents to leave as a
Legacy to their children, by Mrs Dorothy Leigh. Several Treatises of Mr
Perkins, 1. How to live, and that well. 2. The right way of dying well. 3. The
government of the Tongue. 4. A Grain of Mustard Seed. 5. The right knowledge of
Christ crucified. 6. The Nature and practice of Repentance. 7. The Combat
betwixt the Flesh and Spirit.
A Garmmar in French and English, being necessary Rules for a Frenchman to
learn English, by George Mason Merchant. Four plays in Latin, viz. Loiola.
Stoicus Vapulans. Cancer. Paria.
Two Plays by Thomas Kellegrew, viz: The Prisoners. Claracilla.
Lots Little-one. A warlike Treatise of the Pike. A Manual of Prayers.
In 24.
Latin Testament. English Testament. The third part of the Bible.
Plays.
Queen Elizabeth, first and second Part. The honest whore, first and second
Part. The Fleir. The Opportunity. The swaggering Damsel. Lilly his Comedies.
The Tragedy of Hoffman. Philis of Sciros.
A brief Collection of the Letter and terms of the Law, with their several
Expositions in English: and of all such questions of Tything which be mentioned
and contained within the body of this Table, whereby every Tythable thing and
question that is moved and answered of the same is readily found.
The First Question.
Decima De Frugibus, i. Of Harvest fruits, sown, mown, reaped, gathered, bound
or loose, in Heap, shock or sheaf.


1 When they be tithable, and such other praedial Tithes, whether it be lawful
to the owner to dispose any manner of way of any part of the fruits before
division be made, and the Tenth part be severed from the Nine parts?

2 If a stranger shall prescribe tithes in another parish, and there shall
happen afterward barren and wast grounds to be tilled, whether the stranger
that prescribes, or the Church where the grounds do lie, shall reap the
Tithes?

3 If one shall have right of tithe in a wood, and that wood become afterward
arable ground, whether his right continues in the Corn?

The Second Question.
Decima De Silvis caeduis, i. Of woods felled, and preserved to grow again.
Decima De Lignis, i. Of wood not in use, nor apt for Timber, but for firing.
Decima De Thenitiis agrorum, i. Of trees planted for fencing of grounds, in
fields, pastures, and hedge-rowes. Decima De Turvis, i. Of Turves growing in
fenish and moorish soils, as in the Isle of Ely.


1 Wood of 20. years growth and upwards, whether it be tithable or not? And
what of lopping of timber trees?

2 When woods be felled and sold, who shall answer the tithe? the buyer, or the
seller?

3 If the inheritance of a wood be sold, that is in arrerages for tithe, whom
the Parson may implead?

4 Turves, amongst what tithes they be reckoned?

The Third Question.
Decima De Pasturis, i. Of pasture grounds.


1 If they be fed, how the tithe shall be answered?

The Fourth Question.
Decima De Fenis, i. Of Hay.


1 Hay, of what places? and what Tithe it is?

The Fifth Question.
Decima De Lama, i. Of Wool.


1 Whether the sheep of Sons and Daughters be tithable (or not) with their
fathers flocks wherein they do go?

2 Where sheep be removed from one parish to another, how the Tithe is divided
by rate and proportion of time?

3 If strange sheep be brought to another parish and there be clipped or shorn,
how they be tithable there?

The Sixth Question.
Decima de Agnis, i. Of Lambs. Decima de Vitulis, i. Of Calves. Decima de
Procellis, i. Of Pigges. Decima de Pullis, i. Of Colts.


1 Whether the person may expect his Lamb (the next year following) if the
parishioners number in any one year amounts not to ten? And what, if he
fails then?

2 When ewes be removed, and other such cattle and beasts from one parish to
another, how the several Churches be interested in the Tithe of their Lambs,
and such other increase.

3 Of Lamb, calf, Kid, colt, pigge, etc. and when is their Tythable time?

The Seventh Question.
Decima De Lacte, i. Of Milk. Decima De Caseo, i. Of Cheese.


1 Milk and Cheese how? and when they be tithable?

2 If Cattle feed in one parish and couch in another, how the profits be tithed?

3 Where Cheese is tithable, and the number of Cattle so small that none can be
made; how the tithe shall be answered for their small proportion?

4 Where Milk of sheep is tithed in kind, how they be tithable (for their
pasture) in the Winter, when they do yield no such profit?

The Eighth Question.
Decima de Fructibus arborum, i. Of Fruits of Trees.


1 Of apples and other such fruits of trees, what of their tithable time?

The Ninth Question.
Decima De Seminibus, i. Of seeds: Hemp, Flax, Onious, Rape and such like.
Decima De Herbis, i. Of Pot Herbs. Decima De Curtilagiis, i. Of places
adjoining to mansion houses, applied to seeds and herbs.


1 Of Seeds and Herbs, what manner of tithes they be?

The Tenth Question.
Decima De Pannagiis silvarum, i. Of Mast, of Beech, or Oak, or such like.


1 Of Mast, what, when it is given? and what, when it is sold?

The Eleventh Question.
Decima De Molendinis, i. Of Mills, forced by wind, water, etc. Decima De
Vivariis, i. Of Parkes, Warrens, pools, ponds, etc. Decima De Bestiis
guarenarum, i. Of wild beasts under custody, etc. Decima De Columbariis, i. Of
Dove-cotes, or houses. Decima De Apibus, i. Of Bees.


1 What manner of tithes they be? And how they be tithable?

The Twelfth Question.
Decima De Aucupiis, i. Of Fowlings. Decima De Venationibus, i. Of Huntings.
Decima De Piscationibus, i. Of Fishings.


1 Beasts, Fishes, Fowls, how (diversely) they be tithed, (diversely) considered?

The Thirteenth Question.
Decima De Cignis, i. Of Swannes. Decima De Aucis, i, Of Geese.


1 Of Swans, Geese, Ducks, and how they be considered of.

The Fourteenth question.
Decima De Ovis, i, Of Eggs.


1 Of Eggs, where tithes be yielded, whether chickens be tithable there?

The Fifteenth question.
Decima De Artificiis, i, Of Crafts, and manual occupations. Decima De
Negotiationibus, i, Of trades by wares, Merchandise, etc.


1 Of personal tithes, what time, place, and persons, be required in them, and
of whom the Church is forbidden to receive either personal tith, or Oblation?

The First Question. Decima De Frugibus, i, Of Harvest fruits sown, mown,
reaped, gathered, bound or loose, in Heap, shock or sheaf.


1 When they be tithable, and such other praedial Tithes, whether it be lawful
to the owner to dispose any manner of way of any part of the fruits before
division be made, and the Tenth part be severed from the Nine parts?

2 If a stranger shall prescribe tithes in another parish, and there shall
happen afterward barren and wast grounds to be tilled, whether the stranger
that prescribes, or the Church where the grounds do lie, shall reap the
Tithes?

3 If one shall have right of tithe in a wood, and that wood become afterward
arable ground, whether his right continues in the corn?

Questions of Tithing, and their Resolutions. The first Question.
1 PArishioners out of their Harvest-fruits, specified under the word Frugibus
(before their tithes assigned of the same) diminish their fruits, some one way,
some another: admit to godly, or profane uses: or (as their manner has been)
to the satisfying therein their laborers their wages. The question is, whether
this be lawful? It is answered, A fraud unto the Church: For this allowance (If
any such be) not otherwise ought to be made than forth of the Nine parts: and
the reason is, Decima debet solui sine diminutione, etc. Tithe must be paid
without any diminishing c. Cum h^redge^mines de d^redge^cim. Glo. c^redge^
erroris damnabilis. Con^redge^ prou. Ang. d^redge^ dec. ver. err^redge^re
calculi.
:

2 The parson of the Rectorie of A (jure praescriptionis) i. by right of
prescription, has interest in and to the predial tithes of the parish Church
of B. where there be converted (into tillage) diverse barren, heath, and wast
grounds, that never before yielded any profit to the Church: The question is,
(now) of these tithes, and which of the Churches shall have them? It is
answered, that the Parish Church of B shall have these Tithes, because they be
Decimae novalium, i. arising of such grounds that never were manured nor
yielded before any profit at all to the Church: and the reason is, by the
foundation of every Church the Tithes in general of that and every parish, are
due to Cum con^ledge^gat. ubi ^ledge^. and D D. ^ledge^d.
their own proper and peculiar Church. Now, for as much as the Church of A
could never before be in possession of the Tiths of these wast ground, because
they never were in being, and that the law is, that Tantum praescriptum Sine
pos^ledge^sione. ff. de ^ledge^ cap.
est, quantum est possessum, and non plus, i. So much (and no more) in
prescription, than in possession: Quod ^ledge^0. Sect. fl, ff. ^ledge^acquir.
^ledge^sses. cap. ^ledge^iditis de ^ledge^script.
And again, in that prescription is not extended ad futura, i. It reaches not
unto profits of tythable grounds to come ^ledge^an in ult. ^ledge^tabili. in d.
^cum con^gat.
, Summae aequitatis est, etc. i. The premises considered, it stands with
great equity, in this case, that the Church of B should reap and receive these
tithes ^ledge^ost. Io. ^ledge^d in d. c. ^ledge^m con in^ledge^t.


3 But note, it is otherwise where one shall be in possession of the Tithe of
Corn, or of Pasture, or of Wood, or of any predial Tithes whatsoever arising in
the grounds wherein he prescribes, howbeit afterward there be planted or set
and sown in the same any strange plant, seed, or herb, that never grew before
in these grounds. For example: Millet is sown or Saffron, where corn has been
sown usually and ever before, and as the manner is, in some parts of this land
to sow in their Pasture grounds the herb that is called Glastum or Isatis,
Caesar writes of the old Brittans that they used with this herb to smear their
faces, to the end to seem terrible to their enemies in war: we call it in
English wadde or woad. Again, Apples, or Nuts, be newly planted where never
they grew before: and so Ex nemoribus, i. Of woods that be converted to arable
grounds: the Tyths in all these cases be payable as before they were of the
former fruits, and to whom the former fruits were tythable before, namely, to
the parson or Church that prescribes, and the reason is, viz. Praescriptio est
realis censenda. i. Terram concernens, non speciem fructuum preceptorum. i.
Prescription is real, that is to say, respecting not the new or never tythed
fruits, but the tythable grounds that brings them forth Ancha. in c Cum in
tua. de deci. and Ant. But. in. d. c Cum in tuaeod.
: In respect whereof, that is, of the grounds, the tithes whereof forepassed
have been (without discontinuance or other interruption,) continued and
possessed, it is thus affirmed (in these cases) of prescription, viz.
prescriptio extenditur ad particularitatem juris apprehensi, sub unico jure ut
universali, i. Prescription is extended to every particularity of right
apprehended, as it were, under that particular, as general Ant. But. in c
praeal.
. Otherwise it should be in potestate serentis, i. In the owners power
(changing the fruits) to prevent another right in the Tyths of his certain,
known, and tythable grounds: contray to the rule of the law, viz. Id quod
nostrum est sine facto nostro a nobis avelli non potest, i. That which is mine
cannot (without my fact) be taken from me ff. de reg. iur.
. Look the statute De novalibus, i. of barren, heath, and waste ground, 2. Ed.
6. 13. And look the statute for predial Tithes, and Tythable places, 2. Ed. 6.
13.

The Second Question. Decima De Silvis caeduis, i. Of woods felled, and
preserved to grow again. Decima De Lignis, i. Of wood not in use, nor apt for
Timber, but for firing. Decima De Thenitiis agrorum, i. Of trees planted for
fencing of grounds, in fields, pastures, and hedge-rowes. Decima De Turvis, i.
Of Turves growing in fenish and moorish soils, as in the Isle of Ely.


1 Wood of 20. years growth and upwards, whether it be tithable or not? And
what of loppings of timber trees?

2 When woods be felled and sold, who shall answer the tithe? the buyer, or the
seller?

3 If the inheritance of a wood be sold, that is in arrerages for tithe, whom
the Parson may implead?

4 Turves, amongst what tithes they be reckoned?

The Second Question.
1 OF Woods and wood, contained and specified under the words Silvis caeduis,
Lignis, Thenitiis agrorum, some of them exceed the growth of xx. years, and
some of them not felled within the memory of man, peradventure not of an
hundredth or two of years: there grows a question of such woods for the Tithes
of the same: It should seem, the Parishoner herein may plead for the one
(against the Parson) the statute of Silva Caedua, that exempteth wood of Twenty
years growth and upwards, from the payment of tithes: and (for the other) both
the Statute and prescription, in that the Tyths therein were never performed:
interpreting the Statute no further, then the statute explaineth it self: It is
answered by the Canons alleged, so far forth (with protestation) and no
further, then the statute shall permit, that wood not in use nor apt for Timber
is tithable, body or bough, felled or lopped c. Quanquam. Provin. ang. eoubi.
glo in ver. exicis.
. As for prescription it is answered, Praescriptio locum habere non potest, ubi
illi cui jus competit agere non potest, cum cesset materia de qua experiatur,
i. Prescription has no place, where the interessed (in his right) can make no
demand, the matter ceasing whereupon he should work: For example, Of Wood never
cut, the Tithe could never be demanded Gloss. cap. Sancta ecclesia. provin. ang
eo. ver. arborum. ad hoc l. arboribus ff. de us^ft.
. But whether the loppings or boots of such trees the which the Common Laws of
the Realm account timber be tythable or not, is not yet decided by that Law.

2 It is a question, when Woods so felled be sold, who shall answer the Tithes,
the buyer or the Seller? It is answered, the Buyer Ext de decim. c Pastoralis.
shall answer the Tyth: and the reason is, Decima sequitur fructus, and cum
onenere fruuctum decimae transferuntur in alterum, i. Tithe does follow the
fruits, and fruits be translated into another right together with the burden
of Tithes c Praeal. eod.
.

3 Where the Inheritance of a wood is sold the Tithes whereof for certain years
forepassed, by the Seller has been detained and wrongfully subtracted from
the Church, It is a question whom the Parson may implead: It is holden he may
implead the one or the other at his own choice Pet dc ancha. and D. D c. cum
homines eod.
, but he can recover but of one Ar ad hoc de re iud. t. Bona fide. li. 6. Glo.
provin. Ang. de decim ver. asportant.
. But by the statutes of the land, the Seller only, in this case, shall be
impleaded and sued unto treble damages, 2 Ed. 6. 13. And not the buyer who took
not the Tithe away.

4 De Turvis, i. Of Turves, they be tithable, and comprehended under the word
Lignis, because they be so applied, that is, for firing ff. Deleg. 3. ^ledge^
Ligni Sect. ^ledge^ignorum verb ^ledge^uid mirum.
, and reckoned in the number and amongst predial Tithes.

The Third Question. Decima De Pasturis, i. Of pasture grounds.


1 If they be fed, how the tithe shall be answered?

The Third Question.
1 OF Pasture grounds, when they be fed, it is a question how the tithe shall
be answered? It must be considered whose the grounds be, whether the owners of
the cattle that fed them, or a strangers of another Parish. In the first case,
if the cattle be such that yield profit to the Church, the Tyth is satisfied in
the fruits of the beasts Inno ext. de decim c. commissum.
In the other case, it must be considered of the stranger, whether he sells
or gives franckly to the owner of the cattle, the pasturage of his grounds:
the stranger if he sell it, is answerable for the tenth Penny: the Parishoner,
if freely he receives it, is answerable for the estimation c. Procal. eod
. But note, the estimation shall not be answered, but where the grounds with
beasts be fed, Nulla^ Ecclesiae utilitatem alias, etc. i. Yielding otherwise no
profit at all to the Church, of which sort be Horses, Oxen, and such other
barren Beasts. In other profitable cattle, the tyth is intended (as aforesaid)
to be answered in the fruits Juxt. notat. per Inno ut sup. glo. ver. dividenda
prove. an. co.
. But note, that generally the occupier of the pasture is to pay the Tithe, and
so is the custom.

The Fourth Question. Decima De Fenis, i. Of Hay.


1 Hay, of what places? and what Tithe it is?

The Fourth Question.
1 DE Fenis, i. Of Hay, according to the exposition of the word, the tithe is
payable, viz. Of the grass withered or green, perceived and taken in Meddow,
Pasture, great or small, or in other place, places: or Angles (so within the
limits of the parish) wheresoever Prove. ang. c quoniam propter volumus.
: Question has been moved of this Tithe to this effect, that is to say,
whether it be predial or personal: It is answered to be predial Ancha cap
pervenit. eod
: For how be it the industry and labor of the person may seem and be alleged
more to prevail (as they term it) in the making thereof, then the nature of
the ground, yet in that it is perceived of the ground, and gathered of, and
from a place certain, in some one or other known, certain, and limited Parish,
it is tithable as other predial tithes be Ad hoc epastoralis. ext eod.
, that is, to that Parish Church where the grounds do lie. Without Deduction
of charges.

The Fifth Question. Decima De Lana, i. Of Wool.


1 Whether the sheep of Sons and Daughters be tithable (or not) with their
fathers flocks wherein they do go?

2 Where sheep be removed from one parish to another, how the Tithe is divided
by rate and proportion of time?

3 If strange sheep be brought to another parish and there be cliped or shorn,
how they be tithable there?

The fifth Question.
1 OF profits and increase of such profitable beasts before mentioned, and
specified in particular under the words Lana Agnis, question is moved to this
effect, there be in one family diverse persons having to the number of 3, 5, 6,
8, or 10. Lambs or fleeces of wool more or less, their sheep be depastured and
so be reputed part and parcel of the flocks wherein they walk, couch, and do
feed: The question is of their Tithes, whether they be tithable with the
flocks, or in their several parcels? It is answered, In their several parcels,
and the reason is, Animalia quae gregibus alienis admixta sunt, remanent eorum
propria non quorum sunt greges, sed quorum sunt animalia: i. Beasts
intermingled with other men's flocks, do remain notwithstanding proper and
peculiar unto those, not whose be the flocks, but whose be the beasts c. Cle. c.
. Howbeit in Countries where persons such as Sons, and daughters, in their
fathers power, government, maintenance, and finding, shall have such beasts or
cattle intended in law, and counted in bonis profectio and adventitio, i.
accruing and growing by their fathers or friends by the mother side, by gift,
procurement, or otherwise, in which beasts their fathers are interessed, in the
use and fruits, the bare property remaining to the children, the Tithes of
these beasts shall be reckoned with their Fathers Arg. ad hoc ff. per quas
personas nobis Sect 1.
, and not in their several parcels, and the reason is, Vt ipsarum rerum quae in
fructu sunt et patri adquiruntur, pater solvat dicimam, etc. i. Of things in
increase and procured to the father, so shall the father be answerable for the
Tithe Glou. prou. ang. de dec. ver. decima lanae.
, the property notwithstanding reserved to him or her to whom it belongs, his
son or daughter. But for that Patria Potestas, i. That legal power and
prerogative of Fathers is not in use, neither yet Profectitium nor Adventitium
peculium are known in England, the beasts of Sons and Daughters here mentioned
(in respect of their tyth) shall not be reckoned with their Fathers Cattle, but
as the Cattle of other strangers: and what is given by the Father to the Son
or to the Daughter, is their own, except the Father by express words shall
reserve the fruits of such cattle so given, to himself.

2 Where such cattle be removed from Parish, to Parish, and question be made
what proportion of the Tithes is due to each Parish, the custom of the place
must be observed: otherwise the law is, viz. Quaelibet Ecclesia pro rata
temporis portione decimas percipiet. i. Every Church shall receive it tithes by
rate and proportion of time: but the question is, of what space this rate and
proportion is meant? It is answered, of xxx. days, and so to be rated by
Thirties from Thirty to Thirty, Minori trisginta Dierum spatio in rata temporis
minime computando, i. Under or less then the space of xxx. days not to be
counted in rate and proportion of time Text. prouin. ang. caquoniam vt
audinimus. eodem.
: for example, The parishoner has forty sheep which yield him at shearing day
fourscore Pounds of Wool: that Church is interessed entirely in the tithe in
whose Parish the whole year they couched and depastured: that Church in the
half, that is, in the tithe of 40. pounds where the half year they couched and
depastured: that Church in twenty pounds where they couched three months and
depastured: and so ratably four months, five months, more or less
accordingly: and that Church in whose Parish they couched and depastured but
One Month, that is xxx. days, but in the tithe of the twelfth part thereof,
that is, of the whole Fourscore pounds, but the tenth of Six pounds and half,
and under thirty days as before is said, no allowance at all c. Ver sed oves.
. But note, if the whole time they couch in one Parish, and depasture in
another, the Tyth shall be divided. Sect si vero. ^ledge^onst. praeal.


3 If peradventure they come from a strange and unknown place to any Parish to
be clipped or shorn, there the tithe must be paid, except it may appear the
same to be satisfied to the Church whence they came. Sect and si o^ledge^es
constable. ead.


The Sixth Question. Decima de Agnis, i. Of Lambs. Decima de Vitulis, i. Of
Calves. Decima de Procellis, i. Of Pigges. Decima de Pullis, i. Of Colts.


1 Whether the person may expect his Lamb (the next year following) if the
parishioners number in any one year amounts not to ten? And what, if he
fails then?

2 When ewes be removed, and other such cattle and beasts from one parish to
another, how the several Churches be interested in the Tithe of their Lambs,
and such other increase.

3 Of Lamb, calf, Kid, colt, pigge, etc. and when is their Tythable time?

The Sixth Question.
1 FOr tithes in profitable beasts, the Parson may expect the fall of the Tenth
the next year following, if the number in any one year amounts not to ten,
according to the text of the constitution Text provin ang. co. quoniam propter
de decim.
, viz. Vel expect et rector usque ad alium annum donec plenarie decimum agnum
possit recipere, si maluerit: i. Or let the Parson (if so he had rather to do)
expect another year, till he may fully receive his tenth Lamb. Now it falls
out the Parson uses his liberty and refuses his Lamb at seven, and his half
pence at Six, and the Parishoner the year following has never a Lamb at all:
The question is, how the tyth shall be satisfied? It is answered, (in this
case) the Parson has no remedy in law, and the reason is, a principio male
eligendo fuit in culpa, ergo in hoc sibi imputetur, i. He made his choice but
ill at the first, which was his own default, and therefore he must blame
himself Arg. ad hoe inst. quod cum eo qui in alt. pot Sect. caeterum autem and
glo. constable. prove. praeal. verb. possit recipere.
. Yet Lyndwood affirms in this case, That in regard of the Church, in respect
whereof tithes ought not to be lost, and in regard of the party himself, the
owner of the fruits, who without sin cannot detain by any color the rights
from the Church, though the Parson (for his own sake) cannot relieve himself
Jure Actionis, i. By right of action: yet for the Churches sake Officium
Judicis, i. The judge his office may be desired c. verb. constable. praeal.
.

2 Yeaws be sometimes removed from grounds to grounds, from parish to parish,
the question is, (in this case) of the right of their tithes: It is thus
answered by the text law c. Quoniam ut audivimus. eonst. Provin. ang Sect agni.
eod.
. viz. The tithe of Lamb is payable in manner and form as be the tyths of
calves and colts and such other like tithable increase, mentioned to be Pigge,
kid, etc. of which the Law determines thus, viz. Habita ratione ad loca
diversa ubi gignuntur, oriuntur, et nutriuntur, and ad moram quam traxerint
eisdem particulariter decimentur, i. They be tithable by rate and proportion
(particularly) to the several Churches in whose parishes they were engendered,
brought forth, and nourished Ca. and Sect. prae.
: for example, The Yeaw goes five months with her Lamb, they put them
together the Male and Female the last of September, where they coupled they
remain one month: they be removed to a second parish, to a third, to a fourth,
and to a fifth, where they be depastured several months: in this case
Vnusquisque pro tempore suo: i. Every Parson for his time Glo. c. and Sect
praeal. verb. particularitur.
, that is (the several times and places considered) the several Churches in the
tyths have several rights accordingly C. and Sect prae.
.

3 And touching the question of their tithable time, it is answered thus,
Faetus ablactatus esse debet antequam prestetur, i. They must be, weaned,
weanable, or of strength to live without the damme Rebuff, co.
, except custom has observed q. 6. un 30. Inno. host. and alii in ca. cum
homines. eod.
therein a time certain, the which where so it is, there it must be continued.
Look custom the 6.

The Seventh Question. Decima De Lacte, i. Of Milk. Decima De Caseo, i. Of
Cheese.


1 Milk and Cheese how? and when they be tithable?

2 If Cattle feed in one parish and couch in another, how the profits be tithed?

3 Where Cheese is tithable, and the number of Cattle so small that none can be
made; how the tithe shall be answered for their small proportion?

4 Where Milk of sheep is tithed in kind, how they be tithable (for their
pasture) in the Winter, when they do yield no such profit?

The Seventh Question.
1 MIlk and Cheese, viz. of Kine, of Sheep, or of Goats, they be reckoned as In
pecudum fructu, i. In the increase of such cattle ff. de usufr, l. in pecudum
inst de re. di. Sect in pecudum.
, as also be Lana and faetus, i. Wool, Calfe, Kid, and Lamb, whereof mention
is made in the fifth and sixth questions before: and touching question herein
to be made, suppose of the Milk when it is perceived and taken, of the nine
parts thereof (when the tenth is duducted) there be made ten cheeses it is
answered, in this case, The cheeses are not to be tithed de reg. iur. in 6.
: for cheese is not tithable but where milk is not tithed: and so of the other:
briefly, they be tithable either of them tempore suo, i. In their seasons c.
quoniam propter prae. de decim.
, and so long, and so soon, as either Milk or Cheese shall be perceived and
taken (in their kind) by the Parishoner: there can be no custom of
intermission to the contrary. Look Custom, the 3. And what the Law of custom
may be in this case, follows here the 3.

2 Sometime these cattle be depastured in one Parish, and couch in another, in
this case it may be demanded, What the law determines of the tyth? It is
answered in the text Law, viz. Quod inter Rectoris dividatur, i. In this case
the Parsons shall divide c Quoniam ut audivimus. praeal. Sect decima.
.

3 Question also herein is moved further in Law, c quoniam propter prae. Sect
quid vero.
, where such tithes be payable in kind, and the number of cattle so small as
Lyndwood supposes in cap. and Sect praeal verb. modicitatem.
of some one or other Parishioners, which have not only three, two, or
peradventure but one only Cow, and those, or that to be milked but alternis
diebus, i. But each other day, by reason whereof the parishioner can make no
cheese at all: what is the Churches right in this case? It is answered in the
text Law c. Sect praeal. ^ledge^n fin.
. viz. Consuetudini locorum duximus relinquendum, i. The custom of the place
must be observed: provided the custom be, that Certum quid soluatur, i. That
somewhat be paid in consideration and liew ext. e. ti. c. ^ledge^n aliquibus.
for custom herein (as in all other cases of tything) cannot exclude
solutionem decimae, i. It cannot entirely take away the payment of the tithes
of such profits as arise, as may appear in custom the third, only it may
limit solutionem decimae, i. Custom may moderate the payment of Tithes. Look
custom the fourth. Hither (by a constitution provincial of England) also be
referred Calf, Colt, Pigge and such like, that is, when their number is so small
that they cannot be tithed: it is the Chapter Quoniam ut audivimus, and
Paragraph quid vero, which constitution Lyndwood affirms upon the same
Paragraph, that it extends not to Wool and Lamb, but cites there another
express and peculiar ordinance for the same, viz. If the Parishoner shall have
six Lambs or under, he shall yield for his tith for every Lamb a halfpenny: if
seven Lambs, he shall yield a Lamb for his tithe, and receive three halfpence:
if eight, a penny: if nine, the Parishioner (only) receives a halfpenny of the
Parson, or the parson may expect, according to the sixth question before. Et ita
intelligendum est de decima Lanae. i. The same ordinance and provincial
constitution is had of Wool. It is the Chapter quoniam propter, and Paragraph
De nutrimentis, in the title of tithes.

4 Post festum, etc, i. after the feast of Saint Martin in winter, sheep be
eftsoons removed from parish to parish, or else they do continue in one and
the same parish from that feast till shearing day ensuing: the question is, of
their tithes? It is answered, they be tithable thus, viz. Habita ratione ad
numerum ovium Pascua estimentur, i. The pasture in this case must be considered
(for want of their milk in this season) by the head or number of the sheep that
depastured in them c. Quoniam ut audivimus praeal Sect quod si prove. a g. c
, and so shall the tithe be rated and yielded c. Sect. prae. c
: by rate and proportion of time (by the month Gloss. c. Sect praeal. verb.
estimentur.
) as Lyndwood infers, and as it is said of thirty days, and by thirties and
so from thirty to thirty, as in the first question before of Wool.

The Eighth Question. Decima de Fructibus arborum, i. Of Fruits of Trees.


1 Of apples and other such fruits of trees, what of their tithable time?

The Eighth Question.
1 FRuits of trees, viz. Apples, pears, wardens, etc. the question is of their
tithable time: it is answered, Statim fructibus collectis, i. So soon and
immediately when the fruits shall be gathered c. cum homines eod.
, and the reason is, quia minus soluit, qui tardius soluit, i. He diminishes
his duty that delaveth the time si cui in si^ledge^ff. de verb. ^ledge^.
: if therefore: the Parishoner shall gather his fruits, and neither pay the
Tithes presently, nor monish the parson to receive them, but subtract them, or
that (otherwise) they be impaired or lost, tenebitur, says the Law; that is,
The Parishioner is bounden to what satisfaction look the Statute 2. Ed. 6. 13.
for fruits be Tythable, and predial cum ho^ledge^nes prae. eod. ^ledge^xt.
^ledge^. 1. e. ad A^ledge^stolice. c. ^ledge^rvenit eod.


The Ninth Question. Decima De Seminibus, i. Of seeds: Hemp, Flax, Onions, Rape
and such like. Decima De Herbis, i. Of Pot Herbs. Decima De Curtilagiis, i. Of
places adjoining to mansion houses, applied to seeds and herbs.


1 Of Seeds and Herbs, what manner of tithes they be?

The Ninth Question.
1 Seeds and herbs, viz. of Flax, Millet, Hemp, Leek, Onion, Rape, Percely,
Sage, Mint, Rue, etc. comprehended under the words Seminibus, Herbis,
Curtilagijs, they be tithable c. quoniam propter prae. prove. ang c.
, as they be perceived and taken in Gardens, or in the fields, either of the
seed, or of the herb before the seeding time Concor. ext. eo. c. ex part
canonicorum
, Nisi parochiani competentem fecerint redemptionem, i. Except the parishioners
sufficiently shall redeem or compound for the same c. quoniam propter prae.
, these be Minutae decimae, i. Small tithes according to the Evangelist Lu. 1^
Hoc. ex multiplici. eo.
, viz. Ye tyth mint and Rue, etc. And therefore in them no great question to be
made.

The Tenth Question. Decima De Pannagiis silvarum, i Of Mast, of Beech, or Oak,
or such like.


1 Of Mast, what, when it is given? and what, when it is sold?

The Tenth Question.
1 BY the chapter Sancta Ecclesia, in the provincial Constitutions of England,
and title of Tyths, the tyth of Mast and of other such wood and wild fruits,
be payable, viz. Si vendantur, i. If they be sold c. Sancta ecclesia pre^redge^
: that is, (as the gloss infers) of the tenth penny, if they be sold;
otherwise, that is, if Swine franckly and freely received and fed, without
consideration of charges to the owner, in this case Transeunt fructus cum
onere, i. The fruits do pass with their charges glo. in d. verb. si
ven^redge^dantur. ubi ^redge^ hoc exteo. c^redge^ pastoralis, ^redge^ Inno ext.
c. commissum.
, viz. with the burden of tithes.

The Eleventh Question. Decima De Molendinis, i. Of Mills, forced by wind,
water, etc. Decima De Vivariis, i. Of Parkes, Warrens, pools, ponds, etc.
Decima De Bestiis guarenarum, i. Of wild beasts under custody, etc. Decima De
Columbariis, i. Of Dove-cotes, or houses. Decima De Apibus, i. Of Bees.


1 What manner of tithes they be? And how they be tithable?

The Eleventh Question.
1 QUestion has been moved of the tyths of Mils, Parks, Ponds, Warrens,
dovehouses, and Bees, to this effect, viz. Whether they be predial, or
personal? it is answered, They be predial, and tithable without deduction of
charges DD. in cap. ^ledge^astoralis. and ^ledge^liis ca. eod.
, for the reason alleged in the fourth Question before. And they be tithable
thus; that is to say, not the tenth of the rent for mills (as they term it)
the tenth penny, nor for Bees, the tenth Be, or warm, or Hive, but De
proventibus molendinorum, i. The tenth measure of Corn for Mills c: quoniam
propter, pre- Sect de protentibus and ibi ^ledge^lo. verb. inti^ledge^re.
, and so for Bees, the tenth measure of honey, the tenth weight of wax, briefly,
De cera and melle, i. Of Honey and wax Host. and alii. ^ledge^. nuntios. c.
. And the law and reason is of these tithes, especially of Mills, as of other
predial tithes, whereof (for example) it is said, Transit herba pasta cum onere
suo ad dominum bestiarum, i. Where grounds or pastures be demised, or their
herbages sold, the owner of the beasts is chargeable with the tithe Ad hec ff.
^ledge^e usuft. l usu. ^ledge^ructu legato^ledge^ item si ^ledge^undi.
. Especially for the practice of England, look what is said in the Third
Question before. Hither be referred Parks, Ponds, Dove-houses, etc. for Fructus
transit cum onere suo, i. Fruits be liable to their charges. Look in the Second
Question before, 2.

The Twelfth Question. Decima De Aucupiis, i. Of Fowlings. Decima De
Venationibus, i. Of Huntings. Decima De Piscationibus, i. Of Fishings.


1 Beasts, Fishes, Fowls, how (diversely) they be tithed, (diversely) considered?

The Twelfth Question.
1 THe profits that be mentioned and contained under the words Aucupiis,
Venationibus, Piscationibus, i. Of fowlings, Huntings, fishings, question has
been moved of the tithes of the same, viz. The Parishoners of N. one of them
fowleth, another hunteth, the third fisheth, in the fields, grounds, and Rivers
of B. the question is of the tithes, of their advantages taken, and which of
the Churches be Interressed in the same, viz. whether the Church of N. where
the Parishoners inhabit, or the Church of B. where the Profits were taken? It
is thus answered, viz. If the Parishoner had of the owners of the places franck
and free liberty to fowl, hunt, and fish, the Church of N. that is, their own
parish Church shall be entirely interressed in them, as in personal tithes
Inno. in ca. non est, eod. and ibi Host. verb. de venatione.
: but if any consideration be required, either in money or in part of their
gain, that profit only received by the owner, is predial and tithable to the
Church of B. that is to say, in that parish where the fields, grounds, and
Rivers do lie Inno. in and Host. cap. and verb praeal.
. De caeteris vero, i. Of the residue, that is to say, of the clear gain of
these Beasts, fishes, and fowls, all charges and expenses, in, about,
belonging, and concerning these profits taken, deducted D D. praeal. in ca.
pastoralis, eod.
, the Parishoners that took them be chargeable withal to their parish Church
of N DD. in d. c. Non est ibi idem not per D D. prae. in decimis a vium and
ferarum gloss. in pre. c. quoniam propter Sect de piscationibus provin. ang.
eod. verb. debit o modo.
, mentioned before: and the reason is, the Fowls, Beasts, and Fishes be taken
artificio, ministerio and opere hominis, i. By the art only, labor, and
industry of man, from whence proceeds personal tiths c. ad aposto. licae. eod.
, payable only where the Parishioners inhabit c questi 16. q. 1.
. But if the consideration mentioned here, required and taken by the owners,
comes not by art, or industry, but Ex hu to, i. By way only, and means of
the ground Inno. Host. ^ledge^n c. non est praeal eod. verb. de venatione.
, from whence do arise all predial tithes c. 1. c. ad apostolice. c. pervenit.
prae. eod.
: payable only in the place and parishes within whose bounds and limits they
are cap sin. de parochiis.
. Thus they be diverse, these tithes, diversely respected, that is to say,
predial or personal; note the difference. Note also, that where such tithes be
demanded, it is where such art, industry, and travel is answered and rewarded,
not with pleasure Rebuff. eo. ^ledge^. 8 nu. 17.
, but with profit Ancha. in ^ledge^raeal. c. non ^ledge^st. co. col. 2.
. Question has further been moved of these profits and advantages aforesaid,
to this effect: viz. the parishioners mentioned of N. had franck and free leave
and liberty to hunt, fish and Fowl within the fields, grounds, meddows, rivers,
and running streams of B. mentioned before: they took, preserved and reserved
alive their beasts, fowls, and fishes, and so they conveyed them to certain
their own proper and private grounds, within the bounds, compass, and limits
of another parish, then either of N. where they dwell or of B. where they took
them: they include them (there) these beasts, fowls, and fishes, and compass
them within parks, Warrens, ponds, pooles, houses, such as be mentioned and
comprehended under the words Vivariis Columbariis, in the eleventh question
before. Thus they feed and nourish them, and they breed, and increase in their
kinds: now, in that these enclosed and limited places do alter and change (in
law) the nature of the profits of the nourished Creatures within them Rebuff.
eo. nu. 14. and 15. ad hec Inno. and Pan. in d. c. non est.
, which of the Churches have right to the Tithes? It is thus answered, viz.
They were included at the first as they were taken, that is, by art and
industery of man Inno. and Host. in d. c. non est.
: howbeit they increase not by industery and art, but by the nutriment and
nourishment of the waters and grounds, where they live ex sola gratia Dei, i.
Of the mere grace and bounty of God D D. prae. in d. c. non est.
: and therefore for the rate, value, and proportion of themselves, they remain
these profiets as they were taken at the first, that is, personal: Tithable to
the Church of their Parish that took them Pan in cap. praeal. and ibi An. de
intellectu Hostiensis ad idem.
. But their increase is predial, Tithable to the Church within whose limits
they be, and be fed, and nourished Pan. and D D. in d. c non est.
. The circumstances of these tithes mentioned in these cases, according to that
worthy and of famous memory Hostiensis, do make them neither merely predial,
nor merely personal, but mixed Tithes Host. in ca. praeal.
: payable notwithstanding as predial and personal diversely respected as
aforesaid. So, consider thus (briefly) of these Tithes, that is to say,
considered as they be included within compass, limits, and bounds (from their
natural liberty) tied and restrained to the same, as in ponds, parks, warrens,
houses, and in such like limited places, they be predial Tithes: but considered
as they enjoy (at their will) their natural liberties, as Fishes, the Sea;
Fowls, the Air; and Beasts, the Fields; in that they are not reckoned of any
place certain, their Tithes be not predial but personal: touching therefore
question herein to be made, to what Churches they be due? It is answered as of
predial and personal Tithes: that is, the one to that Church in whose Parish
these limited places aforesaid do lie that do make them predial; the other to
that Church in whose parish the Parson does inhabit that makes them personal.
And this is the difference.

The Thirteenth Question. Decima De Cignis, i. Of Swannes. Decima De Aucis, i.
Of Geese.


1 Of Swans, Geese, Ducks, and how they be considered of.

The Thirtenth Question.
1 SWanns, Geese, and Ducks, be distinguished thus, viz. whether they be
Volantes, i. whether they be wild and do fly, or be tame, or not: this
considered, the profits be tithable accordingly: for example, The Cygnets, Si
nascuntur in loco certo, and suscipiuntur a loco certo, i. If they be brought
forth and so be taken in and from a certain and known place, they be predial
and tithable, as predial Tithes: if from uncertain places, they be personal,
and so they be Tithable, viz. as personal Tithes Gloss in c. sancta Ecclesia
prae. Sect. 1. ^ledge^er cignorum.
. It is affirmed of them, as of beasts, fowls, fishes DD. ext. c. it c, non est.
, in the question last before. Hither by the chapter Sancta Ecclesia, in the
provincials of England, be referred Geese and Ducks.

The Fourteenth question. Decima De Ovis, i. Of Eggs.


1 Of Eggs, where tithes be yielded, whether chickens be tithable there?

The Fourtenth Question.
1 DE Ovis, i. Of Eggs, it has been moved whether they be tithable in such
places where tithes be yielded of Chickens? By the written law it may be
answered, as of milk and Cheese in the seventh question before, the 1. Howbeit
Custom in this case prevails, as experience shows in some parts of this
Land Gloss. in. de sancta ecclesia. cap. quoniam ut audivimus ver. pulli.
.

The Fifteenth question. Decima De Artificiis, i, Of Crafts, and manual
occupations. Decima De Negotiationibus, i, Of trades by wares, Merchandise, etc.


1 Of personal tithes, what time, place, and persons, be required in them, and
of whom the Church is forbidden to receive either personal tith, or Oblation?

The Fifteenth Question.
1 TRades, Crafts, and Manual Occupations, they be personal, and of the profits
do arise mere personal tithes: touching therefore first their tythable place,
it is answered in the Twelfth question before. Of their tythable time, it is
answered in fine anni, i. They be payable at the end of the year Gloss. in c.
revertimini. verb. ann us.
, and as our custom is, at Easter. Of persons that be chargable with these
personal Tithes, it is answered of such persons, which of custom have, or of
right ought to have paid their personal Tithes 2. Ed. 6. 13
. Look the Summaries of the Statutes ensuing. There are of these personal
tithes (in diverse cases) Opinionum conflictus, i. Diversities of opinions
Rebuff. q. 13 nu. 44. and ibi. cit. But. in parochianos infin. eod.
but herein they agree, viz. Hae Decimae personales, magis in difficultate, and
subtilitate, quam utilitate consistunt, i. They are these personal tithes, more
intricate then profitable Host. in ca. pastoralis in fin. eod. and 10. detur.
cre. in revertimini praeal. nu. 12. ver ad septimum. 16. q. 1.
only this (to conclude) must be noted, that is to say, all persons
(consideration had as before is said) be bounden to offer their personal Tithes
to the Church, but the Church is forbidden (of all persons) to receive them
Host in ca: ex transmista. eod. arg. ca. Oblationes. 90 did Deuteronomy. 3.
for example, The Harlot, the Robber, the Usurer, etc. they be not exempted,
but the Law rejects them, their personal tithes, and Oblations: Non inferas
mercedem meretricis, etc. i. Thou shall not bring the hire of an Whore, nor the
price of a Dog into the House of the LORD e miror 17. q.4.
And for the other, quaestus fit ex peccato, i. Their gain arises of sin: the
Church is therefore forbidden to receive of them, Ne ipsorum videatur approbare
turpitudinem, i. Least the Church should seem to approve their Iniquities c. si
tantum 6. q 2. hec Rebuff q 5. nu. 18. 8. 19.


Here do end the questions of Tything, moved (in times past) and answered: and
which be now urged (ordinarily) and decided at this day.
Of Composition, Transaction, Custom, Prescription, Privilege: and how they
prevail in Tything.
Of Composition.
COmposition (by the Cannon laws) holds or fails diversely respected: and
it is first to be considered of as it has been made and had inter Clericos, i.
Betwixt Clerks themselves; and then it has tended either Transferendis
decimis, i. To the translating of Tithes from one Church to another: Vt quae
uni Ecclesiae decimae debentur, alia recipiat, i. That one Church receive
tithes which be due to another. And the composition herein holds c. 2. d.
trans c. dilecti. co.
, and the reason is, Non refert quae Ecclesia decimas habeat, modo Ecclesiae
persoluantur, i. It forces not of Tithes (so the Church enjoys them) what
Church receives them c. 3. eod.
. Howbeit, the nature and kind of the Tithes thus translated, must be
considered, namely, whether they be personal or predial tithes; if they be
personal, the composition that translated them holds not, and the reason is,
Ne occasio tribuatur avagandi and divina extra parochiam audiendi, i. Least
occasion should be given to the people of wandering, and hearing of divine
service from their own parish Churches c. 2. sup. ti. ^ Rebuff in q. 13. nu.
17. de decim.
.

2 If they be predial, the Composition holds, Inita cum authoritate Episcopi,
i. The authority and approbation of the Bishop of the diocese thereunto had;
which composition shall bind both the Clerk and his successors c. 2. etc
venieus. de trans
: otherwise without the Bishops confirmation, it shall not only bind the
Clerk that yielded thereunto, and not touch his successors at all c. veniens.
^ praeal.
.

3 Or the composition has tended Remittendis decimis, i. To the remitting of
Tithes, Vt tota decima clerico remittatur, namely, That to a Clerk Tithes
should be entirely remitted, this composition holds not Rebuff. q 1 nu. 27.
de decim.
, and the reason is, Decima omnino tolli non potest, i. Tithe may not wholly be
taken away q. nu. prae. Rebuff.
.

4. Secondly, composition must be considered, as it has been said inter
Laicos, and Rectorem, i. Betwixt Laymen and Clerks, which composition also must
be respected thus, namely, whether it be De praeteritis decimis, Of Tithes
forepassed, or de futuris decimis, i. Of tithes to come. In the first case,
this composition also holds, yea though it be Gratuita, i. Without
consideration or allowance at all c. super. de reb. eccle non alien.
In the second case if the composition be, Vt Aliquas decimas non solvant, i.
That tithes be not paid at all, Non est admittenda, Rebuff. q. 13. praeal.
Not to be admitted i. If the composition be, Vt integra decima non solvatur,
i. That tithe be not wholly paid, but in part, it holds: howbeit not
otherwise but confirmed by authority supreme: for the Bishops confirmation
herein suffices not, for none could exempt from tithing, nor diminish the
quantity of the same, but the Supreme power Text in cavenerabilis de consef,
and ibi Pan.
, as it follows in Privilege.

Of Transaction.
1 TRansaction and composition do differ in this, the one is Gratuita
conventio, i. A voluntary, franck and free agreement of things not conte^ded
for, which is said to be composition: the other, De re dubia and lite incerta
(aliquo dato vel retento) pactio, i. A forced covenant or agreement (for
somewhat given or received) of things litigious, uncertain, and doubtful in
controversy 1. fi. de trans. C. e. c. super eo.
.

2 It must be considered of Transaction as before it has been said of
composition betwixt Laymen and Clerks. Look composition four. Transaction (if
it be of tithes forepassed) holds; yea though the consideration had, be of
things mere temporal: and the reason is Fructus decimarum sunt temporales, i.
The profit and fruits of tithes be reputed temporal c. vestra. de loca.
. Transaction, if it be of tithes to come, must be respected according to the
time and term it is made for, namely, whether it be made in tempus modicum, i.
For a short and limited time, or in perpetuum, i. (without limitation) for
ever, In the first case it holds with the Bishops approbation and authority
Arg. c: 2. and 3. sup. de iis quae fiunta capit.
in the other case it holds also if the right and interest of the Church be
doubtful, as where the Parishoner pleads against the Church, Exemption or
Privilege. But where the right of the Church is Liquidum, i. Where the
Churches right is clear, Transaction holds not otherwise then by consent and
authority supreme Not. ca. a nobis eod. Pan. c, statuimus de trans.
. Transaction is often taken for composition, and one for another c. venien. e.
.

Of Custom.
1 Custom by the Canon Laws holds or fails, diversely respected: if it be
De transferendis decimis predialibus, i. Of translating of tyths predial (as
before has been spoken in composition) it holds c cum sine homines. and c, ad
apostolice. eod.
.

2 If of personal tithes, as also before has been said in composition, it
holds not c. praeal.
.

3 Custom De non solvendis decimis, i. Of not yielding of Tithes at all,
holds not, and the reason is: Juri naturae and divino contraria est, i. Such
a custom is contrary both to the Law of Nature, and the Law of GOD DD. id c.
fi. de consuetud.
.

4 Custom De minori quantitatate solvenda, i. Of yielding less than the tenth
in quantity, holds in Personalibus, i. In personal tithes only after the
opinions of some c. in aliquibus. and ibi inno pan and alii. eod.
, but of others in predial also Rebuff. q. 13. na 46.
; and practice also shows the same.

5 Custom De loco, i. Of place where Tithes ought to be left, holds Host in
sum Sect. sin eod.
.

6 Custom De tempore, i. Of the time of Tithes to be yielded, holds DD in c.
ad apostolice praeal.
.

7 Custom De modo, i. Of the manner and form of yielding of Tithes, holds
Rebuff. q. 13. praeal nu. 40. 50. 52.
.

Tithe what it is, and of how many sorts.
Tithe of the Latin, Decima, is a tenth part or portion of increase, commanded
unto Moses by whom it was delivered (at the appointment of God) to be paid to
the sons of Levi, for their ministry wherein they served in the Tabernacle Nu.
c. 18.
: in Law defined thus; viz. Omnium honorum licite quaesitorum quota pars Deo,
divina constitutione debita, i. Of all lawful increase and gain a certain part
(by constitution divine) due, and appertaining to God Card. consil 26. pro
evidentia. c. tua c, sin eod.
. And they be either predial, as that which does arise and grow by reason and
virtue of the grounds, viz. Fruits, and increase of Beasts, Fishes, Fowls c.
pervenit. praeal. eo c. non est. 22. c.
, etc. Or they be personal, as that which arises by reason and virtue of
lawful and honest commodity, so recovered and procured by art, science, or
manual Occupation of some person c. ad apostolice. prae.
. It is also to be noted, that tithes, some of them comprehended under these
titles, Praedial and personal, be called be the name of mixed tithes, of which
sort be such as do rise and grow partly by the grounds ca. commissum praeal.
, and partly by the care, keeping, labor, and industry of some person c.
apostolice. e pastoralis. eod:
; as of Cattle subject to the Fox, Woolfe, and such devouring beasts, supposed
to be partly of the grounds where they be bred and fed l. cum quidam ff de fun.
instruct.
, even as a tree is supposed to be also partly of that place where the roots do
grow, by the which it is nourished l. si plures, in sin. ff arb. furt. caes.
: so they be maintained by the grounds, but defended by the shepherds. Look
more of mixed tithes in the twelfe question. Some of them by the name of greater
Tithes, In Latin Majores sive grossae decimae ( as we term them) Great tithes:
such be of Corn and Pulse c. ex multiplici de dec.
. Some of them be termed Minores or Minutae decimae ( in our common speech)
Small tithes, such be seeds, Herbs; Eggs Glo. and DD. in c. cum ex tua. etc.
ex multiplici. praeal. eod.
, etc. mentioned in the ninth and fourteenth questions, 1.

Of Prescription.
PRescription is not much differing from custom, as before is specified of
Transaction and composion: but the one oftentimes is taken for the other Dom.
ca. 2. col. ult de preb. in 6. barb. consil. 35. sapientur. col. 6. in 2. vol.
. Howbeit herein they differ, Consuetudo proprie dicitur quando jus acquiritur
in communi et publico, i. It is properly said to be custom where a right to
many is procured in common and public. Praescriptio vero quando privato, i.
Prescription when privately to one Pan. in ca. cum ecclesia. col. 8. nu. 45. de
cause. pos.
.

Of Privilege.
PRIVILEGE or exemption is derived from authority supreme, by the which ex
justa causa, i. upon cause and good consideration, sometimes the persons
themselves, as the order called Cistercienses, and other Religious persons were
privileged and exempted from tithes c. a nobis de decim.
; sometimes the places, as grounds belonging to Religions persons c. ex part
eod.
. For example, Monasteries, Priories, Nunries, Colleges, etc. or other
Ecclesiastical houses, etc. or any Manors, Mesuages, Parsonages appropriate,
etc. or other Hereditaments which belonged unto the said Monasteries, Priories,
etc. which were discharged of and for the payment of Tithes, being in the hands
of Abbots, Priors, or other Ecclesiastical Governors. Concerning these
possessions in religious persons, there has been five several times observed
Rebuff. q: 14. nu. 37, 38, 39, 40, 42.
: but leaving those times I refer the readers only to the statute viz. These
Monasteries, etc. and every person and persons, their Heirs and Assigns,
having etc. shall be according to their estates and titles discharged of
payment of tithes, in as ample manner as any of the said Abbots, etc. at the
days of their dissolution. 31. H. 8. 13.

Summaries of the Statutes of Tything.
EVery of the kings subjects shall truly and justly without fraud or guile
divide, set out, yield and pay all manner of their predial tithes, in their
proper kind, as they rise and happen in such manner and form as has been of
right yielded and paid within forty years before the making of this Act (being
4. November Anno 1548) or of right or custom ought to have been paid. And no
person shall take or carry away any such or like tithes, etc. before he has
justly set forth for the tithe thereof the tenth part of the same, or otherwise
agreed for the same Tithes with the Parson, etc. under the pain of forfeiture
of treble value of the Tithes so taken or carried away, 2. Ed. 6. 13.

At all times whenever the said praedial tithes shall be due at the tything
time of the same, it shall be lawful to every party to whom any of them ought
to be paid, or his deputy or servant to see their said tithe to be truly set
forth, and severed from the nine parts, and the same quietly to take and carry
away, 2. Ed. 6. 13.

If any person carry away his corn or hay, or his other praedial tithes,
before tithe thereof be set forth, or willingly withdraw his tithes of the
same, or of Double value of the tenth besides costs.
such other things whereof predial tithes ought to be paid, or do stop or let
the Parson, Vicar, etc. or other their deputies, to view, take and carry away
their tithes, by reason whereof their said tithe or tenth is lost or hurt: then
upon due proof thereof, etc. the party so carrying away, etc. shall pay the
double value of the tenth, etc. besides the costs, charges and expenses of the
suit in the same, etc. to be recovered before the Ecclesiastical Judge,
according to the Kings Ecclesiastical Laws, 2. Ed. 6. 13.

Every person which shall have any beasts or other cattle tithable, going or
feeding in any waste or common Wast ground not certainly known of what parish.
ground, whereof the parish is not certainly known, shall pay his tithes for the
increase of the said cattle, to the parson, Vicar, etc. of the parish, Hamlet,
Town, or other place where the owner of the said cattle dwells, 2 Ed. 6. 13.

All such barren heath and wast ground, etc. which before this time has been
barren and paid no tithes, by reason of such barrenness, and shall Wast ground
improved that never paid tithe.
be improved and converted into arable ground or Meddow, shall after the end of
seven years next after such improvement, pay tithe for the corn and Hay growing
upon the same. But if such barren, etc. etc. has before, etc. been charged
with the payment Wast ground improved that paid tithe before.
of any tithes, and the same be after improved, and converted into arable
ground or meddow, then the owner thereof shall, during seven years next
following from and after the same improvement, pay such kind of tithe as was
paid for the same before the same improvement, 2. Ed. 6. 13.

Great wood of the age of twenty years or of greater Silva Caedua.
age sold to merchants to their own profit, or in aid of the King in his
Wars, is not Tithable nor comprehended under this word Silva Caedua, 45. Ed.
3. 3.

Every person exercising merchandise, bargayning Personal tithes.
and selling, etc. or other art or faculty, being such kind of persons and in
such places as heretofore within these forty years have accustomably used to
pay such personal tithes, or of right ought to pay (other than such as be
common day-labourers) shall yearly, etc. pay for his parsonall Tithes, the
tenth part of his clear gains, his charges and expenses, etc. deducted. But in
all such places where handicrafts men have used to pay their tithes, etc. the
same custom of payment of tithes shall be observed and continued, 2. Ed. 6.
13. Offerings.


Every person which ought to pay offerings, shall (yearly) truly pay them to
the Parson, Vicar, etc. at such four offering days, etc. as have been
accustomed for the payment of the same; and in default thereof to pay for the
said offerings at Easter then next following, 2. Ed. 6. 13.

No tithes of marriage goods shall be required of any Wales.
person within Wales, or the marches thereof. Neither shall any person be
compelled to pay tithe for the lands or hereditaments, which by the laws and
statutes of this realm, or by any Privilege, or Prescription, are not
chargeable with the payment thereof: or that be discharged by composition real,
2. Ed. 6. 13. Obstinacy.


If any person after sentence definitive given against him, obstinately refuse
to pay his tithes, or shall otherwise contemn and disobey the process and
decrees of the Ecclesiastical Courts, etc. then upon information Contempt.
given, etc. the same party shall be committed to ward, etc. 27. H. 8. 20. Look
the statute in all.

If any of the parties do appeal, etc. then the Appeals.
judge forthwith shall adjudge to the other party the reasonable costs of his
suit therein before expended, and take surety of the other party, etc. to what
effect, see the statute in all, 32. H. 8. 7.

If any party, etc. do sue for any prohibition, etc. under Prohibition
the copy of the Libel shall be written the suggestion, wherefore the party so
demands the said prohibition: and in case the said suggestion by two honest
and sufficient witnesses at the least, be not proved true in the court where
the said prohibion shall be so granted, within six months next following, etc.
Then the party that is hindered of his suit in the Ecclesiastical court by such
prohibion, etc. shall have a consultation granted, etc. and shall also recover
double costs Consultation
and damages, 2. Ed. 6. 13. And the Judges before whom the cause was first
brought in question, shall proceed notwithstanding the Kings Prohibition, 24.
Ed. 1.

These be Summarily (Christian Reader) the spiritual and statute Laws of the
Land for Tything: this is the work, take it in good part: the title but begun,
may better be satisfied hereafter.
FINIS.

