The tears of IRELAND Wherein is lively presented as in a Map, a List of the
unheard off Cruelties and perfidious Treacheries of bloodthirsty Jesuits and
the Popish Faction.

As a warning piece to her Sister Nations to prevent the like miseries, as are
now acted on the Stage of this fresh bleeding Nation.

Reported by Gentlemen of good Credit living there, but forced to fly for
their lives, as Jobs Messengers, to tell us what they have heard and seen with
their eyes, illustrated by Pictures.

Fit to be reserved by all true Protestants as a Monument of their perpetual
reproach and ignominy, and to animate the spirits of Protestants against
suchbloudy Villains.

LONDON, Printed by A. N for John Rothwell, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Sun, 1642.

Courteous Reader:
IT is my hearty pray- for thee which was the last desire of Luther for his
friends, that thou may be filled with the love of Christ, and hatred of the
Pope; He that loves not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be accursed, he that
hates not the Pope, loves not Christ; Abbot Downham, Sharp, etc. de Antichristo.
The Pope is that Antichrist; This indeed is questioned by some Factors for
Rome, but determined by the Apostle. Who is Antichrist, but 2 Thessalonians. 2.
the man of sin, and son of perdition? who is this man of sin and son of
perdition but the Pope? There were never seen greater monsters, and prodigies
in the World for all kind of accursed abominations, then they were that have
sat in that Chair of pestilence, as their own S^egedin. Spec. Pontificum Romans
Platina relates* In which there are reckoned ten Sodomites, fourteen infamous
for adulteries; nine Simoniacks, twelve Tyrants, three and twenty
Necromanticks, that gave themselves to the Devil, ten Traitors, fifty in an
ordinary succession unworthy that name, Seln^ccer v. ^ae Pontif.
many that have justified the vilest of the Heathen Emperors in the most
abominable of their excesses. There were never any that so pulled up the
floud-gates to open a way for the inundation of Wickedness as the popes; Idea
reform. antichrist. tom. 1. part. 2. sect. 2. c 7.
by dispensations for Sodomie, Incest, Murder, fornication, etc. Espens. in
tit. 1. dig. 1. mus^. loc. com.
and by indulgencies, Bellar. de pont. Romans lib. 4. c. 5.
by doctrine. If the pope should declare that virtue is vice, and vice virtue,
the Church is bound to believe it to be so, and practice accordingly. There was
never such a son of perdition; he is that Apollyon, or destroyer of whom
Saint John, a destroyer of souls, and shedder of blood; but especially drunk
with the blood of Saints. It is credibly Idaea refor. Antichrist vide supra c.
6.
related that in the space of eight hundred years, he has been the death of
twelve Millions, one alone pope Baleus de actis Romans Pontif. l. 7.
Julius the Second in seven years of his papacy destroyed 200000 Christians.
But their outrageous fury against the Saints who can relate? How bloody were
the persecutions raised against the Waldenses, in which there was no Hist.
Waldens.
mercy showed to any age, sex, condition, their rage extended it self to the
destruction of the brutish beasts, and senseless trees? Sleidanus.
what internecine wars were stirred up against the Hussites in Bohemia? what
Country or Kingdom cannot produce instances of cruelty more then barbarous?
The Low Countries lament the death of eighteen thousand executed by the Duke of
Alva in the space of three thousand years in the cause of Religion. Thuanus.
Bartholomeis slaughter will be for ever infamous in France? where by a
prodigious Treason and unparalled cruelty, the Rivers did run with the blood of
Hugonets; England has still in fresh remembrance Queen Mary's fires; Italy,
Spain, etc. do yet groan under the merciless inquisition. The report of
these cruelties does astonish the Readers and relators, but not quench the
thirst, glut the never to be satiated ravine of these bloud-thirstie Monsters,
whose delight is that of the Idaea reform. Antich. tom. 1. part. 2. c. 6.
Cardinal Farnesius to see Rivers of the blood of Lutherans to his horse
bridle. But thou will say what is this to the pope, that he should be hated?
Consider this blood was shed by his instigation, by his approbation. It was he
that granted a Croisado against the Hist. Waldens.
Waldenses, and Book Martyrs tom 1.
Bohemians, promising pardon of sins to all such as should die in the
expedition for their extirpation; It was he that hearing of the Massacre in
Paris skipped for joy, and commanded a solemn triumph, and panegyric for that
cause; But what is that to us? What? Have we never heard of the popes good
will to England? Bulla Pii 5^^. against Queen Elizabeth
How long we have stood proscribed, exposed to the fire, and sword of a
Catholic invader? have we never heard of those many horrid treasons hatched,
and furthered against our Kings, and State, by that bloody Moloch and his
instruments, and sworn Vassals? What treason was ever intended against our
Church, or State, in which a priest, or Jesuit has not had a hand? And as a
learned Bishop has showed B. Carleton.
: that most devilish, and hel-borne plot of the Gunpowder Treason, by whom
should it have bin acted? by whom was it invented? Prideaux Sermon. on the
Gunpowder Treason.
It has found an Apology from Eudaemon, approbation from Claudius Aquaviva,
excuse from Bellarmine, absolution from Hamon; al Jesuits. But yet there is
nothing done against us? And papists amongst us abhor this bloudinesse; What
intentions, and desperate machinations are against us the Lord discover, and
disappoint; but consider. That in their account we are heretics, and declared
to be so by the pope; Now consider of their doctrine; Azorius instit. moral.
li. 8. de poenis haeretic.
A heretic loses all right to all that he has; And being Symanch. instit.
lib. 23. 5. 11. Saunders de visibil. Monarch. l. ^. c. 4.
declared to be such, any one may kill him though a King, nay, though the pope
should be willing to suffer him Bannes in 2 2. q. 12. artic. 2.
yet may not the people, nay, Symanch^ ubi supra.
though he would change his Religion, and leave his heresy, that can give him
no safety. Witness Henry the Fourth of France, who after he was turned papist,
was stabbed in the mouth by one John Castile, and to the heart by Ravilliack;
Azor. inst. mor. l. 8. c. 13.
By heresy all bonds and obligations of nature, of covenant, of oath, of duty
are dissolved, witness the practices of these Irish Rebels: Heretics may be
slain by sword, by treason, Eudaem. Apol. pro Garnet. cap 4. Collect for
Gunpowder treason. D. Davenan. determ. qu 17. D. Prideaux. sex. Higgajon and
Selab.
even with the destruction of many innocent Catholics. O devilish! Upon
these, and such like grounds, our Liturgy justly censured their religion
rebellion, and the sometime worthy professors of our two famous Universities
concluded, that it was impossible, but that an absolute Papist living under a
Protestant Prince, and standing to his own gounds, should be an absolute
traitor. And that we feel not the effects of this Romish doctrine, it is
God's providence, in them not want of will, but want of power; In 32. ^. ^ide
supra.
Bannes speaks plainly. The English and Saxon Catholics are to be excused for
not rebelling, because they want strength sufficient to make their party good;
I pray God they may always want it; Abbor. Antilog. c. 6. p. 85.
The Pope sent a Breve or Bull against our blessed Queen Elizabeth, with this
limitation; that it should be always in force against her and the heretics,
but should not oblige the Papists as matters did then stand, but should oblige
them when it might be put in execution; so they wait for a time, and I pray God
their eyes may sink in their heads while they wait; But Reader do not think
there is nothing done against us; Is not Ireland our sister Nation? Do not our
flesh and our blood suffer there? Do we not hear of their threatenings
breathed against us? That when they have finished their work there, they
intend England for the Aceldama, the seat of war, and field of blood; I will
not stay thee longer still in the porch; Enter in and behold, the miseries of
Ireland, and if thou find cruelties unexampled, remember they are Papists,
and have, as I am informed, ten thousand Priests in the head of their armies,
who besides their tyranny toward our bodies would (was it in their power) send
our souls in fiery chariots into hell! So Hoffeus the Jesuit. Well read, and
bestow some pity, prayers, relief on poor Ireland, praises for England,
increase in the love of Christ, and hatred of the Pope; I rest

Thine I. Cranford.

Irelands warning to England.
LOok on me (your sister Nation) and pity me, I am your bone and your flesh, I
am wounded by them that I have too long trusted and harbored in my bosom (I
mean bloody Papists) rather then better friends, take warning by me on sad
experience: Was there ever sorrow like my sorrow?

Look on me, Repent, Amend, let my sins be your summons, my judgments be your
fear, and learn righteousness by them. When thy judgments are on the earth,
the inhabitants thereof shall learn righteousness.

Look on me, pray and fight, my enemies are yours, my cause is yours, we have
one God, one Christ, one Gospel, one Religion, united under one King, if we
fail one another now, the proud enemy will blaspheme our God, dishonor our
Royal King, scorn our Religion. Hold out faith and prayer, surely the victory
is yours, you pray, and the enemy blasphemes, up and be doing, and the Lord
shall be with you. Shall we be less zealous for the Lord of hosts, then they
are for their wooden Idols.

Solicit my Cause to his Majesty, to the Parliament, make my case yours, be
with me as in the body, stir now or never, Help the Lord against the mighty,
your work will be glorious* You shall be called the repairers of our breaches.

Look on me and adventure you that are Gods Stewards, who knows but God
entrusted thee with an estate for this Design. The Design is honorable, your
purchase a Kingdom for Christ. Back your selves with friends, weaken the
bloodthirsty enemies, secure your selves better, try God if he will not be
your Ensurer double and treble. Cast thy bread on the waters, and after many
days thou shall find it. They are bloody men, The bloody men shall not live
out half their days. They are cruel to the faint, to the weary, cruel to
women, to poor children, mark what God threatened against Amaleck for the same
thing. Remember what Amaleck did unto thee,etc. how he smote the hindermost,
even all that were feeble behind thee when thou wast faint and weary, and he
feared not God. Therefore when the Lord thy God shall give thee rest from all
thine enemies round about in the Land which the Lord thy God gives thee for an
inheritance to possess it: that thou shall blot out the remembrance of Amaleck
from under heaven, thou shall not forget it,Deuteronomy. 25. 17, 18, 19.

To confirm the truth of these ensuing Tragic Stories, you may be pleased to
read this Letter, the Copy whereof was read the fourteenth of December, in the
Honorable House of Commons, and also read again before the right Honorable
the Lords at a Committee of both Houses, and desired to be entered into the
journals of both Houses.
It was also read in a public Congregation in London, by an eminent Minister
on the Fast day for Ireland to stir up bowels of pity toward them.
SIR,
ALL I can tell you is the miserable estate we continue under, for the Rebels
daily increase in men and munition in all parts, except the Province of
Munster, exercising all manner of cruelties, and striving who can be most
barbarously exquisite in tormenting the poor Protestants, wheresoever they
come; Cutting off their privy members, ears, fingers, and hands, plucking out
their eyes, boiling the heads of little Children before their Mothers faces,
and then ripping up their Mothers Bowels; stripping women naked, and standing
by them being naked, whilst they are in Travel, killing the Children as soon
as they are born, and ripping up their Mothers bellies, as soon as they are
delivered; driving men, women, and children, by hundreds together upon Bridges,
and from thence cast them down into Rivers, such as drowned not, they knock
their brains out with poles, or shoot them with Muskets, that endeavor to
escape by swimming out, ravishing wives before their husbands faces, and
Virgins before their Parents faces, after they have abused their bodies, making
them renounce their Religion, and then marry them to the basest of their
fellows.

Oh that the Lord, who has moved the Kingdoms of England and Scotland, to
send relief to these afflicted Protestants, would likewise stir them to
effect their undertaking with all possible expedition, lest it be too late.

Some of the persons particularly mentioned to have suffered, who are known
unto you, are, Master Jerome Minister of Brides, his body mangled, and his
members cut off. Master Fullerton Minister of Lughall, Simon Hastings his ears
cut off, Master Blandry Minister, hanged, his flesh pulled off from his bones,
in the presence of his wife, in small pieces, he being hanged two days before
her, in the place where she is now prisoner. Abraham James of Newtowne, in the
Diocese of Clohor, cut in pieces, and it is reported that the Bishop of Clohor
is turned to the Rebels, thus moving pardon in presuming to trouble you at this
time in your public employments, do with humble remembrance of his best
respects to you, and your virtuous Lady, remayn

November. 27. 1641. Your Servant to command, Thomas Partington.

A true Relation of the bloody Massacre and damnable Treason of the cruel
Papists intended against Dublin, October 23. 1641. desperately acted in most
parts of the Kingdom of Ireland, tending to the utter ruin and extirpation of
all the Protestants there: With a list of the several tortures, cruelties,
outrages, on the bodies of poor Christians, related by persons of good credit,
who are fled from those bloody men, to tell us what they have seen with their
eyes and heard with their ears, on examinattions of diverse of the Actors in
this Tragedy illustrated by Pictures.
BEhold, as in a Map of blood, the unwearied plottings, and restless
contrivements of bloody men only skillful to destroy, whose Religion is founded
in blood, whose obedience will not be bounded with oaths, asseverations, nay
execrations, as the ensuing Story of cruelty relates, who are true (as steel)
to their damned Principles, Nulla fides cum Haereticis whose principles are
steept blood, tolerating Rebellion against King and Kingdom, murdering of
Princes, blowing up of Parliament, sowing seeds of division between
Confederate Kingdoms, England, Scotland.
as those two Handfasted and Troth-plighted Nations in a League of love,
indissoluble (blessed be God) can testify: blowing up coals of Division,
hotter then coals of Juniper in the same Kingdom, where they live in too much
peace. Witness Germany, that field of blood, as a book of their miseries
called the Lamentation of Germany ^^ely printed ^elates.
Witness England, who has had woeful experience of their plottings to break
Union between King and people, King and Parliament.

But now behold, these bloody Papists with their Vizard pulled off, and now
acting their plots like incarnate Devils (as our Savior called their brethren
the Scribes and Pharisees. For the works of their father they do) I say now
acting their Devilish design on the State of Ireland our sister Nation,
aiming no lower then the death and ruin of the whole Kingdom at one blow. For
had their plot on Dublin Castle taken (which they had laid with so much
subtilty and secrecy) as in probability it had, had not the keeper of Israel
which slumbers not prevented it, in a most miraculous manner, they had been by
the morning light at work, cutting off man, woman and child, till they had not
left one remaining among them that bore the name of a Protestant. Blessed be
God their snare was broken, and that poor City designed to destruction,
delivered, the relation of which Tragedy now begins: Oh that our ears may
tingle! and our bowels yern at the relation of this horrid design: and at the
relations of those cruelties and tortures exceeding all parallel, unheard off
among Pagans, Turks, or Barbarians, except you would enter into the confines of
Hell it self, to see the Devils (those Engineers of cruelty) acting of their
parts: I know not where you will find their fellows, making it their sport to
torture and to vex those poor distressed Protestants, he that is most cruel
merits most of their bloody Jesuits. Those firebrands of Hell preach to them in
their Massings and Conventicles, as is truly related by Gentlemen of Ireland of
good worth, who like Jobs Messengers are escaped their merciless hands,
relating nothing but what they have heard with their ears, upon examination of
witnesses, or seen with their eyes, that so men might not be deluded with false
and idle Pamphlets, but read and see the truth of things that all men may
behold what bloody Tigres and Vultures these Popish Spirits are, how perfidious
and basely treacherous to those Nations that succor them; never any Kingdom
being long at peace where they were tolerated, as this fresh bleeding Nation of
Ireland can sadly relate you in this ensuing Narration.

Here begins the bloody attempts upon the Kingdom of Ireland in the general,
and on Dublin in particular.
UPon the three and twentieth day of October last 1641, the Castle of Dublin,
should have surprised (as at that time it might easily have been) for there
was no fear or suspicion of Treachery, there being at that time four hundred
Irish Papists elected out of most parts of Ireland, desperate persons designed
and appointed for that bloody and desperate attempt, all lodging and sculking
in several places of the City and Suburbs, waiting and expecting the time and
watchword, when to give the onset. But that God that keeps Israel saw their
bloody intentions to overthrow and ruinate all the professors of the true
Religion, disapointed their wicked hopes, and (to their own shame and
confusion) discovered and laid open their hellish plot to succeeding ages, that
the Lord alone might be admired, and they confounded. And this he did by moving
in the heart of one of their own Countrymen at that time, an abhorring of so
foul and detestable a Treason, and to reveal it to Sir William Parsons Knight
and Baronet, Master of the Court of Wards and Liveries, and Sir John Borlase
Knight, Master of the Ordnance, both Lords Justices of the Kingdom of Ireland.
The party who discovered the plot had been formerly a servant to Sir John
Clotworthy, a godly and religious Gentleman, but at time (when he revealed
their design) he served one Captain Mack-Mahowne an Irishman, who lodged at
the sign of the Artichoake, vulgarly called Saint Mary's Abbey in the Suburbs
of the City of Dublin, The servants name was Owen Mack-Connel, who being with
his Master Captain Mack-Mahown, in a house in Cookstreet, at the Lodging of the
Lord Mack-Gueere, also and Irishman in the City of Dublin. Upon the two and
twentieth of October, being the night before; his Master did then and there
reveal the whole plot unto him in the presence of the Lord Mack-Gueere, and
others.

Now this Owen Mack-Connel, had married an English woman by whom he had
children living in the County of Antrim in the Province of Vlster, and she was
and is a Protestant; as soon as this Owen Mack-Connel had heard and understood
the plot and damnable intention of those sons of Belial, with a sad
countenance, asked his Master what should become of his wife and poor
children, he replied in these words, viz. hang her English Kite, we will get
thee a better wife, but the company perceiving that his thoughts were troubled
at the relation of this horrid Tragedy, now to be acted on the Stage of
Ireland, which within few hours was to be in a flame of confusion, the word
to be given, that, man, woman, and child should have bin butchered the next
morning, the poor man's heart failed him at this hellish and barbarous Massacre,
whereupon these bloody Villains perceiving by the same alteration of his
countenance, that he approved not, or rather like a man amazed, startled at
such a bloody motion, as to imbrue his hands in the blood of his own dearest
wife and children, and that that is more, of his own Country and Kingdom, they
began to bethink themselves what to do with him, they resolved to make him
drunk, and thereupo^ enforced him unnaturally (which a man would not do to a
beast) to drink so much that he could hardly drink more, yet they plied him
close, and provoked him, he desired to be excused, they to give him his load,
poured it down his throat, he resisting such unreasonable violence more then
brutish, there steps toward him in a de sperate manner one Donal Mack-Gueere,
what will you not drink your liquor? see if you dare deny to pledge me, there
upon set a pistol to his breast (see the Popish religion their best argument
is fire and gunpowder) with two bullets, the pan being primed with powder and
brimstone that so it might not fail to speed, twice it was offered against Owen
Macke-onell, who discovered the plot of taking Dublin, had a Pistol Charged
with too Bullets* the pane primed with powder and Brimstone twice offered
against him took not fire* so the Rebels said God will not suffer him to be
killed and he will be on our side* I warrant you,

Owen Macke-onell leapinge over a wall escaped and was sent to our Parliament
with letters and was rewarded 500 lb and 200 per Annum.

him, and took no fire: oh see the hand of God! whereupon Captain Mack-Mahowne
stepped in and spoke these words, videlic^t, let him alone, God will not suffer
him to be killed, he will be on our side, I warrant ye How blind with malice and
rage were these Monsters of nature, that could not see that the God that
overruled the^: for it is observed, that it is very rare and seldom, that
Gunpowder and Brimstone mingled ever fail firing so that sequel proved, that
God would not suffer him to be killed as his Master said, but preserved him to be
a deliverer most miraculously to his distressed Nation: not to be (as they
supposed) on their side but against them, for within less then an hour after
he discovered the treason to Sir William Parsons as aforesaid, for after they
had foxt him, (as they thought sufficiently) they led him from the Lord
Mack-Gueeres lodging in Cookstreet, to go along wih his Master Captain
Mack-Mahowne to his lodging, but the poor man with a longing and earnest
desire to be delivered of what his head and heart were so big with, and
impatient of any longer delay to conceal so foul and horrid a Treason, fained
himself more drunk then he was, and taking the advantage of the time and
place, willingly fell down in a dirty channel, and was so contaminated and
bemired with stinking mud, that none would lay hands on him to help him up, so
that with much ado he crept out of the kennell, and reeled to the stoop or
seat of a door, and sat down to sleep, but the workings of his thoughts would
not suffer him to rest till he had discovered this devilish design neither
did he (at all) intend to rest as himself confessed, till he had made it
known, but he seeming to sleep, the fellow which was left with him to watch
him, departed, which this Own Mack-Connel perceiving, as soon as ever his
back was turned, with a bold resolution arose up, and went to the Merchants
Key in Dublin, between eleven and twelve of the clock at night to Sir William
Parsons house, one of the Lords Justices of Ireland, where knocking at the
door, the Porter knowing him, demanded of him what he would have, he answered
the Porter that he must needs speak with his Lord, the Porter replied that his
Lord was in Bed, It is no matter answered Owen Mack-Connel, I must and will
speak with him, for my business concerns both King and Kingdom, then the
Porter let him in, wondering to see him in such a pickle, still he hastened the
Porter, until he had called up one of his Lords Gentlemen, who got up
speedily, and went into his Lords Bedchamber, where he acquainted his Lord
with the earnest desire that this Owen Mack-Connel had to speak with him
concerning a business of weighty consequence, but would not reveal it to any
but his Honor, whereupon he was called up and had access to my Lord, unto whom
he discovered the whole Plot, which was to be executed the same morning at
nine of the clock, this being between twelve and one.

At the first the Lord Parsons did seem to slight it, but Owen Mack-Counel,
confidently affirmed the thing to my Lord in the hearing of his servants to be
true, and withal told him thus: viz. My Lord, my Lord, I have discharged my
duty and my conscience, look you to it; I will go back to my Master, because
neither he nor the rest shall suspect me.

Your Lordship shall find my Lord Mack-Gueere at Master Cadowgans house in
Cookstreet, and Captain Mack-Mahown, at the Artichoke in the aforesaid Maryes
Abbey, to which place I am going now. This Owen Mack-Connel going homewards to
his Masters lodging, takes up dirt in his hands and besmuts and dirties his
face that he might appear to them to have tumbled over and over in the dirt,
whose approach and entrance into the room (where a great many of them were
assembled together, drinking and making merry, for they intended not to go to
bed) was so ridiculous that the company burst out into such a loud and sudden
laughter with shouting and hollowing that the place rung of them round about,
and to welcome him home the company fell to their old course to make him drink
more, but at last he told them that he must needs go down into the yard, so
they suffered him to go, but commanded two of his companions to attend him and
bring him up again, but they let him go into the yard by himself, not
suspecting what he had done; nor what he meant to do: no sooner was he in the
yard, but knowing the place, leaped over the pale, and so escaped from them.

Great search they made in the yard for him, and up and down the house,
thinking he had been crept to bed, or hid himself in the barn of stable, so
that they were amazed to think what should become of him, because they
generally believed him to be so drunk and in such a pickle, they refrained
looking any further after him, conceiving that he was past care to tell tales
wheresoever he was, and so fell to their mirth and jollitie again.

But not long after, in the midst of their mirth, came some of the Guard
belonging to the Lords Justices, entered the House, where there was little or no
resistance, apprehended Captain Mack-Mahowne, and one Rory Magennis, being the
chief in that place at the Artichoake, and brought them bound before the Lords,
about five of the clock in the morning, being upon the Saturday, which was the
three and twentieth day of October last. At the same time and hour the rest of
the Guard apprehended the Lord Mack-Gueere in Cookstreet, in the house of
Master Cadowgan where they found him under a bed with a case of Pistols charged
and a Skeene by his side, but did not offer to shoot.

Captain Mack-Mahowne upon his examination confessed the whole plot, how that
morning the Castle of Dublin should have been surprised by forty Irish Papists
desperate Villains in this manner following.

First, they should have gone into the Castle (to avoid suspicion) one by one,
some at the watergate, and some at the Castle-gate, each man with his Skeen,
and so to have met in the great Court, and suddenly to have rushed upon the
Warders, and to have murdered them, and so to have possessed themselves of their
Halberds and other weapons, and then to have stood in the entrance of both
Gates to let in the rest being three hundred and sixty more, appointed for the
execution of that Hel-hatcht Design^; they could not have wanted help, the ods
was so great on their side, I mean the bloody Romish party, and I am of opinion
there would have been but little or no resistance, their party would have been
so strong, there being at that time one hundred Papists to five Protestants
within the very City of Dublin* to my knowledge, and so they are generally
throughout the whole Kingdom, what a combustion had there been in Dublin that
day? what a distraction had our poor Countrymen, I mean the English
Protestants been in? and I my self being then one belonging to the Crown
Office in Dublin, and an eye witness of their passages amongst the rest? I
dare be bold to say, that if they had taken that Castle, being so richly
furnished with all manner of Munition, as powder, shot and Arms being also
strengthened with above one hundred pieces of Ordnance of all sorts with their
carriages, that all Ireland had been before this day an Acheldama, or a field
of blood, and I am of opinion that of all the English Plantators in Ireland,
there would not have been living one Family.

Some of those Villains that should have surprised the Castle, to wit, Rory
Mack Mahowne, William O Neale, Thady O Duffe, and others, have been taken and
examined before the Council, and upon their examinations have confessed, that
upon the Sabbath day night after they had surprised the Castle (being the day
following) their intent was to have marked all the Irish houses with a Cross,
to have distinguished them from the English, and so to have murdered them by
entering forcibly and treacherously upon them, and also to have seized all the
shipping at the Rings end near Dublin, that there had been no way or means
left for man, woman, or child to have escaped their fury, nor any place of
refuge left to have found mercy. Stand and pause a while and consider the depth
of this horrid treason to have cut off all the Protestants! Oh the cries, the
shreeks, the tears of poor souls flying, this way and that way, still into
the mouth of these ravenous Lions, and this would have been their Sabbath
days work, a fit sacrifice for him whose servants they were. But praised be
the Lord, their net is broken, and we have escaped.

What man so blind as may not herein behold the handy work of God, and how
the hands and hearts of those malicious furies and firebrands of Rome are bent
to shed inocent blood, that notwithstanding they have so often failed in their
wicked and bloody purposed and intents both private and public, which they
have secretly attempted in darkness will not see although they live in the
light nor take warning, but still run on in their bloud-thirstinesse to
extirpate whole States, to suppress the Truth, and to shed the blood of Gods
Saints, but I trust they shall fall into the pit that they dug for others.

It was concluded by the Lords Justices and Council of Ireland, that the
aforenamed Owen Mack-Connel, who had discovered this Treason should be sent
with Letters to the Parliament here in England, the King being at that time in
Scotland, who at his coming was rewarded with a gratuity of five hundred
pounds in money, and an allowance toward the mayntenance of himself, his wife
and children of two hundred pounds a year, until his Majesty find out some
better gift to bestow upon him, I am verily persuaded that his discovery of
this Treason has preserved the lives of a hundred thousand men, women and
children and many more, in the several Provinces and Counties of Ireland.

Now to enter into this direful Tragedy, every step being a step in blood.

Here follows a true description or relation of sundry sad and lamentable
collections, taken from the mouths of very credible persons, and out of
Letters sent from Ireland to this City of London, of the perfidious outrages
and barbarous cruelties, which the Irish Papists have committed upon the
persons of the Protestants, both men, women, and children in that Kingdom.
Anno Dom. 1641.
THe Irish Nation is well known to be a people both proud and envious. For the
Comonaltie (they are for the most part) ignorant and illiterate, poor, and
lazy; and will rather beg or starve, then work: and therefore fit subjects
for the Priests and Jesuits to spur on upon such bloody actions and murth' rous
Designs. Ignorance is their Mother, which is devoid of mercy: God deliver all
good Christians from the cruelty of such a Mother and Children.

It is too well known, (the more is the pity and to be lamented) that the
Irish have murdered of the Protestant party in the Provinces of Vlster,
Lempster, Connaght and Munster, of men, women, and children, the number of
fifty thousand, as it is credibly reported by Englishmen, who have been over
all parts of the Kingdom, and do protest upon their oaths that there are
above five thousand Families destroyed.

The Kingdom of Ireland has four Provinces, wherein there are contained two
and thirty Counties, besides Cities and County Towns, in all which places the
English are planted up and down in all parts, where the Irish have most
murtherously and traitorously surprised them upon great advantages, and with
out respect of persons either of age, youth, or infancy, of yongmen or maids,
or of old men or babes, stripped all to their skins, naked as ever they were
borne into the World, so they have gone out of the World, many hundreds having
been found starved to death in Ditches for want of food and raiment, where the
rebellious Irish have showed them no more mercy or compassion, no, nor so much
as they would do to their Dogs. Thus much for the general, now I come to
particulars.

At one Master Atkins house, seven Papists brake in and beat out his brains,
then ripped up his Wife with child, after they had ravished her, and Nero-like
viewed Natures bed of conception, they then took the child, and sacrificed it
in the fire.

They have flead the skin from the bones of others like Butchers: the
principles of whose Religion is blood. Witness our Books of Martyrs those
Chronicles of blood. Witness those thousands of butchered Protestants in
France, or Germany.

They burned others, firing their Houses, Towns, Villages, those sons of the
Coal, as if their habitation were in Hell.

At one Mr Atkins house 7 Papists brake in and beat out his brains, then
riped upe his wife with Child after they had ravished her and Nero like vewed
natures bed of conception then took they the Child and sacrificed it in the
fire

English Protestants striped naked and turned into the mountains in the
frost, and snow* whereof many hundreds are perished to death* and many liynge
dead in diches and Savages upbraided them saying now are ye wild Irisch as
well as we*



They have vowed to root out all the English Nation out of this Kingdom.

They have turned all the Protestants out of Kilkeny.

At Belturbal^ in the County of Cavan, the Popish Rebels demanded the Town on
promise, that if they would surrender they should pass free with bag and
baggage, they backed their promise with oaths and execrations, cursing
themselves, if they did not let them go withal. On serious considerations of
the inhabitants and, the Governor, they were persuaded to yield it up, which
when they had done, and drawing away their goods and moneys, they like
treacherous Villains sent about twenty or thirty to guard them, when they had
guarded them seven miles from the Town, they with more of that desperate
forsworn rabble seized on them, robbed all the Protestants, being between five
hundred and a thousand persons, men, women, and children; who submitting
themselves to their mercy, found no quarter but cruelty: they stripped them all
naked, and turned them out of their houses into the open fields in bitter cold
weather, in a most vile and shameful manner, not affording them one of their
lowzy rags to hide those parts which should be covered. Take notice of the
faith of a Papist, who for his own advantage, casts off all bonds of fidelity
and common honesty.

They are remarkable for perfidiousnesse and treachery, as you may behold in
that Master of Mis-rule, the Arch-rebell Sir Philem-Oneal, basely pretending to
be a Suitor to the old Lady Cawfield being a Widow, and made fair promises of
his respects to her, and when he had his advantage of possession of her house
and goods, turned them out of all, and bound them prisoners, and made her whom
he intended his nearest Companion to be his lowest Vassal.

In the Town of Lurgon, in the County of Armagh, the Mac-kans skirmishing with
the Englishmen, slew diverse of our men, whereupon they entered parley demanding
the Town: Sir William Brunlow being Governor of the Castle, on some
considerations thought good to yield thereupon they promised and backed it with
oaths and great protestations, that they should have fair quarter, and pass
without prejudice to their lives: yet behold the perfidiousnesse of these
brutish creatures, as men not fearing God or Devil, whose practice they
imitate, who was a liar from the beginning. Notwithstanding all these fair
pretenses they knew no mercy, killed men, spoiled women, nay, in their
boundless rage, slew and massacred, and sript helpless Ministers, whose
calling might have pleaded pity. But what speak we of pity to men, that have
no bowels?

In London Derry, at the Town of Belly-hagh belonging to the Londoners. Sir
Philem-Oneal, promised under hand and seal to let the poor Protestants to
pass with bag and baggage, only to part with their Town, which was a fair
goodly place: yet this perfidious Rebel, as if it was not enough to make these
poor souls harborless, to lay them open to vvind and vveather, but to add to
all their misery, stripped man, woman and child, took their clothes for a prey,
and sent them out naked, without a shirt or smock to their backs, left them
not vvorth a groat, this was one of their works of mercy, if they escaped
with their lives: but how many lives might be lost by this immodest and
inhumane act, judge. The tender mercies of the wicked are cruel.

Will you behold another merciful act and record it. Captain Rory Macquire,
the Lord Macquires brother at the beginning of the rebellion for the first
fortnight commands his Soldiers to give quarter to women and children, but to
massacre all the men to spare none. Woe to him that makes the wife a widow and
the children fatherless, but after they began to resist, and to gather into
Companies: then hear the Charge of this bloody man, Give no quarter, no not to
women, though tears and prayers interpose, yet know no pity: no not to
harmless babes, though it was death enough to kill their parents, nor spare
neither man, woman, or child.

It is reported by an eminent Gentleman, that has long dwelt among the Rebels,
but it is thought fit to forbear the names of those that give intelligence of
the barbarous cruelties of these savage beasts, because they threaten to be the
death of them that shall unmaske them. It is reported by this Gentleman that
the Handlowans came to Town-regis, diverse of them assaulted the Castle, of
which Captain Saint John was Commander, he with his son got away with some
difficulty, leaping over the wall, they fearing they might fetch supplies to
recover their lost Castle, most inhumanely took the Captains wife, (poor
Gentlewoman) and set her on the wall having stripped her to her smock, who was
big with child (and within an hour of her delivery) that in case the Captain
and his son should have assaulted the Town, his Wife should have been the
white at which he must have levelled: oh extreme and unheard of cruelty!

As for the Protestant Ministers whom they surprise, their cruelty is such
toward them, as it would make the hardest heart to melt into tears. Their
manner is first to strip them, and after bind them to a tree or some post where
they please, and then to ravish their wives and daughters before their faces
(in sight of all their merciless rabble) with the basest Villains they can
pick out, after they hang up their husbands and parents before their faces, and
then cut them down before they be half dead, then quarter them, after
dismember them, and stop their mouths therewith.

They basely abused one M. Trafford a Minister in the North of Ireland who was
assaulted by these bloody wolves of Romes brood, that know not God, nor any
bowels of mercy. This poor distressed Minister desired but so much time to
bethink himself before he took his farewell of the World to call upon God: but
these merciless wretches would admit no time, but instantly fell on him, hackt
and hewed him to pieces.

Doctor Tate Minister of Belly-Hayes they stripped stark naked, and then wounded
him dangerously in the head, and then let him go toward Dublin, where he lay
long sick.

Sir Patrick Dunstons Wife ravished before him, slew his Servants, spurned his
Children till they died, bound him with roules of Match to a board, that his
eyes burst out, cut off his ears and nose, teared off both his cheeks, after
cut off his arms and legs, cut out his tongue, after run a red hot iron into
him.

Multitudes of Herringes driven into Dublin, 20 a penny.

Sr: Patrike Dunsons Wiffe ravished before him* slew his Servants, spurned his
Children tell they died, bound him with Rowles of match to a Board that his eyes
bursted out cut of his ears and nose teared ofe both his Cheeks after cut of
his arms and legs, cut out his tongue after rune a red hot Iron into him



Many Gentlewomen have they ravished before their husbands faces, stripping
them first naked to the view of their wicked companions, taunting and mocking
them (after they have spoiled them) with bitter and reproachful words, sending
them away in such a shameful, or rather shameless manner, that most of them
have died with shame and grief, or else have starved with want and cold. Base
cruelty unheard of, exceeding the brute beasts, and so much the worse because
they are reasonable, which makes them skillful to destroy.

One Master Luttrell dwelling within three miles of the Borough of Cavan, a
Gentleman worth by report, two or three hundred pounds a year, with a very
great stock of Cattle, was basely betrayed by an Irish Boy that he had bred up
in his house. See the baseness of the Popish brood, who when he was at Dinner
(being upon the thirtieth day of October last) was surprised by threescore of
those Irish unmercifull Villains, with a company of dirty Whoores and Bastards
that followed them, which this Boy let in at a back door, where pulling him
and his virtuous Wife from the Table, and four small children, the eldest of
them being not six years of age, and one sucking at her breast without pity or
humanity stripped them naked, notwithstanding their prayers and tears to have
let them kept their clothes, and then thrusting them in a cruel and violent
manner out of doors, threatened to kill them if they went not speedily away.
Take notice how uncertain all our outward comforts are. So they departed (for
fear) away, being ashamed to be seen of their servants, some of them running
one way, and some another to shift for themselves, but the distressed Gentleman
with his Wife and Children, and a little youth, directed their course toward
Dublin, hoping to find some of their friends in the way to relieve them, but
the farther they came the more miserable they were, meeting their loving
Friends robbed (by others) in the same manner, which struck in them such
amazement and fear, that their hearts failed them, so that being naked and
hungry, helpless and hopeless, the poor Infants crying in their ears, which
must needs kill their hearts, they went not far but sat down under a Hedge or
Ditch, and there died: being not (at that time above six miles from his own
house, for this little youth that he had bred up (being an English boy)
forsook not his Master when the rest ran from him, but continued with him till
death, the same day, some Horsemen or Troopers riding that way to coast the
Country, me this youth, unto whom he told this sad story, and being not far
from the place led them to this lamentable sight, where they beheld the true
love of Man and Wife, embracing each other in their death, the three eldest
children dead, but the sucking child was alive preserved through heat, being
between them both, and grabling and gaping for the dead Mothers breast. So the
Troopers took up the child, carrying it to a Nurse, for they knew the Parents
well, and bestowed some clothes upon the English youth, who came to Dublin
within few days after, and related the story in my hearing.

In the County of Roscommon, near the Town of Roscommon, there fled into the
Parish Church, eleven score of the English, men, women, and children, where
they remained three days and nights without any sustenance, till they were
almost starved, so that at last (what with the cries of their children and
their own wants) they were forced to commit themselves to the cruelty of the
Irish, who according to their usual manner first stripped them naked, after
drove them through the Town like so many harmless Sheep and Lambs over a
Bridge at the Towns end, having before broke down one of the middle arches
where a strong water runs, so that either they must leap in or come back,
their intent being there to murder them, as they did. For the poor wretches
being sick, weak and faint for food and sleep (yet unwilling to hasten their
own ends) some returned back whom they killed without mercy, others they thrust
into the water who were drowned, some that could, did swim toward the shore,
and there inhumane villainies, brutish furies, ran and met them before they
could get to land, and knocked them in the head in the water, some few escaped
that did swim to the other side of the River, where the Irish could not come at
them, having before broken down the Bridge themselves, and so escaped to
Dublin, to be sad witnesses of this lamentable Tragedy.

Master Blandry a Minister they hanged, after pulled his flesh from his bones in
his Wifes sight.

Many Ladies and Gentlewomen (which they have surprised in the province of
Vlster) being great with child, they have turned them out of their houses naked
into the fields, Driuinge Men Women and Children by hundreds upon Briges and
casting them into Rivers, who drowned not were killed with poles and shot with
muskets

Mr Blandry Minister hanged after pulled his flesh from his bones in his wiffes
sight

where they have bin delivered without the help of any woman, and so have
ended their misery, others that have escaped death in Childbearing, they have
mercilesly carried away upon Carts (lying in lousy and stinking straw naked,)
to places where they and their poor infants have bin destroyed.

There was one Gentlewoman which was wife to Master King a Deane (Brother to
the Bishop of Clogue) and Parson of Dundalke, in the County of Lowth, who
having three thousand inhabitants in his Parish, had but thirty Communicants of
the Protestant Party, the rest being all Irish and Papist, and although this
Gentleman did for many days together (by his own Relation to me) solicit his
wife to go to Dublin, and to remove his goods thither living at a place about
two miles from Dundalke, she being great with child, yet would not be
persuaded, although she knew the Rebels were at the Newry within eight miles of
Dundalke, whereupon he left her and his Family, and going to a Friends house
within two miles of his own (for fear of the multitude of the Irish, that
lived about his own House) he remained there but two days when tidings was
brought him, that the Irish had seized upon his wife and all that he had, so
that he was forced to fly away for his life with his friends, who was pursued
by the Rebels above twelve miles, but through Gods mercy he escaped with his
precious life (which they hunted after) with the loss of his whole estate, and
wife whom they turned out of doors (having first abused her) where she was
delivered in straw, without the help of any woman, and so perished. She was a
charitable Gentlewoman, and in her life time had relieved many hundreds of the
poor Irish, and this mercy they afforded her for her charity.

The Lord Blany escaped their cruelty, being forced to ride fourteen miles
upon a poor carrion jade, without either bridle or saddle to save his life,
his virtuous Lady being surprised by these Villains, the same day and his
children, who use her most ignobly and cruelly, neither regarding her
nobleness of birth, nor her Lord, but forced her to lodge in straw with a
poor allowance of two pence a day to relieve her and her children: and to add
affliction to the good Ladies misery, slew a Kinsman of hers, and caused him to
be hanged up before her face two days and two nights in the room where she
lay to terrify her, telling her withal, she must expect that end.

In the County of Tyrone (even in that rebellious part) which is above all
other inhabited by those Romish Locusts and wolves, which in nature differ not
from the dog wolves that breed amongst them, was the cruelst murder (of all
the rest) committed by some of the Soldiers belonging to Sir Philem O Neal
that Tyronish offspring and Rory Mack-Gueere, the Lord Mack-Gueeres brother,
who are known to be the most eminent Rebels in this Treason, upon the bodies of
one Master Charles Davenant, his wife, and two young children. The Villain
which first entered the house and most forwardest in cruelty was known by his
the Lord Blany forced to ride 14 Miles without Bridle or Sadell to save his
life his Lady Lodged in Straw being allowed 2 a day to releue her and her
Children, slew a kindsman of hers and hanged him up before her face 2 days
telling her she must expect the same to terrify her the moore

Mr Dauenant and his Wife bound in their Chaires Striped the 2 Eldest Children
of 7 years old roasted them upon Spittes before their Parents faces. Cut heir
throat and after murdered him.

name, to one of the servants in the house, to be commonly called Thady O
Swillyvane, sometime a servant to this Master Davenant, and lived at the time
of this Tragedy not far from Dungannon in the County of Tyrone. The servant
of the house that knew him was born in Ireland, in the City of Clogher in the
said County, but of English parents, his name is Thomas Maddin, but he could
speak good Irish, and so escaped, being an eyewitness of these passages
ensuing. This Swillyvane and his rout broke in forcibly into the house where
they found three or four servants that made no resistance, in the Kitchen, but
going further into the house they found Master Davenant, sitting by a fire with
his Wife and Children two young Daughters, they immediately seized upon him and
his Wife and bound them both fast in their chaires, making a very huge and
great fire, after they stripped the two children, the eldest being not above
seven years old, slew them in the sight of their parents, and after roasted
them upon spits before their faces, such barbarous cruelty was never known.
With great patience they were compelled (poor souls) to behold that cruelty
which they could not help, after they stripped his wife, forcing her most
uncivilly and unmercifully before his face, and afterward cut her throat, the
distressed Gentleman being overpressed with the lamentable sight of the death
of his wife and children, strived and strugled in his chair where he was
bound, and held, hoping they would have killed him, choosing rather to die any
death, then to live any longer. So when they had made an end of his wife and
children in this barbarous manner, they untied him and stripped him, and
afterward murdered him, when he had confessed to them where his money was.
There was a Letter written about the middle of November last, from Stabouud in
the said County of Tyrone, by one Master Birrom, unto one Master Cusack
dwelling in Highstreet in Dublin, which Letter I did read and took a copy off:
and before I came out of Ireland the above said Thomas Maddin came from the
City of Clogher, in the County of Fermanagh unto Dublin, and testified the
contents of this Letter, being an eyewitness of the certain passages thereof,
and did give God great thanks that he had escaped their hands in my hearing,
for he said his soul could not endure to be any longer amongst them, they did
daily commit such cruelty, murder, and outrages upon the English Protestants
in those parts.

At the Borough of Kello, or, as some Letters report, at the Borough of Trim,
being both in the County of Mead, in the Province of Vlster, the Rebels
surprised the house of one Arthur Robinson, he himself being at that time in
Dublin, which was upon the sixth day of November last, about some suits he had
in law, being in the last Michaelmas Term, he not knowing that the Rebels were
risen in those parts there, he intending to have gone home to his wife and
family, five or six days after, hoping by that time to have ended his
business, and indeed when he came from his house to Dublin, which was on the
twentieth day of October, the Rebellion was not begun in any part of Ireland,
but before his appointed time to return home, a Messenger prevented him with
heavy tidings, even his only Daughter whom he quickly knew, though she were
much disguized, for the Rebels have slain most of his Family, robbed and
pillaged the house, after they had stripped his wife and ravished her, they
sought ought for this young Virgin (being about fourteen years of age) who
had hid her self in a Barn, where the Villains quickly found her: but she
made what resistance she could to preserve her Chastity, and with a Knife she
had (unseen to them) wounded one of them, which the rest perceiving seized upon
her violently, stripped her, and then bound her with her arms abroad, in such
manner as she could not help her self any way, and so like helhounds defloured
her one after another, till they had spoiled her; and to show their unheard off
malice, were not herewith content, but pulled the hair from her head, and cut
out her tongue: because she should not report the truth and their cruelty, but
the maid could write, though she could not speak, and so discovered their
inhumane usage to her and her mother. The maid was sent with a letter from her
Father in Dublin to Mynhead in Somersetshire, to her Uncle William Dyer, her
Mothers Brother living within three miles of Mynhead, which letter I have seen
here in Town* containing the contents above-written, being dated at Dublin,
the twentieth of November last.

About the eighth of January last a distressed Minister came to Dublin, that
had left some goods with a supposed Friend, sent for them, the goods could not
be delivered, unless he or his wife came for them, he would not go, but she
went and when she came where her goods were (as if that were too little to lose
her estate, but her life must go also) they hanged her up. Was there ever such
Barbarism among the Heathen?

Arthur Robinsons daughter 14. years old the Rebbels bound her arms a broad,
deflowerd, her one after an other tell they spoiled her then pulled the hair
from her head and cut out her tongue that she might not tell of their Cruelty,
but she declared it by writing

A Minister and his wife came to Dublin Ian: 30. 1641. left behind him some
goods with a supposed friend, sent for them but could not be delivered unless
he or his wife come for them she came and presently they hanged her upe,



In the County of Fermannagh, in the Province of Vlster, they murdered one
Master Champion a Justice of Peace, and a Burgess of the Parliament for the
Borough of Iniskillin in the said County, who was betrayed by an Irish Villain
his Tenant, whom he had saved himself twice before from the gallows. The
Rogue's name was Patrick Mack-Dermot, who finding one of his Companion, brings
him to Master Champion's House, and tells Master Champion that he found this
Thief stealing of his cattle, The Gentleman knowing this Mack-Dermot, said
unto him before one Master Iremonger an Attorney, I am glad thou art turned
from a Thief to catch a Thief, whereupon he returned him this peremptory
answer, That he was no more Thief than himself. No sooner had he uttered
these words in the Court before his house, but there rushes in upon them a
great number of these rebels, who without respect of mercy stabbed Master
Champion, instantly before he could get into his house: so that he fell down
immediately, but their fury went further then death, for they wounded him with
their Skeins in thirty places after he was dead, and then cut off his head to
make sure work, while the rest ran into the house after Master Iremonger, whom
they followed so close that he had not time to lay hold on his sword to help
himself, but falling down upon his knees and calling upon God for mercy, they
fell upon him, and ran him through and through, and so he died. One of Master
Champions servants escaped to Dublin, and reported this in my hearing in
December last. A third was likewise slain, then the Rebels entered the House
and killed more: his wife's sister and her brother in law, with two others in the
house they keep prisoners to this day, taking possession of all they had within
the house and without, his wife was down on her knees to beg a sheet to put her
hubands dead body in. And another Gentleman with other Friends that came to
visit him over night, lost their lives next morning.

In the County of Monaghan, within two miles of the Town of Monaghan, they
murdered one Master George Foord in his Garden, a great company having gotten
into a room or loft over a stable (being between him and the house) surprised
him, This was upon the one and twentieth of November last, being the Lords day,
for when he with his wife and Family were gone to Church, in that place they
hid themselves till their coming back from Church, and so watching their time
and opportunity, first set upon him without any words, and then entered the
house, for the house was strong and not to be easily broken, unless they were
let in at the doors, so they bound all the servants being some English, and
some Irish, till they had found Mistress Foord, whom they stripped naked and bound
taking from her, her keys, having also with them her husbands keys, who lay
murdered in the Garden, and rifled, and opened every Trunk and box in the
house to find their money, where they found but little to that they looked
for, for they knew that Master Foord was rich and well monyed, wherefore they
began Mr: FFordes house rifled and to make her Confess where her money lay they
took hot tongues clappinge them to the Souls of her feet and to the Palms of
her hands so tormented her that with the pain thereof she died

They have set men and women on hot Grideorns to make them Confess where there
money was

with threats to kill her if she did not speedily tell them, but alas she
could not, then they fell to torturing of her, heating a pair of Tongues in
the fire, and clapping them to the soles of her feet, and to the palms of her
hands, so that with the pain thereof she died. After she was dead, they ripped
her body to see if she had not swallowed any gold into her guts, and so when
they had pillaged the house, and carried away with the Gentleman's own Horses
and Carts, all that was worth the carriage, they unbound the Irish servants
which they before had bound, and murdered such of the English as they pleased,
and then departed. I heard Affidavit made of the truth and certainty of this
Massacre, in this manner before recited, before diverse of the Privy Council in
Dublin in Ireland.

They have set up Gallows five miles distant in diverse places on purpose, to
hang up the Protestant Spies, which they have done accordingly, they have
likewise cruelly set women and men one red hot Gridions to make them confess
where such coin, and money, and goods as they had, or whether they have hid or
sold any.

And all these cruelties are not done without the advice and animation of the
Friars, Priests, and Jesuits, and their religious men, or rather Firebrands of
Hell; who at their Masses, and their incendiary Sermons, stir up the people to
the committing of these Massacres, promising them pardon for the same, and
assuring them the more merit, by how much the more they exceed in their
villainous cruelties: they themselves being still in the first of these
executions. For no stratagem of war, nor other horrid action or design
whatsoever, is there undertaken, without them. They going on with their
Soldiers in the head and front of every battle, and by their mischievous
advices and counsels do make them mad, Tigre-like, with fierceness and
cruelty, assuring them that to imbrue their hands in the blood of us
Protestants (which they term Heretics) shall add to their merits and
Canonization of Saints, and gain them higher place and reward in Heaven.

Master Jerome Minister they basely abused who lived near Dublin sometimes:
but when he was thus murdered, he lived near the Borough of Athie, in the
County of Kildare, they hanged him then, mangled his body, cut off his members,
stopped his mouth with them, then quartered him. This is reported by a Citizen of
Dublin now in London to bear witness to this Truth.

A Proclamation was made that neither English nor Irish should either sell or
keep in their houses any powder upon the loss of goods and life: except with
license, and at two shillings the pound.

Ministers they hate and breath out cruelty against cruelty, massacring their
bodies, burning their books, and tearing them in pieces, and it is likely where
they can light on them they use them accordingly.

Having ravished Virgens and Wifes they take there Children and dase there
brains against the Walls in sight of there weepinge Parents and after
destrored them likewise

Mr Jerome Minister of Brides his Body mangled and his members cut of



They rob all English Protestants, stripping them stark naked, and so turn them
into the open fields and mountains in frost and snow, where hundreds have
perished.

They destroy the English breed of Cattle out of malice to the Protestants,
that the poor dumb creatures fare the worse and are spoiled, though one of
ours is worth four of theirs.

They have cut off men's privy members and stopped their mouths with them (like
cruel savage beasts) that they might commit such horrid villainies without
noise and lest their pitiless bowels might be moved with the cries of those
so cruelly massacred Protestants.

At Waterford, some poor Protestants ready to be starved, came to the Town
for relief, and their charity threw them some bread over the wall: it is
likely the Dogs should have had the same entertainment.

The Papists curse the Jesuits and Friars that have been the cause of all
this, this gives hopes their Kingdom being divided cannot stand.

These bloody Papists forced the Protestants to pull off their clothes, and
then killed them on purpose, that they might have their clothes without holes.

After they had knocked a man down dead, they fearing he might counterfeit they
do run their swords twenty times into his body lest he might revive again.

They have stripped Ladies and Gentlewomen, Virgins both old and young stark
naked, turning them into the open fields.

Many hundreds have bin found dead in ditches with cold and want of food and
raiment, esteeming them no better then Dogs.

They labor what they can to make death appear more dreadful then it is in it
self: they hang up Husband, Kindred, Children, before the faces of their
living wives and tender mothers ready to dye for grief, a death worse then
death it self, and this they do on purpose to increase their dolorous pain and
anguish.

They have forced (as is reported) some to turn to their cursed bloody
Religion, and then persuaded them that they were fittest to die, and then
treacherously kill their bodies and do what in them lies to damn their souls.

Debtors basely murdering their Creditors. Tenants sheathing their swords in
their Landlords bowels, servants unnaturally slaying their Masters, others
possessing themselves of their lands, goods, plates, money, jewels,
housholdstuffe, corn, and cattle, and thrust them out of doors naked. Oh
inhumane cruelty!

Many great men's servants being Irish ran away from their Masters with their
best Horses to the Rebels.

Many of the Protestants usually took into their houses, Irish boys, as
Servants and those did basely betray their Masters like Judas, into the hands
of these bloody Wolves. A good caveat to look to our servants before we take
them, and to instruct them in the fear of God when we have.

Others they have wounded to death, and then left them languishing, their
bellies being ripped up and guts issuing out, they poor wretches lying on
Dunghils (see the charity of cruel Papists) all this lest they should be out
of their misery too soon.

It seems it was their delight to linger out their cruelties (like men that
wanted Bowels) for whereas the primitive persecutions were exquisitly cruel yet
they made a quick dispatch of them: but these sons of Belial found new ways of
persecution by extreme cold and hunger to starve (which aggravates their
cruelty) tender women with child, poor helpless infants and sucklings.

An Irish Rebel (as a credible friend reports) snatched an innocent babe out
of the arms of the mother, and cast it into the fire before her face, but God
met with this bloody wretch: for before he went from that place, he brake his
neck.

The Rebels have burned all the Plantation Towns in the County of London Derry.

One hundred and twenty they threw into the water by force, drowning some that
could not swim, others that could they knocked on the head.

Many rich and great men have fled into England, carrying their estates with
them, they have left no relief for the poor distressed people that came
hither. thousands are thus fled into Dublin, many hundreds starved to death
with hunger and cold, the poor Citizens relieve them beyond their abilities
the charge lying on the poorer sort.

Many of their wives they have ravished in their sights before the multitude
like bruit beasts, stripping them naked to the view of their wicked companions,
taunting them, scoffing them, and then sending them away shamefully, that they
have died with grief, or been starved with cold.

One Master Wels Minister losing his notes, went back to look them, and as he
returned he met the Rebels crying, Kill all, Kill all, the head Rebels
command. Thereupon he fled over a Mountain, was up to the breast in cold snow
water and so escaped to Dublin very hardly with his life.

Three thousand six hundred poor souls fled naked into Dublin, and starved
with hunger, came to eat something and died with eating, twenty in a day lay
dead in the open streets, as men smitten with the plague.

Sir James Crag being in his Castle, having many with him was besieged with the
Rebels, and almost famished the Knight was constrained to put forty out of the
Castle which else must have been famished with the rest: behold the crnelty of
these bloud-sucking Papists, when they were turned out, and left to their
mercy, they made quick dispatch set on them, and slew every man.

Another as savage of that Bloudhound Rory Macqueere, at the beginning of the
Rebellion, who came into an English Gentleman's house, and found him in his bed,
and there began to cruciate and torture his naked body, that he might extort
of him a Confession where his treasure lay, which when this poor distracted
Gentleman acknowledged in hopes to be eased, they cruelly killed him, and then
stripped his wife naked, and turned her out of doors, as if they would make all
savage like themselves: and lastly, Makqueere took his daughter being a proper
Gentlewoman and satisfied his beastly lust on her deflouring her, as if this
was too little to kill her father, turn her mother out of doors, and abuse her
himself, but like an inhumane Villain cut off her garments by the middle, and
then turned her to the mercy of the common Soldiers, to be abused at their
pleasure.

Take notice of the bloody practices, and cruelties of Romish party, especially
of the Jesuits and Priests, those firebrands of Hell, who at this very day to
encourage their Disciples to murder, as is afore-written, do anoint them with
the Sacrament of the Unction, assuring The Priests and Jesuits anointe the
Rebels with there Sacrament of unction before they go to murder and robe
ashuringe them that for there meritorious Service, if they be killed he shall
escape Purgatory and go to heaven immediately.

They do usually mangell there dead Carcasses layng wagers who shall cut
deepest into there dead flesh with there Skeyns. they destroy our English
Sheep in detestation of us, although one is better then 4 of theirs. they have
vowed to root out the name of the English.

them that for their meritorious service (if they chance to be killed) they
shall immediately enter into Heaven, and escape Purgatory, and what they get
from the Protestant party, by murdering, robbing and stealing, the one half
shall be their own, and what man would not be willing to venture upon such
conditions to get wealth upon earth, and purchase Heaven for murder. O
damnable Doctrine and Doctors!

They do usually mangle their dead carcasses laying wagers, who shall cut
deepest into their flesh with their skeins.

At Carvagh, near Colerant, the Rebels came to begirt the. Town, Master Rowly
Brother to the worthy Knight Sir John Clotworthy, came forth with a small
Company about three hundred men to prevent them, they came upon them with a
very great company, and slew all but eight of the Protestants, base cowardice
where they want courage, they make it up with heaps and multitudes of frighted
Hares, and the more fearful and cowardly, ever the more cruel upon any
advantage.

All their cruelties have been usually on disarmed men in small Villages, where
was no strength to resist them, there they have tyrannizd over the weaker sex,
women, and they have basely triumphed over little children their rage has
been exercised. Oh base cowardice if they have ventured sometimes on pur men,
it has been when they were naked, as they have bin flying from those Furies
which their party have newly stripped naked: by and by they met with more of
those Whitelivered Villains in companies. They would likewise abuse those poor
naked Protestants like Dogs, adding to their misery beating them and bruising
their naked bodies with cudgels, breaking the heads of some and wounding others
that if they have not died, they have been dangerously sick with the inhumane
usage of those merciless wretches: nay, rather then they will be (no body) they
will show their manhood in abusing dead bodies, as this story declares by very
credible testimony from their own Countrymen.

Here I shall acquaint you with a remarkable Story, which I received from a
Citizen of Dublins testimony of good repute there and here: wherein you may
behold the promise made good to the Protestant side, which the Lord himself
made to his People Israel, that five should chase a hundred.

It pleased God by one man and few with him to out-dare about thirty thousand
of those cowardly Rebels, whose cause is base, whose Religion is but a mere
pretense for their bloody designs, and thus it was as that Citizen related.

A very great Army of about thirty thousand Rebels besieged Drohedah, wherein
was that valiant and religious Commander Sir Henry Tichbourn, with a few of the
Protestant party with him in comparison of those multitudes of Rebels, trusting
to their great Army, boldly demanded the Town, if they would yield, no
question, but they should have fair quarter: but Sir Henry knowing them (its
likely) very well how perfidious they were, and the less to be believed, the
more they swore and execrated themselves, resolutely replied, and sent the
Rebels this Answer. Be it known to you I am a Soldier bred, and will never
yield but upon three conditions:

1 Before I surrender I will kill all the Papists in the Town. 2 I will destroy
all the Nunneries. 3 I will fire the Town, and march in the light of it, by
the help of God to Dublin.
Nay, rather then I will give up, I will feed on a piece of a dead horse, and
if that fail, I will eat the shoulder of an old Popish Alderman. This bone he
threw among those hungry wolves, and you may imagine how they relished it.

And that remarkable instance which was published by order of the Right
Honorable the House of Lords concerning this Noble and Religious Knight Sir
Henry Tichbourn, how it pleased God to honor him with a succesfully victory
against the Rebels now very lately, they being driven in Drohedah, to eat horse
flesh for want of other provision. The Rebels having chained up the River in
hope to keep out provision by Sea, that no relief might come from Dublin, it
pleased God to raise such a storm that broke the chain, and scattered the
enemies boats, and opened a free passage from Dublin, whereby they were
relieved, blessed be God. Thus the Lord fought for them by winds and Seas. As
the winds and Seas obey him, and he rules in them, so on the land he rules.
It is Deuteronomy. 32. 30.
not by many but by few, one shall chase a hundred when God sights for his
people.

It is remarkable to see how few have chased these Rebels, as appears in a
Letter read in the Parliament, what they did before Tredagh. An Army of the
Rebels by Land lying before the City, assaulted them in hopes to famish them:
whereupon this Noble Captain Sir Henry Tichbourn, sallied out of the Town, but
with forty Muskeetiers, and as many horse, beat off four Pulling them about
the streets by the hair of the head, dashing the Childrens brains against
the posts saying these were the Pigges of the English Sowes.

Droghedah so bloked up that a bushel of wheat was fold for 23. Shill, and
meat scarce to be had at any rate* Ian* 4. 1641.

hundred of the enemies, killed above threescore of them, recovered fourscore
Cows and Oxen, and two hundred sheep, burned four Towns and brought home two
of their Colors.

Here take notice of their cowardice again attempted on a noble Lady by a
Letter sent from seven of the grand Rebels, with her resolute and undaunted
answer to them as follow^.

The Rebels Letter to the Lady Offalia, in her Castle at Geshel.
To the honorable and thrice virtuous Lady, the Lady Digby, these give.
Honorable,
WE his Majesty's loyal Subjects being at the present employed in his
Highness Service for the taking of this your Castle, you are therefore to
deliver unto us free possession of your said Castle, promising faithfully, that
your Ladyship, together with the rest in the said Castle restant shall have a
reasonable composition; otherwise upon the yielding of the Castle, we do
assure you that we will burn the whole Town, kill all the Protestants, and
spare neither man, woman nor child upon taking the Castle: Consider (Madam) of
this our offer, and impute not the blame of your own folly unto us, think not
that here we brag: your Ladyship upon submission, shall have a safe convoy to
secure you from the hands of your enemies, and to lead you where you leave. A
speedy replyis desired with all expedition, and thus we surcease:

Henry Demsy. Charles Demsy. Andrew Fitz Patrick. Conn Dempsy. Phelim Demsy.
John Vicars. James m Donel.


The Lady Offalia her answer to the Rebels.
For my Cousin Henry Dempsy and the rest.
I Received your Letter, wherein you threaten to sack this my Castle by his
Majesty's authority; I am and ever have been a loyal subject, and a good
neighbor amongst you, and therefore cannot but wonder at such an assaul; I
thank you for your offer of a convoy, wherein I hold little safety, and
therefore my resolution is, that being free from offending his Majesty, or
doing wrong to any of you, I will live and die innocently, and will do my best
to defend my own, leaving the issue to God; and though I have been and still
am desirous to avoid the shedding of Christian blood, yet being provoked your
threats shall no whit dismay me.

Lettice Offalia.

These stories I relate that all truehearted Protestants may take heart, and
likewise take notice that God is vindicating his own glory against these
desperate Atheists that began to insult, and to ask (as we are credibly
informed) what is become of the God of the Protestants, and likewise what
spirit and courage God is able to put into the hearts of those that fight for
him, and for his cause against his bloodthirsty enemies. And therefore be not
dismayed you Protestants, it is a great honor to fight under the Banner of
Christ, they fight under the Banner of Antichrist, the Lord is with you while
ye are with him. See the blasphemies and cruelties of these bloody men: it is
that their names (as Amalek) may be blotted out from under Heaven, for surely
the day of recompense is coming, that God will make his arrows drunk in
their blood, they love blood, and therefore God will give them blood in great
measure.

As for instance. I shall relate you a bloody story of one of those cruel
beasts. The Protestant Troopers about the beginning of February last, marched
out of Dublin, as they use to do, to view the Coasts, they espied a cruel
Rebel hewing and mangling a woman in so horrid a manner that it was not
possible to know her, having acted his Devilish part he triumphed over her
dead corpse, and washed his hands in her blood, whereupon the Troopers
apprehended this barbarous Villain in the very act of cruelty, and brought
him to Dublin with his hands all bloody, and was adjudged to be hanged
immediately, he ascended the Ladder, and would not stay till the Executioner
turned him off, but desperately lept off and hanged himself. This was in the
beginning of February last, and is credibly reported by a Citizen of Dublin,
who saw him thus hanged with his hands all bloody.

It is remarkable to take notice of the rice of this bloody act, it was thus. A
Friar and this Villain was drinking together in a Village, the Friar hearing
of a poor English woman, there he commanded this Rebel to murder her which
he did, as you have read attested by a Gentleman of Ireland, of good credit.

Thus these poor deluded wretches guld with their Jesuits damnable doctrine, A
Woman mangled in so horred a man^er that it was not possible she should be
known and after the Villain washed his hands in her blood was taken by the
Troopers adiuged to be hanged leaped of the lader and hanged himself like a
Bloodey Tiger.

Companyes of the Rebels meeting with the English flyinge for their lives
falling down before them cryinge for mercy thrust their Pichforkes into their
Childrens bellres and threw them into the water.

who assure them on their words, that the more cruel, the more meritorious. An
Article no where to be found but in the Devils Creed.

Would any man believe that these Villains should take children and toss them
with pitchforks like dung into Rivers^ one was an eye witness (who lost a
great estate there, and since have received relief from the Parliament) who
saw a cruel wretch, throw a woman crying with tears one way, and her Child
with a pitchfork another way.

They have cruelly murdered women great with child, and then left them in
ditches, to the fury of their dogs, who learned to be cruel from their bloody
Masters, for they have eaten the Children out of the bowels of the mother.

At Lesgoole Castle in the County of Four managh, they have burned fifty Scots,
men, women, and children.

Sixteen Scots more they have barbarously hanged at Cloynes in the County of
Monaghan.

Thirty Scots they burned in Tolagh.

It is remarkable that they deal thus cruelly with those Noble Scots, who have
bin renowned through the Christian World, for their zeal against that
Antichristian Rabble, that these Rebels would wish they had but one neck, that
they might cut them off at one blow, but the Protestant Cause shall stand in
England and Scotland, when they and their Babel shall be cast into the
Bottomless pit.

Rory Mackqueere at New town in the County of Fourmanagh, above four hundred
poor Protestants fled in the Church to shroud themselves under its roof, for
safety from the rage of those men of blood, where they might have been
famished, but the mercy of this merciless Beast affords them quarter to go
away with their clothes to Dublin, and vows he will not hurt them: before they
got out of the Town, his Soldiers stripped some and killed others like base
perfidious wretches.

The Iresh Lieutenant pretending they came for the King perfidiously come under
favor, pretends to borrow the arms of the inhabitants, as they say, to quell
the Rebels, then break into their houses, and turn their weapons against
themselves, make havoc taking their featherbeds, and throw out their feathers,
and in the tikes put up what precious things they can find in the house, and
carry all away, and so turns them out of doors, the next company takes away
their clothes, and clothe them with their rags. The next company thinking they
may have money in those rags, they will take them also, search their mouths,
and those parts which modesty will not admit of an expression: if they can find
none, they set their Skeins at their breasts, that if they can extort any thing
when the poor Protestants are naked. Blush! o Sun, to behold the inhumane
cruelties and beastly usages of these unheard of Cannibals.

They inslave the poor protestants under them, making them work like horses
all day, digging and delving for them, and then are shut up all night, not
knowing what wages whether life or death shall be allotted, and so every George
Forde hanged on a tree in his own ground, cut his flesh a peaces carrying it up
and down, sainge this is the flesh of one of the traitors against our Holy
Father the Pope.

a Proclamation that nether English nor Irish should either sell or keep in
their houses any Powder upon the loss of goods and life nether any (...) mos
whatsoever, exept with a liconse and then but five pound at most at 2 Shill: ye
pound.

night lie trembling and praying that they may be delivered from their
cruelties.

Some Ministers they whip, others they set in the stocks, and make others go
to Mass against their wills, then tell them now they have saved their souls,
they would hang their bodies.

A Minister seeing his Wife abused, and his children roasted, desired them to
put him out of his extremity of anguish, to see such cruelty on those so near
him, they most inhumanely cut his tongue out of his head.

And for a conclusion of this dreadful Tragedy. It is related from one of the
last Letters from Ireland, that seventeen of those barbarous Monsters came to a
Ministers house, where they violently fell on him and his wife, stripped them
naked, bound them back to back, then cut off the Ministers privy members,
afterward ravished his wife on his back, and then inhumanely cut their throats:
transcendent cruelty exceeding Pagans and Atheists.

For the oppression of the poor, and for the sighing of the needy: now will I
arise, says the Lord, and set him at liberty from him that puffs at him.

Psalm. 12. 5.
FINIS.

