AETERNAL^^ OR A Treatise wherein by way of Ex^^^cation, Demonstration,
Confirmation, and Application is showed. That the great Labor and pains of
every Christian ought chiefly to be employed not about perishing, but Eternal
good things, from John 6.27.

By FRANCIS CRAVEN, M. A. and Minister of the Gospel at Acton in Suffolk.

Matthew. 6.33. v. But seek ye first the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness,
and all these things shall be added unto you.

Col. 3.2. v. Set your affections on things above, not on things on the Earth.

LONDON Printed by H. Brugis for R. Northcott adjoining to St. Peter's Alley in
Cornhil, and at the Mariner and Anchor upon Fishstreet Hill near London
Bridge, 1677.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY.
To the truly Honorable Lady, the Lady Cordell, Not only a continuance of
Temporal good things upon Earth, but a full fruition of Eternal good things in
Heaven.
MADAM,
THE goodness of Your Ladyships disposition has procured you no little Love
from those you live amongst, and I never could observe any, that I thought
really Loved you but they Honored you, and were very ambitious upon all
occasions to serve you. I must write my self one of those (though the meanest
of many) from whom you may justly expect Love, Honor and Service, and that for
more reasons than (as I judge) you would be willing I should publish to the
World; however permit me to say, Thankfulness makes my best service your debt;
That singular worth that all (even your greatest Enemies) will acknowledge to
be in you, makes me to Honor you; and your no few inward endowments of Grace,
(I have some reason to say) I am not ignorant of, enforce me to Love; All which
I cannot forbear to express, unless I will brand my self with Ingratitude, the
which I have ever held to be a Monster in nature and a solecisme in manners, a
crime so odious that the more Ingenuous of the Heathens much decryed it,
saying, The unthankful man is a compendium of all Evils. Now that I might give
a public testimony of all the said particulars; I most humbly crave leave that
the following discourses (which are not notional but practical and containing
nothing of Fanaticisme but Orthodox Truths) may to the view of the world go
forth under your name, and be transmitted unto the hands and use of your
Neighbors of Acton, for whose Instruction they were primarily prepared, and in
whose hands I desire to leave them (having your Ladyships name prefixed in the
Front) as a testimony of that respect I have for more then twenty years had to
that place. Possibly they may in some degree, serve the Interest of their
souls, when I am in my Grave. It is true they may meet with many profitable
treatises of the like argument, yet I was desirous they should have somewhat
thereof from my self. Besides your Ladyship was pleased to hear almost all,
these discourses from the Pulpit, and I would crave leave to promise my self,
that you will receive them from the Press, and as you retrained not the Church
when they were Preached, that you will not refuse them into your Closet, now
they may be read; as you did not I believe* grudge them your time in the
Congregation, that you will not deny them portion of your retirement; but as
they have already had your religious Ear, so they shall also have your
judicious Eye. Let not I pray, the homeliness of these impolit lines cause you
to reject them; they were, I confess, a tumultuary work, for all the time they
were modelling, I had two works lying upon my hands, Pulpit work and School
work, to labor for Elder persons against the Lord's day, and to labor amongst
and for Younger persons every day, and but slender means of assistance.

That which makes me ventrous to beg your Ladyships acceptance is your
unexpected Candor, being confident you will receive them, as I present them,
with the right hand. More great and excellent things, I know, are expected to
be presented to great and excellent ones, but as under the Law, he that was not
able to bring a Lamb, the sacrifice of the richer sort, was commanded to bring
two Turtle Doves, Levit. 5. 7. v. yea a little Goats hair, from those who had
no better, was required to be brought toward the building of the Tabernacle,
Exodus 35. And our blessed Savior commends the poor Widows two mites, then
when the richer sort cast much into the Treasury, Mark 12. 42. v. Esteem my
present little, and so it is, yet well it may become the Greatest upon earth to
imitate a great God, who weighs the heart of the giver, not the value of the
gift, and so doing your Ladyship will please to eye, not the Present but the
Presenter; who hops the following lines will help you to mind that here upon
earth upon which you must live for ever in Heaven; as also provoke you to
labor for* those Eternal good things in them mentioned; and the rather because
your time is hastening toward an end, and it may come to an end suddenly, for
none know how soon they may meet with the death of the body, that are every day
encompassed with the body of death; but happy they, who, the nearer their
bodies draw to the pit of corruption, do find their Souls draw nearer to the
place of perfection, and the nearer they are to leave Temporal good things, the
nearer also they are to the enjoyment of Eternal good things. On Earth it is
your business to labor for Eternal good things, in Heaven it will be your
blessedness to enjoy Eternal good things. Now that God would continue unto your
Ladyship such a large portion of Temporal good things as you already enjoy here
upon Earth, and Crown you with all happiness in the full fruition of Eternal
good things in Heaven, as you are daily (I hope) laboring for, shall ever be
the Prayer of him who promises to continue at the Throne of Grace,

Madam, Your Ladyships Solicitour FRANCIS CRAVEN.

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader.
IT was not any arrogant stupidity of my own weakness, but a confident
presumption of their acceptance, for whose sakes the following discourses were
first Preached, that caused me to appear so publicly in the world, a thing
very contrary to my natural disposition that has ever delighted in privacy: If
they accept hereof and get good hereby, if they, by what they have so lately
heard, and now may read, be persuaded, (whilst they are laboring for Temporal
good things, yet chiefly and before all other things to labor for Eternal good
things) I have obtained my end, though I should not escape the Satyr,
unchristian invectives or unkind and unjust censures of some envious ones. I
assure thee, Christian, in what thou find written it was not to gain any
praise from thee, that I sent these lines abroad; but truly aiming at thine and
all men's Eternal good.

Et veniam pro laud peto, laudatus abunde,
Non fastiditus si tibi Lector ero.
Only this is all that I desire at thy hands, when thou have read these
discourses, to labor chiefly, and above all other good things, those Eternal
good things that will make thy Soul Eternally happy, and then whether thou
likest or dislikest my way, manner, style, method and plainness in handling so
weighty a point, thou and I shall not disagree: But if thou approvest not of my
Discourse, yet approve of my good will, and as I hope to have the benefit of
thy Prayers, so thou and all God's people shall have my Prayers, that in this
disagreeing age we live in, we may all agree to Labor not for the meat which
perishes, but for that meat which endures unto Everlasting Life.

I am Thine to be commanded in all Christian services FRANCIS CRAVEN.

A Compendium of the chief parts proposed and prosecuted in the following
Discourse, as it is divided into Fourteen Chapters.
CHapter 1. Our Saviors design in speaking the words of the Text. Page 1.
Chap. 2. The coherence of the Text and parts thereof, which are these two in
general p. 3. An 1. Inhibition. p. 4. An 2 Injunction. p. 4. In the Inhibition.
1 Something that Christ does inhibit p. 4. 2 The thing inhibited. p. 6* 3 The
property of the thing inhibited, p. 6.
In the Injunction. 1 A duty enjoined. p. 7. 2 The thing for which this duty is
enjoined. p. 8* 3 The property of the thing enjoined, p. 9.

Chap 3. The proposition laid down, Viz. That the great labor and pains of
every Christion ought chiefly to be employed, not about perishing but Eternal
good things. p. 11. Chap. 4. In prosecuting of this proposition four things are
mentioned to be insisted upon p. 14. Something by way of 1 Explication 2
Demonstration 3 Confirmation. 4 Application.
By way of Explication it is showed, when a man may be said chiefly to labor
for Eternal good things. 1. When he does rem agere, when his heart is intense
and serious about Eternal good things. p. 15. When he does use the right means
to gain Eternal good things, such as are the Ordinances of the Gospel, p. 17.
1. Hearing of the Word Read and Preached p. 18. 2. Meditating thereon, that he
may get that good by Hearing and Reading he aims at. p. 21. 3. Improving the
Sacraments of the Gospel, those seals of the Covenant of Grace p. 23. 1
Baptism p. ib. 2 Lords Supper. p 25.
4. Praying importunately at the throne of Grace for the gaining of Eternal
good things. p. 27. 3. When he does not use the right means for a time only,
but perseveres laboring in the use thereof he holds out to the end. p. 30. 4.
When he will not take up or be put off with any other good things but such as
are Eternal. p. ib. 5. When he goes on to labor, though God keep him low and
mean, though he receive no pay for the present, nay though he meet with many
discouragements. p. 32. 5. When he does this thing at all times, improves every
hour and minute of time. p. 15. 1. When he does it in the daytime. p. 35. 2.
When he does it in the nightime. p. 38.

Chap. 5. By way of Demonstration, it is showed, That Eternal good things are
to be labored for. 1. From those resemblantes that the labor belonging to
Eternal good things is compared to in Scripture. 1. It is compared to a Race p.
50. 2. It is compared to wrestling and striving p. ib. 3. It is compared to
Fighting of a Battle p. 51. 4. It is compared to one being in an Agony. p. 55.
2. From the impossibility of enjoying Eternal good things without labor. p.
56. 3. From the agreement that there is between Eternal good things and our
natures. p. 57. 4. From the Examples of those who have been well acquainted
with the worth of Eternal good things. p. 59. 5. From the paucity and sewness
of that number that will be found to have their share in Eternal good things.
p. 64. 6. From the necessity that there is of enjoying Eternal good things. p.
69. 7. From the end wherefore we live. p. 72. 8. From that willingness to dye
and to have an end put to this Temporal life, that the enjoyment of Eternal
good things will work in us. p. 75.
Chap. 6. By way of Confirmation it is showed, That the great labor and pains
of every Christian ^ought chiefly to be employed not about perishing but
Eternal good things. p. 79. 1. Because God has commanded it. p. 80. 2. Because
Eternal good things are the chiefest of good things, the best of good things.
p. 84. 1. Because only Eternal good things do make those who enjoy them good.
p. 91. 2. Because only Eternal good things will do us good then when other good
things will do us no good. That only Eternal good things do make those who
enjoy them good, appears by instancing in five things. p. 96. 1. Instance,
Grace. p. ib. 2. Instance. In God who is the God of all Grace. p. 100. 3
Instance. In Jesus Christ who is the Author and giver of Grace. p. 105. 4.
Instance. In the Spirit, who is called the Spirit of grace. p. 113. 5 Instance.
In a good Conscience, a consequent of Grace. p. 117.
That Eternal good things will do us good then when other good things will do
us no good, this appears by these two perticulars. 1. That Temporal good things
will not do the wicked man good in such conditions as God will cast him into.
2. That Eternal good things will stand a Christian instead and do him good in
what ever condition a good man can be cast into.
That Temporal good things will not do the wicked man good in such conditions
as God will cast him into. 1. They will do him no good, nor stand him in any
stead when his Conscience is distressed with the sight of his sins, and the
apprehension of God's wrath due for sin. p. 126. They will do him no good nor
stand him in any stead in the day of death p. 127. 3. They will do him no good
nor stand him in any stead in the Grave. p. 130. 4. They will do him no good
nor stand him in any stead at the day of judgment. p. 132. 5. They will do him
no good nor stand him in any stead in Hell, when he there shall lie under
Eternal Torments. p. 136.
That Eternal good things will stand a Christian in stead and do him good in
what ever condition a good man can be cast into. p. 139. 1. They will do a
Christian good and stand him in stead when God shall lay him under Affliction.
p. 140. 2. They will do a Christian good and stand him in stead when God shall
lay him upon a sick bed or a dying bed. p. 144. 3. They will do a Christian
good and stand him in stead when he shall be brought to stand at Christ's
Tribunal in the day of Judgment. p. 152 4. Because Eternal good things are
lasting good things, other good things are perishing good things. p. 164. Here
is showed that all the things of Heaven are Eternal, As, 1. That Glory which is
to be had in Heaven is Eternal Glory. p. 174. 2. That Life which is to be had
in Heaven is Eternal life. p. 175. 3. That Joy which is to be had in Heaven is
Eternal Joy. p. 176. 4. That Inheritance which is to be had in Heaven is an
Eternal Inheritance. p. 179. 5. That the Kingdom of Heaven is an Eternal
Kingdom. p. 180. 6. That Crown worn in Heaven is an Eternal Crown. p. 181 7.
That the house or habitation prepared in Heaven is an Eternal habitation. p.
184. 4. Because Eternal good things are good things always desirable. 189 5.
Because Eternal good things are the only satisfying good things. p. 193. 6.
Because Eternal good things concern our Souls, other good things concern only
the body. p. 198. 7. Because our labor about Eternal good things will not be
in vain. p. 206. 8. Because even to Eternity it self it will never repent us to
have bestowed the greatest labor and pains about Eternal good things p. 211.



Chap. 7. Question. What reasons may be assigned why men labor so much after
Temporal good things, that they do neglect Eternal, and build their happiness
upon so deceitful grounds as earthly possessions and transitory things. p. 215.
To this question these Reasons are assigned. 1 Reason. Because it is natural
for men so to do. p. 217. 2 R. Because men do fancy that in these Temporal
things does consist the only comfort of their lives. p. 221. 3. R. Because
these Temporal things being near at hand, do dazzle the minds and distract the
judgments of men. p. 224. 4 R. Because Eternal good things are not without
great labor to be obtained. p. 229. 5 R. Because men know not the excellency
of Eternal good things. p. 235. 6 Reason. Because men do not as they ought work
upon their hearts such divine exhortations thereunto that they find in
Scripture, which are backed with strong reasons, and encouraged unto by many
sweet promises. p. 239.

Chap. 8. By way of Application the proposition is improved. p. 244. 1. By way
of Lamentation, and that in two branches. 1. Over those that instead of
laboring for these Eternal good things, and having their hearts taken up with
and set upon them, have their hearts wholly set upon sensual pleasures and
carnal delights, and therefore do spend all their time in making provision for
the flesh without the least thought of Eternity that follows. p. 246. 2. Over
those whose minds and hearts are only set upon Earthly things, and whose
affections are fast nailed to the Earth, making all the motions of their souls
to wait upon their earthly designs, and that so fixedly as if they had resolved
upon no other Heaven then Wealth. p. 250. Chap. 9. By way of Application, the
proposition is improved by way of Reproof, wherein they are reproved that never
look after Eternal good things, but are wholly taken up with the pursuit of the
good things of this life. p. 259.
Chap. 10. By way of Exhortation, the proposition is improved. 1. To exhort
every one to labor for Eternal good things. p. 261.
Chap. 11. To exhort every one to labor for Eternal good things chiefly and
before all other good things. p. 265. Chap. 12. Five Motives added to the
second branch of the exhortation, Viz. Motive 1. Because Christians laboring
or not laboring for Eternal good things, will bespeake them wise men or fools.
p. 272. Motive 2 Because the greatest of Temporal good things, without Eternal
good things, will leave a man a beggar. p. 277. Motive 3. Because Eternal good
things, even without Temporal good things will make a man a rich man. p. 286.
Motive 4. Because Eternal good things are real good things and all Temporal
good things are but Imaginary good things. p. 293. Motive 5. Because Eternal
good things only, are they that will be for a Christians life. p. 299
Chap. 13. Six helps to forward a Christian in the laboring after Eternal good
things. Help. 1. Get all the knowledge of Eternity and Eternal good things they
can or are any ways able. p. 304. Help. 2. Frequently employ themselves in
considering and contemplating upon Eternity. p. 306. Help. 3. Labor to get
some tastes of those things that are Eternal. p. 310. Help 4. Always bear in
their thoughts the immortality of their souls. p. 315 Help 5. Study the
shortness of time and their present life. p. 317. Help. 6. Get a sight of
Eternal good things by the eye of Faith. p. 323
Chap. 14. Six directions in laboring for Eternal good things, wherein is
showed how a Christian should labor for them. 1. Faithfully p. 331. 2.
Diligently. p. 332 3. Cheerfully. p. 334. 4. Abundantly. p. 348. 5. Earnestly.
p 343. 6. Vnweariedly. p. 348.

John 6. 27. Labor not for the meat which perishes, but for that meat which
endures unto everlasting Life.
CHAP. I.
THings Temporal and Eternal deserve the most serious and most holy Meditations
of all sober Christians; for indeed there is not a Christian but hopes to out
live Time and all temporal enjoyments. When all things below must end with
Time, nay perish with Time, yet a Christian hopes to enjoy an happy Eternity.
How much then does it concern every man to labor more for those things which
Eternity preserves, then for those things that time it self will make an end
of; the former being of greater value, the other (in comparison of the former)
but of little worth*

I will say of the Excellency of Eternal good things, what one says of
Eternity it self; Eternity (says he) is that which never can be comprehended,
yet ever ought to be pondered and thought upon, such is the incomprehensible
excellency of Eternal good things, that the excellency of them can never be
comprehended, yet ought always to be labored after. A Lesson you see taught
by our Savior Jesus Christ to his followers here in the Text, Labor not, etc.

It is the wonted manner of Physicians ( Erumpens sanguis vena secta sistitur)
when blood gusheth out immoderately one way, to open a Vein elsewhere: And so
by revulsion (as they call it) to stay it, by diverting the course and current
another way* The like course does our Savior Christ take in this place, for
observing the minds and hearts of the people that followed him to the other
side of the Sea, to be set upon only earthly things, not to be taken with the
Miracles of Christ, but with the Loaves wherewith they were fed by Christ, he
endeavors in this place to withdraw them from thence, and to cure them of
that disease, by diverting and turning the tide and stream of them another way.

As the Apostle would have us to turn all our worldly grief into godly grief,
into sorrow for sin, 2 Cor. 7. 9. 10. And our Savior advises to turn worldy
fear into godly fear, into fear of offending and displeasing Almighty God,
Matthew. 10. 28. And would have us to turn our worldly care into a godly care,
our care for this life and the things of this life into care for the things of
another life, of a better life, Matthew. 6. 31, 32, 33. v.

The like course uses our Savior here in this Chapter, when he says Labor
not for, etc.

CHAP. II.
Showing the coherence and parts of the words.
THe words are a direction following upon a reprehension; the reprehension is
in v. 26. Jesus said un^o them, verily, verily I say unto you, ye seek me, not
because of the Miracles, but because ye did eat of the Loav^s and were filled;
It was, for that they valued not his doctrine, or confirmation thereof by
Miracles, so that they might believe and be saved, but cared princi^ally for
their bellies. The direction is for the ordering ^f their and our endeavors
toward that which is the ^ain of all, and this in the words read, Labor not
for ^he meat which perishes but for that which endures un^o Eternal life.

Thus you see the Connection. But to the words.

It is observable that all Preaching may be referred to two heads, viz.
Inhibitions and Injunctions. Inhibitions, to pull back from evil; Injunctions,
to quicken to ^ better course.

Take some instances hereof out of the Scriptures.

In the 6. of Math. 31. 33. v. in the 31. v. Our Savi^ur takes them of the
world, and the things thereof, ^ying, Therefore take no thought, saying, what
shall we eat or what shall we drink? or wherewithal shall we be clothed? In
the 33 v. he sets them to work. But seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and
his righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you.

1. Pet. 3. 11. Eschew evil and do good; there we have the Apostles
Inhibition, Eschew evil, And his Injunction, do good.

Romans 12. 9. Abhor that which is evil, there we have an Inhibition: and then
follows the Injunction, cleave to that which is good.

Ephesians. 5. 4. where we have, 1. a dehortation or Inhibition 2. an Exhortation or
Injunction. 1. A Dehortation or Inhibition, Neither filthiness, nor foolish
talking, nor jesting, which are not convenient. 3. An Exhortation or
Injunction, But rather giving of thanks.

So my Text in every man's eye and apprehension divides it self into two parts.

1. An Inhibition; Labor not for the meat which perishes. 2. An Injunction;
But for that which endures unto everlasting life.
In the Inhibition we may note.

1. Something that Christ does Inhibit and forbid* Labor not. (...) ne
operanimi. In the fourth Commandment, says God the Father, six days shall
thou labor and do etc. St. Paul agrees with the same, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 10, 11, 12.
For even when we were with you, this we commanded you, that if any would not
work neither should he eat, v. 10. For we hear that there be some which walk
among you disorderly, working not a^ all, but are busy bodies. v. 11. Now them
that are such we command, and exhort by our Lord Jesus Christ, that with
quietness, they work, and eat their own bread v. 12.

In the Text, Christ says, Labor not, God the Father and St. Paul the Apostle
command Labor, an^ here Christ the son says, Labor not. The words a^ first
reading, me thinks do please men of a sluggish spirit, men that do like no life
like to an idle life. It wa^ the speech of that Epicure M. Lepidus, who lying
under a shady tree, upon a sun shine day, stretching himself, cries out. O
utinam hoc esset laborare. O would to God this were to take pains to live at
ease. There are more such in the world, men that cannot away with labor, men
that by their good will would do nothing but eat and drink and sleep and sport,
and sit and talk and laugh and be merry, but such are the very excrements of
all humane Societies where they live, very burdens to the earth whereon they
walk; as unprofitable they are to the world as that Margites I have read of, of
whom it is said, that he never Ploughed or dug, nor did any thing all his
life long that might tend to any goodness, spending their time, nihil agendo,
in doing nothing at all.

But our Savior does not absolutely forbid laboring for things necessary to
this life. 2 These. 3. 10. There you have St. Paul his Sanction or Ordinance for
Manual labor, For even when we were with you, this we commanded you, that if
any would not work, neither should they eat; and this you see is enforced by a
penalty provided for willing or wilful Loyterers; if any would not work,
neither should they eat. As Scipio Banished all idle Soldiers and unprofitable
people from his Camp, so the Apostle banisheth such sloathful ones from the
table. It was not Adams case alone, but it is the case of every one in his
calling, in sudore vultus tui, in the sweat of thy brows thou shall eat thy
bread: So the Apostle cannot brook those who spend their whole lives only
merely in Epicurate ways. I could wish St. Paul his penalty here might be such
men's punishment, Let not such eat; That if naught else, yet hunger and
necessity may drive them to labor.

The act here is (...), a thing indifferent and lies all upon the object that
our labor is conversant about, as that is good or evil; as the thing is good
or bad for which we labor.

2ly. The thing for which we must not labor. Meat. Under this word it is
observed that Christ comprehends all earthly things. 1. Because it was their
meat they were most taken up with; they followed Christ now only for their
bellies, as Christ, note v. 26. saying, verily I say unto you, ye seek me, not
because ye saw the miracles (of which read v. 2. and 14.) but because ye did
eat of the Loaves and were filled. 2. To point out to them what it was they
might expect from the things of time, let them have what dreams they please, if
they had all the world at will, yet they would get no more of it but their
Meat, which the poorest man may attain unto. 3. To suggest unto them an
argument why they should not toil and labor so much for that which would
afford them so little, Eccles. 5. 11. When goods increase, they are increased
that eat them: and what good is there to the owners thereof, saving the
beholding of them with their eyes. Therefore he takes them off from laboring
for (...) the worlds things, Temporal things: and so the wiseman forbids what
Christ forbids, Prove. 23. 4. Labor not, and he shows what we must not labor
for, To be rich. Labor not for these earthly things, though they are in
themselves mercies, yet they are but mercies without the pale, they are but
Acrons with which God feeds swine, there are choiser fruits to be looked after,
viz. those Olives and Pomegranates which grow on the true Vine Jesus Christ;
and springs of living waters clarified with Christ's blood and indulcorated
with his love.

3ly. The kind or property of that meat for which they must not labor that
perishes; Labor not for the meat which perishes; that perishes with the
using as the Apostle says (2 Coll. 22. v.) rudiments of the world. Such was
that Manna which God gave Israel for meat from Heaven, he gave them this meat
indeed miraculously, but yet it was no lasting meat, they could not keep it by
them any long time, Exodus 16. 20. 21. If they kept it but till the next morning
it bred worms and stank, it was but of a perishing nature; and indeed all meat
for the body is but perishing meat, is but of a perishing nature; it serves but
to uphold a perishing life, and cannot prevent the bodies perishing at last; to
which agrees that of the Apostle Paul 1 Cor. 6. 13. Meats for the belly, and
the belly for meats, but God shall destroy both it and them; and where men do
only and mainly labor for that, it will cause them to perish Eternally.

In the Injunction we may note.

1. A duty by Christ, enjoined, and that is Labor, It must necessarily be
supplied in the Text; Labor not for the meat which perishes, but Labor for
that meat which endures unto everlasting life.

Though it is true servile labor with trouble, sweat and vexation was occasioned
by the curse, Genesis 3. 17. yet there was work required of man, or labor in the
earth with reference unto his natural life and subsistence in the world, in the
state of innocence, for it is expressly said, Genesis 2. 15. That God put man into
the Garden of Eden to dress it and to keep it, that is to labor in it, and to
preserve it by labor: No sooner was man Created, but by and by he is set to
labor, Paradise was not(...) place that served only to delight his senses, but
to exe(...)cise his hands.

God never made any as he made Leviathan to spo(...) himself only; or to do as
it is said of the people in Tom(...)m in Africa, that they spend their whole
time in (...)ing and dancing, but to work either with his hands or his head (in
the sweat of his brow or of his brain) the thing that is good. God will have no
man to be idle, he will have no Ciphers in his Arithmetic, o^ sloathfull
servants in his Vineyard. Homo natus ad laborem, man was even born to labor,
and not to expect any rest whilst here; only the dead which dye in the Lord
rest from their labors. Rev. 14. 13. Now they must labor and toil and then
rest.

Idle persons are good for nothing but to eat drink and sleep. It is good
(says one) to do something whereby the world may be the better, and not to
come hither merely as Rats and Mice, only to devour victuals, and to run
squeaking up and down. Periander made a Law at Corinth, that whosoever could
not prove he lived by his honest Labor, he should suffer as a Thief. No State
whatsoever can privilege Idleness; no Man is too Noble to have an occupation;
the greatest Kings have not this privilege. Alphonsus said, that God and Nature
had given Kings hands as well as other Men. By the Law of Mahomet, the Great
Turk himself is bound to exercise some manual trade or occupation* though sin
brought in man*s labor, Genesis 3. 19. yet now for a man not to humble himself by
just labor would increase his sin; and therefore abundance of idleness is
reckoned to be in the number of Sodomes sins, Ezekiel. 16 49.

2. In the Injunction we have the thing for which la^our, that is the duty is
enjoined (...), That meat, ^at food for the soul; that which is meat for a
Christi^ns faith and not for a christians taste; such as are Christ with all his
riches and treasures, with all his benefits and privileges, and what else with
Christ, the Gospel declares making for the Saints Eternal ^^lfare; of which
afterward in the discourse.

But these things Christ commends under the name of Meat, as one notes, 1.
Because his followers now were earnestly seeking after meat, therefore he
points them out better meat. Thus to the woman of Samaria coming for water, he
points out the living water, 2. To show the necessity of having these things
and the usefulness of them, they had as great need hereof as of meat.

3. In the Injunction there is the mod^s or property of the meat for which
labor is enjoined which endures unto everlasting life; that is for those
things which are appointed by God to refresh and sustain the soul unto
Eternity, for such things that when all these poor helps which serve to prop up
a Pilgrims travel, as so many baits, till he get home shall fail, may be
Eternal provision.

That which our Savior does here then is this, he diverts their affections and
eagerness from off earthly things and sets them upon the right object, Christ
does not hereby dehort them altogether from laboring for meat that perishes,
but what he says is spoken per modum comparationis, by way of comparison, q.
d, do not so labor for the meat that perishes, that you neglect to labor for
the meat that perishes not; as when he says Matthew. 6. 31. 33. Therefore take
no thought, saying, what shall we eat, or what shall we drink? or wherewith
shall we be clothed? But seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his
righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you. The Heathens (with
whom if Christians should symbolize in sins or not exceed in virtue, it were a
shame to them, for as a Christian differs from an Heathen in Profession, so he
should in Practice*) because they know not the Eternal blessedness of the life
to come, but only that which concerns this present life, their care is only
after what they shall eat and drink and wherewithal they may be clothed, as our
Savior observes, v. 32. For after all these things do the Gentiles seek, for
men that have hope in this life only, it is no marvel if they labor their
utmost to make their best of it, but our Savior teaches his Hearers to prefer
care for things Eternal before a care for things Temporal, indeed what our
Savior says here is not contradictory to that of the Apostle in 2 Cor. 8. 21.
Provide for things honest, things that are necessary; provide for things
necessary has his time; so that our Savior his primum quaerite regnum Dei, be
first remembered. The care for this life present and things necessary thereunto,
is by the Apostle commended, but by our Savior the care of heavenly things is
preferred.

Many such like instances we meet with from Christ, as Matthew. 9. 13. I will
have mercy and not Sacrifice; Christ excludes not Sacrifice, but prefers
Mercy: And Math. 10. 28. Fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to
kill the Soul; but rather fear him which is able to destroy both Soul and body
in Hell. Christ does not here exclude all reverence and fear to be given unto
such, but the meaning is, do not so fear them, as you neglect to fear him which
has power to kill both body and soul, he preferred the latter before the
former. So in my Text, Christ excludes not laboring for things necessary in
this life, but prefers labor for those things that will endure to Eternal
life.

This I conceive to be the scope and intent of our Savior in these words, and
being thus opened would afford us several very profitable observations, but I
shall only name one, the which I have chosen to make the subject of my
following discourse.

CHAP. III.
Obser. THat the great Labor and pains of every Christian ought chiefly to be
employed not about perishing but eternal good things. Not for things that
endure but for a season, but that will endure to Eternity.

A doctrine worthy our serious and choicest thoughts and meditations.

It was a good question the young man proposed to Christ, Mark 19. 17. v. Good
Master what shall I do that I may inherit eternal life.

As if he had said, I know I shall be eternally happy or eternally miserable,
eternally cursed, or eternally blessed, eternally damned, or eternally saved,
etc. but what shall I do that I may be eternally happy, that I may be eternally
saved, that I may be eternally blessed, etc. that I may be happy to all
eternity? The point of doctrine may be a fit answer. Let thy labor and pains
chiefly be employed not about perishing but eternal good things.

It is observable that in the Lords Prayer where there are five Petitions for
spiritual good things, there is but one for temperal good things, and that is,
Give us this day our daily bread, to note and intimate unto us, that our
desires and endeavors should be most after spiritual good things, things that
will endure to eternity. And besides, these are Petitioned for in the first
place, before Temporal good things, to note that Temporal good things should be
subserviant to Spiritual and eternal things, the things of this life should be
subservient to thos^ which belong to an Eternal life.

I may allude to that which St. Paul says, 1 Cor. 7* 38. speaking of giving a
Virgin in marriage, says he he that gives her in marriage does well, but he
tha^ gives her not in marriage does better; so he that carefully and
industriously labors for the things of this lif^ does well, as he that gives
his Virgin in Marriag^ does well, but he that labors and provideth for
things belonging to Eternal life, as he that gives no^ his Virgin in Marriage,
does better.

As it is said of Rachel and Leah, Genesis 29. 17. Rachel was the fairer, though
Leah was the fruitfuller; so to be diligently laborious to get what is
necessary for this life is needful, but to be diligently laborious to ge^ what
belongs to Eternal life is more needful. It was once the saying of one, Si mihi
daretur optio eligeri^ Christiani rustici sordidissimum and maxim agreste opi^
praeomnibus victoriis and triumphis Alexandri aut Caesaris: Might I have my
wish, I would prefer the most despicable and sordid work of a Rustic
Christian, before all the Victories and triumphs of Alexander and Caesar, let
it for ever be the practice of holy minded Christians, always to prefer the
diligent laboring for the Kingdom of Heaven, before the striving and
contending for more Kingdoms and Countries then ever were possessed by
Alexander or Caesar.

The Wiseman who knew what was fittest to be chosen and what was best to be
labored for, says, Prove. 1^ 16. That wisdom and understanding is to be
chosen rather than Gold and Silver; Grace here and glory hereafter, are
unspeakably better than Gold or silver; these things they serve only the life
that now is, the back and the belly, but Grace and Glory the life to come. What
Aeneas Silvius said of Learning, may much more be said of Grace and Glory and
all Eternal good things, Vulgar men should esteem thereof as silver, Noble men
as Gold, and Princes should prize it above their chiefest Pearls, and manifest
the same in laboring, not with Martha for the many things, but with Mary for
the one thing necessary, Eternal salvation.

A Christian should have his affection carried out to these things as the
Thessalonians had theirs toward St. Paul, 1 These. 3. 6 where the Apostle takes
notice of the Thessalonians excellent faith and love, the truth of their faith
discovering it self by their love (for faith that justifies works by love, Gal.
5. 6. v. For in Jesus Christ neither circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but faith which works by Love) Now as to their faith was
joined love, so in their love (for which I name the place) may be observed a
specialty toward the Apostle, they loved all Saints, but especially St. Paul,
for they had a special remembrance of St. Paul; him, above many they desired to
see; him above many they had in their remembrance: So these things of Eternity
above many should be labored for by every Christian.

Moses exhorts the children of Israel in Deuteronomy. 4. 9. 10. v. to remember all
the things which they had seen, but especially the day that they stood before
the Lord their God in Horeb. what ever a Christian wants he must labor and
take pains for, but specially for those things which endure to everlasting
life; the Jews had an high esteem of every part of God's worship that he had
appointed them to observe, but praecipuus honos Paschae habitus est, the
Pasover was chiefly had in honor. We cannot promise our selves to obtain any
good thing at the hands of God without labor, but Eternal good things are
chiefly to be labored for.

CHAP. IV.
In the discussion of this point I shall speak to these parts.
1. SOmething by the way of Explication. 2. Something by way of Demonstration.
3. Something by way of Confirmation. 4. Something by way of Application.

By way of Explication we shall enquire when a man may be said chiefly to
labor for eternal good things; And this we shall do in these following
particulars.

1. When he does rem agere, when his heart is intense and serious about eternal
good things. 2. When he does use the right means to gain eternal good things,
such as are the Ordinances of the Gospel. 1. The word read and preached. 2.
When having read or heard the Word of God Preached, he does meditate upon it,
that he may get the good by hearing and reading he aims at.
3. When he makes use of and improves the Sacraments of the Gospel, those seals
of the Covenant of Grace. 1. Baptism. 2. The Lords Supper.
4. When he is importunate at the Throne of Grace by Prayer, begging of these
things. 3. When he does not use the right means for a time only, but
perseveres, laboring in the use thereof, he holds out to the end. 4. When he
will not take up or be put off with any other good things but such as are
eternal. 5. When he goes on to labor though God keep him low and mean, though
he receive no pay, nay though he meet with many discouragements. 6. When he
does this thing at all times, improves every hour and minute of time. 1. When
he does it in the day time. 2. When he does it in the night time.

1. When he does rem agere, when his heart is intense and serious about eternal
good things. Orantis est nihil nisi caelestia cogitare; he that is employed in
any holy and sacred employment should have his mind set only on heavenly
things, Luk 9. 62. says our Savior there No man having put his hand to the
Plough, and looking ^ack, is fit for the Kingdom of God; The meaning is, that
as he that ploughs, must have his eyes always ^orward, always upon his work
to guide and direct ^is hand in casting and laying the furrows straight and
^ven, (for his hand will be quickly out and his Plough ^o amiss when his eye is
off.) So he that heartily re^olves for heaven, and seriously sets himself to
labor ^or eternal good things, such a one addicts himself whol^y and intently
to the business of Religion.

I remember a story of a certain Youth, who being ^ the Temple with Alexander
when he was to offer in^ense to the gods, and the youth holding the golden
^euser with the fire in it, a coal fell on the youths hand and burnt ^is wrist,
but the youth considering what a ^cred thing he was about, for all he felt his
wrist to be ^urnt, yet he would not stir, but continued still to the and; the
burning of his wrist did not disturb him when ^ey were offering to the gods. So
then a Christian ^ay tru^y be said to be taking pains for Eternal good things,
when he so vehemently applies himself to understand, apprehend and gain them,
that at the same time he scarcely observes or takes notice of such things as do
occur his senses, the whole force of his Soul bu^^ing it self herein as in one
of its most supreme and most noble actions and employments of all other. Like
that Archimedes, a great Mathematitian, who, when a City of Sicilia wherein he
dwelt was taken by the Romans, he never took any notice that the City was
taken, when the Soldiers broke into the house where he was, yet he takes no
notice, nay when they brake into his Study, he was not the least moved nor took
any notice of them, he was drawing Lines in the dust and did not mind them,
insomuch as one of the Soldiers thinking they were disregarded, drew his Sword
and killed him.

Then a man labors indeed for Eternal good things when he is so bent upon this
his employment, as that famous Painter Zeuxis was about his Paintings, who
being asked the reason of his so much carefulness and exactness, answered,
Aeterni^ati^ pingo, I paint for Eternity, and what Augustus says of the young
Roman is verefied in him, Quicque vult, valde vult, whatsoever he does herein,
he does it exactly and to purpose* And then does a Christian the like, when he
spends the marrow of his soul and the strength of his spirits about Eternal
good things, about things that will abide for ever, not for ten, twenty or
thirty years, but for ever.

Surely he had need to be serious in what he goes about who is laboring to
provide for what must endur^ to Eternity, and be provision not for a few years,
bu^ for Eternity. Such one should so be employing himself for Heaven, as the
Duke of Alva said of himself. The story is this, King Henry the four^h asking
him wheth^ he had observed the Eclipses: No, (says he) I have so much to do
upon Earth, that I have no leisure to look up to Heaven.

2ly. When he does use the right means to gain Eternal good things, such as are
the Ordinances of the Gospel. It is acknowledged by all, that in every man
there is an innate appetite to the chiefest good and Eternal happiness, but as
naturally all men do err about the knowledge of it, what it is, so also about
the means, how to attain the same. The best means we can use in our laboring
for Eternal good things are Gospel Ordinances. Manna from Heaven usually falls
in the dew of those spiritual Ordinances, and warm milk streams into their
mouths, who suck at the breasts thereof. They are so many golden stair-cases
by which our souls may climb above the thickets, and dunghils of this world,
as high as Heaven, to view and contemplate the things of Eternity, They are as
so many wings to help the Soul more speedily to approach the presence of its
Creator. They are so many Conduit pipes to convey the water of life and motions
of God's spirit into our hearts; And as Galleries, in which both Saints and
Angels walk, beholding the Glory of him that sits upon the Throne, Zach. 3. 7.

Now when a Christian improves these Ordinances rightly, then he labors for
Eternal good things; then when he searches for these things, as Saul did for
David, when he said 1 Samuel 23. 23. v. I will search him out throughout all the
thousands of Judah; so when he searches for them through all the Ordinances of
the Gospel, searches for them in reading and hearing of the Word Preached;
searches for them in the Sacraments of Baptism and the Lord's Supper, etc. But
to come to particulars.

1. When he searches for them in reading and hearing of the word preached.

He has an high esteem of the Scriptures, with him the Scriptures are to other
writings as Joseph's Sheave was to his brethrens, or as the Sun is to the
lesser Stars, he accounts of all writings but as so much wast Paper in
comparison of them.

I may here apply the answer of Budaeus, to Francis the first King of France,
when the King asked him, if all the books in the world were to be burnt but
one, what one that should be to preserve Learning: Budaeus answered, that he
would save the works of Plutarch, because they had in them impressions of all
Sciences: but let the like question be propounded to a Christian desirous to
obtain Eternal good things, his answer will be, though all the books in the
world were to be burnt and Plutarch also to bear them company, yet if the book
of the Scriptures were preserved, in them a man might find impressions of all
Arts and Sciences, of all kind of Divinity, both contemplative and practical;
The Scriptures being (as that Princely Preacher Count Anhalt used to say) The
swaddling band of the Child Jesus; provided they are to inform us in matters of
Faith, to guide and direct us in the course of life, to discover and reveal
unto us what God has prepared for those that love him, things that eye has
not seen, nor ear heard, nor have entered into the heart of man, 1 Cor. 2. 9.
and to teach us the way to possess those things.

No wonder therefore if in laboring for Eternal good things, he be heard to
say with St. Austin, Sacrae Scripturae tuae sunt sanctae deliciae meae; Thy
holy Scriptures are my delights; no wonder if he account them one of the
greatest and most noble Love Tokens that ever God gave to the children of men:
no wonder if he prize them above gold, yea above much fine gold; the Scripture
being both concha and canalis, a Cistern to contain the glorious mysteries of
Salvation, and a Conduit to convey God and Grace into the Soul, that it may in
glory be happy unto all Eternity; No wonder if he imitate that Peerless
Princess Queen Elizabeth, to whom, after her coming to the Crown, as she passed
in Triumphant state through the streets of London, the Londoners presented a
Bible (at the little Conduit in Cheapside, who received the same with both
hands, and kissing it, laid it to her breasts, saying, That she received it
thankfully, and by it she would square her deportment, that the same had ever
been her chiefest delight, and now should be the rule* whereby, she meant to
frame her Government, this puts him upon reading and hearing of the Word
Preached; and certainly then he labors for Eternal good things.

1. When he reads the Scriptures, that therein he may search for Eternal life,
that in them he may find the way to Eternal life: When he follows our
Savior's counsel given to the Jews, Joh. 5. 39. Search the Scriptures for in
them ye think ye have eternal life. The Greek word signifies to search, as men
do under ground for Treasures, or to search as men do under water for something
at the bott^me. And then a Christian labors after those things when he is not
wearied in the pains he takes in the Scriptures, but takes all the pains he
can, that he may more clearly discover that heavenly Treasure which lies
therein* that he may be rich in Faith and enriched in all knowledge 1 Cor. 1.
5. that he may be acquainted with the Mysteries of Salvation, and be taught how
to obtain those things that will last beyond a season.

That he may be made wise to Salvation, that he may discern between things
Temporal and things Eternal, that he may come to know God and all the
excellencies that are in Jesus Christ; that he may learn from thence the
happiness and glory of Heaven, and have his heart inflamed with desires to
possess those Eternal Mansions.

When the earnest desire after these things makes him* to keep his Bible near
unto him, as it said of the Old Lord Burleigh (Lord High Treasurer) that to his
dying day he would earry always a Tullies Offices about him either in his Bosom
or in his Pocket; so as Charles the 5th. took not more delight in the study of
the Mathematics then he in the study of the Scriptures, wherein he seeks for
the knowledge of these things as for Silver, and searches for them as for hid
Treasures, as Solomon directs Pro. 2. 4.

2. When he is a diligent hearer of the word of God preached, that he may by
the help thereof come the better to understand the word of God and know the
will of God (which as it is revealed in the Scriptures, is to be the rule of
all our ways and actions in this world) and be informed in that (wherein most
and greatest part of the world do mistake) future and eternal happiness of
another life.

Where the Word of God is sincerely preached, I may use his words that says,
Quicquid ibi docetur est veritas, quid praecipitur est bonitas, quicquid
promittitur saelicitas; All that is there taught is truth, all that is there
commanded is goodness, all that is there promised is happiness.

Now that Christian that therefore is ever drawing water out of these pure
Fountains, that waits conscientiously at the posts of wisdoms house, that
esteems the word as his appointed food, that hears that his Soul^ may live,
that here his soul may live the life of Grace, and hereafter it may live the
life of Glory, when it shall be let loose from his body that cage of clay, such
an one is then without doubt in the right way providing for Eternity.

I will not say it of all hearers, that therefore they hear that their Souls
may thus live, for there are many who would be thought to have a desire after
the word, and are often where the Word is Preached, but alas! should it be
demanded of them, as once it was of Aristotle after a long and curious Oration,
how he liked it, they may as truly answer as he did; Truly (says he) I did not
hear it, for I was all the while minding another matter. Too many such there
are, men whose eyes are open, but their minds asleep; but when a Christian is
attentive to what is spoken of the high Mysteries the word contains, is
attentive to every description of the Heavenly Canaan, and every direction
pointing out the way thither as to what concerns him, here such an one follows
our Saviors counsel in the words, and is laboring not for that meat which
perishes, but for that which endures to everlasting life.

3. When having read or heard the word of God, he does medita^e upon it, he
spends many thoughts about it, that he may the better bury the good seed in his
heart, that it may not lie loose upon the top of his heart, neither for the
fowls of the air to pick up, or the Devil (that bird of Hell) to steal away.

When herein he imitates Cato, whose practice was to call to mind and meditate
upon at Evening, what thing soever he had seen, read or done that day; by which
means he radicated things the better in his memory. And Asaph, who that he
might remember the works of the Lord, and remember his wonders of old, Psalm.
77. 11. 12. says, I will meditate also of thy works. And the blessed Virgin
Mary, Luke 2. 19. Mary kept these sayings, and pondred them in her heart; she
kept them because she pondred them, and therefore pondred them that she might
keep them; so here, when an Heavendesiring Christian has read and heard
Scripture reports of Eternity, and the things of Eternity, and has learned out
of the Word what course he must use to make Eternity an happy Eternity, and to
be enriched with Eternal good things, he practices that charge given Josuah,
Josu. 1. 8. This book of the Law shall not depart out of thy mouth, but thou
shall meditate therein day and night, that thou may observe to do according
to all that is written therein; for then thou shall make thy way prosperous and
have good success; As if the Lord had said, thou shall never attain to that
knowledge of the Word, as will bring thee to a co^scionable practice of it, and
doing what it does direct to be done, unless thou meditate upon it, unless when
thou have read it, or heard it, thou call to mind what thou have read or heard.

Thus David's Godly-man had his delight in the Law of the Lord, and therein
would meditate day and night, Psalm. 1. 2. What Law this is, David's Godly-man
delights so much to meditate in, is worth our observing, it is not the Canon
Law, nor the Civil Law, nor the Law of the Twelve Tables, it is not the Law of
the Medes and Persians, nor the Law of Nations, but it is the Law of the Lord,
a Law that gives rule to all other Laws, and is it self ruled by no other Law;
a Law leading to perfect happiness, and a Law whereby they must live and be
ruled, that will be happy; David pronounces his Godly-man to be a blessed man
that does this, and the man that does it after a godly manner, does i^ that he
may be blessed, he is in some measure a blessed man already, but he meditates
in the Law of God as one that would be perfectly blessed hereafter.

4. Another means he makes use of, are both the Sacraments of the Gospel, those
Seals of the Covenant of Grace, and all things therein contained, Viz.
Baptism and the Lords Supper.

I have sometimes wondered at the too usual practice of some, that though they
will not let their children want the Sacrament of Baptism, yet can themselves
be content to be without the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, as if that were
some unnecessary Ordinance, whereas Christ and all spiritual good things, are
Sacramentally held out as well in the one as in the other, as well in the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, as in the Sacrament of Baptism. But then a
Christian labors for Eternal good things, when he improves both these
Sacraments.

1. When he dares not neglect to improve the Sacrament of Baptism, that
initiatory Sacrament of the Gospel, and first visible act of God's grace,
whereby he is received into his favor and family, and the first visible means
whereby God does apply to him by word, sign, and Seal the blood of Jesus Christ
for the remission of his sins. He has learned in his Catechism that Baptism
in its general notion is an outward and visible sign or means holding out, and
giveing some inward and invisible grace and favor conveyed and made over
thereby unto him, and that thereby he is received into the enjoyment of some
privileges and benefits that otherwise are not ordinarily to be had and
enjoyed, Viz.

That by that door God has let him into the Church, opened a gate for him to
enter into Christ's fold, and assured him that Christ in his life and death is
his, and that he shall be saved by Christ, through the washing of regeneration
and renewing of the Holy Ghost; that he is thereby put into a new state, for
being before only a child of Adam, he is now taken to be a child o^ God, and so
stands upon better terms then mere Nature did instate him in; That he shall
enjoy pardon, grace and Salvation, and be privileged from wrath to come, he
forsaking the Devil, the world, with all the Lusts o^ the flesh, having no
fellowship with the unfruitful^ works of darkness, and being in every other
respect faithful in God's Covenant sealed by Baptism, and following the
conduct of the Holy Ghost (which in Baptism seals his Vocation, his
Justification, Adoption, Sanctification and all other spiritual privileges,
one as well as the other) he shall at last be made a possessor of that
immortality unto which in Baptism he had a title given him.

Now when the hopes of such things and the remembrance of that treble Vow and
Covenant which was by others made for him in his Baptism (and by himself at
Confirmation or laying on of hands resumed and ratified in every part) causes
him to cleanse himself from all filthiness both of flesh and spirit, and to
perfect holiness in the fear of God; to cleave to God faithfully against all
the persuasions of the Devil, the world and the flesh, not to live as if he had
been Baptized into the Devils name, but as Baptized into the Name of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, as one that has put on Christ and entered into
Christ's death, being buried with Christ in Baptism, and therefore reckons
himself to be dead indeed unto sin, but alive unto God through Jesus Christ,
Romans 6. from 3. v. to 8. v.

When the thoughts of God's putting his Seal in the way of an Ordinance, to
ratify and confirm the Covenant of Grace and all things therein contained, do
encourage him to wait upon every other ordinance for the gaining all inward
prerogatives of Saints by them, that at last he may be brought to Mount Zion,
Heb. 12. 25. to the Souls of just men, and to the assemblies of glorified
Saints, with them to be made a partaker of that life and glory which will be
Eternal.

2. When he frequently is a guest at the Lord's Table to partake of the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, where are opened floods of Honey and Butter for
each believer, where is food in abundance for the Saints nourishment and growth
in Grace, Manna that will continue for ever, and make believers continue for
ever; All other food the sweetness of it is gone in a quarter of an hour, and
the strength of it gone in a few hours. But here the believing Soul is fed to
everlasting life, the sweetness, the strength and the comfort of this food
endures for ever, when the fullest cups shall be emptied, and the largest and
plentifullest Tables shall be bared, then the food to be had at the Lord's
Table shall last for ever, and be Eternally advantageous to the worthy receiver.

Then therefore is a Christian at this kind of labor, when he comes hungring
and thirsting after Christ, and all the benefits of his death and passion even
as a hungry man comes to his meat or a thirsty man to drink, i. e. with an
earnest desire, desiring this Sacrament and the good things there held as David
desired and panted after God, Psalm. 42. 1. 2. As the heart pan^eth after the
water brooks, so pan^eth my soul after thee, O God. My soul thirsts for God,
for the living God, As Jesus Christ did after the Passover, Luke 22. 15. With
desire have I desired to eat this Passover with you, also he speaks to his
Disciples; single desires would not serve his turn, his desires are, desiring
desires; believing ou^ Savior's words of himself, John 6. 48, 49, 50, 51. v. I
am that bread of Life: your fathers did eat Manna in the Wilderness and are
dead. This is the bread that came down from Heaven, that a man may eat thereof
and not die. I am the living bread that came down from Heaven. If any man eat
of this bread, he shall live for ever; and putting his seal to the words of
holy Bernard, In hoc sacramento (speaking of the Supper) non solum quaelibet
gratia, sed ille in quo est omnis gratia, In this Sacrament, not only some one
certain grace is given, but he in whom is all grace, viz. Christ Jesus the
Lord, from whom is to be had all grace, and by whom is to be had all glory.

There are some who may be observed to be frequently at the Sermon, but never
(to their shame be it spoken) at a Sacrament: now come these to look for Christ
and what is to be had by Christ? come these to obtain Eternal good things? why
come they not unto both? is not the same Christ in all his benefits propounded
in both? does not the same spirit seal up his promises by both? does not that
God, who lifts up his voice in the one to promise what he calls upon us to
labor for, reach out his hand in the other to give what he promises? and must
men and women have ears opened in the one and not their hands stretched out at
the other? yes. And hence it is whilst a Christian does breath after things
above, he is at the Lord's Table, not once a year only (as at Easter) but his
constant need* therefore makes him a constant guest hereat.

When others look for no good to be had there, and therefore never come
thither, they are often at the Plough and C^^t; why? they expect some good will
come of that course: others are often at their Wheels, why? they expect some
good will come of that course; but as for coming to the Lord's Table, Oh, how
backward! oh, how discouraging of others! But now when for the Eternal good and
welfare of his Soul, a Christian is a constant partaker of this Sacrament,
dares not turn his back thereon, but highly valuing those spiritual incomes and
soul-refreshments there to be had, is ever one of those guests that desire to
eat of the Lord's Supper where Christ's body is set before him to eat, and warm
draughts of his blood to drink; and where he beleives are held out unto every
worthy receiver, all the unsearchable Riches of Christ, Heaven and Eternity, as
truly and as really as in the Preaching of the Word, then I say he is laboring
and taking pains for what will Eternally be advantageous unto him.

3. When he is importunate at the Throne of Grace praying for these things;
Prayer is not performed without labor, 2 Cor. 1. 10. 11. v. The Apostle
intimates so much there, when he says, v. 10. We trust that he will yet deliver
us, v. 11. You also helping together prayer for us; The Greek word is,
laboring together, verily he that will obtain any thing at God's hands by
Prayer, his Prayer must be a working and laboring Prayer; Lazy praying will
not prevail, the heart herein should not be sluggish, but earnest at work; a
man may spend much time in Prayer and be no better then those Psalliani and
Euchitae who spent all their time in Prayer, and yet were accounted but
Heretics for their pains; it is not the length of Prayer, but the importunity
of Prayer that prevails with God.

It is storied of Proteus that he was wont to give certain Oracles, but it was
hard to make him speak or deliver them* but he would turn himself into several
shapes and forms, yet if they, who sought to him, would hold out, and press him
hard without fear, into whatsoever form or shape he appeared, they were sure to
have satisfactory Oracles. So verily God gives not any kind of blessings,
either Temporal, Spiritual or Eternal, unless we will wrestle them out, and
contend and strive with God for them by earnest and importunate Prayer.

Now when a Christian wings his soul with fervent Prayer, thereby to fly to
Heaven, and use all the motives he can to make him pray to God with the
greatest fervency and importunity; he goes not coldly, but importunately to the
Throne of Grace, contenting himself not to utter words but Prayers to God; when
he is ever striving and wrestling with God by Prayer for them, that he obtains
not any thing of Heaven but he may name it his Napthaly, because with great
wrestlings he did wrestle for them, as Rachel called her maid Bilhah's second
son whom she did bare Jacob, Genesis 30. 8. v. And Rachel said, with great
wrestlings have I wrestled with my Sister, and I have prevailed, and she called
his name Napthaii. when he wrestles with God for them by Prayer, as Jacob did
for the Blessing, Genesis 32. 24, 25, 26. v. As Hannah did for a son, 1 Samuel 1. 9,
10, 11. v. striving with such an unusual* motion of her lips, that old Eli,
looking upon her, thought her drunk, and yet her Prayer consisted more* in the
travel of her heart then in the labor of her lips. As the Canaanitish woman
besought Christ for her Daughter who had an unclean spirit, Matthew. 11. 26* 27.
v. she was importunate and would not be put off with any denial or repulse,
neither with silence or sa^ answers. As St. Paul did to have the messenger of
Satan sent to buffet him, to depart from him, 2 Cor. 1^. 7. 8. says he in the
8 v. For this thing I besought the Lord thrice, that it might depart from me,
that is often, left not off praying until he had his desire. As the Widow did
strive with the unjust Judge, Luke 18. who left not off her suit until she was
master of her requests. As Elijah did use Prayer, 1 Kings 18. 42. who put his
head between his legs, as straining every string of his heart in Prayer: He
prayed and prayed, says Saint James, Jam. 5. 17. and by his prayer he had what
he would of God, even so does he use prayer as Elijah did, to be a key to open
Heaven, and to unlock Heaven, where all the Treasures of Eternity are laid up,
that as the Prophet by Prayer procured rain, so he by Prayer may gain the Dews,
and showers of the spirit to water the seeds of grace in his heart, that they
may bring forth a crop of glory Eternal.

When he resolves not to restrain Prayer, Job 5. 4. or give the Lord any rest
until he bestow these things upon him, he will take no nay until he speed in
his suit before God; Paulus Aemilius the Roman General, being to fight against
Perses King of Macedony, when as he sacrificed to his god Hercules, and it
proved not to his mind, he slew twenty several sacrifices one after another,
and would not give over, until in the one and twentieth he had descried certain
Arguments of victory; and so does the importunate Christian, when his heart is
set upon it to gain Eternal good things, he perseveres in Prayer, continuing
instant in Prayer, Romans 12. 12. As St. Paul directs, a Metaphor from hunting
dogs, that give not over the game until they have got it, so he continues
praying unto God, until he get the better of him, and is the more fervent when
most confident of obtaining what he prays, for hope is industrious and draws
to action.

4. When he does not use the right means for a time only, but perseveres
laboring in the use thereof, he holds out to the end; laboring herein not
only in some good moods and hot fits of zeal, or strange pangs of Devotion at
certain times of their lives, as when they are invited to the Sacrament of the
Lord's Supper, in times of sickness, and fears of death, or when some heavy
judgment of God has befaln them; but when he devo^es himself to a diligent
endeavor at all times to store his soul with such things as will for ever be
useful to the soul. When he follows that good counsel of one, Non tantum
facite, sed perficite, and thinks not enough to begin his work, unless he crown
it with perseverance, not ceasing to labor until he come to die, not being
weary in well doing, for he knows that in due season we shall reap if we faint
not: Gal. 6. 9. accounting it a shame to faint or be weary in the search of
that which being found will more then pay for the pains of searching, as one
says, Quaerendi defatigatio turpis est, cum id quod quaeritur, sit pulcherimum,

When he follows on to use the right means as the Prophet Elisha followed his
Master Elijah, whom having once found, he would never again go from him, never
leave him until he saw him taken up into Heaven; no more does one truly
industrious for the things of Eternity, having entered into a course of well
doing, he never goes from it until he be taken up into Heaven, and put into
possession of what he has been laboring for: He is like the little Be which
will not off the meanest flower until he has got something out of it.

5. When he will not take up or be put off with any other good things but such
as are Eternal; he will bless God for the least of the mercies of this life, if
he have but Offam and aq(...) bread and water, if he have but ^ood and raiment
(as good Jacob desired of God, Genesis 28. 20.) he is well satisfied therewith,
and envies not the richest Craesus or Crassus upon the earth, and yet will not
be put off with the greatest of worldly things for a portion; when he is
contented with daily bread, with the bread of the day for the day, only that he
may in diem vivere, as birds do, the little birds, having only what may serve
for natures use, yet he would not be put off with the greatest of those things
which are indifferently distributed to Saints and Sinners.

Such a one was Luther who when he had great gifts sent him from Dukes and
Princes, he refused them, and says he, I did vehemently protest God should not
put me off so, it is not that will content me.

No mercy but the God of mercy would satisfy David's desire, Psalm. 73. 25. Whom
have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire besides
thee; David would not be put off with any thing in Heaven or Earth, but the God
of Heaven and earth; should David by his diligent labor and pains have gotten
not only the earth but Heaven, yet that by David would not have been thought
enough to put an end to his labor except he had God also: The possession of
that which would have made another to say with the rich man in the Gospel,
Soul, take thine ease eat, drink and be merry, Luke 12. 19. would not have
wrought so upon David, until David had what he desired, viz. God; David from
labor would not have been eased.

As it is said of Caius Marius, in choosing of his Soldiers, he would
willingly admit none into his band, that were less then six foot high, men of a
low, mean, and ordinary stature would not co^^ent him, no he would have such as
were of a tall and high stature; so when not low mean things of the world, but
only the highest things of Heaven and Eternity are the object^ of a Christians
desire, then he chiefly labors, etc.

6. When he goes on to labor and take pains for these eternal good things,
though he meet with many vexations and sore persecutions; when he will onward
in the way to Heaven, though the way thither be, via spinosa and sanguinea full
of thorns and briars; when he will not be hindered in his journey toward Canaan
though he must travel through a wilderness of Serpents, and a red Sea. When he
will follow Christ though he sees Swords and Staves in the way, as St. Paul at
Miletus tells the Elders of the Church of Ephasus. Acts 20. 22, 23, 24. And now
behold, I go bound in the spirit unto Jerusalem, not knowing the thing that
shall befall me there: save that the Holy Ghost witnesses in every City,
saying, Bonds and Afflictions abide me. But none of these things move me; none
of these things discourage me, as if he had said, For I am ready not to be
bound only but also to dye at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus, Act 21.
13. And has taken up the like resolution as St. Ambrose took up to Valentinian
the younger; I follow (says he) the determination of the Council of Nice, from
which neither sword nor death shall ever separate me; when neither the worlds
flatteries, nor its frowns shall take him off his pains and labor. When
neither Nebuchadnezars Music nor his Furnace can alter his resolutions, but
continues like the three Children, who would not leave off to worship God, and
worship the golden Image, though they knew a fiery Furnace, heat seven times
hotter then ordinary, was provided for them; Like Daniel that would not be
taken off praying unto God, though he knew for certain he should be cast into
the Den of Lions. Like St. Paul and Barnabas, whom neither the Lycaonians
preposterous affection to have deified them, nor their devilish rage when they
about to stone them, could procure either of them to yield one hairs breadth,
like all the Martyrs (that noble Army) whom neither the threatenings of fire,
nor the fair and large promises of their cunning and cruel Adversaries, could
cause them to shrink from Christ.

When rather then to desist or draw his neck from under Christ's yoke, he will
be stretched upon the Cross, choosing rather to keep his conscience pure, then
his skin whole, and to secure an Eternal rather then a fading inheritance,
resolving to gain (through the assistance of a good God) an eternal Crown,
though he swims to it in blood, not mattering what he suffers upon Earth, so he
may be but Crowned in Heaven, and not retiring for any trouble or persecution
whatsoever, that stands between him and eternal happiness; If by any means I
might attain to the Resurrection of the dead, says the Apostle, Phill. 3. 11.
Ad gloriam cae^estem and vitam aeternam, ad quam Christus exitatus ^st, quaeque
credentibus ex morte exci^^tis a Deo contingit; St. Paul speaks not of the
Resurrection of the dead common to all, but of a resurrection to a glorious and
immortal life; This so takes up the heart of the Apostle, that no opposition,
no persecution shall deterr him in looking after it. Witness Holy St. Bazil;
when Modestus the Emperors Lieutenant told him what he should suffer, as
confiscation of Goods, cruel tortures and death, etc. He answered, If this be
^ll, I fear not: Yea had I as many lives as I have hair* on my head, I would
lay them all down for Christ; and he can say with that Martyr, that being very
much threatened by his persecutors, he replied, there is nothing of things
visible, nothing of things invisible, that I fear, I will stand to my
profession of the name of Christ, and contend earnestly for the faith once
delivered to the Saints, come on it what will.

When he holds on to continue firm to such a resolution, he is therein serious,
in both taking of it up and keeping of it afterward, ever having an eye at the
glory of God and the eternal good of his own soul, his resolution is not like
that pretended resolution of the Scribe in the Gospel, that soon vanished and
came to nothing; he comes to Christ and declares to him what his resolution
was, viz. to be a constant follower of him, Master (says he) I will follow
thee whither soever thou go, Matthew. 8. 19. But when Christ had told him what
he must expect to meet with, in case he should do what he had resolved on, how
he must look for no such temporal advantage as he had an eye at, as profits and
honors, etc. presently he recedes and falls off, so as we hear no more of him;
but his resolution is rather like that of Maevius a noble Centurion of
Augustus, who being taken and brought to Antonius, and demanded how he would be
handled; heroically answered, Jugulari me jube, quia non salutis beneficio, nec
mortis supplicio addue; possum, ut aut C^saris miles esse desinam, aut tuus
esse incipiam, command me to be slain, because neither the benefit of life, nor
the punishment of death can move me either to cease to be Caesar's Soldier, or
to begin to be ^hine; what ever befalls him, though a thousand deaths be
threatened, yet neither the hope of life, nor the fear of death draws him from
his resolution; which thing discovers how much he esteems of these things, and
prefe^rs them before what ever the whole world affords.

As Jacob no way more discovered the sincerity o^ his affections to Rachel then
that he continued to love her, notwithstanding all the hard usage he endured
for her; so no way does he more discover the great esteem he has of Eternal
good things, then that he continues to labor for them notwithstanding all the
hardship he meets with in laboring for them. As Antimachus said, when all his
Scholars save Plato forsook him, I will go forward, for Plato is more to me
then all the rest; so says he that is laboring thus, one Heaven is more to me
then all these things that I do suffer and endure.

7. When he does this at all times, improves every hour and minute of time,
lets no time or opportunity slip, and slide away without laboring for such
things as will endure beyond a season.

1. When he does it in the day time. 2. When he does it in the night time.
1. When he does it in the day time; indeed the daytime is a working time, then
it is that Man goes forth unto his work and to his labor until the Evening,
Psalm. 104. 23. For each one in his place, should in a literal sense say with
Christ, John 9. 4. I must work the works of him that sent me, while it is day;
to be sure a long night will shortly cover us with its wings, in which we shall
not have the power to work.

Our King Alfred cast the natural day (that is our ordinary day and night) into
three parts, eight hours he spent in Prayer, Study and writing, eight hours in
the service of his body, and eight in the affairs of his Kingdom, he was
careful to spend every hour of the day: The whole day is not to be spent in
bodily labor, some time should be set a part for actions of piety toward God,
and laboring after the eternal welfare of our souls; this should be our work
not only upon the Lords day, but every day. As David in his Psalm of
thanksgiving to God, 1 Chronicles. 16. 23. v. would have them show forth from day to
day his salvation, so from day to day, even every should a Christian be
employed about his salvation, should a Christian be providing for Eternity,
especially in the Morning or first part of the day, and also in the Evening or
last part of the day.

1. In the Morning or first part of the day.

Our Naturalists tell us that the most Orient Pearls are generated of the
Morning Dew; the best services and holiest endeavors of Christians are they
which are performed in the days morning; So soon as the Sun arises the Be
flies abroad to gather in her Honey; so does the industr^ous Christian in this
his Heavenly labor, he ^^ care^ul to spend the morning well, as the best way to
put h^s heart in^o a good frame for the right expense and husbanding ^he day
following. I have read of a sort of Heathens which wo^ship that as their God
all day which they first see in the morning; It is so with Men's hearts, if they
look upon God first and spend the morning with him ^e is likest to have all the
day, and their hearts will be best fi^ted to s^end the whole day in his service
and in the affairs of the soul. Even some Heathens have thus spen^ the morning,
choosing the morning c^iefly for Sacrifice; The Persian Magi sang Hymns to
their Gods at break of day and worshipped the Sun rising: The Pina^ij and
Politij sacrificed every morning as well as evening to Hercules. Publius Scipio
that famous Roman (of whom it was said, Ejus vi^^ ^rat dijs dedica) was ^^nt to
go to the Capi^o every morning before he went to the ^^at, to converse with the
gods before he would converse with Men, to be employed in Heaven before he wen^
about any employment upon Earth, So true have Heathens found those words,
Aurora est au^ea hora, the morning is called the Golden hour and fittest as for
any employments, so especially for Religious employments.

And when a Christian religiously spends the morning or first part of the day
with God for the good of his Soul, and in Heaven, laboring for the things of
Heaven, that he may all the day after have God in his thoughts and Heaven in
his eye, then is he taking pains for Eternal good things; Many instances hereof
might be mentioned out of Scripture, even of those that chiefly labored for
these things. David highly esteemed of the morning for religious and heavenly
exercise, therefore says he, Psalm. 63. 1. v. O Lord thou art my God, early
will I see^ thee; And Psalm. 5. 3. v. My voice shall thou hear in the morning,
in the morning will I direct my Prayer to thee and look up. Psalm. 88. 13. In
the morning shall my Prayer prevent thee. So ^ob, chap. 1. 5. He rose up early
in the morning and offered up burnt offerings. So the Church to express her
long^ngs after God, says, Isai. ^6. 9. With my spirit within me will I seek
thee early; in the dimm and duskish morning, while it is not yet so much as
twilight. And our blessed Savior, Mark 1. 35. it is said of him the^e, in the
morning rising up a great while before day, he went out, and departed into a
solitary place, and there prayed. Of Luther it is said that every day he spent
three hours in Prayer, Etiam studijs aptissimas, even those that were most
proper for study, and surely no time so proper as the morning for study, and no
^^me more proper then the morning for Heavenly du^y an^ labor.

Under the Law they who gathered not Manna in the morning had none all day an^
they who begin not with God in the morning, have ^ar^l^ any thing to do for God
or in ^eaven all the ^ay; if the world ^s but the start of Re^^gion in the
morning, is hard for Religion to overtake it all the day.

2. In the Evening or last part of the day. As God lets him see the day begin
in mercy and end in mercy; so then is a Christian minding the good things of
Eternity, when he both begins the day with God and ends it with God. When
Eternal good things are the first things he labors for in the morning of the
day, so they are the last things he minds in the evening of the day, then he
may be said chiefly to be employed about Eternal good things.

When before he begins with the world or any business on Earth, he begins with
God and the things of Heaven, and when he has done with the world and all
business upon Earth, he again returns to mind God and the things of Heaven. As
under the Law God had his evening and morning Sacrifices 1 Chronicles. 16. 40. 2
Chro. 13. 11. So from him God shall have his evening as well as his morning
Services. Twice a day was God worshipped in the Temple, both morning and
evening; twice a day was the Jews constant course to be in the Temple, there to
worship God; They had their morning sacrifice when they went to their labor,
and their evening sacrifice when they ended their labor, they gave God the
first part of the day and the last part of the day, although they were days
appointed for work, they gave the Lord his part of every day; so when a
Christian though he does follow the work of his particular calling in the day,
yet forgets not to labor for what is chiefly to be labored for, as in the
morning and first part of the day, so in the evening and last part of the day,
he is obeying our Savior's Injunction in the Text.

2. When he does it in the night time. It is true the night is for sleep, God
has made the night time for man to rest in; they that sleep, sleep in the
night, 1 These. 5. 7. and sleep is a singular mercy when God does afford it, it is
ros naturae, the Nurse and dew of Nature, the sweet Parenthesis of all griefs
and cares, it is Medicus laborum, redintegratio virium, recreator corporum, the
great Physician of the sick body, the redintegration of man's spirits, a reviver
of wearied bodies, more necessary then meat and drink, and without which a man
were not able long to subsist; but yet as the whole day is not always to be
spent in bodily labors, no more is the whole night always to be spent in
taking of bodily rest, under pretense of a little time allowed us for that use,
the half of our time should not always be exacted from us; Heathens will
herein shame many Christians; Alexander and Caesar parted the night into three
parts, the first they took unto rest, the second to the works of Nature, the
third to their Studyes, and thus they did, because they were forced to take the
daytime for the Government of their Kingdoms, and administration of warlike
affairs.

Indeed God sometimes withholds sleep from men in the night, that they might be
employed in some Nocturnal actions of piety toward God for the good of their
immortal Souls. Sometimes that they may call to mind their sins, to mourn for
them and repent of them, that so they may not sleep the sleep of death, Psalm.
13. 3. that a sensible sinner can truly say with David Psalm. 6, 6. v. All the
night long make I my bed to swim; I water my Couch with my tears, surely these
are no tears of an Hypocrite that are shed in the night, and that in such
abundance as to cause a flood in the bed; God deals by Men as those used to be
dealt with who had the Sweatingsickness; In the Sweating-sickness (that reigned
sometims in England) those that were suffered to sleep (as all in that case
were apt to do) they dyed within a few hours; the best office therefore that
any could do them was to keep them waking though against their wills; so God
deals with many when he brings their sins to their remembrance, the thoughts of
their sins will not let them sleep; As it is said, The rich Man's abundance will
not let him sleep, Eccles. 5. 12. care of getting and fear of losing breaks his
sleep, and how often does God make the poor penitent troubled Sinner find this
true, that the abundance of his sins will not let him sleep.

Sometimes to pray unto God in the night; It Is true, the day is most seasonable
to work in; Night comes (says Christ) when no Man can work, John 9. 4. v.
that is, then it is unseasonable to work; but though it be unseasonable to
follow the works of our particular calling in, yet it is not unseasonable to
Pray in; of Samuel it is said, 1 Samuel 15. 11. v. he cried to the Lord all
night, for Soul; And of David it is said 2 Samuel 12. 16. v. And David fasted,
and went in, and lay all night upon the earth; when he sought to God by Prayer
for his child. So did our blessed Savior, Luke 6. 12. v. in the Mountain he
prayed all night, totam noctem consumps^t in ^raeci^us; he spent the whole
night in Prayer* when Christ prayed for sinners he prayed all night long, that
they might learn how to pray for themselves; if God drive sleep from them, or
the condition of their souls req^ire i^, not only to pray in the day, but also
in the night; so did Jacob when he wrestled with God in the shape of a Man,
Genesis 32. 24. 25. ^. until the breaking of the day. I^ is storyed of St.
Anthony that having spent the whole night in Prayer, he chi^ the Sun at the
rising of it, saying, O Sol ^in is prop^re no^^s redi^sti, O Sun th^^ have
returned to us oversoon.

Sometimes to s^ them upon seeking for Jesus Christ, ^^d how unsatisfied are
those souls that do want Christ? Places of rest and sleep are but unquiet and
restless places to souls desiring, but wanting his presence; they that have him
are never weary of him; see Cant. 7. 11. the breakings out of that flame of
love to Christ that was kindled in the breast of the Spouse; Come my beloved;
let us go forth into the fields, let us lodge in the villages; she is wholly
bent to spend both day and night with Christ whom she so dearly loved, she
would walk with him into the fields by day, there to meditate upon him, there
to pray to him, there to talk and converse with him; and why? because her
delight is in him, And when the day is spent and gone, yet she will not let her
beloved go, for says she, Let us long in the villages. And Cant. 1. 13. A
^undle of Mirrh is my well beloved unto me, he shall lie all night betwixt my
breasts; She desires still to have her dearest in her thoaghts, still to retain
him in her contemplations, still to have him in remembrance: As they that have
Christ are never weary of Christ, so they who are sensible of what they want
when they want Christ; are not at rest no not in their usual places of rest
until seeking him they have found him. Cant. 3. 1. By night on my bed I sought
him whom my soul loves; She lies upon her bed of ease, but to her wanting
Christ whom her soul loved it was but a little ease, her place of rest was a
bed of unrest: how* ever her body might rest yet her soul was troubled and
^ossed with solitary seeking, longing and looking after the love of her soul.

Sometimes to set them upon praising of God; Signal have ever been and always
great are the workings of God for his people, not only in the daytime but in
the night season; God has not ^or does not withhold his hand from doing them
good in the night* It was in the night that God slew the Egyptian* first born
to effect his peoples deliverance out of Egypt, Exodus 12. 12. It was in the
night that he sent an Angel to slay an hundred fourscore and five thousand of
Senacharibs Host, 2 King. 19. 35. v. It was in the night that the Israelites
were brought out of Egypt, Exodus 12. 42. v. It was in the night that the Angel
opened the prison door and brought forth the Apostles, Act. 5. 19. v. and Peter
fterwards Act. 12. It was in the night that God spoke to Laban and charged him
to do Jacob no harm Genesis 31. 24. And when he encouraged Jacob to go down to
Egypt being afraid to go thither Genesis 46. 2, 3. 20. And when he comforted Paul
in the Shipwreck, Act. 27. 23, 24. v. As he went before Israel by day in a
pillar of a cloud, to lead them the way, so by night in a pillar of Fire to
give them light to go by day and night. Exodus 13. 21. Dark nights are but bad
for Travelers through great Wildernesses, but God leads his people by night.
It were easy to abound in such instances, but I shall name no more; only add
that as God has not, so he does not withhold his hand from doing his people
good in the night, as he preserves them from morning till evening in the
daytime so also he protects and guards them from evening to morning in the
night season: Death seases upon many in the night, it comes upon them like a
thief in the night, that as the Annotator upon Isay 15. 1. notes of a famous
City in France burnt down in a night; an Heathen Author, says he, observes,
That there was but a night between a notable City and none at all; so there is
but a night ofttimes betwixt their being alive and their being dead; Thus it
befell Belshazzar in the night after a drunken Feast, who was in the night
season slain by the Persians, Dan. 5. 30. v. so it befell the first born in
Egypt, Exodus 12. 29. At midnight the Lord smote all the first born in the land
of Egypt, not only the first born of Men but of Beasts; And also the Man in the
Gospel, Thou fool this night shall thy soul be taken from thee, Luke 12. 20. v.
And those hundred fourscore and five thousand Assyrians mentioned before; how
many do go well to bed but the Lord spares them not until morning, as
Chrysorius, a Man as full of wickedness as of wealth, cried when he came to
dye, Judutias usque ad mane Domine, Truce Lord but till morning; Truce Lord but
till morning; The Lord has not truce with them until next morning, when he
who is the keeper of Israel that neither slumbers nor sleeps is a guard to his
own people, that they have not needed to be afraid for the terror by night, nor
for the Arrow that flies by day, Psalm. 91. 5. v. The night is a time of fears,
Solomon had a guard of threescore valiant Men about his bed because of fears in
the night, Cant. 3. 7, 8. least any evil should befall Solomon in the night; and
those who wrought at the Wall of Jerusalem in the day, were a guard to Nehemiah
and the rest in the night, Nehem. 4. 22, 23. So God is instead of a guard to
his People in the night; as he works out mercy and goodness for them in the
daytime, so he is a Guard to them in the night season, wherefore they do not
fear. It being observed of Alexander that he slept soundly one night when the
Enemies Camp was near unto him, one asked him the reason, he answered, because
Parmenio waked; Parmenio was upon the guard that night, and that made him sleep
securely. David dares lies down and sleep, though he might be in some outward
danger, when he knew the Lord would make his dwelling place safe, Psalm. 4. last
v. O how safe must every Christian be in the night, that has God to be his
Lifeguard.

Now those that find God not withholding his hand from doing them good in the
night, will surely (if God drive away sleep from their eyes) be praising of God
in the night; At midnight will I rise to give thanks unto Thee; says David
Psalm. 119. 62. v. what a promise have you here of Dvid, wherein you have the
duty promised; viz. To give thanks; and the time when, viz. at midnight. David
was a strict improver of time in the night, when he lay down at night he
watered his couch with his tears, after the examination of his heart; At
midnight he rose to give thanks, and he prevented the morning watch, that he
might meditate upon the word of God; The people of God have had their songs in
the night, Psalm. 77. 6. v. their songs of Praise and Thanksgiving; Paul and
Silas when they were prisoners, when their feet were in the Stocks and that in
the night, yet they can sing praises to God, Act. 16. 25. v.

I was carried to the Colehouse, says Mr. Philpot, where I with my fellows, do
rouse together in the straw as cheerfully, we thank God, as others do in their
beds of Down; They had their hearts in the night, though they lay only in
Straw, fuller of heavenly Melody then some who rested every night upon their
beds of Down, their darkest nights were enlightened with the delights of God,
the elevations of then hearts were great; such a temper as this in the ancient
Christians ^a^sed them to be called the Crickets of the night, ^ttering those
Magnalia Dei the wonderful works of God, Act. 2. 11. v. expressing their
spiritual Jollity (whilst they have been praising God) in Psalms and Hymns and
spiritual songs.

Sometimes that they might meditate upon the Word of God. Time in it self is a
most precious thing, not such a Jewel among all things partaining to this life,
upon this time depends the welfare of our souls as to Eternity, and it is but
short, 1 Cor. 7. 29. v. I say Brethren the time is short; when Men find their
time too short to perfect a business, they will not only persecute i^ in the
day but in the night also; (...) Men but want Bread for themselves or families,
they will work hard in the day, and continue to work some part of the night
also; The good houswife Pro. 31. 14. rises whilst it is yet night; As the
Oracle told the Cyrrheans (noctesque Diesque belli gerandum) they could not be
happy unless they waged War night and day: Our whole lifetime is little enough
to effect the Salvation and everlasting happiness of our Souls, and yet of this
how much do Men consume in sleep; but a gracious soul when God in the night
time drives away sleep from his eyes, will sometimes be calling to mind his
sins to repent of them, sometimes be praying unto God, sometimes be seeking for
Jesus Christ, sometimes be praising of God, and sometimes also be meditating in
the law of God, as is noted before of David's godly Man, that he would be
meditating herein day and night, his thoughts then are set upon the Word of
God. Some indeed when God dri^es away sleep from their eyes, pass away such
nights in wandering and roving thoughts, their thoughts then running too and fro
from one object to another, without any good or profit to their souls; they
stay and fix upon nothing that is good, are soon weary of any thing that is
good, ever are their thoughts ^^^tting up and down the world; And (thus for
want of Meditation) too often stiflle what good things they have read or heard
of out of the Word of God in the daytime, that their hearts are a ^in to that
ground at Coll^n, where some of St. Vrsida's eleven thousand Virgins were
bu^ied, which will cast up in the night any that have been ^nterred there in
the day, except of that company, though it were a Child newly baptized; they
neither keep any thing in their thoughts or their thoughts upon any thing but
what agrees to their corrupt hearts.

Sometimes again to have their hearts taken up with some considerations of
Eternity, and their immortal Souls everlasting salvation. All time is his who
gave Time a beginning and continuance, though yet some he has made ours, not
to command, to abuse and misspend, but rightly to use. Time is as it were a
portion, part or Cantle cut out of Eternity, and then time is best used when a
Christian is providing for Eternity, laying hold upon every occasion, and
improving every hour and minute thereof for the good of his soul, fitting it
for that great Account in the day of the Lord Jesus Christ, and laying in
provision for that endless Duration. This is that will comfort him at the day
of death, when all worldly comforts will and must leave him, when riches can no
whit avail him; When a Man's conscience shall witness with him that he has not
misspent his time, not lost nor let slip any opportunities of doing his Soul
good, when he can give a good account of his time. Good Hezekiah when the
message of Death came to him, comforted himself thus. Isay 38. 3. v. Remember
now O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in truth and with a
perfect heart, and have done that which was good in thy sight; as if he had
said, I can give a good account of my time, I have spent my time well; I have
not idled away my time and lost my time V^^a est punctum temporis a quo de
pend^ aeternit^s; It shall be with us to Eternity as we spend our time; And we
may observe that God sometimes drives sleep from Men's ^o set them upon thinking
of Eternity. D^^x^^^us reports of a young man that was much given to his lusts
and pleasures, and could not endure to be crossed; but of all things he could
not bear to be kept from sleeping in the night and to lie awake in the dark,
but being sick he was kept from sleep in the night, and then he began to have
these thoughts and think, What is it tedious to be kept from sleep one night,
and to lie a few hours awake in the dark? O what will it be to lie in torments
and darkness for ever? I am hear in my house upon a soft bed in the dark kept
(by sickness) from sleep but one night; O what is it to lie in Flames and
Darkness for ever, and ever, how dreadful will that be? And these thoughts of
Eternity were the means of breaking this young man off his lusts, that was
given to all manner of lusts before.

Now when a Christian (God driving sleep from his eyes) does in the
night-season set himself to call to mind his sins, to pray to God, to seek for
Jesus Christ, to praise God, and has his heart taken up with these serious
thoughts of Eternity, and his immortal Souls everlasting Salvation, he is about
such an employment as may gain him the possession of Eternal good things.

Such a one was David Psalm. 22. 2. v. O my God (says he) I cry in the daytime,
but thou hear not: and in the night-season and am not silent; Like one hot
in the pursuit of a business, if he finisheth it not in the day, he will spend
the night about it; David that prayed three times a day, morning, noon, and
night, yea seven times a day sometimes, held on the work in the night. And so
does the Church express her longing desire after God, Isay 26 9. v. With my
Soul have I desired thee in the night, yea with my spirit within me will I seek
thee early. It is storied of that Stoical Philosopher Cleanthes, the successor
of Zeuo, a Man who for his excessive pains, was called another Hercules, while
he was poor, on the daytime he studied Philosophy, and in the night he got his
living by drawing of Water; such another is that Christian who labors after
Eternal happiness; after he has labored in the day, (if God should drive sleep
from his eyes or his souls condition requires it) he leaves not off in the
night. Like Seneca who says, Nullus mihi per otium exit dies partem etiam
nectium studijs vendico, I let no day pass me idle, some part of the night also
I spend in study, so does an Heaven desiring Christian, when he has spent the
day with God and has been taking pains about Eternal concerns of the soul,
will not be backward to spend some* art also of the night, especially if God
drive sleep from his eyes.

Indeed it has been well for some that God has thus dealt with them, that he
has kept them a^ake in the night, their souls will fare the better for it to
all Eternity. It was well for Mor^ic^i and the people of the Jews that
Ahasuerus could not sleep in the night, it was a means to save them from
dest^uction Esther. 6. 1. v. There is no need of searching after external
reasons, or occasions of sleep this night departing from the King, the
circumstances followi^g do appare^tly demonstrate it, that God by his special
pro^^dence took away his sleep; this was the first occasion of (...)n^ng the
^heel of God's providen^e to the d^li^erance of his Church; For that the ^ing
might the ^e^er pass over the night, or that he might the berte^ sleep, the
Chronicles were read before him, for reading to one ^^ b^d, makes him sleep the
sou(...)er. So was (...)e ^ for that youngman m^ntioned bef^^e, that God (...)
is ^yes waking in the night (as (...) says of hi^ (...) ^sal. 7^. ^. Thou
hold mine (...) waking) i^ wa^ a ^e^^s of breaking him of his lusts ^ha^ was
g(...)n to (...) of lust before. And as (...)e^ was it for ^he (...) that by
the Earthquake sh(...) the fou^d^^ions of the Prison, he was awaked o^^ of
sleep, for the^eby he was brought to inquire what he ^ho(...) do to be sa^ed.
Act. 16. 2^* 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, v. thereby ^e h^d a^ opportunity
afforded to be acquainted with the word of the Lord, and to receive the
Sacrament of Baptism straightway, that is, instantly* at the same hour of the
night, that the foregoing story was acted, without any further delay.

Thus much by way of Explication, to show when a Man may be said to labor for
Eternal good things; I proceed to the second thing propounded to be spoken
unto, and that is something by way of Demonstration, where I shall show that
Eternal good things are to be labored for.

CHAP. V.
It will appear that in all Eternal concernments a Christian should put forth a
great deal of labor.
1. FRom those resemblances that the Labor belonging to Eternal good things is
compared to in Scripture.

2. From the impossibility of enjoying Eternal good things without labor.

3. From that agreement that there is between Eternal good things and our
natures

4. From the examples of those who have been well acquainted with the worth of
Eternal good things.

5. From the paucity and fewness of that number that will be ^ound to have
their share in Eternal good things.

6. From that necessity that there is of enjoying Eternal good things.

7. From the end whereof we live.

8 From that willingness to dye, and to have an end put to this temporal life,
that the enjoyment of Eternal good things will work in us.

I shall begin with the first, and speak to them as they have been named. It
will appear.

1* From those resemblances that the labor belonging to Eternal good things is
compared to in Scripture, As

1. It is compared to a race, the labor of a Christian about Eternal good
things is compared to a race, to that labor which men take in running of a
Race. See Heb. 12. 1. Let us run with patience the race that is set before us.
And that 1 Cor. 9. 24. Know ye not that they which run in a race run all, but
one receives the prize; so run that ye may obtain. It is called a Race, to
show what labors and endeavors we must put forth after these things. Here is
the race, but above is the Crown, said Ignatius to Polycarp. Here we must
labor and take great pains, here we must put forth all the strength we can. We
see that those who run in an earthly Race (though but for no great matter) how
they will strain themselves to run, how they will put forth all their strength,
how they will sweat with labor and pains taking therein.

2. It is compared to wrestling and striving 2 Timothy 2. 5. If a man strive for
masteries, yet is he not crowned except he strive lawfully; For a man to be put
to strive for any thing is both labor some, difficult and painful;
Christianity is like to a game or striving for the mastery, wherein no man is
crowned, unless he strive according to the Laws that are prescribed, be they
never so difficult and painful; a Christian will find it hard labor* and pains
to win an incorruptible Crown; it is that we labor and strive for, so the
Apostle says* 1 Cor. 9. 25. v. Every man that striveth for the mastery, is
temperate in all things: now they do it to obtain a corruptible Crown, but we
an incorruptible; that which St. Pau^ elsewhere calls a Crown of righteousness,
2 Timothy 4. by St* James chap. 1. 2. v. and by St. John Rev. 2. 10. is called a
crown of life, and is by St. Peter, 1 Pet. 5. 4. called a crown of glory, is
here by St. Paul called a crown incorruptible. The Apostle alludes to the
Olympic games, wherein the wrestlers to gain some honorary or reward (as a
crown of Olive or Laurel or the like) put forth all the strength, pains and
labor they could, a lazy kind of striveing and wrestling would not win them a
Garland upon the earth, nor will it win a Christian a Crown in Heaven. The
Jews are said to have a common Proverb amongst them; He that on the Even of
the Sabbath day has not gathered what to eat, shall not eat on the Sabbath;
meaning thereby, that none shall reign in Heaven that has not wrought on Earth.

Albeit men can no more merit Eternal good things by labor, then a beggar by
craveing can merit his Alms, yet they are not to expect that these things can
be enjoyed without labor and striving, as flesh and blood will find both hard
and difficult to go through.

3. It is compared to fighting of a battle; the whole life of a Christian, and
the whole work of christianity in the concernments of the Soul is set forth by
and compared in Scripture unto a fight or battle 2 Timothy 4. 7. I have fought a
good fight. 1. Cor. 9. 26. so fight I, not as one that beats the air. Heb.
10. 32. Ye endured a great fight of afflictions.

A Christian has more then one Enemy to fight and contend with, that labor to
hinder his passage toward the Promised Land, and is ever to look for wars and
bickerings with one or other that is an enemy to his souls everlasting
happiness: here is a Christians warfare, only in Heaven is his Crown; there is
no place nor state but Heaven wherein a Christian is free from either outward
or inward enemies; there and no where but there is he triumphant, here he is
always militant, assaulted and fought against by many adversaries that
disquiet, hinder his content, and that would fain for ever overcome bim.

As Israel passing through the Wilderness toward Canaan, had many wars and
resistances to hinder them in their march thither, so have all the Israelites
of God designed for Heaven whilst they are in the Wilderness of this world;
they have the Devil and other both Church and soul Enemies without them, and
inbread corruptions and lusts within them that fight and make war against
their Souls. That as it is said of Cato, that he conflicted with manners as
Scipio did with Enemies; so does a Christian conflict and combat with Lusts
and corruption, as a Soldier does with his enemies in the field these warring
against his Soul; so says the Apostle Peter 1. Pet. 2. 11. Dearly beloved, I
beseech you as Pilgrims and strangers, abstain from fleshly Lusts, which war
against the soul. And the Apostle Paul says of himself, Romans 7. 23.

I see another law in my members warring against the Law of my mind; The Law of
his members did war and fight against the Law of his mind, by provoking him to
sin; the Apostle speaks it of the regenerate estate. Gal. 5. 17. For the flesh
lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, and these are
contrary the one to the other. There is a contrariety in the flesh against the
spirit, there is an opposite disposition in the nature of it against the
spirit, and this not at one time of a Christians life, but all the time of his
life. As fire and water being put together, never cease striving and fighting
until either the fire be extinguished or the water consumed, so a Christian
finds it in his spiritual fight and combat with sin, there is no ceasing of the
fight or combat until one of the combatants be killed and destroyed; Now it is
no little labor to fight a battle with and against a potent enemy, as indeed
sin is, an enemy that has overcome the stoutest warriors, Quos arma and equi
and milites and machinamenta capere non potuerunt, hos peccatum vinctos
reddidit; such as arms and horses and soldiers and engines could not
overcome, sin has overcome: Victorious David felt the force of sin in this
respect; Abraham that subdued those Kings who did plunder Sodom and carried
away Lot is yet, though the eminentest man alive in his age for faith, foiled
by unbelief; such instances as these and many more, (but that I love not to lay
open the Saints sores) would show how potent an enemy sin is; and you know when
men are fighting to get a victory over a potent enemy, fightting to wrest a
Kingdom or a Country out of the hands of a potent enemy, they use all the
care and all the labor possible to be used; and the like care and labor has
a Christian need to manifest, when he considers what he fights for; not for his
country, not for greatpossessions, not for liberty, not for wife and children,
(though the remembrance of such things animates soldiers) but he fights for
that peace of conscience which passes all understanding, he fights for God and
Christ, whose glory lies at stake every day, and suffers as often as he is
overcome by sin, he fights for Eternal life, and for the everlasting salvation
of his immortal soul.

Are not these things worth fighting for, laboring and contending for? It is in
the fighting of this battle as Caesar said it was in the battle he had once in
Africa with the children and partakers of Pompey, that in other Battles he was
wont to fight for glory, but then and there he was fain to fight for his life:
O Christians here let us remember that our precious Souls lie at the stake in
this fight, Heaven, and all the Eternal good things laid up in Heaven, lie at
the stake in this fight, this will then call for the labor and pains we use in
the managing thereof.

Hence we read of striving against sin, Heb. 12. 4. v. ye have not resisted
unto blood striving against sin (...) the Theme is (...) proprie in certamine
me alij oppono; It is here fitly translated [ Striving against] and is a
soldier-like word, which signifies opposing or fighting, as an enemy to whom a
man will not yield, and by whom be is loath to be overcome; And the opposed
enemy we see here is Sin, against which a Christian is to strive with all might
and main as Combatants and Wrestlers were wont to do; Sin being such a
malicious enemy that aims at the damnation of the soul; After that sin has
brought Diseases upon the body, Poverty upon the estate, and a Curse upon
posterity, it proceeds further, laboring to rob and ransake the Soul of all
spiritual graces, a privation of mortal life contents not, the malice of sin,
sin aims at the loss of Eternal life, at the loss of our Souls, of our God, and
Christ, and the blessedness of Eternity.

It was observed of Julius Caesar, that in his engaging the Swisses who thought
to obtain Gallia out of his hands, he would alight and send away his Horses and
cause all the rest to do the like, To show them that they must overcome or dye,
leaving them no other hopes of their safety but only in the sharpness of their
Swords; So in this fight, a Christian must either overcome or dye, the wages of
Sin is Death, Romans 7. 5. Romans 6. 21. The end of these things is death, Death is
but a modest word for Damnation, the first and second death, not only that
which is temporal but that which is Eternal.

I have read of a people who when their armies were preparing to fight in the
time of War, used only this expression to put spirits into their soldiers;
Estote viri, libertas agitur: Be Men, your liberty is in question: Christians,
Heaven and Eternal glory are in question betwixt you and sin; Estote viri, show
your selves therefore to be Men, nay to be Christians.

4. It is compared to one being in an Agony; Luke 13. 24. Strive to enter in at
the straight-gate, The word in the Greek is (...) strive till you are in an
Agony, as Christ was; Christ was in an Agony in the Garden, when he sweat drops
of Blood; so says St. Luke chap. 22. 44. v. And being in an agony, he prayed
more carnestly, and his sweat was as it were great drops of blood falling down
to the ground; the words sets forth what a vehement conflict was at this time
in Christ's soul, occasioned through the deep sense of his Father's wrath
against sinners, for whom he stood now as Surety and Redeemer, a conflict that
put Him into a bloody sweat, so that through flesh and skin in great abundance,
sanguinem congelatum quasi extruscrit, issued forth clottered or congealed
blood. So that our Savior when he says, strive to enter in at the
straight-gate, he would have us to strive, and strive until we are in an Agony,
until we sweat blood to get in^o Heaven; As it is storied of Scanderbeg, that
in fighting against the Turks, he was so earnest, that the blood would often
start out of his Lips; A Christian should at this work strive Quasi pro vita,
si vincit, vel pro morte, si vincitur, luctaturus, as if he labored for life or
death, nay for that which is dearer then life it self, even the life of his
soul; the words are an allusion to that fighting and striving which was to be
amongst Wrestlers in their solemn games, with sweat, pains and trouble, and
wherein a Christian should use his utmost, best and choicest endeavors and
labor with all his ability of power and skill, whilst striving to get into
Heaven; and the reason laid down by our Savior in those, would seriously be
considered, For many I say unto you, will seek to enter in, and shall not be
able, Luke 13. 24. it is not enough to seek; many seekers will never find, but
there must be striving, there must be an holy violence used to enter in at the
straight-gate; Matthew. 11. 12. And the violent take it by force. A Metaphor
taken from Warriors, who force their passage into a City, and take it by
Storm. Heaven is as Canaan (the type of it) was, though a Land of Promise, yet
of Conquest too; it will not prove any easy work to get to Heaven; Facilis
descensus Averni; A Man may go to Hell without a Staff (as we say) the way
thither is easy.

2. From the impossibility of enjoying Eternal good things without labor; Of
all things to be enjoyed Eternal good things are not to be enjoyed without
labor, and that not without our own labor and pains, so run that ye may obtain,
1 Cor. 9. 24. v. there is no obtaining the prize of Eternal happiness without
running the Race. God will not bestow these things upon those who never seek,
never labor for them; It is true, without God all a Man's labor can do nothing,
and without a Man's labor God will do nothing. They can never expect Heaven
afterward, that labor not for Heaven now: Qui fugit molam, fugit farinam, he
that will not have the sweat of labor upon Earth, must not expect the sweet of
honor and happiness in Heaven. Matthew. 20. 8. v. The Lord of the Vineyard, says
unto his Steward, Call the laborers, and give them their hire; it is not call
the loyterers or idle bodies, but call the laborers; none but the laborers had
their Penny given them. They must be doing that will keep in with God. Ad summa
nemo sine labor pervenit. Worldly wealth and honors may be had without labor
or study by the donation of others, or by succession and descent. Pharaoh
raised Joseph out of Prison and gave him the next place to himself in the
Kingdom. Darius prefers Daniel above the Presidents and Princes of his Kingdom,
nay had thoughts to have set him over the whole Realm. Of how many Men may it
be said what Seneca said of Plato, Philosophy found not Plato a Noble Man, but
made him one; There are many who are not noble Men born, but the Prince makes
them Noble Men; Princes have not found some men Noble Men, but they have made
them noble.

But it is not so with Eternal good things, for the gaining of them each man
must labor for himself, the labor and pains of others herein will do him little
good; All the Princes in the world with all their combined Bounties and forces
cannot put a Christian into possession of Heaven or the things thereof.

3. From that agreement that there is between Eternal good things and our
Natures. Laboring for Eternal good things does best agree with the nature of
every Man. Man is by nature a provident Creature, apt to lay up for time to
come. It is with Men accounted a good piece of providence to lay up something
for a Rainy-day, (as the proverb is) something that may do them good
afterward, and not only in Diem vivere, as the ^oules of Heaven do. Now this
disposition should reach beyond the forecast of Joseph in Egypt, Genesis 41. 35,
36. v. laying up Corn in the Cities only for seven years; Or of that fool in
the Gospel who had good things laid up for him in his Barnes many years, Luke
12. 19. v.

Our Savior directs where our treasure is better to be laid up, Matthew. 6.
19. 20. Lay not up for your selves treasures upon earth, where moth and rust
does corrupt, where thieves break through and steal. But lay up for your selves
treasures in Heaven, where neither moth nor rust does corrupt, and where
thieves do not break thorough and steal. Laying up treasure in Heaven is here
opposed to laying up treasure in earth; a Christians care should be not so much
to labor to be rich here, as hereafter, not so much to be rich upon Earth as
to be rich in Heaven; the best store is that which is laid up in Heaven. The
Argument that the Apostle uses to persuade rich men not to rest in uncertain
riches but in the living God, and to move them to be rich in good works, you
have 1. Tim. 6. 17. Charge them that are rich in this world, that they be not
high minded, nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God who gives us
richly all things to enjoy, v. 19. Laying up in store for themselves a good
foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal life.
Most men delight to hoard and treasure up something for themselves for the time
to come; an hoard of Eternal good things is that will do good more then a
thousand years hence.

Verily that is the best store that will last not only until time shall be no
more, but will last more days then will be time in, even to Eternity; that will
not be consumed in that universal Flame which shall melt the very Elements into
their primitive confusion, when this whole visible Fabric must be dissolved by
the fire of the Lastday.

Were a man made Lord of all the world, and had he his life co-extended with
it, yet he may be assured that there will come a day in which the Heavens will
pass away with a noise, and the Elements melt with heat, and ^he Earth with the
works that are therein shall be burnt up, that there will be an universal
Dissolution.

4. From the Examples of those who have been well acquainted with the worth of
Eternal good things, their ^abor and pains taken about them should excite and
stir up others, should animate and encourage others to use ^he like pains.

It is most true indeed that the Word of God should ^e the Standard of all our
actions: For as in matters of Faith we properly produce a divine act when we
believe, Quia ipse dixit, because God has commanded it so; So then we act by a
good warrant in all doings when we do what we do, not because others so do, but
Quia ^pse voluit; because God commands us so to do. De^osthenes was wont to
say, In civil matters we live and ^ule by Laws, not by Examples; so say I, in
divine and spiritual matters, Precepts must be our guides, and ^ot Patterns,
except the pattern of our most dear Sa^iour. We are tide to Scriptures as the
Jews are tied ^o their Cabala; The Turks to their Alcaron; Logici^ns to the
Axioms of their Aristotle, and Physicians to ^he Aphorisms of their
Hypocrates and Galen; But not ^o the examples of the best Men further then they
have ^ollowed this rule, 1 Cor. 4. 16, 17. v. Wherefore I be^eech you be
followers of me; For this cause have I sent unto you Timotheus, who is my
beloved Son, and faith^ull in the Lord, who shall bring you into remembrance of
^y ways which be in Christ, as I teach every where in every Church. And in this
case the Apostle propounds ^he doings of many of the Saints and people of God
for ^ur examples and encouragement.

Heb. 12. 1. Wherefore seeing we also are compassed about with so great a cloud
of Witnesses, let us lay aside ^very weight, and the sin which does so easily
beset us, and let us run with patience the race that is set before us. By the
particle Wherefore, the Apostle shows the reason why he had recited the
examples of the Saints in the former chapter, viz. that we should take
encouragement from them in running the race that is before us, seeing so many
have run the same race and broken the Ice for us, we should not be discouraged
from imitating, though the path be rough yet it is beaten. There were in Greece
certain Fields called Palestae where young men exercised themselves in
wrestling, running, etc. in these were set up Statues of sundry Champions, that
the sight of the^ might encourage others to imitate their doings; such a field
is the foregoing Chapter, where we have several worthies set up to our view as
presidents, viz. Abel, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, and all the rest of the holy
Fathers, who are a cloud of witnesses to us.

See James 5. 10. v. Take my brethren the Prophets for example of suffering,
the word is (...) it is noted by some, sometimes to signify a Type or Figure
of something, as Heb. 8. 5. Heb. 9. 23. and sometimes it signifies the setting
before the eye, or subjecting of something to a man's view or sight, not only
for caution and warning as in 2 Pet. 2. 6. but for imitation also, as John 13.
15. For I have given you an example, that ye should do as I have done, and so
in this place of St. James named before, it notes such an example as is
propounded for imitation, and to be as a copy for us to write after. How many
inherit in Heaven what they labored for whilst they were in the world? Now the
Apostle propounds such for our example, Heb. 6. 12. v. Be followers of them who
through faith and patience inherit the promise. We should all of us honor the
Saints departed; but how? Non adoratione, sed imitatione; not by making gods of
them, but by imitating those virtues that were in them.

As Melancthon proposes George Prince of Anhalt for an example of unparalleld
piety, worthy of all men's imitation: And Machiavel sets forth a far worse man
as the only pattern for a Prince to express: And St. Hierom, having read the
life and death of old Hilarion folding up the book, said, Well Hilarion shall
be the Champion whom I will imitate; so the Apostle St. Paul propounds men
eminent for piety and holiness by us to be imitated. And how have these
preferred Eternal good things before temporal good things, nothing that was
only for a season could satisfy them, they have ever looked for, and at things
that are beyond a season. To give some instances.

Moses if he would have been satisfied with any thing that abides for a
season, he might have had satisfaction enough, but his heart was set upon
Eternity, and therefore could have no satisfaction in things that were but for
a season; how happy might he have been in Pharoahs Court? what Honor, Dignity
and Riches might have been heaped upon him there? he rejects all, choosing
rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures
of sin for a season; esteeming the reproach of Christ, greater riches then the
Treasures of Egypt, for he had respect unto the recompense of reward, Heb. 11.
25. 26. v. Egypt was a rich country and full of treasures, it was and still is
famous for its fruitfulness, it is called by many, Horreum caeterarum regionum,
the Granary of other countries; hence Abraham when famine was in Canaan went
into Egypt, and Jacob in time of Famine sent his sons into Egypt, and
afterward went himself: It is said of it, that they sow almost every month;
and yet Moses upon mature deliberation esteemed the reproach of Christ greater
riches then the treasures of Egypt.

Those in Heb. 10. 34. preferred their better and more enduring substance in
Heaven before all whatsoever they enjoyed in the world; these were such as
walked in the view of that glory above, and maintained a conversation in
Heaven, and therefore were not at all taken with these temporal things below;
to them an enduring substance did vail the tempting splendor of sublunary
things, and dulled their affections unto them. And says St. Paul 2 Cor. 4. 18.
v. We look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not
seen; for the things which are seen are temporal, but the things which are not
seen are eternal.

St. Basil was for money that would last for ever, and glory that would
eternally flourish; for being offered money and preferment to tempt him, he
refusing both, returned this answer, Pecuniam da quae permaneat ac continuo
duret, gloriam quae semper floreat; give me money that will last for ever, and
glory that may Eternally flourish.

St. Origin chose rather to be a poor Catechist in Alexandria, then denying the
faith, to be with his fellow Pupil Plotinus in great authority and favor; the
knowledge he had of the things of another world caused him to make a greater
account of them then of things fadeing and transitory, undervaluing these for
the esteem he had of those.

When some bid stop Luther's mouth with preferment, one of his adversaries
answered; it is in vain, he cares neither for Gold nor Honor; the small things
of this world (which most men account great) have not been taking with those,
with whom the whole world was despised, and that had there eyes set upon the
great things of Eternity.

Gracious hearts cannot rest satisfied with such low things that Reprobates may
have as well as they, these admire and hunger after those things which none but
the darlings and favorites of Heaven can have, as knowing that a man possessing
the former may go to Hell, and without an interest in the latter can have no
hopes of Heaven.

What labor and pains have these taken for such things? Phill. 3. 12. I follow
after (says St. Paul) if I may apprehend that for which also I am apprehended
of Christ Jesus: v. 13. Forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching
forth unto those things which are before. v. 14. I press toward the mark for
the price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. A full place setting
forth St. Paul his great labor and pains to gain the prize of heavenly glory;
for says he in the 12. v. I follow after: and verse the 14. I press toward
the mark; It is the same word in both places, and signifies with utmost
eagerness to pursue and follow, not simply to follow, but to follow as an
Hunter follows his prey, who pursues it until he take it; Or rather as a
persecutor that will not give over nor rest until he have him whom he
persecuteth; For it is the same word that signifies to ^ersecute, showing that
the earnestness of St. Paul his spirit in pressing toward the mark now, is the
same that ^t was in his persecution of those that pressed toward ^he mark
before; the Apostle is resolved not to rest un^ill he had attained his end;
Forgeting those things that ^re behind, and reaching forth unto those things
which ^re before. Ad ea vero quae sunt priora extendens me ^sum: that is, prono
and quasi praecipiti corpore ferri ^d scopum; straining and stretching out head
and hands and whole body (A manifest Metaphor from runners in race) to lay hold
of the prize of the high calling of ^od in Christ Jesus. Ad praemium supernae
vocationis in Christo Jesu; The Greek word is (...), Proprie est praemium quod
datur certantibus ac vincentibus, It signifies that reward which was wont to be
given by the (...) or Jugd, in the Olympic games amongst the Grecians to those
who overcame therein; Whence it is that some render the Greek word by Palmam
rather then by Praemium, which is thought to be too general a word, they are
not a few that approve of Palmam, and they render this reason for it, Propterea
quod certaminum judices data virga palmea designarent victorem. How copious is
the Apostle in relation of his labor and pains taken for that incorruptible
Crown, as he calls it 1 Cor. 9. 25. for that Crown of life, as it is called by
St. James, chap. 1. 12. and by St. John Rev. 2. 10. for that Crown of Glory, as
it is called by St. Peter, 1 Pet. 5. 4.

I shall therefore, to conclude this point, only urge the following of
Solomon's counsel, Pro. 2. 20. That thou may walk in the way of good men, and
keep the paths of the righteous; and also the practicing of St. Paul's
Exhortations, that we read in his Epistles to this purpose, Phill. 3. 17. v.
Brethren, be followers together of me, and mark them which walk so, as ye have
us for an example: So Phill. 4. 9. v. Those things which ye have both learned
and received, and heard and seen in me, do: And the God of peace shall be with
you, Heb* 13. 7. v.

5. From the paucity and fewness of that number that will be found to have
their share in Eternal good things. Thousands hope they are such as shall be
happy for ever, and yet they will find themselves mistaken; even men whose
hellish nature is written in the face of their conversations, that he that runs
may read it, whose tongue pleads the cause of the Devil, and speaks the
language o^ Hell, yet ^hese do strongly hope for Heaven, thoug^ the God of
Heaven has told them over and over again in his Word, that none such as they
shall ever come there; these do strongly hope to be Eternally happy in the
Kingdom of Heaven, though Christ has said, John 3. 3. v. Except a Man be born
again he cannot see the Kingdom of God; these do strongly hope to see God in
Happyness, though God has told them, Heb. 12. 14. v. without holiness no man
shall see the Lord: The Angels for their unholyness were cast out of Heaven,
and shall we think that God will take unholy ones into Heaven? The place in the
Temple that did represent Heaven, was called the Holy of Holies, and if no
profane or unclean things might enter the Temple, much less into that more
Sacred place. These strongly hope to escape Hell, and forever to be happy in
Heaven, though God plainly tells them in his Word, That the Wicked shall be
turned into Hell, and all the people that forget God, Psalm. 9. 17. And again,
They all shall be damned that obey not the truth, but have pleasure in
unrighteousness. 2 These. 2. 12. v. The Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven
with his mighty Angels, in flaming Fire, taking Vengeance on them that know
not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall be
punished with everlasting Destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from
the glory of his power: 2 These. 1. 8, 9, 10, v.

Nothing more common then for those who have least grounds to build hopes of
Heaven and Eternal happyness upon, yet to nourish most confident hopes thereof
in their hearts: see that place Prove. 14. 16. v. A wise Man fears and
departs from evil; but the Fool rages and is confident. A wise man he is
jealous over his own heart, he trembles at the judgments whilst they hang over
his head in the threatenings of God, he meets God with entreaties of Peace, and
so redeems his own Sorrows; but what follows? A Fool, that is, a wicked Man,
he rages and yet is confident, Transit and confidit, as some render it, he
rangeth and yet is confident, he passes on from sin to sin like a mad Man, and
yet persuades himself all shall do well, he runs on in wicked ways and
practices without any remorss or sorrow, and yet he is a confident man he shall
go to Heaven and be Eternally saved as well as the best. Such another you read
of Psalm. 36, 1, 2. The transgression of the wicked says within my heart, that
there is no fear of God before his eyes. And yet in the next words, He
flattereth himself in his own eyes, until his iniquities are found to be
hateful. Wicked men are very apt to have good conceits of themselves, Wretches
that give way to all manner of sin and uncleanness, and fulfill the lusts of the
flesh and of the mind, yet they are confident of Heaven, and the enjoying
Eternal good things in heaven when they are running headlong to Hell.

But these men will be frustrated of their expectations. Pro. 10. 28. v. The
hope of the Righteous shall be gladness, but the expectation of the Wicked
shall perish. Pro. 11. 7. v. When a wicked man dies, his expectation shall
perish: and the hope o^ unjust men perishes. Methinks it is one of the most
doleful spectacles in the whole world to stand by such a one in his dying hour,
that all his life long never took any care for his souls Eternal welfare, never
so much as entertained any serious thoughts of Eternity, but spent all his days
in sinning against God; and then to think of his Soul and his hopes departing
together, and with what a sad change he appears in Hell, that was confident he
should have appeared in Heaven; with what amazedness he stands amongst Devils
that was confident he should stand before God. That place is remarkable, Job
11. 20. v. But the eyes of the wicked shall fail, and their hop^ shall be as
the giving up of the Ghost. As a dying man a little before his death is pritly
joyful and merry, entertains some hopes of a longer life; but when his
Eye-strings crack and the tokens of death appear upon him, then his heart fails
him, and all his hopes are dashed in pieces and taken from him; just so it will
be with the greatest number of Men in the world, they are full of hopes for
Heaven, and Glory, and Everlasting life, they are confident that they shall
have their share of the good things of Heaven, until they come to dye, but
then their hopes leave them, and all their expectations perish, for of those
many that hope to enjoy Eternal happyness, there are but few will be Eternally
happy. Matthew. 22. 14. Many are called, but few are chosen to Eternal life;
there shall droves and herds of Men be damned to all Eternity, but there is but
a little flock that shall be saved.

Heaven is a stately Palace but with a narrow portal, hence so few enter in at
it: Matthew. 7. 13, 14. v. Enter ye in at the straight-gate, for wide is the Gate
and broad is the way that leads to Destruction, and many there be that go in
thereat: Because strait is the gate and narrow is the way that leads unto
life, and few there be that find it. It is but a little flock to whom the
Father's good pleasure is to give the Kingdom; Luk 12. 32. v. The Greek words
are Emphatical; there are two diminutives, Fear not little little flock. To
show, that the flock that shall come to the Kingdom of Glory, it shall be but a
little, little flock.

Alas! they are but as the Gleanings when the Vintage is done, here and there a
bunch left upon the outmost branches; but one of a City, and two of a Tribe:
Matt. 24. 13. He that indureth to the end shall be saved: The love of many
shall wax cold, but he that indureth to the end shall be saved. Lo it is but
an He, a single Man, (a very few) holds out in comparison of the many
Apostates that fall from their own stedfastness.

Somewhere I have read it of St. Chrysostom, that he asked this question in a
public Sermon of his at Antioch. How few are there think you in the City of
Antioch that shall be saved; and it was thus resolved? In this great City of
Antioch where there are an hundred thousand persons and above, I hardly (says
he) in all my observation can discern an hundred that look after. Jesus Christ,
and of these hundred I have great doubt many of them are unsound toward God.
We live in a land where many thousands profess Christ, but God knows how few of
them shall be Eternally happy hereafter. Thousands and Ten thousands shall be
woeful and miserable indeed to all Eternity, that never doubted of being
glorified and happy to all Eternity. The broad way to Hell is daily thronged
with passengers, when the narrow way to Heaven has in it but few travelers.

Infinite are the stalls and styes of brutish Paganism; and how many poor
Savage Indians are there that know nothing of God; and blind-folded Mahumetans
who are taught to enslave their faith to a wretched Impostor; and obstinate
Jews that are wilfully blind, and will not see the light of that truth
concerning the Messiah, though shining clearly in the writings of the Prophets,
that if the whole world were divided into One and thirty parts, there are (as
is observed by Geographers) but five parts thereof that know or profess Jesus
Christ; thirteen parts of the world are possessed at this day by Turks and Jews;
neither of which acknowledge Jesus Christ; Seven parts of the world are
possessed by merely Heathens, which know not Christ, but worship Stocks and
Stones; and but five parts possessed with Christians, so that there are Six and
Twenty parts of the world that never look after a Christ that only can free us
from Hell, and give us possession of Heaven, that only can deliver us from
Eternal Torments, and bestow upon us Eternal Happyness; And of these five parts
possessed by Christians, how few make it their labor and pains to provide for
Eternity; Very true are the words of the heathen Orator, Deteriorum magna est
natio, boni singulares, there is a great nation of bad ones, and but a few good
ones; but few that embrace goodness and godlyness,

How should this consideration be as a motive and spurr to every one diligently
to labor to be of that little number that shall go to Heaven and enjoy the
Eternal good things of heaven. If there should be but one or two of a Town
saved, it is each man's duty to labor to be one of those two. When that
Questionist had demanded of our Savior Luke 13. 23. v. Lord, are there few
that be saved? Christ he returns him this answer in the 24. v. Strive to enter
in at the straight-gate, for many, I say unto you, will seek to enter in and
shall not be able. Christus non respondit huic ad ea quae interrogabantur,
docuit tamen e^m, quid ut salvaretur, faceret; though Christ tells him not that
few shall be saved to satisfy his curiosity, yet he would have him and us to
strive and labor, to tugg and take pains to enter, and that from this
consideration, because many will seek to enter and not be able; their seeking
will not serve the turn, will not do the work, there must be laboring and
striving to enter.

6. From the necessity that there is of an enjoying Eternal good things. It is
said of Pompey, that when he was to carry Corn to Rome in time of Dearth, he
was in a great deal of danger of Storms at Sea; but, says he, we must go on,
it is necessary that Rome should be relieved, but it is not necessary that we
should live; It is absolutely necessary that we labor for Eternal good things,
but it is not absolutely necessary that we labor for Temporal good things. For
Eternal good things must be had, or Eternal evil things will be had; either
Eternal pleasures or Eternal pains must be had, either Eternal bliss or Eternal
burnings, either Eternal life or Eternal death, either an Eternal heaven or an
Eternal hell.

Omnis homo aut est cum Christo regnaturus, aut cum Diabolo cruciandus, every
man will be found to belong either to Christ's flock or the Devils heard,
either to Christ's sheep or the Devils goats, to be vessels of honor prepared
unto Glory, or vessels of wrath fitted for Destruction: you know the old
Proverble, Aut Coesar aut nullus, either a King or a Caitiffe, not a Man but
must be either Eternally happy with Christ or Eternally miserable with the
Devil.

He that will not labor for the things of Heaven, shall never enjoy the things
of Heaven; Those who will abuse their pains in this world will meet with
nothing but pains in another world, when men make the world only their aim, the
world only is like to be their gain, nothing of Heaven or in heaven; Those by
whom Eternal good things are here neglected, by them Eternal good things
hereafter cannot be expected.

I may ask many men what good they think it will be to them under Eternal
Torments to remember that by their great industry and pains they got such an
Estate* heaped up so much wealth and riches, attained to such preferments, but
neglected the good of their Souls, neglected what would have done them good to
Eternity.

We read of some which have sold the Righteous, but at no great rate, for a
matter of nothing, for a very small price, for a pair of old Shoes, Joel 3. 6.
Amos 2. 6. But we may see there how much the Lord abhorred that detestable
fact, and recompensed it upon the neck of the Oppressors: And what can they
expect who setting a great Estimate upon earthly things and advantages, labor
more for them then they do for the Eternal welfare of their Souls, and
afterward see that their Damnation and perdition is the only reward of their
pains; that instead of Eternal Felicity, they are rewarded with Eternal
Miseries and Torments, even Torments that cannot be expressed by the tongues of
Men and Angels; Prisons, Dungeons, Racks and Gibbets; Pangs of Childbirth,
burning with Scalding Lead, drinks of Gall and Wormwood, gnawing of
Chest-worms, raging fitts of the Stone, Chollick, Strangury, Toothache, etc.
are not able to shadow them out.

Mauritius the Emperor, when it was revealed unto him that he should be
punished for his great Offenses, sent unto all the Patriarchal Seas, unto all
Cities, Monasteries, etc. to desire them to pray that he might be punished in
this world and not in the world to come; And when again it was revealed unto
him that his request was granted, but he should lose his Empire, Life, Children
and all, he was heartily thankful for it, and accepted it as a great mercy; the
punishment and greatest evils of this world being nothing to those evils of
another life.

Now they who for want of laboring for Eternal good things here, shall be thus
dealt with hereafter; with what anguish of Spirit will they then mourn for
ever. It was a sad expression of Lysimachus who had lost his Kingdom for one
draught of Water; O dij quam brevis voluptatis gratia ex Rege me feci servum:
For what a short pleasure have I made my self a servant; And what a
soul-sinking thought will it be in Hell; O God, how have I, for preferring
Temporal good things before Eternal good things, for laboring more after Earth
then Heaven, made my self a bondslave in Hell for ever; and instead of for ever
being Happy, must for ever be Miserable; I may therefore conclude with his
words in another case, Haec qui pavet, cavit; qui neligit, excidit. He that
minds these things in time, is safe; he that slights them is in danger, of
what? of losing Eternal good things, and of feeling Eternal evil things.

7. From the end wherefore we live; to enjoy Eternal good things is the end
wherefore God gave us life. All things have some end for which they are, and
man came not into the world for nothing, there is an end to be known wherefore
God gave him life, wherefore God drew him from a not being to a being,
wherefore God made him to pass from nothing to be a reasonable Creature, to be
a Man endued with a rational Soul, and to be Lord of all things below. Now what
is this end? It is to be made capable of Eternal Happyness, capable of Glory,
capable of an everlasting enjoying of God. This is the end of Man's life* to
enjoy a life whereof there is no end. It is a good saying of one; Quis alius
noster est finis, nisi pervenire ad Regnum cujus nullus est finis? What other
thing is our end but to come to that Kingdom, whereof there is no end?

The end of a Christian's life is (not as Anaxagorus dreamed of the life of
Man, to behold the Heavens, but) to live in heaven; to serve God upon earth
whilst he is here, and to enjoy endless Joys with God in heaven hereafter.

Questionless (Christians) the end why God created us, was not for a short
season and time to remain in the world, there to eat, drink, sleep, engender,
and then presently for ever to decay and return to nothing, but rather to be
pertakers of a most high and inestimable Happyness to all Eternity, which is to
be given us by God after the Emigration and passing out of this life, after our
souls shall be divorced from our bodies.

Christians, you that are earthly Angels by the nobleness of Creation, were
placed in this world not to labor and take pains chiefly for temporal good
things, but for business of another nature, and for a far more important
affair, and of dearest consequence, viz. by all means possible to win and work
out glory unto God, and to save your immortal Souls, For what is a man
profitted if he shall gain the whole world and lose his own soul, Matthew. 16.
26. A lesson that Francis Xaverus counseled John 3. King of Portugal daily to
meditate upon.

Man himself is the end wherefore all things in the world that are Temporal
were created, they were created that they might be serviceable to Man; but it
cannot be, that he for whom God made the world, should have no further end then
to enjoy the world; certainly the end wherefore Man was created, and wherefore
Men are daily born, is that they might enjoy an Eternal and Supernatural
Felicity; That which is the last Article of his Creed or Belief, is truly the
end of his life, viz. Eternal life; There is no creature has a more noble end
then Man, there is neither Seraphim, Angel nor Archangel that surpasses Man in
his end.

How should the thoughts hereof cause every Christian's end and design to take
a nobler flight then to stay within the narrow bounds of a visible Sphere,
things of another world should raise the hearts of such noble creatures as Men
are, and not be contented with such things as they daily see with their eyes,
and touch with their hands: The things that we daily see being but small,
inconstant and of short continuance, the other great, firm and in fine Eternal
and answer the end wherefore God gave us life.

The excellency of any thing lies herein, when it answers the end whereunto it
was assigned; what is a thing good for that does not answer the end whereunto
it was assigned. The end wherefore Men will get a Clock into their houses is to
strike; what is a clock good for that will not strike? it does not answer its
end: The end wherefore Merchants are at great charges to build or buy Ships, is
to sail in them upon the Waters; What is a Ship good for that will not sail? it
does not answer its end. The end wherefore a Man hires a Servant is to do his
work; what is a Servant good for that will not do the work he is set about? he
does not answer his end; The excellency of any thing lies herein when it
answers the end unto which it was assigned, so herein lies the excellency of a
Christian, viz. To attain unto the end wherefore God gave him a being: Hence it
is that the Apostle goes about to breed in us an holy Ambition, telling us, we
are born for higher matters then any earthly things are, therefore not to be so
base minded as to dote on these transitory things, but to seek after things
above. Col. 3. 1, 2. v. though we may have Temporalia in usu, yet should we
have, aeterna in desiderio, Temporal things may be by us used, but Eternal
things should be by us desired.

It is said of Isidore that being at a great Feast and there beholding a great
sign of God's bounty toward the sons of Men, suddenly breaks forth into
abundance of tears: being demanded the cause; for and (said he) I here feed on
earthly creatures, that am created to live with Angels.

8. From that willingness to dye and to have an end put to this t^mporal life,
that the enjoyment of Eternal good things will work in us. That Man will never
be unwilling to dye that can say as St. Paul does, Phil. 1. 21. v. Mors mihi
lucrum, to dye is gain; Death will no ways indamage me, but rather turn to my
advantage, hereby I shall gain heaven though I lose the earth, and an happy
Eternal life though I have an end put to this miserable and mortal life. Not
every one is thus a gainer by Death, they that have labored only to gain the
world, the more they have gained whilst they did live, the greater is their
loss when they dye; It was a good saying of one to a great Lord (upon his
showing him his stately House, and pleasant Gardens,) Sir, you had need make
sure of Heaven, or else when you dye, you will be a very great loser; When men
are sure to lose by death, it is no wonder if they be loath to submit unto death;
How many tell us they have been utterly undone by great Losses, some have lost
all by Fire, others by Water; some have lost all by Thieves, and others at
Land; some again have lost all by Pirates and Shipwrecks at Sea; but the
greatest number of men are undone by death, Death robbs them of all, death
spoils them of all their great Estates in the world, and takes away from them
what they were unwilling to part with; When the Duke of Venice had shown unto
Charles the Fifth the glory of his Princely Palace, and earthly Paradise, the
Emperor instead of admiring it, or him for it, only returned him this grave
and serious memento (Haec sunt quae faciunt in vitos mori) These are the things
which make us unwilling to dye.

Some of the Turks have said, they did not think Christians believed there was
an heaven, because they saw them so loath to dye and to go to it; such an
aspersion have some of those Infidels cast upon our Religion; but none are
loath to go out of this world, but such as have not made sure of Eternal good
things laid up in Heaven.

When the people of Israel were come to the very entrance of Canaan, the
children of Reuben and the children of Gad, regarding not that good Land,
desired Moses, that they might stay on this side Jordan, because it was a place
meet for their droves of Cattle, which they more respected then their passage
into Canaan; Numb. 32. 2. and following verses, they were loath to go over
Jordan, the land on this side Jordan pleased them so well; not far unlike these
children of Reuben and Gad are they who be of that Cardinals mind, unwilling to
quit their parts in Paris for any hopes whatsoevr of Paradise; loath to quit
the pleasures and profits of this life, in hope of those incomprehensible joys
of Eternal life, and esteem more of one Bird in the hand, then two in the bush:
Certain it is a Man will never yield to part with this life until he have
gotten good hopes of a better life; it is that will help a Christian to outface
Death.

He that has gotten treasures laid up in Heaven, will not be loath to part
with the greatest treasures upon Earth: Nay, such will rather rejoice at the
sight of those things they have so longed to see and now must possess to all
Eternity; Contemnu^t presentia and ad futura festinant, little regarding things
present, and hastening toward things to come; such a one can say when death
approaches, M^riar ut videam, I am willing to dye that I may see God, and
Christ and all the Eternal good things of Heaven; And with St. Paul, I desire
to be dissolved and to be with Christ, which is far better. Phil. 1. 23. And
with Babylas, slain by Decius, in the words of the Psalmist, Return unto thy
rest, O my Soul, for the Lord has been beneficial unto thee; and now my soul
be glad, for now comes thy rest, thy sure rest, thy sweet and never fading
rest; and can truly say, he is willing rather to be absent from the body, and
to be present with the Lord. 2 Cor. 5. 8. v. This was it made the Martyrs go to
their death with cheerfulness and songs, and run to the Stake as to a Garland;
It was the sight of these things that made them not loath to dye any kind of
death; as some of them being asked what made them so to suffer; they have named
that Text, 1 Cor. 2. 9. Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither has it
entered into the heart of Man, the things that God has prepared for them that
love him.

Though death spoil such a one of all the good things of life, yet like the
believing Hebrews mentioned Heb. 10. 34. v. he takes joyfully the spoiling of
his Goods, knowing in himself that he has in Heaven a better and more enduring
substance.

It is storied of the Duke of Bulloin and his company when they went to
Jerusalem, as soon as his company saw the high Turrets, they gave a mighty
shout that the Earth rang; so when a Christian at death (that all his life long
has been providing Eternal good things) shall see the Turrets of the heavenly
Jerusalem, shall see that enduring substance laid up for him in Heaven, shall
see those Rivers of Pleasure that are to be had at God's right hand for
evermore, shall see those things that now are invisible, shall see such things
as no mortal Eye ever saw, shall see what no heart is able to conceive, and
shall see that all these things are his own, and that they shall now be
possessed and enjoyed by him for ever unto all Eternity, what joy, what
gladness, what rejoicing of heart will there be in him?

In some places of the West Indies there is an opinion in gross that the soul
is immortal, and that there is a life after this life, where beyond certain
hills* (they know not where) those that dye in the defense of their Country,
should remain after death in much blessedness, which opinion made them very
valiant in their fights, and willing to dye in defense of their Country. The
bare opinion of the Druides (who taught that the soul had a continuance after
its separation from the body) made many of their followers hardy in great
attempts, and abated in most, the fear of Death; When a Christian has labored
for, and by his labor obtained what will nourish his immortal Soul unto Eternal
life and be provision for it in Eternal life, none can express the willing
thereof to leave the body; A Christian now looks upon Death to be a valley of
Achor, a door of hope to gain entrance into Paradise, to bring him Malorum
omnium ademptionem, and bonorum omnium adeptionem, a removal of all things that
are evil, and an enjoyment of all things that are good, and that not good only
for a season, but for Eternity.

Old Hilarion could not but wonder his soul should be so loath to depart out of
his body; and therefore when he lay a dying, it is said of him, he bespake it
in this manner: Soul get thee out, thou have for seventy years served Christ,
and art thou loath to depart, or afraid of Death; When a Christian has
husbanded all the time of life for the good of his Soul, and finds it stored
with grace, and assured of glory, he is not afraid or unwilling that his soul
should leave his body; he has hope in his death and that makes him to be be
willing to submit to death, Pro. 14. 32. v. The wicked is driven away in his
wickedness, but the righteous has hope in his death.

I have done with two of the first perticulars I propounded to speak to, upon
this Point; I have showed by way of Explication when a man may be said to labor
for Eternal good things; and I have showed by way of Demonstration, That
Eternal good things are to be labored for. The third particular propounded,
was, to speak something by way of Confirmation, and here I shall show that
labor is chiefly to be used for and about Eternal good things.

CHAP. VI.
I come now to Confirm this Truth, That the great labor and pains of every
Christian ought chiefly to be employed not about perishing but Eternal good
things.
To which end I shall speak to these following Perticulars.

1. Our labor and pains ought chiefly to be employed not about perishing but
Eternal good things, because God has commanded it.

2. Our labor and pains etc. Because Eternal good things are the chiefest of
good things.

3. Our labor and pains etc. Because Eternal good things are lasting good
things, other good things are perishing good things,

4. Our labor and pains etc. Because Eternal good things are good things always
desirable, good things that a man shall never be weary of.

5. Our labor and pains etc. Because Eternal good things are the only
satisfying good things.

6. Our labor and pains etc. Because Eternal good things concern our Souls,
other good things concern only the body.

7. Our labor and pains etc. Because our labor about Eternal good things will
not be in vain.

8. Our labor and pains etc. Because even to Eternity it self it will never
repent us to have bestowed the greatest labor and pains about Eternal good
things.

1. I shall begin with the first of these eight, and say something to that,
Good reason there is that Our labor and pains ought chiefly to be employed not
about perishing but Eternal good things, Because God has commanded it; it is
charged upon us as a duty, and if we obey not we run our selves into a
spiritual Praemunire: that Almighty God who tells the number of the Stars
calling them by their names, he charges us to do so, and if we obey him not, we
offer an affront to his Soveraingty, as if his will were not reason enough for
his commands; And to his wisdom, as if he did not know what Laws were good for
us; And to his Justice, as if the ways of God were not equal. If any ask me,
Quis requisivit? who has required this at our hands? who requires that our
labor should chiefly be about Eternal good things? I answer, It is the great
GOD of Heaven and Earth that by his word made all things, to whom the Winds and
Seas obey.

And it is well we have express commands from God in Scripture for this, else
the world is full of curious Heads and profane Hearts to outface and
out-wrangle such a Truth, nay any truth indeed which men are labor^^^ oath to
yield unto; so ready are carnal men to be the Devil's Proctors against God, and
having their wits and spirits whetted upon the Devil's whetstone to cavil
against spiritual and flesh-crossing truths.

I wish all that do love God and do make it their daily work to labor chiefly
for Eternal good things, may be all of the mind of that reverend Baldassar, as
he expresses it in an Epistle unto Oecolampadius, Veniat, veniat verbum Domini
and submittemus illi sexcenta si nobis essent colla; Let but the word of God be
urged upon us, and we shall not be unwilling to lay down our very lives in
obedience thereunto; were this but the resolve and holy temper of Men's hearts,
a few Scriptures would serve to confirm such truths that Ministers do preach
upon: I shall here commend only one unto you, and I think it may be as good as
many, it is that in Matt. 6. 33. v. But seek ye first the Kingdom of God and his
righteousness; In the first place, and with your best care and endeavors seek
after the kingdom of God; that ye may be possessed and seized of it, that ye
may have a right and title to it.

The Kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof, these things before all
other good things should be labored for; nay these things above all other good
things should be labored for. Why? Because a laborious striving for these
things before all other good things, and above all other good things, is the
way that the wisdom of God has directed us unto. You see our Savior's command
what it is, Seek first the kingdom of God and his righteousness; I Will take up
the words of God himself, the place is that which contains a most pathetical
Option, wish or desire of our most infinitely holy, just and righteous God,
that would find us in such a way that he may do us good for the present, and
also hereafter; see them Deuteronomy. 5. 29. v. At the 27. v. the Israelites promise
Moses very fare, nothing more could have been expected from them, and nothing
less was their duty to be performed by them; say they to Moses, Go thou near,
and hear all that the Lord thy God shall say, and speak thou to us all that the
Lord our God shall speak unto thee, and we will hear it and do it. Hereunto God
pleases to return answer, 'as if he did (after the manner of men) speak thus,
Moses, I have heard the voice of the words of this people, which they have
spoken unto thee, and they have well said, all that they have spoken. 28. v.
And I have but this one wish or request, Oh that there were such an heart in
them, that they would fear me, and keep all my commandments always, that it
might be well with them and with their children for ever* v. 29. O that there
were such an heart in Christians, that they would fear God and keep his
commandments; that they would seek first the kingdom of God and his
righteousness; And why? The great God of the whole world commands it, and the
best friend of Christians that ever trod upon the earth (even Christ) advises
it in my Text, and we may well be assured, that the one will reckon for
disobeying his Commands, and the other for slighting of his advice and counsel.

It is a dangerous thing to neglect one of his commands who by another is able
to command us into nothing, or into Hell. And it will prove as dangerous to
slight his advice who is called Wonderful Counselor. Isay 9. 6. For the first
see 2 These. 2. 12. v. They all shall be damned that obey not the Truth but have
pleasure in unrighteousness. For the second read Psalm. 107. 11, 12. Because
they rebelled against the words of God and contemned the counsel of the Most
High, therefore he brought down their hearts with labor; they fell down and
there was none to help them.

When Ahasuerus commanded Haman to put on the Crown upon Mordecai; he presently
executed the King's pleasure, he presently obeyed what the King commanded; and
he honored his greatest enemy because the King required it: And shall not
Christians at the King of Heavens command, be laboring for better honor then
was bestowed upon Mordecai, and for more excellent good things then ever
Ahasuerus was able to give; even for honor that is lasting, and for good things
that are everlasting.

When Abraham knew that it was God's will that Hagar and her Son should be cast
out, he soon yielded, it seems not to him grievous Genesis 21. To gracious hearts
understanding the will of God, none of God's commands are grievous; 1 John 5.
3. obedience ^o all his commands is very delightful, but here obedience to
God's Commands is very profitable, it calls indeed for labor, and labor to some
is grievous, but he that ^ath a Crown in his eye, his labor cannot be grievous;
hopes of gaining great matters will qualify and alay the difficulty of any
work, and make duty light; here is that will animate a Christian with courage
and resolu^ion to undertake any labor, any difficulties, any pains.

God forbid any that hear me this day, should say as those did Jer. 44. 16. As
for the Word thou have spoken ^o us in the name of the Lord, we will not do. We
will not wast our time, we will not spend our labor and pains for these
uncertain things of another life; yet ^uch there are that neither the authority
of God commanding, nor the hopes of those Eternal advantages which will follow
upon the doing of the thing command^d; such that neither God's promises nor his
threatenings work upon them; Though they are told 2 These. 1. 7, 8. That that the
Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels, in flaming
fire taking vengeon them -- that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Et non sunt vanae minae Dominicae, God's threatenings are not in vain; they are
no Bruta fulmina, Insignificant noises or thunders; they will not be found
lying words, but like the sentence of a Judge which cannot fail of Execution.
Neither do the promises of God work upon them to yield obedience; though
thereupon God has intailed temporal, spiritual, and Eternal Blessings; never
was any man a loser by yielding Obedience to God's commands; Christ became the
author of Eternal salvation, to all them that obey him. Heb. 5. 9. v. An
obedient Christian in this present life has God in Covenant with him, Jer. 7.
23. v. Obey, and I will be your God; and in another life shall partake of
Eternal salvation with God, and surely Eternal salvation there is enough to
make any one willing to labor and take pains for it, enough to encourage any
one to yield obedience to God.

It Is Obedience unto the Commands of God that will entitle us to true
blessedness, Luke 11. 28. v. There when one (in the company that were with
Christ) blessed the Womb that bear Christ, Christ presently replied, ye rather
blessed are they that hear the word of God and keep it.

2. Our labor and pains ought chiefly to be imploye^ not about perishing but
Eternal good things; Because Eternal good things are the chiefest of good
things, they are the best of all good things.

I shall easily grant that the things necessary for the use of this life are
good things. When I read Genesis 1. las^ v. where it is said, That God saw every
thing that h^ had made, and behold it was very good; I cannot but admire the
Prodigious Blasphemy of that Alfonso, called Alfonso the Wise, who openly said,
that if he had been of God's Counsel at the Creation, some things should have
been better made and marshalled; whereas the Holy Ghost has left it upon
Record, that every thing was very good; Good as they came from God, for as from
his mouth proceeds not evil and good, so from his hand proceeded nothing that
was evil, but only good; for from an absolute Goodness nothing can proceed but
good; And such are (as will appear).

Even things necessary for this life they are called Good things; In Deuteronomy. 6.
11. We read of houses full of all good things; In the Book of Job there is
mention made of such a wretched kind of people, which said unto God, Depart
from us, and what can the Almighty do for them, Job 22. 17. And yet in the 18.
v. it is said, He filled their houses with good things. Says Abraham to the rich
Man in Hell, Luke 16. 25. v. Son remember that thou in thy life* time
receivedst thy good things. St. James calls them precious fruits of the Earth,
Jam. 5. 7. v. and therefore precious, says an Interpreter, because they cost
hard labor, and because they are choice blessings of God; Called they are in
Scripture, Our life, Because they are the very sinews of our life: It is said
of the Woman in the Gospel, that she had spent all her living upon the
Physicians, Luke 8. 43. In the Greek it is (...), she spent her whole li^e upon
the Physicians, because she spent her estate by which she should live; No Man
can live in the world without some portion had of the things of the world; Here
I may fitly transcribe the words of a good Preacher; As (says he) the^e be
three Ages of Man: An Infant, who creeps upon the ground with all four, a young
man, who goes upon his two legs; an old man, who goes on three, counting his
staff for one: So there be three conditions of Men; the worldly man, who goes
upon all four, and looks to earthly things; The Saints in Heaven, who trample
these things of the world under their feet, going upright and scorning so much
as to look toward them, they need them not at all; But the Saints on earth,
though they tread upon them in their esteem, yet they must look a little
toward them in their necessity, because they cannot be without them: as long
as any of us have the old man about us, we cannot go without the staff of
Bread, as long as we abide in the world, we cannot be without some things of
the world; and even these things you see are called good things.

But yet our labor should be chiefly about Eternal good things; Because though
the things of this life are good, yet Eternal good things are the best, the
chiefest and excellentest of good things, they are the only things worth the
laboring for; many things are hard to come by, and yet of no great use or worth
when by great labor and pains taking they are gotten or brought to pass.
Aelians censure of the Chariot (I have read of) made (by Myrmccidas and
Callecrates) so small that it might be hid under a Fly, (in my conceit) was
good, and applicable to my purpose; For when others wondered at it, he said it
was worthy no wise man's praise, but was rather to be accounted a vain expense
of time; and how much vain expense of time may be noted amongst many men
laboring for what is not worth the labor used to gain them. As some more
excellent Scholars of great parts and abilities spend their time and studies
about very unprofitable Questions and Disputations, and intricate subtilties
about Moonshine in the Water, as one complains, that Spider-like, eviscerate
themselves and spend their bowels, to make Cob-webbs of Wit: So a man cannot
but have observed what time and labor some men spend in and about some things
that neither are of advantage to their Souls or their Bodies. But now Eternal
good things they are indeed hard and difficult to obtain, but will be found to
be singularly excellent good things.

Eternal good things to the very best of worldly good things are as the Sun to
the least of Stars; as some stately Palace, the seat or habitation of a great
Monarch, to a smoaky and thatched Cottage the habitation of a Peasant; they are
as Gold to Brass; Et melius est pallens aurum quam fulgens aurichalcum, a
little of the palest and coursest Gold is far better then much of the finest
and brightest Brass.

One Christian's share of Eternal good things, is far better then what all the
Kings and Potentates in the world, do enjoy of the world: Hi numerose aggrigant
penes se densissimum lutum, as the Prophet Habakkuk speaks chap. 2. 6. v. Woe
to him that increases that which is not his: how long? and to him that ladeth
himself with thick clay. These are laden with thick clay; Illi aurum igni
exploratum possident; They are enriched with pure Gold: Revel, 3. 18. v. Their
Exchequer may be full, but it is only the World's counterfeit coin; the other
have the true treasure. Their Wardropes may be plentifully furnished, but it is
only with glassy Pearl; the other enjoy that precious Orient Pearl, which to
purchase, the wise Merchant sold all.

There is as much difference between Temporal good things and Eternal good
things as there is between the light of a Candle and the light of the Sun when
it shineeth in its full brightness at mad-day: A Candle in a dark-night makes a
great show, but the light thereof when the Sun comes, vanishes, and is
nothing: Even such are all those things, that men now so much affect and labor
so much for, if compared with what will endure to Eternity, the worth of them
does vanish and come to nothing.

What think you of those new investitures of the Soul after the Resurrection:
of those royal endowments of glorified souls in Heaven, shining there like the
glorious body of our Savior upon Mount Tabor?

What think you of having our bodies to glitter in glory like those spangles in
the Firmament? of those Sun-like bodies we shall have in Heaven? Of corruptions
putting on incorruption, and mortality putting onimmortality?

What think you of the beatifical vision? of beholding him who is invisible in
the presence chamber of his glory? of the souls living for ever in the
continual prospect of the infinite beauty and Majesty of God, in the most
glorious and eternal sanctuary of Heaven? of taking a full view of that
All-glorious Deity whose very fight gives blessedness to the beholder? of
having the beams of our Creators heavenly glory to shine in our faces? of so
seeing God as never more to look of him? of so enjoying him, that he shall for
ever be all in all unto us? Of seeing the glory of Christ which is the glory of
glories?

What think you of the Golden City, beautified and irradiated with the
unconceivable splendour of the glory of God, where Streets, Walls, gates and all
is gold and Pearl, nay where Pearl is but as mire and dirt, and nothing worth?
of walking through the stree^s of Paradise, where Sorrow is never felt,
complaint is never heard, matter of sadness is never seen, evil success is
never feared; but instead thereof there is all good without any thing of evil,
There is mirth without moan, joy without heaviness, peace without perturbation,
blessedness without misery, light without darkness, abundance without want,
ease without labor, eyes without tears, hearts without sorrow, souls without
sin; a life that never ends, and joy that never cease, for there is not the
least shadow of matter for tears, discontentments, griefs and uncomfortable
passions to work on? What think you Christians of all these things? are not the
Psalmist's words true when he says, Psalm. 87. 3. v. Glorious things are spoken
of thee thou City of God?

What think you, Christians, of a Crown of Glory? Of glittering thrones, of
Abraham's bosom? of being admitted into the society of God and Christ, and of
Saints and Angels? of enjoying the company of the ancient Patriarchs and
Prophets? of living with the holy Apostles and Evangelists? of belonging to the
noble army of glorious Martyrs and Confessors? of being amongst all those
eminent Saints whose holiness was by all Men magnified? of walking with all
those now in Heaven, in whom either nature or grace have especially interested
us?

What think you of dwelling for ever in the presence of God: of lying in the
bosom of his love? of being infolded in the everlasting arms of his mercy? of
being filled with all the fullness of God, then when God shall communicate
himself beatifically to the uttermost, and shall manifest what a glorious God
he is, and the souls of glorified ones find him to be a Sea of sweetness and an
Ocean of unspeakable joys?

What think you of inhabiting in that Eternal Palace of Heaven and
blessedness, where God and his blessed Saints inhabit? when we shall be raised
far above all the visible Orbs, and starry firmament? when we shall behold
those Stars under our feet which now are over our heads? when we shall have
all our spiritual senses feasted with unspeakable delights?

What think you of those treasures in Heaven more precious then Gold, Pearl,
and Diamonds? If all the earth were of Gold, and all the Rivers there of the
most precious Liquours, and all the Rocks of precious stones; who but would say
here were a great treasure? Well, Christians, yet know that a treasure which
exceeds Gold, as far as Gold does Dirt, precious liquours water, or precious
stones pebles, is laid up for Believers in Heaven. Bona vitae aeternae, tam
multa ut numerum, tam magna ut mensuran, tam praetiosa ut estimation em omnen
excedunt: The good things of Eternal life are so many that they exceed number,
so great that they exceed measure, so precious that they are above all
estimation. One leaf of the Tree of Life being far better then all the fruits
that grow in this world.

But why do I promise my self to set forth the Excellency and worth of Eternal
good things? It was a good saying of Seneca, Nusquam verecundiores esse
debemus, quam cum de Deo agitur. Modesty never becomes us better, then when we
speak of God; It will hold as true of Heaven, for verily a Man may as well with
a Coal paint out the Sun in all his splendour, as with his tongue express, or
with his heart (though it were as deep as the Sea) conceive the Excellency and
worth thereof, and if any tongues can utter it, or hearts conceive it, they
must be the tongues and hearts of those that are translated already thither;
and yet were an Angel from Heaven sent to set forth to us the excellency
thereof, he would sooner want words then matter. What Tully said once
concerning Socrates and desired his Readers concerning L. Crassius, that they
would imagine greater things of them then they find written: So our highest
apprehensions of Eternal good things, falls infinitely short of the excellency
thereof.

I deny not but that many things in this world are transcendent and ravishing;
but the best of them are no better then accessories to these principals, drops
to these Oceans, glimps to these Suns, and dunghill-felicities to these Eternal
Enjoyments; The greatest pomp and glory of Kings and Emperors is but dust in
comparison of these things.

It will appear that Eternal good things are the best Good things.

1. Because only Eternal good things make those who enjoy them to be good. 2.
Because only Eternal good things will do us good then when other good things
will do us no good.
Now by making good these two things, that Eternal good things make men good in
this world, as well as happy in another world; and also that Eternal good
things will do men good and stand them in stead when other good things will
neither do them good nor stand them in stead, I hope it will appear that
Eternal good things are the best good things; for surely those things may well
be called the best things that make men good, and that do men good when nothing
else in the world will do them good; I shall begin with the first,

1. It will appear that Eternal good things are the best good things, Because
only Eternal good things make those who do enjoy them to be good: They make men
to be good here in this world, and happy hereafter in another world.

Even to be conversant about Eternal good things, is of great moment to the
bettering of the Soul; for look what the object is, such is the soul that is
conversant about it; high and Eternal Objects lift up the soul to God and
toward Heaven, and make the mind answerable unto them: Eternal good things are
high Objects, and they will work in men conversant about them high minds, they
will draw the mind upward and raise it from Earth to Heaven.

But too often is it otherwise with Temporal things; Gold may make a man the
richer, not the better; Honor may make a man the higher, not the happier: Says
one of our own Land, God has no worse servants in our land, then they that can
live of their own Lands and care for nothing else; none are so ready and apt to
neglect the thoughts and care of Religion and Heaven as those who have most
upon earth, as being on every hand beset with temptations to sin and
solicitations to forget God. That verily the more any man has of Temporal
things, the more cause he has to pray, Lord lead us not into temptation;

I have to this purpose read it noted out of St. Hierome, that anciently there
were two most notable Proverbs in prejudice of Rich Men; The first, That he who
was very rich could not be a good man. The second, That he who was rich, had
either been a bad man, or was the Heir of a bad man. Indeed two often Riches
and Vice go together; And therefore our Savior when he taught the Beatitudes;
he gave the first of them to the Poor, Luke 6. 20. v. Blessed be the poor, for
yours is the Kingdom of God; And in laying down of the Woes, he gave the first
of them to the rich, Luke 6. 24. v. But woe unto you that are rich, for ye
received your consolation; The first of the Beatitudes is given to the poor and
needy; The first of the woes is given to the rich and such who abounded with
the Temporal good things of the world. Riches proving two often not only
impediments to Virtue and Piety, but occasions to Sin; gotten for the most part
they are by sin, and occasions they are often times afterward of sin, and
(without Repentance consequently of Eternal Damnation.

It is an hard matter to have them and not to be hindered from Heaven by them,
they being fuel to men's Lusts, lets to Prayer and blocks in the ways of Piety
and Devotion many times. Matthew. 19. 24. It is easier for a Camel to go through
the eye of a Needle, then for a Rich man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.
Here Christ alludes to a proverbial speech among the Jews, and it was this;
When men did brag and boast they would do strange works, and great matters,
their friends would jeer them with this, you can as soon bring a Camel through
a Needles eye as do it. Now Christ in a solemn way uses this Proverb, (they
knowing what he meant) that as it is a thing not easy to bring a Camel through
a Needles eye, so it is a thing not easy neither to bring a Rich man to the
kingdom of Glory.

How many have had them, but they got no good by them, they do rather poison
them then profit them. What kept the Young man from following of Christ in the
same Chapter? Great possessions. Christ tells him at the 21. v. If thou will be
perfect, go and sell that thou have, and give to the poor, and thou shall have
treasure in Heaven: and come and follow me: but (at the 22. v.) When the young
man heard that saying, he went away sorrowful: for he had great possessions.
When Christ (that spoke as never Man did) persuaded him to sell all and come
again then to follow him: He was so far from obeying Christ, that without any
civility or good manners tendered unto Christ his Master, he rudely and
unthankfully departs from Christ, neither love to Christ nor desire of Eternal
life could prevail with him to stay with Christ any longer; he was loath to
part with his great Possessions, that if Heaven and Eternal life be to be had
upon no other terms, Christ may keep his Heaven to himself; He will have none,
he will keep his possessions upon earth, for all possessing of Eternal life.
How good had it been for this young man that he had never been a Rich man?

How many do we see in the world enjoying a Confluence of temporal good things
to kick against God: Hence that Caution Deuteronomy. 6. 10, 11, 12, v. And it shall be
when the Lord thy God shall have brought thee into the Land which he swear unto
thy Fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob to give thee, great and goodly
Cities which thou buildest not, And houses full of all good things, which thou
fillest not, and wells dug, which thou diggest not, Vinyards and
Olive Trees, which thou plantest not when thou shall have eaten and be full,
Then beware least thou forget the Lord thy God which brought thee out of the
Land of Egypt, from the house of Bondage. And indeed so it fell out at the 32.
Deuteronomy. 15. But Jesurun waxed fat and kicked: -- nay more, then he forsook God
which made him, and lightly esteemed the Rock of his salvation; His heart was
exalted against God; though he had in his possession Houses full of good
things, yet for want of having his heart filled with Goodness, he kicked
against God; like the young Mulet, when it has sucked, turns up his heels and
kicks at the Damm. Nay that is not all, for he runs from God; like the fed Hawk
that forgets his Master.

There are but few Jehosaphats in the world, some I hope there are that do
imitate so good a Man; It is said of him, 2 Chronicles. 17. 5, 6. That he had riches
and honor in abundance, and his heart was lift up in the ways of the Lord; in
the ways of God's commands, to do such things as God required and that were
pleasing and acceptable unto God. The higher God had raised Jehosaphat in his
Estate, the lower he kept his Heart in a way of obedience to the God of his
Estate; the more God had enriched Jehosaphat, the more Jehosaphat set himself
to obey God; what God had given him became as Oil to the wheels of his
obedience, and made him more fit and willing for service.

But alas! it oft-times proves otherwise with very many that enjoy much of
these Temporal good things, that they have had cause to curse the time that
ever they had an Estate, that ever they had abundance of the good things of
this life, they have found them as enchantments to draw away their hearts from
God, and as Trumpets sounding a Retreat, and calling them off from the
pursuance of Religion; these things are as great weights upon the backs of
thousands, hindering them from ascending up the hill of God.

Solomon's Wealth did him more hurt then his Wisdom did him good, it was his
fullness and abundance that drew out his spirits and dissolved them and brought
him to such a low ebb in Spirituals, that it remains a question with some,
Whether he ever recovered it to his dying day. What a sad story was that of
Pius Quintus; When I was in a low condition (said he) I had some comfortable
hopes of my salvation, but when I came to be a Cardinal, I greatly doubted of
it, but since I came to the Popedom, I have no hope at all. For as it is the
misery of the poor to be neglected of men, so it is the misery of the rich to
neglect God, and too often to neglect the worship and service of God; Rare fumant
faelicibus arae, the Altars of the Rich seldom smoke.

But herein now lies the excellency of Eternal good things above the best of
Temporal good things, that as these are often found to do hurt to the Owners,
so the other good things make the owners thereof to be good; not only make them
happy in another life; but they make them good here, that they may be happy
hereafter. And this will appear by laying down some instances of Eternal good
things that may be had in this life, all which have in them this Excellent
property, to make those who have them to be Good.

I shall Instance in these five Particulars.

1. In Grace. 2. In God, who is the God of all grace, 1 Pet. 5. 10. v. 3. In
Jesus Christ, who is the author and giver of Grace. 4. In the Spirit, who is
called the spirit of Grace, Heb. 10. 29. 5. In a good Conscience consequent of
Grace.
Such things as these cannot but make that man a good Man who injoys them;
surely he must needs be a good man that has his heart established with Grace,
Heb. 13. 9. That is sanctified by God the Father, who is the God of all grace,
Jude 1. That is purged from his sins, by Jesus Christ w^o is the author and
giver of Grace, Rev. 1. 15. v. That like Barnabas is full of the holy Ghost.
Act. 11. 24. v. And in whom is found a good Conscience (the consequent of
grace) purged from dead works to serve the living God; Heb. 9. 14.

These are the true Riches, Luke 16. 11. v. which cannot stand with Reprobation.

1. The first Instance is that of Grace, this is the curious enamel and
embroidery of the Soul, making Christ's Spouse all glorious within, and it is
the true Philosophers Stone, this turns all into gold, and makes a man like
Caleb of another spirit.

Grace may well be reckoned amongst the good things that are of enduring
nature. Temporal things are but (...), but for a season, but Grace has
Eternity stamped upon it; It is called durable Riches, Prove. 8. 10. v. other
good things take wings and fly from us, Grace takes wings and flies with us to
Heaven. Glory with God will be Eternal, and so is Grace from God Eternal. Grace
and glory differ very little, Grace is glory in the bud, and glory is grace at
the full; Grace is glory in the seed, and Glory is grace in the flower. Grace
is that glory the Saints have in this life which is Militant, and Glory is
Grace to be had in that life which is Triumphant.

Grace is a blossom of Eternity, and will last to Eternity, as being the
foundation on which the Superstructure of glory which is Eternal, is laid;
called therefore Vnctio manence, the anointing that abides, 1 John 2. 27. v.
Grace is therefore compared to a river of the water of life, John 7. 38. He
that believes on me as the Scripture has said, out of his belly shall flow
Rivers of living Water; now this is spoken of the Spirit as appears by the
following verse; the 39. v. clears it that Christ spoke de donis spiritus
sancti; This river can never be dried up for the spirit of God is the spring
that feeds it. A Christian may lose his estate though never so great, yea he
may lose his life, but he cannot lose his Grace; Enemies may plunder him of his
money and plate, but not of the Pearl of Grace, for that is locked up in the
Cabinet of the heart. Grace is in the number of those riches that Lewis of
Bavyer, Emperor of Germany spoke of, when he said, Hujusmodi comparandae sunt
opes, quae cum nau^ragio simul enatent: Such goods are worth getting and
owning, as will not sink or wash away, if a Shipwreck happen, but will swim
with us to the Shore.

Now Grace that is of such a lasting nature, is no flower that grows in
Nature's garden but is a slip taken off from the Tree of Life in the heavenly
Paradise and planted by the spirit of God in the Soul; And where ever Grace is
it makes a great change, it makes those men good that were bad, it makes those
holy that were most unholy. Man by the Fall was rendered most Deformed and much
Degenerated from his primitive Innocence; he that had seen Adam in Paradise,
and afterward met him in the vast fields, would not have known him to be the
same man: and in this defaced and deformed Image did he beget his Postery, how
unlike are they to Adam in the state of innocence before the Fall? how vile?
how wicked? and yet Grace changes the very worst, Grace has changed such as
have been the most hopeless, men upon whom spiritual Physicians for a great
while have lost all their labor.

You have mentioned a most admirable and wonderful change made by converting
Grace, in that 1 Cor. 6. 11. v. And such were some of you; but ye are washed,
but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified, in the name of the Lord Jesus, and
by the spirit of our God. In the 9. and 10. v. the Apostle had made mention of
Beasts and Monsters rather then of Men endued with reason; and says he in the
11. v. Such were some of you; these Corinthians it seems were very bad, for the
Apostle, setting forth their badness, speaks in the Neuter Gender, (...), not
(...), not such persons, but such sins, demonstrating their wickedness, they
were not so much peccatores as ipsa peccata, sins as the very sins themselves.
Yet behold they are changed by the power of Grace; But ye are washed, etc. Here
God raised up children unto Abraham out of stones, and caused a company of
Black-moores to have their skins made white. Here God took crooked trees and
made them pillars in his Temple, unpolished stones, and by Grace polished them
for his building.

So cast your eyes upon St. Paul, and see what he was before Grace came unto
him; he tells you himself, 1. Tim. 1. 13. v. Who was before a blasphemer, and a
persecutor, and injurious, i. e. to the Church and people of Christ, he was
exceedingly mad against them and persecuted them even to strange Cities; but
what a good man was Paul afterward.

Sin has made the nature of man which in the time of innocence was holy to
become unholy; it has changed Righteousness into Hemlock and Wormwood, as Amos
speaks of Israel, Amos 6. 12. v. that was a wicked change; but Grace turned
Hemlock into righteousness. When the hand of God was out against the Church for
her sins, and afflicted her sore, Jeremy complains Lam. 4. That her Gold was
become Dross, and her Wine water. This was a change from good to bad, but Grace
works a quite contrary change, it makes dross to become gold, and water wine:
This is a change from bad to good.

Though Sin be an impure Issue, a befilthying thing, 2. Cor. 1. yet grace
cleanses the heart: Grace is therefore called the washing of Regeneration.
Titus 3. 5. v. Not by works of righteousness which we have done, but according
to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of Regeneration and renewing of the
holy Ghost; Grace cleanses out those Leopard spots that are in the Soul; Grace
beautifies and adornes the Soul; a Soul beautified with grace, is like a room
richly hung with Arras or Tapestry, or the Firmament bespangled with glittering
Stars.

This then is the first particular, showing that Eternal good things are the
best of good things, because they make those good who enjoy them; to be rich in
grace is of greater consequence then to be rich in gold. When Cyrus had given
Artabazus a Cup of gold, and Chrysantas but a kiss, in token of special favor;
Artabazus complained that the Cup he gave him was not so good gold as the ^iss
he gave Chrysantas; it holds here, that the greatest and best of temporal
things are not so good gold as Grace; Gold though it may make a man the richer,
yet it cannot make a man the better; let the gold be never so good it cannot
make the owner good; Those then to whom God gives Grace, they may truly say;
Their grace is better gold then the world affords.

2. The second Instance is that of God, the thriceglorious Jehovah, blessed for
evermore, who is the God of all Grace, and the most sovereign only and chiefest
good; he is Summum verum, summum pulchrum and summum bonum; The chiefest truth,
the chiefest beauty and chiefest good; who Himself is more then a world of
worlds, filling Heaven and Earth with the Majesty of his glory, having before
his all-glorious Throne, innumerable hosts of powerful and glorious Spirits, in
comparison of whom, the All here below is nothing; God brings it in himself as
an argument of his own geratness, I say 40. 15. v. That all the Nations of the
earth are as a drop of a bucket, and as a dust of the balance to him. He it is
who is the only satisfying and everlasting portion of his people; and the
apprehension of such a portion, as God is, will solace and refresh those that
have him. See Davi^'s words Psalm. 16. 5, 6. The Lord is the portion of mine
Inheritance (says he) the lines are fallen unto me in pleasant places, yea, I
have a goodly heritage: He alludes to the manner of dividing the Land of Canaan
to the children of Israel, which was done by line; upon this account also Jacob
said, I have enough Genesis 33. 11. v. Or, I have all.

And this God is an Eternal God, he whose life is Eternity must needs be
Eternal: Aeternitas enim Dei solummodo naturae substantialiter in est; says
one, Eternity is substantially only in the name of God. When God would make his
Name known to Moses, he tells him what is his name, I Am that I am, by which
name God has made himself known according to his Eternal Essence, whereby he
is discerned from all other things which are in Heaven, or the Earth, or
elsewhere. Exodus 13. 14. To which that of the Psalmist does well agree, Before
the Mountains were brought forth, or ever the earth and the world were made,
thou art God from everlasting to everlasting, Psalm. 90. 2. And of all beings
God is the most excellent, all beings else falling infinitely short of God
himself, whose perfections are infinite and without limit; all the perfections
whatsoever that are found in Creatures are more eminently contained in our
great All, our All-mighty, All-lovely, All-glorious God. In him is enough to
make him the desire of all hearts, and the accomplishment of all hopes and
wishes; Nihil potest quietare hominis voluntatem nisi s^lus Deus; says one;
Nothing but God can satisfy the Soul; Were the whole earth turned into a Globe
of gold, it would not fill the heart, it would still cry Give, Give. Only God
fills and satisfies those who have him The souls of men, are like Noah's Dove;
Wicked men's souls are like the Dove out of the Ark, they are in a constant
motion ever restless, seeking for some satisfaction for themselves, but find
none; but pious souls enjoying an Eternal God, are like the Dove returned to
the Ark when they take up their rest in God.

God is totus, totus desiderabilis, wholly amiable, every whit of him to be
desired; Where may we find such a man? says Pharaoh of Joseph, implying that
such another would hardly be found, Genesis 41. 38. so may I say, Christian, where
will thou find out such a God, as God is? Multi sacerdotes and pauci
Sacerdotes, Multi in nomine and pa^ci in opere; said one of the Ancients; So
many good things are presented unto the Soul, but none are so desirable to the
Soul as God is; his Manifestations are a Paradise; his Communications a very
heaven in the hearts of all that enjoy him. If there be any object of Delight
either in Heaven or Earth it is God, who is more radiant and shining then all
light, more fair then all beauty, more sweet then all pleasure and infinitely
far more excellent, then either words can express, or mind deliver.

The Spaniards say of Aquinas; that he that knows not him, knows not any thing,
but he that knows him knows all things; He that possesses God possesses all
things that may make him happy, but he that has no interest in God. possesses
nothing that can make him happy. Ipse unus erit tibi omnia, quia in ipso uno
bono bona sunt omnia, In God all goodness is summed up, and wraped up together;
Happy soul that can say, My God, and my All, the God of my heart, my portion
and my Inheritance to all Eternity!

But the world methinks is like some great Kings court wherein are both great
Statesment and young children, the children are very much taken with pictures,
they delight to feed their eyes and fancies with gildings, paintings, hangings
and such fine things; but the wise and grave Statesmen pass by these, their
business is with the King; I compare, he greatest part of men to these young
children, these are wholly taken up with what they judge gaudy and outwardly
fine, but there are others like the wise and grave Statesmen, whose eyes,
desires, and ways, are unto, and wholly set upon God; And indeed no wonder if
those that know the worth of God have their hearts set to have God for their
God, for to enjoy one God is far better then to enjoy many worlds. When Charles
the fifth Emperor in a challenge to Francis the first King of France commanded
his Herald to proclaim him with all his Titles, styling him Emperor of
Germany, King of Castile, Aragon, Naples, Sicily, etc. Francis commanded his
Herald to call him so often King of France, as the other had Titles by all his
Countries, intimating that France alone was more worth then all the Countries
which the other had. So when men of the world bragg of their honors, livings,
and great Lordships; He that can say, God is his God, that God is his Portion,
he may oppose this one God to all Dignities and Possessions whatsoever; for
when a man has God he has all; God is blessedness it self, he is a good in
whom there is no evil.

But this is not all, for he who thus injoys God is made good; God being the
source, the spring, the fountain and original of all that good which is in the
Creature; from him comes all that good any of his have received, as the beams
from the Sun or water from the Fountain; and from him comes all that good any
one can expect hereafter.

God is good and he does good; so he is good and makes all those, who have him
for their God in Covenant with them, Good. They who enjoy God in heaven are
made glorious, those upon earth that have God for their God are made gracious.
God is an holy God, and those upon whom he bestows himself in a special manner,
he makes them holy, he stamps his Image upon them, he conveys his blessed
Spirit into them, to sanctify their natures, to purg sin out of their hearts;
he makes them pertakers of the divine nature; and in due time, cleanses them
from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit; he puts upon them the new man;
which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness.

Admirable have been the works of God toward even those that never had him for
their God in Covenant, unto what great promotion have some such been advanced;
Iphicrates, that brave Athenian was but the Son of a Coblar. Eumenes one of
Alexander's best Captains, but the Son of a Carter. Agachocles King of Scicily,
was but the Son of a Porter; Abdolominus a poor Gardener, and yet became to be
King in Sidon. Thus God sometimes raises the poor out of the dust, and lif^eth
up the beggar from the dunghill to set them among Princes, and to make them to
inherit the throne of Glory, 1 Samuel 2. 7, 8. v. The Lord makes poor, and
makes rich: he brings low, and lifts up: He raises up the poor out of the
dust, and lifts up the beggar from the dunghill, to set them among Princes and
to make them inherit the throne of Glory; So true is that of the Psalmist,
Psalm. 75. 6, 7. v. For promotion comeeth not from the East, nor from the West,
nor from the South. But God is the Judge: he puts down one, and sets up
another.

But in the work of Sanctification and Holiness, he does a greater work then
all this, there he makes Grapes to grow upon thorns, and ^iggs upon thistles,
he turns the worst weeds into sweet and beautiful flowers; O^^ of the most
crooked pieces in the timber he makes a glorious Building; Of stones he raises
up children unto Abraham, turns Gall into Honey, Darkness into Light* Wolves
into Lambs, barren Wildernesses into pleasant Gardens.

How should this make us to shut our eyes to all Creatures as if they were not,
and look wholly to God, and there make our desires and labors to terminate as
having nothing further to labor, and as desiring no other portion. When the Sun
shines to us, though there be never a Starr, is it not day? do we not call it
so? Again when all the Stars shine and the Sun is set, is it not night? Thus
it is to those that have an enjoyment of God though they have him alone,
nothing besides him for their portion, yet as he makes them good, so he alone
is sufficient to make them happy.

This is that very thing which has made those, who have known the truth of
this very thing, to be restless in their souls until they have centered
themselves in God and the enjoyment of God. All creatures (say Philosophers)
desire their Center, and do no where rest but in their proper places; The spark
of fire tenders upwards; stones they move downwards; The floods and all waters
have many turnings and windings, but they never cease until they come into the
Sea, that common receptacle of all waters; So the soul of man has its Center,
which is God; it never rests until it be there, and when it injoys God, it
would never be removed. Fecisti nos, Domine, propter te, and in quietum est cor
nostrum, donec perveniat ad te, says holy St. Augustine, Lord thou have made us
for thy self, and our hearts are unquiet until they be wi^h thee, for indeed
the Creature is not capable of an higher blessedness then to have God for his
God; in God is to be found enough, in God are to be found such things as will
fit all times all occasions of soul and body fully.

3. The third Instance is that of Jesus Christ the Eternal Son of God and heir
of the King of glory, who in time became Man for his Elect; who is the fountain
and foundation of all our Bliss in this world and the world to come. Verily the
Lord Jesus Christ is the whole of Man's happiness, he is the Jacobs Ladder by
whom God descends unto man and man ascends unto God. Nothing can make that
man miserable who has Christ for his possession: for the life and liberty, the
peace and safety, the wealth and glory, the present and future happiness of a
Christian are treasured up in him. The Lord Jesus Christ is richly worth the
laboring for; when as all things without him are worth nothing, they are in
comparison of Christ but as a drop of a Bucket, and as the small dust of the
balance; they are in comparison of Christ who is a pearl of choicest Worth,
but as base and vile. He does very shamefully abuse Christ that prefers and
esteems any thing above Christ, that makes not all things to vail and stoop to
Christ.

The fullness of the world without Jesus Christ is but a dry bone without
marrow, a shell without a kernel, an empty pit without water, a casket without
a jewel, and as a barren tree without fruit. It is not the having an abundance
of riches and temporal good things in the house, but the having of Christ in
the heart that will make the possessor contented and happy. He that looks for
either contentation in, or happyness from any thing but Christ, seeks for water
to quench his thirst in a broken Cistern. As he said of Plato, Vnius Platonis
calculum inter mill, the approbation of Plato, alone was instead of a
thousand; so the enjoyment of Christ alone is instead of a thousand other
things, Prove. 8. 11. v. For Wisdom is better then Rubies, and all the things
that can be desired, are not to be compared unto it. And doubtless Christ is
the wisd^m there spoken of; in whom there is a confluence of all blessedness
and happyness; he that has Christ, he is rich, he is full, he has all, he is
(...), All in All. In him there are unsearchable riches, Ephe. 3. 1. v. The
Spanish Ambassador coming to see the Treasury of St. Mark (in Venice) which is
cried up so through all the world, fell a groping to find whether it had any
bottom, and being asked why he did so, answered, In this amongst other things,
my great Master's Treasure differs from yours, in that his has no bottom, as I
find yours to have; alluding to the Mines in Mexico and Potosy; but what are
the Spanish Treasures to the unsearchable treasures that are in Christ; He is
such a golden Mine of all good things, that all the Saints and Angels can never
digg to the bottom.

This has made those that have in some measure known the worth of Christ to
account him precious, 1 Pet. 2. 7. v. Unto you therefore which believe he is
precious above all the things of the world; As the chiefest amongst ten
thousand, Cant. 5. 10. v. It has made them esteem of Christ above all things.
St. Paul's sublime spirit counted all things but loss for the excellency of
Christ; yea he counted them but dung (...), dogs meat, (...), that he might win
or gain Christ and be satisfied with a larger portion of his fullness.

Let burning, hanging, all the torments of Hell befall me, Tantummodo ut Jesum
nauciscar, so that I may get my Jesus, said Ignatius. Christ to him was more
dear then his temporal life. Jesus Christ was the Paradise wherein he
delighted, and the foundation in whom his Soul found all satisfaction.

Lambert at the Stake cried out, None but Christ; none but Christ; lifting up
at the same time such hands as he had, and his fingers ends flaming.

It was the saying of Holy Bernard, Lord Jesus I love thee, Plus quam mea,
meos, me; that is, more then all my goods, then all my friends, wife or
Children; yea, then my own self. To him all riches were but poverty in
comparison of that treasure he found in Jesus Christ; all his friends and
relations but dumb idols in comparison of Christ; Himself to be nothing in
comparison of Christ; nothing was so sweet and dear unto him as Christ.

It is storied of Hormisda a Noble man in the King of Persia his Court, because
he would not deny Christ, he was put into ragged clothes, deprived of his
honors, and set to keep Camels; after a long time, the King seeing him in that
base condition he was, and remembering his former fortunes, he pitied him, and
caused him to be brought into the Palace, and to be clothed again like a
Noble man, and then the King persuades him to deny Christ, he presently rends
his Silken clothes, and says, If for these things you think to have me to deny
my Faith take them again, and so with scorn was cast out.

This has made those who have wanted Christ, to long as sore for Christ, as
Da^id did for the waters of the Well of Bethlehem; Oh for a blessed armful of
the Babe of Bethlehem, such a one as Simeon once had. It has made them cry
out, Give me Christ or else I dye. All things to them have been of no value in
comparison of Christ; they must have (...)t w^ateve^ it cost ^^em.

Certainly did Christians i^ these days thus esteem of Christ, Christ would
have ^^^e ^oom in their hearts. It Is said when (...) was Emperor, that
Germani^us reigned in ^^e R^^an h^^r^s, Tiberius only in their Provinces; ^o
^ill it be ^i^h all that prize Christ, Though God have given them lea^e ^o ^ave
the world in their hands, yet Christ only shall reign in their hearts; they
will take him to be the top of all their felicity and happyness. Christ shall
be to them in respect of all things else, as the Aple Tree among the trees of
the Wood, as the Sun among the gloe-worms, as the Jewel among dross.

Well may we reckon Jesus Christ amongst the chiefest of Eternal good things,
called therefore the Everlasting Father, Isay 9. 6. v. He is One Eternal God
with the Father and with the Holy Ghost; read these following places. John 10.
30. v. I and the Father are one. John 1. 1, 2, 3. v. In the beginning was the
Word, and the word was with God, and the word was God. The same was in the
beginning with God. All things were made by him; and without him was not any
thing made that was made. As God he did preexist in the form of God, not only
before his Incarnation, but before the whole Creation: before Abraham was born
he was, Joh. 8. 58. v. Before any creatures were, he had an existence; Jesus
Christ was so before all Creatures, that all creatures were made by him; Col.
1. 16. v. For by him were all things created that are in Heaven, and that are
in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be Thrones, or Dominions, or
Principalities, or Powers: all things were created by him and for him: Pro. 8.
23. v. I was set up from everlasting, from the beginning, or ever the earth
was. And as he was before the world began, so will he be after the world shall
have an end: As ^e was before all Temporal things, so is he not to be outlived
by any Eternal things whatsoever. As he was begotten of his Father before all
worlds, so will he be the same when there shall be no world, when there shall
be no Earth nor Heavens. Psalm. 102. 26, 27. v. Of old have thou laid the
foundation of the earth, and the heavens are the work of thy hands. They shall
perish but thou shall endure, yea all of them shall wax old like a garment: as
a vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be changed: But thou art the
same and thy years shall have no end. St. Paul assures us that he it is who is
over all, God blessed for ever, Romans 9. 5. v. Jesus Christ is the same
yesterday and to day and for ever. Christ is the same aforetime, in time, and
after time, he is unchangeable in his Essence, always the same. Revel. 1. 8. v.
I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending, says the Lord, which is
and which was and which is to come! The phrase is known to be taken from the
Greek letters, whereof Alpha is the first, and Omega the last letter of the
Greek Alphabet; The first and last letters are a description of Jesus Christ,
who was before all, and will be after all, and altogether unchangeable in
himself. When friends dye, when estates are gone, yet Jesus Christ will remain
and be a never failing spring and fountain of all blessings and goodness.

And Jesus Christ does make all them good who do enjoy him; All men by nature
are empty of all spiritual good, but Christ is as a fountain filling them
therewith that possess him. All men by nature are dead in sins and trespasses;
it is true of all men what the Apostle faith of the wanton Widow, 1 Timothy 5. 6.
v. She that lives in pleasure, is dead while she lives. As Pamphilus in
Terence says the like of a light Huswife, Sane hercle homo voluptati obsequens
fuit dum vixit. St. Paul's Greek (as one notes) cannot well be rendered but by
Terences Latin, and Terences Latin cannot well be put into other Greek; Here is
the true condition of men before they are interested in Christ, they are all as
so many dead men; they are but walking Sepulchers, their bodies living Coffings
carrying about in them dead souls, they are all of them spiritually dead, they
are living ghosts; those men who be already in their graves are not more devoid
of natural life then these are of spiritual life, they are like Ezekiel's dead
bones until Jesus Christ breath life into them; until Jesus Christ speak to
them as once he did to Lazarus, Come out of the Grave and live, they are stark
dead. Look what a branch is without a root, or a body without a Soul, such is
every man without Jesus Christ; he is but a withered branch or dead carcass;
Dead, twice dead and plucked up by the roots, spiritually dead whilst corporally
alive, altogether alienated from the life of God whilst they enjoy the life of
Men. There is the life of the body, and this life they have, but there is the
life of the Soul and that life they have not. We hear of many children born
dead, its true in this sense, all men are born dead men, there is not a man
born a member of the new Adam, but every man is born a member of the old Adam,
and therefore in a spiritual sense they must needs be born dead men, though
otherwise endued with a natural life. For if the root be dead, as the old Adam
is, all the branches, that rise from that root must needs be dead also. In Adam
all dyed, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. 22. v. Adam was the common root of
Mankind, all Mankind was in him Tamquam in radice, as so many Branches in the
root, and so consequently Adam dying, all Mankind dye in him and with him, and
in this dead condition they all do remain until they do enjoy an interest in
and union with Jesus Christ the last Adam, who was made a quickening spirit, 1
Cor. 15. 45. v. he being the fountain and author both of a spiritual and
eternal life to all Believers. And therefore says St. John, John 5. 12. v. He
that has the Son has life, and he that has not the Son has not life. And
the Apostle St. Paul calls him Our life, because none live the life of Grace
but those who partake of Jesus Christ, it is he in whom and by whom they do
live; Col. 3. 4. v. When Christ who is our life shall appear, then shall ye
also appear with him in glory: Hence says Wisdom, that is Christ, Pro. 8. 35.
v. Who so finds me, finds life. Not a Soul wanting Jesus Christ but he
wants life, and also in him there dweleth no good thing, Romans 7. 18. v.
Neither faith nor any other saving grace dwells in such a one, but he is as
full of all kind of evil, as Baal's house of Idolatry, as the Sluggard's field
of thorns and briars, or as Pharisees sepulchers of dead men's bones; such a
man's Soul is a very sink of uncleanness and naughtiness. ^ut as when a man is
made a partaker of Christ, he is a new creature, old things are past away,
behold, all things are become new, 2 Cor. 5. 17. v. So he is also a Good Man,
bad things are passed away, and all things are become good: he is become a good
man and has his heart filled with the good treasure of saving Grace. Such
another as Joseph of Arimathea who was a good man and a just, Luke 23. 50. v.
Such another as Banabas was, a Good man and full of the Holy Ghost, Act. 11.
24. v.

When Christ came into the Temple John 2. 5. v. he purged his Father's house;
he overturned the money ^ables, he drove out the buyers and sellers. So when
Christ comes into any man and takes up his holy habitation in the heart, he
throws down every sin, he drives out every ^orruption and carnal lust, he
purges out every evil thing and makes the heart good. The heart of man by
nature is a very den of Thieves, a palace of Pride, a slaughterhouse of
Malice, a brothel-house of uncleanness, a raging sea of Sin, a little hell of
black and blasp^emous Imaginations and ^warming with all manner of noysom
lusts; but the Lord Jesus Christ rids the heart hereof and makes it holy;
Himself is called that holy thing, Luke 1. 35. v. Therefore that holy thing,
which shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son of God, (...), That holy
thing, it is put in the Neuter gender, Emphatically showing that he has not
the least spot of sin in him, but is every way holy, typified therein by the
high Priest under the Law, who had this written upon him, Holiness to the Lord;
but Jesus Christ is not only (...), holy, but he is also (...), He that
sanctifies and makes us holy by his blood, cleansing us from all filthy
abominations.

4. The fourth Instance is that of the Spirit, who is called the Spirit of
Grace, and is of the same essence and consubstantial with the Father, and the
Son, and in all respects coequal and coeternal, called therefore the Eternal
Spirit, Heb. 9. 14. How much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the
Eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God; purge your Conscience from
dead works to serve the living God. The holy Ghost in Scripture is expressly
called God, Act. 5. 3, 4, v. Peter reproving Ananias for lying to the holy
Ghost, says, Thou have not lied unto Man, but unto God. And St. Paul proves
that our bodies are the Temple of the living God, 2 Cor. 6. 16. v. Because of
the holy Ghost which dwells in us. 1 Cor. 6. 19. v. Know ye not that your
body is the Temple of the holy Ghost which is in you? He that in one place is
called the holy Ghost, in the other place is called the living God. And
whosoever will be saved is taught in St. Athanasius his Creed to believe thus;
That the Godhead of the Father, of the Son, and of the holy Ghost is all one:
the ^lory equal, the Majesty coeternal: An^ again, Such as the Father is, such
is the Son, and such is the holy Ghost: And again; The Father Eternal, the Son
Eternal, and the holy Ghost Eternal. And yet they are not three Eternals, but
one Eternal. And Eternally blessed is that man who has gotten this Eternal
spirit of the living God into his heart, for wheresoever the spirit of God
comes it is not idle; We read Matthew. 8. 7. v. how Christ says to the
Centurion, When I come I will heal thy servant; I will not merely come to see
him and visit him, but when I come I will heal him: So when the holy Ghost does
come into a man, he will not be idle and do nothing, but he will heal the Soul,
sanctify the heart, and purge corrupted nature in some measure. Holiness is the
natural product of the spirit, by its powerful influence and breathings it
raises poor dead Souls out of the grave of sin, frames them unto a spiritual
and divine conformity unto Christ, subdues the rebellion of evil hearts and
makes the sinner to become another man by a spiritual Metamorphosis. This is
that work which is ascribed to the holy Ghost, 1 Pet. 1, 2, v. Elect according
to the foreknowledg of God the Father, through sanctification of the spirit
unto obedience; and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus: Here is held forth the
concurrence of the whole Trinity in the salvation of man; The Father electing
us, the holy Ghost sancti^ying us, Jesus Christ shedding his blood for us.
Hence it is that our Savior calls it the holy Spirit, Luke 11. 13. v. If ye,
being evil, know how to give good gifts to your children: how much more shall
your heavenly Father give the holy Spirit to them that ask him? Sanctus
dicitur, quia sanctificat, He calls him the holy Spirit, which is to
sanctify, or make holy the hearts of men. St. Paul therefore calls it the
spirit of holiness, Romans 1. 4. v. And tells the Corinthians they were
sanctified hereby, 1 Cor. 6. 11. v. And again thus he does speak to the
Thessalonians, God has from the beginning chosen you to salvation, through
sanctification of the Spirit and belief of the Truth. The spirit is principal
in stamping the Image of God upon the heart, and sanctifying the soul by Grace
here, that he may exalt us to Eternal glory in heaven hereafter.

Hence we have all our graces and gifts, Grace whereby we are sanctified,
whereby the rebellion of our will is subdued and the uncleanness of our
affections purified and we thereby qualified and enable to serve God: Hence we
have not only our Graces but all our gifts to qualify and enable us in our
several places and relations to edify one another; 1 Cor. 12. 7. v. The
manifestation of the spirit is given to every man to profit withal. The gifts
of the holy Ghost are given for the common good of all the Church, to which
only end all ought to be referred. Non nobis nati sumus; we are neither born
nor born again for our selves. By the former we are made good Christians, and
by the latter we are made profitable Christians.

Hence also it is that we read of the renewing of the Spirit, Titus 3. 5. v.
for upon whom the spirit is bestowed it changes such from earthly to heavenly,
from the Image of Adam to the image of Christ. Every man by nature in respect
of any divine or spiritual good, has a very heart of stone. It was the Poets
fiction that Men were made of Stones, Inde g^nus durum sumus; to be sure there
is this spiritual Stone in the hearts of men, all Mankind naturally a^e a^
hard, tough, rugged and untractable people; Insomuch that where any are
sanctified by the spirit, there children are raised up to Abraham out of
stones, there water is made to gush out of a rock, there dry bones are caused
to gather together and made to live, and such a gracious quality of softness is
wrought by the spirit, that it melts before God, becomes willing and obedient
to all commanded duties, and cries out with St. Paul, Lord what will thou have
me to do; he is willing to do any thing and pliable to any thing that God
commands him. Ezekiel. 36. 26. 27. v. And I will put my Spirit within you, and
cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my Judgments and do them;
Such a willing obedience is wrought by the spirit when that is made good that
you have in the 26. v. A new spirit will I put within you, and I will take the
stony heart out of your flesh and I will give you an heart of flesh. If a man
could put a vegetative life into a stone, what would the stone do? it would
grow as a plant does grow: If a man could put a sensitive life into a stone,
what would the stone then do? it would stir and move as a worm or beast does:
If a man could put a reasonable soul into a stone, what would the stone do? it
would talk as a man does, it would discourse of heavenly matters as a man does,
and pursue the matters of the world as a man does. But if a man could put the
spirit of God and the spirit of Grace into a stone, what then would the soul
do? it would speak of God and Christ, of Heaven and Happyness, it would pursue
spiritual and heavenly matters and things. This is every Man's estate and
condition, as long as there is nothing but the life of reason in them, they
savor nothing but the things of the World, they talk of nothing but the world,
and they labor after nothing but the Temporal things of this world; but if once
the spirit of God be in them, if once they have gotten the spirit of God, it
stirrs them up to talk of Heaven and to labor after the things of heaven; it
works in them holy motions and holy affections. How fruitful in all kind of
goodness does the spirit make those in whose hearts it dwells? read Gal. 5. 22.
v. It is fruitful in love, joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness, goodness,
faith, meekness, temperance. All these are the fruits of the Spirit. The spirit
is as seed in the heart which will spring up and show it self, it cannot lie
dead but will work and move, it will make the Soul that was barren to become
fruitful, it animateth the Soul as to an heavenly being, so to all kind of
heavenly working. When others are empty Vines, like Israel, Hos. 10. 1. v.
Israel is an empty vine. And when others are unfruitful willows and barren
grounds, not trees of the Garden but of the Wilderness, wild degenerate plants,
and for their unfruitfulness in goodness shall have an heavy doom pass upon
them, Matthew. 25. 30. v. Cast ye the unprofitable servant into utter darkness;
These, being filled with the fruits of righteousness which are by Jesus Christ,
unto the Glory and praise of God. Phil. 1. 11. v. are plants of renown, like
the Pomcitron, which (as Naturalists say) bears fruit at all times of the year;
they are like the ground in the Parable which brought forth Some sixty and some
an hundred fold, Matthew. 13. 8. v. And it may be said of them as of Joseph, Genesis
49. 22. v. Joseph is a fruitful bough; Who have their fruit unto holiness and
their end everlasting life, Romans 6. 22. v.

5. The fifth Instance is that of a good Conscience. A good Conscience will be
of no little concernment hereafter. Forty thousand pounds for a good
Conscience, cried out a wicked wealthy Worldling when he was dying and passing
into Eternity. I may here propound a most serious question to those whose
hearts are more taken up with the Temporal things of this world, then with the
Eternal things of another world, Quid prodest bonis plena arca, si in anis sit
conscientia? What good is there in a Chest full of goods when the Conscience is
empty of goodness? Conscience will live for ever, Conscience dies not when a
wicked dies. Death it self is not able to part Conscience from a sinner.

As the probationer disciple said to Christ, Matthew. 8. 19. v. Master, I will
follow thee wheresoever thou go. So will Conscience follow a sinner
whithersoever he goes. It is said of the Statue of Juno placed in a City near
to Euphrates in Assyria, that it always looks toward those that come into her
Temple, be they where they will in the Temple she stares still upon them; if
they go by her, yet she follows them with her eye; So unto all places
whithersoever a sinner goes, Conscience will follow him.

Goes he to God's tribunal to receive the sentence of his Eternal doom, to have
the question of his Eternal estate, to be absolutely and unalterably
determined, even thither will conscience follow him, and when he hopes to stand
rectus in Curia, upright in Judgment, he shall ( Conscience witnessing against
him) be condemned.

Goes he down to Hell the place of torments, yet thither also will Conscience
follow him, there it will lodge in his bosom and be a Chest-worm that will never
leave gnawing. What else is that worm our Savior speaks of when he says Mark
9. 44. v. Where (speaking of Hell) their worm dies not, but Conscience? The
Poets have a fiction concerning (...) a Giant mentioned by Ovid in the fourth
book of his Metamorphosis, that Jupiter striking him dead for his attempting to
ravish Latona the Mother of Apollo and Diana, he was sent to Hell, where he was
adjudged to have a V^lture to feed upon his Liver that ever grew again with the
Moon. Conscience is like T^^y^^ his vulture and is ever a gnawing upon wicked
men's inwards, many times in the ruff of all their jollity here, and in another
World for ever hereafter.

In Hell also Conscience is that fire that never goes out; Mark 9. 44. v. No
length of time can wear out Conscience in this life; and no space of Eternity
can wear it out in another life. It was conscience that made Joseph's Brethren
to remember the cruel usage of him twenty years after in Egypt. Conscience,
Janus-like has its double aspect, it is not content to glance only at what is
to come, but it also looks back to what is past, it brings to remembrance every
one of the sinners violations of God's Laws. I remember my fault this day, said
Pharoah's Butler, Genesis 41. 9. v. his conscience brought it to his memory when
as he had forgotten it; And so does the Conscience of many a man, many years
after that they have done a wickedness, their conscience brings it to their
memory and perplexes them. So it did Nero, after he had killed his Mother and
Wives: So it did Otho, after he had slain Galba and Piso: So it did Herod the
great, after he had caused his Wife Mariamne to be put to death. So it did
Theodoricus King of the Goths after he had murdered Symmacus and Boethius his
son in Law. So it did our Richard the Third after he had murdered his two
innocent Nephews. And so it did Judge Morgan, who gave the sentence of
Condemnation against the Lady Jane Gray, shortly after he condemned her, fell
mad, and in his raving, cried out continually, to have the Lady Jane taken away
from him, and so ended his life.

Verily that man who has an ill conscience, especially if God have opened the
mouth thereof to check and condemn him (as it did those before mentioned) what
ever his estate may be in an outward respect, though he should possess as much
as any ever did of these Temporal good things; yet is he (to use some
Similitudes borrowed from a famous Preacher) but like him that is worshipped in
the street with Cap and Knee, but as soon as he stepped within doors, is cursed
and rated by a scolding Wife: Or like him that is lodged in a bed of Ivory,
covered with cloth of Gold, but all his bones within are broken: Or like a book
of Tragedies bound up in Velvet, all fair without, but all black within; the
leaves are gold, but the lines are blood.

But what is all the rack, the horror and torment of Conscience in this life,
(though it be an hell upon earth) to that everlasting and immortal sting of
Conscience in Hell; when in Hell to all Eternity the sinner must undergo the
lashes of conscience, Conscience making him for ever to remember his sins
committed in this life. It is and will be Conscience that will be the sinners
remembrancer of his sins against God in another life. Though Saul kill himself
yet he cannot kill his Conscience. Though Judas and Achitophel hang themselves
yet they cannot hang their Consciences. Though men murder themsel^es as not
being able to bear the checks and rackings of conscience here, yet they cannot
free themselves from the everlasting gnawings of conscience hereafter. As the
reasonable Soul of Man is immortal, so conscience also is immortal.

There is not a person upon the face of the Earth that we must always live with
upon Earth; but with his Conscience a man is always to live with. Therefore the
Egyptians in their Hieroglyphics expressed an ill Conscience by a Mill, which
always grinds the Soul with the remembrance of evil things past. When we dye,
as one observes we must leave all books behind, not a book of St. Augustine's,
St. Basil's, or any other, no not the Bible (that book of books) can we carry
along with us, but the book of Conscience that we must carry with us, that will
lie open before us for ever; that will hiss like a Snake in the bosom of
Impenitent ones for ever, that will trouble them for evermore, that will put
them for ever in mind of two tormenting things; First, that through their sins
they are deprived of all the good things of Eternity, the which they might with
timely labor and pains have obtained; Secondly, that they are mancipated and
bound to everlasting torments, which by laboring for Eternal good things
(whiles they lived) they might have avoided; And from hence will be engendered
a twofold grief, which with extreme bitterness will gnaw and bite (like a
worm) the hearts of those miserable ones for ever.

These things being first considered, we may easily find out who is the good
man, and also who will be the Eternally happy man. The good man is the man of a
good Conscience; the man that endeavoreth to keep a good conscience, without
which no man truly believes, 1 Timothy 1. 19. v. Holding faith and a good
conscience, which some having put away, concerning faith have made shipwreck.
It is a note that one has upon these words; A good conscience, is as it were a
Chest, wherein the doctrine of Faith is to be kept safe, which will quickly be
lost, if this Chest be once broken: For God will give over to errors and
heresies such as cast away conscience of walking after God's word. Such a good
man, as we now speak of, was St. Paul, Act. 24. 16. v. And herein do I exercise
my self to have always a conscience void of offense toward God and toward
Man. Well may he pass for a good man amongst all men that endeavors neither to
offend God nor Man; And that can when calumniated, take up St. Paul his
protestation, Act. 23. 1. v. I have lived in all good Conscience before God,
until this day; as if he had said, however I am calumniated, and by some
accused of profanation, yet I can appeal to God, that I have lived in all good
conscience; And this makes me merry at heart, when otherwise their calumnies
would sadden my heart, For our rejoicing is this, the Testimony of our
Conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not in fleshly wisdom but
by the grace of God, we have had our conversation in the world 2 Cor. 1. 12. v.
With which agrees that of the Heathen Cicero; Conscientia been actae vitae,
multorumque benefactorum recordatio jucundissima est. A good Conscience is that
will suggar all our tears, sweeten all our bitterness, comfort a man in chains,
prisons and persecutions.

Now this good conscience is the consequent of Grace, only the regenerate have
it, every wicked man has a bad, defiled and polluted conscience: Titus 1. 15.
Even their mind and conscience is defiled, that is, by Original Sin; which yet
in the regenerated and gracious ones are purged, cleansed and made good by the
blood of Christ, Heb. 9. 14. The Apostle there teaches us, That it is the
blood of Christ which purges the conscience, and verily the effect of Christ's
blood cannot but be a gracious effect. And verily it is a singular blessing to
have such a conscience that is purged by the blood of Christ;

No such a bridle in the wo^ld to keep a man from sin; nor such a spurr to put
a man forward to do what is good, and no such a comfort or cordial under any
outward troubles or afflictions.

Take a man without this good Conscience and what wickedness will he not
commit? what evil will he not run into? such a man dates speak any thing in any
business or of any person; he will not scruple to curse, lie and swear in any
business; nor yet to slander, calumniate or speak e^il of any person, if by the
former he may but fill his purse, with gain; or by the other satisfy himself,
with revenge; Toll conscientiam, toll omnia; Take away conscience and take
away all, said the Heathen; take away all restraints to evil. For gainsake such
will not stick to hazard their souls; As it is reported of Nevessan (a better
Lawyer than an honest man) that he should say, He that will not venture his
body shall never be valiant; and he that will not venture his Soul, will never
be rich: And for revenge sake, will not be backward to let the Devil into their
hearts.

So take a man of a good conscience, and what a spurr does he find it to Duty;
when a man makes conscience of discharging those duties that God requires,
prays, hears and reads out of conscience, he then goes on cheerfully in his
work, puts to all his strength; and dares not cast off the performance of that
which God calls upon him to perform; a man of a good conscieence exercising
himself to be void of offense toward God, he will not, nay he dares not
wilfully and resolutely omit any known duty or part of God's worship for which
he has clear warrant for in the Scriptures; and so exercising himself to be
void of offense toward man, he will not, nay he dares not wilfully and
resolvedly omit any part of that duty he owes to Man; and as he would not for a
world wrong God of his due, no more to gain the world will he wrong man of his
due. And no such a comfort and cordial in times of troubles and afflictions as
a good Conscience. It is that which the Preacher says of Money Eccles. 10. 19.
Money answers all things; What ever it is that a man desires, if it be to be
got, Money will procure it for him; Money is the Monarch of the world and
therein bears most Mastery: Of Antipater it is said, He was a well moneyed man,
and therefore a very mighty man. We may truly say the same of a good
conscience; A good Conscience answers all things; What winds can arise to
trouble a Christian which a good conscience cannot alay? A good conscience will
turn the waters of Marah into Wine. I wonder not that St. Paul could sing when
he was in prison and had his feet in the Stocks Act. 16. 24, 25, v. When he was
one that could truly say it; I have lived in all good conscience to this day:
Act. 23. 1. Premat Corpus, fremat Diabolus, turbat Mundus, ille semper securus.
Let Men, the World, and the Devils do their worst they can never hurt him that
has a good Conscience; Though a Christian meet with a storm abroad, yet a good
conscience makes a calm within; It makes a Christian like Noah, medijs
tranquillus in undis; quiet in the midst of greatest cumbustions: It will
bear out a Christian against the King of terrors, it will help a Christian to
look Death in the face with boldness. I have read of one who a little before
his departure out of the world, spoke these words. My friends, I now find it
true indeed, he that leaves all to follow Christ, shall have in this world
Centuplum, a hundred fold: I have, I have, I have that Centuplum, peace of
Conscience with me at parting.

A man of a good conscience, in all things willing to live honestly, as the
Apostle St. Paul says of himself, Heb. 13. 18. v. We trust we have a good
conscience in all things willing to live honestly. Such a one he lives and
dies in peace. Peter in the prison sleeps sweetly, though laden with chains,
and (for ought he knew) to dye the next day. A good conscience is a continual
feast, it has the sweetest relish, but most of all does the sweet relish of a
good conscience refresh a dying Christian. It was Hezekiah his great comfort in
his sickness and apprehentions of death 2 King. 20. 3. v. I have walked before
thee in truth and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in thy
sight.

A good Conscience will stand us in stead at the day of Judgment, when the
whole world shall be burnt before us, when the day of God's wrath against
wicked and impenitent sinners shall be come. A good conscience will make a man
hold up his head in Judgment when a world of wicked ones shall be confounded.

How should what has been said cause us to labor for these Eternal good
things, viz. Grace, God who is the God of all Grace, Jesus Christ who is the
author and giver of Grace, the blessed spirit of God, that is the spirit of
grace, and a good Conscience that is the Consequent of Grace; since hereby we
are made good here, and being made good here, we may be assure to be happy
hereafter. One being asked whether he would rather be Socrates or Craesus? the
one an industrious and laborious Philosopher, the other a man flowing in all
abundance; answered, That for this life he would be Craesus, but for the life
to come Socrates; thereby showing that in this life rich men are accounted
happy men, but hereafter none but good men will be found to be the happy men;
none but they who are made good here shall be happy hereafter.

2. I have done with the first of the two particulars propounded to show that
Eternal good things are the best of good things, viz. Because only Eternal good
things make those who enjoy them good; The second follows, because only Eternal
good things will do us good then when other good things will do us no good.
Eternal good things will stand us in stead when other good things will stand us
in no stead; To enjoy an interest in such things as have been named, and to be
assured of what is afterward to be enjoyed in Heaven, will stand a Christian
in stead in what ever condition a good man can be cast into; when as all that
the world affords will not do the wicked man any good in such conditions as God
will cast them into.

1. They will do him no good nor stand him in any stead when his Conscience is
distressed with the sight of his sins and the apprehension of God's wrath due
for sin.

2. They will do him no good nor stand him in any stead in the day of death.

3. They will do him no good nor stand him in any stead in the Grave.

4. They will do him no good nor stand him in any stead at the day of Judgment.

5. They will do him no good nor stand him in any stead in Hell when he there
shall lie under Eternal Torments. I begin with the first of these five.

1. Temporal good things will do those who enjoy them no good when their
Consciences are distressed with the sight of their sins and the apprehension of
God's wrath due for sin. A time of all other times wherein a Christian needs
consolation and refreshment; but these things are not able to afford any
refreshment.

When a man is terrified with the threatenings of the Law, vexed with the inward
accusations of his own Conscience, and affrighted with the apprehension of
God's deserved wrath; what will it avail to live flourishingly in Prosperity?
to sit in the feat of Honor? to be advanced to the greatest Preferments? to
have multiplied treasure as the sand of the Sea? to have full Barns and rich
Chests? and to be as great in Dominions as Cyrus, and as wealthy as Solomon?
All these things, as they cannot give ease in the midst of a Fever or tortures
of the Gout o^ Stone, so neither can they comfort a man when God opens the
mouth of conscience and amazes him with the sight of his sins, calling to his
mind the history of his life, and makes him to have some glimpses and
pre-occupations of Hell; when he lies under the phrensy of Cain, the despair of
Judas, the madness of Achitophel, the tremblings of Felix; then the whole Earth
though changed into a Globe of Gold or Center of Diamond will do no good, will
stand in no stead. Then all the Riches of Craesus, all the Empires of
Alexander, nor the Hundred twenty and seven Provinces of Ahasuerus will procure
no ease, no peace in the conscience.

Had a man all the Kingdoms of the world and the Glory of them, yet could they
not purchase the least dram of Spiritual Comfort; the lifting up of God's
countenance or an assurance of God's favor; it is Faith not Wealth, it is somewhat
inward and spiritual, not any thing external and accidental that will then give
ease.

Then inward peace is more esteemed t^an outward plenty; As when David said to
Ziba, 2 Samuel 16. 4. v. Behold thine are all that pertained unto Mephibosheth.
And Ziba said, I humbly beseech thee, that I may find grace in thy sight, my
Lord, O King: as who should say, I had ^ather have the King's favor then the
Lands; The King's favor will do me more good then all Mephibosheth's Lands or
goods. Inward consolation and assurance of Salvation at this season will do
more good and stand in more stead then the whole world and all the things of
the world that will endure but for a season.

2. Temporal good things will do those who enjoy them no good in the day of
death: They will do them no good nor stand them in any stead in those last
Dreadful pangs when they lie gasping for breath upon a dying Bed and must now
pass t^rough the valley and shadow of Death, they will do them no good nor
stand them in any stead when they must shoo^ the vast Gulf and lanch out into
the Infinite Ocean of Eternity. Solomon tells us, That Riches, yea, whole
Treasures do not profit in the day of death; Pro. 11. 4. and chap. 10. 2. v. A
speech worth our consideration, for we have it repeated by two Prophets after
him, Ezekiel 7. 19. Zeph. 1. 18.

They say, there stands a Globe of the World, at one of the Libraries in
Dublin, and a Skeleton of a Man at the other: we need not (says my Author)
study long in this Library, to learn a good lesson, though a man were Lord of
all that he sees in the Map of the World, yet he must dye, and become himself a
map of Mortality; and when he dies the whole world (though he enjoyed it) would
do him no good in that last and sorest conflict.

They will not keep off death, nor bribe that grim Sergeant no not for one day,
not for one hour; Henry Beauford that rich and wretched Cardinal, Bishop of
Winchester, and Chancellor of England in the reign of Henry the 6th. when he
perceived that he must dye, and that there was no remedy, murmured at Death,
that his Riches could not reprieve him till a further time; for he asked,
wherefore should I dye, being so rich? If the whole Realm would save my life, I
am able by policy to get it, or by riches to buy it. Fie, (quoth he) will not
death, be hired? will Money do nothing? No, Christians, here money will do
nothing, here money can do nothing when the poor sinner shall be left to
wrestle with the accusations of his Conscience, terrors of Death and fierce
oppositions of Hell and the Devil.

Then all Temporal good things will serve the most greedy ingrossers thereof as
the friends and subjects of our Edward the 3d. served him at his Death; At the
time of his death all of all sorts forsook him, only one Priest is said to stay
with him when he gave up the Ghost; Or as Absolom's Mule served him which went
away, when his head was fast in the great Oak, and so left him in his greatest
extremity. In like manner will Wealth and all worldly felicities deal with men
upon their Dying-beds, leave them in their greatest extremity to the fury of a
guilty conscience (which like the Priest with Edward the 3d. stayed when every
one left him) for their cursed laboring more for that meat which perishes,
then for that meat which indureth to Eternal life. As I have read of one who
when he lay upon his sickbed, called for his baggs, and laid a bagg of Gold to
his heart, and then bad them take it away, saying, it will not do, it will not
do. Baggs of Gold will then afford no comfort to dying ones.

It is reported of Phillip the 3d. of Spain, although it is said of him, that
his life was free from gross Evils, yea, so as he professed, he would rather
lose all his Kingdoms, then offend God knowingly. But being in the Agony of
Death, and considering more thoroughly of his account he was to give to God,
fear struck into him, and these words brake from him: Oh would to God I had
never reigned; Oh, that those years I have spent in my Kingdom; I had lived a
private life in the Wildreness; Oh, that I had lived a solitary life with God,
how more securely should I now have dyed, how much more confidently should I
have gone to the Throne of God? What does all my glory profit me, but that I
have so much the more torment in my Death?

Christians, experience the truth of what I am saying when you please; When you
hear of some such lying upon their Deathbeds; Go to such a one whilst he is
gasping out his last breath, and ask him; What does the world do you good now?
do Riches profit you now? do your great Possessions stand you in stead now?
does that which your chiefest labor and pains was laid forth upon, do you good
now? Then you may expect to hear the words of a great Courtier, who when he
came to dye, did most lamentable cry out, Plus temporis operaeque se palatio
quam Templo impendisse; That he has spent more time in the Palace then in the
Temple; so they, that they did all their life long spend more time and take
more pains and labor for Temporal good things then for Eternal good things, for
Earth then Heaven, but what they labored for so much, does them but little, nay
no good now, and makes them (as he said) have the more torment in their death

O the Testimony of a Man's Conscience upon good grounds, that he has lived
graciously, been afraid of Sin, walked according to the rule of Gods word,
labored chiefly not for perishing but Eternal good things, will afford more joy
and comfort in a dying hour then all the world can; And I cannot think but that
in cool blood, not one amongst many that hunt after these things below so much,
but he will subscribe to the saying of the wise Man, Pro. 10. 2. Treasures of
wickedness profit nothing; but righteounsness delivers from death; from Death
Eternal to be sure.

3. Temporal good things will do those who enjoy them no good in the Grave,
though they possessed whilst living, all the Riches of the Indies, yet when
they dye they can carry nothing thereof with them. Naked came I out of my
Mothers Womb (says Job) and naked shall I return ^^ither, Job 1. 21. v. Job
brought nothing with him when he came into the world, and to be sure he should
carry nothing with him out of the world; Job's wealth and great substance could
not descend into the Grave with him; hereunto agrees that in Psalm. 49. 17. v.
read the 16. v. Be not thou afraid when one is made rich, when the glory of his
House is increased; 17. v. For when he dies, he shall carry nothing away: his
glory shall not descend after him. Though to gain these things here, Men weary
their bodies, perplex their thoughts, rack their consciences, and endanger
their Souls, yet carry they nothing to the grave with them; so says the
Apostle 1 Timothy 6. 7. v. For we brought nothing into this world, and it is
certain we carry nothing out.

There is no man that is rich in the Grave more then another: The King is as
poor there as the basest Peasant in his Kingdom, his Crown and Scepter, his
great State and glory follow him not thither, no, all differences end in the
grave; if we do search Graves and Sepulchers (those chambers of Death) we shall
discover no difference amongst those bones we find there; betwixt the Rich and
the Poor, the Master and the Servant, the greatest Lord and the lowest Subject;
Sculls wear no wreaths or marks of Honor there.

Vetera fraugantur sepulchra, ossa divitum agnoscas, non opes. Open the graves
of rich men, and see what is there; you may find the Misers bones, but not his
riches. Salandine that great Conqueror, carried nothing with him thither but
his Winding sheet. Alexander, that would have been the greatest and richest Man
in the world, in the grave is lesser and poorer then the poorest man in the
world. It is remarkable what one re^ates concerning a Stone that was presented
to Alexander, the nature of it is said to be thus, that being put into the one
part of the balance, it weighed down whatever was put into the other part of
it, but if a little Dust were cast upon the S^^^e, then every thing weighed
down the stone; and he that brought the stone being asked what he meant by it?
he answered. O Alexander thou art this Stone, thou whilst thou live, do
weigh down all that are against thee, and treadest down all before thee; but
when thou come to dye, and there is a little Dust thrown upon thee, then
every man will outweigh thee, and then thou will be less then any man in the
world. Then his conquered Kingdoms, then his large Dominions and great
Treasures would not do him any good.

It was but a foolish action of one (that I have read of) and bespoke him to
have an heart wholly taken up with the things of this world; that being near
death, clapped a twenty shillings piece of Gold into his mouth, saying, Some
wiser then some, I Will take this with me however.

4. Temporal good things will do those who enjoy them no good at the day of
Judgment. Where Luke 21. 27. v. They shall see the Son of Man coming in a cloud
with power and great glory, having Math. 25. 31. v. all his Angels with him,
Being ordained of God to be the Judge of quick and dead, Act. 10. 42. v. For he
has appointed a day in the which he will judge the world in righteousness by
that Man whom he has ordained, whereof he has given assurance unto all men in
that he has raised him from the Dead, Act. 17. 31. v.

And can I name the day of Judgment without putting all that hereof into a
shaking fit of an Ague? without causing their thoughts to be troubled, the
joints of their Loins to be loosed and their knees to smite one against
another, as Belshazzar's did at the sight of the hand writing upon the wall.
Dan. 5. 6. v. and without causing them to tremble as Felix did when he heard of
the Judgment to come, Act. 24. 25. v. Or as the people of Israel did, at the
giving of the Law with thundering in the Mount, Exodus 9. Then those men that
here could never be contented with their condition, but would be higher and
higher, richer and richer, greater and greater, laboring only for Temporal good
things but neglecting Eternal good things, will wish they might be turned into
beasts, or birds, or stones, or trees, or air, or any other thing, yea,
Nothing, rather then be brought before the Judge at that great Assize held not
for a particular County or Kingdom, but for the whole World, to hear that
dreadful sentence of Damnation, Matthew. 25. 41. v. Depart from me ye cursed into
everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels. At the hearing whereof,
no tongue can tell, nor heart can conceive, what rage of guilty consciences,
what furious despair, what horror of mind, what distractions and fears will
seize upon such men, what gnashing of teeth, what wailing and wringing of hands
will be then.

Then both small and great shall stand before God. Rev. 20. 12. v. But the
distinction then will be good and bad, not small and great; for then all Civil
differences will vanish, and Moral only take place. The differences of high and
low, rich and poor, small and great are only calculated for this present life,
and cannot outlive time. The grave and the Judgment Seat put no difference
between Monarchs and Vassals, and there will be no Crowns worn that day but
Crowns of Righteousness, no Robes in fashion then but those that have been
washed in the blood of Christ.

That which Pelicane a German Divine said upon his Deathbed concerning his
Learning, may be said of all wordly greatness, riches, honor, and pomp here,
however doted upon: When I appear before God (says he) I shall not appear as a
Doctor, but as an ordinary Christian; None shall appear then as Lords and
Ladies, as persons of so many hundreds or so many thousands by the year, but as
ordinary men and women; Titles of honor and great Revenues will stand them in
no stead, where such Eternal good things (as are before mentioned) shall be
found wanting; Then they that have been high and mighty Emperors as well as the
poorest Outcasts, the talest Caeders and stoutest Oaks, as well as the lowest
Shrubbs, naked of these things will be rejected: then Majesty that never had
any thing more then worldly Greatness, shall lie and lick the dust of the feet
of Christ; the Sword men and Emperors, the Alexanders and Caesar's, who once
made Nations to tremble, shall themselves tremble before Christ, when they
shall be examined not what Temporal good things they contended for but what
Eternal good things they gained; not what worldly Kingdoms and Territories they
conquered, but whether they first sought, the Kingdom of God and his
righteousn^s^.

Then the great Judge of the World will n^^ inquire how honorable any have been
amongst m^n, ^ut how they have honored him who caused them to be so much
honored. Then it will not be regarded, how many caps and knees any have had in
the world from Inferiors, but how often and how zealously they have humbled their
souls and bowed the knees of their hearts in praying unto God for his mercies
wanting, and in praisi^g him for his mercies received.

Then no man will be respected for the riches which they have had in the world,
but for what spiritual riches of sanctifying grace they have had; The Judge of
the whole World will not regard how rich men have been in Lands, but in
holiness of life; not for what they have had laid up in their Chests but in
their Consciences; neither shall those who here hunted after worldly gain, be
respected because they seized on their prey, But Pro. 21. 21. v. he that has
followed after righteousness and mercy, shall find life, righteousness and
glory.

Temporal things now many times procure men to be set at the upper end of the
World; but at this day (which is coming) all mankind shall be summoned naked
without any respect to what they either have been or have had in this world,
when the Crowns of Kings, when the Robes of Princes, when the Gallants bravery
shall be laid aside, and all men shall be reduced to an equal plea, and without
respect of persons shall be doomed according to their works. 2 Cor. 5. 10. v.
For we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every one may
receive the things done in his body, according to that he has done, whether it
be good or bad. No hopes of bribing of the Judge, he will not be biased by
favor nor acquit any who is in truth saulty or inwardly unsound. Alas! many
have here passed for good men (and none but good men will there find favor)
that there will find the Hypocrisy of their hearts discovered, and themselves
condemned.

It is written (as the cause of Bruno his more strickt religious course) That a
Doctor of great note for Learning and Godliness being dead, and being brought
to the Church to be buried, whilst they were reading the Office for the burial
of the Dead, and came to those words, Responde mihi, the Corpse arose in the
Bier, and with a terrible voice cried out, Justo Dei Judicio accusatus sum; I
am accused at the just Judgment of God; at which voice the people ran all out
of the Church afrighted. On the morrow when they came again to perform the
Obsequies, at the same words as before, the corpse arose again, and cried with
an hideous voice, Justo Dei Judicio judicatus sum, I am judged at the righteous
Judgment of God: whereupon the people ran away again amazed. The third day
almost all the City came together, and when they came to the same words as
before, the Corpse rose again, and cried with a more doleful voice than before,
Justo Dei judicio condemnatus sum; I am condemned at the just Judgment of God.
The consideration whereof, that a man reputed so upright should yet by his own
confession be damned, caused Bruno and the rest of his companions to enter into
the strickt order of the Carthusians.

If men that have passed for good men here but were not good, shall be accused,
judged and condemned then, what shall become of those who had not so much as
the outward face of goodness, of men that all their life long neglected even
the externals of Religion, and only gave themselves to look after the present
world? however they may for many years together flourish in the pomp and
splendour of an outward Estate, yet then their faces will gather blackness
finding themselves to become the scorn of God, Angels and Saints.

The sins of men whereby they have all their lives provoked God, will lie down
with them in the grave, follow them into another, meet them at Christ's Bar to
further their Damnation, but their riches will neither lie down with them in
the grave, follow them into another world, nor meet them at Christ's Bar to do
them any good or stand them in any stead to further their Salvation.

5. Tempor^d good things will do those who enjoy them no good in Hell under the
everlasting torments there, when for want of having gained Eternal good things
they suffer the vengeance of Eternal fire. Can the greatest Possessors of the
world carry any thing thereof with them into Hell to bribe the Flames or
corrupt their Tormentor? Or will a whole world, yea, will Ten thousand worlds
comfort them through a miserable Eternity? What comfort will it be in Hell to
remember that they were Lords or Ladies, Dukes or Dutchesses, Kings or Queens
on the earth? No comfort will it be to them there though they had enjoyed in
their lifetime Mints of Gold and Silver. Those that are already gone down to
the Dead and are amongst the damned, are not at all comforted with the
remembrance of what once they had or were.

Those prisoners of Hell have all their sins there about them, their sins which
were the cause of their being cast into Hell are with them, but they have none
of their delights, pleasures, worldly honors and sensual contentments about
them; they have nothing of Gold, Silver, Pearl, or their sweet Perfumes about
them.

What is it, Christians, to be lifted up in this world, and in another world to
be cast down? Here to enjoy abundance of all Temporal good things and there to
want all things? for a short time to shine here in glory and hereafter to
consume in misery? here to have plenty of all things that can do us good, and
there to be deprived of all things which would do us good?

What though a man were now possessor of as much gold as Pope John the two and
twentieth was possessor of, who is said to have at the time of his death two
hundred and fifty Tun^s of Gold? What though a man had hoarded up as much
wealth as Pope Boniface the Eight, of whom it is storied, that when he was
taken by Phillip the Fair, King of France, and his Palace rifled, there was
more Treasure found than all the Kings of the earth could show again? And yet
after all these great Stores to have no place in Heaven, but to be cast down
into Hell and there to have nothing to do us good.

There are thousands that once knew not where to bestow their goods on earth,
who now know not which way to turn themselves in Hell, upon earth they took to
themselves the Timbrel and Harp, they spent their days in wealth; as you have
it in Job 21. 12, 13. v. Then they lay upon beds of Ivory and stretched
themselves upon their Couches, and eat the Lambs out of the flock, and the
Calves out of the midst of the st^ll; that chaunted to the sound of the Viol
and invented to themselves instruments of Music, like David: that drank Wine
in bowls, and anointed themselves with the chief Ointments, As Amos gives the
character of some, Amos 6. 4, 5, 6. Their whole life was but a diversion from
one pleasure to another; but now know not which way to turn them for a little
ease in Hell, that prison of the Damned. They, who here had their Harps and
Timbrels to make themselves music, have there no music but roaring, and
crying, and howling of the Damned; they who here lay upon beds of Ivory and
stretched themselves upon their couches; have there no other beds but what are
made of fie^y Brimstone, pitchy Sulphur, scorching Darkness, and Fire
unquenchable; they who here eat the Lambs out of the flock, and the calves ou^
of the midst of the stall, have there their most dainty and delicious tastes
empoysoned with far wor^e food then the bread and water of Affliction, even
food of Devils and Damned ones; they who here chaunted to the sound of the
Viol, have there no Hymns but cursings, no tunes but wailings, no dittyes but
blasphemies, no songs but lamentations, no streins but scriechings, they who
here drank wine in bowls, have there not a drop to cool their tongues, no
other wine there but the wine of the wrath of God, Rev. 14. 10. v.

Do but consult History and read the stories of formerages, and you will easily
find that God has given the good things of this life, ye the best of such
things as this world affords unto the worst and (as Daniel speaks) the
basest of men. Who but the Nimrods, the Nebuchadnezzars, the Alexanders, and
the Caesar's, have ordinarily been the Lords of the world: Even such, when they
lived fleeted of the cream of earthly enjoyments, when the portion of the
Saints has been thin and lean and poor, but alas they had their good thngs
only in this life (as Abraham tells the rich man) but now in Hell, in another
life, they enjoy not any thing that will do them good or stand them in any
stead.

Hitherto of the first particular, viz. That Temporal good things will not do
the wicked man any good in such conditions as God will cast him into; I come to
the second, and that is,

2. That Eternal good things will stand a Christian instead, and do him good in
what ever condition a good man can be cast into. As,

1. They will do a Christian good and stand him in stead, when God shall lay
him under affliction. 2. They will do a Christian good and stand him in stead
when he lies upon a sick bed or a dying bed. 3. They will do a Christian good,
and stand him in stead, when he shall be brought to stand at Christ's tribunal
in the day of judgment.
Having named these three things, I cannot but conclude him an happy man that
has that which will do him good under those afflictions he may meet with in
this life, and that will do him good when he shall have an end put to this
life, and at the day of judgment that follows after this life is ended.
Christians, let me say unto you as Paul once did to Agrippa, Do you believe the
Scriptures? I know you do. And in them these truths are plainly and plentifully
proved, That Eternal good things will do those good who enjoy them, under
afflictions, at death, and at judgment. I begin with the first of these three.

1. Eternal good things will stand a Christian in stead and do him good when
God shall lay him under affliction. Nothing more common indeed then to find the
worst of men in the best outward condition, enjoying abundance of Temporal good
things, and liveing in prosperity and free from all kind of afflictions; so
David says of them, That they are not in trouble as other men, their eyes
stand out with fatness, they have more then their hearts can wish, but for
himself all the day long he was plagued and chastened every morning. Psalm. 73.
4. 5. 7. 12, 14. v.

And says Jeremy when he would plead this very case with God; Wherefore does
the way of the wicked prosper, why are all they in wealth who rebelliously
transgress; thou have planted them, yea they have taken root, they grow, yea,
they bring forth fruit, Jer. 12. 1, 2. v.

Mal. 3. 15. They that work wickedness they are set up, yea, they that tempt
God, are even delivered. Proud and presumptuous sinners prospered and
flourished, they carried the Flagg in the Main-top, as if they had been God's
special favorites, whilst in the mean time it went fally with those that feared
God.

And Job he asks the like question as Jeremie did before, as if he would
reason out the matter with God, Job 21. 7. v. Wherefore do the wicked live,
become old, yea, are mighty in power. 9. v. Their houses are safe from fear,
neither is the rod of God upon them. 10. v. Their Bull gendereth and fails
not, their Cow calveth, and casts not her calf. 12. v. They take the Timbrel
and Harp, and rejoice at the sound of the Organ. 13. v They spend their days in
wealth.

And as nothing is more common then to find the worst of men in the best
outward condition; yet as common it is on the other hand to find the best of
men in the worst outward condition; to find them suffering Afflictions and to
meet them traveling through the Valley of Bata as they go toward Zion, Psalm.
84. 6. v. Usually God most afflicts those whom he best affects. Many are
the troubles of the righteous, Psalm. 34. 19. v. The Israelites passage through
the Red Sea and the dismal Wilderness into Canaan, what was it but a type of
the afflicted condition of God's people afterward.

In outward things God's enemies fair better in this world then his friends,
and for any to expect to be wholly freed from affliction is in vain, that is
the privilege of none but Saints already in Heaven, even they whilst on this
side Heaven were fed with the bread and water of affliction, and it is not for
any to expect that God should strew Roses or spread Carpets for their feet only
to tread upon in the way to Heaven; that Man is but a Thistle and no good corn
that comes not under the Flayl; a bastard and no son whom God corrects not.
I might abound in Scripture instances; time would fail me to tell you how
grea^l* Job was afflicted in his children, in his substance, in his body, from
the crown of the head to the soul of the foot, whose afflictions came upon him
like waves, one in the neck of another; Or to show you that holy David had
cause to say what he did in Psalm. 38. 2. v. Thy arrows stick fast in me, and
thy hand presses me sore. What an arrow was that at David's heart to hear from
Nathan, That the Sword should never depart from his house; that his house
should be cut off by the sword. What another arrow was it, that Tamar his
Daughter should be deflowred by his own Son Ammon. And that Ammon should be
afterward murdered by Absalom. That Absalom should be a Rebel and force David
from Jerusalem. Besides other arrows that could not but stick deep in the heart
of David.

But I will not so much as name any more; for whosoever lists to look over the
whole Book of God, and will consider the history of the lives of God's people
in all ages both in Scripture and other records, will find them usually in an
afflicted condition.

And now the great fault of Christians at such a time, is this, they are too
ready to look upon their afflictions, as if they viewed them through such
multiplying glasses as they say are made at Venice, which being put to the eye,
make twenty men in Arms show like a terrible Army; So they are ready to fancy
their troubles and afflictions so great and so many that they shall never be
able to bear them, never be able to overcome them, and extricate themselves out
of them.

But Eternal good things at such a time as this will stand a Christian in
stead, they will make him bear afflictions more patiently, they will be as
Cordials to strengthen him when he faints, as an Ark to bear up his spirits and
keep them from sinking in a deluge of Calamities; as so many baits for his Soul
until he comes home to those heave^ly Mansions.

We noted before what David says of the prosperity of wicked men, in Psalm 73.
and how he himself was afflicted, all the day long he was plagued and chastened
every morning, but now see what it was that helped David in the midst of a sore
temptation, that did arise from his affliction; read v. 24. Thou shall guide me
with thy Counsel, and afterward receive me to glory: as if he should say.
Howsoever it be with the men of the world, who enjoy their prosperity according
to their desires, and howsoever it be with me, that I am afflicted, and must
endure hard things here, yet this is that which upholds me through all, this is
that which does me good under my afflictions, Thou shall afterward receive me
to glory.

That which made Moses not only patient but joyful in what he suffered, was
this, Heb. 11. 26. v. He had respect unto the recompense of the reward; he had
his heart set upon that state of Eternal glory in Heaven.

It Was this upheld the spirit of St. Paul, and made him account of any evil here
to be endured but light and short, and not to be compared and reckoned with
that exceeding and Eternal weight of glory that is to come, Romans 8. 18. v.
whereunto let me add that in 2 Cor. 4. 17, 18. While we look not at things
which are seen; but at the things which are not seen; for the things which are
seen are temporal, but the things which are not seen are Eternal.

Israel never minded the difficulties they went through, nor the Anakims they
fought with, when the Land of Canaan was to be possessed by them. Pericula non
respicit Martyr, Coronas respicit; It was not the danger that troubled the
Martyrs, it was the Crown that helped them to go through those dangers; the
fullness of those joys, and sweetness of those pleasures at God's right hand,
bore up their hearts and raised up their souls under their sufferings, and made
them contemn fire and faggot, yea, and slight what everthe malice of men could
do unto them. It was nothing with them to drink down large draughts of Vinegar
and Gall, when God called them to it, why? because such Cups were sweetened
with the new Wine drunk in his Kingdom. They would not pull in their heads for
fear of any blows whatsoever, for that they had put on for an helmet the hope
of Salvation and glory. They refused not to enter into the most fiery Chariots
for that they knew they would carry them up into Heaven.

It is reported of Egypt, that there is no Country in which there are more
venomous creatures then in Egypt; and also that there is no Country has more
Antidotes to help against poison: Even so no people under the Sun, I think,
meet with more troubles and afflictions outward and inward then the people of
God do, but then none have more excellent Cordials to make use of at such a
time then they have: Alcheumes, Bezoar, dust of Pearl, or aurum potabile are
not so comfortable as those spiritual Cordials (of all sorts) that the Saints
have to do them good in times of affliction. And, believe it, those who enjoy
any share in these Eternal good things find such comfort therein and they stand
them so much in stead under afflictions, that they go on cheerfully in their
way toward Heaven. What else stood the first Martyr in stead, in the storm of
his Lapidation; and upheld good Jobs heart in an evil day, and made him bear so
bravely the ruin of a great Estate without repining.

2. Eternal good things will stand a Christian in stead and do him good when he
lies upon a sick and dying bed. A great part of a Christian's wisdom lies
herein, always to keep death in his thoughts, and what ever escapes his
thoughts not to let death escape them ^^ says God himself, Deuteronomy. 32. 29. v. O
that they were wise, that they understood this, that they would consider their
latter end. Memento mori, is a motto which some carry in their Rings; that is
the motto which every Christian should have engraven upon their hearts, never
to lay aside the thoughts of death; The youngest have reason to keep Death in
their, thoughts as well as the oldest, the day of death comes on a pace toward
both young and old. No sooner does any one begin to live, but so soon does he
also begin to dye.

Very careful were the ancients herein, As some now will have their Coffins
made in their lives time, so would they have their Graves. King Asa made
himself a Sepulcher in his lifetime. 2 Chronicles. 16. 14. v. in the City of David.
So did Joseph of Arimathea, John 19. 41. v. Some Heathens would walk among the
Graves, to put them in mind of death; Some have had their Graves before their
gates; some had a dead Man's Skul presented at their Tables; some have had cups
made of dead men's skuls to drink out of. The Romans of old used to put a
Sergeant in the triumphant Chariot of their Generals, to keep the triumphing
Conqueror within the bounds of moderation and sobriety of spirit, and make him
even then to have death in his thoughts, by crying to him, Memento te esse
^ortalem, Remember that thou art a mortal man. Philip of Macedon directed his
Page every morning ^o call at his chamber door, with this morning saluta^ion.
Memento mori. Remember Death. If Heathens were thus careful to keep death
always in their thoughts, shall not Christians, that believe the Doctrine of
Eternal life, have serious thoughts of Death?

Thoughts of death would make Christians to labor for such things as will stand
them in stead at death. As the thoughts of a Famine in Egypt made the Egyptian
King to provide for that which would do Egypt good and stand it in stead in the
time of the Famine. Or as the Governor of some great Fort expecting a Seige,
will provide for what will do the Garrison good in a Seige, that they may not
then fear the beseigers, that the greatest enemy that comes may not be a terror
to them.

Death is called the King of terrors, Job 18. 14. v. Heathens called it, The
most fearful of all fearful things; Hence it is that the hearts of miserable men
empty of Eternal good things are kept in straitness and bondage; Heb. 2. 15.
Through the fear of death all their lifetime are subject to bondage; some have
been so afraid of death that they have commanded their servants not to name
death in their hearing. O Death that is (as I said) called the King of terrors
is a terrible sight to all; Even the godly themselves have a natural fear of
death, (Because they have as all creatures a natural desire of
self-preservation; and this natural fear being concreated with Man in the state
of innocence, is not sinful. And also because sometimes, because their faith is
weak and little; little Faith will cause great fear. Matthew. 14. Why art thou
fearful, O thou of little faith.) But none more fearful of death then they who
have made no provision for Etern^^y, that have contented themselves with an
Heaven here, and never labored for any thing of hereafter. But having an
intrest in Eternal good things then, will sweeten the bitterness of death as
the tree did sweeten the waters of Marah, Exodus 15. 25. v. this will make a
Christian not to be afraid of death.

At death, to have God with us, a good Conscience within us, and to see Heaven,
and all those Eternal good things laid up in Heaven, before us, will do us good
and stand us in stead then; It was that which comforted David, Psalm. 23. 4. v.
Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death I will fear no evil;
And he renders his reason why he will not be afraid; For thou art with me. And
as for a good Conscience* that is a continual feast, but it has the sweetest
relish at death; When a man, at that time is become like old Barzillai through
age and debility, 2 Samuel 19. 35. v. his senses of seeing, tasting, and hearing,
fail him, yet even at that time the relish of a good Conscience will most
refresh him. I pass to the third, viz. To see Heaven before us; and might here
referr the Reader to what I have said of that (with the rest) before; but let
me tell thee, Christian, such a sight as this will make a dying man look upon
death with a smiling aspect, it will make him welcome death. I remember what I
have read of Mandanius, a famous Gymnosophist, to whom Alexander sent
Messengers, willing him to come to the Feast of the Son of Jupiter, meaning
Alexander himself, declaring also that according to his obedience he should be
rewarded, and if he refused he should be put to death* The Philosopher first
denying him to be Jupiter's Son, answered the Messengers, that for his gifts he
esteeme^ them worth nothing, seeing his own Country could furnish him with
necessaries; and as for Death he did not fear it, but wish it rather, in that
it was a change to a more happy estate; So far did mere Philosophy carry men in
the opinion of Felicity; that death was not to be feared in that to good Men it
was the way to Felicity; a truth that a Christian may rely upon on better and
more certain grounds then a Heathen can; It made Seneca embrace death, saying
as he bled to death, Scalpello aperitur ad illam magnam libertatem via; his
death made but way to a greater liberty; so does the good Man, death it makes a
way for that which is far better then any thing the world affords; And should
it trouble a Christian then to yield to death.

Suppose a Man's Landlord should turn him out of his house, that he and his
wife and children must lodge in the Streets, would he not willingly submit to
that person that would remove him out of his present habitation, that possibly
is but some smoaky hole, a dark, low and old Cottage, and compassed about with
bad neighbors; into a lightsom, large, lofty, lasting house, and where he were
sure to have good Neighborhood; Would it not do such a one good to think of the
exchange he is to make? would it not make him willing to remove? such an house
will stand him in stead indeed; And is not the believer assured of such an
house? read 2 Cor. 5. 1. v. For we know, that if our earthly house of this
Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made with
hands, Eternal in the Heavens. The Soul now dwells in the body, which is but as
a dark, mean, decaying old Cottage which is compassed about with bad neighbors.
The Soul finds the body but a dark habitation, dark in comparison of Heaven; As
that Dutch Divine Bugenhagius said of Luther after he had read his book De
Captivitate Babylonica, That Luther was in the light but all the world besides
in darkness; So only those souls by death removed out of the body and now in
Heaven, They only are in the light; but the best of those that yet are in the
body, are in darkness.

The body is but a mean habitation for the soul which is of a spiritual and
immortal substance to dwell in Eliphaz in Job, calls it an house of clay; St.
Paul in the place last named, calls it an Earthly house; Solomon calls it
nothing but Dust, Eccles. 12. 7. v, it is but a vile body Phil. 3. 21. v. It Is
but (as one says) a clay wall encompassing a treasure; or a course case of a
rich Instrument.

And that which is yet worse, a decaying and ruinous habitation that will
shortly moulder to Dust; those parcels of dust, making up the body, that were
bound together by the bond of innocence, are by sin shaken loose and subject to
a continual flux and decay.

But yet worst of all, the Soul finds its dwelling compassed about with bad
Neighbors; how often is the Soul whilst living in the body, like Lot living in
Sodomie, even vexed with the filthy conversations of the Sodomites, 2 Pet. 2.
7, 8. How often are gracious souls for^ed to cry out with David, Psalm. 120. 5. Woe
is me that I remain in Mesech, and dwell in the Tents of Kedar. As bad
Neighbors are always wrangling and quarrelling, and stirring up discord with
those they ^ive near; so are wickd men always contesting with ^hese. That the
soul may truly say as Lamenting Je^emy of the Church of the Jews, she dwells
among the Heathen, she finds no rest, all her per^ecutors overtake her, Lam.
1. 3. v.

Much might have been said of the Souls present ha^itation to make the soul at
death willing to remove ^ut of it; but what shall I say of that house not made
^ith hands Eternal in the Heavens?

Is the body a dark house? Heaven is a light some house; hence it is set forth
by the name of Light. Col. 1. 12. Saints in Light; that is, in the glorious
Kingdom of heaven. And 1 Timothy 6. 16. God is there said to dwell in an
unapproachable light; there is a perpetual Day without Night; there is no night
there, says St. John, Rev. 21, 25. v. Though some regions that lie immediately
under the Pole have light for several Months together, yet when the Sun
withdraws from their Horizon, they have as long a night and darkness as before
they had a day; but says St. John, There shall be no night there, no darkness
there.

Is the body but a mean habitation for the Soul to dwell in? Heaven is a most
glorious habitation. Lactantius beholding the magnificency of Rome, said,
Quomodo caelestis Jerusalem si sic fulget terrestris Roma? What an habitation
has God prepared for a Nation that love holiness and truth, if he have such
things as these for them that love Vanity? What was the Temple built by Solomon
for the Lord to this celestial Paradise prepared by the Lord? What are the
Courts of the greatest Emperors to the Court of the great God? what are the
stateliest Fabrics in the world, if compared with this Eternal house in Heaven.

Is the body a ruinous house that will shortly moulder into dust? Heaven is an
everlasting habitation; It is called so Luke 16. 9. v. They may receive you
into everlasting habitations; so is Heaven called in opposition to Earthly
dwellings, which though many of them are beautiful and glorious, yet shall be
laid in the dust. Many houses here below may be lasting, but not everlasting,
but this runs parallel with Eeternity. The first seat of the first Adam in the
first Paradise, was without doubt very glorious, but not permanent, not
Eternal, this is far better, more glorious and Eternal.

Does the Soul find its present dwelling compassed about with bad Neighbors? In
Heaven there is good, very good neighborhood. It is related of Cato an old
Roman that he advised in the purchase of a Farm or House, that a man should
consider of the vicinity or neighborhood there; Ne malum vicinum haberet; And
to that purpose is related the proclamation of Themistocles a famous Athonian
Captain, in the sale of his Lands, that, if any man would deal with him he
should be sure of a good neighbor. There is (if I may have leave to say so)
good neighborhood in Heaven. There is God our Father, he that begot us again
lives in Heaven. There is Christ our Elder brother sitting at the right hand of
God in Heaven. All the Saints departed, are now inhabitants of the new
Jerusalem, which is Heaven.

And now, Christians, will it not do a man good that has a good title to this
house not made with hands Eternal in the Heavens, when he comes to dye, and his
soul must be removed out of his clay Cottage. Death to him will be but a bridge
from Woe to Glory; a passage out of a Wilderness to Canaan; the end of his
misery and the beginning of his felicity; the conclusion of his labor and the
settling himself to rest; though death may be a wicked man's fear, yet it will
be his wish; though it be the others shipwreck, yet it will be his entering
into harbor; though it be the others remove from Earth to Hell, yet will it be
his remove from Earth to Heaven. To him death will be gain, to the other, death
will be a loss; Death to the wicked man will be a dark and dreadful passage
unto the second death and utter Darkness, but to him an entrance into Eternal
life and an heavenly light. Death to the wicked man will put an end to his
short joys and begin his everlasting sorrows, but to him it will put an end to
all sorrows and begin ^his everlasting joys.

When Valentinian the Emperor was upon his dying bed, among all his victories
only one comforted him and did him good, and that was victory over his worst
enemy, viz. his own naughty heart; So this one thing is enough to comfort a
believer and do him good upon his dying bed, That having faithfully all his
days labored for Eternal good things, now that he must dye, yet his eyes will
be no sooner off these temporal things, but they shall behold Eternal objects;
and the same minute that shuts his eyes shall again open them to behold God,
and as it determines his misery, so it shall begin his happyness and feoffe him
in that glory which he cannot but for ever enjoy. This made holy Basil so
resolute in his answer to Modestus the Emperor's Lieutenant when he threatened
him with death; Death (says he) is a benefit to me, it will send me sooner to
God, to whom I live, to whom I desire to hasten. This made that noble army of
Martyrs mentioned in Ecclesiactical History such Lambs in suffering, that their
persecutors were more weary with striking, then they with suffering; This made
them slight the sentence of death, go cheerfully to the stake, and leap into
beds of Flames as if they had been beds of Down, and to suffer the most
exquisite deaths and torments that ever the wit or malice of men or devils
could invent or inflict upon them.

3. Eternal good things will do a Christian good and stand him in stead when he
shall be brought to stand at Christ's tribunal in the day of Judgment; when all
the world shall be on fire about his ears, and all earthly glory shall be
consumed, yet our Savior encourages such then to look up and lift up their
heads, for their redemption draws nigh, Luke 21. 28. v.

We have seen the man enjoying Eternal good things upon his deathbed, not
shrinking or trembling at death; sed post hoc judicium; but after this the
Judgment, Heb. 9. 27. v. whither if we follow him, though he stands at Christ's
bar, yet not fettered in chains like a Malefactor, expecting a dreadful
Sentence; neither trembling at Judgment to come, as Felix when he was a Judge
upon the bench did, when he heard St. Paul preach of Judgment to come.

The Epicures, Atheists, and those debauched ones that now Hector it out so
stoutly in the world, and brave it in a way of all manner of Voluptuousness
both in despite of God and men, these would be glad if death were ultima linea
rerum, the last line of all things, that when they dye and lie down in their
graves there might be no Resurrection; As Solomon calls the Grave a long home,
Eccles. 12. 5. v. they could wish it were rather an everlasting home; and that
the grave might never give up her dead, Rev. 20. 13. v. But as death is a
sleep, so it might be an Eternal sleep, and that there never might be any more
Evigilation or waking out of sleep. It would please them to hear the grave
called, Invium retro sepulchrum, a place that had no regress thence; and they
could wish from their hearts the doctrine of the Saduces against the Gospel
were as true as the Doctrine of Jesus Christ in the Gospel; Jesus Christ in the
Gospel tells us both of a day of Resurrection and a day of Judgment, but the
Saduces teach that there is no Resurrection, no Judgment nor Judge; as these
wish there were not; so dreadful are the thoughts of that day unto wicked men.

This day will be the greatest for terror to those who never possessed more
then this world, but the greatest for joy to those who, not contented with this
world, had their hearts taken up with the great things of another world; When
the greatest part of the world shall be sent trembling to Hell, being doomed to
everlasting Flames, and for ever to remain in the same condition of the Devils
themselves, then they shall go triumphingly to Heaven, be actually stated in an
everlasting happy condition, and for ever delivered from their fears and doubts
of Salvation, which all their livestime were a grievous burden unto them.

Terrible will this last day be to all those who never looked after providing
for the Soul's welfare; but it will be a joyful day to those who have laid up
treasures in Heaven, whither both Soul and body (those two old companions are
joyfully hastening together. Happy Christians are they who in this day of Grace
(the only time men have to provide for their Eternal Condition) have gotten
their souls stored with Grace, those who now have their souls made gracious,
shall then have both their souls and bodies made glorious. Time was when sin
had changed their souls from their Original beauty and glory, had changed them
from their primitive excellency and holiness, their natures were then
altogether sinful, but at their conversion Nature was turned into Grace, and
now at their Resurrection unto Judgment, those who had here gracious souls,
will then have as glorious souls so glorious bodies; Then their souls shall be
wholly freed from all sins and corruptions and brought to their primitive
beauty and comeliness; and their bodies from mortality and all sinful
uncleanness that they may by Christ be fashioned like unto his glorious body;
It was a rare saying of holy Bernard and worthy to be written in letters of
Gold; says he, Christ has a double coming, He comes now by his Ministers to
make his peoples souls gracious, and at the day of Judgment he will come in his
own person to make their bodies glorious; those that have gracious Souls now
shall have glorious bodies then, even bodies conformable to the glorious body
of Christ, Phil. 3. 21. v. Who shall change our vile body, that it may be
fashioned like unto his glorious body; like unto the Sun-like resplendent body
of Christ. Their corruptible bodies shall be changed and be made incorruptible;
their natural bodies shall be changed and be made spiritual bodies; their
mortal bodies shall be changed and be made immortal bodies, 1 Cor. 15. 42, 43,
44. 53. v. Behold (says St. Paul) I show you a mystery, we shall not all sleep,
but we shall all be changed. 1 Cor. 15. 51. v. speaking there of the last day.
Indeed the Apostle was already changed and the Corinthians were already
changed; if we consider what St Paul and the Corinthians once were, they will
appear to have been changed, Nature in them was already changed into Grace, but
the change he speaks of, which should be at the day of Judgment, is this, Grace
should then be turned into glory; Their gracious souls should be made glorious
souls, and their vile bodies should be made glorious bodies.

As the Inhabitants of Samaria once said, Isay 9. 10. v. The Sycomores are cut
down, but we will change them into Cedars; the Sycomore is but a mean
despicable tree to the Cedar; the bodies of the best are but vile and
despicable bodies now, but at the day of Judgment they shall be changed into
glorious bodies. In that glorious morning when Christ shall come to Judgment,
every one that has gotten grace here, shall put on a new fresh suit of flesh,
richly laid and trimmed with glory, says an ingenious person. So much good will
Grace do us then and stand us in stead then.

Then to have an interest in God, the God of all grace, will also do us good
and stand us in stead; then those, who have gotten God for to be their God in
Covenant with them, will find their interest in God to do them good. though God
will then be a consuming fire to burn up souls like stuble that had not God for
their God, yet those who have this intrerest in God, they may look upon him,
not as an enemy that will set himself against them, but as a friend that is
reconciled unto them; not as an angry Judge that will condemn them, but as a
merciful Father that willingly has pardoned them; they may behold him not as
clothed with dread and terror, but with mercy and compassion; though then God
will frown upon them who never labored to get an interest in him, yet will he
turn away his anger from them who have chosen him for their God, and will
behold them with a smiling countenance.

Most men highly value an Interest in great persons, and too many value this
more then to have an interest in a great God; But experience shows how mutable
the friendship of men is, they are like weathercocks upon Steeples that turn
with every wind; sometimes in their friendship they are like the Sun in its full
strength, but anon some cloud of a small or imagined offense darkens all their
love; and nothing is more common then to find friends dying oftentimes one to
another, even whilst they live, and their sometimes enjoyed friendship then does
them no good nor stands them in stead, whatever be their straits they come
into. But when once a Christian has gotten an interest in God, God will be a
God to him as long as he is God; God is a God for ever, and he will be his God
for ever. What God is, he was from Eternity, and what God is to any he will be
to Eternity, there shall never come the time when God will withdraw his love,
or his good will cease toward them. He will always do them good, and always
stand them in stead, both in life and death, and the day of Judgment.

God that has done them good and stood them in their greatest straits of this
life will do as much for them at this day. An Interest in God did stand David
in stead when he was in that great strait at Ziglag, the City was burnt by the
Philistines in his absence, his wives carried captive, the people ready to stone
him, but David he encouraged himself in the Lord his God: So Psalm. 31. 14. v.
there also this man, who was a man after God's own heart, is in a great
calamity and trouble, but an interest in God did him good and stood him in
stead then, For says he, I trusted in thee O Lord, I said thou art my God. God
will have them to know that they have not any cause to fear nor be dismayed
wheresoever they are or whatsoever condition they lie under, so long as they
have him to be their God. Isay 41. 10. v. Fear thou ^at, for I am with thee: be
not dismayed; And he gives the reason, which is satisfactory enough to all that
know what God is, and what it is to have God for their God; the reason is in
these words, For I am thy God. O the happy condition of that man who has God
for his God. God being his, then whatsoever is in God, whatsoever God can do,
and whatsoever God has is his, because God himself is his. The propriety that
he has in God extends throughout to all that is in God, to all that God is or
can do for his good; Whatsoever there is in God shall be as truly that man's
for his good, as it is God's for his own glory. God will do that man good not
only whilst he lives but when he dies; for God is not his God only while he
lived, but when dead; he is his God to do him good at death, and to do him good
at Judgment. Whilst he lived God was his God to pardon his sins, they both go
together, I will be their God and I will forgive their Iniquities and remember
them no more, Jer. 31. 33. v. When he dies God is his God, even when he passes
through the valley and shadow of death, he is with him, and when his soul
leaves his body, he sends a guard of Angels to carry that into Abraham's bosom;
And when the body has lain a while in the Grave, as he is his God he will
raise it up out of the grave to glory, in the day of Judgment he shall be made
up with God's Jewels at that day.

Then also an Interest in Jesus Christ will do good; let the terror of that
Judgment be never so great to the greatest part of the children of men, it will
not be so to those that have gotten Jesus Christ to be their Savior, and that
then shall have Jesus Christ to be their Judge.

It will be a dreadful day to all those that have been ashamed to make a
profession of Jesus Christ, that have been ashamed of the ordinances of Jesus
Christ. Luke 9. 26. v. Whosoever is ashamed of me and of my words, of him shall
the Son of Man be ashamed when he shall come in his own glory, and in his
Father's, and of the holy Angels.

And that have showed no mercy to the poor afflicted and distressed members of
Jesus Christ, that have shut their bowels against those that have been related
to Jesus Christ, Matthew. 25. 41, 42. v. Depart from me ye cursed into
everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. But why so sad a doom?
For I was an hungered and ye gave me no meat, I was thirsty and ye gave me no
drink, I was a stranger and ye took me not in, naked and ye clothed me not;
sick, and in prison, and ye visited me not;

And that have had no sincere love to Christ, 1 Cor. 16. 22. v. If any man love
not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathama Maranatha. Let him be Anathama,
that is, let him be accursed, When? Maranatha, when Christ comes to Judgment.

And that have not yielded obedience to the Gospel of Jesus Christ, 2 These. 1.
7, 8. v. The Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven, with his mighty Angels,
In flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not
the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.

But Jesus Christ will stand them in stead who shall then be found having an
interest in Christ; Will it not stand one in stead at the bar of Man's
tribunal, that the Judge upon the bench is his friend, that the Judge is one that
loves him dearly, that he is one who designs the good and welfare of the
prisoner; that the prisoner knows assuredly, Well, my Lord the Judge whatever
accusations are brought in against me, will be my friend, I am sure he will
save my life, I am sure he will acquit me; Indeed if the Judge were a man's
enemy, such a one has cause to fear; So if then the Devil or wicked men were
to be our Judges we should have cause to tremble, but Jesus Christ he is to be
our Judge; he that was once judged, condemned and executed in our stead, is to
be our Judge; he that redeemed, regenerated, sanctified and justified us, is to
be our Judge; he that has loved us, he that has interceded for us with the
Father, he that has united us to himself and has made us one with himself, is
to be our Judge. And will not Jesus Christ now stand his people in good stead?
see Romans 8. 1. v. Such shall never be judged to condemnation: For there is
therefore now no condemnation to them which are in Jesus Christ, who walk not
after the Flesh but after the Spirit: they shall then hear no other
proclamations but of blessings, peace and glory; no other sentence but of
absolution; Christ has verily told us, John 5. 24. v. Verily, verily I say
unto you, He that hears my Word, and believes on him that sent me, has
everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation, but is passed from
death to life. John 3. 36. v. He that believes in the Son has Eternal life.
Has Eternal life? how? 1. In promissis, in promises thereof. 1 John 5. 25. v.
And this is the promise that he has promised us, Eternal life. 2. In
principijs, in the beginnings of it; Eternal life is beg^n here: John 17. 3. v.
And this is life Eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and
Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. This is life Eternal, that is, It Is the
beginning of life Eternal, the full enjoyment of which life is hereafter to be
had. 3. In primitijs; in the earnests, first fruits and handsel of it, in those
clusters of grapes and bunches of figgs, those graces of Christ's spirit; they
are called by Saint Paul Romans 8. 23. v. The first fruits of the Spirit. 4. In
capite, Christ as a believer's head already injoys it, and so a believer has
it in a begun possession. Upon Earth Christ was his surety to answer the
penalty of his sin, and in Heaven he is now his advocate, to take seisin and
possession of Eternal life. So that Jesus Christ then will not sentence them to
Eternal death who are so many ways interested in Eternal life; he will not cast
any of his members nor any branches growing in him, into Eternal fire; none of
these shall be made everlasting fuel for Eternal flames.

But yet this should not encourage any one in the way of Licentious living; no,
the thoughts of the day of Judgment should call upon every one to keep a good
Conscience and to walk unblamably all the days of their lives both before God
and Man; This is a duty that St. Paul lays down from this doctrine of the day
of Judgment, Act. 24. 15, 16. v. First the Apostle lays down the Doctrine of
Christ's coming to Judgment, That there shall be a Resurrection both of the
Dead, both of the just and of the unjust; as if he had said, All men shall
appear at Christ's Tribunal in the last day: And what follows? Herein do I
exercise my self to keep a good Conscience void of offense, both toward God
and toward Man. The thoughts of this, that the just must arise and be judged
by Jesus Christ, as well as the unjust, this was an inducement upon St. Paul's
heart, that he should labor to keep his Conscience void of all offense both
toward God and Men. Unto this of St. Paul let me add another place out of St.
Peter, The Apostle having showed That the day of the Lord will come as a theif
in the night, in the which the Heavens will pass away with a great noise, and
the Elements shall melt with fervent heat, the Earth also and the works that
are therein, shall be burnt, 2 Pet. 3. 10. v. adds in the 11. v. Seeing you
look for such things as these, and that all these things shall be dissolved,
What manner of persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation and Godlyness.
The Apostle here would infer from Christ's appearing in Judgment, and the
dissolution of the Heavens and all things at the last day, That they should be
^areful to spend their days in all manner of Piety, and to keep their
Consciences free from Sin. St. Augustine tells of himself, that as long as his
Conscience was gnawed with the guilt of some youthful lust he was once ensnared
with, the very hearing of the day of Judgment was even an Hell to him.
Conscience will then go with men to Judgment, but they who have their hearts
sprinkled from an evil Conscience, will hold up their heads in judgment, and
not fear when the rest of the world shall be full of fear, nay when the whole
world shall be in an aproar, and shall see the Earth flaming, the Heavens
melting, the Judge arrayed with Majesty and attended with all his holy Angels,
sitting on his Throne of Glory like the fiery flame, Dan. 7. 9. v. and all
souls fetched from Heaven and Hell to be reunited to their bodies; when
dreadful souls must leave their place of terror, and once more to be reunited
to their stinking Carions to receive a greater condemnation; and blessed souls
now in their place of happiness once more to be reunited to their then refined
and glorified bodies to receive Eternal glorification.

Happy we if here we find our souls changed by Grace, in Covenant with God,
united to Christ, and do exercise our selves to have always a good Conscience
void of offense toward God and toward Man; Then may I say as St. John does; 1
John 3. 2. Now we are the sons of God, but it does not appear yet what we shall
be: but we know, that when He shall appear, we shall be like him, for we shall
see him as he is. Read those words of the same Apostle in the former Chapter, 1 John 2. 28. v. And now little children abide in him, (In Christ your dear and
ever blessed Savior) that when he shall appear (in Judgment) ye may have
confidence, and not be ashamed before him at his coming. Fear thou not, O
Christian, who have labored for, and possessed thy self of Eternal good things;
which are the Best of good things; such things that will make thee good, and do
thee good when all Temporal good things will do thee no good, But go thou thy
way until the end be: for thou shall rest, and stand in the lot at the end of
the days, Dan, 12. 13. v. Go on in the way and course of thy life that yet
remains, be contented whatever condition thou be cast into, prepare for
the end of thy life, so that thou may end it comfortably and go to thy
g(...)e in peace, and stand up at the general r(...)ec^ion of the Dead (when
Christ shall come to Ju^gment) in thy lot, of Celestial Inheritances and
heavenly glory, prepared and allotted to thee and all laborious Christians, at
the end of the world, for the days of Eternity. For the Lord himself shall
descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and with the
trump of God: and the Dead in Christ ^^all arise first, And then we which are
alive and remain, shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet
the Lord in the air: and so shall we ever be with the Lord; Wherefore comfort
one another with these words. 1 These. 4. 16* 17, 18. v.

I have done with the two first Reasons confirming this truth, That the great
labor and pains of every Christian ought chiefly to be employed not about
perishing, but Eternal good things. First because God com^ands it, and the very
obeying of his commands goes not without a blessing, not to name any temporal
blessings we have here in hand, or promised unto o^edience, it is sufficient that
we obtain a future happyness and glory with all those Eternal good things of
Heaven; And it is said of Jesus Christ, Heb. 5. 9. v. He became the author of
Eternal salvation unto all them that obey him. Secondly, because Eternal good
things are the best of good things, things of the greatest usefulness and
necessity to us in order to our Eternal happyness. It is of absolute necessity
that we should be made gracious, as we would be made glorious; that we should
be interested in God, as we would be made happy with God; that we should be
united unto Christ, as we would be saved by Christ; that we be sanctified by
the spirit, as we would dwell with the Spirit; that we keep a good Conscience,
as we would escape everlasting horror of an evil Conscience. These make a man a
good man and assure him of Heaven, and they do a man good and cheer him in his
way to Heaven. I now pass on to a third Reason.

^ Because Eternal good things are lasting good things, other good things are
perishing good things; and this is the third Reason why our Labor and pains
ought chiefly to be employed not about perishing but Eternal good things; all
other good things perish in the using, they are fading good things, things that
endure but for a season, 2 Cor. 4. 18. say they should endure for a very long
season, what were that season to Eternity, unto which they will not endure.
Those in the Hebrews were contented to part with any thing that endured but for
a season, so they might have an enduring substance: things that were but for a
season would not content them; only things that would endure to everlasting.
Those things only are lasting that are for everlasting.

It is tru^ what Divine Seneca says, Inter peritura vivimus; The things of this
world we live amongst are all perishing and decaying daily, things that never
subsist, but pass along with the headlong and precipitate river of time.

The greatest things of esteem in the world are naturally of themselves
perishing and decaying and without suffering any exterior violence, would of
themselves soon come to an end; but there are also many unthought of
accidencies and extraordinary violencies which force Nature out of her course,
and raises storms in the Sea of this world, by which such things, that men dote
upon below, suffer Shipwreck. As the fairest flower withers of it self, yet it
is also very often withered by some storm or other, or plucked from the root by
some hand. Take the most exact and resplendent beauty that is, a face never so
beautyful or amiable for color and favor, a body most comely for feature and
shape like that of Absolom's, who from top to toe had no blemish) a skin as
white as the Lilly and embroidered over with purple veins, yet this beauty how
soon will it lose its luster and be withered and rivelled with age, and at last
be turned into a rotten carcass, which the worms and dust will devour; Nay,
often before Old age or Death it is blasted by some other cause; by the
violence of a Fever or infection of the Smallpox, it is rendered an ugly
spectacle to behold, nay a little Sorrow will melt it and consume it, Psalm. 39.
11. v.

The strongest and most sumptuous Cities or Palaces will decay with continuance
of time, but are also ruined many times by the violence of Fire or Earthquakes.
To give some Instances hereof. And first what was^ has been made by fire, a
judgment seen with your own eyes upon the Nineteenth of April, 1667. besides
other Foreign and Domestic Ruins caused by this furious Element, which has
sometimes ridden triumph through the Streets of greatest Cities as though it
disdained all resistance until either the whole or greatest parts thereof have
been turned into Ashes and laid in their Rubbish; I Will pass by that great Fire
at Constantinople 1633. where it is said 7000 Houses to have been on fire at
once. And that Fire in Germany in the time of the late Wars there, where a
Reverend Divine of this Nation, accompanying of an Ambassador, affirmed that
his own eyes told at one time the number of Twenty and six Villages and Towns,
all burning at once round about one City. And I will little more then hint to
you what ruin Nebuzaradan caused by fire in Jerusalem, when he burnt with fire
Solomon's house that was thirteen years under the hands of no small company of
Workmen, and also the Temple there built by Solomon for the Lord, being the
work of Seven years, and overlaid with pure Gold, and all the houses of
Jerusalem and all the houses of the great Men, burnt he with fire, Jer. 52. 13.
v. Who can but even weep to remember that dreadful Fire in London, September
the 2. 3. 4. in the Year 1666. where there were about 13000. houses burnt, what
an heavy spectacle was there then seen, to see the flaming of so many houses at
once, the consuming of so much substance, the desolation of so many dwellings,
and to behold the labor of many a Father, Grandfather, and great Grandfather,
suddenly converted into Smoke and Rubbish. Sit transit gloria Mundi. How many
but two hours before this fire begun, possibly were promising themselves to
live merrily and comfortably? they did not, many of them, fear that themselves
or children should ever be destitute of an habitation, they then enjoying
convenient houses, and those well furnished, and themselves well stockt to make
good their promis^s and to escape miseries, but in a few hours saw all these
Temporal good things flying away from them upon the wings of a windy Flame, and
flying away as an Eagle toward Heaven, as Solomon has it Pro. 23. 5. v. One
little flake or spark of fire turning all into Rubbish suddenly, and making
rich Men to become poor, and poor men to become Beggars. How many upon the
first day of September were well furnished with all things, but before the
fifth day, were spoiled of all and sent to the Fountain for their best Cellar?
to the ground for their bed, to another cu^bard for their bread, and to their
friends wardrobe for their clothes. It would be even endless to undertake to
recite how many stately Cities and sumptuous Fabrics this untameable Element
has turned into Ashes; yet let me add what is said of that brave Roman Scipio
Africanus, he having set Carthage on fire, and beholding the burning, foresaw
and bewailed the destiny of Rome: Christians, we have seen the houses and
habitations of others burnt before our eyes, we have heard of more then our
eyes have seen, what shall we learn hence? O let us learn, that though God (for
which praised be his most glorious Name) preserves us and our habitations,
encircles us and our houses about with the securities of providence, yet what
has befaln others may befall us, and may befall the stareliest, strongest, and
most magnificent Fabrics of others, which as they are in themselves subject to
many casualties, so our Sins may provoke God by the like judgments to make us
know they are (though good things* yet that they are (not only in themselves,
but also many other ways) subject to sade and perish. I must mind you of his
words, who says, P^^perant ignita peccata ignita supplicia, Fiery sins will
beget fiery punishments.

Not to say more of ruins caused by Fire, I come to the other caused by
Provocations, Earthquakes, which in many places ha^^ proved more destructive
and done more mischief th^n Fire; suddenly throwing down Mountains, and again
sometimes also making plain grounds to be mountains, ruining houses and great
buildings, leaving Churches like unto great heaps of stones, swallowing up not
only whole Towns and Cities, but large Islands, turning dry Land into Sea,
raising up Islands in the Sea; Severing great places from the Continent, and at
one instant, destroying thousands of People in such places.

Thus were destroyed Laodicea, Hieropolis, Colossus and Smyrna, those great
Cities of Asia, for the rebuilding of the last, the Emperor remitted ten years
tribute. Thus in the year 1531. at Lisbon, 1400. houses were overthrown. And
thus was Britain severed from France; Africa from Spain; and Sicily from Italy.

What a prodigious Earthquake was that of Mount Aetna in the year 1669.
causing astonishment and amazement, not only to those who saw it and felt the
horrid effects of it, but even to the whole World, that in any measure heard
thereof: an Earthquake that was attended with violent eruptions of the said
Mount, and an inundation of Fire, rivers of fire* Cinders and burning stones
and other matters of dreadful Nature proceeding from thence; In forty days the
habitations of 27000. persons with thirteen Towns, were destroyed by this fiery
inundation, with all the Lands belonging to the same, besides many houses near
the very walls of the City Catania. Now as the strongest and most sumptuous
Cities and Palaces decay not only by continuance of time, but are also
oftentimes ruined by the violence of Fire or Earthquakes, even so it
oftentimes happens to all temporal things whatsoever, not only their own
natures but many extrinsecal violences cause them to perish and decay. I shall
confirm this by some Instances of such men that have been lifted up to the
height of Prosperity, Honor, and worldly greatness, yet afterward have been
flung headlong into the lowest adversity, that have been to day rich and to
morrow poor, to day in prosperity, to morrow in adversity; to day accounted
happy, to morrow made miserable.

Andronicus, Emperor of the East, at one time is clothed in Purple, adored by
Nations, his Temples are enriched with a Royal Diadem* the Imperial Scepter in
his hand, at another time laid hold upon by his own Vassals, led with a strong
chain and collar about his Neck like a Mastive-dogg to the Marketplace, there
abused by all, his right hand cut off, mounted upon a lean Camel with his face
toward the tail, and after the suffering of a thousand indignities and
miseries, hung up by the heels between two pillars and there left to dye.

Belisarius, at whose valor and courage the whole World was amazed, who had
been crowned with many warlike prosperities, triumphs, and victorious
Achievements under the Emperor Justinian, having overthrown the Persians,
vanquished the Vandalls, subdued the Goths, and whose wealth was exceeding
great, yet became a blind Beggar having his eyes put out, was led at last in a
string, begging Alms and crying, Date obolum Bellisario; give an halfpenny to
Bellisarius.

Proud Bajazet the great Turk was carried and carted up and down in an Iron
cage through all Asia, and made to serve as a block by whose shoulders
Tamberlain, that warlike Scythian, used to mount his horse.

Dionysius the great King of Syracuse, was driven to get his bread by teaching
of a School at Corinth. Adonibezek a mighty Prince, is suddenly made a
fellow-commoner with the Dogs, Judge. 1. 7. v.

Pythias, who once was able to entertain and maintain Xerxes his whole Army,
yet afterward pined to death for lack of bread.

Vitellius, whom both the East and West acknowledged for the Lord and Monarch
of the World, waited on by Princes of his Empire, whose Riches were beyond
Estimation, even Gold abounding with him as stones of the streets with others;
but his great glory ended in ignominy, his Majesty in the greatest infamy, he
was soon brought from the top of worldly Honor and Felicity, into the greatest
contempt and misery; being by a rope dragged through the streets of Rome,
Murdered in the Marketplace, and his body at last cast amongst those as were
not lawfully to be buried.

That victorious Emperor Henry the fourth, who had fought Two and thirty
pitched Battles, fell to that poverty before he dyed, that he was forced to
petition to be a Prebend in the Church of Spier, to maintain him in his old age.

It Is reported of a Duke of Ex^eter, one that had married Edward the fourth's
Sister, that he has been seen in the Low Countries begging barefoot.

Haman was a great Man and feasted with the King one day, and yet was made a
^east for Crows the next day.

Julius Caesar goes an Emperor to the Senate in the Morning, but before Evening
is brought a Corpse home again.

Gillimer a potent King of the Vandalls, was so low brought, as to entreat his
friend to send him a Spung, a Loaf of Bread, and a Harp; a Spung to dry up his
tears, a Loaf of Bread to maintain his life, and an Harp to solace himself in
his misery.

Alexander the Great that famous Monarch who filled the Earth with the Trophies
of his Deeds and Triumphs of his Victories, whom not Darius or other great
Princes could conquer, was soon poisoned by his obliged Servants: Histories
abound with examples of all sorts of Men, who in their prime, their pride, in a
flourishing estate and upon the very top of worldly glory, have most strangely,
suddenly, fearfully, and wonderfully, been brought low and debased.

Verily the misery wherein all temporal things and humane happiness often
terminates, is not to be conceived; that a man may better trust to the wind or
to letters written upon water, then to any humane felicity or Temporal good
things whatsoever. All things in the world being but like a nights dream which
disappeareth with the day; like flowers that have only their months, but end
with the Spring or Summer; like Grass which in the morning flourishes and
grows up, but in the evening is cut down and withered; like Nosegays now i^
the bosom, by and by in the besom; like so many bubles in the wa^er which burst
of themselves; as so many Spi^e^s-webs that are easily torn in pieces; like
wandering Sirds, which look upon us from a bough of some tree, making us a
little chirping music, and then fly away. How many examples are there in the
world of withered and blasted estates? How many persons do we read and hear of
that have supposed their mountain so strong, that they should never be moved?
yet they have been stripped of all before they dyed, and have become as poor as
Job, as we say; How many that for a long time together never saw one day of
Sorrow but had the patient providence of God resting with all favor and success
upon their Tabernacle, and were invested with great Lordships and possessions,
but have brought all to a morsel, and have dyed wanting? How many who were once
well fed and warm clad, have soon changed their pastures; and their cups, which
did once run over with Wine, have been filled with the waters of Marah; and
they put into the poor man's dress. Let men possess never so much of these
Temporal good things, yet they have no Charter for what they enjoy. They who
are now full and abound with all things to make their lives comfortable, may ^^
many ways) brought to poverty; Ruth. 1. 21. v. says she there, I went out full,
and the Lord has brought me again empty. As one says; Dies, hora, momentum,
evertendis Dominationibus sufficit, quae adamantinis credebantur radicibus^esse
fundatae. A day, an hour, a moment is enough to overturn the things that seemed
to have been founded and rooted in Adamant, and to make them perish.

O that those men who are so greedily set to gain the world, and nothing else
but the world, and the things of the world are in their thoughts, and have
their hearts and affections, for these they toil, labor, and take pains day and
night, never minding what will be fall their souls, and yet they see what the
things are they so much labor for, poor trifles, the very best are, if compared
to the Soul, the soul that must abide for ever, and yet these things, that are
but perishing things and they have no assurance to enjoy them one hour to an
end, take up all their time and labor and pains.

Such men put me in mind of what is reported of a Woman who had her house on
fire, that she was very busy and spent her time and took great pains about
saving and gathering up many ^^ifling things, and in the mean time had a child
in the Cradle, and forgot that; now when the poor Woman came to take a view of
what she had gathered up, she saw but a few trifling things; but when her child
came into her mind, imagining that her child had been burnt (though it was
saved) she ran mad, to consider that she should be so foolish, as to mind
things of no concernment and to forget her child. So will it grate upon the
Consciences of thousands to all Eternity when they shall remember they labored
all their life for such things as perish with their using, but neglected what
should have done their souls good to Eternity.

But those things we should chiefly labor for, are Eternal and everlasting good
things. As indeed all the things of Heaven are Eternal and everlasting, and as
far from dimi^ution and decay as the soul from death, and can be no more
corrupted or shaken then the seat and omnipotency of God surprised. How many
Scriptures bring this Olive branch in their mouth and assure believers that all
the things of Heaven are Eternal, which truth is the flower of all our joy.

Take this brief account of Heavens Eternal good things.

1. That Glory in Heaven is Eternal Glory. 2. That life which is to be had in
Heaven is Eternal life. 3. That Joy which is to be had in Heaven is Eternal
joy. 4. That Inheritance which is to be had in Heaven is an Eternal
Inheritance. 5. The kingdom of Heaven is an Eternal kinddom. 6. The Crown worn
in Heaven is an Eternal Crown. 7. The house or habitation prepared in Heaven is
an Eternal habitation.
1. The Glory in Heaven is Eternal glory. Our blessed Savior is ascended up
into Heaven, and there is made partaker of this glory, but he will have all
those who are his to fare as he himself fares, they shall all of them be
dwellers in glory with him. See John 17. 22, 23, 24. v. The Glory which thou
gave me, I have given them: (viz. those whom God had given him, v. 6.) that
they may be one, even as we are one. I ^^ them, and thou in me, that they may
be made perfect in one, and that the world may know that thou have sent me, and
have loved them, as thou have loved me. Father, I will that they also whom thou
have given me, be with me where I am, that they may behold my glory which thou
have given me: When David was sent by God to Hebron to be crowned, he will not
up alone, but takes with him all his men, with all their households; they shall
have a part with him; So Jesus Christ, will not be happy alone, will not live
in glory alone; as, a loving Husband he cannot enjoy any thing if his wife and
children have not a part with him; so Jesus Christ will have all his in glory
with him, to see his glory, and as I have already showed, to be glorified with
him; and this glory wherewith they shall be gloryfied is an everlasting glory;
it is no glory that is transient, or that will ever end, but it is Eternal glory;
It is Excellentis gloriae pondus aeternum, 2 Cor. 7. 4. 17. v. where the
Apostle speaks of an Eternal weight of glory; And St. Peter speaks De aeterna
gloria in Christ^ Jesu. Of Eternal glory by Christ Jesus.

2. That life which is to be had in Heaven is Eternal life; It is not a life of
threescore years and ten, or fourscore years, as our lives in the world are,
which are soon cut off and fly away, Psalm. 90. 10. v. A longer life then that
which is promised in the last verse of the very next Psalm, Psalm. 91. 16. v.
With long life will I satisfy him; the word Long is too short to set out to us
this life; Old Parr's life was a long life; and the life of Johannes de
temporibus, was a long life, for he lived in sundry Centuries and filled up
Three hundred threescore and one years; Adam his life was a long life, and
Methusalah' life was a longer life; but this is an everlasting life.

Alas! our life here on earth is but a short life, every day the thread of men's
lives are wearing, the oil of their Lamps wasting, ^ and time is carrying them
toward the habitations of Eternity, and they quickly come to an end, but in
Heaven (our being, our blessed being,) shall have no end. Ibi esse nostrum non
habebit mortem. It is the promise made to those who are believers, John 3. 15.
v. That whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have Eternal life;
the life in Heaven is a lasting life indeed, Adeo diutina, quod nequit
terminari; So lasting as it is everlasting; A life that is as Eternal for
continuance as he that had no beginning.

That not to be termed a life, which consists of the body and the soul; but
that, even that is truly life, which flourishes in the memory of all ages, and
which Eternity it self ever beholds; says one, Illa, illa vita, the life of
glory that is life indeed; where when a Man has lived as many thousand years
or ages, or Centuries as there are piles of Grass on the ground, or grains of
Sand on the Seashore, or Stars in the Sky, he shall be as new to begin again
as the first day he lived in Heaven.

We are here ready to admire the great age of some men, of such as live long,
but Nihil longam quod finem habet; that is truly long that lasts for ever. And
this life that lasts for ever is enough to Comfort any Christian in the loss of
a present life that will last but for a few years. When Philip asked
Democritus, if he did not fear to lose his head, he answered, No: for, (quoth
he) If I dye, the Athenians will give me a life immortal: his meaning was only
this, he should be Statued in the treasury of Eternal fame: So may every
Christian say who has gotten Eternal good things for his portion, When they
dye and have an end put to this life, God will give them a life immortal: Such
a man cannot but have his soul brimful of brave thoughts, that in a dying hour
is able to refresh himself with this meditation, Though I now must dye and have
an end put to my natural and miserable life, yet I shall now enter upon an
Eternal an^ happy life.

3. That Joy which is to be had in Heaven is Eternal Joy; Whilst the best here
in the world are weeping and many times full of Sorrow, the worst and vilest o^
men are full of joy and abound in their pleasures, bu^ here is their misery,
the posting Sun of their joy an^ pleasures after a short gleamand a few days
vain glistering will set in the Ocean of endless Sorrow. The wicked man's joy
is but a short-lived joy, soon puffed out and lasts but for a moment (to speak
of) when it lasts longest, Job 20. 5. v. The triumphing of the wicked is short;
and the joy of the hypocrite but for a moment; and therefore it is by the
Preacher, Eccles. 7. 6. v. compared, to the crackling of thorns under a pot;
It is as soon out as in: makes a great noise and dies. But the joy of Heaven is
lasting, ye everlasting, begun here and lasts to all Eternity, called therefore
Everlasting consolation, such is the Saints joy, 2 These. 2. 16. v. We may
compare their joy in Heaven as ones does God's rich mercy (from whence it
flows) to the Oil in the cruse, which was still spending but never spent.

They who have made sure a provision for Eternity, shall have joy for evermore;
In the world indeed they meet with many changes; in this Babylon they are
oftentimes forced to hang their Harpes upon the Willows, and disabled from
singing sweetly to the Lamb their Hebrew songs, their estates and conditions
are as variable as you see the Heavens at this time and season are; now fair,
by and by foul, now the Sun shines most gloriously, but by and by the whole
Heavens are cloudy and sending down show^^s: Their comforts have an Autumn and
their joys a fall of the Leaf.

Their joys are soon clouded with sorrows; for if God do but hide his face they
are troubled; Psalm. 30. 7. v Though they sometimes taste of the waters of life,
yet again they do drink of the waters of Marah.

Now they are with God in the Mount, and see his face, at another time they are
walking in the valley* of the shadow of Death and there wandering in a maze of
perplexed thoughts, heavy cares, afflicting fears and bitter sorrows.

If at one time they have the oil of joy and gladness, yet at another time they
have the spirit of heaviness and sadness. If at one time they have sweet tastes
of Heaven, yet at another time they are even distracted with fears of Hell.

But in Heaven they shall have nothing but joy and no sorrow; all tears there
shall be wiped from their eyes, and all sorrow driven from their hearts, there
they shall enjoy full joy without any mixtures of sorrow, they never sow again
in tears, but shall enjoy good days for ever. Rev. 21. 4. v. There will be no
more death, neither sorrow nor crying; But Isay 61. 7. v. Everlasting joy shall
be unto them; yea fullness of joy and pleasures for evermore; Psalm. 16. 11. v.
there will be pleasures to all Eternity; and millions of years multiplied by
Millions, do not make up a minute to this Eternity.

The joy of Heaven is such a joy, Quod non divellit aeternitas; A joy that
Eternity begins, but Eternity shall never end.

Great was the Jews joy after that the lamentable and sad decree of Ahasuerus
was reversed and Haman's plot defeated, insomuch that the days that were
appointed for their death and ruin, were turned into day of feasting and joy,
and wherein they sent presen^s every man to his Neighbor and gifts to the Poor,
Es^her. 9. from verse the 17. to 28. and this joy as it was then great, so it
has been lasting, for the Jews cease not to celebrate the same to this day.
But what is the Continuance of the Jews joy for this great Deliverance from
Haman, to the joy of every believer in Heaven for their deliverance from Hell?
that has been but for some hundreds of years, from the time of Ahasuerus to
this present, and say this annual commemoration should last as long as the
World shall last; yet would ^t be nothing to the joy in Heaven that shall last
for ever.

4. That Inheritance which is to be had in Heaven, is an Eternal Inheritance;
The greatest Inheritances that men do settle upon their children, put them all
together, are not equivalent unto it. When an Ambassador told Henry the fourth
that magnificen^ King of France, concerning the King of Spain's ample
Dominions; First says he, he is the King o^ Spain; ^s he so? says Henry; and
I am King of France* but ^aith the other, he is ^ing of Portugal; and I am King
of France: says Henry: He is King of Naples* ^and I ^m King of France: He is
King of Sicily: and I am King of France: He is King of Nova Hispanio^a, and ^
am King of France: He is King of the West Indies, and I said Henry am the King
of France. He thought ^he Kingdom of France only, equivalent to all those
Kingdoms how large and great soever, how rich and ^eal thy soever they were; so
this Inheritance in Heaven is more then equivalent to all the Inheritances in
his world; It is an inheritance infinitely large and ^at will satisfy all the
children and heirs thereof without any occasion of e^vy or contention; it is
not ^e that Land that could not contain both Abraham and Lot with their
Substance, whi^^ was the occasi^ of quarrelling to the Heardsmen; Neither is it
on^ large but lasting, even everlasting; Inheritances ^ith Men last but for a
season, this endures for ever, ^ Inheritance incorruptible -- * and that
fades ^t away, 1 Pet. 1. 4. v. Many Inheritances seem ^^ and glorious, and it
is a goodly thing to possess the inheritances of a Gentleman, of a Knight, a
Lord* an Earl or Duke; but a Kings inheritance surpasses all; yet these
inheritances may be taken from us whilst we are here even before death comes,
Mephibosheth's inheritance was given to Ziba, and Naboth's Vineyard that was
the inheritance of his Father, was taken away by Ahab and Jezebel; But this is
called an Eternal Inheritance, Heb. 9. 15. an inheritance we shall never be
deprived of, an inheritance to be enjoyed world without end.

5. The kingdom of Heaven is an everlasting kingdom; A Kingdom is held to be
the top of all worldly felicility, but such honor have all the Saints, they
have all of them a Kingdom prepared for them, Matthew* 25. 34. v. Then shall the
King say unto them on his right hand; Come ye blessed of my Father, Inherit the
Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world. Here is a Kingdom
far excelling all worldly kingdoms; what though any Prince should posses^
twenty eight flourishing kingdoms as Charles the fifth did; or that he ruled
over an hundred and Twenty Nations as Darius King of the Medes did; or that he
enjoyed an Hundred twenty and seven Provinces as Ahasuerus did; or that he were
actually Governor and Monarch of the whole world, as Amurath the third styled
himself, and the great Cham of Tartar^ reports himself; yet what were all these
Kingdom^ and more then these to the Kingdom of Heaven. But one Heaven is worth
a thousand kingdoms. The Kingdom of Heaven is an everlasting Kingdom, it is
called the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 1.
11. v. The Kingdoms of the world have their times and turns, their ruins as
wel^ as their rise, so that most of them now live but by fam^ only, to many
Monarchs and sometimes flourishing Kingdoms there is left little more then their
Name. Not so the kingdom of Heaven, we may write upon it the Venetian Motto,
Nec fluctu nec flatu movetur, neither winds nor waves can move it; It is
therefore called a Kingdom that cannot be moved, Heb. 12. 28. v. Wherefore we
receive a kingdom that cannot be moved. I may truly say of it what is said of
that kingdom, Dan. 2. 44. v. It is a Kingdom set up by the God of Heaven, and
it shall never be destroyed but stand for ever, All other Kingdoms are but
transitory, only this kingdom shall remain for ever.

The kingdom of Israel was a long time very famous, but at last came to decay;
It is observed somewhat to resemble the course of the Moon for alterations and
change: The Moon in 28. days finisheth her course, fourteen days to the full,
and fourteen days to the wane, so from Abraham to Solomon were fourteen
Generations, then the Moon was at the full: from the end of Solomon's days to
Zedekiah are fourteen generations, and here the Moon decayed and waned; but the
kingdom of Heaven shall last beyond all time.

6. The Crown worn in the kingdom of heaven is an Eternal Crown. Such there are
whose heads were long since destinated to a Crown. Charles the Ninth was
crowned at eleven years old: Frederick the Second was crowned at three years
old. King James was crowned at ten Months old. Sapores King of Persia, was
crowned whilst he was yet in his Mothers belly, the Nobles setting the Crown
upon his Mothers belly, but the Saints and people of God were crowned, in God's
Eternal counsel, before the world was founded.

What promises are there in Scripture of a Crown made, 1. Gregem Christi been
poscentibus, to such as feed the flock of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 5. 2, 3, 4. v.
Feed ye the flock of God which is among you -- and when the chief Shepherd
shall appear, ye shall receive a Crown of glory that fades not away, 2. Deum
amantibus to ^ho^e that love God, Jam. 1. 12. v. He shall receive a Crown of
life which the Lord has promised to th^se that love him, 3. Adv^n^um Christi
dilig^ntibus, to such as love the appearing of Jesus Christ. 2. Tim. 4. 8. v.
Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness, which the Lord the
righteous Judge* (...)ll give at that day, and not to me only, but unto all
them that love his appearing. 4. Tentationes sustinen^ibus, to those who endure
tribulation, these shall have the Crown because they are brought to the strife,
to the fight of faith. Jam* 1. 12. v. Blessed is the man that endures
temptation for when he is tried, he shall receive the Crown of life. 5 Ad
mortem usque fidelibus, to those who are constant unto death. Rev 2. 10. v. Be
thou faithful unto death, and I will g^^e thee a Crown of life, those that
persevere and hold on though meeting with persecutions and put to fight for a
victory, shall be crowned. Clemen^ Alexand^inus reports that there were in
Persia three Mountains; He who came to the first, heard as it were a f^^ off,
the noise and ^oice of them who were fighting; he who attained at the second,
heard perfectly the cries and clamours of Soldiers engaged in the fury o^ a
ba^tail; but h^ who attained unto the third, heard nothing bu^ the joyful
acclamatio^s of a victory; This happens really with every Christian striving
for Heaven, who are to pass three mystical Mountains, to wit, Reason, Grace,
and Glory, He who comes at the knowledge of Reason, gives an alarm unto Vice,
which he combats and overcomes by Grace, and in Glory celebrates his victory
with the joy and applause of all the Inhabitants of Heaven, and is crowned a
conqueror with an incorruptible crown. 1 Cor. 9. 25. v. And every man that
striveth for the mastery, is temperate in all things; now they do it to obtain
a corruptible crown, but we an incorruptible Crown. The most Royal Diadems that
are worn by Princes in the world, are but corruptible ones, that in Heaven is
incorruptible.

Crowns are made of Gold though they be also enriched with Jewels; Gold indeed
is the most during Metal, but Solomon's rich Diadem made of the pure gold of
Ophir, is long since dust; but the Crown of glory worn in the Kingdom of
Heaven, is immarcessible, incorruptible and lasting beyond all compass of time,
being without all possibility of alteration; as there will be found no Cross
set upon this Crown, so there will be no end of this Crown.

Its no news to hear of Crowns in the World plucked from the heads of Kings and
Emperors, but Fortune (that ridiculous riddle of fools) cannot reach this
Crown; for as it is super-eminent, so it is permanent; Then the head wearing
this Crown, and the crown then worn will be both immortal, the person glorified
and the Crown of glory both will endure for ever.

You will hardly hear of a King or Prince that wore the Crown of his Kingdom
the whole age of a Man, long a time as a man may naturally live, which the
Psalmist says is threescore years and ten, and few come to fourscore, but the
Philosopher makes the life of a man an hundred years, yet Saints in glory
wearing this Crown, will enjoy not only the age of a man, but In secula
seculorum, for ever and ever.

7. The house or habitation prepared in Heaven, is an Eternal habitation. God
is an excellent preparer; He prepared a table in the Wilderness for the
Israelites, where he gave them water out of a stony rock, and Manna from
Heaven: He prepared a Kingdom for Hester when she was a poor banished Maid: He
prepared a Whale for Jonah when he was cast into the Sea: He prepared the World
as an house well furnished against the coming of Man into it; But of all
preparations that is the greatest, He has prepared for every Believer an house
Eternal in the Heavens. 2 Cor. 5. 1. v. For we know, that if our Earthly house
of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made
with hand, Eternal in the Heavens: Here is the habitation prepared for every
true believer, that which St. Paul lays claim to belongs to each member of
Jesus Christ, so that each one of them may say, Was Heaven prepared for
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, so it is prepared for me Was the Apostle St. Paul
sure of this, so am I. Was Lazarus carried up thither, so shall I: I shall one
day inhabit those habitations situate in heaven.

An house situate in a fruitful and pleasant Country is very taking with
every one: An house in some great City is of great esteem: What would you judge
of an house to have been situate in Jerusalem, that Princess and Paragon of
the Earth, and for Renown called the City of God. But this is the new
Jerusalem, this is Mount Zion, the garden and paradise of God* here is an house
situated, not in any Kingdom of the World, but in the Kingdom of the Saints,
not in any Region of the Earth but in Heaven, in the Land of Promise flowing
with Milk and Honey, where are fruitful Hills and pleasant Valleys, whence came
all those large clusters of Grapes of inward and outward comforts unto us,
whilst we are on this side the river.

This sets forth the excellency of the habitation, that it is in Heaven; when
Christ would show the excellency of the bread of Life, he says, It is bread
from Heaven; the excellency of Spiritual and Eternal blessings is set out in
this, That they are blessings in heavenly places, Ephesians. 1. 3. v. Blessed be
the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with all
spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ. Because Gold is the most
precious metal, therefore we lay it over things, not only Wood and Cloth, but
Silver it self, we will wash over Silver it self, that is a precious metal,
with Gold that is the most precious metal; So because Heaven is so excellent,
we find the choicest blessings and good things gilded with this adjunct, and
all to show the wonderful excellency of Heaven it self; this then sets out the
Excellency of this building of God, it is in heaven; and our Savior Christ
calls it his Father's house. Joh. 14 2. v. In my Father's house are many
Mansions; this was created to be the Court of the great King, the Praise of the
whole World, made to be a Non-such, most magnificent, stately and glorious,
far above the reach of the thought of Men; no man being able in words to set
forth what Workman-ship and ^are pieces, what Majesty and incomprehensible
Excellencies are in this Palace of the great King, and heavenly habitation of
Saints and Angels.

It pleased God to create this glorious ^abrick (which we see) for his servants
to inhabit in for some time, but this is not to be compared to the Palace in
Heaven. When in a Kingdom we see Subjects live in stately houses, what houses
think we Kings live in.

Verum haec tantum alias inter caput extulit urbes
Quantum lenta solent inter viburna cupressi.
To use the Poets words; for look how much the greatest Palaces of Kings and
Princes do exceed the poorest and meanest Cottages, so much, nay infinitely
more does Heaven the greatest Palaces themselves that soon will be laid in the
dust.

The most sumptuous Palaces, and the strongest Materials have vanity written
upon their Portalls and are oftentimes demolished and laid in the dust, hence
those ruins of whole Cities, strong Castles, great Abbeys and Monasteries,
these are subject to Fire, Earthquakes, Storms, Tempests, Inundations and many
other Casualties; but Heaven has Eternity written upon the gates thereof, and
shall stand for ever.

Say that many houses in the World, Kings Palaces and strong Castles have stood
long, have lasted already many generations and yet may endure hundreds of
years, and be neither burnt with Fire nor shaken with Earthquakes, nor
battered with Canon, nor blown up with Gunpowder, but continue quiet
habitations, not only to the present possessors* but Ad natos natorum, Et qui
nascentur ab illis, even for many years many Generations be continued to their
children and to the children of their Nephews. Yet who knows not that the like
places have sometimes been laid waste, the line of Confusion has been stretched
out upon them, thorns and nettles and briars have grown up in them, they have
be^n habitations for Dragons and Courts for Owls, Cor^orants and Bitterns have
possessed them, Ostriches and Ravens have dwelt in them, the wild beasts of the
Desert have there met with the wild beasts of the Islands and the Satyr has
been heard to cry to his fellow, the Shrich-Owl has also rested there and
found for her self a place of rest, there the great Owl has made her nest and
laid and hatched and gathered under her shadow, and thither have the Vultures
been gathered together; As the Lord in Isay 34. for many Verses threatens to
deal with his Churches enemies.

But say they should escape such desolating Judgments, yet the day is coming
when they will be consumed and brought to nothing. When the Disciples came to
Christ and showed him the goodly buildings of the Temple, after that Herod (to
get the peoples good will) had been at wonderful charge in building and
beautifying of it, says Christ to them Matthew. 24. 2. v. See ye not all these
things? verily I say unto you, There shall not be left here one stone upon
another, that shall not be thrown down: This thing was afterward fulfilled,
when the Temple was set on fire by Titus his Soldiers; that it could not be
quenched by the industry of Man; for Titus himself would have preserved it, as
one of the Worlds Wonders from being burnt, but could not, such was the fury of
the Soldiers. So may I say, look upon the strongest, most glorious and
magnificentest Structures in the world, yet time will come when there will not
be left one stone upon another.

We see 1 Kings 18. 38. v. That the fire which came down from El^^ah's
Sacrifice, did not only burn up the Sacrifice and the wood, but it did lick up
the water and burn up the Stones. Then the fire of the Lord fell, and consumed
the burnt Sacrifice, and the Wood, and the Stones, and the Dust, and licked up
the water that was in the Trench, 1 King. 18. 38. v. So the fire of Heaven will
not only burn up the slight buildings but also the strongest houses that be
made of sollidest matter, of Brick and Stone and Marble, yea if they were
houses of Iron, they shall be destroyed and dissolved. Many times if ordinary
and slight houses be burnt, such as be of Brick and Stone escape, but at the
day of Judgment not only the slight buildings shall be burnt, but also the
strongest houses, such as are made of no combustible matter, of brick and
stone. But this building of God, an house not made with hands will be Eternal
in the Heavens; Heaven is therefore Luke 16. 9. v. called an Everlasting
Habitation; and that in opposition (as has before been noted) to Earthly
dwellings, which though many of them are beautiful and glorious, yet shall be
laid in the Dust; when as Heaven will be for the Saints and Angels, an
habitation for ever.

It was a rejoicing to David that God would give him a Kingdom, but more that
he would prepare a Kingdom to his house a great while. 2. Sam. 7. 16. 18, 19.
v. David took it for a great favor that God would bestow a Kingdom upon him,
and yet says he in the 19. v. This was but a small thing in thy sight, O Lord
God.

What, was it but a small thing to give a Kingdom? No, but there was something
more than a Kingdom, and that was this, that his Posterity should sit on the
Throne for a great while; Thou have spoken of thy Servants house for a great
while to come. This made the mercy greater. Even so it is here; should we be in
those heavenly Mansions but a few days or years, and then to have them
dissolved, yet this were worth more labor and pains and seeking after than all
the worlds glory, but they shall be there for ever, and our abode shall be made
there for ever, it shall never have an end.

4. Our labor and pains ought chiefly to be employed not about perishing but
Eternal good things. Because Eternal good things are always desirable, good
things that a man shall never be weary of; a man may after a short time of
enjoyment be weary of other things, they often prove vexing and molesting to the
injoyers of them, though sometimes never so much affected, loved and desired; as
many Wives to Husbands, children to Parents, Servants to Masters, Preferments
to the Ambitious, Crowns and Scepters unto Kings and Princes!

We do not always find all those who have more of the world than others, to
have more content from the world than others, or less troubles and cares in the
world than others; they have more delicates than others, but these often so
dissweetened with crosses, that they take little pleasure in them; they may
have more attendants than others and thereby not seldom attended with more
discontents than others.

How many at one time are vexed, that, as heirs, they come to their estates no
sooner; at another time they are vexed, as at Death, they can keep them no
longer: some are vexed in getting these things, like Ahab who waxed heavy, laid
him down upon his bed and would not eat, only because he could not obtain
Naboth's Vinyard. Others are vexed in the keeping of them, being troubled and
perplexed with Lawsuits. How often find we not a few vexed, sometimes that they
have wasted and spent so much, and now have less then themselves once had. That
the world to many is a sharp bryar to prick them rather then a flower to
delight them, and whilst they suck freely the breasts of the world, in the one
they find nothing but the wine of vanity and in the other the water of vexation.

Solomon, who was a great and mighty King, that had riches without example, and
Reigned Forty years in a most rich and flourishing Kingdom, which was a
sufficient time to content his mind in gathering riches, in sumptuous
buildings, in multitude of horses, in all variety of Studies and Sciences, one
that had traversed his spirits through all the secrets of Nature from the
Caedar to the Hysop, that he was even the most experienced one for enquiry, he
at last, considering how these sweets were confected with bitterness, makes
this close of all his actions, Eccles. 1. 14. v. I have seen all the works
that are done under the Sun, and behold all is Vanity and vexation of Spirit;
Solomon had obtained as large and as intuitive a knowledge as humane curiosity
or furtherances could attain unto, and in these words gives us an account of
all Temporal things after he had taken an Historical and Penetential review of
all the inquiries he had made into them; and what finds he? He found by
diligent inquiry how much they do molest and disquiet the hearts of Men; they
were not only ineffectual to confer happyness, but which was worse, apt to
bring or cause much affliction and trouble upon the hearts of those who are too
earnestly conversant about them. And again, Eccles. 2. when from the 3d. verse
to the 11th. verse he had drawn out the thread of delight and stretched the
webb of all worldly pleasures and enjoyments upon the largest tenter of
Variety; he says, he found nothing in it but Vanity and vexation of spirit, v.
11. Then I looked on all the works that my hands had wrought, and on the labor
that I had labored to do, and behold all were vanity and vexation of spirit;
Hereunto agrees the words of St. Paul, 1 Timothy 6. 10. v. for says he, The love
of Money is the root of all evil, which while some coveted after, they have
erred from the Faith, and pierced themselves through with many sorrows. And very
remarkable are the words of our Savior, Matthew. 13. 22. v. where he compares
the deceitfulness of Riches and cares of the world to thorns which prick not
the flesh only, but pierce through the mind and heart, and wound the souls and
conscience with manifold hurts and smart-pain: Our Savior and St. Paul confirm
the verdict of Solomon to show the vexation of spirits that attends all
Temporal good things.

As Bees have honey and wax, but they have a sting with all, so verily have
most of earthly and Temporal things, they have honey in them to entice, and wax
to inflame, but with all, too oftentimes deadly stings wherewith they sting the
possessors of them, and therefore Solomon unto vanity adds vexation of mind.

If ever there were any man fit and able in respect of his wealth to try, of
industry to search, and of wisdom to judge of the things of this life, it was
King Solomon, and yet Solomon when he had employed his wealth, wisdom and
industry in this diligent scrutiny and distilled forth even the purest spirits
of these Terrestrial bodies, he found amongst them vanity, but that is not all,
vexation of spirit.

When Hezekiah had defaced the Serpent which had defaced God*s glory, he*
called it in contempt Nehushtan; It is a piece of Brass, that so it might be
vile in the eyes of those who did adore it, for by this name he gave the people
to understand that there was no Deity in it, and therefore no worship to be
done to it, no sacrifice or Incense to be offered unto it; in a word, that it
was not what they took it to be, neither did it deserve to have such an high
esteem as they had of it, For it was but a piece of brass and no more, and a
piece of brass was no such thing as to be worshipped and adored: In like manner
so does Solomon call all sublunary and Temporal good things, Vanity and
vexation of spirit, thereby to undervalue them in the eyes of those that over
valued them, thereby to debase and villi^y them, and to show others what he
after trial made, had found to be in them, no contentation but rather vexation.

Who would not think Kings and Princes to be the only happy ones? They are (to
make their lives happy and full of Felicity, if it may be had) most liberally
provided for, they have stately Palaces, costly Ornaments, honorable Services,
delicate Meats, variety of Pleasures; they have all Honors, Dignities and Rule
at their dispose; they are able to raise at their pleasure the meanest Man to
an high place, and with a frown to disgrace the mightiest; and what ever
precious Rarities, choice and desirable things their eyes (which are the
principal Seats of desire or lusting) can desire, are not kept from them; unto
which we may add their ample and Royal Revenues, rich Exchequers, great
tributes out of their Kingdoms and Provinces. And yet even their Reign and Rule
is but a Noble Servitude, as Antigonus said to his Son, so many are the
calamities depending upon Regal Crowns and miseries that do compass Scepters
and States of Princes; besides the daily trouble in Government, in Domestic
and foreign Affairs, what secret censures, murmurings and dispraises do they
undergo? what continual fears do they lie under? In their Palaces they are
afraid lest Servants in the daytime do poison them, or in the nightime
murder them. In their Kingdoms least their Guards betray them, least their
Nobles forsake them, and least the rude and common People, encouraged by
discontented great ones, Rebel against them. From abroad also their fears are
increased, sometimes least their Allies desert them, and least their Enemies
invade them. And after a whole life of Dangers and Fears, how often are they
but even ill rewarded by those they have defended and protected, nay by some
they have favored, enriched and advanced? Sometimes they have been at last
hissed at and chased from their Thrones with Shame and Confusion: Have mean
ones been derided? so have Princes: Have mean ones been restrained? so have
Princes: Have mean ones been imprisoned? so have Princes: Have mean ones been
banished? so have Princes: Have mean ones been murdered? so have Princes: Not
only is their whole life a life of Fears and Dangers, as Dionysius told
Damocles, but their deaths have been both ^gnomius and barbarous.

Demosthenes after he had been a just and faithful Governor of the
Commonwealth of Athens, was in ^he end* without* cause unjustly banished. So
was A^istides, of whom it used to be said, A man might as ^oon turn the Sun in
her course, as turn Aristides from doing Justice.

These Temporal good things are like to those wa^ers of Babylon where the Jews
sat down and wept, Psalm. 137. 1. v. By the river(...) Babylon, there we ^ate
down, yea we wept; like unto which waters ^re these Temporal good things, not
only for their ^wift passing away and never returning, but for the ^oubles that
attend them, they being to the possessors thereof no little cause of vexation
of Spirit, of weeping and small sorrow. The whole world (as one calls it) is
but a Sea of glass (for its vanity) and mingled with fire (for its vexation)
Rev. 15. 2. v. And the things of the world like so many sweet Briars, or like
the Rose, which is a fragrant flower but yet it has its pricks, and to one
Rose in the Worlds-garden we meet with a thousand thorns. Let men set what
esteem they will upon them, yet are they not pure Wine but mixed, and have in
them more dreggs than spirits; they are like the River Plutarch speaks of,
where the waters in the morning run sweet, but in the Evening run bitter: Like
the profitable Be, which though it affords the owner Honey, yet again many
times stings him, and for one Ounce of Honey the World affords, we meet with a
Tunn of Gall.

It fares with many men in this respect, as it did with Lot, Genesis 13. 10, 11.
v. When he beheld all the plain of Jordan to be well watered, and that it was
like the Garden of God, he chose all the Country and departed from Abraham.
But many sad dangers and many daily vexations did this unwise choice of his
cast him into, and bring upon him: In like manner, the enjoyment of these
things often expose to dangers, Multos sua felicitas stravit; Many men their
lives had been longer, if their riches had been less, that which they counted
their happyness made them miserable; Consolationes factae sunt desolationes, as
one says; the same things that have sometimes made their lives comfortable, at
another time have occasioned them afterward to be miserable, Pro. 1. 19. chap.
that they have been weary of their enjoyments and weary of their very lives.
But we never did, nor ever will hear of any weary of Grace, weary of the love
of God, weary of Heaven and Eternal glory. Can any think that the Saints in
Heaven are weary of their being in heaven, or that they are weary of the
presence of God there? Vident semper, and videre desiderant, sine anxitate
desiderant, and sine fastidio satiantur. ^n heaven they always behold God's
presence, and ^till they desire to behold it, and yet without anxiety; they are
satisfied with God's presence, and without sa^iety.

We read of some Kings that have been weary of their Crowns and Kingdoms, and
have therefore laid aside their Crowns and yielded up their Kingdoms unto
others.

5. Our labor and pains ought chiefly to be employed not about perishing but
Eternal good things. Because Eternal good things are the only satisfying good
things. Verily when a* man can pull the Sun, Moon, and Stars from the Heavens
and fix them in his house; when he can sow Grace in the furrows of his field,
when he can fill his barns with glory; when he can get baggs full of Salvation*
when he can plow up heaven out of the earth, and extract God out of the
creatures, then he may be able to find that in Temporal things which shall
satisfy his desires.

A covetous man may have his house full of Money, but he can never have his
heart full of money: An ambitious man may have Titles enough to overcharge ^his
memory, but never to fill his pride: A voluptuous man may spend whole weeks,
nay years in carnal pleasures and delights, and yet never be satisfied
therewith, but is ever thirsting after new invented delights and pleasures,
like Nero that wicked Emperor, who had an Officer about him that was called
Arbiter Nero^nian^ libidini^, The Inventer and Contriver of new ways of
uncleaness: Sooner will Stygian darkness blend with light, the Frost with Fire,
or Day with Night, then these things below satisfy the hearts of men. As all
the rivers run into the Sea, yet the Sea is not full nor does it for all that
flow its banks, Eccles. 1. 7. v. So though all the golden streams of the world
should run into the hearts of men, yet would they not be filled; which was long
since observed by Solomon, Eccles. 5. 10. v. He that loves silver, shall not
be satisfied with silver; nor he that loves abundance, with increase.

Agur mentions four unsatiable things in Pro. 30. 15, 16. v. There are three
things that are never satisfied, yea, four things say not, It is enough: The
Grave and the barren Womb, the Earth that is not filled with Water, and the
fire that says not, It is enough; Such an unsatiable thing also is the heart
of Man, this also says not, It is enough; So inordinate are the appetites and
desires of men after these things. Non plus satiatur cor auro quam corpus aura.
As Ai^ fills not the body, so neither does money the mind. A Man may as soon
fill a Chest with grace, as satisfy an heart with wealth. Wherefore (says the
Prophet) Isaiah, 55. 2. v. Do you spend money for that which is not bread? and
your labor for that which satisfies not? This very consideration should take
off our immoderate love and labor from the things of the world, because there
is not any sweet juice of satisfaction in them. As it is reported of a great
School-man, Quod a studijs Scholasticae theologiae averteretur fere nause
abundus, quoniam succo carebant liquidae pietatis: He turned with loathing from
the study of School Divinity, because it wanted the sweet juice of Piety. The
sweet juice of what we labor for it is satisfaction and content, but this we
see is altogether wanting in Temporal good things.

But Eternal good things are satisfying good things; here all the earth would
not satisfy one man, hereafter one Heaven will be enough for all men. Herein
lies one of the excellencies of the heavenly Inheritance, Non augustior
multitudine haeredum; the portions of those that possess it are not scanted by
reason of the number and multitude of coheirs.

In the 23 of St. Luke, you have a Theif condemned, crucified, and hanging upon
a cross, (an ^ngine and rack of most grievous torture for spinning out of pain,
and slowing of death) and what desires he? To be remembered of Christ: He beggs
not life, nor pleasure, nor riches, nor honor or any other Temporal good
things; no there was one thing more necessary, one thing more satisfactory;
Give him Heaven, he cares for nothing more, give him but an Eternal inheritance
in Paradise, and his desires are satisfied. Let the Executioners now rack him,
tear him, break all his bones and pull him into atoms, if Christ will do so
much for him as to remember him in his Kingdom, he is satisfied; Let him but
hear of being with Christ in Paradise, he desires no other news, he is
satisfied, he has enough. And Christ answers his expectation, for at verse. 43.
he tells him, To day shall thou be with me in Paradise, Paradise was (however
now defaced) the sweetest and goodliest place upon earth, a Demesne suitable for
the greatest Prince then on earth, renowned for many things, for all sorts of
trees, such as were both pleasant to the sight and good for food, (there growed
the tree of Life and the ^ree of knowledge of Good and Evil) and for that famous
four-brancht River, that watered the place; In a word, nothing was wanting
which might be either for Ornament, use or delight, or which might make Man as
happy as he would be, for God loves to see his creatures happy: And as Man was
the Image of God, so was this earthly Paradise an image of heaven, but both the
images are defaced, the image of God in Man, and the image of Heaven in
Paradise; yet the first patterns they are both Eternal, and in Heaven are such
things that Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither has entered into the
heart of man, 1. Cor. 2. 9. v. There that chosen Vessel was in the Spirit and
heard and saw so much that could no^ be expressed, 2 Cor. 12. 2. v. for indeed
it is as easy to compass the Heavens with a span, or contain the Sea in a
Nut-shell, as to relate what things are in the heavenly Paradise. St. John adds
the name of God to it, and calls it the Paradise of God, Rev. 2. 7. v. To him
that overcomes, will I give to eat of the tree of life, which is in the midst
of the Paradise of God; The adding of the name of God here does not only p^^ a
difference between the heavenly Paradise and Adam's earthly Paradise; but also
shows it to be a great and most excellent place, and enough there is i^ it to
satisfy all those who possess it.

There is enough in God to satisfy all that have a^ interest in him. It is a
notable speech to this purpose, that of Jacob, when his brother Esau met him*
ye find Genesis 33. 8. v. That Esau he refused Jacob's present, and told Jacob he
had enough; What meanest thou by all this drove, which I met? and he (Jacob)
said, these are to find grace in the sight of my Lord; In the next verse says
Esau, I have enough. At the 11. v. Jacob urges it, saying Take I pray thee, my
blessing that is brought to thee, because God has dealt graciously with me,
and because I have enough. I have enough, says Esau; I have enough, says
Jacob: though the word ^e one and the same in both places in the English, I
have enough, yet it is by Divines observed that there is a difference in the
Original, Jacob's word is different from Esau's; Jacob's word signifies, I have
all things, and yet Jacob was poorer than Esau; Esau had much, but Jacob had
all; but how had he all? Because he had the God of all, he had God that was
all. And indeed as one observes, Habet omnia, qui habet habentem omnia; He has
all things that has him, that is all things.

God alone was enough to Jacob, and God alone would satisfy David's desire,
Psalm. 73. 25. v. Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none I desire
upon earth besides thee. So great is the capacity and largeness of the Soul of
Man, that no Riches, no Dignities, Kingdoms, nor the Empire of the whole World,
no Pleasures, in a word, no finite and limitable good can quench its insatiable
thirst and desire; nothing can do this but some immense, infinite and boundless
good, and such as contains in it self by way of Eminency or preheminency* the
fullness of all good whatsoever; This David insinuated, Psalm. 17. 15. v.
Satiabor cum apparuer it gloria tua: as the vulgar translation renders those
words; I shall be satisfied and filled, when thy glory shall appear. As if
David had said; No other thing can give me full contentment, except the
manifestation of thy glory, which is an infinite and illimitable good. David is
here conceived to speak of that confidence and hope that himself and others of
God's people have of happyness and satisfaction after this life when their
bodies that sleep in the grave shall be awaked to the resurrection of Eternal
Life; then their happyness will be full in the measure, without want of any
thing that can make them happy, all their desires shall be then satisfied; They
shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house. Psalm. 36. 8. v.

It were impossible to imagine that any one should have an interest in God and
not be happy; Psalm. 144. 15. v Happy is that people whose God is the Lord; But
in this life the happyness of the best is but like an house in building,
hereafter, when they shall enjoy God in heaven and be glorified with Christ in
those heavenly Mansions, when they shall wear upon their heads a Crown of life
and be blessed associates unto Angels and all glorified spirits, then the
top-stone of perfect and everlasting happyness shall be put on; At their
conversion they are restored to the possession of some of those good things
they lost in Adam, but in heaven they shall enjoy all those good things they
lost in Adam.

6. Our labor and pains ought chiefly to be employed not about perishing but
Eternal good things; Because Eternal good things concern our Souls, other good
things concern the body only; As the soul is to be preferred before the body,
so our labor and pains should rather be for those things that concern the soul,
than for those that concern the body only.

It is most true there is an excellency even to be taken notice of in the body,
and most excellent things might be observed touching the Noble Structure and
Symetry thereof, its figure, frame, temperature and proportion, not any part of
the common lump of Cla^ being fashioned like to it. It is said of Galen that he
gave Epi^urus an hundred years time, to imagine a more commodious Configuration
or Composition of any one part of a humane body. When David spends his thoughts
upon the curious frame of Man's body, he seems to look upon himself, as it were
in amazed Ecstasies: See Psalm. 139. 13, 14, 15. v. Thou have possessed my reins:
thou have covered me in my Mothers womb. I will praise thee, for I am fearfully
and wonderfully made, marvelous are thy works: and that my Soul knows
right-well. My substance was not hid from thee, when I was made in secret, and
curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the earth. Where David compares the
Workman-ship of the body to the curious Needle Work of some skilful Woman.

The body is indeed a little miracle of Nature, a vessel made capable of the
best Jewel, an house prepared for the best inhabitant, every part whereof has
its wonder, neither is there any piece in this Exquisite frame, whereof the
place, use and form, does not admit wonder and exceed it; God having invested
the body with many noble Endowments, made it a mirror of beauty and printed
upon it surpassing excellencies.

But yet a Christians greatest labor and pains should not be for the body but
for the soul; the body indeed is to be provided for, but the more special care
should be for and about the soul. The Egyptians parted with their money, after
that with their cattle, and last of all with their land to buy bread to feed
their bodies; and what should not a man part with and do for the good of the
soul. The Heathen man could say, Major sum and ad majora genitus quam ut
mancipium sim mei corporis. I am more noble and born to more noble ends then
that I should become a Slave to my body; And should not Christians who are made
capable of an infinite good, and do far exceed him in spiritual nobility, as
having God for their Father, Christ for their elder-brother, conclude it far
short of those noble ends for which they were born, to toil and labor all their
whole life only to nourish, to feed and cloth the body, and in the mean time to
neglect the soul which is far more excellent then the body? Shall they only
look after what is conducing and accommodated to a corporal life and not mind
what will be good for their souls when they must enjoy an Eternal life.

It is said of Caesar, Major fuit cura Caesari libellorum quam purpurae: That
he had greater care of his books, then of his Royal robes; for swimming through
the waters to escape his enemies, he carried his Books in his hands above the
waters, but lost his Robes. That heathen Epimanondus being dangerously wounded
with a Spear, so that he sunk down as one dead, and after coming to himself, he
asked if his Target were safe, his chief care was about his Target. So should
it be with a Christian about his Soul, his chief care should be about his soul,
that must in the first place be regarded and cared for, the body is but the
souls upper garment, and although that should fall into hands of unreasonable
men, though the Soul should lose its upper garment, yet if the soul it self be
safe, all is safe, but if the soul be lost, all is lost, God lost, and Christ
lost, and the society of glorious Angels and blessed Saints lost, and Heaven
lost and that for ever.

Is it not a wonder to consider, that whereas Faith teaches us, that the soul
is immortal and must live for ever, and experience shows us that the body is
mortal: yet most people, contrary to faith and experience, do neglect the Soul,
as though that were mortal, and labor for the body, as if that were immortal*
As Julius Caesar was wont to say of Cicero, that he was negligent in things
belonging to himself, but diligent in things belonging to the Commonwealth: So
such there are, who are negligent in things concerning their souls, but
diligent in things concerning their bodies; who spend the best of their time
and strength in laboring for their bodies, but in the mean time neglect to
provide for their Eternal Souls.

Prima animi bona; says Juvenal; those good things of the mind are the first
things to be minded. Optimum est curam principalem animae impendere; says
another, Our first and principal endeavor should be for the principal things,
for things which concern the Soul, for sanctification here and glorification
hereafter.

To provide for the body* should be but a Christian's by-work, but caring for
the soul ought to be his main work. As our greatest fear should be for the
Soul, so our greatest care ought to be for the Soul. That our greatest fear
should be for the Soul appears by those words of our Savior, Matthew. 10. 28. v.
Fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul, but
rather fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body in Hell. It is the
greatest folly in the world out of fear of the body to betray the soul. That
our greatest care should be for the soul appears also out of our Savior's
words, Matthew. 16. 26. v. What profit has a man, if he win the whole World, and
lose his own Soul? A Christian's great care should be not to hazard the Eternal
welfare of his soul for a short fruition of Riches and Splendour in the world,
these are but conveniences of the body, not of the soul.

If we could discern Souls with the eye, or conceive them by the mind, they
would even ravish us and lead us into an excessive love of them. The souls of
Men, though now they are clogged with flesh, are dwelling in houses of clay and
tabernacles of dust; though now they are shut up in the body like a bird of
paradise in a cage, yet are such beings as have no less distant original from
the body then heaven is from earth, coming immediate from God, a truth expressed
by Ovid in a short verse, Sedibus aethereis Spiritus ille venit; but better by
Zachariah, chap. 12. 1. The Lord which stretches forth the Heavens, and lays
the foundations of the Earth and forms the spirit of Man within him; The body
which is flesh, is from flesh, but the Soul, which is a spirit, is from the God
of Spirits, and in the Soul mostly and properly is the Image of God stamped.
Magna res est anima, It is a sparkling Diamond set in a ring of Clay; It is the
better, more noble and sublimated part of man; It is the quintessence of a
rational nature; the very glory of the Creation that has the image of its
Creator to beautify it, and is a Jewel more worth than the World with all its
Revenues and Perquesites, in every respect far more excellent and precious then
the body; The body that is but of a course make, the soul that is a finer
spinning; the body that is but of an earthly extract, the soul is an heavenly
born being. The Apostle Phil. 3. 21. v. calls the body a vile body, and so it
is* compared with the soul.

It Is the Soul that makes the body lovely and amiable. Take the soul out of the
body but even half an hour, and the body forthwith grows out of each one's
love, that they who before were enamoured on it, do not now desire to come near
it, or have it in their sight; Though Sarah had been unto Abraham the desire of
his eyes (Ezekiel. 24. 16. v.) and a most sweet companion of his life, yet is she
by the removal of her soul at death so defaced, that he loathes to look on her;
hence says he to the Sons of Heth, Genesis 23. 4. v Give me a possession of a
burying-place with you, that I may bury my dead out of my sight. Hence it is
that the Psalmist calls it Vnica mea, my Darling, Psalm. 22. 20. v. Deliver my
soul from the Sword, my Darling from the power of the Dog; He prefers the
soul, as his Darling, before the body. A darling child shall be cared for, and
provided for, whoever is neglected.

Not a soul here but is so excellently and perfectly precious, that we cannot
set forth, nor understand, how excellent and perfectly precious it is. So
precious is the soul of every man, that all the Gold of the West, all the
treasures of the East, all the Spices of the South, all the Pearls of the
North, are nothing, though a man had a Monopoly of them, to an invaluable Soul;
heaps of wedges of Gold, mountains of Silver, hoards of Pearl, are not to be
compared with it. I may say of the Souls preciousness, what is commonly spoken
of Aristotle's book of Physics, (...), that made public it was, and yet not
made known, because men do not yet understand the Secrets of it: So the
preciousness of the Soul has by many pens been made public, and yet not made
known; because no man knows the full preciousness thereof.

Favorinus the Philosopher was wont to say (and his words are excellent) Nihil
in terra magnum praeter hominem? nihil in homine praeter mentem. The greatest
thing in the world is Man, the greatest thing in man is the Soul, The body at
best cannot live long, for all the pampering, and triming, and repairing, and
dawbing, it will not be long before it lies down in the grave, it has but a
short time to live, but believe it, Christian, in that mouldring, decaying and
dying body of thine, thou have an immortal and never dying soul; And will thou
provide for thy body and not for thy soul? will thou labor and take pains for a
decaying body, and not labor for thy soul, that means to live as long as
Eternity? This were as if a man should buy in a great deal of provision for his
Servants, and starve his Wife and children: or as if he should think nothing
too much to lay out upon his Dogs, and yet starve himself. So do all those
that labor for what pleases and contents the body, but neglect their immortal
and never dying souls, which God has breathed into them, which God has
beautified with some shadowing representations of his own most glorious being,
and for which he has given so great a price, and values above all the world
besides.

It was the saying of Aristippus an Heathen (who will rise up in Judgment
against many Christians) That he would rather neglect his means th^n his mind,
his farm than his soul.

To be stored with Eternal good things will cause our souls afterward to go
out of our bodies upon the wings of joy, calmness, and serenity of spirit, and
with full sail for heaven. This will make a Christian sweetly to sing with old
Simeon; Lord now let thy servant depart in peace; And say as Hillary said to
his soul; Soul, thou have served Christ th^s Seventy years, and art thou afraid
of Death; Go out soul, go out. But without this with what a dreadful Outcry
and Shrike will poor souls leave the body, seeing themselves attended only with
a black guard of Devils, and no other place provided for them but the burning
Lake and bottomless Pit; with no other treasure enriched, but the curse and
wrath of the Almighty. Not to have labored and taken pains for what will do the
soul good, will prove bitterness in the end. It is storied of Caesar Borgias
that being sick to death, that he lamentingly cried out, When I lived, I
provided for every thing but Death; now I must dye, and am unprovided to dye:
this was a dart at his heart, and, believe it, it will be at last a dagger at
their hearts, who now take care for their bodies, but neglect their souls, who
labor and take pains to make provision for their ignoble part, but make no
provision for their more noble part.

When the body shall lie under its short breathings, cold sweats, dying groans,
and hastening to the Grave, where worms and filthy Vermin must feed upon it,
and the soul has nothing to comfort it now that it is passing into Eternity,
surely such a soul must needs be amazed at the ^nsuing change. Oh that
Christians were wise to consider these things; that they would make it their
work to provide for their souls, to furnish them with that will prove Eternal;
that they would labor for spiritual and heavenly excellencies; that they would
acknowledge one soul to be more worth than many worlds; God has given to each
of us a soul, and to each of us but one soul. It was a wretched and most
foolish speech of a profane Noble Man of Naples, who said, that he had two
souls in his body, one for God, and another for whosoever would buy it. Omnia
Deus dedit duplicia (says one) speaking of bodily members; God has given men
double members, two eyes, if one be lost, the other supplies the want of it;
two hands, two ears, two feet, that the failing of one, may be supplied by the
help of the other, Animan vero unam; but one soul; if that perish there is not
another to supply its loss. And it is no other than madness and folly to look
after the body and neglect the soul, to gratify the body but to lose the soul
With what hopes can such look to receive mercy and comfort from God in a dying
hour? It is reported of Alphonsus King of Arragon, when a Knight of his had
consumed a great patrimony by lust and luxury, and besides ran into debt, and
being to be laid into prison by his Creditors, his friends petitioned for him
to the King; the King answered, Si tantam pecuniam vel in sui Regis obsequium,
vel patriae commodis, vel sublevandis propinquis impedisset, audirem; nunc
quoniam tant as opes impendit corpori, part est ut luat corpore. If he had
spent so much money in the service of his Prince, or for the good of his
Country, or in relieving his Kindred, I would have harkned; but seeing he has
spent so much upon his body, it is fit his body should smart for it. So when
those who now labor for the world and the things thereof, that only concern the
body and profit the body, but neglect what concerns the soul and would profit
the soul. I say when these come and look up to God for comfort and mercy, when
all comfort from the world is gone, God may justly answer, If they had labored,
not for the meat which perishes, but for that meat which indureth unto
everlasting life; If they had labored as much for what would have done their
souls good, as for what they saw would do their bodies good, I would have heard
them, but as they have neglected their souls in their life, I will not care for
their souls at death.

7. Our labor and pains ought chiefly to be employed not about perishing but
Eternal good things, Because our labor about Eternal good things will not be in
vain. In Malachy his time, some did not stick to say, It was in vain to serve
God. Mal. 3. 14. v. they did, as others now, think their pains in vain;
hypocrites they were, such as would needs persuade themselves that they served
God, and that truly: And being ^uft up with this conceit, they thought God
should ^hereupon serve them, as they would have him, and ^hey expected: but
when he at any time punished them ^or their sins, and exercised them with
afflictions, ^hey presently would cry out, It is in vain (and to ^o purpose) to
serve God, and what profit is it, that we have kept his ordinances, and that we
have walked ^ournfully before the Lord of hosts. Indeed there is many a man
that pursues the world with a fruitless and ^ain attempt; they rise early, go
to bed late, eat the ^read of sorrows; yet all will not do; they labor, and
that hard, for what they are not sure to obtain in the world, and for that very
often which they never do obtain, they have but their labor for their pains.
Quid emolumenti? what profit or gain have most, after many a hard days labor?
utterly disappointed of that they labored for, like many such who seek after
^he Philosophers stone.

Not so a Christian laboring for Eternal good things, ^hey are sure to obtain
what they labor for, their la^or will not be in vain. That will never befall
them which is written of Dioclesian and Maximian Her^ulius who suddenly gave
over their Empires, and cast ^ff their honors, and betook themselves to a
private ^fe, out of rage and madness, when they saw themselves labor so much in
vain, for the rooting out of ^he Christians. See that place 1 Cor. 15. 58. v.
There^re my beloved Brethren, be ye steadfast, unmovable, ^ways abounding in the
work of the Lord, forasmuch ^ you know, that your labor is not in vain in the
Lord. Christians labor herein will not be like those labors that were by way of
punishment inflicted upon the Daughters of Danaeus, whom the old Poets feigned
to be condemned in Hell to fill a bottomless tub with Water, and to increase
their labor, this water they were to carry in Sieves, and never to leave work
till the tub were full; here was a great deal of unfruitful labor, here was
labor in vain indeed. A Christian has better encouragement to labor, his labor
is not in vain in the Lord. Though God may think fit to delay them sometimes,
before they enjoy what they labor for, yet at last they shall be satisfied;
therefore are they quickened in the Text with a promise. Labor not for the meat
which perishes, but for the meat which indureth unto everlasting life, which
the Son of Man shall give unto you: And with another in the foregoing place,
Your labor is not in vain in the Lord. The promises are the Christian's Magna
Charta for Heaven, They are Pabulum fidej, and anima fidej, the food of faith
and the soul of faith; enough to suppor^ and bear up a Christians faith in what
condition soever^ he is, and in whatsoever he goes about; God, who is a true
God, will not falsify his word with any. The author of such Scripture promises,
is God* God wh^ cannot lie has promised. As God is light and in hi^ is no
darkness (1 John 1. 5. v.) So he is truth and i^ him can be no lie. The
strength of Israel will not lie, 1 Samuel 15. 29. v. herein is made a difference
betwi^ God and Man; God is not as man, that he should lie, neither the Son of
Man that he should repent. Numb. 23. 29. v.

God's promises are all sure; not only sure, Certitudine veritatis, in a way of
truth; but also sure Certitudine haereditatis in a way of performance. Kno^
(says Moses Deuteronomy. 7. 9. v.) That the Lord thy Go^ he is God, the faithful God
who keeps Covenant and Mercy with them that love him, and keep his
commandments; It was the saying of Saint Ambrose upon his death bed, We are
happy in this we serve a good Master, that will not suffer us to be losers;
servants in the world may lose by their Masters, when they have labored and
taken pains in hopes of being rewarded after their labor, but God will not let
any of his be losers by him. That which was the Apostle's fear, Gal. 4. 11. v.
may here be taken notice of, I am afraid of you (says the Apostle) least I
have bestowed upon you labor in vain: Though this was Saint Paul's fear in
reference to the Galatians, yet it needs not be a Be^ievers fear, in reference
to heaven and the things of heaven; in heaven he shall eat the labor of his
hands, Psalm. 128. 1. 2. v. Blessed is every one that fears the Lord, that
walks in his ways, For thou shall eat the labor of thine hands.

Many a man labors and toils in a business where he ^s not sure to get profit,
or be satisfied for his labor he ^akes. How many poor beggars go to rich Men's
doors, where they are not sure before hand to receive ^n alms, they know not
but that after long waiting, and much begging, they may be sent away empty, and
all their begging and waiting be but in vain. How* many laboring men will set
about a piece of work, where they are not sure before hand to be paid for their
pains; they will yet hazard some pains-taking; ^ut believers need not fear it
will be so with them, ^hey do not hazard their pains, their pains and labor
about Eternal good things will be answered. Gal. 6. ^. v says St. Paul there,
Let us not be weary in well^oing, for in due season we shall reap, if we faint
^ot. Seed time and harvest are not at one instant; the laborers in the Gospel
at night had their penny, but though they labored all day, it was night before
their penny was given them. Although a Christian may seem to lose his labor at
present, yet the time comes when he shall find it with advantage. Say it
should be long before you do find this, But ye, brethren faint not. 2 These. 2.
13. v. For in heaven you will not repent your labor. You never heard nor ever
will hear of that glorified Saint, who said in a complaining way, That he got
to Heaven at too dear a rate, or that the possession of Eternal good things
cost him more labor then they were worth.

We may say of all our labors as St. Paul of his sufferings, Romans 8. 18. v For
I reckon that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared
with the glory which shall be revealed in us. Let what will befall us, what
afflictions, what troubles, what miseries, or crosses, Heaven will make amends
for all; let us put all our troubles and afflictions, all our labor and pains
in one balance, and Eternal glory in the other balance, and this glory will
overweigh all afflictions and sufferings, they are not all of them worthy to be
compared to this glory.

In the beginning of those Civil Wars which the Senate of Rome carried on
against Cajus and Fulvius Gracch^^, the Consul Opimius by public Edict
promised, that whosoever should bring the head of Cajus Gracchus, should
receive for reward its weight in Gold. All esteemed t^is a recompense highly to
be valued, that one should receive equal weight in Gold (that precious meral)
to the weight of dead flesh. (But Gods promises far exceed this, for a short
labor here, he rewards with an Eternal weight of glory. And all the Greatnesses
of this world being but as crum^s, nut-shells and trash, if compared with the
least particle of Eternal glory.

All the labors, the watchings, the fastings, the prayings, etc. for Eternal
good things, are but as the taking up of a straw for the gain of an earthly
Empire; they are but as the gathering up a basket of chipps to gain an hundred
weight of glory; they are but as the filling a little vessel with sand or
water, to gain multitudes of precious stones; they are but as the reaching
forth of an hand to receive a rich and massy Crown of Gold. Such are the
Eternal good things we labor for, and take pains for, if compared to our labor
and pains, that I may well apply here what was once mis-applyed in the trial of
that holy Man Job, We do not serve God for nothing. Though we should not serve
him merely for reward, as hirelings; nor for fear, as servants; but as
children, for love.

8. Our labor and pains ought chiefly to be employed not about perishing, but
Eternal good things; Because even to Eternity it self, it will never repent us
to have bestowed the greatest labor for Eternal good things. It never repented
Jacob when he came to inherit his Father's blessing, that he had endured a long
exile, a tedious bondage and hard labor with Labon: It never repented Joseph,
when he was once made Ruler in Egypt, that he had been sold thither for a
slave, that he had sometime labored for the Ishmaelites to whom his Brethren had
sold him, or for Potiphar who bought him afterward of the Ishmaelites* It
never repented him then that he had been a prisoner, for he had never been a
Courtier, if he had not been a prisoner. It never repented the Israelites, when
they came to inherit the Land of Promise, that they traveled forty years in a
forlorn Wilderness, and that they had been put to fight with the Sons of Anak
and other enemies. No more did it ever repent any believer when he was once in
Heaven, that he had taken pa^ns for heaven. Heaven has made amends for all his
pains taken. But it will hereafter repent thousands that now labor and toil
only after the things of the world, but neglect the things of heaven.

We have Solomon recognizing and reviewing all his works and all his labor that
he had labored to do, and what finds he? van^y and vexation of Spirit; no
conten^a^ion, no satisfaction, but endless vexation, enough to convince him to
how little purpose he had wearied himself, enough to make him repent of all his
labor and pains; See that place Ecc^es. 2. 11. v. Then I looked on all the
work* that my hand had wrought and on the labor that I had labored to do, and
behold all was vanity and vexation of spirit, and there was no profit under the
Sun. So it will be with many men (in Hell that here take uncessant pains, and
(as we say) labor like an horse) when they shall review and recognize all the
labor and ^ains they have taken after Temporal good things and what little
pains about and for Eternal good things; What will be the issue, but even
endless vexa^io^? this will vex and torment their Souls throughout all
Eternity; this will make them say as Solomon in the 2 Eccles. 18. v. I hate all
the labor which I have taken under the Sun; Solomon had got no good, no pay
that would equallize his pains* In (...) they will have the remembrance of all
their labor, having in their life gained nothing that would equa^lize their
labor or their loss, even the loss now of heaven and all the Eternal good
things of heaven. As they say of the Bird that ^^t^eth upon the Serpents Eggs,
that by breaking and hatching of them she brings forth a perilous brood to her
own destruction; So do these that sit brooding on the worlds Vanisies, the end
of all their pains will be but Eternal Destruction.

When I see some men priding themselves in what they possess in the world, but
careless of Heaven: When I behold them delighting themselves in the many honors
conferred upon them by the great boun^y of Princes, but not minding God's
honor* When I observe them spending their whole time in voluptuous pleasures
that are but for a moment, and look no further, I call to mind some pleasant
rivers that fall into the Sea. You know there are many sweet and Crystal
rivers that run pleasantly, as it were sporting of themselves, winding and
turning their silver streams up and down many a pleasant and goodly Meadow a
great while, but at last they fall into the Salt Sea, there they lose their
sweetness and become brackish: So these men for a while do turn and wind
themselves up and down through the Meadows of pleasure, and bath themselves in
the transitory bliss of this world, arising from their great possessions and
many honors, but for want of laboring for Eternal good things, at last fall
into the mouth of Hell; and there lose all the sweetness of those things and
find nothing but the bitter brackishness of Eternal pains. How will it now
repent them that they labored for Earth so much, and for Heaven so little, for
Temporal good things so much, and for Eternal good things so little* that they
looked more at things below than at things abo^e.

This has made some bewail their folly at death, that ever they set their
hearts upon them, and so sinfully labored to attain them. I have read a sad
story of a rich oppressor, who had scraped up a great estate for his only Son,
when this rich opp^essor came to dye, he called his Son to him, and said, Son
do you indeed love me? the Son answered, That Nature, besides his Paternal
indulgence, obliged him to that: then said the Father, express it by this, hold
thy finger in the Candle so long as I am saying a Pater noster, the Son
attempted, but could not endure it; upon that the Father broke out into these
expressions: Thou can not endure the burning of thy finger for me, but to get
this wealth, I have hazarded my Soul for thee, and must burn body and soul in
Hell for thy sake, thy pain would have been but for a moment, but mine will be
unquenchable fire. Thus he bewailed that he had wickedly labored after the good
things of this life; this at the time of his death filled his heart, no doubt,
with no little sorrow and vexation.

But I do ^erily believe that there never was any laborious Christian, but upon
his death bed lamented, that he took no more pains for these things; Nay rather
he has then wished that he had been a thousand times more laborious for them.
Though a lazy generation of men have accused them for ^oo much preciseness,
have de^ided them for too much strickness, and have judged them to be almost
besides themselves; when they have taken notice of their extraordinary
diligence; yet themselves could say as Erasmus did, Accusant quod nimium
fecerim, verum Conscientia mea me accusat quod minus fecerim, quodque lentior
fuerim. They accuse me for doing too much, but my own Conscience accuses me
for doing too little.

And what shall I say more? have we God's command to labor after Eternal good
things? are they the best of good things, making those Good, and doing those
Good, that enjoy them? that when others under terrors of conscience, upon a
dying bed, in the grave, at Judgment and under everlasting torments, will find
nothing which do them any good or stand them in any stead; these, under all
their afflictions, upon a deathbed and at judgment, will not want what will
support them under the first, comfort them under the second, and make them hold
up their heads at the third, being interested in that everlasting, desirable,
satisfying provision they have made for their souls, and shall see their labor,
for the same has not been in vain, as also that they shall not have cause ever
to repent thereof. Are not these considerations sufficient to make our hearts
serious to improve every hour and minute of time (both day and night) in the
use of all good means, to the very end of our days, for Eternal good things,
and not yield to be put off with any other good things whatsoever then such as
are Eternal, though God keep us low and mean in the world.

I shall answer one question and then come to apply what has been said.

CHAP. VII.
Question, What Reasons may be assigned, why men labor so much after Temporal
good things, that they do neglect Eternal, and build their happyness upon so
deceitful grounds as earthly possessions and transitory things, they account
themselves happy in these earthly enjoyments; whereas a painted face is as
certain an argument of a good complexion, as this of an happy condition.

When God shall come hereafter to take up his own to himself into heaven, he
will not look so much amongst the great ones of the earth, the rich and
wealthy, as amongst the persecuted and contemned ones; Out of them he will find
his own, out of them he will gather those who shall be Eternally happy; Mal. 3.
17. v. In that day when I make up my Jewels; says the Lord: The phrase notes
that God's Jewels now lie scattered in the dirt, and God has his time to take
them up, and to bring them into the closet of Heaven; but in gathering together
of these Jewels, God will pass by Palaces and look into Cottages; he will pass
by the rich and take the poor; he will pass by the honorable and take the
despised ones. In the 1 Cor. 26. v. Ye see your calling Brethren, how that not
many wisemen after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called: The
Apostle does not say, not any, but not many. How many are now in Hell under the
Eternal hatred of God, who when they lived had as much of the world as most now
have, who when they lived flourished in as much pomp and worldly glory as any
now do; and were served and waited upon in as much state as any now are. And
these men accounted their condition happy, and of the like opinion are such as
they once were at this day, they content themselves with their present Temporal
possessions and neglect the things of heaven that are Eternal.

For which I shall assign such Reasons as follow.

1 Reason. Because it is natural for men so to do; Temporal good things do
agree with their corrupt natures* 2 Reas. Because men do fancy that in these
Temporal things below does consist the only comfort of their lives. 3 Reas.
Because these Temporal things being near at hand do dez^le the minds and
distract the Judgments of men. 4 Reas. Because Eternal good things are not
without great labor to be obtained. 5 Reas. Because men know not the excellency
of Eternal good things. 6 Reas. Because men do no^ as they ought, work upon
their hearts such divine exhortations thereunto, that they find in scripture,
which are backed with strong reasons, and encouraged unto by many sweet
promises.
The agreeableness of Temporal good things (which are so nea^ at hand) unto
men's natures, and fancies, corrupted by Original sin, as also the greatness of
that labor by which Eternal good things are to be obtained, ignorance of their
excellency, and the want of working upon men's hearts, Scripture Exhortations
thereunto, and Divine promises thereof, are some of those reasons, why men
labor so much for Temporal good things and so neglect Eternal good things.

1 Reason. Because it is natural for men so to do, Temporal good things do
agree with their corrupt natures; every thing in religion is Antipodous to
nature, amongst the rest, for a man to be dead to the world, for a man to take
his heart off from things below, for a man to prefer things to come before
things present, and to have his conversation in heaven; such things as these
are wholly against nature: But to hunt after the transitory trash of this
world, to set a greater value upon things below than upon things above, to
prefer things pleasant to flesh and blood before what pleases God; these things
agree with the corrupt natures of men; which made the Heathen Poet say, O
curvae in terras animae, and caelestium inanes: showing how the Souls of men
are bent to the earth and not regarding heavenly things. It is not more
unnatural for a stone to ascend upwards or for a spark of fire to descend
downwards, than it is for the corrupt natures of men to look after these
Eternal objects.

There is a generation of men whose names are written in the earth, as the
Prophet has the phrase, Jerem. 17. 13. v. called the Inhabitants of the earth,
Rev. 12. 12. v. in opposition to the Saints and heirs of heaven; Men that may
with the Athenians give the Grass-hopper for their Badge a creature that is
bred, lives and dies in the same ground; a creature that though she has
wings, yet flies not, sometimes she hoppeth up a little, but falls to the
ground again; but naturally lives and dies on the ground: So these Terrigenae
fratres, as one calls them, they are bred upon the earth, they live and dye on
the same earth, and they naturally mind only the things of the earth, and their
affections can no more ascend heavenward, than a worm can fly upwards like a
Lark. Hence that command directing us about the Object we are to place our
affections upon, Col. 3. 2. v. Set your affections upon things above, not upon
things on the earth; the object prescribed them, they are to be upon Things
above, heavenly things, things that will out last the days of heaven, and run
parallel with the life of God, and line of Eternity. The Command implies that
our affections are before conversion, naturally placed other where than they
should be, viz. Upon earthly things and fading objects. The Serpents seed (and
so are all men by nature) does naturally lick up the dust of the earth.

By nature all men's affections are taken off their proper Center, they are
crawling upon the earth, they center themselves in the things of the earth,
they embrace only such things as are suitable to sense, although there be never
so many snares and temptations therein to endanger their souls. It is made the
description of a child, Isay 7. 15. v. That he knows not to refuse the evil
and do the good. And it may well pass for the description of a natural man;
Such folly and simplicity is upon the Sons of Men. Not a man naturally, till he
be converted and regenerated will choose any thing, but as such a thing is
connatural to and commensurated with that depraved appetite within. Herein men
somewhat resemble the Lodestone, altogether despising and counting as nothing
Gold and Silver (metals so excellent in their own nature) makes choice of Iron
and draws that unto it with a violent and greedy affection: Such is the nature
of men that they too often neglect things of greatest worth and most precious
esteem* to pursue what is of far inferior value. It may be found true in these
men's souls, that which Solomon took notice of to be sometimes in the world,
Princes go on foot, and Servants ride on horseback; things of greatest worth
are debased, and base things are advanced; they suffer Temporal things to be
like Antichrist, even to lift themselves up above all that is called God in
their Souls; these shall and do with them sit upon the throne in the Soul, but
God and Christ and the spirit of Grace are shut out; heaven and the favor of
God had in no esteem, Grace and glory not looked after.

There is indeed since the fall of Adam an unsutableness between men's natures
and any spiritual or heavenly object, hereby their hear^s are naturally full of
enmity toward, hatred of, and cont^arity against God, and what belongs unto
God, despising and rejecting whatsoever is heavenly and supernatural, both
truths and ways, doctrines and things. As the learned Grecian accounted Christ
crucified, but a foolish Doctrine to be either embraced or believed, for no
other reason than because it was against natural reason: So are these Eternal
good things not accounted of or labored for by too many, for no other reason
but because they agree not with their natures. By nature, all men are in the
flesh, walk after the flesh, making provisions for the flesh, and no ways
savoring what is agreeable and suitable to flesh.

Were it possible to prove that there were Praeadamiti, men before Adam, (for
though Scripture does not mention any such, but calls Adam the first man, yet
such a paradoxal opinion has been vented and endeavored to be pro^ed,) or
might it be as peremptorily concluded of any, as some do of the Virgin Mary,
who shall ever be acknowledged blessed amongst women) others also of St. Anne
the Virgins mother; others of all the Virgins Family; that they were without
Original sin. Or if mankind were multiplied not by Generation, but by an other
way, as some have thought; That if Adam had not fallen, all his Posterity would
have been, and as the Turks say of such their Religious persons whom they call
Nefesogli, that they are not born in an human way of Generation. Or if God
would please miraculously to create some men de novo, make children to Abraham
out of stones, so as their Natures might be holy and free from Original
contagion, as I find some affirm, that Seth, Enoch, Noah, and such eminent men
were, and as indeed Jesus Christ was, he being without all sin either Original
or Actual, called therefore, Dan. 9. 24. v. Sanctum Sanctorum, the Holy of
holies, or most holy. Were there now such men as these to be found in the
World, their hearts would not have in them this contrariety to God, and the
things of Heaven, such a neglect of, and aver^ness unto grace here, and glory
hereafter.

2. R. Because men do fancy that in these Temporal things below does consist
the only comfort of their lives; look as the affections are very potent in a
man to turn him this way or that way, and from this thing to that thing; so
also is the Imagination or fancy of a man; a man's fancy since the Fall is as
full of evil as the Sea is of water, a Womb wherein much iniquity is conceived,
and is a great impediment and hinderance to the Souls good, but in no way more
th^n in this, that i^ pleases it self with empty and vain things, and neglects
true solid good things; it pleases it self with the vain things of this World,
and neglects the real and lasting things of Heaven.

It is one part of man's misery, devoid of grace, and whilst in a sinful
estate, that his Soul, and all the parts and powers thereof, are inhabited by
Satan, there he dwells, and therein he reigns, and in no one room of the Soul
does he of^ner appear then in the fancy; the Devil has a great command over
the fancy, who being the God of this World, he makes men to set an high
estimate upon the things of the World: Hence it is, that having raised the
value and price of Temporal good things above their real worth, and caused men
to place their happiness ^herein, they now think no labor too great to obtain
what they fancy very good, and that (as they believe) makes for the happiness
of their present being.

And I wonder not to see this very thing practiced by men of greatest
understanding and wisdom in a Country, who however they are or may be
otherwise profound Statesmen, and very wise as to all Earthly affairs, yet are
altogether oftentimes blinded and know not how to guide their actions to their
true end. And the reason hereof is, because their fancy usurpeth upon their
understanding and gets into the Chair thereof. Even as Athaliah destroyed
all the Seed Royal that she might reign; so fancy bolteth out all solid reasons
and arguments, used to take their hearts from off an immoderate pursuit of
these Temporal things, It is fancy only that does all, and they are herein
more led by their fancy then by any Scripture grounds or reasons; their
understanding is made but subservient and an under-agent to their fancy in
these undertakings.

It can hardly be imagined how vain such men are become in their fancies and
imaginations, and how far fancy does transport men herein. So true is that*
noted long since to be delivered by Gerson, That the world now grown old, is
full of doting fancies: Or as a most reverend and learned Person glossing upon
those words of Gerson, says, The world now near her end, raves and talks
nothing but fancies and frenzies. Some men are not more subject to madness in
their fancy, then these to be guided by fancy rather then by Scripture, or
right reason. That it is true of many Christians, what the Apostle speaks of
the Heathens, and that in their high profession of wisdom, Rom 1. 21. v. They
became vain in their imagination^: And he shows wherein at the 23. v. And
changed the glory of uncorruptible God, into an Image m^de li^e to corruptible
man, and to birds and fourfooted beasts and creeping things. So that they
became vain in their imaginations, by their setting up many fabulous and idle
Deities, whereby the knowledge of the true God was obscured: Even so many
Christians are become vain in their imaginations, in fancying and imagining
that happiness may be found in things below, and therefore neglect to labor
after the true happiness of Heaven. They regard not what God commands, or
what the Soul wants; but what their fancy pleases.

But why do the people imagine a vain thing? Psalm. 2. 1. v. For the comfort of
a man does not stand in having much; It is Christ's maxim, Luke 12. 15. v.
Man's life consists not in the abundance of the things which he possesses.
Yet otherwise men believe and fancy, and hence it is that they esteem more
highly of those things which will perish in the using, then they do of those
things which are of Eternal use. Wherein they are like that Hermit, who set a
grea^er value upon his Cat then Gregory upon the World: And like Diogenes who
preferred his Cynical life before Alexander's Royalty; he fancyed his little
Cloy^ter best: Or like those of Angola, who prefer a Dog before many Slaves: Or
the Indians, who esteem more of trifles then Gold. Or Children who ^ake greater
delight in (...) handful of Nut-shells then Jewels.

What a strange fancy was that of Bassianus the Emperor, who so degenerated in
effeminateness, that he would not only conform to Women's attire, ^ut would also
make his name feminine; he would be ^alled Bassiana not Bassianus. Such a fancy
have many amongst Christians, who are so degenerated unto Irreligion, that they
will not only conform to ^he sinful lusts and pleasures of the World, but they
so idolize Temporal things, that they place their only and chiefest happiness
in the enjoyment of the World, they terminate their happiness here. Though a
man may as well think to extract Oil out of a flint or fire out of water, as
happiness out of these Temporal and terrestrial things. To seek for happiness
in any thing below, is to seek for the living among the dead.

3. Reas. Because these temporal things being near at hand, do daz^le the mind
and distract the Judgments of men. The sight that now the best here below have
of those Eternal good things in H^eaven, is but weak, dark and obscure; for
says the Apostle 1 Cor. 13. 12. v. Now we see through a Glass darkly. And
again, Now I know in part. If Saint Paul and other enlightened ones see but
darkly and in part, surely Children of darkness see nothing at all: If the
vigourous and sparkling eyes of Heavens darlings see no clearer, the blind and
bleer eyes of others behold nothing, The Saints see a great deal, yet nothing
to what they shall see in Heaven, where the illustrious beauty of Eternal good
things shall be displayed in a most glorious Emphasis, and they have their eyes
fixed upon them through all Eternity.

An Eagle-eyed Christian by the eye of Faith, beholding the beauty of these
things, sees a great deal of excellency and worth in them why they should be
labored for; and the oftener he looks thereon the more he is enamoured
therewith, and he is made restless until he enjoys them: As it is said of
Apelles, that by his often beholding and looking on the Woman, whose picture he
was drawing, though at first he minded his Art only, yet secretly love did
creep into his affection at the same time, which made him languish away, till
Alexander helped her to him as his wife; so it is with a Believer, his heart
pants after these things, as the Heart pants after the water brooks, and his
Soul even languisheth away, till God help him to possess them as his own.

But now a generation of men having no other but sensual eyes, which serve only
to behold Objects near hand, not Objects at a great distance; they apprehend
nothing in these Eternal things to affect them withal, and therefore do they
acknowledge nothing in them to make them desirable or worth taking pains for. I
remember what I have read of Nicostratus, who being himself a cunning Workman,
he finding a curious piece of work* and being wondered at by one and asked, what
pleasure he could take, to stand as he did, still gazing on the picture?
answered: Had thou mine eyes, my Friend, thou would not wonder, but rather
be ravished as I am at the inimitable art of this rare and admired piece. Had
these men the eyes of Faith to behold things within the vail, to see the
Sun-like resplendent Body of Christ there; to look upon our Jehovah's face
there, and the glory of all crowned Martyrs and other the glorious Inhabitants
of that happy place, surely things below would not daz^le their eyes so much as
they do, they would rather be looked upon as so much dung and dross in
comparison of these; but though they are sharp-sighted into things of Earth,
yet are they blinder then a Mole in beholding any Spiritual or Celestial beauty.

As Moses did, Heb. 11. 27. v. so other of the Saints do, see him who is
invisible, but these see nothing but what is visible. They have no other but
bodily eyes to see with, and so God cannot be seen, 2 Timothy 6. 16. v. Whom no
man has seen, nor can see. And having no other but bodily eyes, it is no
wonder if things as far off as Heaven do seem very small and little unto them,
and those things which are nearer unto them, seem of a greater magnitude.

It is here as it is with many ignorant men, who standing here below, and
looking upon the Sun, Moon and Stars in Heaven; whereof the first and several
of the last, are many times bigger then the Earth; yet by such ignorant People,
the Stars are judged to be only pretty little golden spots, of the breadth of a
pe^ny or of a man's finger, and the Sun or Moon not broader then a bushel or a
Cart-wheel. The reason of this mistake is this; these Heavenly luminaries are
at a great distance from them; from the Earth to the Starry Heaven Astrologers
have made it sixteen millions, three hundred thirty-eight thousands five
hundred sixty two miles, and such ignorant Persons will not allow for the
distance, and so are not able to judge thereof. So it is here with carnal
ignorant ones, the things of Heaven are now accounted but small because of
their distance, though in themselves great; but Earthly things are accounted
great because of their nearness, though in themselves small.

Now as Eve's looking upon the Tree of knowledge, did her much prejudice, she
was thereby tempted to eat thereof, and thereby lost an Earthly and hazarded an
Heavenly Paradise: So to men, looking upon such things as the Temporal good
things of this life are, with no other eye then that of sense, their eyes are
dazzled with the splendor of them and they seem great, and do them a great deal
of prejudice; they make thousands not to hazard only, but even to lose an
Heavenly Paradise, whilst all their searchings and enquiries, all their
plottings and contrivings, all their labor and pains are chiefly after them,
neglecting those Magnalia Aeternitatis, those great things of Eternity. Why do
not men love those things more? why do not men desire them more? why do not men
labor and take pains for them more? The very reason is because they see them
no clearer. If men saw them clearer, they would love them more: If men saw them
clearer, they would desire them more: If men saw them clearer, they would
labor for them more. When Jacob had seen Rachel's beauty he loved her, loving
of her he desired to have her to be his Wife, desiring her he labored twice
seven years to obtain her; And though Lovers hours are full of Eternity, yet
his love toward her, and his desire of her did facilitate his labor, and made
the time seem short.

But now Temporal things being near at hand, and more clearly seen, men who are
devoid of Grace, have their eyes dazzled and their hearts bewitched therewith;
for the World is a bewitching thing; and (as one says) the World at last day
shall be burnt for a Witch: Herewith the d^v^l (who is daily trading with men
for the Souls) be witcheth millions. The World is the greatest price that the
D^v^l has to give for a Soul. What else does the D^v^l use when he would be
dealing with Christ? As that which was the most forcible temptation he could
use, he offers him all the Kingdoms of the World and the glory of them; he had
been tampering with Christ before, but this he kept (as the Orator does his
best arguments) unto the last. At his last bidding the Devil shows him all
the glory, pomp, wealth and dignity of the World, with these the D^v^l hoped to
dazzle our Savior's eyes (those windows of the Soul) and to imprison his
affections; as knowing that temptations of profits, pleasures and honors are
most forcible with men. Set but a wedge of Gold in Achan's sight, it dazles his
eyes, it bewitcheth his heart, and now Joshuah (that could stay the course of
the Sun) cannot stay him from lusting and laying hold of it. Set but preferment
before Balaam's eyes, herewith they are dazzled and his heart bewitched, and his
Ass never gallops fast enough after it. Promise but Judas thirty pieces of
Silver, and his eyes are dazzled therewith* and his heart even bewitched, that
he will betray innocent blood to get it. Thousands have dyed of the wound of
the eye: And so herewith the D^v^l hoped to prevail with Christ; he shows him
all the Kingdoms of the World and the glory of them, and says unto him: All
these things will I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me, Matthew. 4.
8, 9. v. A most tempting object, but this Heavenly Eagle had Oculum irretortu^,
and was not at all moved at the beauty and bravery of all the Kingdoms of the
Earth, the glistering pomp whereof had misled millions, when their eyes have
been dazzled with the gayety thereof.

As some have had their eyes so dazzled with going fires, that they have gone
out of the good path which would have lead them to their journeys end, and have
instead thereof been led into hedges and ditches, into pooles and waters: So
have men been turned out of the way leading to Eternal life, and have been lead
in the way that leads to the chambers of death, by this means: What is told
of the Serpent Scytale, is applicable here; they say of this Serpent, that when
she cannot overtake the fleeing Passengers, she does with her beautiful colors
astonish and amaze them and so dazzle their eyes, that they have no power to
pass away, till she have stung them to death; Even so the luster of things
below so dazzle the eyes of men, and bewitch their hearts, that they have
neither will nor power left in them oftentimes to look after things above.

4. Reas. Because Eternal good things are not without great labor to be
obtained, it will cost a Christian some sweat before he gets into Heaven. To
clim^ up an high hill is difficult and will ask a man no little labor, but to
run down the highest and steepest hill is easy: Facil^s est descensus Averni.
Hell may be gained without storm, labor or pains taking. But Heaven must be
labored for, and the things that belong to our everlasting peace are not to be
possessed without an holy Industry: To obtain such great things as these is not
so facile a work as most men do imagine: Trifles may be had at a trivial rate,
but Difficilia quae pulchra, things of worth, as all Eternal good things are,
are not obtained without great toil and labor.

The Lord Jesus Christ who has made known these things to the World, and who
knows better then the greatest Doctors or Masters of the School, the worth
and excellency of them and what pains there must be used to obtain them, he
has told us, that the way to them is narrow and strait and requires striving,
Luke 13. 24. v. Strive to enter in at the strait gate; for many, I say unto
you, will seek to enter in, and shall not be able; And that we must as so many
Soldiers, force our passage thither, Matthew. 11. 12. v. And from the days of
John the Baptis^ until now, the Kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and the
violent take it by force. And after all ou^ striving and fighting we must fall
to digging for these things as for hidden treasures, Prove. 2. 4. v. and pass
through many tribulations and asperities, many dangers and troubles, yea
possibly through prisons, fires and bloody labyrinths, before we can come at
them. Acts 14. 22. v. We must through much tribulation enter into the Kingdom
of God.

These things lessen men's appetites after them and do make them less desirous
of them, yea to leave pursuing of them upon pretense of that difficulty there
is to come by them, as fearing they should in the pursuit meet with affronts
and disgraces, tempests of rage, despite and hostilities from violent persons
and unreasonable men, and in the end lose their lives which they prefer before
all other interest.

This the very reason why no more put out themselves to obtain these good
things of Eternity. Omnes enim appe^unt delectabilia, and fugiunt labores and
difficultates. The generality of men are for what is facile and delightful, not
for hard labors and difficult undertakings. Herein few are like that Emperor
I have read of, that delighted in no undertakings so much, as those who in the
esteem of his Counselors and Captains were most difficult and impossible: If
they said such and such an enterprise would never be accomplished, it was
argument enough for him ^o make the adventure, and he usually prospered, he
seldom miscarried.

But hence comes men's backwardness herein, because flesh and blood can not
endure such Spiritual labor and pains for them, Men are naturally overgrown
with Spiritual sloth and a careless laziness, they are loath to put themselves
to so much labor this way, which is so opposite to their corrupt natures.

Viscera terrae extrahimus, ut digito gestetur gemma quam petimus. Men
willingly will draw out the very bowels of the Earth, that they may get the
gemme they desire. How will men toil and labor to digg for Gold and Silver,
and yet take no pains for Grace and Glory, for Christ and Heaven? How will men
weary themselves in pursuing their sins, but yet are backward to be at any
pains for the saving of their souls. Impii quam strenue serviunt Diabolo; They
will even sweat in the D^v^ls work, and yet not ^o much as stir themselves in
the service of God or for the good of their Souls. They will do wickedly with
both hands earnestly, and often tire themselves to get to Hell; but to get to
Heaven they will hardly labor with one of their fingers. Heaven and Eternal
good things they would have hereafter, but are loath to put themselves to take
pains for them now; they are like Solomon's Sluggard mentioned Prove. 13. 4. v.
The soul of a sluggard desires, and has nothing. Vult, and non vult piger; so
the vulgar Latin reads those words. The Sluggard would and he would not; he
would have the end, but not use the means: So it is with these Spiritual
Sluggards, they would sit at Christ's right hand, but they would not drink of
his Cup, nor be baptized with his Baptism; they would be admitted into the
Kingdom of God, but not pass through many tribulations; they would ^nter in at
the strait gate, but they would not be put to strive to enter; they would have
given unto them a Crown of righteousness, but they would not sight; they would
be glorified, yet take no pains to be sanctified. One well compares such men to
Cats, that would fain have fish, but are loath to wet their feet. Wish for
Heaven at their end they will, but labor and work for Heaven they will not,
they will not add endeavors to their desires. Ora and labora, that is the old
rule, our willingness of heaven should be seconded with laboring for Heaven,
else it is nothing worth. The young man in the Gospel wished well to Heaven,
when he came kneeling to our Savior, with Good Master, what good thing shall I
do that I may have Eternal life? Matthew. 19. 16. v. The man seems to be no
Sadducee, for he enquires after Eternal life, which they denied; he is rather
thought to be a Pharisee, by the manner of his expressing himself, and of that
sort of Pharisees which was named, Quid debeo facere, and faciam illud; Tell me
what I shall do, and I will do it. He comes congeeing to Christ, as if he had a
good desire to be informed in this question of such great importance, How he
might obtain Eternal life. He had a good mind to Eternal life, but he stuck at
what our Savior directed, for he went away sorrowful, v. 22. This troubled him
to be put upon what he was not willing to perform. If Heaven and Eternal life
are to be had upon no other terms, Christ may keep them to himself and those
who will come up to such hard terms, (as this young Gallant thought these were)
he will have none. And now he that came running so hastily, he goes away and
departs heavily. In like manner do more then this young man, if Heaven and
Eternal life cannot be had without so much ado, without so much crossing of
corrupt nature, without so much denying themselves a carnal liberty in the
World, bidding adieu to their sins and embracing a strict holiness, without
which no Heaven or Eternal life is to be had, they will not come up to the
terms or use such means.

When the Israelites were come to the very skirts of Canaan, and no question
they had a longing desire to be in it, yet would they (notwithstanding that God
himself had told them it was a good Land, a Land flowing with milk and honey)
send out of every Tribe one, as so many Spies to search the Land, these were to
report unto them what manner of Land it was; after forty days they return,
and with them bring some of the fruit of the Land. and withal told Moses and
Aaron and all the Congregation, Numb. 13. 27. v. saying: We came unto the land
whither thou sentest us, and surely it flows with milk and honey, and this is
the fruit of it. Here was enough to persuade and excite to a cheerful and
speedy endeavoring to possess it. But the next Verse lays before them several
difficulties they were like to meet with before they could possess it, v. 28.
Nevertheless, the people be strong that dwell in the Land, and the Cities were
walled and very great, and moreover we saw the children of Anak there. As if
they had said, Indeed the Land is a good Land and plentiful, but it will cost
us hot water before we can possess it, we shall hardly ever conquer it. And now
they are discouraged, they look at these difficulties and judge it to be in
vain to set upon endeavoring to possess it; they had Giants to fight with, and
walled Towns to besiege, and they themselves were but as Grass-hoppers to the
Inhabitants thereof, the conquest would certainly be very difficult. And now
they fall to wishing, Numb. 14. 2. Would to God we had dyed in Egypt, or would
^^ God we had dyed in this Wilderness. And at v. 4. say they, Let us make a
Captain and let us return into Egypt. Now Canaan is rejected, and Egypt, that
is preferred; as if the Land of their bondage had been better then this Land of
promise, and a death there better then a life here. And all this for no other
reason but because Canaan could not be enjoyed without a sharp and hazardous
War, and they judged it better and a more easy work to go back to Egypt,
content themselves therewith. In like manner many that cannot but speak very
glorious things of Heaven, and do wish well to the good things of Eternity, and
would gladly go in and possess that good Land, but there is a Lion in the way;
so says the the Sluggard in the Proverbs chap. 22. 13. v. The slothful man
says: There is a Lion without; I sha^ be slain in the street. A mere fiction
of his ow^ brain to cover and color his idleness; for who ca^ expect a Lion to
be in the streets; Lions hau^t n^ in streets, but in woods and wildernesses;
and s^ these men they want not what to say for themselves, they complain with
these Mal^-contented Israc^^^ of the strength of the Amakims, and many other
difficulties in the way to Heaven; Hence their secre^ wishes are, Oh, that we
might live for ever upon the Earth: Earth is preferred before Heaven and a life
upon the Earth is more esteemed then a life in Heaven, and they can content
themselves with the Earth and cast off all laboring for Heaven.

I da^e appeal to any observant Christian, if he does not take notice of the
truth of what I say, that ^here are many who spend a great part of their lives
^n doing nothing toward their Salvation, in not pray^ng for Heaven, in not
hearing for Heaven, in not ^eading for Heaven, in not taking any care or pains
at all for Heaven, and that upon no other ground ^hen this, but that they
cannot away with such labor, as praying, hearing and reading does require.

5. Reas. Because men know not the excellency of Eternal good things. Eternal
good things are no fancies, they are no Entia rationis, no Chymeraes or
conjectural things, for the Gospel affords us a certain knowledge thereof, of
the ways to obtain them. In the Gospel we have some glimpses of Heaven and
prospects of Canaan yea many (...) of happiness; so that when a Christian shall
come to possess Heaven, he shall be able to say, surely this is the very Heaven
that was described in the Gospel. As if Moses, after he had seen Canaan from
mount Pisgah, had gone into that promised Land, he would have said, surely this
is the very Land I saw from mount Pisgah, these are the hills, these are the
rich valleys, these are the rivers of milk I saw from thence: So will
Christians that have studied the Gospel, describing this good Land, and
declaring the excellency of those Eternal good things there, when they
afterward come to possess it, will verily conclude, This is the Heaven we read
of in the Gospel, and these are those Eternal good things we were told of out
of the Gospel; here is that Eternal God, that glorified Christ; those beauteous
Mansions, those Rivers of pleasures, those joys without end and Crown of Glory
we heard of out of the Gospel; that knowledge we had of them out of the Gospel
was truth, and that labor and pains we took to obtain them was not in vain.

Indeed not all, that do pretend to know the excellency of these things, do
labor after them. As Plutarch said of the Grecians, they knew what was just,
but did it not: So these know what things are Eternally good, but they labor
not after them. The Devil no doubt has a great deal of knowledge hereof, he
knows there is Eternal glory, everlasting joy and pleasures for evermore in
Heaven; he is called (...), from the great knowledge he has; but the Devil
does not labor after them. Hell is full of many knowing heads, of men who once
had knowledge to bespangle them, but none to sanctify them: Of men who once
had knowledge, to enable them to dispute de caelo and rebus aeternis, but none
to enable them to labor for Heaven and Eternal things; Mal^^t disputare quam
laborare; they took more delight to dispute of them then to labor for them. Of
men who once had Metaphysica ingenia, Metaphysical heads, and much knowledge to
write learned Exercitations de Deo, of God; but none to put them on to labor
to get into Covenant with God* and to have God for their God; Of men who might
have much knowledge to labor for the Philosophers Stone, that Midas like, they
might turn all they touched into Gold; but none to make them labor* that their
portion, above all other portions, might be God. That had the World no other
Bibles to teach it, that these things were to be labored for, th^n the labor
and pains these men took for them, the World had not known there had been such
a duty commanded.

Sapientes sapienter in infernum descendunt. Even men furnished with great
helps of such knowledge, miscarry to all Eternity, when others less knowing,
yet spiritually knowing and diligently laboring, are happy to all Eternity.
Insurgunt indocti and rapiunt caelum, and nos cum omnibus doctrinis detrudimur
in gehennam, said one. Many learned and great knowing men can dispute of
Religion and Heaven, but others of less learning and knowledge, laboring
religiously for Heaven, surprise it.

But without knowledge thereof, and of the true way to obtain these things, men
can no more come to obtain them, th^n Devils can, that habitation which they*
once forsook. Hosea 4. 6. v. My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge. Why
do none seek after God, laboring to get God for their God? St. Paul gives the
reason, Romans 3. 11. v. There is none understands; What follows? There is none
that seeks after God: None seek after God, because none know or understand
God. It is true of all Eternal good things; why do no more seek after them,
laboring to get them for their treasure, because no more understand and know
them and the excellency of them, they have no Spiritual judgment in such
things. Ask many men why they do not such and such things, why they take not
such courses and ways, that might verily prove gainful and very advantageous
unto them; the answer usually given is this, They have no understanding in such
things, they have no knowledge in such ways and courses. Which holds most of
all true herein, they know not Eternal good things, they understand not the
surpassing excellency of them; and this is the reason they never look after
them.

Here many men are like the Cock in the Fable, they are not acquainted with
such Jewels as God and Christ, Grace and Glory* are, and so had rather have
their Barley-corn then all such Jewels, they had rather feed upon the Onions
and fleshpots of Egypt, th^n labor to be fed with that meat which endures
unto Eternal life.

I will not ask you what Aristotle (whom one calls Vltimus conatus Musarum, as
if Nature could not have sent forth a greater Artist) or Plato; what Tully or
^ato ever understood or knew any thing hereof, or labored for an interest
herein, they were Heathens and had no Scripture light, no revealed light; for
even amongst our selves who are called Christians, there are many enjoying this
kind of light, that yet know nothing of the excellency thereof. How many such
have a damnable ignorance, covering the faces of their Souls, as darkness did
the deep at first, they have a very Chaos in their Souls, they are as it were
shut up in a dark dungeon. We have (I fear) many that are no more acquainted
with the worth and excellency of such things then Heathens and Pagans, no more
then savage Indians or rude Barbarians.

As your Batts and Owls can see well enough in night, but not in the day: So we
have millions that do frequent our Church Assemblies, who though they have
parts, abilities, and are of quick apprehensions and great knowledge in the
things of darkness, matters of sin and the world, yet in the things of God and
Heaven they are stark blind; says the Apostle Paul of some of the Corinthians
in his days, 1 Cor. 15. 34. v. Some have not the knowledge of God, I speak it
to your shame: The like may we say of many of our hearers, there are many that
have no knowledge of God, of Justification, Sanctification or Glorification; we
speak it to their shame, and it ought to be to their grief. In such things they
are very Sots and know nothing, they savor nothing but the things of the
Earth, they re^ish nothing but what flows from creature contentments, they know
nothing of Eternal excellencies, all their knowledge lies in Earthly things,
because Earthly things are all they mind: Herein they are knowing men indeed,
herein they do abound with knowledge, but it is with such a knowledge, as (like
the Ostritches wings) make them outrun others upon Earth, and in Earthly
things, but help them never a whit toward Heaven. And there are plenty of such
dustheaps in every corner; but of persons knowing of and laboring after
Eternal excellencies, Hand facile invenies multis e milibus unum, there is a
very great scarcity. These are as Gideon's t^ree h^ndred, when the ignorant
ones as the Medianites lie like Grasshoppers for multitude upon the earth; or as
those Syrians, 1 Kings 20. 27. v. they fill the Country, they darken the Air,
as swarms of Flies once did the Land of Egypt. What Cicero says of thankful
men, may be said of the fewness of these knowing men; Perraro grati
reperiuntur, It is hard to find a thankful man; so is it hard to find men
laboring chiefly for Eternal good things, because it is also hard to find out
men that know the excellency of them.

6. Reas. Because men do not as they ought work upon their hearts such Divine
exhortations that they find in Scripture, which are backed with strong reasons
and encouraged unto by many sweet promises. If we had, says one, a window in
men's breasts, we should see this principle engraven on their hearts, That the
Gospel is promises, and all their work is to believe them to be true. And so
they never mind exhortations to labor after Heaven and Immortal life, after
Salvation and Eternal happiness; only they please themselves with such promises
that God has made of Heaven and Eternal rewards, making use of the promises to
strengthen their hopes for Heaven, but follow not the exhortations which call
upon them, to labor for Heaven.

It is most true that a well grounded hope for Heaven and Eternal salvation is
gotten by, and grounded upon the Word of God; hence it is called the Hope of
the Gospel, Col. 1. 23. v. because it is gotten by the Gospel and grounded upon
the Gospel. All a Saints hopes comes from the Scriptures; Psalm. 119. 49. v.
Good is the Word of the Lord wherein thou have caused me to hope. Romans 15. 4.
v. That we (says the Apostle) through the comfort of the Scriptures might have
hope. And the promises of the Scripture are the Anchor of a Christian's hope;
that hope which any one has of Heaven, if not founded upon a promise, it may
rather be called presumption then hope.

Promises are the surest Pillars to build our hopes for Heaven upon; when that
hope which is not built upon a promise shall suffer shipwreck, then a promise
will be as a planck upon which we may swim safe to the shore of Heaven; then a
promise will be as a Fiery Chariot to carry us up to heaven. Heaven is nothing
else but the enjoyment of the promises, Heb. 6. 12. v. Be followers of them,
who through faith and patience inherit the promises; that is Promissam illam
haereditatem; the promised Inheritance. The promises are Heaven folded up;
Heaven is the promises unfolded.

The promises are made by God, and they make over God to a Believer, as his
portion, and Christ as his Savior, and the Spirit as his Sanctifier, and all
Eternal good things as his everlasting Inheritance. It is therefore one of the
greatest titles that ^ belong^ a Christian, to be styled an Heir of the
Promises. Heb. ^. 17. v. God willing more abundantly to show unto the heirs of
promise the immutability of his counsel, confirmed it by Oath. That man who
has a right to the Promises, is the richest man in the World; for God is his,
and Christ is his, and the Spirit is his, Grace here, and Eternal glory
hereafter, is his. Sad is that man's condition who has no interest in God, nor
in Christ, and who is without all hopes of future and Eternal happiness; But he
that is a stranger from the promise, is without Christ, without God and without
hope, Ephesians. 2. 12. v. Such a man may indeed nourish hopes of Heaven, but his
hopes, if not bottomed upon a promise, will prove afterward to be no other
then his Souls delusion, and his Souls consenage; he may promise himself to go
to Heaven, and there be blessed and happy for ever, but his hopes will deceive
him.

And under the like Soul-delusion are those men, that hope they shall enjoy all
whatsoever are held forth in the promises; men who do not at all mind all the
conditions of the promises; men that only believe them to be true, but labor
not by an holy industry and diligence to gain and possess themselves of what is
promised. These men do highly value Promises, but they under-value and despise
Commands; they read the Word of God, and they meet with the promising-word,
this they retain and be^ieve and build their hopes thereon; and they meet also
with the Commanding-word, this they embrace not, this they obey not, Ask many
profane Persons, what hopes they have of being happy to all Eternity: O say
they, God is a merciful God and he has made many gracious promises in the
Scriptures, to pardon our sins and blot out our iniqui^ies, and upon such free
promises as these we build our hopes.

I remember Mr. Torshel in his Hypocrite discovered and cured, does tell of
such a one that he well knew; He was, says he, full of assurance to be saved,
but I knew him very well, and knowing nothing that could make him so confident,
dealt with him as I saw most convenient for his estate, and urged him with that
of the Apostle, Give all diligence to make your calling and election sure. And
with that other place; Work out your salvation with fear and trembling. The man
now was sta^led, and told my Author, He acted the d^v^ls part against him to
make him despair. Here was a confidence of being saved here was, no question, a
resting upon promises; but here wanted diligence and working, here wanted a^
obedience to Scripture Comma^ds, none of that appeared in the wretches life and
conversation.

And verily here is the very nature of many wicke^ men, to hope for Heaven,
building their hope upon promises, but they will not do God's Commands that
thousands, I fear, presume themselves into He^ and under Eternal Torments by a
false hope in the promises. They will not run the race, and yet hop^ to obtain
the prize; they will not fight the batte^ and yet hope to win the Crown; they
hope for Heaven at the end, but they never act holiness as the means, though
happiness be intailed upon holiness Heb. 12. 14. v. Follow peace with all men,
and holiness, without which none shall see God: And a. promise of the life that
now is, and that which is to come, is (...)iled upon Godliness, 1 Timothy 4. 8. v.
Godliness has the promise of the life that now is, and that which is to come.
And as Christ became the Author of salvation unto all them that obey him, Heb,
5. 9. v. And the Psalmist concludes, Psalm 119. 15. v. Salvation is far from the
wicked, for they seek not Gods Statu^es; And if Salvation be far, surely a
wellgrounded hope of Salvation must be far from them. But why is Salvation far
from the wicked? Because they keep not thy Statutes; they are strong in their
expectation of Heaven, but slow in their endeavors after Heaven, they take no
pains at all for Heaven. They challenge an interest in the Promise, but yield
no obedience to the Command. But believe it there is no hopes to have Gods
promises fulfilled, unless the Commandment of God be obeyed; They are but
presumptuous persons who so rely upon the promises of God, as that they do
slight and disobey the Commandments of God.

Hitherto we have spoken only to the Doctrinal part of this point, in the
Explication, Demonstration Confirmation thereof, and also answered that serious
question, What Reasons may be assigned why men labor so much after Temporal
good things, that they do neglect Eternal, and build their happiness upon so
deceitful grounds as Earthly possessions and transitory things, they account
themselves happy in these Earthly enjoyments. The fourth particulor propounded
was to make Application of all; and here I shall speak but to three Uses.

Use 1. By way of Lamentation, and that over two sorts of men.

1. Over those that instead of laboring for these Eternal good things, and
having their hearts taken up with and set upon them, have their hearts wholly
set upon sensual pleasures and carnal delights, and therefore do spend all
their time in making provisio^ for the flesh, without the least thought upon
Eternity that follows.

2. Over those whose minds and hearts are only set upon Earthly things, and
whose affections are fa^^ nailed to the Earth, making all the motions of their
Souls to wait upon their Earthly designs, and that so fixedly as if they had
resolved upon no other Heaven then wealth.

Use 2. By way of reprehension, to reprove those that never look after Eternal
good things, but are wholly taken up with the pursuit of the good things of
this life; laboring for the meat which perishes, but not for that meat which
endures unto everlasting life.

Use 3. By way of Exhortation, to exhort every one to labor after Eternal good
things.

CHAP. VIII.
Use 1. BY way of Lamentation over those two sorts of men named, whom when I
consider how much they prefer momentany pleasures before Eternal joys, Earthly
trash before everlasting riches, and what little care they do express to have
of their Souls, of Heaven, of being in Covenant with God, of having an interest
in Christ, of gaining the Holy Spirit of Grace, thereby to be brought out of
that undone estate and condition they are naturally in, I see cause to be
Afflicted, and mourn, and weep: to let laughter be turned to mourning, and joy
to heaviness, Jam. 4. 9. v. as often as I think of their present sinfulness and
their future Eternal miserableness. When Jeremiah foresaw the heavy wast and
destruction that should befall Moab, Jer. 48. at what time the spoyler should
come upon every City, and no City should escape, but the Cities thereof should
be desolate without any to dwell therein, and Moab should be a derision and
dismaying to all them about him; there should be no more praise of Moab, but a
continual weeping should go up; the little ones of Moab should cause a cry to
be made, and the chosen young men thereof go down to the slaughter, all joy and
gladness should be taken from the plentiful field; at the 17. v. the Prophet
calls upon all those who are about Moab to bemoan Moab; and at the 20. says
he, Howl and cry, tell ye it in Arnon that Moab is spoiled: But how is the
Prophet himself affected therewith, see v. 31. Therefore I will howl for Moab,
and will cry out for all Moab; mine heart shall mourn for the men of Kir-heres.
But all that was threatened here to befall Moab was only a Temporal Judgment; but
when we consider what the neglect of Eternal good things will bring upon these
men, I could even wish with the same Prophet Jer. 9. 1. v. Oh that my head were
waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night for
them.

1. By way of Lamentation over those that instead of laboring for these
Eternal good things, and having their hearts taken up with and set upon them,
have their hearts wholly set upon sensual pleasures and carnal delights, and
therefore do spend all their time in making provision for the flesh, without
the least thought of ^ternity that follows.

There are many indeed that have nothing to do, no callings wherein ^o employ
themselves, no business to spend their time about; but let me make bold to tell
them, especially the Gallants of our days, Tha^ they have Souls to save, and
that they have an Heaven to labor for, and Eternal good things to make sure
of, and if they have any hopes to save their Soul, to gain Heaven and make sure
of those Eternal good things we have spoken of, they have work enough every day
to do; They that say they have nothing to do, ought to employ themselves the
more in reading, meditating, watching over themselves, resisting sin, with
other acts of piety, lest otherwise their time (which they must afterward
account for) pass away without any profit or fruit.

Every day is precious time, and pity it is any one day should be spent in
Idleness or evil employments: The Heathen Cicero has taught us thus much,
saying, Non generati a natura sumus, u^ ad ludum and jocum facti esse videamur;
sed ad severitatem potius, and ad quaedam studia graviora atqu^ majora; Ludo
enim and joco uti illis quidem licet, se^ sicut somno and quietibus caeteris,
tum cum gravibu^ seriisque rebus satisfecerimus. We are not bred o^ nature, as
to spend our time in playing and sporting, but in severity and great weighty
studies; and that we should use sporting and jesting as we do sleep and other
recreations, only at such times when we have dispatched our weighty businesses.
Every thing almost in Nature is in motion and performing a kind of labor:
There is a continual change of day and night. The Heavens are incessantly
carried about with a daily motion. The Sun stands not still, but runs its ten
or twelve millions of leagues every day. The Sea no day cease from its
ebbings and flowings. But our Age has produced a generation of men, who do
after a most strange manner spend their who^e time in Idleness. Men that seldom
know of what color the dawning of the day is; of whom it may be said, as ^ully
said of Verres the Deputy of Sicily, Quod nunquam solemn nec orientem, nec
occidentem viderat. That he never saw the Sun rising, being in bed after, nor
setting being in bed before. Herein these men imitate that Epicurean Swine, who
boasted that he had grown old without seeing the Sun either rise or set. As
^^bosheth slept upon his bed at Noon, so these men are found to be in their
beds at Noon.

They change the day or a great part of the day into night, as oftentimes they
change the night into day, spending night after night, as well as day after day
in actions of impiety and profaneness. It is said of Theodosias the Emperor,
that after the variety of worldly employments, relating to his civil affairs in
the day time, he was wont to consecrate the greatest part of the night to the
studying of the Scriptures, to which end he had a lamp so artificially made,
that it supplied it self with Oil, that he might no way be interrupted in
dedicating that time to God: As he was careful to dedicate some part of the
night to God, so these are as forward to dedicate it to the Devil. As they of
Gibeah, Judges 19. 25. v. abused the Levites Concubine all night until morning;
so to the shame of Christianity, they abuse and disorder themselves all night,
and not until morning only, but night after night, not being contented to
continue from morning until night till wine inflame them, as the Prophet has
it Isay 5. 11. v. but they second the days drunkenness with the nights excess.
As they are never well until they be at it, so they never give over when they
are at it, Prove. 23. 35. v. They can awake in the night to pursue that is evil,
but sleep away much of the day without doing that which is good, without
laboring after or so much as minding of the salvation of their Souls, and the
enjoying of these Eternal good things.

Or rise they early, they are in their rising but like the High Priests we read
of, that early in the mo^ning, before it was yet day, were gathered together
against Christ; they could not rest until they had apprehended and condemned
Christ. No question but there were some of these Confederates that would not in
all probability have been hired to come out of their beds or have broken their
sleeps, to have done any thing that was good, but to persecute and condemn
Christ; now sleep never troubles them, now they are awake before day, now they
are up and abroad about the D^v^ls business. Who, alas! observes not many in
our days to be of these High Priests minds? Men that if they rise early, yet it
is not to spend the day to the glory of God; it is not to employ themselves in
any thing wherein they can with confidence and a good conscience desire any
gracious assistance from God; It is not to be active for God and Heaven, that
great end wherefore they have their beings; It is not that while they have yet
a day allowed them they may be providing for Eternity; But to spend the day in
sensual pleasures and carnal delights; to wast and pass away their time either
in Play Houses or Alehouses, those Palaces of Satan, Chapels of Hell, and
Nurseries of all kind of sin and uncleanness; little considering that in such a
day they thus live, thousands and perhaps millions of Souls are loosed from
their bodies, and presented before God's Tribunal, there to receive an Eternal
doom, and that themselves in a moment may be forced to bear them company.

Dan. 4. 25. v. Seven times passed over Nebuchadnezzar; that is, he lived seven
years like a beast: But many amongst us have lived seven years three times, yea
seven times told, and yet cannot say they have spent seven days to lay in any
provision for their Souls against that endless duration; these men live all
their days like Beasts, and happy were it for them might they perish as Beasts.

When some have thought day after day, and night after night, too little to
labor in for Eternity; they can spend day after day, and night after night, in
doing nothing ^or Eternity. That I may say of them as Ephorus of his
Contrymen the Cumaeans, having no remarkable things to report of them, and
yet desirous to insert the name of his Country in his History of the Grecians,
relating what worthy acts many Nations had done; the Lacedaemonians, says he,
did this valiant act; the Athenians did other noble acts; but his Contrymen
the Cumaeans did nothing; he had nothing to say of them, but that they had done
just nothing. So in like manner we may recite this Holy man, who has done much
toward the gaining of Heaven; and that Martyr who chose rather to lose his
life then lose his soul; and that Believer who never thought he could do enough
in laboring for Eternal good things, but these men we speak of have done
nothing at all.

We may here c^y out with the Prophet, call for the mourning women; yea we may
call for all such as are skilful of lamentation, to wailing, Amos 5. 16. v.
Here we may excite all that know the worth of Souls, and the excellency of
Heaven with the Eternal good things thereof, to sit down by the rivers of
sorrow and weep: Lachrymis non verbis, miserationibus non orationibus opus est.
O Christians, as often as we behold these kind of men, let us look upon them
with eyes full of tears; as often as we speak of them let it be in words and
expressions full of sorrow, with sorrowful and lamenting hearts; and yet let us
not rest here, but every one teach his Neighbor lamentation: As that Phrase is
Jer. 9. 20 v. that there may be a voice heard, not in Ramah but in our own
Country, lamentation and bitter weeping. Jer. 31. 15. v. Not Rachel only, but
all Parents weeping for their Children, yea and refusing to be comforted for
their children, because they are not more careful for their Souls and more
industrious for Heaven, because they sottishly prefer swinish pleasures here,
before a laboring to enjoy pleasures in Heaven for evermore; This very
consideration should make us to lament with a doleful lamentation, Micha. 2. 4.
v.

2, By way of Lamentation, over those whose minds and hearts are only set upon
Earthly things, and whose affections are fast nailed to the Earth, making all
the motions of their Souls to wait upon their Earthly designs, and that so
fixedly as if they had resolved upon no other Heaven then wealth; For which to
gain, how do they lie, flatter, swear, deceive, supplant, undermine, wrong and
oppress others; having darkne^ the eyes of their consciences, by offering
violence to the tenderness thereof, and neglecting the checks thereof, they can
entertain and digest without scruple or reluctation, any means though never so
indirect, any conditions though never so base, any advantage though never so
dishonorable or unconscionable, to raise themselves in the World.

Judas will betray the Son of God for a few pieces of Silver. Balaam will be
contented to curse the Church and People of God, for a little honor and
preferment. Gehazi will multiply lie upon lie, for a talent of silver and two
changes of raiment. Micha's Levite for a little better reward than the beggarly
stipend he had before, will neither scruple theft nor Idolatry. To gain a
Kingdom, the bargain of treason is presently concluded between Absalom and the
Devil. He that is greedy of gain will not be backward to lie in wait for the
life of his Neighbor, Prove. 1. 18, 19. v Rather then Ahab shall not have
Naboth's vineyard, poor Naboth shall be murdered. How do we see some enrich
themselves by Sacrilege, as Ananias and Sapphira* Others by Bribery, as Felix.
Others by extortion and grinding the Poor, as the griping Us^rer and
unconscionable Tradesman. Others by Symonie, as too many of our covetous
Churchmen. The undone condition of many poor Families that are left with naked
backs, empty bellies and languishing bowels, do too sufficiently demonstrate
the truth hereof.

The whole World abounds with men that do make nothing to break through many a
hedge, to make many a gap through God's Law and their own consciences, that
they may by shorter passages come, to what they aim at, then others. Oh how
many lie under the Serpents curse, Genesis 3. 14. v. They lick dust, and eat dust,
and lie and wallow into the dust. On many the judgment of Corah is spiritually
exercised: The Earth opened her mouth and swallowed up his body, but it has
opened her mouth and swallowed up their hearts, their time and their
affections. These men are like the Israelites, who preferred Leeks and Onions
before Quails and Manna; or like that Diaphontus, who refused his mothers
blessing to hear a Song: Or like some low bred Persons, that prefer themselves
before their betters, vaunting and boasting with much vanity and presumption,
of themselves, and of all that belong to them, but despise others though their
Superiors and betters: So these men having set their hearts upon things below,
care not by what unjust and indirect means they come by them; they are resolved
to get Rem, rem quocunque modo rem. They are of the mind of that Atheistical
Politician, who said, Quod utile est, illud justum est; That which is
profitable, the same is just and righteous; all is fish that comes to their
nets.

As it was said of Cicero, that he was gentle to his Enemies, froward to his
Friends: And as it was unjustly charged by Joab upon David, 2 Samuel 19. 6. v.
That he loved his enemies and hated his friends: So it may be truly said of
these men; They higly esteem what they should under-value, and they under-value
what they should highly esteem; highly esteeming these poor things below, this
Mam^^n of unrighteousness in the World, and not valuing the incomprehensible
excellencies of Heaven, the inexplicable and inestimable glory there; and all
those unutterable and ineffable felicities to be enjoyed at God's right hand
for ever-more. And why? Because their hearts, by excessive rooting in the
Earth, are turned wholly into Earth, that they are even drunk with the love of
the World; and no wonder then if, like the Gadarens, they prefer Swine before
their Souls; or like him in the Parable, that would go to see his Farm though
he lose Heaven: Or like the rich Glutton, who was so taken up with his great
crop and building his new barns, that he never thought of Heaven, until he was
in Hell: Or like thousands more in the World, who if they have but something to
leave behind them for the good of their Children, they matter not whether they
have any thing to take with them for the good of their Souls.

Quis talia fando temperet a lachrymis? Who can refrain from tears, when he
relates such a truth? Not the Apostle Paul, that blessed Saint and Servant of
Jesus Christ; he cannot speak of them without weeping, Philip. 3. 18, 19. v.
For many walk, of whom I have told you often, and now tell you even weeping,
that they are the enemies of (...) Christ: Whose end is destruction, whose God
is their belly, and whose glory is in their shame, who mind Earthly things. Nor
methinks can any other, who knows the worth of Souls and Eternal good things,
but secretly weep for them. As Zanchy complained with much regret of the
Lutheran ubiquitaries, that he found them ubique, every where to vex and molest
him; so has every Christian cause to grieve (oh that we could all of us with
brokenness of heart bewail it) that these kind of men are every where to be
found. And themselves are called to weep by the Apostle St. James, who looks
upon them as Persons in a deplorable condition: Indeed none more frolic and
merry, none dreaming of more content and freedom from want, none less fearing
either miseries or judgments, than many carnal rich worldlings; although what
they possess has been gathered and scraped together by oppression and
unrighteous dealings. But see what the Apostle says, Jam. 5. 1. v. Go to now
ye rich men, weep and howl for your miseries that shall come upon you. Here we
have assigned the reason why they should weep and lament, For the miseries that
shall come upon you: That is, says an Interpreter, partly sore afflictions in
this life; but these are but the beginnings of sorrow; And partly also, Hell
torments in the life to come; Hell torments are indeed miseries to come; and
though here they laugh, yet there they will howl.

O that such Earthly minded ones (that be rooting and (...) in the Earth, as if
they meant to dig themselves (...) it, a nearer way to Hell) would consider
this before the cold grave holds their bodies, and hot Tophet burn their Souls!
The one is as sure as the other, if timely repentance prevent it not; for they
have damnation for their end, Phil. 3. 19. v. Whose end is destruction. When an
Angel of the Lord threatened the Israelites, not to drive out the Inhabitants of
Canaan from before them, but that they should be as thorns in their sides, and
their Gods should be snares unto them, Judge. 2. 3. v. In the two next verses it
is said, v. 4. 5. And it came to pass when the Angel of the Lord spoke these
words unto a^ the children of Israel, that the people lift up their voice and
wept: And they called the name of that place Bochim; That is, as it is in the
Marg^n ^ Weepers, because the People of Israel did weep abundantly in this
place. And we have a strain of threatenings in Scripture, against such who both
sinfully get and use these Temporal things below; I say 5. 8. v. Woe unto them
that join house to house, that lay field to field, till there be no place, that
they may be placed alone in the midst of the earth. Luke 6. 24, 25. v. Woe unto
you that are rich: for ye have received your consolation. Woe unto you that are
full, for ye shall hunger. Woe unto you that laugh now, for ye shall mourn and
weep. Let us mind the words before we leave this point. 1. Here the Rich are
threatened with this, That they have received their consolation; we may
understand the words either Ironically, by way of a scornful jeer unto them
that call it a consolation to have riches, and account them the only comfort of
their lives; or at the most the words can intend no more then Woe be to you
hereafter, for here in this life, and only here in this life, they have that
they call consolation, they shall have none of this consolation in the other
life.

CHAP. IX.
2. A Second use may be by way of Reproof, to those that never look after
Eternal good things, but are wholly taken up with the pursuit of the good
things of this life; laboring for the meat which perishes, but not for that
meat which endures unto everlasting life; laboring only for back and belly,
for food and raiment, but as for those things that endure to Eternal life, them
they postpone to the things of this World: Here they do as we use to say, Set
the Cart before the Horse; not only equalize Hagar with Sarah (though that were
injurious enough) but they give Hagar the place, and make Sarah come behind as
an attendant; they make Sarah to tend on Hagar, the Mistress to wait upon the
Handmaid. Like the Gadarens they prefer their Hogs before Christ. Or the Jews
that preferred Barabbas before the Messiah. With Esau they esteem more of a
mess of Pottage then a birthright. They bestow most labor about that which
God would have them to bestow least labor about, and the least labor and
pains about that which God would have them bestow most labor about.

I remember a pregnant Story of an ancient Father, that being invited to a
great Man's house, coming there about ten a clock, he saw the Mistress of the
house trimming and dressing her self in a glass; and from ten until one, he
observed she spent that time in plaiting her hair, painting her face and
trimming her se^f; at one a clock, when she came to d^nner, expecting nothing
but mirth, this ancient Father fell a weeping; and being asked why he wept, he
turned himself to this Gentlewoman, and said thus unto her, I weep to see,
that you have spent three hours in dressing your self, and doing other acts of
pride to damn your Soul, and yet I never spent so many hours to save my Soul
since I was born. We may make this the very case of many in the World, whom (in
the Phrase of Habbakuk, chap. 2. 13. v.) we see to weary themselves for very
vanity: To work day and night and take indefatigable pains for a poor living,
and to scrape together a little more of the World then another does; but no
pains at all for life Eternal, and to get a better assurance of Eternal
happiness then others do.

Herein, more use the Counsel of the World than the Counsel of the Lord; the
words of Horace than the words of the Bible, H^^. Ep. 1. O Cives, cives,
quaerenda pecuma p^imum est, virtus post nummos: First look after ^iches, then
virtue; first after money, then mercy; first make sure of the Earth, then of
Heaven Most do, as that ^^^ said he would do, if he should meet with an Angel
and a Priest together, he would first do his duty to the Priest, and then
afterward salute the Angel; though the Angel were an Inhabitant of Heaven, and
the Priest an Inhabitant of the Earth; yet would he prefer the Earthly
Inhabitant before the Heavenly Inhabitant, he would salute and show his
respects to that, before he would so much as take notice of or show any
respects unto this.

As the Poet reports of his Achilles, that he had rather be a Servant to a poor
Country Clown here, th^n to be a King to all the Souls departed: So these men
had rather live here, and posse^s what is only here to be possessed, than leave
the possessions of these things for a Crown, not of Gold, but glory, in Heaven.

It was the saying of a Cardinal. That he prefer^ed his part in Paris, before a
part in Paradise: And ^s wretched an expression was that of another wor^d^y
disposition: Let but God give me enough of Earth, and I will never complain of
the want of Heaven: We do every where meet with such Cocks of the Worlds
dunghill, that prize a Barley-corn more than a Jewel, who make it their work,
their business, and their chiefest labor, to fill their chests with money
rather then their hearts with grace; to gain great Inheritances here, rather
then to be Heirs to an Heavenly Inheritance hereafter. As that man in his
sickness cried out to his Physician, Give me any deformity, any torment, any
misery, so you spare my life: So these in their hearts to God, deny us grace,
deny us glory deny us Heaven and all Eternal good things; so we may have our
fill of the Earth and all Temporal good things.

Such men are like Children that are more taken up with counters than with
future Crowns, being as laborious as Bees for Earthly prosperity, but as Drones
for heavenly felicity; having more of the Earth in them, th^n there is of them
in the Earth; discovering thereby their hearts to be full of the Earth, but to
have nothing of God in them.

When the Devel tempted our blessed Savior* Matthew. 4. 3. 5, 8, 9. v. he soon
perceived that Chri^ was more then man. It is worth our observation, that when
the Devil began his temptation on Christ he tempted him as the Son of God, and
used two subtle arguments to work upon him thereby, to manifest and show his
power: As first to turn stones i^ bread: 3. v. If thou be the Son of God,
command the these stones be made bread. And then secondly, T^ cast him self
down from the Pinnacle of the Temple v. 5. 6. Then the devil takes him up into
the h^^ City, and sets him on a pinnacle of the Temple* And says unto him,
Cast thy self down, for it is written, etc. But when these weapons in the
Devil's hands were soon repelled by our Savior, the Dev^ sets upon him as Man,
and that he might not ^^ foiled a third time, he used that which he knew seldom
failed with me^^ men, and this was to show him all the Kingdoms and glory of
the world; and to promise him all these things. 8, 9. v. Which when the Devil
found that Christ refused, he then perceived that Christ was more th^n Man; and
then and not till then, the Text says, The devil leaves him, 11. v. for the
Devil saw it was time to leave tempting him any further, knowing that if the
profer of, and hopes to gain, the world's wealth, would not persuade, that
nothing could be able to move him. A^ heart void of Grace, and having nothing
of God therein, but wholly set upon things below, would questionless have
caught the promise out of the Devils mouth (when he said, All these things will
I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me, 9. v.) least he should have
gone back from his word. Such a love, men void of God, have to the World and
things thereof, that they will be content to fall down and worship the Devil
instead of God, yea to ride post to Hell, might they be but well paid for their
pains. So earnestly fixed are their desires hereon, that they grow as impatient
in their hopes hereof, as Rachel (who cried, Give me children or else I dye)
and too often take very ill courses, and use very unlawful means, to come
thereby: As Tamar who chose rather to lie with her Father, then to dye without
issue: In like manner, who sees not the neglect of Heaven on one hand, and the
many ill courses and unlawful means on the other hand amongst men for these
things.

Thousands we see are resolved to be rich, what course and means soever they
must use, or what labor and industry soever they must manifest; but their
daily conversation does not bespeak in them any resolution to be holy here, and
to be happy hereafter, for holiness and happiness, neither private nor public
means are made use of. Now thus to do, what is it, but as if an Husbandman
should be very diligent to gather in his ^ubble and leave out his Corn: Or as
if a Goldsmith would carefully gather up his ^^oss, and disregard his Gold: Or
as Jacob to lay his right hand upon the younger, and the left hand upon the
e^^er child.

It is spoken of some Jews by way of disgrace, that when they might have
returned to Jerusalem out of Captivity from Baby^on, they would still dwell
with the King of Babylon, and live among their pots, so they might have
maintenance there, they would rather there stay th^n to return to Jerusalem,
which was their own Country, a^^ a type o^ Heaven, and where also was the true
worship of God, 1 Chronicles. 4. 23. v. these were men of base spirits, and that is
there said is spoken by way of disgrace of them. And such base spirited men are
they we do speak of, men that do chose rather to spend all their time and
labor about things of the World th^n Heaven, that make Earth their Heaven,
Gold their God, that do worship the Golden Calf, and herein pro^e the Apostle's
words fully, ( Col. 3. 5. v. where he calls Covetousness Idolatry) these
evidence themselves to be Idolaters, and no other th^n worshippers of the
Heathen's God Pluto, who having his name from riches, was by them feigned to be
the God of Hell, and the rich man's God. Being like those Natives in America,
who regard more a piece of glass, or a mean priced knife and the like, then a
piece of Gold. May we not say of these Americans, surely they never heard of
the worth of Gold, or else they would no^ exchange it for toys. And may not
the like be said of these kind of Christians? surely these men, though they
have heard of Heaven, though they have heard of Eternal good things, yet they
do not believe the worth and excellency of Eternal good things; why else do
they so little mind them and labor for them?

CHAP. X.
3. A Third use may be by way of Exhortation, To exhort every one to labor
after Eternal good things. Christians, you hear what all men should first and
last labor for; what they are chiefly to labor and take pains about, viz.
about Eternal good things. Eternal good things should be esteemed by them as
the (...), or principal things to be labored for, and Temporal things to be
reckoned only as (...), or secondary matter to be looked for.

I shall divide my Exhortation into two parts.

1. To exhort Christians to labor after Eternal good things.

2. To exhort them to labor for them chiefly, and before all other things
whatsoever.

I will begin with first of these two, and speak to it but briefly; the second
being what I chiefly intend to speak unto.

1. To exhort every one to labor for Eternal good things. How will the
Merchant run through the intemperate Zones of heat and cold for a little
treasure? The Husbandman contentedly undergoes a laborious seed* time to enjoy
a happy c^o^ afterward. We every day see much gadding up and down in the World
amongst men, like a company of Ants upon an hillock, for these things below,
some that they may get a poor living from hand to mouth, others that they may
get a step higher in the World th^n ano^^er, and almost all, mo^e panting
after, and laboring for, Temporal, th^n Eternal good things. Shall they take
pains for Ear^^ly Mammon, and shall we take no pains for a Heavenly Mansion;
shall they sweat and ^o^l and labor for these Temporal things, and we take no
pains for Eternal?

Much is spo^en in Scripture against slothfulness, Romans 12. 11. v. Not slothful
in business. Hebr. 6. 12. v. In the foregoing Verse says the Apostle: W^
desire that every one of you do she^ the same diligence, to the full assurance
of hope unto the end; And in this Verse he adds, That ye be not sloth^ul. There
is ^ great deal of Spiritual sloth to be taken notice o^ in the World; many
lazy and dull spirited Persons, Persons, like that slothful and unprofitable
Servant, who is mentioned and threatened to be cast into utter darkness, Matthew.
25 25. 30 v. And can such slothful ones expect any better thing to follow their
slothfulness? Let the Heathen's words be considered, N^ illi fal^i sunt, qui
diversissimas res expectant, ignaviae voluptate^, and praemia virtutis. They
are utterly out that think to have the pleasure of Idleness and the plenty of
painfulness. It is true as to the ga^ning of any me^^ Earthly thing; and much
more true (as may appear by what has been said before) in the gai^ing Heavenly
things. Religion requires action, labor, and diligence; Heaven will not be
gotten, but as it were by force and victory. All Spiritual means and holy
courses must be used, all time and all opportunities must be improved, least,
what gainers soever men are in this life, they be losers in another life. Sad
will be the condition of those men, whose Spiritual sloth eats up most of their
time, and thereby hinders their work, and loses them Heaven. To how many may it
be said, as the Householder said in the Parable to those, Mat^h. 20. 6. Why
stand ye here all the day idle? We read that Joshua said to the Sun stand
still, but God never said to the Soul of any Christian stand still. Jacob saw
the Angels, some ascending, others descending, none standing still, none
appeared to him in an idle posture; If Angels are not seen idle or standing
still, no more should men be seen so; Though God made Behemoth to play in the
waters, not so men, they must be doing, that will keep in with God, or get any
thing from God.

-- -- Nil sine magno
Vita labor dedit mortalibus.
He that will lay claim to the Habendum and Tenendum, to the freehold of
happiness in Heaven, must look to the Proviso of holiness and labor.

After all, therefore, that has been said of Heaven and the Eternal good
things of Heaven, let me say to you, as the Danites to their Brethren, having
spied out a good Land, Judge. 18, 9. v. We have seen the Land, and behold it is
very good: and are ye still? ^e not slothful to go, and to enter to possess the
Land. As if they had said, we have found out for you a Land which is very good,
pleasant and fruitful, and which may, if you will take the pains, be conquered
and possessed by you; do not ye therefore, by your sloth and negligence, let
slip such an opportunity, as now offers it self unto you, to be enjoyers of a
place, where there is no want of any thing that is in the Earth, 10. v. a place
which abounds with all pleasures and profits, and with such plenty and
prosperity, that nothing is wanting that can be desired. So may I say unto you,
Christians, the Heavenly Country is before you, and such Eternal good things
as you have heard described, are there to be possessed, arise and work, and
lose not all that you have heard of for want of labor. As David said to
Solomon, 1 Chronicles, 22. 16. v. Arise therefore and be doing, and the Lord be with
you.

Christians, you are laboring every day for meat that perishes, you are
engaged over head and ears in the pursuit of the things of the World. I^ is a
speech I have read of one Demades, when the Emperor sent to his Contrymen
of Athens, to give him Divine honor, and they were loath to yield to it, but
consulted about it, says he, Take heed you be not so busy about Heavenly
matters as to lose your Earthly possessions: So say I, Take heed you be not
busy about Temporal matters as to lose Eternal possession. Follow therefore
the Apostle's direction, Col. 3. 1. v. Seek those things that are above. Os
homini sublime dedit. God has given to men countenances erected toward
Heaven, that they should not cast their eyes on t^ings below, but lift them up
to better, even things that are above. Christian, thy affections were made for
those things that are above thee, not for those things that are below thee; A
Christian should Superna anhelare, pant after glory and things Eternal; his
affections should be carried above all Earthly Objects, he should not be
content until he get up into Heaven; This Bird of Paradise, though he may with
God's good leave sometimes touch upon the Earth and upon Earthly things, yet
should he be mostly upon the wing, and what ever he enjoyes here on the Earth
should be to him, but Scalae and alae, Wings, and wind in his wings to carry
him upwards.

To conclude this first Part and come to the second; I shall use the words of
Saint Austine, Volemus sursum, Let us fly upwards; so he somewhere reports
that his Mother Monica said in a kind of trance, when she was near her death.

CHAP. XI.
2. I Come to the second Branch of this use of Exhortation, and that is to
labor for Eternal good things chiefly and before all other good things; labor
for these in the first place. Labor indeed we may and must for Temporal good
things: Though Temporal good things are not so high as to be primarily desired,
yet they are not so low as to be peremptorily neglected: They are a good
Viaticum to a better Inheritance, they are great enablements to do service to
God and good to others. Not a Christian, though a Believer, but has relation
to two Worlds whilst he lives here; he is a member of this World, but he is
Heir of a better: Now so long as he is in this World he stands in need of what
may help him in his way toward Heaven, or that may be useful for his better
and more easy leading of this short and mortal life. Verily, were but the
World kept in its own room, it would prove no enemy to Grace, to the Soul or
Heaven; for no question, but there is a way of enjoying God, even in Worldly
enjoyments, and laboring after the good things of this life

The whole World, (says one) and all things contained therein, were made for
man, and are so disposed in that ^ort, as they may best serve to the benefit
and profi^ of man, It seems nothing else then a vast house furnished with all
things necessary, whose in^abitant, possessor or Fructuarius, is man. Supposing
(says ^y Author) man were not in the World, there were no ^^se of the World;
The World was never intended to ^e a desert, serving only for a den of wild
Beasts and for a Wood of thorns, but for man to dwell in and inhabit, there to
glorify his Creator in a right using of ^he Creatures, as well as any other
way.

A Believer may, questionless, with God's good leave, labor for the good
things of this life, he ha^h God's allowance to endeavor to get an estate in
the World, and to have a share in the fatness of the Earth as well as in the
dew of Heaven, as Isaac divides that ble^^ing of his, Genesis 2. 28 v. to Jacob;
God give t^ee (says he) of the d^w of heaven, and the fatness of the earth,
and plenty of corn and wine. Though M^rie's better part, in the unum
necessarium of the So^l, ^hou^d ^e ^ooked after in the first place; yet
Martha's many t^ings of the body should not be neglected. Your heavenly Father
(said Jesus Christ our Savior) knows ye have need of these things, Matthew. ^.
32. v.

And God has promised to his People Temporal blessings, needful for this
Natural life: In the Covenant of Grace, God promises not only to write his Law
in our hearts, and to forgive our sins; but also to confer even Temporal good
things, as they shall be serviceable to us in our journey toward Heaven, or
for our more comfortable living in the World. Adam, when he fell, did not only
lose his title to Heaven and all Eternal good things, but even to the Earth too
and all Temporal good things thereof; but when God makes a Covenant with any of
the Sons and Daughters of Adam, it shall give them a title, not only to Heaven,
but also to the Earth; they shall be as Heirs of Salvation, Heb. 1. 14. v. so
inheriters of the Earth. Matthew. 5. 5. v. Blessed are the meek, for they shall
inherit the earth. Psalm. 37. 9. v. Those that wait upon the Lord, they shall
inherit the earth. 22. v. Such as be blessed of him shall inherit the earth.
29. v. The righteous shall inherit the Land, and dwell therein for ever. 34. v.
Wait on the Lord and keep his way, and he shall exalt thee to inherit the Land.
And therefore, in old time, the best men were likewise the richest men, as
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Job, and David.

Abraham's Servant says, Genes. 24. 35. v. The Lord has blessed my master
greatly, and he is become great, and he has given him flocks and herds, and
silver and gold, and menservants and maidservants, and Camels and Asses.

Jacob speaking of his two bands, or great herds of Sheep and Camels that went
before him, says Genesis 32. 10. v. With my staff I passed over this Jordan, and
now I am become two bands. Job 1. 1. v. Job was a perfect man and a just, one
that feared God and eshewed evil; Now one of the next things mentioned of Job
is his substance, 3. v. which was very great, Seven thousand Sheep, three
thousand Camels, five hundred yoke of Oxen, five hundred she-Asses and a very
great household, so that this man was the greatest of all the men of the East:
As Job was eminently rich, so he was eminently good; as by Providence he was
made eminently rich, so by Gra^e he was also eminently godly, none like him in
all the earth.

And moreover, Temporal good things are God's blessings that came with a
promise; God has promised his own People such a share and portion of them, as
shall be needful for their more comfortable being and living in this World. It
is not my purpose to enlarge upon this subject, yet would I leave a few words
with you to encourage you to labor even for these Temporal things, forasmuch
as God has promised them; it is promised to him that feare^h the Lord, Psalm.
112. 3. v. That wealth and riches shall be in his house; That is, when God
sees it good; for all promises of Temporal mercies must be understood with an
exception, they are not to be taken absolutely, but conditionally: So far as
they are helps to the furthering of a Christians main good, and no hindrances
of his everlasting welfare, so far he may be sure to be a partaker of them, and
God will b^ess his endeavoring to gain and possess them. Whatsoever he does it
shall prosper: Psalm. 1. 3. v. Indeed we cannot instance in any Temporal good
things, but in one place or other there is a promise made of it to the Godly,
Godliness has the promise of this life. What God has promised to give, his
People may with his good leave labor for.

But notwithstanding what I have said, a Christian's care should be, that
whilst he has his hands in the Earth, his heart should be in Heaven; and he
should learn to live above those things which he cannot live without: his chief
labor and pains should be to gain such things which will be of most use in
Heaven. I may say of the best of all Temporal things, as the Philosopher said
of the City of Athens, That it was a City, Ad perigrinaendum jucunda, but ad
habitandum non tuta: Pleasant for journeying, but not safe for dwelling: So
these things are comfortable and useful for us journeying toward Heaven, but
they are not such things as will be of use when we come into Heaven. It is good
counsel that one gives, Omnia ista contemnito quibus solutus corpore non
indigebis: Despise whilst you are in the body, those things whereof you shall
have no need when you are out of the body: Those things that will be of use in
Heaven should principally be labored for on Earth.

We cannot better show our selves to be wise Christians then by taking off this
course, as I shall by and by show. You know what Christ said, when he came to
determine the question between the two Sisters, (even now named) Martha and
Mary, Luke 10. 42. v. Mary has (...) that good part which shall not be taken
from her. And why that good part? because she had chosen that which should not
be taken from her. Verily he makes the best choice that prefers those things
that will last, those things that death cannot rob us of, before all other good
things in the World.

It was the saying of Aristotle, (that great leader of the School and most
Eagle-eyed into the mysteries of Nature of all Philosophers, called therefore
Nature's Secretary) concerning knowledge: That a little knowledge, though but
conjectural about Heavenly things, is to be preferred above much knowledge,
though certain, about inferior things: It is true herein also, that a little
of those things that are Eternal is to be preferred before a great deal of what
is mee^ly ^^mporal: And this should make every one to labor ^or E^ernal good
things, as the same Ari^^otle studied Philosophy; he studied Philoso^hy in the
morning, that was (...), but Eloquence in the afternoon, that was his (...):
his chief study was that o^ Philosophy, as for Eloquence and other studies,
they were only by the by, as we say.

Indeed no time better spent then what is spent this way: I find it reported of
Suarez, a very learne^ man, one who wrote many Tomes of Dispu^ations that he
prized the time he set a part for the searching and examining of his heart in
reference unto God above all the time that ever he spent in other stu^ies his
cons^ience felt a relenting pang for strength an time so ill employed; this
time and strength, had i^ been spent in searching and examining his heart, ha^
been better spent; and so of every Christian, their time cannot be better spent
then in laboring for wha^ will advantage the Soul in reference unto Eternity
and for Heaven, where he hopes to spend his who Eternity. Even Hea^hens have
highly esteemed tho^ Eli^ian delights which they did but fancy, an^ have
under-valued and contemned the things here be low: how sad a thing is it, that
a Christian's hear^ should not be more taken up with Heavenly delights, which
(as I shall show afterward) are no pha^sies, but certainties.

Now to back this second branch of the use of Exhortation, I shall add the
following Motives to what has been said, by way of Confirmation.

Motive 1. Because Christians laboring or not laboring for Eternal good
things, will bespeak them wise men or fools.

Motive 2. Because the greatest of Temporal good things, without Eternal good
things, will leave a man a Beggar, leave him in an undone condition.

Motive 3. Because Eternal good things, even without Temporal good things, will
make a man a rich man.

Motive 4. Because Eternal good things are real good things, and all Temporal
good things are but imaginary good things.

Motive 5. Because Eternal good things only are they that will be for a
Christian's life.

To persuade all men to labor chiefly for Eternal good things, I shall,
besides what I shall now add, desire every one to call to mind those eight
particulars, mentioned in the sixth Chapter. And when we remember that God has
commanded this very thing; That these things are the chiefest of good things;
The only lasting good things; Good things always desirable; The only
satisfying good things; Good things that do concern the Soul; Good things about
which our labor will not be in vain; Neither will it ever repent us to have
labored for them; I conceive the Exhortation will be sufficiently backed with
Motives.

CHAP. XII.
1. MOtive. Because your laboring or not laboring for Eternal good things
will bespeak you Wisemen or Fools.

My discourse will fall into these two parts.

1. Your laboring for Eternal good things will bespeak you Wisemen. 2. Your
not laboring for them will bespeak you Fools. I do begin with the first.
1. Your laboring for Eternal good things will bespeak you Wisemen. There are
more fools in the world then such as we say are to be begged for fools; men who
are defective in their naturals, that are mere Idiots and void of natural
understanding. Solomon affirms this in his Proverbs, always styling the wicked
man the fool, Prove. 1. 7. v. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of
knowledge, but fools despise wisdom and instruction. 22. v. How long ye simple
men will ye love simplicity? and the scorners delight in their scorning and
fools hate knowledge. It is the wicked man here that Solomon styles fool; the
man that cares not to be made wise to salvation; the man that cares not for the
knowledge of Eternal good things.

There was not a man in all Egypt to be found so wise as Joseph; why so?
Because foreseeing the years of famine, he filled their Storehouses against
the time of want: Neither is there a man to be found in all the world so wise
as the Godly man, who only is called the man of wisdom, Mi^ha 6. 9. v. Why so?
Because fore seeing the length of Eternity, he labors to enrich himself with
hidden and Heavenly treasures that will do most good then. They only show
themselves wisemen that are careful to lay up a stock and store, that will do
them good throughout all Eternity; when as the world's fools, for want of the
like care, will then have no good thing for their Souls to feed upon.

Many foolish men are like the want on Grasshopper, that leaps and skips, chirps
and sings all the time of Summer, and when the time of the Winter comes, it
perishes for want of what might have been gathered in the Summer: O such are
too many, they eat and drink, they laugh and sing, they spend their days in
sinful delights all the days of their life, and entering upon Eternity, they
Eternally perish for want of what might have been gotten in the time of life.
Whereas the wise-hearted Christian is like the Annt or Be, that toil and
labor in the Summer against winter: So they who are Spiritually wise, in the
time of life, are trading for Eternity; whilst they live upon Earth they are
seeking after Heaven, and looking after things that are invisible, they are
laying up treasures in Heaven, a good foundation against the time to come.

Before their Bodies be laid up in the dark and dismal Prison of the grave,
their care is that their neverdying Souls may be carried into Abraham's bosom.
Before all opportunities for doing their Souls good are taken away, their care
is to turn to God, to accept of Christ, to get their sins pardoned, their
evidence for Heaven cleared, that so they may be for death prepared, and after
death enjoy a future and glorious felicity. Before the unavoidable dissolution
and separation of their Souls and Bodies, and the departing hour must come,
their care is; that when they dye* they may dye in the Lord, Rev. 14. 13. v.
that when they sleep the sleep of death, they may sleep in Jesus, 1 Thessalonians. 4.
14. that when their lives must end, their ends may be in peace; Psalm. 37. 37.
v. In a word that they may dye the death of the righteous.

That already twice repeated Text, Col. 3. 2. v. Set your affections on things
above, not on things on the earth; speaks to this purpose; The word is (...),
we must be wise for them; and this is to manifest an high point of Heavenly
wisdom, when me^ are wise for Heavenly things, that though they do walk on the
Earth, yet they do daily converse in Heaven, and have their eyes fixed upon
invisible things there, looking upon Earthly contents to be too mean grounds
whereon to raise their joys, that which ravisheth their hearts and quickens
them in their labors, is their thinking upon, beholding of and hoping for
those beams of inaccessible glory.

Moses was a wise man and so esteemed and reported by the Spirit of God,
because he despised the pleasures of Pharaoh's Court, having an eye to the
recompense of reward, Hebr. 11. 24, 25, 26. v. That is, because he despised all
the present arguments of delight and contentment, and preferred those
excellencies which he knew should be infinitely greater, as well as he knew
they should be all.

2. Your not laboring for them will bespeak you Fools. Here in the world if
men be but deep Politicians, have profound reaches and a deep insight into the
things of the world, they go for very wise men. But suppose a man were not
inferior to Virgil, of whom it is reported, that if all sciences were lost,
they might be found in him: Or to Aristotle, who by some was called wisdom it
self in the abstract: Or that Jew Aben Ezra, of whom it was said, that if
knowledge had put out her Candle, at his brain she might light it again, and
that his head was a throne of wisdom: Or to that Israelitish Achitophel, whose
words were held as Oracles: Or to Solomon, who was able to unravel Nature, and
to discourse of every thing, from the Cedar to the Hysope or Pelitory on the
wall: Though we were as one says of St. Hierome, that he knew all that was
knowable: Or lastly, though a man were equal with Adam, who knew the nature of
all Creatures; And yet not be wise to salvation, not be like the wise Scribe,
who was taught from the Kingdom of Heaven; not be seeking after those things
that will endure beyond a season, and that will satisfy an immortal Soul,
verily this man will at last prove himself but a fool.

Such a fool was that miserably mistaken rich man in the Gospel, who (though by
himself or others judged wise) in the account of the only wise God was a very
fool; why? for he provided only for the time of this life, for many years only
to be spent in the world, but provided nothing at all for death, or for his
Soul after death.

As Cicero said of some: Mihi quidem nulli satis ^ruditi videntur, quibus
nostra sunt ignota. I cannot take them for Scholars that partake not of our
learning: So may I say, they are not to be accounted wise men but very fools,
who are not wise to that which is good, wise in Christ, wise to secure the
chiefest good and which is of the greatest value, to wit, their precious Souls
(of more worth then any thing they can stand possessed of) and Heavens
happiness.

Such and such only deserve the name of wise men and prudent ones, who choose
those ways and are diligent in those actions that make for Eternal happiness.
The Italians arrogate to themselves the monopoly of wisdom, in that Proverb of
theirs: Italians, say they, both seem wise and are wise, whereas Spaniards seem
wise and are fools; French men seem fools and are wise: They of Portugal
neither are wise, nor so much as seem so: So many in the world think themselves
the only wise men, but in Spiritual and Eternal matters neither are wise nor so
much as seem wise therein. Those who are not Heavenly wise, wise to that which
is good, though the wisest Politicians upon Earth, though they be the most
ample and cunning Machiavilians that live; though they be Doctors in that deep
reaching Faculty, yet are they like fools, being sharp-eyed like the Eagle only
in the things of the Earth, but as blind as Beetles in the things of Heaven.
Wise it is true they are, but it is with such a wisdom as (like the Ostrich
wings) makes them outrun others upon Earth and in pursuit of Earthly things,
but helps them never a whit toward Heaven or to pursue Heavenly things.

Every one will cry him up for a fool, who rather chose to stay in the Theater,
and see the sports out, then quit the present spectacle, though he had
assurance given him to be adopted into Caesar's Family. Indeed here was one
that had an offer made him too great for a fool, a fool he was indeed, for he
understood not his own felicity, and therefore rejected what he understood not.
And such fools are they that prefer base momentany pleasures before Heavenly
treasures, that have no other objects of their affections but those which are
the objects of their eyes, that esteem more of money then mercy, of Earth then
Heaven, of fading vanities then Crowns and Scepters of a Kingdom. Glaucus who
changed his Armor of Gold with Diomedes for his Armor of brass, stands upon
record for a fool. And they deserve no other title, who exchange present
enjoyments for future and Eternal happiness; such a one as learned Davenant
has it on Colloss. 2. Quisquilias the sauro praefert; prefers trifles before
treasure.

2. Motive. Because the greatest of Temporal good things, without Eternal good
things, will leave a man a Beggar, leave him in an undone condition. We have
many Beggars in this world, more will there be in another world.

It is a great judgment that is laid upon that man whom God brings to beggary,
and yet how many are through riot and excess brought even to a mor^el of bread,
nay forced to beg their bread? a truth which Christ notes in him that is
commonly called ^he prodigal Child: Through his prodigality he ^rought himself
to such beggary and penury, as He ^ain would have filled his belly with the
husks that the Swine did eat, and no man gave unto him, Luke 15. 16. v. It is
said at the 13. v. that he Wasted his substance with riotous living. And what
follows? At ^he 16. v. it is said, He would fain have filled his belly with the
husks that the Swine did eat, and no man gave unto him. And of them that used
to Rise ^p early in the morning that they may follow strong drink, that
continue until night, till wine inflame them: and the Harp, and the Viol, the
Tabret and Pipe, and Wine are in their feasts, it is said, their honorable men
are famished, and their multitude dried up with thirst, Isay 5. 11, 12, 13. v.
How many are there who in swilling and drinking pass away and lavish out much
time, that might otherwise be spent in laboring for Eternal good things; and
afterward are even starved for want of necessary food.

In that dreadful prophecy against Ely his House one thing threatened is, that
unto him whom the Lord should make Priest in the room of Ely, those that were
left of Ely his House should crouch for a morsel of bread, 1 Samuel 2. 36. v. And
it shall come to pass, that every one that is left in thine house shall come
and crouch to him for a piece of silver and a morsel of bread. And what does
David wish to befall the Children of his slanderous Enemies? Psalm 109. 10. v.
That they may be continual vagabonds and beg, yea, seek their bread out of
desolate places. And therefore Agur prays for food convenient, Prove. 30. 8, 9.
v. Give me neither poverty nor riches, feed me with food convenient for me. And
he assigns the reason why he prays against proverty; Least I be poor and
steal, and take the name of my God in vain. Beggary is a great judgment and
exposes to such ways and courses as will bring further judgments; often times it
puts men upon fraudulent and violent means to get a living; Necessity makes
many a thief; want is a sore temptation to steal; this Agur feared, therefore
prays against extreme poverty.

What is the great care of many? that they may not want, hence they labor and
hence they spare what they do get by labor, they are loath to be beggars,
loath to beg their bread before they dye: To beg in old age, oh it is hard! I
wish many would consider of it now that God prospers them. Have thou Christian
an estate? art thou (as we use to say) well to pass? so have been many that now
receive thy Alms, and have sometimes as little expected want as thou do. Have
thou thy lim^s to labor for a living, improve thy time; thou see many a lame
Person beg his bread from door to door, that as little feared the loss of his
lim^s as thou now do.

It Is sad when a Family is full of wants; it would cut our hearts to see the
naked walls, the ragged clothes, the mean lodging places, and hear the cries of
hungry bellies in some Families. Little do many know how some are bitten and
pinched with want and extreme penury, oppressed with poverty, living as so many
Lazars, in a starving and famishing condition.

Is it so sore a judgment to be a Beggar in this world? far sorer it will be to
be a Beggar in another world, to be a beggar in Hell. Beggars here cry for a
bit to fill their bellies; Beggars in Hell will howl for a drop to cool their
tongues. Beggars here do often become the scorn and ^ontempt of men that dwell
about them; Beggars in Hell will be made the scorn, not of men only but of God
and Angels. Beggars here suffer many and long, yea a succession of afflictions
and miseries; Beggars in Hell will and must undergo great, unspeakable and
everlasting torments. And this is that condition which will be the lot of
thousands for want of laboring for Eternal good things. Men that now have
eminent stations in the world, that are clothed with purple and scarlet, that
have their hundreds and thousands by the year, that have their chests well
filled, their tables well spread, that fare deliciously every day, and that
undervalue their poor neighbors and do contemn their meaner Brethren, yet
these for want of Eternal good things will be left Beggars, and in an Eternally
undone condition.

Innumerable are the Temporal mercies and good things of this life, that men
careless of Eternity do enjoy; all the days they live, they live upon mercy,
and all these good things they do enjoy may be called Mattaniahs, that is, the
gifts of God; but the time is a coming, the name of Mattaniah shall be turned
into Zedekiah, that is, the Justice of God. I remember that when Jehojakim the
King of Judah was taken captive by Nebuchadnezzar, Nebuchadnezzar sets up
Mattaniah his Fathers brother to be King, and changed his name to Zedekiah, 2
Kings 24. 17. v. Mattaniah signifies the gift of God; but Nebuchadnezzar
changes that name into Zedekiah, which signifies the Justice of God: In Hell
the now sleighters of Eternal good things, however here they may abound in
Temporal enjoyments, will find mercy turned into Justice* they will be stripped
of all what now they possess of the world, and be left worse then the poorest
Beggars in the world.

What a change was that the rich man in the Gospel met with; Luke 16. 24. v. He
was rich and faired deliciously every day; he had more Corn then his barns
would hold, his condition on all hands might have been accounted happy; but
view him afterward* and what a change is there in his condition? He is forced
to beg and yet could not obtain a drop to cool his tongue: Whilst he lived he
was accustomed to drink in Cups of Gold, to eat in Silver and to be clothed in
Silk and curious Linnens: But behold a change, in Hell he begs, for what? Not
for wines of Candie to delight his palate: Not for precious Cordials to
refresh his Spirits, but for a drop of water to cool his tongue, and that not
in a Cup of Gold or Crystal, but from the filthy and loathsome fingers ends of
a Leper. Not the meanest Beggar that comes to your doors was ever reduced to
that strait, as to come and beg of you a draught, much less a drop of water.
Scarce would our ordinary Beggars drink rich wine, if they knew for certain
that the filthy and loathsome fingers of a scabby Leper had been therein: their
squeamish stomachs would not take down such a draught, though it were given
them in a Cup of Gold.

But observe the change betwixt Dives and Lazarus in the Story, it is such a
change as sometime was ^n Gideon's fleece, Judge. 6. 37, 38, 39, 40. v. One ^ime
that was wet and the floor dry; 37, 38. verses, Behold I will put a fleece of
wool in the floor: and if ^he dew be on the fleece only, and it be dry on all
the ^arth beside, then shall I know that thou will save Israel by mine hand, as
thou have said, And it was so: for he rose up early on the morrow, and thrust
^he fleece together, and wringed the dew out of the fleece, a bowl full of
water. Another time the floor was wet and the fleece dry; 39, 40. v. And Cideon
said unto God, Let not thine anger be hot against ^e, and I will speak but this
once: Let me prove, I pray thee, but this once with the fleece, let it now ^e
dry only upon the fleece, and upon all the ground let there be dew: And God did
so that night: for it ^as very dry upon the fleece only, and there was dew ^
all the ground. Now look as this fleece at one time was wet and the floor dry,
but at another time the floor was dry and the fleece wet; so was it with Dives
and Lazarus: One while Dives is in prosperity, rich and wanting nothing, and
Lazarus is in poverty, poor and begging of crumbs: Afterward Lazarus is in
glory, and Dives in torments begging for a drop of water.

Questionless there are many that here swim and wallow in a Sea of pleasures,
who drink their Wine in Bowls, yet hereafter shall want a drop to cool their
tongues; here there are many who enjoy great abundance, but hereafter shall
have nothing to sustain them, nothing to help them; here there are many that do
enjoy great honors and glory in the world, but hereafter shall have their
great honor and glory turned into everlasting shame and confusion. Hos. 4. 7.
v. As they were increased, so they sinned against me, therefore will I change
their glory into shame. Here there are many adorn themselves with Pearls and
Jewels, but hereafter will find God to have rejected them, and say of them,
They shall not be mine, In the day that I make up my ^ewels.

What else can that place in 1 Cor. 1. 26. v. be but as a thunderbolt in the
very heart of some that boast themselves in their wealth, power, nobility and
greatness in the world; that however they abound with these things here, yet
not being effectually called, are never likely to be admitted into Heaven but
made Beggars in Hell. For ye see your calling, brethren, how that not many wise
men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called: And who are
not called into the state of grace here, will never be called into a state of
glory hereafter. The words of the Apostle may be like the handwriting on the
wall, to make the joints of many, enjoying plenty and abundance of Earthly
things, to tremble; when they are not at the same time possessed of Eternal
good things; their plenty, greatness and abundance will certainly be followed
with a future want and Eternal beggary in Hell, who live and dye without any
care of Eternal good things.

Oh the great alterations amongst men that will be at the day of Judgment!
Lazarus shall then be received into Heaven and Eternal glory, but Dives, who
was rich and fa^red deliciously every day, will then be tormented in Hell and
want a drop of water.

What heart can conceive the rage and madness, yea the terrible confusion that
will be upon the faces of many that now think to ruffle it out in the world,
and do scorn those who are their inferiors, only because of their wealth and
greatness, when these shall find themselves stripped of all their power,
greatness and revenues, and sent wretched and miserable, and poor and naked
into Hell. There will certainly afterward be such a change between many of
these high and mighty ones, that mind not Heaven and the things thereof, and
those who are not content with Ishmael's portion, but labor after Isaac's
Inheritance; Abraham, we know, he gave many gifts unto Ishmael, but the
Inheritance was bestowed upon Isaac: Wealth, greatness and honor, with the
like gifts* are given even to wicked men, but the Inheritance of Heaven is
given only to others, I mean to those that labor and take pains for it; those
gifts are perishing and will not p^ofit after death, but the Inheritance fades
not away.

The moment wherein a man dies bereaves him of all his worldly gifts and
enjoyments. In that instant wherein Heliogab^lus dyed, an end was put to all
his sports, pleasures and delights. In that instant wherein Croesus dyed, an
end was put to his enjoyment of great riches and substance. In that instant
that Ahasuerus dyed, he was bereaved of his hundred and twenty Provinces, In
that instant thou dyest, (though now thou possessest great houses, fair
revenues and a large Inheritance) thou will be deprived of all.

The moment of death (as touching the things of this life) makes all men equal;
then he who enjoyed much, and he that enjoyed but little* are equal; then he
who was glutted with all sorts of delights, and he who was fed with the bread
of sorrow, are equal. Then he who was an Emperor, ruling over many flourishing
Kingdoms, and he who was a Peasant, hardly owner of a small Cottage, are equal;
the one enjoyes no more of this world then does the other: Croesus possesses
no more then Irus; Dives then Lazarus; nor the King more then the Beggar.

As in a Stage Play, it imports little who plays Alexander, and who the
Beggar, since all are equal, when the Play is done: So are all after death
equal, both the Prince and the Plowman, Alexander and the Beggar, the King and
the Peasant, the Scepter and the Spade, the Master of the greatest glory in the
world, and the most contemptible in the world. Divitiae corporis paupertatis
plenae sunt; Earthly riches are full of poverty, says one. I am sure that they
who here enjoy nothing but Earthly riches will be laid afterward under an
everlasting poverty.

I may here use his words, who said of these Earthly things: Si adsunt ornant,
si absunt non tollunt. If we have them they help us, if not they do not undo
us. How many do we hear cry out after a fire, or after any other great loss? Oh
they are undone, they are undone, they are even beggared* why what is the
matter? they have lost much of the world, lost an Estate, lost what they
thought they should have lived upon, lost what they hoped should have maintaind
them in their old age, and now they are undone, now they are made Beggars. No
Christians* they are not all undone that lose riches upon Earth, but they that
have none laid up in Heaven; these are the poor men indeed, these are the
undone men, these are the Beggars.

Should some great Person, possessing a vast Estate, be banished out of his
Country by his Prince into some Foreign Country, and not be permitted to
carry one penny with him of his great Estate to live upon, and he has not one
penny laid up before hand in that Country; would not every one say, This great
Man is undone, he is made a very Beggar, it cannot be thought otherwise but
that he must beg his bread, in the place whither he is banished. How many such
undone ones will there be? How many such Beggars will there be hereafter? Men
that now possess much in the world, but have nothing at all in Heaven; Men that
have here store of treasure, but no treasure in Heaven; Men that have riches to
serve their turn and to spare, In nunc saeculo, as I find that Text has it, 1 Timothy 1. 17. v. In the world that now is, but none for the world to come; they
possess much Goods, but they possess only this worlds Goods, as St. John calls
them, 1 John 3. 18. v. Not any thing of Heavens good. When God packs these men
out of the world, what are they permitted to carry with them? Nothing, not a
penny: So much the Psalmist tells us of the rich man, Psalm. 49. 16, 17. v. When
he dies he shall carry nothing away, his glory shall not descend after him,
Though whilst he lived he blessed his soul. And says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 6. 7.
v. We brought nothing into the world, and it is certain we carry nothing out.
The Prince carries no more th^n the Peasant, the Peer no more th^n the
Plowman, the Conqueror no more th^n the Slave, the Rich no more th^n the Poor.

Saladine on his deathbed, gave charg^ that his inner garment should be
fastened to a Spear, and born^ Ensign-wise at his Funeral, and an Herald to
proclaim, This shroud is all that Saladine, Conqueror of the East, carries
away with him. Indeed I read of one that being ready to dye (as I have hinted
before) put a Twenty shillings piece of Gold in his mouth, he would ^ake that
with him into the Grave; if he must leave all the rest, yet that he would take
with him. But believe it Christians, they that have nothing else to take with
them, with find the whol^ world not able to purchase for them in Hell one dro^
to cool their tongues.

3. Motive. Because Eternal good things, even wi^^ out Temporal good things,
will make a man a rich man Though the greatest or most of Temporal good things
without Eternal good things, will leave a man a Beggar, yet Eternal good
things, without Tempor^ good things, will make a man a rich man. And i^ this
sense how many rich men are there in the work^ who yet it may be have not a
penny in their purse, b^ live as we say from hand to mouth, not having t^ least
patch of Land in the world to sustain them.

Those mentioned in the former, and those that f^ under this point, mind me of
the words of Solom^^ Prove. 13. 7. v. There is that makes himself rich, yet
has nothing: there is that makes himself poor, yet has great riches: I may
allude to these words thus, viz. As they in the former Motive are worldly rich,
but Spiritually poor; so those that will fall under this Motive though they be
worldly poor, are yet Spiritually rich, being enriched with the unsearchable
riches of Christ, as the Apostle calls them, Ephesians. 3. 8. v. that is to say
Justification, Adoption, and Glory.

It is a truth seriously to be thought upon; that though some men have never so
much of the world, yet may they truly be counted poor, and certainly will be
Beggars hereafter; but he that bath a portion of Eternal good things, though
never so little of the world, is a rich man. When that Scholar of Apelles
would paint Helena, be pai^ted her richly drawn in costly and glorious appare^,
hung all over with Orient Pearls and precious Stones; though all Possessors of
Eternal good things are no^ so externally, yet are they so internally, their
Souls are richly hung and bespangled with the Orient Pearls of Spiritual Graces
(one of those Eternal good things mentioned before) and these are true riches
indeed, Verae divitiae non opes sunt sed virtutes; called therefore durable
riches; Prove. 8. 18. v. The riches of Grace excel all other riches, The
merchandise of it is better then the merchandise of silver, Prove. 3. 14. v.
Each Grace is of more worth then many Kingdoms. It is far better for a
Christian to have his Soul filled with Grace then his Chest with Gold. Grace to
the Soul is as the Diamond to the Ring, not only beautifying of it, but also
enriching of it. It Is that which makes a Christian be accounted a Jewel, Mal.
3. 17. v. And such riches have all they who are Favorites of Heaven, who are
Heirs of Salvation, and that have been successful in laboring for Eternal good
things. They are all great Heirs, Romans 8. 17. v. Heirs of God and joint heirs
with Christ, such as shall possess the same glory with Christ.

One that is Heir apparent to a Kingdom, though being but young, he has not a
penny in his Pocket is yet accounted rich, such are all in a state of Grace,
what ever they are for the present, are yet destinated to the greatest honor,
they are all of them as so many Princes under years: though many of them be
poor and beggarly ones in the world, yet have they this (...), this dignity put
upon them to be Heirs of the fairest Kingdoms that ever was, and their heads
destinated to the most glorious Crown that ever was worn. There are (none
doubts of it) most magnificent and splendid Crowns in the world, but the
splendor of the richest Earthly Crown is but like the shining of a Glowworm,
brightned at the nightshining of the Stars, in comparison of the Crown of
Heaven, which is as the glaring of Diamonds or Crystal Looking-glasses, the
gloss of cloth of Gold and Tissue, at the sight of the Noon-Sun, every gemm in
this Crown of Glory is lightened and heightened to a true transcendency of
translucidation and luster. It may be said to every one of these Gracious ones:
Cogita te Caesarem esse, Remember thou shall one day be a King with God in
Glory, upon thee shall be settled such Crown-Revenues as no Earthly King could
ever boast of.

We read of some indeed that are poor in the world, but withal it is said of
them, that they Are rich in faith and heirs of the Kingdom, Jam. 5. 2. v.
Hearken, my beloved Brethren: has not God chosen the poor of this world, rich
in faith, and heirs of the Kingdom, which he has promised to them that love
him. Faith, says an accurate Preacher, is an enriching Grace, it brings all
Christ's riches into the Soul, it intitles to the promises that are a Christians
Magna Charta for Heaven, and are themselves full of Heavenly riches, it gives a
Believer right to the everlasting Inheritance reserved in the Heavens, an
Inheritance that could not be bought with all the wealth of the world, an
Inheritance which does more excel all the wealth of the world, then the purest
Gold does the drossiest dirt. Our hopes cannot conceive what this Inheritance
will be; when we come to possess it, we shall know what it is. 1 Pet. 1. 3, 4.
v. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to
his abundant mercy has ^egotten us again unto a lively hope, by the
resur^ection of Jesus Christ from the death, to an Inheri^ance incorruptible
and undefiled, and that fades ^ot away, reserved in Heaven for you. Here is
the Believers title to this Hea^enly Inheritance; He is ^o poor man certainly
tha^ has a good title to show ^or some great Inheritance.

It was once the design of Alexander the Great to ^ave been Master of the who^e
world, the which had ^e effected, yet would it not have contented him, ^is
heart would not have been therewith satisfied, he ^ould have wept, that there
was not another world ^ be enjoyed. I read that when Captain Drake ^ok St.
Domingo in America, in the year 1585. in ^e Town Hall were to be seen the King
of Spain's ^rms; and under them a Globe of the world, out of which arose a
Horse with his fore-feet cast forth, with ^is inscription, Non sufficit Orbis.
Great were the Dominions of Charles the Fifth, who ruled over eight and twenty
flourishing Kingdoms. Darius King of the Medes, who vanq^ished Belshazar, we
read of him that he appointed One hundred and twenty Governors, which should
rule over the whole Kingdom, Dan. 6. 1. v. From whence it is inferred that he
had so many Provinces or Nations under him, every Governor having the charge
of a Province. Ahasuerus took state upon him because he reigned over an hundred
seven and twenty Provinces, from India to Ethiopia, Esther 1. ^. v. But what
are the large Dominions of Charles the Fifth, Darius or Ahasuerus, to what
Alexander and the Spaniards unsatiableness desired? The world was but enough
for them to conquer and possess; They would have been what Amurath the Third
styled himself, and the great Cham of Tartary reputes himself, the Monarchs of
the whole World. But the Believer has the promise of two worlds, this that now
is and that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4. 8. v. he has two worlds entailed upon
him, he has made over unto him all the blessings of this present world (so far
as they conduce to his present happiness) and of the world to come absolutely.

It is true the Church is called the Congregation ^ the poor, Psalm. 74. 19. v.
Forget not the Congregation of thy poor for ever: A miserable sort of me^ they
are many of them, who oftentimes are destitu^ of all worldly advantages; yet
have they one advantage above all othe^s in the world, and that is this* The
Lord is their portion. Levi that had no portion amongst his Brethren, yet had
the Lord for his portion; so these men unto whom God has given Eternal good
things, though they may have no portion many of them of any Temporal good
things, yet have they a portion in an Eternal God, Jer. 31. 33. v. I will be
their God and they shall be my people. And happy is that people whose God is
the Lord; Psalm. 144. 15. v. Who can sufficiently lay open their portion, that
have the Lord for their God. Psalm. 16. 15. v. The Lord is the portion of my
Inheritance: Impossible it is that any should have God for their God and be
accounted poor. Rich men are ready to boast of their riches; hence that
prohibition, Jer. 9. 23. v. Let not the rich man glory in his riches; which
prohibition is followed with an injunction, 24. v. But let him that glories,
glory in this, that he understands and knows God; yet not with the
knowledge of the brain only, but with such a knowledge as sinks down into the
heart, and works upon the affections; not with such a knowledge of God, as only
Heathen Philosophers and mere carnal Christians have of God, knowing him to be
the Creator of the world; but with such a knowledge as a Christian, in Covenant
with him, knows him, he knows him to be his God: And such a knowledge of
God has a Soul enriching excellency in it; 1 Cor. 1. 5. v. Ye are enriched
with all knowledge. I am sure that they who know God after this manner, have
cause to boast that they know God, they may make their boast of God, and have
more cause to glory in God, than the richest man has cause to glory in his
riches; they may upon better grounds boast of God then the Jew in Romans 2. 17.
v. they may boast of God upon the like grounds that the Psalmist does, when he
says, Psalm. 34. 2. v. My Soul shall make her boast in the Lord; And again
says the Church, Psalm. 44. 8. v. In God we boast all the day long.

Rich men in the world are called happy men: I am sure that they who have God
for their God are happy men; read that place but now named, Psalm. 144. 15.
Happy is that people whose God is the Lord; They have him for their God in whom
is (...), all fullness, Col. 1. 19. v. And who is Bonum in quo omnia bona, their
Souls need to look no further for any thing to enrich them, here they may wri^e
a Ne plus ultra; God is quies animae, Psalm. 116. 7. v. Return unto thy rest, O
my Soul, for the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee. God communicates and
doles out himself, amongst those who have him in Covenant with them. The
Babylonians are said to make more then three hundred several commodities of the
Palm Tree; but none can reckon up the many thousands of good things, that all
interested in an Eternal God have in him.

It is said of the great Duke of Guise that (though he was poor as to his
present possessions) he was the richest man in France, in Bills, Bonds and
Obligations, because he had engaged all the Noble men in France unto himself,
by preferring of them: So you see that a Christian interested in these Eternal
good things is the richest man in the world, though he may be poor as to his
Earthly possessions; though he may be temporally poor, yet he is Spiritually
rich, and so he makes good that riddle of the Apostle concerning himself, 2.
Cor. 6. 10. v. As having nothing yet possessing all things; That is, as having
nothing, Re, yet possessing all things, Spe. It seems no less then a Paradox
what is said of those Churches of Asia, Smyrna and Laodicea, but is a real
truth: Laodicea was the very worst of all the Churches of Asia, and she thought
her self rich and increased in goods and to have need of nothing; but she was
indeed wretched, and miserable and poor, and blind and naked, Rev. 3. 17. v.
Whereas on the contrary Smyrna was one of the best Churches of Asia; of which
Church Christ says: I know thy poverty but thou art rich, Revel. 2. 9. v.
though the Church of Smyrna was outwardly poor yet she was inwardly rich: And
such are all those who have labored for, and by their labor have gotten a
share of Eternal good things; though possibly they should be outwardly poor,
yet are they inwardly rich; though now they may be oppressed and made miserable
with Temporal wants, yet will be hereafter made blessed and happy with Eternal
enjoyme^ts.

4. Because Eternal good things are real good things, Temporal good things are
but Imaginary good things. There is as much difference between Temporal good
things and Eternal good things, as there is between a shadow and a substance;
as there is between Counters and current coined Gold, between Entia and Non
Entia, things that have a being and things that have no being; says* Solomon,
Prove. 23. 5. v. Will thou set thine eyes upon that which is not? Why are thy
desires so ardent for that which is not, that is but a mere Cipher without a
Figure before it.

The things of this world are only Beryls, no true Diamonds; they are Juno in
the pursuit, but Clouds in the enjoyment. They are not what they do appear;
they are like some double Pictures which are sometimes showed unto us, Pictures
that are so made by the making up of the cloth or paper in folds and pleats;
that being looked upon one way they represent one shape, but being looked upon
another way, they present another shape; As some represent the face of a Woman
the one way, but the other way a Serpent: Or an Emperor's head one way and the
head of a Fool another way. So look upon Temporal good things one way, with
Carnal eyes, and they are substantial enjoyments, the only desirable good
things, real certainties, present fe^ici^ies and absolutely necessary to be
labored for; but look upon them another way, with Spiritual eyes, and then
they are but vanities, fancies, and empty imaginary contentments; no
foundations for the Soul to build her happiness upon; in a word they are
directly contrary to what they do appear They are but like to Hercules
Sacrifice, who offered a painted man to the Gods instead of a living man. They
are but painted faces, no true natural complexions; And hence they are so
bewitching, which they could not be, did they appear in their own Native
colors. If Jezabel had not painted her face, she had not gotten so many doting
Adulteres to have fallen in love with her as she did.

What Pareus is noted to have said, concerning Aristotle's arguments, whereby he
would prove that the Wo^ld neither had a beginning nor would have an end, is
applicable to my purpose. These Arguments, says he, be but Inania Sophismata
ad obscurandum veritatem, ingeniose magis quam solid excogitata; Vain
Sophistications to obscure the truth, having more wit then matter in them: So
may I say of these things, they are but vain Sophistications, having more
fancy then of reality in them, to make the Possessor of them happy; being
empty Clouds, Wells without water, but very shadows without any substance.

When Master Roger Ascham asked the Lady Jane Gray how she could lose such
pastime, her Father with the Duchess being a hunting in the Park, she
smilingly answered, All the sport in the Park is but a shadow of that pleasure
I find in this book; having a good book in her hand. It is true of whatsoever
good things the World affords, the best of them are but a shadow of what
Eternal goods Heaven does afford. Look how much substances do exceed shadows,
so the shadowy great things of the Earth are excelled by the great good things
of Heaven. I ache a Catalogue of all those things below, that men's hearts are so
much set upon and thirst after, and I may say of them all, that they be all of
them to those Eternal good things, mentioned before, but as the shadow of a
shadow, like the reflections of a rain bow, when it seems to be doubled in a
Cloud; The rainbow it self is but a shadow, what is the shadow of this shadow?
nay, what is the third generation of a shadow, as sometimes, when the
reflection is strong, three are seen at once; Verily all things in the world,
even the most excellent of them must stand in the lowest degree of these, if
compared with God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, if compared with Grace and a
good conscience: Those things are but shadowish and seeming good things; God
and Christ, Grace and Eternal glory are real good things, they are substan^es
and no shadows, no lies, no falsehoods nor any varnished appearances of good.

Narcissu^ a beautiful youth, though he would not love them that loved him, yet
afterward fell in love with his own shadow: So those whose hearts are so
inflamed with love to the world, that they have not hearts to labor after any
thing else, they are (...) here fallen in love with a very shadow, so the Apostle
hinteth, 1 Cor. 7. 31. v. For the fashion of this world passes away, (...),
The word signifies a Mathematical Figure, which is a mere notion and nothing
in substance; It is a notable diminishing term in the Original, as if the world
were not a substance, but a fashion, a Scheme, an apparition, a show, a pageant
or imagination. I have read of a King of Persia, that he would have an
Imaginary Heaven, and therefore he prepared for himself a brave Palace, and in
the top he made the Heavens, and underneath Clouds, that with art moved up and
down, and distilled rain and made thunder; and he made a brave Throne
glistering above the Clouds: Indeed this might be sufficient for an Heathen,
but an Imaginary Heaven is not sufficient for to entertain the Lambs wife, to
refresh the suffering Martyrs, to reward God's People; God has provided for
those who are as the Apple of his eye, who are the Signet on his right hand,
his Portion, his pleasant Portion, his Inheritance, his Jewels, his Royal
Diadem, other manner of things then these, another manner of felicity then the
world affords, which is but Bracteata saelicitas, a felicity but tin'd over,
which when it is at death worn off, the greatest admirers thereof will find
that all their life they have been as it were but in a dream, they have dreamed
of an happy condition they thought themselves to be in, but no such-matter.

The enemies of the Church that had in their hopes and expectations devoured
Zion, in Isay 29. 1. v. are compared to an Hungry man that dreameth he eats,
but when he is awakened his soul is empty: or, as when a thirsty man dreameth,
and behold he drinks; but he awaketh, and behold he is faint, and his soul
has appetite: And says that Text, So shall the multitude of all Nations be,
that fight against Mount Zion. In a dream a man being hungry and thirsty, he
dreameth perhaps that he eats and drinks, and while he sleeps he has
some imaginary refreshing and satisfaction, but ^hen the man awaketh, all his
eating and drinking proves nothing, and his refreshing and satisfaction proves
to be a mere delusion and just nothing. Thus it is with many men in these
Temporal enjoyments, their life is but a dream, all the while they live they
are as men in a dream, and are never awaked till they come within the borders
of Eternity. And what do they dream of? what are the thoughts of these dreamers
heart? They dream that they are some great Ones, as Simon Magus thought of
himself. They dream that therefore God loves them, because he has enriched
them. They dream that they are happy, because they are wealthy. Though not all
interested in Eternal good things, yet they dream of future happiness in
Heaven, but have no thoughts of future torments in Hell; like Joseph who
dreamed once and again of his preferment, but never of his imprisonment. They
dream as to their Eternal estate, that they are rich and increased in goods and
lack nothing, as did the Laodicean Church, lying in a deluding dream upon
mistake of her Spiritual estate, but they are wretched and miserable, poor and
blind and naked, Rev. 3. 17. v. And by these deluding dreams they are taken off
looking after the real and Eternal happiness of Heaven: As those filthy
dreamers, Jud. 8 ^. despise dominion and speak evil of dignities, so these
foolish dreamers because they enjoy an Imaginary happiness here in this World,
set light by the happiness of Heaven. These dreams make them to pursue Earthly
good things hotly, the which, without Eternal good things, will leave them in
Hell certainly. And it is to be admired how much these men hugg these shadows
and empty shows; bow down to these Images and Fictions; embrace these
Imaginations; please themselves with these sigments and fond conceits; delight
themselves with these vain thinkings and phantasmes.

It is real truth that the Scriptures, those Oracles of truth, call the
splendid braveries of this world but lucid fantasies, the pomp and state of
the great ones but a vain show, their gl^ttering glory but a vanishing
appearance; Agrippa after a Princely manner and in great state comes to have
the hearing of Saint Paul, Act. 25. 23. v. but Saint Luke calls all his pomp
but a fancy; he came (...), with great fantasy, or vain-shew. And it is as
certain a truth that those men, who because they possess no small store of
Temporal good things apprehend themselves happy, will find their apprehensions
mere apprehensions, their felicity but an Imaginary fancy, they will hereafter
see that they have been deceived like men in a dream, who when they do awake
miss of those great things they dreamed of, and their raised expectations do
sink with disappointment. It will be with them as it was with certain Witches I
have read of, to whom in the night time the Devil did bring (to their thinking)
good pieces of Gold, but in the day time when they were awake and they went to
make use thereof, all proved but withered leaves. So now these men please their
thoughts with golden matters; but at death when they shall pass away as men in
a dream, and shall not be found, Job 20. 8. v. then they will not find that
made good and real^zed, when they awake in the morning of the resurrection,
which they dreamed concerning Temporal good things in this life; then their
dream^ of happiness will be dashed; then they will know what they labored so
much for in the world, was but an Imaginary no real good, and that Eternal good
things were the only good things.

This very consideration should make all men to set an high rate and price upon
Eternal good things; this should attract their hearts and draw them to labor
after them chiefly and above all things whatsoever, and to overlook all the
greatest and best things of this life as empty and void of what men expect to
be in them, and that should make the soul Eternally happy.

O how should the thoughts hereof make Christians labor and take pains for
Heaven, and the things of Heaven, which are really what the Scripture reports
them to be.

5. Motive, Because Eternal good things only are they that will be for a
Christians life. How glad are many men when they are got into such a way of
liveing as will serve them for their whole life; if they have gotten but a
Service, an Office, any preferment, or what else they know will be for their
life; Or if they have but made a good Bargain about a Farm or the like, that
will help them to live comfortably all the time of the life; this much contents
them and sets their hearts at rest.

Christians we are all of us made to abide for ever, to live in Eternity. What
are a few years here unto Eternity? What are forty, fifty, threescore, or an
hundred years here, if compared to Eternity? Old Parr lived an hundred and
fifty years, but what is that to Eternity? The old man of Bengala in the East
Indies was three hundred thirty and five years old, when he came to the
Portugals; from whom, for his miraculous Age, he received a yearly stipend; but
what is that to Eternity? Johannes de temporibus lived three hundred sixty and
one years, but what is that to Eternity? Adam lived nine hundred and thirty
years, Noah lived nine hundred and fifty years; Methusalah lived longest of
any, even nine hundred sixty and nine years, he wanted but thirty one years of
a thousand: but what is the longest life to Eternity? what are a thousand years
to spend here? we must abide for forever; our life hereafter will be Eternal,
Eternal? how long is that? nay that is a thing which the most skilled in
Arithmetic will want figures to express. Imagine the number of stars in the
firmament, the piles of grass upon the earth, and the grains of Sand upon the
Sea shore, yet will not all those put together set forth the duration and years
of Eternal life; though every starr and every pile of grass, and every grain of
sand should be used to express so many millions of years or Miriads of ages as
there are drops of water in all the Seas and Rivers in the world.

If men had no other life to live but this here in this world, then they might
content themselves only with the things of this life, but they have an
everlasting life, therefore should they make some provision answerable
thereunto; not providing only for this life which is but a span long, and
neglect another life that is so spacious, We must all live for ever, 1 John 2.
17. v. And truly these thoughts of Eternity should be prevailing thoughts, and
over-awing thoughts.

I speak not to one here, but must live an Eternal life one way or other, both
young and old must live in a season beyond this season: And being we must all
of us live Eternally, it should call upon us to labor for Eternal things, for
such things as will endure all our life long. Amongst the Customs that have
been observed amongst the rites and ceremonies in making Bishops, they have
this speech to them, have Eternity in your minds. O that we all could work this
upon our selves that it might prevail with us to seek after that which is
Eternal,

Think with yourselves, Christians, these bodies of yours, though frail and
mortal, must yet live forever, these souls of yours must live forever. And it
becomes us therefore to labor after those things that will endure forever, for
things that will endure beyond a season, that will continue after millions of
ages, and longer then the ages of a million of worlds.

For want of considering that life which must last through all Eternity, and
providing for the same, when men have come to dye, and seen Eternity before
them, how has the sight thereof amazed the souls of ^en. I have read of one
who in a dying condition, ^aving his thoughts upon Eternity, said, If it were
^ut a thousand years, I could bear it, but seeing it is ^ Eternity thus amazeth
me. Surely if men did but ^riously think upon Eternity, they durst not neglect
^roviding for it, they would not lay aside all labor ^d thoughts for Eternal
good things. This, this is ^e thing that will indeed amaze them when they come
^ dye. But on the contrary, that Soul* which is in^rested in Eternal good
things, the thoughts of Eter^ity will not dismay him, he is provided of that
which ^ill last as long as his life will last, and this very thing ^th comfort
him.

The Psalmist when he considered the decaying con^tion of himself, that his
life present was a shadow, ^d that he was like withered grass, yet comforted
himself, that God with whom he should live for ever was Eternal and did abide
for ever, Psalm. 102. 11. 12. My days are like a shadow that declineth, and I
am withered like grass, but thou O Lord shall endure for ever, and thy
remembrance unto all generations. Why does he put these two together thus! My
shadow and God's enduring for ever; as if he had said, says one, This is my
comfort, that though I am of short continuance, yet God with whom I shall live
afterward is Eternal and abides for ever. And happy he when this life is
ended is sure of an Eternal God with whom to spend an Eternal life: The
Psalmist therefore goes on comforting himself v. 24. 25, 26, 27. Thy years are
throughout all generations, of old have thou laid the foundations of the earth,
and the Heavens are the work of thine hands; they shall perish but thou shall
endure, yea, all of them shall wax old like a Garment: as a vesture shall thou
change them, and they shall be changed, but thou art the same, and thy years
shall have no end.

What comfort will it be when these old buildings of our bodies shall be pulled
down, and these tabernacles and cottages of clay must be mouldred into dust, to
be assured of a building not made with hands eternal in the heavens. Even when
one skin falls off, another comes on. Or as when a man lays by an old suit, it
is but to put on a better and more lasting, 2 Cor. 5. 1. v. For we know, that
if this earthly house of our tabernacle were dissolved we have a building of
God, a house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens.

What a comfort will it be, when a man must leave a great Estate here, and a
great Inheritance here, that for hundreds of years, and many generations, has
appertained to his Ancestors, that he is assured of an Eternal inheritance,
Hebrews, 9. 15. verse.

What a comfort will it be, when a man shall part with, and be taken from all
those pleasures of the world he now does enjoy, yet he shall enjoy pleasures at
God's right hand for evermore, Psalm. 26. 11. v. In thy presence is fullness of
joy, at thy right hand are pleasures for evermore.

The Swan was of old dedicated to Apollo, because she sings sweetly before
death; by which Hierogliphick, the Ancients intimated the joyfulness of
virtuous men before their death, as supposing the El^^ian delights, in the
enjoyment whereof they should always live after this life. Christians
remember, we have far better assurance of an Eternal life than the Heathens
had; and knowing we must live Eternally, should help us to look beyond present
things, such as are Riches, Revene^s, Honors, and the utmost of all earthly
excellencies and worldly felicities.

Having done with the Motives or Arguments to persuade to labor for Eternal
good things, all which I desire may be weighed in the balance of reason and
conscience, I shall in the next place hereunto add these following helps.

Help 1. Get. all the knowledge of Eternity and Eternal good things you can, or
are any ways able. Help 2. Frequently employ your selves in considering and
contemplating upon Eternity. Help 3. Labor to get some tastes of those things,
we have showed before, are Eternal good things. Help 4. Always bear in your
thoughts the immortality of your souls. Help 5. Study the shortness of time,
and your present life. Help 6. Get a sight of Eternal good things by the eye of
faith.
Of all which briefly, in the following Chapter, as they are here propounded.

CHAP. XIII.
Helps to forward you in the laboring after Eternal good things.
1. Help GEt all the knowledge of Eternity and eternal good things you, can, or
are any ways able. It is most true that no tongue can express either the
length of Eternity, or the excellency of Eternal good things. Eternity is that
( unum perpetuum hodie) one perpetual day which shall never have end; and
therefore the old Romans were out, that thought Eternity dwelt in statues and
Marble Monuments. And it is as true, that we shall never in this life, know the
worth and preciousness of things that are Eternal; it should yet be a
Christian's care and labor, to read such books as handle Eternity, and things
that are Eternal. The little knowledge that all sorts of persons have of
Eternity and Eternal things, is the main cause why they so much esteem the good
things of this life, and undervalue the good things of another life; they are
things excellent in themselves, but how many do not so much as know their
excellency.

Here is the very reason, that when men are pressed to labor after eternal
good things and provide for Eternity, they know not what these things are, and
therefore they take no pains about them.

Had men but the knowledge of Eternity and eternal good things, their desires
would be like that of one Myrogenes, I have read of, who when great gifts were
sent unto him, he sent them all back again, saying, I only desire this one
thing at your Masters hands, to pray for me, that I may be saved for Eternity.

An ignorant man, if he sees a precious stone, he may ^ossibly value it no more
then a common stone, because he knows not the excellent nature and occult
^ualities of it, but a Lapidary, or a Jeweller that ^nows it, does highly value
it, his very mind is set upon it, he is contented to use all the ways he can
to ^et it and purchase it. Even so in like manner, such is ^e attractive nature
of eternal good things, that they ^ould draw the hearts of all that rightly
know them, ^ labor for them, not leaving them contented in esse ^gnito, as the
Philosopher speaks, with the (...) ^owlege of them, but in esse reali, that
they do really ^d truly enjoy them.

Acquaint your selves therefore O Christians* with ^e knowledge of these
things, before your glass be ^t, your Sun set, your race run, least the dark
night ^ Eternity should overtake you, and you made mise^ble for ever. Without
some clear knowledge here^, you will never be persuaded to labor and take ^ins
for them, and then you are undone unto all eter^y, then you will curse the time
that ever you labored ^ get the knowledge of other things, and got no know^ge
of eternal good things, and that for this very reason; ^cause your not knowing
the excellency and necessi^ of them, was the reason you never looked after
them. ^ Christ said to the woman of Samaria, Joh. 4. 10. ^ thou knew the
Gift of God, and who it is that say^ to thee, give me to drink, thou would
have asked of him, and he would have given thee living water; her not knowing
of Christ, was the reason why she begged not this living water of Christ; the
reason why men mind not eternal good things, is this, they have no knowledge of
them, Ignoti nulla cupido* men's affections are kindled toward any thing,
according as their understandings apprehend the same. Voluntas sequitur
dictamen intellectuus. Their hearts will never be affected with what they know
not. Job's heart was not affected or troubled at his great losses, until a
messenger related them unto him that he might know them* Jacob rejoiced not
that Joseph was alive till he knew it. No man joys in an inheritance befallen
him till he know it; neither will any man be affected with or have any desire
after eternal good things, until he have knowledge of them. The knowledge that
D^^^ had of God, made him prize him above Heaven an^ its glory, or the Earth
and its comforts, Psalm. 73. 2^ A knowledge of these things will make men pri^
them, and prizing them to labor for them.

2. Help. Frequently employ your selves in consid^ring and contemplating upon
Eternity; Get as live^ apprehensions as you can of what it is, either to p^rish
Eternally in Hell, or to enjoy a blessedness Et^nally in Heaven. He that spends
his time with an ^ upon those two extremes which attend him, will c^tainly be
brought to spend it in laboring for wh^ most advantageous for him, viz. Grace
here, and ha^piness hereafter. Let this voice Eternity, Etern^ often sound in the
inmost part of your souls; think o^ upon this truth; you not only are to dye,
but be^ dead, Eternity attends you; either you must be g^^ of Paradise, or
guests of Hell, and in one of those pl^ces, enjoy either Eternal happiness, or
Eternal mi^e^ either Eternal pains, or Eternal pleasures; either Eternal bliss,
or Eternal burnings; either Eternal joy, or Eternal torment.

Write upon all your hearts that which a learned man used to write upon all his
books, viz. Johannes Mursius, he used to write upon all his Books, Eternitatem
cogita, think upon Eternity.

Christians keep Eternity, and the great things of Eternity, that are ready to
be revealed, always within your view; live in the beleiving and serious
contemplations of them, and forbear laboring for those things we have spoken
so much of, if you can.

I have read of a Gentlewoman that used to spend her time in Carding, and such
like games, coming late home one night, the found her maid reading of a book,
and casting her eye thereupon, she happened upon the word Eternity; in the
night time she could not sleep, which her maid noting, asked her the reason,
she answered, I read this word Eternity in thy Book, which has so pierced my
heart, that I believe I shall never sleep more, till I have a better assurance
of my Eternity: A serious meditation of Eternity will make us industrious after
those things that will be Eternal.

Let your thoughts run upon both Eternities.

1. Upon the Eternity of pains. 2. Upon the Eternity of glory.
1. Meditation upon the Eternity of pains in the nethermost Hell, that region
of confusion; and the dread thereof me thinks should cause those, who believe
there are Eternal torments, to labor for and make sure of Eternal happiness,
and not to content themselves with Temporal enjoyments. In the Assumption and
Consecration of Popes, they burn before their eyes a small quantity of Flax,
with these words, Holy Father, so passes away the glory of the world; that by
the light of this short and transitory blaze, he may call to mind the flames
that are Eternal.

I have read it to have been the saying of a wicked young man (one very
thriving in the World) that he should utter these words: If I live, I shall be
a rich man, but this is the plague of it, I must dye; which accordingly came to
pass not long after. But though many wicked rich men do account thus of death,
that it is a great plague to be taken from their riches and wealth, from their
greatness and excellency in the world, yet there will be a greater plague of
the infinite and Eternal wrath of God, when for want of what would interest
them in Eternal happiness, they must dwell with everlasting burnings.

I find it related of Peter Camois, a Bishop of Berry in France, that he, in
his draught of Eternity, tells, that some devout Personages caused those words
of the Prophet Isaiah 33. 14. v. to be written in letters of gold upon their
Chimney pieces: Who amongst us shall dwell with the devouring fire? who amongst
us shall dwell with everlasting burnings. Hell fire is an everlasting fire; and
Hell torments are Eternal torments. There will be no getting out of Hell, nor
ever any end put to the torments of Hell. If the torments were never so
extreme, yet it were something if they might have an end, but they are endless.
They shall be punished with everlasting destruction, from the presence of the
Lord; as Saint Paul says, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 9. v. The fire thereof is unquenchable.
Matthew. 3. 42. v. Whose fan is in his hand, and he will thoroughly purge his
floor, and gather his wheat into the garner: but will burn up the chaff with
unquenchable fire. There is not only an Extremity, but also an Eternity, in
these torments of Hell, that great Lake of God's wrath, that Storehouse of
Eternal fire and bottomless depth; where there is no evil but must be expected,
and no good that can be hoped; where poor Sinners shall be drench^^in Seas of
fire, and Floods of wrath shall over-whelm them, and they shall never rise
again.

Momentaneum est quod delectat, Aeternum quod* cruciat. That which now delights
men is momentany, but that which will torment them hereafter is perpetual; for
there is no redemption out of Hell. If once thou come there, Christian, thou will find no passage thence, and there most certainly must thou be this night,
if thou dyest this day without any share of Eternal good things. And this will
be the lot of those gilded pot-sheards of the Earth, who because they abound
in the things of the Earth, do pride themselves in their power and pomp, look
high and speak big, and triumph over the impotent and inferior ones living
near unto them; but in the mean time they do not at all mind our Savior's
injunction in my Text: Labor not for the meat that perishes, but for that
meat which endures unto everlasting life.

2. Meditate upon Eternal glory. Christian thus think with thy self, upon thy
laboring or not laboring for Eternal good things, thy bane and thy bliss, thy
avoiding everlasting torments, and thy enjoying everlasting happiness does
depend. Now thou have before thee a double Eternity to think of; the one
infinitely miserable and most accursed, the other infinitely comfortable and
most glorious.

Think it not much to labor and take pains; but think with thy self what thou
labourest for. Thou labourest to gain a Crown that fades not away. Thou
labourest for an Inheritance that is Eternal. Thou labourest for better and
more enduring substance then the World affords. Thou labourest for pleasures
that are at Gods right hand for evermore. Thou labourest for an happiness that
never will have an end. And who would think much to labor for these things?
Shall a poor man cheerfully ply his labor all day in hopes of a little wages
at night, and shall not a Christian labor cheerfully in hopes of Eternal glory?

3 Help. Labor to get some tast^ of those things we have showed before are
Eternal good things. God usually affords his People, that hereafter shall
possess such things, a prelibation and taste of them whilst they are here. They
have arraboncm, an earnest; and they also have primitias, first fruits: God
gives them earnest, to show them how sure they are of them: Hence it is that
we do read of the Earnest of the Spirit, and the Seal, 2 Cor. 1. 22. v. Who
also has sealed, us, and given the earnest of the Spirit in our heart: And God
also affords them first fruits, to show them how good they are: Hence it is
we do read of the first fruits, Romans 8. 23. v. Our selves also which have the
first fruits of the Spirit, even we our selves groan within our selves, waiting
for the adoption, to wit, the redemption of our body. As God you see gives unto
them a pledge to show how sure, so he also gives then a taste to show how sweet
and how good.

As Israel tasted of the first fruits in the Land of Canaan, in the Grapes of
Eshchol, before they were actually possessed of Canaan; that they might be
encouraged to use means to get into the Land: So deals God oftentimes with his
People, he gives them tast^s of Heaven to encourage them to labor after more
of Heaven; for that soul which has once tast^d of Heaven and those Eternal
good things there, will have its appetite provoked for more of them.

It is the way to have a greater esteem of Heavenly good things, to have those
who have been cloyed and surfeited with the Worlds dainties, to tast^ that
sweetness which is in them. He that gets but a tast^ of these things, will find
a great difference between the bitter sweets of this World, and those fruits
that grow upon the Tree of life in the midst of the Paradise of God; It was the
practice of one Antigenedes, a famous Musician, that when he was to play any
lesson, he would give order, that before or after, some other bad Musicians
should even cloy and surfe^^ his Auditors, hereby his Music would be the more
esteemed of, and delighted in; in like manner, tast^s of Heaven, and the good
things of Heaven, cannot but make all to esteem them* that have tast^d the
things of the World before, and esteeming of them, they will the more eagerly
labor to have their fill of them. As it is said of the Lioness, that when she
has once tast^d of the sweetness of man's flesh, she is never satisfied until
she has more of it. A tast^ of that excellent and rarest Wine made by Christ
in Cana of Galilee, did so affect the tast^ of the Guests, that in comparison
of it they esteemed but little of the former Wine they had drunk of; the new
Wine had gained their liking and good opinion.

It argues that men have never tast^d any of the sweetness of Eternal good
things, that are not laboring for more of them; if they had tast^d of the
sweetness thereof, they would not be satisfied without more tast^^ thereof. The
Apostle has an apt passage, in 1 Pet. 2. 3. v. As new born babes desire the
sincere milk of the Word, (and surely Babes do with much earnestness desire the
milk of the breasts) but what might stir up this? see v. 3. If so be ye have
tasted that the Lord is gracious. A taste of sweetness in the honeycomb whets
the appetite, sets on the edge thereof again and again: So would men but labor
to get some tast^s of God and Christ, of the Spirit and graces thereof, and of
the comforts of a good conscience, they would again long after and labor for
more of them. They would be like those Gauls that Plutarch tells of, who after
they had once a tast^ of sweet Wine of the Grapes that grew in Italy, they
enquired in what Country such sweet Wine was: And after they had understood
where such Grapes grew, they would never be at rest, till they had got that
Country,

Tasting enters the Soul of a Believer into the first degrees of Heavenly
joys, imparts unto it some beginnings of the vision and fruition of God, gives
unto it an earnest and assurance of Glory, as being the first fruits of Eternal
happiness: And that sweet relish of God and Christ, that unspeakable sweetness
they do find in the Spirit of God, and Graces thereof, do make them long to
partake of that Sea and Ocean of Eternal bliss in Heaven. I have read indeed of
one Lazarus, of whom it is said, Nullo prorsus gustu praeditus erat, nullam in
edendo voluptatem persentiebat; He had no bodily tast^ at all: And we
oftentimes hear men complain, under sicknesses and diseases, that they have
lost their tast^^; so I know it is with many in a Spiritual respect, they
savor not, they relish not the things of God, they find no sweetness in the
things of Heaven, Angelical viands are no ways pleasant unto them, in these
things they find no more tast^ then in the white of an Egg; Sin (which is the
Devil's Sweet-meat) only pleases them, though it will prove bitterness in the
end. But Believers tast^ a sweetness herein that even ravisheth their Souls, A
tast^ of God even ravished the Soul of David, when he cries out, Psalm. 34. 8.
v. O taste and s^e that the Lord is good; he had tast^d of God himself and is
not content, unless he bring others to taste also. A taste of Christ, in his
living waters, even ravished the Woman of Samaria, that she leaves her
water-pot, runs to the City, and calls out her Friends and Neighbors, to taste
how good the Messiah was, John 4. 28. v. The sweetness found in the Spirit of
God is so ravishing, that when all the World cannot cheer up a drooping heart,
test^^ of the Spirit's Graces can; these make the Soul rejoice with joy
unspeakable and glorious: Says the Spouse, Cant. 2. 3. v. As the Apple Tree
among the trees of the wood, so is my Beloved among the Sons, I sat down under
his shadow with great delight, and his fruit was sweet to my tast^; what other
fruit is this th^n the Graces of God's Spirit, which are called the fruits of
the Spirit? Gall. 5. 22. v. And of the sweetness of a good conscience, he that
has it can best judge, unto such a one it is a continual feast, from hence he
sucks more sweetness then Sampson did from his honey comb, the peace of a good
conscience unto him is like Ezekiel's Roll, Chap 3. 3. v, which when the
Prophet are it, it was in his mouth as honey for sweetness. And a taste of such
things as these will effectually draw and inflame a soul to obtain a further
and a full enjoyment, as being unsatisfied until it be filled with all the
fullness of God. The old Romans by their imperial Laws forbad the Exportation
of Wine, Oil, and some other things, Barbari, gustu illecti, promptius
invaderent fines Romanorum, least the Barbarians, allured with the taste of such
things that grew and were plentiful amongst them, should be provoked to invade
them? I may well here allude to this story, and say, such an exciting property
there is in the taste of all divine and heavenly things, that it makes the
tasters unquiet and restless until they swim in and drink their fill of those
Crystal Rivers in glory, those heavenly Nepenthes and infinite Oceans of
pleasures that are at God's right hand for evermore. O what would the damned in
Hell give for a few drops of this heavenly Nectar! had they a thousand worlds
to part with, they would give them all for one taste thereof, for one drop
thereof; but such a mercy can never be purchased. The rich man in the Gospel,
beggs, but in vain, for a drop or two, to cool his mouth, and could not
prevail. Indeed he did not ask for a taste of the water of life, but a drop of
common water, which in torrents runs down among us; but God, he will not let
the damned taste so much of his goodness as a drop of common water comes to.
Time was, that they were invited to taste of that cup in God's right hand,
filled with what is ten thousand times sweeter than Nectar, but they would not,
they slighted the invitation, and now of the cup of trembling which is in God's
left hand, into which the dreggs of his fury are wrung out, they shall taste and
drink deep to Eternity. They would not taste of his goodness then, and now they
shall for ever taste of what his infinite power, justice, and wisdom can
inflict upon them. Well then, Christian as thou would be among the damned who
shall never taste the least drop of mercy, get tast^ of those Eternal good
things that are laid up in Heaven; thou hear, tasting thereof will make the
Soul long for more, and labor for more; this is that will also carry thee
through what troubles, persecutions, or fiery trials, thou may possibly meet
with in the way to Heaven. It was this, which made the holy Martyrs to deny
themselves in all that was dear to flesh and blood, this revived their souls at
the stake, and upon the Scaffold, this supported them in their going and
suffering what ever the enraged malice of men or Devils inflicted upon them;
they had tasted of that amazing, and ravishing sweetness, that was in Christ
Jesus, they had tasted of the fruit of the Tree of Life that is in the midst of
the Paradise of God, Rev. 2. 7. v. And with desire they desired to eat, and
have their fill thereof, as God has promised to him that overcomes.

4. Help. Always bear in your thoughts the immortality of your souls; that
your souls, by which you have your animation, must survive the grave, must live
longer th^n time, their continuance must be eviternal, inexterminable, and
without end, they must live for ever. To live is so natural to the Soul, as
that the soul can as soon cease to be, as cease to live: Life is insep^rably
linked to it, and immortality most proper to it; though in a moral sense, the
Soul is said to dye and be dead, yet in a natural sense, the Soul of man so
lives that it never dies.

Often think of this truth, Christians, that your Souls will be immortal;
immortal, I say, but not as though they were any parts or particles taken from
the substance of that God which inspired them, as Servetus, Osiander and others
are said to hold: Nor as if there were a transmigration of Souls into other
bodies, as the Pythagorians think: Nor that they are placed in the Stars,
which formerly governed them, as the Stoics taught: Nor yet are they immortal,
A part ante, as the Philosopher speaks, but only A part post, and that only
and merely, Ex gratia.

Your Souls are not so immersed in your bodies, as that they must be
extinguished with your bodies; but they are seperable from your bodies, and are
able (through the benefit of their own subtilty and spiritual substance, being
of a simple and uncompounded nature) to subsist by themselves; and when they
are once divested of these earthly cases, and divorced from your bodies, they
shall be clothed with an Eternity, either of joy or torment, and run parallel
with the life of God, and longest line of Eternity.

The senses of seeing, hearing, and the rest of those Organs of the body, cease
and dye with the body, because they are parts of the body, and have their
dependence upon the body, but the Soul has a nature distinct from the body,
and moves and operates of it self when the body is dead and i^ sep^rated from
the body; for when the body dies, the Soul dies not with it, but subsists even
in its sep^rated state, has a being, is still living and active, and is
crowned with immortallity. It being the end of the resurrection of the body to
meet with its old partner the Soul.

Not a body here this day but must dye, but Souls (those inmates) must live:
though all our bodies return to the Earth, whence they came, yet our Spirits
shall return to God that gave them and be sempiternal, Eccles. 12. 7. v. though
our bodies must be made a prey to rottenness and worms, and become captives to
death and corruption, yet our intellective Souls (being spiritual substances,
independent and selfsubsisting agents) shall be incorruptible and for ever
exist, being endowed with an undying condition: though our bodies was old, yet,
Anima non senes^it, the Soul does not wa^ old, nor ever lose its strength and
vigor, as bodies compounded of elements do.

Death, its true, may tyrannize over our earthly parts, and may drive our Souls
out of these clay* lodgings, but it is that they may (at the very instant of
departure) have livery and seisin of everlasting Mansions in Heaven, be always
themselves, be for ever permanent, and not subject to any extinguishment or
destruction.

Hence it was a custom among the ancient Romans, that when their great men
dyed, they caused an Eagle to fly aloft in the Air, signifying hereby, that the
Soul was immortal, and did not dye as the body.

The serious consideration of the Souls immortality should make us labor for
that which will makes the immortal Soul for ever blessed and happy, when it
shall be unsheathed from the body, unclothed from corruption, and let loose
from this cage of clay.

5. Help, Study the shortness of time and your present life. And believe it,
Christians the less time you have, the more need have you to make have to
labor for these Eternal good things. Aeternitati comparatum omne tempus est
breve: All time if compared to Eternity is but short. But time as it is short,
so it passes away fast. The ancients emblemed time with wings, to show the
volubility and swiftness of it, as if it were not running, but flying; whither?
toward Eternity, for time is but a space borrowed and set a part from
Eternity, which must at last return to Eternity again.

I have read of certain Heretics called Eternales, because they held the world
to be Eternal: We have many such Eternallists, who fancy to themselves a kind
of Eternity here upon Earth. Such an Eternallist was that rich fool in the
Gospel we have spoken of before; who fancied that he had a long time, that yet
he should remain upon the earth; but was suddenly to be taken away. Thou fool
this night shall thy soul be taken away. In a moment his life ends.

We read of a beast called, from the continuance of its life, Ephemeris, which
though it live according to his appellative name, but one day, yet it falls
presently to provide for sustenance, as though it might live years. Man's life
is frequently in Scripture called a Day, and yet most, like this beast, labor
and toil, build and purchase, thirst after honors and preferment in the world,
as if they were here to live for ever, but in the mean time improve not a short
life for Eternal advantages.

Let me tell the most healthful person here present, that he is not assured of
one day more wherein death may not assault him and push him into an Eternal
Ab^^s after a few hours more, and then you may expect your departing hour and
throw the last cast for Eternity. Thou know not yet what may be in the womb
of this very day. Prove. 27. 1. v. Boast not the self of to morrow, for thou
know not what a day m^ bring forth. Whilst a woman is with child, none c^
tell what kind of birth it will be; so as little does an^ man know what is yet
in the womb of this very day until God have signified his will by the event.
Ther^ was a fellow that brought to Domitian the names those in a paper that
would murder him, but he put it in his pocket, saying, nova cras, to morrow is
a new day; but he was killed or ever night. He was a Wise man that being
invited to a Feast on the next morrow, answered, Ex multis annis crastinum non
habui: For these many years I have not had a morrow to promise for any
business. No more do any here present know whether they shall have a morrow to
labor for what will make them Eternally happy; Death may surprise them before
the Sun rise again.

The Apostle Peter says, 2 Pet. 1. 13. v. I will put you in remembrance,
knowing I must shortly put off this Tabernacle. O so let us say to our selves,
We will now be thinking of death, we will now have Eternity in our thoughts, we
will now be laboring for Eternal good things, we will be storing our Souls
with Grace, because we must shortly put off these Tabernacles, we must shortly
have an end put to this present life.

I have sometimes acquainted you with the speech of young King Charles of
Sicily, lying upon his deathbed; I have scarce begun to live, and now, woe is
me, I am compelled to dye. Art thou one that have not yet begun to live the
life of Grace, that only have a share of this Worlds goods, but altogether
without the good things of Heaven; O make haste, for thou may suddenly be
called to dye, and it will be a sore affliction to you, to have an end put to
time, before you have provided for Eternity. Oh that men in their sins would
consider what space, what distance, how far off their Souls are from death,
from Hell, from Eternity; No more but a breath, one breath, and no more, the
next puff of breath may be their last.

It is said of Sparta, that they used to choose their Kings every year; and
whilst they did reign, they were to live pompously, and have all the fullness
their hearts could wish, but when the year was over, all their pomp was taken
away, and they banished into some obscure place ever after. One King knowing
this, and being called to reign over that Nation, that short time of his reign
(for it was but one year) as King, he was not lavish in spending his revenues,
but heaped up all the treasure he could gather together, to send into the place
where he was to live afterward, that so in the little time of his reign he
might prepare and provide to live comfortably all his life after. Christians, I
only make this use of it. The Lord has given you time to live in this World,
and but a little time, you are every day going down amain the stream of time
into the great Ocean of Eternity, and it will not be long before you come
thither, it may be not a week, it may be not a day; The Lord may come upon you
as upon Entichus, i^ the Acts 20. 9. ^. before the Sermon be ended, o^ this
Assembly broken up and gone home, your shor^ life will soon be ended, and how
suddenly you know not; while you live here, you are in the way to Salvation,
you suck at the breasts of those Ordinances, that may feed you to Eternal life;
you have an opportunity to make such provision as will serve all your li^ long
in another World, that you may live happil^ after that you are banished hence,
after that you ar^ deprived of Temporal accommodation; lose this opportunity,
and you are undone for ever, and will ^ miserable for ever.

Plutarch tells of Hannibal, that when he could have taken Rome, he would not,
and when he would have taken Rome, he could not. Now is the time of obtaining
Heaven, in this life you have an opportunity to gain Eternal good things, but
if you let go this opportunity, and do not improve the season of life, believe
it, Christians, God will not afford you another opportunity, when this life
shall be ended. The Ancients painted Opportunity with an hairy forehead, but
bald behind, to signify, that while a man has opportunity before him, he may
lay hold on it, but if he suffer it to slip away, he cannot pull it back again.
Felix looked for a better opportunity to hear Paul, but we do not read that
ever he found such an opportunity more, as that he did then let slip. Poor
Jerusalem lost her day, and could never find it more: And therefore the Lord
weeps over Jerusalem, because she had slipped the opportunity of doing her self
good. Luke 9. 41. ^. He beheld the City, and wept over it; Saying, If thou
had known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things which belong to
thy peace! but now they are hid from thine ^yes. Now thou have* slipped thy
opportunity. Thousands under Eternal misery are now convinced, that ^hey have
slipped the opportunity of getting any share in Eternal good t^ings.

It was wisely done of Noah to take his time, and to ^uild an Ark, before the
Flood came, to the saving of himself and his Household: But foolishly done of
the ^hole World besides, that they did not improve the ^undred and twenty years
time that God gave them, and not only time but an opportunity also, by means ^f
Noah a Preacher of righteousness, to have made ^rovision both of Bodies and
Souls. The very want ^f making that provision, was the ruin of them.

It was wisely done of Joseph to take the time, and observe the season and
opportunity of laying up Corn in the years of plenty, that Egypt might have
wherewithal to live in the years of dearth and famine. Had not that season and
opportunity been taken, the misery of the Egyptians had been intolerable.

It was wisely done of Nineveh to take their time and opportunity, that God
gave them to repent whilst the forty days continued, otherwise they had been
destroyed, but thus they came to be spared. For this end God gave Nineveh those
forty days, that they might husband that opportunity for their good and
preservation, that they might not be destroyed. So God has afforded unto you,
Christians, the opportunity of this life to husband and improve it, to the best
for your poor Souls, to gain an interest in Jesus Christ, to lay hold upon
Eternal life and to obtain a future and everlasting happiness. The time allowed
is but short; Cito pede prae^erit aetas, Our days pass away like a Post, glide
away strangly, and every day, every hour, and every minute added to the time of
our life, is so much taken from our life. And it is a most true saying: Vita
est punctum temporis a quo dependit aeternitas. It shall be with us to Eternity
hereafter, as we spend the time of our present life here; according as we now
prepare for Eternity, so will it be with us to Eternity.

To squander our short time here and in it not to labor for Eternal good
things, is as much as ou^ Souls are worth, as much as Heaven is worth and as
much as Eternity is worth. In this point we may learn a piece of blessed wisdom
from our Savior, John 12. 35. v. Yet a little while is the light with you,
walk while ye have the light, lest darkness come upon you. Yet, Christians, you
have the day of Grace and the light of the Gospel continued, now labor and
take pains before Eternal darkness come upon you. Be not like to Charles, King
of Sicily and Jerusalem, who was called C^^ctator: not in the sense of Fabius,
because he stayed till opportunity came, but because he stayed until
opportunity was past.

If you will not learn wisdom from Christ, yet learn it from that subtle
Serpent Sa^an; he rages and does all the mischief he can, he bestirs himself,
because he knows his time is short, Rev. 12. 12. v. Woe to the inhabiters of
the earth, and of the Sea: for the devil is coming down unto you, having great
wrath, because he knows he has but a short time. O be not any of you worse
th^n the devil; is not your time shorter? be not ye more negligent and careless
in doing what may Eternaly save you, th^n the Devil is in doing all he can
Eternally to damn you: he delays no time, because his time is short to get you
to Hell, delay not you any time, because your time is far shorter to get to
heaven.

6. Help. Get a sight of these Eternal good things by the eye of Faith. I doubt
not but the sight of Eternal good things hereafter will be most ravishing. It
will certainly be a most pleasant and ravishing prospect to see all the
excellencies of Heaven; to see the beauty of Jerusalem that is above, whose
walls are of Jasper, whose building is of Gold, whose gates ^re of Pearls, and
whose foundation is of precious ^tones; to see the King in his glory, you know
I ^ave sometimes mentioned that promise, Isaiah 33. ^7. v. To see the King in
his beauty or glory. There ^s a great deal of difference between seeing the
King ^t an ordinary time, and seeing him when he is in his ^obes, with his
Crown upon his head, and his Scepter in his hand, and set upon his Throne, with
all his Nobles about him in all his glory; God does manifest himself now unto
his People, but this is not all he intends they shall see of him, he will
manifest himself unto them in ^eaven in his Glory.

What a most ravishing sight will it be there to see the Lord Jesus Christ,
wearing the Ro^e of our humane nature, in the presence of his Father, arrayed
(as was said of Mordecat. ^sther 8. 15. v.) in Royal appar^^, and with a great
Crown of Gold upon his head; to see the noble Army of Martyrs; to see those
millions of blessed Saints, that have lived upon the Earth, clo^hed in white,
and following the Lamb whither soever he goes; to see the Angels, those Morning
Stars, and to hear those Heavenly Choristers Eternally singing Jehovah's
praise. And l^stly, to see what ever of Eternal good things we have mentioned
before.

The best sight we have here of these things is but cloudy and obscure, for we
see but through a glass darkly, whilst our Souls are hid in the dark Lanthorns
of our bodies: Here we see only some broken beams of Heavens glory, but some
few glimpses thereof as they are scattered up and down in the Scriptures, so
much as sets the Soul a longing, rather then gives any true satisfaction. When
we come to possess them, then we shall see more th^n the Scriptures do mention,
more then our hearts can conceive. I may take up part of that ecstasy Saint
Paul breaks out into 1. Cor. 2. 9. v. Eye has not seen -- what God has
prepared for them that love him. The eye has seen many admirable things in
nature, it has seen Mountains of Crystal, and Rocks of Diamonds; it has seen
Mines of Gold and Coasts of Pearl, Spicy Islands (so Travelers tell us and
Geographers write of) the eye has seen the Pyramids of Egypt, the Temple of
Diana, Mauseolus Tomb, which by Geographers are made the wonders of the World;
but what is all this, and more then this, to what the eyes of Saints in Heaven
shall see. Then i^ shall be said to every glorified one, Vide quod cred^disti,
apprehende quod sperasti, ^ruere quod ama^ti: Be^old now and see clearly what
formerly thou believe^st faintly. Creed quod non vides, and videbis q^^^ non
credis; Because that they have not seen and yet believe, they shall then see
more then now they do believe; and have their eyes fixed upon them to Eternity.
These beautiful and beatifical objects they shall see and still desire to see,
and though they shall be satisfied in seeing of them, yet they shall not be
satiated with the sight of them. To have but one glimpse of them, though it
were presently gone, it were verily a great happiness beyond all that the World
affords, but they shall never lose the sight of them, they shall have it to all
Eternity, their eyes shall be Eternally open to see them.

And without doubt the getting of a sight of these things, whilst here, will
quicken the hearts of the Children of men to labor and take pains for them.
But what an eye must that be, that can see at such a distance as Heaven is;
some compute, that betwixt us only and the Starry Firmament, there is no less
then seventy four millions, seven hundred three thousand one hundred and eighty
miles; and if the Empereal Heaven (as many say) be two or three Orbs above ^he
Starry Firmament, how many more miles is it ^hen beyond: And the further
distant any thing is from us, the less clear sight can be had thereof, but at
such a distance no Corporeal eye can behold any object whatsoever; yet may they
be seen by the eye of Faith.

Faith is a sure Prospective-glass, by help whereof the Soul may see things
though afar off: Did you never observe an eye using a Prospective-glass, for
the discovering and approximating of some remote and yet desirable Object? Such
a Glass the Soul has of Faith, it can discover and approximate things that are
most remote; remote, I say, and that either in respect of time or in respect of
place. I shall give an instance or two to clear this. And first in respect of
time.

It is said of Abraham by Christ himself, who directs his speech to the Jews,
who were often calling Abraham Father: Your Father Abraham rejoiced to see my
day: and he saw it, and was glad, John 8. 56. v. It will not be amiss, for the
understanding of this place, to enquire what day this was that the Patriarch
Abraham so much rejoiced to see? (...), Exultavit ut, laetitiam gestivit; The
word signifies; He did leap or skip for joy, it is such a joy as is expressed
by some bodily gesture. Abraham it seems could not contain his affection, could
not keep it in, but out it must; And why? He rejoiced that he might see; surely
it was something worth the seeing, that he who was now well nigh an hundred
years old should, as if he had been grown young again, fall to leaping for joy;
stayed, discreet and grave Persons will never be so exceedingly moved, but upon
some very great occasion; And such was ^^at here in the Text, it was to see
Christ's day. But Christ has many days, Christ has more days then one. Luke
17. 22: v. And he said unto the Disciples; The days will come when ye shall
desire to see one of the days of the Son of man, and ye shall not see it. It
is true, as God, he was before all days, before all time, having neither
beginning of days nor end of life, as is said of Melchisedeck, Heb. 7. 3. v.
Before the day was, I am he. But as man he has many days.

The Lords day is his day: Rev. 1. 10. v. I was in the Spirit on the Lords day.

As man he is called Lord of the Sabbath day. Math. 12. 8. v. For the Son of
man is Lord even of the Sabbath day. So the day of Judgment is called the day
of Jesus Christ. Philip. 1. 6. v. Being confident of this very thing, that he
which has begun a good work in you, will perform it until the day of Jesus
Christ. And at 10. v. That ye may approve things that are excellent, that ye
may be sincere and without offense till the day of Christ. So Philip. 2. 16. v.
Holding forth the word of life, that I may rejoice in the day of Christ.

The time of Christ's preaching here on Earth is called Christ's day, and thus
understand that Luke 17. 22. v. before mentioned, where Christ tells them they
should desire to see one of the days of the Son of man; that is, After Christ
was departed out of the world, they should desire his bodily presence here with
them again to comfort them. So also the day of Christ's birth, may, and is
called, his day, in the place before mentioned, when Christ tells the Jews,
Your Father Abraham rejoiced to see my day.

But the great question will be this, how Abraham did see this day of Christ's
birth It is clear in the words, that Abraham had his desire granted, He did see
Christ's day, he saw it though it were two thousand years before it came to
pass. But how saw he this day of Christ's birth? It was oculis animi, says
Piscator, by the piercing eye of his Faith. It is most true that Abraham saw
not the day of Christ, as the Shepherds and wisemen of the East saw Christ in
the Manger at Bethlehem, the one being sent thither by the Angel, and the other
guided by a Star, that they might see and behold Christ. Nor did Abraham see
the day of Christ, as Simeon saw Christ in the Temple at his Mothers
Purification. Nor as Zacheus who had a sight of Christ from the top of a
Sycamoor-tree, being climbed up thither to get a sight of him. But Abraham saw
it luce fidei, by the sight of Faith. Faith helped Abraham to see Christ, and
to see his day, as clearly as he was seen by the Shepherds or Wise men of the
East, as clearly as he was seen by Simeon or Zacheus; and this two thousand
years before it came.

And as Faith can discover and approximate things remote in respect of time. so
things remote in respect of place: It is said therefore, That Faith is the
evidence of the things not seen, Heb. 11. 1. v. by it may be seen what is afar
off: Some write of one Lynceus that he could see an hundred and thirty thousand
paces off, but the eye of Faith can see further. The eye of the Eagle is very
sharp and piercing, she can see from Heaven to Earth, she can spy her prey afar
off, she and her Birds can look upon the Sun: Faith is such an excellent eye;
it can see him who to the eye of the body is invisible, By Faith Moses saw him
who is invisible, Heb. 11. 27. v. God is invisible to any eye but to the eye of
Faith. And as God is an invisible God, a being that no natural eye ever saw or
can be that way seen; so also are all the Eternal good things of Heaven; so
says Saint Paul, 2 Cor. 4. 18. v. he says that things that are Eternal, are
not seen: But in the very same Verse he says, that we look at things that are
not seen; Though they be things that are not seen, yet Saint Paul says of
himself and other Believers, that by the eye of Faith they could see them, they
could by the eye of Faith see Eternal things: While we look not at the things
which are seen, but at the things which are not seen, for (...) the things
which are seen, are Temporal, but the things which are not seen are Eternal. In
which words, it is observable, that Saint Paul says, That he and other
Believers look at the things which are not seen, and those things not seen that
they look at, are Eternal; they are good things that are Eternal.

And without doubt such a sight as the Apostle here means, cannot but work very
much upon the heart of a Christian. A sight of the day of Christ by Faith
greatly rejoiced the good old Patriarchs heart. It even ravished his heart to
hear the wonderful promise of God concerning the Messiah, and to foresee the
joyful performance which he saw would follow in due time. The Apostle Saint
Paul is Perplexed, but not in despair, 2 Cor. 4. 8. v. he is Cast down but not
destroyed, 9. v. he faints not, saying, Though our outward perish, yet the
inward man is renewed day by day, 16. v. And the reason of all is laid down at
the 18. v. While we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things
which are not seen; And these things which are not seen are Eternal. In like
manner such a sight would work signally upon our hearts; if we could by the eye
of Faith but have a sight of Eternal good things, it would make us long until
we come to the fingering and possessing of them, till we have livery and seizin
of them. Such a sight would inflame our hearts with love to them, it would make
us like a Suitor or Lover, who is not satisfied, who is willing to do any thing
and take any pains that he may enjoy his desired Object. He that gets this
sight will certainly find his affections settled upon them, and having his
affections settled upon, his heart will be set to take pains to gain them. When
Sampson had seen Dalilah he loved her, loving her he could not be at rest until
he enjoyed her. When Jacob had once seen Rachel he loved her, loving her he was
contented to labor and take pains the space of two hard Apprentiships, that he
might possess her.

CHAP. XIV.
Some directions in laboring for Eternal good things.
Wherein is showed how a Christian should labor for Eternal good things. As

1. Faithfully. 2. Diligently. 3. Cheerfully. 4. Abundantly. 5. Earnestly. 6.
Vnweariedly.
And because I have been long upon this subject, I shall speak but briefly
hereunto and so conclude this Text.

1. In laboring for Eternal good things labor faithfully, let there be
sincerity in using all those means whereby Eternal good things are to be
gained; take heed in the use thereof that there be no squinting aside at any
thing else. Verily not every one that uses those means, are laboring after
Eternal good things, but may have their eye rather upon Temporal good things;
like the Monk in the Story, who looked downwards toward the Earth like a
mortified Person, but 'twas only to find the keys of the Abbey: The Monk indeed
seems to have been a most mortified man, and dead to all these things of the
World, and to have minded things above: Even so do many others; how attentive
are they in hearing of the Word of God? how often are they reading of the
Scriptures? how earnest are they in praye^? how frequent in eating
Sacramentally the Body and Blood of Christ in the Lord's Supper? But alas their
hearts are not upright for God, not any delight in such duties, not any love to
God's ways, not any hungring desire after Eternal good things moves them; but
they are conscious to themselves that there is something else which does set
them upon this work; and that notwithstanding all they do, they are not
faithful in these and the like holy observances. Verily thousands there are who
will hereafter bewail such kind of labor and pains taking. When Cardinal
Woolsey was cast out of his Princes favor, and left to his enemies fury, said
he, If I had served my God, as faithfully as I have served my King, he would
not have left me thus. And will not those men say so, when they come into Hell,
that have been as you call them true drudges to the World, but hypocritical in
all their seeming labor for Heaven and the things thereof; If we had as
faithfully labored after Eternal good things, as we did after Temporal good
things, we had not been left under Eternal misery thus.

I would discourage none from hearing, reading, and Sacramentally feeding on
Christ's Body and Blood in the Lords Supper; he that will have Eternal good
things must make use thereof, but in using such means the heart is all,
Quicquid cor non facit, non fit; that which the heart does not, is not done.
It Is but loytering and not laboring where the heart does not labor and is not
employed. God he judges of men's doings by what their hearts do, it is the
heart that makes labor herein, good or bad. Amaziah did that which was right
in the sight of the Lord, but not with a perfect heart, 2 Chronicles. 25. 2. v. What
he did was in hypocrisy, his heart was not faithful unto God, though he did
what was commanded by God. It is not enough to do what God wills to be done,
but we must do the same as God wills it should be done.

2. In laboring for Eternal good things, labor diligently, laying aside all
sluggishness of Spirit, that most men in the World are guilty of, who go but a
Snails pace in the way to Heaven, whereas they can run as fast as Dromedaries
in the ways of the world; diligence is required in every man's undertaking and
in every man's calling; how active and diligent are some men, that will lose
nothing for want of looking for, diligently husbanding all opportunities of
thriving and growing rich. How diligently did Boaz himself follow the business
of husbandry; you will find his eyes in every corner, on the Servants, on the
Reapers, yea and on the Gleanners too? he lodges in the very midst of his
husbandry, Ruth 2. and 3. Chapters. As knowing the truth of that Proverbial
speech, Procul a villa dissitus, jacturae vicinus. He that is far from his
business is not far from loss.

Diligence is required in all matters concerning the Body here upon Earth,
therefore much more should men put forth diligence in all matters concerning
the Soul in Heaven, Eccles. 9. 10. v. Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it
with thy might. And we read (Psalm. 127. 2. v.) of men that Rise up early and go
to bedlate, and eat the bread of carefulness, and all for something here in the
World to sustain the Body. If we must put forth so much diligence, and use so
much care, that the Body may have whereupon to live whilst here, surely much
more must we use diligence, that the Soul may have whereupon to live hereafter.
The So^l is a more noble piece then the Body, and he that will work and toil,
labor and take diligent pains for a mortal and vile body, should much more use
diligence, and take pains for a glorious and immortal Soul.

The Wise man's words are pertinent, Pro. 10. 4. v. The hand of the diligent
makes rich. I am sure the hand of a diligent Christian w^ll make him rich in
the best things, when as a sluggard in Christianity will come to Eternal
beggar^. We ought always to use the greatest diligence about the best things,
about matters of greatest concernment, 2 Pet. 3. 14. v. Wherefore, Beloved,
seeing that we look for such things, be diligent that ye may be found of him in
peace, without spot and blameless. And in 2 Pet. 1. 10. v. Wherefore the
rather, brethren, give diligence to make your calling and election sure: The
word in Greek is emphatical, and signifies to do a thing enough, not agere, but
sat agere, not in an overly and careless way, but to do a thing with industry,
vigilance and unweariedness of Spirit: And the diligence required is in matters
of the Soul, herein, diligence is to be manifested rather then in other
matters, hence the Apostle says, Wherefore the rather, brethren, give
diligence to make your calling and election sure; Do this before all other
things in the World; do this rather then all other things in the World; St.
Peter makes a comparison between this duty and all other duties, and wills a
Christian to lay out his sweat and industry, his labor and diligence, rather
about this then any other; as if all other things, in comparison of this, were
to be neglected. In this Channel should run (as it were) the whole stream of a
Christian's diligence. Eternal good things should set a Christian's head and
heart on work to obtain them; there should be an earnest and vehement
application of both to this employment; in comparison of them his diligence for
other things should be but negligence.

Many a poor Soul has miscarried, for the want of putting forth diligence in
the matters of the Soul; they have lost Heaven and all Eternal good things for
want of diligence.

3 In laboring for Eternal good things, labor Cheerfully, as those who take
delight in what they are about; If there be a delightsome employment under
Heaven, it is when a Christian is employing himself to get into Heaven; true,
the work is laborious, but yet delightfully labo^rious, it is like the work of
bandry in many respects, in this especially, The work of husbandry is
laborious; but it is easy to learn, and pleasant to practice, affording a great
deal of health and delight, as well as gain and profit; so is the spiritual
Christian as much delighted in his work. Says David Psalm 40. 8v. I delight to
do thy will O my God. And in Psalm. 119. 16. v. I will delight my self in thy
Statutes, 35. v. Make me to go in the path of thy Commandments; for therein do
I delight. And holy St. Paul, Romans 7. 22. v. says of himself, I delight in the
Law of God, after the inward man. Such an one though he keep never so hard to
the work he is about, yet has he always at hand a Cordial of comfort to cheer
him, that he does not plow the Sea, nor sow the wind, nor spend his money for
that which is not bread, and his labor for that which satisfies not, but that
having plowed in fruitful ground, and sown precious seed, he shall return from
the field of this world, into the Garner of Heaven, and bring his sheaves with
him; Psalm. 126. 6. v. If Husbandryfollowing laborious men can make their labor
cheerful with the hopes of a barn full of corn, and when they have got it, can
say rejoicing, Soul; thou have much goods laid up for many years; take thine
ease, ^at, drink and be merry; has not a Christian laboring for Eternal good
things, as much to make him cheerful? he is laboring not for a barn full of
corn, that will soon be empty, but for an Heaven full of glory, that will never
decay.

Besides, Deus non amat gementem servum, God ^oves not a Christian that sets
about this work groa^ing and grumbling, sobbing and sighing, as one without
hopes; such a one disgraces his Master whom ^e serves, shames the profession of
a Christian, and ^oth as it were proclaim to the world that he is over^boured
and but hardly used. If any of us should see a servant continually sad and
dejected, hear him murmuring and complaining, we must needs think that he
either loves not his Master, or likes not his work, or fears his pay. Such a
servant discredits his Masters service, and such a Christian also disgraces
Religion, as if he were like to gain nothing by all his Religious labor and
pains.

As God loves a cheerful giver, 2 Cor. 9. 7, v. so God loves a cheerful
Labourer; that in Psalm. 100. 2. v. may be a command, as well as advice, Serve
the Lord with gladness, come before his presence with singing. As St. James
says, if any be merry let him sing Psalms: so I say, if any sing Psalms,
read the word, pray or do any other commanded duty, let him be merry. The
Apostle did take pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in
persecutions, in distresses for Christ sake, 2 Cor. 12. 10. v. He did not only
submit to God's dealings, but rejoiced in them; so should every Christian not
only set about this labor, but he should rejoice in it; his Soul should make
him like the Chariot of Aminadab, and a love to Eternal good things should Oil
the wheel of his affections, he should go through his work, as the Plowman goes
through his drudging work, whistling and singing, imitating our blessed
Savior, who delighted to do his fathers will, it was to him meat and drink, as
he said to his Disciples at the Well of Samaria, John 4. 34. v. Jesus says
unto them, my meat is to do the will of him that sent me, and to finish his
work. Christ's delight in gaining souls and bringing them to the knowledge of
the Gospel took his mind off bodily food and refreshment, even when he had need
thereof, the delight he took herein allayed the sense of his outward
necessities, and was more refreshing to him then meat and drink could be, it
made him to forget his meat, and it was as meat unto him, he took more delight
in this work then an hungry man could take in meat. As Abraham's servant would
not eat, till he had dispatched his errand, Genesis 24. 33. v. he preferred his
work before his food, it was more content to him to dispatch the work his
Master sent him about, then to be eating and drinking.

But that I must draw to a conclusion, here might be laid down many particulars
to show what reason a Christian has to be cheerful in this his labor. For
First he has good company with him, and that will make men cheerful, though
their labor should be a little more then ordinarily difficult and tedious.
Most men will be merry in good company, if ever they will be merry; and herein
a Christian has the company of the Eternal Trinity and the immortal Angels.
Secondly, He is certain to be a great gainer by his labor; he is not called
upon to labor, like a Captive or a Galley slave, for nothing; God has made
promises to him of good Rewards; he has promised a Crown of Righteousness, 1 Timothy 4. 8. v. a Crown of Life, Rev. 2. 10. v. Such a Crown of Life as is a
Crown of Glory, 1 Pet. 5. 4. v. and such a Crown of Glory, as is everlasting;
an Inheritance incorruptible, undefiled and that fades not away, 1 Pet. 1. 4.
v. All which are such things as are enough to make a lame man walk, and a
broken arm to bear a burden. Thirdly, he is assured of a future and Eternal
rest after the labor of this life ended. It is not with a Christian, as it is
with an Ox, that when he can labor no longer, is carried to the slaughter and
cease to be; but he lives for ever, yet cease to labor, and enjoyes a
Sabb^th of Sabb^ths, in the Heavens, Rev. 14. 13. v. Blessed are they which dye
in the Lord, for they rest from their labor. When once this present life ends,
he shall pass his Eternity of bliss in contemplating, loveing, lauding, and
praising the incomprehensible Glorious Majesty of our Creator, Redeemer, and
Sa^ctifier, and in perpetual Hallelujahs unto him that sits upon the Throne, in
the fellowship of Caelestial Spirits, who rest not day nor night, saying Holy,
Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty which was, and which is, and is to come. Rev. 4.
8. v. Fourthly, his work, while he labors as he should for these things, is
accepted; it is no small trouble to a man both in and for the doing of any
thing, when the person by whom he is employed, accepts not of what he does; as
the contrary must needs be a great cheering, Eccles. 9. 7. v. Go thy way, eat
thy bread with joy, and drink thy wine with a merry heart, for God now
accepts thy works. Fifthly, he has good help and assistance; he is assisted
herein auxilio spiritus by the help of the spirit, and the spirit makes all a
Christians labor, work, and duties easy. Heaven is promised unto him to
encourage him, and make him willing to labor, and the spirit is given unto him
to assist him and make him able; not any one will much complain what ever his
work is, who has power and affections too. The spirit works in every
Christian the (...), and (...) both to will and to do. Sixthly, His labor is
easy, it is so if we will believe either the testimony of Christ, or the
testimony of St. John, both the Master and the Disciple give their testimonies
hereunto, we have the testimony of Christ, Matt. 11. 30. v. My yoke is easy and
my burden is light. Sin lays an heavy yoke upon men, and therefore Sin is
compared to a Talent of Lead, Zach. 5. 7. v. to show the weightiness of it; but
Christ tells us his yoke is easy; the yoke that was easy so long ago when
Christ said it, cannot be grown uneasy with wearing; for the longer any thing
is worn, the easier that thing is to wear. We have the testimony of St. John 1 John 5. 3. v. His Commandments are not grievous. As Christ spoke what he well
knew, so questionless St. John spoke what he by experience had found to be
true. Indeed to labor for these things may be irksome and troublesome to him
that is unwilling and would not labor, that would not at all strive to enter
in at the strait Gate or climb up the Hill; or it may at the first beholding of
it appear so unto one that never set himself to labor; or it may be so to one
that loves not any kind of labor, for as love will make any kind of labor
delectable, want of love makes it burdensome. Or, Lastly, it may be so even to
the carnal, fleshly and unregenerate part of a beleiver, for in such there is a
Law in the members which rebels against the Laws of Heaven: but to the
regenerated part of a Christian, it is not irksome but delightful, it is not
difficult but easy. It is certainly easier then sin in the midst of all its
pleasures and imaginary felicities; there is less trouble here then in all the
ways of sin; the ways to Heaven, though they are narrow, yet are not
unpleasant, Prove. 3. 17. v. these are ways of pleasantness; though they are
strait yet are they not crooked; though labor they have in them, yet in them
are not those confusions, distractions of thoughts, inward storms, secret
smarts, fears, amazements, labyrinths, intricated counsels, contradictory,
circumstances, unperformed promises, violations of health, accidental deaths,
shames, disgraces, scorns and contempts (with infinite the like things that
might be named) as the ways of sin, Death and Hell have in them.

4. In laboring for Eternal good things labor abundantly, this is St. Paul's
practice. His direction you have, 1 Cor. 15 last v. Therefore my beloved
brethren, be ye steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of the
Lord, for as much as ye know your labor is not in voin in the Lord, The
Apostles direction in the former part of the verse is backed with a good
encouragement in the latter part of the Verse; for as much as you know that
your labor is not in vain in the Lord. And as you have St. Paul's direction so
we have his practice, he did what himself taught; he was not like those Lawyers
against whom Christ pronounces a Woe, Luke 11. 36. v. Woe unto you also, ye
Lawyers, for ye lade men with burdens grievous to be borne, and ye your selves
touch not the burdens with one of your fingers; that which our Savior here
speaks against, was their rigid and imperious exaction of obedience to the
whole Law of Ceremonies (which St. Peter calls a yoke which we nor our
Fathers were able to bear, Acts 15. 10. v.) and in the mean time they favored
themselves, with ease and indulgence, not so this blessed Apostle, he was as
one calls him, insatiabilem Dei cultorem, an unweariable servant of God. See
1 Cor. 15. 10. v. I labored more abundantly then they all, so 2 Cor. 11. 23.
v. In labors more abundant, he spent no time needlessly, had he done so, he
could not have passed over so many Countries as he did to convert Souls and
plant Churches. It is a note that an Author has of St. Paul, Paul was the most
eminent of all the Apostles, no Apostle out-stript Paul; Now Divines ask this
question, why St. Paul should be more eminent then the rest of the Apostles,
who saw Christ in the flesh, whereas St. Paul saw him only in a vision, and no
where else, yet St. Paul was more eminent than any other Apostle; and Divines
give this reason, because he was in labors more abundant; he was more
industrious and more laborious, and God blessed that labor of his with a
further increase of Grace then others had. Surely a Christian may promise
himself, that his abundance of labor will be followed with abundance of good
things, and that both of Grace and Glory. It is as true of laboring after
Eternal good things as it is of Alms in Temporal things; He that sows
sparingly shall reap sparingly, and he that sows bountifully shall reap
bountifully, 2 Cor. 9. 6. v. Word for word to translate the latter part of the
verse it is thus, Qui seminat in benedictionibus in benedictionibus and metet;
he which sows in benedictions or blessings shall reap in benedictions, he
shall reap a plentiful Crop of blessings, not only upon Earth where this kind
of seed is sown, but a much more plentiful Crop in Heaven, he shall receive
from God's hand not one kind of blessing only, but diverse blessings of the
right hand, and blessings of the left, Temporal blessings, Spiritual blessings,
and Eternal blessings, blessings in this life, and blessings in the life to
come. In like manner he that labors abundantly for the gaining of Eternal
good things, he shall receive abundantly thereof. Though no man shall be
rewarded for his works, yet God will at least measure out happiness and
blessedness to the sons of men according to their works: Psalm. 36. 8. They
shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house: and thou shall
make them drink of the River of thy pleasures. Let a Christian be never so
abundant in his labors of this kind, yet there is goodness and mercy enough
in God to answer all his labor; his mercy is abundant mercy, 1 Pet. 1. 3. v.
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his
abundant mercy has begotten us again unto a lively hope. The Clouds may
commend the extent of his faithfulness, and the Mountains may shadow out his
right^ousness, and the deeps resemble his judgments: but who, or what can
express the excellency of his goodness? It cannot be fully discerned any way
but in Heaven. So says David the servant of the Lord in this Psalm bearing
that title, The servant of the Lord, verses 5. 6. Thy mercy (O Lord) is in the
Heavens, and thy faithfulness reaches unto the Clouds. Thy righteousness is
like the great Mountains: thy Judgments are like a great deep. There is an
Ocean of goodness and mercy in God; he that [by his laboring for Eternal good
things shows that he] trusts in God, mercy shall compass him about. Psalm.
32. 10. v. yea a variety of all sorts of mercies, both Temporal, Spiritual and
Eternal; for the mercy and goodness of God is abundant in the Fountain, and not
only so, but also it is abundant in the extent thereof. He has not spent all
upon David and Abraham or others now in glory, but has enough for thousands,
even for all the thousands in all ages to the end of the World that will seek
for it; his treasures of Grace and Glory are both great and lasting, yea they
are everlasting as himself is. God is abundant in goodness. Exodus 34. 6. v. He
is able to do exceeding abundantly, above all that we ask or think, Ephesians. 3. 20.
v. A man can ask for and think of more and greater things then he can labor
and take pains for; yea he can ask for and think of more things in a quarter of
an hour, then he can by labor and pains-taking, promise himself to gain in all
the years that he lives upon the earth, though he should out live Methusalah
his nine hundred sixty and nine years; though God had made all grace abound
toward him, that having all sufficiency in all things, he may abound to every
good work, 2 Cor. 9. 8. v. and able aright to perform and improve all duties
and actions for gaining of what he labors for; and though he did as much
abound in labor, work, and all kind of diligence, as Solomon says, a furious
man abounds in transgression, Prove. 29. 22. v. who having no command of his
passions, but being transported by them, or wedded to them as a man to his
wife, and being big with wrath, he sets his mouth against Heaven, and his
tongue walks through the Earth, he lets fly on both hands, and lays about
him like a mad man, and so abounds in transgression. Let a Christian never so
much abound in laboring for Eternal good things, when he comes to enjoy them,
he will acknowledge that the abundant mercy of God in bestowing them upon him,
has abundantly, yea infinitely exceeded all his labor.

5. In laboring for Eternal good things, labor earnestly. We shall see some
men at their labor, laboring so earnestly for what they desire to gain, that
they are not, nor cannot be quiet until their desires be accomplished, Qui
di^^s vult fieri, and cito vult fi^ri; they that will be ^^^h cannot be at
quiet until their desires be accomplished, they are all upon the spurr, all
upon the wing after the world, they add labor to labor, for the getting of
the worlds good things; they are so inflamed with covetousness, that the
Prophet says, they pant after the dust of the earth. Amos 2. 7. v. So eager
are they in their pursuits as if they were almost out of breath, but have no
breath to labor after these Eternal good things. But believe it, Christians,
any kind of labor will not serve the turn, it must not be (...) an ordinary
and labor, but that labor St. Paul requires 1 Cor. 15. last. v. (...) the
hardest labor, Negotium quod nos caedit and quasi vires frangit. It were a
shame for a Christian to see some labor more earnestly for bubbles th^n he for
blessedness, for trifles th^n he for glory, for Temporal good things th^n he
for Eternal good things. His labor for these things should be like that
whereunto St. Jude exhorts in his Epistle, when he would have those that he
writes unto earnestly contena for the Faith, v. 3. the Apostles word is (...)
it signifies cum summ^ studio c^rtare, t^ contend with all the strength most
earnestly. Herein he should be like the twelve Tribes of whom St. Paul says
Acts 26. 7. v. That they served God instantly, not only sine intermissione
without intermission, but with a kind of vehemence; the word used signifies to
the utmost of their strength. And herein do as the Apostles prayed, Acts 1. 14.
v. They all continued with one accord in Prayer and supplication, (...) The
phrase signifies not only continuance in regard of time, but instancy and
importunity, and such a perseverance as is kept up with much labor and force.
When a Christian labors earnestly for these things, he may hope his labor
will be effectual: As when Elias prayed earnestly that it might not rain, it
rained not on the Earth by the space of three years and six months. James 5.
17. v. This clause (he prays earnestly) notes the cause why Elias was heard;
he prayed with earnestness and faith according to the will of God revealed to
him. So when a Christian labors earnestly and in Faith, God will not let his
labor be in vain.

It is great pity to see some men, and observe their uncessant care, earnest
labor, and unwearied industry, in riding and toyling and bustling up and down
in the world, and all this is done, that they may be rich in the world, but
will do nothing to be rich toward God, Luke 12. 21. v. and to compass an
earthly purchase, but take no care for Heavenly excellencies: The very reason
hereof is, because they have no desire of these things, and therefore they lay
not out that strength and earnestness for Heaven as they do for the world.
Christ and Grace, God and Salvation are offered unto them, nay pressed upon
them, but they put away Salvation from them, as a froward child puts away the
breast, hence God complains, Psalm. 81. 11. v. Israel would none of me; they
prefer vain things that cannot profit, before the blood of Christ and the
Graces of the spirit; Oil in the ^cruse, and Meal in the barrel, before the
bread of life, Mammon before Manna, perishing comforts before heavenly things
that are lasting: like foolish children who prefer their play before their
food, and trifles before Treasure. It were to be wished that there were more,
who desired these Eternal good things, more* whose souls and hearts were set
upon them, as hungry men whose stomachs are set upon their meat, such are not
only willing to eat their meat, ^ut they strongly long after their meat, with
desire, they desire it, and think it long until they have it. How would they
then cry out with the Church to God, Isay. 26. 9. v. With my soul have I
desired thee in the night, yea, with my spirit within me will I seek thee
early: and say as David Psalm. 42. 2. v. My soul thirsts after God, when shall
I come and appear before God? or as he again says, Psalm 73. 25. v. Whom have
I in Heaven but thee? and there is none upon Earth that I desire beside thee.

Many it is true desire what I have spoken so much of, but their desires are
not right desires, in as much as they labor not for them, but are like a man
tha^ would have a Lease, but is loath to pay a fine: An^ like Herod, who of
long time desired to see Christ, but never stirred out of his doors to come
where Christ was, that he might see him: Or as Balaam tha^ wished well to
Heaven, but cared not to lead such a life as would bring him to Heaven.
Carnales no^ curant quaerere, quem tamen desiderant invenire^ cupientes
consequi, sed non and sequi, says one, Carnal men care not to seek after him,
whom yet they desire to find; fain they would have Christ, but car^ not to make
after him; fain they would be in Heaven but care not to strive to enter into
Heaven. Multitudes there are who notwithstanding such desire^ after happiness
will certainly be forever miserable most true will they find the words of
Solomon, Prove 21. 25. v. The desire of the sloathful kills him: for his hands
refuse to labor. Such a one wishes we^ to himself, and because he cannot
attain desired food he vexes himself to death, but yet will not labou^ and
work for it, and so pineth away in his iniquity what is said of the sluggard in
respect of the body, also true of all those men in respect of their souls who
would be happy and desire to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but such
desires will undo them, why? for their hands refuse to labor for Heaven. Men
must not think that good things, (whether temporal, spiritual, or eternal) will
drop out of the clouds to them, as towns were said to come into Timotheus his
toil while he slept. Unless men's desiring of Heaven and Eternal happiness be
^econded with labor whereby to obtain them, it is nothing worth; desires if
right are ever seconded with ^ndeavours after the thing desired. Though St.
^aul says, 2 Cor. 8. 12. v. that if there be first a wil^ing mind, it is
accepted according to that a man has. and not according to that he has not:
yet he had before said in the 11. v. Now perform the doing of ^: that as there
was a readiness to will, so there may ^ a performance also. As a thirsty man
will not on^ long for drink, but he will labor earnestly to get ^; neither
will a covetous man only desire or wish ^r Riches and wealth, but he will
strive and take ^ins to be rich and wealthy; so it should be with a ^tristian,
not only should he desire to be happy, ^d desire to obtain Eternal good things,
but he ^ould labor earnestly to get these things. Who was ^ere ever so wicked
that desired not to be good, and come to Heaven? But neither Grace here, nor
^ory hereafter can be had with bare wishing and ^iring; as they say of Caeneus
in the Fable, who of ^oman, became a man with a wish. The Apostle ^h told us
that there must be a seeking those things ^ich are above, as well as a minding
of those things ^ve, Col. 3. 1. 2. v. If ye then be risen with Christ, ^e those
things which are above, where Christ sits ^he right hand of God: Set your
affections on things above, not on things on the Earth. (...) Seek those things
which are above; the word used signifies summo studio quaerere, to seek with
the whole strength. (...), set your affections on, or mind, (as in the marg^nt)
things above, it signifies to mind with the whole Soul.

6. In laboring for Eternal good things, labor unweariedly, never being
weary, but holding on to the end of your lives; indeed that great desire which
any one has of enjoying these things, will be to him like a rod of Myrtle, of
which it is reported, that i^ makes the traveller who carries it in his hand,
that h^ shall never be weary or faint; when others that wan^ this true desire
are in their pains and labor herei^ like Charles the eight of France of whom
one note^ in his Expedition to Naples, he came into the fiel^ like thunder, but
went out like a snuff: So these answer not always their sometime undertaken
labo^ but languish and sink; herein such resemble tho^ winds about Sancto Croix
in Africa, which the Po^tug call the Mon^oones which blow constantly o^ way for
six months, and then the quite contrary w^ the other half of the year; while
the vein lasts the outdo and over-labour all others, but this hot is soon
over, their motion soon ends, it being b^ like the motion of a Watch which is
quickly dow^ The true labor for Heaven is constant, but the though they put
their hand to the Plou^^ soon gr^ weary and look back, whereby they show they ^
not fit for the Kingdom of God, Luke 9. 62. v. present diligence herein
should be followed with future and lasting diligence, Heb. 6. 11. v. We des^
(says the Apostle) that every one of you do show same diligence, to the full
assurance of hope unto and. We look for happiness as long as God has any being
in Heaven; why then should we cease from painfulness, as long as we have any
being on Earth. Man goes forth (says the Psalmist, Psalm. 104. 23. v.) to his
work, and to his labor until the evening; so till the sun of our life be set,
we must be working, we must be laboring. The things we labor for shall never
end, why the should our labor for them ever end? this should animate us every
day to labor a fresh for them: As the Mother of Melitho animated her son, when
she saw his legs broken, and his body bruised, being ready to yield up his
spirit in Martyrdom; saying, O my son, hold on yet but a little, and behold
Christ stands by ready to bring help to thee in thy torments, and a large
reward for thy sufferings. So may we animate our selves with those words of St.
Peter, 1 Pet. 1. 4. v. who calls this reward, an Inheritance incorruptible, and
undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in Heaven for us, the two Greek
words here used for undefiled and that fades not away, are also Latin words;
the first is (...), undefiled; it is a Latin word also, Amiantus, it is a
precious stone, the nature whereof is such, that though it be never so much
soiled, yet it can never at all be blemished, but cast it into the fire, it is
taken out still more bright and clean. The other word is (...), non marcescens,
that fades not away: This Greek word is a Latin word also, Amarantus, it is
the proper name of a Flower, which being a long time hung up in the house, yet
still is fresh and green. To these it is thought the Apostle ^alludeth here,
and it is as if he should say, the Crown that you shall receive, shall be
studded with the stone Amiantus, which cannot be defiled: and it is garnished
with the Flower Amarantus which continues fresh and green. The latter of these
two words is used by the same Apostle, 1 Pet. 5. 4. v. where he calls it, (...)
immarc^ssibilem gloriae coronam; a Crown of glory that fades not away. This is
the Crown laid up in Heaven, but it is given only to such as hold out to the
end, Rev. 2. 10. v. Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a Crown
of life. Matt. 10. 23. v. He that endures to the end shall be saeved. Non
currenti sed vincenti datur corona. Only they who run their race with patience
and finish their course, can truly hope for these things. When Judas Maccabeus,
1 Macca. 4. 17. 18. v. saw two men over greedy of the spoil of the Enemy, and
thereupon to begin to desist from the Battle they had hitherto so valiently
prosecuted, Judas wills them to follow on the persuit of the Enemy flying,
for, quoth he in the end you shall safely take the spoils, or at last ye shall
have Riches enough: So say I, Christians, be not weary of your laboring after
Eternal good things, for in the end you shall have Eternal good things enough.
Let me here allude to our blessed Saviors words, Matthew. 5. 6. v. Blessed are
they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be filled.
It is observable, the Greek words in this place are the participles (...),
Blessed are they that are hungring and thirsting; though they have
righteousness, yet they are still hungring after more. So should every
Christian, though he have already gotten a portion of Eternal good things, yet
should he be laboring and taking pains for more; the sweetness of these things
cannot but stir up an hungring and thirsting after more of them, whose
infiniteness will more than fill the Soul brim-full.

How unweariedly therefore should a Christian go on in this Labor after
Eternal good Things; especially remembering That it will not be long but this
Labor will be at an end: 1 Pet. 5. 10. v. After ye have suffered a while. So
may I say, After you have labored a while, your Labor, how great soever now
it is, will be at an END.

Soli Deo gloria in Aeternum.
A Prayer wherein the foregoing Treatise is Epitomized, the several Pages
thereof, out of which the Prayer is collected, being pointed unto by the
Figures set down, and composed for the use of the weaker sort of Christians,
after that they shall have read over the Treatise.
Psalm. 19. 14. v. (...) the words of my mouth, and the meditations of my heart
be acceptable in thy sight, O Lord my strength and my Redeemer.
O Eternal Lord God, before the Mountains were brought forth, or ever the Earth
or the world ^re made, thou art God from everlasting to everla^ng. Help me, a
poor sinner, with a thankful heart ^ bless and praise thy name for the manifold
and great ^reies, both temporal and spiritual, I have recei^d from thee.
Praised be thy name for ever, that by ^ holy word thou have brought me to the
know^ge of thy self and Eternal happiness, and have af^ded unto me many
precious helps both to under^d thy word and to direct me in that way which will
^d in a future and everlasting happiness. Lord, ^nt that what I have been
taught by reading of this ^eatise may be sown as good seed in my heart, keep
that Satan, that bird of Hell, may not pick up an^ of it, but let it be so
watered with the dew of the blessed spirit, that I (who hope to (1) out live
time an^ all temporal enjoyments) may turn (2) my worldl^ care into a Godly
care, my care for this life and the things of this life, into a care for the
things of another life, of a better life. Let the great matter of m^ thoughts
(3) be, not what I shall eat or what I she drink or wherewithal I shall be
clothed, whereunto ^ am (217) naturally prone, but rather to seek first the
Kingdom of God and his righteousness, being assure^ that all these things
shall be added unto me. Seein^ thou call for Labor, and did enjoin (4. 5.
6.) Labor to Adam in Paradise, and would have (8) no^ idle, and I have
learned not to promise (13) my se^ to obtain any good thing at thy hands
without Labor; work my heart into such a willing frame, tha^ (11) my Labor
and pains may (80) in obedience unt^ thy commands, be chiefly (11) not about
perishing b^ Eternal good things, and which without (56. 229* Labor cannot be
obtained. Help me, being inten^ and serious (15) to spend the (16) marrow of m^
soul and the strength of my spirits about Grace he^ and Glory hereafter, which
are (12) unspeakably be^ter then Gold and Silver, and always (17) to u^ the
right means to gain them, searching for them ^ all thine Ordinances, in reading
the Scriptures (19* for in them I think to have Eternal Life; but becau^ of my
self I am dull to understand, bless to me the hearing (20) of thy word
Preached, and help me so t^ hear that my soul may live the life of Grace here,
an^ hereafter may live (21) the life of Glory. To hearin^ help me to add (21)
such meditation both day an^ night that may enable me to practice what I learn
b^ hearing. Teach me how to improve the Sacrament so Baptism (23) that first
visible means whereby thou ^ast pleased to apply to me as by Word, Sign and
Seal the blood of Jesus Christ (24) for the remission of my sins, that I may
forsake the Devil, the world ^d all the Lusts of the flesh, and have no
fellowship ^ith the unfruitful works of darkness, but be found ^ every respect
faithful in God's Covenant sealed hereby. However there be some who slight the
^essed Sacrament of the Lord's Supper (23. 26.) if as ^ were an unnecessary
Ordinance, for ever keep me ^at I, hungring and thirsting (25) after Christ and
^ the benefits of his death and passion, may delight ^ be a Guest at that Table
(27) where Christ's body ^ set before me to eat and warm draughts of his blood
^ drink. Thou art a God hearing of Prayers, by im^tunate (28.) prayer at the
Throne of Grace, make ^e able through Jesus Christ to obtain those great ^ngs
of Eternity which are discovered unto me in ^y Word and sealed up in the
Sacraments. And grant ^at I may not use these means for a time but (30)
per^eringly use them and all other right means to gain ^eaven, until thou
make me to enjoy Heaven, ha^ng assurance (202) that my Labor shall not be in
^n, and that it will there (211) never repent me to ^ve Labored for it.
Blessed be thy Name (31) for ^yly bread and all the good things of this life,
yet ^ke not up my Portion out of the greatest of those ^ngs which are
indifferently distributed to Saints ^ Sinners, but let Eternal good things
absolutely ^9) necessary to be had, be my portion, though (23) ^ould in
Laboring for them, meet with many vex^ons and sore persecutions, choosing
rather, as the ^ (72) wherefore I live, to secure (33) an Eternal then a fading
Inheritance. As thou renewest (37^ thy mercies to me every morning in this
Life, ever^ morning help me to renew my diligence for the ob^taining of a
better life; and when I have done wit^ the world and all business upon Earth
(38) permi^ me again into thy presence to mind and Labor for thee and the
things of Heaven. When in the nigh^ (38. 39.) thou drivest sleep from mine
Eyes, kee^ me that I may not drive any spiritual devotion from my Heart; though
then rest be denied to my body ^ yet O that my soul might not rest from (40)
Prayin^ to thee, from (41) seeking after Christ, from (44^ praising thee for
mercies, from (45) meditating upon thy word; O let my Soul desire thee in (47)
the night. Strengthen me to run (50) with patience t^ Race that is set before
me, and always to fight (51^ a good fight of Faith, and to strive (55) that I
man enter in at the straight gate, that I may obtain (50^ not a corruptible but
incorruptible Crown. As I a^ naturally provident (57) for time to come, gra^
that I may be found provident for Eternity to com^ by laying (58) up Treasures
in Heaven where neith^ moth nor rust does corrupt, and where Theives ^ not
break through and steal, and hereby manifest (60^ my self to be a follower of
those, though (64) se^ who through faith and patience inherit the promis^
w^i^st I do walk in the way of good men and keep t^ paths of the Righteous,
beleiving (239) Scriptu^ promises and obeying Scripture commands, the at last
with them now in Heaven I may posse^ Eternal good things. Enrich my Soul with
tho^ good things that will (91) make me good, by Gra^ (96) work a change in me;
give thy self (100) ^ me, that by holiness I may be fit for thee. Uni^ me to
Christ (111) who is the Fountain, of life that I may live who by nature am dead
in sins and trespasses. Let thine Eternal spirit, by its powerful influence and
breathings, heal (114) my Soul, sanctify my heart, subdue the rebellion (115)
of my will, and purify all uncleanness out of my affections, that, acting from
inward principles of holiness, I may (imitating blessed St. Paul) exercise
[121] my self to have always a conscience void of offense toward man, and
[122] in simplicity and godly sincerity, not in fleshly wisdom but by the
grace of God I may have my conversation in the world, in all things willing
^12] to live honestly and walking before thee in truth and with a perfect heart
doing that which is good; that so when thou shall bring to my mind the History
[126] of my life (which having been very sinful might here be followed with
dreadful apprehensions of thy wrath, and some glimpses and preoccupations of
Hell, and hereafter with Eternal torments) I may have that which will afford
unto me inward consolation and refreshment; and in the day when I must pass
[127] through the valley and shadow of death, that neither the terrors of
death, nor the fiercest oppositions of Hell and the Devil may dismay me, let me
be found interested in what will do me [145] good then, and being lasting good
things, will last beyond Death, go with me out of this [131] world, stand me in
stead at the day of [23^. 152] Judgment, and keep me out [137] of Hell. If
whilst I live thou shall make my condition an afflicted condition, that [141] I
must go through the valley of Baca toward Zion^ yet bestow upon me what thou
know [142] will make me bear afflictions patiently, be as an Ark to uphold
my spirits and keep them from sinking in the greatest deluge of calamities.
Though here I should meet with shame and disgrace O Christ yet with thee let me
[174] enjoy Eternal Glory; though here I should live but a short life, yet in
Heaven let me live [175] an Eternal life; though here I should not have one
joyful hour, yet hereafter let me enter into my Masters [177] joy, into that
joy which Eternity begins, [178] but Eternity shall never end; though here I
should never enjoy any earthly inheritance yet let me not miss of that
Inheritance incorruptible [179] which fades not away in the [180] everlasting
Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and there also receive that
Crown [182] of glory that fades not away; though here I should not have a
house to shelter my self from storms and tempests, yet let me be admitted into
that house not [184] made with hands Eternal in the Heavens, and situated in
the new Jerusalem which is the everlasting habitation of [189] Angels and
glorified Saints. Take my heart off these lower things (wherein so many do
fancy [221] does consist the only comfort of their lives) which are only for
the body [198] and but vanity and vexation [191] of spirit and set it upon
those always [188] desirable good things in Heaven which only can satisfy
[193] the longings of it and make my soul [198] that most precious and immortal
[203] being, happy. By faith help me to look above [22^] the gaiety and
eye-dazling [224] objects here in the world, and to see the excellency and
worth of those things that are [215] invisible but are made [235] known in the
Gospel. Oh that my head were water [245] and mine Eye a fountain of tears that
I might weep day and night for them who make all the motions [250] of their
Souls to wait upon earthly designs and for the gaining [252] the Mammon of
unrighteousness in this world, such ^s prefe^ momentany pleasures before [244]
Eter^al joys, and spend their whole time in making pro^sion for the flesh,
without the least thought upon E^ernity that follows, and never think of their
present ^nfulness or their future Eternal misery. Pardon ^e, O my God, that I
have at any time postponed [256] the things of Heaven to the things of this
world, ^referring dross before Gold, the fatness of the Earth, before the dew
of Heaven, earthly Mammon before Heavenly Mansions and the good things of this
life before the good things of another, and better life, yea ^ood and ^aiment
for my body before Grace and Glory ^or my soul; and now, O Lord, ^help me to
consider that it is ^igh time for me to mind the concerns of my ^oul and to be
laboring for Eternal good things and ^261] seeking those things that are
above, and to ^ve above those things which [269] I cannot live without, yea
wholly to spend my time whilst [269] I am ^n the body about those things
whereof I shall have ^ost need when I am out of the body, and principally ^o
Labor for on earth those things that will be of use ^ Heaven. Make me
spiritually [273] wise to lay up ^uch a stock and store that will do me good
through^ut all Eternity, and before my body be laid in the Grave, to take care
that my never dying soul may be ^arryed into Abraham's bosom, by a turning to
thee O God, by accepting of Jesus Christ, by getting my ^ins pardoned and my
evidence for Heaven cleared, though I do yet remain upon Earth. let, I pray
thee, ^hy spirit help me to converse in Heaven [274] and ^o have mine Eyes
fixed upon those invisible things. ^or ever blessed be thy most holy name, O
Lord, that I am not placed among the common Beggars of this world, that I have
not been sent to beg my bread from door to door; it might [278] have been my
portion to have crowched to another for a morsel of bread, to have been a
vagabond and have saught my bread out of desolate places and to have lived as
another Lazarus [279] in a starving and famishing condition: O Lord, I beseech
thee never lay me under the heavy judgment of poverty in this world, least I
be poor and steal, and take the name of thee my God in vain; neither let me be
a beggar in another world, in Hell to howl for a drop of water to cools my
tongue. Yet if poverty must be the condition, thou O God wilt have me to end my
days in, and I must be made worldly [287] poor, yet, O God, vouchsafe to make
me spiritually rich, rich in Faith, even enriched with the unsearchable riches
of Jesus Christ, let me be found to be an heir of Salvation, even an heir [288]
of God, and a joint heir with Christ, an heir of that Kingdom [289] which thou
have promised to them that love thee. Help me, O Lord, to overlook the splendid
braveries of this world, the greatest and best things of this life [299] as
those things which are [293] not, but are as so many Empty [294] clouds and
Wells without Water, ciphers without figures, and but as shadows to real
substances, being altogether void of (291) what will make me happy to Eternity;
and to Labor that I may have thee (whom my soul prizeth above (306) the earth
and its comforts, and above heaven and its glory) for my portion; Jesus Christ
for my Savior, the blessed spirit of Grace for my sanctifier, Grace to change
me from what I am by nature, and Glory, with thee in Heaven hereafter, that
will continue throughout that life which will be (299) Eternal, even after a
Million of ages (301) and longer then a Million of worlds. Inlighten my darkened
understanding, that I may attain to the true knowledge of Eternity (304) and
Eternal good things, before my glass be out (305) my Sun set, my race run, and
the dark night of Eternity overtake me. Work, Lord, upon my heart a serious
consideration what it is to perish (306) Eternally in Hell, and to enjoy a
blessedness eternally in Heaven, that my labor and care may be to escape the
one and to obtain the other. O that as I must live hereafter through all
Eternity, so whilst I live here I might always have Eternity in my thoughts
and ever be endeavoring to (307) get assurance of an happy Eternity. As my
soul trembles to remember the (307) Eternity of pains in the nethermost Hell
(that region of confusion (309) and storehouse of Eternal fire) where poor
damned ones must be drenched in Seas of fire, and floods of wrath (309)
overwhelm them: So, Lord, make me to tremble at sin that will bring all this
upon me, and enable me to walk in the ways of holiness which will (309) be
followed with happiness and Eternal glory. O God whilst I am in the wilderness
of this world, let me I pray thee have some tastes (310) of those fruits that
grow and are to be had in the Land of promise, whereby my Soul (312) may be
entered into the first degrees of heavenly joys, and may learn what a great
difference (311) there is between the bitter sweets of this world and those
fruits which grow upon the tree of Life in the Paradise of God, and may have my
soul effectually drawn and inflamed, made unquiet and (314) restless to long
for more, labor for more (312) and not think my self happy until I have my
fill of them, until I be (314) filled with the fullness of God; and come to
swimm (312 in that Sea of Eternal bliss in heaven and those infinite Oceans of
pleasure (314) that are at thy right hand for evermore. I am convinced that my
Soul (315) by which I have my animation shall not be extinguished (416) with my
body, but that it is seperable from my body and will sub^ist and have a being
in its separate state, survive the grave, live longer then time, its
continuance must be eviternal, inexterminable and without end, and be clothed
with Eternity after it is divested of this earthly case. O God, help me so to
work this consideration of my Souls immortality upon my heart, as to make me
Labor for that (317) which will make my immortal soul for ever blessed and
happy when it shall be unsheathed from my body, unclothed from corruption and
let loose from this cage of clay. About this very thing, I confess O God, that
my former carelessness has been very great, and at the remembrance of which, I
blush, I am ashamed and tremble. Had death separated my soul from my body,
whilst I was thus careless of my Soul, as my body should have been a prey (316)
to rottenness, worms and corruption, my Soul (that is endowed with an undying
condition) might have been in Hell. I have yet a little time before me, and it
may be but a very little, for the whole time of all my life is but short (317)
and I do perceive my days do pass away (322) like a Post, glide away
strangely, every day, every hour, every minute added to the time of my life,
proves so much taken from my life, and I confess I know not what a day may
bring forth, (318) or whether I shall (319) enjoy a morrow, even this night may
(318) death assault me, and my Soul be taken from me, and before the Sun rise
again I may be taken hence: Help me therefore to improve my short time about
such things as will be (318) of an Eternal advantage. O let me not see an end
put to my time until I have provided for Eternity. Whilst I am in the way (320)
to salvation, whilst I suck at the breasts of those Ordinances that can feed me
to Eternal Life, help, O Lord, to improve present opportunities (322) to get an
interest in Jesus Christ, to lay hold on Eternal Life and to make sure of a
future and everlasting happiness. As the Devil (323) delays no time ( because
his time is s^ort) to get me to Hell, enable me to delay no time (because my
time is far shorter) to get to Heaven. But, oh, how dull is my heart in
laboring for that without which I can neither be happy here nor hereafter!
help me therefore, O Lord, by the eye of faith to get a sight of (323) Eternal
good things, that so my heart may (325) be quickened to labor and take pains
for them, and long until it be in possession of them. Purge out of me I pray
thee, O God, all insincerity and all hypocrisy, and make me with all
faithf^lness [331] and Christian [332] diligence cheerfully [336] and with
delight, earnestly [343] and unwear^^aly [348] to seek those things [347] that
are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God, and always to abound
[340] in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as I know my labor is not in vain in
the Lord, and I shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house,
and thou shall at last make me drink of the River of thy pleasures. These
things, O Lord, and whatsoever else thou know needful for the enabling of me
thy poor servant to live to thine honor and glory and forwarding the Eternal
happiness of my precious Soul, I beg for the sake of thy dear Son Jesus Christ
my only Mediator and Advocate, to whom with thee and the Holy Ghost be honor
and glory world without end Amen.

Mark 11. 24. What things soever ye desire when ye pray, believe that ye
receive them, and ye shall have them. John 16. 23. v. Verily, Verily I say unto
you, whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, he will give it you.
A TABLE By the Order of Letters, Directing to some Chief Things found in the
foregoing Treatise.
A.
A Bounding in all things in this life is often times followed with want in Hell.
page 282 Abundant must the labor for Heaven be. p. 340 ^braham how said to see
Christ' s Day. p. 327 ^chilles Choice. p. 257 ^dam in innocence set to labor.
p. 7 ^fflicted ones find that Eternal good things stand them in stead. p. 14^
^fflictions often befall the Saints. p. 141 ^lexander sleeps sound, Parmenio
being on the war* p. 311 ^lexander compared by one to a stone. 92 Alexander
poisoned. p. 171 King Alfred how spent the natural Day. p. 35 Aelians Censure
of a Chariot made by Myrmeeidas and Chalecrates. p. 98 Alphonsus his Saying. p.
8 Alphonsus refuses to give any thing to a Knight that had spent his Estate.
p. 206 Ancients used means to keep Death in their thoughts. p. 145 Andronicus
his fall. p. 169 Angola Inhabitants prefer a Dog before a Slave. p. 223
Antimachus high esteem of his Scholar Plato. p. 35 Antigenides a famous
Musician, his custom before he played a Lesson. p. 311 Apelles how he came to
fall in love with a Woman. p. 224 Archimedes the Mathematician slain, and why.
p. 16 Aristotle preferred conjecturall knowledge about Heavenly things, before
certain knowledge about Earthly things. p. 270 Aristotle studied Philosophy in
the morning, but Eloquence in the afternoon. Ibid. Artabazus Cup not so good
Gold as Chrysantus Kiss. p. 100 Athenians gave the Grasshopper for their Badge.
p. 218 Athens what a kind of City. p. 269 Attention required at hearing of the
Word. p. 21 Aetna' s sad and ruining eruptions 1669, wasting the Habitations of
27000 Persons, with 13 Towns. p. 168
B.
BAjazet carried in an Iron-cage. p. 169 Babtism what it is. p. 23 Baptism
enters us into the Church. p. 23 Baleassar his submission to the Word of God.
24 Basil his answer to the threatenings of Modestus. p. 23 Bassianus the
Emperor strangely degenerated into effeminatness, would be called Bassiana. p.
223 Beatitudes, the first of them belong to the Poor. p. 92 Beauford Bishop of
Winchester, and Chancellor in the Reign of Henry VI. p. 128 ^ee, what Men are
like to it. p. 273 ^eggars are all they who, though they possess the greatest
of Temporal good things, are without Eternal good things. p. 277 ^eggars lie
under a great judgment. p. 278 ^eggars are all they who have nothing laid up in
Heaven. p. 285 ^eleivers have the promise of two Worlds. p. 290 ^elisarius his
poor condition. p. 169 ^engala, where was an old Man of a great age. p. 299
^ernard' s Esteem of Christ. p. 108 ^ernard' s words of the end of Christ' s
Coming at the last Day. p. 155 ^ible presented to Queen Elizabeth. p. 19 ^ody
but a mean habitation for the Soul. p. 149 ^ody made lovely by the Soul. p. 202
^ody of an excellent Structure. p. 198, 199 ^ooks cared for by Caesar. p. 200
^runo his change of Life, and the cause thereof. p. 135 ^udaeus high esteem of
Plutarch^ Works. p. 18 ^urleigh his high esteem of Tully' s Offices. p. 20
C.
Caesar's* Battle in Africa with the followers of Pompey. p. 53 Caesar's Battle
with the Swiffes that fought to obtain Gallia out of his hands, p. 54 Caesar
murdered. p. 1^1 Caesar's Care of his Books. p. 200 Caesar Borgia upon his
Deathbed lamented because he had not taken care for Death beforehand. p. 205
Caius Marius how he was wont to choose Soldiers. p. 31 Camois relates what
devout Personages used to writ^ upon their Chymney-pieces. p. 308 Cardinal his
choice. p. 257 Cato at evening meditated upon what he read in the day p. 21
Cats, why Men compared unto them. p. 232 Change is made by Grace p. 98, 9^
Charles the Fifth Emperor, his Challenge to Franci^ the First King of France
p. 10^ Christ the full of Man's Happiness p. 10^ Christ reckoned amongst the
chief of Eternal good things p. 10^ Christ makes them good who do enjoy him p.
11^ Christless Men are dead Men p. 111, 11^ Christ loved by Saints above all
things p. 107, 10^ Christ will be a Righteous Judge in the day of Judgment p.
135 Christ has a two fold Coming p. 15^ Christ will do those who have an
Interest in him good, an^ stand them in stead at the day of Judgment p. 15^
Christianity compared to a Race p. 50 Christianity compared to Wrestling Ibid
Christianity compared to a Fight p. 5^ Christianity compared to an Agony p. 5^
Christians have many Enemies p. 51, 52 Christians find their condition in this
Life very mutable p. 177, 16^ Christians should be cheerful in laboring for
Eternal good things p. 337, 338 Chrysostomes Censure of Antioch p. 68 Church,
why called the Congregation of the Poor, p. 209 Cicero his Saying, wherein we
are taught not to be idle p. 246 Cleanthes great labor p. 47 Count Anhalt his
Saying concerning the Scriptures. p. 18 Colen, Ground Where Saint Ursula' s
Virgins are buried, retains no other dead Bodies in it p. 45 Commands of God
dangerous to be neglected p. 82 Conscience that is good of a great benefit p.
117 Conscience an everlasting Companion p. 118 Conscience does mind Men of sin
in this Life that long after it has been committed p. 119 ^onscience will
bring to mind sins in another Life. p. 120 ^onscience that is bad, like a Mill
Ibid. ^onscience that is good is in a good Man p. 121 ^onscience that is good,
a consequence of Grace p. 122 ^onscience that is good is a bridle against sin
p. 122 ^onscience that is good is a spur unto duty p. 123 ^onscience that is
good, a comfort under affliction. Ibid. ^onscience that is good lives in peace,
and dies in pease. p. 124 ^onscience when terrified for sin, not comforted by
Temporal good things p. 826 ^onstantinople had 7000 Houses in it burnt in the
year 1633 p. 166 ^ourtier, his Saying upon his Deathbed p. 130 ^reatures, all
of them do desire their center p. 107 ^ickets of the Night, who p. 44 ^own worn
in Heaven is Eternal p. 181 Crown in Heaven promised to five sorts p. 182
D.
DAvid his great desire after God p. 31 Daughters of Danaeus are in Hell
condemned to fill a bottomless tub p. 208 Day time is for labor p. 35 Days,
how Christ in Scripture is said to have many of them p. 326, 327 Dazzled are the
minds and Distracted are the judgments of Men by Temporal things p. 224 Dead
Men are all Men without Christ p. 111, 112 Death cannot he kept off by Temporal
good things. p. 128 Death should always be in a Christians thoughts p. 145
Death terrible, especially to those who have made no provision for Eternity p.
146 Death by Mundanus an Heathen, looked upon to be but a change to a more
happy Estate p. 147 Death not feared by Seneca p. 148 Death, what it will be to
a good Man, and what it will be to a wicked Man p. 151 Death, what thoughts
Saint Basil had of it p. 152 Death makes all Men equal p. 284 Deathbed, how
terrible to Philip the Third King of Spain p. 129 Deathbed, how terrible it
was to a Courtier p. 130 Deathbed, what thoughts Pelican ( a German Divine)
had thereupon p. 133 Deathbed made comfortable to those who have gotten
Eternal good things p. 144 Deathbed, how Valentinian the Emperor was
comfortable thereon p. 152 Deathbed, what will comfort any Christian thereon
Ibid. Delightful is the labor for Heaven p. 335 Demades his Counsel to the
Athenians p. 264 Diligence commanded p. 332, 333 Diocletian leaves the Empire,
because he could not rout out the Christians p. 207 Diogenes preferred his
Cynical Life before Alexanders Royalty p. 223 Dionysius of Syracuse teaches a
School at Corinth. p. 170 Domitian' s carelessness, a cause of his death p. 318
Dreams, how Temporal good things are compared thereunto p. 297 Dye willingly,
those will who are interessed in Eternal good things. p. 75 Dying Men by wealth
cannot be freed from the fury of a guilty conscience p. 129
E.
EArthly things comprehended under Meat for three Reasons p. 6 Earthly things
are but mean things in comparison of Eternal good things Ibid. Early some rise,
but why? p. 248 Edward the Third at death forsaken of all but one Priest p. 128
End of a Christian' s life what it is p. 72 Enemies there are many unto a
Christian p. 51, 52 Enemy to a Christian is Sin, and that a sore one p. 53
Ephemeris a Beast, and why so called p. 318 Ephorus his Saying of his
Contrymen the Cumaeans. p. 249 Equal are all Men after death p. 284 Eternal
good things comprehended under Meat for two Reasons p. 9 Eternal good things
especially are to be labored for. p. 11, 12, 13 Eternal good things to be
labored for, do best agree with our Natures p. 57 Eternal good things greatly
labored for by the Saints. p. 63, 64. Eternal good things will be possessed
but by a few. p. 64, 65, 66, 67, 68 Eternal good things must of necessity be
gained p. 69 Eternal good things make Men willing to dye p. 75 Eternal good
things are by God commanded chiefly to be labored for p. 80 Eternal good
things the best of Good things p. 84 Eternal good things the best of Good
things proved by two Reasons p. 91 Eternal good things make the possessor of
them good. Ibid. Eternal, God is p. 101 Eternal good things will do a Christian
good under afflictions p. 140 Eternal good things will stand a Christian in
stead, and do him good when he lies upon a sick or dying bed. p. 144 Eternal
good things will do a Christian good, and stand him in stead at the day of
Judgment p. 152 Eternal good things are always desirable p. 188 Eternal good
things are satisfying good things p. 193 Eternal good things concern the Soul
p. 198 Eternal good things neglected will cause vexation in hell. p. 212
Eternal good things not to be gotten without labor. p. 229 Eternal good things
are not Fancies. p. 235 Eternal good things make a Man a Rich man p. 286
Eternal good things are real good things p. 293 Eternal good things are for a
Man's life p. 299 Eternity longer than the longest life p. 400 Eternity thought
of should make Men provide for Eternity p. 301 Eternity; with the very word
Eternity a Gentlewoman was much moved p. 307 Eternales, certain Heretics so
called p. 318 Evenings Returns to God p. 38 Examples of Saints to be imitated
p. 59, 60, 61 Excellency of a Thing lies in answering of the end. p. 74
Exceter, a Duke of that Place begged barefooted. p. 170 Exhortations to get
Eternal good things p. 265 Eye of Faith sees a beauty in Eternal good things.
p. 22^
F.
FAith an enriching Grace p. 289 Faith like a Prospective-glass to the Soul. p.
326 Faiths eye sees a beauty in Eternal good things. p. 224, and 225 Fancy of
some Men is that the only comfort of this Life does consist in temporal good
things p. 221 Fancy, since the Fall what it is Ibid. Fancy often usurpeth upon
the Understanding p. 222 Favorinus his excellent Saying concerning the Soul. p.
203 Few only have a share in Eternal good things p. 64, 65, 66 67, 68 Fighting
of a Battle, a Comparison to set forth Christianity by p. 51 Fire has caused
great ruins p. 168 Five parts of the World only are observed to know CHRIST
p. 68 Fools are all they who labor not for Eternal good things. Friendship
amongst Men mutable p. 156 Fruitfulness in the heart is caused by the Holy
Ghost. p. 117
G.
GErmany, in it 26 Villages at once on fire p. 166 Gillimer the King of the
Vandals his poor Estate. p. 171 Glory, the hopes thereof in Heaven, is a
cordial under sufferings p. 143 Glory in Heaven is Eternal p. 174, 309 God
only desired by David p. 31 God Eternal p. 101 God has in him all perfections
Ibid. God in Covenant with any makes their condition happy God has enough in
him to satisfy a Christian p. 196 God to be a God to any is a great portion p.
291. 292 Good are all they who do enjoy Christ p. 110 Good men are men of good
consciences p. 121 Good and bad, not small and great, will be the difference at
the day of Judgment p. 133 Gospel gives a true account of Heaven p. 235 Grace
and glory, better than gold and silver p. 12 Grace commended p. 96 Grace an
Eternal good thing p. 97 Grace and glory, how they differ p. 97 Grace cannot be
lost p. 97 Grace makes a change p. 97 Grace the best riches p. 98 Grace
cleanses the heart p. 97 Grashoper was the Athenians badge p. 219 Grashoper,
who like it p. 218. 273 Grave, in it no man is richer than another p. 131
Grave, in it temporal good things yield no comfort p. 130. 131. Great gifts
despised by Luther p. 31 Guise, the Duke thereof said to be the richest man in
France. p. 292
H.
HAbitation for the soul in the body but a mere habitation p. 149 Habitation in
Heaven is Eternal p. 184 Hannibal disappointed in taking of Rome, and why p.
320 Happy men who they are p. 292 Hearing of the word attention is required p.
21 Heart of man by nature is stony p. 115 Heart is made fruitful by the
workings of the Holy Ghost p. 117 Heathens minding things of this life p. 10
Heaven a light some, glorious and everlasting habitation p. 150 Heaven truly
described in the Gospel p. 235 Heaven all that have a knowledge thereof, do not
labor for it p. 236 Heavenly happiness set forth in some Queries p. 88. 89. 90
Heavenly happiness cannot be conceived p. 90 Heavenly things are the only
lasting, the everlasting good things p. 264. 173 Heir of the promises one of
the greatest titles that belong to a Christian p. 241 Hell full of many knowing
heads p. 236 Henry the 4 Emperor in poverty. p. 170 Henry the 4 King of France
esteemed France equal to the Spaniards many Kingdoms p. 179 Hermet his esteem
of a Cat p. 223 Holiness from the Holy Ghost p. 114 Hopes of wicked men for
Heaven will be frustrated p. 66. 67. Hopes for Heaven should be grounded upon
the word of God p. 240 Hopes for Heaven a Cordial under afflictions p. 143
Hopes for Heaven, are but in vain built upon the promises by those who obey not
the Commandments p. 242. 243 Hormisda his esteem of Christ p. 108
I.
Idleness desired of most men p. 5 Idle persons unprofitable persons p. 5. 8
Idle persons Periander makes a Law against p. 8 Idle no day was Seneca p. 48
Idle to be, Nature never brought forth any p. 246. 247 Idly some Affricans do
spend their time p. 8 Jehosaphats but few p. 94 Ignatius his esteem of Christ
p. 107 Imaginary good things only, are all temporal good things p. 293. 294
Imaginary Heaven was made by a King of Per^ia p. 296 Inheritance in heaven is
an Eternal inheritance p. 179 Interest in Christ will stand a man in stead at
the day of judement p. 152 Johannes de temporibus his age p. 300 Joy to be had
in Heaven is Eternal joy p. 176 Judgment day will be terrible to those who
never had more then Temporal good things p. 132 Judgment day will put no
difference between small and great, but between good and bad p. 133. 135
Judgment day when it comes, Eternal good things then do a Christian good and
stand him in stead p. 152 Judgment day, to whom it will be terrible p. 158
Judgment day, thoughts thereof should keep men from sin p. 161 Juno's Statue.
p. 118
K.
Kingdom of Heaven an everlasting Kingdom p. 180 Kingdom of Israel compared
to the Moon p. 181 Kings Reign is but a noble servitude p. 193 Knowledge of
Heaven and Eternal good things does not always put on men to labor for them
p. 236 Knowledge of Heaven, the want thereof, the cause why men labor not for
it p. 237 Knowledge conjectural about heavenly things is to be preferred before
certain knowledge abo^t earthly things p. 270
L.
Labor required of every Christian p. 4. 5. 7 Labor required of Adam in
Paradise whilst innocent p. 7 Labor we must especially and chiefly for Eternal
good things p. 11. 12. 261. 265. 269 Labor we must for Eternal good things or
else they will never be enjoyed p. 56 Labor for Temporal good things, is with
God's good granted p. 266 Labor for Heaven, all will not that do desire Heaven
p. 231. 232 Laboring for Eternal good things, will bespeak a man to be a wise
man p. 272 Lady Jane Gray her answer to Master Ascham p. 294 Lambert Martyr his
high esteem of Christ p. 107 Learning a notable saying concerning it, by
Aeneas-Silvius p. 13 Lepidus an idle person p. 5 Life in Heaven is an Eternal
life p. 175 Life of that man is provided for who has gotten Eternal good
things p. 299 Lodestone, what man are like unto it p. 219 London about 13000
houses there burnt in the year 1666 p. 166 Longest life nothing to Eternity p.
300 Life Eternal may be said four ways to be enjoyed in this present life p.
160 Lords Prayer but one Petition in it for Temporal good things, and why p. 11
Loyterers a penalty against them p. 5 Luther despises great gifts p. 31
Luthers morning piety p. 37 Lyoness her property p. 311 Dysimachus Ioseth his
Kingdom for a draught of water p. 72
M.
MAn why he was created p. 37 Mandanus an Heathen looked upon death to be a
change to a more happy estate p. 147 Manna was food miraculous but not lasting
p. 7 Martyrs dyed cheerfully, and what comforted them at death p. 75. 152
Mauritius thankful when he heard he should be punished in this world, and
spared in another, though he were to lose Empire, Life and all p. 71 Maximian
Herculeus leaves his Empire in a rage because he could not root out Christians
p. 207 Maevius a noble Centurion of Augustus, his resolute answer to Antonius
p. 34 Mean men have been highly advanced p. 104 Means used by the ancients to
keep death in their thoughts p. 145 Meats for the body are of a perishing
nature p. 7 Meditation useful after reading or hearing the word p. 21 Melitho
how she animated her son p. 349 Money that would never perish only pleased
Saint Basil p. 62 Monk, a story of such a one p. 331 Mornings to be spent in
piety p. 36 Morning piety practiced p. 37 Mountains three famous ones in Persia
p. 182 Moses his great self denial p. 61 Mursius, what he used to write upon
all his books p. 307 Myrogenes his request p. 305
N.
NArcissus fell in Love with himself p. 295 Naturally men do labor for Eternal
good things, p. 217 Neighborhood in Heaven good p. 151 Nicostratus a cunning
workman, how much he admired a curious picture p. 255 Non-communicants reproved
p. 26 Night piety required p. 39 Night spent in Prayer by St. Anthony p. 40
Night judgments on wicked men p. 41. 42. 43 Night mercies bestowed upon good
men p. 42 Night guard God is to his people p. 43 Night piety practiced p. 44.
47* Night how spent by some p. 248
O.
OBedience entitles to blessedness p. 84 Opportunity painted with an hairy
forehead but bald behind, and why. p. 321 Opportunity improved Examples of such
p. 321. 322 Oracles how given by Proteus p. 27 Ordinances what they are p. 17
Origens choice p. 62
P.
PAlestae, fields in Greece so called, what they were p. 60 Paradise was a most
delightful place p. 195. 196. Pareus his opinion of Aristotle's Arguments to
prove the world to have had no beginning p. 294 Parr his age p. 29 Paul the
Apostle, especially beloved by the (...) ans p. 13 Paulus Aemilius his
sacrifices to the gods p. 29 Peace inwardly, better then plenty outwardly p.
129 Periander his Law against idle persons p. ^8 Persecution should no way
hinder a Christian in his laring for Heaven p. 32 Perseverance required p. 30
Philip the 3 of Spain his saying upon his deathbed p. 129 Philosophy was
studied by Aristotle in the morning and Eloquence in the afternoon p. 270
Philpot, Martyr, how cheerful in the Colehouse p. 44 Pius Quintus saying of
himself p. 95 Pleasures in the world compared to Rivers that fall into the Sea
p. 213 Poor have the first of the beatitudes belonging to them, but amongst the
woes, the first belongs to the rich p. 92 Poorer in the grave is Alexander,
then the poorest man in the world p. 131 Popes, a ceremony used at the
assumption of them p. 307 Prayer should be importunate p. 27. 28. 29 Promises
are the surest Pillars to build hopes for Heaven upon p. 240 Promises are a
Christians Magna Charta p. 208 Promises of God are all sure p. 208 Prosperous
oft-times are the wicked p. 131 Proteus how he gave Oracles p. 27 Proverb one
Jewish p. 51 Proverbs two very notable in the prejudice of rich men p. 92
Psalliam and Euchitae but Heretics, though they spent all their time in Prayer
p. 27 Pythias piued to death p. 170
R.
RAce, thereunto Christianity compared p. 50 Real and not imaginary things are
all Eternal good things p. 293 Repent none ever will that they labored for
Eternal good things p. 211 Reproof to th^se who prefer temporal good things
before Eternal good things p. 255 Resolution required in a Christian p. 33. 34.
35 Rich to be, what unlawful means some men do use p. 251 Rich that man is who
has Eternal good things p. 286 Rich a Christian may be inwardly although he be
poor inwardly p. 292. 293 Riches of tentimes proves an impediment to piety p.
92. 73. 94. 95. Riches at death will leave a man to the fury of a guilty
Conscience p. 129 Righteous Judge will Christ be at the day of Judgment p. 135
Rise early, why some so do p. 248
S.
SAints departed how to be honored p. 60 Saints are often afflicted p. 141
Saint Anthony spent the night in Prayer p. 40 Saint Marks treasury at Venice p.
107 Saladine carried nothing but his Winding sheet out of the world with him to
the grave p. 131. 286 Satisfaction in God is to be found by any Christian p. p.
196. 197. Satisfy the Soul of man the whole world will not p. 289. 290. Scipio
banished idle and unprofitable soldiers from his Camp. p. 5. Scipio used every
morning to go first to the Capital, and then to the Senate. p. 36 Scriptures
excel all other writings p. 18 Scriptures should be the standard of all our
actions p. 59 Seneca no day idle p. 48 Seneca not afraid of death p. 148
Seriousness to be exercised when at any time a Christian is laboring for
Eternal good things p 16 Serpent Scycale p. 229 Sight of God and Christ in
Heaven most ravishing p. 323. 324 Sin a sore Enemy p. 53 Sin aims at the souls
damnation p. 54 Sin has made man deformed p. 98 Sleep very beneficial p. 39
Sleep why by God it has sometimes been withheld from men p. 39. 40. 41. Sleep
being withheld has proved well for some men p. 48. Slothfulness reproved p.
262. Sluggish spirits there are that would not willingly labor p. 4. 5.
Solomon's judgment of these Temporal good things p. 191 Soul of man has but a
mean habitation in the body p. 149 Soul of man concerned in Eternal good things
p. 198. Soul of man especially to be provided for p. 199. 200. 201 Soul of man
is immediately from God 202. Soul of man most excellent p. 202. 203 Soul of man
makes the body lovely p. 202 Soldiers how chosen by Caius Marius p. 31.
Spaniards what they say of Aquinas his writings p. 102 Spartan Kings that
reigned but a year, their practice p. 320. Spiritual sloth grown common p. 231
Stars and other Caelestial bodies why they seem small to us p. 226 Striving,
Christianity compared to it p. 50 Store, the best p. 58 Snarez, what is
reported of him p. 270 Supper of the Lord, holds out Christ as well as the word
p. 23 Supper of the Lord, what food is received at it p. 25 Supper of the Lord,
to it men should come hungring and thirsting p. 25 Supper of the Lord, neglects
thereof reproved p. 26 Swan why it is dedicated to Apollo p. 303 Sweating
sickness in England p. 39
T.
Tastes of Heaven how operative p. 310. 311 Temporal and Eternal things deserve
serious and holy meditations p. 1 Temporal good things but once petitioned for
in the Lords Prayer p. 11 Temporal good things should be subserviant to Eternal
good things, proved out of the Lords Prayer p. 11 Temporal good things under
terrors of Conscience do no good p. 126 Temporal good things at death yield no
comfort p. 127 Temporal good things will not keep off death p. 128 Temporal
good things yield no comfort in the grave p. 130 Temporal good things will
yield no comfort in Hell p. 136 Temporal good things are but perishing good
things p. 164 Temporal good things dazel the mind and distract the judgment p.
224 Temporal good things their worth p. 265 Temporal good things may with God's
good leave be labored for p. 266 Temporal good things promised so far as
needful p. 267 268 Temporal good things without Eternal will leave a man a
beggar p. 277 Temporal good things but imaginary good things p. 293
Thankfulness due to God for the least mercies p. 30. 31 Theodosius how he used
to spend the night p. 247 Threatenings not in vain p. 84 ^ime is precious p. 44
^ime not misspent will be comfortable at death p. 46 ^ime is but short p. 317.
318 ^ytius his punishment in Hell p. 118 ^orments in Hell are Eternal p. 308.
309 ^ully s Offices much esteemed by the Lord Burleigh p. 20 ^urks upbraid
Christians p. 76 ^urkish Emperor by Mahomets Law is bound to Exercise some
manual Trade or Calling p. 8
V.
VAin will not be Labor of Eternal good things p. 206 Valentinian the
Emperor, what comforted him upon his deathbed p. 152 Verres Deputy of Sicily
his much lying in bed p. 274 Vile bodies of the Saints at the day of judgment
shall be glorious bodies p. 155 Vexation often accompanies Temporal good
things p. p. 190. 191 Vitellius Emperor both of the East and the West basely
used and murdered p. 170 Ubiquitaries complained of by Zanchy p. 253 Undone
will all those men be when they come to dye who have nothing laid up in Heaven
p. 285 Unwilling are many to take pains for Heaven, though they desire to Enjoy
Heaven p. 231. 232. 233 Unwearied must a Christians labor be for Heaven p. 348
W.
Want feared by many in this world p. 276 Want will many in Hell, who do
abound in this world p. 282 Wealth will leave thousands at death to the fury of
a guilty conscience p. 129 Weep we have reason, over neglecters of Eternal good
things. p. 245. 253 Wicked, prone to nourish hopes for Heaven p. 65. 66 Wicked
men may enjoy prosperity p. 140 Wine to be Exported, was hindered by the old
Romans, and why p. 314 Winds about Sancto Croix in Afric by the Portugal^
called Monzoones 348 Wisemen are they who labor for Eternal good things p. 272
Wisemen, who they are that are so accounted in the world p. 276 Woman whose
house was burned, minds trifles and neglects her child p. 173 World compared to
a Kings Court p. 102 World is the greatest price that the Devil has to give
for a Soul p. 227 World like a going fire p. 228 World were of no use if man
were not in it p. 266 Worldly things satisfy not the possessor p. 193. 194
289. 290 Wrestling, Christianity compared unto it p. 50
Y
YOung man's question in Matt. 19. 13. verse answered p. 11
Z.
ZAnchy his complaint of the Lutheran Vbiquitaries p. 253
The Printer to the Reader.
NOtwithstanding the great care to prevent faults in the Printing of the
foregoing Trea^ise, yet the Reader will meet with some, though but few that are
great, yet too many will be found in Literal and Syllabical mistakes, as also
in Points either misplaced or left out, some hereafter follow, the which and
all others, the Candid Reader is desired (as he meets them) to mend, else the
sense in some places possibly may not be clear.

In the Epistle Dedicatory. 2 Page 18 line after Love, add you, 4 p. 14 l.
before portion, add a. 5 p. 7 l. for unexpected read unsuspected.

In the Epistle to the Reader. 2 p. 11 l. before those, r. for.

In the body of the book. 4 p. 19 l. for operami r. operamini, 5 p. 27 l. ^,
sedore r sudore, 5 p. 30 l. f. Epicureate, r Epi^ureal, 7 p. 2 l. before
rudiments, add of the, 16 ^. 20 l. f. aeternitatem r. aeternitati, 18 p. 4 l.
for sheave r. sheaf, 26 p. 30. l. after need, blot out the Comma, and f
therefore r thereof, 28 p. 10 l. for use r. uses, 36 p. 3 l. after every add
day, 56 p 4 l. after those add words, 70 p, 2 l. f. of storms, r. by storms, 78
p. 17 l. f. willing r. willingness, 87 p. 25 l. before the, add of, 96 p. 17 l.
before consequent, add a, 105 p. 4 l. af. labor add for 105 p. 17 l. f.
tenders r. tends, 136 p. 26 l. af. that, r. is, 176 p. 33 l. f. glean r. glean,
177 p. 12 l. f. ones r. one, after does add to 185 p 14 l. af. over, add other,
191 p. 21 l. f. ignomius r. ignominious, 192 p. 2 l. before small add no, 193
p. 18 l. after in, add in the roof, 193 p. 2^ l. f. salvation r. salvations,
193 p. last l. f. Neroniand r. Nerionianae, and f. libidinus r. libidinis, 195
p. 11 l. f. ingine r. engine, 223 p. 25 l. f. and r. an, 234 p. 13 l. before
content, add and, 207 p. 17 l. before not, add at, 317. p. 5 l. f. cenessit, r.
senescit, 317 p. 6 l. f. be, r. bed, 334 p. 25 l. before In, add 3. 334 p. 33
l. for bandry r. husbandry, 344 p. 9 l. f. straight, read slight.

FINIS.

