THE VOYAGE of the Wandering KNIGHT.

SHOWING The whole Course of Man's Life, how apt he is to follow Vanity, and
how hard it is for him to attain to VIRTUE.

Devised by John Cartheny, a French man: and Translated out of French into
English, by W. G. of Southampton Merchant.

A Work worthy the Reading: AND Dedicated to the Right Worshipful Sir Francis
Drake, Knight.

LONDON, Printed by John Cadwell, for Andrew Crook at the Sign of the
Green-Dragon in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1661.

To the Right Worshipful Sir Francis Drake, Knight: happy success in all his
Attempts, and due Reward for the same.
THE common course of man's life (most ventrous and no less Worshipful Knight)
and their daily dealings, do manifestly declare how variable they be, how
wandering, how wavering, how uncertain and unconstant; if Fortune, or rather God
(to speak Christian-like) by blessing them as abundantly, so extraordinarily,
and raising them, tanquam e pulvere and luto, advance them to promotion. And no
marvel though this be incident to the manners of men, seeing that Nature her
self in this point offends. For what is he, unless he be mortified, that is
not naturally of an aspiring mind? Imitating herein the property of the Ivy,
which never cease climbing by degrees, Donec ipsam summitatem attigerit, till
it be come to the very top. This fault being general, and hateful in the
judgment, specially of the wise, might seem so much the more tolerable, if
that men placed in pre-eminence, and sitting like Hills over-looking the
Valleys below, with their high calling and stately authority, had agreeable
hearts. But some notwithstanding their state be singular, and indeed such as
that they may sit down, take their ease, and say, Hic terminus esto, do carry
so base a mind, as that if I should compare them to Aesops Cock, preferring a
Barley Corn before a precious Pearl, I should not do amiss. There is none but
by diligent observation may see this to be undoubted truth.

In the taxing of which English and Outlandish fault, (for it is as common as
the World is wide) I should show my self no cunning Archer, to over-shoot the
mark of your deserved commendation: For although you have had Fortune holding
the Basin whilst you washed your hands, and cast the best chance of the Dice:
yet for all that, such is your contentment, you hoyst not up the lofty sail of
self-love, to swell with the wind of vainglory, as vanting of any exploit
which you have achieved, Per tot Cyclopia saxa, per mundi scopulos, Scyllam,
vastamque Charibdim: But as you went out, so are you come home, familiar with
your friends, courteous to your acquaintance, remembering all, forgetting none,
still of one mind, will, and affection, the prosperous event of your dangerous
Voyage notwithstanding.

Some one having passed a Sea of six days sailing, or less, (if less might be
supposed) is so far in love with himself, and so indiscreetly doteth over his
own doings, at his return; that he makes his Travel ordinary Table-talk,
aggravating the matter so monstrously, as if he had endured the very Labors of
old Hercules. Another, Et terris jactatus and alto, having seen the mighty
Works of the Lord, and his Wonders in the Deep, and as it were measured with a
pair of Compasses, (be it spoken without offense) the globe of the World, post
multa discrimina rerum, arriving to his native Soil, marvellously blessed from
above, yet discovers not the multitude of dangers, or rather death, wherewith
he has encountered. Which of these judge you, deserves the Trumpets plausible
sound.

I cannot therefore sufficiently wonder at the equality of your Worships mind,
which notwithstanding so many tempests of perturbations, and sharp surges of
inward motions, continues calm. And it does me not a little good, first, to
see you so fortunate; secondly, though that were enough to make you insolent
and disdainful, the credit which you have gotten deserving (no doubt) even with
the very best, that yet you contemn not the company, the acquaintance, the
familiarity and conference, even of such as by many degrees are your inferiors.

This among other considerations of your courteous disposition and friendly
nature (being a mirror in a Gentleman in this our proud arrogant Age) like a
right Lodestone, drew me, an Iron lump, having in my hands a notable Work,
entitled, The Voyage of the Wandering Knight, to overrun the same, according
to my superficial skill, and slender knowledge, to polish and burnish it, to
restore and make it perfect, in some such limbs, whereon it seemed to halt,
that it might with so much the more grace Proripere in publicum, and in hominum
manus involare, for their large delight, and indeed to procure the printing and
publishing thereof, that well-disposed people might thereby reap some benefit.

Which Work so perfected and brought into a reasonable good form, as my little
learning and less leisure gave me leave, I am bold upon request of the
Translator, being absent, to make Dedicatory unto your Worship, and have added
this Epistle of mine own, as a testimony of the unfeigned affection and hearty
good will which I bear you (without presumption be it spoken) not doubting how
it shall be received, seeing the former presentation thereof was so well liked.
Beseeching God to bless you, and the good Lady your Wife, and all yours, one
with another, to prosper your proceedings, to further all your affairs: and
that as hitherto you have had Virtue your ^ore-runner, and Fortune your
follower, so you may have them still, even to your lives end: Vt magis atque
magis tua gloria crescat: and that after you have sailed even to the very
Straits of Death, which no mortal man can avoid, you may arrive in the Port of
peace, I mean Abraham's Bosom, even the Kingdom of Heaven, the appointed Haven
for all the true Christian Navigatours.

Your Worships most humble, to command, N. R.

The Contents of the first part of the Voyage of the Wandering Knight.
THe Wandering Knight declares his intent and foolish Enterprise, wishing and
supposing in this World to find true Felicity. Chap. 1. The Wandering Knight
declares unto Dame Folly, his Governess, what is his intent. chap. 2. Folly,
and Evil will, provide the Knight Apparel, Armor, and Horse. chap. 3. Folly
apparelleth and armeth the Wandering Knight. chap. 4. Folly upon the way shows
the Knight many of her ancient, proceedings, and how many great and notable
Personages she had governed. chap. 5. The Wandering Knight finding two ways,
and doubtful whether of them to take, there chanced to come to him Virtue and
Voluptuousness, either of them offering to conduct and guide the Wandering
Knight on the way. chap. 6. The Wandering Knight by the counsel of Folly, left
Lady Virtue, and followed Voluptuousness, which led him to the Palace of
worldly Felicity. chap. 7. How the Wandering Knight was received and welcomed to
the Palace of wordly Felicity. chap. 8. Voluptuousness shows the Wandering
Knight some part of the Palace, and after brought him to Dinner. chap. 9.
Dinner being done, Voluptuousness shows the Wandering Knight the rest of the
Palace of worldly Felicity, with the superscription of the Towers thereof, and
by the Author is declared the evil fruit of certain notorious sins. chap. 10.
The situation or standing of the Palace of worldly Felicity. chap. 11. The
Author declares how the Wandering Knight, and such like voluptuous livers in
the World, transgress the Commandments of Almighty God. chap. 12. The Knight
going for to recreate himself, and to view the Warrens and Forests, which were
about the Palace of Worldly Felicity, anon he saw it sink suddenly into the
Earth, and perceived himself in the mire up to the Saddle skirts. chap. 13. The
Author cries out bitterly against Worldlings, and their Felicity. chap. 14.
The Second part of the Voyage of the Wandering Knight.
GOds Grace draws the Knight out of the filth of sin, wherein he stuck fast.
chap. 1 Gods grace shows Hell unto the Knight, with all the Voluptuous
company that he saw in the Palace of Worldly Felicity. chap. 2. The Knight
declares how he entered into the School of Repentance, and of his entertainment
there. chap. 3. How true Repentance begins in us, and how the Knights
Conscience accused him, with the pains he had deserved. chap. 4. By the
Commandment of Gods Grace, Remembrance read to him the goodness of God, with
the promises made to the repentant Sinner. chap. 5. A Sermon which
Understanding, the good Hermit, made unto the Knight upon the History of Mary
Magdalen. chap. 6. The Knight having received the holy Communion, heard the
Sermon, and Dinner ended, mounted into a Chariot of Triumph, and was by Gods
Grace carried to the Palace of Virtue. chap. 7.
The third part of the Voyage of the Wandering Knight.
THe Knight declares the great good, solace and pleasure which he found in the
Palace of Lady Virtue. chap. 1. The description of Virtue. chap. 2. The
description of Faith, and how we ought to believe in God for our Salvation.
chap. 3. The description of Hope, and how we ought to hope in Almighty God.
chap. 4. The description of Love and Charity, and how we ought to love God, and
our Neighbor. chap. 5. The effects and praises of Love and charity. chap. 6.
The description of the four moral Virtues, Prudence, Justice, Fortitude, and
Temperance. chap. 7. How Faith from the top of the Tower shows unto the
Knight the City of Heaven. chap. 8. The desires that the Knight had to come to
Heaven, and how Gods Grace brought perseverance. chap. 9. Good Understanding
shows the Knight how to keep perseverance always with him. chap. 10. The
Protestation that good Understanding taught the Knight to make every day to
avoid temptation, that he ought to humble himself before God, and what he
should ask in his prayers. chap. 11. The Authors Peroration or Conclusion, to
the devout Readers or Hearers. chap. 12.
THE VOYAGE OF The Wandering Knight.
The First Part.
CHAP. I.
The Wandering Knight declares his intent and foolish Enterprise, supposing in
this World to find true Felicity.

MAny Historiographers, both Poets and Orators, as well Profane as Divine,
have by Writing notified diverse persons with their Voyages and Adventures.
First, Justin and Diodore, of Sicilie, have made mention of the Argonautes
Voyage by Sea: that is to say, of Jason and his Allies, Castor, Pollux,
Hercules, and other Peers, to the I Will of Cholcos, to win the Golden Fleece,
which a great Dragon kept. Also Homer, a Greek Poet, writ in Verse the wandering
and Sea Voyage of Ulysses and his Companions, at their return from the Trojan
Wars. After him Virgil, a most eloquent Latin Poet, set down in Verse the
Voyage of Aeneas into Italy, with his fortunes, after the subversion of Troy.

Now if we come to the sacred Histories, we shall find, first, how Moses wrote
of the Children of Israel their going out of Egypt into the Land of Promise,
and of the two and forty Mansions that they made in the Deserts, for the space
of forty years. And how the four Evangelists likewise most faithfully have
written of the holy peregrination of the Blessed Son of God our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, who took upon him our frail and humane nature. The self
same Savior has set down the Parable of the boluptuous Voyage of the prodigal
Child, and his return. S. Luke very notably and sincerely has delivered, in
writing, the painful and holy perigrination of that great bessed of Election
Saint Paul, together with the great travel he took to preach the Gospel, and
the Faith of Jesus Christ, to all the Gentiles.

And now (by Gods grace) I mean to declare mine own Voyage and Adventures, much
like to that of the Prodigal Child, who left his Fathers house, and ranged
into strange Countries, wasting all his goods, living licentiously: but after
he knew his lewdness, he returned back to his Father, of whom he was very
lovingly received. So I by great Folly counseled, in absenting my self far
away (not only in body, but also in mind) from God my Father and Creator, have
wasted and consumed all the goods which the same my God and Father had
bountifully bestowed upon me, in following bain pleasures of this life. But in
the End, I being inspired with Divine grace, acknowledged mine effences; and
leaking the dark Region of sin and vanity, through the aid and conduction of
Divine grace, am returned to mine Eternal Father, humbly requiring pardon and
mercy; who of his unspeakable mercy has lovingly received me. But how all this
has been done, I will declare unto you, praying you patiently to give me the
hearing, and attentively consider my talk, and well to note the whole, from the
beginning to the End.

When I had passed in all Folly and Lastiviousnesse three weeks of the years of
mine age: that is to say, My infancy, Child age, and Youth, which make together
one and twenty years, I entered into the age of a young man, which is the fourth
week of my age, which is between two and twenty and four and twenty years. At
five and twenty I was minded to make a Voyage, by my foolish industry to seek
where in this World I might stud true Felicity and Happiness, which seemed to
my sortish sense an easse matter, being Young, Strong, wild, Hardy, and
Courageously disposed. Me thought in my mind, to live in the world without
Felicity, was a Life worse than Death. But alas, being plunged in deep darkness
of Agnorance, I considered not that true Felicity was the Gift of God from
above, and cannot be attained without his help.

Being robbed of Reason, I thought it might come easily of my self without the
help of others: so that then I sought true Felicity, where she is not, was not,
nor ever shall be: as in Riches, worldly Pleasure, strength, Honor, and
Delights of the flesh. But I was in so thinking as very a Fool as he, who
hops with Angling Lines to catch Fishes in the Air, or with Hounds to hunt
the Hare in the Ocean Sea: were it not, think you, a great Folly so to think?
Even the like is it to think that true Felicity is to be found here in this
wretched world. And for so much as in perfect Felicity is Comprehended all
goodness, and that the world (as says St. John) Is addicted and given to all
Evil, and Subject to hunger, thirst, heat, cold, diseases, calamities, pride,
ambition, covetousness, and voluptuousness; it is evident that those which here
be living, supposing here to find true Felicity are worse then Fools, and void
of right Reason.

True Felicity is not without goodness and virtue, which comes from God above:
if it be so, why then is it not a most wicked and Presumptuous Opinion, to
think that by a Man's own industry he is able to possess and enjoy the fair for
of true Felicity? Therefore every one that thinks, in this world, he may come
to perfect Felicity and true blessedness, shall find, in fine, as I found, for
Felicity, Vanity; for Good, Evil.

CAP. II.
The Wandering Knight declares unto Dame Folly his Governesse, what is his
Intent.

INtending to take my journey, I considered that it was necessary to use
Council therein, knowing that whatsoever is done without advice cannot have
good Suctess: as contrariwise, a matter discreetly attempted is luckily ended.
Then dwelt with me a Damosel which ruled my House, whose proper name was Folly,
the only Enemy to Wisdom: For every thing that hates the one, loves the
other. There is as much difference between them, as between white and black,
hot and cold, moist and dry, light and darkness, God and the Devil: all which
be contraries, and cannot be in one body together.

Wisdom governes the good: Folly the evil. Wisdom makes the evil good,
when they yield themselves to be her Subjects: Folly makes the good evil,
when they place themselves under her Protection. Wisdom draws Men from Hell,
and brings them to Heaven: Folly fetches Angels from Heaven to dwell in Hell.

I do not term that Wisdom, to know the seven Liberal Soiences, the qualities
of the Stars and Planets; but I count him wise that has the true knowledge of
God. For, as says Saint Cyrill, Wisdom is that true understanding, by the
which the Sovereign good, namely God, is seen, known and loved, with a chaste
love and pure Affection. Folly is very Ignorance, and salse Worshipping of God.
Wisdom makes Fools wise, and Folly makes wise Men Fools. Lell me, I pray
you, can there be a greater Wisdom than to serve God with a pure Faith, and to
observe and keep his holy Law Obediently? And contrariwise, can there be
greater Folly than to commit Sin, and to disobey God by transgressing his
Commandments? It is not possible. For whosoever commits sin, burieth
himself, and runs headlong to Hell, which is a point of very great Folly.
Therefore all those that saithfully serve God, and keep his holy Commandments,
are wise, and governed by Wisdom: and all those that transgress she
Commandments of God are Fools, and fostered by Folly, as Slaves or Vassals.
When I wandered into wanton ways, I wrought my will, esteeming my self wise,
but I proved a flat Fool. Thus fostered by Folly, to whom I unfolded my intent,
which was to take upon me a Voyage to find Felicity and Messedness, I requested
her Counsel; who without regard whether it were profitable for me or no, did
not only like the matter, but also forced me forwards, and with flattering
phrase commended my Enterprise. And to encourage me therein, she began to exalt
my device, to commend my industry and wit, to praise my strength, to advance my
virtue, to blaze my knowledge, to decipher my beauty, and to extol all my
qualities: saping that I was a second Solomon, to have in my head such notable
Cogitations. Hereupon she promised to be my Enide, and vowed not to go from me
in all my Voyage, affirming that she had sundry seasons made the like journey,
and that I might assure my self shortly to see the Palace of true Felicity.

My Son (quoth she) I would not have thee think, that any Evil or Guile can
have place in my heart. Thus Comforted, or rather emboldened, I thought my self
most happy to have such a Governesse, so wise, so grave, and so expert, for
very joy whereof my heart tickled within me: But alas, wretch that I was, my
destre was always after contrary Things: for I rejected whatsoever tended to
my Health, in so much that to me sour seemed sweet, black seemed white, evil
seemed good, Folly seemed Wisdom, Light seemed Darkness: And Folly so fore
bewitched me, that I neglected to do the good I should have done, and I was too
willing to play the part I should not have plaved. It is true that the wise man
make, saying: There is health, where many do give counsel; and he that takes
good advice and counsel before, shall not repent him after.

But it is forbidden to take counsel of Fools. For that they love but what
they like. There is an old Proverb, Such as my Counselor is, such needs must
be my Counsel: It were against all reason, that a Fool should give good
Council: For this is even as if Rivers should run against the Hill. Nothing
can be compared to good Counsel: neither can any thing be worse than evil
Counsel: by the which the World is troubled, Realms molessed, Princes defaced,
Kings killed, Empires altered, Towns taken, Cities sacked, Laws abolished.
Justice generally corrupted, Divine Mysteries profaned, mingled with mischief,
and confounded: the true knowledge of God is forgotten, all Reverence to
Superiors neglected: Shame-fastnesse, Sobriety, Faith, Hope, Charity, and all
other Virtues defaced; all manner of Wars both Foreign and Civil attempted: O
Grief, O Plague, O cruel Monster ^ Now to our purpose.

CAP. III.
Folly and Evill-will provided the Knight Apparel, Armor, and Horses.

FOrasmuch as Men oftentimes do alter their intents, Folly was bufie and
earnest to force me forward, in the prosecuring my purpose, persuading me to
put my self on the way, and saying, that such good meanings and enterprises
should presently and without delay be put in execution, for sear of
inconveniences that might ensue: and that to mean a matter without doing it,
was a reproach to any Person. Whereto I answered, that I would proceed
whatsoever followed thereupon: but me thought it was necessary to have company,
and other provition, as Apparel, Horses, and Armor, sit for such a Voyage. My
Son (quoth she) I will take that charge upon me, whereto trust: cast all care
from Thee, let nothing torment thee, be of good cheer, Sleep at thine ease,
refuse no rest: for I will within few days bring thee all necessaries that
thou shall need; and seeing thou have submitted thy self to me, I will not sail
thee. Being glad of these words, I referred the whole matter to her discretion,
and took mine ease.

Then Folly was acquainted with an Armourer, named Evill-will, whose company
she daily frequented. This Armourer was not always occupied in forging
Armours, but also oftentimes he made Shirts, Hosen, Doublets, and meddled in all
matters that his Friend Folly appointed him to do.

To this Armourer Folly declared all my purpose, and he at her request made me
a Shirt of Lasciviousness, a Doublet of lewd Desires, Hosen of vain Pleasures,
Armor of Ignorance, a Corslet of Inconstancy, Vambraces of Arrogance,
Gauntlets of Idleness, a Gorget of Licourousness, a Helmet of Lightness, a
Buckler of Shamelessness, a quilt Cap of Vainglory, a Girdle of Intemperanee, a
Sword of Rebellion, and a Lance, named Hope of long Life. Then Pride prepared
me a galloping Horse called Temerity, or Rashness.

All these wicked weapons, with this prodigal apparel, and unhonest Armor,
Evil-will prepared me at Follies request. And what better service can he do,
seeing he is deprived of truth and verity? for as good will is the worker of
all goodness, so is evil will of wickedness. Jesus Christ (who cannot fail)
says in the Gospel, That of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks: the
good man of the good treasure of his heart delivers out good things: but the
evil man clean contrary. For out of a sack can nothing come but such as is in
it; and out of a coffer of precious Pearls, we must not look for colebrands;
and therefore surely seeing I have Evil-will to my Armourer, and Folly to my
Governess, how can I do other than evil.

CHAP. IV.
Folly apparelleth, and armeth the wandering Knight.

WHiles Folly my Governesse, and Evill-will my Armourer prepared my Apparel,
and other provision, I forgot not to cast all care behind me, as Folly
commanded. For when I was a Child, I did eat always of the best meat, drank of
the delicatest drink, I slept when I listed, I lay in soft Silk, I passed my
time in pleasures, trusting to my Governesse Folly in all my affairs. After I
passed three days in pleasure, upon a morning, being in my Golden sleep, Dame
Folly came to my Beds side, accompanied with Evil-will, and with them they
brought all my necessaries. When she saw me asleep in my soft Bed at that time
of the day, tossing my self every way wantonly, she said: what, pretty one, are
you yet in Bed: It is late, arise. Ah, my sweet Friend (quoth I) I have
followed your advice, I have cast all care away, and taken mine case in mine
Inn: but I wonder how you are so soon returned.

What man (quoth Folly) know not you how diligent I am in mine affairs? I never
rest till all things be brought about, that once I take in hand. Then she put
on me my shirt of Lasciviousness, most agreeable to my wanton will, and then
all my delight was to be delieately handled, pompously Apparelled, and soft
Lodged. After that, on went my Doublet, of Lewd desires, aiwaies enemy to the
good Spirit: then my Hosen of Vain pleasures, tied together with the Points of
delight. Then I was full of lewd desires, I took pleasure in nothing but
vanity; and as my desires were damnable, so were my pleasures dangerous.

Then, as I was making me ready, Folly commanded the Clerk of my Kitchen,
called Ill-government, to prepare me my Breakfast, of light and delicate meats,
in doing whereof my Cook was more cunning, then ever Cicero was Eloquent in
speaking. And thus as Folly and I were merrily discoursing together, spending
time till Breakfast, I took occaston to ask of what age she was, and also what
jests and sine feats she had, what people she had governed and how she ruled
them. She said, that question was asked and answered long ago: But as we rid on
the way, she would declare all; in the mean time she said that she was about
sive thousand years old. How can that be (quoth I) you do not seem to be forty
years old. Yes (quoth she) thou must understand, that I was born at the present
hour that the World was made, and have ever since stood in strength, always in
health, and never sick, I shall never seem old, though I live till doomes day:
Fools die, but Folly never dies. Having ever been in force, I forceably do
reign in every corner of the world, and do govern as well Princes as poor
People.

Now to our purpose: after washing in sweet water, in came my breakfast, so
sumptuous, that Partridges were esteemed paltry for Pages, Phesants for common
folk. Breakfast finished, on went mine Armor: but being once apparelled and
armed, I cared not for my souls health, I had no desire to bear the Word of
God, no fear to follow his Commandments, or to do any thing fit for a
Christian toward his salvation: I did what I would, I said what I pleased. And
after that I was covered with my steel coat of ignorance, and my corslet of
inconstancy, I presently became inconstant, and variable, oftentimes altering
my intent, not for better but for worse, out of one ill into another. I never
ceased to acquaint my self, now with one sin, and then with another, doing
nothing that seemed good or honest. For such is the nature of sin, that unless
it be soon subdned, it will draw unto it another sin, as witnesses Saint Paul,
in his first Chapter of his Epistle to the Romans.

Then Folly put on my Vambraces of Arrogance, which made me become careless and
presumptuous, taking things in hand far passing my capacity, strength and
ability, and not fearing to adventure on that which was above my reach. But
being armed with Arrogance, up went my curled Hair, I advanced my self
ignorantly above others: then on went my Gorget of Gluttony, and Licorousness,
the breeders of all fleshly sins, and chiefly of Leachery: For when the belly
is full of licourish meats and drinks, it warmes and heats the other Members
exceedingly, which by and by wrestle and strive against the good Spirit: Bu if
the belly were bridled from Gluttony, those rebellious Members would be
subdued, as says the Comicall Poet: Sine Cerere and Baccho friget Venus, That
is to say: From Wine and good cheer thy belly refrain,
And lust of the flesh small heat does contain.


Upon all this Folly put me on another Armor, called Vainglory, which is of
such a property, that the greater it grew, the less I perceived it: then on
went my Girdle of Intemperance, which did let loose the Bridle of Leachery, and
all other fleshly affections: to it was tied my Sword of Rebellion: so that
then I rebelled against God, his holy Commandments, and all Magistrates and
Superiors. But if I had bridled my boldness, reprehending my self, in my
desires and affections, and had rested in Reason without rebelling, then I had
served God, and obeyed my betters with all dutiful Reverence. Dame Folly
disguised me with a Helmet of wantonness, upon the top whereof was put a
Peacocks Tail: so that then I might not suffer any Check for any Fault, but
might and did maintain my Opinion against all men, giving place to none
whatsoever, Learned, or in Authority. After my Gauntlets of Idleness were once
on my hands, I greatly gloried of the gifts which were in me, vaunting my self
to be more rich, more Wise, more Strong, more Hardy, more Gracious, and in all
respects better then I was. Many times I boasted of mine imperfections, as of
Drunkenness, Lechery, and such like. Then on went my Buckler of shamelesness,
which being about my shoulders, I blushed not to commit any villainy, I led the
life of an Insider, rather than a Christian: Vnshamefully I despised both God
and Man, nothing regarding mine own honor, renown, or salvation.

Then I mounted on Temerity my Horse, with a Lance in my hand, called Hope of
long life. O deceitful Lance! more rotten then a Reed. How many proper youths
have trusted unto thee, hoping to have been safe and assured, and were daily
deceived. This Lance once being possessed by me, I entertained all vices, it
ever bindred me from embracing Repentance, persuading me in this manner: Thou
art young, make merry whiles thou may, for when thou art old, all play and
pastime will be past: then it will be time enough for thee to repent. Being
thus governed by Folly, I thought neither of God nor the Devil, of Life nor
Death, of Heaven nor Hell: but lived at my pleasure, doing what I delighted in.
At last Folly apparelled her self lightly with a cloak of Feathers, and mounted
upon a Iennet, and opening her Feathers and Wings, with the wind away she flew;
and I also at a wild adventure set the Spurs to my Horse, and away we went
both. Thus you see that Folly is my Guide, Temerity my Horse. Now the first
that shall repent this Voyage must needs be my self, as you may evidently judge
and gather before hand.

CHAP. V.
Folly upon the way shows the Wandering Knight many of her ancient
proceedings, and how many great and Noble personages she had governed.

AFter we were so far passed upon our way, that we had lest the sight of my
House, I called to my remembrance the promise which Dame Folly had made me in
the morning, namely that she would tell me of her exploits past, and what
People she had governed. And thus with flattering phrase I began; My good
Mistress, my loving Lady, my Heart, my Aoy, my Life, my Lust, my Counsel, my
Hope, my Sovereign good, I desire thee most earnestly (if it please thee) to
let me understand thine ancient proceedings, and to rehearse what People thou
have governed, how they were ruled, lead, conducted, and counseled.

Mine exploits (quoth Folly) are innumerable. Ten days are not enough to
repeat half of them. Nevertheless to accomplish thy request, and to shorten
the tediousness of the way, I will tell thee of the mest Principallest.

First, the World and I was together, and because I found no Man in the World,
I ascended up into Heaven, and there assaulted the excellentest Angel of all
the whole company, called Lucifer, who at my present arrival entertained and
received me for his Governess, and so did many more of his Coequals. By my
counsel he advanced himself to be fellow mate with God; for the which
presumption both he and his were thrust out of Heaven, and thrown headlong into
Hell. That was the first of my exploits.

Shortly after, God made Man, and of his rib fashioned Woman, these two were
Husband and Wife, with them both I had much ado, because they were full of
Wisdom and Reason. I used the help and subtilty of a Serpent, to tempt the
woman, being the weaker, who with his deceitful words won her to eat of the
Apple which God forbad to be eaten. But after she had eaten it, in the presence
of her Husband (because he feared her sadness) he did eat also to fulfill her
desire and lust: wherein they both committed great folly, for the which they
were deprived of Innocence, of Gods Grace and Glory, yea, they were banished
the place appointed by God for them to dwell in, and made (with all their
posterity) subject to eternal death. This was my second principal exploit.

Then began my reign in the World, where I governed a number of Fool^; I
governed Cain the first born both of his Father and Mother. By my counsel he
killed his good brother Abel the Innocent. I governed the greated Giants that
ever were of the seed of Man, as the Daughters of Cain, and the Sons of Seth: I
made them trust in their own strength, not only touching fears of war, but I
caused them also to contemn the lord of God, and the knowledge of the same: I
persuaded them to use their Liberty, and to live according to their Lust, in
Lechery and all other abominations, without regard of the uprightness of
nature, honesty, or fear of God.

When Noe had preached forty years space of the last destruction of the World,
these obstinate Giants being nuzzeled in all wickedness of life, detestably
turned all his Admonitions and Sermons to mockery: whereat God was wroth, and
sent a great Flood which drowned all living Creatures saving Noe and his three
Sons, Sem, Ham and Japhet, with their wives. Then I thought to have lost my
reign in world, but in short space they increased wonderfully.

Then I counseled them to build an high Tower, which might reach as high as
Heaven, that in despite of God they might save themselves, if again be meant
to drown the world: But God confounded their device; and where before all the
world spoke in one Language, he divided them, so that the Lower remained
unfinished, for the Builders understood not each others speech.

Then the Posterity of Noah were dispersed throughout the world, and I reigned
amongst them every where, counselling many Nations to forsake the knowledge of
God, and to worship the Host of Heaven, as the Sun, the Moon, the Stars, the
Planets, the Fire, the water, the Air, and the Earth, and to make Idols. and
honor them in the likeness of Men, of Beasts, and Birds, and to worship them,
so that the true knowledge of God should be proper but unto one People,
descended from the loins of Abraham, and they are the Jews.

Then I demanded of Folly, how Idolatry entered the world, and where she took
place first. My Son (quoth she) understand that Idolatry has been brought into
the world by my means, For Idolatry took her first Original and beginning in
Chaldea, in the City of Babylon, and in the Region or Country of the Assyrians,
in the reign of Ninus the third King, which was the Son of Bell, Bell of
Nimroth, Nimroth of Chus, Chus of Cham, Cham of Noe: so that Ninus the third
King of Babylon, was the first Man that did ordain Temples, and set up Altars,
to Sacrifice upon, unto his Father Bell, and to Juno his Mother. First, he
fashioned their standing Images, and set them in the midst of the City of
Babylon, and that was the first beginning of Idolatry: other Neighbors and
Nations did as much: the Egyptians made the like by Osiris, surnamed Jupiter,
the true Son of Cham and of Rhea. The same Osiris, after his death was esteemed
of the Egyptians for his Virtue to be a God, so that the matter by my Counsel
(quoth Folly) turned to Idolatry. For they offered Sacrifice unto him, and
honored him in form of an Ox or a Calfe: the like also did the Children of
Israel in the Deserts with their Idol, which afterward was named Seraphis.

But as yet France and Germany were not infected with Idolatry, howbeit I did
my Endeavor to make it more Universal, and ceased not, till that shortly
after this Pestilence had taken Root. For the abovenamed Ninus, Son of Bell
King of Babylon, married Semiramis, that wonderful Woman, who (as it is
written) devised that all the Male Children should be gelded; of her Body begat
he one Son named Ninus the Second, and by another wise he had another Son
called Trabeta, who by Right of Succession should have enjoyed the Crown of
Babylon, but that his Mother-in-Law kept him from it, and took the Government
and rule unto her self, and kept it in the behalf of her young Son Ninus.
Trabeta then fearing his Stepmother, fled from Babylon, and after long travel
he arrived in France, not far from the River of Rhene, where he founded a City
and called it Treves, which is yet a very ancient City. At that time was
Gallica Belgica, and all the Country about it, which we call Low Almaine, first
Infected and Poisoned with Idolatrry, which was 1947 Years before the
Incarnation of Jesus Christ. There Trabeta (by my Counsel) made the Picture of
his Grandfather Bell the Son of Nimroth, the great Giant, and first Saturn
of the Babylonians, to be Worshipped in the City of Treves. But afterward Bavo
who founded the City Pelges, otherwise called Bayvoy in Hainot, had taken by
Force the City of Treves, and victoriously brought to Bavoy all the Treasure of
Treves, and their Idols, wherewith also he brought his own Idols from Phrygia,
By this means the error of Idolatry was more authorized: For by my counsel he
built with the spoils of his conquest seven mavelous and mighty Temples in
his City, which had seven doors, according to the seven Planets; they had also
a thousand Towers, every one an hundred cubits high, and eighteen foot broad.
By what I have related, (quoth Folly) you may perceive that the Babylonians,
the Egyptians, the Phrygians, the Frenchmen, and the Germains, followed my
counsel: but as for other Nations, they were not as yet infected with
Idolatry: For the good Patriarch Noah, otherwise called Janus, having dwelt in
Italy fourscore and two years, and being 950 years old, ( 370 years after the
Flood) he dyed, before the Incarnation 1976 years. This good Man was lamented
and bewailed through all the World generally, but chiefly of the Italians, then
called Lanigenes, and of the Armenians, over whom be first reigned. These
People presently after they knew of Noah's death, they honored him as a holy
Man: For in those days all holy Men were counted Gods: as it is often
mentioned in the holy Scripture, I have said ye are Gods; and ye all are
children of the most high. And which is more, they made him Temples and Altars,
as now adays Idolaters do unto the Saints of Heaven. I (quoth Folly) made the
simple people assure themselves that his Soul was removed into some of the
Heavenly bodies, for the which they called him the Sun, and the seen of the
World, the Father of Gods, the greater and lesser, the God of Peace, Justice,
and Holiness, the driver away of evil things, and the preserver of all good
things. Again, they called his Successors, Janus, Geminus, Quadifrons,
Enotrius, Ogiges, Vertumnus, Jupiter Optimus Maximus. Then I persuaded the
People to offer Sacrifice unto him as unto God, by which deed they became all
Idolaters: for if they had esteemed him no better then a holy Man, they had not
finned in that, for indeed he was a holy Man. Mark what Austine says in his
tenth Book of the City of God: It is not lawful (says he) to offer any
sacrifice to any Saint be it Man or Angel, but only to God. After the
destruction of Troy, Aeneas came into Italy, bringing with him his own Idols,
and the Gods of Troy: hereupon Idolatry took force, and increased more and
more. I think (quoth Folly) that this which I have told thee already may
suffice to declare how Idolatry entered the world first. Thou best heard also
how I governed Angels and Nations. Now thou shall understand how I have ruled
and ordered particular persons.

After the Flood, I first ruled Cham, Noah's Son, who being wholly given to the
Magical Art, obtained, and had the name of Zoroaster. He hated his Father,
because he loved his own brother better then him, in revenge whereof upon a day
he found his Father Noah drunk, lying fast asleep upon the ground, unhonestly
he discovered his Fathers Privities: and (by my counsel) he presumed to touch
those his secret parts, and enchanted them by his Magical Art, so that ever
after for want of ability, he could not join issue with any woman to beget
Children. His Father being angry thereat, abandoned him for a season. After
that, he became the first King and Saturn of Egypt, insomuch as the holy
Scriptures called Cham the first King of Egypt.

Again, by my counsel he trained up his People according to his own Nature, in
all villainy and filthiness; openly affirming, that Men might lawfully use and
have to do with their own Daughters and Sisters, as was the custom before the
Flood, and also to commit many other unlawful deeds, which I am ashamed to
declare: by the which doctrine, natural Virginity was oftentimes violently
assaulted and ravished. Then my friend Cham went into Italy and Usurped the
Realm to himself. And whereas other Princes of his Lineage in Germany, Spain,
and France, gave good examples to their Subjects, instructing them in good and
godly Laws, he contrariwise spoiled all the Youths in Italy, corrupting them
with all kinds of Vices, as Leachery, Theft, Mutther, Poisoning, and
Enchantment, whereof he himself was the first Inventer, as all Historiographers
hold Opinion. But when his good Father Noah understood of it, he came into
Italy, and hunted him from thence.

If I should write of all the evil deeds of Cham, it would be a weighty piece
of work, and the matter would seem monstrous. But at the last, he conveyed
himself over among the Bactrians, a People inhabiting toward the Indians,
where by his Enchantment the People became his Subjects, and he reigned over
them with great Force and Power. Yet at the last he was Vanquished and Slain in
Battle by Ninus King of Babylon, which descended of his race by his Son Chus.
Thus (quoth Folly) I lost my Friend Cham, surnamed Zoroaster, Saturn of Egypt,
the common Enemy of God and Man, and one of the most perverse and untowardest
Tyrants that ever was in the World.

I governed Bell the second Ring of Babylon, and his Son Ninus: into whese
heads. I put a disordinate raging, so that they desired to rule alone in the
World. And to bring this to pass, I counseled them to change and cut off the
Golden Age, which would have things common, peaceable, and in quiet. Hereunto
they armed themselves by all possible means, undertaking to spoil Sebatius
Saga, surnamed Saturn, King and Patriarch of Armenia, so made and ordained by
his Grandfather Noah. The same Sebatius was Son of Chus, and Brother to
Nimroth, whom Moses called Sabtah in Hebrew, which in Latin is Saturnus.

Then the said Sebatius King of Armenia, (having hardly escaped the hands of
Bell and Ninus) went for refuge to his Brand-father Noah in Italy, where Noah
made him King and Patriarch of the Aborignes, and founded him a City on the
other side of Tiber, which was named Saturnia: as Virgill declares in a
passage, where he says thus: Primus ab aethereo venit Saturnus Olympo,
Arma Jovis sugiens, and regnis exul ademptis.
That is to say:
Saturn the first, from's Realm did fly,
for fear of Joves Artillery,
He lost his Rule and Regiment,
and led his life in banishment.


For Bell the Son of Nimroth was surnamed Jupiter. And it is not likely to be
true, as some say, that the same Saturn that was chased away by Jupiter was
Nimroth the King of Crete; but the Bible says, that he was King of Babylon,
which was far distant from the Isle of Crete. In those days they termed the
chief Man of every House Saturn: their Sons Jupiters or Joves: their Daughters,
Juno's: and their Nephews, Hercules: so that we find in ancient Records, many
men named Saturn, Jupiter, and Hercules.

But to my purpose, (quoth Folly) the above named Ninus by my counsel, after
the death of his Father Bell, caused his Picture and standing Image to be made,
commanding every manner of person to do Homage unto the Idols of his Father and
Mother, and to adore them with Divine Worship: and so be was (as you have
heard) the first Inventer of Idolatry. I governed Tiphon the Son of Cham, in
whom all his Fathers Vices abounded. He maliciously envyed the prosperity of
his Brother Osiris, surnamed Jupiter the just, who was a great persecuter of
Tyrants. It angered me (quoth Folly) that so honest a man lived. Then I caused
Tiphon with other Giants, to murder Osiris, insomuch that Tiphon out him in
six and twenty pieces, and bestowed them upon other Giants that helped him to
work his feat. But the good Hercules of Lybia, the Son of Osiris, with the help
of his other Brethren, in foughten Field, killed Tiphon the Giant, and the
other Tyrants which consented to his Fathers death.

I governed (quoth Folly) one Jupiter King of Crete, which Country is now
called Candie. But forasmuch as the Greek Liars, and other Writers both Latin
and French, to enlarge their Lies and Dreams, attribute that unto this Jupiter
oftentimes, which appertains not to him, I would have you mark well, that in
those days, the Kings Children and Fathers of Families, were called Jupiters
or Joves: notwithstanding there are three of that name renowned, as we find in
Histories. The first was Osiris the Nephew of Noah, the Son of Cham: who was no
less good then his Father was evil. This Jupiter begat great Hercules of
Lybia: who was King of Spain, France, and Italy. This great Hercules was like
unto his Father, a great persecuter of Tyrants throughout all the world. He
begat of Araxa, the young Tuscus, King of Tuscany in Italy.

This Tuscus begat Alcirus Blascon, by whom was begotten Cambo Blascon, which
was (as some say) surnamed the second Jupiter, and worshipped in the world. Now
this Cambo Blascon surnamed Jupiter, begat upon Electra the Daughter of Arlas
surnamed Italus (of whom yet Italy bears the name) Jasius and Dardanus. This
the lying Cretians, and many other Triflers, attribute unto Jupiter of Crete:
which matter is in controversy and may be denied. For Dardanus after he had
killed his Brother Jasius by envy and treason, he fled into the Isle of Samos,
and from thence into Phrygia, where he founded a City called Dardania, where he
begat a Sen called Erictonius, and of him lineally descended Troas who gave the
City of Dardania the name of Troy.

This same Troas had three children, Illius, Issaracula, and Ganimedes, which
Ganimedes was taken by Tatus the King of high Phrygia and sold to Jupiter of
Crete, to be abused like a Sodomite: which argues that he begat not Dardanus
the great Grandfather of Ganimedes. The first Jupiter then you may perceive
was Osiris, Nephew to Noah, whom Moses named Mazaraim. The second Jupiter was
Cambo Blascon King of Italy, which some say also had been King of Athens, and
of Arcady, but I think that Jupiter of Arcady, who begat Lacedemon, is some
other beside Cambo Blascon. Howsoever the case stands, certain it is that
Jupiter of Crete, Osiris and Cambo Blascon were contraries.

The third Jupiter, renowned in the World, was King of the Isle of Crete: who
bare in his Seutchion and Coat Armor an Eagle: but in all his manners he was
altogether given to Folly. For he defloured Virgins, he ravished Wives, abused
young children, and committed all kind of Villainy that was possible either to
be spoken or done. He committed adultery with Alcmena, the Wife of Amphitrio,
of whom he begat little Hercules of Greece: he did the like with Laeda the Wife
of Tyndarus, of whom also he begat fair Helen: I loathe to tell what
Deflourings and Rapes he offered and thrust upon diverse particular ^aidens and
fair young Children. But notwithstanding his vile life (quoth Folly) by my
means the rude People made him a God, and many false Liars have attributed unto
him the Noble deeds of the good Patriarch Noah, and his Nephew Osiris, surnamed
Jupiter the Just.

Moreover, they did not only make Sacrifice unto him, but also gave him the
Title and Name of Most excellent good, whereas indeed he was the werst evil:
for he was an Incestuous and Sodomitical person, and a common Enemy to Chastity
and honesty; in so much that People openly in their Stage plays counterfeited,
Sung and Descanted upon the filthy Leacheries, and other Villainies which he
used, affirming that such Antiques and Pageants were most fit and agreeable
unto him: By means whereof all his Subjects gave themselves to the same,
saying, that it was as fit for them so to live, as for their great God Jupiter.

I governed little Hercules of Greece, otherwise called Alceus, the Bastard Son
unto the same Jupiter, whom he had by Alcmena, the Wife of Amphitrio. Unto the
same Hercules the lying Greeks, full of Vain Eloquence, give the name and title
of great Hercules of Lybia, which is most falss: For that Hercules of Greece
was the first Pyrate that ever roved on the Seas, and abounded with all Vice,
following the steps of his Father Jupiter the Adulterer, in all respects; and
as he lived, even so be dyed: For being mad (says Seneca) he stew his wife and
children, and afterward burned himself. But a little before his death be made
Philactetes swear that he would never disclose his Death, nor the manner how he
had bestowed himself, which thing he did of a Vain, arrogant, proud, and
ambitious mind, even to this end, that the people might report and believe,
that the Gods had drawn him up to Heaven invistble: but it chanced not as he
desired. Yet notwithstanding (quoth Folly) I persuaded the lying Greeks that it
was so, and made them worship him as a God.

I governed fair Paris King Priams Son, whose surname was Alexander. At the
first he made no account of me, but leading a Contemplative life be followed
the Lore of Pallas the Goddess of wisdom, mine Adversary: but when Juno,
Pallas, and Venus, were at strife for the golden Ball, which was thrown amongst
them, (with condition that the fairest of them should have it) they committed
the matter to the Judgment of Paris firnamed Alexander? who was upon point so
give Sentence in the Behalf of Pallas mine Enemy, but by my perswasson
afterward he gave it unto Venus my good friend, and my old acquaintance: then
for Recompense of his foolish judgment, I counseled him to go to Greece, where
he ravished fair Helen. Hereupon the Greeks in a great and mad rage prepared
all their force against the Trojans, and after ten years Siege against their
City they took Ilion, and put King Priam to death, insomuch that the whole
Realm was thereby defaced.

In that War were killed many Princes and Noble Knights, as Hector, Achilles,
and Paris also was slain by Philactetes the Companion of the less Hercules, in
a Combat fought hand to hand. The weapons which they used were Bows and forked
Arrows, wherewith Philactetes wounded Paris in three places. First, in his
left hand; secondly, in his right eye; thirdly, in beth his legs, which were
fastened with the stroke together. Being thus wounded, the Trojans carried him
into the City, where shortly after he died.

I governed (quoth Folly) fair Helen, the bastard Daughter of the third Jupiter
King of Crete, begotten of Laeda the Wife of Tindarus: which Helen, by my
counsel, went from her Husband Menelaus, and suffered her self to be ravished
by a young Lecherous Trojan named Paris, surnamed Alexander, the Son of King
Priam: she brought blood and death to Troy, instead of Dowry: for by her
occasion Troy was destroyed, and Priam with the most part of his Children
killed. And to the end that her adulterous Mate Paris or Alexander, should not
leave her and go to his own lawful Wise Pagales Oenone, she bewitched him with
certain drinks, wherein she was her crafts Mistress: which thing when one does
use, he is in such case that he forgets all things past, and all sorrows
present. When she was thus arrived at Troy, the good man her Husband Menelaus,
with Ulysses and other Greek Ambassadors, came to fetch her away, and King
Priamus commanded that she should be brought into his presence, offering unto
her frankly with loud boyce, that she should (if she thought good) freely and
with full liberty depart again into Greece, with all her retinue, people, and
pelf. Whereunto she answered in the hearing of her Husband and King Priam,
with the rest of his Counsel and Commons, that she was not disposed to retire
to her Country, wishing also that her Husband Menelaus that good man might go
to God, that she was none of his wife, neither would she have to do with him,
and that she came not to Troy against her will, neither did she esteem of his
marriage.

To conclude, at length Troy by Treason was taken, and ransackt: eighteen years
after she had been from her Husband, and all that space had lived in Leachery,
with two Adulterers, she grew to agreement and made peace with her Hasband
Menelaus. But when she was waxed old she looked in a glass, and seeing her
lace far from fair, she fell into a loud laughter, and flouted at the Fools
that fought ten years together, for the love of a thing that faded so soon
away: but when her Husband Menelaus was dead, two chief men of the City Sparta,
named Nicostratus and Magapentus, men of great authority, hunted Helen out of
the City and Realm of Lacedemonia, without appointing unto her any place or
provision to keep her. Upon which Banishment she came to Rhodes, to her ancient
Companion and Friend Queen Polipo, which was also then a Widow, by reason of
the Death of her Husband Tlepolemus, who was stain before Troy: And when she
was at Rhodes, Queen Polipo used her very well; but the young Gentlewomen her
waiting Maids hated her deadly, for that she was the cause that their King
Tlepolemus was killed: insomuch that upon a day they conspired together against
her, and got her into a Garden, where they fastening a Rope about her Neck hung
her upon a Tree and strangled her to death. This was the miserable end of
Helen, who being dead (quoth Folly) I put into the heads of the blind people
that she was a Goddess, by reason of her incomparable Beauty. For which
consideration they being not only Idolatrousty, and heretically, but also
damnably deceived, built her a mavelous costly and stately Temple, and named
her with great Devotion, The Goddess of Beauty, and devised many false Miracles
and Lies, the which for brevity I let pass. I governed (quoth Folly) Pharaoh
Amenophis, and Pharaoh Bacchoris, both Kings of Egypt: who by my counsel
caused all the Male Children of the Jews to be drowned, which people the first
Pharaoh held in mavelous subjection. As for the second, I instructed him so
well that he would not suffer she Children of Israel to depart out of his Land,
but in the end being scourged by God he was constrained to let them go, and
when they were gone, I gave him Counsel, in revenge, to pursue them with all
their Chivalry and Power of Egypt, which thing he did: but the Tyrant and all
his Company were drowned in the red sea. I governed Chore, Dathan, and Abiram,
counselling them not to obey the commandment of Moses whom God had ordained
chief Governor over the Children of Israel: but Chore in offering Incense
contrary to his Office, was attainted, and five hundred more of his Faction
with him. And for the Rebellion of Dathan and Abiram, the Earth opened,
insomuch that they, their Wives, children, and goods, were all swallowed up
alive.

I governed Saul the first King of Israel; at the beginning of his Reign he was
good and Godly, but at last I enchanted him so that he caused many of Gods
Priests to be killed, insomuch that in one day he put to Death fourscore and
five. I counseled him to persecute good David, and to ask counsel of witches
and Sorcerers, contrary to Gods Laws; then at the last being sorsaken of God,
he was vanquished by the Philistines, and with his own hands stew himself upon
the Mount of Gilboa.

I was so hold as to enter into King David's House, and by my counsel I made
him commit adultery with Bathsheba the wife of Urias: And notwithstanding that
Urias was his faithful Serbant, and good Counselor, yet I gave him counsel
to kill Urias, by means whereof his Sin might be covered in marriage of his
wife. For the which offense the Prophet Nathan disclosed me, so that my further
meaning brake off, and ever after I was banished his house. I also governed his
Son Absolon, who after he had killed his Brother Amnon, made war with his
Father, and drabe him from Jerusalem, being nothing ashamed to enter the house
of all his Fathers concubines, and to lie with them; but an Oak did execute
Justice upon that wicked child, for when he thought to escape with his Mule,
the Tree caught him fast by the Hair of the head, till Joab came with a Dart
and killed him.

I also governed Rehoboam King Solomon's Son, who unreasonably grieved and
oppressed his people with Taxes, and Imposts: Insomuch, that when they
requested to have it somewhat eased, he did not only deny their Petitions, but
also gave them uncourteous Language, following the counsel of his young wanton
Gentelmen, rather then the wise admonitions of grave Counselors, by the which
means he lost the greatest part of his Realm.

I governed the great Queen Jezabel, by whose advice King Achab her Hushand
worshipped the Idol Baal, and caused good Naboth to be killed: She persecuted
the Prophets of God, and made many of them to be put to Death: She sought by
all means to dispatch good Elias; but as her Life was evil, so was her death
shameful: for she falling from a high window, was ovethrown with horses feet,
and eaten up of Dogs.

I governed Sardanapalus, the last King of the Assyrians, who regarded not the
Government of the Realm, but lived altogether in delight. He used to paint his
Face, and to apparel himself in woman's apparel: he exercised himself in all
kinds of villainy and filthiness: insomuch that when he saw that he was forsaken
of the greatest of his people, and that he had very evil luck in Battle
against his Enemies, and stood upon no ground free from danger of death; It
chanced one day, that being in the Tower of Babylon, he set it on fire, and
there burned himself, and all that ever he had.

I governed Cambises King of Persia, the Son of good King Gyrus, who by my
counsel was given to gluttony, and Drunkenness, with other vices not beseeming
a Prince. Upon a time, Praxaspes one of the most excellent counselors, seeing
him immoderately bivving, reverently told him that it was not Princelike:
whereat the King was wroth, and commanded him to send for his youngest Son, who
being brought, Cambises caused Praxaspes to tie him to a Tree, saying: If I can
hit the heart of thy Son with an arrow out of my long bow, is it the feat of a
man that is drunk? So Cambises shor, and clobe the child's heart asunder, and
showed it unto his Father, with a warning to take heed how he judged his Liege
Lord drunk. Then I made him marry his own natural Sister, and to kill his own
Brother. It fortuned upon a day, that as the King and the Queen his sister were
at the Table, for his Pastime and Recreation sake he had a young Lion let
loose, and a mighty mastiffe or Band-Dogge that the King kept: these two fought
so long, till at last the Dog was like to have the worst. Within the sight of
this Game another Mastiffe was tied in a Chain, both bred of one Bitch, this
band-dog brake his Chain in haste and came to help his fellow, insomuch that
these two dogs overcame and killed the Lion. The King liked well of the love
and loyalty of the two dogs. but the Queen being moved thereat, began to weep
bitterly. Which when Cambises saw, he asked the cause of her sorrow, to whose
demand the Queen answered in this sort:

It is otherwise happened to my brother, than to this Dog that was too weak for
the Lion. For thou being his own brother, have not showed the like love and
faithfulness unto him, as this Band-dogge has done to his Mate; for thou have
caused thy brother to be slain. The King being fore displeased, and full of
indignation at her answer, commanded that the Queen should be had away by and
by out of his sight, and put to death, the which was done: but as the King came
one day out of Egypt riding on horseback his Sword by hap fell out of the
scabbard, and he fell likewise upon the point of it, and was thrist through the
body, and dyed.

I governed (quoth Folly) one Cataline a Roman, a very seditious Fellow, who
conspired to kill all the Senators of Rome: but he was put bessdes his purpose,
by reason that one Cicero opened it, and he, with all his Conspirators were
killed in battle. I governed (quoth Folly) Horod, and Herodias, to accomplish
their Leachery I coupled them in marriage, albeit she was his Brother Philips
Wife, which unlawful marriage Saint John reprehending and finding fault
withal, for so doing had his Head cut off. I governed Pilate, Annas, and
Caiphas, in Jerusalem, with many Doctors, Priests, Scribes, and Pharisees: I
counseled them to crucify Christ herween two Thieves as if he had been a
sower of Sedition: which being done, I thought then that I had won all the
World, but when I saw that upon the third day after he rose again, contrary to
my reckoning I lost a great number of Clyants and Subjects, who hearing the
Aposles preach, quite abandoned and gave me over.

I governed Nero the firth Emperor of Rome, who at the beginning of his Reign
was good and virtuous, but after he had possessed the Empire five years, he
became most evil and wicked, and was given to Leachery and Filthiness. This
man was a Murderer, he flew his Wife, his Mother, and diverse other honest
Persons, of which number Seneca was one; he was the first Persecuter of the
Christians, and put many good men to death, as for Example. S. Peter and S.
Paul, with other, But the Tyrant being upon a time unguarded, and wanting about
him his Lievtenants and Captains of War, the Senators and States of Rome sought
means to punish him, for anger whereof he killed himself, and the Soldiers
that were sent to seek him found him dead in the Field.

I governed Antonine Bassian Caracalla, the nineteenth Emperor of Rome, who by
my counsel killed his brother Geta: besides that, he married his Stepmother,
and desired Pompinion the great Lawyer to excuse his murder. Who answered him:
That he was not so willing to excuse a Murder as he was to disclose him: the
Emperor unworthy of so good an answer, killed the Lawyer.

I governed Varius Heliogabalus, the one and twentieth Emperor of Rome, who by
my Counsel lived so dissolutely, that he left behind him no memory of honest
life, but infamy. This Man's own Soldiers slew him, and threw him into a ditch;
and because his body would not sink to the bottom, they dragged him out again
with a Hook, and hurled him into the River Tiber. I governed (quoth Folly)
Julian Apostata, the nine and thirtieth Emperor of Rome, who in his life was
so wise and well given, that he was made Reader in the Church of Nicodemia.
This man Traveled to Athens, where he studied Philosophy, but he stayed not
long in that good purpose, for by the connsell of me Folly, he renounced the
Christian Faith, and became a Revolter, and an Idolater: I persuaded him to
persecute the Christians, lest they should increase seven for one. I moved him
also by my subtle device, to root and weed them out quite, which thing he
meant to do, but he was killed within two years after, who being stain in Persia,
and yielding up his evil Spirit, he lifted up his bloody hand to Heaven in
contempt and despite of Jesus Christ, making this outcry; Now, O Galilean,
thou have the Victory.

I governed the false Prophet Mahomet, and counseled him to make a Book, to
entitle it Alcaron, and to expound things in the holy Scriptures carnally,
which he did; and that Law is yet continued in the greatest part of the World.
I Governed Mesaline an Empress, the Noblest Whore in the world, who being but
newly married to Claudius fifth Emperor of Rome, an old Gentleman, when she
found by proof, that her Husband was insufficient, and unable to satisfy her
leacherous desires, by my counsel oftentimes she disguised her self into man's
Apparel, and went to the common Stews, where she abused her body with a great
number, returning back no better than a Bitch, and vaunted that she had
vanquished and gone beyond all the whores in the house of Bawdry. When the
wandering Knight had heard these wonderful Discourses uttered by Folly, and
having in him some sparks or Reason and inclination of nature, he thought
himself foolish, if it were not in him to judge of Deeds so mischive ous and
ill. And being no longer able to keep silence, he breaks his mind to Folly,
finding great fault with this unfatiable Empress; insomuch that he cried out
with a loud voice, and said, Fie, fie, fie, filthy Bitch, and Vile Whore,
worthy to be tied to a tree stark naked, and delivered to greedy Dogs and
ravening Birds to be devoured. Then I asked Folly what was the end of this
wicked woman, who told me that the Emperor put her to Death, because she was
not content with her lawful Husband, but married another Man, whose name was
Silius: whereunto I assented, saying, that it was a good deed; for there need
no more but three such detestable filths in all France to spoil the whole
Realm.

This Tale of Folly touching her deeds and exploits, her devices, and
practices, her provocations and counsels, it being long and strange, I am not
able to repeat as it was spoken: but have nakedly recorded so much as rests
in my remembrance; which thing I have the rather dane, to the end that all
devout Christian Readers might willingly learn, and thoroughly know what great
wickedness they commit in following the evil Counsel of Dame Folly. Every one
ought to forsake her; for that the end of such as he ruled by her precepts,
tread in her paths, and dance after her Pipe, is proved by experience to be
dangerous, deadly, and damnable. But noto let us return to our Voyage, and
former matter.

CHAP. VI.
The Wandering Knight finding two ways, and doubtful whether of them to take:
Then chanced to come unto him Virtue and Voluptuousness, either of them
offering to conduct and guide the Knight on his way.

SO long lasted the talk of Folly, that we had worn out the way well, and the
Sun went low. In the end we came into a straight, where we found two ways; one
lay on the left hand, was fair, broad, and entering into a goodly green Meadow;
the other, on the right hand, which was narrow, racky, and full of Mountains.
Being then in a perplexity, and deubtfull which of these ways I might take,
Folly told me, that the way on the left hand was best and fairest, and Temerity
my Horse kept a slinging to go that way, so that I had much ado to rein him in.
Then said I to Folly, that I feared lest the green grassie way would lead me
into some ditch and Quagmire, where we should stick fast. Bestdes that, I was
more than halse discouraged with her Tales which she had told me; and though I
in heart hated them, yet notwithstanding custom caused me to use them, not
being able to do otherwise without Gods grace. Hereupon I was resolved to take
the way on the left hand, Folly keeping me company.

But as we were thus talking together, I espied two Ladies coming toward the
place where we stood, (which made me very glad) one of the Ladies rode upon a
white Horse, and went in a Gown of costly colors, bravely embroydered with
Needle Work, and in a border the three Divine, and the four Moral Virtues were
wrought. This Lady was very beautiful, and she seemed naturally to be fraught
with goodly graces and gifts; she had a neat body, a sweet countenance, a
modest gesture; her face was not painted, she was always very courteous, she
pretended authority and Reverence, without flattery; she was not sour and
grim, but lovely and amiable; the other Lady rode upon a Rats colored Horse,
and went in a changeable colored Gown, garnished with Gold and excessive cost:
she wore about her neck a chain of Gold, with rich Jewels tied unto it: her
singers were decked with Ring upon Ring: she seemed to have been delicately
brought up, her Face was beautiful, but I suspected she was painted: her looks
were wanton and unconstant, and she rolled her eyes every way. This Lady came
to me before the other, and after Salutations, I asked her which of the two
ways I should take to find persect Felicity. She answered me, saying: My Son,
if thou will follow me, I will bring thee a short and pleasant way through a
green Meadow: be not doubtful; for I will lodge thee this night in the Palace
of Felicity, into the which when thou art entered and placed, thou need not
think upon any thing, but what may best please thy mind, and procure thy
delight: as fine. Fare, Dancing, Singing, soft Lodging, Ladies Love, Laughing,
Hunting, Hawking, Fishing, Fowling, Riding, Running, Shooting, Bowling, Rich
Array, and all things else that can be devised to please thy Fantasy: all
which pleasures I will provide thee, with a thousand more, for it is in me to
bestow such things upon them that take me for their Mistress.

With these words I was bewitched and longed to see this pleasant Palace, not
mistrusting that she was any other then she said and seemed to be. And being
destrous to learn her name, I began thus, My good Lady, may it not offend you
if I ask your name? My Son (quoth she) such as follow me, and have had
experience of my goodness, call me Felicity, and that deserbedly and of good
right: For I am indeed the Empress of the Palace of worldly Pleasures, whither
I will bring thee before night, if thou will follow me. There be some Enemies
of mine that nickname me, and spightfully mis-call me, by false and
counterfeit terms, saying, that I am named Malice, Vanity, Vice, and
Voluptuousness: But give thou no ear unto them, for they speak upon envy,
hatred, and evill-will.

Then approached the other Lady, which, after salutation done, uttered these
words unto me. Reason required, that I should have spoken first, but this
painted Peacock, named Wicked Voluptuousness, puts forth her self for to speak
before me always, and to take the Tale out of my mouth. Take heed of her, for
doubtless her Communication corrupts and infecteth even the very best livers,
with the poison of her error. Now I see thou art of good Inclination, and
ready to weigh thy paths in the vallance, willing to walk as well the good way
as the bad. And seeing thy mind wavoureth, apply thy self unto Virtue
continually, shorten the sorrow of thy Soul, water thee well with wisdom,
adventure not thy present precious age, to be boldned in Ambition and
Vainglory, Detest the danger of unsatiable Covetausness; let not thy liking be
laid upon licentious love, avoid and shake off Idleness, by using thy self to
honest exercises, fly Worldly Felicity, arm thy self against the dart of
Cupid, lest at length he overcame thee, open thine ears of understanding and
follow my Counsel. I am not the vile, villainous, vain, mischievous, subtle,
deceitful, and lying Lady Voluptuousness; but I am the assured and sefe way
that leads to perfect Felicity. And though I am narrow and painful to pass,
yet if thou will follow me, I will make thee merry, and guide thee in the very
way which God has ordained to lead unto true Blessedness. For, my Son, thou
must understand this, that Almighty God does not bestow on Men perfect joy and
Sovereign goodness, unless they labor to archieve it. If therefore thou think
always to pass thy time in pleasure, and followest thine affection, doing all
whatsoever seems delectable to thy foolish fantaste, and supposest that way
to find Felicity, thou art far wide and greatly abused: for, He that will have
honey must make much of Bees. If thou desire Felicity, so lead thy Life that
God of his goodness may bouchsafe to give it thee. Cleanse thy heart and empty
it of evil thoughts, be firm in Faith, establish thy Soul with soundness and
sincerity, be not deceived with damnable Doctrine, nor led astray by wrong
Opinions. This that I tell thee cannot be done without labor, neither can any
profitable or good thing be obtained without pains-taking. Thou see how
Shepherds, Seamen, and all Artificers, if they grow in wealth, it is by
labor and travel.

Were the Husbandman any better than a Fool, if he should hope in Harvest to
reap Corn eff his Ground where he has sown no Seed, when Season served: Even
so is that man marvellously misinformed, that thinking to atchieve perfect
Felicity, or to reap true Blessedness, having not first sowed his Field with
Virtue, good Deeds, Faith, Hope, and Charity, which is the highway to Heaven.
The Husbandman dungeth his Ground, sows his Seed, grafteth his Trees, tarreth
his. Sheep, and leads his life in Labor, hoping to enjoy the Fruit, the
Graffe, the Grain, the Wool, and generally all the Profit: the expectation and
full account whereof makes him to take pains with pleasure. Even so, if thou will be concent painfully to walk this way, without regard either of Rocks or
Mountains, doubt not to find true Felicity.

Having heard this long and wise admonition, and marking the Lady well, I could
not be in quiet till I knew her name: Wherefore I said, Madam (without offense
be it spoken) I pray you what is your name? she answered, saying; My Son, I am
great with God, I am acquainted with the Saints, I am all in all with Angels, I
am much esteemed of good men, without me nothing is done in Heaven, and without
me no good thing can be done on Earth; I am commonly called Felicity, Wisdom,
and Virtue. I govern good Kings, Princes, and People; good Prelates, and
Eccleffastical Persons: I stop the mouth of false Prophets and erroneous
Teachers: I hinder their Herestes, and flay their wicked proceedings: I govern
Householders and their Families in good order, I am a Companion with the lovers
of Learning, I am a Husband to all chaste Wives, Widows and virtuous Virgins, I
reward my Friends in prosperity, with holiness, and in adversity with kind
consolation; I minister unto them Food, Raiment, Lodging, Strength, Patience,
and all things necessary; and whether it he little or much they take it in good
part. Contrariwise, the friends of Voluptuousness are never satisfied,
although they have too much.

My Friends had rather sing Psalms than vain Songs: they had rather fast than
be drunk: they had rather pray than curse: they rise early and go to bed late:
they have care of the Commonwealth: Faith counsels them, Hope assisteth
them, Charity inflameth them, Wisdom governs them, Justice guides them: and
I do and will enrich and encourage them, that all the World shall have them in
admiration, honor and reverence. Yea, though their bodies die, yet their Fame
shall live for others Example: and their souls shall remain immortal, like unto
the estate of Angels. Contrariwise, he that leads his lise in Voluptuousness,
Ambition, Filthiness, Uncleanness, or Evil Conversation, if he be not sorry for
his sinfulness, and repent him of his time lewdly spent, that mand death is
damnable, and his shameful report shall never die, no more than that of
Sardanapalus, Nero, Heliogabalus, Herod, Pilat, Annas, Caiaphas, and such like:
therefore my Son, leave Voluptuousness, if thou meanest to find true Felicity
and perfect Blessedness.

CHAP. VII.
The Wandering Knight, by the counsel of Folly, left Lady Virtue and followed
Voluptuousness, which led him to the Palace of worldly Felicity.

WHen I had heard both these Ladies tell their Tales, I was more amazed than
ever I was before, insomuch that I wist not which to take for my Guide. But
alas (poor perplexed Pilgrim) if I had had but the wit of a Woodcock, and not
wavered in mind, I had followed Virtue, and left Voluptuousness: But being
amidst mine amaze, I requested my Governesse Folly to teach me quickly which of
these two Ladies I were best to follow, for the finding of true Felicity. No
sooner had I spoken the word, but suddenly she cast out this Language, saying
that Virtue was an Hypocrite, and that her way was painful to pass. But (said
she) if you follow Voluptuousness, thou see her way is fair, sweet, green,
and pleasant.

If thou follow Virtue, thou submittest thy self to cold, heat, hunger, thirst,
travel, pain, and weariness: thou must rise early, and go to bed late, stand
in fear, weep, take care, live in forrow, and yet be in doubt to have Felicity
at last. If thou offend her never so little in word or Deed, she will leave
thee, for she is too severe, even in small trifling matters: Whatsoever she
said to thee now she will deny when she has thee among the Rocks and
Mountains: she will leave thee alone among wild beasts, to lead thy life in
the Wilderness. Wherefore I advise thee believe her not, and follow her not.
But let us take this fair large way on the left hand, through which the
greatest part of people do pass, and at night we will lodge in the Palace of
Felicity. And this I tell thee, that if thou chance to mislike of thy
entertainment there, within a day or two thou may return, for the way is
but short; and then (if thou think it good) thou may clime over the
Mountains, and ride through the way on the right hand.

These delicate devices of my friend Folly dashed quite the advertisements of
Virtue, whom (with thanksgiving). I bade farewell, desiring her not to be
offended, in that I did not follow her over the Mountains. Then Lady
Voluptuousness led the way, my horse Temerity trod his Trace, and Folly
followed fast at my Heels. Virtue viewed us very well, and came sadly behind
me, even like one that mourns after a dead Toarse borne to be buried, crying
with a loud voice: Ah thou arrant Ass, leave Voluptuousness, for she will lead
thee to death and destruction. The counsel of thy friend Folly is devilish,
she daily deceives such as follow her: Felicity is false. The language of
Voluptuousness is a mere charm, wherewith she uses to bewitch her children.

Notwithstanding this exclamation and rebuke, I went on my way, and could not
away with her Christian counsel: which when she saw, she gave me a furious
farewell, saying: O monstrous man, O bedlam beast, O fool unfortunate, O
idiotly Idol, O shadow of man! thou have no more sense or reason than an Ass,
thou show thy self to be shameless, in thus framing thy self to follow
Voluptuousness, and to forsake Virtue. Will thou embrace worldly wealth rather
than heavenly grace? Did thou destre the Tree before the Fruit? I see thou
art foully abused. He that leaves Virtue and follows Voluptuousness is
subject to Satan. Remember, O thou wretch, what Solomon says: For that I have
cried, and thou have refused to come after me: I stayed till the Morrow, but
thou understoodest not but doubtdedst my counsel, and would not receive my
correction; therefore I laugh at thy destruction: but when thine evil hap and
trouble comes, then thou seckest me in the morning when thou shall not find
me, because thou have hated knowledge, and have not received the fear of God,
nor obeyed my counsel, but despisest my correction.

Which words uttered unto me by the mouth of Wisdom might have sufficed to
withdraw me from my foolish enterprise: But she preached to a post; and Folly,
whom I followed, did mock and deride her all the while.

CHAP. VIII.
How the Wandering Knight was received and Welcomed to the Palace of Worldly
Felicity.

AFter we had passed certain degrees on our way, with unwonted joy,
Voluptuousness laid her hands on my head, and gave me her best blessing, (I
letting her alone as one to whom I ought duty.) Then uttered she unto me
certain sweet words, which enchanted me: for presently I lost my senses,
esteeming all well that she said or did. After we had spent in sport some hours
of the time, the Sun began to set, and so I espied the Palace of worldly
Felicity, whereat I was not a little glad: for it seemed to me very pleasant,
and me thought I smelt dainties. Whereas indeed all was very witchcraft. When
we were within a Cross-Bow shoot of the Palace, Voluptuousness hoopt and
hollowed, whereat came out a Legion of Ladies Pompously Apparelled, among whom
were these next named: Lust, Prodigality, Leachery, Wantonness, Carelessness,
Bravery, Lasciviousness, Ambition, Drunkenness Licourishness, and such like.

Being dismounted from off my Horse, Folly took off my Helmet, and my Face
being bare, all the Ladies ^i^ me, and bade me welcome: which entertainment
agreed well with my Foolish Fancy. Then Prodigality and Ambition led me by the
hands, Lasciviousness and other Ladies led the way before, Bravery and the rest
followed after. Thus we entered into the Palace of worldly Pleasures, the gate
whereof was great and high, built with Marble-stone, and always stood wide
open day and night, Winter and Summer, whereat I marvelled much. Then
Voluptuousness told me the reason, with these words: I always keep open House
for as many as will, and at what hour soever any do come to me, by night or by
day, they are welcome, and I do receive them royally. Then Voluptuousness led
me into a great and sumptuous Hall, hanged with Cloth of Arras, and full of
Torches burning round about. There Lust unarmed me, and Bravery gave me a night
Cown of Crimson Velver, lined with Martine skins. Within a little while after
the Table was covered, in came the fine cates, and to supper we go.

This done, Lady Voluptuousness set me in the highest place, and there sat on
either side of me Licourishness and Drunkenness; then the rest of the Ladies
sat down in their degrees: but Voluptuousness sat right against me, who
curiously carved me of the delicatest meat. Our Waiters were young Gentlemen,
bravely Apparelled, our Service was sumptuous, our Meats well seasoned, and
handsomely handled: our Cooks were cleanly, our Butlers bountiful, our
Servitours were singular, our Music was excellent, our Singers were sweet, and
every Officer exceeded in delicateness. There was dainty feeding, pleasant
parleying, continual quassing, insomuch that half drunk and whole drunk was a
goodly game: ribauldry was our recreation, and as for knavery it was canvast to
the proof. When supper was ended, Lady Wantonness came to me, and asked me if
I would Dance: And Lady Lust likewise, asking me whether I would lie alone, or
have a Bedfellow? I made answer, that I was weary, by reason of my journey, and
so desired to go to bed. Then Lasciviousness brought me to my chamber, where
she lodged me in sweet Sheets, a soft Bed, Curtains of Tissue, and all things
costly and excellent. In conclusion, Lady Voluptuousness took her leave,
promising in the morning to show me the rest of the Palace of Worldly
Felicity, whereof I dreamed all night, my head was so full of toys.

CHAP. IX.
Voluptuousness shows the Wanding Knight some part of the Palace, and after
brought him to dinner.

IN the Morning when the Sun beams brightly adorned she Chamber where I lay, I
perceived the gallant glass Windows of costly Crystal; Lasciviousness came
unto me and bad me good morrow, asking me if I would rise. Whereto I answered
yea, and did so with speed: now whiles I was trimming my self, in came
Licourishness, and her Sister Drunkenness, who had prepared my breakfast: anon
after came in Lady Voluptuousness accompanied with Lust, Leachery, and all the
rest; she was apparelled more like a Goddess than a Queen. All these kissed me
sweetly, and sat down with me to breakfast; which being ended, Ambition put
upon my head the Cap of Curiosity, wherewith presently I became so curious as
could be in all things, saving goodness. Then I desired Voluptuousness to show
me the rest of the Palace, according to her promise: so we walked together,
into a goodly great Chamber, hanged about with Cloth of Gold beset with
Pearls. This Chamber was paved with Marble black and white, the Pillars were
Jasper, the Roof was Ivory laid on with Gold, and the Stairs were Alabaster.
In this Chamber also was a Sumptuous Chair of State, wherein-most magnificently
sat a Prince, having on his head an Imperial Crown of Gold beset with precious
Pearls, and in his hand a scepter Royal. He was, besides that, very richly
Arrayed, accompanied with many Nobles, Pompously Apparelled. This Prince I
reverenced, and he likewise saluted me, giving commandment, that I should be
most singularly and ercellently used. So we went from thence; and being abroad,
I asked Lady Voluptuousness what Prince the same was: who said that he was the
Prince of (...) Palace, (even my Father) the only giver and b^stower of
Felicity: the which I believed to be true, till I found indeed, that he was
Lucifer, the Father of Filthiness, the Grandfather of Gluttony, the Prince of
Pride, the Emperor of Iniquity, and the Lord of Lewdness, a Ruler of the
World, and one that had nothing to do in Heaven, but in Earth, among a sort of
wicked worldlings, and Devilish People.

This Lucifer arragantly challenges unto himself, that he has Power to give
Glory, Honor, and Riches, to whom he lists, as the Scripture witnesses;
wherefore worldlings do serve him as his Subjects. From thence we went to the
Treasure-House, where we saw Coffers full of Coin and Jewels, which was kept by
Lady Fortune (as Voluptuousness said) and she bestowed all that Treasure on
such as the King commanded. From thence we went up into a great Gallery, where
we saw three Presses, the first full of fine woollen; the second of pure Silks;
the third of fair white Linen: this place Pomp had in keeping. From thence we
went to the perfuming house, which differed nothing from an Apothecaries Shop.
For there I found all things that might move a Man's appetite, or stir up his
delight. There were colors to paint proud women, Perfume and Ointments to make
their bodies soft and sweet, and this place was kept by Lasciviousness. Then we
went into goodly large-Vaults, where wine of no kind wanted, and there was Dame
Drunkenness her Kingdom. From thence I was led to the Kinchins, where all
things were kept in order by Licorourishness, whose rule lay in that place.
From thence to another great Room, where we saw a sort of young sweet-faced
Bodies: Voluptuousness told me they were Ganimedes and Endimions. From thence
she had me by to a place that was builded very round in compass, which place
was mavelous bright and lightsome, by reason of the great Glass windows of
Crystal. This served them instead of a Temple, for they had none other: Here
we saw a great number of fine Delicate Dames, exceeding Amiable and Beautiful;
among all, one Excelled, whose Name I asked, and Voluptuousness showed me that
it was Lady Venus, whom all Licentious Lovers do like notable well, and honor
her as a Goddess. By her sat a blind Boy, who with his Bow and Arrows shat
at adventure, and hit my Heart: by and by came down Venus and she plucked it
out, receiving me with comfortable words and wonderful perswafions. And
although the Arrow was quickly taken out, and might seem to do no harm: yet I
think the head thereof was poisoned, for it has made so deep a wound, as is
very infections, and scarce curable, unless with some special plasters. The
same Cupid governs all Leacherous Lovers, of what age soever they be, or
degree, witness daily experience; he is naked and past shame, not caring who
looks upon him: his blindness represents the Folly of such as run headlong
after lewd love, setting their Feathers in the wind, without respect of any
after-clsp. His Bow and Arrows do signine the Folly of Foolls, which offer
themselves to be his But, and stand still while be does shoot and hit them. His
wings signify the wavering mind of such as he hits, who are quiet in no place
or time. For who is more mutable, vain, light, inconstant and variable, than
the fleshly Lover. Some say that this Cupid has a Torch burning in his hand,
meaning thereby that he burns to the heart, all them that he touches. All
this dispatched, Voluptuousness and I went to Dinner; and she promised me when
I had dined, to show me the rest of the Palace.

CHAP. X.
Dinner being done, Voluptuousness shows the Wandering Knight the rest of the
Palace of Worldly Felicity, with the description of the Towers thereof. And by
the Author is declared the evil Fruit of certain notorious sins.

THis chanced in the pleasant Month of May, when Love and Lust is most in
force: so it was determined, that we should Sup in goodly Gardens; not in
Banqueting Houses, although they were Wonderful fine, but in Arhours
Overgrown with Sweet Eglantine, Rose-trees, and Vines; fair, and clear
Fonntains of cold water running by, and fragrant Herbs and Flowers casting a
comfortable Scent. The little pretty Birds did sing round about us, as well in
Cages, as on Trees, and Bushes. There was playing, piping singing, dancing,
leaping, embracing, and kissing: Finally, each Lover with his Lady was merry;
and to be brief, every one did what liked him vest, and thought themselves
happy to find such Felicity. But all my desire was, to see the rest of the
Palace: wherefore I charged Lady Voluptuousness with her promise, which took
effect, insomuch that we went all along to a certain place, where I saw the
very secret Lodgings of Voluptuousness. But what they were, for fear of
offending the Reverend Reader, I mean not to rehearse: then we went from
Gallery to Gallery, from Office to Office, from Chamber to Chamber, where I saw
every place furnished with so rich Movables, and such choice, as nothing can be
wished more.

Amongst all those Rooms one Chamber exceeded in largness and Workmanship, for
costly Carving, and in all other respects. There I sound a very brave Bed
Gorgeously trimmed, insomuch that I commended the same highly. Then
Lasciviousness said that she had charge of that Chamber, and if I listed to lie
there that Night, I should. Lust also promised to bring Lady Venus to lie with
me. I hearing this, me thought I felt the wound that Cupid gave me as fresh as
at the first: Then went we about the Walls which were all of Iet, Thick and
Strong: Upon these Walls were built seven Towers likeunto Steeples, and every
Tower had his owner: In the first Ledged Pride, in the Second Envy, in the
Third Wrath, in the Fourth Gluttony, in the Fifth Leachery, in the Sixth
Covetousness, and in the Seventh Sloth. My purpose was to go unto them all one
after another. And as I entered into the Lower of Pride, which was the first, I
spied Written this Possy over the Porch, PRIDE IS THE PRINCE AND ROOT OF ALL
SINS. For as a King accompanied with a great Train of Servitours, even so has
Pride a sort of Sins for her Subjects, over whom she Reigns Prince like.
Again, as Kings keep and hold their own right, even so does Pride behave her
self toward the proud. It is a singular sign of a great Reprobate and
east-away, when a Man lives long in Pride. For this sin displeases God more
than all other Vices, as humility pleases him more than all other virtues. And
because the proud advance themselves above all orver, the Devil deals with
them accordingly: For as the Crow when he in not able to crack a hard Walnut
with his Bill, takes his flight aloft right over a great stone, and letting it
fall, breaks the same, and then alighteth to eat the kernel, even so plays
the Tevill with the proud, for first he advances them alost, and brings them
to promotion in this World, but when they are in the top of their happiness,
and think upon no danger, then, even then comes the Devil and throws them down
headlong with a mischief, into Hell.

The difference between the humble and the proud, may be known by that of Corn
and Chafe. For as Chafe being light is puffed up alost with the wind, and is
suddenly Consumed, whereas contrariwise good Corn lying low, is gashered from
the ground, laid up in Garners, and esteemed of every body: even so it falls
out with the pride of the proud, and the Humility of the Humble. Unto Pride do
appertain these Vices following: namely Arrogance, Presumption, Contempt,
Heresy, Hypocrisy, Disobedience, Vainglory, Ambition, and such like.

In the second Tower lodged Envy, over whose Entry-doo^e this device was
Written, FIREBRAND OF HELL, AND THE DEVILS DARLING. Now Envy is a Sadness and
Heaviness of Heart for another Prosperity. This Sin has Saveraignty in the
had, as Charity in the good. Charity is a Badge of Salvation, Envy of
Damnation. The envyous Man differs not from the Devil in any Degree, they are
Partners in gain and in loss. If the Devil reap profit by doing evil, the
envious Man will ^e sure to follow his trade, for lucre sake. And as the
envious Man grudgeth at another profit and good name: so does he delight in
another loss and ill Report: Where cannot be a souler and more cruel Sin than
Envy: for she always tormenteth and vexes her Fosterer, I mean the envious,
in whem she dwells. He that seeks to get good by others evil, never amends
in that mind. And he that planteth his pleasure upon another pain, shall have
such fruit, as he that grasts Figs on Thorns: or would make Fire to burn by
pouring Weser thereon. Envy is a disease hard to be healed, because it lies
hidden in the heart, where the Phystrian cannot come to cure it. There belongs
unto this Vice, Hatred, Malice, Slander, Disdain, Treachery, and the like.

In the third Lower dwelt Wrath, over whose Porch this Posey was written, THE
VERY MURDERER OF HOLY LOVE. For as holy Love prepares the Conscience to dwell
with God, so does Wrath prepare it to dwell with the Devil; Wrath takes away
the hearing of Reason. The Wrathful Man will hear the Counsel of none. There
is nothing Resembles the Image of God more than Man being in perfect Love. For
God will be there where Unity is kept, where People be at peace, and where
Countries be quiet: which cannot be in Wrathful Wretches. A Wrathful Man is
like unto one possessed with a Devil, who is ever tormented until he has
vomited him out. Wrath makes Men fight, Wrath causes Blasphemy, by Wrath the
Devil conquereth Countries, Wrath is like a muzled Dog; For when he cannot
bite, yet with snarling he makes others go together by the ears. And as the
Fisherman troubles the Water, because the Fish should not see his Nets, even
so the Devil by Wrath troubles Man, to the end he should not understand nor
perceive his own destruction. To the wrathful Man belongs inflaming of the
heart, Indignation, Disorder, Blasphemy, Contention, Rancour, Revengement,
Murder, and such like.

In the Fourth Tower dwelt Covetousness, whose Posey is this: IDOLATRY AND A
BOTTOMLESS GULF ARE INSATIABLE. The covetous man is forsaken of God, for he
loves his gain better than God: he had rather lose God than Goods. For little
trifles that touch his profit he swears and lies, which is a thing most
damnable. The Faith, and Hope, and Charity, which he should have toward God,
Covetousness turns it to Riches. The covetous Man's heart is all upon his
Goods, and not upon God; for where the heart is, there is also a Man's love. The
covetous Man offends in evil getting, in evil using, and in evil loving his
goods, The Covetous Man is governed by the Devil, hazarding his Soul to
eternal torment for the lewd Love of Temporal toys. And as the Mouse is
caught in the Trap, whiles she hops to get the Bait, even so is the covetous
Man by the Devil, in hunting after Riches. The covetous Man is like unto a Hog,
whose life does little good to any Man, but rather great harm, by reason of the
noysomness and filthy stink which that nasty Beast procures: but when the
Butcher has killed him, then he yields profit, because it nourishes, etc.
Even so the covetous Man whiles he lives does good to none, but rather
damnifies his Neighbors: but, when Gods slaughterman ( Death I mean) comes and
destroys him, then those that live fare the vetter. The Covetous man is like
a Band dog, that seedeth upon Carrion, and will admit no companion to take part
with him, but eating all alone, and filling his guts till he burst, he dies,
and the Fewles of the Air devour him. The covetous man hordeth his goods, and
suffers the needy to starve. The covetous Man croweth over the poor, the
Devil croweth over him. And upon covetousuess attend these Monsters, Usury,
Simony, Fraud, Perjury, and all Sacrilege, Deceit, Extortion, Oppression, and
the Devil.

In the fifth Tower dwelt Gluttony, over whose Portall this Posey was Written,
VENOMOUS WINE AND DEADLY DAINTIES. Truth it is, that the throat is the gate of
the Body, you know that when an Enemy would win a Castle, if once he get in
at the Gate, he makes no doubt of winning the held: even so the Devil, when he
has entered in at the Throat, it is no question but he would winn both the
heart and body. Now his custom is to enter with many Sins, of which Cluttony
is the Mother. For the Drunkard and Immoderate Feeder consents to all Vice.
Therefore it is renuiste to set a good Porter to keep the Throat, lest the
Devil get in. For as a Man may lead a Horse when he has him by the Bridle:
even so may the Devil rule a Man, having once gotten hold of his mouth by
Gluttony, yea he then possesses himself (...). The servant being Corn-sed,
oftentimes rebelleth against his Master: even so the Body having received
excess and more than enough, is apt to Revel against the Spirit. Gluttony kills
more than the Sword of the Enemy, it makes many to dye sooner then they should
by Nature. Excessive Eating and Drinking corrupts the Body, and iugendereth
diseases. By Gluttony Men be franked, as Capons are crammed. A Glutton is worse
then a Hog that feeds filthily, and yet the Hog is like the Sire, of whom he
takes his manners, and does but his kind.

They that make Taverns their Temples, are like a Hog wallowing in the mire.
For as the filthy Hog tumbleth in the mire and dirt, even so do Gluttons and
Drunkards oftentimes wallow in damnable Drunkenness and Gluttony. Upon this
foul Sin other Sins do depend, as namely, Greediness of meat, Devouring,
Daintiness, Excess, Dullness of feeling, Foolish mirth, Vain-babling, Ribauldry,
and bold beastliness.

In the sixth Tower lived Leachery, whose Posey was A COMMON AND FILTHY WHORE
DEFILES BOTH BODY AND SOUL. For the filthiness of a Harlot corrupts a Man
within and without. Of all Sins, this Sin of Leachery is the pleasantest to the
Devil, because it hurts both Body and Soul, and because he was never touched
with it, being a Spirit, and no Body. Were not the Merchant a flat fool to make
any Bargain, knowing before that he shall repent it after? Even so the Leacher
takes much pains, he spends his Goods to accomplish his desire, but afterward
herepenteth both his pains, his cost, and his purchase: nevertheless, with that
repentance he is not forgiven of God, unless a full purpose and resolute intent
of amendment issue and follow he reupon. The Leacher in his Life is three ways
tormented: first, with the heat of a Harlot: secondly, with the pain of his
hurt: and thirdly, with the worm of his own Conscience. He burns in
Concupiscence, he stinks with infamy, his Conscience accuses him for his
offense. Leachery is a ditch wherein the Devil hurles other Sins. To behold a
Woman wantonly is a great alluring to Leachery, so that good were it, not to
look upon her at all, but much better not to touch or meddle with her carnally.
Six other Sins wait upon Leachery, to wit, Fornication, Adultery, Sacrilege,
Incest, Buggery, and Rape.

In the seventh Tower dwelt Sloth, whose Posey was, A SLOTHFUL HUSWIFE AND
ALWAYS SLEEPING. Sloth is a heaviness of heart, and an hatred of spiritual
goodness, whereby a Man is made negligent in serving of God, either by good
words proceeding from the mouth, or good works issuing from the heart, both
which God himself wills. It is most fit to acknowledge a Creator, and an
encreaser of that good and goodness which we daily receive: as also to confess
our selves Sinners, and God the forgiver. But as People are dull to do good
deeds, so are they swift to commit Sin. Many Evils grow by Sloth, whereof two
be perilous, and Sloth her self confesses no less: namely, to neglect a
converting unto Christ, and a carelessness of confessing Sin, Whereby it comes
to pass, that oftentimes many depart this Life, not confessing themselves to
have offended God, neither yet converting or turning unto him: in doing whereof
they hazard both body and soul. It is a hard thing for one to dye well, that
always lived ill. In this Tower of Sloth are fifteen several lodges or
cabins: in the first, lives Luke-Warmness; in the second, Lasciviousness; in
the third, Drowsiness; in the fourth, Carelessness of himself and his Health; in
the fifth, Delaying the time to do good; in the sixth, Retchfulness; in the
seventh, Dastardliness; in the eighth, Undevoutness; in the ninth, Heaviness of
heart, or hatred to serve God; in the tenth, Weariness of life; in the
eleventh, Desperation; in the twelfth Unstaidness; in the thirteenth,
Unconstancy; in the fourteenth Murmuring, in the fifteenth, Unpatience. And
thus much of the seven Towers built upon the Wall, and the dwelling in the
same. It remains now to say somewhat of the standing of this Palace, which
we intend to do in few words.

CAP. XI.
A Description of the Situation or standing of the Palace of Worldly felicity.

THis Palace was situated or built in a pleasant Valley, upon the foot of a
high Mountain, environed with Hills on every side, whereby it was not only
defended from force of Tempests, which way soever the Winds blew, but the very
Hills themselves were very sightly and serviceable. For on the one was a goodly
Vineyard, wherein grew Grapes of sundry sorts: on the other side it yielded
great quantity of grain: on another side where high Woods, which yielded great
store of good Timber, and Trees wherein bred all manner of Birds; on another
side were Warrens and Conny-borows full of Hares and Connies: in another place
was a goodly Park, wherein was no want of Deer, Red or Fallow. Beyond these
Hills were goodly Forests, full of Gentlemanly Game for hunting. In the Valley
where the palace stood was a mavelous fair green Meadow, through the midst
whereof ran a River of fine fresh water, upon the brims whereof on both sides
along grew Apple Trees, Pear Trees, Plum-trees, Olive Trees, Elder-trees,
Oke-trees, Elme-trees, and such like: fast by the goodly Bank also grew many
young Hazel-trees, full of Nuts, at the time of the year, and by that again
such store of Walnut-trees, as pass to be spoken, besides many Ponds full of
Fish, and excellent Orchards of all kinds of Fruit, and goodly Gardens also of
sweet flowers. The River was not without great store of Water-fowles; and as
for the Wood, there bred in it Hawks, Hernes, Pelicans, Pheasants, Cranes,
Wood-cocks, Bittors, Kites, Crows, Cormorants, Turtles, Woodquists, Eagles; to
be short, all kind of Birds possible, as might be perceived by Feathers, which
fell from them to the ground pruning themselves. What should I speak of Pigeon
Houses, and of secret Banqueting places, fine and delicate? why it were but
Folly. Belide all this, you must think that there were Tennis-Courts, and all
other places of Pastime; the Walls whereof were very high, insomuch that it
would have made one amazed and dizzie to look down from the top. There was also
a mavelous Moat and searfull to behold, the bridge whereof was not broad, and
called Desperation, the passage over being a long narrow Plank, so that if one
went awry, he fell in, with hazard never to be recovered. The Stables were
full of goodly horses, as Hobbies, Iennets, Barled Horses, Geldings, Hackneys,
Mules, Camels, and Colts. The Kennels full of Dogs, as Gray-hounds,
Otter-hounds, Hare-hounds, Spaniels, for Land and Water, Mastives for Bull,
Bear, and Boor. We Supt in a Banqueting House, and our Supper excelled all the
Fare that ever I saw,: Lady Venus kept me company, and I was dulled with the
sumptuous service that I had. All my delight was to behold Lady Venus, who sat
over against me, insomuch that at last Voluptuousness over-came. Supper being
ended, in came Stage Players, Dancers, Maskers, Mummers, and many sports, which
we used daily in Feasting. Now when I waxed weary, I took my leave of the
Company with good night: and then was brought to the bravest Chamber in all the
Palace, Lady Venus and her waiting maids tending upon me. But every one
departed after I was in Bed, saving only Venus, the Goddess of Love, with whom
I lay all night.

CAP. XII.
The Author declares how the wandering Knight, and such like Voluptuous livers
in this world transgress the ten Commandments of Almighty God, underwritten.

SO long as the Knight continued in this pestilent Palace of Worldly Desire,
following his own Fantasy, by Vain Voluptuousness enticed, he did no other
thing but play the tool, Dance, Leap, Sing, Eat, Drink, Hawk, Hunt, Fish, hunt
Whores, and such like, (as did the Prodigal Son) and lead a dissolute life, for
the space of eleven days, which signifies a mavelous mystery, and
unfortunate. For the Number Eleven by the Opinion of Christian Doctors, and
Philosophers, is a wicked and unlucky number; for that the number ten
signifies, the ten Commandments of God, the number of Eleven which is one
more, prophesies and sore-telleth the transgression of them. Wherefore the
Knight having remained eleven days in the Palace grievously transgressing the
will of God, letting loose the bridle of his own affections, without refraining
any of them: if you note well the premises, and see into the senuel, you shall
find, that such as live after the order of the Palace of worldly Felicity,
being given to follow the pomp and Pride of the World, with the Pleasures and
Voluptuousness of the same, and seem willing to lead that life, without purpose
of change, nay rather, triumphing and rejoicing therein; I say truly, that such
are Transgressors of Gods Laws. Contrariwise, such as account themselves here
to he but Pilgrims, and fix their affection on the other World, where Jesus
Christ reigns in glory, reputing this life an exile, and destring to be
delivered out of it, to the end they may enter in at the Palace of the
heavenly King, shall enjoy the fullness and happiness thereof.

As this World yields a great deal of Temporal goods and Transitory Honor, so
does it also make an end of them. Now these that use these gifts to the glory
of God, are Gods people. Contrariwise those that do use them voluptuously, are
Vessels of the Devil, and transgressors of the Laws of God, as may appear by
the Ten Commandments, which I have set down for that purpose. Wherein all
Worldlings may perceive that by living voluptuously they grievously transgress
Gods Laws, to their own destruction. And as the Ten Commandments were written
in two Tables, even so are they divided into two parts. The first comprehends
four, concerning the Love of God: The second, six, touching the love of your
Neighbor. And therefore who so loses his Life Worldling-like, and fixes his
Felicity in Voluptuousness, is doubtless a Vessel of the Devil, and loves not
God nor his Neighbor, because he transgresses the Law of God, which follows
in due and convenient order.

I Am the Lord thy God, thou shall have none other Gods but me.

2. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, nor the likeness of any
thing that is in Heaven above, nor in the Earth beneath, nor in the Water under
the Earth. Thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them. For I the Load
thy God am a jealous God, and vifit the Sins of the Fathers upon the children,
unto the third and fourth Generation of them that hate me, and show mercy unto
thousands in them that love me and keep my commandments.

3. Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in Vain: for the Lord will
not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in Vain.

4. Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day, six days shall thou labor
and do all that thou have to do: but the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord
thy God, in it thou shall do no manner of work, thou, and thy Son, and thy
Daughter; thy Man servant, thy Maid servant, thy cattle, and the stranger that
is within thy Gates: for in six days the Lord made Heaven and Earth, the Sea,
and all that therein is, and rested the seventh day, wherefore the Lord blessed
the seventh day and hallowed it.

5. Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thy days may be long in the Land
which the Lord thy God gives thee.

6. Thou shall do no murder.

7. Thou shall not commit Adultery.

8. Thou shall not steal.

9. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy Neighbor.

10. Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors House, thou shall not covet thy
Neighbors Wife, nor his servant, nor his Maid, nor his Ox, nor his Ass, nor
any thing that is his.

This is the Law of God, by which you may perceive that such as live in the
Palace of Worldly Voluptuousness are Transgressors of the same. Contrariwise,
such as seek for Heavenly Felicity are Gods beloved, and they shall have the
possession thereof. Now hearken what happened unto the Knight, having lived
eleven days in the Palace of Vain and worldly Felicity.

CAP. XIII.
The Knight rode to recreate himself, and view the warrens and Forests, which
were about the palace of worldly Felicity, anon he saw it sink suddenly into
the Earth, and perceived himself fast in the mire up to the saddle.

AFter I had sojourned eleven days in the Palace, transgressing Gods
Commandments and leading a beastly life I desired to ride into the Forests
thereabouts, not intending to give over my Voluptuous life, but for my
pleasure, because I was weary of making good cheer. For although Worldlings
delight to eat, drink, dance, leap, sing, ride, run, and such like; yet
notwithstanding they cannot continue in this trade of Life, without
intermingling it with some other recreation; wherefore they often leave (by
constraint) their pastimes, though they intend to return thereto again. They do
not utterly abandon them, but break off for a season to procure them better
appetite. I then being weary, was willing to see the Warrens, and other
pleasures, which when my governess Folly understood, she told the same to Lady
Voluptuousness, and she consented to Hunt or Hawk with me, whereof I was right
glad. Then I apparelled my self in Hunters guise; instead of my Helmet, a Hat
full of Feathers; for mine Armor, an Horn, and I leapt upon Temerity my Horse:
Voluptuousness had a Hobby, Folly a Ienner, and the other Ladies every one of
them a Palfrey. There came the Huntsmen with Greyhounds and Mastives, hooping,
hollowing, and galloping together, some one way, some another. The dogs were at
a beck, up starts the Hare, the cry was pleasant to hear. But in the midst of
all our pastime, I chanced to breathe my Horse, and turning toward the Palace
of Worldly Felicity, suddenly I saw it stuk into the Earth, and every Body
therein. But what lamentable Outcries they made, you that have reason are to
judge: then did there arise amongst us a Whirlwind, with an Earthquake, which
set us all asunder, in so much that I and my Horse sunk in mire up to the
Saddle: all this while my mistress Folly only remained with me. This
Earthquake yielded such an Air of Brimstone, that the like has not been felt:
then I perceived that I was far from the pleasant Palace, Gardens, Orchards,
and Vine-yards of Voluptuousness; and rather in a beastly Bog sticking fast,
and nothing near me but Serpents, Snakes, Adders, Toads, and Venomous worms.
Such was my perplexity in this case, That I fell into despair, being not able
to speak one word, I was so sore amazed: but when I came again to my self,
revived from death to life, and found my self in that beastly Bog, I tare my
hair, I rent my clothes, I wept, I wailed, I howled, I cried, I wrung my hands,
I struck my breast, I scracht my face, I bit my Arms, and spoke thus: O
Wretch, O Ass, O Miserable Fool, O Captive, O Fondling, where is now thy Palace
of Worldly Felicity? Where are now thy brave Chambers, hanged with cloth of
Arras: Where are now thy gallant Gardens, Orchards, thy Meadows, thy
Cornfieldsd, thy Coffers of Coin, thy Ladies so lovely, thy hawks, thy Hounds,
thy Horses, thy Oxen, thy Servants, thy soft beds, thy good cheer, thy Wives,
thy Music, thy Pleasure, and all the things which thou have abused? Alas
wicked Wretch, how have thou been deceived, thou thoughtest thou had been in
the Palace of true Felicity, and for Felicity thou find Vanity: Thou have
been wickedly enchanted thus to find evil in stead of good. Herewithall I
turned my self toward Folly, and railed at her, saying: O cursed, cruel, and
deceitful beast, O monstrous mocker of mankind, O filthy Bawd, O Venomous
Viper: Is this the good hap I should have? Is this the palace of Felicity,
whither thou would bring me?

Cursed be the day that ever I saw thee, cursed be the day that ever I heard
thee, cursed be the day that ever I believed thee, cursed be the day that ever
I followed thee. It is even so? that thus thou governest, even beastly and
damnably? Is it even so? that thou leadest people even to Perdition? Where is
the Felicity thou promisedst me? Where is the good hap I should have by thee?
It is chanced to me even as I doubted by the way, when thou discoveredst thy
filthy Feats, beginnings, and proceedings, howbeit thine enchantments and thy
flattery caused me to keep thee company, when full fain, God wot, I would have
been rid of thee. But such was my arrogant ignorance, and ignorant arrogance,
that I followed thy dangerous Counsel. When I had thus scolded and took on, the
lewd lossel loudly laughed me to scorn. Whereat being in a rage, I offered to
draw my sword, but it would not be: then I spurred my horse, but he could not
lift up his legs. Notwithstanding for all this I carried the mind still I might
get out not having help, even by mine own strength and industry. But be you
sure of this, that after a Man be once sunk in, and drowned in fleshly
Voluptuousness, he shall stick fast, and not be able to recover himself, unless
he have the help of Gods Grace, which he of his goodness give us all. Amen.

CAP. XIV.
The Author cries out bitterly against worldlings, and their Felicity.

O Wicked Worlding, O Traitor, O Liar, O damnable deceiver, armed with filthy
fraud and cursed craftiness, having a face like a man, but a tail like a
Dragon, who with thy pestilent prating promisest that which thou never wilt nor
can perform: to wit, peace, rest, assarance, blessing, and felicity. Whereas
contrariwise thou show thy self Vain, Cruel, unquiet, uncertain, cursed,
and desperate. And because thou would bestow thy peysons, and not be
perceived, thou coverest it with a little honey of delight. O foolish
Worldlings and lovers of Voluptuousness, why suffer you your selves to be so
foully abused? Why fly you not from her, since you know she is damnable? Why do
you believe a Liar? Why do you follow a deceiver? Why become you acquainted
with such a Murderer? Why do you not purge your understanding of Erroneous
Opinions? Why consider ye not what the World is with a perfect Judgment? If you
did all this, you should find your selves out of the way. For Worldly goods,
Voluptuousness, and Pleasure, are mingled rather with Sour things than with
sweet.

In following Voluptuousness, you are not happy, but unhappy, not Wise, but
flat Fools. Saint John says: All that is in the world is Concupiscence of the
flesh, Concupiscence of the eyes, and Concupiscence of Pride. The world and all
her Concupiscence shall pass: but he that does the will of the Lord shall
continue eternally. Hearken ye foolish Worldlings, hearken you Vessels of
Voluptuousness. This teaches you assuredly, wherein consists all your
Felicity, and how it is damnable. Consider Saint John's words, That the world
shall pass, and the Concupiscence of the same: What meant he by the World?
nothing else but, as Saint Austen says, All worldlings and lovers of
Voluptuousness, which prefer visible things before invisible, the flesh before
the Spirit, Satan before Jesus Christ: even as commonly we call a house good or
bad according to the usage of them that dwell in it. The eye, the flesh, and
the pomp of life is the Worldlings Felicity, that is, their Heaven. In all
goodness come of God, (as sure the coucupiscence of the eye, the flesh, and the
pride and pomp of Life comes of the Devil) are not they deceived that think ^t
good, or sir their affection to follow it? I could say, there is a gnawing
Conscience to terment the Worldings. I could say, that the Voluptuous man has
the wrath of God hanging ever his head: I could say, eternal death is reserved
for his reward. A for excessive eating and drinking, centes farfets, Headache,
lass of wit, dropstes, loss of appetite, griping of the guts, palsies, weakening
of the body, infamy, and shame. Now to Venery, wherein the Voluptuous Man
takes such pleasure, as in nothing more: First, what gains, what forrows, what
torments and anguish has the Lewd Lover, before he can compass his desire? his
dessire cannot be achieved without loss: For we see that Leachery and Gluttony
breeds poverty, which is a very heavy burden. But imagine it costeth
nothing, as oftentimes it chances among such as be rich, yet notwitistanding
they feel even what so lowes, namely loss of Body and Soul. Touching the sin of
Leachery a man therein is like unto a beast; for in his blind delight he is
deprived of reason, and therefore the deed declares it self to be damnable.
This Sin brings her reward in this World, as Dropsies, Palsies, Leprosies,
Gowts, Burnings, Batches, and French Pox, which is the very worst, the
commenist, the loathsomest, and the most infectious disease of all: besides
that, banishment from all honest company, decay of Strength, and loss of good
Name and Fame. Do you account him a happy Man which spends his days in
Drunkenness and Leachery, having here so many H^ls? abstinence or forbearance
does not warn them to take heed thereof, though it be the only medicine. Now
touching Concupiscence of the eyes, whereby covetousness and desire of Riches
is understood: First, though Gold and silver be but Earth, what vexation has
the covetous Man to atchieve it? He saileth over tempestuous Seas, he climeth
over Monstrons Mountains, he diggeth deep into the bowels of the Earth, he
suffers hunger, thirst, cold, heat, and a thousand mischiefs. One is drowned,
another killed, the third robbed, and he that has obtained his purpose, lives
in fear to lose it: the covetous Man suspects every body. It is not Coffers
full of Coin, that can make men happy: Our Savior terms it Trash and Thorns,
because it pricks the heart, and corrupts both Body and Soul. Saint Paul
says, He that wishes Wealth in this World, falls into temptation: Is not
Judas an Example, who in case of covetousnes hanged himself. Now to
Coucupiscence of Pride. He that has Honor, Authority, Might, Estimation, and
Dignity in this World, thinks he is happy, but such are laden with
unhappiness: for what pains, labor, and vexation endures the ambitious Man,
before he can come to dignity, Honor and Authority? And when he has it with
all these vexations, he is not sure how long he shall enjoy it. We see
oftentimes Fortune turns her Wheel, and that the Ambitious end their Libes with
infamy. Take an Example of Priamus King of Troy, who flourished in Friends, and
Riches, Honor, Might, Kindred, and Children: did not he and his Offspring,
the greatest part of them dye most miserably: as for the rest, they became
Servitors, and were at length killed in Troy.

Croesus King of the Lydians, as rich and mighty as he was, after he had
reigned fifteen years, he was Vanquished by King Cyrus, lost his Realm, was
carried away Captive, and led all the rest of his life like a Slave.

Dionyfius the cowardly King of Sicill, was hunted out of his Realm, and became
so poor, that he kept a School in Corinth, and by teaching little Children he
got his living very poorly, God wot, and beggarly.

Mithridate, King of Pontus, a rich and mighty Prince, he subdued twelve
Nations, wherein some say all Languages were spoken, yet he for all that, after
he had wearied the World with Wars, was forsaken of his own People, pursued by
his own Son, and overcome by subtilty: insomuch that he was glad to desire a
Frenchman to kill him, who did so, and that was his end.

Valerianus the great Emperor of Rome, even he that persecuted the Christians,
and did much mischief, was taken by his Enemy the King of Persia, who against
the Law of Arms, made him lie down, whiles he trod on his back to leap on his
Horse.

Bajazet the fourth King of the Turks, was Vanquished by Tamberlane a
Tartarian, and King of Scythia, who kept him in a Cage like a beast, and with a
Golden Chain led him, like a Spaniel, throughout all the Army: yea, he was glad
to feed under Tamberlanes Table, like a dog. And therefore let this be a
conclusion, that Honor, Authority, and Dignity is no Inheritage. Moreover,
what Labors, Trabels, Verations and Perils do Princes pass through even at the
present, to maintain themselves in their Estates? What Wars and slaughters have
been committed partly to get, and partly to keep rule and Regiment? Ambitious
Worldlings cannot play with their pleasures, if they have not first passed some
of these Vexations. In youth men run their race without regard of Conscience,
but when age comes on, and nothing left for Lust: when White hairs, a Walking
staff or crutch, a pair of spectacles, Cotton put in their ears, when none of
these things can help them, then must they endure the gnawing of Conscience,
which Voluptuousness kept hidden a long time. Whatsoever is pleasant to youth,
the same is unpleasant to Age. And what comfort may an Old Man conceive, when
he can think upon no time of his youth, that was well spent and Virtuously
bestowed. What discomfort is it, when Conscience accuses the old man of his
young years wickedly wasted: But as the Elect live in hope, so do the Reprobate
in despair. He that follows Voluptuousness, is Gods enemy. For Saint James
says, He that loves the World hates God. You may well think, that Sin is
hated of God, when he suffered his only Son to dye upon the Altar of the cross
for this end, that Sin should not be unpunished. And why was it, but because
the Sins of Adam increased, as Generations multiplied? The evil rich Man that
lived at his lust, was Tormented in Hell with fire and thirst, in whom the
words of our Savior Christ are verified, saying, Woe unto you that now laugh,
for you shall lament and weep. Go to you foolish Worldlings therefore, and you
Vain Voluptuous persons, vaunting your selves happy in following your fleshly
appetites, when for such pleasures you shall suffer torments, not in this
World, but in the World to come, you will sing a new note.

But now to our Knight, whom we left in the mire, and deep ditch of Sin. I
refer you to the Psalms of David, and chiefly the 36.98.72.143. and there you
shall find the truth, that Worldly Felicity is no other thing, than Vanity,
dreams, and mere a^uses; and also that Worldlings are accursed and unhappy.
Wherefore I beseech you in the name of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ to use
the goods of this world, as Pilgrims use their Lodgings, and such fare as they
find in their Voyage, that is, not to set your hearts upon them, nor so to love
them that nothing be lest for the Lord. For as the Knight saw the Palace of
wordly Felicity sink suddenly, with all her people, and pomp: even so shall it
happen unto all Voluptuous worldings, at the dreadful day of Judgment, unless
they return from their wicked ways, forsake Sin, embrace a new lise, and serve
the Lord in holiness and righteousness. Wherefore let us bridle our
affections, refrain our own pleasures, repent with true sorrow of heart,
attend, wait, and hope for the mercy of God, by the intercession of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ, that he may make us happy Possessors of true and
everlasting Felicity; to whom be all honor and glory world without end.

The end of the first part of the Voyage of the wandering Knight.
THE VOYAGE OF The Wandering Knight.
The Second Part.
CHAP. I.
Gods Grace draws the Knight out of the filth of Sin, wherein he stuck fast.

I Have declared in the first part of my Voyage, how being governed by Folly,
in contemning Virtue, and following Voluptuousness, I entered into the Palace of
false Felicity, there resting my self for a certain season, and transgressing
all the Commandments of God, in leading a diffolute and worldly Life, thinking
that by living so I might be happy; whereas indeed I was unhappy. And why?
because that in stead of Felicity I found Vanity: For as I thought to recreate
my self in hunting, I saw the Palace of Voluptuousness sink, and come to utter
confusion, and my self also plunged into the pit of Sin, even up to the saddle.
It is an easy matter for a Man of himself to fall into Hell, but it is
impossible for him to get out again, unless by the help of Gods Grace: I term
him to be in Hell, who lives in continual wickedness, committing Sin with
delight. For if he dye in that Estate, Hell is his reward; but in this lise if
he repent, there is hope of Salvation: For by Gods Grace he may be comforted
and delivered. Therefore Man of himself falls into Perdition, but without
Gods Grace he cannot rise up again. God therefore seeing his Creature given to
all Vanity, led with Ambition of Worldly honor, and not ceasing his sinful
Life, oftentimes sends Adversity, Diseases, Dishonours, and confusion in the
World, to make him humble, and so open the eyes of Reason, which Voluptuousness
had shut up, whereby he may come to the knowledge of his Sins, and confess the
same to God. All this is figured in the Gospel, where our Lord Jesus raised the
Widows Child, which was carried out of the City of Naim to be buried, he
commanded the Bearers to stay, and having touched the Cossin of the Corpse, with
a loud Voice he said, Young man, arise, and straight way the dead body rose up
and spoke: Which done, the Lord delivered him to his sorrowful Mother. The
mourning Mother mystically represents the Church, lamenting for her dead
Children, to wit, Wicked Worldlings, and Voluptuous Christians, which are worse
than dead Corses. The Widows child represents souls dead in Sin. The Coffin
represents the natural body, wherein lies the sinful Soul. The four
Bearers carrying the dead Soul to Hell, represent hope of long life, custom of
sinning, delaying of repentance, and contempt of Gods words. Nevertheless, when
our Lord will raise to life this dead Soul, he commands the Bearers to stay,
afterward touches the Body, sending upon Sinners Adversity, Diseases, and
Misfortunes: but all that suffices not, unless the Lord say unto the Soul,
Soul, I say unto thee, arise. Do not we see oftentimes People visited with
afflictions murmur against God, cursing him that afflicted them? These by
impatiency being unable to arise of themselves, is it not necessary that God
say to the soul, Arise: There is no difference between his saying and doing:
for what he says he does. And therefore if the Lord say once Arise to the
Soul, she arises, and then he delivers her to her Mother the Church, which
was sorrowful for her sins. In like manner God to raise me from my Sins,
sends Adversity, to the end I should acknowledge mine iniquity, and with
humility turn unto him, which I cannot do without his Heavenly grace, much less
atchieve true Felicity and Blessedness, unless he help. Then was I warned by
the scourges of God; that living Worldling like, and following Voluptuousness,
I was not happy, but unhappy, being full of filthiness and infection, tumbling
in the mire of all iniquity, from the which I could not withdraw my self, for
that the eyes of Reason were closed up by Voluptuousness, which afterward were
opened by Gods grace. To see the pitious Estate wherein I was, and the
Understanding which Folly bad darkened, made me the wofullest wretch in the
World; nevertheless when I was whipped with Adversity, I perceived my knowledge
somewhat cleared and lightened, so that I found in Conscience that I had
accustomed my self greatly to unhonest things: and when I saw the sequel, that
there was no retiring of my self without Gods grace, I lifted mine eyes to
Heaven, and wringing my hands, all ashamed and confounded, I lamented with a
loud boyce, and humbling my self before the Face of God, whom I had grievously
effended, I made my moan, saying:

O Lord God, Father and Maker of all things, I am not worthy to lift up mine
eyes toward thee, nor to ask pardon for those infinite Sins whereof I confess
my self guilty. Nevertheless, O God of all goodness, and Father of mercy, I
beseech thee not to punish me in thy great rage, nor to condemn me among the
Reprobates: I acknowledge my evil, and crave pardon for my misdeeds: my former
life displeases me greatly, and my heart quaketh for fear of thy Judgments. O
God forsake not thy Creature, which is a sinner, but aid and assist me with thy
Heavenly grace, whereof if I may taste the Virtue, I shall need none other
Succor: O grant this, for the glory of thy great Name, and for the love of thy
dear Son Jesus Christ, to whom with thee and the holy Ghost, be all Honor and
glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

As I was thus praying, with a willing mind, shedding tears, striking my
breast, conceiving sorrow for my Sins, suddenly I saw a Lady descending down
from Heaven, setting her self before me, fast by the Bog where I stuck fast.
This Lady was of a Marbellous Majesty, and Wonderful Courteous; she appeared
to me in a Garment of White Satin, a Cloak of blew Damask, imbroydered with
Gold. Her face shined like the Sun, so that I was amazed at so sudden a Vision,
not knowing what she was, yet I took heart a grace supposing some help came
from Heaven, to draw me out of the Bog wherein I lay. In the end, with all
reverence I made my Petition unto her, saying: O good and gracious Lady,
whatsoever thou be, I most humbly beseech thee, if thou can, that it would
please thee to help me out of this beastly Bog of filthy infection; For nothing
is near me but Venomous Serpents, and noisome Vermin: In the name of God
therefore I crave thy help. To the which my request she answered, O Fool, thou
see now what reward Voluptuousness yields thee for following her: If thou
had believed my daughter, thou had not been in this misery.

Then I asked her, who was that Daughter of hers: She answered, the Gentlewoman
which admonished thee, eleven days past, to leave Voluptuousness, and to
follow her: whom because thou believedst not, but neglectedst her Counsel,
thou lie in this unhappiness. By this speech of hers, I knew she was Gods
grace, and the mother of Virtue. Then fell I on my knees, and Weeping, thus I
said: O dear Lady, my cursed Counselor Folly drew me from thy Daughter, and I
most unhappy wretch believed her: which deed of mine grieves me, and now I cry
thee mercy, most humbly desiring thee of thy clemency, to deliver me out of
this filthy mire to follow thee. For although I deserve Damnation for my
misdeeds, yet thou being by nature merciful, wilt spare me. Gods grace hearing
this my Lamentation, of her mercy stretched forth a Golden Rod, and commanded
me to lay my hands upon it, which when I did, I rose from my Saddle and so was
out of the Bog, where I left Temerity my Horse, and Folly my Governess, to fish
for Frogs. Thus you see that Gods Grace draws us from sin, without any merit
of ours: howbeit not without an inward heart-grief, and sorrow for sin, which
is a special gift of Gods grace.

CAP. II.
Gods grace shows Hell unto the Knight, with all the Voluptuous company he
saw in the Palace of Worldly Felicity.

WHen I was out of the Bog, humbly on my knees I gave thanks to Gods grace, for
her goodness, being assured, that he to whom God does good is not worthy
thereof if he be not thankful. Then Gods Grace marched before me, saying that
I should follow her, the which I did. For doubtless our freewill guides not
Gods Grace, but Gods Grace guides our freewill. Then I followed her, all to be
dagled, until we came where I had seen the Palace of Worldly Felicity in
greatest glory, turned into a deep Dungeon of Darkness, boiling with consuming
sire, from whence came a Vile Vapor and stinking smoke of burning Brimstone,
over the which we must pass by a little long plank, whereat I was so afraid,
that the hair of my head stood an end. Then with sorrowful lighes I beseeched
Gods grace to tell me what was the light which we saw, (queth she) This is the
place of thy Voluptuous Palace, with all thy Allies, amongst whom thou wast
entertained. Mark well, if I had not been thy help, and showed thee mercy, thou
had been plagued with them. Think with thy self, if the place be pleasaut or
no. Thou see how the Devil handles those that be here with torments. This is
the great King Lucifer, whom thou supposest to have seen accompanied with so
many Nobles in the Palace of counterfeit Felicity? these be they that fry in
the Furnace: here is the reward of such as serve him.

Then we saw a great bed of Iron red hot, wherein lay a naked Woman, whom a
great dragen embraced, playing with his Tail between her Legs, with two ligly
Serpents winding about her thighs, and eating her privy members. This miserable
Woman lamenting, cried aloud with terrible noise. This (quoth Gods grace) is
the brave Bed wherein thou layest, and this Woman is the Goddess of Love, which
kept thee company. Would thou be glad now to serve her? To which I answer,
No. Thou see (quoth she) this is the end of Voluptuous livers and wicked
Worldlings. Ask them now where are their pleasures and Voluptuousness. Alas
Lady (quoth I) for fear I dare not. Then with a loud Voice she began,
particularly, asking the question, saying: O cursed out casts of God, and
Wretched Worldlings, where are now your fair Chambers, hanged with Silk
Lapestry, your goodly Gardens, your Dogs of all sorts, your Birds, your Horses,
your brave Apparel, your delicate Wives, your change of Meats, your sweet
waters, and servants, Cooks, and Butlers, your Ladies of love, and such like: O
unhappy People, the change is great. Instead of your Gluttony, you suffer
hunger; instead of your drunkenness you suffer thirst; for your sweet smelling
you suffer sour savours: instead of your leacherous lovers you are accompanied
with tormenting Debils, and for your former pastimes, you endure Terrible
punishments. When Gods Grace had thus spoken, that cursed company cried aloud:
Woe be to the hour that ever we were born: the heavy justice of God has
deservedly punished us.

This being past, Gods Grace told me we must pass over that way,
notwithstanding the Plank was narrow and long. Then I, though I were afraid,
followed her, she going before me for my safety. But I had not gone three
steps, but I saw Cerberus the Dog of Hell with his three heads, yelping and
gaping to devour me: at which sight all amazed, my feet slipped, and straight he
had me by the heels to tear me. Then I cried to Gods grace for help, who looked
back, espied me in danger, and hearing me cry, Succor, Succor, she took me
up, and in a moment delivered me out of the Dungeon: Then I remembered what
David said: Si dixissem, motus est pes meus, miserecordia tua Domine adjuvabat
me; When I said, My feet slipped, thy mercy O Lord did help me up. Now when
Gods grace carried me in her arms, I feared my silthiness would hurt her Array;
but I found it contrary, for her Apparel was nothing spotted, and mine being
foul became fair, which made me much to marbel. Then said Gods grace; My Son,
like as the Sun shines into the Dyars Dye-fat and yet returns forth
unspotted: even so do I without blotting my self, enter into the sinful Soul,
and in a moment do make it clean.

Then over the High Mountains and ragged Rocks away we Walked, till we came to
a cross way, where Ventue wished me to follow her; whose sayings when I called
to mind, it made me weep bitterly for my Sins and Follies past. But when Gods
grace perceived me to be weary, and noyed with the smells that I sound in that
loathsome Lake, for pity she took me in her Arms; and at the last she showed me
the School of Repentance, whither I must go before I could enter into true
Felicity.

CAP. III.
The Knight declares how he entered into the School of Repentance, and of his
entertainment there.

WHen we approached to the School of Repentance, which was built upon a high
hill, environed with a Moat, named Humility: Gods grace called, and out came
Lady Repentance, in plain Apparel, having next her naked Skin a smock of
Hair-cloath, and upon the same a Gown of Sackcloth, girded tegether with a
great leather Girdle, a Kercher of course Canvise upon her Head. With her also
came two waiting-maids, named Sorrow for sin, and Confession of Sins, both
Apparelled like their Lady: the first seemed very sorrowful and sad, and the
Second was Bashful and Shamefast, and hung down her Head. Then Gods grace
spoke to Repentance, and presenting me unto her, said: Here is a Knight which I
have brought to thy School, that he might forget the evil which be has
learned abroad, and to be instructed in the good which he never yet knew: And
being received into the School of Repentance, I learned to live well, and
forget all the evil which I was taught in Times past. And whereas before I
learned to Leap, Dance, Eat, Drink, Play, hunt Whores, and to do all Villainy
and Mischief: new I learned a new Lesson, namely, to Kneel, to Fast, to Pray,
and to live well, flat contrary to all that I used in (...) Palace of Worldly
Felicity. Then Repentance said to Gods grace, that my Hat full of Feathers, and
all things else about me must be put off, and cast away. Then Repentance began
to take off my Toys, and first she hurld my Hat of Hautiness into the Dungeon,
then off went my Girdle of Intemperance, whereunto was tied my Sword of
Rebellion, which being broken in pieces, with my Coat of Vainglory, my hosen
of lewd Delight, and my Doublet of ill Desires, all were thrown into the Lake,
and there remained only with me my Shirt of Lasciviousness, the which also she
would have plucked over mine ears, but I entreated her earnestly not to leave me
naked. So I was for a while excused, but not altogether: for said Repentance,
except thou cast off all the Apparel of the old Man, thou can not come to my
School. Then Repentance said unto me; Son, thou must enter in at this Straight
hole, whereout I came. But when I complained, and said, that it was unpossible,
because my Head would not in, she said there was no other way or entrance into
her School. Then I called to mind what our Lord had said in the Gospel of
Matthew; The way is straight which leads to everlasting life, and very few
walk that way.

Now as I stood Wondering at the narrow hole, I saw an old Serpent enter in, who
for lack of room left his Skin behind him, and presently returned all renewed,
and young. Whereat as I marbelled, Gods Grace told me, saying: Thus thou must
do. For in entering the School of Repentance, thou must leave thy old Skin
behind thee, and afterward thou shall return a new Man. This is it which the
Apostle speaks of, saying: Put off the old Man, according to the first
conbersation, corrupted with ill thoughts, and put on the new Man, which is to
be created according to God, in justice, holiness, and truth. The Old Man is
the affections of Sin, and the former evil life, which is left behind in the
School of Repentance, and the new Man is the good life which is newly begun in
holiness and truth. As Gods grace was thus teaching me, I saw an Old Eagle,
heavy-eyed, and thick featherd fluttering aloft: This Eagle falling down, dived
three times into a fair fountain thereabouts, and presently returned young and
lusty: which Miracle made me marvail more then that of the Serpent. Then said
Gods grace, as the Eagle is renewed from the Fountain of water young and lusty,
so shall thou, after thou come to Christ with sorrow for thy sin, and
consession of the same, which if thou do, thou shall receive thy first
innocence, which I gave thee in thy Baptism.

Then Gods grace entered into the School of Repentance before me, saying, I
will draw thee in, for it is none but I that shows Sinners the way of
Repentance. With that she plucked me in, and sorthwith I became an enemy to Sin.
Now therefore let no Man glorine himself, seeing it is Gods Grace that goes
before Man's will, and that by its means is made good. Then I eutring in after,
and being a little way in, the passage waxed wider, Gods grace plucking me in
by the head, and Repentance thrusting at my feet. So then in passing in at the
narrow place, I left Lasciviousness my Shirt behind me, torn in pieces, which
she hurled into the Dungeon, and all my body was scratched. Thus does
Repentance prepare her Scholars, for if any mouth will consess his former sins,
not having inward sorrow and heart-grief for offending God, and full purpose to
amend his life, he is greatly deceived. For thinking to have Gods blessing, he
shall be sure of cursing. But to my purpose; Repentance put on my naked body
such Apparel as she her self did wear; which when I saw, I thought upon the
Apostles; not that I thought my self as good as they, but hoping to come (by
Gods grace) to the place where they are, I was well content to do as they did.

CAP. IV.
How true Repentance begins in us, and how the Knights conscience accused him,
what pains he had deserved.

IT is true, that Repentance (as it ought) cannot be done without special grace
from God. For the heart of sinful men cannot change her disordinate life nor
turn from their offenses, nor prepare themselves to God, without the fingular
operation of Gods grace. The Doctors dispute daily, whether true Repentance
takes her beginning at love, or at sear. This question cannot be decided in
few words: but to be short, I say it may begin at both. For true Repentance
being a work of God, he may bring it as he list. But when it comes from love,
it is not ordinary or common, but Mavelous. Look upon the conversion of Saint
Paul, of Saint Matthew, and the Thief. But ordinarily God begins Repentance in
us by fear, as in the third Book of the Kings, when be commanded Elias to come
out of his Cave to remain in the Mount before the Lord, and a mighty strong
Wind passed by, and rent the high Hills and ragged Rocks before the Lord, but
the Lord was not in the Wind: After that came an Earthquake, but the Lord was
not in the Earthquake: After that came a Fire, but the Lord was not in the
Fire: After that came a soft Wind, wherein the Lord was. In such sort, Gods
sends to Sinners, a Wind of Terror, to break the mighty Mountain of Pride, and
the heart more hard than the Rock: after that comes the troubling of the Soul,
after that comes the Conscience, grudging the heart of the finner and accusing
him of his evil Life: but yet the Lord is not there with his quickening grace:
Neverthelese, these be forerunners to prepare the way of the Lord. For when the
perverse Will of Man is mortified by servile fear, and led almost to Hell;
after comes the sweet sound of Gods grace, which reviveth the Soul, saying:
Lazarus come forth. This is the voice that gives Consolation, at the hearing
whereof we may be bold to depart in peace, with assurance of remission of our
sins. But it seems that Repentance began first in the Knight at Love, and that
miraculously: for he being in the Filth of Sin, suddenly by Gods Providence
confessed his folly, and loathing his lewd life, he required help and succor
at Gods grace, who presently assisted him, and brought him out of the sink of
sin. But this manner of conversion is not ordinarily used.

There are indeed certain forerunners to the justifying of sinners, which
prepare the way to Gods reviving or quickening grace, and offers unto God a
renewed Spirit, and a pure and upright heart; which manner of conversion Godly
People only do use. And hereof means the Knight to speak, purposing also to
show how it digresseth from Gods grace. When Repentance had thus apparelled me
with Hair and Sackcloth, I was set upon a Stool, and then Gods grace
appeared unto me with two Women and one Man, which was a Preacher. Now one of
the Women held in her right hand a sharp pricking Iron rod (called the gnawing
of the Conscience;) in her lest hand she had a red Book, whereat I was afraid.
For as she beheld me, me thought she threatened me. The other Woman was
Courteous and Mild and gentle, holding in her right hand a Book of Gold,
covered with Pearls, and she was called Remembrance. Gods grace placed
Conscience on my left hand, and Remembrance on my right hand, the Preacher,
repentance, and the Damsels about me, and then commanded Conscience to open the
red Book, which when I perceived, and saw the Words Written with blood,
declaring all my offenses, with Torments unto them belonging, for my following
of Folly, I was amazed and became speechless. Then Conscience with her Iron rod
teucht me, pricked me, yea, pierced my heart, and cried aloud unto me, saying:
Behold thou Wretch, view this Book, and thou shall see how thou have lived,
even against God, and contrary to right and reason.

Thou have been Proud, Arrogant, ambitious, spiteful at others prosperity, a
prolonger of time, Wrathful, a Backbiter, injurious, Traiterous, hateful,
Covetous of Gold more than of God, Gluttouous, Wanton, Shameless, a
stewes-hunter, given to all vices, and have transgressed all the commandments
of God, leading a loathsome life, denying God, swearing, and blaspheming his
name, an heinous effender, a false Witness bearer, a liar, a desirer of other
Men's goods, disobedient to Parents, cursing them, and wishing their death.
Furthermore, thou had neisher Faith nor hope in God, but rather in the force,
riches, honor, and friendship, of thy kindred, with their Authority. I cannot
reckon up the rest of thy Sins, for they are uncountable. Very little care have
thou had of Christ's merits, or of thy own souls health, but always yielding to
Voluptuousness, filthiness, and iniquity. When Conscience had thus accused me,
Sorrow for Sin sell bitterly aweeping, and oftentimes struck her breast. Then
Conscience showed me what Torments I had deserved for following Voluptuous
affections, and for loving them better then God. Thou ought, said she, to
burn in Hell fire that never quenches, and to be nipped with Torments both of
Body and Soul for evermore. Thy laughing shall be turned to Weeping, the Joy to
Sorrow, thy Songs to Cries: yea, what pains can be named, but thou art like
perpetually to suffer them, without hope of Redemption? For this is the due
reward of Worldly Felicity, and following Folly. Be think thee now, and tell me
if it be in thy power to rid thee from these grievances: Hearing my Conscience
thus speak, me thought I saw Hell open to swallow me up, and with sorrowful
sadness I fell to the ground, before Gods grace speechless: but she had
Compassion on me, and bade me arise; the which I did, though half in despair;
and to re-comfort me, she opened the book which Remembrance held in her hand.

CAP. V.
By the Commandments of Gods grace, remembrance read to me the goodness of
God, with his promises made to repen tant sinners.

AFter Remembrance had opened her Book, I perceived the Letters were Gold and
Azure, containing the great goodness and infinire mercy of God so repentant
Sinners, with fair promises annexed thereunto. Then at the commandment of Gods
grace, remembrance read out of that book unto me in this manner; Saint Paul
Writing to the Romans, says; Where Sin has abounded, grace has more
abounded. He that mistrusteth the mercy of God, mistrusteth God to be
merciful, and in so doing he does God great dishonor. For he denies God to
be Love, and power, wherein consists all the hope of poor Sinners. For of his
great love, he sent his only Son to take Man's Nature upon him in this World,
that in the same he might suffer death upon the Cross, for the remission of
Sins. Consequently he promised for the love of his Son, Remission and Pardon to
all Poor Sinners, so often as they desired it in Faith, with an heavy and
sorrowful Heart. Now God is as true of his Promises, as he is of Power able to
perform them. And as he is of Power, so will he do whatsoever pleases him; God
will pardon Sinners their Sins; who then can let him from doing it? To whom God
pleases or has promised to pardon their Sins, he forgiveth. The truth hereof
is Written in plain Words, and showed by examples in many places of the holy
Scripture, as well in the Old Testament as the New. First, Esaias says: It is I
my self, It is I my self, that does blot out thine iniquities, for mine own
love sake, and I will not have thy sins in remembrance. For the love of me
(says he) and not for the love of thee, meaning his goodness and mercy, and
not for the love of thy merits. As if he had said to all sinners in this sort;
If thou think that I pardon thy Sins for thy merits sake, thou art deceived,
and Wallowest in despair; no, no, but for my mercy and infinite goodness, I
remit and forgive. Thou have no cause to despair, for the least part of my
mercy exceeds all thy Sins. In another place he says by the same Prophet:
Turn your selves unto me all the Earth, and you shall be saved, for I am God,
and there is none other besides me. What is the meaning of these Words, I am
God, any thing else, but that God is good and merciful? If it be unpossible
but he should be God, it is unpossible but he should be good and merciful.

The same Prophet speaks unto every one of us, saying: Let the Infidel leave
his ways, and the unjust Man his thoughts, let them turn to the Lord, and he
will have pity upon him, for he is ready to forgive. And by the Prophet
Jeremy, he says to the People of Israel, that he was wroth for their Idolatry,
and many other Sins, nevertheless he said, Turn Israel, thou Rebel, unto me
thy Lord, and I will not turn my face from thee; or as the Hebrew Text says, I
will not lay mine ire upon thee; for I am (says the Lord) holy and gentle, and
keep not mine anger for ever. And by the Prophet Ezechiel he says, If the
evil Man repent him of his Sins, and keep my Commandments, doing righteously,
he shall live and not dye: neither will I have his former offenses any more in
remembrance. Do you think (says the Lord) that I delight in the death of a
Sinner? nay, rather that he should turn from his Wickedness and live. Repent
you then, and you shall live. The Prophet David said: That from morning till
night Israel hoped in the Lord: what does this signify, but that the faithful
from their Nativity and Birth, until their very Death, have hope in the Lord?

There is mercy in the Lord, and great Redemption attends upon him. In Joel
it is Written: Turn your selves unto the Lord, with all your heart, in Fasting,
Praying, Weeping, Sorrow, tearing your hearts and not your Garments, so shall
you be turned unto the Lord your God, for he is full of Clemency, Mercy, and
Grace, slow to ire, and ready to forgive; or (as the Hebrew Text says) such a
one as repents him of evil, that is to say, is leath to execute the punishment
upon Sinners, which he has denounced and threatened. Micheas the Prophet says:
What God is there like unto thee, which take away iniquities and forgivest
Sins, for the rest of thine Heritage sake? He keeps not his ire for ever, but
of his compassion and mercy will have pity upon us. He will put out our
iniquities, and throw all our Sins into the bottom of the Sea. What Sinner is
there that hearing these words, has so heavy a heart as to despair, seeing
that God is more ready to forgive, than the Sinner is to ask forgiveness?

Now let us come to the New Testament, to try if there be not Testimenies to
the same effect: The Son of God, which is the infallible Truth, spoke thus to
Nicodemus: God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, to the
end that whosoever believes in him should be saved and not perish, but have
everlasting life. God sent not his Son into the World to condemn the World, but
to the end the World should be saved by him. To the Scrives and Pharisees which
murmured because he did eat and drink among Publicans and Sinners, Christ said:
Those that be whole need not the Physician, but such as be sick. Again, I came
not (says the Lord) to call the just, but Sinners to repentance. Not as a
Judge, but as a Physician: for such as languish in their Sins came I into the
World, not that they should remain Sinners, but to turn them from their Sins,
that being Penitent they might be made righteous: Likewise he told the
Pharisees, that the Angels in Heaven do more rejoice in one penitent Sinner
than in 99 just persons, which need no repentance. God (says Saint Paul)
spared not his only Son, but gave him that he should rather dye for us, than we
be unpardoned.

If God spared not his only Son to dye for Sinners, what thing is more precious
unto him, that he should resuse to give them? And therefore the same Apostle
speaking or Jesus Christ, says thus: We have not an high Priest which cannot
have Compassion of our Infirmities, but such a one as in all points was tempted
as well as we, Sin excepted. Let us go then boldly to the Seat of Grace, that
we may obtain merry and find grace in time convenient. If I should rehearse all
the places of the Scripture to this effect, the ti^e would fail me. Thus we see
then, none has cause to distrust the goodness of God, or to despair because of
the greatness of his Sins, seeing that God has made so many fair promises to
pardon the Penitent Sinner: there be many Examples in the Old and New Testament
of the performance of Gods promises, as namely to David, who commitred bath
Adultery and Murder, he, even he, by sorrowing for his offenses, and crying
Peccavi, obtained mercy and pardon of all his Wickedness.

Manasses the Son of Hezekiah set up the false worship of God, which his Father
had defaced, and of an evil zeal to infidelity, he himself offered up his own
Children in fire for Sacrifice. He persecuted the Prophets, and sine
innumerable Innocents; amongst all which, he caused the prophet Esaias to be sawn
in pieces. In the end he was taken by his Enemies, and led Captive into
Babylon: but when he was in his extremity, he acknowledged his offense, and
asked forgiveness of God, by whom he was received to favor, and restored to
his Kingdom again.

The People of Ninive, whom God threatened by the Prophet Jonas, utterly to
destroy, for the multitude of their Sins, they repented and prayed, and so God
forgave them. The Samaritane also and the Canaanite, notwithstanding their
horrible sins, when they asked Gods mercy, he forgave them; Matthew, Zacheus,
and diverse other Publicans, upon their repentance were received into favor.
Peter that denied his Master (our Lord Jesus Christ) three times swearing that
he knew him not, when he wept vitterly for his Sins, he was received into
mercy. The Thief also upon the Cross, being at the paint of Death, even this
Fellow who lived upon nothing but Robbery and Man slaughter all his life time,
acknowledged his heinous Sins, asked pardon, and God forgave him; yea, he
obtained more than he required: for Christ said unto him, This day thou shall
be with me in Paradise. This is Gods property, even to give of his Liverality
more than Men do or can ask. Saint Paul was a Blasphemer, and a Persecuter of
Gods Church, and yet he received mercy. God has set down such Persons as
Examples for Sinners, to the end they should not doubt of his Mercy: and to
teach them that he does not Pardon offenses, for the merits of the Sinners,
which are stark Naught, even when they are best, but for his mercies sake,
which is adove all his Works. For so to imagine of Men's merits is Destruction;
if any thing be ascribed unto merits, then to the merits of his Son Jesus
Christ, and for his bitter Passion sake. Let this be the conclusion, that
albeit the Sinner has committed as many Sins as there be drops of Water in the
Sea, or Sands on the Sea shore, yet he has no cause to despair, for though
they be never so monstrous and manifold, yet the mercy of God does infinitely
exceed them. For his mercy consumes them sooner, than the fire does durn up the
dry Ton. When I heard Lady Remembrance read these words, I took heart a grace,
and recited a place Written in the Psalms of David, According to the multitude
of the grief and sorrows of my heart, thy consolations have refreshed my Soul.
And then falling on my knees, holding up my hands, with sorrowful Countenance
and Compunction of Heart, resting wholly upon the mercies and promises of God,
and the merits of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, I most humbly desired
pardon for my Sins, at the hands of Gods grace. Upon which unfeigned confession
of mine offenses, and heart-grief, handmaids of perfect Repentance, and
forerunners to the purpose, I received by the means of Gods grace, the benefit
of the death and Passion of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; to whom with the
Father and the holy Ghost, be all Honor and Glory for ever and ever. Amen.

CAP. VI.
A Sermon which Understanding the good Hermit made unto the Knight, upon the
History of Mary Magdalen.

IN the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, Amen. The
great goodness and unspeakable mercy which has been used in all Ages and
times, of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ toward all poor Sinners, are in
many places of the Gospel made manitest, and clearly notified: but chiesty in
the seventh of Luke. Wherein mention is made of a sinful Woman, lewd of Life,
and of ill name, contemned, despised, and abhorred of Men, whom sweet Jesus did
not only receive to Favor, but also by inward and secret inspiration drew her
to repentance: how, and in what sort, hear and understand.

The Gospel says, that there was a Pharisie, furnished with false Faith, and
nuzled with a vain Opinion of holiness: he was a great Doctor of the Law, and a
renowned Iusticiary; howbeit weak in Faith, and yet very high minded. When our
Savior had one day preached and instructed the People, by his Divine and holy
Doctrine, exhorting poor Sinners to turn to God by repentance, and uttering
many Parables and Similitudes, as the Prodigal Child, the lost Sheep, and such
like, whereby he does declare and signify, that he is inclined to compassion,
ready to have mercy, and to receive into savor all repentant Sinners: the
proud Pharisie prayed him to come into his House, and to dine with him. The
good Lord which had taken upon Him Man's Nature, and was born for the Salvation
of all, denied not his proud fellows request, neither resused to enter into
his House, although he was ambitious, but down at the Table sat the Son of
God, made Man for the Salvation of Men. He was conbersant among Men, he did eat
and drink with Men, he offered himself a helper to every one, showing unto all
his goodness, without exception of any. Now he being set at the Table, there
came one unto him in shape like a Woman, but in courage a Man, who by the brute
of the whole City was counted a great Sinner, and very ill-reported of the
World, and such a one indeed as every Body mocked and pointed at with their
fingers. But yet in the sight of God she was in great honor, not because she
was an heinous Sinner, but because she was Predestined and elected of God,
from the beginning, to reign with him in his Heavenly Kingdom.

This Woman hearing by report the renown of our Redeemer, and that he showed
himself sweet and bountiful to all sinners, defending them against the
malicious slanders and mocks of the proud and arregant Pharisees, and promising
to every one that believed in him, the Kingdom of Heaven: this Woman was
inspired both outwardly and inwardly by our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, to
see and hear him preach. Then did she by outward speech express, how she was
inwardly affected and moved in mind, and seeing her Soul sore sick and
diseased, her heart full of iniquity and sin, her Conscience defiled with all
kind of vice, her self frustrate and void of all hope of health, and devising
how to recover this malady addressed her self to seek him who is the only
Physician of all sick Souls, she sought for grace at the Well of Mercy, and
though she was a shameful Sinner, yet was she received of him, which came into
the World to save Sinners. She came not pompously arrayed, nor yet came with a
train, she came alone and not empty handed: for she brought with her a Box full
of most precious Ointment, of a sweet smell, representing the Faith, Hope, and
Charity, lodged in her heart.

What could this be but the sweet smell of Virtue? For what represents the Box
of Alablaster-stone, but holy Faith, founded upon the true Cornerstone, Jesus
Christ, wherein is conserved all Virtues, and without which it is unpossible to
please God? Came she alone, being accompanied with Faith, Hope, and Charity,
Humility, and Repentance? She entered the House uncalled, where was her
Physician, and putting apart all shame, which might hinder her, together with
the mocks of the proud Pharisees, which sat at the Table, she craved Comfort
and Health for her sick Soul, acknowledging her grief, and that being certain
he to whom she came, had power to help her. Unto this Physician she could not
have come without Faith; she was not so bold and hardy as to look Jesus in the
Face, but sell at his seet upon Her knees sementably Weeping, and with the
flood of Her Hears washing his seet, and wiping and drying them with Her hairy
locks; then she kissed them, and with her Precious Ointment she (...).

All this while her vaice was not heard, but her Heert spoke unto the true Son
of God, saying, I have no need to declare with my tongue my inward (...), or to
express the cause or thy coming hither, seeing thou know the (...) to thee I
come, O Christ, (...) to thee my sorrowful Heart (...) working well weighed
(...) heartily sorry for her offenses. For her (...) eyes, and her sair face
which was wont to be painted with costly Colors, for the adorning of Her
beauty, to allure licentiens Lovers, and to extice Voluptuous Worldlings, is
now turned into Tearn. Her body which afore-time was given to delights is now
asisicted with Fasting: Her lauging is turned into weeping: and as Her first
life was wholly bent to please the World, so now it is more behemently and
earnestly disposed to please God.

With Her fair flaxen Hair, which she was wont to keep daintily, she has dried
our Saviors Feet: her sweet lips, wherewith she used to kiss her Lovers, has
kissed his feet: Her Odoriferous Ointment, wherewith she beautified Her face in
wantonness, has anointed our Saviors feet: Now all this was a sure fign of
Faith, Hope, and Charity. And thus you see how we ought to repent. Surely we
should do according to Saint Paul's Doctrine, which is, that our Members which
have consented to commit iniquity should be offered unto the Lord, as
Instruments of righteousness, to receive sanctification. As for example, to
make the matter more manifest: Have thou been a Drunkard? Become now Sober.
Have thou keen a Glutton? Now fast. Have thou been proud? Be now humble. Have
thou been Coverous? Now gives Alms. Have thou been wrathful? Be now gentle.
Have thou been envious? Be now charitable. Have thou been Traitorous? Be now
Faithful. Have thou been Leacherous? Be now Chaste. Have thou been blasphemous?
Be now fearful to speak any thing but Truth. And so consequently to every Vile
Vice lay a meet medicine, which may serve for thy sickness, and expel the
poison of sin.

But now let us see what may be thought and judged of this Pharisie, who so
saucily besought our Lord and Savior to come into his House. Surely he seemed,
as he was, a Vainglorious Hypocrite. For when he saw the Woeful Woman fallen at
the feet of our Savior, with her Tears washing them, with her hair Wiping
them, with her mouth kissing them, and with her Precious Ointment anointing
them, he blamed not only her in his heart, but also our Lord for suffering her.
Then the Lord took the sick Woman, healed her of her sickness in the presence
of this proud Pharisie, and withheld Physic from him, whose Heart was wounded
to the death with the dart of Vainglory: then he showed himself frantic, and
as one that had lost his understanding, not knowing his grief, nor what
Medicine would do him good: But what said he in his foolish Heart: If this Man
(quoth he) were a Prophet, he would quickly know what Woman this is that
touches him? for she is a great Sinner.

This Pharisie is of the race of the Vainglorious of whom the Prophet Esaias
speaks in their person saying; Come not near me, for I am clear: or as
another Translation says; Get thee hence and meddle not with me, for I am
holier then thou. Even so surely it is not unlike if the Woman had come near
the Pharisie, he would have used these words, and have said, Stand back, and
touch me not, for I am holy, but thou art known for a heinous Sinner.
Certainly, true righteousness and holiness has compassion upon poor Sinners,
whereas on the contrary, false righteousness and Hypocrisy has them in Hatred
and Disdain. But let us listen with what sentence this sond Pharisie was
convicted, and reproved by our Savior, to be worse then this sinful Woman.
The Lord then to show that he was not only a Prophet, but also the Lord and God
of Prophets, answered the thought of the Proud Pharisie, saying, Simon, I have
somewhat to tell thee. Then said he, Speak on Master.

A Creditor (quoth the Lord) had two Debtors; whereof the one owed him 500
pence, the other but 50; now they both having nothing to pay, the Creditor
forgives them the Debt. Now tell me which of those Debtors loves the Creditor
most? Simon said, I think he to whom most was forgiven; Jesus answered. Thou
have rightly spoken.

Our Lord in propounding this Question, defired also to heal this Pharisie. For
if he had denied it, Jesus would have eaten none of his meat. These two Debtors
were Simon and the sinful Woman. The sinful Woman not only by the Judgment of
the standers by, but also by her own confession acknowledged her self more
indebted then Simon, and Simon less indebted then she, because he thought
himself righteous in respect of her. The Creditor is our Lord God, who lends
and gives us his gilts, both temporal and spiritual, to interest, disbursing to
one five Talents, to another two, and to another one. Now then is signified by
the judgment of Simon, that the Woman was most in debt to God, unto whom he
forgave most. And because she loved God better then Simon did, she deserved
again of him to be better beloved, in that she did more good service to God,
then Simon did, notwithstanding his meat.

Wherefore the Lord valued the love and good Will of this woman, and preferred
it before Simons, reprehending him of his arrogance, and saying: Do thou
see this Woman, whom thou judge more in debt then thy self? I entered into
thy House, and thou have not given me water to wash my feet, but she has
washed them with tears, and wiped them with her hair, though Water was easier
to be found then tears; Thou have not kissed my mouth, but she has kissed my feet.
Thou have not anointed my head with common Oil, but she has anointed my feet
with fine Ointment. So that by these signs thou see that she loves me better
then thou do. Therefore I tell thee, that many Sins are forgiven her, because
she loved much. For to him is least forgiven, that has least loved.

The Lord said this to beat down the proud opinion of the fond Pharisie, not
that he was but little forgiven, but because Simon might know that he thought
so. For truly as who so commits most Sins, is most indebted to God: so
likewise is he that has least offended. To conclude, both the less and the
great stand in need of Gods Grace: unto whom they cannot come of their own
strength and virtue. As the greatest Sinner reserreth to God the remission of
his fins: even so ought the justest man to do also. For there is no sin which
one Man commits, but another would commit the like, if God, who made Man
without sin, did not keep him from sin, as witnesses Saint Austen. But
perchance one will say, I have not committed Adultery as this man has. To whom
I answer, thou have not had such occasion ministered as he has had: and he has
not had the Grace to avoid it as thou have had. It was Gods doing, and no Will
of thine, if thou have had no occasion nor convenient time, nor fit opportunity
to fall into that Sin. Suppose thou have had occasion offered, with opportunity
and all things fit, and yet have resrained: Well, it is God then that guided
and governed thee, that thou should not do it. Acknowledge then the grace of
God, as thou art bound, because thou have not committed such a sin. For as he
who has committed most sins, is most indebted to God: even so is he who never
finued, Gods debtor: for were not the grace of God his Guide, he would do
enough. Now to our purpose. After the Lord had convinced the Pharisie of his
proud Opinion, to comfort the sorrowful Woman lying at his feet, he said thus:
Woman thy sins are forgiven thee. O joyful voice, O happy Woman, that art
worthy to hear the Son of God speak to thee, and forgive thee thy Sins. But
those comfortable words of the Lord greatly offended the proud Pharisees at the
Feast, who turned them to Blasphemy, saying: What Fellow is this that also
forgiveth Sinners? It is apparent enough that he is a Blasphemer: for to pardon
and forgive Sinners belongs only to God.

No doubt our Lord Jesus Christ was taken to be a very poor man, of him that
requested him to Dinner, and of those which were at the Table. It was known
that man could not forgive sins, but they believed not that Jesus Christ was
God, and therefore say they: What Fellow is this, that forgiveth sins? These
Feasters were sick of a deadly disease, which they neither knew, nor yet the
remedy to heal and do them good. Is it not a Madness, that such as are Sick
should fall a laughing at them that are sound and in good Health? So did the
Pharisees laugh at Jesus Christ, and the Woman, who were not sick: or if she
were sick, she acknowledged her Sickness, and sought help of the Physician. It
is most true that Man cannot forgive Sins, but this Woman which believed that
Christ could forgive Sins, believed also that he was God, and therefore able to
forgive Sins.

But why did not our Savior Christ answer these murmuring Pharisees, and say:
I am the Son of God, when they asked the question, saying: what Fellow is this
that forgiveth Sins? No, he let them murmr, and turned himself toward the
Woman, and said: Thy Faith has saved thee, depart in Peace. Though she heard
him say of the Pharisees, these men murmr, and esteem me as it pleases them,
nevertheless be thou assured that thy Faith has saved thee, and therefore
depart in peace, and enjoy full rest and tranquillity of conscience, justified
by a lively Faith, and fulfilled with Love. Let all sick souls that are laden
with Sins, if they will be healed, let them (I say) come in Faith and assured
Hope to the true Physician of souls, which is Jesus Christ; let them confess
their offenses with s^w and Weeping; let them Wipe the Feet of our Lord with
their hair, and they shall be restored, made whole, and recover their Health.
Let your superfluous riches be given among the poor, and not spent in Feasting,
and Pompous Apparel. And after that the Sinner with love and liverality has
thought upon the poor, helping them in their need, as well with good counsel,
as with Alms-deeds, and living as the Rule of Gods Word requires, he shall
receive peace and quietness of Conscience, and he reconciled to God the Father,
for the merits of his Deer Son Jesus Christ, to whom be all Honor and Glory,
for ever and ever. Amen.

CAP. VII.
The Knight having heard the sermon, received the holy Communion, and dinner
being ended, mounted into a Chariot, and was (by Gods grace) carried to the
Palace of Virtue.

GReat was the comfort I took by the sermon of the good Hermit, wherefore I was
desirous to know his Name, the which I asked Lady Memory, who told me that it
was good Understanding. Then I received the holy Communion, which being ended,
and Thanks given to God, I meant to salute gratisie him. But before we went to
receive the holy Sacrament of the body and blood of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, I remembered the great love of our Lord, which humbly took upon him our
frail and weak nature, for our sakes became accursed, and suffered most bitter
death upon the Cross, to deliver us out of the bandage of Sin, Hell, and
Eternal death, and to bring us to everlasting life. I remembered also that love
which he showed unto me in drawing me out of the sink of sin, wherein I was
plunged over head and ears: so that I was not only drawn from my unspeakable
sins, but also made a Communicant of the mystery of his Divine Majesty, by
faith. And to the end it might please him to give me grace to receive it
aright, I prayed unto him on this wise.

O Sweet Jesus, and loving Redeemer, I yield thee thanks for thy unspeakable
love, by which thou have purged me from the filth of sin, and plucked me by thy
grace out of the dark dungeon of death. Behold, I reconcile my self unto thee,
most heartily beseeching thee that thou would vouchsafe (amongst the great
number of thy benefits) of thy great liberality, to give me grace to be a
faithful partaker of thy precious body and blood, represented unto me under
the visible form of Bread and Wine. O immortal King, I am not worthy, I
confess, of so great a benefit: yet I beseech thee, as thou do make the
unworthy worthy, and the sinners just, so make me worthy to receive this holy,
blessed, and Heavenly Sacrament, to my Souls Health. Feed my Soul, O Lord, with
thy spiritual Body, and let thy blood revive and quicken my Spirit. O make me
(by thy grace daily increasing in me) a member of thy mystical body, that I
may be included within the Covenant and blessing which thou made with thy
Saints and Apostles in thy last Supper; communicating unto them the holy
Sacrament of thy body and Blood: and consequently that I may be of the number
of them which according to the Vow and Promise made in Baptism, do live in
Faith, and by thy grace are received into the company of Saints. Amen.

This prayer being ended, with all Reverence and Devotion I received the holy
Sacrament, and that being ended, we went from the Chapel into a great Hall,
where I met the good Hermit Understanding, whom when I had saluted, and he me,
I thanked him for his good sermon. Then as we were talking, Gods Grace said
unto me, Sir Knight, I give thee for thy Governor this good Hermit
Understanding, believe his Counsel, and do what he commands. Then I remembered
my old Governess Folly, whom I left in the bog amongst Serpents and Toads; so I
was very glad of my Governor, and give thanks to Gods Grace: who from the
Table gave me drugs to eat, and repeated unto me a place written in the 80
Psalm of David, Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it.

Then having swallowed that which she gave me, I forgot the World, and made no
reckoning of any thing therein. For all my desire was in haste to see the
Palace of true Felicity. I desired death, to be with Christ in Heaven. Dinner
being done, the Gates of Repentance were opened which were narrow:
contrariwise, as it appears in the first Book, that the entrance into the
Palace of Voluptuousness was wide, large, and great, but the end thereof was
desperation, and destruction: as on the other side, the entering into the Palace
of Repentance is straight and narrow, but the end thereof is eternal Life. For
Repentance (as Saint Paul says) leads the Repentant to everlasting
Salvation. When the gates were open, I mounted up into a Chariot of Ivory,
having golden wheels, and two white Horses with wings drawing the same. Gods
Grace gat up first, and with her hand helped me up, then followed the good
Hermit Understanding, then Memory, Conscience, and Repentance, but Gods Grace
governed all, who touching the Horses with her Rod, they mounted up over the
Mountains which are above the Earth. So we passed through the Region of the
Air, where inhabiteth all the wicked spirits, which watch to annoy such as
would mount up to Heaven.

And though I was greatly aghast hereat, yet my trust was in Gods Grace, under
whose Wings I hid my self. I trusted not in my Conscience, although it was at
peace, nor to Repentance, nor to Understanding, but to Gods Grace only, who
safely throwded me under her Wings, as the Hen does her Chickens against the
coming of the Kite. Then she commanded the wicked Enemies to get them hence,
and they forthwith sled away, crying aloud: Now have we lost our Knight: lo, he
is mounted up to the Palace of Virtue, in despite of us all: Now he is escaped
under the Wings of Gods grace. Being past this brunt, I heartily thanked Gods
grace of her goodness, and on the sudden I saw upon the top of a Mountain a
goodly Palace. Now for that love ingendreth tamiliarity, and familiarity breeds
boldness, I asked Gods grace, what place it was: and she told me it was the
Palace of Virtue. It was so high that it reached even to Heaven, and about it
were seven sair Towers of Alablaster. In the first dwelt Faith, in the second
Hope, in the third Charity, in the fourth Wisdom, in the fifth Justice, in the
sixth Fortitude, and in the seventh Temperance.

In the first Tower, Gods grace showed me Faith, which waited for our coming,
near unto whom I might perceive the Palace of true Felicity. With that I
desired Lady Memory to put me in mind in the morning of seeing that gallant
City. Whiles we talked thus, our Chariot arrived at the Court, where Lady
Virtue with her Daughters, Faith, Hope, Charity, Wisdom, Justice, and
Temperance dwelt. At the first sight I knew it was the same Lady Virtue which
afore-time had so well admonished me, to whom I gave no ear. Then reverently
upon my knees lamenting, I cried her mercy for contemning her Counsel, and
following Voluptuousness. Wherewith she made me arise, and in token that she
took in good part my recantation, she sweetly kissed me, and bade me Welcome.
So with great joy accompanied with Gods grace, true Understanding, quiet
Conscience, and unfeigned Repentance, I entered into the Palace of Lady Virtue.

Thus much for the second part of the Wandering Knights Voyage.
THE VOYAGE OF The Wandering Knight.
The Third Part.
CHAP. I.
The Knight declares the great good, the solace, and the pleasure which he
found in the Palace of Lady Virtue.

IF I had a thousand tongues to tell the truth of all the good and pleasures
which I found in the Palace of Virtue: and if I live a thousand years to report
this matter, all were too little, in every point to decipher it: for it
consists not in Angelical knowledge, much less in man's wit, wholly to
comprehend so noble a mystery: none knows it but he who has proved it: you may
be sure that there are not, as in the Palace of Worldly pleasure chambers
hanged with Silk, Tapestry, and every corner sumptuously and superfluously
adorned. No, no: but there were Histories of the Old and New Testament to view
and mark. I found not their Coffers full of Gold and Silver, Cup-boards of
Plate, Presses of Silks, all manner of Mercery-ware, neither dainty Dishes,
delicate Drinks, bawdy Songs, wanton Music, the Lady of Love, her Son Cupid,
nor any thing that Worldlings embrace, but I found a thing far supassing all
that is in the World.

This good, this joyful, this comfortable, this unspeakable, this
incomprehensible-thing, cannot be named worthily enough: but of good and bad he
is called God, even he who is the only Sovereign good above all things
reasonable and unreasonable. Peradventure you will say this is stoange news,
that you Sir Knight should see God in the Palace of Virtue. How is it strange,
seeing he is every where, not only in Heaven, but also in Earth, and in Hell?
Truly I confess that God is every where, but I deny him to dwell every where,
and yet I know that by his power and invincible presence he is every where,
though not every where by the fullness of his greatness, and his gifts: it
follows then that he dwells every where: I pray you what profits it the
damned, that he is in hell by his power, Justice, and Vengeance? Truly by such
presence of God they have no joy, no consolation, no benefit or selicity, for
that all are cursed in whom God dwells not by his grace, whatsoever they be,
be they Kings, Princes, or Popes, who have all other riches and delights in the
World. But all they that have the grace of God are happy, or at least wise in
hope, though they live even in a loathsome prison and are poorer than Lazarus,
which desired to be refreshed with the crumbs that fell from the evil rich Man's
Table. Now, when we pray to God, we say; Our Father which art in Heaven; for,
that is the place where God gives the enjoying and possession of himself to his
elect, and that is their dwelling, prepared by the grace of God. That is that
God speaks of, by the Prophet Esaias, saying: Heaven is my seat, and the Earth is
my footstool: For as much says God, as I dwell in mine Elect by Grace, I will
tumble at my feet those that love Voluptuousness, rather then their Maker. In
the book of Wisdom, it is written: That the seat of wisdom is in the soul of
the just, God is wisdom, and the just soul his seat, God is in every place
where he dwells, but he dwells not in every place where he is. This is most
true, though mavelous, for the evil are always where God is, but yet God
dwells not in them. Wheresoever the wicked are, they cannot hide themselves
from God, and yet they are not dwellers with God, nor God a dweller with them.
They are where God is, as the blind man in the Light of the Sun: the Light is
not in him, because he has not the use of it. But the good are always with
God, and God dwells in them, as in his Temple. Saint Paul says, That the
temple of God is holy. And therefore is ye live well as he commands you, you
are his Temple. And God himself says, I will be in them, I will walk amongst
them; I will be their God, and they shall be my people. Now therefore you see
that although God be every where in his power, yet he dwells no where, but
where he is by grace. It is plain, that where Virtue is, there God inhabiteth
by grace, which is the only consolation of all reasonable Creatures. Is it
possible that any Man can find in Heaven or in Earth, such Sovereign good as is
in God, who is the most excellentest and chiefest good, and the true joy of all
reasonable Creatures? Now can that body fail in any goodness, which has God by
his Grace resting in his Heart, who is the only Author of all goodness, and
the giver of all true Joy and persect Felicity.

But some will say that they see good People in the World oftentimes suffer
misery, deprived of their goods, and put by the pleasures of this world, which
appears in the sadness of their countenance: for they seem to be conceived
with sorrow, and as it were to labor and travel in heaviness, as a Woman in
Child birth. I confess it to be so, but yet if you say that they are not
surnished with all good and true joy and Felicity, you err greatly. For the
Sovereign good which is God, dwells in the just soul for evermore: although
foolish Worldings say in their Hearts and thoughts: Can it be that those
miserable men, which are afflicted with poverty or imprisonment, have more
possession of true Felicity, than we that wallow in Wealth, and are without
want of any Worldly pleasures? But they consider not that true Joy consists
in the Soul. But be you sure, that as the Soul is the most precious part of the
body, so ought the goodness of the Soul to be greater than the goodness of the
body; The Joy of the Just and Righteous is more inward than outward, for all
his goodness is in the soul: as the joy of wanton Worldlings is outwardly in
the body. This just Man suffers outward extremities, but yet inwardly he has
more joy than the Voluptuous Man. And though the just man, being always
afflicted, makes show of sadness all his life time, yet at the hour of death
their joy and consolation appears, with hope of eternal life: whereas
contrariwise the Wordling goes his way with grudging and despair; The just man
esteems Gold and Silver to be colored Earth, worldly wealth and Voluptuous
seeding to be Famine and Filth: Honor, Dignity, and Delight, to be smoke,
which the Air consumes suddenly: to be short, he makes all the World no
better than an exile: and although his body be detained here for a season, yet
all his thoughts, cares, desires, and meditations, are conversant among the
Orders of holy Angels, and the happy Assembly of Saints in Heaven singing
Psalms and Praises incessantly. So that whatsoever we esteem evil in this
World, God turns it to good. For he makes us rejoice in Tribulations, taking
them for medicines to purge our corruptions, and not accounting our Persecutors
as our Enemies, but rather as Helpers to salvation.

The just Man esteems simple fare, sufficing nature, better than abundance of
delicate or excessive Drunkenness, or Gluttony. They take more pleasure in
kneeling, praying, and fasting, then worldlings do in dancing, and singing
wanton Songs. Finally, that they do or suffer God turns it to good. And
therefore Saint Paul says, that all things turn to the good of those that love
God: The eye never sees, the Ear never hears, the Heart of Man never
understands the great goodness and the joy that God brings into the body,
when he comes, by grace, to dwell in it; only he that has had experience once
knows it. Worldlings do wonder to see the just man weep and lament, to suffer
tribulations, and to be deprived of all worldly pleasure, they esteem the goods
of this world to be the true felicity: much like unto a blind man, taking upon
him to judge of colors. For they compare false felicity and worldly wealth,
with heavenly Riches and perfect Happiness; whereas indeed they are but
shadowess. Nothing displeases the Elect more than Sin, and that which leads
to Sin: nothing pleases the elect but God, and that which leads to God.

As concerning the soul, no man can deny, if he hate Sin, and love Virtue, but
that he had rather lose all that is in the world, than lose Virtue, and suffer
all manner of torments, than to commit Sin: he had rather descend into Hell
with Virtue, than mount up to Heaven with Sin. For where Virtue is, there is
quietness. Contrariwise, where sin is, there can be no rest. Let every one
therefore labor to lose worldly happiness, if he mean to atchieve virtue,
wherein consists so much goodness. But many make no account to come thither,
and so care not for loving Virtue, because indeed they know not Virtue;
Wherefore Understanding describes her, and her seven Daughters, namely Faith,
Hope, Charity, Wisdom, Justice, Fortitude, and Temperance, in manner following.

CAP. II.
The Description of Virtue.

Virtue, according to the Definition of Saint Austin, in his second Book of
Free Will, the 18 Chapter, Is a good quality of the Soul, whereby a man lives
rightly, and commits none evil; which thing indeed is the only work of God
in Man. By the Soul he understands in this place the Superior part of the
Mind or Soul wherein consists Reason, Iugdment, and Will, The inferior part
we call Sense, which is common to man and beast. Now that is called in Latin
Men's, and is not a part of the Soul sensitive, which is the inferior part, but
it is that part of the Sool, where reason and Understanding do fit, which is
the superior part. By the Soul then we do mean the Freewill of Man, which is
nothing else, as Philosophers say, but the frank judgment of the mind, and
Will. For when we say, free will, we utter and pronounce two words, namely,
free will. It is termed free, because that freely without constraint the will
works his feats at liberty. And it is called free will, because of the
Judgment of the Saul. Therefore free will is in the superior part of the
Soul, for thereby we differ from bruit beasts, who have a Sense as well as we,
but no judgment of free will. Now then we say, that Virtue is a good quality of
the Soul, that is to say, of free will: For Virtue qualifies free will,
disposes and prepares it to do and will well, neither of which can be done
without the aid and Grace of God.

The second part of the Desinition is: Whereby a man lives rightly. But no Man
lives rightly, unless he live justly; no man lives rightly without Virtue,
Ergo, no man lives justly without Virtue. Who so lives rightly lives well,
and who so lives well, if he continue in so doing, atchieveth true felicity.
It follows then that by Virtue we atchieve true felicity, for Virtue prepares
free will, which is corrupt and depraved, and therefore unapt either for
well-willing, or well-doing: but the Grace of God preserving it by Virtue, it
is made capable of perfect blessedness.

The Third part of the Definition is: And commits none evil: wherein is
comprehended the excellency of Virtue, and great goodness, by the which none
can do ill. Men may abuse all the goods, all the Arts, and Sciences in the
World, as indeed very often they are ill used, as with Money, Wine, and Women,
but by Virtue they be never abused: Who uses Virtue, he does the works of
Virtue: Who so uses the Deeds of Virtue he does well; and if by Virtue none
does ill, thou ought rather to lose all that is in the world, than to lose
Virtue, seeing she excels in goodness all things in the World.

The Fourth part of the Definition is: Which thing indeed is the only work of
God in Man. Virtue then is a work of God in us, as Witnesses Saint Austin,
upon the Sentence which is spoken in the 118 Psalm: I have done Judgment and
Justice. Justice (says he) is a great Virtue of the Soul, coming from the
Grace of God, which none out he works in man. I have done Justice: And
therefore when the Prophet speaking in the Person of the Church, so says: he
means not that he has done the Virtue of Justice of himself, which passes
Man's power to do, but he refers it unto God, whose He affirms it to be. By
these words then of Saint Austin, it appears plainly, that Justice in Man is
no Work o^ Man, but of God. Wherefore Peter Lombard upon these word of Saint
Austin concludes, and says: That Virtue is not the cause of Free Will, nor of
any affection of the Soul coming from Free Will, but he says, by that Virtue
Free Will being depraved evil and corrupt, is helped and moved to goodness:
and so you se^ that by Virtue, which he says is Gods grace, inclining and
preparing the Will to will well, proceeds the good affection of the Soul, and
afterward do follow good works, and an honest trade of Life. To make it the
more manifest, he gives similitudes. As the rain (says he) moistneth the
ground to make it yield fruit: and yet the rain is not the ground, nor the
ground the fruit, even so (says he) into the ground of our Souls, that is to
say, the free liberty of the Will, the rain of Gods blessing is poured, that is
to say, Gods grace is inspired, which liquereth the will of man to make him
fruitful to will well, according to the effect of Gods inspiration, which is
his Grace working in us, to the end we should do well. And therefore all the
good works that we do or can do, are to be attributed unto Gods grace, by whom
our will is prepared to will and do well. This grace ingendreth good motions in
the soul of Man, and these good motions are a chief gift of Grace to Man, as
namely, by faith to believe that Christ is the true Son of God: by Love and
Charity, to love God and our Neighbor: and so of all other Virtues, which are
the good Motions and Gifts of Gods grace, working in us, to the increase of
more Virtue, yea, to the pessession of eternal life. It is apparent then, that
Virtue is the gift of Gods grace, working in our will to make it will and do
well: and therefore say we, that Faith, Hope, and Charity, being Divine and
godly Virtues, are the works of God. Some there be which say, that Virtue is
the well using of the natural Powers and abilities in Man, inward only, but
not outward, that is to say, a perfect affection of the soul, which God
precureth in man, and not Man in himself. For although such motions seem to be
motions of free will, yet they cannot be such, except God vauchsafe of his
working Grace to sanctify the will, and to make it capable of such good
affections: These two Opinions recited by the Master of the Sentences, in the
second Book, and 27 Distinction, I refer to the Judgment of the Reader, and
allow them so far forth as they both agree, that Virtue is a work of God in
Man, and not of Man in himself. But yet they differ, because the first says,
that Virtue is not a moving of the Soul, for that it is the only working of
God, without Man, and of mere Grace: the other Opinion says that Virtue is a
good motion of Man, not coming of God in Man: I dare not judge rashly in so
High and secret a Mystery, and therefore I appeal to the determination of the
Learned. It suffices to know that Virtue is a work of God in Man, and not of
Man in himself; and in this point, as both Opinions do consent, so I approve
them to be true.

CAP III
The Description of Faith, and how we ought to believe in God for our salvation

FAith is a Virtue, whereby we believe that which we see not. When it is said
that Faith is a Virtue, it is most manifest that faith is the pure gift of God,
whereby we believe that which we see not. But yet it follows not that we
should believe all that we hear and see not, but this is meant only in things
touching Religion, and the Worshipping of God. Faith is properly of things not
apparent, for apparent things have no Faith, but a certain Demonstration: as
when our Lord says to Thomas, Because thou have seen, thou believe. Yet
Thomas believed more than he saw, a Man, and he believed that the same Man was
God also, which he saw not: for he said, Thou art my God, and my Lord. In this
consists the merit of Faith, when a man at the Commandment of God, believes
that thing which he sees not. To believe (says Saint Austin) is to think upon
a thing with consent to that thought: as when thou think the Son of God was
born of a Virgin, and toah man's nature upon him, and consentest to that
Thought, it is properly called Belief. This thought may come often by seeing,
and often by hearing. And when Saint Paul says, that faith comes by hearing
of the word of God, he understands that by hearing faith comes into the mind
and thought, if we consent thereunto. For we may hear a Preacher, without
consenting to that he says, because men do not always believe what the
Preacher speaks, for that the consent wherein consists the perfection of
Faith, comes of the mere gift of God, and not from seeing nor hearing, but from
the light of Grace, speaking in the Soul of the Believer, believing the
principal truth, which is God, and working in him an agreement with that
Sovereign truth above all other things. So that Faith is a foundation
unmovable: our Lord Jesus Christ who is the only Foundation of true
Blessedness, dwells in the Hearts of the Believers, and so long as Faith is
in Man, he shall be sure not to perish; but faith without Charity is no
Foundation, because such Faith is in vain and unprofitable.

Faith then joined with Love or Charity, belongs to good Christians: and Faith
without Love belongs to evil Christians. It is necessary therefore that we
note the difference in these three sayings or speeches, namely: To believe a
God, To believe of God, To believe in God. To believe a God, is to believe that
he is the only true God, so the Devils do believe as well as the evil
Christians. To believe of God, is to believe that all is true which God says,
and so believe the evil Christians as well as the good, unless they be
Heretics. But to believe in God, is to love God, and in believing to join thy
self to God, by love and obedience incorporating thee with His Members, that is
to say, his Church.

This Faith justisteth the Sinner, and this Faith being knit with Love and with
Charity, begins to do good deeds, which cannot be done without Love. The Faith
which evil Christians have, is indeed a quality of free will, but it is not
knit with Love and Charity, which is the bond of perfection, and the life of
faith, as Faith is the Life of the Soul. And yet such an unshapen Faith, being
naked and Void of Charity, may be termed a gift of God: for that the evil man
may have some gift of God: but that cannot properly be called Virtue, because
that by Virtue we learn to live rightly: and for that the Devils and Evil
Christians do live wickedly, it is a sign that the faith which they have is
dead, and therefore is not properly Virtue, nor yet a work of Virtue. If thou will then have thy Faith to be good and saving, it must have four properties,
that is to say, it must be plain and simple, it must be whole and sound, it
must be constant and unmovable, it must be quick and lively. Touching the
first, that it must be plain and simple, that teaches thee thus much in
effect, that thou must believe the word of God simply, and whatsoever is
therein contained, without inquiring into Gods mystical matters by humane
Reasons: and simply believing in thy heart that every thing contained in the
holy bible is most true. Secondly, thy Faith must be whole and sound, that is,
thou must not take part with Heretics, or cleave to the erroneous Opinions of
the Enemies of Gods truth: for this is no good faith. And therefore for a
Testimony of thy Faith, be not ashamed to make open Confession in the
Congregation of thy belief, with the Fellowship and Communion of Saints, That
thou believe in God the Creator and Governor of all things, and in his Son
Jesus Christ the Redeemer, and in the holy Ghest, by which we are sanctified
and receive true comsort and joy, etc. according as it is declared in his holy
word. Thirdly, it must be constant and unmovable, that is, without doubting,
for any reason of Man's brain that seems contrary, or for any temptation,
promise, or threatenings, either of torment or of death. And let not the
obstinacy of such as enchant with the vain pleasures of this life, although
they seem to live most joyfully, allure thee to cleave to their opinion, which
is siat heresy: for that is a work of Satan's who wholly possesses them, and
can change himself into an Angel of light, to deceive the simple and innocent,
whom God permits to be tempted for the trial of their constancy. Not that he is
ignorant of the issue, but because he would have it appear in others, that he
crowns us with glory, for our constancy and perseverance. This is clearly set
down by Moses in the 13. of Deuteronomy. and by S. Peter in his 2 Epistle, chap. 2,
and by our Savior Jesus Christ, in the 24 of Matthew. And though we live in
the later times, when many Sects do abound, and Virtue and truth in many places
do fail: yet let us listen what our Savior says: Whosoever believes to the
end, shall be saved. Fourthly and lastly, thy Faith must be quick and lively,
that is, it must be linked with love and charity, which is the life of faith,
as the Soul is the life of the hedy. And therefore abuse not thy self, as some
do, saying: I have Faith, and I shall be saved, whatsoever chance. No, no,
assure thy self, that if thy Faith be not quickened with Love and Cherity, it is
nothing Worth, and therefore unable to atchieve true Blessedness, as S. Paul
well notes in the first Epistle, the 13 chap. to the Corinth. Even so, when
our Lord in the Gospel attributes salvation unto Faith, and S. Paul
justification: this is to be understood of an holy, lively, and Evangelical
Faith, working with Love and Charity. Likewise when our Savior says in the
Gospel, that he which believes and will be Baptized, shall be saved: that is
meant of such a Faith, as love quickneth, and Charity reviveth. The holy
Scripture in many places expresses, that none shall be saved, unless he
observe and keep the Commandments of God. Now none can keep the Commandments
without Love and charity, Ergo, none can be saved without Love and Charity. The
sum and effect of all is this, That whosoever renounceth Sin, and imbraceth a
quick and lively Faith, and lives in Love and Charity, he cannot perish, but
shall find in the end perfect and everlasting Felicity, in the Kingdom of
Heaven.

CAP. IV.
The Description of Hope, and how we ought to hope in Almighty God.

NOw (Sir Knight) know this, that Hope is a Virtue, whereby Happiness or
Blessedness both spiritual and eternal are hoped for. And as Faith is of things
not seen, so is Hope also. For Saint Paul says, Hope that is seen is no Hope,
because we have possession of it already. It is common to Faith and Hope to be
of things unseen: and yet Hope is distinguished from Faith, not only by name,
but by reason. For by Faith we believe as well evil things as good, that is
Hell as Heaven. We believe that Adultery is a very wicked sin, we believe also
Charity is a very good thing: all these things good and bad, we believe, but we
Hope only for good things, and not for bad. Again, Faith is of things past;
present, and to come. For we believe the death of Jesus Christ which is past:
we believe also that at this present he sits at the right hand of God the
Father in Heaven, and we believe that Christ shall come to judge the quick and
the dead. But under correction, I think that Hope is of things present: as when
I Hope that I am in Gods favor: and of things past, as when I Hope my Sins be
forgiven me: and of things to come, as when I Hope to have eternal life. This
is true that Faith has an eye generally unto that which is spoken in holy
Scripture, believing that all the promises, without exception, which God made,
shall be accomplished, without descending to particular or special Persons: but
Hope applies unto her self those same promises, waiting for the accomplishment
of that which God has promised. And therefore it is requisite for assured
Salvation, that thou believe thou shall be saved, but to Hope so is not
sufficient. For Faith, in it self, imports an infallible assurance and
certainty of things, as when we firmly believe all the Articles of our true and
Christian Faith, and all things contained in the holy Scriptures to be more
certain then man is man: but the hoping of it is not so requisite. For if we
have a firm assiance in the goodness of God, touching our Salvation, and doubt
not a whit of the remission of our sins, it is enough. There be two degrees in
Hope, which are two contrary extremities. The one being the most highest, is
the infallible assurance of eternal Blessedness: The other being the basest and
lowest, is to despair of Salvation. Between these two extremities consists
Hope. But the more that a Man approaches to the highest extremity, which is an
infallible assurance of Eternal life, and the more he rejoices from the lowest
extremity, which is desperation, the more perfect he is in hope. As it
suffices the hoping Man, that believes an^ loves God, that he has a firm
affiance and confidence, that God of his good grace will give him whatsoever he
has promised to his Elect, hoping that he is of their number. So it is
necessarily requisste that we have a perfect infallible certainty of our
Salvation. Now for that in the Definition of Hope, it is said, that by her we
Hope and look for the eternal Happiness; it is to be noted, that Hope has two
Objects; the first, the perfect enjoying of Gods presence: the other is, all
the necessary means to come unto the clear seeing and enjoying of God: and
these means are remission of Sins through Gods Grace, justification, Faith
unfeigned, and charitable deeds, and agreeableness unto God. Now all that we
hope for, we ought with prayer devoutly to crave of God; as his Kingdom, the
remission of our sins, justification, increase of Grace and Virtue, deeds of
faith and Charity. But concerning goods temporal, forasmuch as we may use them
well and ill, they may be said to hinder the Salvation of Man, rather then to
surther it. And therefore the good Christian ought not to ask them, nor covet
them excessively: indeed so much as will necessarily serve him for sustenance
in this life, he may lawfully ask. and here by the way, it is a lesson worthy
the Learning, namely: that it is necessary for us to do good Works, because it
has pleased God to enrich us with Goods, which Goods ought well to be
employed. Now unto him properly belongs the merits of the works which he
works in us. For all our good works are the gift of God, howbeit he does not
deny us his Grace, whereby we consent to do the good works which he only moves
in us.

And therefore every one ought, to the uttermost that he is able, to do good
works, considering that they come of God, who is the Author of all good works,
and without whom we are not able to think so much as one good thought, much
less do a good deed. For otherwise to hope in doing ill to go to heaven,
without good works springing from a firm faith, is not hope, but a flat
presumption. And therefore thou ought to enforce thy self to do good works,
hoping that thou and thy works may be acceptable unto God: nevertheless, thou
must not in any case trust upon thy merits or good works, but altogether to the
infinite goodness of God. For otherwise thou fallest into that curse which the
Prophet speaks, saying, Cursed is the man that trusts in man, and
contrariwise, happy is the man that trusts in God. We ought always to do
well, to delight in well-doing, and to hope in the goodness of God, that he
will give us that which he has promised. But this Hope ought to be firm, and
as an Anchor constantly to hold thy conscience, that by the floating of
temptation it move not. But some will ask by what testimony or witness can the
conscience rest assured of remission of sins, of Gods adoption, and of Heavenly
blessedness. I answer, S. John Epist. 1 chap. 5. says, There be three things
that bear witness in Earth, that is, the Spirit, Water, and Blood. These three
testify unto the spirit of the believing Man, that Christ is the infallible
truth, who fulfilleth in the believing man the whole sum of his promises. The
first witness then that assures man in Hope is the precious blood of our Lord
Jesus Christ, which was shed for the remissien of our sins. The second witness
is the water of Baptism, by the which also our sins are forgiven. But these two
witnesses put not the conscience in full and perfect Hope and Assurance. And
therefore there must be annexed unto them a third; which third is, The holy
Spirit, which bears witness with our spirit, that we are the Sons and Heirs
of God. Who so has not this witness, he cannot be assured of his Salvation.
The works of the holy Spirit in Man, if thou ask me what those works are, I
answer thee, that they are these that follow, and such like; namely, Sorrow for
sin; hatred of all things which displease God, and are contrary to his
Commandments; taking pleasure to read and hear Gods word; mourning for thy
imperfections; and sure Faith, Hope, and Charity: and effection, desire, intent
and purpose to love God above all things, and to do thy endeavor to fulfill
his Commandments. For all these things spring not from the corrupt nature of
man, unless his Heart be moystened with the dew of Gods grace: without the
which we feel not in our selves any good affections, nor desire to do good
works, which are signs of the presence of the holy Chest in us. Wherefore we
ought with sighing to pray unto God, and to beseech him most humbly that it
would please him of his unspeakable pity, to send us his holy Spirit, which may
assure us of the remission of our sins: to Vouchsafe us his heavenly Adoption,
and the enjoying of everlasting Blessedness. And thus much concerning Hope. New
let us speak of Love or Charity.

CAP. V.
The Description of Love or Charity, and how we ought to love God, and our
Neighbor.

CHarity is a Virtue, by the which God is loved for the love of himself; and
our neighbor for the love of God, or in God. It is said in the first part of
this Desinition, that Charity is a Virtue. Let us see how: certainly Charity in
the excellentest virtue that is, even the mother and nurse of all the rest. For
he that has not charity, has nothing in him to obtain everlasting life. This
Charity is given when the holy Spirit it is given. For the holy Spirit being
resident in the Soul, makes us to love God for the love of himself, and our
Neighbor for the love of God. To love God for the love of himself, is to love
him for his own sake, and because he is God. And that is to be done three
ways, that is, to love God above all things entirely, above all things
orderly, above all things preciously. We will declare these three ways of
loving God the more plainly, that every one may know how to love God.

To love God entirely, is to have a good will to God, and to rejoice greatly
that he is such a one as he is: But for the better understanding hereof, it
shall not be amiss to show what it is to love; to love is nothing else, but to
wish well to every body: as when I love a man, I wish as well to him as to my
self: Now there are two manners of love. One is called the cobetous love, as
when a Man loves any thing for his own profit sake, and in such sort men love
their horses, their victuals, and all other worldly necessaries. The (...) the
love of friendship, when one loves a thing for the love of it self, without
respect of particular profit: as when I see a man wise, I take pleasure in him,
and wish that the Virtues which are in him may not only be continued, but also
increased in him, and this do I, being to him well affectionated, and loving
him with delight.

There is not in God and good that is not like himself. For his might or Power,
his Wisdom, his Mercy, his Justice, and his knowledge are Heavenly, as he
himself is, who is all wise, all just, all mercy, all knowledge, and all
mighty; So that we love God above all things entirely, when we rejoice and be
glad that he is as he is, without regarding our proper profit or honor. Thou
ought not to love God with a covetous love, that is, thou must not love God
only because he gives thee all things profitable for thee: or in so doing thou
love thy self better then thou love God. If thou love God rightly, he will
reward thee greatly: but this love must be single and it must be pure, and not
depending upon any other thing: for who so loves God for gain, loves him but
as his Horse, in whom he delights, because he serves his turn. God ought to be
loved lovingly, without respect of particular profit.

But then may ask me a question; May I not love God to this end, and under
this condition, that he may give me Heaven, which is the principallest thing
that Man can wish for after this life? the Doctors say no, if we consider well
of the thing beloved, which is God: for in so doing, thou love thy self
better then thou love God. Thou may come to Heaven by this means, as
namely, by keeping his Commandments, by giving Alms, and by doing other good
deeds, and yet give God his due and single love. Now these things are not
charity it self, but the works of Charity. We say then that God ought to he
loved in doing good deeds, and in keeping his commandments: but this love
ought to be entire, without respect of profit or reward.

To love God orderly above all things is to refer thy self and all thy goods to
God: so that all which thou love, wishest, do, and leabest undone, thou
ought to love, to wish, to do, and leave undone, for the love of God and
his glory. Thus referring all to the Honor and Glory of God, thou love God
above all things ordarly, and accomplishest, as much as in thee lies, what is
written in Deuteronomy. and in Saint Matthew, where it is said; Thou shall love the
Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy strength:
For what other thing is it to love God with all thine heart, with all thy soul,
and with all thy strength, but to refer all things to God, and to his glory,
all our thoughts, all our word, all our works, all our purposes, and all our
intents? To love God therefore above all things orderly, is to refer to God and
his glory our selves, and all that is within and without us; which we cannot
well do, if our thougts, if our words, if our works, be not good and acceptable
unto God.

To love God preciously, is to love him so dearly, and so much to esteem of
him, that for no cause thou would lose him, nor his love: but wish rather to
lose thy goods, thy lands, thy limbs, thy life, and the love of the World. This
indeed is to love God lovingly, when without respect of profit we referr to God
and his glory all that we have, our hearts, our hands, our lips, to praise and
magnine him, and to set forth the greatness of his Divine Majesty, and
omnipotency. To love God then for the love of himself, is to love God because
he is good. And he that loves God in this sort shall be sure never to miscarry
or perish.

To love thy Neighbor, it is required that thou do it in God, or for the love
of God. Now thou must understand that every Man is thy Neighbor, when either
thou to them, or they to thee can show mercy or relief, by succor and help. So
that every reasonable creature is thy Neighbor, wheresoever he dwell in the
World. Thus are the Saints in Heaven thy Neighbors, by whose example thou art
taught to live godly; wherefore thou oughrest to love them and all mankind for
the love of God, or in God. Thou ought to love thy Neighbor, because he is
good, or because he should be good, then thou love him indeed for the love of
God: every Man which is a Sinner thou ought to love, not because he is a
sinner, but because he is a Man, for the love of God.

Thou ought to love in the sinful Man that which he hates, and to hate
that which he loves. The sinful Man loves sin and iniquity, which thou
ought to hate: The sinful Man hates his Soul and the purity of Nature,
which thou ought to love. For Sin is against nature, it defiles Nature, it
oppresses nature, yea, it quenches nature, and he that commits sin kills
his own soul, and corupteth nature. Thou ought then to love the Soul, and
the Nature of the Sinner, but not his sin. And when thou give Alms to a
sinner being in need, thou ought not to do it because he is a Man, but
because he is a man of the same nature that thou art. Some be thy friends, and
some thy Enemies; thy friends thou ought to love in God, lest loving them
otherwise, thou should offend God. Thy Enemy thou ought to love, for the
Love of God: and if he offend thee in word or deed, and does repent him, and
asks thee forgiveness, thou ought for the love of God to forgive him with
all thy heart, and to receive into friendship. Again, if thy Enemy be obstinate
and will not cease to persecute thee, although thou can not presently forgive
him, yet thou ought not to hate him, but rather to do him good, and to be
ready always to pardon him, and then chiefly when he shall raquire it. Yea
thou ought to do him what good thou can in his need.

By that which we have spoken already it appears, that thou ought to love
all men living, both good and bad, friends and foes, no worse then thy self.
Our Lord had an eye to the love of our Neighbor, when he said in the 7 of
Matthew. All things that thou would thy Neighbor should do unto thee, do
thou the like to him. Whosoever then does to his Neighbor as be would his
Neighbor should do to him, loves his Neighbor as himself. But this is to be
understood according to God and reason. For if one offering to pleasure thee,
bring thee a Wench to lie with thee, or lend thee a sword to fight, and to kill
another, as reason would instruct thee to refuse such offers, so the love
according to God should teach thee obedience, and they both ought to be the
rule of thy life, and the lights to guide thee in the dark places. Thus far
have we declared, in as much brevity as we could, how a man ought to love God
and his Neighbor. Now intend we to show the effects of love and Charity.

CAP. VI.
The effects and praises of Love and Charity.

NO tongue in the World can tell for truth all the Excellency of the effects
and praises of love or charity: For first of all, she makes men the Children of
God, and Heirs of Heaven: according to that saying of Saint John; behold what
Love or Charity the Father has showed unto us, to make us the Children of God.
S. Paul also says; That those which be lead by the Spirit of God, are the
Children of God: For you have not received the spirit of bondage, to fear any
more; but you have received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father,
and that same Spirit (which is the Spirit of Love or Charity) bears witness
with our Spirit, that we be the Children and Heirs of God, and Coheirs with
Christ. Can we desire a thing more excellent, than to be the children of God
and Heirs of Heaven? what dignity is that to boast of? Such as have feeling of
the love of God in their hearts, have boldness and courage, though the world
contemn them. For this is certain, that they whom the world hates, are not the
children of the world, but the children of God: as contrariwise, such as the
world loves, they indeed are the children of the world. Secondly, Charity
works the cause in us, that God dwells in us: who dwells in Charity,
says S. John, dwells in God, and God in him Our Lord likewise says. If any
Man love me he will keep my Commandments, and my Father will come and dwell
with him. Can we desire a more rich, a more bountiful, or a more liveral Host
than he? Is it like that so loving an Host will suffer the soul to want: Will
he ask money for his expenses? No, he comes not to dwell with us to consume
that we have, but to increase our riches, and to make our store greater.
Thirdly, Charity makes our goods, be they little or be they much, acceptable
unto God: it makes a Man contemn the World, it makes a man to rejoice in
temptations, and tribulations. When Charity enters into the soul, she knits us
to God, and uniteth us with him. Love or Charity makes men of one mind, and
will. Love or Charity makes men reform their manners, and to draw near unto
God. Love or Charity makes men to consider of things present and visible, as if
they were not. Love makes a pure and clean heart, which may contemplate and
behold Heavenly things. By love, the Goods of this World are well ordered, and
by Love the Goods of this World are contemned; and by Love the secrets of God
are revealed. Saint John says, That God is Love or Charity, whereby no doubt
he means the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, the three persons in
Trinity: God the Father is Charity, God the Son is Charity, and God the holy
Ghost is charity. This Love or Charity requires in the same such likely
things, namely, love and charity, by the which, as by some spiritual affinity
thou art joined unto God, which Love also boldly comes unto God, and
familiarly speaks unto him, without any doubt or fear. He that loves not,
shall lose his Life: but He that loves, always lifts his eyes to God, whom
be loves, whom he desires, on whom he museth, in whom he is refreshed, and by
whom he is preserved: such a debour and religious soul does so sing, so say,
read, so dispose all his business and so circumspectly foreseeth all things, as
if God were ever present with Him, as doubtless in spirit he is. The man in
whose soul the love of God is lodged, so prays, as if God were personally
present with Him.

The Love of Charity awaketh the soul when she is asleep, it puts him in mind
of His Salvation, it softneth and moysteneth the Heart. Charity or Love sets
the cold Heart on fire. Love makes the froward soul gentle. Love chaseth away
sin. Love keeps the affections of the flesh and blood under. Love amendeth
Iewd Men's manners. Love renews the Spirit. Love bridleth the light motions of
wanton youth, all this works Love or Charity, where she is present.
Contrariwise where Love or Charity is absent, there the Soul does Languish and
waxes cold: even as a Caldron of water does, when the fire is taken from under
it, and raked abroad, Charity is the only thing whereby the soul boldly
approaches unto End, constantly cleaves unto him, and familiarly speaks
unto him. The Soul that loves God cannot but think, and talk of God, insomuch
that it hates all ungodly things. Who so will know God, must love God: the
more that one loves God, the more be grows in the knowledge of God. To read,
to write, and to study of God, yields no true knowledge of God, without Love.
In vian do we read, in Vain do we talli, in Vain do we preach, in Vain do we
pray to God, if we do not love God; the love of God ingendreth the love of
thine own Soul, and makes it attentive always to God. God loves to be loved
again: and when he loves, he requires nothing but love: happy therefore is he
that loves God. The Soul which loves God rejects his own effections, being
earnestly given to Gods love. The Soul that loves has no fear: the soul that
loves not, is ever in fear. The Soul that loves, is carried by promises, and
drawn by desires unto Heaven: the soul that has in it the presence of Gods
love, is tickled with joy, and with ravishing leapeth up to Heaven, having by
coutemplation exceeding great joyfulness. Love breeds familiarity with God,
familiarity breeds boldness with God, boldness breeds the taste of God, and
Taste breeds an hunger after God. If I should declare all the excellency of
Love or Charity, the time would fail me, and mine Ability in that behalf would
not suffice: But let this stand, for a conclusion, that the Soul which is
touched with the love of God cannot desire any thing contrary to God: but ever
after it has received any taste of Sin, it cries out, and says with the
Prophet, Psalm. 14. O Lord God, like as the Heart desires the Fountains of
water, even so long I after thee. Well then Sir Knight, lift up thy Soul, and
remember the great Love and Charity of God, and his manisold benefits bestowed
upon thee, that by them thy Heart being enlightened, thou may increase and go
^or^ and day by day in doing good works, to the glorifying of God, (...)
delights in the same, according as it is said: Let your light so shine before
men, that they seeing your good works may glorisie God in Heaven. Thus much
touching these three spiritual Virtues: now come we to the four moral Virtues.

CAP. VII.
The description of the four moral Virtues, Prudence, Justice, Fortitude, and
Temperance.

By these sour Marral Virtues Man lives orderly in this martalise. Saint
Hierom says that the Christian man by these (...) lives well in this
mortality, and by them after death comes to everlasting Life. Prudence knows
the good we should do, and evil we should leave. Justice does good. Temperance
leaves the evil. Fortitude is constant, without losing courage in adversity,
or waring proud in prosperity. Prudence teaches man how to approach unto God;
Fortitude and Temperance, how to govern himself; Justice, how to use his
Neighbor. These are the four things which Satan shoots at, to destroy the
Soul.

By Prudence, which is the rule of right Reason, we govern our selves wisely,
we order our affairs discreetly, doing nothing but Right and reason. In
Prudence consists Reason, Knowledge, Foresight, Aptness to give good
Counsel. Plato says, That Prudence is the Governess of all Moral Virtues,
showing how we should understand and use the rest: For as Faith informs us
what we should hope after, and what we ought to love: even so Prudence teaches
us how we should use Justice, Fortitude, and Temperance. Aristotle says, that
it is impossible but a prudant Man should be good. If he mean moral goodness,
it is most true: for a wise Man does nothing but that which is lawful: But yet
without Love or Charity, Prudence is a Virtue no more meritorious, then Faith
without Love and Charity. But if the prudent man love God with all his heart,
it is unpossible but that he should do good, and consequently be good.

Justice is a Virtue used in two sorts, sometimes it is a general Virtue, and
comprehends in her self all Virtue: as the man that Ilbeth well and justiy, is
therefore called good: and Justice otherwise is understood a particular Virtue,
called Justice distributive, yielding to every one that which unto him
belongs. This Virtue, Justice distributive is convenient for all men, and
principally for Emperors, Kings, and such as have the Administration and
Governments of Commonwealths; to the end that they may yield to every one
their right, defending the innocent, and punishing the offender: doing justice
and right, according to equity, as well to little as great, and to poor as
rich. Many have justice painted in their Houses, and yet have wrongful dealing
lodged in their hearts. Many a one has Christ in their mouth, but the Devil in
their mind. He that will be acceptable to GOD, he must be just in word,
upright in deed, undefiled in thought.

Fortitude is a virtue, unto which belongs a magnisicent courage, not fearing
any thing but unlawful actions. He that has this virtue, keeps himself
constant in adversity, and waxes not proud in prosoerity. Fortitude gives a
man Magnanimity, Constancy, Hope, Assurance, Patience, and Perseverance. With
this Virtue the Martyrs of all Degrees and Ages were endued, grounded upon a
firm Faith, contemning the world, and setting light by the torments of Lyrants,
embracing death, rather then to deny Christ. Gods Prophets were armed with
Fortitude, who without siattery reprehended the Kings of Israel and Juda of
their falls worship of God, and feared not their furies. The Apostles of Jesus
Christ were armed with Fortitude, who feared not to control the wisdom of the
wise, and vanquish such as were in high places, that they might with contented
minds carry the yoke of Christ. This they did, not with man's power, or warlike
weapons, but with dibine Doctrine: not defiring to kill any one, but to die
themselves. It is a great worlds wonder, that so few simple souls, unarmed,
unlearned, and having no humane policy, should vanquish the wisdom of the
World, confound earthly policy and strength, and subdue Kings, and bring them
in obedience to the Faith of Christ, revoking the People from false Religion
and Adoration of Debils. With this Virtue of fortitude Kings ought to be Armed,
not fearing any danger for the Defense of the Faith of Jesus Christ, but being
of one mind with the holy Martyrs of God. With this virtue ought Preachers to
be armed, worthily defending the word of God, against all Heretics and Enemies
of the same, not fearing the threatenings of Persecutors whatsoever. But you
must understand that fortitude is not a dealer in the committing of unlawful
deeds: as to beat, hurt, or kill thy brother, unless it be justly done in thy
own defense, or for thy Countries cause: otherwise it is a mere Malice.
Moreover, such as desperately dispatch themselves, as Wretches weary of Life,
they do it not by Fortitude, but by the Lemptation of the Devil, who is
permitted of Gods sufferance to tempt some even to the making away of
themselves. Such People are not Valiant, for it is not fortitude, unless it be
in lawful deeds, as in the defense of thine own Person, the Magistrate, thy
Country, or the Faith of Christ, for the which to suffer death is excellent
fortitude.

Temperance (says S. Austen) is an affection to resrain the appetite when a
Man is excessively inclined. Temperance has rule over pleasures and delights,
resusing to meddle in any thing which cannot be done without offending God, and
not falling into any excess whatsoever, wherein a man may pass the rule of
reason. To live in Temperance, is to dispose every thing according to the right
use whereto it was appointed. These four Virtues have four Vices clean contrary
unto them, by the which Vices, the Virtues are corrupted and destroyed.
Prudence by Folly, Justice by Covetousness, Fortitude by Pride, and Temperance
by Inconstancy is defaced. These Vices are signified by the sour plagues, which
consumed the Goods of Job, namely: The Sabees, the Chaldees, the force of Fire,
and the Violence of a vehement Wind. The Sabees of Folly made havoc of
Prudence Oxen. The Chaldees of Pride led away the Camels of Fortitude. The fire
of Lechery made waste of Temperance Sheep. And the boisterous wind of
Covetousness, overthrew the Houses of Justice. The four Virtues likewise are
devoured of their adversary Vices, according as Joel complains against the
Wicked Jews, under sour notable things, decyphering the four Vices Opposite
and against the sour Virtues before-named. These sour things are the
Caterpillar, the Grasshopper, the Locust, and the Blasting: all which four
things being vent to wastfullness, leave nothing unspoyled. By the Caterpillar
is meant foolish bragging, which destroyed the Virtue of Prudence. By the
Grasshopper is meant Pride, which destroys the Virtue of Fortitude. By the
Locust is meant Covetousness, which destroys the Virtue of Justice. And by
Blasting is meant Lechery, which destroys the Virtue of Temperance. For
foolish bragging destroys the Virtue of Wisdem. Pride corrupts the State.
Avarice devours Justice. Lechery spoyleth Temperance.

Now therefore, Sir Knight, I wish thee to refrain from these insatiable Vices,
lest thou lose the enjoying of these four notable Moral Virtues: thou know
what company thou had in the Palace of Virtue; there thou saw Gods Graces,
Faith, Hope, Charity, Prudence, Justice, Fortitude, Temperance, and that
goodness which none know but they who have had experience.

CAP. VIII.
How Faith from the top of the Tower, shows unto the Knight the City of
Heaven.

AFter Good Understanding had delivered these good words, I was ravished in my
mind, I felt not my self, I lost my taste, I neither regarded meat nor drink,
and most of all I marvelled that Night approached not, because many hours were
consumed. Being in that amaze, Virtue told me that darkness had nothing to do
where she dwelt. Then Memory put me in mind, what Gods Grace told me by the
way, saying: that by the works of Faith, which are the fruits of the same, I
might perceive and see the City of Heaven, wherein is comprehended true
Felicity. Then Faith led me to her Tower, and all the other Virtues kept us
company. For Faith properly is not without Hope, nor Hope without Charity, and
therefore they must go all together. And though these Virtues have several
properties, yet they join hands, and are never asunder. S. Hierom says, that
Abraham was furnished with Faith, Job with Fortitude and patience, David with
Humility, and so conseouently.

Then Faith from her Tower showed me a high Hill, whereon was Luilt a
mavelous sumptuous City, and she told me it was the City of Heaven, wherein
is comprehended true Blessedness and perfect Felicity. In that City I saw never
a Temple, which made me marvel, until that Faith told me, that the Lord God
Almighty was the Temple of that City. There needs no shining of the Sun, no
brightness of the Moon, no glittering of the Stars, to give them light, for
Almighty God is their true Light himself. None enters into this City, but such
as are written in the book of Life. Furthermore, Faith told me, that there was
no Adversity, no sin, no iniquity, no fear, no sorrow, no shame, no darkness,
no pain, no unquietness, no ill, no grudging: finally, nothing that savoureth
of mortality: but there was Prosperity, Perfection, Unity, Love, Gladness,
Quietness, Charity, sure Rest, perpetual Felicity, and everlasting joy in God,
with eternal Happiness. There was mirth without Sadness, Rest without Pain,
Abundance without Want, Life without Corruption. In this City God is seen Face
to Face, there is the endless light shining, the Saints always singing,
blessed Souls rejoicing, and ever beholding God, yet still coveting to see him,
without dullness of destre. The Citizens of this City of Heaven are Coheirs of
the eternal Deity, the Father, Son, and holy Ghost. They are made immortal,
according to the promise of our Lord and Savior Christ, saying: Father, those
that thou have given me, I will that they be with me where I am, that they may
see my brightness.

What can I say more? In this City is our King without death and without
change: without beginning, and without Ending. In this City there is no Night,
there is no limitation or term of life, but continual day most brightly
shinning. For in this City dwells the Father of Lights, even God himself,
whose brightness no darkness can over-shadow. The Citizens of this City are
partakers of unspeakable grace, of endless joy, and of such persection as
thereunto there can be added no more. Unto this place shall the just be
advanced: as for the wicked, their promotion is in the Lake voyling with Fire
and Brimstone.

CAP. IX.
The desire that the Knight had to come to Heaven, and how Gods Grace brought
perseverance.

HAving seen from the Tower of faith, the City of Heaven, and heard (by her)
the manner of it, I was ravished of my wit, and esteemed nothing at all of the
World: For I selt not my self; methought I was walking in Heaven: Hereupon I
destred Faith that I might remain still in her Tower, the which willingly she
granted me, insomuch that I was never weary out of her lower Window to behold
Heaven: yea, the more I beheld it, the more beautiful it seemed. Then I was
loath to live in this World, and desired, that I might dye, the sooner to have
the sight and enjoying of Christ my Redeemer: and kneeling by my self all
alone, I made this Prayer, saying: O How happy is the soul that is out of this
earthly prison, and rests in Heaven most joyful, seeing his Savior face to
face! That soul, is without fear and affliction. O how happy is the soul which
is in the company of Angels and holy Saints, singing praises unto the Most
High! Such a Soul surely is laden with abundance of joy. O happy society of
Citizens. O happy company of Saints, which lamented in their mortal life, but
now reign with God immortally. O sweet Jesus, let me come to thy pleasant
City, where thy Citizens see thee daily, to their great delight. O let me come
there where nothing is troublesome to hear or understand: what melody hear they
without ending! And how happy were I, if I might hear the Songs, or be admitted
to sing a Song of David in the holy Hill of Sion. O that I being the least of
thy Servants, may by thy grace put off my fleshly burden, and come to thy
happy City, to accompany the holy and happy assembly of Saints, to see the
glory of my Creator, and to behold his amiable Majesty. That I may be made
meet for this so sweet a blessing, grant I beseech thee O gracious God, that I
never look back upon this shadow or valley of tears, that I remember not the
false pleasures of this wicked world, that I esteem not this corruptible and
evil life. O how can we here be happy, where the Devil always assaults us?
where the world flatters us? where the soul is blinded? and where all men
sin? After which great evils, death does follow, as the very end of all vain
pleasures, and then they are esteemed as if they had never been. What
recompense may be made unto thee (O God) which give us consolation in the
midst of all our extrencities by the wonderful visitation of they Divine
Grace? Behold me miserable wretch filled with sadness, when I consider my sins,
when I fear thy judgments, when I think on the hour of death, when I remember
the pains of Hell, when I am ignorant what punishment I deserve, when I know
not where nor in what Estate I shall end my days: In all these things and many
other, I appeal to thy gracious goodness, knowing that thou art ready to give
me consolation against all these sorrows. Thou liftest up my soul (full of
anguish) above all Mountains, thou make me receive thy great love, charity,
and goodness, by the which thou recreatest my heavy spirit, and rejoycest my
sad heart, in revealing unto me thy heavenly delights.

This Prayer ended, I rested my Soul upon the anchor of hope. Then as I was
kneeling, Gods grace appeared unto me, accompanied with another Lady, which I
had not seen before. And after I had given her thanks for all her benefits, she
delivered me this Lady named Perseverance, to continue with me, charging me on
keep her with me, if I meant to be a Citizen of Heaven. For (said she) all
other virtues without her are as nothing to win braven: For it is written, who
so perseveres unto the end shall be saved. And therefore if thou will be saved
then must continue. Hereof we have many Examples in the holy Scripture, but I
will only touch two. When Saul was first anointed King of Israel, he was as
lowly as the child of one year old, but he continued not above two years in his
goodness: For after he had once put Perseverance away, he became evil, and
grew to be a cruel Tyrant: insomuch that he slew many of the Lords Priests,
and persecuted good David. But what was his end? He was vanquished of his
Enemies, and being given over of God, he killed himself upon the Mount Gilboa.
Again. touching the same matter, Judas at the first when God made him an
Apostle, was good and dutiful, but when he had put Perseverance away, he
became a Thief, and by Covetousness he vetrayed and sold his Master Christ: and
being forsaken of God, he became a Reprobate, fell into desperation, and with a
Halter hanged himself. When I heard Perse verance say so, for fear lest the
like should befall me, I desired the counsel of Good Understanding, to show me
the means how I might keep Perseverance always with me, that in so doing I
might not be deprived of the glorious City of Heaven. To which request of mine
the good Hermit Understanding, tendering the safety of my Soul, and having a
careful regard to all my Endeavors, did yield, and spoke to me on this wise.

CAP. X.
Good Understanding shows the Knight how to keep perseverance always with
him,

MY Son, the last point of thy Souls health (quoth Good Understanding) is to
know how thou art now, without going back, which if thou desire, then must
Perseverance never leave thee, for if she forsake thee, then must thou needs
lose the pleasures of Lady Virtues Palace, wherein thou art now. From whence if
thou go back, thou shall be sure to lose the joys of Heaven. Thou must
therefore remain constant without wavering; the which to do, thou must by
devour and continual prayer faithfully crave helpof Gods grace. And to
accomplish all this thou must remember three things: the first is, thy Life
past: the second, thy life present: and the third, thy lise to come. Those
three confiderations will encourage thee to stay where thou art, and as it were
with a bridle will keep thee from recoyling.

First, think what thou have done before time, in following Folly, how thou
livedst vainly, yielding to every vain concupiscence, whereby thou did fall
into the filth of sin, and endangeredst both thy body and Soul. O where had
thou been, if Gods Grace had not taken compassion upon thee? Where be the
Worldlings the would not be sorry for their sins? Where are they become? Are
they not condemned to everlasting torment in Hell fire? O think then that sin
does greatly offend God: Think what punishment God has ordained for sin, which
makes Man an Enemy to God, and a friend to the Devil.

Secondly, think that at this present time thou art in Gods favor, by the
means of his Grace, who made thee a child of God, and an Heir of Heaven, by
Hope, so that now thy Conscience is quiet. Think what good Consolation thou
have received by devour prayer: think what spiritual instructions Gods Grace
has given to thee: think all the pleasures of the World are mingled with
Sorrow: think that this World shall pass away, with all the pomps and pleasures
of the same: think that thy present Estate is the high way to Heaven, and so
shall thou keep perseverance.

Thirdly, think that the just judgment of God is to come, which is, to the good
to give Heaven, and to the evil Hell. Think thou must dye, and that at thy
death thou shall not receive so good consolation, as thou have had of Virtue
and Gods grace. Think that at thy death thou must leave behind thee. Wife,
Children, Goods and Money, whether thou do good or evil. Think that thou must
go to a Region unknown, and to a place where thou have never been: and if thou
be sound to have dyed in sin, without repentance, the Devils will attend to
take thy damned Soul, and will carry it into the dungeon of Darkness, there to
seel eternal torments. But if thou be sound with Perseverance in the Palace of
Virtue, millions of Angels will go before thee, and with great joy will bring
thee to heaven.

O think upon the just judgment of God to come, when every one shall be judged
according to his deeds. For God fahoureth neither Kings, Princes, nor People,
high nor low, rich nor poor, without respect of persons be will choose the good,
and condemn the evil, at the day of doom, when we must appear personally
without excuse or exception before him: then every man must be his own Attorney
when the just Judge at that day will show himself terrible to the Perverse,,
which have followed Voluptuousness, and have not heartily repented; but will be
gentle, merciful, and good unto those that have been sorry for their offenses.
O think what torments the un-repentant shall suffer both in body and soul
perpetually: whereas all such as have persevered in goodness to the end, shall
receive joy, and the fullness of God and of Heaven. In such sort to persevere in
goodness to the end, do thine utter endeavor, and thou shall see that God will
be ready with his grace, to arm thee with constancy in thy Christian purpose.

CAP. XI.
A protestation, which Good Understanding taught the Knight to make every day
for the avoiding of temptations, and how he ought to humble himself before God,
and what he should ask in his prayer.

MY Son, always I wish thee to keep perseverance with thee, by whom thou
may avoid temptations, which would induce thee to sin, and force thee to
forsake the true Faith, and also to transgress the holy Commandments of
Almighty God. This to avoid, I wish thee every day to repeat the promises which
thou have made to God in thy Baptism, which follow thus in effect:

O Most high, most excellent, and holy Lord God, I protest that I will live and
dye in the true Catholic and Apostolic faith revealed in thy holy Word: and
that I will do my utmost endravour to keep thy holy Commandments, which
heretofore I have wilfully and carelessy transgressed, wherefore I am sorry,
and do heartily repent me for the breach of them: and in token thereof I make
my Confession, saying: I Believe in God the Father Almighty, maker of Heaven
and Earth. And in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord, which was conceived by
the holy Ghost. Born of the Virgin Mary. Sufferred under Pontius Pylate. Was
crucified dead and buried. He descended into Hell. The third day he rose again
from the dead. He ascended into Heaven, and sits at the right hand of God
the Father Almighty. From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead.
I believe in the holy Ghost. The holy Catholic Church. The communion of
Saints. The forgiveness of sins. The resurrection of the body. And the life
everlasting. Amen.

Then say, Lord God give me grace, most heartily I beseech thee, without
doubting to confess and believe the articles of this my Christian Faith, and in
the same to persevere to the end. And so rehearse the Ten Commandments of
Almighty God, which are these: The same which God spoke in the xx Chapter of
Exodus, saying, I am the Lord thy God which have brought thee out of the Land
of Egypt, out of the house of Bondage.

1. Thou shall have none other Gods but me. 2. Thou shall not make to thy self
any graven image, nor the likeness of any thing that is in Heaven above, nor
in the Earth beneath, nor in the water under the Earth. Thou shall not bow down
to them, nor worship them. For I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, and visit
the sins of the Fathers upon the Children unto the third and fourth generation
of them that hate me, and show mercy unto thousands in them that love me, and
keep my commandments. 3. Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in
vain: for the Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain.
4. Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day, six days shall thou labor
and do all that thou have to do: but the seventh day is the Sabbath of the
Lord thy God, in it thou shall do no manner of work, thou and thy son, and thy
daughter, thy man servant, thy maid servant thy catell, and the stranger that
is within thy gates, for in six days the Lord made Heaven and Earth, the Sea,
and all that therein is, and rested the seventh day, wherefore the Lord blessed
the seventh day and hallowed it. 5. Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thy
days may be long in the Land which the Lord thy God gives thee. 6. Thou shall
do no murder. 7. Thou shall not commit Adultery. 8. Thou shall not steal. 9.
Thou shall not bear false witness against thy Neighbor. 10. Thou shall not
cover thy Neighbors house; thou shall not covet thy Neighbors wife, nor his
servant, nor his maid, nor his ox, nor his Ass, nor any thing that is his.


Then considering the tenor of that which thou have said, crave grace at Gods
hands to walk after his will, using the same prayer which Christ taught thee,
and saying: Our Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom
come. Thy will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily
bread. And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against
us. And lead us not into temptation. But deliver us from evil, Amen.

Besides all this, thou must also most heartily humble thy self before God,
acknowledging thy self a sinner, and that thou can do nothing that is
righteous: but if there be any goodness in thee either of Nature, or of Gods
Grace, thou must sreely confess that all comes from above. Repute not thy self
better than another, but rather the least of all: If any despise thee, mock
thee, or injure thee, suffer it not only patiently, but also willingly, and
gladly, even for the love of God. For the sealing Ladder of Heaven is Humility,
and a full denying of thy self in worldly causes. Think not well of thy self
for any thing that thou do, have done, or may do: but if thou have any
goodness in thy body, or in thy soul, be not ashamed to confess that it is not
thine, because it comes not from thee, but of God: for from him indeed it
proceeds. And when at any time thou find thy self as it were lest of God,
and destitute of consolation, whether it be inwardly or outwardly, be not
discouraged for it, neither think that God has Forgotten thee, but heartily
Humble thy Self before God, putting all thy confidence in God, as in one that
knows how to save his Elect. If thou receive any blessing inwardly, as Wisdom,
or any other gift, exalt not thy self in pride, neither discommend others that
have not received of God such grace: but use that which thou have to Gods
glory. Again, if thou see thy Neighbor fall, take heed, judge him not, but
think, that God permits thee to see his effence for thy profit. Imagine thou
wast never touched with that crime, well, it is much, but yet thou have been
culpable in some other as bad, or else worse: upon this examination reform thy
self: suppose thou art in no fault, thou must not therefore esteem thy self
better than he that is in fault, knowing thou art of such a nature as he is,
and made of the same stuff as he is, and therefore notwithstanding thy
supposition, a sinner and offender, as well as he; so that both need amending.
Be thou sure, that if God had provided no better for thee than thy self
deserved, thou had committed the like offense, or else greater: and thank God
for that he has kept thee so, and pray for him that does amiss, and is not
yet converted. When thou see a sinner only led to lose his life by Law, know
that thou stand a sinner before God as well as he, although before the world
thou be esteemed better. There is no School wherein a Christian may so well
learn to live well, as in the contemplation of Christ's life and conversation:
thou must oftentimes think on thy last end, as Death, Judgment, Hell, and
Heaven, persevere in Prayer, so shall thou please God, and not be loath to die.
Remember thy end (says the wife Man) and thou shall never sin: thou must often
pray deboutly to God, and when thou will so do, thou must draw thy self from
all affairs: for Prayer is a lifting up of the heart to God, and a private
speech of the soul with God. If it be so, were there any reason, that a man
should draw his cogitations from God, or rather (all outward business put
apart) with all reverence to submit thy soul before him. All this
notwithstanding, it is not forbidden in all our affairs to pray and sing Psalms
to Gods glory, and oftentimes with Tears to say the Lords Prayer, or any other
Prayer to that effect. And here by the way thou must understand, that the
longest Prayer is not the profitablest, because of the multitude of cogitations
of the mind, besides that thou must be devout, for the prayers which are done
with devotion of the heart do profit, all other prayers are but vain, and to no
purpose. If thou pronounce but three words as the Publican did, saying, God be
merciful to me a sinner: or as the Canaanite said, O Son of David have mercy
upon me, it is enough: Again, be not curious of thy tongue, nor line in
speaking: it suffices that thy heart speaks within thee, and thy tongue though
but bleatingly, if unfainedly, it is well, as we read of Moses, and Anna,
Samuels Mother.

Worldly goods superssuonsly thou ought not to ask, but necessarily, and
with measure, for thy bodily health, and for the succor of the needy. If thou
be sick, poor, or in adversity, thou may ask Health, Riches, or Prosperity,
so it be done to Gods glory. But if thy asslictions do more advance Gods glory
than thy prosperity does, (yielding thy soill to Gods will) thou ought to
ask Patience, and say with a meek heart, Lord, thy will be done, and not mine.
I thy senses be inclined to sin, be not dismayed, for there is a God, to whom
if thou pray, he will by the power of his grace suppress that inclination.
Wherefore take courage when thou art tempted, ask help of God, saying, O God
make speed to save me, O Lord make haste to help me: Lord God leave me not, but
be my help, O thou Lord God of my health. Do what thou can to resist the
Devil, and he shall go from thee: approach unto God by Faith, and be will draw
near unto thee by his Spirit: If the Devil assault thee, desy him, and make thy
moan to thy Savior, saying, Lord help me, and be with me. Do thou thy
endeavor, and assure thy self that God will make thee strong, he will aid
thee, he will ease thee, and in the end will set thee free from all verations,
placing thee in the Heaven of Heavens, the Portion and Inheritance of his
Servants. To this God, and to Jesus Christ, with the holy Ghost, he all glory,
honor, and praise, world without end. Amen.

CHAP. XII.
The Authors Peroration or Conclusion to the devout Readers, or Hearers.

I Thank Almighty God of his goodness that I am come to the End of the Voyage
of the wandering Knight: by the which thou mavest understand, that in following
Folly and vain Voluptuousness, he forsook God, to the prejudice and hurt of
his Soul, yea, to the danger of everlasting damnation. Here thou may learn
that all voluptuous worldlings are the very Subjects of Satan, and their
earthly goods and worldly pleasures shall quickly consume. Thou art taught
likewise what great clemency God used to ^m, drawing him by his grace from the
sink of sin, wherein he was sunk: how he was led to the Palace of Repentance,
and from thence to the Palace of Virtue, where by Gods grace he is now, and
what goodness he has found there, thou have heard at large. The Lord grant us
to land where he is landed, even in the Land promised to the Elect. Amen.

And now to conclude, I beseech your courtesies, that if any thing in this my
labor mislike you, interpret the same to the best, and lay nothing to my
charge in the way of presumption: but commending my good meaning, and allowing
my will, not to contemn, but to speak well and esteem of this my Work, and to
use it for thy benefit and edincation, for the which end I made and compiled
the same.

And now, I exhort you all (in Christian love and charity) that if by Gods
grace you be resident in Virtues Palace, to persevere and continue there to the
end, humbling your selves before God, and always trusting unto his goodness,
not unto our own strength or merits: acknowledging also Gods grace, by the
which you are as you are, and of whom you have that you have. Let all your
considence be in his mercy and in his goodness.

Furthermore, if any feel and perceive himself out of Virtues Palace, by the
means of wordly vanities, let him consider the great peril he is in, and
speedily turn to repentance, with a contrite and sorrowful heart, requiring
pardon of God, and trusting wholly in the merits and passion of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ. Let him not be ashamed to acknowledge his sins, which if
he do, he shall find at Gods hands grace and mercy. And now I beseech nor Lord
God to give us all Grace, to do according unto that which is here spoken, (for
otherwise of our selves it is not possible) that leading a life acceptable and
agreeable unto his holy will, we may in the end, after the Voyage which we have
to pass in this world, see and enjoy, possess and have the full fruition of
that glorious city of Paradise, where true Blessedness and perfect Felicity
welleth, even in the Habitation of God Almighty: unto whom be all Honor,
Glory, Power, and Dominion, for evermore Amen.

FINIS.

