JUDAH'S PURGING IN THE MELTING POT.

A SERMON Preached in the Cathedral at SARVM before the Reverend Sir Robert
Foster, and Sir Thomas Tirrell Knights, Judges for the Western Circuit, at the
Wiltshire Assizes. Sept. 6. 1660.

By W. CREED D. D. Archdeacon of Wilts and Canon Resident of Sarum.

Published at the special request of their Lordships, and diverse eminent
Gentlemen, Justices of the Peace, and others.

LONDON, Printed for R. Royston, and are to be sold by John Courtney Bookseller
in SARUM.

To the Reverend Sir ROBERT FOSTER, AND Sir THOMAS TIRRELL Knights, His
Majesty's Justices of the Court of Common Pleas at Westminster, Judges for the
Western Circuit. AND To the Honorable and Right Worshipful, the Justices of
the Peace for the County of WILTS.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
THat I presume to affix your Names to this Sermon, is to let the World know,
that as by your Favor in not forsaking our Cathedral, I had the Opportunity
to Preach it, so by your desire, and at the Instance of diverse Honorable and
Worshipful Persons, Justices of the Peace, and others it was committed to the
Press.

The truth is, my Lords, you and those worthy Gentlemen did more then desire
it. You assured me (as a Motive for you to ask, and me to grant) that it would
be very useful for the Public. And this had with me the Nature of a Command;
because I count it my duty, as a Minister of Christ, to promote by all lawful
ways, the true interest of Christianity, exemplary Piety, Repentance, Purity
and Peace.

And as these blessed Ends (wherein the Happiness; and Welfare of a Church and
Nation consist) have been by Gods Grace (though with much Frailty and Weakness)
the constant Objects of my Endeavors in the work of the Ministry, so now more
especially, since God has been pleased so miraculously to be seen in our
Deliverance, and happy Restoration. For though Gods Judgments always
signally call for Repentance, yet me thinks his Mercies much more; because he
has promised that Christ's People shall be willing in the day of his power,
Psalm. 110.
in the Beauty of holiness from the womb of the Morning, when the lively
fruitful Dews of Grace fall, that renew the face of the Earth, and make it
fresh and youthful.

And as these times are Times of Mercy, so I thought, that healing Discourses
were the fittest. But then that the Cure might be sound and real, not
Palliative and false, I thought it proper at this Season (the Emblem of the
great Assize) to search the wound unto the bottom. And therefore I made choice
of a Scripture, not so much to teach you your Duties, (which I had good Reason
to hope you better understood, than to need my Admonition) as to make my
Auditory sensible of those sins, that had drawn down our heavy Judgments, that
so laying them to heart, they might leave the Magistrate less work by a Cordial
Repentance, and more prise Gods Mercies, so miraculously bestowed on us, when
we had least Reason to expect them, because by his Corrections, we had so
little been prepared for them.

Yet because I saw God had drawn a wonderful Veil of Mercy between our Sins,
and his Judgments, and that the King and his great Council, were so
sollicitous and careful in Preparing and Passing so unparalleled an Act of
Grace and perpetual Oblivion, I resolved not to meddle with any Persons, or
Parties, concerned in that Act, but with the crimes of the Text, and the Vices
of the Nation, and still to fix on such Motives, as the Text naturally
suggested, to make us bury our Animosities, and with all Humility to adore the
Hand in the Clouds, and not regard the rods, and the Scourges, wherewith we
were beaten. And where in the Application I was forced to speak of the sins,
that had made us like Jerusalem, in the Punishment, I industriously confined my
self to those, that had been in the Melting Pot. And I have reason to bless
God, that the great Sufferers, and prime Objects of my Discourse, were so
sensible of my reproofs, that they gave me hearty thanks.

As for the rest of the Audience, they were so unconcerned in my Thoughts, that
I could not be so uncharitable to imagine, they would so much own and
countenance the sins of the Text, as to conceive themselves aimed at in the
Description of those sins. And it must be their own unchristian Imprudence, if
by any sinister Construction, they turned that into a Satyr, which I delivered
a Sermon. And I wish them timely to consider, whether such unjust Apprehensions
may not deprive them of a right to our Mercies, by entitling themselves as yet
to those sins, that have drawn down such Judgments.

Yet if any Sanballats and Tobiahs still maligning the happy restoration and
Building our Jerusalem and Temple, will think themselves concerned, when the
sins so sorely threatened, and sharply punished in Gods People, are but named
and described, this will only argue their guilt, that still stares them in the
Face, and will not suffer them to forget, what their Brethren have resolved to
bury in perpetual oblivion; and they are too much like the Roman Dame, whose
trembling at the noise of the Lictors whip (that was the Ensign of her Sisters
Honor) did palpably betray the meanness of her present condition. But as I
thought not of any such Self-libellers, as these, before the Sermon was
Preached, so I shall less think of them now, when it comes from the Press.

I have better work at present; to praise God for his Mercies in the removal of
his judgments, and humbly beseech him, that by the power of his Grace, he
would put an end to our sins, lest they make us unworthy of the continuance of
his mercies. And as he has restored us our Judges as at the first, and our
Counselors as at the beginning, so he would make you, my Lords, and Gentlemen,
very eminent among those, whom he has designed to dress and polish us by
Justice and Judgment, that so being now delivered from the hands of our
enemies, we may all serve God without fear, in holiness, and righteousness
before him all the days of our life, and becom^ a faithful City, a City of
Righteousness. And this shall be the Prayer of,

My Lords, and Gentlemen, Your most faithful servant in Christ Jesus WILLIAM
CREED.

JUDAH'S PURGING IN THE MELTING POT.
Isaiah I. verse. 25, 26. And I will turn my hand upon thee, and purely purge
away thy dross, and take away all thy Tin.

And I will restore thy Judges, as at the first, and thy Counselors, as at the
beginning: afterward thou shall be called the City of Righteousness, the
faithful City.


The Context runs thus.

Verse. 21. How is the faithful City become an Harlot? it was full of
judgment, righteousness lodged in it, but, now murderers. 22. Thy silver is
become dross, thy wine mixed with water. 23. Thy Princes are rebellious, and
companions of thieves: every one loves gifts, and follows after rewards:
they judge not the fatherless, neither does the cause of the widow come unto
them. 24. Therefore thus says the Lord, the Lord of hosts, the mighty one of
Israel, Ah, I will ease me of mine adversaries, and avenge me of mine enemies.
25. And I will turn my hand upon thee, etc. 27. Zion shall be redeemed with
judgment, and her converts with righteousness. THe words indeed are a Prophecy
concerning Judah and Jerusalem Esaias 1. 1.
ver 1. but fitted and calculated for every Meridian and Country, where God
has a Church. 1 Cor. 10. 11.
These things, says the Apostle, happened to them for ensamples, and were Romans
15. 4. 1 Cor. 9. 9, 10. 1 Cor. 10. 11.
written for our instruction.

And though this be Gods constant Method, yet no Nation under Heaven has had a
more signal experiment of the Accomplishment of this Prophecy in the first,
and most eminent parts of it, then our selves. We have sensibly been ^aught by
our late afflictions and miseries, and the now happy Restoration of our former
Judges and Counselors, that it belongs to us, as well as to Judah and
Jerusalem. And God grant, that as our late miseries and judgments have not
been to devour, but only to refine us, so we may have a share in the Issue
and Event of the Prophecy, and that our Magistrates and Ministers, that God has
restored to us, may have a powerful influence on our true Reformation; that
our Zion may be redeemed with Judgment, and her Converts with Righteousness.
Esaias 1. 27.


You see the Text exactly squares with the Times, and this Occasion. For here
the Prophet represents to you Gods dealings in the Reformation of his people
under the Metaphor of a Founder, as it were melting and dressing them to be fit
vessels of his Sanctuary. And I will turn mine hand upon thee, and purely purge
away thy dross, etc.

Wherein observe a double Work or Operation of this All-wise, Almighty Artist,
with the Issue and Event of it.

In the first work, we have God like the Goldsmith laying his hand upon the
Metal, which he finds corrupted and embased beyond all possibility of
scouring, and then breaking it in pieces by his judgments, and casting it into
the Furnace of Affliction to purify it from its dross, and refine it from the
Tin. And I will turn mine hand upon thee, etc.

In the second, we have Gods dealing with the Metal now purified and melted.
He brings it to the Wheel, and the Anvile, the Hammer and the File, the Putty
and the Oil to shape and fashion, dress and polish it for the great Masters
use. He restores unto them good Magistrates, and good Ministers Calvin, Junius,
and others after them, by Counselors, here also understood Civil Magistrates,
that were assistents to the Judges; but Jerome, Haymo, Lyra, Alapide, Brentius,
the ordinary Gloss, and others understand it of the Restoration of the Priests
and the Prophets; such as Ezra, Josuah the son of Josedeck, and the Apostles
and Ministers of the Gospel. But it seems; to me at least, to have been
literally and primarily fulfilled under Hezekiah, who restored the Priests and
the Levites to the service of the Lord; though secundatily, and in type, it
referrs to all such future Restoration in the Church. Compare 2 Chronicles. cap.
29. 30, 31. and 2 Kings 18. and the stories of Vzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, with the
first Chap. of Isaiah.
men of lawful Authority for Commission, and of solid Integrity for Execution;
such Judges as they had at first, and such Counselors as at the beginning: the
one to shape and dress them by Judgment and Justice in punishing offenders,
and Psalm. 101. 8.
cutting off all evil doers from the city of the Lord; the other to scour and
polish them by sound doctrine 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16, 17.
, and seasonable reproof, by wholesome correction and instruction in
Righteousness. And I will restore unto thee thy Judges, etc.

And then the Issue and Event is (which is the third Branch of the Text) the
vessels of Gold and Silver thus purified and fashioned become sanctified indeed
and vessels unto honor. Afterward thou shall be called the City of
Righteousness, the faithful City, or according to the Hebrew Idiome, thou
shall really be, as thou art called, or, as Calvin, thou shall be so eminently
a just and religious people, that all Nations round about shall take notice,
and speak of it, and call thee, as thou art.

Of these in the Order proposed. And first of the first, Gods purifying of his
People from their dross, and their Tin by the fire of Affliction.

And I will turn my hand upon thee, etc. It beginns with a Copulative. And this
shows the (...) LXXII.
Connection and dependence of this Act and Operation on the former, at the same
instant, that God will avenge himself upon his Adversaries, he will turn his
hand on Zion. Whence observe, That when the sins of a Nation are at the height,
God brings a national Judgment.

He kindles a fire in Zion, and it devours the very Lam. 4. 11.
foundations thereof. In common Calamities all suffer alike. The Plague, the
Sword, the Famine (Gods National whips and scourges) make no distinction. The
Good and Bad are equally exposed unto their fury. The fire in the Furnace as
well furiously scorches the precious metal, as the Tin, and dross. The only
difference is in the issue of the work, and the design of the Artificer: and
God with the selfsame Judgments, wherewith he eases himself of his
Adversaries, refines and melts his people, that are in covenant with him.

Whence learn we not to pass censure on private persons in common Calamities.
Let us not think them worse, on whom the Tower in Siloe fell, then the Luke 13.
4.
rest of Jerusalem that escaped: or that those were Luke 13. 2,
the very worst and most seditious of all the Galileans, whose blood Pilate
mingled with their sacrifices, and so perished in their Rebellion. But consider
we what our Savior has told us Luke 13. 3. 5. against such Censurers, I tell
you nay, but except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. He that sinks in a
common Calamity, may be better then any that are spared: nay sometimes the best
and chiefest in a Nation fall soonest under the Burden.

But then many times this happens not for their own, but others sins, even of
those that are often spared in the Judgment. When the People murmured Psalm.
106. 32
against God, he was angry, says the Psalmist, with Moses, (their Ruler) for
their sakes. A pious King may be destroyed by, and for the sins of those, that
conspire his destruction. Or secondly, God sometimes takes away the Goodman
from the evil yet to come, when he has greater plagues in store. Or thirdly,
that the wicked may have no Mediators, no Intercessors left, to bind his hands,
and wrestle with him in Prayer, as Exodus 32. 10, 11. Psalm. 106. 23.
Moses did, when he resolves to destroy them. We do not Genesis 18. 32.
find ten righteous persons in the four Cities of the Plain, though Lot and
his Family dwelt in Sodom, lest it might have been spared for tens sake.

And no injustice at all in this. For as the best men have their sins, and he
that is least guilty in a Nation has some way or other helped to add to the
public Banck: so the worst may, through Gods mercy to them in Christ, be
reprieved in National Judgments, to give them space to repent (it was wicked
Jezabels case Revel. 2. 21.) or he may reserve them for whips and scourges to
punish an hypocritical people, as he saved the 1 King. 11. 26. 40. 2 Chronicles.
13. 6
Traitor Jeroboam from the sword of his Prince, that so he might be the 1 Kings
11. 31, 32, 33. compared with verse. 9, 10. 11.
scourge to Rehoboam the son of a 1 King. 11. 1, 2 etc. to the 11. Quisquis
ille Confessor est, Salomone major aut melior, aut charior non est, qui tamen
quamdiu in viis Domini ambulavit, tamdiu gratiam, quam de Domino fuerat
consecutus, obtinuit. Postquam dereliquit Domini viam perdidit and gratiam
Domini. Et ideo scriptum est, Tene quod habes ne alius accipiat Coronam.
Cyprian de Eccles. Unitate seu simplicitate Praelat. p 171. edit. Froben.
Basil. But if the wicked will turn from all his sins, that he has committed,
and keep all my statutes, and do that which is lawful and right. he shall
surely live, he shall not dye, Ezekiel. 18 21. And that Solomon repented of his
evil ways, I have reason to imagine, and that Ecclesiastes was the signal
fruit of his Repentance.
wicked Father. And if they make not good use of this Reprieve, God has greater
Judgments in store (as he had for impenitent Jezabel, Revel. 2. 22, 23.) and
when the discipline is ended, then the Assyrian the Esaias 10. 5. 12.
Rod of his Anger, must be thrown into the fire, and Esaias 10. 5. 12.
another nation shall visit and ruin them, for the evil of Gods People, to
which they were isntrumental.

Let not then the Esaias 10. 15.
Axe boast it self against the wood, that is hewed, and say, I am better then
thou, much less against him that heweth therewith: nor let him, that has
escaped a common Calamity, think it was for his own goodness, that he fell not,
as other men. Gods Judgments as we read in Dan. 12. 4 9 Revel. 6. 3. and 10.
4. Isai. 29. 11.
Daniel and the Revelation, are still sealed. They are secret hidden things to
us, and we know not the Causes nor the Justice of them. Nevertheless, as the
Apostle 2 Timothy 2, 19
2 Timothy 2. 19. the foundation of the Lord stands sure, having this seal, the
Lord knows them, that are his. And let every one that but names the name of
Christ depart from iniquity. That is Deuteronomy. 29. 29.
our business at all times; especially in public Calamities. But secret things
(his winding intricate Paths of Providence and Judgment against an
hypocritical People) belong unto the Lord. We may see indeed who suffers, and
what scourge falls upon him, but then we know not the end, or reason of the
stroke.

It is not then for us to pry into Gods Counsels when he is at his work of
Judgment* When the Founder sits at the Melting pot, none can know, but
himself, why this piece of Metal first goes into the flame, or why that other
is reserved. Gods Judgments, says the Psalm. 36. 9.
Psalmist, are a great deep, not to be fathomed by us.

No rather, let it humble us under his sin-avenging hand, and make us tremble
at the severity of his wrath, and abhor our own vileness, that makes him spare
none. Good, bad, all alike, we see, lie under a common Calamity: and the best
are either first taken away, or are the most eminent in sufferings. Let it
teach us to adore his Justice in Wonder and Silence, and make us lay our hands
on our lips, as Psalm. 39. 9.
David did, and be dumb, and open not our mouth, because God did it. Or rather
let us lay our hands on our hearts, and judge not others, but our selves, and
say as Nathan did to David, we, we are the men; 2 Samuel 12. 7.
We have brought this destruction on our Princes, and on our Brethren. Let it
make us lift up our Prayers for the remnant that is left. As the Judgment Esaias
37. 5.
has been National and Public, so let all the Joel 2. 16. 17.
Congregation, the Elders, the Sucklings, the Bridegroom, the Priests, all cry
out, spare thy People, O Lord, and give not thine heritage to reproach. Let our
Prayers and our Repentance be as large and public as our Sins and Miseries
have been. Alas! let us not consider who was struck, or who spared, or who
threatened in the desolation, but the hand, that did strike us. The Author of
the Punishment, the next thing considerable.

And that is one sufficient enough for such a work. For he wants nor Power, nor
Skill, nor Authority to effect it, because he is the Lord, the Lord of Hosts,
Esaias 1. 24.
the mighty one of Israel, as he describes himself in the verse before the
Text, to show his own strength, and our weakness, and affright the sinner to
Repentance.

For his Power, he is the Lord of hosts, the mighty one: Job 25. 3.
and is there any number of his Armies? as it is Job 25. 3. And certainly
methinks this alone should humble us, were we rational Creatures. For do we
provoke the Lord, the Lord of hosts, to Jealousy? Are we 1 Cor. 10 22.
stronger then he, that is, the mighty one of Israel? Are any of us able to
dwell with his Everlasting burnings? Esaias 33. 14.
Are we sufficient to meet him with our ten thousand Weaknesses, that comes
against us with his twenty thousand Judgments? Me thinks when a National
Plague is broke in upon us, it should humble and terribly amate us, that it is
the King of Kings, and Lord of hosts, one higher, one stronger then all, that
smites us, that can consume us with the very breath Psalm. 18. 8. Esaias 5. 24.
Esaias 31. 3.
of his nostrils; us, that are as stubble before the flames, and chaff before
the wind, that like Aegypts horses, are flesh and not Spirit?

Though in our Brave, with Esaias 37. 24. 25.
Sennacherib, we talk high, and threaten what we will do against the enemy at
home, or abroad, yet Verse. 29.
Leviathan has a hook in his Nostrils, the war horse has a bridle in his
lips: he shall go, but to the compass of his Line, and whether A notable
example of Gods Providence in this kind we have Ezechiel 21, 19, 20, 21, 22,
etc. Vid. Grot. in loc.
God himself by his all wise Providence shall guide him to destroy. Esaias 37.
33, 34, 35. Esaias 54. 16.
Therefore thus says the Lord concerning the King of Assyria, He shall not
come into this City, nor shoot an Arrow there, nor come before it with shields,
nor cast a Banck against it. By the way that he came, by the same shall he
return, and shall not come into this City says the Lord. For I will defend
this City to save it for my own sake, and for my servant David's sake. So again,
Esaias 54. 16. Behold, says God, I have created the Smith that blows the coals
in the fire, and that brings forth his Instruments for his work, and I have
created the Waster to destroy. But can he go further then God pleases? No. It
follows v. 17. No weapon that is formed against thee, Verse. 17.
shall prosper: and every tongue that shall rise against thee in Judgment,
thou shall condemn: this is the heritage of the servants of the Lord.

And therefore, Esaias 49. 9.
Woe unto him that striveth with his Maker: Let the Potsheards strive with
(their equals) the Potsheards of the Earth: Shall the Clay say to him that
fashioneth it, what make thou, or thy work, he has no hands? No, consider we
what he says a little before to this purpose of Cyrus, Esaias 49.
whose right hand he had holden to subdue Nations before him, Esaias 54. 5. Verse.
5.
I am the Lord and there is none else, there is no God besides me: I have
girded thee with strength, though thou have not known me.

This for the consideration of Gods Power to humble us, in a common Calamity.
None so strong as he; none so weak as we are.

But then not only strength and might are his; but wisdom, and counsel too,
to effect, whatsoever he pleases. He styles himself the Lord, for that. Ah Lord
God, says Jeremy c. 32. 17, 18, 19. behold Jer. 32. 17, 18, 19.
thou have made the Heaven and the earth -- and there is nothing too hard for
thee -- Great in Counsel and mighty in work; for thine eyes are open upon all
the ways of the sons of men, to give every one according to his ways, and
the fruit of his doings.

We when a Judgment comes, may strive and plot and labor what we can to
prevent it. What Rabshaketh spoke falsely concerning Hezekiah, is often 2 Kings
18, 19, 20.
too true of our Policies and Stratagems. What confidence is this, wherein we
trust? We say (but they are but vain words) we have Counsel, and strength for
the war. But talk, and think, what we will; No Counsel shall prosper against
his determination to punish a rebellious People. For what says he in Esaias 46.
c. 10, 11? My Counsel shall stand, and I will Esaias 46. 10. 11.
do all my pleasure, calling a ravenous bird from the east, the man that
executes my Counsel, from a far Country; yea I have spoken it, and I will
bring it to pass. I have purposed it, I will also do it.

We are apt on all sides to lay the blame on evil Counsel. How readily do we
charge our Miseries on this man's Treason, or the others Folly? If such a one
had been wise, or honest, to have advised the Prince in good time, or such an
one had not been false, to reveal his counsels, or conspire against him, none
of these Calamities had followed. But fools as we are, not to think of our own
sins, that are the true causes of all our miscarriages, the rest are but
Occasions. When God is resolved to visit a People in Judgment, he catches the
wise in their own craft, and turns the counsels of the Sages of the Nation,
like those of the Oracle, Achitophel, into foolishness. 2 Samuel 15 31. 2 Samuel
16. 23 2 Samuel 17. 5, 6 7, 8.
And by his Providence he blasts the best directions; either making wise
advises to be rejected as vain, or raising up a Hushai to match Achitopbel, a
Craftyer Verse. 14.
then they, to counterwork all their Plots, and bring them to confusion.

This should teach us not to look on any kind of Instruments, evil
Counselors, or others, that God makes use of, for our chastisement. How apt
have we all along been to complain, (and yet this Mistake is not purged out of
us to this day) against this man's Craft and the others Folly; against this man's
Rashness and the others Treachery; this Laymans Faction, and that Priests
seditious Rhetoric; this Tradesmans Covetousness, and that Gentleman's Malice;
this Citizens Pride, and that Courtiers Ambition? But have we thought of our
sins, and of our God, whose Providence and Wisdom has overruled our own sins,
to be our own Punishments? Sure things had been far better, if we had looked up
to God, and adored the strange Abyss of his wisdom in all our Punishment, and
had not fallen on Inferior Agents, that can do nothing of themselves, but
only as he directs.

For as he has Power and Wisdom, so he has the only Right to chastise. He is
not only the Lord of hosts, but the mighty one of Israel too, to show his
Right and Authority to punish: none can do it, but He. for as the Prophet asks
the Question Amos 3. Amos 3. 5, 6.
verse. 5, 6. Can a bird fall in a snare upon the earth, where no ginne is for
him? Shall there be evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it? He it is,
that hisses for the Fly (the Horsemen) in the uttermost parts of the Rivers
Esaias 7. 17.
of Egypt, and for the Be (the spear and arrow) that is in the Land of
Assyria, Esaias 7. 17. And he usually rewards them with unexpected success, whom
he raises for vengeance. O Assyria, the rod Esaias 10, 5, 6.
of mine Anger, and the staff in their hand is my Indignation. I will send him
against an hypocritical Nation, and against the people of my wrath will I give
him a charge to take the spoil, and to take the prey, and to tread them down
like mire in the streets. Hence it is that God compares him to a Rasor that is
hired for this purpose, Esaias 7. 20. And for this cause he calls Esaias 7. 20.
Esaias 45. 1, 2, 3.
Cyrus his anointed, whom he had raised up unexpectedly to the throne, and
prospered him to beat down the Gates of Brass, and loose the loins of Kings,
and receive the Treasures of Darkness, Esaias 45. v. 1, 2, 3.

The Instruments of all our Miseries, could never have been able to have done
any thing against us, unless God had not only given it them in charge, but
assisted them to do it. We blame their Pride and and Covetousness and Ambition;
and we do not amiss. But our spoils and Plunder were the wages, God bestowed
upon them for their service. And they were Gods Hirelings, when they knew it
not, and only designed to serve their lusts, and obey their own ambitions.
Even heathen Cyrus was Esaias 45. 1, 4*
Gods Anointed, though he was ignorant of him. And the Assyrian was his hired
servant, howbeit, as it is in Esaias 10. 6, 7.
our Prophet, that he meant not so, but only to destroy and cut off Nations
not a few.

This should help to bury our Animosities on all sides. Consider we, that they
have been Gods instruments, his Fire and Hammer to break us for the Furnace,
and melt us from our dross and Tin. The Devil, Gods Executioner, and wicked men
his substitutes, are all but in a chain. They could not fall on Jobs cattle, or
substance, or touch his Person, Job 1 9, 10. 11. Mark 5. 12, 13
till God gave them leave. Nay they could not enter into the Gadarens Swine,
without Christ's permission.

And yet God, in this, is not the Author, nor Abetter of their sin, no more
then the Apothecary begets the Scorpion and the Viper, which he makes into an
Antidote; or the Goldsmith Creates the Fire, whose Fury he makes use of, to
refine his Metal. The Sinner is a Sinner still. Judas was never a whit the
less Traitor, or the Jews less Parricides, the one in betraying, the other in
murdering the Lord of life, because by their malice God brought redemption to
the world, by the death of his Son. And herein appears, as well the strange
wisdom, as the Power of God, that he can make use of the sins of men to punish
a wicked People, and yet himself be just and innocent.

Truth is, God need not be the Author of sin (if it were possible) that so he
may become the Author of Punishment. If Satan, the Executioner of Gods
Vengeance be but loosed, he will do it fast enough. If God but once remove his
hedge of Providence about Job 1. 2.
us, he will bring Chaldeans and Sabeans, winds and tempest, fire and
brimstone, botches, plagues and diseases more then enough for such a purpose.
Nay if the Devil were not a roaring Lion, still running up 1 Pet. 5. 8.
and down to devour us, yet wicked men have sins enough to devour one another,
to punish themselves while they refine others. The fire in the Furnace, whilst
it melts the Metal, consumes it self. The apper and the nether Millstone, as
they grind the good Corn between them, so they wear out one another.

The (...). Arist. Eth. Nicom. l. 2. c. 8.
Moralist observes of the two opposite vices, that they are more Enemy one to
the other, then to the middle virtue between them. And we had too sad
experience of this in our late unnatural war. Had we any need to prompt on the
debauched Cavalier against the hypocritical pretender? or of Curse ye Meroz to
stir up the Zelot to come in to the help of the Lord against the Mighty? Their
own contrary humors and passions would make them fight, and with eagerness
enough, to one another destruction.

The time will not give me leave to show you ho^ God makes use of the sinner
for the punishing his servants, and purifying them from their dross. Sufficient
it is for the present Point, that he does it, and only for his Peoples sake.
And this hints unto us the Persons melted, his People, his Chosen; the next
Circumstance.

And it is Thee Judah and Jerusalem, his own People. God will not lose his Art
and Pains on those, that are without the Pale of the visible Church. You only,
says he in Amos 3. 2.
Amos, have I known of all the families of the earth: therefore will I punish
you for all your iniquities, Amos 3. 2. This was a Philip. 1. 29
Privilege God granted them, when he promised Abram that the Church should
spring out of his loins. Thy seed shall be strangers in a foreign land, and
Genesis 15. 13, 14
afflicted for four hundred years together. A long time this to be in the
Melting Pot! But the silver must not out till purified. The same Promise he
renews to David, 2 Samuel 7. 14. I will be his Father and he 2 Samuel 7. 14.
shall be my son: if he commit iniquity I will chasten him with the rod of men,
and with the stripes of the children of men, but my mercy shall not depart from
him.

Though this may seem somewhat unworthy the generousness of Faith, that the
Christian should, as it were, be dragged and haled unto Goodness, because the
Whip is for Slaves, and the Rod for the back of Fools, Prove. 26 3. etc. 10. 13.
c. 29. 15.
as Solomon speaks, yet this is Gods usual Method, and which seldom fails of
success. The best of all Gods Saints, from him that sits on the throne, to
Act. 14. 22.
him that grinde^h at the mill, must through much tribulation enter into the
kingdom of God. The Ram, the Genesis 22. 13.
emblem of our Savior, that saved Isaac from the slaughter, was caught in a
Thicket. The Church, though she be a Lilly, is planted among thorns. And
Cantic. 2. 2. Heb. 2. 10. Rev. 21. 4.
the Captain of our salvation, because a Surety for sinners, was made perfect
through sufferings.

It is in heaven only, where the Saints are without sin, that they are without
sorrow. Where no dross or rust can corrupt, there needs no Furnace, no Mat. 6.
10.
Scouring.

But here the case is otherwise, we are all an unclean Romans 3. 11.
thing: and Adam's Curse, and his Sweat and his Labor and Sorrow, are together
with his sin entayled upon us. The best of us all 2 Cor. 4. 7.
have our treasure but in earthen vessels: and though our James 1. 17 Recte
Metallorum ortus tribuitur Coelesti calori, etsi consistentiam a frigore
recipiant. Vales. Philos. sac. c. 49. p. 239.
Gold and Silver be begun and perfected by the Influences of heaven, yet
because they are begotten in the Metalla omnia generantur sub terra. Vales.
ibid. page 237. vid. Georg. Agricol. dear Metal. l. 3. p. 54. and de subterr.
ortu and cause. l. 5.
Bowels of the Earth, they are earth too, and the rich Vide Vales. philos. sac.
page 23 8.
Ore must be brought to the Fire, and the Melting Pot before it can be cleansed
from the dross.

And therefore it is the less to be wondered at, that we can not any where turn
in this book of God, but we shall find eminent Examples of it. Even Abraham the
Father of the Faithful, before he can be Genesis 11. 28. vid. Ainswer. in loc.
called the Friend of God, he must leave his Native Country, and his Fathers
house, and pass through Ur of the Chaldeans: that is, say the Vid. Targum
Jonathan Ben. Uziel. c. 11. v. 28.
Rabbis, he must be cast into a fiery Furnace by that Idolatrous People from
whence he escaped by Miracle, that he might flee from their Pollutions. But be
the story what it will, yet (...) cujus ignis est in Sion. Esaias 31. 9. Psalm,
34. 19. Number. 12, 3. Exodus 7. 1. Exodus 3. 10. Acts 7. 35, Acts 7. 30. 1 Samuel 13.
14.
Ur, in that language signifies fire, and shows us this lesson, that many are
the troubles of the Righteous, though the Lord delivers them out of all. What
think you of Moses the meekest man alive? Before he can become a God to Pharaoh
and a Leader of Israel, he must be weaned for forty years together from the
vices of Egypt and the dalliances of Pharaohs Court. What say you to David,
the man after Gods own heart? Take him from the sheepcote to the Throne, and
you shall find him either 1 Samuel, 17 36, 37, 50, 51. 1 Samuel 19. 10.
in the Jaw of the Lion, or the Paw of the Bear, or the Sword of Goliath, or the
Spear of Saul; in deaths and perils often. His enemies mighty for their Power.
Psalm. 38. and more then the hairs of his head for number Psalm. 38. 19.
Psalm. 69. his troubles at home, abroad, in Jewry, Psalm. 69. 4.
Palestine, in Gath, in Jerusalem, in the Cottage, in the Throne, in the Court,
in the Camp, so many I cannot count them: for he himself, that suffered them,
says that they are innumerable, Psalm. 40. and Psalm. 40. 12. Psalm. 38. 8.
these, many of them so sharp, that they made him rore through the very
disquietness of his Soul. Mark the good man and the Perfect, Job, and you shall
find Job 1. 1. and. c. 2. 3. Psalm. 37. 37. Job 2. 8. Job 7. 11.
him on a Dunghill, and in the midst of the Ashes with a Potsheard in his
hand, to scrape his sores. And so great was his afflictions, that this miracle
of Patience will not refrain his Mouth, but he will speak in the anguish of his
spirit, and complain in the bitterness of his soul.

And therefore, beloved, think it not strange concerning 1 Pet. 4. 11.
the fiery trials, that have tried us. You see no new thing happens unto us.
The best of Saints have had their meltings, as well as we of this Nation. The
Excoquam igne tribulationis, sordes and vitia purgando, ut soparato stann^
purum remaneat argentum; quod absque igne fieri non potest: unde quasi ignis
conflans. Malach. 3. Gloss. Ordinar. in Esa. 1. 25.
dross and Tin cleave so close to their best and purest Metal, that there is
no taking it away, nor purging it out, without the Crucible and Mel^ing Pot.

Nay it is the greater wonder, if we were not truly Gods People, that he should
turn his hand upon us. If we were Reprobate Silver, God would throw us to the
dirt of the street, and not into the Melting Pot. The Refiner will not put the
Dantur quaedam mixta, quae, metallicam naturam utcunque aemulantur, plene non
assequuntur; simul enim ad lapidum naturam deflectunt. Haec duorum ordinum.
Priora Marchesitae nomen obtinuere. etc. Mocenic. p. 336.
Marchesite into the Furnace, because though it glisters like Gold, yet it is
but a stone. God will not lose his Art and Pains on such adulterate ware. For
what says he in the Prophet of these, Jer. 6. 28, 29, 30. They are Brass and
Iron, they are all corrupters Jerem. 6. verse. 28; 29, 30.
(and have nothing of precious Metal in them.) The Bellows are burnt, the
Plumbum in examine perfectorum (metallorum) adhibitum, imperfecta absumit, and
una per sumum abripit, aut in scorias convertit Sennert. Institut. Phys. l. 5.
c. 5. p. 401.
Lead is consumed of the fire, the Founder melts in vain. For the wicked are
not plucked away. Reprobate silver shall men call them, because the Lord has
rejected them. Such Revolte^s as these, notwithstanding their gilded outsides
are unworthy of his skill. And therefore he cries out, why should ye be
stricken any more, ye will revolt more and more? Since Esaias 1. 5.
it is not in the Power of his Art to refine them, he withdraws his hand, and
lets them alone to prosper in their wickedness, that they may be scourges to
the Psalm. 73. 3. Psalm. 85. 8. Psalm. 73. 5, 6, 12.
Saints, least they return again to Folly. Behold these are the ungodly that
prosper in the world; they are not in trouble as other men; therefore Pride
compasses them. But this their way is their folly, their happiness is their
Psalm. 49. 13. Psalm. 73. 18 Verse. 19.
curse. They are in slippery places. And O how suddenly do they consume? How
are they brought into desolation as in a moment? they are utterly consumed with
Terrors.

And therefore, beloved, this should be our rejoicing, that we have been in the
Melting Pot; and we should count our selves happy, that God has turned his hand
upon us. This shows that as we have been under his Artifice, so we are with him
in esteem, otherwise the Founder would not melt us. Whatsoever our Enemies
scandalously say against us, it seems there is something in us of his Grace and
Goodness left. The Dross and the Tin have not eaten out all our precious metal,
but to the glory of his Grace be it spoken, we retain something (as I hope our
lives and conversations and future amendment shall testify) something of that
Treasure, which the workman at first founding did put into the vessel. As we
have been a long time in the Crucible, and under the Hammer and the Cross, so
we have been under his Art and his Care and Protection too.

And this, as it may argue us to belong to the household of faith, so it may
assure us of Gods love and respect toward us. If he were not our Father that
begat us, he would not trouble himself thus to discipline and correct us. Whom
the Lord loves he Heb. 12, 6, 7.
chastneth, says the Apostle, Heb. 12. 6. and he scourges every son, whom he
receives. But if ye be without chastisement, whereof all are Partakers, then
are ye Bastards and not Sons.

Away then with those that Censure the Church or Good men, when they are under
the Scourge, and cast into the Melting Pot. Those that seem (...) 1 Cor. 4. 13.
vid. Bezam, in locum.
(...) as the filth of the world, and offscouring of all things, fit for
nothing in the eyes of men, but to be burned and destroyed, are now in Gods
more immediate custody, when they are in the Furnace. Now they are the Objects
of his Art and Skill, his Care and Love. Now the Founder is about his business
and Trade; and he more immediately attends upon them, to purify them from
their dross and their Tin, and cleanse and new fashion them. Though carnal men
looked on us, as cast away by God, yet the issue has showed that all our
crosses and afflictions have been only in order to our scouring, and as we
have been under Gods Protection, while we were in the Crucible, so we were in
his account in the readiest way to honor. And this hints unto us our next
circumstance, the manner how God refines his People: it is by fire and melting.
And (...). LXX. -- Excoquet omnes sordes -- ut separa. to sta^no purum argentu^
remaneat, quod absque igne fieri non potest, per quod significat eos passuros
esse tormenta. Hier. in loc. vid. Lyram in loc.
I will purge, and take away.

And though the Method be sharp, yet it is for all that necessary. Dross and
Tin will never be got out with all the washing and scouring in the world. There
is nothing but the Fire can do it. Who sees not but that our Corn must pass
under the flaile and the Mill, before it can be cleansed from the Chaff, and
dressed from the Bran to be Shewbread for the Sanctuary? The Grapes must be
tred in the winepress, and boil and work in the Fatt, the Juice must be racked
and drawn, and imprisoned in the Cask, before the Wine will be fully purified
from the stone and the Husk, the Must and the Lees, and fitted for our Saviors
drinking in his Fathers kingdom. Though Israel be Gods chosen vine, a plant
which his Esaias. 5. 2. Jer. 2. 21.
own right hand has planted, yet the luxuriant Branches must come under the
discipline and stroke of the Pruning hook, before it will be fruitful.

And therefore God in Scripture is compared to a Vine-dresser, a Gardener, that
is nothing without Esaias 5. 1.
the Spade, and the Hough, and the Pruning-knife; to a Husbandman, that must
tear the bowels of the Earth Joh. 15 1. 1 Cor. 3. 9.
with the Plough and the Harrow, before he can kill the weeds, and fit the
soil for the seed; to a Refiner, as here in the Text, that is nothing without
his Aqua fortis, and Melting pot, his fire, and waters of Separation.

And this as it serves to represent the Sharpness of the Affliction, that God
often brings upon his People, so it shows the deepness of their sin and
Pollution.

God sends not National Judgments for ordinary common sins. Those he leaves
to the Sword of the Magistrate. It is for the dross and the Tin, notorious
debaucheries, and gross and scandalous sins, and gilded Hypocrisies, that have
imbodyed themselves in the precious Metal, and have run through the whole
substance, and overspread the whole Nation, and are too big for the Law.

If you read in the foregoing Part of the Chapter, you shall find the Princes
rebellious, and companions of Esaias 1. 23.
Thieves, the Courts of Justice made Exchanges and Mercates to sell the Causes
of the Poor for the Briberies of the Rich; nothing but following after gifts
and rewards; no Judging of the Fatherless, nor the Cause of the Widow
regarded. The faithful City verse. 21.
was become an Harlot, and instead of Judgment and Righteousness, nothing now
but Murderers to be found in it. The hands full of blood, the mouth full of
blasphemies and cursing and lies, the head full of covetousness and projects to
gain Estates, and the heart full of hypocrisy, and dissembling with God and
Man.

For still they are for the outside and cheap forms of v. 11, 12, 13. 14, 15.
devotion. Much treading Gods Courts, and sanctifying the Sabbaths, and calling
solemn Assemblies, and multitude of Sacrifices, and spreading forth the hands,
and making many prayers.

Their silver, as it is verse the 22. was now become so drossy and embased,
that no Lotion was sufficient, though of Fullers soap, or Nitre; no scouring or
cleansing, though of Putty and Oil, will serve the turn. The Laws and
Punishments of the Nation are too weak, and the Preachings of the Prophets not
regarded. None but such active Instruments as the fire and the flame, that
pierce into the very substance, and dissolve the Metal, is sufficient for the
work.

And this should teach us, not to repine at Gods Judgments, but to be angry
with our sins, that force as it were, the Almighty against his own gracious
inclination to wound and chastise us. Wherefore, says the Prophet Jeremy,
Lament. 3. 39, 40. does a living Lam. 3. 39. 40
man complain, a man for the punishment of his sins? Let us search and try our
ways, and turn unto the Lord our God.

For to our Comfort it is, God will not cast us off, his mercies are not clean
gone, even in the very midst of our Afflictions. Though, as it is Lament. 3.
32, 33. he cause grief, yet will he have compassion according Lam. 3. 32, 33
to the multitude of his mercies. For he does not afflict willingly, nor grieve
the children of men. We Esaias 1. 24.
see he sighs and laments and cries (...)
Ah, when he rouzes himself to ease him of his Adversaries, and avenge
Plangitautem clementissimus Pater Principes delinquentes, etc. Hieron. in loc
quem vid. and Lyram.
him of his enemies: and therefore when he turns his hand upon his People, we
may be well assured, that his strokes are only the disciplines of a Father,
and the launcings of a Surgeon, not the wounds of an Executioner. And though he
kindle a Fire about us, yet it is only to melt and refine us from our dross
and our Tin, and not to destroy us. Which hints unto us the end of Gods
Judgments, the next Circumstance.

It is, I will purely purge away thy dross, and take away (...). LXX. secund.
M. S. Angl. (...). Symmach, in Drusii Fragment. Veter. Interpr, Grae. in Esai
page 286.
all thy Tin.

Though their sinful Condition requires this sharp Artifice; yet is there mercy
in this fiery trial. Though it purge out the dross and Tin, yet the fire is a
kind of Lambent flame to purify the precious Metal, not consume it. The Gold,
like that of Exodus 32. 24.
Aaron, is cast into the furnace, that it come forth a statue: but not like
that which verse, 22. ^
Moses cast there (that by a strange (...). Arist. l. 3. Meteor. c 6.
unheard of Chemistry was calcined and ground to Powder) for a final abolition.
I know O Lord, says David, Psalm. 119. 75. that thy Judgments are right, and
that thou in faithfullness have afflicted me. Whatsoever Carnal men may think,
it is a mercy to be in the Melting Pot. Afflictions make us know our selves,
our sins, our God. Before I was afflicted, I Psalm. 119. 67.
went wrong, says David, but now have I kept thy word. And he observes it of
Israel, a whole Nation, Psalm. Psalm. 78 34.
78. 34. When he slew them, they sought him, and returned, and enquired early
after God.

And therefore says Solomon, the fining pot is for Prove. 17. 3.
silver, and the furnace for Gold, and the Lord tries the heart. And how is
that? Let Malachi tell you, Mal. 3. 3^.
c. 3. 3. For he is like a Refiners fire, and like Fullers soap, and he shall
sit as a Refiner and a Purifier of Silver. And we know by experience, that the
Hammer of the Goldsmith, and the flame, and the Crucible is not to destroy the
precious Metal, but to cleanse and fashion it. And what it looses of its dross
and Tin, it gains in luster and brightness, in purity and worth.

For that is the end of Gods Artifice and Pains, that being purified, he might
put us into the mold, and fashion us to be vessels unto honor, sanctified, and
meet for the Masters use, and prepared unto every good 2 Timothy 2. 21. Malachi 3.
3, 4.
work. For it follows Malachi 3. v. 3, 4. And he shall purify the sons of
Levi, and purge them as Gold and Silver, that they may offer unto the Lord an
offering in Righteousness. Then shall the offerings of Judah and Jerusalem be
pleasant unto the Lord, as in the days of old, and as in former times. And
that we may be sure that this is Gospel-m^thod, and disciplines of Grace, the
Baptist will tell you, Mat. 3. 27. that the great Mat. 3 27.
Founder and restorer of his Church shall baptize with the holy Ghost and with
fire; that his Fan is in his hand, and that he will thoroughly purge his Floor
and gather his wheat into his Garner, and burn up the Chaff with unquenchable
fire.

This made the good Father S. Austin cry out, hic ure, hic seca, Domine, ut in
aeternum parcas, Lord let me have my hell here upon earth, that I may have my
heaven and happiness hereafter. I care not, how sharp my A^flictions be, since
they are for my amendment: if what I lose in my Estate, and my Liberty and good
Name, I gain in Christian Purity, and Meekness and Patience; if I dye at the
stake, or on a Gibbet, or a Scaffold, if that death prove a Martyrdom, and I
be delivered unto Satan for the destruction 1 Cor. 5. ^
of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus.

Oh beloved! me thinks there cannot be a greater comfort to believers, nor a
stronger support to them in the midst of their afflictions, then to consider,
that when they are in the fining pot, they are in the way to spiritual
advancement; that God delights not in the tormenting of their bodies, but aims
at the salvation of their souls. Gods end in these sharp Methods shows his Love
and respect toward them. The care he takes in Melting, and purely purging out
our dross, and taking away all our Tin, manifests, that he then most prizes us,
when to Carnal worldly men, that triumph in our miseries, we seem as lost and
gone in the fire of Indignation. And therefore the Apostle sensible of the love
of God, even in the midst of our trials, cries out in behalf of believers, 2
Cor. 4. 8, 9, 10. We are 2 Cor. 4. 8, 9, 10. 11.
troubled on every side, yet not distressed, persecuted but not forsaken, cast
down but not destroyed, always bearing about in the body the marks of the Lord
Jesus, that the life also of Jesus might be made manifest in our body. For we
which live are always delivered unto death for Jesus sake, that the life also of
Jesus may be made manifest in our mortal flesh.

Let then the Atheist and the prosperous sinner boast of Providence and
success, whilst we, when good men are oppressed and slain, and the blood of
Princes and of Nobles is poured out like water in the streets, do glory in the
cross of Christ, that fits us for a Crown.

But then as the Consideration of the Cause Proegoumenal and Final, Gods love
to us in Christ, that alone inwardly moves him, and his great end and aim, the
purifying and saving of our souls by these sharp disciplines, should serve to
support us in the midst of our Calamities: so it should serve to humble us
under his hand, when we consider the Procatartick and Meritorious Cause, that
from without stirs up God to cast us into the Melting Pot, our dross and our
Tin, that have corrupted and embased our precious Metal. And that is the next
thing considerable.

And happy it is for Judah and Jerusalem that God promises to purge out their
dross and Tin. For no greater enemies to Gold and Silver then these. They
corrupt and embase the precious metal, and make it cheap and contemptible.
Nothing so vile in Gods esteem as the Sinner. This dross and Tin, this
pollution that is in him, makes the great Artist not delight in the work of his
own hands, nor value that Purchase, which he bought with his own blood.

It is true, as the Est Obriza examen seu probatio per ignem acerrimum, qua
omnis fere alienae materiae admixtio excernitur. Vid. Budae. l. 3. de Ass.
dixi (fere) nam eousque excoqui aurum posse, ut caractae unius quadrans tantum
relinquatur materiae alienae, etc. Brerewood de Ponder. and Pret. cap. 22.
Refiners have observed, the finest Gold, let it be purified seven times in the
fire, will still retain some mixture of Alloy. Grace, though it sanctify
nature never so much, yet so long as we are in the flesh, we shall have a touch
of our fleshly corruptions. As the best man that is, Prove. 24. 16.
falls seven times a day: so is it true of Nations and Churches. The Mat. 13.
39, 40.
Corn and Tares, and Chaff will be mixed in the threshing-flore, till the
winnowing day comes. The 47, 48, 49.
net of the Gospel catches the Fish of all sorts, the bad as well as good, and
no sorting them as yet, till the Net comes to shore. There will be sinners as
well as Saints, in the Pale of the visible Church, till the day of Separation
of the Sheep from the Goats. The only Church without Ephesians. 5. 27. Gal. 4. 26.
spot or wrinckle, is Jerusalem, that is above.

And therefore when God promises he will purely purge away the dross, Purgatio
ad liquidum ut nulla scoria maneat, non ita debet intelligi, quasi Deus
Ecclesiam suam in hoc mundo penitus unquam abstergat ab omni labe (sed) ut
instar mundi argenti reluceat. Vera pietas notatur, cum ante Judaei sibi in
faecibus suis nimium placuissent. Calvin. in loc.
and take away all the Tin, it is not to be expected that any single Saint
should arrive to an absolute sinless perfection in this life, much less that a
Nation should. For then there would not be work for Mortification, Repentance,
and godly sorrow for sin, and the Magistrate would be useless, and truly bear
the sword in vain; Our Purity consists, in not suffering sin, as the Apostle
advises, to reign in our Romans 13. 4. Romans 6. 11.
mortal bodies, that we should obey it in the lusts thereof, that the dross
and the Tin be so purged out of a people, that its brightness may appear, that
the sinner may be every where discouraged, and virtue and Godliness eminently
advanced.

As then it is not to be expected that the Artist should purify his Gold and
Silver, till it be wholly without Alloy; so such Purity as this, is not the
Object of the great Founders skill and Pains. For in the next verse he promises
to restore our Judges as at the first, and our Counselors as at the
beginning; and this supposes that still there will be business for the private
Christian, and the public Magistrate. They are Public, Scandalous, Open sins,
of a Crimson die Esaias 1. 18.
and a spreading nature, that as they corrupt, and embase, so they run and
diffuse themselves through all the good Metal, that here God promises to purge,
and take away. They are National sins, which are too big for the Law, that
call for National Judgments.

And these the Prophet elegantly describes under the Metaphor of Some by dross
understand gross iniquity: by Tin glittering Hypocrisy; or persons openly
profane by the one, inwardly unsound by the other. Which may well be, for that
Tin carries an outward resemblance of silver. etc. Assemb. Not. in loc.
Confer. Calvin in Isa. cap. 1. v. 22.
dross and Tin. The dross: what is that? It denotes the gross and palpable
impieties, that are open to every eye, that Nature as well as Grace discovers
and condemns. The weakest sight that is can discern the dross, from the Silver.
And therefore says the Apostle Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21. Esaias 1. 4. 16, 17, 21, 23
the works of the flesh are manifest.

And this was Jerusalems Pollution. Abundance of dross in it: Rebellions,
Thievery, Plunder, Bribery, Oppression, Murder, Blood, what not? and this from
the sole of the foot even to the head, the corruption verse. 6.
was universal. And yet though her impieties were so gross and palpable, the
more to embase her precious Metal, she adds Tin unto her dross, and masks her
^o^orious wickedness with the veyle of Religion. Much treading Gods Courts, and
verse 11, 12, 13, 14, 15.
making many prayers, and sanctifying of Sabba^hs, and calling solemn
Assemblies, and heaping Sacrifice upon Sacrifice, while the hands are full of
blood.

And this was the Aggravation of their sin, that they added Hypocrisy to
Profaneness, that they fasted for strife and debate, and striking with the fist
of Wickedness* Esaias 58. 4.
that they had much pretense of Religion and Godliness in the face and tongue,
when rapine and sacrilege, and bribery, and Covetousness, and Rebellion was in
the heart. The Devil is never more a Devil then when he puts on the shape of an
Angel 2 Cor. 11. 14. 1 Kings 21. 9
of light. And it was the height of Jezabels impiety, that she sanctified a
fast, and counterfeited Religion to hide her Bloodshed and Perjury, and
Injustice and Rapine. By this the sinner gains him not only security, but
Reputation to his highest crimes, and Multitudes to follow him. And this makes
Hypocrisy, of all others, to be the most hateful thing to God; and our
Savior so often and so passionately to cry out, Woe unto you Scribes and
Pharisees, Mat. 11. 13, 14, 15.
Hyppocrites.

The Prophet excellently describes the Nature and Property of this Vice, under
the Metaphor of Tin.

For first, Tin is very Ex stanno va^a ^omestica ducta in mensaru^ usu
argent^is fulgor^ comparantur C^mbden. Britan. in Cornub. Quamvis autem stannum
aemuletur quodammodo ^rgenti splendorem, tamen long est melius and ab igne
magis exeditur* Magir. ^hvs l. 5. c. 1. in comment 1. Convenit argentum cum
stanno in albedine, magis tamen album est, quoniam ipsius terrestre est magis
^enue, magis lotum, ae ^^gis digestum. Phil^p Mocenici univers. Institut.
contemp 4. p. 2 c 6. p 334. Propter ^ruditatem and volatilitatem dicitur
imperfectum: vere quidem cum incoctum ratione cruditatis imperfectum dici
mereatur. P. Io. Fabri Panchym. vol. 2. l. 4. sect. 7, c. 27.
like to Silver in color, though i^ has nothing of the substance of it: so
the Apostle tells us of Hypocrites, that they have the form of Godliness, but
deny the power of it, 2 Timothy 3. 5.

Secondly, the Naturalists tell us that Tin is never Stannum differt ab albo
plumbo, quod hoc per se oritur, illud autem semper cum argento. Magir. loc.
citato. Invenitur and in aurariis metallis, quae elotia vocant Plin. Not his^.
l* ^4 c. 16. Plumbum aut sua provenit vena nec quicqu^m ^lind ex se parit, au^
cum arg^nto nascitur, mistisque venis conflatur. Ejus, qui primus fluit in
fornacibus liquor, stannum appellatur; qui secundus, argentum. Plin. ibid.
found to grow by it self as all other Metals do, but only in Mines of Gold
and Silver: so the Hypocrite will never put on the shape of devotion among a
company of Atheists. He will be sure to act his part to the purpose, where the
true religion is professed; there he is a Pharisee to the height; still at his
Esaias 65. 5.
touch me not, I am holier then thou, there and in the Luke 18. 10, 11, 12.
Temple, still at his Lord I thank thee I am not as other men, no not as this
Publican, though never so humble and penitently devout.

Thirdly they observe, that Tin by reason of the thinness, and rarity of the
Constat stannum substantia rariore, and minus excocta; quare -- and liquores
subtiliores transmittit, ut vinum destillatum, and medicamenta pretiosa.
Magirus loc. citat.
substance, will not hold spiritous bodies, and that precious oils and rich
spirits evaporate away through it: so though the Hypocrite pretend much to the
spirit, yet the rich graces of the spirit dwell not in him. Saint Jude will
tell you that these mockers walking after their own ungodly lusts, separate
Jude verse. 19.
themselves having not the spirit.

Fourthly, the Mineralists observe that Tin is of a Stannum balbutientem
complexionem habet, caeteris metallis admixtum ea similiter balbu. tire facit,
ab illisque ductibilitatem aufert. Mocenicus loc. citat.

Tin is said being mixed with gold and silver, to make them harder or shorter
and more brittle. Assembl. notes in loc.

Plumbum inimicitiam gerit cum omnibus metallis, praesertim cum sit album,
auroque and argento vel centesima part additum, fragilia ea reddit. Magir.
loc. citat.


stubborn nature, and that if mixed with gold or silver, it makes them harder
and less ductile and pliable; but apt to cracks and flaws; more short, and
brittle. And S. Jude and S. Peter and S. Paul will tell you that the Hypocrite
is never good subject, but one that Jude v. 8. 2 Pet. 2. 10.
despises dominion, and speaks evil of dignities; that they are 2 Timothy 3. 4.
Traitors, heady, high minded, that though they know not how to rule; yet less
know how to obey, 2 Timothy 3. 6, 7, 8. 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2, 3, 18, 19.
crumbling the Church and State into Schisms and Factions, making the People
hard-hearted, and uncharitable, and disobedient and stubborn.

Fifthly, they that write of weights Stannum est metallorum omnium levissimum,
sicut aurum gravissimum, ex experientiis Nic. Tartaleae in appendice ad lib*
Jordani de Ponderofitate and Francisci Euxei Parisiensis. Brerewood. de ponder.
and pret. c. 23.

Stannum -- est facillimae fusionis and sub malleo facilis extensionis -- --
Copia humidi, and viscosi aeris and aquae -- -- * effi^i^ effusionem facilem
and extensionem. P. Jo. Fabr. Panchym Vol. 2. l. 4. sect. 7. c. 27. vid.
Mocenicum loc. citat.


and measures tell us, that Tin is the most light and fluid metal of all; and
S. Jude observes of the pretenders to Godliness, that they are of an aerie
flitting complexion, waves of the sea, foming out their own shame, wandering
Stars, Clouds without water, carried about with every wind of Doctrine, v. 19.
ever learning, as S. Paul speaks, but never coming to the knowledge of the
Truth. 2 Timothy 3. 7. He can be Pharisee, Saducee, Gaulonite, Herodian, any
thing. The double minded man is unstable in all his ways. S. James 1. 8. it is
no matter what the religion be, if it will serve his advantage. And if he can
make a Trade of Godliness, you shall be sure to have enough of the form, though
he denies the power of it.

For Sixthly, it is observed that Tin has this property, that it will cleave to
any Metal; Vasa non solum ex re domestica in cisternas, caldaria, lebetes,
despumatoria, sed etiam arma e re bellica, ut manubria sive capulos gladiorum
and sicarum, parmas, and thoraces, sive ex ferro; aut chalybe, sive ex aere,
aut cupro conficta Stanno obducimus etc. Angel. Sal. Oper. Chymic. in sept.
Planet. Ter. Spagyr* recens. c. de stanno. p. 119.
Gold, Silver, Brass, Iron, Lead, indeed it matters not what, if you dress with
Tallow, or Rosin, or any other fat or unctious body; and then it will be sure
to cleave so fast there will be no ungluing it it again, till you bring it to
the Jungi inter se plumbum nigrum sine albo non potest, nec hoc fine oleo*
Plin. Not. hist. l. 34. c. 16*
Stannum est facillin^ae fusionis -- nam abundantia humidi efficit effusionem
facilem, -- cum autem crudum sit, and non perfect coctum, ideo non est fixum
and permanens in igue, sed perenni igne and ^orti evaporat, and in auras
convertitur. J. P. Fabr. Panchym. loc. citat. vid. and Mocenic. loc, citat.
fire: such is the pretender of religion, you shall be sure to have him of the
thriving side still: no getting him from thence without fire. And if it once
comes to that pass, if he be but in any danger of that, he melts and drops away
from the Party, whatsoever it be; as soon from the gold, or silver, as the
Brass, or Iron, or Lead, the good, as the bad cause. And therefore says our
Mat. 18. 7.
Savior, it is necessary that offenses (and persecutions) should come; and S.
1 Cor. 11. 19
Paul, that heresies and sects and divisions should come, that they which are
approved (that are gold and silver indeed, and can endure the Fire, and the
Touch) may be made manifest among you. The Hypocrite will be sure to be a
weathercock, a turn-coat, and you may know him by that; and he will never be a
Martyr, for Tin and he cannot endure the Fire. The least danger makes him wagg;
and therefore S. Peter, 2 Pet. 2. 17. 2 Pet. 2. 17.
compares him to clouds, that are carried with a Tempest, and our Savior to
corn sown upon stony ground, Mat. 13. 5, 6, 20, 21.
which though for a while it may in calm and thriving times sprout up, and
flourish, yet no sooner does the scorching summers heat of persecution beat
upon it, but it instantly decays and withers.

Again it is observed that Tin, if it be mixed with Brass and Copper or Silver,
it makes Bell-metal, that is excellent for sound and Noise; indeed only
useful for that: so if hypocrisy and pretense to religion meet with some
subtle crafty dispositions, and of fit and popular Tempers, they are excellent
for Pulpits and Declamations: and with their noise will soon draw whole
Maltitudes together. Their fair speeches and language chain a Nation to their
Tongues, as it is storied of the Gallick Hercules, and make them follow to what
place they please. And therefore says Saint Paul, Now I beseech you brethren,
mark them which cause Romans 16. v. 17, 18.
divisions and offenses contrary to the Doctrine, which ye have learned, and
avoid them. For they that are such, serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their
own belly, and by good words and fair speeches, deceive the hearts of the
simple.

Lastly, it is observed of Tin that it is of a Si dubites an sit venenum in
stanno, quaere ab iis qui embryonem fundunt, ac purgant, aut abiis qui
calcinant stannum, magno cum suo malo dicent: Frigidus, O pueri, fugite hinc,
latet anguis in herba. Angel. sal. op. Chym. loc. citat.
very poisonous nature, infecting the Brains, and distorting the Limbs and
Sinews of those, that melt, and work in it, by a deadly fume, that arises from
it: so it is also true of Hypocrisy, nothing so fatal to the brain and
understanding, as that, corrupting the spirit, distorting the face with strange
seemingly sanctified spasms and convulsions. When ye fast, says our Savior,
be not like the Hypocrites 2 Timothy 3. 5. 6. Mat. 6. 16.
of a sad and mortified countenance: (...), for they rack and crucify, or
vanish into a vizard, or a Fucus, they corrupt and disfigure their faces, that
they may appear to men to fast, and be the only religious, when the heart is
infected with diverse lusts and abominable impieties, which makes them resist
the truth, and become men of corrupt minds, 2 Timothy 3. g.
reprobate concerning the Faith. But you shall know them by their faces, for
they look not as other men.

And therefore since this is the true Nature of Hypocrisy, since the whited
sepulcher hides nothing Mat. 23. 27.
but rottenness and dead men's bones, was it not a great blessing for Jerusalem,
that God now brought them to the Fining Pot? For whatsoever the Fury and the
sharpness of the Flame be, yet since by these God purifies them from the dross
and Tin, and National sins be purged out by National Judgments, there is
mercy even in this Judgment. And though whilst the rod is on our backs, the
Caustic to our wounds, and the Metal in the Flame, the Chastising is not
joyous but Heb. 12. 11.
grievous, Nevertheless afterward it yields the peaceable fruit of
righteousness to them that are exercised thereby, and now being made free from
sin, and become servants to God, we have our fruit unto holiness, and the end
everlasting life. Romans 6. 22.


But especially since God turns his hand upon a Nation, and melts them by
Judgments to purge out the dross and take away the Tin, we should do well to
consider, whether we have answered Gods Artifice and Labor upon us, how we are
bettered by our Judgments, least, if we prove Reprobate silver, he casts us
out of his favor, and reserve us for desolation.

For let us not flatter our selves, beloved -- God has lately turned his hand
upon us, and he never brings National Judgments on a Land, but for National
sins. We have had a long time much dross and Tin in all our holy things.

That you may not think me a Satyrist, behold God loudly proclaims your sin in
your Punishment. Does not Blasting and Meldews in our fields show us, that God
is angry with the Riot of our Tables? Does not he by our late Malignant Fevers
in all places show us, that we are truly Ecclesia Malignantium, all every where
malignant? And does he not send unknown diseases to punish unknown sins?

What dismal noisome pestilences did God not long since send among us, to sweep
away a Multitude of noisome gross impieties? They provoked Psalm. 106. 25.
him to anger with their Inventions, says David, and so the Plague brake in
upon them. And what a multitude of new Inventions had we? in Apparel, in diet,
in building (alas this was nothing!) in our shops, in our Trades, in our
Cities, in our Towns, in our Schools, in our Courts, in our Pulpits, and
Churches, nay in our Parlors and Conventicles too; and all for our Pride, and
our covetousness and lust?

And this made way for the Bloody Horse, War. Revel. 6. 4.
They chose new Gods, then was war in the Gates. Judges 5. verse. 7. And this
was just our case: Much longing and stir about new Religions, and Ceremonies,
and then the War brake in upon us.

And now when destruction overtook us like an armed man, our sins and
debaucheries did multiply with our miseries; execrable and cursed Oaths
outroaring the mouth of the Cannon; Soldiers pouring out their blood and their
wine at the same wound; Oppression, rapine, Murder, Calumny, Perjury of all
sorts, but above all the most damnable Hypocrisy and Lying in the world.

And now triumphantly marches in the Pale Rev. 6. 8.
Horse Famine. We lusted for War, and we had all the Plagues and Miseries of
Want and Devastation that attend it. When Israel would not be contented with
Manna, but they must have blood and flesh too, then says David, he gave them
their desire: but he sent leanness into their souls. Psalm. 106. 16.
And what a Famine of all things instantly came upon us? Unusual blights on our
Corn; and then the poor wanted work, as well as bread, decay of Trade in our
Shops, and of Merchants on the Exchange, of our Ships on our Seas, and our
strengths by Land. Our Gentry wasted, our Nobility degraded; our Universities
ruined; our Clergy vilified, and silenced; our Laws, and Lawgivers and
Parliaments trampled on; and our Kings dethroned, and a new Turkish
Grand-Signoirship built and cemented with their blood. So that now the whole
nation with the Prophet began to cry out My Leanness, my Leanness! Woe un^o Esaias
24. 26.
me! the treacherous dealers have dealt treacherously, yea the treacherous
dealers have dealt very treacherously!

And now we were in the Melting Pot indeed! The fire fell upon all; the dross
and Tin, as well as the Gold and Silver. But all this while we were the worse
for the Founders Art. Our sins increased, and so did Gods Judgments. A great
deal of Zeal in the Pretext, but in the Issue sacrilege, Bloodshed, Devouring
Widows Houses, while for a pretense we made long Prayers. Much ado about
Gifts, and setting Christ upon his Throne, but that we might be his Deputi^s,
and take the houses of God in possession.

And then what was the Issue? we that were not content with a Religion, the
purest and best established in the Christian world, had instantly a thousand
several Sects let in upon us. Our Tin had made our Silver so brittle, that the
more it was beaten, the more it cracked and flawed; and no sooner was one
Faction grown into Power, and began to set up for it self, but instantly
another like a Mushrom in a night, sprung up and pretended greater Purity, and
as they had damned their Predecessors of Antichristianisme and Popery; so did
these by the same Arts ruin those, that had ruined others. Religions every day
multiplied, as the Factions did, till at last we had so many, that many doubted
we had none at all.

And as it was with our Religion, so it was with our Government. God suffered
our best of Princes to be taken from us for our sins: and because we
surfeited with that Plenty and Peace, that his own and Ancestors wisdom, under
God had poured upon us, but we scorned his gracious easy reyne that he had
laid upon our Necks, and like wild, resty horses, that have got the Bitt into
their mouths, kicked to throw off the rider, God then suffered us to be
exercised and ridden by all sorts of Masters; Aristocracy, Democracy,
Oligarchy, Anarchy, Oplarc^^, Tyranny, (though masked under the gracious name
of a Protectorship) the most absolute of any.

By this God exercised and melted us so long, till he made us sensible of our
own Follies; and we had nothing left to pray for, or hope or endeavor, but
only to recall that blessing, we had so unworthily squandred away.

And now to prove whether we were purified indeed, God poured us out of the
Melting Pot, Jer. 3. 7, 14. etc. 31, 18, 19.
and to see whether we truly turned to him, and not to our selves, by a
Miracle, without our own Counsel or Conduct, or Valor or Forces, nay without
a Blow struck, or almost so much as a word spoken, he restored to us our old
Religion, and Laws, and Church Discipline, and State-government, our Judges as
at the first, and our Counselors, as at the beginning, our Magistrates, and
Ministers, and Bishops, and Nobles, and Princes, but above all our good King,
whom we prayed for, we longed for, as the only healer of our Breaches.

And what does he now expect, but that we thankfully embrace his Mercies, and
truly value those blessings? That this Grace of his, which has brought this
Salvation, may teach us, that denying Tit. 2. 11. 12.
ungodliness and worldly lusts, we live godly and righteously and soberly in
this present world, that so we may be called by all Nations round about us, a
Nation of Righteousness, a faithful Nation? And I humbly beseech God, that it
may prove so in the issue.

But I fear me that many, many of us at least, Hos. 7. 16.
are like a deceitful Bow; that we have returned indeed, but not to the most
high that we have not cried Hos. 7. 14.
unto God with our hearts, when we howled upon our Beds, and that we assembled
for Corn and for wine, but not to the most High, as it is in Hosea 7. 14. 16.
For else what means this bleating of the sheep, and 1 Samuel 15, 14.
the oxen that I hear? To what purpose this murmuring and repining at the Kings
Grace and Goodness, and unparalled Act of Mercy? Why are we so unwilling to
forget, and forgive petty private injuries, done unto us by our Brethren, when
God has so wonderfully passed by the gross impieties of the whole Nation, and
so miraculously spared those, as well as our selves, whom we grudge to Pardon?
what means this reviving of our old fears and Jealousies, and Popular
Declamations in our Pulpits and Presses against the Kings evil Counselors,
and the Persecution of the Godly Party that is approaching? the
Antichristianisme and Popery in our Religion, and Discipline, and Liturgy,
first up, and approved by the most eminent P. Martyr. Bucer, Cranmer, Ridley,
Tailor.
Reformers, and then sealed by the blood of the most learned of our Martyrs?
Have we a mind to revive our old Miseries and blood by our old Animosities and
scandals? such which time and experience, and the faith and Patience and
steadfastness of our Confessors have confuted even to any ordinary
understandings?

But consider I beseech you, beloved; will it not be a sad thing, if God after
all this mercy, should say to us as he did to his People in the Prophet Zachary
c. 7. v. 5, 6, 7. When ye fasted and mourned this many years, did ye fast unto
me, even to me? And when ye did eat,, and ye did drink, did you Zach. 7. 5, 6,
^,
not eat for your selves and drink for your selves? Should ye not hear the
words, which the Lord ha^h cried by the Ministry of the former Prophets, When
Jerusalem was inhabited, and in prosperity, and the Cities thereof round about
her?

O then, beloved, in time consider, before it repent God of his Mercies. Esaias
21. 12.
If ye will return, return, return to purpose: to him, not to our selves. If
there be any Contention, let it be to show who is most thankful to God, and
Loyal to the King, who most Zealous against vice in our selves or in others;
who most endeavoring to keep the unity Ephesians. 4. 3. 2 Cor. 7. 1.
of the spirit in the bond of peace, and perfecting holiness in the fear of the
Lord. As God has turned his hand upon us and from us, so let us turn our hands
to him. Since we have been melted by his Judgments, let us by his Grace, and
for his mercy purge out our dross and Tin. Let not this wise Founder lose his
pains and his Art, but let us answer his expectation; you my brethren of the
Clergy, especially, that have been in the very bottom of the Furnace,

Let your Patience, and Meekness, and readiness to forgive, your holy lives and
conversations, and Zeal and diligence in your callings show, that 1 Per. 3. 15.
you did not suffer as evil doers. And though God put you into the Crucible and
Melting Pot, yet it was not your just crimes, but your steadfastness and
Constancy in your adherence to the King and the Laws, and the Primitive
doctrine and discipline of the Church, threw you out of your places and
callings. And if as you have suffered as Confessors, so you shall live as
Confessors too, it shall appear to your very adversaries, that you have been in
the Mel^ing Pot to your advantage, and you shall recover your Reputations as
well as Legal Possessions.

But if any of you justly have suffered as evil doers, though not according to
a due course of Law, let it appear by your future amendment, that you have been
bettered by your sufferings, and though the flames have been sharp, yet they
have purely purged out all your dross, and your Tin.

Then shall God and Men be delighted in you, and Righteousness and Peace break
in upon us like an overflowing mighty stream. Then shall your offerings and
services be acceptable to God, and Moses hands lift up in prayer shall
strengthen the Exodus 17. 11. 12. 13.
hands of our Josuah's and Rulers, and Magistrates, while they lift up the
sword of Justice against the Amalekites. When Phineas the Priest prayed, as
some render it, and Phineas the Magistrate Psalm. 106. 30: (...) Oravit. Paraph
Caldaic. Verse. Syriac. Dijudicavit. Pagnin. Junius.
executed Judgment, as others, then the Plague was stayed.

But, my Lords and Gentleman, the Justices of the Peace, I need not mind you of
your duties, if the Time would give leave. As you have eminently suffered by
the sins of the Nation, so I hope your sense of your miseries, which those
sins have brought upon you, will make you friends to Justice and the Laws,
without any other Monitor. And if as Gods Name is called upon you, so you Psalm.
82. 6.
shall Judge for God too, and carry your selves as in his sight, who still
stands in the Congregation of the Gods, to mark and judge them, then shall it
appear, that you are the Ministers of God to us for good, and that you bear not
the sword in vain. Then shall the People speak of your wisdom, and the
congregation shall show forth your praise; then shall you make them sensible of
the evil of our former Governors, and bless God, that has restored us our
Judges as at the first and our Counselors as at the beginning. And you shall
be the happy Instruments of repairing our Breaches, and building, and
establishing our Jerusalem in Righteousness and Peace, and we shall again be
called a City of Righteousness, a faithful City. Which God of his infinite
mercy grant for Jesus sake Amen.

THE END.

