A Backslider Reproved, AND His Folly made manifest, and his Confusions and
Contradictions Discovered.

In a short Reply to a Book lately published by Robert Cobbet, called A Word to
the Upright; who being turned from the Light, now makes it his work to war
against it, and them that walk in it: But his Weapons are broken, and in his
own snare is he taken.

Written for the Truths sake, by a Servant thereof, known by the Name Stephen
Crisp.

Prove. 10.18. He that hides hatred with lying lips, and he that utters a
slander, is a fool.

Verse. 21. The lips of the Righteous feed many, but Fools die for want of
wisdom.

Chap. 12.2. A good man obtains favor with the Lord, but a man of wicked
devices will be condemn.

Unto which is added, A brief Answer to a Pamphelet, styled, A brief Discovery
of the Laborers in MYSTERY BABYLON.

Printed in the year 1669.

A Back-slider Reproved, and his Folly made manifest, and his Confusions and
Contradictions discovered.
IT is not a new nor strange thing, to see the old Enemy of the Light, viz. the
Prince of Darkness, to be diligent in raising up as high Mountains and Towers
as he can, to keep it from shining; and as he can bring forth no evil to man of
himself, without some Instrument into which he gets an entrance; therefore he
is diligent in persuading and tempting from the Light, even those that have
seen the Appearance of it, and not become so subject to it as they should have
been, whose foolish hearts he darkens, and fills their minds with vain
imaginations, and then are they choice Instruments for his purpose, as bearing
something more of his Image (who himself abode not in the Truth) than others.
And such as these he always spurred on in a blind zeal against the Light, as
that which was most destructive to his and their works of darkness. And among
this sort of Instruments, here is one Robert Cobbet has presented himself as
an enemy to the Doctrine of the Light, though he is indeed but as one of the
meanest and shattredest of that Camp, and has attained to but a small measure
of that subtilty which this Father and Prince of Darkness does use to furnish
his children withal, that are capable to receive it. But however, what he has,
or thinks he has, he has adventured to present to public view; though
indeed it is as a Rod for his own chastisement: and I heartily wish there be so
much sense left in him, that he may feel the smart of it, and may amend and
leave off his folly and blind zeal, and submit to that which comprehends him,
his spirit and work; For I knew a time when he could not have believed that he
should have been led to such a depth of Confusion in opposing the Light as now
he is, though he was never faithful to it as he ought, but sought in his fallen
corruptible wisdom to have comprehended it; but I desire he may yet see a death
upon that which has unto this day, kept his soul in death and darkness; and in
order thereunto, and for the Truths sake, I have written these few lines,
briefly to show him and others his Confusions, Contradictions and Absurdities;
or at least a few of those many which he has uttered, and Printed in his Book,
called, A Word to the Upright, etc. And therefore, Reader, take notice, that
after his Book called, God's Truth attested, was made public, and something
was written in Answer thereto, showing him how he contradicted himself and the
Scriptures too, in a seeming Reply thereto, he published this, called, A Word
to the Upright, which, he says, is to establish them in these erring days,
and to keep the young sprouts of the Nation from corruption in Opinion; which
whether R. C. has written a piece that is likely to prove an establishing of
the upright from Error, or to prevent the young sprouts from corruption in
principle or opinion, will more appear anon, to the considerate Reader, when he
has rightly weighed the Consequences of letting in all his Doctrines for
truth, whether it will not render them more like to distracted men, than
principl'd Christians.

At my first sight of this Book, it rose in my heart to write something in
Answer to it, and to take off the reproach which he has endeavored to cast
upon the blessed Truth and Way of God which he has turned his back upon; but
when I came to make a diligent search into the matter, I found much of that
labor spared, the most part of his Doctrines being answered and confuted by
himself, in the same Book, so that it might have been called, Robert Cobbet
answering and confuting Robert Cobbet, as will appear in this ensuing rehearsal
of his Doctrines and Principles.

And therefore now let the Upright, to whom he writes, consider what he
propounds to them as an establishment against the errors of these erring days.

And first as to the Light in the Conscience, he says, page 22. In that the
Light is a sparkling glimpse in the Soul, does convince the Soul of what is
done amiss, which being discerned by the Soul, serves for a Director of the
Soul to Christ Jesus, where only lies its help. And in his 10th page says,
That the Soul has knowledge from this Light to eschew evil, and do good; in
the doing of either of which, stands his (...) peace. And in his 22 page says,
That this Spirit or Light in man, is the candle of the Lord that searches the
innermost parts of the belly. And in his 4 page faith, Did not this Light in
thy Conscience condemn thee of all that ever thou did before the day of God
brake forth? And in his 3 page says, That the end of Christ's coming was to
beget unto Communion with the Father and himself, by giving them his life,
which is man's Light, which (my Brethren) being our Salvation, we have it by
him who is our Savior Jesus Christ. And in his 11 page says, The Light serves
to condemn for unbelief, and to justify the Creature in his obedience of
Faith, etc.

So by this time we see what a large testimony R. C. has born to the Light in
the Conscience and to its original; to wit, the Life of Jesus, and to its
power, efficacy, and influence; and also to the effects that follow both the
obedient and disobedient; as woe and peace, condemnation and justification, and
how it is the Souls director unto Christ, and that by which the Soul obtains
the knowledge of what is good, and communion, etc.

Now will or can any, that does take in and receive this Doctrine from R.C.
doubt or question his being a friend to the Light, and to the Quakers too,
seeing he has so strongly asserted their Principle, with so many
illustrations? Well, suppose that now thou do believe R.C. in these things,
and be settled in thy mind that he has written the truth, and so come to find a
need of loving and obeying this Light in thy Conscience; which he further
affirms in the 21 page thus, The Word that was God by which all things was
made; in him was Life, and that Life was the Light of men, and he it is that
lights every man that comes into the world. I say, if thou do come to be
settled thus in these erring days (as he calls them) and do come to have an
esteem of the Light according as R.C. has written; my Counsel is unto thee,
that if R. C. or any else, shall deny this Doctrine again, and write or speak
against it, that thou believe them not, but keep single to this truth and thou
shall find the good effects of it, beyond what he has or can declare; yet thus
far R. C. has against his will witnessed to the truth. Now mark what follows
as to this Doctrine, that R. C. may sufficiently appear to confute himself; He
says in the 22 page, The Light in the Conscience cannot lead the followers of
its dictates further than its own center, which is the center of nature; and
its power felt, but the power of the center of nature; and that man's internal
Light has no more power to give Salvation than the Soul has to save its self,
as in the same page; and that the sinking down into it for a manifestation of
the Salvation that came by grace in Christ, is a Doctrine that turns away the
Creature from Christ the Redeemer to a property of nature, wherein can be no
saving health, as in page 10. And again, in the same page he says, The Light
in the Conscience being a property in man, as man is a creature, its office in
the Soul is not appointed to give Salvation. And in the 21 page he says,
Christ the Word that makes all things, is not the Light; and although he be
goodness it self, and sends forth his love (to wit) his life, which shed in the
heart, is a Light which he calls his Spirit, which Light is not Christ though
of his nature. And in the 5 page says, That the spirit of man is of the
principle of light, and is a spark of that nature, which having lost its life
by the transgression of the man to God, is dead, etc.

Now by this time where is the settlements for the young sprouts of the Nation?
who must (if they will believe R. C.) believe that the Light in Conscience is
to lead to Christ, and yet can lead no further than the center of Nature; and
that it is Salvation, and has power to minister woe and peace, to justify or
condemn; and now must believe it can do neither, it being but a property of
Nature, and dead to God: and must believe that the Light of men, is the Life
and Christ; and now must believe that though this Light is his Life, and is his
Spirit, and of his Nature, yet it is not He. Oh horrible blindness and
sottishness! Is this the way to settle People, for such double-minded and
double-tongued Hypocrites to take in hand to doctrinate them thus backward and
forward, to believe and deny the same thing, and all in one hours time?

But one thing more I have to note, which R. C. goes about to settle us in, in
these erring times, about what we should and ought to believe of Christ, and
what he is that is the Savior: in which mark; First he affirms in the 3d page,
That Christ is everlasting as he is the Word; and in the 16 page says, The
Seed is Christ, to whom the Covenant was made by God, as written, My Covenant
shall be with thee, and with thy seed, and he is Lord and Savior: And in page
17. he quotes the saying of Christ, They have believed that I came down from
thee. So here thou may see who R.C. acknowledges to be the Savior, even the
Seed of Promise, with which God's Covenant stands for ever, which Seed came
down from God, etc. So this is good sound Doctrine according to Scripture; but
that thou may be unsettled again from this: R. C. says again in the 18 page,
That the Savior is in Nature and Creaturality like him; and that the Seed that
broke the Serpents head is not something that this R.C. is not, as he is nature
and creature, but is the off spring of Adam, consisting as he does: and says
in his 12 page, the body was Christ: and in his 6 page, Behold I show you a
Mystery, you men in the clouds, Christ being the product of the Holy Ghost to a
coagulated substance from the properties of Man in Mary. And in the 18 page
says, Being out of doubt that the Soul of Christ was of and from the
properties of nature and creature, made by generation of the properties of
Mary, is that Seed God promised to break the Serpents head: and in the 19 page,
Is it not the Body of Christ by which we are reconciled unto God? yes verily.

So now let all People see if this man be like to settle any, and to keep the
young sprouts from being deceived, who is thus confused himself; one while
telling it is the Seed that is the Savior, and the everlasting Word of God,
and he which came down from God, etc. and then presently saying it is a thing
produced, a thing formed of the properties of man, a body that reconciles, a
coagulated substance, a thing in nature like him himself, consisting as he does
both in kind and substance; and much suchlike, as may be seen more at large in
his Book.

Well, if R. C. had known Christ Jesus, and the Power of his Death and
Resurrection, he had not written so confusedly; for then he had known the
virtue of the Seed, and the service of Body and Soul too, and had known the
offering to be made by the eternal Spirit, and then he would not have said that
it was the body only that reconciled, or that the body only was Christ, seeing
that the Body without the Spirit is dead, and that could not give life; but the
Son of God that took the body, has life in himself, and can give life to them
that believe, and was, and is, and is to come; and he is in the Faithful, and
they are in him and in his body, bone of it, and flesh of it; and the life
which they live is by faith in him, and not by talk of him. But these things
R.C. is a stranger to, and so imagines about him, and intrudes into things
which he has not seen, and is vainly puffed up in a fleshly mind, and fleshly
knowledge which is for judgment; for this jumble and confusion is the only way
to bring into Atheism indeed, if there were no better Asserters of the Doctrine
of Christianity then he is. But let all sober People wait to feel a measure of
that life and fullness that dwelt in that Body of Jesus, for which it was
prepared, that so they may by the power of that Life be settled in the
knowledge of the Savior Jesus, and may daily wait for his Appearance to save;
for he ever lives and is ever needed, and none are safe but under the
government of his Spirit. Now as to what substance he was of, R. C. says in
his 6th page, His substance was from the properties of man in Mary: but in the
same page he says again, That the body of our Lord was of an heavenly
substance. And in his other Book says, He is the Son from the substance of the
Father; and was, he says, of the nature of heaven. So then the properties of
Man in Mary was heavenly substance, of the nature of heaven, or else R. C. is
here unsettled, and in error and darkness himself; nay that which is more, R.
C. himself must be of this heavenly substance, this nature of heaven; for he
says, Christ consisted as he does. But lest ye should believe what he says
about the heavenly Nature, he says, his soul was made by generation of the
properties of Mary. R. C. will thou not blush at these things when thou reviews
them?

And then for the form of this substance, he says page 8. That while he there
stood, differed nothing from the form of a servant: but in the 6 page he says,
That as he was thus circumscribed, and thus consisted of Soul, Body and Spirit,
he was that form of God.

How now R.C. What, is the form of a servant, and the form of God all one? And
is the form of God a circumscribed form? Have not thou learned this of Lodow.
Muggleton, that false witness and notorious blasphemer? (that says God is but
the bigness and compass of a man) whose steps thou art treading, and whose end
will be thy end, except thou repent.

And then again concerning the Blood that saves and does away sin; hear what R.
C. in his 11 page says, My Brethren, you are bought with a Price, not of blood
of Bulls, and Goats, nor Heifers of a year old, but by the Blood of God. But in
his 13 page he is of another opinion, and says quite contrary; these are his
words, viz. Which blood being the blood of his humanity, as he was creature,
was that which did with God expiate for sin. So now which of these two
Doctrines shall we believe, that we are saved by the blood of God, or blood of
the Humanity? or shall we suppose them to be both one, and so God to be humane,
and so the Doctrines indifferent?

R. C. will do well to clear up these things, or own his condemnation upon his
folly and presumption; for its unlike he should ever be reconciled to the
People of God who is so at odds in himself in this manner. Alas Robert! Do
thou not yet see whither thou art gone by going from the Light, and now
staggers and reels, and do not know whither thou go? Oh! that a day may be
yet found for thee and thine, and that thou may come to bow down to that,
which thou now kick'st and spurn'st against.

And in page 21 thou say, If the Light in Conscience be Christ, then so many
men as are in the world, so many Christ's. Why so, Robert, Have not thou thy
self answered this in confessing that one Christ has with his Life served to
lighten every man that comes into the world, and what need is there then for
every man to have a distinct Christ, seeing he is the Christ of God thou say
that lightens them all. And thou say in this same page, That Christ, as he
is the Word and Maker of all things, is not the Light in Conscience; but in the
next line or two thou say, But the Word that was God, etc. in him was Life,
and the Life is the Light of men, and he lightens every man. How do thou mean
by this? Do thou not mean that he lightens them in their Consciences? Or
where else?

And as to the Soul of Man thou say in thy 4 page, That it is a spark of
God's eternal Nature, coagulated into a Spiritual substance for a center of his
insensitive life; and as thus compacted is a creature of an eternal being, of
an own self-subsisting consistency.

Answ. R.C. has here described a creature that subsists of its self contrary
to the Scripture, that says all things are upheld by the Word; and besides
this eternal creature, as he calls it, this spark of God's eternal Nature, this
coagulated substance (he says) was to be a center for God's insensitive life.
What Robert! Had it not a center before? But if this coagulated substance
subsists of it self, then not by the life that centers in it; and if the Soul
be a spark of God's nature, how comes it to be created? And if it be his
nature, how comes it to be corrupted in the life time as thou say it is? and
how can a spark of God's eternal nature let into its self the poison of the
Serpent and so die? Where is its own self-subsistency now? Is this thy
explaining the matter? Or, where is its being a center for that insensitive
Life of God? And further in thy 5th page thou say, This spark, this
coagulated substance, this own self-subsistency dies: and in another place
speak of its perishing; and yet talks of an eternal creature. But R. C. what
life of time is that which corrupts the soul, and how came it to have its abode
in an infectious life of time, seeing its an eternal creature as thou say?
But what man's Soul, or the Soul of Jesus either is, thou know not; for if
thou had, thou would not have thus befooled thy self, to say man's Soul was
a spark of God's eternal nature, and yet say the Soul of Christ was but of the
properties of nature made by generation; nor yet have affirmed that to be the
Seed of Promise which came by generation of, and from the properties of Mary:
Is not that the Seed of Promise mentioned in Isa. 9.6. who is called, The
Mighty God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace? And what is Mary the
Mother of God? This will please the Papists well; and is this the way to settle
Christians, and preserve the young sprouts of the Nation from corruption? And
where is thy Scripture to prove that Jesus, the Savior, was created, as in thy
6 page thou say? But Oh! this darkness and confusion that thou may see it,
and be ashamed of it.

Again Robert Cobbet, in his 26 page, says in plain words, That Christ and his
Spirit are not one: and his Argument is, That Christ said, I go away, but I
will send you a Comforter. Which Argument is sufficient to prove, that Christ,
the Messiah and Savior, is one with the Spirit of Truth, and not distinct. If
one should ask R. C. how many were mentioned in that text, where he says, He
that now is with you, shall be in you; would he answer that there was more than
one He; if not, then here is no more (to wit) Christ and his Spirit which
eternally are one.

But that he may sufficiently manifest his folly, he tells us in the same 26
page, That the Father, the Word, and the Spirit, are all One, both in respect
of consent in their Testimonies, and also in respect of their eternity of
being; so which of these shall we believe? that Christ and his Spirit are One,
or that they are not One? R. C. will do well to tell People which he will stand
by.

And for R. Cobbet's pleading or hoping, That the Powers will keep up a Charity
to us, upon the account that thousands of us do (he hopes) believe his
narrative of God; and his desire altering the matter for a corporal form into a
nature for production of creatures, speaking forth the modal by his word, etc.
page 26. Truly we need not R. C. to set forth an account of our Faith and
Belief in these things, neither can we own it, or him; for if we should, we
should soon be brought under the judgment both of God and Man. And for his
pleading, That in the soundest Bodies, there sometimes breaks forth a Boil.
Truly if he aims at us by this Body (as I think he does) we do confess, that so
far as ever he was of us, so far he is that Boil which we confess is now
broken forth: but they that know him in particular, know how little he was of
us, and how little while he professed himself to be of us; so his breaking-out
and running like a boil or sore, the corrupt matter that was in him, is no
great disparagement to the Body; for the body is sounder without him than with
him: and whilst he was amongst us, he was often breaking out with his whimseys
and imaginations, so that he became naucious unto us, but not in so gross a
manner as now.

And for R. C. saying, That some of us knew that he counted our language but a
cant language. We know that from the first of his coming among us, he was far
enough from our language or life either; but it is no great matter for him to
call our Language a Cant, who replies to our words thus, viz. when we said, The
Lord is one, and his Name one; he answers, Friends, do not caper, as in his 2d
page. And he says in his 31 page, That he is no Quaker; of which, all that
ever saw or heard any thing of the Quakers Books or Doctrines, will bear him
witness; for never did Quaker appear in such a heap of confusion as R. C. has
done; and yet that malicious saying of his in this 31 page, That to be a
Quaker, is to deny his Lord and Master, God will judge him for; if by Lord and
Master he means the Lord Jesus Christ, as I think he does. But he that really
and truly is his Lord, viz. the Prince of the air that rules in the hearts of
such disobedient Children and Apostates as he is; He, I confess, he must deny
more than ever yet he has done, before he can become a Quaker, or have unity
with them, who are scornfully so called.

But why does R. C. in his 30 page come with a kiss, Judas-like, and say,
Brethren, I will ask you a question, etc. when as the matter he intends there
to insinuate to his Reader is, That we deny that Christ that was born of the
Virgin Mary, to be Christ: Is not this on purpose to betray us, and beguile his
Reader? and that with a Lie; for we never yet denied him that was born of the
Virgin Mary, and suffered under Pontius Pilato, to be the Lord and Savior. But
indeed we never did believe him to be produced by coagulation as R.C. does; nor
by generation of and from the properties of Man in Mary; for then some might
have declared his generation, which the Scripture says, Who can do? And
besides, we believe him to be the Eternal Son of God. But if R. Cobbet's
Doctrine be true, then he was not before Mary; but his ignorance of Christ is
sufficiently manifested to all that have an eye opened.

And as to his saying, That the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 15.1, 2, 3. That the
Sufferings of Christ is the Power of God and Gospel, by which we are saved:
That Is false, and a belying the Apostle and Scripture too: for all that reads
the text may see, that the Apostle speaks of his Sufferings but as one part of
many of that Gospel which he had preached; but it was the Resurrection of
Christ he most of all pointed at, as the principal thing, they must come to
feel the power of; as in verse. 12.

Many more of R. Cobbet's Absurdities and Contradictions I might note down, as
also those noted in the Answer to his first Book, which yet remains unanswered,
nor so much as an attempt made thereof; he (it may be) dispairs of ever
reconciling them in the sight of rational men: But these, at present, may
satisfy the ingenious Reader, what spirit it is in Robert Cobbet, that has
taken in hand to settle People in these erring days, and to preserve the young
sprouts of the Nation from corruption. And so let Robert Cobbet mind (if he
writes again) to keep more within the bounds of moderation, and not to let his
envy against the Light, so captivate his reason, as to bereave him of the use
of it, as it has done; for truly is that Scripture fulfilled in him, He that
walks in darkness slumbleth, and knows not whither he goes.

Concerning the Light that lights every one that comes into the world, what
it is, and what it is not, as Robert Cobbet says.
Page 1. WHich Doctrine of the Light in Conscience, had it been kept in its
office, as a Schoolmaster, to bring unto Christ, had been a Doctrine of good
Morallity. Page 22. BE not deceived, the Light in Conscience cannot lead the
followers of its dictates further then its own center, which is the center of
nature and its power felt, but the power of the center of nature. Page 3. I
deny not, but the ends of the coming of the Lord into the world, was to beget
his Children into fellowship, by communion with his Father and Himself, by
giving to them his Life, which is man's Light, which (my Brethren) being our
Salvation, etc. P. 22. So hence I conclude that the spirit of man being his
internal light, has no more power to give Salvation to the soul, than the soul
has to save its self, P. 10. But a light of reason man has, as man is a
rational creature, from which, his light has knowledge of good and bad; as
also knowledge from his light to eschew evil, and to do good; in the doing
either of which, stands his woe or peace. P. 10. Therefore the light in man,
being but the light of man, as man is a rational creature, sinking into it for
the manifestation of the Salvation that comes from Grace by Covenant from God,
by Jesus Christ, is a Doctrine that turns away the creature from Christ the
Redeemer to a property of Nature, wherein can be no saving health. Page 22. But
in that the light is a sparkling glimpse in the soul, does convince the soul of
what is done amiss, which discerned by the soul, serves for a Director to the
soul to Christ, where only lies its help; which Spirit, or Light in man, is the
Candle of the Lord, which searches the innermost parts of the belly, and comes
down with every man by generation from Adam. Page 10. The Light in Conscience
being a property in man, as man is a creature; its office in the soul is not
appointed to give Salvation. P. 21. Christ, as he is the Word and Maker of all
things, is not the Light in Conscience. P. 21. The Word being goodness its
self, sends forth his Love (to wit) his Life, which shed in the heart, is to it
a light, and this he calls his Spirit, which light is not Christ, though of his
nature. P. 11. The light serves but to condemn for unbelief, or to justify the
creature in his obedience of faith. P. 5. The spirit of man, being of the
principle of light, is a creatural spirit from the principle of light, as a
spark of that nature, which having lost its life, by the transgression of the
man, to God is dead P. 21. But the Word which was God, by which all things were
made, in him was Life, and that Life was the Light of men, and he it is that
lights every man that comes into the world. P. 11. If the light in
Conscience be Christ, then may Christ be darkness. P. 4. Did not this Light in
thy Conscience condemn thee of all that ever thou did, before the day of God
brake forth?

Concerning Christ, his Body, Soul and Blood, and what he is, and is not, as R.
C. says.
Page 3. HE is the everlasting Word, but as he was the Man Christ, he was in
time. Page 5. AND the Soul of Christ, that was of and from the soul-like
properties of man's nature, as Christ consists personally from his Mother Mary.
P. 6. Which body of our Lord being of a heavenly substance, as it was
circumscribed was the body of his personality that he gave for an Offering for
the ransom of the World, which body being of the nature of heaven. Thus have I
given you an account of Jesus his Body, Soul, and Spirit; who as he thus
consisted, was that form of God, and express image of his Fathers substance. P.
6. Behold I show you a Mystery ye men in the clouds; Christ being the Product
of the Holy Ghost, to a coagulated substance from the property of man in Mary.
P. 8. Who while there stood, differed nothing from the form of a Servant. P.
12. Which Body was Christ. P. 7. We have proved before the personality of
Christ, and that he was the express Image of God in his Person. P. 17. He came
of Abraham's lineage, of the loins of Mary, begotten by the Holy Ghost of his
Mother Mary, for the Savior. P. 16. The Seed is Christ, to whom the Covenant
was made by God, as written, My Covenant shall be with thee, and with thy seed,
etc. He is Lord and Savior. P. 18. That the Seed which is the Savior, is
Christ in Person; for if he had not been Creature of Soul and Spirit as I am,
as I am Nature it had not availed me: but the Seed that broke the Serpents
head, is not some strange thing that I am not, as I am creature, but of kind
and substance as I am, he being made so from the nature of Mary, by which she
became creature, as the Offspring of Adam, of Soul and Spirit consisting as do
I. P. 17. They have believed that I came down from thee. P. 18. Being out of
doubt that the Soul of Christ was of and from the properties of nature and
creature, made by generation of the properties of Mary, is that Seed that God
promised to send to break the Serpents head. P. 19. This Christ being born of
Mary, proceeded from David and Abraham, according to the Line of the Covenant,
Christ coming from Mary, and God forming himself in and with that Body Christ;
for its Savior to Man was the Power to Christ, by which Christ brought forth
man's Salvation; but could he, or did he without the Body of Christ, reconcile?
P. 19. Is it not the Body of Christ by which we are reconciled unto God? yes
verily. P. 11. My Brethren, you are bought with a Price, not of blood of Bulls,
and Goats, nor Heifers of a year old, but by the Blood of God. P. 13. Which
Blood being the Blood of his Humanity, as he was Creature, was that that did
with God expiate for sin.

THE END.
THE HARLOTS VAIL Rent, AND Her Impudency rebuked. In a short ANSWER to one
Elizabeth Atkinson her Babylons Brat against the People called Quakers.
Friend Eliz. Atkinson,
WE have taken some notice of thy abusive slanderous Pamphlet against the
Quakers, whom thou have confessed to have walked nine years amongst: And is
this the fruit of thy nine years Travel? A pack of Lies, Feignedness, and
Deceit, which discovers more Impudency, than Modesty or Sobriety on thy part;
as also apparent Nonsense and Contradictions to thy self, as will briefly
appear in what follows; though blasphemously and impudently thou fatherest thy
Work upon the constraint of the Love of God: But thou have been led by a lying
spirit to blaspheme against the Truth, nine years professed by thee; and yet
thou art fain to make use of many words and phrases thou have learned amongst
the Quakers, though to a wicked end, and to thy own confusion. Thou now
pretendest to declare against our Principles and Practice; but what thou say
as to our Principles, reaches very few of them; but the Light within chiefly,
thou, in thy darkness, smitest against, though to the discovery of thine own
folly and contradiction, as will appear.

And as to practice, thou say, Those that for a time practiced Honesty in
their Callings, are now turned Deceivers; and those that formerly were content
with their own Wives, are now turned Adulterers, lusting after other men's, etc.

We answer, Both these Accusations are general, and do reflect upon all of us
that have practiced Honesty, who are now accused with Dishonesty and Adultery;
wherein thou have appeared both impudent and wicked, thus to bring forth a
general charge to asperse a whole Body, whose Principle is against all such
Abominations, and against all unrighteousness; and herein our Principle is
justified, as that which led to practice Honesty, and to live in Chastity and
Faithfulness to our own Relations; and now however any have apostatized from,
or abused this Principle of Truth and Righteousness amongst us, their falling
is not chargeable upon the Principle, for the Truth stands entire still, and
the offenders must bear their own burdens. Our righteous Principle is not to
be accused, either because Eliz. Atkinson or R. Cobbet, or others, have turned
their backs of it, after so many years being amongst us: If any should revile
the Quakers, because she is turned treacherously against them, in a light airy
spirit, with a parcel of fained expressions, this were unjust in them, as well
as in her. It were a great wickedness for any to accuse the true Prophets or
Apostles, because of the false Prophets and false Apostles that rose up against
them, who turned from the Counsel of God and Truth. And it is as wicked in E.
A. to accuse the people of God now, because probably she knows of some
disorderly persons that walk not according to the Principle and Doctrine of
Godliness which we have received; as it is probable she being false and perfidious
her self, might have more knowledge of (or intimacy with) such disobedient and
disorderly Spirits and Walkers than some of us have. But however, her
accusation being general, it is most unjust and impudent. For first, We are not
only principled against all wickedness, filthiness, and abominations, as that
of Cheating, using Deceit and Adultery, with all other wickedness, which we
Judge and Testify against, both in the spirit and practice, and such as are
guilty, etc. But secondly, We also endeavor, as much as in us lies, to clear
the Truth and Gods people of all such scandals, and of all such as give any
occasion thereof; by bringing just Reproof and Judgment upon the Offenders,
and endeavoring to suppress and cast out that loose, disobedient, and unclean
mind and spirit, which either does tempt or lead any into disorders or
wickedness: So that indeed a modest woman or person would have been ashamed to
publish such a general Charge of wickedness and impiety against us, as
thousands that are not of us, know many of us to be both of better spirits and
principles, than in the least to countenance or admit of such gross wickedness
as Cheating or Adultery; under which she has included many innocent persons:
for her words [ Those that practiced Honesty, and those that were contented
with their own Wives, etc.] are general terms, and may be construed that all
amongst us that were so, are now contrary, for here is no exception made. Who
but an impudent person would thus grossly and slanderously have endeavored to
have defamed a people whom she confesses to have walked nine years amongst,
wherein she has brought Reproach upon her self.

And now ( E. A.) what have thou against our principles, more than that thou
tellst us, That we preached a Light within that showed you good and evil, and
that thou knew was in thee: (So herein thou knew the Truth was preached amongst
us.) And that we said if you would mind that, it would lead you out of all
evil: Thus (say thou) we set you to feed upon the Tree of Knowledge, which
indeed was good, but not for food; but the subtle twining Serpent called it
the Tree of Life, (thou say:) Thus by hearkening unto them, wast thou
deluded and blinded, to forsake thy first Love, etc.

Thus like a silly ignorant Woman, perverted with prejudice, have thou
blasphemously accused the Light, as being but the Tree of Knowledge; and
perverted the Truth, which directed thee to it, as being but the subtilty and
delusion of the Serpent, and yet thou knows such a Light was in thee as showed
thee Good and Evil; which Light, had thou lived and waited in it, would have
kept thee out of evil and backsliding which thou art fallen into. Its showing
the evil, was, that thou might forsake sin and evil, and not that thou
might either feed upon it, or upon the knowledge of the evil, by partaking
thereof. Did not the Light give the Saints a discerning between Good and Evil?
And things that are reproved, are manifested by the Light; and the Light that
did shine in their hearts gave them the knowledge of the glory of God in the
face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4. and Christ said, Believe in the Light, that you
may be the Children of the Light; and this was not the Serpent that thus
directed, as blasphemously thy words import, against the Light and the Ministry
of Truth amongst us, which directs to it. But we need not say much in answer to
such silly ignorant sottish blasphemous stuff, as thou have here uttered: for
like a drunken person, thou have reeled and staggered both ways, and have
sufficiently answered and confuted thy self in what follows in thy own words,
on the behalf of the Light within.

As in page 2. thou say in the beginning, God made the World by Christ the
Word, and the bright shining of his Life was the Light of Men; and this Christ
is indeed the true Light that enlightens every one that comes into the World;
and by this Light Man knew the Will of his Maker; but being disobedient
thereunto, he fell into the wrath of God, etc.

Here take notice, That the Life of Christ was the Light of Men, and this was
not the forbidden Fruit: And secondly, That every one that comes into the World
is enlightened by Christ: Thirdly, That Man's disobedience to the Light, was his
Fall; and this disobedience the Serpent led into; therefore it is not the
Serpent nor his delusion that directs people to the Light within, as
blasphemously and contradictorily thou have implied.

Again, Thou confessest that Christ came to be a Sacrifice for sin for the
whole World, if they will believe in him; and that these things by the Light
within are showed to us: (By which thou have justified the Quakers Doctrine,
though to thy own confusion.) And in p. 3. thou adds, The Light within is but
the manifestation of him that is the Savior: A large confession! And must not
people look to the manifestation of their Savior, or that which shows them
Christ to be a Sacrifice for sin?

Again, Thou say we deny the Fountain, because we have had a little taste
from the Stream; and tells of the Plant being refreshed by the beams of the Sun.

So here again thou have falsely charged us, but justified our Principle: for in
thy setting thy Light as the Stream, and as the Sunbeams, thou have
contradicted thy former accusation against it: for they that follow the Stream,
do not deny the Fountain which it leads to; neither is the virtue of the Sun
denied, where its Beams or Rays are felt and acknowledged; for the Suns virtue
and influence is felt in the Beams.

Again, P. 4. thou confessest the Light within, which shows good and evil, to
be a glance from him who came to be Salvation: And also, that we may refresh
our thirsty Souls in the Stream, but we must go unto the Fountain to be
cleansed, in the City of God, etc.

So then, if the Light within be this refreshing Stream, it is not the Tree of
knowledge forbidden, neither are we forbidden to drink of the Stream, for it
comes from the Fountain: and surely people may wash in the Stream. And why do
thou suppose the Stream not to be in the City? Whereas there is a River the
Streams whereof make glad (or refresh) the City of God, Psalm. 46.4. And surely
seeing the Light gives the knowledge of our duty, and shows sin and evil, if
the Light be obeyed, or truly improved, it will lead out of evil, and guide man
in his duty to God, and so preserve him from the punishment: And by this Light
we were first called, and are in it, and need not thy Exhortation, who art a
treacherous Backslider from it.

P. 5, 6, 7. And if harkening diligently to the Voice of Christ, be the the
condition joined to the Covenant, and that the Law is manifesst within, and we
must wait upon him that has called us, with earnest prayers, etc. and that
experience is to be had in the Mystery, and Life, and Salvation, not in the
Scripture; and that the Creature is to retire it self in stillness, and not to
take part with the Enemy, etc. as thou have largely confessed; What must we wait
in, hearken in, receive Life and Salvation in, or experience the Mystery? And
to what must we retire? And by what shall we know the Voice of Christ, and
pray, if not in and by his Light within? For thou have confessed that the
spirit of the Wicked one works in the Children of Disobedience to do evil, so
the Spirit of Christ does work in the Believer to do well, [which is Trurh, but
against thy self.] As also those that have been faithful to their Captain,
though never so little were committed to their trust, shall enter into the
possession. And p. 8. thou tells us of some that were deceived by not keeping
humble and low to follow the Lord; and how hard it will be for these to be
renewed, except they hearken to the Voice of the Lord behind them! and O that
we may never forget to wait upon the Fountain of Wisdom, etc. Thou art one of
those that art exalted, thou have not kept in humility, thou have not followed
the Lord, thou have grown wanton, and kicked against his Light within; thou
have not waited for his Counsel as thou ought, but have lusted after evil,
till leanness is entered into thy Soul, till gross darkness is come over thee,
and confusion is thy snare; thou have made lies and falsehood thy refuge, like
an impudent, immodest, hard-hearted Woman. Who did help thee to compose and
word thy lying Pamphlet? We hear To. Co. commends it: Was he thy Patron? An
angry dark conceited man, who glories in his folly, and yet thinks he is wise,
though he is as full of nonsense and confusion as thou art; but his and thy
clamorous lying Tongues God will cut off, and stop your Mouths. In p. 4. thou
tellst us, That the Disciples whom Christ called Brethren, did not call
themselves the Seed: This is thy blindness, for were not the Children of the
Kingdom called the good Seed, and the Children of the Promise counted for the
Seed? Were they not of one holy Seed and offspring; seeing he that
sanctifies, and they that are sanctified, are all of one? And were not they a
Royal Seed, a holy Priesthood? And who were the Remnant of the Seed of the
Woman, that kept the Commands of God? And it is remarkable, that though thou
have often belied us, yet in p. 1. have confessed, That we, the people called
Quakers, of a truth God has called us out of the broad way of wickedness, and
many Jewels were we adorned with: So then, we were a people called and adorned
of the Lord, and not with the Jewels of the Egyptians, which falsely thou have
instanced in the Case. Besides, we are in the same Way, Truth and Principles,
which God at first called us into; though such perfidious Backsliders and
Apostates as thou thy self, and some others are, have abused the Truth,
rejected his Call, and cast his Law behind your backs, to your own condemnation
and destruction, if you do not return and repent.

Here follows a Collection of some of thy Lies and Slanders in thy Book against
the Chosen people of God called Quakers, which are rejected, and returned back
upon thee.

Lie 1. That they are Laborers in Mystery Babylon.

2. That the subtle Serpent deceived them, and made them become proud Boasters.

3. That they call the Tower of Babel, Mount Zion.

4. That they are building it in their Imaginations.

5. That he has confounded their Language.

6. That they call good evil, and evil good; saying, It was the Enemy, when it
was the Lord.

7. That they conclude themselves to be saved by their works.

8. That they subtly persuade you to rest under a Covenant of works. (Which
are gross slanders, for it is Christ who is our Savior. It is God that works
all our works in us; and good works, as the fruits of the Spirit and true
Faith, God has ordained.)

9. That they are turned Deceivers and Adulterers.

10. That they content themselves with the works of their own imaginations.

11. That they trust in their own Righteousness, as the Pharisees, etc.

12. That pride of imagined Knowledge has puffed them up.

13. That they being deceived, labor to deceive others.

14. That they say they see, and desire to know no more. (A palpable slander
against Quakers.)

15. That thou know many of them to be grievous Hypocrites.

16. That they slight the Scriptures.

17. That they are full of all subtilties, far from the real Innocence.

18. That they are strong Builders in Mystery Babylon.

19. That they, to shelter themselves, many times bring Scripture in a confused
manner, only to maintain imaginations.

20. That when they are confuted by plain Scripture, they will put it off by
Evasions.

These, with several more Lies in thy Pamphlet, intended against the Quakers,
we return back upon thee ( E.A.) as one that have impudently slandered Gods
people called Quakers. And though thou art back-slidden, and turned into lies
and lightness, yet thou art fain to make use of many words and expressions thou
have learned amongst the Quakers, to make thy false Coin go the more current.
But the Lord has made thee, and that Reviler To. Co. sufficiently manifest;
and your wickedness will sink you down into the pit, if you do not return to
the Light within, which you have abused, and repent. Thou tellest, If the Lord
shall call thee out of this Tabernacle of Clay: That will be a sad day, if thou
go on in this wickedness and impudency: a sad end and terrible death will
seiz upon thee, if thou do not repent in time. When thou art on thy
Deathbed, remember thou were warned in thy Lifetime. Thy vain light mind and
spirit, which has brought forth Lies against the Innocent, will not be able to
contend with the mighty God in that day wherein he will judge the Secrets of
thee and all other Transgressors and Revolters, according to the Gospel, and
that Light within which thou have so much slighted and opposed. Thou upbraidest
some with a Common Belief of being saved by the Merits of Jesus Christ, as not
having Faith, when we see not the Fruits of it brought forth, p. 5. But what
fruits have thou brought forth, and what are those Saints thou speak of
being Companions with, p. 6? What Saints can own thee in thy Lies and
Slanders? Where are the Fruits of thy Faith, that have thus reviled an
innocent People in general; making some particular disobedient persons thy
Cloak in what thou have done? But this Covering will be too narrow for thee,
and all such Back-^^iders, who have been forced to confess to the Principle of
Truth amongst us, after thou have essayed to declare against it. Whereas thy
chiefest color is the backsliding or transgression of some disobedient
persons like thy self: And not any Truth or Reason that thou can produce
against our Principles.

We are Witnesses to the Truth, against Deceit and Impudency, ANNE TRAVERS.
ELIZ. COLEMAN.

THE END.

