A SATYR AGAINST Atheistical Deism With the Genuine Character of a DEIST To
which is Prefixed, An account of Mr. AIKINHEAD's NOTIONS, Who is now in Prison
for the same Damnable APOSTASY.

By MUNGO CRAIG S. Ph. and Sac. Th.

Do you Admire, why with Satyrick Rhyme,
I Scourge the whifling Scoundrels of the Time?
To be resolved, turn over the Page, and you
The Justice of my Quarrel will avow,
And must Adopt the same; if you be not
A silly Fop, or Epicurean Sot.
Semper ego auditor tantum? nunquamque reponam
Vexatus toties --
Si Natura negat, facit indignatio versum
Qualemcunque potest. Quales ego --
Juven. Sat. 1. EDINBURGH, Printed for Robert Hutchison, and Sold at his Shop
in the Head of the Colledge-Wind. M. DC. XCVI.

A Catalogue of the Works promised to the World, by T. Aik. Gent. the meerest
Don Quixot in Nature, but one of the principal Patrons and Promoters of the
Witty, I would have said, Witless Sect.
I. DEath Dead and Burried without hope of Resurrection; or, A discovery of the
as incomparable, as impossible, Aurum Potabile Aikinheadaeum, i. e.
Chimaericum: Being a Sovereign Antidote, against all external and internal
Causes of Death: And when applied by Art, can raise the Dead, and perfect the
imperfect works of Nature: Yea, it can cure a Man, although he were cloven in
twain, or, to give you the Authors own Phrase, Though he were speldered like a
dry Haddock.

II. Machina Dedalaea magna atque nova; or, A new Engine of the same use in Air
that Ships are in Water; whereby we may have easy Commerce with the other
Vortices, and especially with the World in the Moon.

III. The Indies in a Crucible; or, An expeditious, infallible and cheap way of
making the Philosopher-Stone, in four Hours time, and for 4 sh. expenses, being
an excellent Proposal for maintaing the present War, without troubling the
Leidges either for Pol-penny or Hearth-money.

IV. Lux e tenebris; or, A clear Refutation of all the Self-evident Principles
of Reason, with the establishment of those of Nonsense, exactly Calculated to
the Capacity of Block-heads, whereby they may be able to toss any Thing
(extempore) pro and con, without the help of the Lullian Art.

V. The Power and Extent of Imagination demonstrated; or, The way of working
All Things by Exalted Fancy; especially of bringing the Author to the Gallows,
if not to the infernal Lake.

By what is here said, concerning Mr. Aikinhead's ridiculous Works, the Reader
may easily judge how Frothy and Crackbrain'd a Fellow he is. But should we
trouble you with a Recital of his damnable Extravagancies in Divinity, it would
prove no less ungrateful Task to our Pen, than nauseous to any Pagan, let be
Christian Ear, being a complete Aggregat of all the Blasphemies that ever were
vented, maintained, or excogitated, by the Atheistical Ministers of Satan in
all Ages, with an Overplus of his own Coining: So, that without Envy, he may be
denominated the Non plus ultro of Atheism.

Lest any think that this is only a Calumny cast either upon the Party or
Person forenamed; the Book-binder promises, in name of the Author, to produce a
considerable Number of Witnesses, who can give their Oath that they heard him
boast of the abovementioned ridiculous Notions.

A SATYR against DEISM.
GReat GOD! what dire Enimity, do I
Amongst my divided Faculties espy.
How, in the Palace of my Soul, each Power
Another fiercely threatens to devour.
Which Horror and Confusion, in the end,
Do civil War and bloody Jarrs protend;
Unless All-ruling Providence direct
Another Event, than we do expect,
Or Man from second Causes could detect.
For while with resolute and factious Bands,
My partial Judgment, selfishly gain-stands
The venting of my Rage, against the Proud
Ungodly Scumms, and Self-conceited Crowd;
(Not, that it does not judge them worth the Strips
Of Juvenal and Horace, or the whips
Of bitter Perseus; but, that still it pleads
Self-impotence for such Heroic Deeds:)
My lofty Will, enflamed with zealous Fire,
TO atchieve more Noble Projects has desire;
Despising private Infamy, the stain
Of Clown or Poetaster does disdain.
When great Jehovah's thought-surpassing Love
Toward His undeserving Creatures, move
The Wheels of my Affections, swelled to see
This scoffed at, with an impious We-hee,
Of Hells abortive Brood; Or when the Right
And Dignity of Humane Souls: the Light
And Product of sound Reason do compete,
With the small Credit of my humble state.
O Joys! I see the Cub-web Sophistry,
That did misguide my Judging Faculty,
Dispelled, and her resolving to fulfill
The Dictates of the better-guided Will.
Then let the Spring tide of my Passions rise,
TO its greatest height; and O! that I had thrice
As great a Force, as e're in Mortal yet,
Our Natural Constitution did permit.
For why should I suspect the Breach of Bounds?
When, tho they were composed of Rage of Hounds,
Wolves, Bears, with Vipers Tongues and Adder-stings,
The Quintessence of Choler, and all things
That savor both of Madness and of Rage,
When on improper Objects they assuage
Their extreme Fury, then tho never so large,
Would be impotent found for such a Charge,
As I Am obliged now to engage them in;
To whip the maddest-Heaven-daring Sin,
That ever was hatched in Hell, or act'd upon
This Universal Theater; since the Throne
Of Soul-destroying Sin began to show,
Its Sacrilegious Tragedy below.
A Sin! which, though Natures ingrafted Light,
And all Gods holy Councils, with Despite,
It totally rejects; and does deny
An' other Notion of a Diety,
Than what of mere Repugnancies is coined,
A Sorry maimed Bugbear, where disjoined
Are all the essential Attributes divine,
That in an independent God combine.
Yet marching from the infernal Lake in State,
And Equipage of Hell, Malice and Hate,
Undaunted Impudence and strong Delusion.
Satanick Rage, and Machins of Confusion:
To act the Divils utmost Spite, and try
How this last powerful Scene of his Envy,
Can the Foundations of Christ's Kingdom shake,
And spread the Jurisdiction of his Lake.
Has so possessed some Epicurean Beasts,
Stunned with the Fumes of wine, luxurious feasts
And hellish Magic, void of saving Grace,
Pedantick Bruits, who neither time nor space
On Truths investigation can bestow,
Vain glorious Nothings with an empty show:
(...)hat briskly reeling, where the roving Light
(...)f misled Fancy, terminates their sight:
(...)elight themselves to catch at empty Wind,
(...)nd Creatures of an ill-distracted Mind;
(...)ill utterly they, lacking Sense and Terror,
(...)e lost, in Satan's Labyrinth of Error.
And yet a Drunkard, or distemp'red Man,
Who, rising from his Couch of Rest, does scan,
(...)y Night, a Precipice, led by the vain
(...)maginations of his troubled Brain:
(...)nows as much of the Danger he is in,
(...)s they do of their ex^ecrable Sin.
Yet these our Hero's be, profoundly wise,
Who Things Divine and Humane so despise,
(...)lown up with airy Possibilities,
And Sceptick-doubting of all Destinies,
Huffing at Reason, like the Cuccow cry,
Begone! God, Christ, Scripture and Piety,
Let Us Eat and Drink, to Morrow must we die.
Such be the scurvy Wittlings who deplore,
That we a Wise and Loving GOD Adore,
(...)n Whom we Move, in Whom we Live and Be,
Who, from Sins dreadful Slavery, set us free,
Such only, do reject all called Divine,
And swear, no Spirits exists, but those of Wine.
Dubbed Knights of Nonsense, yet in their conceits
Wits of the Age, who can Gigantick Feats
Perform at Reasoning; whereas they know
As little as an Ass, what is truly so.
Those be the course-grain'd Philosophs, who stuff
Their Heads with Contradictions and pure Buff,
Chimaera's coined in Hell and horrid Fopp'ry,
Surpassing Transubstantiating Pop'ry.
Such are as wild in sound Philosophy;
And Law, as in profound Theology.
Such are the blazing Comets that attract
The Amazement of the Novel-catching Pack.
Whose sluttish Minds, drowned in the Lethargy
Of Ignorance, black Singularity
So eagerly affect, that rather they
Will damn their Souls, than walk the Vulgar way
And since they cannot, to eternize their Name,
Erect a lasting Monument of Fame,
They Will choose by far the shorter course to take,
And headily themselves resolve to make
Famous for Infamy, by running down
What they don't understand, just as a Clown
would mock, to hear us prove, that Phoebus bright
Descended to our Antipodes all Night;
And did surmount in Magnitude so far,
This vast and spacious Glob whereon we are.
Who would believe, with Mahomet, that he,
All Night, were rather drowned in the Sea.
Or, with Old Epicure, would sing a Sonnet,
That he were little bigger than his Bonnet.
A Course! of such successful operation.
That all the Block-head Swineherds of the Nation,
Might, in a point of Time, brisk Wits commence
And singl, arize themselves for men of Sense.
Yet such are they, who Scoffingly deride
Those sacred Mistries, which we ought to dread
Such Giants, with Loud-laughters empty Phrase
Our Rational and Holy Faith debase:
And yet when they opugn't, can naught profer,
But what one less than a Philosopher
Without the straining of his Wit could solve,
And to its Native-nothing make it dissolve.
Since that, upon its Front the infamous Brand
Of Falsity self-evident does stand
And since the Fundamentals of their Light
Dissents from Reason, as the day from night.
And more, when they defend the monst'rous Bees
Of their half-codled Brains and hellish Lies,
The very Light of Nature they will deny;
And with a brazen Countenance will cry,
I know it it is Nonsense if it but dessent
From this my demonstrable Sentiment.
As if their Crazy Noddles only were
The Unerring Rule, of all we should averr.
But sirs, would it not be a pretty sport,
To see Baboons, Aps and the inferior sort
Of Animals, with Mock'ry to despise
Scholastic Demonstrations of the wise;
And Scoff at deep-drawn policy of Sat,
Because it is far above their humble fate,
To judge of Matters of so high a rate.
What shall we say then, of those cursed currs
who still resolve, with diabolick Slurrs.
God's mighty power and wisdom to reject
And providential Ruling to neglect;
Because their purblind Souls the Mystery.
Cannot Sound of Divine Christianity.
Hence of us Men if different Species were,
On Corrolary sure I could infer:
That like us only in our outward shape.
To be Created was their harder hap,
Devoid of that reflexive power so bright,
Which from the Soul dispells the cloudy Night
Of Ignorance, and high conceited Wit,
Which is a sure Concomitant of it.
And show's us, from each object that we see,
That so profess Socratick Modesty,
Is to be wise; while of our flut'ring Souls
The high flown-aims, gross muddy Earth controuls.
But, could Job's Patience suffer one to hear,
(Without atrembling, Terror, Wrath and Fear,)
Those Sycophants, sprung from the accursed line
Of Judas, with the Divil now combine,
Under the Name of Deist; to essay
If they God, Good, and Reason can betray.
A Deist! oh! how far's this from the thing,
That their Assertions in my Fancy bring,
A greater distance is not surely found
By Thought, in that Vacuity profound;
Wherein their Atoms merrily did Dance,
When they were Modified thus by Chance.
For Men to acknowledge that there is a GOD,
And not a Providence! O thing most odd!
And if a Providence, then not to be
A Christian, is an odder thing to me.
Methinks a Stoic Moralist, who knew
The Reasons why I whip so mad a Crew;
Might be convinced, how hard it is to fight,
Against what inheres in us, by Natures Right:
And learn from hence, that none of innat dower,
Lacks its own proper Use, had we the power
To Use't aright, unless that we (like Stocks
Or Stones) were Metamorphosiz'd to Rocks.
When all the Intelligences that do dwell,
IN the upper Regions, or yet out of Hell,
Except a Deist, in their proper way,
Banners of sullen Frowning still display,
To see the Race of Mankind so decay.
Ungrateful Monsters, Slaves of Hell and Sin!
O! that each Curse and Plague pronounced within
That Sacred Volumn, which with Scoffing ye
Reject, may on you verified be.
On you more Wo's, ten Thousand times, denounced
From Heaven let be, than Ovid has pronounced
Against his Ibis, and O that the God,
Whose 'stablish'd Councils ye Revile, the Rod
Of His intolerable Wrath may put
In execution, and in pieces cut,
Your good-contemning Carcases, before
In Tophet ye be scorched for evermore.
Let every thing in Heaven Earth and Hell
Concur, this Pestilence of Sin to quell;
And make the infected, Monuments of Wrath,
For Confirmation of our Christian Faith:
Except, whom God's unsearchable Decree,
Culls out for Objects of His Clemency.
But oh! tho we by Charity are bound,
This venerable Abyss not to sound,
Wherein the prying Seraphims are drowned.
Yet in the Sacred Pages naught I find,
But Ruin for a Christ-denying Mind.
O Times! O Manners! may I justly cry,
Will Scotland nourish such Apostasy?
A Covenanted People! and even while
Such Glorious Sunshine over-spreads the Isle!
Shall this then be the effect of Gospel Light?
To petrisy our Hearts and dim our Sight
In Things of God? if it be so, no less
Than Famine, Sword, and Pestilent Distress
I Prophesy: Neither by taking part
With Delphos, Magic, or Star-gazing Art:
But from a reasonable Scrutiny
Into the eternal Rolls of Verity.
Which do more Plagues against such a Case protest
Than ever Aegypts Borders did infest;
Or yet on Sodom and Gomorrah fell,
With all the Punishments reserved for Hell.
Come! let a Rational and Holy Flame,
Of Zeal to Christ and God's most glorious Name,
Our Nations Honor, and our Christian Right,
Inspire God's Deputes with Celestial Light,
Who sit at Justice: That they may atone
with Blood, th'affronts of heavens offended throne:
And turn away that Deluge of God's Ire,
Which threatens us worse than devouring Fire.
Oyes! all Sons of Adam shun the way,
And Commerce of the Witlings of the Day;
As if he Furies of the Dungeon deep,
The noisome Entry, thereunto did keep:
Would I entrust that Monster with a Straw,
To whom Self-intrest is so much a Law,
That all to this subordinate must be.
Drowned so in stupid Sensuality,
That only this he studies as his End,
From worldly Cares his Carcass to defend:
All ye on whom right Reason to its Throne
Advanced by Divine Oracles has shown,
By Grace illuminated to that pitch,
That perverse Prejudice cannot bewitch.
Lo! here is a Trial of your zealous Love,
And Touchstone to your Faith sent from Above.
Endure with Courage then, your Royal Yoke:
For ye are surely builded on a Rock.
In fine; Remember ye, who against the High,
And Holy One, Who blessed Eternity
Inhabites, vomit out proud Blasphemy
Those, whom He has examplifi'd before,
And that e're long, ye'll Tremble and Adore,
Among your Brother Wits: who never could be
Persuaded that there was a Diety,
Who punished Sin: Till wholly stunned with Evil
They got as much Religion as the Divil.
FINIS.
THE GENUINE CHARACTER OF A DEIST.
A Deist Reduplicatively Considered, falling neither under the Laws of
Description, nor legitimat Definition, may be called a mere. I wot not what.
Nor can we have a notion of him any other way, than the Vulgar has of Nothing,
when they define it, A Bodiless Shirt wanting the Sleeves, viz. By Amputation
of all Realities, Yet I Am of Opinion, that he is more apositly termed, An
accidental aggregat of Contradictions actually existent, which is the greatest
Paradox, that ever was offered to a Philosopher. Or an Eas rationis objectively
taken, not only having an Ideal, but a real existence: Which is a Degree beyond
any Sophister, that ever pretended to that Chimaera. And hence we have light in
the very Fundamentals of his Nonsense; first why he is so virulent in
propugning his beloved Fortuitous concourse: And why impossible est idem simul
esse et non esse, eodem respectu: with other Principles of the like Quality,
has so little weight with him: Seeing he can produce himself, as an undeniable
conviction of their Falsities. He may be fitly called an incomparable Hero of
Wit, and is truly as impregnable by Reason, as the Bass by blank Powder;
having not left so much as Archimedes his Punctum for you to build upon. And
that day, in which you prove any thing against him, at least convince him that
you have done so; I Will prove the Moon to be made of Green Cheese; especially so
long as he keeps his Achil^^an distinction; Secundum vestrum, cognoscendi modum
Co. Secundum meam nego. He pretends to be a great Friend to Reason, which
nevertheless he is as much acquainted with, as an Ass with Mathematics; and
truly ere you and he agree, you must divest your self of that Armor; for he is
a Sceptick of the first Magnitude, and the chiefest of that size too; for
discourse him upon never so cleat and evident Truths, you must of necessity run
in Infinitum to prove 'em; since he acknowledges no Principles, further than
they serve his turn. And I dare swear he would put a crack-brain'd Philosopher out
of his Wits, either to prove or defend, that it were himself. He Is General
Generalissimo of Sophisters; for so long as he keeps within the Burrows of his
Warren, which are contrived more Artificially for his purpose, than Daedalus
his Labyrinth, you will never catch him: And if you follow him in, I Will promise you
a Foil before you come out again, seeing he has deprived you of the Cord of
Reason to lead your way back. For he applys the objects of Sense to be judged
by the Intellect, and vice versa; and that so dexterously, that in all the
Justice of he World he might be dubbed Knight Errant of Juggling or
Leiger-demain; and for this end, he has prepared an Helmet of Adament; and a
complete Coat of Armor consisting of loud Laughter, huffing and nauseating
disdain for a Shield with this motto, Nego totum etiam antequam audiverim: His
Lance is made of Reviling, Calumniating, Cursing and Lying: his Sword is much
of affinity to the same Metal, being framed of Sophistical quibbles, having as
little connection among themselves, as dependence upon the self-evident
principles of Reason. And how can any conceive it to be otherwise when it was
forged by the Father of Lies, upon the Anvil of Falsitie And whereas a
Christian has no back-peice to be a Defense in his flight, he has this to brag
of above him, that he has one, which is a Sluggish Carelessness whatever come
of his Opinion, providing that his Body be well. You Would think that he were a
Monkish Hermit at his Devotion, if you saw how seriously he looks, when he
deplores the World's Stupidity in paying a Reasonable Service to God their
Creator, Preserver and Redeemer. He bears the same Love to Churchmen, that
Cats does to Mustard: for he Wrayes his Face bitterly when he sees or hears
'em; and it is no wonder, if we consider that there is as much Enmity betwixt
them, as between a Basalisk and a Man. He Is so great a lover of Monarchy, that
to have a pretense to the Title, he is content to attribute the same to all
Mankind; and to have it Absolute, he calls all civil power such, whether it be
Aristocracy, Democracy, or Monarchy. And to attain his End (as he thinks) the
more honorably, he rejects the Notions of Good and Evil, but in so far as they
contribute to, or opugn his Designs: As likewise those of Justice, and
Injustice. Before mutual Paction, which he resolves never to make sure, as long
as he can keep his darling of Mental Reservation, and that he may turn his Coat
with the times under the pretense of Reason, he has learned this among the rest
from his Apostle Hobb's, to keep stive with the Strongest. and will cite that
of the Poet, Tempora mutantur and nos mutamur in illis, ^ for a sufficient
Authority. He is so biggor on Singularity and Fame that to acquire both, he
feeds on Nonsense, as Toads does on Filth and Venom And because he cannot be
singular for Rationality, which is the common Attribute of human Nature; he
degrades himself to a Beast, and turns Irrational. He disdains I Confess to
swear in any one Philosopher's words, but under the Notion of philosophic
Liberty, and free use of Reason, has stored the Magazine of his Brain, with
all the ridiculous Fopprie, that either fell by Inadvertancy, Contention,
Malice or Ignorance, from the pens of Ancient and Modern Philosophers.
Wherefore, he is highly enamoured, with Aristotel's Eternity of the world,
paucis mutatis, with Epicure's Denial of Providence, and fortuitous production
of the Universe, with his denial of the Souls Immortality; and especially with
his Assertion that temporal Pleasure is the Summum bonum, or last-end of
Mankind, and enveighs against Gassendus, for spending so much pains in
vindicating the Old Dottard from this Brand of Infamy, which he accounts his
chiefest Glory. Nor is he less taken with Des Cates his Dubitation, adoring it
as a chief Pillar of his Skepticism and his Vortices, with the assertion, that
Matter and motion being granted, all could fall out as they are, without the
concurrance of an inteligent Overruling Power. This differing nothing from
Epicure, but that the Particles lack a Vocuum to hoble and dance in. He
likewise animadvrerts an admirable Congruence, betwixt this Author's
Clock-works animals, and Epicurus his denial of the Souls Immortality; For
(says he) Men and Beasts vary only in the more and the less. He no less savours
this Authors rejecting of the Consideration of Final Causes in Phisicks,
interpreting it to be an implicit denial of Providence. But least I weary you
with his Nonsenfe, it shall suffice to indicat what for a Philosopher he is, to
declar what cursed Author's are his dearest darlings; which are, first the
excellent Head-pice of Malmsbury the incomparable (for Nonsense to Wit,)
Theologue and Philosoph Spinoza, with Lucretius Redivivus, I mean Blunt's
Oracles of Nonsense. He Is so great an Affector of Novelties (and that so much
the more in how much they contradict Sense and Reason) that he looks upon the
Author's of them, as second Solomon's, or third Cato's fallen from Heaven And
although, he reject all Histories that are above Forty Years old, for mere
Romances, yet, he is as didactical, in in the Embrios of his Fancy, which he
thinks may serve his turn any way, as if you had seen it with your Eyes; though
he feign it to have been done Forty Thousand Years since. And hence it is,
that he will rather believe, that there are Rosy-crusian Chimists wandering
about the World in aereal Vehicles, than that there ever was such a Man as
Moses or Julius Caesar; for which cause he has a very ill gust of Mr Lock's
Moral way of Demonstration, however well he may please other parts of his works
But to extricat our selves from this stinking Tale, he is a transcendental Evil
(which is another Paradox, or rather, Rhetorical Hyperboly, though not so far
strained as Sublimi feriam sidera vertice) or if you will, he is a
Constellation fixed in direct opposition to all Good, composed of Malice,
Hatred and Self-conceit, which two first, are as inseparable from the last, as
Heat from Fire; and is truly the greatest plague that can be inflicted on a
human Society, though he accounts himself the primum mobile of it. He surpasses
the most malevolent of all the Devils, in every thing except knowledge; and
happy is it for the World that it is so ordered, for had he knowledge
preportionate to his Diabolical Qualities, he would degrade Lucifer, and lead
the Van of Hell himself; for fear of whose Tyranny the Furies themselves would
tremble. If you speak seriously to him he will swear you're an Enthusiast, and
it is as great folly to discourse him that way, as to read Moral Dissertations
to an Ass. He Is a mere Ape mounted on the pegasian Wings of a rampant
Imagination, delighting himself to rove in an imaginary Vacuity, where he
egarly pursues the Quary which his ill-codled Brains exhibites to him; ignorant
that he shall incontinently tumble into the infinite Abyss of a bottomless Pit.
Or, he is a Galleass of the first Rate, of the kingdom of Darkness, tossed by
the wind of Pride in an Ocean of Folly, were the Devil personally drives at the
Helm. Finally, he is the Excrements of the Creation, the ultimat Butt of God's
Wrath, the Subject of Satan's laughter, and Object of Man's Derision; Where we
leave him.

Having put a Period to our Conception of a Deist, we shall in the last place
present the Reader with that Unerring Character which the Spirit of God
describes them by, in the Oracles of Truth. Which may serve, if not for the
Conviction of their seared Consciences, yet both for the establishing of
wavering or weak Christians, and for corroborating or encouraging the stronger.
And may be unto us as a Mirror, in which we may evidently contemplat the
Immensity of God's Love and Providence, in giving us a Watchword against so
strong Delusion; which (as our Savior Himself affirms) would deceive the
Elect, if it were possible.

Of these accursed Apostats who separat themselves from us by the Name of
Deists, Saint Paul speaks in 2 Timothy 3. 2. thus, For Men shall be Lovers of
their own selves, Covetous, Boasters, Proud, Blasphemers, Disobedient to
Parents, Unthankful, Unholy, Verse. 3. Without natural Affection,
Truce Breakers, false Accusers, Incontinent, Fierce, Despifers of those that
are Good, Verse. 4. Traitors, Heady, High-minded, Lovers of Pleasures more than
Lovers of God. Verse. 8. Now as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do these
also resist the Truth: Men of corrupt Minds, reprobat concerning the Faith.
Verse. 9. But they shall proceed no further: for their Folly shall be manifest
to all Men, as theirs also was. And Jude excellently describes them in this
manner, Verse. 4. -- Who were of old before ordained to this Condemnation,
ungodly Men, turning the Grace of God into Lasciviousness, and denying the only
Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ. Verse 8. Likewise also these filthy
Dreamers defile the Flesh, despise Dominion, speak Evil of Dignities. Verse. 10.
But these speak Evil of those things which they know not: but what they know
naturally as bruit Beasts, in these things they corrup themselves. Verse. 11. Woe
be unto them, for they have gone the way of Cain, etc. Verse. 12. Those are
spots in your Feasts of Charity, when they feast with you, feeding themselves
without fear: Clouds they are without water, carried aboat with winds; Trees
whose Fruits withers, without Fruit twice dead, plucked up by the roots;
raging Waves of the Sea foaming out their own shame, wandering Stars, to whom
is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever. 16. These are Murmurers,
Complainers, walking after their own Lusts, and their Mouths speaking great
swelling words, etc. Verse. 19. These be they that separate themselves, sensual,
having not the Spirit. To the same purpose speaks Peter in the whole 2 Chapter
of his Epistle, with many other places of sacred Write. We shall conclude with
that in 2 Pet. 3. 17, 18. Ye therefore, Beloved, seeing ye know these things
before, beware lest ye also being led away with the Error of the Wicked, fall
from your own stedfastness. But grow in Grace, and in the Knowledge of our Lord
Jesus Christ; to Him be Glory both now and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

