EXCEPTIONS Against a VVRITING OF Mr. R. BAXTERS, In Answer to some
ANIMADVERSIONS Upon his APHORISMS.

By Mr. Chr. Cartwright of York.

LONDON, Printed for Nevil Simmons and Jonath. Robinson, at the Princes-Arms
and Golden-Lion, in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1675.

Exceptions against a Writing of Mr. R. Baxters, in Answer to some
Animadversions upon his Aphorisms.
HOw Relations should be inter Entia and Nihil I cannot see; Page 2. 1. 2.
For Nihil is Non ens; and inter ens and non ens non datur medium.

(...) is indeed for most part so taken, 4.
as to include Love and Good Will; yet it seems to be otherwise taken Matthew.
11. 26. and Luke 10. 21. as Dr. Twisse observes. And it is true, Vindic*
(...) and Beneplacitum express one the other: Lib. 1.
yet if we consider the propriety of the words, Part. 2.
both of them may well signify the Will and Pleasure of God concerning any
thing whatsoever. Sect. 20.
It is observed, that the Lxx Interpreters devised the word (...) to express
the Hebrew Ratsa, which is as much as Velle; though it be often used for
Benevolum esse. The Members of that distinction, [Gratia gratum faciens, and
gratia gratis data] fall one into another, as well as the Members of this,
[Voluntas Beneplaciti, and Voluntas Signi] yet the distinction, though not so
exact, may be useful.

1. What you intended, Ibid.
I know not; but you seem to speak alike of all the Signs mentioned, Ibid. 3.
Aphor. p. 3. 2. I find Aquinas express for this, Part 1.
that Voluntas Signi, Quaest. 19.
is but Signum Voluntatis; so that according to him Voluntas Beneplaciti seems
indeed to signify the whole Will of God, Art. 11.
properly so called; and Voluntas Signi the whole Will of God also, so far
forth as there is any signification of it. But however, I see not how you can
hence infer, [then impletio voluntatis beneplaciti de eventu, non est signum
voluntatis beneplaciti de jure]. This seems but a mere evasion; it suffices,
that Impletio is Signum Voluntatis de eventu, as Praeceptum is Signum
Voluntatis de Officio.

1. When you say, that God does permit, Ibid.
and more than permit the Wicked to amend; I suppose you mean, he does command
them: But is not this to take the word [permit] morally? Yet page 5. you say,
That you speak all the while of Permission Natural, not of Moral Permission. 2.
Permission is only made Signum Volintatis Dei de malo. Part 1.
Thus Aquinas, Permissio ad malum refertur, Quest. 19.
operatio autem ad bonum. And Maccovius, Art. 12.
Objectum Voluntatis Permissivae Des est peccatum. Ita quidem est. These.
Theolog. Disput. 26.
Nam bonum, quod vult, vult Voluntate effectiva, non permissiva. 3. That
Permissio Mali, is certum signum voluntatis Dei de malo quoad eventum, I think
is not to be denied. Animad. p. 162.
[The Permissive Decree (says Bp Davenant) concerning Sinful Actions, implies
an infallibility of the Events so permited]. And he cites Ruiz, saying, Posita
permissione, certissima est futuritio peccati, quod permittitur and omnium
circumstantiarum, quae permittuntur in illo. So Dr. Twisse, Vindic.
Posito decreto permittendi peccatum, non potuit homo a peccato abstinere: Lib.
1.
haec tamen necessitas exhypothesi cum liberate convenit. Part. 1.
Camero makes this the reason,. 3.. 4.
why God does foreknow evil, because he does decree to permit it; Advers.
which were no reason, if the Event did not certainly follow Permission. Tilen.
Stat igitur sententia mea, Deus novit peccatum fore, page 193.
quia decrevit permittere peccatum. And he speaks diverse times to this purpose.
So Maccovius, De Provident.
Deus praescit futura peccata. Ergo decrevit permittere. Nam quae Deus praescit
fore, ea praescit fore ex eo, quia decrevit. Disp. 5.
The same Author also gives another reason; These. Theolog. part 1 Disp. 26.
Permissionem necessario sequitur eventus: hoc est, quod perm^^tit Deus,
necessario evenit -- Ratio etiam hoc ipsum evincit. Nam si Permissio nihil
aliudest, quam gratiae Dei substractio, sive privatio, qua posita peccationi
impediretur, ut a nobis ante ostensum est, fieri non potest, ut Creatura n^n
labatur ubi Deus eam non sustentat: in Deo enim Movemur, vivimus, Part 2.
and sumus. And again; Non agitur de Permissione Ethica, Disp. 14.
quae nihil aliud est quam Concession, sed de Physica, hoc est, de (...)
non-impedire. Quid vero sit disquiritur; Nos cum Whitakero dicimus, quod sit
privatio auxilii divini, quo posito peccatum impediretur. -- Necessario ergo
sequitur Permissionem Lapss: interim tamen Permissio non est causa Lapsus, sed
antecedens solum. 4. Austins saying, which I cited, seems to hold out thus
much, That as well God's Permittere as his Facere, is a sure sign of his Will
concerning the Event. 5. I see not, that the Opinion of the necessity of
Physical Efficient Predetermination does deny God's Permission, seeing that
Predetermination is de Bono, or de Action qua tali; but Permission is de Malo,
or de obliquitate Actionis. Dr. Twisse in that very Digression which you
mention, after a tedious Dispute against that Proposition, grants as much as (I
think) Perkins did, or any need desire. For he grants, Manifesto sequi peccati
existentiam ex permissione ejus Divina: Vindic.
He adds indeed, Lib. 2.
Nequaquam sequitur ex natura Permissionis in genere, Digr. 3.. 3.
quod non paucis Theologis visum est, ut in superioribus accepimus, sed ex
peculiari modo permissionis divinae, constante sc. negatione gratiae, quippe
sine qua peccatum a nemine vitari potest. But this is that Permission which
Divines speak of, as I have showed. What he further adds, de peccato definite
sumpto, viz. that a bare Permission does not infer the existence of it, seems
little to the purpose. To his Instance about Formation, I Answer: There is a
Restraining Grace as well as a Renewing; God vouchsafes the one to many, to
whom he does not vouchsafe the other; see Genesis 20. 6. I grant, that besides a
mere Permission, there must be (as he speaks) aliqua alia rerum administratio,
secundum quam actus aliquis naturalis patretur, quae sit proxima materia talis
deformitatis: and that quoties juxta Permissionem Divinam res aliqua sortitur
effectum, toties Dei permissio non est solitaria, sed aliam Divinam
Providentiae gubernationem concomitantem obtinet. But I suppose, that Perkins
and others comprehend all under the name of Permission, that being it upon
which Sin indefinitely considered, as Twisse himself confesses, does follow,
though for the specification of the sin something more be required. The reason
is, because malum is privatio, and so in alieno fundo habitat; therefore there
cannot be Permissio Mali, but there must also be Effectivus Concurs^^^ ad id,
in quo Malum existit.. 2.. 1.
But for the thing it self Twisse is as clear (I think) as any. Nec (inquit)
minus efficax esse dicimus decretum Dei de Permissione Mali, quam de Effectione
Boni.

Voluntas Signi, as put for Signum Voluntatis, to be but metaphorically
Voluntas; yet I hold, that there is Voluntas proprie dicta, quae Signo
indicatur. 2. When I say [so far forth as the Signum is praeceptum] it is only
(as you might see) to show, that Volunt as Signi (not Signum Voluntatis, but
voluntas cujus signum est Praeceptum) is the same with that which you call
[Will of Precept]. 3. If Dr. Twisse do not extend it to the whole Law, but only
to Precept, it may be he had not occasion to extend it further. Neither do you
speak so fully in your Aphorisms as in this Writing. You mention indeed
Legislative Will, but so as to call it also Praeceptive, and to make the Object
of it our Duty, Aphor. page 4. 4. That he does take notice of the Immanent Will
de debito, whereof Praeceptum is Signum, is clear by the words which I cited,
viz. Precepta non indicant quid Deus velit esse Nostri Officii, etc. Yea your
self here say, p. 4. That he makes Praecipere and Vetare to be the Objects of
God's Will; and that this clearly implies, that he took in the Immanent Acts,
of which they were the Objects. You add indeed, That he so often contradicts
it by speaking otherwise, that you doubt it fell from him ex improviso: but I
see no cause for any such surmise.

[to bestow good upon a Man] I know not how I omit^ed; 3. 9.
perhaps because I thought there was no need of expressing them. For however
they must be understood; because God's Word and Truth is else engaged in a
Threatening as well as in a Promise*, 2. You say, Append. p. 48. That the
absolute promise of a New Heart is made to wicked Men: where you seem to speak
of a Promise properly taken, as distinct from Prophecy or Prediction: Yet
Aphor. p. 9. you say, That Absolute Promises are but mere Predictions; so that
you seem not well reconciled to your self. But you best know your own meaning,
only I think it meet that you express it so, as that none may have occasion to
stumble at it.

I see indeed, Ibid.
that you call it Legislative Will: But, 1. you make Legislative and Preceptive
both one, 4. Ibid.
and make the Object of it Man's Duty, Aphor. p. 4. So that you rather seem to
restrain the word [Legislative] by the word [Preceptive], than to enlarge the
word [Preceptive] by the word [Legislative]. 2. When you take the word
[Legislative] largely, you make Precept and Promise distinct parts of it: So
that still it is strange to me that you should say; That Promises fall under
the Will of Purpose, not of Precept. For if the Will of Precept be taken
strictly and properly, it is superfluous to say, That Promises do not fall
under the Will of Precept: Neither on the other side is it true, if the Will of
Precept be taken largely and improperly, viz. for the whole Legislative Will,
which does contain both Precept and Promise.

These two Questions (as you now make them) you comprise in one Aphorism, Ibid.
p. 15. and equally determine of both. Ibid. 15.
For you say, That the Life promised in the First Covenant, was in the judgment
of most Divines (to whom you incline) only the continuance of that Estate that
Adam was in in Paradise: So that according to this Opinion, Adam was both to
have continued in the same place, and also in the same Estate. I think still,
Exe^ cit. 2.
he should have been changed in respect of both. In Adamo (inquit Barlous)
omnes in universum homines jus ad Coelum habebant, and si ipse stetiss^^, ipsum
Coelum unusquisque habuisset; adeo ut jus ad Coelum in Adamo habuimus
primaevum, a Christo jus rest tutum. Adam's continuance in the same Estate, is
most clearly expressed by those whom you seem to follow; and how then can you
say, That you did not meddle with that Question? And if he were to continue in
the same Estate, no question he was also to continue in the same Place; For
Heaven is no place for such an Estate as Adam had in Paradise.

I shall wonder if any will be so bold as to affirm, That Adam was Created in
Patria, and not in Via. How was he to be tried by his Obedience, if he were not
Viator, but Comprehensor? It seems also strange that any doubt should be made,
whether Adam being Created after the Image and Likeness of God, were capable of
Heavenly Blessedness.

The Reasons which I alleged, Ibid.
notwithstanding any thing you say against them, seem cogent. 1. By the Second
Death, you might see, I meant not the same degree, yet the same kind of
punishment. The Scripture seems to speak of several degrees of Hell-Torment,
yet all is called the Second Death. And this Second Death, viz. Hell-Torment,
Adam by his sin became liable unto: therefore if he had not sinned, he should
have enjoyed a Life directly opposite to that Death, viz. Celestial Glory. The
perpetual Death which Adam (without a Savior) should have suffered, was not a
perpetual abiding in the Estate of Death, viz. a perpetual separation of Soul
and Body, or a mere privation of that Life he had before his Fall, but an
enduring of eternal Torment; and so consequently the Life promised upon
condition of Obedience, was not a perpetuating of his earthly Life, but the
fruition of Heavenly Happiness. 2. I grant, God was able to change Adam's
State, not changing his Place; but it seems rather, that both should have been
changed. And though we know not the Nature of the Life to come, yet we know it
is not such a Life as Adam had in Paradise, to Eat, Drink, Marry, etc. 3. It is
not in vain to say, How in an ordinary way of Providence should there have been
room for Men upon Earth, if Adam and his Posterity, still increasing and
multiplying in infinitum, should there have continued for ever? Of the Coven.
chap. 5.
Your Friend and mine Mr. Blake, having urged this Argument, seems to enervate
it when he has done, saying, [But a thousand of these God can expedite, when
we are at a stand]. But yet that without a Miracle it could be done, he does
not say, and he there professedly opposes you in this Point. Whereas you add,
[Especially seeing God knew there would be no place for such difficulties] I
know not to what purpose it is. For the Opinion, which I impugn, does suppose
that upon which such difficulties do arise. 4. How should Paradise be a Type of
Heaven, if Man should never have come to Heaven? If Heaven had not belonged
unto him upon condition of his Obedience? Whereas you say, That you little know
where or what that Paradise was; I do not well know what you mean. By [that
Paradise] I suppose you understand (as I and others do) the Garden wherein Adam
was placed: a place upon Earth for certain it was, and very pleasant; yet such
a place as wherein Adam lived a natural Life, far beneath that happiness which
he was made capable of.

Those words [Thou shall die] being not only meant of a privation of the Life
which he then enjoyed, Ibid.
but also of eternal torment; 5. Ibid.
it follows, That the Life implicitly promised, is to be understood, not only
of the continuance of that Life, but of Eternal Blessedness.

I do not say that any now are altogether as Adam was under the Covenant of
Works; Ibid.
but that some are so under that Covenant, that in statu quo they have no part
in the other Covenant, nor are guilty of contemning it, being utterly ignorant
of it.

To whom God does not say, Ibid.
[Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved] to them in effect
he does say [Obey perfectly and live]; or, [If thou sin, thou shall die
eternally]. But there are many in the World to whom God does not say [Believe,
etc.] that Promise is altogether unknown unto them, they live and die without
ever hearing of it, so that to them it is as if it had never been. Consider (I
pray) what the Apostle says to this purpose, Ephesians. 2. 12. Might not the
Ephesians have continued in that condition unto death? Do not many continue in
the same Condition? I yield, that none are so under the Covenant of Works, but
that if they repent and believe they shall have Mercy, and that by virtue of
the New Covenant: but that which I stand upon is this, That the Covenant of
Grace wherein Mercy is promised, being not revealed unto some, nor any way
dispensed unto them, they cannot be said to be under it, nor shall be judged as
transgressors of it.

Add, 1. Though the Covenant of Grace had never Indians enjoy, (setting aside
the possibility of partaking of the New Covenant) might have been enjoyed. Add,
2. Though the Covenant of Works vouchasafeth no pardon of sin upon Repentance,
yet surely it requiring perfect Obedience, consequently it also requires
Repentance and turning unto God. Else if the Covenant of Grace had not been
made, Man after his Fall, though plunging himself into sin continually more and
more, yet had contracted no more Guilt, nor incurred any greater Condemnation,
than he did by his first Transgression. And, 3. Christ as Mediator shall judge
even those that never heard of any Salvation to be obtained by him; and
consequently he will not judge them as guilty of neglecting that Salvation.
Christ judges wicked Men as Rebellious Subjects; but as rebelling (I conceive)
only against the Law, not against the Gospel, they being such as never were
acquainted with it. Add, 4. There are common Mercies, (which might have been
though the New Covenant had not been) the abuse whereof is sufficient to
condemn; yet the improvement of them is not sufficient to save. If such Mercies
as mere Pagans enjoy tend to their recovery, How then are such said to be
(...)? Ephesians. 2. 12.

Romans 2. 12. I cited to this purpose, Ibid.
to show, That as they that sinned without the Law, shall perish without the
Law; even so they that sinned without the Gospel, shall perish without the
Gospel. That 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7, 8. speaks not only of them that obey not the Gospel
of our Lord Jesus Christ, but also of such as know not God. The Apostle there
seems to divide all the Wicked into two sorts, viz. such as know not God; so
he describes the Gentiles, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 5. and such as obey not the Gospel, etc.
that is, such as having had the Gospel preached unto them, would not receive
it, either not at all, or not sincerely. Yet Christ (he says) will in flaming
fire take vengeance on both, as well on the former as on the latter. And here
also I have Mr. Blake agreeing with me, and so, as that he cites this very
place to the same purpose as I do. Of the Coven.
Infidels (says he) that were never under any other Covenant than that of
works, and Covenant Breaking Christians, Chap. 5. p. 23.
are in the same condemnation; there are not two Hells, but one and the same
for those that know not God, and those that obey not the Gospel of Christ, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8.]

You pass by that which I alleged from Romans 6. ult. viz, Ibid.
That death, which is the wages of sin, is opposed to Eternal Life, which is
the happiness of the Saints in Heaven. Ergo, Death comprehends in it the misery
of the Damned in Hell; and that (you know) is it which the Scripture calls the
Second Death. I marvel therefore that you make no more of it than to say, [Call
it the first or second Death, as you please]?

The Argument drawn from the Bodies Co-partnership with the Soul, Ibid.
I take to be a good proof of its Resurrection. Tertullian surely thought so,
or else he would not so frequently have used this Argument. De Resur. cap. 15.
Age (inquit) scindant adversarii nostri carnis animaeque contextum prius in
vitae administratione, ut ita audeant scindere illud etiam in vitae
remuneratione. Negent operum societatem, ut merito possint etiam mercedem
negare. Non sit particeps in sententia caro, si non fuerit in causa And again,
Secundum consortia laborum consortia etiam decurrant necesse est praemiorum.
And again also, Ibid. c. 38.
Non possunt separari in mercede (caro and anima) quas opera conjungit. Ibid.
c. 8.
And surely that of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5. 10. [That every Man may receive the
things done in the Body] does imply, That as the things were done in the Body,
so also the Reward must be received in the Body. As for the dissolution of the
Body which you speak of, it is but such a punishment as the Godly lie under as
well as the Wicked, until the Resurrection, Therefore it is not probable, that
it was the only punishment intended to the Body in the First Covenant.
Whatever some new Philosophers may say, true Philosophy (I think) does tell
us, That it is the Body, which by the Sensitive Soul does ^eel pain; even as it
is the Eye, which does see by the Visive Faculty.

You observe not (it seems) that I did but answer your Queries, Ibid.
which you made Append. p. 10. To the second, [When should he have risen?] I
thought, and still think it sufficient to answer, That Adam, and so others,
should either have risen in the end of the World, as now they shall, or when
God should please to raise them. It is for you to prove that it could be
neither the one way nor the other.

How does the Apostle 1 Cor. 15. seem to extend the verse. 23. And when the
whole discourse is about Resurrection unto Glory? Maccov. de statu primi ho.
Disp. 5.
Express resurrectio Christi est causa resurrectionis eorum, qui ad Vitam
Eternam suscitabuntur, 1 Cor. 15. 20, 21, 22. To the same purpose also is that
1 Thessalonians. 4. 14. etc. What the other Texts you speak of be, when you show, I may
consider then. This I grant, That the Wicked shall rise by the Power of Christ
as Mediator, John 5. 28, 29. But that is not enough to prove, That had not
Christ been Mediator, there should have been no Resurrection; no more than it
follows, that otherwise none should have been condemned for sin, because no^
all Judgment is committed unto Christ, John 5. 22, 27.

I see no such difference betwixt them. Ibid.
For slaying before the foundation of the World, 7. 24.
cannot be meant of actual slaying, but only of fore-ordaining to be slain.

I mean Christ's Sufferings, Ibid.
as in obedience to his Father he submitted unto them. This Commandment have I
received of my Father, said he, John 10. 18. Sufferings simply considered
without Obedience, find no acceptance with God. No need therefore to except
against the Phrase commonly used, Vide Gataker cont. Gomarum p. 14, 15.
[Passive Obedience] i. e. Obedience in Suffering. Christ had a Commandment to
lay down his Life, it was the Will of his Father that he should do it, and in
obedience thereto he did it.

The Rule (A quatenus ad omne, Ibid.
etc.) does not here make for you, Ibid. 56.
because it was not Christ's suffering merely as obedience, but as such
obedience, viz. Obedience in suffering, that was satisfactory. So that neither
Suffering without Obedience, nor Obedience without Suffering would avail. Sed
quae non prosunt singula, juncta juvant.

If only such Obedience be meant Romans 5. 19. as is opposed to Adam's
disobedience, Ibid.
and therefore Active Obedience is meant, it will follow that only Active
Obedience is meant, which you will not admit, because Adam's Disobedience was
only Active. But Christ's Obedience in Suffering, may be opposed to Adam's
Disobedience in Acting; and Christ's Passive Obedience (suffer me to speak so)
may stand in opposition to Disobedience in general, as working a contrary
effect, viz. Whereas Disobedience does make Sinful, Christ's (Passive)
Obedience does make Righteous; and in that respect only does the Apostle oppose
Christ's Obedience to Adam's Disobedience.

1. The Apostle saying, 10
That Christ was made under the Law, Ibid.
it seems to be without doubt, That it was the Will of God that he should
observe the Law. 58.
For is it not the Will of God that his Law should be observed by such as are
under it? Yet Christ might observe the Law for some ends peculiar to himself,
as for those ends he was made under it. Christ according to the flesh was a
Jew, therefore meet it was he should observe the Jewish Law, otherwise he had
been an offense unto them. 2. As Christ was not made Man for himself, so (it is
true) he was not bound to observe the Law for himself. But thus you should not
limit it to some Works; for all his Works were so for us, as he was nobis
natus, nobis datus, Isa. 9. 6. Yet being made Man, as Man he was bound (I
think) to perform that Obedience which God did require of Man. You say, That he
used the Legal Ceremonies to show his subjection: So say I; and this (I think)
is against you, it being meant of such subjection as the Law required of all
those that were under it. 3. If Christ were sub Lege, as the Apostle says he
was, then it was ex Lege that he observed those legal rites. Yet, I grant, it
was ex vi sponsionis propriae; so all that he did, so his very being made Man
was. Whereas you say, [Else the Law would have obliged him to the act and end
together]; I Answer, The Law does oblige, according to the Will of the
Lawgiver, who might oblige Christ to it otherwise than he did others. I think
the Ceremonial Observances, besides the Typical Nature of them, are to be
considered as Religious Rites, whereby God was honored and worshipped; and so
Christ as Man was obliged unto them, Man being bound to honor and worship God,
so as God does require of him. That which you add of the burden of Penal
Actions, seems impertinent; For Penal Actions (I think) have the nature of
Sufferings, and so they concern not the Point in Controversy betwixt us, which
is only concerning Actions as Pious, not as Penal.

Your Reasons drawn from the Actions of Christ, Ibid. 11. 9. 59.
receiving their chief Dignity from his chief Nature, etc. will reach further
(I think) than you intend or desire, even to make all Christ's Active
Righteousness to be satisfactory for us. And so indeed you seem to hold, Aph.
p. 61. where you say, [The Interest of the Divine Nature in all the Works of
Christ, makes them to be infinitely meritorious and satisfactory]. Yet here,
p. 10. you seem to restrain it to Penal Actions, and the burden of tedious
Ceremonious Worship, as you call it. For my part, I yet think; That as the
Holiness of Christ's Nature, so also the Holiness of his Life was requisite to
qualify him for suffering, and (by suffering) satisfying for us. Him that knew
on sin, God made sin for us, 2. Cor. 5. ult. Such an High Priest became us, who
is holy, harmless, etc. Heb. 7. 26. Mr. Blake (whose Judgment I do much value,
though I cannot force mine own further than I am convinced) in this Point,
concerning the Imputation of Christ's Active Righteousness, seems to differ
both from you and me; Of the Coven. c. 12. p. 78.
he says, [Christ had been innocent, though he had never come under the Law to
have yielded that obedience]. But how Christ could have continued innocent,
without yielding obedience to the Law; or how being Man, he could be exempt
from that Law, whereby the Creature is to show his subjection to the Creator, I
cannot see. He adds, [His Person had not been as ours under the Law, unless of
his own accord he had been made under the Law]. He was not made Man (say I) but
of his own accord; Vide Gatakerum nosturm adversus Lucium, Respons. ad vindic.
yet being Man, I conceive it was necessary that he should be under that Law
which God imposed upon Man, and so both under the Moral Law, as the eternal
Rule of Righteousness; and also under the Ceremonial Law, as the prescribed
Rule of Worship. He adds further, [Somewhat might be said for the subjection of
the Humane Nature in Christ, Part. 2.
the Manhood of Christ, which was a Creature, but the Person of Christ, Sect.
7. page 54. etc. Et contra Gomarum p. 4. and 22.
God-Man, seems to be above subjection]. This I confess seems strange to me;
for the Humane Nature of Christ, though personally united to the Divine Nature,
being still a Creature, must needs be in subjection to him that made it; and
therefore the Person of Christ, God-Man, though not as God, but as Man, must be
under subjection. He goes on saying, [We know the mortality of the Humane
Nature, yet Christ bad never died, unless he had made himself obedient unto
death; neither needed to have served, unless he had humbled himself, Phil. 2.
to take upon him the form of a Servant]. But Mortality is no necessary
consequent of Humane Nature, as subjection unto God is; and Christ taking upon
him the Nature of Man, did es nomine take upon him the form of a Servant; for
Man must be Servant unto God, the Creature to the Creator. He bids, [See the
Assemblies Confession of Faith, Chap. 8. Sect. 5. and Dr. Featlies Speeches
upon it]. These Speeches I cannot now see, but I have seen them long ago, and
was not satisfied with them. The words of the Assembly are such, as that some
question may be made of the meaning of them, viz. Whether by [Christ's perfect
Obedience and Sacrifice of himself] be not meant one and the same thing, so
that the latter words are exegetical to the former. But to return to you, who
say, [The Question should be, Whether it be only Poena Christi, or Obedientia
also, that satisfies and meriteth]? I think it is not simply Poena, or
Obedientia, but Poena Obedientialis, and Obedientia Poenalis.

1. The Creator is absolute Lord over the Creature, Ibid. 60.
2. You seem to make even the Actions of sinful men capable of being
meritorious, though less properly. 3. Though Obedience be absolutely perfect,
yet if absolutely due, it seems repugnant to Luke 17. 10. that it should be
meritorious.

The interest of the Divine Nature does certainly put an infinite excellency
into all Christ's Actions: Ibid.
Yet see not how Christ's good Actions (I speak of mere Actions, Ibid. 61.
which have no penality or suffering mixed with them) could properly be
meritorious, they being otherwise due, supposing Man had not sinned, and so
there had needed no satisfaction to be made for him. Though I am not of their
mind, who think that the Son of God should have been incarnate, though Man had
never sinned; yet I see no reason to doubt but so it might have been: Now hoc
supposito, all Christ's mere Active Righteousness would have been due, but not
his Passive Righteousness.

I have diverse times told you, That when we speak of

My interpretation of these words, Ibid.
[The Father judges no Man] contains indeed no absolute exclusion of the
Father, 10. 65.
neither can I admit any such exclusion; but an exclusion of him in some
respect it does contain. He that does a thing, yet not immediately by himself,
but by another whom he has put in authority to do it, may be said in some
respect not to do it. When the Egyptians cried to Pharaoh for Bread, he bad
them go to Joseph, etc. Genesis 41. 55. q. d. I meddle not with these things,
Joseph is to do all such matters. Yet Pharaoh indeed did all, though not
immediately, but by Joseph. Your Arguments, p. 13. press not me, who never
intended to deny that it belongs to Christ's Mediatorship, and namely to his
Kingly Office, to judge the World; only I showed what I took to be the meaning
of those Texts, John 5. 22. and 27. Wherein I followed Jansenius and Maldonate,
no absurd Expositors, though Papists. And even Calvin and Beza also seem to
agree with me in the exclusion of the Father, v. 22. In Patre nihil mutatum
est, Calv. in John 5. 23.
etc. Est enim ipse in Filio, and in eo operatur, Beza in eundem loc.
says Calvin. And so Beza, Negat Christus a Patre administrari hunc mundum,
ita, viz. ut Judaei arbitrabantur; qui Patrem a Filio separabant, cum Pater
contra non nisi in persona Filii manifestati in carne mundum regat.

You seem to make the present death of Adam a part of the rigorous execution of
the Law, 14.
when you say, Ibid. 67.
Aphor. p. 33. [That the Sentence should have been immediately executed to the
full, or that any such thing is concluded in the words of the Threat, In the
day that thou eatest, etc. I do not think; for that would have prevented both
the Being, the Sin, and the Suffering of his Posterity]. How would this have
been prevented, if Adam's present Death were not included in the immediate and
full execution of the Sentence, i. e. in the rigorous execution of it?
Therefore though you argue, That the words of the Threat were not so meant, as
that the Sentence should immediately be executed to the full, yet your very
Argument supposes, That if the Sentence should have been so executed, Adam
should presently have died. Now though Christ had not died, yet this part of
the rigorous execution of the Law might have been suspended, and supposing the
propagation of Mankind must have been: against this (so far as I see) you say
nothing.

I desire to be as favorable an Animadverter as Truth will permit: Ibid.
but how under the name of Animadversion I defend what you say, 11. 68.
I do not see. If you had used the word [Chastisements], it would not have
freed you from mine Animadversion. For I show that Chastisements are
Punishments. And whereas you speak of my great oversight, it is indeed your
great mistake; for I did not take those words to express your Opinion, only you
seemed therein to allow the distinction betwixt Afflictions of Love and
Punishments; this is it which I thought worthy of an Animadversion.

You might see, 15.
that I make the Afflictions of God's Children in their Nature to be Evil, and
a Curse, though not so to them, they being sanctified and working for their
good. And I presume, those Divines whom you oppose, meant as both you and I do,
though you interpret them otherwise. The difference here betwixt you and me is
this; You allow their Expression, and dislike their meaning; I allow their
Meaning, and dislike their Expression. They distinguish betwixt Chastisements
and Punishments, which distinction in your Aphorisms you seem to allow, only
disliking the Application of it. The distinction it self I dislike, though I
think that some who used it, did not err in that which they intended in it. In
the Contents of Isa. 27. there are these words, [God's Chastisements differ
from Judgments], which words I hold incongruous. I like not that of Mr. Kendal
against Mr. Goodwin, Chap. 4. p. 139. [Punishment aims chiefly at the
satisfaction of Justice, Correction at the amendment of the Offender]. That is
not true of all Punishments, see Geld. Lib. 6. cap. 14. Yet the meaning of
those that used them, was not (I think) erroneous.

I would give you no cause to quarrel with me. Ibid.
But is not this your own Argument? 12. 70.
Do you not thus oppose the Common Judgment as you call it? [They are ascribed
to God's anger, etc.] Aphor. p. 70. Do you not there oppose God's Anger to his
Love? Whereas Love and Hatred, not Love and Anger are truly opposite. God may
be angry with us, and yet love us; yea therefore angry with us, because he
loves us. Rev. 3. 20. There is Ira Paterna and Castigans, as well as Ira
Hostilis and Exterminans, Davenant in Col. 3. 6. Where those words of yours
are, which you say I almost repeat, I do not know. I expressed mine own sense
in mine own words; and my scope was only to correct that Opposition which you
make betwixt Love and Anger, though I see that Aphor. p. 71. you speak of a
mixture of Love and Anger, and say, That there is no Hatred, though there be
Anger. My chief design in those Animadversions was, That in your Second
Edition, which you promised, you might have occasion, if not to confirm your
Assertions, yet to clear your Expressions.

I know you oppose their sense that so distinguish, Ibid.
but their distinction simply considered you seem to admit; if you say that you
do not, I am satisfied.

Your words were of Affliction as Affliction, Ibid.
therefore of Affliction in general. Ib. Ib.
You say, Aphor. p. 70. [The very nature of Affliction is to be a loving
punishment, etc.] But you confess now, that you should have said
[Chastisement]; and so I have my desire in this Particular, viz. your better
expression.

God is not the Father of the Unregenerate, Ibid.
though Elect, in respect of Actual Adoption: Ib. Ib.
But you know that Ephesians. 1. 5. [Having predestined us to the Adoption of
Sons, etc.] God having loved such with an everlasting Love, viz. Benevolentiae,
though not Complacentiae, no marvel if he afflict them in Love before their
Conversion, viz. in order to their Conversion. But (you know) I speak of
Reprobates, and that it is written, Romans 9. 13.
[Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated]; Whether that import the Election
of Jacob, and the Reprobation of Esau, I now dispute not; but I think it does
import God's love of the Elect, and his hatred of the Reprobate. Part 1.
Deus omnes homines diligit (inquit Aquinas) and etiam omnes Creaturas, Quest.
23.
in quantum omnibus vult aliquod bonum: Art. 3. ad 1.
non tamen quadcunque bonum vult omnibus. In quantum igitur non vult hoc bonum
quod est vita aeterna, dicitur eos odio habere, and reprobare.

Sanctified Suffering I hold to be malum in se and sua natura: Ibid.
and so I think do they, Ib. Ib.
against whom you dispute in your Aphorisms: but though Suffering as Suffering
be evil, yet as Sanctified it is not evil. It is good for me that I was
afflicted, Psalm. 119. 71.

Afflictions were then indeed to be loved, 16.
if they were good of their own Nature: but being only good as sanctified, we
are not simply to desire them, but a sanctified use of them, and in that
respect to rejoice in them, Jam. 1, 2, 3. Romans 5. 3, 4, 5. Whereas you advise
me to take heed of arguing thus, [That which works for our good, etc.] Where
do I argue so? Rather thus; That which is sanctified to us, does work for our
good: and so though it be evil in it self, yet it is good to us. But Affliction
is sanctified, etc.

I am apt to oversee: Ibid.
but neither I, nor they (I think) whom you first opposed, Ib. Ib.
deny Sin to be the meritorious cause of Affliction, if that were all you aimed
at in your Question.

What I mean by Comformity unto Christ, Ibid.
you might set by Romans 8. 17. which I cited: I may also add 1 Pet. 4. 17. In
these places the Scripture speaks of suffering for well-doing, which is
acceptable with God, 1 Pet. 2. 19. Yet I grant, sin is the Root of all
suffering; so it was of Christ's suffering, though not his sin, but ours. Only
I thought it meet to put you in mind, that God in sending Affliction has other
ends than to punish sin, which the places alleged do show, and so other places.

The Object of Love is not only present Good. Ibid.
There is a Love of Desire, as well as of Delight. 13. 71.
The Spouse wanting Christ, was sick of Love, Cant. 5. 8.

I did not say, Ibid.
That Sanctified Suffering is not Evil, but that it is not evil as sanctified.
Suffering, though sanctified, is suffering still, and so evil; but as
sanctified, it is good, and not evil.

Those Arguments prove nothing against me, 17.
nor (I am persuaded) against those Divines mentioned in your Aphorisms. Ib. Ib.
It is granted, That Death in it self is Evil, an Enemy, a Punishment, to be
feared, avoided, etc. Yet as it is sanctified, it is good, a Friend, a Mercy,
to be desired, embraced, etc. 2 Cor. 5. 6, 7, 8. Phil. 1. 21, 23.

It is evil, Ibid.
1. to them to whom it is not managed for their good. Ib. 72.
2. To them also to whom it is so managed, but not as it is so managed.

Lex abrogata vim nullam habet obligandi, Ibid.
says Grotius. 14. 79.
Well, but we are not always so much to mind the strict propriety of words, De
Satisfact. p. 57.
as what they that use them do mean by them.

That which you speak of our discharge before believing, Ibid.
might have been omitted, the question being about Believers, and so believing
presupposed.

Why the Justification and Condemnation of Believers does not depend upon the
Law, 18.
this (I think) is a sufficient reason, 15. 83.
Christ has redeemed them from the Curse* of the Law, etc. Gal. 3. 13. Si quid
novisti rectius isto, Candidus imperti.

The Law so concurs to the constitution of Guilt, Ibid.
as were there no Law, Ib. Ib.
there were no Transgression. In the other two Particulars, which follow, we do
accord also.

1. Neither did I mean so, Ibid.
as if there were no explicit threatening to Unbelievers* 16. 85.
but only this, That pardon of all sin being promised upon condition of
believing, it implies that death is only threatened in case of unbelief. And tho
there be an express threatening to Unbelievers, (viz. Mark 18. 16.) yet not only
to Unbelievers. The threatening of death only to Unbelievers, is (I think) only
employed in the promise of Li^e made to Believers. 2. Neither did my words hold
out any other meaning of 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7, 8. than what you express. 3. The new
Law or Gospel requiring Faith, the Fruit whereof is Obedience; it will condemn
the disobedient, i. e. it will leave them to the condemnation of the Law, while
they remain in that estate, though it hold out Mercy upon condition, that they
believe and bring forth Fruit meet for repentance.

Mr. Lawson I know for an able Scholar; Ibid.
but his reasons for that Position I do not know. 17. 86.
If no Law, no sin; for sin is a transgression of the Law, 1 John 3. 4.

Your saying, 19.
Aphor. p. 89. [Whosoever will believe to the end, Ib. 89.
shall be justified], may seem to imply, That though a Man ^elieve, yet he
remains unjustified, (as well as unglorified) until he go on and hold out unto
the end: otherwise (I suppose) all will yield, That a Man must believe unto the
end, that he may be justified unto the end.

1. Though you deny that which I say your words seem to imply; Ibid.
yet what your meaning was, 18. Ib.
or is* you do not clearly show. 2. You seemed to make the Life promised to
Adam, only a continuance of his present enjoyments, which were as all upon the
Earth, so many of them earthly, and none comparable to the happiness of the
Saints in Heaven.

1. Though there be several degrees of Damnation, Ibid.
yet all being the damnation of Hell, Ib. Ib.
I do not think that there is such difference between one degree of Damnation
and another, as there is betwixt the scratch of a Pin, and the pulling off a
Man's flesh with Pincers. 2. If Adam had not sinned, he should have had that
happiness which all those Privileges that you mention tend unto; and by his
sin he forfeited all that happiness. Besides, when I spoke of the identity of
Punishment for kind, though not for degree, I meant it of Poena sensus; and
that (I conceived) was your meaning also.

No question but the Confirmation, Ibid.
Radication, and further degree of Grace is comprehended in those Promises, Ib.
91.
[I will put my Law in their inward parts, etc.] as a further degree of
Spiritual Circumcision is promised, Deuteronomy. 30. 6. and a greater measure of the
Spirit, Luke 11. 13. But though the Circumstances of those Texts do so limit
the Promises contained in them, (which yet may be questioned concerning Deuteronomy.
30. 6.) yet so do not (that I see) the Circumstances of that in Jer. 31. 33.
and Heb. 8. 10. And therefore there is no reason to restrain these in that
manner. Ampliandi favores. Besides, it is certain, Man can perform no condition
required of him, except God work it in him, 2 Cor. 3. 5. Phil. 2. 13.

By Relative Change you mean Justification and Adoption: Ibid.
Now I think it is no hard matter to prove a real change in any, 19. 95.
in whom this relative change is, i. e. That they that are justified and
adopted, are also sanctified. 1. They that are justified and adopted, are
Christ's, Gal. 3. ult. Ergo, they that are justified and adopted, are
sanctified. For so are they that are Christ's, Romans 8. 9. Take the Syllogism, if
you please, thus; They that are Viz. By actual relation unto him.
Christ's, are sanctified: But they that are justified and adopted, are Christ's.
Therefore they that are justified and adopted, are sanctified. 2. They that are
in a state of Salvation, are sanctified, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13. John 3. 3, 5. But
they that are justified and adopted, are in a state of Salvation, Tit. 3. 7.
Romans 8. 17, Ergo. Hear one* with whom you are acquainted, and whom I shall have
occasion to cite afterward, De Reconcil. Part 2.
viz. Wotton, Vt regni (inquit) coelestis hereditatem adipiscamur, and venia
peccatorum, and sanctimonia opus est, Lib. 2.
-- Qua enim ratione here is esse vitae aeternae intelligatur, Cap. 22.
qui immundus est? And lest you should put this off, and say, That
Sanctification indeed is requisite before any can enter into the possession of
Eternal Life, but not before they can have a right unto it; he adds, Remissione
igitur sive condonatione opus est ad haereditatis jus obtinendum: Sed nequaquam
in ill a sunt omnia. Etenim (ut paulo ante significavi.) acced^t etiam oportet
regeneratio, per quam sanctimonia imbuamur. Qu^re Christus factus est nobis and
justitia, and sanctificatio, 1 Cor. 1. 30. For the Arguments which you mention
in Mr. Bedford's Book, if you had propounded any of them, I should have
considered how to answer them. Now as you only refer me to that Book for
Arguments against my Opinion, so shall I refer you to another Book for answer
to those Arguments, viz. Mr. Gataker's lately published.

i. e. confirmed. Though Baptism therefore be ordained to this end, to seal
remission of sins, yet none can make this use of it, until they believe, and so
have their sins remitted. Neither does this make for Anabaptists, for
Circumcision was of the same nature, Romans 4. 11. Yet were Infants circumcised.
Of Persever. chapter 12.
[Not all that are baptized (says Bp. Downam) are truly justified]. And again,
[It is not necessary, that every one baptized, should presently be regenerated,
or justified: but Baptism is a Seal to him of the Righteousness of Faith,
either to be applied by the Holy Ghost to the Elect dying in infancy, or to be
apprehended also by Faith in them, who living to years of discretion, have
grace to believe]. Again also, [The Papists themselves teach, That the
Sacraments do not confer Grace ponenti obicem mortalis peccati; but all that
come to Baptism, are guilty (if not justified before) of mortal sin, not only
adulti, who to their original sin have added their own personal transgression,
but Infants also, who besides their original corruption, in respect whereof
they are mortally dead in sin, stand guilty of Adam 's most heinous
transgression]. 2. Baptism is as well a Seal of Sanctification, as of Remission
of Sins; for it seals the whole Covenant, and all the Promises contained in it.
And as Circumcision signified and sealed the taking away of the Foreskin (or
superfluity of naughtiness, as St. James speaks, Chap. 1. 21.) of the Heart,
so does Baptism signify and seal the washing away of the filthiness, as well
as of the guiltiness of it. Indeed Mr. Mede in one of his Diatribae, would have
the thing signified in Baptism, to be only the sanctifying Grace of the Holy
Ghost; wherein I cannot subscribe unto him, Whereas you speak of an External
Covenant, as some call it; some may express themselves one way, some another,
yet all mean the same thing. For my part, I do not use to speak of an External
Covenant, but of an External Being in the Covenant, which is all that
ordinarily we can be assured of in respect of others, and which is enough for
admittance to the Sign and Seal of the Covenant. The People of the Jews, until
by professed unbelief they fell away, were generally in the Covenant, Romans 9.
4. even in that Covenant, which they that were Allens from, had no hope, Ephesians.
2. 12. Yet many of them were but externally in the Covenant, Romans 9. 6, 27, 29.
You labor in vain, when you seek to evade that Text, Romans 8. 9. How should any
be actually Christ's, except they be united to him? And how united, but by the
Spirit? 1 Cor. 6. 17. And if you meant (as you say) only of Saving Relations,
Can a Saving Relation be put upon any, and yet no Saving Work wrought in them?
Neither truly is a mere profession ^uch a real change, as I supposed you did
mean, viz. a change of the Heart, whereby one is made a new Creature.

I think that properly there are not distinct Laws, 23.
from whose distinct condemnations we must be freed: Ibid. 103.
That the Gospel does not condemn any, Ad. 1.
but only leave some to the Law to be condemned by it, though their
Condemnation by reason of the Gospel, as of every Mercy neglected, or abused,
will be the greater.

The Father (as I have said before) does judge, Ibid.
though by Christ, Ad. 2.
see Acts 17. 31. And however, I see not how you can conclude any thing to the
purpose by this Argument.

If for every several Accusation there must be a several Righteousness, 24.
then there will be need of infinite Righteousnesses, Ad. 3.
seeing there may be infinite accusations. But one Righteousness, viz. that of
Christ's Satisfaction for us, will take off all Accusations brought against us;
else how does the Apostle say; Who shall lay any thing to the charge, etc. Romans
^. 33, 34. Indeed the Promise is made upon condition of believing, and
therefore the not performing of the Condition, debars from benefit of the
Promise. But this (I conceive) is not properly a new Accusation, but only a
making good of the former accusation, we having nothing to show why it should
not stand in force against us. Your self did well distinguish p. 22. betwixt a
Condition as a Condition, and a Condition as a Duty. Now Faith as a Condition,
is required in the Gospel, but as a Duty in the Law; For the Law requires us in
all things to obey God; that is comprehended in the first Precept, therefore it
requires us to believe in Christ, God commanding it. Else not to believe, were
no sin; for sin is a transgressiin of the Law, 1 John 3. 4. Now as Believing is
a Duty, so notbelieving does afford matter of Accusation, and cause of
Condemnation: But as Believing is a Condition, so Not-believing does only leave
the Accusation otherwise made in force against us; and for sin, whereof we are
accused and found guilty, leaves us to condemnation. Thus (I think) are those
Texts to be understood, John 3. 18. and ult. Whereas you say, That the
Accusation may be threefold, truly in that manner it may be manifold: But
indeed the Accusation is but one and the same, viz. that we are Non-credentes:
For Pagans do not so much as appear, and Hypocrites, Solifidians are no
Believers, as believing is a receiving of Christ, and that is the believing by
which we are justified.
Solifidians do but appear to be Believers.

For the several Sentences from whence you argue; Ibid.
1. You urged Joh. 5. 22. Ad. 4.
to prove that God Creator judges none. 2. How are any freed from the Sentence
of the first Law, but by the benefit of the New Law? therefore I see no ground
for that which you seem to insinuate, viz. That we must first be freed from the
Sentence of one Law, and then of another. Indeed I do not see, That the Gospel
has any Sentence of Condemnation distinct from the Law; only it does condemn
Unbelievers, in that it does not free them from that condemnation which by the
Law is due unto them.

That there is a sorer punishment, Ibid.
as of a distinct kind, than that Death threatened Genesis 3. Ad. 5.
you do not prove, neither (I presume) can it be proved. There are (I grant)
several degrees of that Death, yet all of the same kind, viz. The loss of
Heavenly Happiness, and the enduring of Hell-Torment. And if there must be a
several Righteousness for every several degree of Punishment, there must be
more Righteousnesses than you either do or can assign.

I say as before, Ibid.
I do not think this, [Thou art an Vnbeliever] (I speak of Unbelief as a
not-performing of the Gospel-Condition) to be a new Accusation, Ad. 6.
but only a Plea why the former should stand good, viz. that we are sinners,
and so to be condemned by the Law, because the benefit of the Gospel which we
lay claim to, does not belong unto us, we not performing the condition to that
end required of us.

Whereas you say, Ibid.
[We are devolved to the New Law before our Justification is compleat]. Are we
not devolved to it for the very beginning of our Justification? So again,
[Christ's Satisfaction is imputed to us for Righteousness, etc. But the New
Covenant gives the personal Interest]. Does not the New Covenant give Christ
also, in whom we have interest? I note these Passages, because your meaning in
them perhaps is such as I do not sufficiently understand.

I say still, Ibid.
Here is no occasion properly of a new Accusation, but only of a removens
prohibens, a taking away of that which would hinder the force of the former
Accusation. And so there is no new Righteousness of ours required unto
Justification, but only a Condition, without which we cannot have interest in
Christ's Righteousness, that thereby we may be justified.

In your Aphorisms you speak only of a Twofold Righteousness requisite unto
Justification; Ibid.
now you speak of a Twofold Justification necessary to be attained. But the
Scripture speaks of Justification by Christ, and Justification by Faith, as of
one and the same Justification, Acts 13. 39. Romans 5. 1.

The Second Cause (as you call it) viz. 25.
[Whether the Defendant have performed the condition of the New Covenant] is
indeed this, Whether he have any thing truly to allege, why upon the former
Accusation he should not be condemned? And so he must be justified indeed by
producing his Faith, (and so his sincere Obedience to testify his Faith) yet
not as a new Righteousness of his own, but only as intitling him to Christ's
Righteousness, as that whereby he must be justified.

Whereas you speak of a Threefold Guilt, Ibid.
viz. [Reatus culpae. 2. Reatus non-praestitae Conditionis. 3. Reatus poena
propter non praestitam conditionem]. 1. As Omne malum est vel Culpae, vel
Poena, so omnis reatus seems to be so too. 2. The not-performing of a
Condition, as a Condition, brings no new guilt of Punishment, (if it did,
surely it were Culpa, and so the second Member falls in with the first) but
only the loss of the Remedy, or Reward promised upon the performing of that
Condition; though the not performing of the Condition as a Duty, will bring a
new guilt of Punishment. 3. Therefore the Reatus peenae is not properly ob non
praestitam Conditionem, but ob culpam admissam, which Reatus does remain in
force, because the Condition required for the removing of it, is not performed.

We must take heed of straining Law-terms too far in Matters of Devinity. I see
not how the firmness of my title to Christ's Righteous ness for Justification,
26
may properly be called my Righteousness whereby I am justified; though the
firmness of that title may be questioned, and must be proved; yet if it prove
false, it is not that properly which does condemn, (I speak of the Meritorious
Cause of Condemnation) but sin committed against the Law, is that which does
put into a state of Condemnation, and for want of that Title, there is nothing
to free from Condemnation.

The Obligation unto Punishment is not dissolved by Satisfaction made by
Christ, Ibid.
as to Unbelievers, because for want of Faith, the Satisfaction of Christ is
not imputed unto them.

1. For that far greater Punishment, Ibid.
which you speak of, I have said enough before. 2. Is that Non-liberation from
former misery a distinct punishment from that misery? Though the former misery
may be aggravated by neglect of that which would procure a liberation from it.
If God had never made a New Covenant, there had certainly been a Non-liberation
from that misery, which the breach of the first Covenant did bring upon us; and
under that misery they must lie for ever, who neglect the Remedies provided for
them; and as their neglect does aggravate their sin, so will it increase their
Condemnation.

The Immunity does result from the New Covenant, Ibid.
the Penality from the Old, unto which Unbelievers are left, the New Covenant
affording them no Remedy by reason of their unbelief: and the Penality of the
Old Covenant is accidentally increased by the New Covenant, in that by neglect
of its Remedy sin is increased.

I am of this opinion, Ibid.
That the New Covenant has no other Penality, but that it does leave
Unbelievers to the Penality of the Old Covenant, and by accident increase the
same.

If that Penality be but the same Death, Ibid.
it has no more than the former; neither can that Act of Grace be properly
said to appoint a new Punishment, but only to leave to the former Punishment,
as not delivering from it. You speak indeed of Double Torments appointed by
that Act for such as do reject it; but so (I think) the Similitude does not
hold. For I see not; that the Covenant of Grace does so, but only (as I have
said) leave some upon their not performing the Condition required of them, to
the Punishment appointed by the Covenant of Works; which Punishment will be the
sorer, as Sin by neglect of Grace offered is the greater.

3. Though our Mediator do not believe, Ibid.
repent and obey for us, but we our selves must believe, repent and obey, yet
it does not follow that our believing, repenting and obeying, is that
Righteousness by which we are justified.

4. Though we be not guilty of not performing the Condition of the New
Covenant, yet this is not properly our Righteousness, 27
by which we are justified, though without it we cannot be justified, because
not partake of Christ's Righteousness.

5. The rejecting of Christ may be considered* 1. As the receiving of Christ is
a Duty Commanded. 2. As the receiving of Christ is the Condition of Pardon and
Salvation offered. In the former respect, the rejecting of Christ is properly a
sin; and so against the Law, though aggravated by the Gospel, in that Christ is
rejected notwithstanding all the benefit to be obtained by him. That the Law
does not speak of Christ, is nothing; for it speaks of obeying God in all his
Commands, and so implicitly it speaks of receiving Christ, when God does
command it. In the latter respect the rejecting of Christ (I think) does not
properly bring a new guilt, but only continue and aggravate the former.

6. But recurrit question, viz. Whether the New Law does require the Condition
as our Righteousness: it seems to me to require it only to that end, that
Christ's Righteousness may be imputed unto us, and that so by that
Righteousness we may be justified.

7. Faith, as a Duty, is a Conformity to the Law, though a partial and
imperfect Conformity unto it, and so there is no being justified by it. As a
Condition, it is a conformity to the Gospel, but no Righteous^ess by which we
are justified, though a Condition upon performing of which we are justified by
Christ's Righteousness.

8. I deny that there is any other condemnation of the Gospal, but only a
not-freeing in some case from the condemnation of the Law.

9. The Condition being considered merely as a Condition, and not as a Duty, to
object that we have not performed the Condition, is not to bring a new
Accusation, but only to take away the Plea, why the old Accusation should not
prevail against us.

10. The performance of the Condition of the New Covenant, being designed to
that use, which you mention, viz. [to be the sinners self-denying
acknowledgment of his sin and misery, and insufficiency to deliver himself] it
does hence rather follow, that properly it is not our Righteousness, by which
we are justified, though it be required of us to that end, that we may be
justified by Christ's Righteousness.

11. That the Condition is not of so large extent as the Duty commanded, seems
not to the purpose, the Question being of the Condition as a Condition, not as
a Duty. Faith as a Duty (I grant) is part of our Personal Righteousness; but
that is not it by which we are justified.

12. As the Condition is a Condition, and no more, so the performing of it is
no Justitia at all: as it is a Duty, so indeed the performing of it is Justitia
particularis, and secundum quid, as the performing of every Duty is: but such a
justitia I dare not rely on for Justification. Whereas you say, That Christ's
Righteousness is not simply our Universal Righteousness it is true, if by
[simply] you mean [absolute and nulla interposita conditione] otherwise our
Universal Righteousness it is, so that we have no need of any other
Righteousness for our Justification, though we have need of some thing to that
end, that we may partake of Christ's, Righteousness, and be justified by it.

13. The Gospel as distinct from the Law, does show us our Remedy; the Law as
distinct from the Gospel, does prescribe unto us our Duty. Or if the Gospel
also does prescribe unto us our Duty, yet no other Duty, though upon other
terms than the Law does prescribe. However, though the performing of the Duty
be in some sort our Righteousness, yet it is not that Righteousness by which we
are justified. Still I distinguish of Believing considered as a Duty, and
considered as a Condition. As a Duty, it is our Righteousness, but not that
whereby we are justified; as a Condition, it is that whereby we are justified,
but not our Righteousness; it is only that whereby we receive Righteousness,
viz. the Righteousness of Christ, that Righteousness indeed by which we are
justified. Whereas you say, [The difference of the two Laws or Covenants, is
the main ground which shows the necessity of a Twofold Righteousness]. The
necessity of a Twofold Righteousness is not denied, but only the necessity of
a Twofold Righteousness unto Justification.

This Twofold Justification seems to be a new conceit. Ibid.
I remember not that you spoke any thing of it in your Aphorisms; neither (I
think) will it easily be granted because of your Positions and Suppositions,
but rather they will be rejected, as inferring that which is not to be
admitted. For truly where the Gospel does speak of more Justifications than
one, (in that sense as we treat of Justification) I am yet to seek.

From a Twofold Covenant you infer a Twofold Justification. Ibid.
But is there a Twofold Covenant, by which we are or may be justified? I
conceive, we are justified only by the New Covenant. For by the Deeds of the
Law (the Old Covenant) shall no flesh be justified, Romans 3. 20. See also Acts
13. 39.

1. To be accused as an Unbeliever, and a Rejecter of Christ, Ibid.
etc. is to be accused as a finner, and as one that did not continue in all
things written in the Law to do them. For else Unbelief and rejecting of Christ
were no sin; that Christ is not spoken of in the Law, is nothing, as I have
showed before. 2. That Accusation (that a Man is an Unbeliever, and a Rejecter
of Christ) if it be made good, does leave a Man to the Law, and makes all its
Accusations to be in force against him, with aggravation of his Sin for
contempt of Mercy.

Bradshaw (so far as I see) makes nothing for you. De Justis. c. 24.. 21.
He says, Bona opera quodammodo justificare dicuntur, quod fidem, i^samque
(...) justificationem nostram arguendu, accomprobando, utramque ista ratione
justificent. This is but what others say, That Faith does justify the Person,
and Works justify the Faith: and that is indeed no more than what all
Protestants do say, viz. That Works declare and manifest Faith to be such as
whereby the Person is justified: and that therefore a Man is said to be
justified by Works, because thereby he appears to have Faith, whereby he is
justified.

Again he says, Ibid.. 23.
Obedientia non minus quam ipsa (ex qua oritur) sides ad falutem aeternans est
nobis necessaria, utpote sine qua justitiam Christi imputatam prodess nobis
posse spes nulla exist at. This is but what Protestants generally acknowledge,
That Obedience is necessary as a Fruit of Justifying Faith; so that without
Obedience it is in vain to think of being justified by Christ's Righteousness:
Yet is not our Obedience therefore a Righteousness, by which we are justified.

Again he says, Ibid.. 25.
Cujuslibet Christiani, quicum actu Deus in gratiam rediit, duplex est
Justitia; Imputata una, Inhaerens altera. But he does not say, That we are
justified by Inherent, as well as by Imputed Righteousness: He is as far from
that as other Protestants generally are; and other Protestants generally are as
ready to assert the necessity of that Twofold Righteousness, as he is.

Again he says, Ibid.. 26.
Per justitiam Christi nobis imputatam non possimus dici absolute sive omni
modo justi, etc. He means, We are not freed from future Obedience, though we be
freed from the guilt of Disobedience. This (except Libertines) none, I presume,
will deny. But all this, as to the Controversy betwixt us about a Twofold
Righteousness requisite unto Justification, is (that I see) just nothing. But
concerning Bradshaw, and the places which you point at in him, I observe, that.
21. is twice so figured, and therefore which of the two you did intend, may be
a question. I before noted what is in the former; but in the latter there is
something, which peradventure you intended, though I judge it as little to your
purpose as the rest. He says, Nova Nostra Obedientia pro grad^ suo, and
mensura, etiam justitia nostra dicitur, qua and formaliter, inherenter,
habitualiter, sive ex operibus justi (pro ipsius modulo) cora^ Deo etiam vere
dicamu^, utpote cujus ratione pro justis ex part a Deo ipso censeamur,
cujusque intuitu etiam in foro divino aliquo modo (si id opus esset)
justificari possimus. But, 1. you see what mincing of the matter here is; [Pro
gradu suo and mensura: Pro ipsius modulo: exparte: Aliquomodo^e si id ^pus
esset]. This is not to the Point we have in hand, who speak of universal and
entire Justification. 2. Here he makes against you; for he clearly makes
Inherent Righteousness imperfect, [cujus ratione pro justis ex part a Deo
censemur] whereas you hold all Righteousness to be perfect, or none at all.
What you mean by citing Wotton de Reconcil. part 1. lib. 2. cap. 18. I cannot
imagine, for nothing do I there see for you, but much against you, though
touching other Particulars in debate betwixt us. As in the very beginning of
the Chapter; Ex efficientibus Justificationis causis reliqua est Fides, quam
Instrumenti locum obtinere diximus. And the title of the Chapter is, Quomodo
Fides Causa Instrumentalis Justificationem Nostram operetur. And page 100. he
cites and approves that of Downam, Fides sola est, quae nobis jus tribuit ad
omnes Dei promissiones in Evangelio consequenas, etc. And page 103. that of our
Church; Nihil ex hominis part flagitatur ad ipsius justificationem, praeter
veram and vivam fidem. And immediately after he adds; Neque tamen hac Fides
spem, dilectionem, timorem, panitentiam excludere censenda est, quasi ad eum,
qui justificandus est, non pertinerent, sed haec omnia ab officio justificandi
(N. B.) significantur penitus excludi. Atqut hoc quidem justificandi munus sol^
Fidei convenire, his rationibus ostendo, etc. The rest of the Chapter is taken
up with those Reasons. Now what there is for your purpose, judge you. The next
place which you refer me to, is more punctually cited, viz. part 2. lib. 2.
cap. 35. page 383. but neither there do I find any thing that makes for you. He
there answers Bellarmine's Arguments, whereby he would prove, That Fides est
solus assensus, non etiam siducia: But what is this ad rhom^^^? I know not
whether you may lay hold on those words, Fidem Justificantem, sive quatenus
Justificat, non esse unam virtutem, nec ullam quidem virtutem, sed justificare
omnino, and solummodo ex officio and loco, quae Deus misericors illi sponte and
libere concessit, ut dixi part 1. lib. 2. cap. 28. So it is printed, but it
should be cap. 18. for there are but nineteen Chapters of that Book. What you
can gather from this (if this were it you aimed at) I cannot tell, especially
he referring us to the other place before mentioned, where there is much
against you, but nothing (I think) for you. And as little for your purpose do I
meet with in part 2. lib. 1. cap. 7. page 144. where he only says, Accedat
etiam oportet, ut idonei simus, quibusaditus ad Coelum pateat, habitualis
justitia sive Sanctitas, de qua, etc. Mat. 5. 8. Denique vitae etiam
sanctimen^a, and bonis operibus opus est, ut Regnum Coeleste comparemus, Heb.
12. 14. Matthew. 25. 34, 35. But does he say; That this Habitual Righteousness
(which he makes all one with Holiness, therein opposing you as I do) is
requisite unto Justification? Otherwise that it is requisite, Who does
question? Whereas you next cite part. 2. lib. 1. cap. 5. p. 127. n. 3, 4. I
doubt whether you did well observe what the Author there means. He only
answers an Argument of Hemingius, denying that which (he says) Hemingius
supposes, viz. Eandem justitiam esse viam ad vitam aternam, cum in Lege, tum
in Evangelio. But of a Twofold Righteousness he there makes no mention; not (I
say) of a Twofold Righteousness required of us at all, much less required of
us, that thereby we may be justified. He says indeed, Quid enim si Lex Dei in
decalogo sit norma illius justitia, quae e^t via Vitae Eternae? Si praeter hanc
in Lege praescripta sit alia via in Evangelio constituta, quid impediet, quo
minus justificetur quispiam sine Legis impletione? He does not mean, That the
Righteousness prescribed in the Law, is one Righteousness, and the
Righteousness constituted in the Gospel another Righteousness, whereby we are
justified; but that we are justified only by this latter, and not at all by the
other. He was far from thinking of your Legal and Evangelical Righteousness, as
being both necessary unto Justification; he only asserts Evangelical
Righteousness as necessary in that respect, which Righteousness he makes to
consist merely in remission of sins. See part. 1. lib. 2. cap. 2. n. 12. and
cap. 3. per totum. To the very same purpose ( i. e. nothing at all to yours) is
that Ibid. cap. 6. p. 138. n. 2. where he taxes Hemingius for taking it as
granted, Nullam esse justitiam, vel injustitiam, nisi in Lege praestita, vel
non praestita: And then he says, Nam si alia sit justitia, quae Lege non
contineatur, fieri potest, ut alia etiam sit via Aeternae Vitae consequendae.
He does not grant (as you seem to understand him) that Justitia, quae in Lege
continetur est una justitia, quae ad Justificationem a nobis requiritur; for
that indeed he denies, and says, That there is another Righteousness now in
the Gospel ordained for that end; and remission of sins (as I said) he makes to
be that Righteousness, even the only Righteousness by which we are formally
justified. Immediately after indeed he adds that which I cannot allow; Verum
nec peccatum quidem Legis in Decalogo cancellis circumscribitur. This is not
directly to the Point now in hand; yet because it may reflect upon it, and
somewhat we have about it afterward; I therefore think meet to note it by the
way, and say, That if it be as he says, then (it seems) St. John did not
give us a full definition of sin, 1 John 3. 4.
when he said, Sin is a transgression of the Law: but of that more hereafter.
Wotton's Argument is of small force; Fides (inquit) in Christum crucifixum non
praecipitur in Lege: but I have before him, showed that it is otherwise. He
himself presently after cites that, 1 John 3. 23. [This is his Commandment,
That we believe, etc.] Now the Law contained in the Decalogue, requires us to
do whatsoever God commands; for if we do not so, we do not make him our only
Lord God, as the Law requires. That the Apostle does oppose (as he says)
Faith to the Law, Gal. 3. 12. makes nothing for him. For Faith, as a Duty, is
required in the Law, though as a Condition it be required only in the Gospel.
Neither does that advantage him, which he also objecteth, That the Law has
nothing to do with Christ as Mediator, Gal. 5. 4. For though the Gospel only
hold out Christ as Mediator to be believed in; yet Christ being so held out,
the Law does require us to believe in him. For the Law does require a belief of
every Truth that God does reveal, and a performance of every thing that God
does enjoin. Now for Lud. de Dieu, If the Justification which he speaks of, Qua
ut sanctificati ac regeniti absolvimur a falsis Diaboli and improborum
criminationibus, be meant of some particular Acts, of which we are accused, it
is but such a Justification as the Reprobates themselves may partake of, who
may be accused of some things whereof they are not guilty. See Bradshaw de
Justif. cap. 25. If it be meant of our estate in general, (as I suppose it is)
then this is indeed no distinct Justification, but only a confirming of the
other. For in vain do we pretend to be justified by Faith, (by which alone de
Dieu grants we are justified) so as through Christ to be freely acquitted from
the guilt of our sins, if yet we remain unregenerate and unsanctified. By the
way I observe, That de Dieu's words are against you, [Jacobus non agit de
Justificatione, quae partim fide, partim operibus peragatur]. Thus much I had
said in reference to this Author before I had him upon the Epistles; but now
that I have him, I shall speak more fully to him, or to you of him, from that
other place to which you remit me, viz. his Notes on Romans 8. 4. There he speaks
likewise of a Twofold Righteousness, and of a Twofold Justification, yet so
as but little to patronize your Cause. Besides Imputed Righteousness, which we
have in Christ, there is also (he says, and who does not?) an Inherent
Righteousness which we have in our selves. The former Righteousness (he says)
is that, Qua nos Deus, etsi in nobis ipsis Legi adhuc dissormes, plene tamen,
ipsius etiam Legis Testimonio, justificat, eique pro omnino conformibus habet
in capite Christo: de qua justificatione Apostolus supra, cap. 3. and 4. and 5.
multis disputavit. Altera est, de qua, Romans 6. 13. Ephesians. 4. 24. 1 John 3. 7.
Qua nos Deus per regenerationem in nobis etiam ipsis Lege ex part conformatos,
ex part nunc justificat, and indies justificat magis ac magis, prout
incrementum capit regeneratio, ac justificabit plene, ubi perfectio advenerit,
de qua Justificatione agitur, Jac. 2. 21, 24. Apoc. 22. 11. Mat. 12. 37. 1 Reg.
8. 32. Hanc justificationem Opera Legis ingrediuntur; ut primam constituit sola
Fides, i. e. justitia Christi fide imputata, non opera; sic alteram censtituunt
opera, non fides. Here, 1. he makes Inherent Righteousness imperfect, and so
also the Justification which does arise from it. By this Righteousness we are
but Legi ex part conformati, and ex part nunc justificati: But Imputed
Righteousness, and Justification by it, he acknowledges to be perfect: hereby
we are plene justificati; tanquam Legi plene conformes in capite Christo. 2. He
makes Faith only, i. e. (as he explains it) the Righteousness of Christ imputed
by Faith, that whereby we are fully and perfectly justified. Now you make all
Righteousness, as such, perfect: for otherwise you make it to be no
Righteousness if it be imperfect. And you make Faith and Works to concur unto
the same Justification, though you distinguish of the Inchoation, Continuation
and Consummation of it. You also make Faith properly taken to be the
Righteousness (though not the only Righteousness) by which we are justified. So
that de Dieu's Opinion and yours are much different.

Again, Sola Fides (inquit) amplectens istam obedientiam (sc. Christi)
imputatur in justitiam, Ibid. p. 104.

And page 105. Fidei imputatio est in justitiam perfectam, qualis est
Obedientia Christi. Operum imputatio in imperfectam, qualia sunt ipsa Opera in
hac vita.

And page 109. he cites Bucer in Colloq. Ratisb. as agreeing with him, and
saying thus, Dixeramus nos, secuti Apostolum, and omnem Scripturam, duplicem
esse Sanctorum justitiam, qua justi sunt coram Deo and hominibus. Vnam Christi,
perfectam, qua illis spes omnis gratiae Dei, and salutis vitaeque semp^ternae
tota nititur. Alteram in ipsis per Spiritum Christi inchoatum, qua considere
non debent, propterea quod ea imperfecta semper est, dum hic vivunt, and Deo
non nisi ex liberali and infinita ejus misericordia, and merito Christi probari
non potest. Hac justitia nemo justificatur coram Deo justificatione vitae. --
Justitiam hanc Inchoatam sentimus esse quidem veram and vivam Justitiam, Dei
praeclarum and eximium donum, vitamque novam in Christo hac justitia constare,
omnesque Sanctos hac ipsa quoque justitia justos esse, and coram Deo, and coram
hominibus, and propter eam Sanctos quoque a Deo justificari justificatione
Operum, i. e. comprobari eos a Deo, laudari, and remunerari. Attamen quamlibet
haec justitia sit vera ac viva, and suo etiam modo (N. B.) justificans, tamen
non esse ejusmodi, non sic veram vivam and solidam, ut quisquam Sanctorum
justificari ea possit justificatione vitae, multo minus ut sit ipsa justitia
vel justificatio vitae.

Thus then de Dieu in the Matter it self does not differ from other
Protestant-Writers, who generally hold, That the Righteousness of Christ
imputed to us, is that by which we are fully and perfectly justified; and yet
we must also have Inherent Righteousness, which will justify us in some sort,
but not fully and perfectly, because it self is imperfect.

For Placeus I have him not; but because you allege his words, I will say
something to him. He speaks indeed of a Twofold Accusation, and of a Twofold
Justification. But, 1. he seems to differ from me and others only modo
loquendi. For he says, Ab accusatione priore (qua sc. objicitur nos esse
peccatores) sola fide justificamur; qua Christi gratiam and justitiam
amplectimur: a posteriore, (qua objicitur nos esse infideles) justificamur
etiam operibus, quatenus iis Fides (N. B.) ostenditur. This seems to be in
effect the same with that of Maccovius, De Fide Justif. Disp. 12.
Conciliationem hic (inter Paulum and Jacobum) hanc ponunt Theologi, and quidem
ex Scriptura, sola Fides nos justificat apprehensive, opera declarative. 2. To
speak properly, they are not (I think) two distinct Accusations. For to omit
this, That to be Infideles, is to be Peccatores; and so the one Accusation does
include the other: To omit this (I say) the latter Accusation is but a
re-inforcing of the former. Thou art a Sinner, says the Accuser, and therefore
to be condemned. Not so, says the Party accused, for I am a Believer, and
therefore justified. Hereupon the Accuser replies, Nay, it is not so as thou
pretendest, thou art indeed no Believer, therefore the guilt of thy sins is
upon thee, and thou art under condemnation. All this is but one Accusation,
prosecuted and confirmed against a Plea made against it. If they were distinct
Accusations, t^en we might be freed from the one, and yet be condemned by the
other: but it is here quite otherwise. For the force of the former Accusation
does depend upon the latter; neither are we freed from the former, except we be
freed from the latter; whereas you seem to carry it so, as if we were first
justified from the former Accusation, and then were again to be justified from
the latter: this seems to be the result of your Opinion.

1. Because I grant Faith to be required of us, that so viz. that whereby we
are fully justified. A part of Inherent Righteousness. (I grant) Faith is, by
which we may be justified in some measure; but that is not the justification
here enquired of. 2. You should not put me to prove, That your Assertion is
without Scripture; it is sufficient for me to say it, until you allege
Scripture for it. 3. Christ's Satisfaction is solely and wholly our
Righteousness, whereby we are justified from all Condemnation, though except we
believe in him, we cannot enjoy that benefit by him; (p. 36.)
See 2 Cor. 5. ult. and Acts 13. 39. 4. The New Covenant does hold out unto us
Christ's Righteousness to be made ours by Faith, that so we may be freed from
the Condemnation of the Old Covenant, to which Condemnation we are left, if we
believe not; and our Condemnation will be so much the sorer, by how much the
sin in neglecting so great Salvation is the greater. 5. I confess indeed that
there is more than Faith in the Condition of the New Covenant, but not as to
Justification. For that which you add, [James says, We are justified by Works,
and Christ by our Words]; the question is not, Whether we be said to be
justified by our Works or Words; but how and in what sense we are said to be so
justified. There is a Particular Justification, and a Declarative
Justification; thus we are justified by our Works and Words: but a full and
formal Justification is only by Christ's Righteousness through Faith imputed
unto us. 6. To say, That we are healed partly by the Medicine, and partly by
the Application, I still think to be improper; neither do you bring any thing,
whereby to show the propriety of it. The Application of the Medicine is indeed
requisite, yet it is the Medicine properly that does heal, though not except
there be an Application of it. Common Speech is not always Proper Speech;
neither can any that are acquainted with Scripture, and know how to distinguish
between Proper and Improper Speeches, think it strange that there are improper
Speeches found in Scripture. What will you say of those, [This is my Body] [The
Rock was Christ] and a hundred suchlike? For Rules of Logic, if you had made
use of any, I might have considered of them. 7. May not a Similitude
illustrate, though there be such a difference as you speak of, betwixt that
from which it is fetched, and that to which it is applied? But why do you join
Repentance and Obedience with Faith in point of Justification; I speaking only
of Faith, and you as yet having said nothing for the joint interest of the
other? 8. In your Aphorisms you plainly assert two distinct Righteousnesses, as
requisite unto Justification; that there you make them subordinate, is more
than I observe. But though Faith be subordinate unto Christ's Satisfaction in
the matter of Justification, yet that we are justified by Faith as a distinct
Righteousness, I cannot yield, no more than that the Application of a Medicine
is a distinct Medicine by which one is healed. I am glad that you plainly
disclaim a Coordination of Christ's Righteousness and Faith in the Work of
Justification: But if they be but subordinate, then (methinks) they should not
be two distinct Righteousnesses, by which we are justified. I see not how we
can be justified (I speak of an Universal Justification, opposite to all
condemnation, that which Bucer calls Justificationem Vitae) both by the
Righteousness of Christ imputed to us, Apud. Lud. de Dieu in Romans 8. 4.
and also by our own personal Righteousness. You say, [A Man having a Medicine,
and not applying it, may properly be said to die for want of Application]; but
to speak properly, I think, It is not the want of Application of the Medicine,
but the Disease that does kill the Man; So though a Man wanting Faith shall be
condemned, yet take Faith merely as a Condition, not as a Duty, it is not
properly the want of Faith, but Sin that is the cause of his Condemnation;
though his want of Faith may as aggravate his Sin, so increase his Condemnation.

That I speak your words, Ibid. 20. 108.
is more than I do know. How Christ's Righteousness may be called our Legal
Righteousness, I showed by Romans 10. 4. viz. as serving us instead of that
Righteousness which the Law required of us, and for want of which the Law
otherwise would have condemned us. Neither did I blame you merely for calling
Christ's Satisfaction our Legal Righteousness, but for making another
Righteousness of our own, which you call our Evangelical Righteousness,
necessary unto Justification. Now also you overlook that, which I alleged
about Christ's Satisfaction, as being our Evangelical Righteousness.

1. Does the Old Covenant prescribe Christ's Satisfaction as our Righteousness?
Ibid.
You said a little before, Ib. 110.
[I do not think, that Christ's Righteousness of Satisfaction is that which the
Law required]; as if I said, That the Law did require it; whereas I meant only
this, That the Law required Satisfaction, and Christ made it for us, so that
Christ's Satisfaction serves us instead of that Righteousness which the Law
required of us, and so may be called our Legal Righteousness. But the New
Covenant does hold out Christ's Righteousness to be apprehended by us, and made
ours Faith, that so thereby we may be justified. Where the Scripture speaks of
a Twofold Righteousness so as you do, or how this makes for the unfolding of
the main Doctrine, or tends to heal our Breaches, I do not see: You affirm
these things, but do not prove them. 2. What plain ground you laid down in your
Aphorisms for that Twofold Righteousness, I do not know: What I could observe
any way Argumentative, I was willing to examine, and so am still.

1. If it imply Blasphemy, to say, That Christ repented, 21. 111.
and believed for us; Does it follow that Faith or Repentance is our
Righteousness, by which we are justified? Can nothing be required of us, and
performed by us, but it must therefore be our Righteousness, and by it as our
Righteousness we must be justified? 2. The Scriptures which I alleged, (viz.
Romans 9. 29. and 10. 6. Gal. 5. 5. and Romans 3. 22.) do sufficiently distinguish
Faith from that Righteousness, whereby we are justified, and show it to be only
a means, whereby we partake of Christ's Righteousness, and so by that
Righteousness of Christ are justified. The Argument (I think) is good,
notwithstanding any thing you say unto it. Faith is only a means whereby
Christ's Righteousness is imputed unto us unto Justification: Therefore it is
not that Righteousness by which we are justified, De Fide Justif.. 15 and 16.
Rivet speaking of the Remonstrants says, Volunt igitur Fidem cum operibus
ven^re in partem justitiae debitae, and Fidem justificare, non Relative, ut
organum apprehendens objectum, sed Inherenter, etc. Hoc iniquitatis mysterium,
etc.

1. You might easily know what I meant by [Simply and Absolutely justified in
the sight of God], Ibid.
if you did well consider the other Members of the distinction, viz. to be
wholly freed from all Condemnation; the same that Mr. Bradshaw meant by
Universal Justification: You know sufficiently the distinction betwixt
Simpliciter or Absolute, and secundum quid. Bradshaw having said, Hoc modo (sc.
justificatione particulari) non Electi soli, sed and Reprobi ipsi coram Deo
Justificari possunt: Adds immediately, Neutri vero eorum absolute hoc modo
justificari possunt. -- Hoc modo justificari non est penitus a peccati reatu,
sed ab hujus vel illius peccati imputatione injusta liberari. 2. Comparative
Righteousness I showed to be but a less degree of Unrighteousness: but Ironical
Righteousness is downright Unrighteousness, whereas a less Unrighteousness in
comparison of a greater, is a kind of Righteousness. Minus malum respectu
majoris habet rationem boni. 3. I do not deny the Righteousness of Faith,
though I deny Faith to be that Righteousness by which we are justified. Though
our Salvation depend upon our Faith, and sincere Obedience, yet are we not
therefore justified by Obedience, but Declarative, as it is the fruit of
Justifying Faith; nor by Faith, but Apprehensive, as by it we apprehend and
receive Christ's Righteousness.

1. I never doubted, Ibid. and 32.
much less denied Faith to be a part of Inherent Righteousness. 2. It is indeed
a strange Righteousness, that will not justify so far forth as it will reach:
but it is not strange to Protestant-Divines, that Inherent Righteousness cannot
reach so far as to justify in that sense as we speak of Justification. De
Justif. Habit.
Ilud concedimus, (inquit Daven.) esse in omnibus justificatis justitiam
quandam inherentem, cap. 22.
quam si formalem causam statuant Justifactionis, (liceat enim vocabulum
procudere) non repugnabimus: sed predictae Justificationis, quae respondet
stricto examini Coelestis Judicis, nec formalis, nec meritoria esse ^llo modo
potest. And he lays down these two Positions; 1. Christi Mediatoris, Ibid.
in nobis habitantis, atque per Spiritum sese nobis unientis, perfectissima
Obedientia, est formalis causa justificationis Nostrae, utpote quae ex
donatione Dei, and applicatione Fidei fit nostra. 2. Justitia per Spiritum
Christi nobis impressa and inherens, non est formalis causa, per quam stamus
justificati, hoc est, per quam liberati judicamur a damnatione, and acceptati
ad vitam aternam, tanquam eadem digni per hanc qualitatem nobis inherentem.
Ibid.
That you may not catch at the word [digni], he afterward expresses it thus;
cap. 26.
Atque hie ne inanem de vocabulis velitationem instituamus, illud praemittedum
nos per formalem causam Justificationis nihil aliud intelligere, quam illud,
per quod stamus in conspectu Dei a damuatione liberati, innocents,
gratificati, and ad vitam aeternam acceptati. And the whole Chapter is to prove
that Inherens Justitia non est formalis causa Justificationis Nostrae coram
Deo. But it is a needless labor to cite Authors to this purpose. For what more
common with our Divines (I speak of such as are of chief note) than to
acknowledge Inherent Righteousness, and yet to deny that we are justified by
it? What you mean, when you yield that we are not universally justified by
Faith, I do not well understand. For if you mean (as you seem to do) that we
are not freed by it from the Punishment of the Old Covenant, but only from the
Punishment of the New Covenant; 1. I know no Punishment of the New Covenant,
but a leaving to the Punishment of the Old Covenant, with an aggravation of it
for contempt of Mercy offered. 2. Faith, though not as our Righteousness, yet
as the means whereby we partake of Christ's Righteousness, does free us from
the Punishment of the Old Covenant, viz. Death. For the Just shall live by
Faith, Romans 1. 17. And in that sense Faith does universally justify us. For
being justified by Faith, we have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus
Christ, Romans 5. 1. Whereas you speak of justifying against the Accusation of
Non-performing the Condition of the New Covenant; I must still tell you, That
taking the Condition merely as a Condition, the Accusation of non-performing
it, is but a confirming a former Accusation of being guilty of the breach of
the Old Covenant, and therefore to be condemned, as having no relief from the
New Covenant, the Condition of it being not performed. 3. If I do ill oppose
the Righteousness whereby we are justified, and the Righteousness whereby we
are sanctified, as if the same thing might not be both; then welfare the
Papists, who confound Justification and Sanctification. Duraeus Advers.
Duraeus the Jesuit, in his Defense of Campian, says, Nova haec, Whitakere,
Theologia est, Whitak.
nos per grattiam insusam, vitae novitatem ac sanctificationem adipisci, miaime
tamen justificari. At quae te, obsecro, Scriptura docit Justificationem a
Sanctificatione distinguere? The same Righteousness that does sanctify, cannot
also justify; because that Righteousness, which does sanctify, does it but in
part; but that which does justify, must do it fully, or else it is to little
purpose. De Justif.
For (as Bradshaw observes) even the Reprobate as well as others, cap. 25.
may have a particular Justification. 4. The Texts which I cited, (Luke. 1. 75.
Ephesians. 4. 24. Psalm. 147. 17. Apoc. 22. 11.) seem to me to make the terms
[Righteousness and Holiness, Righteous and Holy] equipollent: and that Text,
Psalm. 145. 17. speaks not of God's People, but of God himself, which (it seems)
you did not observe. And why should you call it tautologizing, when two words
are joined together as Synonima's? What is more frequent in Scripture than
this? It has more show of tautology, when diverse sentences importing the same
thing, are joined together; which yet is very usual. And as the Scriptures, so
also our Divines do promiscuously use the words [Righteousness] and Holiness].
De Just. Habit.
Davenant, Hanc ergo qualitatem justitiae, sive Sanctitatis, quaem Deus
imprimit hominibus renatis, cap. 26.
negamus esse causam formalem justificationis, Bell. Ener.
etc. So Ames. Non excluditur justitia, seu Sanctit as inherens, Tom. 4. l. 6.
c. 1. p. 126.
etc. 5. The Matter of our Righteousness, is that which is conformable to the
Law: Justum est, quod est secundum Legem; Injustum, quod contra Legem; and so
by your own confession is the matter of our Holiness.

1. They are no vulgar Divines, that say, 32.
Our Inherent Righteousness is imperfect; yea, and make this one principal
Argument to prove that we are not justified by Inherent Righteousness. Contra
Camp. ad
Fides, and spes, and Charitas (inquit Whitakerus) nos justos aliquo modo
faciunt, Rat. 8. p. 178.
sed inchoate, non absolute. Lud. de Dieu, and in him Bucer were cited before.
De Justif.
Here now Davenant; Ipsa (inquit) justitia inherens, Habit. cap. 26.
in se considerata, qualis reperitur in vtatoribus, imperfecta est, atque caret
illis perfectionis gradibus, Arg. 4.
qui ad justificationem perfectam necessario requiruntur. Contra
Vide etiam Ibid. cap. 23. ad Arg. 6. Thus also Amesius; Bellar.
Justitia qua justificatur homo coram Deo, Tom. 4.
debet esse perfecta: Sed justitia nobis inherens, lib. 6. c. 1.
non est talis. Ergo. Wotton speaks not only for himself, Arg. 11.
but also for others, even our chiefest Divines; Lutherus, De Recon. par. 2. l.
1. c. 19.
Melancthon, Calvinus, and Chemnitius, ta potissimum causa (N. B.) nos infusa
and inherente justitia justificari non posse contendunt, quod illa in nobis it
a imperfecta sit, ut in Dei conspectum, cum ad judicandum accedat, prodire non
audeat.

And again; Ibid.
Nihil profeco cause erat, cur Vasquez in 1. 2. Disp. 202. n. 26. cap. 23.
tantopere huic argumento confideret, ut illo potissimum ^iteretur; Perfectio
nostrae justitiae (inquit Vasques) non debet probari ex quibusdam Scripturae
testimoniis, in quibus commendaetur perfecta and integra charitas, sed potius
ex illis, in quibus docemur nobis inesse justitiam. Nam justitia non est, quae
vera, and perfecta non est.

And again; Ibid.
Justitia nostra habitualis nobis a Deo infusa, lib. 2. c. 16. and c. 19.
non est perfecta. And again; Respondent nostri Theologi justitiam illam
habitualem esse imperfectam. I will add one more, Of the Covenant, chapter 16. p. 10
whom both you and I reverence, viz. Mr. Blake, He having spoken of some (he
names none, but you know, I suppose, whom he means) who grant Holiness to be
imperfect, but will have Righteousness (our Personal Righteousness) by all
means to be perfect; he adds, [This and much more to assert a personal perfect
Inherent Righteousness, as is said] all which, as it is here held out, to me is
new, and I must confess my self in ignorance all over. I never take Imperfect
Righteousness to imply any such contradiction, no more than Imperfect Holiness.
Isaiah (I am sure) says, All our Righteousnesses are as filthy Rags, etc. See
more afterward.

2. I take Righteousness to be a Conformity to the Law, which Conformity may be
more or less perfect, as one may more or less come up to the Rule set before
him. If I over-slipt any thing in your Aphorisms, you might have directed me to
it; otherwise to search for it, may prove both a tedious and a fruitless labor.

That one thing may be more or less like another, Ibid.
is most evident, Alio alio amicior, and similior, Alsted. Metaph. lib. 2. c. 5.
so that if all the wit in the World should conspire against it, yet one might
as easily demonstrate it, as he did, who to prove dari motum, when one had
disputed against it, rose up and walked. Is not the Similitude sometime more,
sometime less, that is betwixt Parents and Children, and betwixt Children of
the same Parents, especially Twinns? and so in other things? To deny this, what
is it but to put out men's eyes, or to bid defiance unto common-sense? Log. l.
1. c. 7
Relata recipient magis and minus, says Burgersdicius. Yet he says, Recipere
magis and minus non convenit omnibus Relatis. Surely there is great difference
betwixt Similitudo and Aequalitas, so that neither Scheibler nor any Man else
must think to carry it so, as if there were eadem utriusque ratio; so that
because Aequalitas consistit in indivisibili; therefore similitudo must do so
too. Perfect Righteousness indeed is quaedam Aequalitas, not simply all
Righteousness. That an Action cannot be conform to the Precept, except it be
perfectly conform, you must prove as well as assert, before I can assent. Of
the Coven. c. 16. p. III
I could yet see no reason to doubt of that which Mr. Blake says, [As an Image
carrying an imperfect resemblance of its Samplar, is an Image; so Conformity
imperfectly answering to the Rule, is Conformity likewise.]

1. You do not well to confound Conformity and Equality. 33.
And though the Law require perfect Conformity, which none can perform, it does
not follow that imperfect Conformity is none at all. If a perfect Conformity to
the Law could be performed by us, then we should be justified by the Law, which
we cannot be: yet the Regenerate conform to the Law in some measure, and so it
behooves us to do; For then shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect to all
thy Commandments, Ps. 119. 6. I let pass your Second and Third. Ad 4. I do not
speak of Qualification considered absolutely, but in reference to the Rule.
Loc. cit.
Mr. Blake says well, [Neither do I understand how Holiness should be
imperfect, taken materially, and Righteousness perfect, taken formally, in
reference to a Rule. We may (for ought I know) as well make Holiness formal,
and refer it to a Rule, and Righteousness material, in an absolute
consideration, without reference to any Rule at all. And in such consideration
I do not know how there can be perfection or imperfection either in Holiness or
Righteousness; it is as they come up, or fall short of the Rule, that they have
the denomination of perfection or imperfection]. Holiness and Righteousness are
opposite unto sin: therefore formally considered, they are a Conformity to the
Rule, as Sin^is a deviation from it. The Conformity therefore of our Actions
and Dispositions to the Rule is not (as you say) the matter of our
Righteousness, but (as I conceive) it is the form; and our Actions and
Dispositions themselves are the matter of it, viz. of our Personal and Inherent
Righteousness; and so of our Holiness. The Rule of Righteousness (to which as
we conform more or less, we are more or less righteous) is the Law, the sum
whereof is contained in the Decalogue: therefore it is said, That Believers are
under the Law as a Rule, though not under it as a Covenant. For Pana
Evangelica, of which you speak, I have said enough of it before.

To your Queries and Objections, Ibid. and 34.
I answer, Ad 1. Christ does justify the Unrighteous, God does justify the
Ungodly, Romans 4. 5. But how? They were unrighteous and ungodly before they were
justified; they are not so when they are justified, though it is not their
Personal Righteousness or Godliness whereby they are justified. Know ye not
that the Unrighteous shall not inherit, etc. And such were some of you, but you
are washed, Of the Coven. p. 219.
etc. 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10, 11. That of Tainovius, cited by Mr. Ball, is useful
here; In Scriptura saepe res dicitur quod paulo ante fuit, ut caeci vident,
surai audiunt, claudi ambulant, etc. Ad 2. The Law does not justify any but
such as are perfectly righteous; therefore they that are imperfectly, though
truly righteous, cannot be justified by it. De Just.
Sumus vere justi, (says Daevenant) non putative, Hab. c. 23. al Arg. 7. Ibid.
ad
si respiciamus justitiam nistram habitualem: sed haec vera justitia est adhuc
inchoata and imperfecta. Arg. 8.
And again, Sanctification^m nostram non putativam and fictitiam, sed veram and
realem statuimus. Bellarmini autem Dialecticam, qui inde concludit nos
justificari justitia inherente, putativam arbitramur, and fictitiam. And why
should not Imperfect Righteousness be acknowledged True Righteousness, as well
as Imperfect Holiness is acknowledged True Holiness? That of the Apostle,
Ephesians. 4. 24. [in Righteousness and true Holiness]; or, as the Original has
it, [in righteousness and holiness of Truth], attributes Truth as well to
Righteousness, (though imperfect) as to Holiness. Genitivus Veritatis (says
Calvin on the place) loco Epitheti positus est, qui tam justitiae, quam
sanctitati convenit. Ad 3. You seem quite to mistake the meaning of that in
James 2. 10. It makes nothing against an Imperfect Righteousness, but only
shows, That respect must be had to one Precept as well as to another because
though a Man should keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one point, viz. so as
wholly to wave it, and to have no respect unto it, he were guilty of all, his
Obedience were indeed none at all. For at all. For to obey, is to do that which
is commanded, because it is commanded. Now he that does any one thing eo nomine
because it is commanded, will endeavor to do every thing that is commanded. A
Quatenus ad omne, etc. That this is the meaning of the words, is clear by v.
11. See Calvin on the place. Ad 4. The Law does pronounce an imperfect Obeyer
imperfectly righteous; and therefore if he be left to the Law, to stand or fall
by it, he shall not be justified for his Righteousness, but shall be condemned
for his Imperfection: Ad 5. The Damned and Devils cannot be pronounced
Righteous according to the Law, as the Saints may. Is there no difference
betwixt Imperfect Obedience, and Perfect (if it may be called Perfect)
Disobedience? The Unregenerate do something that, but nothing as the Law
requires: the Regenerate do something both that, and as, though not so
perfectly as the Law requires. De Just. Act. c. 34. Memb. 2.
Licet modus agends (inquit Daven.) bonus sit, quia agunt ex fide and
charitate, tamen gradus in hoc modo deficit, quia non agunt ex tanta fide and
charitate quanta ab ipsa Lege praecipitur. It is granted, That the best action
of any upon earth is not good and just according to the rigor of the Law; for
the rigor of the Law requires it to be perfectly good and just, which it is
not. But it follows not, that therefore it is not good and just at all. Ibid.
Nam aliudest (says the same learned Author) actionem esse vere bonam, Cap.
36. ad test. 7.
alud esse pure bonam, and ab omni vitio liberam: sicut aliud est aurum verum,
aliud aurum purum, ab omni foece depuratum. That Rule therefore, Bonum non nisi
ex integra causa oritur, malum ex quolibet defiectu, must be taken cum grano
salis, viz. so as that the Defectus must be either in the substance of the Act,
or in some material Circumstance: And of such Actions Dr. Twisse (whom you
cite) does speak; Qui dat elecmosynam vanae gloriae studio, etc. There is
indeed some defect in the best Actions of the best Men, quoad gradum: But shall
we therefore deny them to be good, because they are some way defective, and so
not perfectly good? And see here I pray, to what you have now brought the
matter; even to make Imperfect Holiness no Holiness, as well as Imperfect
Righteousness no Righteousness. For is not Holiness Goodness as well as
Righteousness? Therefore if every defect make Goodness no Goodness, then there
is no more an Imperfect Holiness (which yet you grant) then there is an
Imperfect Righteousness. Those words, [Neque put andum est, fieri posse, ut per
Legem saltem aliqua ex part justificemur] taken in rigore are not true. For
then there were no such thing as a particular Justification; neither do they
accord with that which I cited before out of Lud. de Dieu on Romans 8. 4. to
which place you did refer me. Indeed we cannot be so justified by the Law, as
thereby to be freed from all condemnation; and this seems to be all that your
Author here cited did mean, when he says, Si non es Legem transgressus, Lege
justificaris: si transgressus es, condemnaris. But this does no more prove,
That Righteousness must either be perfect, or it is none at all, (though indeed
it is none as to absolute and universal Justification) than it does prove, that
there is no Holiness at all, except it be perfect. For does not the Law require
perfect Holiness as well as perfect Righteousness? And is not every
transgression of the Law a privation of Holiness, as well as of Righteousness?
How then can you admit an Imperfect Holiness to be Holiness, and yet deny an
Imperfect Righteousness to be Righteousness? And if our Inherent Righteousness
(for of that we speak) must needs be perfect, if it be any at all, must not the
same be said of our Holiness, this being a conformity to the Law as well as the
other?

1. You do not answer my Question, 34
viz. Whether those Orthodox Writers (a multitude of whom you say you could
heap up) do make our Personal Righteousness that by which we are justified. If
they do not, their calling it Evangelical is to no purpose. 2. It is not
preposterous to say, That Righteousness ( viz. inherent) is required unto
Sanctification; it being that whereby we are sanctified, as Imputed
Righteousness is that whereby we are justified. You said before, That I did ill
oppose that whereby we are justified, as if the same thing might not do both:
You grant then (it seems) that Righteousness may sanctify; I think it must,
and so is required unto Sanctification. How you can make Inherent Righteousness
it a se habere ad sanctificationem, ut se habet Albedo ad Parietem, to me seems
very strange: rather (I think) ut se habet Albeds ad Dealbationem. 3. If you
had spoken absolutely without any qualification, [He that affirms a man
Righteous, (viz. by Inherent Righteousness) and yet denies him to be
justified, viz. by that Righteousness, contradicts himself] you had condemned
all our famous Divines (I think) of selfcontradiction. But your speech being so
qualified, as it is, [so far as he is Righteous] I know not at whom it
strikes. But though none by the Law of Works can be pronounced perfectly
righteous, and therefore if they be tried by it, all will be found unrighteous,
yet does it not therefore follow, that there is no such thing as an Imperfect
Righteousness.

You seem not to dislike what I say, Ibid.
neither do I what you now say. I grant, that the New Covenant is to the wicked
an unspeakable mercy, in that by it they may be freed from the condemnation of
the Old Covenant: yet until they embrace the New Covenant, they remain under
the Old, even under the condemnation of it.

1. Concerning Christ's Satisfaction, 35
how it may be called both our Legal and our Evangelical Righteousness, I have
spoken before. Legal Righteousness may either signify the Righteousness of the
Law, (...), or the Righteousness which is of or from the Law, (...). There is
great difference between these two, for the former is asserted, but the latter
is exploded, Romans 8. 4. and 10. 5. Phil. 3. 9. Christ's Satisfaction may be
called our Legal Righteousness in the former sense, not the latter. But in both
respects it is our Evangelical Righteousness, as being the Righteousness of the
Gospel, (...), i. e. the Righteousness which the Gospel does hold out unto us,
and the Righteousness which is of or from the Gospel, (...), i. e. the
Righteousness which by the Gospel we are made partakers of through Faith. And
therefore it is called the Righteousness which is of Faith, (...), and by
Faith, (...), Romans 9. 30. and 10. 6. Phil. 3. 9. 2. In that Faith is the
Condition, or Instrument (or what any please to call it) whereby Christ's
Righteousness is made ours unto Justification, it rather follows, that Faith it
self is not properly our Righteousness, by which we are justified.

Something out of Rivet I have cited before to this purpose; hear also what
another says, viz. Vignerius, whose Disputation Rivet much commends, and
thought meet to annex it to his own, De Satisfact. Christi inter opera Riveti,
Disp. 13.. 61.
Quidni in fide nostra gloriabimur, si ex fide justificatio est, ut operae
Evangelico, and apposita foederi condition, contra Apostolum, qui exclusam
esse dicit per Legem fidei gloriationem? Romans 3. 26. -- An possibile est, ut
sit fidei instrumentum accipiendae justitiae, and simul sit ipsa, quam
querimus, justitia? Vtut sane glorietur homo, solus tamen Christus est nostra
justitia, nec aliud agit Fides, quam quod Christum apprehendit, and nostram
facit illius justitiam, ut in eo inveniamur, non nostram habentes justitiam,
quae ex Lege est, sed illam, quae est per fidem Christi, justitiam, quae est ex
Deo per fidem, Phil. 3. 9.

1. I see nothing in the place cited ( viz. Aphor. Ibid.
p. 127. 128.) but a Similitude, which proves nothing; and I gave some touch of
it in the Animadversions. Whereas you now say, [In respect of the condition of
our personal performance to make Christ's Satisfaction ours, Faith is imputed
unto us instead of our personal performance of Perfect Obedience], it seems to
imply as if personal performance of Perfect Obedience might be required as a
Condition to make Christ's Satisfaction ours, which were very strange. For if
Perfect Obedience could be performed by us, what need were there of Christ'
Satisfaction to be imputed to us, except for sin committed or contracted before
this personal performance of perfect Obedience? If Righteousness come by the
Law, Christ died in vain. Gal. 2. ult. But how-ever, such Obedience cannot be
performed by any, there being not a Just man upon Earth, that does good, and
sins not, Eccles. 7. 20. That Faith is as effectual or sufficient a
Condition under the New Covenant, as perfect personal Obedience, if performed,
would have been under the Old Covenant: if this were all that you meant, though
I like not your expression, yet I allow the thing; only this I think meet to
observe, That perfect personal Obedience was so the Condition of the Old
Covenant, that it was also the Righteousness required in it: But Faith is so
the Condition of the New Covenant, as that it is not properly the Righteousness
it self, but only a means to partake of Christ's Satisfaction, which is the
Righteousness that the New Covenant does offer and afford to a Believer,
instead of Perfect Obedience personally to be performed by the Old Covenant.
For that which you add about the paying of a Pepper-Corn, etc. I do not think
that we can be said truly and properly to pay any thing our selves as a price,
whereby to purchase the benefits of the New Covenant; see Isa. 55. 1. and Apoc.
22. 17. When we preach and press Holiness and Good Works, we use to distinguish
betwixt Via Regni and Causa regnandi; and we make them requisite unto
Glorification, but not unto Justification. Colleg. Controver. Disp. 36.
Dicimus (inquit Rivetus) bona opera necessaria esse, tanquam adjunctum
consequens justificationem, tanquam effectum acquisitae satutis, quatenus salus
accipitur pro justificatione; and tanquam antecedens ad salutem, quatenus
accipitur pro glorificatione; non dutem tanquam causam, quae sali^tem efficiat.

2. The acceptance of a Gift, being a means to enjoy it, is a means whereby the
Gift does enrich; and so Faith is a means whereby Christ's Righteousness does
justify us, as being a means whereby it is imputed unto us, and made ours. But
properly it is the Gift that does enrich, though not without the acceptance of
it; and so it is the Righteousness of Christ that does justify, though not
without Faith. The Trial of a Man's Title in Law to a Gift, depends on the
Trial, and Proof of his Acceptance of it, because otherwise except he accept of
the Gift, it is none of his: Yet for all this, it is the Gift that does enrich,
though it must be accepted, that it may do it. And so it is Christ's
Righteousness that we are justified by, though Faith be required of us, that it
may be made ours, and so we may be justified by it.

That my words are contradictory one to another, 36
you say, but the Reason which you add for proof of it, is of little force. I
deny it to be as proper to say, [We are justified by Faith as a Condition] as
to say, [We are justified by Christ's Satisfaction, as the Meritorious Cause];
yea and as the Righteousness by which we are justified. What inconvenience does
arise from it, if Paul and the Scriptures do oftener speak improperly than
properly in this Point? May not improper Speeches, concerning some Point, be
more frequent in Scripture, than proper? Sacramental Speeches, wherein the Sign
is called by the name of the Thing signified, are improper: Yet are they more
frequent in Scripture, than those which in that kind are more proper.

1. You not clearing the Question, Ibid.
either there or any where else (that I know) in your Aphorisms, seemed to
leave it doubtful; and so I thought meet to note it, that you might prevent any
ones stumbling at it.

2. What you now add upon review, does less please; For the Holiness that is in
us, is from God, the imperfection of it is from our selves; this therefore may
be sinful, though God's Work be good.

1. Relation when it is founded in Quality, Ibid.
may (for any thing I see) be intended and remitted, Vide Alsted. Metaphys.
lib. 2. c. 5.
as the Quality is wherein it is founded. I like not Scheiblers joining
Similitude and Equality together, as if there were the same reason of both. One
thing cannot be more or less equal, though it may be nearer to, or further from
Equality than another; but one thing may be more or less like, when yet there
is a true and proper likeness in both.

2. That no Man ever performs one act fully and exactly conform to the Law of
Works, is the same that I say: But why do you put in these terms [fully and
exactly] if there can be no conformity but that which is full and exact?

3. That our Inherent Righteousness (for I must still mind you that we are
speaking of it) is Non-reatus poene, I deny; and all that you add there in that
Page is impertinent, as being nothing to Inherent Righteousness, about which
now is all the Dispute. Page 37. You seem to come up to what I say, when you
grant, that our Gospel-Righteousness considered in esse officii, as related to,
or measured by the Precept, so our Faith and Holiness admit of degrees. Here by
Faith and Holiness, you mean the same with that which immediately before you
called Gospel-Righteousness, which must needs be meant of Inherent
Righteousness. As for those words which you insert, [and that only quoad
materiam praeceptam] I know not well what they mean. For how can officium, as
related to, and measured by the Precept, be considered but quoad materiam
praeceptam?

1. If I take Holiness (as you say) as opposite to Sin, 37
How do I make all the Actions of the Heathens Holy? Do I make them not sinful?
I have ever approved of those Saying of the Ancients.

Sine c^ltu very Dei, Prosp. de Vocat. Gent. lib. 1. cap. 7.
etiam quod virtus videtur. esse, peccatum est. And, Omnis infidelium vita,
peccatum est, and nihil est bonum sine summo bono. Vbi enim deest agnitio
aeternae and incommut abilis veritatis, falsa virtus est, Idem in Sentent. ex
Aug. Sent. 106.
etiam in optimis moribus. And, Quicquid boni fit ab homine, and non propter
hoc fit, propter quod fieri debere vera sapientia praecipit, and se officio
videatur bonum, ipso non recto fine peccatum est. Scripture also does carry me
that way, Aug. contra Julian. lib. 4. c. 3.
namely these place, Romans 8. 8, 9. and Heb. 11. 6. I wave that place Romans 14.
ult. because it seems to look another way; though Prosper de Vit^ Contempl.
lib. 3. cap. 1. does urge it to this purpose. There is not then the same reason
of the Actions of Heathens, as of the Actions of Believers: these are
imperfectly holy, the other are altogether unholy.

2. You grant that Holiness is the same with Righteousness, which is opposed to
Reatus Culpae: And truly I should think, that Inherent Righteousness is rather
Nonreatus Culpae, than Non-reatus Poenae. For your Parenthesis, [If any were
found, that had any such Righteousness according to the Law of Works] it is
ever granted, That such a perfect Righteousness is not found in any upon Earth;
but still it is denied, that because it is not perfect, therefore it is none at
all.

Justi appellantur (says Hierom, Ad Ctesiphont. contra Pelagian.
speaking of Zachary, Elizabeth, Job, etc.) non quod omni vitio careant, sed
quod major^ part virtutum commendentur. You grant, that Holiness may be
denominated from its congruency to the Precept as a Precept. Now this you must
grant, may recipere magis and minus: for so you grant that Holiness may. And if
Congruency, why not Conformity? For Congruency and Conformity, though diverse
words, yet import (for any thing I see) one and the same thing. I take Faith to
be in part our Inherent Righteousness, as it is Officium, not as it is Conditio
praecise considerata.

3. Whether Habitual Faith, or Actual, be properly the Condition of the
Covenant, is little to our purpose. And for the thing it self, as I shall
grant, that we must not content our selves with a habit of Faith, but must also
act Faith: So (I think) you will not deny, that we are Fideles, and so
justified, even when we sleep, though no act of Faith be performed by us.

You say nothing to that which I answered concerning our Divines, Ibid.
of whom you spoke, viz. That they hold, That the Righteousness whereby we are
justified, is not our Personal Righteousness; and therefore though they say,
(as you allege) That our Justification is perfect, and therefore (as you
infer) our Righteousness, viz. whereby we are justified, must be perfect also;
yet all this is little to your purpose.

2. To what you say, I have said enough before, viz. That Faith which is the
Condition of the New Covenant, as to Justification, is not our Righteousness
whereby we are justified, but only a means to partake of Christ's Satisfaction,
the only Righteousness by which we are justified. And for being rei poenae
Novae Legis for nonperformance of its Condition; I say still, I know no
punishment of the New Law for want of Faith as its Condition, but only a
leaving to the punishment of the Old Law; which punishment yet (I grant) will
be so much the more grievous, as the sin, which an Unbeliever, both as an
Unbeliever, and otherwise, is guilty of by Gospel-Aggravations, is the more
heinous.

1. I as little doubt but that sincerity of Righteousness does consist with
imperfection of Righteousness, 38
viz. Inherent Righteousness, which is really the same with Holiness, how-ever
in this or that respect we may distinguish the one from the other.

2. How Hypocrisy can be taken for a seeming or appearing better than we are,
yet without affectation or dissimulation, I do not understand. If without any
affectation or dissimulation of ours, we seem better than we are, it is
another's error, not our fault; neither can we therefore be called Hypocrites.
Your manifold distinctions of Sincerity do serve rather to confound the Reader,
than to unfold the matter. I take sincerity to be no distinct Grace, but the
Modus of other Graces: but why that Modus may not admit of degrees, I confess I
do not see. I conceive Zeal to be of like nature, yet one may be more or less
zealous, and so also more or less sincere. You say here, [There is no Medium
inter Ens and non Ens] of which I make no doubt but page 2. you think Relations
to be inter Ens and Nihil; and what difference between Nihil and non Ens? You
say, That you have over and over showed, That Conformity to the Rule of the
Condition, does consist in indivisibili. Indeed you have diverse times affirmed,
That all Conformity is of that nature, but I could never yet see it proved. But
why do you now speak of Conformity to the Rule of the Condition? I take
Conformity to the Rule of the Precept to be our Personal Righteousness, and the
Sincerity of that Conformity to be the Sincerity of this Righteousness. And
this Righteousness, though it be sincere, I hold to be imperfect, because the
Conformity to the Rule is imperfect. Of the Coven. chap. 16. page III.
[Sincerity (says Master Blake) is said to be the New Rule, or the Rule of the
New Covenant. But this is no Rule, but our Duty, taking the Abstract for the
Concrete; Sincerity for sincere walking, and this according to the Rule of the
Law, not to reach it, but in all parts to aim at it, and have respect unto it.
Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect to all thy Commandments, Psalm.
119. 6. And this is our Inherent Righteousness, which in reference to its Rule
(N. B.) labors under many imperfections]. And a little before he says thus,
[I know no other Rule but the Old Rule, the Rule of the Moral Law: that is with
me a Rule, a perfect Rule, the only Rule].

3. It seems very incongruous to grant, that Apoc. 22. 11. [Be holy still] does
import an increase of Holiness; and yet to deny, that [Be righteous still] does
import an increase of Righteousness. For any thing I know, some on the contrary
may as well say, That the latter words import an increase of Righteousness, and
yet the other no increase of Holiness. Whereas you speak of varying the sense
according to the variety of Subjects, you take it for granted, That here the
Subjects are various; whereas both by this, and diverse other places before
cited, it seems clear to me, that the Subjects, viz. Righteousness and Holiness
are really the same one with the other. For the Formale of Righteousness, what
is it but Conformity to the Law, the only Rule of Righteousness? And why such
Conformity may not be more or less, I am yet to learn. That place indeed, as
many other, speaks of a true Personal Righteousness in the Saints, but yet not
of a Perfect Righteousness in them; and consequently not of such a
Righteousness, as whereby they are justified, except it be only in some sort,
and in some measure, which is not the Justification about which we contend.
This Imperfect Righteousness is measured by the Law of Works, as a Rule, though
it be accepted only by the gracious condescension of the Gospel.

To Ephesians. 4. 24. you give many Answers, but they seem but so many Evasions. 39


1. I think there is no Question, but the Apostle speaks by way of Precept and
Exhortation. q. d. If you have indeed learned Christ, and have been taught by
him, you have learned to do so and so; therefore have a care to do so. Surely
the Apostles words import a duty required, and so implicity contain a Precept
or Exhortation.

2. That he speaks as well to Believers, True Believers, as mere Professors, is
as little to be doubted. For he speaks unto them upon a supposition, that they
had learned Christ, and had been taught by him; which though it may belong to
mere Professors, yet to true Believers much rather.

3. If the New Man, which is created in Righteousness and Holiness, may
increase, as you grant, then surely Righteousness and Holiness, in which the
New Man is created, and without which the New Man is nothing, must increase
also. To say, That the New Man may increase in Holiness, but not in
Righteousness, is for one that would say any thing, so that he may but (...).
As well might it be said, That the New Man is created in Holiness, but not in
Righteousness.

4. The Form of Righteousness is Conformity to the Law, to which we must labor
to conform still more and more, not only extensive, but also intensive.

5. The very conjunction of the words here, as in other places, shows that they
are used as (...). Besides, how we should give unto God the things that are
God's, and to Men the things that are Men's, and not conform to the Law, which
does prescribe our Duty toward God, and toward Men, I cannot see: and surely
Conformity to the Law, is the Righteousness now in question.

1. If we be justified from the Accusation of Reatus poenae primae Legis
propter peccatum; Ibid.
What need is there of any other justification? Of the Coven. If c. 14. p. 95.
[Vpon the Laws Convictions (says Mr. Blake) there may follow
Gospel-Aggravations; but Conviction is the Work of the Law]. If Conviction,
then surely Condemnation. If the Law do not condemn, what can? And what can the
Law condemn for, but for sin? It is the Law which is the Ministration of
Condemnation, 2. Cor. 3. 9. By the Law is the knowledge of sin, Romans 3. 20.

2. For the accusation of Reatus poenae Novae Legis ob non praestiam
Conditionem, it is no new Accusation, but a making good of a former Accusation;
and so Reatus paenae Novae Legis, is but to be left in reatu poenae Veteris
Legis; save that aggravata ex Evangelio culpa ipsa etiam poena aggravatur.

3. I confess, I was not before acquainted with these two Justifications which
you speak of: I did not find them in your Aphorisms, but only two sorts of
Righteousness as requisite to one and the same Justification, so I understood
it. But truly now that you lay open your conception more than before, I can see
no solidity in it. We are justified by the Righteousness of Christ participated
by Faith; but not by Faith, as being it self our Righteousness. Faith is indeed
required unto Justification, yet not as our Righteousness, but as a Condition,
Instrument, or Means (for I would not strive about words) whereby we partake of
Christ's Righteousness. I see not, that the Scripture does speak of such a
Twofold Justification, one by Christ and his Righteous^ess, another by Faith
as our Righteousness; but only of one Justification of Christ through Faith. By
him all that believe are justified, Acts 13. 39.

Non-reatus poenae is not Inherent Righteousness, Ibid.
of which I expressly spoke. I take it to be really the same with Holiness. (p.
47.)
What you cite therefore out of Gataker and Placaeus, is nothing against me, I
speaking of Righteousness in one sense, and they in another. Besides, you seem
to mistake the meaning of Mr. Gataker's words: for Sons is as much as reus
culpae, and insons as much as non-reus culpae; whereas you seem to take Sons
for Reus poenae, and Insons for Non-reus poenae; how-ever his words are not to
our purpose.

1. I see not how either here or elsewhere you infringe that, Ibid.
which I said about the Materiality and Formality, as well of Holiness as of
Righteousness.

2. As Holiness (you grant) is a Conformity to the Law, as it does constituere
debitum officii, so I conceive is Righteousness, (Inherent I still mean) and
not a Conformity to the Rule, (p. 48.)
as it constituteth, Conditionem praemit obtinendi, and poenae vitandae, si
nimirum seclusa omni consideratione officii, Conditio tantum ut Conditio
consideretur.

1. Acceptance as taken for Accepting Justification is by the consent of all
men (I mean Protestants) a remission of our sins, and accepting of us as
Righteous, Mr. Kendal against Mr. Goodwin, cap. 4. p. 138.
as Righteous, or Accounting just, is (I think) as much as Justifying.

2. I did not (nor I suppose those other Divines by you mentioned) speak so
generally, but to presuppose Faith, whereby our Persons are accepted in Christ,
and then our Actions. By Faith Abel offered a more excellent Sacrifice, etc.
Heb. 11. 4. At length, after many words, which touch not me, in your 6th, you
grant as much as I did, or do desire, viz. That our Persons must be justified
and reconciled, before our external Obedience can be accepted. Whereas you
there add, That it was not as they were an imperfect Conformity to the Law of
Works, that Abel 's Works were accepted: I answer, It was not indeed by the Law
of Works; yet as they were a sincere, though imperfect Conformity to that Law,
as a Rule, so they were accepted by the New Covenant. The Law of Works directs,
the Covenant of Grace accepts, though we come short of what the Law requires.

[The Law (as Mr. Blake says) still commands us, Of the Coven. chapter 16. p. 9,
10.
though the Covenant in Christ, through the abundant Grace of it, upon the
terms that it requires and accepts, frees us from the Sentence of it]. And
again, [A perfection of Sufficiency to attain the end I willingly grant, Ibid.
p. 111 112.
God condescending through rich Grace to crown weak Obedience: In this sense
our Imperfection has its perfectness; otherwise I must say, That our Inherent
Righteousness is an Imperfect Righteousness, in an imperfect Conformity to the
Rule of Righteousness, etc.] He means the Law of Works, which (as before noted)
he says is, a Rule, a perfect Rule, the only Rule.

1. I shall not deny, 40, and 41.
but that our Faith and Obedience may be said to be justified from the
accusation of unsoundness: Yet I think, That this is but a making good of our
Justification against the Accusation of being Sinners. For besides that the
unsoundness of Faith (and so of Obedience) is sin; besides this (I say) if our
Faith be not sound, it is in vain, we are yet in our sins, we lie under the
Curse and Condemnation of the Law, there being no freedom for us without Faith.

2. I know none that say, Our Actions are justified through Christ's Merit by
the Law of Works. For my part I should say, We and our Actions are justified
from the Law of Works, i. e. from the condemnation of it, God for Christ's sake
accepting us and our Actions, notwithstanding our imperfection, for which the
Law, if we should be sentenced by it, would condemn us. But here by the way,
let me observe this, That your retractation of what you said in your Aphorisms,
does seem to manifest thus much, That when you composed those Aphorisms, you
either knew not, or liked not that Twofold Justification, which now you so
often speak of, and somewhere say, That my ignorance in this Point is it, that
does mainly darken all my Discourse. That common saying is not always true,
(...).

For my words; 1. I see not why those, [Acquitting us from all sin] should
offend you. For you might see by what I there said, That I meant the
not-imputing of any sin unto us. And so the Phrases used in Scripture, of God,
not remembering our sins, his covering them, casting them behind his back, into
the bottom of the Sea, etc. they all import such an acquitting of us from sin,
as I intended; not as if God did account us to be without sin, which were
false, but that God does not charge sin upon us, viz. so as to exact
satisfaction for sin from us. I mean the very same with Mr. Gataker in the
words which you cited p. 39. Non hoc dicitur, Deum apud se judicare, illos pro
quorum peccatis universis Christus satisfecit, nihil mali unquam commisisse,
aut boni debiti omisisse; sed eodem habere loco quoad mortis reatum, and jus ad
vitam aeternam, ac si nihil vel mali admisissent, vel boni debiti omisissent.
Thus Christ speaks to the Church, Cant. 4. 7. Thou art all fair, my Love, and
there is no spot in thee. What? may some say, Is there no spot in the Church?
No, none in her, so as to be imputed to her. Sine macula deputatur, Gilber. ad
Loc.
quia culpa non imputatur, as one does no less truly than elegantly express it.
You your self yield as much as I desire, or as my words import, viz. That God
acquitteth us from all sin, so as it induces an obligation to punishment.

2. When you say; That to acquit us from the Obligation of the Old Law, is one
Justification, and to justify us against the accusation of being so obliged,
is another Justification; I confess (Davus sum, non Oedipus) I do not well
understand what you mean, for to my apprehension these are one and the same.
Methinks it must needs be, That what does acquit us from the Obligation of the
Old Law, does also eo nomine justify us against the Accusation of being so
obliged. For how are we acquitted from the Obligation, if not justified against
the Accusation of being obliged?

3. I marvel why you should trouble your self with speaking of the sin against
the Holy Ghost, and of final unbelief, when as you could not but know, that I
spoke of all sin, from which we may be justified. Why might not one as well
quarrel with those words of the Apostle, Acts 13. 39. By him all that believe
are justified from all things, etc.

4. I grant the New Covenant not to be violated but by final unbelief, yet (as
I expressly added in that very place which you take hold on) so that this be
rightly understood. For the right understanding of it, I said something before;
and for further explication, I refer you to Mr. Blake of the Covenant, Chap. 33.

5. But in the next you do most strangely, even without any cause that I can
see, (...), and (as they say) fluctus in simpulo excitare. That [first our
Persons, and then our Duties and Actions may properly be said to be justified,
that is, accepted as just, and acquitted from all accusation brought against
them, though in themselves they be not such, but that sin does cleave unto
them] why should this seem such horrid Doctrine, as that your Heart should
detest it?

1. I speak of good Actions: for it is absurd to say, That evil Actions are
accepted as just, though we may be so accepted notwithstanding our evil Actions.

2. I plainly say, That sin does cleave to our good Actions; yet (I say) God
does accept them as just, notwithstanding the imperfection of them, and the sin
that does cleave unto them. If this be offensive to you, as well (I think) may
you be offended at that Nehem. 13. 21. Remember me, O Lord, concerning this,
and spare me according to the greatness of thy Mercy. And so at that 1 Pet. 2.
5. You also as lively stones are built up a Spiritual House, an Holy
Priesthood, to offer up Spiritual Sacrifices, acceptable unto God through Jesus
Christ. Neither is there any reason why those words [acquitted from all
accusation brought against them] should distaste you. For what though an
Accusation be true, if yet in some other respect it be of no force? May not
they be properly said to be acquitted from all Accusation, who notwithstanding
the Accusation, are freed from condemnation? What matter is it how we are
accused, so long as we are sure not to be condemned? Therefore the Apostle
uses these Expressions as equipollent, [Who shall lay any thing to the charge
of God's Elect?] and [Who is he that condemns?] Romans 8. 33, 34. Might you not
as vehemently fall upon those words of the Apostle, [Who shall lay any thing to
the charge, etc.] as you do upon mine? Might you not say, Why? I will lay this,
and that, and that, and ten thousand things besides to their charge? Yea, but
when you have done all you can, to what purpose is it? For who is he that
condemns them, notwithstanding all the Accusations brought against them?
Medull. lib. 1. c. 27.. 20.
These very words of the Apostle does Amesius alledg in the former of those
Sections which you cite. And if (as you say) all may be there fully seen in
Amesius, that you would say in this, then I see not that you would say any
thing against me, as indeed you do say nothing. But what do you mean by those
words, [and that as to the Law of Works] which by a Parenthesis you thrust in
among mine? As if I meant, that as well our Actions as our Persons are accepted
as just, and acquitted from all condemnation by the Law of Works. Truly I think
tam quam, as well the one as the other, that is indeed neither the one nor the
other. The Law does convince of sin, and (as much as in it lies) condemn for
sin, both us and our Actions, even the best of them: But by the New Covenant,
Through Faith in Christ we are accepted as just, though guilty of manifold
sins; and our Actions are accepted also, though full of imperfection. When you
say, That the Reatus Culpa cannot possibly be removed, or remitted, though I
think it is but a striving about words, which I do not love, yet I cannot
assent unto it. For I think it is truly and properly said to be remitted or
pardoned; neither does that seem proper or pertinent, which you add by way of
Explication, [that is, The Man cannot be, or justly esteemed to be a Man that
has not sinned]. Quid tum postea? Cannot therefore the guilt of sin be
remitted? Yea, how should sin be remitted, if it were not committed? I think it
is as proper to say, Remittere culpam, as Remittere poenam. Surely if I may
argue from the frequent use of Phrases, and hence infer the propriety of them,
as you did, there is nothing more usual in Scripture, (and so in other
Writings, and in common Speech) then to say, that Sins, Faults, Offenses are
remitted. Grotius faith, De Satis. page 52.
That (...), which in Latin is Remittere, is as much as missum facere; and that
the Greek Scholiasts usually expound it by (...), i. e. to neglect, not to
regard, to pass over, (as Prove. 19. 11. to pass over a transgression) and that
therefore (...), is peccata missa facere, which the Scripture (he says)
following the Metaphor further, calls peccata in mare pro^icere, Ibid. p. 53.
Mich. 7. 19. It is true, Sin is said to be remitted in reference unto
Punishment: Remittere, or missa facere peccata, (as Grotius says) is as much
as punire nolle. Yet this hinders not but that sin, or the guilt of sin is
properly said to be remitted or pardoned; yea (I think) it does confirm it. For
if it be proper to say, That God will not punish sin, and this is as much as to
remit or pardon sin; then it is proper to say, That God does remit or pardon
sin. In a word therefore, my words, about which you make so much ado, are such
as that I see not why any should stumble at them. They do not import, that our
Actions, even the best of them, if strictly examined, are not sinful; or that
God does not see any sin in them; but only that God does pardon and pass by the
sinfulness of them, and accept them in Christ, (who is the High-Pri^st, that
does bear, and so take away the Iniquity of our holy things, Exodus 28. 38.) as
if they had no sin in them. Neither do I see why you should detest this
justifying of our Actions, and yet grant the justifying of our Persons. Your
Reasons seem to make as much against the one as against the other. For are not
our Persons sinful as well as our Actions? Surely if the Action be sinful, the
Person whose Action it is must needs be so too. And though you pass over the
next, because you reverse your former Assertion, yet in that which I there
said, you might have seen enough to vindicate me from all that you have here
said against me.

1. You grant what I say.

2. I have said before, 42.
That though (in mine Opinion) sin may properly be said to be remitted, yet
this is in reference unto punishment.

3. You had no reason to imagine, that I should think, that my Actions, or the
Actions of the best upon Earth, can be justified against all Accusations, as if
they were absolutely good and perfect; when in that very place I spoke of the
imperfection and iniquity that is in our best Actions, and how it is through
Christ covered, and not imputed unto us. Yea, and immediately I cited diverse
places of Scripture (viz. Eccles. 7. 20. James 3. 2. 1 John 1. 8, 9. Job* 9. 4.
Exodus 28. 38.) to prove, that neither our Persons, nor our Actions are so
righteous, but that we may be accused of, and condemned for sin in them, and so
without the mercy of God in Christ must be. It is strange how you should pass
by all this, it being directly before your eyes, and should raise a suspicion,
as if I should mean quite contrary.

1. It will not follow that our Persons being once justified by Christ, Ibid.
afterward they may be justified by our Works, when once our Works themselves
are all justified in that sense as I explained it, viz. That first it is meant
only of good Works; and then that God does not justify those good Works for
their own sake, as if they were fully and perfectly Righteous, but for Christ's
sake pardoning and passing by the imperfection that is in them. Illud semper
retimeatur, De Just. Act. c. 33. Memb. 2.
(inquit Davenantius) hanc acceptationem operum pendere ex praevia acceptatione
person in Christo; Cum enim ipsi renaticarnem peccatricem adhuc gestent, and
opera illorum omnia carnis vitium redoleant, Deus neque ipsos, neque eorum
opera grata haberet, nisi and hos and illa in Christo magis quam in seipsis
amplexaretur. What you say of Chamier and others, as being against the
meritoriousness of Works merited by Christ, might well have been spared, as
being nothing at all against me, who am far from making our Works meritorious,
when I make even the best of them imperfect, and to need pardon. 2. It is
evident by this very Section, to which you now reply, that I spoke only of good
Actions. For how absurd and senseless were it to say, that our Sins are not
fully and perfectly righteous, as I there say that our Works are not? The two
former Sections also clearly show of what Works I spoke; so that here you do
but nodum in scirpo quaerere.

1. Asserting may well enough be called Confessing, Ibid. 43, and 44.
though it be that, and somewhat more.

2. I cannot tell what Judgment some others may be of, I speak for my self.

3. I take all sin to be against the Law, as it is distinguished from the
Gospel, though some sins may be aggravated by the Gospel. Of that Law I suppose
St. John spoke, saying, Sin is a transgression of the Law, 1 John 3. 4. And St.
Paul, By the Law is the knowledge of sin, Romans 3. 20. And again, I had not known
sin but by the Law: for I had not know lust, (or as the Margent has it,
concupiscence, viz. to be sin) except the Law had said, Thou shall not covet,
Romans 7. 7. I think it is the common judgment of Divines, that every sin is
against some of the Ten Commandments.

4. It is no hard matter to conceive how unbelief, and neglect of the
Sacraments, etc. are sins against the Precepts of the Decalogue. The first
precept requires us to have the Lord, and him only, for our God; and so to
believe whatsoever he does reval unto us, and to perform whatsoever he does
require of us. The second Precept requires us to Worship God as he himself does
prescribe; and consequently not to neglect any of God's Ordinances; See Mr.
Cawdrey and Mr. Palmer of the Sabbath, Part. 2. Chap. 4.. 21, 22, 23. What you
add after, makes all for me in this particular, only some things seem meet to
be observed.

1. This (I confess) to me is strange Philosophy, That the Earth, of which
Man's Body was made, ceased not to be Earth still, when it was made Man. As
well may you say, That Adam's rib, of which Eve was formed, ceased not to be a
Rib still; and so that all the Elemenrs retain their several Natures in all
mixed Bodies.

2. The Precept and Threatening (you say) are parts of the New Law, though they
be common with the Old. Here you seem to grant, That nothing is commanded, or
threatened in the New Law, which is not commanded or threatened in the Old.
Methinks then you should not make a Twofold Righteousness, and a Twofold
Justification; one in respect of the Old Law, another in respect of the New.
The Precept [believe] belongs to the Old Law; but as it is not only a Precept,
but also a Condition, upon performance of which Salvation is promised,
[Believe, and thou shall be saved] so it belongs to the New Law. So this
Threatening [If thou do not believe, thou shall perish] belongs to the Old
Law, as threatening death for every sin, and consequently for unbelief, which is
a sin: and it belongs to the New Law, as leaving an Unbeliever under the
condemnation of the Old Law both for that sin of unbelief, and also for all
other sins, from the guilt of which he cannot be freed, because he does not
perform the Condition, which the New Law to that end does require of him. And
(as I have before noted) the Condemnation of an Unbeliever is now increased, as
his Sin is, by neglecting Salvation offered upon condition of believing.

3. You say, That the promissory part of the Law of Works does not oblige. But
your Reason seems invalid, Quia cessat materia, vel capacitas subjecti. You
mean, no Man can perform the Condition; and so no Man is capable of the Promise
made upon that Condition. But why may it not be said, That as the Precept,
which is also the Condition, cease not, though none be able to obey it; so
the Promise does remain, though none can enjoy the benefit of it? It may seem
unreasonable, that the Threatening should still be in force, and the Promise be
quite taken away.

4. You say again, That the Earth, of which Man's Body was made, does still
retain the form of Earth* which surely does need further Explication, or
Confirmation, or both.

5. The threatening of the New Law (you say) has something proper to the New
Law: But for any thing I see, the New Law does threaten nothing, which the Old
Law does not threaten; though as by the New Law there is an aggravation of sin,
so there will be an increase of condemnation.

6. Whereas you say, that the right stating and clear apprehension of this
part, (viz. of the difference between the Law and the Gospel, and how far the
Law of Works is abrogated) is of greater moment and difficulty by far than my
Animadversions take notice of, or than any thing (as to difficulty) that I deal
with; truly my desire was, and so is, only to give you some hints for the
further clearing of things in the Second Edition of your Aphorisms. But if you
think, that here in this Section, which is somewhat long, you have sufficiently
explicated those Points, I am not of your mind.

1. All that you here say is nothing to my Animadversion; 44.
only you strive a little about the acceptance of those words [the Moral Law].

2. Neither do I make the Moral Law as taken for the Precept conjunct with the
Threatening, a true part of the New Law: yet the Moral Law so taken, being not
dissolved or abrogated by the New Law, as you grant, Unbelievers, while they
remain such, both for their unbelief, and for their other sins, are under
condemnation, as belonging unto them by the Old Law, there being no Remedy
provided for them by the New Law; which has no other threatening, (I think) but
that it leaves Unbelievers to the Old Law, and the condemnation of it.

1. I do not dislike your Thesis, Ibid. and 45.
[That Christ died not to satisfy for the violation of the Covenant of Grace]
as you understand it, viz. for final unbelief. Yet I hold, That such as profess
the Gospel, and live in those sins, which are not consistent with true and
sincere Faith, do for the time violate the Covenant of Grace; and for such
violation of that Covenant Christ died, or else all such are left without
Remedy. I am in this fully of Mr. Blakes mind, Of the Coven. chap. 33.
[As a wife (says he) by adultery, so they by sin forsake the Covenant, by
which they stand betrothed; and by consequence it must needs follow, that
Christ died for breach of the Covenant of Grace, as well as for breach of the
Covenant of Works; unless we will say, That all Men by name Christians, and
found in any of these sins, are in a lost and unrecoverable condition, joining
with those that have said, That there is no Grace or Pardon for those that fall
into sin after Baptism. That he died not for their sins, that live and die in
final impenitency and unbelief, may be easily granted: and that rises to no
more, than that he died not for those, that finally and unrecoverably break
Covenant with him].

2. Whereas you confess, That for unbelief and impenitency, though it be not
final, Men remain obligati ad poenam per Legem Naturae, but deny it as to the
proper Obligation of the New Law; I conceive that the New Law providing no
Remedy for them, while they remain such; in this respect they are as well by
the New Law obligati ad poenam for the time, as final Unbelievers and
Impenitents are for ever. You grant the Gospel does non-liberare, while Men
continue in Unbelief; yet you conceive, That it does not obligare ad poenam
proprie, viz. ad non-liberationem, and ad poenam majorem. Now I conceive that
while it does non-liberare, it may be said, obligare ad non-liberationem;
though I should rather like to say, That it does relinquere in statu
non-liberationis, and so majoris poenae ob contemptum gratiae, and
misericordiae oblatae, In your Similitude, The Malefactor, whiles he refuses to
come in, and submit to the Terms upon which Pardon is offered, remains in a
state of Condemnation, though the sentence be not executed upon him, except he
continue in his refusal of the offer unto the term prefixed. But you profess
your self willing to acknowledge, That this non-liberatio may in some sort be
called Poena; and truly I think, that Poena Nova Legis non alia est, quam
non-liberatio a poena veteris Legis; hoc tamen semper addito, poenam veteris
Legis, ob neglectum liberationis in Lege Nova oblatae, graviorem reddi.

I mean [Actually in the state of Damnation] and you grant as much as I desire,
45.
viz. That they are obliged even for that sin unto death, per Legem Naturae,
and non liberati per Legem Gratiae. Why then should you deny, that they are
actually obliged to Damnation? Will you put a difference between Death and
Damnation? Or betwixt obliged, and actually obliged? He that believes not, is
condemned already, John 3 18. therefore he is actually under condemnation, and
so remains, as long as he remains in unbelief; The Wrath of God abides on him,
John 3. 36. That the Sentence is not yet executed, but upon believing he may be
freed from the execution of it, is another thing.

The Parenthesis, Ibid.
which you say, is wanting in your Aphorisms, might help to make the words more
clear; as they stand, they seem obscure: which is all that I would have
observed.

Neither am I willing to fall upon either Logical or Philosophical Disputes;
Ibid. and 46.
yet I am also unwilling to recede from received Opinions, except I see urgent
cause for it. Now that an Accident must have a Subject to exist in, as it is
generally held, so I am persuaded it is true. Burgersdicius (whose authority I
may well enough oppose to Scheiblers) says, Logic. lib. 1. cap. 7.
Accidens est Ens substantiae inhaerens. Indeed the says, Relationes non tam
inhaerent alicui subjecto, quam adhaerent: but he does not deny that they do
inhaerere. For he says, Relatio ejusmodi accidens est, quod non tantum (N. B.)
in aliquo est, ut in subjecto, sed refertur etiam ad aliud. It is usually one
Argument which our Divines have against Transubstantiation, that thereby
Accidents are made to exist without a Subject. Scheibler grants, that an
Accident has not existence by it self, that it is not (...), (so it should be,
not (...)). Now every thing that has Existence, must (I think) either exist by
it self, or in some other thing.

2. Adjunctum and Subjectum, and Effectum and Causa, are not so contradistinct,
but that the same thing may be Adjunctum and Effectum, and so the same thing
Subjectum and Causa.

3. Whereas Scheibler says, Actio transiens nullum habet subjectum, See Mr.
Kendal against Mr. Goodwin, chap. 4. p. 135.
ne quidem ipsum Patiens, ut visum est; I say, Ego illud nondum vidi, nec vel
verum, vel verisimile mihi videtur. I think, Omnis Actio subjectatur in
Patiente: and this I hold to be true even of Immanent Actions, which though
they have the Agent for the Subject, yet it is because the Agent is there also
the Patient; and it is not qua Agens, but qua Patiens, that it is the subject
of the Action.

4. He argues thus, Actio ut sic non dicit nisi egressum a virtute activa
alicujus Agentis. Egressus autem opponitur (...) esse in. Resp. 1. Actio ut sic
necessario infert Passionem. Fieri enim non potest, ut aliquid agat, nisi etiam
aliquid patiatur. Ergo Actio non tantum dicit egressum a virtute activa, verum
etiam infert receptionem in Patiente. 2. Actio and Passio sunt idem motus; sed
Actio vocatur quatenus ab Agente procedit, Passio autem quatenus in Patiente
recipitur. Etiamsi igitur Actio and Passio formaliter differant, cum tamen
realiter idem sint, si Passio est in subjeco, Actionem etiam in subjecto esse
necesse est.

5. Whereas you doubt whether Scotus be not right in holding that Immanent Acts
are in the Predicament of Quality, that (as diverse other Passages) does show
that you are much inclined to that which does cross the common Opinion; which
surely is in it self very dangerous, though (I know) you are prudent and
sober-minded, so that there is little cause of fear this way in respect of you.
Yet wanton Wits, and unstable Spirits, may extend your Notions further than you
intended them; and therefore, especially considering the times into which we
are fallen, you have need to be wary: but dictum sapienti sat est.

Though we cannot know God to Perfection, yet we may and must know him so, 46.
See Mr. Kendal against Mr. Goodwin, chap. 4. p. 130, 131. Ibid.
as to remove from him all Imperfection, and consequently all composition. The
more simple any thing is, caeteris paribus, the more perfect it is: Therefore
God being most Perfect, he is most Simple.

This contains only a Logical Dispute about the Predicaments and Relations. Now
for the Predicaments, though I do not say that they all note real Beings
distinct one from another, so Action and Passion do not; yet I think they all
note real Beings, i. e. Beings which are not merely rational or imaginary. And
how you should question this, especially of Substance, Quantity and Quality,
(which are more than two) I cannot conceive. And for Relations, hear Aquinas,
whose judgment (besides that he gives reason for what he says) with me is of
far more weight than of your late Authors. Quidam posuerunt Relationem non esse
rem naturae, Part. 1. Quest. 13. Art. 7. in Corp.
sed rationis tantum. Quod quidem apparet esse falsum ex hoc, quod ipsae res
naturalem ordinem and habitudinem habent ad invicem. Yet as there are Entia
Rationis, so there are Relationes Rationis. Ibid. Et Vide. ibid. ad 2. and ad 4.
Yea, Aquinas shows, that Quaedam Relationes sunt quantum ad utrumque extremum
res naturae, etc. Quandoque vero in uno extremo est res naturae, and in altero
extremo est res rationis tantum, nempe cum duo extrema non sunt ejusdem
ordinis, etc. And of this latter sort he notes the Relations are, which are
betwixt God and the Creatures. Cum igitur (inquit) Deus sit extra totum ordinem
creaturae, and omnes creaturae ordinentur ad ipsum, and non e converso,
manifestum est, quod creaturae realiter referuntur ad Deum, sed in Deo non est
aliqua realis relatio ad creatura^, sed secundum rationem tantum, in quantum
creaturae referuntur ad ipsum. Et sic nihil prohibet hujusmodi nomina
importantia relationem ad creaturam, praedicari de Deo ex tempore, non propter
mutationem aliquam ipsius, sed propter creaturae mutationem, sicut columna fit
dextra animali, nulla mutatione circa ipsam existente, sed animali translato.
Aquin.
And again, Creatio (inquit) active considerata significat actionem divinam,
Part 1.
quae est ejus essentia cum relatione ad creaturam. Quaest. 45 Art. 3. Ad 1.
Sed relatio in Deo ad creaturam non est realis, sed secundum rationem tantum:
relatio vero creaturae ad Deum est realis, etc.

Heereboord, p. 179. says, Pater non significat aliquid, quod humanae naturae
proprie and per se insit, sed quomodo ille, qui sic dicitur, se habeat ad
filium. Resp. Pater est Relatum, nempe Substantia cum Relatione ad aliud:
Paternitas est Relatio, and inest subjecto, nempe homini, qui est Pater. Quod
p. 184. dicit Relationem esse medium inter Ens reale and Nihil, id tantum
dicit, non probat.

You say, That however you are confident, that Relation is not vere Ens; yet
you will not say, that it is Nihil or Non Ens; and you said before, (as I
noted, and it is most sure) Inter Ens and non Ens non datur medium. The
distinction of Medium Participationis, and Medium Negationis will not here
serve. For certainly Contradictoria non admittunt medium Negationis. Aut Homo,
aut non Homo: aut Ens, aut non Ens: non datur medium. The Authors to which you
refer me, I have not, save only Dr. Twisse; but he is of another Edition, viz.
in Folio, so that I cannot find the place, as you cite it.

1. He that is justified, Ibid. and 47, 48, 49.
is so freed from all condemnation, that he is liable to no condemnation, Romans
8. 1, 33, 34. And he that is so freed, is perfectly freed, and consequently
perfectly justified, though the freedom from condemnation, and so the
justification be not so fully and perfectly made manifest as it shall be. The
freedom from condemnation per sententiam Judicis, of which you speak, does not
add to the freedom it self, but only to the manifestation of it. The Sentence
is indeed past already, John 3. 18. though it be not so solemnly pronounced, as
it shall be.

2. He that is freed from all Condemnation, is certainly freed from all
Accusation, so as that no Accusation can be prejudicial to him; though he may
be accused, yet it matters not, seeing he cannot be condemned. Else the Apostle
had triumphed before the Victory, saying, Who shall lay any thing to the
charge, etc. Who is he that condemns? Romans 8. 33, 34.

3. The Apostle does not only say, There is no condemnation to them that are in
Christ Jesus, Romans 8. 1. but also, Who shall lay any thing to the charge of
God's Elect? v. 33. viz. when they are in Christ, and so justified. Which in
effect is as much, as if it were said, There shall be no condemnation to such.
But you grant, That other Texts speak as much, and that such neither now are,
nor ever shall be under condemnation. Yet you say, That they would be to morrow
condemned, if no more were done than is done. You mean (I suppose) if they did
not renew the Act of Faith: but (I say, and you grant it) they who are once
justified, though they sin daily, yea, and may lie long in sin, as David did,
yet they shall renew the Act of Faith, and have the joy of God's Salvation
restored unto them, as he prayed, Psalm. 51. 12. Neither is there any
intercision of Justification, though there may be a privation of the joy and
comfort of it.

To your Objections, I answer, Ad 1. He that is once justified, can contract no
guilt so as to fall from his Justification. Besides, when I spoke of
Justification being perfect, I only mean, That a Justified Person is justified,
not in part only, but fully, i. e. from all sins which at present he is guilty
of: not but that his Justification has need to be renewed in respect of new
sins; and so his Justification may be said to increase extensive, as extending
to more and more sins, as they are increased more and more. But that in this
respect we shall be more fully justified at the last Judgment than we are now,
is but by accident, and not from the Nature or Essence of Justification.

Ad 2. Justification per Sententiam Judicis, and Sententiam magis publicam,
makes (as I said) but for the more full and perfect manifestation of it. De
Justif. Disp. 7.
In die judicis (inquit Maccovius) Christus non ram justificaturus (N. B.) est
credentes, quam declaraturus est ex optribus eorum, eos credidisse in hac vita,
and justificatos fuisse. Thus undoubtedly is that to be understood in Acts 3.
19. For without question no sins shall then (at the last Judgment) be blotted
out, which were not blotted out before: but the blotting of them out shall then
more fully appear than before. De Libr. Apocryph. Prelect. 171.
In resurrectione a mortuis, (inquit Rainoldus noster) Christus, qui veniet
judicatum vivos and mortuos, quemadmodum ipse pronunciat, ea quae ligaverint
ipsius ministri, ligatum iri in coelis, ita quae prius in terra remissa
fuerint, confirmabit ipse sua sententia, ut remissa and deleta in aeternum,
omnia nimirum fidelium and sanctorum peccata. Quare quaecunque, and
quorumcunque peccata remissa fuerint in hoc seculo, etiam in futuro seculo
remittentur, quoniam autem peccata non fuerint remissa in hoc seculo, non
remittentur in futuro, nempe peccata hominum incredulorum and impiorum. Petrus,
Act. 3. hoc locupletissime confirmavit. -- Resipiscite (inquit) ut deleantur
peccata vestra, postquam venerint tempora refrigerationis, etc. -- Nostri cum
affirmant peccata non remitti in futuro seculo, sed in isto tantum, negant id
quod astruunt Pontificii, peccata remissum iri in futuro seculo, quae in
praesents non remittebantur. Nam Christus confirmabit sententiam suam, quam
prius tulit, cum feret sententiam illam novissimam in ultimo judicio. Itaque
peccata nulla tum remittentur, nisi quae quisque testimonio conscientiae suae
hic percipit remissa esse in presenti seculo. -- Certe ipse (Bellarminus)
agnovit, vel agnoscere potuit e verbis Instit. lib. 3. c. 1.. 7.
Calvini que citat, nos hoc judicio esse, praesertim in eo ipso loco Calvini
quem citat, ubi dit Calvinus, Christum (Mat. 12. 32.) hac partitione usum esse,
qua judicium complexus est, quod sentit in hac vita uniuscujusque conscientia,
and postremum illud, quod palam (N. B.) in resurrectione feretur. For peccata
futura, which you also here speak of, I have said enough in answer to the
former Objection. And you may see much more to this purpose in the Account
given to the Parliament by the Ministers which they sent to Oxford, p. 7, 8, 9.

Ad 3. Castigatory Punishment is no part of that Condemnation, from which we
are freed by Justification, but a means to preserve us from falling into
Condemnation, see 1 Cor. 11. 32.

Ad 4. Though the continuance of our Justification here be conditional, viz.
upon condition of the continuance of our Faith, yet the continuance of the
Condition being certain, so also is the continuance of our Justification. There
is not the like reason of Predestination, which is only a decreeing of what God
will do for us; but God justifies (as you say) pro praesenti; and whom he once
justifies, he will always justify; else the Apostle would not say, Whom he
justified, them he also glorified, Romans 8. 30. Though Means must be used, and
Conditions performed for the continuation and consummation of our
Justification; yet it being certain that the Means shall be used, and the
Conditions performed, it is also certain that our Justification shall be
continued and consummated.

Here perhaps you may take hold of what I say, and object, It shall be
consummated; therefore as yet it is not consummated.

Answ. It is not (I grant) in respect of the full enjoyment of the Benefits
belonging to Justified Persons: but it is already consummated; Justificatio
nullum locu^ relinquit condemnationi. Joh. 5. 24. Et vitam aeternam certo and
immediate adjudicat. Ames. Medul. lib. 1. cap. 27.. 23.
so that they have a full right to the enjoyment of those Benefits. Therefore
the Apostle speaks as of a thing already done, Whom he justified, them he also
glorified: see also Romans 5. 1, 2.

Ad 5. If by this, [the solemnizing of all is wanting] you mean, That yet there
wants the manifestation of our Justification, it hinders not but that our
Justification is already perfect, though it be not so perfectly made manifest
as hereafter it shall be. So if by [Marriage not solemnized] you mean a
Marriage not publicly celebrated, I see not but that a Marriage privately
celebrated may be in it self as perfect as the other. But it seems strange,
that you should think, that we should scarce be called Justified now, but in
reference to Justification at the last Judgment; when as both Scripture and
Divines usually speak of Justification as a thing that we are here actually
partakers of. What you say of Mr. Lawson, as if he held, That Justification
here is but a right to Justification hereafter, I much wonder at: His Reasons I
know not, but if that be his Opinion, the whole current of Scripture, and the
general consent of Divines (I think) is against him. Whereas you call the
solemn pronouncing of Sentence at the last day, Sentential Justification, I
should rather call it, Public Sentential Justification, or a public
manifestation of the Sentence of Justification. For surely our Justification
here is See the Oxford account, p. 7. and Ames. Med. lib. 1. cap. 27.
Sentential. God does now pronounce and sentence Believers Just and Righteous,
though not in that clear and evident manner as he will at the Last Judgment.
Neither do I think that our Divines commonly using the word [Justification] for
Justification (as you say) by Sentence, do understand it of the Sentence at the
last Day, but of the Sentence whereby God does now justify those that believe.

Perhaps you will say, Where is that Sentence?

Answ. It is in the Scripture. But (you may say) The Scripture speaks only in
general. Well, but if God in the Scripture say, That all that believe are
justified, as Acts 13. 39. then consequently he says, That you and I
believing, are justified. And this Sentence God by his Spirit does bring home
to Believers in particular; though it is true, they have not that clear
evidence and full assurance, as they shall have hereafter. So for Condemnation
at the last day, I think it to be but a more solemn and public pronouncing of
the Sentence, together with the immediate and full execution of it. For
otherwise the Sentence is past already, He that believes not, is condemned
already, John 3. 18. I do not deny, that Declarative Justification at the last
Judgment, is properly Justification; only I think it is the same Justification
which Believers here have, though it shall then be more fully manifested than
now it is. That which you speak of Justification being more full at death than
before, only shows that it is more full Extensive, as freeing from the guilt of
more sins: but that is only per accidens; Justification in it self considered,
was as perfect before: for it freed from all sin, and from all Condemnation,
and the other does no more.

What the meaning of your Question was, 50.
[If we be not one real Person with Christ, then one what?] I could not tell:
but the words did seem to imply, That we must either be one real Person with
Christ, or else we could not any way be one with him; whereas the Scripture is
clear, that Believers are one with Christ, though that they are one real Person
with him, is not to be admitted. Therefore I thought meet to answer as I did,
viz. That we are one Spirit, as the Apostle expresses it, 1 Cor. 6. 17. that
is, spiritually one with Christ, as being partakers of one and the same Spirit
with him. No doubt but further Queries may still be made: and who is able to
clear all Difficulties that do occur in matters of this nature? Yet I see not
why we should not content our selves with those Similitudes and Resemblances,
which the Scripture does use to illustrate this Mystery, as of the Vine and
Branches, Joh. 15. and of the Head and Members, Ephesians. 5.

To your next Section I need say no more than this, Ibid.
Non oportet litigare de verbis, cum de re constet.

I have showed my meaning all along, Ibid. and 51.
viz. That Christ's Satisfaction, and not Faith, is properly that by which we
are justified. Whereas you say, [We are justified by Faith it self, as the
Condition, and not so by Christ] I can admit it only thus, That Faith is the
Condition required of us, that so we may be justified by Christ. Otherwise I
cannot yield, that the performing of the Condition required of us unto
Justification, is properly that by which we are justified; but of that enough
before. For the Habit and Act of Faith, I little doubt but that Habits and Acts
are of a different nature. For Habits may be in us when we sleep, or otherwise
do not act and exercise those Habits. I think also, that though acquired Habits
follow Acts, yet infused Habits (such as Faith is) go before.

2. The Act of Faith being the receiving of Christ, I see not how any can make
the Act of Faith, but the Habit to be the Instrument of receiving Christ. And
if any of our Divines say, That it is not the Habit of Faith, but the Act that
does justify; I think they mean, that Faith does justify as acting, i. e.
receiving Christ. So that they do not deny the Habit of Faith to justify, yea,
they make it the instrumental cause of Justification; only they make the Act of
Faith requisite unto Justification. The Similitude betwixt the Hand and Faith
is to the purpose, though they differ as you say. No Similitude is to be set on
the Rack: if it seem to illustrate that for which it is used, it is sufficient.
But except you speak of the supernatural perfection of the Soul, I see not how
Faith is the perfection of it. For the Soul has its natural perfection without
Faith, or any other Habit. Whereas you labor much to prove, that the Habit of
Faith is not properly an Instrument, I think you trouble your self to no
purpose, though (I know) you have some end in it. But what if it be not an
Instrument properly, if yet it may not unfitly be so termed? And for any thing
I see, it may, even as generally Divines do so term it.

Fides (says Revet) est velut organum; Disp. de Fide Just.. 17, 18.
and manus animae, qua beneficia oblata acceptantur. And again, Videndum est
quodnam sit animae organum hanc remissionem apprehendens -- Id fidei exclusive
tribuendum, etc.

So Trelcatius Jun. Instit. lib. 2 de Justif.
Ex part hominis, Justificationis passivae causa efficiens est ac dicitur
reductive, tota est Instrumentalis, and Fides est, etc.

Thus also Calvin, Fides Instrumentum est duntaxat percipiendae justitiae.
Inst. lib. 3. cap. 11.. 7.

And Wotton, De Recon. p. 1. l. 2. c. 18 Ibid. p. 2. l. 2. c. 6.
Ex efficientibus Justificationis causis reliqua est Fides, quam Instrumenti
locum obtinere diximus. And again, Nec illud quidem cujusquam est momenti, quod
Instrumenti nomine nusquam in Scripturis (Fides) insigniatur. Nam nec Causa
esse dicitur, cujus tamen rationem obtinere, Theologi omnes confitentur.

And Bellarmine, De Just. Habit. cap. 22.
saying, that Luther makes Faith Formalem causam Justificationis; Davenant
answers, Instrumentalem semper agnoscit, non autem formalem, etc.

Pemble says, [Faith does justify Relatively and Instrumentally]. Of Justif..
2 chap. 1. p. 27.

So Mr. Ball of Faith, chap. 10. page 135. [It is a cause only Instrumental,
etc.]

And of the Covenant, chap. 3. p. 19. [Faith is a necessary and lively
Instrument of Justification, See Hemingius as here cited, p. 95.
etc. If it be demanded whose Instrument it is? It is the Instrument of the
Soul, etc.]

Mr. Blake's words (I think) do more nearly concern you. Of the Coven. c. 12.
p. 80.
[And these things considered, I am truly sorry, that Faith should now be
denied to have the office and place of an Instrument in our Justification; nay,
scarce be allowed to be called the Instrument of receiving Christ that
justifies us, Ibid. page 81.
etc.] And having cited Acts 18. 26. Ephesians. 3. 17. and Gal. 3. 14. he says,
[These Scriptures speak of Faith as the Souls Instrument to receive Christ
Jesus, etc.] See there much more to this purpose.

I will add to these one more, Of Justif. c. 7. p. 90.
viz. J. Goodwin, who though in diverse things he be cross and contrary to our
Divines, yet in this, at least in words, he does comply with them, professing
to hold, That Faith does justify instrumentally.

If the propriety of Words must always be strictly examined, we shall scarce
know how to speak: It is well if we can find words, whereby to express our
selves so as that others may understand (if they please) what we mean. All that
our Divines mean, when they speak of Faith justifying Instrumentally, or as an
Instrument, I suppose, is this, and so much also they usually express, That
Faith does not justify absolutely, or in respect of it self, but Relatively in
respect of its Object, Christ and his Righteousness laid hold on and received
by Faith. Neither should you (methinks) strive about the word [Receiving] how
it should be the Act of Faith. It suffices, That the Scripture makes Believing
in Christ, and Receiving of Christ, one and the same, John 1. 12. That which
you say of our most famous Writers ordinarily laying the main stress of the
Reformed Cause and Doctrine on a plain Error, did deserve to have been either
further manifested, or quite concealed; to me it seems very injurious both to
our most famous Writers, and also to the Reformed Cause and Doctrine.

My meaning is, 52.
That Faith justifies, as it apprehends and receives Christ, whom the
Gospel does give for Righteousness to such as receive him, i. e. believe in
him. And thus our Divines frequently express themselves.

Luther, Fides justificat, quia apprehendit, and possidet illum thesaurum,
scil. Christum presentem. Loc. Com. Class. 2. loc. 19. ex tom. 4. And again,
Fides non tanquam opus justificat, sed ideo justificat, quia apprehendit
misericordiam in Christo exhibitam. Ibid. ex tom. 1. in Genesis

So Calvin, Inst. lib. 3. cap. 11.. 7
Quod objicit (nempe Osiander) vim justificandi non inesse fidei ex seipsa, sed
quatenus Christum recipit, libenter admitto. -- Fides instrumentum est duntaxat
percipiendae justitiae.

Thus also Hemingius, De Justif. page mihi 141.
Justificamur autem fide, non quod fides ea res sit, qua justi sumus, sed quia
est Instrumentum, quo Christum apprehendimus, and complectimur.

Davenant, Hoc necessario intelligendum est, De Just. Hab. cap. 28. Arg. and
Ibid.
quatenus suum objectum apprehendit, and credenti applicat, nempe Christum cum
salutifera ejus justitia. And again, Qui igitur Fides apprehendit, and applicat
nobis Christi justitiam? id fidei ipsi tribuitur, quod reapse Christo debetur.

Ames. Dolor ac detestatio peccati non potest esse causa justificans, Contra
Bell. Tom. 4. lib. 5. c. 4. 5.
quia non habet (N. B.) vim applicandi nobis justitiam Christi. And again,
Apprehensio justificationis per veram fiduciam, non est simpliciter per modum
objecti, Ibid.. 11.
sed per modum objecti (N. B.) nobis donati. Quod enim Deus donaverit fidelibus
Christum, and omnia cum eo, Scriptura disertis verbis testatur, Romans 8. 32. Hic
tamen observandum est, accurate loquendo, apprehensionem Christi and justitiae
ejus, esse fidem justificantem, quia justificatio nostra exurgit ex
apprehensione Christi, and apprehensio justificationis, ut possessionis nostrae
praesentis, fructus est, and effectum apprehensionis prioris.

Pemble, Of Justif.. 2. chapter 3. page 61.
[We deny that Faith justifies us as it is a Work, etc. It justifies us only as
the Condition required of us, and an Instrument of embracing Christ's
Righteousness; nor can the contrary be proved].

Mr. Ball, Of the Coven. chap. 3. page 19.
[When Justification and Life is said to be by Faith, it is manifestly
signified, That Faith receiving the Promise, does receive Righteousness and
Life freely promised].

Mr. Blake, [Faith as an Instrument receives Righteousness unto Justification].
Of the Coven. chap. 12. page 82.

If you agree with me (as you say) in this particular, you will agree also with
these whom I have cited, for I agree with them; their meaning and mine (so far
as I can discern) is the same. See also Mr. Ball of Faith, Part 1. chap. 10.
page 135.

For the Twofold Righteousness, Ibid.
which you make necessary unto Justification, I think also I have said enough
before. But seeing that in the place, on which I made the Animadversion, you
mention it as a Reason why Faith must justify in a proper sense, and not
Christ's Righteousness only, I cannot but observe how that acute and learned
Man Mr. Pemble does argue the quite contrary way, Of Justif.. 2. cap. 2. page
39.
viz. That Faith does not justify, as taken properly, because then we should
be justified by a Twofold Righteousness. [We are not justified (says he) by
two Righteousnesses existing in two diverse Subjects; But if we be justified by
the Work of Faith, we shall be justified partly by that Righteousness which is
in us, viz. of Faith, and partly by the Righteousness of Christ without us].
Ibid. page 40.
And again, [We cannot be properly justified by both, for our own Faith, and
Christ's obedience too. For if we be perfectly just in God's sight for our own
Faith, what needs the imputation of Christ's Obedience to make us just? If for
Christ's Righteousness we be perfectly justified, How can God account us
perfectly just for our Faith?]

1. If you do not oppose the Literal sense of Scripture to Figurative, Ibid.
and 53.
I do not oppose you, but grant that Faith does justify figuratively, viz. as
apprehending Christ by whom we are justified.

[In these places (says Pemble) where it is said, Vbi supra.
Faith is imputed for Righteousness, the Phrase is to be expounded Metonymice,
i. e. Christ's Righteousness believed on by Faith, is imputed to the Believer
for Righteousness].

A figurative sense may be a plain sense, yet it is not a proper sense; for
surely Figurative and Proper are opposite one to the other.

Distinguendum est (inquit Rivetus) inter has phrases, In Genesis Exer. 73.
quae etsi in unum sensum convenient, differunt nihilominus in eo, quoduna est
figurata, altera prop^ia. Figurata est, Fides imputatur ad justitiam. Propria
est, Justitia imputatur credenti. Tum enim justitiae nomen ponitur direct pro
e^ justitia, cujus intuitu Deus erga nos placatus est, and pro justis habet. In
primo autem Fidei tribuitur, quod ejus non est propre sumptae. Nec enim est
justitia, nec justitiae loco habetur, sed objectum ejus est justitia vera, quae
per fidem nobis imputatur, ut pro nostra habeatur, quam credendo amplexi sumus.
Haec si capere nolint aut veteratores Romani, aut Novatores Sociniani,
sufficiat nobis Apostolos autores habere, qui operibus nostris, ergo fidei qua
opus, omnem justitiae laudem detrahunt, eamque in justitia, quae sine operibus
nobis imputatur, constituunt. That the sense by me and others put on Scripture
is forced, you affirm, but prove not.

2. I acknowledge but one Righteousness by which we are justified, viz. the
Righteousness of Christ through Faith imputed unto us; see Romans 5. 18. Your
Similitude makes against you. For our Hands and Teeth are but Instruments
whereby we are fed: so our Faith is but an Instrument whereby we are justified.
And mark here, how you can use the Comparison your self, which yet you dislike
when others use it. But does the Scripture no where say, That Christ or his
Righteousness is imputed unto us for Righteousness? Does not the Scripture call
Christ our Righteousness? Jer. 23. 6. Does it not say, That Christ is the end
of the Law for Righteousness to every one that believes? Romans 10. 4. Is not
this as much as if it were said, That Christ or his Righteousness is imputed
unto us for Righteousness? See also Romans 5. 18, 19. and 2 Cor. 5. ult.

What Mr. Gataker says concerning this Point, not having the Book which I
suppose you mean, (his Defense of Wotton) I cannot tell: What Wotton and J.
Goodwin say, I see, but am not satisfied with it. Maccovius de Justif. in
diverse Disputations does professedly oppose Wotton, and answers his Objections.
If you had urged any of his, or the others Arguments, I should have taken them
into consideration; but seeing you do not, it is enough (I think) to oppose
their authority, with the Authority of others no way inferior unto them.

Davenant, De Just. Habit. cap. 28. Arg. 8.
Scripturae, quae asserunt ipsam fidem nobis imputari ad justitiam, aperte
indicant Christi justitiam credentibus imputari. Nam fides, qualitas in se
considerata, non potest magis imputari ad justitiam, quam aliae qualitates ab
eodem Spiritu infusae: sed hoc necessario intelligendum est, quatenus suum
objectum apprehendit, and credenti applicat, nempe Christum cum salutifera ejus
justitia. Among other Scriptures which he cites to this purpose, that is one,
which you stand so much upon, [Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him
for Righteousness]. Ex hisce (inquit) nos colligimus, imputari credentibus
Christi justitiam, quando illam vera fide apprehendunt.

And Bellarmine objecting, Ipsa fides imputatur ad justitiam: fides autem non
est imputata Christi justitia, sed qualitas in nobis inhaerens. He answers,
Frivola est Objectio: nam nihil usitatius, quam causae applicanti illud
tribuere, quod proprie and immediate pertinet ad rem applicatam. Quia igitur
fides apprehendit and applicat nobis justitiam Christi: id fidei ipsi
tribuitur, quod reapse Christo debetur.

So Ames. answering the very same words of Bellarmine, Contra Bellar.
says, Fides imputatur ad justitiam, Romans 4. 5. idem est cum eo quod dicitur,
Tom. 4.
v. 6. Deus imputat justitiam absque operibus; Lib. 6.
and remittit peccata, v. 7. Fides autem ipsa absolute considerata, cap. 1.
neque est justitia sine opere, neque remissio peccatorum: necesse est igitur,
ut fides imputata relative involvat suum objectum, id est, Christum fide
apprehensum.

Bucan. Quomodo igitur fides dicitur in justitiam imputari? Loc. com. de Justif.
Non absolute, sed relative, etc. And having cited Romans 3. 22, 25. he says,
Loc. 31.
Quibus locis Fidei voce (metonymia continentis pro re contenta) Christus
crucifixus intelligitur, Quaest. 35.
sed fide apprehensus. Hoc sensu fides Abrahae imputata est ei ad justitiam,
seu pro justitia, Romans 4. 9. Et fides cuilibet credenti imputatur ad justitiam,
i.e. Christus crucifixus apprehensus fide censetur nostra justitia; censetur,
inquam, a Deo e tribunali suo sententiam justitiae pronunciante. Quemadmodum
igitur manus, quae recipit the saurum donatum, non ditat, sed thesauras: sic
nec fidei opus, vel actio nos justificat, sed ipse Christus, quem fide
apprehendimus. Et hoc est, quod Theologi Orthodoxi dicunt, nos justificari fide
correlative, and ratione Objecti fidem imputari in justitiam. Quae asserto inde
manifesta est, quod apud Paulum, Romans 3. 27, 28. opponitur haec enuntiatio,
Fide sumus justi, propositioni huic, Justificamur ex operibus, tanquam
contradictoriae. Quare ex natura contradictionis perspicuum est, non
justificari quemquam Fide in quantum est opus sive nostrum, sive Dei in nobis,
sed in quantum Christi meritum includit.

Rivet; In Genesis
Fides excludit seipsam, qua opus est. Vnum enim opus non justificat, Exer. 73.
nec quidem potest justificare. Redeundum ergo ad Controversiae statum, quo
Fides statuitur justificare, non quatenus est opus, sive per se, sed relative,
quatenus significat applicationem justitiae Christi, i.e. non nostrae, Disput.
sed alienae. The same Author also says thus, De Fide Justif.. 19.
Apostolus non distinguit inter Opera Legis, and Opera Fidei, sed in hoc
negotio Fidem semper quibuslibet operibus opponit. Vnde etiam sequitur fidem
non justificare, quatenus est opus justitiae, sed quatenus apprehendit
justitiam Christi.

That we are justified by Faith, is without controversy, the Scripture being
express for it: but when you say, That Faith properly taken does justify,
which the Scripture says not, in this I dissent from you. And also because you
make Faith one Righteousness, by which we are justified, as indeed you must, if
properly we be justified by it.

Davenant urges from Romans 5. 18. Vbi supra Arg. 11.
That there is unum tantum (...), quod ad justificationem vitae potest valere,
nempe unius Christi obedientia. Whence he infers, Justificatio igitur vitae non
redundat in nos ab ulla qualitate in nobismet ipsis inherente, sed ab hac
justitia completa Mediatoris nobis donata and imputata. Nostra justitia
inherens non habet in se (...), hoc est, perfectionem justitiae completam, and
absolutam. Ergo non potest producere in nobis (...), etc.

You mistake my Argument, and do not mind the Text which I alleged, viz. Acts
13. 39. By him all that believe are justified, etc. Therefore not only all that
believe in Christ are justified, but it is by him that they are justified, i.
e. by his Obedience, as it is expressed Romans 5. 19. So that Christ's Obedience
is that which is properly imputed for Righteousness, though it be so imputed
only to those that believe; Faith to apprehend it, is required of us, that it
may be imputed to us; and in that respect Faith is said to be imputed for
Righteousness.

1. The first Note seems to show thus much, That some may make Faith an
Instrument of Justification, and yet deny that we are properly justified by it
as by an Instrument: Though if this be granted, I see not what you gain by it.
For (as I said in the Animadversion) they that make Faith an Instrument of
Justification, when they deny that we are properly justified by Faith; they
mean, That Faith is not the Non est justitia, nec justitia loco habetur, etc.
Rivet before cited.
Righteousness by which we are justified; and that we are therefore only said
to be justified by Faith, because by Faith we receive the Righteousness of
Christ, by which Righteousness properly we are justified. That this is the
meaning of our Divines, appears by that which I have before alleged.

2. Therefore who those be, of whom you speak, I do not know: However, I do not
see that your Objections are of force. For Faith is not wholly excluded as to
the Text, though it be so interpreted, as that by [Faith imputed] is meant
Christ and his Righteousness, viz. See Bucan before cited.
as apprehended by Faith; and I presume that they whom you tax, did so
understand it. And this does not exclude Faith, but include it. Your Question
therefore seems captious, [If by Faith be meant Christ's Righteousness, then
what word does signify Faith?] For by Faith is not simply meant Christ's
Righteousness, but as it is apprehended by Faith.

3. Davenant's words, which I cited, are clearly to the purpose to which I
cited them; neither do I see any thing in them, which argue him to have been of
another mind than I am of. Whereas you add, [It seems he discerned the mistake
of them, that affirm Christ's Active Righteousness as such to be our
Righteousness]. I think your Scribe did mistake, and it should be, [he
discerned not]. For therein indeed, in that Chapter, but not in the words which
I cited, he differs both from you and me: But I was willing to let that pass,
both because it is nothing to our present purpose; and also I like not to show
my dissent from any eminent Writer, except I be forced to it.

4. What you say you will allege out of Davenant against me, is to be
considered when it is alleged. But here you profess your self far from
approving what he says, viz. That Christ's Righteousness est formalis causa
justificationis ex communi nostrorum sententia; You should say, Christ's
Righteousness imputed to us: for so Davenant has it in the words which I
cited. And you should also consider how immediately before those words he
explained himself about the formalis causa justificationis.

For Bellarmine objecting, That though Christi obedientia sit meritoria causa
justificationis nostrae, propter quam Deus nos justificat, yet Justitia
inherens potest esse formalis, per quam justificati constituimur; and taxing
Chemnitius for stating the question thus, Quid sit id, propter quod Deus
hominem in gratiam recipiat, etc. De Just.
He answers, Sed immemorem se hic praebet Jesuita, Habit.
qui eodem modo and ipse loquitur de Just. lib. 2. cap. 1. cap. 22.
[De Causa formali, propter quam homo dicitur justus coram Deo, disserendum
est]. Atque revera in Justificatione talis causa formalis ponenda est, quae
simul and meritoria esse possit. Nisi enim illam contineat dignitatem in se,
propter quam homo rite justificatus reputetur, nunquam erit formalis causa, per
quam justificatus existat in conspectu Dei.

And again, Ibid.
Vt itaque seponamus Philosophicas Speculationes de natura causae formalis,
quando formalem causam quaerimus justificationis nostrae, quaerimus propter
quod peccator in gratiam Dei recipitur, per quod immediate Deo gratus, and ad
vitam aeternam acceptus stat; cujus beneficio damnatoriam Legis sententiam
evadere, denique quo inti possit, and debeat ad coelestis Judicis favorem and
approbationem consequendam.

And again, Quod igitur dicit Bellarminus, Ibid.
impossible esse, cap. 24.
ut per justitiam Christi imputatam formaliter justi simus, ad 5.
si per formaliter intelligat inhaerenter, nugas agit, etc. Si autem per
formalem causam intelligat illud ipsum, quod Deus intuetur quando quemvis
peccatorem justificat, etc. dico hoc non esse inhaerentem ullam qualitatem, sed
Christi obedientiam and justitiam credentibus gratuita Dei misericordia donatam
atque imputatam. Impossible quidem est, ut haec justitia, quae in Christo
inhaeret, sit etiam nostra per modum inhaesionis; sed quando tanquam membra
unimar Christo capiti, non est impossible, ut nostra fiat per modum
donationis, and salutiferae participationis: atque hic modus sufficit, ut in
Justificatione formalis causae rationem, efficaciam, and similitudinem obtineat.

Methinks all this should suffice to satisfy any ingenuous Man, and to cut
off all occasion of quarrelling about the term, when there is so full and
frequent explication of the meaning of it.

So also Amesius having out of Contarenus distinguished of Righteousness,
Contrae
and stated the Question about the formal cause of Justification, Bellar. tom.
4. l. 6. c. 1.. 1.
he says, Hoc sensu nos negamus formalem causam absolutae (N. B.) nostrae
justificationis esse justitiam in nobis inhaerentem.

And again, Ibid.
Non alia ratione formaliter nos justos nominari,. 22.
and esse dicimus imputata Christi justitia, quam qua is cujus debitum ab
altero solvitur nominatur and est ab illo debito liber and immunis; and qua is
cui procuratus est alterius favor aut gratia, nominatur and est alteri gratus.
For that which you cite out of his Med. l. 1. c. 27.. 12. I find there only
these words, Christi igitur justitia in justificatione fidelibus imputatur,
Phil. 3. 9. Those which you add are not in my Edition, Edit. 3. per Rob.
Allotum Londini 1629.
viz. Quatenus ejus merito justi coram Deo reputamur.

However they are not repugnant to what I have cited, both from him and
Davenant, because (as Davenant expressly notes) Causa formalis hic etiam est
meritoria. Alsted's words, as you cite them, [Christus est justitia mostra in
sensu causal^, non in sensu formali] carry no good sense, at least are not so
accurate. For surely if Formalis Causa, then Sensus Formalis is also Sensus
Causalis.

You add, [So Rivet Disp. de Fide.] but you should also have noted the Section.
Indeed. 13. he says, That Bellarmine does affingere nobis sententiam de
justitia Christi, College.
tanquam causa formali. And elsewhere he says, Controvers Disp. 34.
Forma justificationis consistit in justitiae Christi imputatione, propter quam
nobis remittuntur peccata.

So Treloatius, Instit. lib. 2.
Forma justificationis, Active sumptae, est Actualis Justitiae Christi gratuita
imputatio, qua meritum and obedientia Christi nobis applicantur, vi communionis
arctissimae, qua ille in nobis, and nos in illo.

Dr. Jackson says, Of Justifying Faith
That to demand what is the formal cause of Justification, Sect. 2. chap. 18.
is as if one should ask what is the Latin for Manus: and that it is the folly
or knavery of our Adversaries to demand a formal Cause of the^ Justification,
who deny themselves to be formally just in the sight of God. [He alone (says
he) is formally just, who has that form inherent in himself, by which he is
denominated just, and so accepted of God: as Philosophers deny the Sun to be
formally hot, because it has no form of heat inherent in it, but only
produces heat in other Bodies].

Thus there is difference among our Divines about the term, but they agree in
the thing. Some would have no formal Cause of Justification at all; some would
have such a Cause, but would not have Christ's Righteousness imputed, but the
imputation of Christ's Righteousness to be it: yet both the one and the other
do indeed hold the Righteousness of Christ to be the formal Cause of
Justification, in that sense as Davenant and Ames do explain it.

1. As Faith alone is the Condition of our Justification, 54.
so also Faith alone as continued (though it is not continued alone) is the
Condition of our Continued Justification.

Neque etiam (says Calvin) sic putemus commendari post gratuitam
justificationem opera, Instit. lib. 3.
ut and ipsa in locum justificandi hominis postea succedant, cap. 17. 9.
aut ejusmods officium cum Fide (N. B.) partiantur. Nisi enim perpetuo maneat
solida Fidei justificatio, illorum immundities detegetur. Nihil autem absonum
est, sic Fide hominem justificari, ut non ipse modo justus sit sed opera quoque
ejus supra dignitatem justa censeantur.

So Mr. Ball, Of Faith,
[Faith does not begin to apprehend Life, and then leave it to works, Part 2.
that we might attain the accomplishment by them, Chap. 4. p. 252, 253.
but it does ever rest upon the Promise until we come to enjoy it].

2. I know no accusation but of the Law of Works, though in case of unbelief
and impenitency that Accusation be aggravated by the Law of Grace.

Though Calvin thinks not that Joh. 5. 45. [Do not think that I will accuse you
to my Father; Calvin in Joh. 5. 45.
there is one that accuses you, even Moses, etc.] to be to this purpose, as
some do; yet he grants, That it is Legis propriereos peragere infideles.

To question whether he spoke of the Law of Works, were to question whether the
Sun shines at noonday. When any is accused to be an Infidel, or finally
impenitent, or a sinner against the Holy Ghost, as it is a sin that he is
accused of, so the Accusation is from the Law: but as Unbelief or Impenitency
(for why you bring in the sin against the Holy Ghost, I do not know) does
import a want of the Condition required in the Gospel, so (as I have said
before) it is no new accusation, but only a re-inforcing of a former
accusation; and so the refelling of this Accusation, by showing the fruits of
Faith and Repentance, is not properly a justifying of our selves by any thing
in our selves, but only a proving and manifesting that we are indeed justified
by the Righteousness of Christ imputed to us.

3. The imperfection of our Faith and Obedience does prove that it is no
Righteousness by which we can be justified; consider always, that I speak of
absolute and universal Justification.

Si per se (says Calvin) vel intrinseca, ut loquuntur, Instit. lib. 3. c. 11..
7.
virtute justificaret fides, ut est semper debilis and imperfecta, non
efficeret hoe nisiex part; sic manca esset justitia, quae frustulum salutis
nobis conferret.

So Davenant, De Instit.
Ad justificationem efficiendam non sufficit justitia suo quodam modo
perfectae, Habit.
and aliqu^ modo imperfecta; cap. 26.
sed necesse est eam esse legali modo perfectam, Arg. 3.
and omnibus suis numeris absolutam. And again, Nulla justitia coram Deo
justificat, Ibid.
sed quae ad amussin Legis perfecta est: Arg. 4.
Sed nostra inhaerens non est talis, etc.

Thus also Maccovius, De Justif.
Quod nobis imputatur ad justitiam, Disp. 11.
(nempe proprie and per se, seu respectu sui) i^ debet esse perfectissimum, ut
consistere possit cum judicio Dei, Romans 2. 2. At Fides non est perfectissima, 1
Cor. 13. 9.

To me it seems not hard to be certain of the meaning of that place, Ibid.
Luke 7. 47. [Many sins are forgiven her, for she loved much]. It appears (as I
noted) plainly enough by the Context, what the meaning is, viz. not that her
love was the cause of the forgiveness of her sins, but the forgiveness of her
sins the cause of her love: And you see how sharply Calvin (whose words I
cited) censures those that interpret it otherwise.

The Parable going before those words are so clear, In Lut. 7. 42.
That Maldonate is forced to say, Videtur ex hac parabola non fuisse
colligendum, quod Christus colligit, multa peccata illi mulieri remitti, quia
multum dilexisset, sed contra propterea eam multum dilexisse, quod multa illi
peccata remissa essent. -- Quae res speciosam Calvino, and caeteris haereticis,
errandi occasionem praebuit, negantibus huic mulieri propter praecedentia
charitatis opera remissa peccata; illa vero verba, quoniam dilexit multum, sic
interpretantibus, ut dictio illa quoniam, non causam, sed effectum, and
consequentiam significet: quod utinam nemo Catholicorum secutus esset.

And see how poorly and pitifully he comes off, viz. either thus, Vt Christum
in versa parabola usum fuisse deceremus. q. d. Sicut ille dilexit multum, quia
multum illi remissum fuerat; ita huic mulieri e contrario, quia dilexit multum,
remissa sunt peccata multa. Or, which he rather inclines unto, thus, Quod
Christus hoc loco rogat, Quis ergo eum plus diliget etsi futurum tempus est,
tamen ex consuetudine loquendi vim praeteriti habere puto. q. d. Quem tu
judicas, ex effectu conjecturam faciens, plus ante Dominum suum delexisse?
Vtrum illi magis amicum fuisse, cum amicitiae causa faenerator debitum utrique
remiserit? What straits was this acute Man driven to, because he was resolved
to hold the Conclusion, and yet saw how ill it did suit with the Premises?

1. What others, Ibid.
of whom you speak do, I know not; they may answer for themselves.

2. I take affiance (which is a Believing in, or Relying on) to be an Act of
Faith it self, the Act of Faith being as well Credere in, as simpliciter
Credere. But internal Obedience or Love, (for these you make both one, though
indeed Believing it self is inward Obedience as well as Love, the one being
commanded as well as the other) is not the Act of Faith, though caused by
Faith; not actus elicitus, though actus imperatus: therefore this is not so
immediate a product of Faith as the other.

3. I conceive Affiance to be a part of Justifying-Faith, and not only a Fruit
of it. To believe in Christ, which is as much as to rely on him, and to have
affiance in him, is requisite unto Justification. He that believes on him is
not condemned, John 3. 18.

1. As Justification is begun upon sole Believing, Ibid.
so is it also continued and consummated. The Scripture (so far as I see) makes
Justification simply and absolutely to depend on Faith, and not only in respect
of the beginning of it: yet (it is true) Justification is neither begun, nor
continued, nor consummated upon such a Believing as is not attended with other
Duties. That this is the Uniform Doctrine of the prime Protestants, I showed by
the confession of our greatest Adversary, to which you oppose nothing.

2. Though some other things besides Faith must go before Justification, Multa
ad justificationem requiruntur quae non justificant Ames. contra Bellar. tom.
4. l. 5. cap. 1.. 1.
yet do they not therefore justify as well as Faith, it being only Faith that
does apprehend Christ, by whom so apprehended we are justified.

Neque tamen haec fides (says Wotton) spem, dilectionem, timorem, poenitentiam
excludere censenda est, quasi ad eum, qui justificatus est, non pertinerent;
sed haec omnia ab officio justificandi (N. B.) significantur penitus excludi.
Atque hoc quidem justificandi munus soli Fidei convenire, his rationibus
ostendo. Quia sola Fide recta in Christum tendimus, De Reconcil. part 1. lib.
2. c. 18.
ut per eum justificemur, and promissiones Dei de justificatione amplectimur.
2. Vbicunque Spiritus Sanctus disertis verbis loquitur de justificatione impii,
ejusque causas ex hominis part assignat, nullam ejusmodi causam assignat nisi
fidem.

But hear also Luther, Loc. Com.
who does both thunder and lighten in this particular: Class. 2.
Cur insane Sophista, asseris dilectionem, Loc. 19. de Justif. ex Tom. 2. in
Genesis
spem, and alias virtutes? Scio has esse insignia Dei dona, divinitus mandata,
per Spiritum Sanctum in nostris cordibus excitari and ali. Scio fidem sine his
donis non existere; sed nunc nobis quaestio est, quid cujusque proprium sit.
Tenes manu varia seminae, non autem quaero ego, quae cum quibus conjuncta sint,
sed quae cujusque propria virtus. Hic aperte dic quid faciat Sola Fides, non
cum quibus virtutibus conjuncta sit. Sola autem Fides apprehendit promissionem,
credit promittenti Deo, Deo porrigenti aliquid admovet manum, and id accipit.
Hoc proprium solius Fidei est; Charitas, Spes, Patientia habent alias materias,
circa quas versantur; habent alios limits, intra quos consistunt. Non enim
amplectuntur promissionem, sed mandata exequuntur; audiunt Deum mandantem, non
audiunt Deum promittentem, ut Fides facit.

In the next Section we are agreed. 55.


To this long Section I need not say much. Ibid.
For now that you explain your self, there seems to be but little difference
betwixt us. All that I aim at, is this, That Christ simply considered, is not
the Object of Justifying Faith, but Christ as promised in the Gospel: so that
to believe in Christ, does imply a believing of the Promise, and that not only
so as to assent unto it, but so also as to apply it. And therefore we often
find in Scripture, That the Axiom or Proposition concerning Christ, is made
the Object of Justifying and Saving Faith, see Romans 10. 9. 1 John 5. 1. Acts 8.
37. Joh. 6. 69. And thus our Divines often speak of Faith justifying as
apprehending the Promises.

Sola Fides (says Luther) apprehendit Promissionem. Locis paulo ante citatis.


So Wotton; Sola Fide Promissiones Dei de justificatione amplectimur.

And Mr. Ball, Of the Coven. chapter 3. p. 19.
[For Faith only does behold and receive the Promises of Life and Mercy, etc.
When therefore Justification and Life is said to be by Faith, it is manifestly
signified, That Faith receiving the Promise, does receive Righteousness and
Life freely promised].

But I willingly grant, That the Axiom, Proposition or Promise does but serve
to convey Christ unto us, and the apprehending and receiving of him, is the
Faith by which we are justified. Only I say, it is Christ in the Promise, or
Christ promised, who must be apprehended and received unto Justification.

Fidei objectum quod (says Ames.) vel materiale; Medul. l. 2. c. 5.. 21.
est quicquid a Deo revelatur ac proponitur credendum, Ibid.. 23, 24.
etc. -- Hoc objectum est immediate semper aliquod axioma vel enuntiatio sub
ratione very; sed illud, in quo principaliter terminatur Fides, de quo, and
propter quod assensus praebetur illi axiomati per fidem, est Ens incomplexum
sub ratione boni, Romans 4. 21. Heb. 11. 13. Actus enim credentis non terminatur
ad axioma, sed ad rem, fatentibus Scholasticorum clarissimis. Ratio est, quia
non formamus axiomata, nisi ut per ea de rebus cognitionem habeamus.
Principalis igitur terminus, in quem tendit actus credentis, est res ipsa, quae
in axiomate praecipue spectatur.

All this I like well enough, save that he seems to make the Act of Faith
exercised about an Axiom or Enunciation to be only Assent, as to that which is
true; whereas sometimes it is also Apprehension and Receiving as of that which
is good, though (it is true) this Act of Faith is principally terminated in the
thing, which the Axiom or Enunciation does contain in it.

1. I do not say, 56, and 57.
That the receiving of Christ as King is Fides quae justificat, though I grant
it is Actus fidei quae justificat.

2. I refer [qua] to [Justificat] q. d. [Faith which justifies, does receive
Christ as King; yet this is not the Act of Faith, whereby it justifieth]. Or if
you will, thus; Christ as King is the object of Faith, which justifies, but
not of Faith as it justifies. Indeed Faith, which justifies has respect to
the whole Word of God, yet only to the Word of Promise concerning Christ, and
the Mercy of God in Christ, as it justifies.

Non tam quaeritur (inquit Ames.) quae aut quid sit Fides, Contrae Bellar.
quae justificat, quam quae sit ratio qua propre dicitur justificare. Tom. 4.
And presently after follow the words, which I cited in the Animadversions.
Lib. 5.
Again, Vna and eadem (inquit) Fides est, c. 1.. 1, 2.
qua placemus Deo ad reconciliationem, Ibid.
and jam reconciliati dirigimur and sustentamur ad placendum ipsi in Obedientia
nova. cap. 2.. 1.
And again, Fidem illam, Ibid.
quae justificat, praesupponere, involvere, and infer concedimus fidem
Historiae,. 8.
atque etiam (in quibusdam olim) miraculorum; sed historiae ac miraculorum
fidem saepe a justificatione separari palam est; Quamvis multa sint exercitia
and objecta Fidei, non tamen justificans est, nisi prout respicit misericordiam
Dei in Christo. Hinc omnes illi, quorum fides in eo capite (Heb. 11.) laudatur,
collimabant ad promissionem illam miserecordiae in Christo.

3. Where do I say, That the receiving of Christ as King does justify, that
you ask me in what sense it does so? I say, Justifying Faith does receive
Christ as King, but not as justifying; or that Faith in that respect does not
justify.

4. Faith as the Condition of Justification is the receiving of Christ as
satisfying for us.

5. If Christ's Satisfaction only be our Righteousness, by which we are
justified; and Christ as Priest only made Satisfaction for us, then by
receiving Christ as Priest only we are justified. This you might perceive was
the meaning of the Argument, though I left out the word [only].

And here also I have Mr. Blake agreeing with me, as (I think) in every point,
wherein we differ, if he have occasion to treat of it. Of the Coven.
[It is true (says he) that Faith accepts Christ as Lord as well as Savior:
but it is the acceptance of him as Savior, c. 12. p. 79.
not as Lord, that justifies. Christ rules his People as a King, teaches them
as a Prophet, but makes atonement for them as a Priest, by giving himself in
Sacrifice, his Blood for remission of Sins. These must be distinguished, but
not divided: Faith has an eye at all, the Blood of Christ, the Command of
Christ, the Doctrine of Christ: but as it ties and fastens on his Blood, so it
justifies. He is set out a propitiation through Faith in his Blood, Romans 3. 24.
not through Faith in his Command. It is the Blood of Christ that cleanses from
all sin, and not the Sovereignty of Christ. These confusions of the distinct
parts of Christ's Mediatorship, and the several offices of Faith may not be
suffered. Scripture assigns each its particular Place and Work. Sovereignty
does not cleanse, nor Blood command us: Faith in his Blood, not Faith yielding
to his Sovereignty, does justify us. There are several acts of
Justifying-Faith, Heb. 11. but those are not acts of Justification. It is not
Abraham's Obedience, Moses Self-denial, Gideon or Sampson's Valor, that was
their Justification, but his Blood, who did enable them in these things by his
Spirit].

Your Similitude is not suitable; for a Woman receiving a Man for her Husband,
may be enriched or dignified by him, though she never look at him as rich or
honorable, but only as her Husband. But we must look at Christ as a Priest,
and as making Satisfaction for us, that so we may be justified by him. For the
Scripture does set forth Christ unto us in that respect for our Justification;
see Apoc. 1. 5. Heb. 9. 26. 2 Cor. 5. ult. Romans 8.34. where those words [It is
Christ that died] show how Christ does justify us, and free us from
condemnation, viz. by dying, and so satisfying for our sins. That which follows
of Christ's Resurrection, etc. seems (as to our Justification) but for our more
full assurance of the benefit of Christ's Death, and for the effectual
application of his Satisfaction, which he made for us by his Death, that so we
may be justified by him.

6. You grant, that Christ, not as King, but as Priest, does justify us
meritoriously and satisfactorily; and that is it which I urge, That Christ's
Satisfaction, which as Priest he made for us, is that whereby, or for which we
are justified. Now we speak of receiving Christ unto Justification, therefore
we must consider him as satisfying for us, and so receive him as to that
purpose, viz. our Justification; though (I grant) whole Christ, or Christ in
respect of all his Offices must be received; neither may we think to have him
as a Priest to satisfy for us, except we also have him as a Prophet to
instruct us, and as a King to govern us. So I usually Preach and Teach.

57.
1. When you say, (p. 69.)
That I leave the Error in his Language, but not in his Sense, your words are
ambiguous. For they may import, That I leave, i.e. relinquish and desert the
Error the one way, but not the other. Or that I leave, i.e. let the Error abide
and remain in his Language, but not in his Sense. This I take to be your
meaning, for else you could not say (except ironically, which I do not suspect)
that it is a fair Exposition, and that you like it. I have no reason to strive
about another's words, especially not knowing how they are brought in: but I
think meet to interpret words in the best sense that they will bear: neither do
I yet see but those words which you tax as foully erroneous, may admit that
fair interpretation which I made of them.

2. Where Ames. has those words, you do not show: But surely he there speaks
de Fide Justificante qua tali. For otherwise he should neither agree with the
Truth, nor with himself in saying, Christus est objectum adaequatum Fidei
justificantis. The whole Word of God is the Object of Justifying-Faith, though
not of Faith as Justifying; and so much is acknowledged by Amesius, as appears
by his words before cited. Neither again does he speak of Christ in all
respects, but as Christ is the Propitiation for our sins, as is clear by that
very place which you now take into consideration.

Besides, I find Amesius to have such words as you mention, but withal to add
such, as plainly to express what I say. Medul.
Christus (inquit) est adaequatum objectum Fidei, lib. 1. c. 27.. 17.
quatenus (N. B.) Fides Justificat. Fides etiam non alia ratione justificat,
nisi quatenus apprehendit illam justitiam, (N. B.) propter quam justificamur.

1. The Text (1 John 4. 19.) cannot (I think) be rightly understood but as I
interpreted it. Ibid. and 58.
For v. 10, 11. the Apostle speaks of God's great love manifested unto us,
(p. 70.)
in giving his Son for us. And v. 19. he shows whence it is that we love God,
viz. from hence, that God loved us first, i.e. we apprehending the Love of God
to us, answer his love with love again. Amat non immerito, qui amatus sine
merito, as Bernard speaks. Yet we must first find and feel the love of God
toward us, before we can love him for what he has done for us.

2. There is more than a bare assenting Act of Faith going before the Love, of
which I speak.

3. Embracing, which from Heb. 11. 13. I note to be the completing Act of
Justifying-Faith, does include or presuppose amorem desiderii; we can never
sincerely embrace Christ, if we do not desire him: but amor delectationis, or
complacentiae does follow after embracing, viz. when the thing desired is
enjoyed. All that you add, holds only in respect of the former kind, not in
respect of the latter.

1. There are diverse kinds of Love, but I speak of that 58.
Love which differs from Desire; and so did you seem to understand it, as I
noted from your words, Aphorism, p. 267.

2. Whereas you say, [There is no need of Faith to make it present, before it
can be accepted and loved]; you cannot by Faith mean Assent, for that, you
grant, does go before Love and Acceptance. And if by Faith you mean Acceptance,
surely there must be Acceptance, before a thing can be accepted, though in time
these go together. But perhaps you only mean, That though Faith as an Assent,
must go before in time, and as an Acceptance must go before in Nature, yet not
so as to make a thing present. For you add, That God's Offer does make it
present. But though the Offer be present, yet the thing offered is not present,
so as the Object of the Love of Complacency must be: for it must be present by
way of Enjoyment, but the offer of a thing can only make it to be hoped for; so
that the thing, though it be offered, yet until it be accepted, it is absent,
because it is not enjoyed. The thing offered must be desirously, and in that
respect lovingly accepted; but it must first be accepted, and then loved, so as
to joy and delight in it.

3. We look at Christ as enjoyed, when we love him with the Love of Complacency
and Delight, of which Love I speak.

Gaudium oritur ex hoc, Theolog.
(says Raimundus de Sebundae) quod aliqua res scit se habere id, Nature.
quod habet, and non ex hoc duntaxat, Tit. 95.
quod habet.

There must both be the Having of a thing, and also the Knowing that we have
it, that we may rejoice in it.

4. As Assent must go before Acceptance, so must Acceptance go before that
Love, of which I speak.

1. I did not say, Ibid.
or think, that you thought so of all Love, viz. that it considers its Object
as present or enjoyed; for there is no distinguishing here of these, as I have
showed before; the Object is not present, except it be enjoyed. You grant that
Amor Complacentiae does so consider its Object; and I thought you had meant
that kind of Love, because you did distinguish Love from Desire. Therefore I
said, [Love as you take it, considers its Object as present and enjoyed] viz.
Love as distinguished from Desire. I know not (I confess) what to make of Love,
but either a Desire, if the Object be absent, or a Delight, if the Object be
present.

2. That which you say concerning Acceptance, Election, and Consent, is nothing
to me, who do not enquire whether they be diverse acts or no, but only show that
they go before Enjoyment, and so differ from Love, as I take it, viz. Love of
Complacency, which does follow Enjoyment.

59.
I take the Love of Desire to go before Acceptance, and the Love of Complacency
to follow after it. Although Amare and velle bonum be one and the same, yet
this velle bonum vel est cum desiderio, si objectum absit, vel cum
Complacentia, si adsit.

Aquinas does not satisfy me, Part 1.
when he says, Nullus desiderat aliquid nisi bonum amatum neque aliquis gaudet
nisi de bono amato; Quaest. 20.
if he mean, Art. 1.
that a thing is amatum prius Nempe prius tempore, non natura.
quam desideratum. The very Desiderare (I think) is Amare, and so is Gaudere
also; but the one is Amare quod abest, the other Amare quod adest. So you in
the next Section say, [Desire is Love, and Complacency is Love].

1. I did not doubt, Ibid.
much less deny that there is Amor Desiderii, as well as Amor Complacentiae;
only I showed, that your words there must be meant of the former, in which
sense I did not oppose you, but as it is taken in the other sense; and so you
seemed to take it before, because you did expressly distinguish it from Desire.

Neither is your second any thing against me.

3. The Scripture is not so much to be interpreted according to the most
comprehensive sense, as according to the most proper sense, viz. that which
does best agree with the Context and other places of Scripture.

Your fourth contains nothing but a Sarcasm very unworthily used of such a
worthy Man as Calvin was.

1. The places, Ibid.
which you alledg (John 16. 27. and 14. 21.) do not prove, that Love, viz. our
Love is an antecedent Condition of God's Love, and Christ's Love to us, so that
we must first love God and Christ, before we can be reconciled unto God in
Christ. For because we are reconciled unto God in Christ, therefore we love God
and Christ, 1 John 4. 19. The meaning of those other places (as Calvin notes)
is this, That they that love God, insculptum habent in cordibus Paterni ejus
amoris restimonium: To which may be added, That God will still manifest his
Love to them more and more.

2. Not only Love, but Obedience also must go before Glorification; but it does
not therefore follow, That they must go before Justification, as your self hold
that Obedience does not as we are at first justified. That there is any other
Condition of Justification at last than at first, is more than I can find in
Scripture.

1. What some have answered, Ibid.
and what you have read in others I know not; you cite none whose Works are
extant, but only Mr. Ball, and him at large, [On the Covenant] but where in
that Book you do not show. I find there that he does use the words [Instrument]
and [Condition] promiscuously.

[The Covenant of Grace (says he) exacteth no other thing inherent in us, Of
the Coven.
as a Cause (viz. instrumental) of Justification, or a Condition (N. B.) in
respect of which we are justified, p. 65.
but Faith alone]. This is point blank against that which you say of him. Ibid.
And again, [It is (says he) the sole Instrumental or Conditional (N. B.)
Cause required on our part to Justification].

As I showed before in the Animadversions, ad page 243. our Divines say, Fides
sola justificat, sed Fides quae justificat, non est sola: but they mean that
Love and Obedience follow as the fruits and effects of Faith.

Thus Stapleton somewhere (I cannot now cite the place) testifyeth of them,
saying, Omnes adunum Protestants docent Fidem justifcantem esse vivam, and
operantem per charitatem, atque alia bona opera.

2. I grant, That Amor Concupiscentiae is prerequisite; if you will call it so,
as I see not but you may, though Amor Concupiscentiae, is usually opposed to
Amor Amicitiae, and so you speak of it, p. 58. And if you speak not of Amor
Complacentiae, then neither do I speak against you. For of that do I speak, and
had reason (I think) to understand you as speaking of it, because you spoke of
Love as distinct from Desire. Perhaps you speak of it only in respect of its
Generical Nature, abstracting from the consideration of either Desire or
Complacency, which are the Species of it: but surely these two taking up the
whole nature of Love, that Love which is not the one of these, must needs be
the other. We accept or choose a thing, because we first Love, i.e. desire it,
or (as we use to say) have a mind to it: and having accepted and chosen it, we
further love it, so as to delight in it, except our Love turn into Hatred, as
Amnon's unchaste Love did: but the very Accepting or Choosing of a thing is not
(that I see) properly a Loving of it.

3. I grant, that all Love does not presuppose Acceptance, Consent, etc. the
Love of Desire does not; but the Love of Complacency does. This is all that I
have desired, and so much you have yielded.

1. The distinction of Fides quae, Ibid.
and Fides qua, as it is frequently used by our Learned Writers, so it does
hold good notwithstanding any thing you have said, or (I suppose) can say
against it.

Quamvis hanc controversiam elevent, Disp. de Fide Just.
(says Rivet, speaking of the Remonstrants) nec ciccum (ut loquuntur)
interdiunt, an Fides quae est viva,. 16.
an Fides qua est viva, ad justificationem requiratur, and Logicam tantum
pugnam esse velint, Logica tamen haec pugnarealem continet magni momenti.
Siquis enim dicat, Christus qui homo est infinitus, and Christus qua homo est
infinitus, nemo samis existimabit nihil differ has enuntiationes.

I grant you more than you require, That not only Christ as Lord, but even the
whole Word of God is the Object of Justifying Faith; but not therefore of Faith
as Justifying. The Hand may receive both Meat and Money, yet it does not enrich,
as it receives Meat, nor feed as it receives Money.

2. If Christ's Satisfaction be our Righteousness, (which I think you have ever
affirmed, though you would also have another Righteousness of our own, and that
unto Justification;) then I see not but that I may speak of Faith laying hold
on and apprehending Christ's Satisfaction. For though the Satisfaction was made
unto God, yet it was made for us; and in that respect we are to lay hold on it,
and receive it, and not only to assent to the truth of it.

You somewhere cite Bellarmine yielding unto us thus much, Imputari nobis
Christi merita, quia nobis donata sunt, and possumus ea Deo Patri offerre pro
peccatis nostris, quoniam Christus suscepit super se onus satisfaciendi pro
nobis, nosque Deo Patri reconciliandi.

Which words also Amosius does cite, Contra Bellar.
and interpret to be as much as if he did say, Christi merita sunt nobis a Deo
donata, Tom. 4. l. 6. c. 1.. 22.
ut possimus ea pro nobis Deo offerre tanquam Satisfactionem pro peccatis
nostris.

It is Satisfactio Christi, though by Faith it becomes Nostra, (p. 72)
which we must offerre Deo: but first we must by Faith receive it, before we
can have any interest in it, to make such use of it. Faith justifies (I grant)
as a Condition, because it is required of us, that we may be partakers of
Christ's Righteousness; but it is not Faith properly, but the Righteousness of
Christ by which we are justified.

Recte Contarenus (says Ames.) in Tract. de Justif. Fide justificamur, Vbi
supra lib. 5. c. 4.
non formaliter, sicut Albedo efficit parietem album,. 12.
aut Sanitas hominem sanum; sed efficienter, sicut Linitio efficit parientem
album, and Medicatio efficit sanum: sic, vel non dissimili ratione, Fides
efficit hominem justum, and justificat.

I like your Explication which you now make, Ibid. and 60.
and I think my labor well bestowed, as being the occasion of it. I perceive
all that you mean is this, That the Covenant wherein God does give Christ, is
not of force to make Christ ours until we believe. This who can question,
Christ being given to be ours only upon condition of believing? Yet Christ
being so conditionally given in the Covenant, (p. 73*)
upon our believing he is made ours by virtue of the Covenant: so that still I
see not but that our believing does immediately make Christ ours, there being
nothing more to that end required of us, but to believe. But how will it
follow, that God does justify Men before they believe, when by his Covenant he
does not justify but upon condition of Believing? The Grant of a thing being
Conditional, it cannot be actually obtained until the Condition be performed,
though upon the performance of the Condition by virtue of the Grant there be
actual enjoyment.

6.
Whether the receiving of Christ as Priest, and the receiving of him as King be
two distinct acts, does little concern our purpose; (p. 73.)
yet I think the Acts may be distinct, though I deny not but Christ may be
received at once in both respects: yet if he be, it is the receiving of him as
Priest, not as King, that does justify. I grant that the receiving of Christ
in respect of any one Offi^^ does virtually include the receiving of him in
respect of all his Offices: and he that does not so receive Christ in respect
of his Priestly Office, as to be ready to receive him also in respect of his
Kingly Office, when Christ shall so be set forth unto him, does not at all
receive him: such a Faith is a false Faith, and cannot justify. Yet may there
be a receiving of Christ as Priest without an express and direct receiving of
him as King, though implicitly and by consequence he be received as such.
Neither is it a false Knowledge, though it be an imperfect Knowledge to know
Christ as a Priest, and not to know him as a King. And that Christ is sometimes
propounded only as a Priest, i.e. with express mention only of his Priestly
Office, seems clear and undeniable by diverse places of Scripture; see John 1.
29, 36. and 3. 14, 15. and so other places which speak of Christ as suffering
for us, not mentioning his Sovereignty over us, though that is there implied
and expressed in other places. And though he be (as sometimes he is) expressly
set forth at once both as Priest and King, and so must expressly be received at
once in both respects; yet it hinders not, but that the receiving of Christ as
Priest, and not the receiving of him as King, is that which justifies. One may
at once receive diverse things, and yet those things not all serve for one and
the same use, but one thing may serve for one use, and another thing for
another use, all being, though in several respects, useful and necessary to be
received.

You say that you are of my mind in all this, Ibid.
yet you seem to differ from me, in that you make Affiance a Fruit of
Acceptance, (74.)
which you make the very Act of Faith by which we are justified; whereas I
taking Affiance for Recumbency, and for that which is meant by Believing in
Christ, and Embracing him, make it to be the very Justifying Act of Faith. That
Believing in Christ does principally import Assent I cannot see: to Believe
indeed does seem principally to import Assent; but to Believe in, seems
principally to import Affiance.

Credere in Christum (as Ferus says well) est certa, In Joh. 6. 29.
firma, and stabili fiducia Christum, omniaque ejus bona complecti, eisque toto
cord, tota, anima, totisque viribus inhaerere.

So Wotton; De Reconcil. part 1. lib. 2. c. 14.
Quid est in Christum credere? An id solummodo; credere vera esse, quae
Christus loquitur? At quid opus erat Spiritus Sancto tam novum and insolens
verbum usurpare, presertim obscurum etiam, and a vulgi intelligentia remotum?
Quod recte and clare dici potuit, (...), id Spiritus Sanctus novo more dicendi,
(...), voluit obscurare? Nam hic certe loquendi modus, (...), totus est a
Spiritu Sancto illi proprius, nec ullume Gracis autorem agnoscit, ne illos
quidem LXX Interpretes, qui Hebraea Biblia Grace reddiderunt, a quibus Apostoli
and Evangelista multa in Scriptis suis, quod ipsum loquendi modum attinet,
crebro mutuentur. Quamobrem plus quam verisimile videtur Spiritum Sanctum quum
novo loquendi more uta^ur, quem fiduciam significare perspicuum est, aliud
quoddam praeter communem vocis significationem proponere voluisse.

I find that Seneca does use the Latin Pharase, In Ludo de morte
Hunc sinquit) Deum quis colet? quis credet in eum? Where [Credet in eum] is as
much as [fiduciam in eo colloca^it]. Claudii Caesaris.
And so the Phrase of [Believing in] used in the New Testament, seems to import
as much as the Phrases of [Trusting in] and [staying on] used in the Old
Testament, as namely, Isa. 50. 10. See Mr. Ball of Faith, part 1. chap. 3. p.
24, etc.

So far as I can judge, your success is not answerable to 61.
your desire. But if you did not intend to infer such a conclusion from your
earnest seeking the Lord's Direction on your Knees, (74.)
I know not to what purpose you did speak of it. For if it were only to show
the sincerity of your desire, What is your Cause advantaged, though that be
granted, as I know not why any should question it?

What is that which you say is yielded? Ibid.
That Faith does not justify, as it is the fulfilling of the Condition of the
whole Covenant? Yet you make Justifying-Faith, as such, to be the Condition of
the whole Covenant. For you make it to include Obedience: and what does the
Covenant require more than Faith and Obedience?

2. Of Justification begun, and Justification continued and consummated by
sentence at Judgment, I have spoken before, not is there need here to say any
more of it.

1. No doubt the Holy Ghost means as he speaks: Ibid.
But what of that? Does he speak so as you interpret him?

2. Though our Divines in expounding the words of St. James, express themselves
diversely, yet they agree in the Matter, viz. That Works do not concur with
Faith unto Justification.

Mr. Ball speaking of those words, Of the Coven.
[Faith is imputed unto Righteousness] says, p. 64.
[This Passage is diversely interpreted by Orthodox Divines, all aiming at the
same Truth, and meeting in the Main, being rather several Expressions of the
same Truth, than different Interpretations].

Then he shows three several ways where by those words are interpreted, which
differ as much as these Interpretations which you mention. They that say, That
the Apostle speaks of Justification coram Deo, by Works, understand a
Working-Faith: They that expound it of Justification coram Hominibus, take the
meaning to be, That by Works a Man does appear to be justified. They that
understand it of the Justification of the Person, make the sense the same with
those first mentioned: and they that say it is meant of the Justification of a
Man's Faith, agree with those in the second place, making Works to prove the
sincerity of Faith, and so to manifest a Man's Justification.

3. Are not those words [Hoc est Corpus meum] as express words of Scripture, as
those which you alledg? Though words be never so express, yet not only (...)
but also (...) is to be considered.

4. James might well and solidly prove by Works done many years after, that the
Faith of Abraham, whereby he was justified, was a Working-Faith, of a Working
Nature, a Faith fruitful in good Works, his Faith bringing forth such fruit in
due season, and so showing it self by Works when occasion did require. Abraham
(no doubt) had many other Works, whereby his Faith did appear, yet the Apostle
thought meet to instance in that Work, which was most remarkable; and by which
his Faith did manifest it self in a more especial manner.

Hoc facinus ( says Chrysostom) tanto praestantius erat cateris omnibus, In 2
Cor. 1
ut illa cum hoc collata nihil esseviderentur. Hom. 3.


What your Parenthesis does mean (Legal Justificatiion I mean) I do not well
understand. But how does James speak of Justification as Continued, and not as
Begun? Is his meaning this, That a Man is indeed at first justified by Faith
only, but both Faith and Works together do continue his Justification? So you
understand it: but surely James does neither speak, nor mean so. For by Faith
alone without Works, in his sense, a Man never was, never can be justified.
This is clear by his whole Discourse, for he calls him a vain Man that relies
on such a Faith, and calls it a dead Faith, etc. So that when a Man is first
justified, it is by a Working Faith: not that Faith must necessarily produce
Works at the first, but it is (as I said) of a Working Nature, of such a Nature
as to produce Works when they are required; which is the same with what you say
out of Grotius: and this does answer all that you object against the
Interpretation which I stand for. Who can doubt but Abraham was justified long
before he offered up Isaac, the Scripture being express for it? But how then?
Therefore this Work could be no Condition of that Justification which was past.

Answ. No indeed, that Work was not, nor could be; but Faith apt to show it
self by that Work, or any other, when required, and consequently a Working
Faith might be, and was the Condition of that Justification. Grotius, whom you
cite, giving you such a hint of it, I wonder that you could not observe this.
James and Paul may well enough be reconciled, though both of them speak of
Justification as Begun. For James does not require Works otherwise than as
Fruits of Faith, to be brought forth in time convenient: and Paul does not
exclude Works in that sense.

[Every observant Reader ( says Dr. Jackson) may furnish himself with plenty
of Arguments all demonstrative, Of Justifying.
that Works taken as St. James meant, Faith,. 2. chap. 17.
not for the Act or Operation only, but either for the Act, or promptitude to
it, are necessary to Justification, etc.]

And again, Ibid.
[Faith virtually includes the same mind in us that was in Christ, a readiness
to do Works of every kind, which notwithstanding are not Associates of Faith in
the business of Justification].

And thus he reconcileth the two Apostles, who in this Point seem to differ,
Ibid.
[St. James affirming we are justified by Works, and not by Faith only, speaks
of the Passive Qualification in the Subject, or Party to be justified, or made
capable of absolute Approbation, or final Absolation. This qualification
supposed, St. Paul speaks of the Application of the Sentence, or of the ground
of the Plea for Absolution: the one (by his Doctrine) must be conceived, and
the other sought for only by Faith. The immediate and only cause of both he
still contends not to be in us, but without us: and for this reason, when he
affirms that we are justified by Faith alone, he considers not Faith as it is a
part of our qualification inherent, or the foundation of other Graces, but as
it includes the Correlative Term, or Immediate Cause of Justification,
whereunto it alone has peculiar reference, and continual aspect. This is that
which in other terms some have delivered, Fides justificat relative, non Not
that Faithhath no efficiency at all in Justifying, but that it is not the
Meritorious Cause of Justification.
effective, aut formaliter, etc.]

Take a few words more from this Author, (Ibid.) [The Apostle levels his whole
Discourse to this Poin^ maintained by us, That seeing Righteousness was imputed
to Abraham by Faith, and not through Works, none after him should in this life
at any time, (N. B.) whether before or after the infusion of Grace, or Inherent
Righteousness, presume to seek or hope for like approbation from God otherwise
than only by Faith].

How I exclude Love, I have showed, even as you do, viz. Love of Complacency,
which you grant does follow Acceptance, that Act of Faith by which we are
justified. And when I say that Protestants generally deny Faith, which is
without Works to justify, ^mean Faith which is without works when God does
call for them. You might easily have perceived this to be my meaning by what I
said out of Cajetan de fide non sterili, sed faecunda operibus. A Tree is not
said to be barren, except it does not bring forth Fruit when the Season does
require.

5. I showed you what I take to be meant Jam. 2. 23. when it is said, [And the
Scripture was fulfilled, which says, Abraham believed God, and it was imputed
to him for Righteousness]; viz. That by Abraham's readiness to obey God in
offering up Isaac, the truth of that Scripture did clearly appear, it was then
most manifest, That Abraham believed God indeed, and that his Faith was a true
Justifying-Faith, it being operative, and showing forth it self so evidently by
Works of Obedience, when they were required of him; so that the Scripture did
well and truly say of him, That he believed God, and it was accounted to him
for Righteousness.

Cajetan does explicate it (methinks) very well. In Loc.
Adverte (says he) prudens Lector, quod Jacobus non sentit fidem absque
operibus mortuam esse, etc. Sed sentit fidem sine operibus, id est, renuentem
operati, esse mortuam, esse vanam, and non justificantem. Er recte sentit,
quoniani, quae non est paruta operari, mo^tua est. Suapte enim natura operatur
per dilectionem, ut Paulus dicit. Quodergo Jacobus affert verba, Genesis 15.
[Credidit Abraham Deo, etc.] ad hoc affert, quodcredidit paratus operari. Er
properea dic^, quod in opere oblationes filit impleta, inquam, est Scriptura
loquens de fide Abrahae parata operari. Impleta, inquam, est quoad executionem
maximi operis, ad quod parata erit fides Abrahae.

(...) And though you make light of this interpretation of James, In Loc.
as if it were nothing against you; yet Calvin doubted not to say, Nodo
insolubili constrictos teneo, quicunque justitiam Abrahae coram Deo imputatam
fingunt, quia immolavit filium Isaac, qui nondum natus erat, quum Spiritus
Sanctus pronunciat justum fuisse Abraham. Itaque necessario restat, ut aliqu^d
posterius notari discamus. Quomodo igitur Jacobus id fuisse impletum dicit?
Nempe oftendere vult, qualis illa futrit fides, quae justificavit Abraham, non
otiosa scilicet, out evanida, sed quae illum Deo reddidit obsequentem; sicut
etiam Heb. 11. 8. habetur.

Calvin (it seems) never dreamed of being justified one way at first, He is
express against it. Instit. l. 3. c. 17. 9.
and another way afterward. I would not have you put him off with a taunt, as
you did before. Parcius ista tamen, etc.

But let Mr. Blake also be heard speak, Of the Coven. c. 12. 79, 80
[James indeed (says he) says that Abraham was justified by Works, when he
had offered Isaac his Son on the Altar, Jam. 2. 21. But either there we must
understand a Working-Faith with Piscator, Bareus, Pemble, etc. and confess that
Paul and James handle two distinct Questions, the one, Whether Faith alone
justifies without Works? which he concludes in the Affirmative. The other, What
Faith justifies, whether a Working-Faith only, and not a Faith that is dead and
idle? Or else I know not how to make sense of the Apostle, who straight infers
from Abraham's Justification by the offer of his Son; And the Scripture was
fulfilled, that says, Abraham believed God, and it was accounted to him for
Righteousness. How otherwise do these accord? He was justified by Works, and
the Scripture was fulfilled, that says, He was justified by Faith? Neither can
I reconcile what he says, if this be denied, with the whole current of the
Gospel].

And he adds a little after, [All Works before or after Conversion, are
inherent in us, or wrought by us, are excluded from Justification].

Your Interpretations, viz. [Abraham believed, i. e. believed and obeyed]. Or,
[Yet the Scripture was fulfilled, etc. For Faith did justify him, but not only
Faith] are so uncouth and incongruous, that I wonder how you could persuade
your self, much more think to persuade others to embrace them. Paul cites those
words to prove that Abraham was justified only by believing, and that
Justification is by Faith only: And shall we admit of such an interpretation,
[Faith does justify, but not only?] Or [Abraham was justified by Believing and
Obeying?] What is this else but to make the Scripture a nose of wax, and to
wrest it which way we please? Yea; What is it else but to make the Scripture
plainly to contradict it self? And yet (forsooth) you pretend to stand upon the
(...), and the plain words of Scripture. But Paul (you say) speaks of
Justification as Begun; and that (you grant) is by Faith only? Well, and for
proof of his Doctrine (say I) he alleges the words of Moses concerning
Abraham. Must not those words then be understood of the same Justification?
Will you say with Bellarmine, that Paul speaking of the first Justification,
does fetch a proof from the second? As on the other side, he says, that James,
speaking of the second Justification, does fetch a proof from the first? This
is Caelum Terrae miscere, and Mare Caelo.

6. For my interpretation of Jam. 2. 22. I did not only affirm it to be so, but
also showed where the same phrase is so used, viz. 2 Cor. 12. 9. And I find
that Orthodox Writers do parallel those places, and interpret the one by the
other.

Thus Camero; Fides (inquit) dicitur perfici operibue, Myroth. ad Jac. 2. 22.
quia Fides, dum producit opera, ostenait quam sit perfecta: ut 2 Cor. 12. 9.
Virtus Christ dicitur perfict in infirmitatibus, quia tum scilicet se maxim
exerit, and prodit.

And so Maccovius; Fides fuit perfecta ex operibus, De Justif.
quomodo virtus Christi perficitur in infirmitate, Disp. 10.
2 Cor. 12. 9. quia in ea se exerit: consimili ratione Fides perfici per opera
dicitur, quia per ea se prodit.

Generally I find the words thus expounded by those that either comment upon
them, or have occasion to treat of them.

Dicitur ex operibus (says Calvin) fuisse perfecta, In Loc.
non quod inde suam perfectionem accipiat, sed quod vera esse inde comprobetur.

So Beza; Hoc igitur (inquit) ad declarationem quoque pertinet. In Loc.
Fides enim eo perfectior dicitur, Perfecta, i.e. perfectius cognita. Tremell.
ad
quo before perspecta est, ac cognita, and quo efficacius vires suas exerit
quae prius non ita apparebant.

Fulke does cite Beda thus expounding it; [His Faith was perfected by his
Deeds, that is, by perfect execution of Works it was proved to be in his
Heart]. Loc.


Thus also Lud, de Dieu, Quatenus bona opera vitam fidei, In Loc.
ejusque vim, efficaciam, sinceritatem produnt, adeoque eam illustrant and
exornant, recte dicuntur persectio Fider.

And so Polanus; Symphon.
Fides justificans perficitur ex bonis operibus, Cathol.
non quoad (...) seu essentiam and constitutionem suam, Cap. 36.
sed quatenus per ea firmatur, manifestatur, comprobatur; Thesi 2.
sicut res aliqua tum fieri dicitur, quum patefit.

And he cites the Interlineary Gloss upon Jam. 2. Per opera fides est
augmentata and comprobata. Fides dicitur perfici per opera, quia per ease
prodit Rivet.


And Lyra; Et ex operibus fides consummata est. Habitus enim firmatur and
manifestatur per opera. Et similiter magnitudo fidei Abrahae apparuit ex ejus
obedientiae offerendo filium, propter quod dictum fuit sibi (...) Domino; Disp.
de Fide Justif. 20.
Nunc cognori, etc.

Thus also Mr. Ball, [Faith is perfected by Works, not that the Nature of Faith
receives complement or perfection from Works, Of Faith, Part 1. c. 4. p. 44.
but because it does declare and manifest it self by Love and good Works, and
is esteemed so much the more perfect, as the Works produced are the more
excellent].

To illustrate this, Animad. page 54.
I used also the Similitude of a Tree, the goodness of whose Fruit does but
manifest the goodness of it; Where I also cited Dr Preston thus expounding it,
and using this similitude to illustrate it.
and so the power of Faith does but appear by its fruits, viz. Works. You say
that Faith is really perfected by Works, as a Tree is by bearing fruit. But (as
our Savior says) a Tree is known by his Fruit. The Fruit does not make the
Tree good, but only show it to be so. And this very Similitude have Learned
Divines used to this purpose.

Beza immediately after the words before cited adds, Vt si dicatur alicujus
arboris bonitas tum fuisse perfecta, quum optimum aliquem frractum edidit. Nam
quia de causa judicamus ex effectus, videtur quodammodo ca^s^ vis vel minu^,
vel augeri ex effectorum proportione. Sed hoc ex effectis intelligitur quidem,
and astimatur, non autem emanat.

So Mr. Ball, Vbi supra.
[How then says the Apostle that Faith is perfected by Works? As we judge of
the Cause by the Effects, and by the proportion of the Effects the efficacy and
force of the Cause may seem to be increased or diminished. Every thing is
acknowledged to be perfect, when it works, and is esteemed so much the more
perfect, by how much the more it works: As we say the goodness of a Tree is
perfect, when it has brought forth some excellent good Fruit. Thus
Philosophers teach, That the Form is not perfect, when it is considered as the
first Act, but when it is taken as the second Act; for by working it puts
forth its force, and declares it self. And so Faith is perfected by Works,
etc.] as before cited.

You say also, That Faith is really perfected by Works, as a Covenant or
Promise is by Performance. But the Performance does only manifest the
perfection of a Covenant or Promise. It is a perfect Covenant or Promise, as
soon as it is made, if it be made sincerely and without guile, though it
appears more fully to be so when it is performed. Again you say, That Faith is
really perfected by Works, as it has naturam medii, viz. Conditionis, to the
Continuation and Consummation of Justification. But you have not yet proved,
That there is any other Condition of Justification as Continued and
Consummated, than of Justification as Begun.

Apprehensio illa fidei habet fluxum suum continuum, In Genesis 15 Exercit. 73.
etc. (says Rivet) Quod continuum beneficium fide apprehensum, si secundam
Justificationem appellare velint adversarii, imo tertiam, quartam, quintam, and
millesimam, non repugnamus, dummodo constet nulla alia ratione (N. B.) nos
justificari a peccatis sequentibus, quam ca, qua semel justificati fuimus a
precedentibus.

St. James does not speak of Works perfecting Faith more to the continuing and
consummating of Justification, than to the beginning of it. For (which must
ever be remembered) he speaks of Faith as apta nata operari: and such a Faith is
requisite, that we may be justified as well at first as afterward. Otherwise
Works neither at first nor afterward do concur with Faith to our Justification.

[A preparation or promptitude of Heart (says Mr. Ball) to good Works, Of
Faith, Part 1. c. 4. p. 57.
is an effect of Faith as immediate as Justification].

And again, Ib. Part 2. c. 4. p. 253.
[Faith does not begin to apprehend Life, and leave the accomplishment to
Works, but does rest upon the Promise of Life until we come to enjoy it].

Yet again you say, That Faith is really perfected by Works, as Works are a
part of that necessary Matter (not necessary at the first moment of Believing,
but necessary afterward, when we are called to it) whereby we are justified
against the Charge of nonperformance of the New-Covenants Condition, even
against the Charge of being an Unbeliever or an Hypocrite. But all this proves
not that Works give any perfection to Faith, but only that they show the
perfection, i.e. the sincerity, force, and efficacy of it. Works may manifest a
Man to be no Unbeliever or Hypocrite: but it is his Faith, which being
unfeigned, does indeed make him to be no Unbeliever or Hypocrite. All therefore
that you have said, makes nothing against my interpretation of those words,
Jam. 2. 22. [And by Works was Faith made perfect].

7. Your self deny necessitatem praesentiae operum in respect of our being
justified at first. And for the Conducibility of Works to the effect of
Justification, James speaks not of it, but only shows, that Justifying Faith
is not without Works, viz. when God does call for them. He shows that
Justifying-Faith is a Working-Faith, a Faith ready to Work when occasion does
require: But that Works do therefore conduce unto Justification as well as
Faith, he does not show, neither does this any way follow upon the other. A
Working-Faith is the Condition of Justification, i.e. Faith which is of such a
nature as to bring forth the Fruit of good Works in due season; yet are we not
therefore justified by Works as well as by Faith. For we are justified by Faith
only apprehending Christ and his Righteousness; though the same Faith that does
this, will also produce good Works, as Abraham's Faith did. Fides sola
justificat, quia ipsa est unicum instrumentum, and unica facultas, in nobis qua
recipimus justitiam, Christi.
That Works do justify the Faith, but not the Person, though I use not to
speak so, yet I think may be said without any implication of Contradiction. It
is true, Justificatio causae est etiam Justificatio personae, non simpliciter
and absolute, sed quoad istam causam: but they that use that distinction mean
(I think) only this, that Works show Faith to be sound and good, yet it is
Faith and not Works, by which a Man is simply and absolutely justified. Do not
(I pray) here lay hold on the word [absolutely]; it is referred to the word
[justified] not to the word [Faith]. I do not say, That Faith absolutely
considered does justify: no, it does justify as it is considered relatively;
Bucan.
Faith, i.e. Christ apprehended by Faith, Loc. 31. ad quast. 37.
is that whereby we are absolutely justified. Though Works may justify against
the Accusation of being a final non-performer of the Condition (so I would say,
not Conditions, in respect of the Justification of which we speak) of the New
Covenant; yet do they not therefore simply and absolutely justify, but only
against that Accusation, showing that a Man did perform the Condition, viz.
believe, and so is simply and absolutely justified, not by Works (which do but
only declare him to be so) but by Faith, as the Condition or Instrument (for I
will use the terms promiscuously as others do) of Justification. Faith does not
justify as Working, i.e. as bringing forth the Fruit of good Works; your self
deny this in respect of our Justification at first: yet Faith does not
justify, except it be of a Working-Nature, i.e. of such a Nature as to work
when God calls for it. More than this cannot be inferred from Jam. 24. as is
clear by the Context.

1. All Works, if good, are Works of the Law, viz. 63.
the Moral Law, which (as I said in the Animadversions) is the eternal Rule of
Righteousness. And of that Law the Apostle speaks, when he excludes Works from
Justification, as appears by his Reasons which he uses for proof of his
Assertion, Romans 3. 20. Gal. 3. 10.

Evangelii (inquit Maccovius) nulla sunt opera bona distincta a Lege
formaliter. These.
Adversarii cum urgentur, Theolog.
ex operibus legis non justificari hominem, Part 1.
admittunt hoc, Disp. 16.
and dicunt, ita quidem esse, sed non proinde non justificari operibus
Evangelii. Hinc distinguunt inter opera Legis and Evangelii. Sed si obtineat
hac distinctio, tum utique dabuntur etiam peccata, quae committuntur Nempe
Solam, and non etiam in Doctrinam Legis.
in Doctrinam Evangelii: Non ergo erit adaequar^a definitio peccati, quam dat
Spiritus Sanctus, 1 John 3. 4. quod peccatum sit Legis transgressio -- At
Evangelium distinguitur a Lege. Certe; interim Evangelii Doctrinae praecipitur
Lege. Nam Deus postulat, ut Evangelio credamus, etc.

So Pemble, Of Justif.
[Nor yet (says he) has this Distinction (viz. Works of the Law, Sect. 2.
and Works of the Gospel) any ground in Scripture, Chap. 2.
or in Reason. For both tell us,. 2.
That the Works commanded in the Law, and Works commanded in the Gospel, are
one and the same for the substance of them. What Work can be named, that is
enjoined us in the New Testament, which is not commanded us in that summary
Precept of the Moral Law, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart,
and with all thy Soul, etc. What is there against the Gospel, which is not a
transgression of the Law? -- You will say, It does not command Faith in Christ.
I answer, Yea, it does. For that which commands us in general to believe
whatever God shall propose unto us, commands us also to believe in Christ, as
soon as God shall make known that it is his Will we should believe in him. The
Gospel discovers to us the Object, the Law commands us the obedience of
believing it].

The Moral Law may be said to be a part of the New Covenant, as it requires
that they which have believed, be careful to maintain good works, Tit. 3. 8,
14. and to walk circumspectly ((...) accurate, Ad Loc.
i. e. quam proxime ad Legis Dei praecepta, as Beza does well expound it),
Ephesians. 5. 15. But this is far, and very far too from proving Works to have a
co-interest with Faith in the effect of justifying. For your Reasons why the
Apostle does not exclude all Works absolutely from Justification, I see no
strength in them; and therefore I answer;

Ad 1. That which you call Justification against the Accusation of final
Unbelief, is indeed Justification against the Accusation of Transgressing the
whole Law. For that Accusation being only made void by Faith, where there is
final Unbelief, there that Accusation has its full force. Besides, though the
Accusation of final Unbelief may be proved to be false by Works, yet Works upon
this account do no otherwise justify, than by manifesting a Man's Faith, by
which Faith indeed, and not by Works he is justified.

Ad 2. So also that Justification which James speaks of, is against a true
Charge, and the same with Remission of sins, as well as that which Paul does
speak of. For can they that have but a dead Faith, be justified against a true
Charge and have their sins remitted? Surely it must be a Living and a Working
Faith, such as James does require, can work that Effect. Justification against
a false Accusation, is but such a Justification as the worst of Men and the
Devils themselves are capable of.

Nemo enim iniquus adco, De Justif.c. 3.. 11.
(as Bradshaw speaks) aut injustus dari potest, qui falso accusari, and
consequenter etiam eatenus merito justificari non possit.

Indeed Justification aginst the Accusation of final Unbelief, is by
consequence a Justification against all Accusations, because Faith is the
Condition and Instrument of Universal Justification. But hence it follows that
we are justified universally by Faith, and not by Works, which are only an
Argument a posteriori of Faith, and so of Justification.

Ad 3. All Works that have a co-interest with Faith in Justification, are
Competitors with Christ, or Copartners with him; so that Justification must be
partly by the Righteousness of Christ through Faith, and partly by Works.

Ad 4. As the Righteousness of Christ is freely given or imputed at first upon
condition of Faith, so is the free gift and imputation of it still continued
upon the same condition of Faith; which Faith both when Justification is first
begun, and when it is continued, must be a Working-Faith, i. e. ready to work
as occasion does require. If our Divines affirm, That the Apostle speaking
against Justification by Works, means in point of merit, (as you say you could
bring multitudes of them to this purpose) surely it is, because they know no
other Justification by Works, but that which does presuppose Works to be
meritorious.

Hear one whom I (and so I presume you also) take for a good Divine, Of the
Coven. c. 12. p. 80.
viz. Mr. Blake, [This Justification (says he) wrought freely by Grace through
Faith, Romans 3. 24. is no way consistent with Justification by Works. And what
the Apostle speaks of Election, we may well apply to Justification: the same
medium equally proves the truth of both; If by Grace, then it is no more of
Works, otherwise Grace were no more Grace: But if it be of Works, then it is no
more of Grace, otherwise Works were no more Works, Romans 11. 6.]

Calvin also uses this Argument to confute those who would have Works to
concur with Faith unto Justification, that then we should have somewhat to
boast of, which is not to be admitted. Instit. l. 3. c. 11.. 13.
Sed quoniam (inquit) bona pars hominum justitiam ex fide and operibus
compositam imaginatur, praemonstremus id quoque, sic inter se differ fidei
operumque justitiam, ut altera stante necessario altera evertatur. Dicit
Apostolus se omnia pro stercoribus reputasse, ut Christum lucrifaceret, etc.
(Phil. 3. 8, 9.) Vides and contrariorum esse hic comparationem, and indicari
propriam justitiam oportere pro derelicto haberi ab eo, qui velit Christi
justitiam obtinere. -- Id ipsum quoque ostendit, cum negat per Legem excludi
gloriationem nostram, sed per fidem. Vnde sequitur, quantisper manet
quantulacunque operum justitia, manner nobis nonnullam gloriandi materiam. Jam
si fides omnem gloriationem excludit, cum justitia fidei sociari nullo pacto
justitia operum potest. In hunc sensum tam clare loquitur quarto cap. ad Romans
ut nullum cavillis aut tergiversationibus locum relinquat. St operibus, inquit,
justificatus est Abraham, habet gloriam. Subjungit, atque non habet gloriam
apud Deum. Consequens ergo est, non justificatum esse operibus. Ponit deinde
alterum argumentum a contrariis. Quum rependitur operibus merces, id fit ex
debito, non ex gratia. Fidei autem tribuitur justitia secundum gratiam. Ergo id
non est ex meritis operum. Valeat igitur eorum somnium, (N. B.) qui justitiam
ex fide and operibus conflatam comminiscuntur.

Who those multitudes of Divines be of whom you speak, I cannot tell, because
you name none; but I think that few or none of them will be found of your mind,
viz. That Paul does only exclude Works from Justification in point of merit; as
if Justification might be by Works in some other respect, so as that no merit
thereby is presupposed. So far as I observe, our Divines note this as one main
Argument, whereby the Apostle does wholly exclude Works from Justification,
because otherwise the merit of Works could not be denied, which yet is to be
exploded.

Thus the Centurists among many other Arguments, Cent. 1.
whereby the Apostles (they say) prove Justification to be by Faith alone, lib.
2. c. 4.
note this for one; Col. 257.
Non est gloriandum in nobis, Arg. 26.
sed in Domino. Ergo non ex operibus, sed gratis justificamur, ne quis
glorietur, Ephesians. 2. 1 Cor. 1.

Ad 5. All good Works (as I have showed before) and consequently those whereby
we perform obedience to the Redeemer, are works of the Law, it being the Rule
to which they must be conformed. But it is Faith in the Redeemer, not Obedience
to the Redeemer, by which we are justified, though Justifying-Faith must, and
will show it self by Obedience.

Ad 6. All Works that have an agency in Justification, are meritorious, and so
make the Reward to be of Debt, and not of Grace. Now to your Answers to my
Arguments in oppositum I reply; And for the first thus; If Abraham's
Gospel-Works did justify him otherwise than by evidencing his Faith, whereby
he was justified, if they be made to have a co-interest with Faith in his
Justification, then they are set in Competition or Copartnership with Christ's
Righteousness.

That no Work of the Gospel does justify; Of Justif.. 2. chapter 2.. 2.
Mr. Pemble proves by this, That every Work of the Gospel, is a Work of the
Law also; and therefore the Apostle denying that a Man is justified by the
Works of the Law, See Rivet as cited page 145.
does consequently deny that he is justified by the Works of the Gospel. That
Works do justify as Conditions under Christ, is repugnant to what your self
hold in respect of Justification as begun: and I see not, that the Scripture
shows us any other Condition of Justification afterward than at first.

2. My Conclusion, That Abraham was not justified by Works, but by Faith, is
not against Jam. 2. 21. no more than Paul's Doctrine Romans 3. and 4. is. For I
mean, as Paul does, That Abraham's Works did not concur with his Faith to his
Justification: but James meant only, That Abraham's Faith was not such as some
presume of a dead idle Faith, but a living working Faith; and that his Works
did manifest his Faith to be such as whereby he was justified.

Cum obtulisset (inquit Bucanus) Abraham Isaac filium suum super altar, Lo^.
Com.
ex operibus justificatus est, Loc. 3^ ad quaest. 39.
hoc est, compertus est fuisse justificatus per fidem, idque ex operibus
tanquam testimoniis Justificationis. Et sic homo operibus justificatur, id est,
comprobatur esse illa persona, quae Christi obedientia justificatur, ex vitae
sanctificatione quae tanquam effectus illam sequitur, and de illa testatur.
Quomodo etiam Deus dicitur in extremo illo die justificaturus electos suos ex
ipsonum operibus. Nam sunt duo principia, unum existentiae, alterum
cognitionis. Ita fides principium existentiae facit, ut simus justi. Opera
autem ut principium cognitionis faciunt, ut cognoscamur justi. Ideo Dominus in
extremo die proponet principium cognitionis justitiae fidei, quod incurret in
oculos omnium creaturarum, Mat. 25. Venite benedicti, etc.

For the second; 1. The Apostle Romans 4. 4. speaks without any distinction, To
him that works, etc. Now (as you know) non est distinguendum, ubi lex non
distinguit.

2. If Works justify, then they must be meritorious. The Apostle does not
simply deny a Reward to belong of Grace to him that works, but to him that
works so as to be justified by his Works. Such an one having no need of
remission of sins, because his Works do justify him, (which they cannot do if
they be imperfect, and so he need pardon) he is said to receive the Reward, not
of Grace, but of Debt.

3. Faith as a Fides non justificat quatenus est opus justitiae, sed quatenus
apprehendit justitiam Christi. Rivet. Disput. de Fide Justif. Sect. 19.
Work is excluded from Justification, only it justifies as an Instrument or
Hand receiving Christ and his Righteousness. Or (which is to the same effect)
Faith does not justify, as it is a Duty, which if we perform not we sin; but
as a Condition upon which the Righteousness of Christ is imputed unto us for
our Justification. You are not to be blamed for making use o^ Bellarmine's
Argument, (for so indeed it is, not his Answer) but for not taking notice how
our Divines do answer it. See Ames. contra. Bellar. tom. 4. lib. 5. cap 4. ad
6. Love, Fides sola justificat, quia ipsa est unicum instrumentum, and unica
facultas in nobis, qua recipimus justitiam Christi. Bucan. Loc. 31. ad quaest.
37.
Hope, and Obedience are not Instruments of receiving Christ, as Faith is;
neither does the Scripture make them Conditions of Justification, as it does
Faith.

For the Third; 1. Neither does James speak of any other Justification.

2. The imperfection of Faith proves that none are justified by it, as a Work
or Duty, but only as apprehending Christ and his Righteousness; See Calv.
Instit. lib. 3. cap. 11.. 7. And Pemble of Justif. Sect. 2. chap. 2. page 38.

3. No more do the greatest Transgressors need pardon for that wherein they do
not transgress.

4. Works as Works either justify by way of merit, or not at all: But Faith
does not justify as a Work or Duty required of us, but as an Instrument
receiving Christ, or (if you will) a Condition whereby we are made partakers of
Christ's Righteousness, by which we are justified; See Pemble of Justif.. 2.
chap. 1. page 24.

The Exclusion (viz. of Works from being concurrent 64.
with Faith unto Justification) is not only Mr. Pemble's, but generally all
Protestants, and indeed Paul's and the Scriptures: and to take in Works (in
that sense) is as Mr. Blake before cited truly says, against the whole current
of the Gospel.

1. To deny the Scripture to mean as you interpret it, Ibid. and 65.
is not to deny it to mean as it speaks. Whether the Reasons which I alleged
against your interpretation of St. James be forced, let others judge.

2. It avails your cause nothing to prove, That James by working does mean
Works indeed. I presume Mr. Pemble would not deny that, but his meaning (I
conceive) was, That Works are only spoken of as Fruits of Justifying Faith,
and are only said to justify, because they are (as Dr. Jackson speaks) a
passive qualification in the Subject or Party to be justified.

[Hence (says he also) is the seeming inconvenience of St. James his Causal
form of Speech ((...)) easily answered. Of Justifying Faith,. 2. chapter 17. 7.
For the immediate and principal cause proposed, it is usual to attribute a
kind of causality to the qualification of the Subject, though only requisite as
a mere passive disposition, without which the principal or sole Agent shall
want his efficacy].

All that St. James intended is this, That Justifying Faith is of a
VVorking-Nature, and not such a Faith as some rely on, viz. barren and without
Works. Now for your Reasons, I answer, Ad 1. You speak of the unprofitableness
of bare Faith, i. e. (say you) Assent. But quorsum hoc? You know that
Protestants make Faith to justify, not as it is a bare Assent, but as it is a
Receiving of Christ, and a Recumbency on him.

Fides haec justificans (says Ames.) non est illa generalis, Medull. lib. 1.
c. 27.. 15, 16.
qua in intellectu assensum praebemus veritati in Sacris literis revelatae,
etc. Fides igitur illa proprie dicitur justificans, qua incumbimus in Christum
ad remissionem peccatorum, and salutem. And this Faith they hold not barren;
but fruitful in good Works; though not Works, but Faith it self (apprehending
and applying Christ) be it, whereby we are justified.

Id fidei exclusive tribuendum ex eo constat, Disp. de Fide Just.. 18, 19, 20,
21, 22.dc
quod sola est fides, quae Dco promittenti credit, quae sola acquiescit in
gratuita promissione Dei in Christo, and remissionem peccatorum apprehendit,
etc. Vnde etiam sequitur, Fidem non justificare, quatenus est opus justitiae,
sed quatenus apprehendit justitiam Christi, etc. Nec Jacobus dissentit a Paulo,
quamvis alio modo loquendi utatur, ut redarguat eos, qui seipsos fallebant
inani fidei justificationem tribuentes, quam probat non esse veram (...)
exemplo Charitatis, quae nullam vim habet, si tota sit in verbis, c. 2. 16.
Operibus autem justificari apud Jacobum, idem est, quod apud Paulum, 1 Timothy 3.
16. justificari spiritu, i. e. Vi spiritus dare sui experimentum, quomodo
experimentum dedit Abraham fidei suae, offerendo filium suum: and homo probatus
fit, (...), tentatione, Jac. 1. 12. quae probatio non facit ut res sit, sed per
experientiam docet rem esse. Vnde etiam fides dicitur perfici per opera, quia
per ea se prodit. Ergo cum Paulo vult Jacobus, hominem justificari fide, sed
uterque ea, quae sui experimentum dat per opera: etsi neuter vult opera esse
justificationis causas, aut ad justitiam coram Deo accepta^i, quorum primum
volunt Pontificii, alterum Sociniani and Remonstrantes. Concludimus cum
Apostolo, and colligimus, fide justificari hominem absque operibus Legis, Romans
3. 28. sub quibus comprehendimus quaelibet opera, quae secundum Legem fiunt,
etiam a sanctis and fide^ibus. Cum enim inter Legem factorum sive operum, and
Legem fidei distinguat Apostolus, ibid. v. 27. si ex operibus justificemur,
Legis operum and fidei distinctio (...) vana, and Argumentum ex ea deductum pro
fidei justificatione nut abit; quod absurdum ut vitemus, scientes non
justificari hominem ex operibus Legis, sed tantum per fidem Jesu Christi; etiam
nos in Jesum Christians credimus, ut justificemur ex fide Jesu Christi, non ex
oper^^s Legis, Gal. 2. 22. Sed cum eodem Apostolo fidum esse hunc sermonem
affirmamus studendum esse ^is, qui credideruat Deo, ut bona opera tueantur,
Tit. 3. 8. ut purificemus nos ab omni inquinamento, etc. 2. Cor. 7. 1. quod cum
fiat de die in diem, 2 Cor. 4. 16. quamdiu caro concupiscit adversus Spiritum,
etc. Gal. 5. 17: in eo non possumus coram Deo justificari. Nam in justificando
partialem justitiam Deus non respicit, sed perfectam and plenam, quia Lex
maledicit omnibus, qui non permanebunt in omnibus quae praecipit, Deuteronomy. 27. 26.
Gal. 3. 10.

I have been the larger in citing this Author, both because he is eminent, and
also does speak so fully to the Point, and does meet with many of your Opinions.

But to proceed, It is Faith and Faith, i. e. several kinds of Faith, which St.
James opposes one to the other, viz. Faith which is a bare Assent, and without
Works, such a Faith as the Devils have, and Faith which is moreover an
embracing of Christ, and the mercy of God in Christ, and is attended with
Works as the Fruits and Effects of it, as the Faith of Abraham and Rahab was.
Though therefore he concludes, That Faith cannot save him that has not Works,
yet i^ follows not that Works concur with Faith unto Justification, but only
that a Justifying Faith will show it self by Works.

Ad 2. It is granted, That Faith which is no more than a bare Assent, is
neither Justifying nor Saving: But what of this? Is there no other Faith than
Assent? Do not you your self make Acceptance, which is more than Assent, the
completing Act of Justifying Faith? And how can you say, That there is the
same force ascribed to Works as to Faith, when you make Justification at first
to be by Faith without Works? Indeed Works are requisite in their place, but
not as having the like force with Faith unto Justification, (show any Orthodox
Writer that does hold so) though as necessary Fruits of that Faith, by which
we are justified. Say not that you speak of Justification as continued, for
Works, as St. James does speak of them, are as necessary unto Justification at
first as afterward, viz. a promptitude and readiness to do good Works: if this
be wanting, it is no Justifying Faith, but (as St. James calls it) a dead
Faith; altogether vain and unprofitable.

Ad 3. That Faith without Works is a hardening of Unbelievers, I grant: sed
quid tum postea? Do therefore Works justify as well as Faith? But I do not
think that St. James brings in (chap. 2. 18.) an Unbeliever so speaking. For
how should an Unbeliever (a professed Unbeliever, we mean; for you use to
distinguish betwixt an Unbeliever and an Hypocrite) speak of his Faith, saying,
[And I will show thee my Faith?]

Calvin does far better interpret it, In Loc.
saying, Jacobus dicit, promptum fore piis sancte viventibus, excutere
hypocritis talem jactantiam, qua inflati sunt.

Ad 4. The Devils have a true Belief, i. e. a true Assent; but there is more
than Assent in Justifying Faith, even that Faith whereby we are justified at
first, as your self do hold. And you confess also that Faith does justify at
first without Works; yet (say I) not except it be of a VVorking-Nature, i.e.
ready to Work, when Works are required: and otherwise than as Fruits of
Justifying Faith Works do not justify neither at first nor afterward.

Ad 5. Faith without Works is dead, as to the effect of Justification, even
altogether unprofitable, i. e. Faith renuens operari, or which is not parata
operari, as Cajet an does well express it. In Jac. 2.
But this is nothing to prove a Co-interest of Works with Faith in point of
Justification; it only proves, That Justifying Faith is of a working Nature.
Whereas you add, [Still here the opposite part on one side is Faith and Works,
and on the other side Faith without Works]; this does nothing hinder, but that
the opposition is (as I said) betwixt Faith and Faith, i. e. several kinds of
Faith, whereof the one is accompanied with Works, and the other not; the one
is operative and fruitful, the other idle and barren. That Abraham was
justified not only by that Faith that did work, but also by Works, is more
than St. James does say, and is directly contradictory to what St. Paul says.
Indeed it is more than you can say, without your distinction of Justification
Begun and Continued; which distinction St. James never thought of. For surely
Justification cannot be at first by a dead and unprofitable Faith, as he
affirms that to be, which is without Works. That in Jam. 2. 22. cannot be
meant that Faith by Works is made perfect, as accomplishing its ends, but only
as thereby declared and manifested to be perfect. The end of Faith is to
justify; and your self say, That Faith at first does justify without Works:
so that in your Opinion Faith without Works is perfect, accomplishing its end
in justifying at first. But in St. James his sense Faith does not, cannot at
all justify without Works, i. e. if it be not ready to work: and in that
respect Works do perfect Faith, i. e. they make the perfection of Faith to
appear: but of that enough before.

Ad 6. And so of that also in Jam. 2. 23. enough has been said already. That
Faith alone is the Condition of the Initiation; but Faith and Obedience of the
Confirmation, Continuation, and Consummation of Justification, you often say,
but never prove. Sure I am James does exclude Faith, which is without Works,
viz. when God does call for them, from the very Initiation of Justification.
For he makes such a Faith as unprofitable as the Faith of Devils, who surely
are so far from Justification, that they have not so much as the initiation of
it.

Ad 7. You can never make more of that Conclusion Jam. 2. 24. than that a Man
is justified by a VVorking Faith, or by a Faith which produces Works, and so
by his Works appears to be justified. The words if taken without any
qualification, are against your self, who will have a Man justified at first by
Faith without Works. If you will distinguish of Justification as at first, and
as afterward, to make the Apostle agree with your meaning, though indeed it
will not serve: Shall not others have leave to explain the Apostle so, as to
make him agree not only with them, but also with himself, and the whole current
of the Gospel? The word (...) there imports no more than if it had been (...),
as appears by the whole series of the Discourse, and more particularly by ^*
17. where (...) is as much as (...), [by it self] i. e. alone without the
concomitancy of Works, as the Fruits of it. Beza renders it per se; Tremellius
out of the Syriack Sola: the Vulgar Latin has in semetipsa, which Cajetan
corrects, saying, pro per se, and that he expounds, hoc est sola. Wherein I
suppose he followed Erasmus, whose Annotation on the place is, (...), i. e. per
se, hoc est, sola.

Ad 8. Rahab was justified by Works so as Abraham was, and all must be, even
when they are first justified, viz. by a Faith prompt and ready to work when
occasion does require.

Ad 9. Our Divines by Faith understand a Sound and Orthodox Belief, i. e.
Assent; and such is the Faith of the Devils spoken of Jam. 2. 19. such a Faith
may be without Works, and so is dead, i.e. unprofitable: but that is not the
Justifying Faith which our Divines do speak of, (as I have showed before) who
hold that Faith alone does justify without Works, though withal they hold
that Faith which does justify is not alone without Works, viz. when God does
call for them; and this is all that St. James urges. Your own Analysis does
evince no more than this, save that now and then you put a wrong gloss upon the
Text, and ever and anon come in with your distinction betwixt the Initiation
and the Continuation of Justification, quite besides, yea and against St. James
his meaning, as (I think) I have sufficiently demonstrated.

Oecumenius a Greek Scholiast does expound St. James, In Jac. 2.
and reconcile him with St. Paul, after the same manner as I and others do;
(...) (says he) (...). Sometimes (he says) Faith is taken for a bare Assent,
(...), and so the Devils believe: Sometimes it notes also a disposition joined
with assent, (...). St. James (he says) considers Faith in the former sense,
St. Paul in the latter. (...), etc. (...).

To conclude, It is not Faith as working that does justify, but Faith as
apprehending Christ and his Righteousness: Yet that Faith which does apprehend
Christ and his Righteousness, and so does justify, is a Working Faith. Your
self grant that Works are not necessary quoad praesentiam, in respect of
Justification as begun: and that they are necessary quoad effectum
justificationis, in respect of Justification as continued, is more (I presume)
than ever will be proved.

1. I let pass those things which you speak of Calvin, 65, etc.
because I see nothing but bare words. As for Clemens Romans Ignatius, Justin
Martyr, and the rest, who for 1000 years after Paul (you say) give as much to
Works as you ever did, or more, and make Faith to justify as a Condition, and
To make Faith to be a Condition, is not to deny it to be an Instrument: Our
Divines sometimes term it the one way, sometimes the other, as I have before
showed.
not as an Instrument, whatever forced scraps some may gather out of a Line
against the full scope of the whole Page or Book; I wish you had cited some
Books, or Pages, or but Scraps, as you call them, whereby to make good what you
say, I am not of such Reading, much less of such Memory, as to give an account
of so many Authors. Some of them either wholly or in part I have read, but I do
not remember where they do ex professo treat of Justification, and therefore I
do not marvel if they do not speak so accurately of it.

But for the Opinion of the Ancient VVriters in this Point, I shall refer you
unto some who were much better versed in ^^em than I am, viz. Fulk on Jam. 2.
4. Davenant de Justit. Habit. cap. 25. where he answers Bellarmines
Allegations, and cap. 29. where he produces his own.

And Eckhard Compend. Theolog. Lib. 2. cap. 3. who alleges Chrysostom,
Ambrose, Basil, Cyril, Austine and Bernard, as holding Christ's Righteousness
to be imputed into us for our Justification. And he alleges Ambrose, Hierome,
Athanasius, Clemens Alex* Origin, Nazianzen, Chrysostom, Basil, Theodoret,
Hesychius, Primasius, Epiphanius, Philastrius, Austin, Sedulius, M^xentius,
Theodulus, Fortunatus, Victor* Mar. and Bernard, as testifying that we are
justified by Faith alone without Works; and yet he says he does but aliquot
ex vetusta anti^^^ ate tesiamonia, quod ad hanc rem spectat, delibare.

Beda, omitted by Eckhard, De Statu and Success. etc. cap. 2. page 46.
is cited by B. Usher as writing on Psalm. 77. thus, Per justitiam factorum
nullus salvabetur, sed per solam justitiam fides.

To your other Query concerning Calvin* P. Martyr, etc. I answer in the words
of Amesius, Contra Bell. tom. 4 lib. 5. c. 2.. 22.
Fides specialis misericordia duplici ratione sic vocatur. 1. Qua Christum
apprehendit, vel innititur ipsi ad specialem misericordiam per ipsum
apprehendendam. 2. Qua misericordia specialem jam donatam apprehendit: priore
sensu justifi^ationem antecedit, posteriore sensu sequitur justificatio^em. Sed
quia una and eadem est fides, quae misericordiam Dei in Christo specialiter
applicat apprehendendo, and applicationem illam jam factam certam reddit, and
perfectio vel consolatio ejus in h^c certitudine apparet, quam etiam hosts
gratis precipue impugnant, idcirco per istam certitudinem (quae tamen quoad
sensum a fide potest ad tempus separari) fides justifican^ solet a multis
describ^.

And again, Medul. l. 1. c. 27.. 19.
Fides ista justificans sua natura producit, atque adeo conjunctam secum habet
special^m ac certam persuasionem de gratia ac misericordia Dei i^ Christo. Vnde
etiam per istam persuasionem fides justificans non male soepe describitur ab
Orthodoxis, prefertim cum impugnant generalem illam fidem, cui omnia tribuunt
Pontificii. Sed 1. ista persuasio quoad sensum ipsius non semper adest. -- 2.
Varii sunt gradus hujus persuasionis, etc.

2. By Apprehending, I do not mean bare Assent, but Embracing, or Receiving, or
Applying.

Amesius cites and approves these words of Contarenus; Contra Bellar. loco
proxime citato.
Accipimus justificationem per fidem. Hanc acceptationem Thomas in 3. appellat
applicationem, inquien^ passionem Christi esse veluti Medicinam communem, quam
quisque sibi applicat per fidem and Sacramenta: Protestants appellant
apprebensionem, non ea significatione, qua pertinet a^ cognitionem intellectus,
sed qua illud dicimur apprehendere, quo pervenimus, and quod post motum nostrum
attingimus.

I think that although Justifying-Faith does receive Christ entirely, yet as
Justifying it receives him only in respect of his Satisfaction, which is the
Righteousness by which we are justified. There is no danger in this Doctrine,
so long as People are taught withal, that they must not look to have Christ as
a Priest satisfying for them, except they also have him as a King reigning over
them. Neither does it seem to me any gross conceit, That apprehending or
applying of Christ's Satisfaction, or of Christ as satisfying for us, is that
act of Faith whereby we are justified. Your Similitude does not suit; because a
Husband cannot be offered to a Woman in several respects, as Christ may be
unto a Sinner. I do not conceive Faith to justify modo Physico, or merely
because it is of that nature to apprehend Christ and his Righteousness: If it
were not for the Promise of the Gospel, this Act of Faith would not avail. As
suppose the Devils should apprehend the Righteousness of Christ, yet should
they not be justified, because the Promise of the Gospel does not belong unto
them. Yet this apprehending of Christ and his Righteousness being the Physical
Act of Faith, and withal made the Condition of Justification, in that the
Gospel does promise Justification unto those that apprehend Christ and his
Righteousness; I see not but I may well say, That Faith does justify us,
apprehending Christ and his Righteousness, this being it which the Gospel does
require unto Justification. Faith as apprehending Christ being the Condition of
Justification, it is all one to say, Faith does justify as apprehending
Christ, and Faith does justify as the Condition required unto Justification.
Whereas therefore you prove, That Faith or Acceptance of Christ simply
considered in it self does not justify; it is nothing to me, who do not
ascribe any thing to Faith in order to Justification as it is considered simply
in it self, but as it being of such a nature is in that respect required of us,
to that end that we may be justified. And thus (I think) do others mean, when
they say, That Faith does justify as apprehending Christ, and his
Righteousness: they do not (I suppose) exclude, but include the requiring of
Faith in this respect as a Condition of Justification.

Pemble having said, [We are justified by Faith, i.e. by the Righteousness of
Christ, Of Justif.. 2. c. 1. p. 27.
the benefit whereof unto our justification we are made partakers of by Faith,
as the only Grace which accepts of the Promise, and gives us assurance of the
Performance]. He adds a little after, [He that looked on Christ believing in
him, may truly be said to be saved and justified by Faith, not for the worth,
and by the efficacy of that Act of his, but as it is the Condition of the
Promise of Grace, that must necessarily go before the Performance of it unto
us; upon our obedience whereunto, God is pleased of his free Grace to justify
us].

But still notwithstanding all you say, my Argument remains good; [Works concur
not with Faith in apprehending Christ, therefore they concur not with it in
justifying]. The Consequence is good, because Faith as apprehending Christ is
made the Condition of Justification. For this is that which Believing in, or on
Christ, does import, which is put as equivalent to the receiving of Christ,
Joh. 1. 12. That Repentance and Obedience do concur with Faith in being
Conditions of Contitinued and Consummate Justification, you only affirm, but do
not prove. Indeed Repentance as taken for an acknowledgment of, and sorrow for
sin, is requisite unto Justification at first. For how should we ever look unto
Christ as suffering for our sins, except we be sensible of them, and humbled
for them. Yet it is Faith apprehending Christ, which in the Covenant is made
the Condition of our Justification, as that whereby we are made partakers of
Christ's Righteousness, by which we are justified. It is neither Repentance,
nor Obedience, though Repentance (in the sense beforementioned) must go before
this Justifying-Faith, and so before Justification; and obedience must follow
after.

Penitentia ( says Ames.) quatenus est legalis humiliatio antecedit quidem
justificationem, Contra Bellar. Tom. 4. l. 5. c. 4.. 5.
ut dispositio ex ordine praerequisita, sed non ut causa. Resipiscentia
Evangelica vel notat conversionem totam, cujus primaria pars est fides, ut Act.
11. and Ezech. 18. vel est ipsa fides justificantis, atque adeo ipsius
justificationis effectum, qualis fuit poenitentia illa ad salutem, 2 Cor. 7.
10. Quotunque modo accipiatur, dolor ac detestatio peccati non potest esse
causa justificans, quia (N. B.) non habet vim applicandi nobis just (...)
Christi. Acquisitio talis boni non consistit in aversatione mali. Resipisientia
and fides differentia hac indigitatur, Act. 20. 21. Resipiscentia in Deum, and
fides in Dominum Nostrum Iesum Christum. See also Mr. Ball of the Coven. c. 3.
p. 18, 19.

1. You need not trouble your self to prove, 69, etc.
That by Works are meant Works. For surely a working Faith, or a Faith
bringing forth the Fruit of Works, does imply Works. But the Question is,
Whether Works concur with Faith in justifying, or only are inseparable
Attendants, and necessary Fruits of that Faith which justifies. You hold the
former, yet only in respect of continued and consummate Justification: I hold
the latter in respect of Justification begun, continued, and consummate.
Whether of us has more ground from Scripture, let it be judged by what has
been said about it.

But 1. whereas you say, That Works are still opposed to Faith without Works,
or Faith alone, and not to this or that sort of Faith: I have showed before
from Oecumenius (not to speak of our late VVriters) that there is one sort of
Faith that is with Works, or of a working Disposition, and such is Faith truly
apprehending Christ: and another sort of Faith, that is without Works, viz. a
bare Assent: and that St. James does oppose these two sorts of Faith one to the
other, teaching that we are justified by the former, not by the latter.

2. You say, [It is not only Faith alone without a working disposition, but
Faith alone without Works themselves when there is opportunity]; yet your self
deny not only the efficacy, but even the presence of Works to be requisite,
when we are at first justified: and St. James denies Faith alone (so as he does
speak of it) to have any force at all to justify, as being dead and
unprofitable. Therefore you must needs grant, That it is Faith alone, without a
working Disposition of which St. James speaks. Besides, if there be a working
Disposition, there will be Works themselves when there is opportunity. But all
this does only prove, That Justifying Faith is of a working Disposition, and
produces Works themselves when opportunity is offered: That Works do at any
time concur with Faith unto Justification, it no way proves.

3. Surely a disposition to feed the hungry, is accepted of God, when there is
no opportunity to do the thing it self. And so a Disposition to work may be
enough to prove Faith to be of a right stamp, though Works themselves be
requisite when there is opportunity: and still I must put you in mind, that
your self requires no more than a disposition to work, when we are first
justified.

4. What you can infer from Jam. 2. 13. I do not see. He that expects mercy
from God, must show mercy to his Neighbor. Does it therefore follow, that
Works of Mercy justify as well as Faith? No, but that Justifying Faith must
and will show it self by Works of Mercy.

5. A real Faith being but a bare Assent, as in the Devils, cannot justify or
save. Who opposes this? Or whom does it oppose? So, that the same Faith is
justifying and saving, I think all will yield: yet is there more required unto
Salvation, as taken for the accomplishment of it, than unto Justification.

6. Who makes James v. 18. to speak such nonsense as you tell of? Do they,
who say his meaning is, That Faith is pretended in vain, if it do not show it
self by Works, as occasion does require? And what more can any gather from v.
20, 22, 24, 26? You might save your labor of proving, That by Works are meant
Works; you should prove that Works are spoken of as concurring with Faith, and
as having a co-interest with it in the effect of justifying, and not only as
Fruits of that Faith by which we are justified. This is that which they mean,
who say that James does speak of a working Faith, i.e. a Faith ready to work,
and so actually working, when God does require it, not as if instead of [Works]
it were good sense always to put [a working Faith]. Such sophistry does not
become us.

7. That James does assert the necessity of Works, as fruits of Justifying
Faith, is ever granted: that he does assert the necessity of them as concurrent
with Faith unto Justification, is never proved. Works are therefore necessary
to prove Faith to be such as God requires unto Justification.

Against this first you say, James does make Works or Working necessary to
justify; I say, he does not, but only drives at this, That none must think to
be justified by Faith, except it be a working Faith, as Abraham's and Rahab's
was. You say, [The Soul does not truly signify the Body to be alive]. But the
word Jam. 2. 26. is (...), Breath, which is but an effect of Life, and not a
cause of it.

[Thus (says Pemble) the comparison is exact; Of Grace and Faith, page 240.
As the Body without Breath is dead, so is Faith without Works].

So Downam; Appendix to the Doctrine of the Certainty of Salvation.
[Neither does St. James compare Works to the Soul, but to the Breath, as the
word (...) (derived of (...) to Breath) does properly signify, etc. So that
the meaning of St. James is, As the Body without Breath is dead, even so Faith
without Works (which are as it were the breathing of a lively Faith) is dead].

But if by (...) there be meant the Soul, as 1 Cor. 6. ult. I hope you will not
so understand it, as to compare Faith to the Body, and Works to the Soul, as if
Works were the Soul of Faith, and so did give Life unto it: whereas indeed
Faith does produce Works, and Works do but evidence Faith, and the lively power
of it.

[The Apostle (says Fulk) in this Similitude does not make Faith the Body, On
Jam. 2. ult.
and Works the Soul; but Works the Argument of the Life and Soul of Faith,
which is trust in God, etc.]

2. God (you say) needs no Signs. Well, but God (say I) requiring such a Faith,
whereof Works are Signs, as Fruits and Effects of it, we must look to the signs
of our Faith, to find it such as God requires of us to our Justification.
Maccovius (it seems) met with the Objection; De Justif. Disp. 10. ubi plura in
hanc rem videre licet.
At Deo non est opus experimento. Resp. Hoc sane verum est: at non proinde
sequitur homines non praebere sui experimentum Deo.

3. Faith may be real, and yet not justifying. A real Assent, yea and Consent,
if limited, so as to exclude Christ's dominion over us, is not that Faith which
your Opposers plead for.

4. The New Testament does make a working Faith, yet not Faith as working the
Condition of Justification. I wonder how you can stumble at this, when as you
constantly hold, That we are justified at first by Faith without Works: yet
surely that Faith whereby we are justified at first, is a working Faith, i.e.
of a working Nature, and will, when there is opportunity, show it self by
Works. That working therefore is together with Faith the Condition of
Justification, is more than your own Principles will admit, without that
distinction of Justification Inchoated, and Justification Continued, of which
though you make much use, yet I see little ground for it. Now for Dr. Preston's
words, which I cited, I think they are clear enough against you.

For first he says, That Faith alone justifies and makes Works only
Concomitants or Fruits of that Faith by which we are justified. You limit it to
Justification as begun, but he speaks of Justification simply considered, and
not as begun only.

2. He speaks indeed of a double Justification, but not as you do, nor to that
intent to bring in a double Righteousness as requisite unto Justification. All
that he intends is this, That we are justified only by Faith, according to
Paul's Doctrine; yet (as James teaches) our Faith must appear to be a true
Justifying Faith by Works, otherwise it is but a false and feigned Faith, as
it pretends to be Justifying, and he that pretends it, is a Hypocrite. His
words without doing violence unto them, can have no other sense put upon them.
When any one is accused of being but a seeming Believer, or a mere Believer
without Obedience, take Believing merely as it is the Condition of
Justification by the Covenant, it is but (as I have often said) the making good
this Accusation, That he is a Transgressor of the Law, and to be condemned by
the Law for the transgression of it, and so much the more in that he neglected
the benefit offered in the New Covenant. So that in this case to justify a Man
by his Faith and Works, is but indeed to plead that he is justified by the
Righteousness of Christ imputed unto him through Faith, which Faith is proved
to be sound and good by his Works.

1. I see you are very tenacious of your Opinion: but if you will not forsake
your Opinion till you see better Arguments to draw you from it, marvel not if
others will not embrace your Opinion till they see better Arguments to draw
them to it. But to the Matter; Methinks you might easily see the meaning of
this, that Abraham's first Justification could not be by Faith, which was
without Works, i.e. by Faith, which was not of a working Nature.

Thus in that very page (52.) I explained my self, saying, [Faith if it be
alone without Works, i.e. renuens operari, etc. cannot justifie].

2. Do not you see that your Answer is to no purpose in limiting the words of
the Apostle to Continued and Consummate Justification, whereas he does utterly
exclude Faith, which is without Works, or which is not of a working
Disposition, from being able to justify, as being a Faith that is dead and
unprofitable?

That which you so slight, In Jac. 2. 23.
as if it were indignus vindice nodus, Calvin (a Man as likely to see into the
Apostle's meaning as another) calls nodum insolubilem, as I have before noted.
That more Conditions are required unto Justification afterward than at first,
is more than I can find, and more (I am persuaded) than will ever be proved.
Did Paul when he speaks so much of Justification by Faith without Works,
viz. as concurring with Faith unto Justification, mean that we are so justified
indeed to day, but not so to morrow, or some time after? All his Arguments show
the contrary. Yea, does he not prove from Genesis 15. 6. that Abraham was
justified only by Believing, when as yet that was not the beginning of his
Justification? So when James says, That we are not justified by Faith, which
is without Works, such a Faith being dead, and no better than the Faith of
Devils; was his meaning this, That hereafter indeed we cannot be so justified,
but yet at present we may? If you be of this mind, Non equidem invideo, miror
magis.

3. Of the sense of James his Discourse enough before. And for v. 17. I think
it might easily let you see that he speaks not (as you suppose) only of
Continued and Consummate Justification, but of Inchoated also, and consequently
that he cannot be interpreted otherwise than thus, That Faith which does not
show it self by Works, is dead, ineffectual, and of no force to justify,
either at first or afterward, as not being that Faith which is required unto
Justification, viz. a working Faith, or Faith which is of a working Nature. I
have noted before what Oecumenius (one that was long before either Calvin or
Luther) says upon that very Verse, as also how in the judgment of the Syriack
Interpreter, and other Learned Men (...) there is to be understood.

1. Though Faith may be true and real without Works, Ibid.
yet a living Faith it is not; for a living Faith is operative, so that, a
working Faith, and a non-working Faith are of different Natures, this being but
a bare and naked Assent, but the other an apprehending of Christ, and a
receiving of him. I little doubt but the Faith of Devils, and the Faith of Men
who are justified (even at first, when you say Works are not requisite in
respect of their presence with Faith, though that Faith (say I) is of a working
Disposition), differ much in their very Nature.

2. If you will be true to your own Principles, you cannot say, That Works
make Faith alive, or that Faith is not alive without Works as actually
present, though you consider Faith merely as a Condition of Justification,
seeing you hold Faith to be alive in that respect, when we are first justified,
though there be no Works present with it. And though, as there must be a
promptitude to Works at first, so there must be Works themselves in due
season; yet that Works do afterward concur with Faith unto Justification, is
more than yet I see, or (I presume) ever shall see proved.

3. Therefore my Argument stands good against you, until you can make it
appear, That Faith alone without the Copar^nership of Works, is the Condition
of Justification at first, but Faith and Works together of Justification
afterward. I have showed some Reasons against it, but I can see none for it.
Your Similitude of a Fine, etc. is no proof. Similitudes may illustrate
something, but they prove nothing.

1. You said, Ibid.
[The Apostle says, That Faith did Work in and with his Works]; whereas the
Apostle using the word (...) did not speak of working in, but only of working
with.

2. Of what validity that distinction is (of Justification Inchoated, and
Justification Continued and Consummate) you have not yet showed.

3. What Calvin's Opinion otherwise was, is not to the purpose. I only
alleged his Exposition of those words, Fides cooperata est operibus suis; and
I think his Exposition is genuine.

So also Mr. Manton; On Jam. 2. 22.
[That sense which I prefer, (says he) is, That his Faith rested not in a
naked bart Profession, but was operative, it had its efficacy and influence
upon his Works, co-working with all other Graces: it does not only exert, and
put forth it self in acts of Believing, but also in working].

Beza renders it, Administra fuit operum ejus, and expounds it, Efficax and
foecunda bonorum operum.

1. I showed before how not only Piscator and Pemble, Ibid. and 73.
but many others both before and after them, interpret those words, [By Works
his Faith was made perfect]; i. e. By Works his Faith did appear perfect, i.
e. sound and good. This Exposition is such that as yet I see no reason to
dislike it.

2. I grant that Faith without Works (viz. when God does require them) is dead
as to the effect of Justifying; Yea, and it is also dead in it self, being but
a dead Assent, having no life, no operative virtue in it.

3. Abraham's Faith was, is, and shall be manifested to be perfect, i. e.
sincere by his Works, to all that were, are, and shall be able to discern the
true nature of Justifying Faith. Although there were none then that could
discern this, (which yet is not to be supposed, Isaac was then of age to
discern it, and so other of Abraham's Family to whom the thing was known) yet
to after-Ages the perfection of Abraham's Faith is made manifest by his Works,
especially his offering his Son upon the Altar* And if God did say, [Now I know
that thou fear me, etc.] why may it not be said, speaking of God, (...),
that thereby Abraham's Faith and its Perfection appeared to God himself?
Certain it is, that the Work spoken of did proceed from Faith, Heb. 11. 7. And
therefore as the Effect does show the Cause to be perfect, so did Abraham's
Works (especially that of offering up Isaac) show his Faith to be perfect. To
the Second:

1. Though Justifying Faith include in it three Acts, mentioned Heb. 11. 13.
yet there are but two of them properly and peculiarly Acts of Faith. For
Seeing, or Knowing, the first there mentioned, is but presupposed unto Faith.

Bellarmine in this says truly, De Justif. lib. 1. c. 16.
(though it was little to his purpose); Cognit to apprehensiva praeexigitur
quidem ad fidem, sed non est ipsa proprie fides.

The other two Acts, viz. Persuasion and Embracing, though distinct, yet are
both comprehended in Believing.

2. I see no cloudiness in this, [Believing justifies, not as it is our Act,
but in respect of its Object]; neither is this to speak darkness, except to a
dark Understanding, which (I know) yours is not. But you know what is said of
some, Faciunt nimium intelligendo, ut nihil intelligant. What is more vulgar
with Divines (and those no vulgar ones neither) than to say, That Faith does
not justify as it is a Work of ours, but in respect of its Object, Christ,
whom it apprehends, and by whom so apprehended, we are justified?

Hujus satisfactionis apprehendendae medium (says one whom R^vet much
commends) fides est. Vigner. de Satisfact.
Deo sic ^^dinante, ut non alii illius participes sint, Christi inter opera
Rivet.
quam qui eam sincera fide amplectuntur, non ita tamen ut ipsa fides ratione
sui nos Deo gratos faciat and acceptos, s^d rvatione objecti, Disp. 13.
quod apprehendit, and cujus meritum nobis applicat, and perfectam obedientiam.

So Rivet himself says; De Fide Justif. Disp. 10.
Fides non justificat, quaetenus est opus justitia, sed quatenus apprehendit
justitiam Christi.

Diverse others to this purpose have been cited before. Your Question [Why does
not the Object justify without the Act?] is soon answered; Because the Act
(Believing) is required on our part, Deo sic ^^dinante, (as the Author
before-cited says) That so the Object (Christ's Righteousness) may become ours
unto Justification: yet still it is in respect of the Object (Christ's
Righteousness) that the Act (Believing) does justify. You darken my words,
when you transform them thus, [It justifies in respect to its Object]; I say,
[in respect of its Object], and so you first cited it. My meaning is this, It
is the Object of Faith, viz. Christ's Righteousness, though as apprehended by
Faith, whereby we are justified.

Est autem haec justificatio propter Christum (says Am^sius) non absolute
consideratum, Medul. l. 1. c. 27.. 14.
quo sensu Christus etiam est causa ipsius vocationis, sed propter Christum
fide apprehensum.

This is clear by that Acts 13. 39. [By him all that believe are justified].

I will add Mr. Ball 's words, which in sense are the same with mine, and there
is little difference (as to clearness or cloudiness) in the Expression; Of the
Coven. c. 6. p. 65.
[The Third Exposition is, That when Faith is imputed for Righteousness, it i^
not understood materially, as though the Dignity, Worth, and Perfection of
Faith made us just; but relatively and in respect of its Object: that is, to us
believing, Righteousness, sc. of Christ, is freely imputed, and by Faith we
freely receive Righteousness, and remission of sin^ freely given of God. And
therefore to say, Faith justifies, and Faith is imputed for Righteousness, are
phrases equivalent. For Faith justifies not by its merit or dignity, but as an
Instrument, and correlatively, that is, the merit of Christ apprehended and
received by Faith, justifies, not Faith, whereby it is apprehended and
received, unless it be by an improper speech, whereby the Act of the Object, by
reason of the near and strict connection betwixt them, is given to the
Instrument].

3. What you have said before about Works perfecting Faith, has been
considered. Though Faith may save without manifestation, yet not except it be
of that nature, as to manifest it self by Works, when God does call for them.

You say, [Works do perfect Faith, ut Medium and Conditio]; you mean of
Justification: but that Works are Medium and Conditio Justificationis, you do
not prove. The Tree and its Fruit are considered as distinct; ut Causa and
Effectum, non ut Totum and Pars; and so the perfection of the Tree is only
manifested by its Fruit. It is not therefore a good Tree, because it bears
good Fruit; but it therefore bears good Fruit, because it is a good Tree.

For the Third: If Procreation (as you grant) do not perfect Marriage in its
Essence, then it adds only an accidental perfection unto it.

4. Your Explication is indeed now more full, so that I can better see your
meaning, yet still I am unsatisfied. For I do not conceive that Faith properly
is our Covenant, but that whereby we embrace God's Covenant. Though a Covenant
differ from a Promise, yet it does include a Promise. Now a Promise is de
futuro; so that our reciprocal Promise, both of Faith and Obedience, I take to
be our Covenant. Faith is in part the matter of the Covenant, but not properly
the Covenant it self, and perhaps when you call it our Covenant, you only mean,
that it is the matter of our Covenant.

I being there the Respondent, it was sufficient for me 73.
to deny, the proof did lie upon you. Yet nevertheless the Assertion (viz.
Faith alone is the Condition of the Covenant, for so much as concerns
Justification) is sufficiently proved by those places, where we are said to be
justified by Faith, and that without Works, viz. as concurring with Faith unto
Justification. And for the reason of the Assertion, viz. because Faith alone
does apprehend Christ's Righteousness) much has been said of it before. What
do our Divines more inculcate than this?

Wotton says, that only Faith does justify; Quia sol^ fide recta in Christum
tendim^, and promissiones Dei de justificatione amplectimur. De Reconcil. Part
1. lib. 2. cap. 18.

Amesius says; Dolor ac detestatio peccati non potest ^sse causa justificans,
quia non habet vim a plicandi nobis justitiam Christi. Contra Bellar. tom. 4.
lib. 5. cap. 4. Sect. 5.

So Bucanus; Fides (inquit) sola justificat, quia ipsa est unicum instrumentum,
and unica facultas in nobis, qua recipimus justitiam Christi. Loc. 31. ad
Q^^st. 37.

Thus also Mr. Ball; Of the Coven. chap. 3. p. 18, 19.
[By Repentance we know our selves, we feel our selves, we hunger and thirst
after Grace; but the hand which we stretch forth to receive it, is Faith alone,
etc.] And a little after; [When therefore Justification and Life is said to be
by Faith, it is manifestly signified, That Faith receiving the Promise, does
receive Righteousness and Life freely promised].

You your self do sometimes say, That Faith has in it an aptitude to justify
in this respect; only you deny, that this aptitude of Faith is sufficient, and
say that therefore it does justify, because God in his Covenant has made it
the Condition of Justification. Now I also grant, That if Faith were not
ordained to that end of God, its bare aptitude, or its being that whereby we
apprehend Christ, would not justify. Yet (I say) it appear by Scripture, That
because Faith alone has this aptitude to justify, viz. by apprehending
Christ, therefore God has made it alone the Condition of Justification. This
appears in that we are said to be justified by Believing in, or on Christ,
which imports an apprehending and receiving of him, Joh. 1. 12.

2. Repentance does avail with Faith, yet are we justified only by Faith, and
not by Repentance, and that for the reason even now alleged, viz. because not
Repentance, but Faith is the Hand by which Christ is received.

3. Though Remission of Sins be ordinarily ascribed to Repentance, yet it is no
where said, That Repentance is imputed unto us for Righteousness, as it is said
of Faith. Repentance in some sense is precedaneous to Justification, Justifying
Faith does presuppose Repentance; yet Faith and not Repentance i^ made the
Condition and Instrument of Justification, as being that which does apprehend
the Righteousness of Christ, by which we are justified.

4. That though Faith only be the Condition of Justification at first, yet
Obedience also is a Condition afterward, is often said, but never proved. I
take Justification both at first and afterward to be by the Righteousness of
Christ imputed to us; therefore not by Obedience, but by Faith, by which alone
we apprehend the Righteousness of Christ, that so it may be ours unto
Justification. Certainly that was not the beginning of Abraham's Justification,
which is mentioned Genesis 15. 6. Yet by that does the Apostle prove that Abraham
was and, all must be, justified, not by Obedience, but by Faith only.

1. Faith apt to produce good Works, Ib. and 74.
is necessary to procure that first change, which makes us (in God's account)
Justos ex Injustis. For if it be not such a Faith, it is dead, and of no force.

2. I hope you will not deny, but that being justified by Believing, every
after Act of Faith does find us justified; for you are against the Amission and
Intercision of Justification. Yet I confess, That the continuance of Faith is
necessary to the continuance of Justification: So it must needs be, seeing we
are justified by Faith; therefore every Act of Faith may be said to justify,
as well as the first Act, because by after-Acts of Faith we continue justified.

Nihil erit absurdi, (inquit Rivetus) si dicamus, In Genesis 15. Exer. 83.
in qu^libet verae fidei actu imputari justitiam credenti. Etsi enim
justificatio sit actus momentaneus, cujus nunquam plane amittitur effectus in
piis, qui semel justificat^ sunt, indigent nihilominus renovatione sensus
justificationis suae, qui sensus fit per fidem, and tunc dicitur etiam fides
imputar^ ad justitiam. Nam apprehensio ill^ fides habet fluxum suum continuum
secundum plus and minus; praesertim cum fidelis, and si justificatus, subinde
in peccata incidat, propter quae opus etiam habet remissione peccatorum. Quod
continuum beneficirum fide apprehensum, si secundam justificationem appellare
vel^^t adversarii, imo tertiam, qua^tam, quintam, and millesimam, non
repugnabimus, dummodo constet, null^ alia ratione nos justificari a peccatis
sequentibus, quam (...), qu^ semel justificati futmus a praecedentibus.

Works therefore do not concur with Faith unto Justification no more afterward
than at first.

3. Your reasons whereby you endeavor to confute this Assertion, [As our
Justification is begun, so it is continued, viz. by Faith only, and not by
Works as concurrent with Faith unto Justification afterward, though not at
first] seem to be of no force.

I answer therefore, Ad 1. How do I contradict it by saying, [As it is begun,
so it is continued by Faith?] What though there be diverse Acts of Faith, yet
still it is Faith, and Faith without the concurrence of Works, by which we are
justified as well afterward as at first, which is all that I assert? Because a
continued Act of Faith is requisite to the Continuation of Justification, does
it therefore follow that Works have a co-interest with Faith in the effect of
Justifying?

Ad 2. Do you think How Repentance is requisite unto Justification, and yet
does not justify, was showed before.
Repentance only requisite to the Continuation of Justification, and not also
to the Inchoation of it?

Ad 3. We are not to measure God's Covenant by Humane Covenants. God's Covenant
does reach further than to Justification; and more may be requisite for the
enjoyment of those benefits which belong unto Justified Persons, than is
requisite unto Justification.

74.
Your Similitudes are no Proofs; and you still suppose that there is one
Condition of Justification at first, and another Condition thereof afterward;
that though at first we are justified only by Faith, yet afterward by Faith and
Works. But though Works are required of Justified Persons, as Fruits of that
Faith whereby they are justified; yet they do not therefore concur with Faith
unto Justification, which as it is begun by Faith only, so is it also
continued. Your self observe, That Abraham's Believing, mentioned Genesis 15. was
not his first Act of Faith. So then he was justified before by Faith, and so
was be also afterward, even by Faith only, as the Apostle from that very place
does prove Romans 4. Therefore by Faith without Works (viz. as having a
co-partnership with Faith in Justifying), Abraham was justified both at first
and afterward.

1. Do you think that Abraham was justified from the guilt of those many sins,
Ibid.
which he committed after his first Justification by his Works? Credat Jud^^^:
for my part I cannot but detest such Doctrine. I know no way whereby he could
be justified from those sins, but by Faith in Christ, even as he was at first
justified. Besides (as I noted before, and that as acknowledged by your self),
Abraham was justified before he produced that Act of Faith spoken of Genesis 15.
and in the interim no doubt he committed some sins, yet still by Faith, and not
by Works (as Paul shows) Vide Calvin. Instit. l. 3. c. 14. 11.
he was justified.

2. You do but still affirm, without any proof at all, That Abraham's
Justification could not be continued by the same means (viz. by Faith alone)
works not concurring with it unto Justification) as it was begun.

3. For Sentential Justification at the Last Judgment, I have said enough
before.

Bucan having said, Loc. 31. ad quaest. 39.
that Abraham was Justified operibus, tanquam testimontis Justificatienis;
Adds, Quomodo etiam Deus dicitur in extremo illo die justificaturus electos
suos ex ipsorum operibus.

And again; Fides principium existentiae, facit ut simus justi; Opera autem ut
principium cognitionis faciunt, ut cognoscamur justi. Ideo Deus in extremo die
proponet principium cognitionis justitiae fides, quod incurret in oculos omnium
creaturarum.

4. I think the Argument is good and sound, [Christ's Righteousness, whereby we
are justified, is an everlasting Righteousness; therefore our Justification is
an everlasting Justification]. This always presupposed, That this
Righteousness of Christ be apprehended by Faith; for otherwise there is no
being justified at all by it.

1. To be just quoad praestationem Conditionis, Ibid. and 75.
is but to be just in some respect; and in some respect just even the most
unjust may be. Yet it is true, This praestatio Conditionis will be of force to
procure Universal Justification: not that it is it self the Righteousness by
which we are justified, but only the Means whereby we are made Partakers of the
Righteousness of Christ, and so by his Righteousness are universally justified.
And though this performing of the Condition be required unto Justification, yet
nevertheless that remains good which I said in the Animadversions, [If we be
fully freed from the accusation of the Law, we are fully justified]. For can we
be fully freed from the Accusation of the Law, except we perform the Condition
required in the Gospel? And if we be fully freed from the Accusation of the
Law, will the Gospel accuse us? It is the Law that works Wrath, Romans 4. 15.
The Gospel does free from Wrath, though not without performing the Condition;
for then it suffers the Law to have its force, and to inflict Wrath; and that
so much the more, in that so great a benefit was neglected.

2. The performing of a Condition, as the Condition is a Duty, is a
Righteousness, but such as cannot justify, as we now speak of Justification.
But as the Condition is merely a Condition, the performing of it is not
properly Righteousness, though by it we partake of Righteousness, viz. the
Righteousness of Christ, by which we are justified.

3. Therefore this is no contradiction, to grant Faith to be the Condition of
Justification, and yet to deny it to be the Righteousness by which we are
justified.

That which you think to be most clear, De Satisfact. Christi, inter Opera
Riveti Disp. 13.. 61.
Vignerius (before cited) thought most absurd. An possibile est (inquit) ut sit
Fides Instrumentum accipiendae justitia, (seu Conditio ad obtinendam justitiam
requisita, si ita loqui libeat) and simul sit ipsa, quam quaerimus, justitia?

Indeed you seem but to strive about words; for here immediately you confess,
That it is but a Subordinate Righteousness, meaning (I think) that which all
acknowledge, that it is but a means whereby to partake of Christ's
Righteousness. And you that charge others with Self-Contradiction, seem not to
agree with your self. For here presently after you say, [This Personal
Righteousness praestitae conditionis N. T. must be had, before we can have that
which freeth us from the Law]; yet elsewhere your Expressions are such, as if
being first justified from the Accusation of the Law, by the Righteousness of
Christ, we should after be justified from the Accusation of the Gospel by
Personal Righteousness. However (as I have said before) this latter Accusation
is but a further prosecution and confirmation of the former, by taking away the
Plea that some might make why the Accusation of the Law should not stand good,
and be of force to condemn them.

4. Of what force is Satan's Accusation against any, if be cannot make good his
Accusation, so as to procure his Condemnation? And are not Unbelievers and
Rebels against Christ condemned by the Law? Is it not for sin that they are
condemned? And is there any sin which is not against the Law? The Gospel indeed
may aggravate Sin, and increase Condemnation: and so those words which you cite
[The words which I speak shall judge you, etc.] may be understood; as those are
more clearly to the purpose Joh. 15. 22. If I had not come and spoken unto
them, they had not had sin, (viz. in so high degree as it follows) but now they
have no cloak for their sin. But still it is by the Law that all sinners are
convinced and condemned. As for Righteousness, whereby one is justified from a
false Accusation, it is but such as the Devil himself may have, as has been
noted before, though Faith be of force to take off all Satan's Accusations
whatsoever. And when Satan does accuse any of not performing the Condition of
the Gospel, he does but only show that such stand guilty by the Law, and so are
to be condemned, as having no benefit of the Gospel, because they have not
performed the Condition of it: So that still it is the Law, by which Satan does
accuse and bring to condemnation.

But by the way I observe, That in this place of your Aphor. (p. 308.) you say,
That Romans 3. 28. and 4. 2, 3, 14, 15, 16. Paul concludes, that neither Faith,
nor Works, is the Righteousness which we must plead against the Accusation of
the Law, but the Righteousness which is by Faith, i. e. Christ's Righteousness:
Yet before in this Writing you stand upon the very Letter of the Text, and will
have it to prove, That Faith it self properly taken is our Righteousness. If
you say that you mean our Evangelical Righteousness, yet so you agree not with
your self in your Aphorisms, where you make Paul in those Texts to speak of our
Legal Righteousness.

75.
1. They against whom James disputed, relied on Faith as the Condition of the
New Covenant; but it was not such a Faith as the New Covenant does require, it
was a Faith renuens operari; upon that account James confuted them, not as if
Faith alone without Works (though yet a Faith ready to show it self by Works)
were not the Condition of Justification.

2. I am sorry that Beza's words, which I cited, and which to me seem very
excellent, should be so censured by you, as if there were I know not how many
mistakes in them; but truly I think the mistakes will be found to be in your
censure.

To your Exceptions I answer; 1. Quis vel ex nostris, vel ex Transmarinis
Theologis, Fidem pro Causa (nempe Instrumentali) Justificationis non habet?

2. Beza ait, tu negas; Vtri potius assentiendum? Quid dico Beza? Quis enim
istud non dicit? Sed hominum authoritate nolo te obruere, rations ante allatae
expendantur.

3. Affirms tanthum, non probas, Opera a Jacobo stabiliri ut Justificationis
Conditiones and Media. Effecti ut effecti potest esse necessitas ad veritatem
causae comprobandam, nec alia ratione operum necessitas a Jacobo stabilitur;
neque enim ad justificationem procurandam, sed ad eam duntaxat comprobandam,
tanquam Justificantis Fidei fructus, Opera ut necessaria stabiliuntur, ut antea
ex ipsa Apostoli Argumentatione ostensum est.

4. Nec Beza, nec alius quisquam (quod sciam) distinctionem istam de
Justificatione Inchoata, and Justificatione Continuata, quasi sc. alia hujus,
alia illius esset conditio, perspectam habuit. Hujus inventionis gloriam ego
equidem tibi non invideo.

1. Certain it is, Ibid.
All Works are not the fulfilling of the Old Law's Condition; but all Works
whereby we are justified, are the fulfilling of it; and therefore (as I said in
the Animadversions) to be justified by Works, and to be justified by the Law,
are with Paul one and the same; See Rivet, Disp. de Fide Justif.. 21. the words
are before cited.

2. We are justified by the New Law, against the Accusation of the Old Law.
Certainly if we be accused of Unbelief and Rebellion against Christ, we are
accused of being Sinners. For are Unbelief and Rebellion against Christ no sins?

3. Who does not so distinguish of (...) Credere, except some few whom I have
no mind to follow? But how will this Distinction, inter quod opus, and qua
opus, serve to keep in Obedience, as having a joint interest with Faith in
Justification? What dark Equivocal (I pray) is this, That Faith does justify
as that whereby we are made Partakers of Christ's Righteousness? Your self
acknowledges an aptitude in Faith to justify in this respect; and in this
respect (I say) Faith is appointed to be the Condition of Justification.

I take what you grant, Ibid.
viz. That Paul does not imply Obedience as concurrent with Faith in our first
Justification: that he does imply it as concurrent in our Justification
afterward, you should prove, and not content your self with the bare affirming
of it. Does not Paul by that Genesis 15. [Abraham believed God, etc.] prove that
Abraham was justified by Faith without the concurrence of Obedience? Yet that
was not the first time that Abraham either believed, or was justified. The
truth therefore is, Paul implies Obedience as the Fruit of that Faith which
justifies both at first and last, but not as concurring with Faith unto
Justification either at first or last.

1. There is a necessity of Faith showing it self by Works, Ibid. and 76.
that so it may appear to be such a Faith whereby Christ is truly apprehended
and received. But are Works therefore Copartners with Faith in justifying,
because only such a Faith does justify as does also produce Works? You exclude
Works from having any thing to do in our Justification at first, yet surely
Works must follow as Fruits of that Faith whereby we are at first justified.

2. For the Texts alleged, that Mat. 12. 37. [By thy words thou shall be
justified, etc.] is as plain you say as [We are justified by Faith]. But if it
be so plain, it may seem wonderful, that Bellarmine should never make use of
it, when he labors to prove, That Faith alone does not justify; which (so far
as I observe) he does not. Nor do the Rhemists on the place take any notice of
those words, who yet are ready to catch at every thing that may but seem to
make for them. Yet it seems some of our Romish Adversaries have laid hold on
those words.

But hear how Calvin does censure them for it; Ad Mat. 12. 37.
Quod autem Papistae ad enervandam fidei justitiam hoc torquent, puerile est.

Certainly all good that we do, may justify quadantemus, so far as it is good:
But can we therefore be simply and absolutely, or (if you like those terms
better) fully and perfectly justified, either by our Words or Works? Those
places that require forgiving of others, that so God may forgive us, show
indeed, that it is no true Justifying Faith which does not, as occasion
requires, manifest it self in that kind: but we are not therefore justified as
well by forgiving others, as by believing; nor does the forgiving of others
concur with Faith unto Justification. That in 1 John 1. 9. and Acts 3. 19.
shows that Repentance must go before Justification, and is required unto
Justification, but not so as Faith is required.

Repentance is required, Multa requiru^tur? ad Justificationem quae non
justificant Ames. loco ante citato.
that we may be justified, but not that we may be justified by it, as we are by
Faith, though Instrumentally and Relatively, as it apprehends Christ's
Righteousness by which we are justified. For Prayer, it is a Fruit of Faith,
and therefore called, The Prayer of Faith, Jam. 5. 15.

[Repentance (says Mr. Ball Of the Coven. c. 3. p. 18.) is the Condition of
Faith, and the Qualification of a Person capable of Salvation: but Faith alone
is the Cause of Justification and Salvation on our part required].

And immediately after he adds; [It is a penitent and petitioning. Faith,
whereby we receive the promises of Mercy; but we are not justified, partly by
Prayer, partly by Repentance, but by that Faith which stirs up Godly sorrow
for sin, and inforceth us to pray for Pardon and Salvation].

And again; [Prayer is nothing else but the Stream or River of Faith, and an
issue of the desire of that which joyfully we believe]. Of Faith, Part 1. Chap.
8. page 105.

For that place, Acts 22. 16. the Exposition which I gave of it in the
Animadversions, is confirmed by this, That the nature of a Sacrament is to
signify and seal, as the Apostle shows, Romans 4. 11.

Quatenus ergo fidem nostram adjuvat Baptismus, (inquit Calvinus) ut
remissionem peccatorum percipiat (...) solo Christi sanguine, Lavacrum animae
vocatur. Ita ablutio, cujus meminit Lucas, non causam designat; sed ad sensum
Pauli refertur, qui symbolo accepto, peccata suae esse expiata (N. B.) melius
cognovit. -- Cum testimonium haberet Paulus gratiae Dei, jam illi remissa erant
peccata. Non igitur Baptismo demum ablutus est, sed novam gratiae, quam adeptus
erat, confirmationem accepit.

That Paul's sins were but incompleatly washed away by Faith until he was
baptized, your Similitudes (which are too often your only proofs) do not prove.
Yea, a Kings Coronation, (of which you speak) when the Kingdom is hereditary,
is (I think) but a confirmation of what was done before.

The purifying of the Heart spoken of, 1 Pet. 1. 22. is (I conceive) to be
understood as Jam. 4. 8. and Jer. 4. 14. viz. of purifying from the filth of
sin by Sanctification. And for 1 Pet. 4. 18. who denies the diligence of the
Righteous to be a means of their Salvation! But what is that to prove Works to
concur with Faith unto Justification?

1. I take what you grant, 76, and 77.
That at first believing a Man is justified so fully, as that he is acquitted
from the guilt of all Sin, and from all Condemnation. And surely at the last
one can have no fuller Justification than this is. That afterward he is
acquitted from the guilt of more sins, is not to the purpose, seeing he is
acquitted from all at first, and but from all at last, though this [all] be
more at last than at first. Otherwise the Justification of one who has fewer
sins, should not be so full as the Justification of him, whose sins are more in
number.

2. That there is a further Condition of Justification afterward than at first,
has been said often, but was never yet proved.

3. That which you call Sentential Justification, (viz. at the Last Judgment) I
hold to be only the manifestation of that Justification which was before. That
because Obedience is a Condition of Salvation, heretofore it is also a
Condition of Justification, I deny (as you see) all along in the
Animadversions, and therefore I thought it enough here to touch that, which you
say of full Justification, especially seeing your self hold Obedience to be no
Condition of Justification at first. You lay the weight of your 78th Thesis
upon the word [full] which therefore was enough for me to take hold of.

For your Queries therefore about Sentential Justification at Judgment, I have
told you my mind before, and you might sufficiently understand it by the
Animadversions.

When you prove, 1. that Justification at Judgment is a Justification distinct
from Justification here, and not only a manifestation of it.

2. That Justification at Judgment has the same Conditions with Salvation, as
taken for the accomplishment of it, viz. Glorification.

And, 3. That consequently Obedience is a Condition of Justification at
Judgment. When you shall prove (I say) these things, I shall see more than yet
I do.

In the mean while, besides what has been said before, hear what Bucan says
to this purpose; Loc. 31. quaest. 46.
An perficitur justificatio nostra in hac vita? In Justificatione quemadmodum
judicamur, and reputamur a Deo justi, ita etiam adjudicamur vitae aeternae.
Ratione igitur decreti divini, Non impediunt vitii originalis residui maculae
illae, quin etiam in hac vita perfecta sit justificatio. Quae revera nec
intenditur, nec remittitur, rem ipsam quod attinet. Ga^aker. contra Gomarum. p.
26, 27.
and sententiae ipsius de vita aterna prolatae a Deo judice; item ratione
justitiae, quam imputat nobis Judex Coelestis, jam perfecta est justificatio
nostra in hac vita, nisi quod in altera magis patefacienda (N. B.) si^ ac
revelanda eadem illa justitia imputata, and arctius etiam nobis applicanda. Ea
tamen tota perficitur in hac vita, in qua potest homo dici plene perfecteque
justificatus. Filii Dei sumus (ergo justificati) sed nondum patefactum est quid
erimus, 1 John 3. 2. At si executionem respicias, and rationem habeas vitae,
and gloriae, quae nobis adjudicatur, and quae nobis inhaesura est, quia in
nobis non perficitur in hac vita, imperfecta etiam Justificatio in hac vita
censeri potest.

1. I think there is not the like right of Salvation and Justification, but
that although we must be saved by Works, though not by the Merit of them, yet
we cannot be justified by Works, except it be by the merit of them. My reason
is, Because that whereby we are justified, must fully satisfy the Law; for it
must fully acquit us from all Condemnation, which otherwise by the Law will
fall upon us. This Works cannot do, except they be fully conform to the Law,
and so be meritorious, as far forth as the Creature can merit of the Creator.
But being justified by Faith, i.e. by the Righteousness of Christ through Faith
imputed to us, and so put into a state of Salvation, we must yet show our Faith
by our Works; which though they be imperfect, and so not meritorious, yet make
way for the full enjoyment of Salvation. And methinks the Scripture is so
frequent and clear in distinguishing betwixt Justification and Salvation, as to
the full enjoyment of it, that it may seem strange that you should so confound
them as you do, and argue as if there were the same reason of the one as of the
other.

2. You might easily see, that by [Via Regni] as opposed to [Causa Regnandi]; I
meant only to exclude the Merit of Works, not to deny Works to be a Means and a
Condition required of us for the obtaining of complete Salvation. Salvation is
a Chain consisting of many Links, but so is not Justification; it is but one
Link of that Chain.

3. If all the World of Divines be against this, That Justification at Judgment
is but a Declaration of our Justification here; I have hitherto (it seems) been
in some other World. For truly (so far as I observe) both Scripture and Divines
usually speak of Justification, as we here partake of it. As for Justification
at Judgment, it is but rarely touched, either in Scripture or in other
Writings: Neither (so far as I can see) will it consist with either, to make
Justification at Judgment a completing of our Justification, as if before we
were but imperfectly justified: but rather they show, that our Justification is
then fully declared and made manifest, and that then we come to the full
enjoyment of that benefit, which we have right unto by our Justification, viz.
Glorification. For whom he justified, them he also glorified, Romans 8. 30. I
have spoken enough of this before; but you do so continually repeat the same
things, that I am forced also to repeat things oftener than I would.

1. That Justification by Sentence, Ibid.
viz. at the Last Judgment, and Continued Justification, are several kinds of
Justification distinct from Justification begun, and have several Conditions,
you continually affirm, or suppose, but never prove.

2. My debate with you was about those words, [That which we are justified by,
we are saved by]; and [the full possession or enjoyment of Salvation]. What
your reply is to the purpose, I cannot see. And besides, you had need to clear
those words, [In justifying it is the same thing to give a right to a thing,
and to give the thing it self]. For if you mean, That as soon as a right to a
thing is given by Justification, the thing it self also is actually given; it
appears to me far otherwise. For I think that Justification presently gives a
right to Glorification; For what does debar from that right, but sin? Now the
guilt of sin is done away by Justification; therefore there is a present right
too to Glorification, yet no present enjoyment of it. How I do yield your
Assertion, you do not show.

Your Repetitions indeed have been troublesome unto me. Ibid.
I grant here more than you desire, viz. That not only to morrow there will be
Condemnation to him that shall not sincerely obey, but even to day there is
condemnation to him; his Faith being not prompt and ready to bring forth the
Fruit of Obedience, is not such as does justify him at all. But though Faith,
whereby we are justified, must and will show it self by Works, yet we are not
therefore justified by Works as well as by Faith. Paul does exclud Works, as
well from Justification afterward as at first, viz. as concurring with Faith
unto the Effect of Justifying: for he shows that Abraham was Justified, not
only at first, but also afterward, by Faith and not by Works, Romans 4. 2, 3. And
James does require Works as well to Justification at first as afterward, viz.
as Fruits of that Faith whereby we are justified. For otherwise he says it is
a dead Faith, ineffectual and unprofitable. Though Works do not presently
appear upon our first believing, yet if they do not appear in due season, that
Faith does not justify: Such a Believer does not cease to be, but indeed never
was in Christ, viz. as a justified Person is in him.

How is Justification at Judgment a declaring of a Righteousness in question?
Ibid.
The Word of God (the tru^ whereof is unquestionable) assures us that all true
Believers are justified. And that such and such were true Believers, God by his
Word and Spirit did evidence unto them before, though then he will make it more
fully evident unto all! That Satan shall publicly accuse at the Last Judgment,
is more than I see either Scripture or Reason for. He shall then be judged
himself, and that in some sort by the Saints, 1 Cor. 6. 3. He shall then have
little courage to accuse the Saints, though now he does it.

Yet I question also whether Satan do at any time directly put up unto God any
Accusations against the Saints. He seems to be called the Accuser of the
Brethren, Apoc. 12. 10. because by his Instruments he is ever See Mr. Mede on
the place.
traducing and slandering them. He is said to accuse them, (...), before God,
or in the sight of God; not (...), unto God, as the unjust Steward was accused
to his Master, (...), Luke 16. 1. That in Joh 1. and 2. seems to be
parabolically expressed. Satan knows his Accusations against the Saints to be
false: Therefore he knows it is to little purpose to accuse them unto God.
Especially at the Last Judgment, by the very separating of the Elect from the
Reprobate, he will see that it is in vain to bring any Accusation against the
Elect: and therefore how there should then be any such public Accuser, or any
question of the Righteousness of the Saints, I do not see: besides, that
excepting those who will be found alive at Christ's coming, all have received
their doom before, though not so openly as then they shall. That Obedience is a
Condition of Glorification, not of right unto it, but of possession and
enjoyment of it, I here and everywhere confess.

1. What mean you by those words, Ibid. and 78.
[Doth Obedience get Faith?] Does any such thing follow, upon that which I say?
But you say, [If Obedience only manifest Faith, how then does it procure Right?]

Answ. It is not said, That Obedience does procure right, but only thus much is
signified, That none can have right without Obedience, as the Fruit of that
Faith by which right is procured. As I said before of Works, so I say now of
keeping the Commandments, (which does comprehend in it all good Works) it is
spoken of only as a Fruit of Faith, which Faith indeed does (Instrumentally and
Relatively) procure Right.

For the words of James I have said enough before; I have neither list nor
leisure to repeat the same things continually upon every occasion. What your
multitude of other Texts is, I do not know; but if they be not more forced,
than by my Opinion the words of James are, there will be little cause to
complain of the forcing of them.

2. That Faith without Obedience does give right at first, you grant: The same
right (I hold) is still continued only by Faith; though Faith, if not of such a
Nature as to produce Obedience, can neither give right at first, nor afterward
continue it. Though Repentance must go before Justification, yet Faith alone
may justify, and so give right; which though it be not the same with
Justifying, yet it is necessarily joined with it.

3. Jus in re, I take to be such a Right, as from which the Possession it self
is not, nor can be separated.

4. The Text does not ascribe Jus ad rem to Obedience, but only Declarative: as
a Fruit of Faith it makes it appear, that there is such a Right which Faith
has procured.

5. I do indeed believe, That a Man may have, and has Jus ad Gloriam without
Obedience, even as he is justified without Obedience. For certainly as soon as
a Man is justified, he has Jus ad Gloriam. For what does hinder but sin, the
guilt of which by Justification is done away? Yet still I say, Faith which does
justify, and so gives right to Glory, will show it self by Obedience. Those
words [If he live to Age] are needless: for we speak continually of the
Justification of such as are of Age. But how can you seriously ask me this
Question, when your self put it out of all question, holding that a Man (that
is of Age, I presume) is at first justified, and consequently (as I think you
will not deny) has Jus ad Gloriam, by Faith without Obedience?

6. It is no debasing of Faith to say, That after it, as a Fruit of it,
Obedience is required to give Jus in re, i.e. to bring into the actual
possession of Glory. How can you pretend this to be a debasing of Faith, who
debase it much more in making it unsufficient to give Jus ad rem, except there
be Obedience concurrent with it? Though yet herein you do not keep fair
correspondence with your self, without a distinction of Jus Inchoatum, and Jus
Continuatum; which distinction how it will hold good, I do not see.

If any shall think that you have said enough to prove, 78.
That we are justified by a Personal Righteousness, I shall think that such are
soon satisfied.

1. When we speak of Justification, Ibid.
we speak of it as taking off all Accusation, and as opposed to all
Condemnation. And what Righteousness is sufficient for this, but that which is
perfect?

2. That Lud. de Dieu has not the same Doctrine on Romans 8. 4. as you deliver,
I have sufficiently showed before: And if he had, I take the Authority of
Calvin and Davenant (whom I cited, and to whom many others might be added) to
be of more force against it, than de Dieu's could be for it. That Holiness and
Obedience is necessary unto Salvation, so that no Salvation is to be expected
without it, it were pity (as I said in the Animadversions) any should deny:
but to argue from Salvation to Justification, On Jaw. 2. 24.
Dr. Fulk told the Rhemists, is Pelting Sophistry: Yet you seem to wonder that
I make a great difference between the Condition of Justification, and the
Condition of Salvation. As for Right to Salvation that is another thing: as
Faith alone does justify, so it alone gives Right to Salvation: Yet because
this Faith is of a working Nature, therefore before the actual Enjoyment of
Salvation, Faith, as occasion does require, will show it self by Obedience; and
that is all which the Apostle teaches Romans 8. 13.

Verum est quidem (says Calvin) nos sola Dei misericordia justificari in
Christo: Ad Loc.
sed aeque and istud verum ac certum, omnes qui justificantur vocari a Domino,
ut digne sua vocatione vivant.

It is true, He that proved a Man lived not after the flesh, but mortified it,
does justify him from that Accusation, That he is worthy of Death: but that is
only, because a Man's not living after the flesh, but mortifying it, proves the
truth of his Faith, whereby he has interest in Christ, and so is freed from
all Condemnation, as the Apostle clearly shows Romans 8. 1. If that be a Reatus
to make Faith only the Condition of Justification, yet Obedience also a
Condition of Glorification. I say with the Orator, Quod maxim accusatori
optandum est, habes confitentem reum: But what Reatus there is in this, I do
not see, nor could our choicest Divines (it seems) see any in it.

Rivet says, Colleg.
that Opera sequuntur Justificationem, sed praecedunt Glorificationem;
Controvers. Disp. 36.
the words were cited more at large before.

So Amesius; Contra Bellar. tom. 4. l. 6. c. 6. in initio.
Nos non negamus bona opera ullam relationem ad salutem habere: habent enim
relationem adjuncti consequentis, and effecti ad salutem (ut loquuntur)
adeptam, and adjuncti antecedentis ac disponentis ad salutem adipiscendam.

Thus also Davenant, (De Justit. Actual. cap. 32. sub initio;) Verum est, nos
negare bona opera requiri, (...) Conditiones Salutis nostrae, ^si per bona
opera intelligamus exact bona, and quae Legis rigori respondeant: si etiam per
Conditiones salutis intelligamus Conditiones foederis, quibus recipimur in
favorem Dei, and ad jus (N. B.) aeternae vitae. Haec enim pendent ex sola
condition fidei Christum Mediatorem apprehendentis. At falsum est, nos negare
bona opera requiri, ut Conditiones salutis, si per bona opera intelligamus
illos fructus inchoatae justitiae, quae sequuntur justificationem, and (N. B.)
praecedunt glorificationem, ut via ordinata ad eandem.

What some Divines in their private Contests with you may do I know not; I show
what eminent Divines in their public Writings do deliver, even the same that I
maintain, viz. That Faith alone is the Condition of Justification, and of right
to Salvation and Glory: and yet that Works are also requisite as the Fruits of
that Faith, and as making way for the actual enjoyment of Glory.

For the term [Instrument], I was not willing to wrangle about it, neither am I
willing to strive about words. Yet I told you, I thought it might well enough
be used as our Divines do use it. And I always let you know, That tho perhaps
Faith may more fitly be called a Condition, yet not so as to make it to be
merely Causa sine qua non, but so as to ascribe some Causality and Efficiency
unto it in respect of Justification, viz. in that it apprehends and receives
Christ's Righteousness; by which through Faith imputed unto us we are justified.

[Faith (says Mr. Ball) is not a bare Condition, without which the thing
cannot be, Of the Coven. c. 6. p. 70.
(for that is no cause at all) but an Instrumental Cause, etc.]

This (as you might see by many Passages) is the very reason why (I think) the
Scripture does attribute Justification to Faith alone, and not to Works, nor
any other Grace besides Faith; because only Faith does embrace Christ and his
Righteousness. Though therefore I neither was, nor am willing (...), yet I
neither did, nor do disclaim the word [Instrument] as unmeet to be used.

And indeed seeing Faith has some Causality in Justifying, what Cause it
should be rather than Instrumental, I do not know.

Hear Mr. Ball again, if you please, Of the Coven. c. 3. p. 20.
[If when we speak of the Conditions of the Covenant of Grace, by Condition we
understand whatsoever is required on our part, as precedent, concomitant, and
subsequent to Justification, Repentance, Faith and Obedience are all
Conditions: but if by Condition we understand what is on our part required as
the Cause of the good promised, though only Instrumental, Faith or Belief in
the Promise is the only Condition].

And again; Ibid. p. 19.
[Faith is a necessary and lively Instrument of Justification, which is among
the number of true Causes, not being a Cause without which the thing is not
done, but a Cause whereby it is done. The Cause without which a thing is not
done, is only present in the action, and does nothing therein; but as the Eye
is an active Instrument for Seeing, and the Ear for Hearing; so is Faith also
for Justifying. If it be demanded whose Instrument it is? It is the Instrument
of the Soul, wrought therein by the Holy Ghost, and is the free Gift of God].

So Amesius when Bellarmine objected; Contra Bell. tom. 4 lib. 5. c. 4. ad 11.
Sacramenta promissiones applicant, and nostras faciunt! non ergo per modum
instruments applicantis fides sola justificat.

He answers; Sola tamen ex its, quae sunt in nobis, vel a nobis erga Deum: sola
fides accipiendo: quia Sacramenta sunt a Deo erga nos, and Promissionem
applicant, ut instrumenta dandi, non accipiendi.

Thus then is Faith taken for an Instrument of Justification, in that by Faith
we receive the Promise, or Christ promised, by whom we are justified.

Bellarmine again objecting; Hoc non multum refert: nam utrumque est
instrumentum Dei.

He answers; Plurimum refert, quia sicut Sacramenta quamvis aliquo sensu
possint dici instrumenta nostra, quatenus per illa tanquam per media assequimur
finem nostrum, proprie tamen sunt instrumenta Dei: sic etiam Fides, quamvis
possit vocari instrumentum Dei, quia Deus justificat nos ex fide and per fidem,
Romans 3. 20. proprie tamen est instrumentum nostrum. Deus nos baptizat, and
pascit, non nosmetipsi; nos credimus in Christum, non Deus.

If you desire more to this purpose, besides what has been said before, I
refer you to Mr. Blake of the Covenant, chap. 12. and Mr. Kendal against Mr.
Goodwin, chap. 4.

79.
1. The non-fulfilling of the Condition of the New Covenant does condemn, yet
it is by the Law, and for the transgressing of it that any are condemned; there
being no freedom from Condemnation, but by the New Covenant, nor any by it
without fulfilling the Condition of it. Such as do not embrace the
New Covenant, and that on the terms upon which it is made, are left to the
Condemnation of the Old-Covenant, which will be so much the sorer, as the Sin
in despising the Mercy offered is the greater. So that still (as I said in the
Animadversions) the fulfilling of the Law, viz. Christ's fulfilling it for us,
is that by which we are justified, though Faith be required of us, that
Christ's fulfilling of the Law may be imputed unto us, and so we may be
justified by it.

The Accusations which you speak of, viz. 1. Of not fulfilling the Condition of
the New Covenant. 2. Of having therefore no part in Christ. 3. Of being guilty
moreover of far sorer punishment.

All these Accusations (as I have often said) are but a re-inforcing of that
Accusation, That we are guilty of transgressing the Law, and so to be
condemned; and therefore the more guilty, and the more to be condemned, because
freedom from that Guilt and Condemnation might have been obtained, and was
neglected; see Acts 13. 38, 41. Heb. 2. 3.

2. The Gospel does not join Obedience with Faith as the Condition of our right
unto Salvation, though it require Obedience as a Fruit of that Faith, whereby
we obtain that Right, and so as the way or means whereby to enter into the
actual enjoyment of Salvation.

3. You might see that I do not yield the Thesis, wherein you make Faith and
Obedience so to be Conditions of the New Covenant, as withal to be Conditions
of Justification: This both now and everywhere I deny.

1. If it be not much (as you say) to your purpose; Ibid.
Why do you alledg it? That Christ did not receive either of the Sacraments for
that end as we receive them, who can question?

2. If you judge it uncertain, whether Luke or Matthew did relate those words,
[I will not drink henceforth, etc.] out of due place, why are you so
peremptory in your Aphorisms as to say, [Luke does clearly speak of two Cups,
and does subjoin these words to the first, which was before the Sacramental]?

3. Why do you call that Supposition, [If Luke had not written] a merry one? Is
it ridiculous to suppose such a thing?

Let us suppose (says Mr. Cawdrey and Mr. Palmer) that Question had not been
put to our Savior, Of the Sabbath, Part 2. c. 6. p. 227.
and that the Apostle had not written his Epistle to the Ephesians, etc.]

May not one as well sport with this Supposition of theirs, as you with that of
mine? Luke himself shows, That he wrote his Gospel after others, Luke 1. 1.
Probable it is, that he wrote after Matthew and Mark: And how should any
reading only these, imagine that those words [I will not drink, etc.] were
meant of any other than the Sacramental Cup, they not making mention (no not in
appearance) of any other?

Apud Matthaeum (inquit Ames.) 26. 29. pronomen istud demonstrativum, [ex hoc
fructu vitis] necessario Contra Bellar.
refertur ad illud, Tom. 3. l. 4. c. 1.
quod precedentibus verbis fuit eodem pronomine demonstratum, [Hoc est sanguis
meus].

Though Matthew and Mark had not written,. 48.
yet it had been no such boldness to suppose Luke to relate some words out of
that order wherein they were spoken, such Anticipations (as I said, and you do
not gainsay it) being usual in the Scripture.

Thus again Amesius; Ibid.
Ex ipso Luca (quamvis ibi transponantur verba) contra colligitur aperte, illa
verba pertinere ad Calicem Mysticum and Sacramentalem Coenae Domini. Nam cap.
22. 17. dicitur Dominus gratias egisse super illud poculum, in quo dicit
fructum vitis postea mansisse, eodem modo quo v. 19. gratias egit super panem.
Hac autem gratiarum action intelligi benedictionem and Consecrationem
Sacramentalem concedit Bellarminus, cap. 10. etc.

1. It is such a Justification, Ibid. and 80.
as the Apostle where he does professedly treat of that Subject, does scarce
ever mention: nor yet do Divines use to speak of it. Therefore your [totus
Mundus Theologorum Reformatorum], is Vox, praeterea nihil. Why do you allege
none of them? Juris consultos enim in hac causa minus moror. But and if we
maintain the word [Justification] is taken in sensu forensi; What of that? May
it not yet nevertheless be as I suppose it is, viz. That Justification at the
Last Judgment is only a full manifestation of that Justification which we have
here, and not (as you affirm) our actual, most proper and complete
Justification, as if here our Justification were but potential, less proper and
incomplete?

Amesius handling this Point, says, Medul. lib. 1. c. 27.. 7.
Justificatio est sententiae pronuntiatio, and non physicam aliquam aut realem
commutationem denotat in S. literis, sed forensem aut moralem illam, quae in
Sententiae pronuntiatione and reputatione consistit.

Yet he has nothing at all (that I see) of Justification at the Great
Judgment; much less that it is the actual, most proper and complete
Justification.

He says moreover; Ibid.. 9.
Sententia haec fuit; 1. in mente Dei quasi concepta per modum decreti
justificandi. 2. Fuit in Christo capite nostro a mortuis jam resurgente
pronuntiata. 3. Virtualiter pronuntiatur ex prima illa relatione, quae ex fide
ingenerata exurgit. 4. Express pronunciatur per Spiritum Dei testantem
Spiritibus nostris reconciliationem nostram cum Deo. -- In hoc testimonio
Spirit^s non tam proprie ipsa justificatio consistit, quam actualis antea
concessae perceptio, per actum fidei quasi reflexum.

But as for the pronouncing of this Sentence at the Last Judgment, he does not
so much as make any mention of it. Neither does Calvin (that I find) in his
Institutions, though he treat at large of Justification, and that in sensu
forensi, speak any thing of Justification at the Last Judgment; nor indeed any
that I meet with, except it be on the by, as Bucanus and Maccovius, who agree
with me, as I have showed before.

2. If the Fruits of Faith be inquired after, That so Faith may appear true and
genuine, such as does indeed receive Christ, and so justify; Is not this a
sufficient reason why they are inquired after? But in that which follows about
via ad Regnum, etc. you are quite extra viam. You forget that we are now about
Justification; or at least that I do not make the Condition of Justification
and of Salvation every way the same as you sometimes do. This may suffice for
your two first Objections.

To the Third and Fourth, I answer in the words of that Reverend and Learned
Davenant; De Justit. Habit. cap. 32. ad Object. 9.
Particula [Enim] non semper rei causam denotat, sed illationis consequentiam,
sive ab effecto, sive a causa, sive a signo, seu undecunque petitam; -- Sic
quando Christus dicit electis, Venite benedicti, etc. Esurivienim, etc.
particula illa non cum causa salutis, sed cum signo causae connectitur.
Maccovius de Justific. Disp. 10. Justificatur quis ex operibus apud Deum non
justificatione causae, sed justificatione effecti and signi.
Nam illa bona opera, quae ibi recensentur, sunt signa verae fidei, adoptionis,
insitionis in Christum, praedestinationis ac favoris divini, quae sunt verae
causae salutis.

You are therefore too free and forward in saying, That the Uses pretended for
this enquiring after m^re Signs are frivolous. What though the business at
Judgment be to enquire of the Cause, and to sentence accordingly? May not the
Cause (take it in the Law-sense) be made to appear by Signs, even as the Cause
(in the Logical-sense) does appear by the Effect, and the Tree by the Fruit?
That Obedience is ipsa Causa, de qua quaeritur, the terms [Therefore] and
[Because] do not prove, no more than the term [For]. And here I may with better
reason say than you did, Appello totum Mundum Theologorum Reformatorum.

But here I must mind you of one thing, which (it seems) you do not observe,
viz. That those terms which you build upon, [Because] and [Therefore] are
neither in the Original, nor any Translation (that I know) except the Vulgar
Latin, which has Quia.

Bellarmine urging these Particles, Amesius answers, Mat. 25. 21, 23. Nulla
particula reperitur nisi in Versione non probanda. Contra Bellar. Tom. 4. lib.
7. cap. 2. ad 3.

1. You cite abundance of Texts, but to what purpose? 80.
You would have me try whether they speak only of Signs, or or Conditions.
Conditions of what do you mean? Of Justification? That you are to prove: but
how it can be proved by any of those Texts, I cannot see. They speak of the
necessity of Obedience unto Salvation, of God's rendering unto Men according to
their Deeds, of the reward of good Works, etc. But does it therefore follow,
that Obedience and good Works are Conditions of Justification? I am loath to be
so plain with you, as sometimes you are with me, otherwise I could say, I have
seldom seen so many places of Scripture alleged to so little purpose. Some of
those places you seem to lay more weight upon, as John 16. 27. and 2 Cor. 5.
10. and 1 John 3. 22, 23. For here you do not only note the places, but you
also cite the words, as if they were more especially to be observed.

Now for that Joh. 16. 27. [The Father has loved you, because you have loved
me]; What do you infer from thence? That Works justify as part of the
Condition of Justification? If this be a good Consequence, I may say, Reddat
mihi minam qui me docu^t Dialecticam.

1. Works and Love differ as well as Works, though Works flow both from Love
and Faith.

Calvin makes those words [because you have loved me], In Loc.
to denote an unfeigned Faith, which proceeds from a sincere Affection, here
called Love. And I grant that such a Love, viz. of Desire does go before
Justifying Faith.

3. God does love those that love him, and that love Christ, amore amicitiae;
yet amore benevolentiae, he loves us before we love him, 1 John 4. 10, 19.

Secundum hanc rationem (inquit Calvinus) hic^ dicimur amari a Deo, Ibid.
dum Christum diligimus, quia pignus habemus paternae ejus dilectionis, etc.

That in 2 Cor. 5. 10. [according to, etc.] avails your Cause nothing. For may
not Works be considered at the Last Judgment, so as that we shall receive
according to them, and yet be no part of the Condition of Justification, but
only Fruits of that Faith whereby we are justified? So for that in Joh. 3. 22.
[because we keep his Commandments, etc.]

I say with Calvin; In Loc.
Non intelligit fundatam esse in operibus nostris or andi fiduciam; sed in hoc
tantum insistit, non postea fide disiungi pietatem, and sincerum Dei cultum.
Nec absurdum videri debet, quod particulam Causalem (N. B.) usurpet, utcunque
de causa non disputetur. Nam accidens inseparabile interdum Causae loco poni
solet. Quemadmodum siquis dicat, Quia Sol Meridie supra nos lucet, plus tunc
esse caloris. Neque enim sequitur ex luce oriri calorem.

1. You shall confound Justification and Salvation, Ibid.
betwixt which (you know) I make a great difference.

2. I see not that any of the Texts alleged do prove Obedience to be
concurrent with Faith unto Justification, or to Right to Salvation. Obedience
is an Argument a posteriore of our Right unto Salvation, and a priore a means
of our enjoyment of it. More than this by any Text of Scripture (I presume)
will not be proved.

Your First and Second have nothing but mere Words. Ibid.


Ad 3. I answer, No more is the word [Justification] in any of the Texts which
you cited.

Ad 4. What trick do you mean? Or what prejudice? Do you so wonder at this,
That I cannot be persuaded by any of your Allegations, that we are justified by
our personal Righteousness? Or that Works concur with Faith unto Justification,
as being part of the Condition that the Gospel does require, that thereby we
may be justified? Then all Protestant Divines are Men to be wondered at, or at
least never considered the Texts, which you alledg; and surely that were a
great wonder.

Ad 5. For Justification at Judgment, I will say no more until I see more proof
of your Opinion about it.

Ad 6. The Qualifications spoken of tend to that end, That we may enjoy
Salvation, but not that we may have right to Salvation: They only manifest that
Right, which by Faith in Christ we do obtain.

Ad 7. Of James his words enough already.

Ad 8. I wish you were more Argumentative, and less Censorious, or at least
more wary in expressing your censure. To say [It is next to non-sense] is
over-broad; If you had said, That you could see no good sense in it, this had
not been so much, as truly I cannot in your words. For may not a thing be
spoken by way of Sentence, and yet by way of Argumentation too? I think, Yes,
when a reason is given of the Sentence. But what should that in Luke 19. 17.
force me to confess? That Works are more than Fruits of Faith, by which we are
justified?

Why do you stand so much upon the word [Because], when as you acknowledge that
Works are no proper cause? May i^ not be said, [This is a good Tree, because it
brings forth good Fruit?] and yet the goodness of the Tree is before the
goodness of its Fruit; and this is but only a manifestation of the other. So
what should I see in Luke 19. 27? That none should be saved by Christ, but such
as are obedient unto him, that I see; but not that Obedience is that whereby we
are (at least in part) justified. Yea, I think it worthy your consideration,
That the Texts which you alledg and build upon, speaking only of Works and
Obedience, and not of Faith at all, either must be interpreted, That Obedience
and Works are necessary Fruits of Justifying Faith, or else they will reach
further than you would have them, even to make Obedience and Works the only
Condition of Justification at Judgment.

Ad 9. Where you performed that, I know not: But however your Work was not to
overthrow any Arguments for Merits, (for which I am far from urging) but to
answer my reason, which I urged, why those Scriptures which you alleged, might
rather seem to make Works meritorious of Salvation, than to concur with Faith
unto Justification, viz. because they follow Justification, but go before
Salvation. I know you will say, That they go before Justification as Continued
and Consummate at Judgment: but for the overthrowing of that, I need say no
more till you say more in defense of it.

81.
The Texts which you alledg speak only of Obedience: and so if you will think
to prove by them, That Obedience is the Condition of our ^ustification; you may
as well say, That it is the only Condition, and so quite exclude Faith, which
is not mentioned in those Texts. If you say, It is in other Texts; so (say I)
do other Texts show that Faith is the only Condition, and that Obedience is not
concurrent with Faith unto Justification, though it necessarily flow from that
Faith by which we are justified. That may be alleged as the reason of the
Justifying Sentence, which yet is but the Fruit and Effect of Justifying Faith.
If Sententia be Praemii Adjudicatio, then (I think) Causa Sententiae must be
also Causae Praemii adjudicati. The word [For], when we say [Justified for
Faith], must note either the formal, or the meritorious Cause: the ratio
Sententiae may be drawn from that, which is neither the formal nor the
meritorious Cause of Justification, nor yet a Condition or Instrument of it,
but only a Fruit and Effect of that which is so.

3. The Scripture does not say, That Works do justify us in that sense as you
take it, viz. as joint Conditions with Faith of Justification.

4. I think it not so proper to say, [We must be judged, and receive our Reward
by our Works] as [according to our Works]. And however, to be judged by our
Works, is not as much as to be justified by them, otherwise than as they are
Fruits and Effects of Faith, and so manifest our Interest in Christ, by whom
all that believe are justified, Acts 13. 39.

5. Your [For] must needs be the same with [Propter]. When you say, [We are
justified for Faith] surely in Latin it must be propter Fidem. Here [enim] will
not be suitable.

1. That which I intimated is this, Ibid.
That in respect of God, such an outward judicial Proceeding needed not, no
more than God does need a Sign. Whether the Judicial Proceeding be all upon
mere Signs, and the Ipsa Causa Justitiae not meddled with, is not to the
purpose. Though why may not that which is in some respect Justitia Causae, and
so Justitia Personae quoad istam Causam, be Signum Fidei, and per consequens
Justitiae Christi nobis per Fidem imputatae, qua simpliciter and absolute
justificamur?

2. and 3. That which is the Condition of Glorification, is not therefore the
Condition of Justification, or of right to Glorification, which does
immediately flow from Justification, or at least is inseparably joined with it.
No Man can be accused to be Reus Poenae, and so to have no right to
Glorification; but he that is accused to be Reus Culpae: and from that
Accusation we are justified by Faith, which is made manifest by our Works.

1. I perceive I did mistake your meaning, Ibid.
the contexture of your words being such, that one might easily mistake the
meaning of them.

2. Your Affirmation is no Proof; and as well may you say, That because in
other places of Scripture the Righteous are usually spoken of in respect of
Personal Righteousness, in opposition to the wicked and ungodly, therefore all
those places prove, That Personal Righteousness is that whereby we are
justified. Because we must have a Righteousness inherent in us, as well as a
Righteousness imputed to us; are we therefore justified as well by the one as
the other? Appello Evangelium pariter ac torum Mundum Theologorum Reformatorum.

1. Your Aphorisms tend to prove Justification by Works, Ibid. and 82.
to which end you press the words of St. James, and reject the Interpretation
which our Divines give of them.

2. Paul indeed and James did not consider Works in the same sense. For Paul
considered them as concurring with Faith unto Justification, and so rejected
them: but James looked at them as Fruits of Justifying-Faith, and so asserted
the necessity of them. You do not rightly understand Paul's words, Romans 4. 4.
of which I have spoken before. He does not speak absolutely; for so he should
quite abolish Works, which in other places he does maintain and plead for, as
without which we must not think to be saved: but he speaks in reference to
Justification, and so he excludes Works even for this very reason, because they
cannot justify, except they be meritorious, and such as that the reward of
them is of debt, and not of Grace, viz. pardoning Grace; for otherwise whatever
reward the Creator does bestow upon the Creature, it is of Grace. Yet it does
not therefore follow that Faith is meritorious, Vbi (inquit) Sunt opera, illis
debitum praemium expenditur quod datur fidei, gratuitum est. Calvin. Instit.
lib. 3. c. 11.. 18. vide ibid. plura.
because we are justified by Faith. For Faith does justify Relatively, in
respect of Christ's Righteousness, which it apprehends, and by which so
apprehended we are justified: but so Works cannot justify; they must either
justify for their own worth, or not at all, save only Declaratire, by
manifesting our Faith, and so our Justification. See Mr. Ball of the Coven. c.
3. p. 19. and c. 6. p. 69, 70.

1. The Scriptures do plainly so distinguish, as to deny 82.
Working, that thereby we may be justified, Romans 3. 28. and 4. 5. Yet to asser,
Working, that thereby we may be saved, Phil. 2. 12. You will say, That the
former places speak of Meritorious and Legal Working.

But, 1. All Working which is good, is Legal, as I have showed before, i.e.
according to the Rule and Prescript of the Law, even Gospel-Obedience is in
that respect Legal. And when the Apostle does exclude the Deeds of the Law from
Justification, he does not mean (as some take it) Deeds done by the Power of
the Law, without Grace, but Deeds which the Law does prescribe however done.
For he denies that Abraham was justified by his Works; yet doubtless they were
not done without Grace.

The Apostle takes it as granted, That all Works whereby we are justified, are
meritorious: for if there be no meritoriousness in them, he supposes there is
no being justified by them. For indeed how can Working justify, if there be
any defect and failing in it? Therefore Faith it self does not justify in
respect of it self, but in respect of Christ whom it apprehends. See Calvin
Inst. lib. 3 cap. 11. 7. the words were before-cited.

To your Second; I have always denied that there is the same reason of
Salvation (viz. complete) and Justification; and have always held, That
Justification at Judgment is but a manifestation of our present Justification.

To your Third; None is Reus Poenae, except he be Reus Culpae; and there is no
Reatus Culpae, but by transgressing the Law, though it may be aggravated, and
so the other, by the Gospel. But properly the not-fulfilling of the Condition
of the Gospel, taking it merely as a Condition, and not as a Duty, does not
bring a new Guilt, but only leaves a Man in the old Guilt, with an aggravation
of it, he having no benefit of the Gospel to free him from his Guilt, and being
the more deeply guilty, in that he neglected the Mercy which he might have
obtained.

1. Some of your words (I confess) I do not understand, Ibid.
nor can I see what reference they have to mine in the Animadversions. But when
you speak of Right to Justification and Salvation, you seem to mean Sentential
Justification at Judgment. For else we have here Justification it self, and not
only a right unto it, though we have only a right to Salvation, and not
Salvation it self; I mean in respect of the fullness and perfection of it. And
though Justification and Salvation flow from the same Covenant, yet there is
more required unto Salvation, than unto Justification by that Covenant: and so
you also hold in respect of your first Justification.

2. You trouble your self more than needs with your Distinctions, which (as you
do use them) do but involve the Matter in more obscurity. Surely my words of
themselves, [Freedom from all sin in respect of imputation, and from all
condemnation for sin] are far more perspicuous, than when you so multiply
Distinctions to find out (forsooth) the meaning of them. For, 1. Is not
[Freedom] more plain than [Liberation?] though they both signify the same
thing. 2. Can there be an Active Liberation without a Passive, or a Passive
without an Active? If God free us, are we not freed? And if we be freed, does
not God free us? What need then to distinguish in that manner? If freedom
relate to God, it is Active; if to us, it is Passive. And what difference
betwixt Liberation, or Freedom, (viz. from the Imputation of Sin, and
Condemnation for Sin) and Absolution?

3. The Reprobate are Condemnati per sententiam Judicis, Joh. 3. 18. etiamsi
sententiae publica prolatio, ejusque plena executio in ultimum usque diem sit
dilata.

4. Not only right to Absolution, but Absolution it self is perfect to a
Believer through Christ, Romans 8. 1. Neither are there any more Conditions of
Justification at any time than Faith: though more sins be every day committed,
and so more are to be pardoned, yet still Faith as well afterward as at first
does procure the pardon of them, without Works, as therein concurrent with it.

Non aliam Justitiam (says Calvin) ad finem usque vitae habent fideles,
Instit. l 3. c. 14.. 11.
quam quae illic (nempe Romans 4. and 2 Cor. 5.) describitur.

5. Actual Absolution, and Judicial per sententiam Judicis, is in this life,
and that perfect, though there be not a perfect declaration of it till the Last
Judgment.

6. When you say, [Condemnation is not perfect, if any at all, till the Last
Judgment], you do in effect question whether there be any Justification till
then. For if no Condemnation, then no Justification. But Condemnation I speak
of the Reprobate, who neither do, nor ever shall believe.
(I say) is perfect here, though the Sentence be not publicly pronounced, and
fully executed till hereafter.

7. I do not speak of freedom from all sin as the Antinomians do, as if God did
see no sin in his Children, and they had no sin to be humbled for: but I say,
That God does not impute sin unto them, so as to condemn them for it. And so
much surely the Scripture does say, if I understand it, 2 Cor. 5. 19. Romans 8.
1. For freedom from future sins, I have said enough before.

8. The word [Justification] may be used in sensu Judiciario, (as I have showed
before) and yet Justification at Judgment be but a manifestation of our present
Justification. Your Quotations out of the Civilians are not against me, for I
say, Sententia Judicis jam lata est, etiamsi in extremo demum die plene
publiceque sit revelanda. I speak also of an Authoritative Manifestation; and
therefore your Instance of a Woman manifesting a Felony, etc. is not to the
purpose.

Obedience as a Fruit of Faith is necessary, both necessitate 83.
pracepti, so that it is sin to omit it; and also necessitate medii, so that we
cannot be saved without it. But if it be a Means, (say you) then it is a
Condition. Well, but a Means and a Condition (say I) of what? Of Salvation? It
is granted. Of Justification? It is denied, neither does this follow upon the
other.

Taking Christ for Lord is virtually included in taking him for Priest; Ibid.
see Romans 14. 9. and 2 Cor. 5. 15. They cannot be divided, though they be
distinguished. That Faith which receives Christ as Priest, does also receive
him as Lord, either expressly, if Christ be propounded as Lord, or at least
implicitly: yet Faith only, as receiving Christ as Priest, does justify, for
the reason alleged before, to which I see nothing that you have said of force
to refel it. Wicked Men cannot unfeignedly receive Christ as Priest, whiles
they retain a Heart standing out in rebellion against Christ as Lord. Can they
indeed embrace Christ as satisfying for them, and yet not yield up themselves
in obedience unto him?

The Apostle (it seems) was of another mind; [The love of Christ (says he)
constrains us. For we thus judge, That if one died for all, then were all
dead: And that he died for all, that they which live, should not henceforth
live unto themselves, but unto him that died for them, and rose again]. 2 Cor.
5. 14, 15.

And again, [I am crucified with Christ, nevertheless I live; yet not I, but
Christ lives in me; and the life which I now live, I live by Faith in the Son
of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me], Gal. 2. 20.

This is the nature of that Faith which does receive Christ as a Reconciler, to
work through Love, Gal. 5. 6. May I not retort upon you, and say, When you have
taught wicked Men, that Faith alone does justify at first, and they are
willing to believe, will you persuade them that they are unjustified again,
because Works do not follow after? For my part, I know no unjustifying of those
who are once justified. You speak sometimes of being justified to day by Faith
without Works, and of being unjustified to morrow, or the day after, except
Works come in and help to justify. But I say, Faith without a promptitude to
Works does not justify at first; such as do not receive Christ as Lord, and do
good Works, when there is opportunity, were never justified at all, they never
had a true Justifying-Faith, which is never without Works, as the seasonable
Fruits and Effects of it: Yet Faith both at first and last does justify
without Works, as concurrent with it unto Justification. What you say of a
willingness to receive Christ, is nothing. For I speak of a true actual
receiving, which I say cannot be of Christ as Priest, except it be (either
expressly or implicitly) of Christ as Lord also: and yet we are justified by
receiving him in the one respect, and not in the other. None can have that
Faith which justifies, but they shall have also other Graces and Works of
Obedience in their season; Yet do not other Graces therefore, or Works
justify as well as Faith.

Bellarmine ob^ecting; Contra Bellar.
Fides vera potest (...) separar^.

Amesius answers; Tom. 4. lib. 5. c. 4. ad 8.
Aliqua fides potest; talis est Pontificia: sed illa fides, cui nos tribuimus
justificandi virtutem, cum unionem faciat nostri cum Christo, a Christi Spiritu
vivificante, and Sanctificante non potest separari.

Yet he says; Fides non justificat, Ibid. cap. 3.. 6.
ut respicit praecepta operum faciendorum, sed solummodo ut respicit
promissionem gratiae.

So Dr. Prideaux; Fides sola justificat, non ration^ existentia, absque spe and
charitate, sed muneris. Lect. 5. de Justif.. 7.

And Mr. Ball of the Coven. c. 6. p. 73. [Abraham was justified by Faith alone;
but this Faith, though alone in the Act of Justification, no other Grace
co-working with it, was not alone in existence, did not lie dead in him, as a
dormant and idle quality. -- Those words you alledg afterward, but they are
little to your purpose.
Works then (or a purpose to walk with God) justify as the passive
qualification of the Subject, capable of Justification, or as the qualification
of that Faith which justifies; or as they testify or give proof that Faith is
lively: but Faith alone justifies, as it embraces the promise of free
forgiveness in Jesus Christ].

Here by the way observe how Amesius and Mr. Ball speak of Faith apprehending
and embracing the Promise; which manner of speech may also be observed in other
eminent Divines, yet you somewhere censure Mr. Cotton somewhat sharply for
speaking in that manner.

1. If it be as difficult for the Understanding to believe, Ibid. and 84.
(i. e. assent unto) Christ's Priestly Office, as is his Kingly, then it seems
also as hard for the Will to consent to, or accept of the one as the other. If
the Will be inclined to a thing, it will move the Understanding to assent unto
it. Quod valde volumus, fac le credimus. That the Jews believed neither
Christ's Kingly nor his Priestly Office, was the perverseness of their Will, as
well as the error of their Understanding. What the Papists, with whom you have
met, do say, matters little; we see what their great Rabbis say and maintain
in their Disputations. Yet it is no strange thing, if even they also now and
then let fall something, wherein they give restimony to the Truth, though in
the whole current of their Discourses they oppose it.

Amesius shows, Contra Bellar.
That Bellarmine in that very place which you cite, does contradict himself,
whiles he is overearnest to contradict Protestants; Tom. 4. lib 6. c. 1. ad 22.
Bellarminus hic implicat seipsum contradictione, ut nobis possit contradicere.

Whereas you cite Rivet disclaiming that which Bellarmine makes to be the
Opinion of Protestants, viz. That Christ's Righteousness is the formal Cause of
Justification, I have said enough about it before, viz. That some understanding
the Term one way, some another, our Divines express themselves variously; yet
all agree in the thing it self, viz. That Christ's Righteousness, through Faith
imputed unto us, is that by which we are justified; See Davenant de Justit.
Habit. cap. 24. ad 5. where he answers this very Argument of Bellarmine, though
he contract his words, and leave out those which you cite; but however, both
there, and in other places which I cited before, he has enough to this
purpose, concerning the formal Cause of Justification, and how the
Righteousness of Christ imputed to us may be so termed.

Dr. Prideaux also (I see) is offended at Bellarmine for saying, Lect. 5.
Sed ita imputari nobis Christi justitiam, De Justif.. 11.
ut per eam formaliter justi nominemur, and simus, id nos cum recta ratione
pugnare contendimus; as if this were the Opinion of Protestants.

At quis unquam e nostris (says the Doctor) no^ per justitiam Christi
imputatam, formaliter justificari asseruit?

But see how and in what sense he does disclaim that Opinion; Annon formam quam
libet inhaerentem, qu^ formaliter justi denominemur, semper explosimus?

In this sense also Davenant does reject it; Quod dicit Bellarminus,
impossible esse, ut, per justitiam Christi imputatam formaliter justi simus,
si per formaliter intelligat inhaerenter, nugas agit, atque tribuit illam ipsam
sententiam Protestantibus, quam oppugnant. De Justit. Habit. cap. 24. ad 5. Yet
in another sense he holds that Christ's Righteousness imputed to us, is the
formal Cause of our Justification; the words were before cited.

And as others, Vbi supra.
so Dr. Prideaux speaks the very same thing, saying, Justificamur per justitiam
Christi, non personae, qua ipse est vestitus, sed meriti, qua suos vestit,
nobis imputatam.

But for the principal thing intended in this Section of yours, Though wicked
Men may be more ready to receive Christ as their Justifier, than as their
Ruler, (so you express it); yet it follows not, that the receiving of Christ as
a Ruler, is that Act of Faith which does justify. For the difficulty of a
thing is no good Argument to prove the necessity of it, either at all, or to
such a purpose.

2. My second Note was to this purpose, quite to take away the force of your
Argument, and so (I think) it does notwithstanding your Reply. For have we not
God's means to overcome that aversness of nature, if the receiving of Christ as
Lord do necessarily follow Pardon, as well as if it be a Condition of Pardon?
When I make it a Fruit of Justifying-Faith to take Christ for Lord, I do not
say but that Christ may at once be received both as Priest and as Lord, and so
must, if he be so propounded; I speak of express propounding and receiving: But
my meaning is, That though we be justified by receiving Christ as Priest,
perhaps not yet hearing of him (expressly) as Lord, yet that Justifying-Faith
will also put forth it self to take Christ for Lord, when he is so set forth
unto us. To be justified before we take Christ as Lord, is not to be justified
before we take Christ as Christ. For Christ is Christ as Priest, though not
only as Priest. Indeed to receive Christ in respect of one Office, so as to
refuse him in respect of another, were not to receive Christ as Christ: but
that is not the Case as I do put it. And for the moral necessity of taking
Christ as Lord, which you ask what it is, if it be not a Condition: I suppose
it may be morally necessary as a thing commanded, and yet be no Condition of
Justification. For can nothing be commanded, and so be morally necessary, but
it must be commanded and be necessary to that end, that thereby we may be
justified? Works are commanded, and so necessary, yet you hold them to be no
Condition of our Justification at first, neither indeed are they afterward, as
that of Genesis 15. 6. with Romans 4. 2, 3. does irrefragably prove.

Your Argument I thus retort, [He that is justified, is in a State of
Salvation, and should be saved, if he so died. But he that has Faith without
Works, is justified; Ergo, he is in a State of Salvation, and if he so die,
shall be saved]. Answer for your self as you please: for my part I say, The
same Faith which receives Christ as Priest, and so justifies, is ready also
to receive Christ as Lord, when he is so propounded; even as that Faith, which
justifies, is ready to produce Works, when they are required.

84.
1. You should not only suppose, but prove, that the excluding of Obedience
from Justification (as co-partner with Faith in justifying) is a Scandal given,
and an Error.

2. If it were not Paul's design to advance Faith above Love, etc. in point of
Justification, what then means his so frequent asserting Faith to be that
whereby we are justified, and his never-mentioning Love, etc. to that purpose?

3. Your self acknowledge an aptitude in Faith to justify as apprehending
Christ, and I acknowledge, that besides this God has appointed Faith for that
purpose, in respect of its aptitude, making choice of it rather than of any
other Grace.

I have also often enough considered what you have said. Ibid.


Justificatio (says Davenant) purgat, and abluit a reatu and poena speccati,
idque uno momento, and perfect, De Justit. Habit. cap. 23. ad Arg. 4.

Though Justification be perfect, as freeing from all Condemnation; yet so long
as there may be Accusation, there is need of Justification. Whereas you speak
of the Law justifying, etc. It is God that justifies, Romans 8. 33. though
according to the Gospel or New Covenant, (for that, I presume, you mean by the
Law) and by the imputation of Christ's Righteousness. Christ as our Advocate
does plead our Cause, and procure our Justification; and at the Last Judgment,
as God's Vicegerent, he will publicly pronounce Sentence.

I see nothing against me, Ibid. and 85.
but that still you run upon this Supposition, That there is the same Condition
of Salvation, and of Justification at Judgment, whereas I suppose that Works
are a Condition of Salvation, as full and complete, but not so of Justification
at Judgment, that being but a manifestation of our present Justification, and
so Works looked at but as Fruits and Evidences of Faith, whereby we are
justified. If Illyricus his Doctrine were the same with this, his
fellow-Protestants (I dare say) would not blame him for it. Neither do I see
how Illyricus could, or any rational Man can grant Works to be necessary
Fruits of Faith, and yet deny them to be means or Conditions of Salvation, in
respect of the actual and full enjoyment of it. For surely as Faith it self is
required that we may be justified, so the Fruits of Faith (to be produced in
due season) are required that we may be glorified. But why do you thus still
jumble together Justification and Salvation, saying, [Illyricus his Error was
in denying Works to be necessary to Justification and Salvation?] Yet when you
cite Bucer and Melancthon as asserting the necessity of good Works, there is
not a syllable in them about Justification, as if Works were necessary in that
respect.

Bucer in that Conference at Ratisbon, which you cite, though he maintain
Inherent Righteousness, (as who does not?) yet he says, Hac justitia nemo
justificatur coram Deo justificatione vitae, as he is cited by Lud. de Dieu in
Romans 8. 4. ubi plura vide.

So Melancthon is cited by Bellarmine as holding with other Protestants of
prime note, De Justif. lib. 1. c. 14.
that, Sola fides justificat, and tamen fides quae justificat, non est sola.

And Wotton says, (De Reconcil. Part 2. lib. 2. cap. 19. Number. 4.) Lutherus,
Melancthon, Calvinus, Chemnitius, ea potissimum causa nos infusa and inhaerente
justitia justificari non posse contendunt, quod illa in nobis ita imperfectu
sit, ut in Dei conspectum, quum ad judicandum candum accedat, prodire non
audeat. But of Bucer and Melancthon more by and by.

For Illyricus, what in other places he may hold I cannot tell, but in the
Centuries (whereof he was the chief Author) he seems to agree with other prime
Protestants; For he brings in 27 Arguments, whereby the Apostles (he says)
prove, Cent. 1. lib. 2. c. 4. Col. 253, etc.
Hominem sola fide absque operibus Legis justificari; Among which the 23d is
this; Duae sunt tantum viae ad salutem, and nulla est tertia, etc. Vna harum
est per opera Legis; altera est per fidem in Christum, qui pro nobis Legem
implevit. Sed illa, quae est per opera Legis, postulat a nobis integerrimam
impletionem, quam quia nemo potest praestare, omnes damnantur a Lege. Ea vera
quae per fidem est, gratis propter opeera Christi, donat justitiam and vitam
credentibus. Qui ergo vult per opera salvari propria, is alteram viam tollit;
and e contra, qui vult per fidem salvari gratis, is non potest per opera sua
justificari. Gal. 5. (perhaps it should be Gal. 3.) Romans 4. and 10. Ephesians. 2.

Here he seems indeed to confound Justification and Salvation, as if there were
the same reason of both, and Works were no more required unto Salvation than
unto Justification. But surely by Salvation he meant a Right unto Salvation,
which does necessarily go along with Justification; and whatsoever it be that
does justify, the same also does give a right unto Salvation. For otherwise he
makes Works and new Obedience necessary to the full enjoyment of Salvation.

For he treats at large de nova obedientia seu bonis operibus justificatorum;
Ibid. Col. 279, etc.
and he goes through the several Commandments, Ibid. Col. 283, etc.
and brings in a Catalogue of Good Works which are required in every
Commandment.

Though he sometimes only expresses these Reasons, Ibid. Col. 279.
why new Obedience and good Works must be performed, ut glorificetur Deus, and
inserviatur proximo, and sint testimonia verae fidei; yet even these reasons do
imply that new Obedience and good Works are necessary unto Salvation, viz. in
that sense as I have explained. For can any think to be saved, except they have
a care to glorify God, to serve their Neighbor, and to give testimony of
their Faith?

But sometimes he speaks more expressly to this purpose, Ibid. Col. 349, etc.
saying, Iis qui fidae gratis acceperunt remissionem peccatorum, Apostoli etiam
de novitate vitae concionantur, and poenas comminantur rurses sese peccatis
sine poenitentia polluentibus.

And among other places he alleges that Phil. 2. Cum timore and tremore
vestram ipsorum salutem operamini.

And among other reasons, Why all must repent and walk in newness of Life, he
brings in this as the sixth; Subitus extremi judicii adventus; And cites that 1 John 2. Manete in eo, ut cum apparuerit, fiduciam habeamus, and non pudefiamus
in adventu ejus: And that 1 Thessalonians. 5. Ipsi plane scitis, quod dies ille Domini,
ut fur in nocte, ita venturus sit: Cum enim dixerint, Pax and tuta omnia, tunc
repentinus eis ingruet interitus, sicut dolor partus mulieri praegnanti, etc.
Proinde ne dormiamus, etc.

And for the next reason he brings in this; Poenae ater^^ impoenitentium,
citing Romans 2. Juxta duritiam tuam, and cor poeniterenescium, colligis tibi
ipsi iram in die irae, quo patefiet justum judicium Dei, etc. Ventura est
indignatio, ira, afflictio, and anxietas adversus omnem animam hominis
perpetrantis malum, etc.

This (I think) is sufficient to show that Illyricus (at least when he helped
to write the Centuries) was as much for Obedience and good Works as either
Bucer or Melancthon, for any thing that I see you cite out of them, and that he
made them so Fruits of Faith, whereby we are justified, and have right to
Salvation, that withal he made them Means or Conditions of Glorification; and
more than this the words of Bucer and Melancthon do not import.

Whereas you say, that Davenant's words, which I cited, have nothing that you
dislike, save only that Grace is said to be infused in ipsa actu justificandi,
which yet you show how it is not to be disliked; you consider not for what end
I cited those words, viz. To show that all Protestants generally acknowledge and
profess, (so he, Omnes enim agnoscimus, and clare profitemur) that Inherent
Righteousness does go along with Imputed Righteousness, though it be this and
not that by which we are justified; and consequently, That Works are necessary
as Fruits of Faith, and Means of Salvation, though yet Works have no
Copartnership with Faith in justifying.

Neither Bucer nor Melancthon, nor any of our famous Divines that I know, did
teach other Doctrine. And because you seem to carry it so as if Melancthon and
Bucer had been of your Opinion; though what I have said already may suffice to
show the contrary, yet I will add a little more.

Melancthon says; Tom. 1. loc. de bonis Oper.
Plane and clare dico, Obedientia nostra, hoc est, justitia bonae conscientiae
seu operum, quae Deus nobis percepit, necessario sequi reconciliationem debet.

But here he says no more for Works than generally Protestants do; he is far
from making them concurrent with Faith unto Justification.

Again; Ibid. de Vocab. Fid.
Sed nos (inquit) sciamus suum locum esse justitiae operum, long vero alia
consolatione opus esse in quaere^^^ reconciliatione.

And again; Ibid.
Cum ^citur, fide just ^fi^amur, non aliud dicetur, quam quod propter Filium
Dei accipimus remissionem peccatorum, and reputamur justi. Et quia oportet
apprehendi hoc beneficium dicitur fide, i. e. fiducia misericordiae promissae
propter Christum. Intell^gatur ergo propositio correlative, Fide sumus justi,
i. e. per misericordiam propter Filium Dei sumus justi seu accepti.

And he alleges Basil, Tom. 2. de Eccles. p. 133.
saying; Sine ulla sophistica detrahit justificationem bonis operibus; nec
loquitur de ceremonialibus, sed de omnibus virtutibus; nec tentum loquitur de
operibus ante renovationem, sed de virtutibus in renovatis, ac jubet sentire,
quod sola fiducia misericordiae propter Christum promissae justi sumus. -- Haec
est. (inquit Basilius) perfecta and integra gloriatio in Deo, quando ne quidem
propter justitiam suam aliquis offertur, sed agnoscit sibi deesse veram
justitiam, fide autem sola in Christum justificari, etc.

Bucer also commends Melancthon for saying; In Praefat. Exerrat. Epistolae ad
Romans
Sola fide justificamur, solius misericordiae fiducia justi pronuntiamur.

And presently he adds; Nemini siquidem pio dubium esse potest, quin per solam
Dei misericordiam, propierque unius Christi meritum, ac nulla omnino nostra
quamlibet sancta opera, and germanissimos Spiritus fructus, nos justificemur,
hoc est, a Deo justi pronuntiemur.

1. I am sorry to see you so bent to maintain what you 85.
have once done. Is it fair to take hold on a few words of an Author, and to
pass by that which immediately follows, and show that he meant quite contrary
to what is pretended? Is not this to make your self guilty of that which you
accuse others of, viz. to take up some scraps against the meaning of the whole
Book, and even the very Page out of which you take them?

2. I think nothing is more clear, than that Mr. Ball's words following those
which you cited, gainsay your Opinion, viz. of Works concurring with Faith unto
Justification. For he expressly says, That Faith alone justifies, and that
Works do but testify and give proof, that Faith is lively.

Is not this the very thing that I so much contend for? And yet you stick not
to say, That he yields Faith and Works to be the Condition of Justification,
as if they were Copartners in this respect, whereas he ascribes Justification
wholly to Faith, and excludes Works from having any concurrence with it in
justifying. Of the Coven. p. 70.
A little before the place by you cited, he opposes those who make Faith and
Works the Condition, without which Remission cannot be obtained, and says it
is impossible to conceive how Faith and Works should be conjoined as Con-causes
in Justification, seeing Faith attributes all to Free Grace, and Works
challenge to themselves. And a little before that again he says, Ibid. p. 69.
[We read of two ways of Justification, by Faith, and by Works, but of a third
manner, by Faith and Works both, as joint Causes, or Con-causes, we find
nothing in Scripture]. As he makes Faith to be more than a bare Condition, if
by [Condition] be meant only Causa sine qu^ non, so do I: yet he does use the
words [Condition] and [Instrument] promiscuously, and does sometimes call Faith
the one way, sometimes the other. He supposes also, That if Works concur with
Faith unto Justification, they are Con-causes, and not such Conditions as are
only Causae sine quibus non, as you seem to take it.

3. You say that you allow of the Explicatory terms, as I judge them. Why? then
you allow of this, [Faith alone does justifie]; yea, [as it embraces the
promise of free forgiveness in Jesus Christ]; for so immediately Mr. Ball does
explain himself. And for this very reason he denies Works to justify, Of the
Coven. p. 70.
because [Works do not embrace Christ]: Your distinction of Inchoated and
Continued Justification, will here stand you in no stead. For besides that Mr.
Ball speaks of Justification simply considered, it is certain that Works neither
at first nor afterward conconcur with Faith in embracing the promise of
free-forgiveness in Jesus Christ: and therefore if Faith justify in this
respect, (as Mr. Ball says it And p. 71. he proves it, because in Scripture
every where Faith in Christ, in the Lord Jesus, or the Blood of Christ, is said
to justify, not Faith in other Promises, Threatenings, or Commandments.
does, and you seem to give your approbation of what he says) surely both at
first and afterward Faith alone does justify: though Works appear in their
season, yet they do not concur with Faith unto Justification.

4. That which you cite out of Mr. Ball, p. 20. does not reach home to your
purpose. To say, as he there does, [A disposition to good Works is necessary to
Justification], is no more than to say, A lively and working Faith, or a Faith
apt and ready to Work, is necessary unto Justification. So when he says, [Good
Works of all sorts are necessary to our continuance in the state of
Justification, and so to our final absolution, if God give opportunity]; he
means only this, that Works are necessary Fruits of that Faith by which we
lay hold on the Righteousness of Christ, Of the Coven. p. 21.
and so are justified and absolved. [The Faith that is lively (says he) to
embrace Mercy, is ever conjoined with an unfeigned purpose to walk in all
well-pleasing, and the sincere performance of all holy Obedience, as
opportunity is offered, does ever attend that Faith whereby we continually (N.
B.) lay hold on the Promises once embraced. Actual good Works of all sorts
(though not perfect in degree) are necessary to the continuance of Actual
Justification, because Faith can no longer lay claim to the Promises of Life,
than it does virtually or actually lead us forward in the way to Heaven]. It is
clear, that as well afterward as at first, he ascribes Justification only to
Faith, as being only that which does embrace the Promises, though he require a
working Disposition at first, and Works themselves afterward, as opportunity
serves, to testify and give proof that Faith is lively, Of the Coven. p. 73.
as he expressly speaks. The words which you further add, I have cited before,
and they are directly against you, showing that as I and others take the word
[Condition] Faith is the only Condition of Justification, and Works no part of
it. And see what Mr. Ball adds immediately after those words, [Faith and
Works are opposed in the Matter of Justification, not that they cannot stand
together in the same Subject, for they be inseparably united, but because they
cannot concur or meet together in one and the same Court, to the Justification
or Absolution of Man]. That which you cite from p. 21. is not to be understood
(as you seem to take it) of actual walking, but of a disposition to walk, as he
said p. 20. [A disposition to Works, etc.] This disposition is the
qualification of that Faith, or always conjoined with that Faith, whereby we
are partakers of Christ's Righteousness. This plainly appears to be his
meaning, both by the words immediately going before, and also by the words in
the preceding Page, both which are already cited.

1. If Personal Righteousness be not perfect, Ibid.
but have need of pardon for the imperfection of it, then there is no being
justified by it. This very reason Luther, Melancthon, Calvin, and Chemnitius
give, why we cannot be justified by Inherent Righteousness, as I noted before
out of Wotton de Recon. part 2. lib. 2. cap. 19. number. 4. And to this purpose I
also have cited before the words of Calvin, Davenant, Amesius, Rivet and
Maccovius. As for the Metaphysical Perfection of Being, which you speak of, it
is but such as does belong to things that are most imperfect. And for
Praestatio Conditionis N. Legis, it is not (as I have said before) properly
that Righteousness by which we are justified, though it be required to that
end, that we may be partakers of Christ's Righteousness, and so (viz. by that
Righteousness of Christ) be justified. 2. Of Justification quam continuationem,
and Sententiam Judicis (nempe in ultimo Judicio) enough has been said before.
Neither Calvin, nor any of our famous Divines, (that I know) nor yet the
Scriptures (so far as I can find) do teach, that we are justified by Faith
alone at first, but by Faith and Works afterward; yea I have showed the
contrary both from the Scriptures, and from our Divines; yet they both teach,
That Faith whereby we are (both at first and afterward) justified, has in it
at first a readiness to Works, and afterward does work, as opportunity is
offered. Quid commerita est Fides (inquit Maccovius) in progressu vitae, ut
tantum non possit, quantum in initio? Ergone ingenium fides mutaverit, etc. De
Justif. Disp. 10. See Calvin Instit. lib. 3. cap. 14.. 11. and Rivet in Genesis
15. Exercit. 83. page 404. Col. 1. Whereas you say that Calvin maintains a
true Personal Righteousness; What is that to the purpose? Who does not so? If
that were all that you bade see Calvin for, truly you might soon cite Authors
good store: but (as Martial speaks) Dic aliquid de tribus capellis. Show that
either Calvin, of any Judicious Orthodox Divine does hold such a Personal
Righteousness, as whereby we are justified: both Calvin and all our eminent and
approved VVriters (that I know) deny this Personal Righteousness to be
available unto Justification. Yea, and so do some of chief account in the
Church of Rome. Contarenus, a Cardinal, to this purpose you may find cited by
Amesius contra Bellar. Tom. 4. lib. 6. cap. 1. These. 1. Pighius also, a great
Romish Champion, is as clear and full for this as may be. In illo (inquit sc.
Christo) justificamur, De Fide and Just.
non in nobis; non nostra, sed illius justitia, quae nobis cum illo
communicantibus imputatur. Propriae justitiae inopes, extranos in illo docemur
justitiam quaerere. Much more he has to the same purpose, and herein does so
fully agree with Protestants (though about Faith, as being that alone whereby
the Righteousness of Christ is imputed to us, he dissents from them); that
Bellarmine having recited the Opinion of Protestants, says, (De Justif. lib.
2. cap. 1.) In eandem sententiam, sive potius errorem incidit Albertus Pighius;
he adds also, Et Authors Antididagmatis Coloniensis. And for Pighius he says
further, Bucerus in libro Concordiae in articulo de Justificatione, fatetur
Pighii sententiam non dissentire a Lutheranorum sententia, quod attinet ad
causam formalem Justificationes, sed solum quantum ad causam apprehensivum,
quam Lutherani solam fidem, Pighius dilectionem potius quam fidem esse definit.
Here by the way observe, That Bucer (if Bellarmine did truly relate his
Opinion, though not his only) made Christ's Righteousness imputed to us, the
formal Cause of Justification, and Faith the only apprehensive Cause: and that
therefore he was far from making us to be justified by our Personal
Righteousness, and from making Works concurrent with Faith unto Justification;
but that otherwise is evident enough by what has been cited before out of him.
The truth of my Conclusion (I think I may well conclude) is firm and clear,
viz. That according to Calvin (and so Bucer and all our famous Writers)
Personal Righteousness is not that whereby we are justified. What color you
can have to except against this Conclusion, to say it is merely my own, is to
me a wonder.

Ibid. Repentance and Love to Christ are not excluded from our first
Justification, yet have they no co-interest with Faith in Justifying; Faith,
not Repentance, or Love being Causa apprehensiva (as Bucer and other
Protestants do speak) that which does apprehend Christ's Righteousness, by
which so apprehended we are justified. Neither is it denied, that outward Works
are requisite, that we may continue justified here, and be sententially
(solemnly and openly) justified at the last Judgment: yet it follows not that
Justification as continued and consummated at Judgment, is by Works, as
concurring with Faith unto Justification. It is the Righteousness of Christ
apprehended by Faith, by which we are justified from first to last, only this
Faith being of a working Nature, we cannot continue justified, nor shall be (i.
e. declared to be) justified at the last Judgment, except we have Works to
testify and give proof that our Faith is lively, as Mr. Ball before cited does
express it: but thus also it will follow, that Works being wholly wanting, we
never had a Justifying Faith, nor were at all justified.

86. 1. That the Qualification of Faith is part of the Condition of
Justification, so that Faith alone, as apprehending Christ and his
Righteousness, is not the Condition (or Instrumental Cause, for I do not take
Condition for Causa sine qua non, but for that which has some causality in it)
you have not proved. The Condition of our Justification is that we believe in
the Lord Jesus Christ; this presupposes a desire of him, and infers a
delight in him, and submission to him; yet it is only believing in him, by
which we are justified. 2. Though the taking of Christ for King be as Essential
to that Faith which justifies, as the taking of him for Priest, yet not to
Faith as it justifies. Of Fides quae, and Fides qua justificat, as also of
taking Christ for King, and taking him for Priest, I have said enough before.
3. I mean that Faith only justifies, as it receives Christ as Priest, tho that
Faith which justifies does receive Christ as King also. 4. If it be (as you
grant) Christ's Satisfaction, and not his Kingship (or Sovereignty) which
justifies meritoriously, then (as far as I am able to judge) it is our
apprehending of Christ's Satisfaction, and not our submitting to his
Sovereignty, by which we are justified. The Act of Justifying Faith, as
Justifying (methinks) can extend no further than to that Office of Christ, in
respect of which he justifies; or than as Christ is our Righteousness, by
which we are justified; Christ as Advocate does only justify by pleading his
Satisfaction for us, and our interest in it, and as Judge, by declaring us to be
justified by it: and all this secundum foedus novum, which is the ground of our
Justification. 5. I so confess Faith to be the Condition of Justification, that
nevertheless I hold it to justify as apprehending Christ's Righteousness, God
having in that respect required Faith of us, that we may be justified. And
herein (as I have showed before) I have Mr. Ball and other Judicious Divines
agreeing with me, who call Faith a Condition of Justification, and yet make it
to justify as it apprehends Christ and his Righteousness.

Ibid. My words clearly show my meaning, viz. That Justification as it is begun
by Faith alone, so it is continued, so that Obedience has no more influence
into our Justification afterward than at first. Justifying Faith at first is
Obediential, i. e. ready to bring forth the Fruit of Obedience; and afterward,
as there is opportunity, it does actually bring forth the same; yet both at
first and afterward it is Faith and not Obedience by which we are justified.

Ibid. 1. I have also often enough told you, that you bring nothing of any force
to prove Sentential Justification at Judgment a distinct kind of Justification,
or any more than a declaration and manifestation of our present Justification.
2. For the Texts which you alleged, you do not answer what I objected. You
alleged them to prove, That we are justified completely and finally at the
Last Judgment, by perseverance in faithful Obedience. I objected, That they
speak of Justification, as it is here obtained, and so make not for your
purpose; to this you say just nothing, only you seem to say something to those
words in the end of the Animad^^rsion, [They show who are justified, not by
what they are justified]; but that which you say, is of small force. For none
can truly say as much of the Texts alleged for Faith's Justifying, seeing that
those Texts expressly say, That we are justified by Faith, and that Faith is
imputed unto us for Righteousness, which the other Texts do not say of
Obedience.

Ibid. 1. Did you never understand my meaning about Faith's justifying until
now? Nay, you seem not yet to understand it. Does not Faith justify at all, if
it only justifies Instrumentally and Relatively? Is this so strange unto you,
that when we are said to be justified by Faith, it is meant in respect of the
Object, viz. Christ and his Righteousness, which is indeed that by which we are
justified, though it must be apprehended by Faith, that we may be justified by
it? Where is now the totus mund^s Theologorum Reformatorum, which sometime you
spoke of? My acquaintance in this kind is not so great (I think) as yours, yet
I have before alleged many to this purpose. I will here add one more, a Man of
note, Dr. Prideaux, (Lect. 5. de Justif.. 11, 14, 16.) Justificamur (inquit)
per justitiam Christi, etc. Atqui Fides ex part nostra hanc justitiam sic a
Deo imputatam, apprehendit solummodo and applicat; quia neque Charitati, vel
spei, vel alteri habitui hoc munus competat. And again, Justificat primo Deus
Pater admittendo, and imputando. 2. Deus Filius, Satisfaciendo, and advocatum
agendo. 3. Spiritus Sanctus revelando and obsignando. 4. Fides apprehendendo
and applicando. 5. Opera, manifestando and declarando. And again, Animadvertere
potuit Bertius, nos non proprte justificationem fidei attribuere, sed
metaleptice, quatenus objecti actus propter arctam connexionem inter illum and
habitum, usitata Scripturae phrasi, in habitum transfertur. 2. For Christ's
Righteousness justifying formally, or being the formal cause of Justification,
I have showed in what sense some of our Divines do hold it, and some reject it,
and that the difference is rather in words, than in the thing it self. 3. To me
it seems no obscurity to say, [Faith or Believing does justify, because
Christ's Righteousness, except it be apprehended by Faith, is not available to
Justification]. Is not this as much as Faith does justify Instrumentally, or
as apprehending Christ's Righteousness by which we are justified? The reason why
Christ's Righteousness cannot justify, except it be apprehended by Faith, is
this, That God does require Faith of us; Faith (I say) apprehending Christ and
his Righteousness, [Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ] that so we may be
justified. God's Will is properly the Cause, yet there is a congruity in the
thing it self, an aptitude (you grant) in the nature of Faith: it is of an
apprehensive Nature, and its apprehending of Christ's Righteousness (the Will
of God still presupposed) does make this Righteousness ours, even as a Gift
becomes ours by our receiving of it. If Davenant's words, which I cited, be not
against you, then nothing that I can say is against you. For I cannot express
my own mind, as to that point, more clearly and fully than he does. I will
repeat his words again; (De Justit. Habit. cap. 28.) Nihil usitatius quam
causae applicanti illud tribuere, quod proprie and immediate pertinet ad rem
applicatam. Quia igitur fides apprehendit, and applicat nobis justitiam
Christi, id fidei ipsi tribuitur, quod reapse Christo debetur. Is not this
against you, who say, Append. p. 120. [Faith is a Work and Act of ours; and if
Faith justify as an apprehension of Christ, it justifies as a Work?] Do not
these words of Devenant tell you, that it is not Causa applicans, but res
applicata; not Fides, but Christus fide apprehensus that does justify? Faith
then is said to justify, yet not in respect of it self, but in respect of its
Object: it is not properly Faith apprehending, or the apprehension of Faith,
but Christ and his Righteousness apprehended, by which we are justified. Much
has been said before to this purpose. If this be nothing against you, I know
not how in this particular to say any thing against you: if it be against you,
surely it is nothing but what that Reverend Author says in the words cited.
And mark (I pray) upon what occasion he brings in those words. Bellarmine (De
Justif. lib. 2. cap. 9.) says that Calvin, from Romans 4. Vbi dicitur fidem
Abrahae imputatam esse id justitiam, gathers, nihil esse aliud nostram
justitiam (nempe qua justificamur) quam fidem in Christum, id est, (N. B.)
Christi justitiam Christi fide apprehensam. Against this he objects, Apostolus
dicit ipsam fidem imputari ad justitiam: fides autem non est justitia Christi,
etc. To this Davenant answers, Sed frivota est haec objectio. Nam nihil
usitatius quam causae applicanti, etc. Your Objection is the very same in
effect with Bellarmine's; so that if Davenants words be any thing against
Bellarmine, they are as much against you. And truly as you put off the words of
Davenant, so you might with the same ease have answered all my Animadversions,
and so you may all these Exceptions, by saying, That they are not against you.
It is a strange faculty that you seem to have, of making any thing for you, as
when you bid see Calvin on Luke 1. 6. and nothing against you, as here in this
place.

Ibid. When Mr. Manton speaks of Faith Justifying as a Relative Act, his
words immediately before (which I also cited) show his meaning, viz. That Faith
justifies in its relation to Christ, as it receives Christ: so that not every
Act relating unto Christ, but that which does so relate unto him as to receive
him, is that which justifies: but what I say of the Act justifying, must
always be understood in the sense before explained. That Faith in respect of
its apprehensive nature, is more than Causa sine qua non, to me is clear; it is
Causa applicans, as Davenant in the words even now cited does call it. 2. To
contend much about Faith's Instrumentality, I do not like; I mean in respect of
the word [Instrumentality], so that we agree in the matter, yet as our best
Divines have used the word, I see not but it is convenient to be used. 3. I
grant that it is a material question, Whether it be the receiving of Christ
only as Priest that does justify; for the confounding of Christ's Offices, and
of the Acts of Faith (as Mr. Blake before cited says well) is not to be
endured. But I see no necessary dependence of this question upon the other,
viz. Whether Faith justify as an Instrument, a sole-working Instrument, or as
an Ordinance, or Relative Action required on our parts; which Mr. Manton said
is all to the same issue and purpose, and so I think it is.

87. For the distinction of God's Will, you might at first apprehend what I
meant, though perhaps my Expressions were not altogether so clear as afterward;
neither indeed do you seem to speak so clearly of it in your Aphorisms. 2. How
pertinent those Testimonies which you speak of are, I cannot tell; but truly as
you cited Calvin on Luke 1. 6. it is no hard matter to cite many. 3. What you
alledg out of Davenant, I might evade, by saying as you did, That it is not
against me; but I will not put you off so. I answer therefore, Ad 1. [Bona
opera sunt necessaria omnibus fidelibus, and justificatis, qui habent usum
rationis, and per aetatem operari possunt]. Ita sane res habet: quis negat? Sed
number ideo bonis operibus aeq^e ac fide justificamur? Adverte, quaeso ipsa
authoris tui verba. [Bona opera sunt necessaria justificatis], non
justificandis. Nam (ut site Augustinus) [Bona opera sequuntur justificatum, De
fide and operibus, cap. 14.
non pracedu^t justificandum. Quid quod tuipse fateris, nos fide absque
operibus in initio justificari? Ita, inquies, sed postea ut justificati simus,
opera etiam a nobis requiruntur. At Davenantius istud non dicit, non iis certe
verbis quae citasti. Jubes autem legere sequentia; lego igitur, [Facile est
hujusmodi opera multa (praesertim interna) commemorare sine quibus justificatio
nunquam fuit ab ullo mortalium obtenta, nunquam obtinebitur]. Sedne hic quidem
dicit opera ista pariter ac fidem justificari. Ea enim, quae ad justificationem
requiruntur, cum i^s quae justificant, Contra Bellar. Tom. 4. l. 5. c. 5.. 1.
confundi non debent, ut been monet Amesius. Quin and ipse Davenantius latum
discrimen facit inter Fidem and Opera, cum Fidem ideo justificare dicat, quod
justitiam Christi apprehendat, ac nobis applicet. De Justit. Hab. cap. 24. Arg.
8.
Id enim Fidei peculiare est, nec Operibus ullo modo tribui potest. Ex
Davenantii igitur sententia, non partim fide, partin operibus, sed fide sola
justificamur. Ad 2. That Conclusion is the same in effect with the former. Some
internal Works must go before Justification, yet they do not therefore justify
as well as Faith. Davenantius eo ipso loco negat opera necessaria esse ad
justificationem, ut causas, sed tantum ut ab obtinendam Equestrem dignitatem
necessarium est adire aulam regiam, atque coram rege in genua se dimittere.
Fidem autem (loco alio, atque alibi citato) dicit esse causam applicantem
justitiam, Christi, atque ideo ei tribui, quod proxime and immediat^ pertinet
ad rem applicatam; Fidem nempe dici justificare, cum proprie justitia Christi
fide apprehensa justificet; id quod ego mordicusteneo. Ad 3. De retinendo
scilicet, and conservando Justificationis statu, antea satis responsum est. Id
nunc dico Davenantium nec in principio Justificationis, nec in progressu ejus
vim virtutemque justificandi operibus juxta ac Fidei tribuere, etiamsi dicat
bona opera ad Justificationis Statum retinendum and conservandum esse
necessaria; id quod ego libenter agnosco. Cum enim in ipso Justificationis
exordio Fidem operibus gravidam esse oporteat, procedente demum Justificatione
Fidem opera parere necesse est. Ad 4. Dico te extra oleas vagari, cum ego de
Condition Justificationis loquar, atqui istiusmodi quidem Condition, qua
justificari dicimur, tu autem opponis mihi authorem deoperibus justificatorum
(i.e. Eorum, qui jam justificati sunt, and fide quidem, non operibus, ex
authoris istius sententia) ad salutem necessariis disserentem. The Pages to
which you further refer me, I cannot consult, my Edition differing from yours,
as you might perceive by some places which I cited. But your Inference is of no
force, as having no ground for it, viz. That if I will be of Davenant 's mind,
I must be of yours. I do not see that Davenant does attribute as much to Works
as you do, who hold that they justify, and urge the words of St. James for it,
whereas Davenant (as I have showed) makes Faith to justify as apprehending and
applying Christ's Righteousness, which surely Works cannot do. De Justit. Act.
cap. 32.
He says also, Opera sequuntur Justificationem, and praecedunt
Glorificationem, being not acquainted (it seems) with your distinction of
Justification as Inchoated, and as Consummate at Judgment, whereby you would
have Works to be as well a Condition of Justification, as of Glorification.
What Davenant does mean when he calls Faith an Instrument, he does
sufficiently show, making Faith to have a Causality in Justifying, by
apprehending and applying Christ's Righteousness, by which we are justified.
But do our greatest Divines give as much to Works as you do? This you will
undertake (you say) to manifest. Why? then make it appear, that they hold Works
to justify as well as Faith, or to have a co-interest with Faith in the Effect
of Justifying. Except you perform this, (which I presume you never will) you
cannot make good your Undertaking. So do our greatest Divines give more to
Faith than you. As you urge the (...) of St. James for being justified by
Works, so you also insist upon the very Letter of St. Paul, and will have Faith
it self to be properly our Righteousness, by which we are justified: This our
greatest Divines do not no more than the other. Yet you stick not to brand
them, as making Man his own Justifier and Pardoner. (...); Truly this is
overgross. What professed Adversary could reproach our greatest Divines more
than thus? Whither will not a Man's partiality carry him, if he be let alone?
May you not as well say, That Christ made some their own Saviors, because he
said, That their Faith had saved them? I had thought that all the Glory did
belong to the principal Agent, rather than to the Instrument. And to what
purpose do you say, [Who can forgive sins but God only?] Do they that make
Faith an Instrument of Justification, deny this any more than you, who make
both Faith and Works Conditions of it?

Yea, some will have that Monstrum horrendum, and firstborn of Abominations
(as they phrase it) to be laid at your own door. Mr. Kendal against Mr.
Goodwin, cap. 4. p. 140.
For my part I shall say no more than this, That you seem as guilty this way
your self, as they whom you censure, though neither you nor they (I think) are
indeed guilty in this kind. But why may not Man's Act be an Instrument of God's
Act? Or to speak more properly, Man acting be an Instrument of God acting? We
are workers together with God, 2 Cor. 6. 1. Surely not in a way of
Co-ordination, but in a way of Subordination; and so Man may be God's
Instrument. I am not therefore of your mind, but think, that the Gospel rather
is properly a Means, and Ministers Instruments: though to be nice and curious
about words, so that the Matter be found and good, I do not love.

Ibid. and 88. 1. That Faith does justify, as it apprehends Christ, appello
totum Mundum Theologorum Reformatorum; I have given you enough to this purpose
before. Now to your Reasons why this is to set up (...) Credere, I answer; Ad
1. Not Apprehendere and Credere simpliciter, but Apprehendere and Credere in,
i.e. Apprehendere Christum, and Credere in Christum, are all one. And when it
is said, That this does justify, the meaning is, Christus fide apprehensus
justificat: so that this does not set up (...) Credere, as some do set it up,
who make it as our Act simply considered, to be that Righteousness by which we
are justified. Ad 2. Their meaning is not obscure, as you pretend, that you may
the better oppose it. The Object of Faith, Christ's Righteousness apprehended
by Faith, does justify: and so Faith is said to justify, not as considered in
it self, but in respect of its Object, which it apprehends, because it
apprehends that, viz. Christ's Righteousness which does justify. Ad 3. The
formal reason why Faith does justify, is its Apprehension, yet still that is
in respect of the thing apprehended, Causae applicanti illud tribuitur quod
immediate pertinet ad rem applicatam. Id fidei ipsi tribuitur, quod reapse
Christo debetur, as Davenant before cited does express it, whose words you said
were not against you, though none can be more in this Matter.

For the second Point you are quite mistaken. For I do not put a difference
betwixt Justification and Right to Salvation, but betwixt Justification and
Salvation it self, i.e. the full enjoyment of it, viz. Glorification. I have
frequently expressed my self to this effect, That by Faith alone we are
justified, and so have Right to Salvation; yet by Works and Obedience also we
must come fully to enjoy Salvation.

In hoc Foedere (scil. Evangelico, says Davenant, De Justit. Actual. cap. 30.
page mihi 396.) ad obtinendam reconciliationem, justificationem, atque aeternam
vitam, non alia requiritur Conditio, quam verae and vivae fidei. Presently
after he explains himself thus; Justificatio igitur, and jus (N. B.) ad
aeternam vitam ex Condition solius Fidei suspenditur.

By the way you may observe how he calls Faith the Condition, and the only
Condition of our Justification, and yet he makes it not to be Causa sine qua
non, but Causa Instrumentalis and Causa applicans, as appears by his words
before cited. Your following Arguments are not against me, you do but fight (as
they say) with your own shadow. Yea, you having objected against your self,
Romans 5. 10. You answer directly as I use to do, viz. That Paul does not
distinguish betwixt Reconciliation and a Right to Salvation, but betwixt
Reconciliation and actual (and Complete) Salvation. You add, That Paul makes
them both Fruits of Free Grace. And what Protestant (say I) does not so? A
necessity of good Works, as the way of attaining unto Salvation is asserted,
yet it is denied that good Works are meritorious of Salvation. That in Romans 8.
6. (whence you infer, That only Faith is not the Condition) proves not that
Faith alone is not the Condition of Justification and Right to Salvation, which
is all that I contend for. What you mean by those words [Life as well as
Righteousness] I do not know. Neither do I see what those Verses, 13, 14, 17.
(viz. of Romans 8.) are for your purpose. Whereas by the way you say, [Faith
justifies, not qua Instrumentum, vel Apprehensio proxime sed qua Conditio
praestita, because Justification is given as a Reward; and Rewards are given on
Moral Considerations, and not merely Physical]; I have told you before, That I
also include a Moral Consideration, and do not make Faith to justify merely as
it is of such an apprehensive Nature, but as being of such a Nature, God
therefore in that respect has been pleased to make choice of it for that end,
that by it, apprehending Christ and his Righteousness (i.e. properly by Christ
and his Righteousness apprehended by it) we should be justified.

FINIS.

