Fraterna Correptio: OR, THE SAINTS ZEAL AGAINST SINFUL ALTARS: Delivered in a
SERMON Preached on a day of Humiliation for the Errors, Heresies, and Schisms
of our times and Nations.

By Z.C. Minister of the Word.

Utinam talis z^lus in nobis ess^t, and quidem non unum Altar erectum videmus,
sed innumera. Ferus in decl^m. in Josh. 22 Because Ephraim has made many
Altars to sin, Altars shall be unto him to sin, Hosea 8.11. And they arose and
took away the Altars that were in Jerusalem. 2 Chronicles. 30.14. We have an Altar,
whereof they have no right to eat, who serve the Tabernacle, Heb. 13.10.
Imprimatur;

Edm. Calamy.



London, Printed by T. R. and E. M. for Robert Gibbs in Chancery lane, near
Serjeants-Inne. 1655.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL, Mr. Daniel Andrews, Esquire: ALDERMAN of the
Honorable City of LONDON.
Right Worshipful,
DEdications of Books being a custom no less commendable then common, did
engage my prefixing of your worthy name to this small Treatise, and simple (I
dare not so call it, for the matter declared in it, but the management of it by
the Author) Sermon: preached (in obedience to the commands of Church Officers)
some months since, and now published to the provoking of more general zeal
against sinful Altars then our times afford. Worthy Sir, the aims propounded
to my self in this present Dedication, are such as are common to all
Dedications: First, to express my thankful acceptance and acknowledgement of
your undeserved respect to me, a mere stranger in your frequent attendance on
my Ministry; and fervent expostulations with some in my behalf, in matters
wherein I have been concerned, and many other ways expressed. Secondly, and
chiefly to excite your zeal for, and engage your attendance on Gods one only
Altar distinct from, nay, in opposition to all false Altars of human erection.
Sir, I do not in the least tax you of lukewarmnesse, or suspect your recession
from Gods Altar: no, my self, and many others that minister to the Lord, having
observed your constant attendance on the Ordinances of the Gospel, your
countenance to the Ministers of the Gospel, your complaints against the Errors,
Heresies, and Schisms of the times, with your careful turning away from such
as innovate new and false principles, and practices of Divine worship, must
needs bear witness that you are very fit to be one of the ten Princes of our
English Israel, to be delegated to expostulate with separate brethren
concerning their seeming (at least) building of an Altar against the Altar of
the Lord. Sir, though I speak this without flattery, yet I cannot but observe
you obnoxious unto danger, and a fit object of the Apostles Caution, Let him
that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall: ^or. 10.12.
and that not only as you are a man subject to infirmity, as are your brethren:
but also as you are eminent by your place, a Ruler in our Israel, capable of
being more serviceable to God whilst you stand, and to Satan if you fall. We
see Corahs rebellion and formal Altar-building-sin drew in two hundred and
fifty Rulers famous in the Congregation, and men of renown. Satan well knows
he is a mean man that draws not after him some Clients: and that the
multitude (like Bees) follow their master. Hence his policy is to make the
Leaders of the people, leaders of them into sin. May I therefore be bold to
commend to your reading this small Treatise, as an antidote to temptation, and
guard against all the assaults of Satan, by which he may labor to batter in
pieces your present zeal to the Lords Altar. And now, Sir, I cannot pass over
the third common aim of Dedications, wherein you may be serviceable to the
Author; nay, to God and the souls of men: that is, that your eminent Name may
commend this poor Sermon to public acceptance, and your report of the words
of the Lord therein spoke, may provoke a desire in others the Rulers of this
sinful City to read and hear it: Sir, it is worth observation that Baruchs
roll written against Altar-building Jerusalem, Jer. 36.13, 114, 15, 16.
from the mouth of the Prophet Jeremiah; by the favor of Michaiah the son of
Gemariah the son of Shaphan, obtained an audience from all the Princes; nay, an
access into the presence of the King of Israel. If in this respect this small
Tract may become a Baruchs roll; It may be they will present their
supplications before the Lord, and return every one from his evil way: for
great is the anger and the fury that the Lord has pronounced against this
people. Sir, I will no longer trouble you, but leave it under the shadow of
your Worships favor, not doubting your readiness to cover the infirmities of
it, and its Author with your scarlet robe; and beg of God that it may be useful
to your counsel and comfort in constant attendance on, and contentions for Gods
one only Altar. This, Sir, shall be the daily prayer of him who is,

SIR, Yours to serve you in all Gospel-Altar-ministrations, Z. C.

TO THE Reader.
Courteous Reader,
THou have here a Sermon some monetths since preached at the command of some in
authority in the Church, on a day of Humiliation for the spreading Errors,
Heresies and Scismes of our place and times. It was then by some sincere
worshippers at Gods Altar, desired to be made more public; but was by the
Author denied, and adjudged to remain in silence; yet revived importunity has
reversed that sentence, and presented it to thy view and censure; if thou have,
as does become the sons of Zion been observant of what has past in our
English Israel, thou can not but have seen Church against Church, Ministry
again Ministry, Baptism against Baptism, Fast against Fast, and Thansgiving
against Thanksgiving; some worshipping God one way, others in a way direct
contrary. Certain it is, both cannot be the way of the Lord, one must be
humane invention, will-wors^ip, an Altar against Gods Altar, and s^ the object
of zealous resistance; receive then this small Tract, as that which may by the
grace of God be in some measure useful to discover the sinful Altar, and direct
thy duty toward it.

Two things I desire to premise to thee at the entry of the work: The first is
an answer to an objection, of which in the preaching of the Sermon I had not
time to take notice; neither have since, as I might have done, inserted it; but
think convenient to note to thee in this place, It is this:

If God will be worshipped at one only Altar, how came it to pass that the
Patriarchs and holy men of God did worship at various and distinct Altars?

To this I answer.

First, these various and distinct Altars were used before God had pitched his
Tabernacle and the visible Arc of his presence, and fixed his Name and people
in a settled station: such were the Altars of Abraham and the Patriarchs in
their pilgrimage and travels: but when God had settled Israel, we read not of
any ordinarily built or used. Hence when David was banished from Jerusalem, w^
read of his panting thirsty desire of return for the Sanctuary sake, but not
of his rearing any Altar elsewhere. It was his sad affliction to want worship
at Gods Altar; is would have been his sin to set up an Altar in a strange
place.

Secondly, The Altars that at any time were erected, were able to plead
extraordinary and immediate command from God on extraordinary and emergent
occasions: of this nature was Abraham's Altar in mount Moriah, and Gideons Altar
called Jehovah Shalom, Judges 6.24. and David's Altar in the threshing-floore of
Araunah the Jebusite, 2 Samuel 24.25. Extraordinary precepts cannot be ordinary
proofs.

Thirdly, These were temporary and transient, passed away as soon as they had
served the special occasion for which they were erected; so that God had but
one permanent abiding Altar at which he was constantly worshipped.

Lastly, Though these Altars were various and distinct in matter, yet they were
one for object and form of Divine service; and if God dispense with the matter
by an immediate command, it will be no warrant ordinarily to set up different
matter of divine worship.

The second thing I would premise, is, by way of admonition; when thou
resistest sinful Altars, keep rank and order: step not out of thy place and
calling: invade not the Ministers Chair, with authority to reprove, and
excommunicate: nor yet the Magistrates Throne, to draw the sword of vengeance,
and drive a present precipitate war against brethren. In thy place observe
the sin, mourn under it, admonish brethren of it, wait with patience and in
peace to see what the Princes and Priests of Israel will do against it: It is
true in the text under consideration, all Israel were up in arms with sword in
hand, and purpose in heart to resist the sin; but observe Joshuah and
Phinehas, the Princes and Priests of the Lord summon to it, and lead them in
it: Israel might never stir to war till summoned by the sounding alarms of
the Number 10.
silver trumpets: they rose not to war against the Altars of Baal, when
Solomon was addicted to a sinful Toleration. If God give Magistrates up to a
sinful indulgence of false Altars, it is thy duty to sit in peace, and by
secret mournings to resist the sin: thy irregular insurrection will be the
sin of thy soul, and shame of thy profession. Courteous Reader, let me
therefore charge thee to perform the practices of piety with a spirit of
peace, and to keep thy own compass in expression of thy zeal to Gods Altar.
I will hold thee no longer, but to let thee know, that if any shall charge this
Sermon with violence and bitterness, it is nothing but what is expected; and
therefore was endeavored to be declined as far as was consistent with
Ministerial plainness and zeal; and the charge being groundless, will not be
regarded by the Author, who has taken it up for a lamentation, that our days
denominate zeal violence, and lukewarmnesse moderation, contending for
connivence at, and indulgence of positive sin, and endeavoring to extend
Toleration of all religions so far, that Schisms, Errors, and Heresies may
not only be exempted from the Magistrates sword and Churches Censures, but even
Ministerial reproof and private Christians complaint. So commending thee to the
consideration of thy duty hereby declared; and both it and thee to the grace of
a jealous God; I subscribe my self

Thine to serve thee at Gods sincere and single Altar, Z. C.

Errata.
PAge 6 line 1 woid read would, p 16 l 7 for defecton defection, p 47 l 25 for
Congregration r Congregation, p 49 l 20 for consent r consent, p 50 l 4 r not
se p 71 l 5 r as if, p 79 l 14 for Aretius r Acesius, p 80 l 5 for sot is r it,
p 105 l 13 their of r of their p 111 l 21 concernig r concerning, p 120 l 10
word r wordie, p 112 l 4 immoderatly r immediately p 138 l 11 unifermity r
uniformity p 150 l ult, set r let.

The INDEX. The Saints zeal against sinful Altars, in which you have this
Doctrine.
THe building Altars besides the Altar of Gods is a sin to be seasonably seen
unto by sincere worshippers at Gods Altar. Page 9
This is illustrated by showing,
1. The signification of the word Altar. p. 10, to p. 20 2. Several ways of
building Altars besides Gods Altar; as Materially. Page 20 Objectively. Page 23
Formally. Page 24
3. Several duties of sincere worshippers. 1. Seeing the sin Page 31 2.
Sensibly affecting themselves with it. Page 32 3. Seasonable caution and
counsel. Page 33 4. Speedy removal of temptation. Page 34 5. Zealous
resistance. Page 36

The Doctrine is proved by showing the sinfulness of the sin in respect of the
grounds of it.
1. Shameful novelty. Page 41 2. Swelling pride. Page 46 3. Self-advancement
and advantage. Page 52
Sinful acts of it.
1. Receding from the Lord. Page 59 2. Renddring man's will the rule of divine
worship. Page 63 3. Rebellion against God and the Church. Page 69
Sad effects of it.
1. Rending from the Church. Page 73 2. Running God upon straits. Page 79 3.
Rendering Gods worship vile. Page 86 4. Reviving the Lords fury. Page 88
Aggravating properties.
Singularity of the subjects. Page 91 Sin agninst standing counsel. Page 92
Shuts Gods ears. Page 93
The Doctrine is applied by way of examination, in which you have the
Characters of sinful Altars by the concomitants of it.
1. Doctrines dissonant to truth. Page 100 2. Public astrological predictions.
Page 103 3. Separation from the Church. Page 117 4. Enmity to such as minister
at Gods Altar. Page 121 5. Dispensation of divine worship without due call.
Page 126 6. Doleful contests for universal Toleration. Page 129 Enquiry whether
as sincere worshippers, we have done our duty for Gods Altar. Page 132
Humiliation provoked by considering:
1. We sin under strokes of Gods fury. Page 136 2. Under a solemn Covenant.
Page 138 3. It will subject us to severe judgments. Page 140 4. It is a
symptom of Gods departure. Page 141
The second Use of the Point is exhortation to such as seem to build Altars.
To admit enquiry, and to give to brethren a cheerful account of their actions.
Page 143 To such as have forsaken Gods Altar, to return to it again. Page 147
To such as yet worship at Gods Altar.
To stick to it, to stand up for it against all opposition. Page 150
Fraterna Correptio, OR, SAINTS ZEAL Against Sinful Altars.
JOSH. 22. the latter end of the 19. verse. Rebel not against the Lord, and
rebel not against us, to build an Altar besides the Altar of the Lord.
SIncerity in the Lords Worship being always suspicious of mixture, corruption
or apostasy, does instigate and bring forth a zealous resistance of every
thing that bears but the show of innovation: This we may find very fully
manifested by the ten tribes of Israel, that had passed over Jordan, and
possessed the promised land on that side: if we observe their zealous carriage
(grounded but on a supposition and suspecting jealousy) toward their brethren
of the two tribes that did abide on the other side of Jordan, which in this
Chapter is at large declared.

The Chapter is, as the Book, Historical; and contains in it these two parts.

First, is Joshuah's religious dismission of Reuben, Gad, and the half tribe of
Manasseh, to their allotted portion of the promised land: wherein after the
commendation of their past obedience, ready attendance on their brethren, he
sends them away with a solemn charge, to continue their obedience to Gods
Commandments, and their constant adherence to him, with all their heart and
soul, unto the 9. verse.

The second part declares the Consequents of their return, and they are two as
the most considerable.

the work begun by them in their return to their possession: and that is the
building of a great Altar, like unto the Altar of God. A thing that might well
provoke jealousy, v. 9, 10.

Secondly, the wise carriage of their on the jealous apprehensions of the work
begun by them; and this is to the end of the chapter. And in their mutual
carriage we may observe these things.

1. The nine tribes and half observe it, they heard it, and heed it, v. 11.

2. Prepare a power, and purpose a positive resistance of it, if found to be as
they suspected, v. 12.

3. Presently dispatch Phinehas with ten Princes to demand an account of their
work, and weighty reasons that might induce to it: as also to caution and
counsel their desistance and cessation, v. 13, 14. who coming to them discharge
their duties, and execute their commission these ways.

First, by representing to them the apprehensions of their brethren, concerning
their Altar-building, v. 16.

Secondly, by rendering the sin vile in their sight, if they had intended it as
was feared: by aggravating the same by the sin of Achan and Baal-Peor, for which
sins the wounds received were yet green, v. 17, 18, and 20.

Thirdly, requiring by their authority a cessation from so sinful a work: and
propounding an expedient to the conceived cause, v. 19.

4. A pathetical, religious and brotherly answer of the two tribes and the
half, unto the message received from their brethren, wherein they (though
building an Altar) yet do not stubbornly deny to give their brethren an account
of their proceedings therein: but do

First, by a solemn appeal to God, protest that it was not, as was suspected by
their brethren, to separate from them, or set up a place for the Lords worship
not by him commanded, or to commit idolatry.

Secondly, they publish the very grounds and reasons inducing, and end
whereunto they built their Altar, after the fashion of the Altar of God; (viz)
that it might be a monument of their obedience, and relation to the Lord, as
also an engagement to posterity to worship the same God, at his own appointed
place: shut out the feared differences that might grow by the distance of their
possession; from v. 21. ad 30.

5ly. The pleasant departure of the messengers, satisfied in the answer
received, and cheared by this evidence of Gods presence and mercy, v. 30, 31,
32.

6ly. The peoples denomination of their finished Altar, according to their
declared end of its erection, v. 3^, 34.

The chapter thus opened, you may see the words of the text to fall under the
ten tribes apprehension of the work of the two tribes, and message delivered by
Phinehas, and the ten Princes, and they are an authori ^tive dehortation,
wherein we may observe these two parts.

1. The suspected sin dehorted from: to build an Altar besides the Altar of the
Lord.

2. The serious reasons exhibited to enforce it, which are two, setting out the
nature of the sin as it is a rebellion against God: Us, his People.


If time would admit, and it were now convenient, I might from the distributed
parts of the chapter infer many useful Conclusions and necessary Doctrines, but
that I decline as a work more proper to the exposition of the whole chapter,
then indeed to any one thing chosen to be spoken to in it. I might also if I
delighted in the mincing of the words into many parts, observe many
particulars, as

1. The dehorters, the ten tribes by their Priest and Princes.

2. The dehorted, the two tribes and half.

3. The matter from which they are dehorted, from building an Altar besides the
Altar of God.

4. The manner of the dehortation, with the reasons enforcing it.

From these several parts I might infer so many several Conclusions, and speak
to them particularly: but my design and desire is, to lay before you the
sinfulness of the sin of Altar-building, suspected by the ten tribes to be in
act in the two tribes; and therefore I shall desire you to look on the words,
as an abstract of the whole carriage of the ten tribes toward the two tribes
on a conceived guilt: or a compendious manifestation of their sincerity to, and
zeal for the true Worship of God, against the supposed defection of their
brethren.

As for the explication of the words, there is in them little or no difficulty:
as for what might be said to show this sin to be a rebellion against God, and
against his people, I shall (God willing) speak to it in the doctrinal
prosecution of the truth to be inferred: only I shall desire you to take
notice, that from this history, is by the general judgment of Expositors
inferred, the Magistrates power in punishing heretics and apostates, and duty
to preserve uniformity of divine worship: nay, hereby is justified the making
war against such as make defection from the Altar of God; Piscator says, It
was Piety in the ten tribes, that they resolve to make war with the two tribes
for their defection from the true God. The Assembly of Divines say, Such was
their zeal, Annot.
that they had rather hazard their lives, then suffer Gods true Religion to be
corrupted: for God had ordained there should be but one place for public
worship and service, and but one Altar. The Geneva and Dutch Annotatiors
approve the war. Not to note any thing out of Popish Writers, as Vatablus,
Cafetan, Cornelius A Lapide, Masius and others, who generally justify the war,
and with Ferus say, They sent messengers to try the crime, and bring to
repentance, and were ready if the two tribes obeyed not, armis discernere, to
decide the matter by war; and this is necessary for you to take notice of,
that God had ordained a station for his worship, as well as for his people, and
determined one special Altar to be erected, to which he bound his people to
bring all their offerings, and by a positive Law prohibited the erection of any
other Altar, (as in Deuteronomy. 12. is to be seen at large) then that which was built
by Moses before the Tabernacle, and afterward by Solomon in the Temple, which,
as Piscator observes, laid a necessity on the ten tribes to make war with the
two tribes, by reason of which they did not consult whether they should do it
or no, but the manner how to manage it: so that the standing Ordinance of God,
for adherencie to one only Altar (as the Voluit Deus unicum tantum esse altar
in suo populo: ut esset typus unici Mediatoris Christi, tum ut esset nervus
unitatis in Religione. Par. in loc.
sign of one only Mediator, and the bond of unity in Religion) was by the ten
tribes contended for, when they conceived their brethrens erection of another
Altar, in a place distinct from that prescribed by the Lord to be the violation
thereof; and this occasioned the dehortation in the text, Rebel not against
the Lord, nor rebel against us by building you an Altar besides the Altar of
the Lord. So that from the words thus generally considered and briefly opened,
I shall commend to your Christian and serious consideration, this general
Observation or Point of Doctrine.

Erection of Altars besides the Altars of God,

The zealous discharge of this duty by Hezekiah and Josiah, 2 Kings 18.4.23.12.
in the demolishing of Altars, besides the Altar of God, and reducing the
people to the unity of worship, is in sacred Records specially mentioned as the
luster of their religious reforming times: 1 Kings 15.14.
whilst the neglect thereof is singled out and set up as the black butt of
blemish to religious Asa, Amaziah, Azariah and Jotham, 2 Kings 14.4.15.4, 35.
sincere Worshippers of God.

But for the more full prosecution of this truth I shall propound this method,
to speak to you by way of Illustration, Confirmation and Application.

First, by way of Illustration, and shall endeavor to open to you two things.

First, how Altars may be said to be built, besides the Altars of God, and that
even in Gospel-dayes.

Secondly, how and wherein sincere Worshippers of God are to act and approve
their duty in seeing to this sin of Altar-building.

First, then to speak to the first of these, (viz.) how Altars may be built,
even under the Gospel, besides the Altars of God; I shall desire you to
consider the term; Altar is in Scripture Phrase, properly or improperly and
figuratively significant.

1. In a proper sense, it signifies organum divini cultus praecipuum, the chief
instrument of the divine worship, ordained to be built before the Tabernacle,
or in the Temple, on the which the Priests were to wait, that they might offer
the sacrifices the people were bound to present in that very place; of which we
read in Deuteronomy. 12. where God commands an Altar to be built, and the people to
worship him there: even an instrument of his worship; and thus it is generally
read in the Old Testament, for that very instrument of Gods worship: in this
sense the Heathens generally use the word and thing, and the Papists contend
for the same thing, by imposing on us the proper and restrict sense of the
word: persuading and practicing the building of Altars, distinct places of
divine worship for the Sacrament of the Lords Supper to be offered on, whence
they call that Ordinance, the sacrifice of the Altar. What man of but mean
capacity and knowledge in the Scriptures, observing the Lord Jesus the Antitype
of both Sacrifice and Altar, sees not their assertion as well as argument to be
Jewish? (but I intending an illustration, not confutation: This having been by
many of the Learned confuted,) shall not stand upon, or spend time to do it:
only I desire you to note, that in this proper sense God under the Gospel,
requiring no sacrifices, requires no Altar of stone, or brick, or the like
matter to be built unto him, Heb. 13.10.
but a sincere and spiritual apprehension and adherence to Christ, Habemus
Altar, videlicet Christum and sacrosanctum ipsius sacrificium. Hun. in loc.
Inep^i sunt qui hinc alta^ia lapidea vel lignea in Templis Christianorum
requirunt. Par. in Heb.
as our real and proper Altar, as well as sacrifice, to which every believing
soul is privilegio, not officio, a spiritual Priest to offer prayer, praises,
etc. unto God, 1 Pet. 2.5. So that to build material Altars of wood, stone and
the like, must needs be a sin to be seen unto, and withstood, as opposite to
Christ our one only Altar unto God; and that to contend for Altars in this
sense, is so far from my intent, that I with Pareus declare them foolish and
simple that so do.

2. In an improper and figurative sense, the word is more strictly and
allegorically used by the Fathers, as Augustine, Optatus and others, Ecce
qualem Ecclesiae sententiam audire merebit ^ qui ad convivium nupt^ale, id est,
ad Alta^e Domini aut ebriosus, aut adulter, etc. praesumit accedere. Qui
agnoscens reatum suum ipse se ab Altari Eccl^siae subtraxerit: ab aeterno illo
and coelesti convivio excommunicari penitus non timebi^. Aug. in Christum. De
signis ejusdem fractis. Aug. ad Bon. ep. 50.
when they do by this word denominate the Table, Instrument, or seat on which
the bread and the wine at the Lords Supper was placed the Altar, and so did
vulgarly call that Ordinance the Sacrament of the Altar: the which term of
theirs the Papists taking advantage or occasion by, labor to justify their
Altars, and impose it on us on pain of heresy to be received, Ad Altar
visibile quod in Ecclesia ponitur multi scele^ati accedere possunt ad illud
coeleste quo praecursor pro nobis introivit Jesus nullus eorum accedere
possunt. Aug. de necessitate poenitentiae. Hom. 1.
much advancing the Fathers above the Scriptures authority, the which their
persons and judgments were subject to, and whosoever observes the expressions
of the Fathers, does clearly see the opposition of Altar in the Temple to our
Altar in Heaven, the denomination of it the wedding Supper, and in express
terms sometimes the Table, and the Lords Supper, cannot but confess that they
did allegorically use the term Altar: and in their complaints of the furious
carriage of the Donatists and Arrians, cry out of their breaking down of the
boards of the Altar, and many times expressly of the tables, and burning the
wooden board, etc. for many of them at last, seeing the corruption which began
to grow by the use of the word Altar, Subscellia thronum mensam ligneam Tabulis
Ecclesiae and caetera quae poterant for as elata combusserunt. Atha. ep. ad
solitariam vi^am agentes: quid est Altar? seeds corporis and sanguinis Christi.
where the thing was denied did more warily and improperly use (...) a table,
for the place of the elements: so that in this sense we do not take the word
Altar in the Doctrine: for though the Sacraments be parts of the divine
worship, yet I shall not limit and bound the word Altar to the place and
ordinary instrument of their use: for I shall say of Tables in private places,
as Bullinger of fixed Altars, or rather Tables so called. I condemn them, not
being used to the proper end, and in a right manner. Only the conveniencie of
public Instruments, kept in public places, to public ends duly preserved, I
am so far from restraining the term Altar, to signify that instrument we
vulgarly call the Communion Table, that I shall with Peter Martyr confess the
catachrestical use of it by the Fathers, Dicta hujusmodi non aedificarunt
plebem, sed potius illam ad Judaicos and Ethnicos ritus impellebant: cum caeca
quadam (...) tam a Judaeis quam ab Ethnicis and Altaria and alios ritus
mutuarentur. Pet. Mart. loc. Com. p. 897.
and acknowledge words of this nature thus used, may not profit the people, but
accidentally draw them to have too reverend an esteem of Jewish, Heathenish,
and (let me now say) Popish rites, the sense not being understood in the use of
the word.

Having refused the proper sense of the word Altar, and that restrict improper
figurative sense, used in past ages of the Church, we come now to consider it
in a second improper signification, in which we shall find it used in
Scripture, and that is in a metonymical and synechdochical sense of the word
Altar, which being but an instrument, (though a principal one) of the Worship
of God under the Law, is put for the whole and every part of it: and being the
sign of it, is often used to express divine Worship signified, (...) Unde
(...) the very word in the text, est sacrificium vox Hebraea, and speciatim
atque proprie de sacrificatione, and generatim pro toto cu^tu usurpatur, cujus
praecipua fere olim pars fuit sacrificium. Vid. Stuch. de sacrificio.
so that we must note the Altar used in that sense that a learned man affirms
Sacrifice to be used, both words coming from the same root in the Hebrew, which
signifies to sacrifice, and so the Altars are called Sacrificatories, and that
is for the whole Worship of God, of which the sacrifice on the Altar was a
chief part.

The word Altar thus put to express the Worship of God, Synecdochice potest
intelligi, quod cultum divinitus institutum exturbaverint, protriverint novo
idololatrico invecto. Par. in Romans 11.3.
we shall find in many places of the Old, and generally used so in the New
Testament; as, 1 Kings 19.14. Elijah his complaint of Ahabs breaking down the
Altars of God, which though it be by some understood literally, in its proper
sense; yet by others it is expounded, that he demolished the Worship of God,
and thus generally the defect on of Gods Worship is called a casting off and
forsaking the Altars of God; and reformation, a restoring of the same: and from
this metonymical and synechdochical sense, it comes to be metaphorically used
to express the Worship of God under the Gospel, wherein these instruments of
Worship are not at all used, and so in those Prophecies which predict the
Propagation of the Gospel, and the Worship of God we find promised, the Temple
and the Covenant of the Priesthood to be restored, Haec omnia quae de Altari de
votis and sacrificiis hic dicuntur non sunt intelligenda Levitico, sed
Evangelice; Propheta Leviticis verbis significat ea sacra quae Evangelio
Christi docentur. Bren. in loc.
and the Altars of God to be erected, as in Jer. 33.17, 18, 21. So also the
Lord promises to set up his Altar in Egypt, as in Isa. 19.19. and that the
Egyptians should offer sacrifice unto him, v. 21. which must needs be
understood of the Gospel Worship, which should be and has been received in
Egypt, and not in that literal sense apprehended by Onias the High Priest, and
urged as the great argument to persuade, and indeed did (though with a clear
reluctance of his own thoughts) prevail with Ptolemy Philometor then King of
Egypt, Altatis autem nomine utitur ad designandum velut a signo cultum Dei:
quod sacrificia and oblationes exercitia essent pietatis. Calv. in loc.
to build a Temple there, and according to their zealous ignorance to
accomplish this Prophecy as he pretended, although they never proved the
accomplishment of this Prophecy in the Egyptians, speaking the language of
Canaan, crying to the Lord, and offering sacrifice and oblations unto him; as
also bringing in the Assyrian to join with them, and Israel as the third
party; all which are promised to be the concomitants of this Altar-erection,
and therefore must confirm the former sense of the word Altar as taken for the
Gospel Worship of God: so it is also used in the 56. chapter of this same
Prophecy of Isaiah, the seventh verse, Calv. in loc. Brent. etiam.
where God promises the sacrifices of the stranger to be accepted on his
Altar, that is, the worship they shall do unto him through Christ; and thus
also in the New Testament, the Worship of God is expressed by this word Altar,
as, 1 Cor. 9.13:10, 18. wherein he teaches, that such as are employed in the
Worship of God, must be maintained by it: and that such as eat of the
sacrifice offered to idols, partake in the worship of idols: and so the word
Altar must needs signify the Worship of God; in Matthew. 25.3. wherein our
Savior by a kind of Loquitur more seculi, quando oblationes omnis generis
sacrificiorum adhuc in usu erant; totum vero Dei culium comprehendit externum,
Gualt. in loc. sic Ca^^ Par. Aretius and Dionys. Carth^s.
Jewish manner of speaking, shows the necessity of brotherly agreement, before
an approach to God in any act of divine Worship: and thus is Jesus Christ
evangelically dispensed, the Altar of which the subjects of Legal and Levitical
dispensations cannot partake, Heb. 13.10. so that thus you see the word Altar,
though a legal term, yet capable of an Evangelical signification, not only as
it has been used by the Professors of the Gospel, to express and signify the
Table, on which the bread and wine is set in the Lords Supper; but also as it
signifies the whole Worship of God; and in this sense I understand it in the
doctrine, and shall desire to be understood in the whole discourse about it:
for as the Worship of God was amongst the Jews, corrupted and declined by the
building of any Altars, besides the one only Altar prescribed by the Lord: so
under the Gospel, all innovation of principles and practices, over and above,
below or beside the prescribed Worship of God in his Word, I conclude to be a
rebelling against the Lord and his People, by building an Altar besides the
Altar of God; for that to build a sinful Altar besides the Altar of God, is in
the language of the Psalmist to defile our selves with our own works, and to go
a whoring after our own inventions: it is to refuse to own the object to be the
Author of divine Worship, to be regulated by any other Law, then our own reason
dictates, and will determines, Religio supra statutum, quae in praeceptis
humanis fundata and ex ^is pendet ac consti^^^tur.
and so to set up against God and his people, that (...), superstition and
wilworship which the Apostle dehorts the Christians from, Col. 2.23. and this
was a sin not only committed under the Law and Levitical Worship of God, but
may also be committed under the Gospel: I, and has been; for the Fathers in
the primitive times were wont to observe and declare the Arrians, Novatians,
Donatists, and other schismatic^l heretics disturbing the peace of the Church,
corrupting the doctrine of faith and Worship of God, Altar adversus Altar
erigere, to build Altars besides the Altars of God. And that you may the better
understand the same, I shall briefly show you how Altars may be built, either
materially, objectively, or formally.

First, Altars may be built against the Altars of God materially, as when any
other matter it innovated and introduced into the Lords Worship, as an
essential part thereof, which the Lord himself never prescribed or required: and
thus under the Law, the Jews are sadly complained of, and condemned, for the
multiplying of their Altars as their Cities, J^r. 11.13. and according to the
multitude of their fruit, Hos. 10.1. which were no other then material organs
of divine Worship, distinct from that one, by which alone God would be adored:
such as these were Jeroboams two Altars at Da^ and Bethel, and such as
generally all the usurping Princes of the ten tribes of Israel, and some of the
Kings of Judah did erect. And under the Gospel we may observe the guilt of this
sin charged on such as called themselves true, but are branded for false
Apostles, 2 Cor. 11.13. in that they imposed on the Christians Circumcision,
and the Levitical Law as essential parts of Gods Worship, whilst it was a
matter in abrogating and abolishing, though it had formerly been established:
such are cantiously seen unto by the Church at Antioch: and considerately
condemned by the Council of the Church convened at Jerusalem: Acts 15.24. for
that they troubled the people of God, and (...), Unde argumenta (...) apud
dialecticos s^nt argumenta ad destructionem. Lorin.
subverted their souls from the proper prescribed Worship of God. These Saint
Paul in all his Epistles, to Corinth, Galatia, Ephesus, Colosse, or others,
writes against, as subverterers of the sincere Worship of God received, and
Innovators of their own inventions and impositions, therefore called a
will worship, Col. 2.23. This innovation or rather retention of the matter of
Levitical Worship under the Gospel, is by the Author to the Hebrews, set in a
diametrical opposition (thorough the whole Epistle) to the Gospel-Altar of God,
and declared to be so sinful, as was inconsistent with participation in the
Christians Altar, in Heb. 13.10. Thus also the Papists innovating the crossing
ceremony, sanctifying water, the five sacraments, sacrifice of the Altar, the
Ave Maria, prayers to Saints, and the like matters, as essential parts of
divine Worship, do clearly in the very matter build Altars besides the Altars
of God: so that if the Ministers of God do offer unto God any other matter as
acts of divine Worship, their Ministry will not sanctify their action, but
their innovation makes them subject to the guilt of Altar-building, whilst the
matter of their offering be like to the fire of Nadab and Abihu, strange fire
before the Lord. Lev. 10.1, 2.


Secondly, this sin of building Altars, besides the Altars of the Lord, may be
committed objectively, when the very material Altar continuing, is diveried
from its proper object, unto such, as not being Gods, cannot be the object of
divine Worship: as when the Temple is used to idolatry, the incense of the Lord
is smoking before idols, the sacrifices of God are offered unto Baal, and the
like; all which, though in themselves the very Altar and proper matter of the
Lords divine Worship: yet not being duly tendered to him, is the building of an
Altar besides his Altar; this sin was committed by Manasseh, in diverting the
Temple to idolatry: and is expressly digitated to Ezekiel, when God shows him
the defilements of his Sanctuary, the cloud of incense ascending before the
images, and the twenty five men worshipping, not God, but the Sun, Ezekiel. 8. And
of this God complains, (viz.) that they had defiled his Sanctuary, when they
brought in their idol-service into his holy place, Ezekiel. 5.11, 23, 38. for the
Temple of Jerusalem was not the Temple of the Lord, whilst diverted to idols,
any more then the temples of Apollo, or other heathenish gods are such, when by
Christians they are disposed into convenient places, for the Assemblies of Gods
people to worship in: so that now under the Gospel, to give divine Worship to
any but the true God in Christ, is to build Altars against him, and destroy
his; for though prayer be a part of Gods Sacrifice and Worship, yet it is not
so, nay, it is opposite thereunto, if Darius the King, the Lady Mary, Peter,
Paul, or any other Saint whatsoever be the object thereof: and so the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper, a great p^rt of Gods Gospel-Altar, cease so to be by the
offering it unto God, as one to be appeased, satisfied and reconciled by a
sacrifice; and not as one already satisfied and appeased; nay, it is by the
change of the object, changed in its own nature, and of Divine made
will worship.

Thirdly, Altars may be built besides the Altars of God, formally: when the
very Altar, sacrifice, incense, and every matter of the Lords Worship is
retained, and performed to the very object of divine Worship, the true God in a
false manner of administration: matter miscarrying in the form is changed, as
to its nature; for the axiom is true, that forma dat essentiam: the form
denominates the thing (...), according to that which it is, distinguishes it
from other things, and indeed makes it to be what it is; for the matter is
indeed the principium passivum, capable of being whatsoever the form does make
it; being the principuum activum: Forma est Principium activum pe^ quam res
est, distinguitur ab aliis, denominatur, and operatur.
and thus the slaying of beasts by private men is no more then a moral act of
slaughter, which when done by the Priest, is the religious act of Sacrifice:
and so under the Law, Saul's offering of beasts in sacrifice, is so far from
being divine Worship, that it is denominated disobedience, because not done
according to the prescribed form of God, 1 Samuel 15.22, 23
who not only ordains the matter of his Worship, but also the manner and form
thereof: and in this sense the sin of Corah and his company may be said to be
the erecting of an Altar besides the Lords Altar, when by the gathering of a
guedah or Congregation out of the Congregation, they did separate from the
Church of God, and on the pretense of Piety crying up all the people as holy,
invade the Ministerial despensation of God without due form and order: whereby
they provoked the Lord to vindicate the formal administration of his Ordinances
by the severity of his judgments on them, Numb. 16 Psalm. 106.16, 17.
and by his Statute concerning their censers, that they should be plates of
memorial, that no stranger, not of the seed of Aaron formally called, presume
to celebrate divine Worship: and their sin the Apostle Jude in his general
Epistle notes, to have been committed under the Gospel; and in all the action
we find no change of the matter, but only the miscarriage of the manner in a
separate way, by such as were not formal Ministers. An act like unto this was
that of Vzzahs, in 2 Samuel 6.8. in laying hold upon the Ark of God not formally
called: the danger of religions ruin will be no warrant for men not formally
called to it, ministerially to support and save it.

The great aggravation of Jeroboams sin and evidence of his Altars to be
against the Altar of God, was his expulsion of such as were formally called to
celebrate divine Worship, and establishing of his usurped Magistracy, by an
usurped Ministry, ( for he that would, made himself a Priest, to administer
sacred actions contrary to Gods standing Law, and signal severity on Corah and
his company for this sin) as we at large see in 2 Coron. 13.9, 10. whilst
Abijah declares Judah to retain the truth of Gods Worship and Altar, not only
in the matter and object, but the form and manner thereof by the standing
Ministry of God. And as we find the privation of the form under the Law in
sacred dispensations, to be principium transmutationis, the changing of the
nature of the Ordinance of God, from holy to profane: so also we shall see it
to be under the Gospel; for though adjuration in the Name of Jesus be in it
self a sacred action, yet when disorderly and precipitately without Legitima
autem nominis Dei and Christi invocatio est, quae side dirigitur, nec excedit
vocationis metas. Calv. in loc.
formal authority used by the Exorcists, it will provoke the devil himself to
justify the power of Jesus and Paul, but to torment these usurping Intruders,
Acts 19.13, 14, 15, 16. The neglect of the formal administration of the Lords
Supper in the Church of Corinth, will engage a sincere Paul to affirm
positively, it is 1 Cor. 11.20. Negat eos tunc edere Coenam Dominicam quia
illegitime edere, sit non edere. Par. in loc.
not to eat the Lords Supper at all; for the form destroyed the entity which
must be restored by a formal return to the first sacred institution: and I
cannot but observe the care and pains taken by the Author of the Epistle to
the Hebrews, in asserting the formal inauguration, and exercise of the Lord
Jesus in the work of the High Priest toward God, that he might convince the
Jews that he was no usurping Impostor, but really and formally the High Priest
expected, especially in the fifth chapter of the Epistle.

So that hereby we may see that men may provoke God by their own inventions,
and go a whoring after their own ways, in not only adulterating the matter,
but also the very manner of the Lords worship: and this must needs be a
grievous sin in Altar-building, to make Gods Altar to stand against it self,
nay, whilst it seems to be (and so is more apt to seduce,) what indeed for
want of ministerial authority, and formal dispensation it is not: thus the
Assemblies of the Novatians, Donatists and Arrians, though using Word, Prayer
and Sacraments, were denominated builders of Altars: for that action, which is
sacred in the hands of a Minister, is but common in the hands of private men:
the Lords Supper duly administered by a lawful Minister thereun^o ordained,
will be but at the best a Corinthian love-feast in a John of Leydens hand: and
Baptism a sacred sign and sealing part of Gods Worship, when administered by a
lawful Minister in the Assemblies of Gods people, will be (to use, but not to
own the Anabaptists phrase) but baby-washing by a Midwife, and but mere washing
of the body by the lowest of the people, renouncing or never receiving
Ministerial authority: preaching of the Word, the great part of Gods public
worship in the mouth of a Minister, will be but the simple speaking of things
as good or true, but not as engaged by office to enforce with authority by a
private man. Having thus given you to see what I understand by Altars, and the
different ways whereby they may be built, besides the Altar of God. I shall
close this first part of the illustration of the Point, with this sad
observation which I cannot be silent in, viz. that the corruption of our nature
and times is apt to carry us from one extreme to another. Whilst we are
reforming material innovations, As the learned Didoclavius, alide Catherwood
did denominate the late corruptions of the Church of England.
we run after a superstitions manner of administration of sacred worship; and
though we lately, and yet loudly cried for the purity of Gods Altar, yet we are
apt to destroy the power, by taking away the Priestly ministerial authority
thereof, which must concur to make actions sacred, and parts of divine worship.

I come now in the next place to show you what must be done by sincere
worshippers of God, that they may discharge their duty of s^eing to this sin of
Altar-building, in the resolution of which I shall dictate some few directions
from the precedent in this chapter; wherein if we observe the carriage of the
ten tribes on this conceived act of Altar-building, we shall find these duties
to be done by such as would see to this sin.

First, they must satisfy themselves of the certainty of such an act to be in
agitation; they must take cognizance of the fact before they condemn it: they
must have ears and eyes open to attend to reports, and observe actions; and
hearts rightly acted to apprehend and determine the nature of such things as
they hear and see; they must not shut their eyes at all affairs abroad because
of their own liberty at home: nor live at peace themselves, and leave all
others to serve God as they list; but knowing that there is but one God, and
one Altar or way of worship, they must see whether all that call themselves by
the Name of the God of Jacob, do wait on him at that one Altar, or erect any
other to any sinful end. Thus we shall find the ten tribes carry toward
their brethren; they are so far from condemning complaints of this nature,
and contending for the liberty of the men, that they take notice of rumors,
and are ready to fire their beacons on a bare report: see, v. 11, 12, they
heard say, and begin to stir; yet they run not rashly upon a bare report to
ruin their brethren, but send chosen men to require and receive an account of
the work in hand, by them suspected to be sinful Altar-building: who returning
satisfied in themselves, do also satisfy the Congregation; so that the first
thing to be done, is to search out the certainty of the thing: that by sinful
silence occasioned by non-observance, they indulge not building Altars besides
the Altars of God, on the one hand, or on the other run rashly on the ruin of
their brethren, condemning without conviction, the generation of the innocent
in a just action.

Secondly, they must sensibly affect themselves with the nature of the sin and
the sad aggravations thereof. The hiding of sin under the tongue shows that it
is sweet in the mouth, Job. 20.12 13.
and resolved to be kept and spared. Sins aggravation is the souls
exasperation against it, wherein it is extenuated the heart is not affected
with sorrow for it, or zeal against it: Nehemiah seeing to the reformation of
the Sabbath of the Lord, Ne. 13.17
heigh^ens the sin to his own and the peoples sense; What evil is it that you
do? did not your fathers thus? did not God bring all this evil for this sin?
will ye yet bring the wrath of God on us? So the sincere worshippers of God in
the text, contending against the suspicious act aggravate it very much, calling
it a trespass committed, a turning away from the Lord, rebellion against God
and their brethren considering it to be a provocation of divine wrath, Verse.
16, 17, 18. of this chap.
parallelling it with Achans sin; and making it the more grievous, because of
the hand of God yet on them for the late sin of Baal-peor; in resisting the
sin of Altar-building; we must then not abate, but aggravate the sinful
nature thereof; for aggravations extract sorrow and emulate zeal.

Thirdly, seasonably caution, and seriously counsel the desistance of so sinful
a design; all means must be used to cure the wound before it be pronounced
immedicabile vulnus ense recidendum, incurable: for although to suffer
obstinacy against advice, were sinful indulgence; yet to str^ke precipitately
without solid conviction, and serious counsel to desist, is no better then
Papal tyranny. Sincere worshippers must in contending for Gods Altar, be
actuated by Gods counsel, to give first and second admonition before the
rejection of an heretic, Tit. 3.10.
and imitate the pattern of Gods patience, in warning and wooing before they
war: sin persisted in against counsels and cautions, pleads the equity and
necessity of justice and severity: whilst the pursuit of iniquity without
these preventing means bears the complexion of passionate, and prejudged
executions: and therefore the ten tribes though assembled with sword in hand,
and purpose in heart to correct this supposed sin: check their courage, and
command a stay to their proceedings, till they counsel their brethrens ceasing
from so sinful a design by the embassy of Phinebas, and his associates.

Fourthly, speedily accommodate our brethren with a removal of what arises
from our selves as an accidental temptation to the sin, and may safely be
removed: self-interest is always a sad obstructer of sincere contentions for
Gods worship: when self-denial sets Gods Altar above all our own enjoyments,
and commands a condescension of the lowest and hardest suffering terms that
may anticipate positive and direct sin: Sincere worshippers must have a Paul's
spirit, to become all things to all men, that all men may in sincerity obey the
Gospel of Christ; who will rather never eat flesh then any shall thence take
occasion to refuse or recede from Christianity: who will ^ather labor with his
hands then that the burden of Gods worship shall make it be distasteful
(though he have power to expect, if not exact maintenance) and like unto the
ten Tribes in the Text, who will rather though to the diminution of their
already divided inheritances, admit another division, and allow Credibile est
plerasque tribus non nimis laxe habitavisse, cum tot passim essent Cananaei;
and tamen gentem ob hominum multitudinem a r^ pecuniaria copiosissima sedibus
atque possessionibus recipere; sibique urbes atque agros quae illis attribuunt
detrahere malunt; quam ut adeo tradita religionis jura mutari aut pollui ab
illis paucis tribubus sinant. Mas. in Jos. 22.19.
a portion for their brethren, then that they shall divide from the Altar of
God: Knowing that it is better for them to admit poverty then profaneness.
Groundless scrupulosity sometimes does (as in the case in the Text it was
conjectured to have done) engage men to schism and separation from the sincere
worship of God; therefore wherein the pretended cause, though clearly
accidental, may with some disadvantages as to our own enjoyments be removed;
the care of such as contend for the conservation of the Altars of God, must be
to see it done, and condescend to the same: that thereby they may show to the
silencing of the sinners, it is simple purity of Gods worship they pursue.

The fifth and last duty, inferred from this very story, to be done by sincere
worshippers of God in their contending for the Altars of God, is zealously to
resist the sin of Altar-building: this is the part of their duty the loud
cries of general liberty amongst us does decrie: yet it must be done: Non
dubium est quin sancto zelo excanducrint: non omnibus quidem datus gladius in
manumsed Pro sua quisque vocatione et officio viriliter and constanter studeat
purum religionis statum contra omnescorruptelas. Calv. in text.
every one being bound in his proper place, and according to his capacity, to
approve themselves true attendants on Gods Altar and Sanctuary, by withstanding
sin in the genus of it, and so in every particular species, eminently
attempting to restrain schism from the Church, and sad apostasies from the
worship of God. Although we do not see, or say that strangers to the God, and
Altar of Israel were to be by force compelled to become proselytes to their
religion, and to worship at their Altar: yet what is clearer in all the story
of the Church then that they were to be Judaei neminem proselytum faciebant
donabant^e jure suae gentis nisi prius s^se circumcidisset, Legem M^s^s
recepisset and eorum sacrificiis communicasset. Pet. Mart. loc. Com. p. 204.
restrained from worshipping at any other Altar, or any other god in the midst
of them: how much more clear is it that all defection, or backsliding from the
worship and Altar of God by such as were joined under the visible
administration of his Covenant, was with a Spirit of zeal and a strong hand to
be restrained? Is not this in this very story, so very clear, that he that runs
may read? See we not the people of the ten Tribes generally assembled with
power in hand, and purpose in heart to impede the suspected sin, and so to
keep in due order of attendance on Gods Altar? Is it not to this end that God
has invested his Church with authority, and censures, and requires the due
execution thereof, that by fear men may be forced from sin? Is not the
cutting off the troublers of Gods Church, rejection of heretics, casting off
and delivering up to Satan for the buffetting of the flesh, the very act of
this resistance? Was it not the discharge of this duty that emulated the
Apostles in their days, 1 Cor. 5.
and succeeding faithful Ministers of the Gospel, by the Authority of Christ to
withstand the false Apostles, Gal. 5.12. Tit. 3.10
and seducing teachers of their times, as sinful Altar-builders, that this lies
as a duty on the authority of the Church is generally granted by all, even by
such as deny the same to be a duty in the Magistrate, which at this time is not
my part or purpose to disp^re, having been done by more able men, and that very
fully; that only which I would dictate is, that in general every professed
sincere worshipper of God, is to approve himself such, not only by
cautionating against, or counselling from, but also in his place, and according
to his capacity, in contending against the sin of Altar-building, as private
Christians by friendly objurgations, and discountenancing the same, even by
drawing from communion and otherwise, when duly called: Ministers of the Church
by reproving, condemning and censuring, nay if thereunto called, defending the
place of Gods worship against their entrance into the same, to correct their
sin, as did Alexander that famous Bishop of Constantinople, and undergoing not
only censures of bitterness and violence, but even banishments and saddest
sufferings, as did Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria in withstanding the Arrians:
and when I consider Christian Magistrates waiting on the Altar of God by the
fullness of their power, and influence of their authority on the sons of men,
to be in the sit capacity to manage to the purpose this resistance. I
cannot see (whatever others say to the contrary) how to exempt them from the
approving themselves sincere worshippers at Gods Altar, by the faithful and
zealous discharge of this duty.

Thus then I have done with the second thing to be illustrated, and have showed
you what duties he on the sincere worshippers of God in seeing to the sin of
Altar-building, and you see they must, 1. See it. 2. Be sensibly affected with
it. 3. Speedily cautionate from it. 4. Seasonably remove accidental occasions
as far as may be. 5. Zealously resist when other means will not avail, that
so they may not share in their guilt. I now come to the confirmation of the
Point thus illustrated, by giving the reasons of it.

The reasons, why the building of Altars besides the Altar of God is to be so
seasonably seen unto by the sincere worshippers of God, I shall briefly
comprehend under one general head, and that is this:

To build Altars besides the Altar of God is a sin exceeding sinful: it is
sufficient to emulate a sanctified heart against it, to assert it simply to be
a sin, though of the lowest order; for saving grace does militate against sin
as such, not as it is more or less grievous: yet how much more fervently and
fully will it bend it self against sin, as it appears aggravated, vile, and
exceeding sinful, more eminently and immediately dishonouring God, provoking
fury, scandalizing religion, and sadly dividing the Churches of God? of which
nature, to the emulating of zeal, and engaging the strength of sincere
worshippers of God against it, I shall labor to let the people of God see this
sin of Altar-building to be; and that in the consideration of the grounds,
actings, effects, and sad aggravations thereof.

F rst, Altar-building besides the Altar of God, will appear a sin exceeding
sinful, if we consider the sinful grounds from whence it springs and arises;
amongst others we may specially take notice of these three common causes
thereof.

First, shameful novelty; that frame Variam dant otia mentem.
the soul; this is that frame of Spirit which renders a man weary of every
thing though in it self never so good: whereby men become Athenians to give up
themselves to things as they are new, rather then as they are good, and enquire
after Paul's Doctrine as new, Acts 17.19
and so suitable to their curiosities rather then as true and saving to their
souls; the which although noted as an occasion of Paul's preaching, yet is taxed
as an evidence of their vanity who minded nothing else but novelties, which
might be vanities according to the Greek proverb (...), Novelties commonly are
vanities. This is that shameful sin which brings a distaste on the most
pleasont object Apparet etiam quare tantopere novae res placeant, quoniam men's
cum primum quippiam nobile ac p^aestans affert se contemplandum, acriter and
attente ipsum int^^etur, quo cognito de studio remittit, ideo voluptas definit:
verum si priori objecto aliquid recens supponatur, denuo intelligentia
contendit studium ea contemplando, and voluptas redit, atque hoc pacto semper
rebus novis obiectamus. Pet. Mart. loc. com. p. 330.
, and places affection on that which is more base: a disposition more fit for
babes and children, then men of discretion, who should embrace by reason: this
novelty is the mother of sedition in States and Republics, which a wise
Lycurgus will labor to anticipate by his perpetual absence from his
Lacedemonian subjects engaged to constancy of obedience till his return: and
chiefest polliticians, by assenting to Plato his directions, and seeing that ne
quid in rebus ad religionem attinentibus innovetur, that novelties in religion
be not admitted. In a word, such is the vileness of this novellous temper,
that Satan cannot endure his ways and doctrines to be charged with novelty,
which he therefore cloaks with the plea, and brings in with the loud cry of
Antiquity, whilst he makes the truths, and ways of God distastful with the
charge of Paulus Samosatenus cast the Psalms out of the Church as new found
figments of late Writers. Eusebius. Hist. lib. 7. cap. 29.
novelty, which need; no clearer proof then the Papists contention for their
shameful absurdities, and horrid innovations with the pretense of antiquity,
whilst their common captious calumniating question against the true Churches
doctrine and worship of God is, Where was Protestant religion before Luthers
time? this sinful frame of spirit, this shameful inconstancy of the soul in
its object and weariness of any thing, though in it self never so good, when a
little old is clearly in Scripture dictated to be the cause or reason of
building Altars against the Altars of God. God expressly charged it on the
Jews, that being more novellous then other Nations they had changed their glory
into that which would not profit, Jer. 2.11. When thou did nothing else but
build other Altars unto Idol-gods: which in this very regard, to note this very
ground of following them, by forsaking God, are called new gods, that came
newly up, whom their fathers feared not. As in Deuteronomy. 32.17. And when God calls
them off from this sin of Altar-building, we may find him correcting their
novelty, as that which led them into the sin, by calling on them to enquire
after the good way, and the old, and walk therein, Jer. 6.16. and many times he
pleads his antiquity as a Creator, and as their Redeemer to confirm against
Babylonish idolatry, and curb their novelty in acting this sin: thus and to
this end is God opposed to idols with expostulating terms: Have ye not heard?
has it not been told you from the beginning? have you not understood from the
foundations of the earth, that I as the everlasting Creator of all things, am
the sole and only object of Altar-worship? Non habetis novitium Deum, sed eum
ipsum qui Abrahamo, Mosi, patribusque ab initio patefecit, and certe non parva
hinc confirmatio accedit, quod vetustas doctrinae nobis constat quae per tot
secula inter fideles continuata est. Calv. in loc.
Isa. 40. from ver. 18. to the end of chap. 41. at large to be seen; and so
also we shall find the sin of Gospel-Altar-building in turning away from the
doctrine and worship of the Gospel to be expressly grounded on, and flowing
from this shameful novellous property: the Apostle uses no enigmatical terms
when he makes this sinful, base disposition, and its effects the argument to
excite faithful Ministers of Christ to approve themselves sincere worshippers
of God, by zealous and diligent preaching, in season and out of season; for the
time will come when men having itching ears, given wholly to novelty, (not to
be pleased for their delicacy) will turn from the Altar of God not enduring
sound Doctrine, but will set up new Altars according to their own lusts, by the
heap of teachers gotten to themselves, Causam tanti mali dum vult assignare,
eleganti Metaphora utitur, qua significat tam delicatis auribus mundum fore,
tamque rerum novarum perperam cupidis, ut varios sibi magistros accumulet atque
ad nova identidem figmenta circumferatur. Calv. in loc.
2 Timothy 4.3, 4. So that shameful novelty to be the ground of this grand
iniquity we see clearly and positively asserted in Scripture; to which we might
add the experimented disposition of such in all ages of the Church of God, who
declining the sincere Word and worship of the Lord, and dividing from the
society of sincere worshippers, have by the distastes of found doctrines, and
inconstancy in their own opposed principles, and practices embracing and with
zeal advancing for truth to day, that which with no less zeal shall be
condemned for error to morrow: increasing to themselves teachers, and desirous
to hear every one speak, though they will know none to be over them in the
Lord: being (in a word apt) to try all things, but never to determine any
thing, to hold it fast as good: approve themselves men acted by no other
principle then novelty: but thus much may suffice (I hope) to convince, that
Altar-buildings many times comes from this very ground shameful, sinful,
childish novelty, which as you heard is so vile, as to make a people to decline
their God long, nay, always enjoyed and approved merciful and gracious to
them, to embrace those novellous vanities which are but momentany, and with
which they were not acquainted: but I must pass to the consideration of the
second ground, or cause of Altar-building, which we shall find no less sinful
to the aggravation of this effect.

swelling pride, that diabolical disposition that put the evil Angels on an
opposition of their Creator, from their very beginning to build their own
Kingdom: that high frame of spirit which admits no peers, much less
superiors: that boundless property that cannot endure to be prescribed by any
rules, or confined within any banks: which advancing its own inventions will
contend with men, nay, as much as may be with their sovereigne Creator for
Mastery, to which nothing but singularity and superiority can give
satisfaction. In a word, that cursed principle, which sucks nourishment from
Gods greatest mercies, and most gracious favors; and when strengthened
thereby, manageth a resistance of his sacred pleasures, and struggles to seat
it self in the divine chair, much more easily to prescribe the form and bounds
of that obedience which it will yield; this is a root so notoriously vile, that
none will own it but where it reigns be ready to excuse, I and with seeeming
zeal condemn it: its evil nature is so fully known as well by the light of
nature and long experience, as by the law of God, that to enlarge on the
discovery of its vileness were almost lost labor: yet from this odious and
abominable root does spring this cursed branch of Altar-building: which must
needs savor of that seed it does extract: this was the principle that put
forward Corah and his company to gather a Gnedah out of a Gnedah, a
Congregation out of a Congregration, and to build an Altar against the Altar of
God, by declining, nay, diverting the formal administration of divine worship
in the hand of Aaron; Number. 16.
for we see not that they went about to renounce the material Altar of God: who
can observe their stubborn refusal to come, when Moses called, with a proud,
though unjust recrimination on Moses, their puffed up spirits expressed in
their plea of universal holiness, with which they being too highly affected
durst argue against order and priority, and think al above them to take too
much upon them: who can consider the severity of Gods judgment, and their
censers made signs and monuments of caution to humility for future
generations, and not be clearly convinced that pride was the root of all their
evil of sin, which caused their sorrow? Moses charged this sin of
Altar-building in the declining of the Altar of the true God, and setting up
Altars to their new gods to be the overflowing effect of the Jews swelling
pride, when he digitates the time of this abomination to be when Jesuron was
waxed fat: and expressly notes to have been the cause thereof, Deuteronomy. 32.15,
16, 17. And as this evil disposition drew strength from God increasing mercies
in after-ages, so also did increase this sin of Altar-building causing the
sad complaints of the Prophets in Hos. 10.1. according to the multitude of
fruit they have increased their Altars. Throughout the Old Testament,
whenever God by his servants reproves this sin, he aggravates the same by the
expr^ssions of their pride, as in Is. ^5. from the 2. to the 7. verse. And in
the New Testament, we find Apostates, Seducers, Innovators in to the Lords
Word and Worship, stigmatized with this brand of pride; the Apostle Paul,
describing such as labor to draw aside silly women, and to set up their own
Altar, says of them among other properties that apt them for this work, that
they are proud, heady, high-minded, in 2 Timothy 3.2, 4. and in his first Epistle,
the sixth chapter, the third and fourth verses, notes, that such as teach
oth^rwise, and consent not to wholesome doctrine, are puffed up, knowing nothing,
and that he may clearly, evidence that this proud property produces a
declining of the Altar of God, and building others, he labors to anticipate
this sad effect by a necessary caution concerning the cause, in such as take
the charge of the Churches of God, Non (...) s^d: (...) pr^hibet apostolus,
quales etant Cate^humeni. Calv.
1 Timothy 3.6. where he advises, that a Bishop be not a novice, ungrounded in
the principles of Religion, and that for this very cause, lest he be proud, and
so fall into the snare of the devil. The Apostle Peter, in his se-second
Epistle, the second chapter, sets out seducers with the same characters, They
speak evil of dignities, and of what they know not, and speak great swelling
words of vanity. And Jude omits not this property, when he asserts them to
despise Governments, and to speak evil of dignities, to speak proud things; and
analogically asserts their way to be the gainsaying of Corah. But to close up
what might be more largely spoken to evidence this graceless property, to be
the ground of this grand iniquity, that might appear grievous in the eyes of
the sincerely gracious; I will only add this one general observation, (viz.)
the sin of Altar-buildng never was so eminently acted in the Churches of God,
before or since the Gospel preached, Christ come in flesh, as when the peace
and prosperities of the world had procreated and matured pride. In the Church
of the Jews it is evident, whilst they were beset with wars and troubles,
though by some men and at some times this sin was acted, yet Solomon's peace,
plenty and glory, was attended with the eminency of increasing various and
glorious Altars, to Ashteroth and Milcom, and the gods of the Nations, to which
his wives were related. And in the Christian Church, As Paulus Samosatenus, who
having unjustly gained riches, and puffed up with pride; usurped secular
dignities, and made himself a lofty seat and stately throne, after the manner
of the Princes of the world, exacting obeisance from the people by check and
reviling terms: not much unlike John of Leyden.
who knows not that the ten pressing persecutions did generally by the
humility of the Churches, conserve purity of Word and Ordinances,
notwithstanding the sometime endeavors of particular heretics, to subvert the
same until the Churches peace and prosperity, conferred by Constantine the
Christian Emperor, gave occasion for the proud man of sin to appear, and
advance his abominations, increasing his Altars, to the very casting down of
the Altar of God, in the greatest part of the Christian world, giving the
Church, on sad experience to complain the truth of that saying, reported to be
heard from heaven; Hodie venenum infunditur in Ecclesiam, Now is the poison of
pride poured into the bosom of the Church: nay, my brethren, it is well, if we
find not on serious observation, this sin to be admitted and advanced by such,
as present prosperity and external glory has lifted up. And so I have done
with the second ground of Altar building, which must needs evidence it to be
exceeding sinful, whilst acted from such vile principles: I now pass to the
third and last ground of this sin: and that is

Third ground of Altar-building.
Self-advancement and advantage: that cursed principle, which is inconsistent
with sincere affections to God and his worship: which hurrieth a man forward by
right or wrong, to establish his own glory, and possess himself of creature
transitory enjoyments: this is that which will make a man active for God, and
his Altar, so long as ambitious self can in that way obtain its object: but
that once missed or obtained, affections abate, nay, are altogether alienated
from the ways of God: this uses Religion on a Machivilian account, to
establish their own throne, and keep up their own glory; so that whatsoever is
but serviceable to this base end, though but for a season, that shall be
embraced and advanced. In a word, this is that cursed principle decried by
Christ, in such as take upon them the Profession of his Name, as that which
unsits them for adherencie to his Altar: yet this we shall find clearly to be
a ground of this grievous sin of Altar-building, if we do but consider, how the
wages of unrighteousness engaged Balaam, to go contrary to Gods Will, and by
building many Altars in different places to attempt the cursing of Israel,
contrary to Gods declared pleasure, as in Numb. 22.23. chap. is to be seen; in
which regard seducing Apostates, under the Gospel Altar-builders, acted by this
principle of self-advantage and advancement, are said to follow the way of
Balaam, who loved the wages of unrighteousness, 2 Pet. 2.15. and to be cast
away by the deceit of Balaams wages, Jude 11. so also we shall find this
principle provoking this sin of Altar-building in Jeroboam, when he rebelled
against the house of David, and made Israel to sin in the same way with
himself: if we do but observe the Holy Ghost expressly noting his erection of
a usurped Ministry, to this very end, that he might stablish his usurped
Magistracy, and his setting up his Altars at Dan and Bethel, to be grounded on
his desire and design, to settle the Crown on his rebellious head; for, says
the text, Jeroboam thought in his heart, If this people go up and do sacrifice
at Jerusalem, then shall the heart of this people turn again unto their Lord,
even to Rehoboam King of Judah, so shall they kill me, and go again to
Rehoboam: whereupon the King took counsel, etc. 1 Kings 12.26, 27, 28. et ad
finem capitis: for usurpers know, that the sincere Worship of God teaches due
subjection to their lawful Sovereigns: this self-establishment is declared to
be the cause of Ahaz sinful Altar-building: who (his faith not fixed in the
living God of Israel) feared his approaching fall, and hoping to establish his
throne, built Altars to the gods of Damascus; as we see, 2 Chronicles. 28.23, 2^.
This cursed principle of self-advancement was it, which did actuate the spirit
of Jehu, with readiness and resolution to do the work of the Lord, to the
demolishing of the house, and destruction of the Priests of Baal, so as to call
Jonadab to see his zeal for the Lord of Htstes, so long as this work of the
Lord was concurrent with, and conducing to his own establishment; but when
these two may be divided and distinct, his zeal abates, and himself can follow
the way of Jeroboam, to own the Altars at Dan and Bethel, 2 Kings 10. As under
the Law we find expressly the sin of Altar-building, to be the sad fruit of
self-advancement: so we shall see clearly, that from the same root does it also
spring, under the Gospel, all declinings of the Altar of Gods true worship,
ways and doctrine, and following after innovated principles and practices,
those false and opposite Altars, spring and get strength, if we do but
seriously observe the Apostles characterizing deceivers, seducing Apostate
Altar-builders, to be lovers of themselves, proud, high-minded, lovers of
pleasures more then lovers of God, 2 Timothy 3.2, 4. such as count gain
godliness Quaestum esse pietatem, sic resolve, pietatem esse quaestum, vel
artem quaestuosam, quia scilicet totum Christianismum lucro metiuntur. Calvin
loc.
, 1 Timothy 6.5. such as have hearts exercised (with might and strength, as the
Orig.) (...), ideo ap^stolus utitur plurali numero, ut ostendat, seductores
illos non uno ava^itiae morbo laborare n c unam duntaxat artem callere,
divitias p^rfas nefasque congeroudi, ac simpliciores pecunia emungendi. Ger. in
loc.
with covetousness, 2 Pet. 2.14. Such as followed the way of Balaam, and were
cast away with the wages of unrighteousness, (as I noted before) nay the
Apostle Peter affirms, that through covetousness they make merchandise of
souls, 2 Pet. 23. And St. John in his third Epistle, the ninth vetse, notes
Diotrephes corrupt practice to spring from this, that he loved to have the
pre-eminence. Should we unto these clear Scripture-instanced-evidences, add
examples out of other histories: who shall observe the devil exciting his
Turkish instruments, to crown apostasy from the Christian Religion, with the
honorable order of Genesis hist. of Turks.
Mamelukes, and ^. 107. ^. 91. the latter set up by Cara Rusthemes, a Doctor of
the Mah^metane Law.
Janissaries, but must needs conclude advancement to be the proper way to seduce
a selfish spirit from the Altar of God? This was the very ground which led In
p. 337.
Mahomet the first Turkish Emperor, to fail the hopes of his mother, and the
expectation of the Christians, by embracing the Mahumetane Altar, and abhorring
the Christian to which he was educated: self-establishment in his treacherously
obtained Empire, was the principle that engaged In p. 144.
Michael Paleologus, to subject the Christian liberty the Greek Churches did
enjoy, unto the Antichristian yoke, and Papal tyranny of Gregory the tenth;
nay, we might show that the desire of being reputed a Saint and shame of being
shut out of communion with the Church, was that which gave occasion to Eusebius.
Eccl. hist. l. 4. c. 11.
Marcion, his heretical Altar-building: and the proud affectation of the
dignity of a Bishop, was the cause of Lib. 6. c. 42.
Novatus sinful separation, and uncharitable opinions. What shall we say of
Cerinthus, Samosatenus, Manes, Arrianus, etc. those great Altar-builders
against Gods Altar, is it not easy to see self-advancement to have been the
bellows which did blow their false fire: nay, will not our own experience, of
the pride and self-advancement of the Authors or Indulgers of innovated
principles and practices, clearly evidence this sin of Altar-building to be the
fruit of that bitter root, and so to be exceeding vile, and to be seen unto by
the sincere worshippers?

And thus I have done with the first thing propounded, to set forth the vile
and sinful nature of Altar-building, against Gods Altar; which, unless men may
gather grapes of thistles, and figs of thorns, sincere worshippers of God
cannot but conceive to be exceeding vile and sinful, whilst the odious and
bitter fruit of shameful novelty, swelling pride, and self-advantage and
advancement. I now come to show the second thing that sets forth its vileness,
(viz) its sinful actings: which if we find but answerable to the grounds of
it, must needs render it a sin so grievous, that it is not only to be
difrelished, but with all power in their proper places to be resisted, by the
sincere worshippers of Gods Altar: and in this sinful work, the Actors contract
upon themselves the guilt of a threefold sinful acting: 1. A receding from God.
2. A rendering our wills the rule of divine Worship. And 3. A rebellion against
the divine Majesty.

The first sinful act in building Altars, besides the Altar of God, is the
receding from tht Lord, a forsaking of, and departing from God, not only when
we directly and immediately change the object, and set up Altars unto strange
gods, stocks and stones, idols which are no gods, which must needs be granted
to be the effect of a receding from the Lord: but when we withdraw from the
matter or form of Gods worship, even then we may be, and are justly said to
depart from the true God. To withdraw from God, and to embrace another object
in his stead, are two distinct acts, and ever distinctly noted in Scripture
with distinguishing terms; the one may be done, where the other does not
immediately, if ever, follow; for as a wicked wife may depart from her husband
most treacherously, and yet marries not another: so may men depart from God,
and not so much as embrace any divine object in the room thereof, but with
Atheists, say in their heart, There is no God: nay, usually the departing from
God in declining his Altar and Worship goes before, and is the way to embracing
strange gods, or entertaining mere Atheism; this the Church, wanting the
Ordinances, Altar, and true Worship of the true God was afraid of, Brightman,
Cotton on the place.
(as some note in the days of Jeroboam) when she prays and cries earnestly,
to know where the flocks of God did rest, urging the argument of her present
danger; Why should I turn aside by the flocks of thy companions? (so calling
themselves,) Cant. 1.7. and the ten tribes of Israel by Jeroboam, were drawn
from God before they worshipped at Dan and Bethel; for the receding from the
cause must needs be a refusing of the effect; denial of Gods Altar is the
declining of communion with God. As in the Ordinances and at the Altar of God,
men are said to draw nigh unto the Lord, to appear before him, or in his
presence, as, Levit. 10.2. Psalm. 42.4. so the turning from them may be justly
termed a turning from the Lord, being a declining of that matter, and that
form God has prescribed himself to be enjoyed, and to enjoy his people by, so
that if any do objectively depart from God, by changing their God, they will be
justly charged, not only to depart from God, but also to worship idols, to
change their god^, to forsake the fountain of living waters, and to dig
cisternes that hold no water, Jer. 2.11, 13. and therein they commit two evils;
but if they refuse to worship God at his Altar, and according to his own
declared Will, if they corrupt the matter of Gods Worship, or adulterate the
form of their administration, they are justly charged with a going from God:
thus God by the Prophet Isaiah, in chap. 65.11. charge the people with a
forsaking him, in that they forget his holy mountain: and by the Prophet
Malachi, chap. 2.8. he upbraids the Priests with a departing out of his way,
for corrupting of his Covenant and doctrine: and the Author to the Hebrews
exhorts to a constant adherence to the administrations of Gods Worship,
according to the Gospel-forme, denominating the declining of it, a departing
from the living God, Heb. 3 13. In Altar-building, as in other actions, there
is considerable the term from which before, the term to which they move, and
so the first act in this grievous sin is in Scripture Phrase in the Old and New
Testament, denominated a forsaking of God in ^he complaints of the sincere, as,
1 Kings 19.10. the chsrges of the sin by the Prophets, 2 Chronicles. 12.5,
24.20.24. Isa. 1.4. and by the confessions of the penitent, Judge. 10.10. Ezr 9
10. when Reheboam ready to join battle with Jeroboam declares the grounds of
his confidence, amongst others this is not the least, that they by changing the
matter of divine Worship, 2 Chronicles. 13.10, 11.
or the Priestly form of administration, ordained of God, and so proceeding to
the sin of Altar-building, they had not forsaken their God, as had the ten
tribes: and in the very story to which our text refers, we find the suspected
Altar-building branded with this epithete, a turning aside from following the
Lord, Josh. 22.16, 18, 23. And under the Gospel such as turn from the truth to
innovations, are said to depart from the faith, 1 Timothy 4.1. to forsake the way
of truth, 2 Pet. 2.15. and to depart from the living God, Heb. 3.12. So that
Gods charge upon the Altar-building Jews may be charged on all Altar-builders,
As a wife that treacherously departs from her husband, so have ye dealt with
me, Jer. 12.20. Is it not a vile thing, sinful and sadly provoking amongst men,
for soldiers to forsake their colors, children their Parents, and wives their
husbands? how much more vile must that sin be, whereby creatures forsake their
Creator, the redeemed depart from their Redeemer? they that are naturally bent
to pursue solid satisfying comforts, forsake the fountain of living waters:
nay; and how foolish must it be to provoke, by turning from that presence from
which we cannot flee? mountains and hills, hell and darkness cannot hide, and
that power which we can neither resist nor escape, but it will follow the
sinful Altar-builders that forsake him, to cover them with shame, and to write
them in the dust, Jer. 17.13. Thus then by this first act, we cannot but see
this sin to be so very sinful, and to be speedily seen to by sincere
Worshippers of God.

The second act in Altar-building is, the rendering our own wills the rule of
the Lords Worship, and against the express prohibition a doing that which is
right in our own eyes, and so sinfully subjecting a divine object to the
obedience of humane pleasure: and a sovereign God and Creator to such matter
and measure of service, as suits to the fancy of a frail, ignorant, sinful
creature to yield: which is in its nature so vile and shameful, that it may
make every soul that seriously considers it, to blush and tremble to think
that frail man should once presume to prescribe obedience to be yielded to a
great God: whilst nature it self teaches, that all superior objects of
service and obedience must dictate the Laws, Deuteronomy. 12.8.
and prescribe the form in which they will acquiesce and receive content. Is
it not below supreme authority, to see the Laws despised, and obedience
yielded according to the subjects fancy? What father could brook his sons
obedience according to his own will? what General would relish his armies
subjection after its own conceit? Obedience after the will of the subject is
the subversion of authority and supremacy, and exemption from the charge of
rebellion in every action, though never so vile. How much less shall the God of
Heaven endure to be disrobed of his Sovereignty, in being denied the
Prerogative of prescribing his worship, service and obedience? This God would
not admit in the evil Angels, but for their attempt thereof, cast them into
utter darkness. And if God would not leave man to the liberty of his will, in
the obedience he should yield his Creator in the estate of his innocence,
when he was in a capacity of yielding perfect and pleasing obedience, but would
proclaim his Sovereignty by the prescription of some special act of obedience,
as the approvement of his due subjection, how much less shall the sons of men
think to satisfy his Will, by following their own inventions since their fall,
with the attempt of which, to everlasting reproach humane nature stands
stigmatized, as the thing which cast the same out of happiness? We shall find
God so exact in his service, that he constituting Israel his chosen people to
bear his Name amongst other Nations, Mosem in cultu Dei erigendo Deus
astrinxit ad Coeleste exemplar, ut nihil formaret in terra, nisi quod congruum
esset archetypo ex coelis exhibito. Non habiturus id gratum aut ratum quicquid
ex sito cerebro praeter illud effinxisset. Pa^. in loc. Nunc de forma agitur,
etiam rerum externarum ad cultum Dei pertinentium, quam noluit Deus humano
arbitrio relinquere, sed eam ipse praescrib^re and determinare. R^vel. in Ex.
leaves them not to worship him according to their own will, but gives them
laws, and statutes, and ordinances, and by his terrible appearance on Mount
Sinai: his severe, judgments, and serious charge of Moses, engages them to
the observance thereof: nay, so exact is he in his worship and service, the
very instruments and form of the administration, that he gives Moses a
pattern of the Tabernacle, and all other things, requiring and straightly
charging every thing to be done according to the pattern showed in the Mount,
Exodus 25.9, 40. Heb. 8.5. the due observance of which, approved Moses faithful
in Gods house. It is the observation of Dr. Willet, that the form of the
Tabernacle is not left to the will of man, Willet. Hexapla in Exodus p. 595.
no not to the judgment of Moses; to teach us that God will not be worshipped
with will-morship, according to the devices and inventions of men, but as
himself has appointed: the which we may also infer from David's care,
concerning the edification of the Temple, when he not only leaves his charge on
Solomon his son to do this work, (intended by himself) but also to do it
according to the pattern he delivered him: By some Prophet of God, who revealed
all that should be done to the Temple, as he had anciently told Moses the form
of the Tabernacle. Diod. in loc.
enforcing his charge with this very reason, All this God made me to understand
in writing, by his hand upon me, even all the work of this pattern, 1 Chon.
28.11, 12, 19. therefore called the pattern of all that was with him by the
Spirit; by all which we may see the Sovereign God challenging, (which is his
due) the prerogative of prescribing his own worship, and the very instruments
and form thereof, yet such is the vileness of corrupt nature, that though God
complain of the sin in the Jews, that their fear of him was taught by the
precepts of men, Is. 29.13. and Christ charge and aggravateth their sin by
the same, asserting, that in vain men worship him, teaching for doctrines the
commandments of men, Mat. 15.9. that the sons of men are apt to measure the
worship they will yield to God by the rule of their own will: in which regard
sinful Altar-builders are (in Scripture Phrase) commonly said to forsake the
Covenant, Deuteronomy. 29.25. 1 Kings 19.10. and Commandments of God, Ezra 9.10. and
Law of the Lord, Jer. 9.13. the right way, 2 Pet. 2.15. and to follow their own
inventions, after which, to the provocation of divine justice, they go a
whoring, as, Psalm. 106.29, 39. of which God will take vengeance, Psalm. 9^.8. in
which regard the Apostle Paul calls seducements from the truth of the doctrine
of Jesus Christ, though upon never so eminent pretenses of Piety, (...), or
will worship, Opera hominum nominat omnes cultus quos sinc mandato Dei
instituunt, and in quibus cultum aliquem religionis collocant, bona aliqua (ut
loqui solent) intention. Mal. in loc.
Col. 2.23. the which he condemns, and cautions Christians to take heed of, as
having only a show of wisdom, but being indeed sinful fooleries; so that thus
we see men, whose spirits are subjects to motion a quo ad quem, being in the
first act loosed from the Altar and Worship of God in the sin of
Altar-building, not capable of living without some religion or other; In the
second act, consult their own inventions, and erect an Altar and Worship unto
God, according to their own will; although to the shame of men it be registered
in sacred record, that God made man upright, and he sought out many inventions,
Eccl. 7.29, Thus then I have done with the second act of Altar-builders, Erat
rectus conditus homo ab initio, sed curiositate sua, Dei verbo non contentus,
sibi malum ascivit and toti posteritati. Mer. in loc.
the rendering their own wills the rule of their obedience, and now pass to
the third act.

The third act is, rebellion against God, and against the authority to which
God has committed the charge of his Altar; and to stand on the proving this at
large, were but time and pains spent in vain, whilst I should but do what is
done already: for having cleared the two former acts of this sin, (viz.) that
it is a recession from God, and rendering our own wills the rule of divine
worship; I have cleared the premises, which must needs enforce this Conclusion,
for these two are the integral and essential parts of rebellion, according to
which it is denominated: for when men go from the Covenant and Commandments of
God, what do they otherwise then stand opposite to him, with a stubborn will,
uttering the rebellious language of the rebellious Gentiles, in Psalm. 2.3. Let
us break his bands in sunder, and cast his cords from off us? and those
rebellious Citizens spoken of in the Parable, in Luke 19.14. whose message was,
We will not have this man to reign over us: and hence the words, which in the
As (...) Vid. Leigh Crit. sacr. Bux. Lex. Scapulae. The Septuagint do so use
it. See also Mr. Medes Apostasy of latter times. p. 5. where he interprets
Apostasy to be a rebellion against God.

(...) of (...)


Greek and Hebrew are commonly used to signify rebellion, are also used to
signify defection, delinquencie, and Apostasy or turning aside from God; so
that these several words in our language are and may be synonom^, or of the
same signification, to express the same sin: and hence also all rebellion is
said to be a defection from the superiors to whom they owe subjection: yet
might I give instances in Scripture, where this sin is called a rebellion, and
stubborn opposition of God, as Corah and his company, Numb. 16, 17. chapter and
Jeroboam, nay all the Altar-building Princes of Judah and Israel are said to
rebel against the Lord, when they follow after idols in the acting of this sin;
but why go I to look instances, at this distance, when the very text
denominates it thus: saying, Rebel not against the Lord, and rebel not against
us? only this you may take notice of in the text, that the term Rebel not
against the Lord, comes from the same root in the Hchrew, from which is derived
Nimrod, the name of that great Hunter before (or as Augustine, Hierom, and
others of the Ancients against) the Lord, if he were so called from his
Apostasy, defection and rebellion: his rebellion was so great, as that his
name is proverbially given to every rebellious tyrant, by way of allusion to
him: he is noted to be the head of that rebellious work against God, which we
read of in Genesis 11. and that from a very probable conjecture, seeing in
Scripture that place of Babel is called his Kingdom, Genesis 10.10. his
rebellious act was this very sin of Altar-building, if (as Hugo notes) he was
the first bringer in of idolatry, Hugo in Annot. in Genesis Joseph. antiq. c. 5.
p. 9.
teaching men to worship the fire, or as Josephus, that he excited men to
contemn God and follow fortune in their own united power, and so was the first
founder of idolatry, of whose mind is Dr. Willet, Willets Hexa. in Genesis 10.9.
conceiving him to be the same whom foreign story calls Belus, and makes the
first founder of their Babylonian Monarchy, of whom the Gentiles in the
Eastern parts of the world, called their idols, Belial, Beelzebub, Belphegor.
You see then clearly that Altar-builders, by departing from God, and following
their own ways, do rebel against the Lord: which must needs render the sin
exceeding vile in the eyes of such as are the Lords subjects; for what spot of
infamy and reproach can be cast on the sons of men more odious and hateful
then rebellion? what is so immediately and highly provoking unto Sovereignty as
rebellion? for most clement Princes must needs with a severe hand chastise
rebellion: such is the vile nature of rebellion, that found in children against
the Parents, by Gods Ordinance among the Jews, the subject of it must be
stoned with stones, Deuteronomy. 21.18, 19, 20. And when Moses would exalt Gods
mercies to Israel, he aggravates their unworthiness by charging them to have
been a stiff-necked and rebellious people, Deuteronomy, 9.6, 23, 24. And Samuel
charging Saul with this guilt, asserts rebellion to be as the sin of witchcraft
for its vile nature. And when Jerusalems enemies would make her vile, they will
denominate her a rebellious City, Ezra 4.12, 15. And did ever any yet rebel
against the Lord and prosper? let the severe judgments of God upon Judah and
Israel for their rebellions witness. Whilst then this sin of Altar-building
appears so vile, not only in the ground, but also the acts thereof, let all
sincere worshippers at Gods Altar consider, whether their loyalty to their
great Creator, and gracious Redeemer do not engage them in their places, to see
to so great and crying a sin.

The third thing that may evidence building Altars, beside the Altar of God, to
be a sin exceeding sinful, is the sad effects thereof, which we cannot but
expect to be exceeding sad and bitter, whilst the root and branches thereof
are so exceeding vile; for the fruit must needs be suitable to the tree that
bears it: and those are these four.

1. A rending from the body of the Church, a withdrawing from the communion God
himself has set us in; a making a schism and rent in the Church of God: as
Diodate notes, a severing our selves from the communion of the Church: in which
alone is the true service of God, and the participation of his grace and
Covenant, that sad effect of sins Sovereignty among the Corinthians, 1 Cor.
3.4. which is so evil, that the Propagators thereof are to be declined, Romans
16.17. which violates unity, and deprives the Church of that blessed fruit of
the Spirit: this is that which as nature condemns in the body, so the Gospel
in the Church, 1 Cor. 12.25. which when making factions and parties in the
Church, as sedition in a Commonweal, is dangerous, and many times destructive,
being attended and seconded with envies, strifes, hatred and the like; yet this
evil fruit springs from Altar-building as its sad effect, as is evident in the
story under consideration, wherein it is clear, that the two Tribes suspected
the act in hand to be to this end, to withdraw from any longer communion with
their brethten, and to worship God distinct and by themselves: which they
desire to prevent by rather giving them inheritances on the same side of the
river with them, See more of this schism, Mr. Hollinsworths Rejoinder to Mr.
Eaton, and Mr Tailors Reply.
then the division of portions should divide their piety and joint attendance
on Gods Altar: So Corah and his company did rend themselves from the body of
the Church, and make a fearful division in refusing to keep communion with the
people of God, according to his appointed administration, in Numb. 16. when
they were about to erect their Altar against Gods: what a sad rent from the
Church did Ieroboams Altar-building make? not to this day semented, though
sought after by such as earnestly supplicate the accomplishment of the gracious
Promise of God, that the stick of Ephraim, and the stick of Judah shall become
one in his hand, in Ezekiel 37. from 16, to 21. In which is to be noted that the
accomplishment thereof, is promised to be accompanied with the abolishment of
their Altar-building sin, and unity in Gods ways and worship, v. 22, unto the
end of the chapter: which grievous rent from the communion of the Church, a
burden not to be borne by the sincere worshippers at Gods Altar, provokes (as I
before noted out of Mr. Cotton, His Exposition on Canticles.
) that pathetical prayer to be directed to the true Church and Altar of Christ,
in Cant. 1.7. that they might be delivered from the danger thereof: nay, it
persuaded not only the Priests and Levites to prefer the Altar and Church of
God above their suburbs and possessions, but also all such as set their heart
to seek the Lord, to run the hazard of going to Jerusalem to sacrifice unto the
Lord with their brethren, 2 Chronicles. 11.13, 14, 16. This sad effect does the
Spirit witness to follow this sin, nay, flow from it under the Gospel; The
Apostle Paul, Acts 20.30. foreseeing the appearance of seducers,
Apostate-Altar-builders, that would innovate doctrines and forms of worship,
contrary to Christ's institution, charge the Elders of the Ephesian Church to
see to this sin, at least that their members be not seduced; urging this sad
effect as a swaying reason, They shall draw aside many disciples after them:
from the communion of the Church, [Ut abducant] ab Ecclesiastica unitate: [post
se] ad inhaerendum eorum erroribus. Dyonys. Carthus. in loc.

Abstrahere autem significat inani gloria tumidos compellere sectatores in sua
nomina jurare. Aret. in loc. as did Novatus vid. Eusebius. l. 6. c. 4.

Religionum Confusio dissipat Ecclesiae consensionem. Mas. in Text.


says one, or make sects, says another; and the Apostle Peter, in the second
Epistle, the second chapter, the third verse prophesies, false teachers should
be in the Christian Churches, which building their own Altars of damnable
doctrines, many should follow their pernicious ways, speaking evil of the way
of truth: for the confusion of Religion must needs be destructive to the
concord of the Churches, which God witnessed by constituting one only Altar for
all his peoples attendance, with one only form of administration, and this
cannot but be seen in the Apostles days, by such as shall seriously observe
the Apostolical redargution of schisms and seducers, characterizing false
apostles, charging the Churches to observe and decline them, as those that make
divisions and trouble them: frequent commendations of the union and communion
of the Church and disciples, and fervent persuasion to, and prayers for the
unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace: which all suggest to us, and clearly
imply, that this sin of Altar-building by will-worshippers, was in act to the
dividing of the members from the body in their very days, and who is there,
that looking into Ecclesiastical story, Dyonys. Bishop of Aleaxndri^, his
Epistle to Novatus recited by Eusebius. Pamphil. l. 6. c. 45. or translat. 44.
sees not the sad rentings from, and confusions in the Church, effected by the
Altar-building (of doctrines) dissonant to truth, and the Altar of Christ,
propagated by the many heretics of the primitive times, as Novatus, whom
Dionysius in his Epistle to him charge with a renting and dividing from the
Church, as a sin most grievous, counting the suffering for the unity of the
Church a more glorious martyrdom, then the sufferings for not sacrificing to
devils? for this is suffered for one soul, that for the universal Church. So
also the Donatists, Manichees, Paulus Samosatenus, of whom the Synod of Antioch
sadly complain, that the Church was so rent, See their Epistle in Eusebius. l. 7.
c. 30.
that faith and religion was run, into great spite, hatred, and slander, by
reason of his swelling pride, as also by the Arrians, which filled the whole
Christian world with confusion and division; some taking this side, and some
that; some communicating here, and some there, even to most bloody persecution
of the true sincere Ministers and people of God, the which schism, how sadly
complained of by Athanasius the good Bishop of Alexandria, how earnestly
endeavored to be cemented by Constantine the good Emperor, and how strongly
it reigned to the checking of the Churches comforts, and clouding of the glory
of the the Gospel: Eusebius at large declares, in his first and second books
of Ecelesiastical history; but may not the separations from the communion of
the Church, and sad schisms amongst our selves, produced by such as are of
late risen up to build Altars of innovated doctrines, contrary to the doctrine
of Christ, call us back from wandering so far to seek confirmation of this sad
effect of so grievous a sin, and provoke us with shame and sorrow, to own the
evident effect upon our own sad experience, and set to our seals, that of a
truth Altar-building against Gods Altar is an odious, because a Church-renting
sin? Socrates Scholacticus, Eccl. hist. l. 1. c. 10
for to how many may we say, as Constantine the Emperor to Aretius the
Novatian Bishop, Why sever ye your selves from the communion of the faithful?
whose answer may occasion our reply as his: Provide you a ladder to climb into
Heaven alone.

The second effect which must needs also show the building Altars, beside the
Altar of God, to be exceeding sinful, is (to speak with due reverence) a
running God upon straits, concerning the dispensations of his Providence, and
the administration of his judgments or mercies; not that God is in his nature
capable of such want of wisdom, who is the most wise, and readily disposes
all things according to the counsel of his own will: or weakness of power to
effect and bring about his purpose, whose power is like himself, and not to be
resisted as that is, should make him to doubt or dispute what to do, Luctatur
in Deo hinc justitia and ira adversus peccata, quae atrociter pec^cantes
atrociter puniri and perdi postulat: illinc immensa misericordia and bonitas,
quae non vult mortem peccatoris, sed ut convertatur and vivat. Pa^. in Hos. 11.8

Hac particula ostendit Deus quid meriti sunt Israeli^e, and jam se propensum
esse ad sumendam poenam qua dignisunt: non tamen id sine poenitentia vel saltem
dubitatione. Calv. in l^^.


whether to strike or spare the sinner. But to speak to our capacity, such may
be sometimes the effects of divine Providence, that to us God may seem to be in
a strait, and, as it were, in doubt with himself; his justice provoked by the
sin, putting forward to punish the sinner; and his mercies desiring repentance
and deliverance, pleading for suspense or abatements of the afflictions
striving together, make God (as it were) cry out, What shall I do unto thee?
how shall I give thee, up Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee, Israel? how shall
I make thee as Admah? how shall I set thee as Zeboim? Wherein though this
Altar-building Israel had deserved to be made as Admah and Zeboim for their
sin, yet God does seemingly dispute with himself, how should he do it to
them: in Hos. 11.8. such another strait God seems to be in, when he stands over
Jerusalem with his how long? and when shall it once be? as in Jer. 13.27. where
he cri^s out of this sin of Altar-building, I have seen thine adulteries and
neighings, the lewdness of thy whoredoms, and thy abominations on the hills
in the field^; Woe unto thee, O Jerusalem! as if he should have said, I have
seen all Altars, and am ready to strike and punish thee severely for them: but
yet he checks himself, and bids a stay to his justice, with a will thou not be
made clean? when shall it once be? I would feign have my hand stayed, at last,
even at last before the stroke that is up, fall: and as mercy and justice,
those different properties in God, are (to speak with reverence of a God not in
the least subject to passions) set, as it were, opposite by this sin; so also
we shall see a seeming strife between Gods purity, that cannot endure
iniquity, and divine glory which he will not in the least give to another, and
promise performance, faithfulness: for the sin being acted, God forsaken, his
Law declined, and man's will and inventions advanced, then Gods purity provokes
divine justice to strike with such language as this; I am holy, I cannot endure
sin, yet it is acted against me; If sentence be not speedily executed, the
heart of men will be fully set in them to do wickedly; patience will but
provoke their profaneness, they being so corrupt as to abuse it, Eccles.
8.11. will be as it were driven to sin by it, nay, they will make divine
silence an argument of sins allowance; and when they slight my service, and
set up their own inventions, and yet go on and prosper, and I hold my tongue,
they will say, I am altogether such an one as themselves; arise, justice, let
me not be reputed the Author or indulger of such disobedience, set their sins
in order before their eyes, Psalm. 50.21. Nay, though they being dearest David's,
does not their sin give occasion to mine enemies to blaspheme? should I suffer
Jedidiah, my beloved one, to increase his worship at Idol-Altars, and corrupt,
nay, decline mine and his posterity to possess his Kingdom? will not the
Heathen say, I am not pure and holy, for I indulge their sin? Do not the lewd
lives of Christians cause the Heathen to reproach the Gospel of my Son, and
to say my doctrine dictates such things as nature will blush to see? as if
nature (which I made) were more pure then my self; shall I be silent and not
correct the impieties of my people, which make Heathen Romes Senators when they
see my holy Word, to question whether it be my Law: Shall my divine nature be
blasphemously denied by an Apostate Julian, or Arius, and I not be avenged?
Shall the perfidious and perjurious deeds of my Christian people deny me to be
a God, and provoke this Turkish appeal to my purity, producing the league
sworn in my name, and broken by them?

Behold, thou crucified Christ, this is the league thy Christians in thy Name
made with me, As did Amurath sixth King of the Turks against Udislaus king of
Hungary and Folonia, when he took absolution from his oath from Cardinal
Julian, and fought against the Turks, contrary to the league sworn. See Turk.
Hist. p. 297.
which they have without cause violated; now if thou be a God, as they say thou
art, and as we dream, revenge the wrong now done unto thy Name, and me; and
show thy power on thy perjurious people, who in their deeds deny thee their
God.

And shall I not arise to chastise them? will not the honor of my holy Name
and nature by severe judgments for their unholinesse on those my people, who
will not show it by their conformity, obeying my Laws, and fearing to offend
my pleasure: be vindicated from the blasphemous thoughts of mine enemies?

Unto which Gods power, glory, and faithfulness standing up, do (as it were)
answer and plead, True O Lord, most holy, thy pure nature stands justly
offended, thy people are by their Altar-building made naked in thy sight; they
have moved thee to jealousy with that which is not God, Deu. 32.21 22.
or of God: it may be just that the fire kindled against them in thy wrath,
should burn unto Hell, and that therein for their sin, thou may scatter
them into corners, and make their rememberance for to cease, and thereby
vindicate the glory of thy purity, and show thy self a sin-hating, Exodus
32.22, 23.
by being a sin-revenging God; but what shall become of thy faithfulness? the
glory thereof will be lost in the midst of the Heathen. O remember thy promise,
Lord, thy promise made to Abraham, to Isaac, and Jacob; and let not the Heathen
say thou have spoken what thou will not perform, thou art not as man that thou
should lie, nor the son of man that thou should repent: O let the mouth
of Balaam witness to a cursing Balak, that thou have said it, and thou will do
it; thou have spoken it, and thou will make it good, Numb. 23.19. How shall the
Heathen also blaspheme thy power, and say, because thou wast not able to bring
to pass thy begun mercy, and give them the promised land: thou have slain
them in the wilderness? Numb. 14.16. For, Lord, the Nations consider not the
cause, nor accknowledge thy justice, but reproach thy power, and promise, and
say, For mischief thou have begun to show them mercy: Nay, they will not only
reproach thy power and promise, but rob thee of thine honor, and the glory of
thy justly inflicted fury; the rod will rebel against the hand that uses it;
if now, and so severely thou strike with it: consider, Lord, make not a full
end of this rebellious Altar-building generation; for the enemies will behave
himself proudly, and say, My hand, and not the Lord, Deu. 32.27
has done all this: so that sin does not only make Gods Word to fight
against it self in promises and threats, but also the very properties of the
Lord: how sad must it be unto an ingenuous child to see fury and mercy, power
and pity, justice and compassion at the same time to shine in the bosom of a
tender father? how vile then must this sin be which runs God on such straits,
when as much as in us lies, we labor to confound the very God of Wisdom, and
set unity at enmity, making the Divine nature, as it were, to war against it
self? And hence it is that the properties of God are many times pleading
expostulations with God, modo admonentis de benignitate, by way of humble
minding God of his own nature in the prayers of his own people, fearing or
feeling the fierceness of his fury.

The third effect is, a rendering the worship of God vile in the eyes of the
heathen which know him not: by this sin the enemies of the Lord have occasion
to blaspheme the Name and ways of God, to reproach the Gospel and Doctrine of
Jesus Christ: for in Altar-building men run from God, and actually speak the
language of the Apostate covenant-corrupting Jews, It is in vain to serve
God, and what profit have we that we have kept all his Ordinances? Mal. 3.14.
and attribute the peace and plenty Gods patience indulgeth, unto the Queen of
Heaven, and their shameful impieties, Jer. 44.17, 18. and therefore God
complains, that when his people built Altars unto Baal, they did not know that
God gave her corn, and wine, and oil, and multiplied their silver and gold,
Hosea 2.8. And God aggravates this sin ever with the mention of his mercies,
whereby he declares how little cause they had so really to vilify his ways
and worship, by departing from them: their rebellion against his will and
words, must needs bespeak his yoke to be heavy and servile bondage, which is
indeed perfect freedom, and his tender reign over his people, to be fierce
and cruel. The Schisms and sad Divisions produced by this sin, give occasion
to such as know not the doctrine of unity, to charge the ways and worship of
God with the natural production thereof, never considering how they are the
fruits of sin, not of Gods sacred Altar. How has Satan and his wicked
instruments taken occasion to reproach vilify, and blaspheme the ways and
worship of God from the lewdness of some that profess it in all ages; do not
the Papists generally calumniate the Reformation of the Church with the charge
of division and novelty, and the like? because some professing to it have
divided from the Church, and propagated their Altar-building-principles: so
that every observant eye cannot but see that Altar-building, besides the Altar
of God, makes Gods Altar, Word, and Worship, as Simeon and Levi, their cursed
act on the circumcised Schechemites, made good Jacobs savor to stink among the
Canaanites and Perizzites: in which regard it lies on the sincere worshippers
of God with constancy to adhere to Gods Altar, and with courage to suppress
others in their places, as becomes the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

The fourth and last effect of this sin of Altar-building, which may render
it exceeding vile, is, a reviving of the Lords fury: for these are the Altars
of Bethel which God will visit, Amos 3.14. This is the sin that is written
before the Lord as with a pen of iron, and point of a diamond, Jer. 17.1, 2.
This is the setting of post by his post, and threshold by the Lords threshold,
to the defiling of Gods holy Name till the subjects be consumed in his anger,
Ezekiel. 43.8. This is the setting up the Altar of jealousy to the provoking of
God to depart from his Sanctuary, Ezekiel. 8.6 This is the following new gods to
the kindling of a fire in his wrath, which shall burn to hell, Deuteronomy. 32.21,
22. In a word, this is the golden Calfe, which turns patience (to speak with
reverence) into such rage, that a Moses prayer can hardly bind from
destroying, Exodus 32.8, 9, 10. and the rebellion so highly provoking that a God
most gracious, in all affliction afflicted, in pity and love saving and
redeeming, being by it vexed in spirit, becomes an enemy, Isa. 63.9. How did
Corah and his company by their but formal Altar-building, schismatical
withdrawing from the administrations of divine worship, provoke the Lords wrath
to the causing of the earth to open her mouth and swallow them up alive? How
did Solomon's Altars stir up divine displeasure, to the rending away ten Trib^^
from his Kingdom, not to this day restored? What sad monuments of divine
justice and fury has it made Jerusalem and Samaria: it were easy to evidence
the increasing property of this sin; but this may suffice to such as do but
consider the fierceness of the Lords fury, which will make the mountains to
melt, and hills to shake, Mic. i. 4.
and Kings of the earth to tremble; for who can stand before his frown, much
more fatal then the frown of the most cruel Turkish tyrant threatening present
death? Can this Lion roar, and the beasts of the earth not tremble? Amos 1.2.
If while his wrath is kindled but a little, they be happy that trust in
Christ; what terror must possess them that by their Altars-building are naked
before it; Psalm. 2.12. Exo. 32.25
so that the sin must needs be vile, to be avoided, and seasonably seen to,
that is so highly displeasing unto God.

I have now done with the third thing in the discovery of the sinfulness of
building Altars beside the Altar of God, (viz.) the vile effects which spring
from it: which tasted by serious contemplation, cannot but render it bitter in
the mouth, and excite sincere worshippers of God against it; I shall only add
one thing more to the aggravation of its vileness, and that very briefly, and
so pass to the Application of the Point, viz. the aggravating properties.

The first aggravating property that may render Altar-building to be exceeding
vile, is, the singularity of the subjects. Singularity is not savoury in any;
it many times springs from pride, and bespeaks an evil disposition: this sin
is many times acted by Gods people only, who know the true God, and have
worshipped at the true Altar: this sin God himself aggravates with this very
property, in Jer. 2.11. expostulating with them, Has any Nation changed their
gods, though they be no gods? and yet my people have changed their glory for
that which will not profit: and, Isa. 65. v. 5. the rebellious people which
follow their own thoughts, and burn incense upon Altars of Brick, have their
sin aggravated by their singularity; they say, Stand by thy self, come not
near me, I am holier then thou: as that which makes a smoke in Gods nostrils,
and a fire to burn all the day: so that this adds much to this vile sin:
The isses of Chittim, and coast of Kedar will not afford a parallel, or show
such a thing: for whilst the Ephesians suspecting any innovation against their
Diana, run together with great zeal crying, Great is Diana of the Ephesians,
and readily contend for their Idol-goddesse and superstitious worship, as
resolved not to change, though for a better; and the Athenians, though given to
novelty, think Paul odious in seeming to set forth new gods: the people of the
true God are only seen to change sometimes the object, but many times the
Altar the true God has prescribed to be worshipped at.

The second aggravating property of Altar-building is, that it is committed
against standing directions, dictated Laws and Ordinances, Gods revealed will
and pleasure concerning his Altar and Worship: as it is Isreal's glory, that no
Nation is so great a Nation that has such Statutes and Judgments, Deuteronomy. 7.
as all the Law of the Lord their God; so it is laid on them as the greater
duty to take heed to themselves, and to keep their soul diligently, that they
forget them not, but teach them to their sons, and sons sons, and observe to do
them; it is also their great aggravation, Acts 17, 13
that they forsake the Covenant of their God, go away from his Statutes, forget
his Laws, cast off his Commandments, to create to themselves an Altar and
Worship according to their own inventions: and though the Athenian ignorance
may extenuate their superstitious worship at the Altar to the unknown God: yet
now light is come abroad, and God calls to repentance, they must walk as
children of the light; for ignorance can now be no plea, where prescript rule
is proposed: now as rebellion against a Kings Proclamation, and disobedience
against a fathers declared will, so is this Altar-building heinous and
abominable, because against directions exhibited.

The third aggravating property of this sin of Altar-building, is, that it
shuts Gods ears against prayer. What is spoken of sins in general, in Isa.
59.2. Your sins have hid his face from you, that he will not hear: is
applicable, nay, applied to this sin in special, where God not only declares
that when Israel, his Altar-building people, did cry to him in their trouble,
he would not hear them, Ier. 11.11. but also prohibits the Prophets praying;
Thou shall not pray for this people, neither lift up a cry or prayer for them:
and that is urged with a therefore, (viz.) because, according to the numbers of
the streets of Jerusalem, they have set up Altars, ver. 12, 13. Let me alone,
Moses, was the angry voice of God, produced by the Calf, and Altar at Horeb,
Exodus 32.10. How just is it with God to deny the Petitions of them, that deny
prescriptions from him in the way of his own worship? Prove. 1.25, to 33. For
as children when stubbornly following their own Si cursum vitae nostrae
propriis consiliis regere volumus, and religionis fideique neg^tium secundum
rationem nostram instituere, idem nobis accidit quod pueris quos parents
primum docent incedere, etc. Lav. in Prove. 1.31.
wills fall into harm, their cries are not compassionated by the tender
parent: so deals God with his stubborn people that make their wills the way
or rule of his divine worship.

I have now done with the Doctrinal consideration of the Point, and shall leave
it to the judgments of the sincere worshippers at God^ Altar, to consider
whether a sin springing from such causes, exercised in such acts, producing
such effects, subject to such aggravations, be not exceeding sinful; and if but
suspected to be undertaken, sufficient to stir the zeal of the ten tribes, to
the resistance thereof, much to be seen to, sorrowed for, and soon
suppressed, where it is, really, and indeed acted: I shall now briefly apply to
our more particular instruction.

The first Use of the point may be of enquiry and humiliation, to put us upon
the search whether in the midst of us we may not see some of our brethren,
professing the same, and who have worshipped in the same Gospel Worship with
our selves, to withdraw from the Altar of God, and erect Altars after their
own inventions; which if we find, our hearts should be heavy in us, and our
eyes filled with tears: as humbling our selves for so grievous a guilt: and
upon enquiry, he that is not wilfully blind, cannot but see beyond the river
in the Church of Rome material, besides formal Altars built besides the Altar
of God: five Sacraments innovated which God never instituted: objects of divine
adoration advanced, never by the Lord, or themselves allowed: Sacrifices
presented for sin, which God never prescribed: offices and orders of holy men
and women maintained, which in the Canon of Scripture are never mentioned, nor
by the same warranted: principles pressed as matters of faith necessary to
salvation, and that on the pain of being branded with Heresy, such as were
never found in the Apostles Creed; but repugnant to it, prayers, penance, and
many the like practices performed with much devotion, which are not only not
warranted, but condemned in Scripture as superstitious, and will worship, and
dissonant to reason in the very light of nature; all which may be matter of
mourning to every gracious heart to see, although in a subject somewhat remote:
but more especially if when in mercy God has delivered us from serving at, or
suffering for not serving at such Altars as did our progenitors; and whilst we
our selves profess a reformation of the Altar of God, Gospel Worship and
Ordinances, we shall even at home find Altars of another kind erected, and
erecting: it may be some casting off Gods Altars of Gospel Ordinances, not
worshipping in any external and formal administration, but by their own
pretended spiritual, supernatural, celestial way of omitting all duties which
God has prescribed, giving God only (if indeed ever) the private retirements
and inward actings of the soul instead of Word and Sacraments; which is no
less then down right profaneness, and (if any worship) a will worship of
their own invention for it, never was of divine prescription. But in such also
as profess to God and his Altar; I fear we shall find upon serious enquiry,
Altars at least formally, if not materially built besides the Altars of God:
which if any do not discern, I shall say for their conviction, as Samuel to
Saul: What means the bleating of the sheep in mine ears, and the lowing of
the oxen which I hear? 1 Samuel 15.1^. So say I, if we all cleave close to the
Altar of God, what means the gathering of Churches in the midst of us: the
distinct and opposite Assemblies: the Church Covenant made a door of admission
into Church-membersh^p, even unto the baptized into one body: the cry of men
against the Ministry as Antichristian: and the Assemblies of Christians
reformed, as Babylonish whores: the lowest of the people making themselves
Ministers: with the cry, that All the Lords people are holy: and the very
opposition of Gods own Ordinances (as to the matter of them) in the different
forms of administration? Do we not see some dipping in rivers and standing
pooles, whilst others are baptizing in places of public worship: some
breaking bread in distinct societies, shutting the door on such as themselves
cannot deny to be by Baptism actually consecrated Churchmembers (if that be
which cannot be denied, the door of admission) but also not ejected, nay,
themselves being witnesses, sincerely, godly, and savingly related to Christ,
though not conforming to their separate constitutions, whilst others
administer the Lords Supper to the Lords people as such, though not in such a
Church Way? nay, my brethren, may not we see principle against principle,
preaching against preaching, prayer against drayer, thanksgiving against
thanksgiving, and Fast against Fast? as if we were resolved to confound the
very God of wisdom with our divided worship of him: in which opposition both
cannot be the Altar of God, the one must needs be our own threshold and post
set by Gods threshold and post in the Lords Temple: both cannot plead divine
prescription, and therefore the one must needs be humane invention and
superstition, whatever cry of holiness and sanctity go before it, or accompany
it: now, which of these different administrations are the Altar of God, and
which the Altar against the Altar of God, I will not determinately pronounce,
lest I be reputed censorious, and charged with violence and bitterness, the
common reproach of such as sincerely reprove the erroneous principles and
practices of our days: but to the exciting of the humiliation required, and
the quickening of sincere worshippers of God to their duty, I shall briefly
direct to the object by some few Characters, the usual concomitants of
Altar-building, that wheresoever we see such concomitants, we may conclude, or
at least be jealous, that they are the people acting the sin of
Altar-building: and if any man's conscience shall infer the conclusion from
such premises rationally proposed, I desire them to observe the counsel of the
Apostle James, to be swift to hear, slow to speak, slow to wrath, knowing that
the wrath of man works not the righteousness of God. Wherefore lay apart all
filthiness and superfluity of maliciousness, and receive with meekness the
Word that is graffed in you, which is able to save the soul, James 1.19, 20,
21. Considering the observation of a Reverend Expositor on the text, Mr. Mant.
on James 1 Caracter.
the worst thing we can bring to a religious controversy, is anger: the first
character of Altars besides the Altar of God is, doctrines dissonant to the
truth of God: for principles must needs square the practice and Altar-building
must needs be theoretical before it be practical: hence commonly called our
own inventions and imaginations so denominated from the corrupted
understanding acting the same: The first profane Altar that ever Israel are
noted to provoke divine wrath withal, was erected with the dissonant doctrine,
These are thy gods, O Israel, that brought thee out of Egypt, Exodus 32.4. And
throughout the whole History of the Altar-building of the backsliding Jews we
shall find when ever the Priests offered unto Baal, the Prophets did prophecy
lies in the Lords Name: If they do but formally build Altars, invading the
Priesthood, and corrupting the administration of divine worship, it must be
ushered in with the doctrine of the peoples holiness, and Moses and Aarons
ambition, as did Corah and his company under the Gospel; this sin is
generally denominated man's doctrine, another gospel, the bringing in of
damnable doctrine, diverse and strange doctrines, by which such as follow them
are said to be perverted and turned aside from the Gospel and doctrine of
Christ: and this is observable, that the Apostle dehorting from diverse strange
doctrines, enforces his dehortation with this reason, We have an Alter, etc.
Heb. 13.9, 10. As if he would have said, These diverse and strange doctrines are
Altars against that Altar we have received and owned: and when the Fathers (as
was before noted) said of Heretics, that they built Altar against Altar, it
was occasioned by their cursed doctrines; so that where we see any with
Arminius advance man's free will against Gods free grace; or with Socinus teach
our repentance to be Gods acquittance against the propitiatory satisfying (to
divine justice) property of the blood of Christ: With the Familists, Seekers,
or Anabaptists, to teach immediate Inspirations and Revelations of a pretended
spirit, to be equal to, nay, above the authority of the Scriptures: With the
Arians, to deny Christ his divine nature: With the Seekers to deny
Gospel Ordinances in the matter, or with Anabaptists in the manner of their
administration: With the Separatists, to teach that pollutions are sufficient
ground of separation from true Churches, though retaining fundamentals: that
Baptism is not sufficient to admission to Church Membership without the
Congregational Covenant; that the holiness of men, as Saints, merely Saints,
is a sufficient authority to invade the Ministerial function, and the like;
there we may see, and with sorrow say, Altars are in building against the
Altars of God: for these principles being oppugnant to the rules of the Lords
worship, must needs lead to practices opposite to his prescribed performances:
this Character is so commonly the concomitant of Altar-building, that many
times the professors of this sin conceal from their disciples the absurdest
of their doctrines, till by some of less concernment they are made Skepticks
in Religion, and so capable of admitting any doctrines: and when they dictate
any, it is only as present light, which they may oppose shortly: as much as may
be declining the test and trial of the Word, that they may be usually and well
called (by the epithete Tertullian gave them) Lucifugae Scripturarum, shunners
of Scriptures light.

The second Character of Altar-building, as many times it is concomitant, 2.
Charact.
and indeed cause, it is the public exhibition of Astrological predictions, a
religion amongst the Heathen, whose Altars stand opposite to the Altar of God;
and willing to be received as an Art among Christians and professed people of
God, but could never find entertainment but under the defection from Gods true
worship and the erection of Idolatry and Superstition: Starrie prophecies were
ever more suitable for Egyptian and Babylonish idolaters then
Israel-worshippers at Gods Altars: never shall we read the same acted or
allowed in Israel but in Altar-building days, and by Altar-building Princes;
and as it rose with this sin, it fell with the same, being both together
removed by religious Altar-reforming Princes: and usually the Prophets of God
were found in Jerusalem the place of Gods Altar whilst Soothsayers and false
Diviners were in Samaria the Altar-building City: the Prophet Isaiah joins
Jacobs being full with the manners of the East, Deute. 18.10, 11, 12. Isa.
44.25.57.12, 13, 14
and Sorcerers of the Philistines: with their being full of Idols, as the
causes of Gods desertion of them, Isa. 1.6. Not to stand upon the several
upbraiding expostulations of God with his own people and other Nations for
attending to the divined lies of their Magicians, Soothsayers, Star gazers, and
monthly Prognost cators: I shall only desire you to observe that which seems
a very observable evidence of this concomitant Character (viz) Gods promise in
the restoration of his Church by Christ to cut off Enchanters, and that they
should have no more Soothsayers: is joined with the reforming of his own Altar
by cutting off their Idols and turning them from worshipping the work^ of their
own hands, Mic 5.12, 13. Not only under the Law was this found to be a
concomitant (if I may not say cause) of the many Altars against God, but also
under the Gospel Soothsaying, Starrie Prediction, Astrological Prophecies will
appear an attendant on, or indeed rather a preparer and precu^sor of Errors,
Heresies, Schisms, and saddest corruptions in the doctrine and worship of God
that Gospel Altar at which we worship: a witness hereof may be the Jews, who
in their blindness retaining Moses against Christ, are by the Apostle hinted
to be opposite to the Altar of God, Heb. 10.13. Do not the dictates of their
Starre-numbring Cabalists obdurate them in their superstitious way? Their false
Prophets sometimes heighten their hopes of the approach of their fantastical
Messiah (as did Abraham the Jew, assuring them that the time of his coming
should be in 1464.) to the hardening their of hearts against the true Messiah
already come: unto which we may add the experiences of the Primitive Church in
the Heretics that rose up to corrupt the Word of truth: if we consider those
sorts of Heretics, (viz.) Simonianists, Cleobianists, Dositheans, Gortheans,
Menandranists, Carpocratians, Marcionists, Valentinians, Basilidians and
Saturnilians) in the Primitive times noted to bring in the false Christ's, false
Prophets, false Apostles, renting asunder the Church with their false doctrine
against God and Christ; which Thebulis at Jerusalem received and began to
propagate. Eusebius. Eccl. hist. l. 4. c. 21.
What a line of Astrology may be seen in their principles, attributing the
production of many and various things, to many and various powers: advancing
their own divinations above Scripture-Divinity: and their Magical practices
and enumerations to the astonishing of their auditors; nay, this line is not
only to be seen in, but as it were to lead unto their corrupting principles
and practice. Eusebius. Eccles. hist. lib. 4. c. 21. Socra. Sch. lib. 1. c. 27.
Eusebius. in Eccles. hist. lib. 4. c, 11.
We might hereunto add Manes, the author of the Manichees, the founder of the
Heresy of two beginnings, who taught the worshipping of the Sun, and the
like principles, properly flowing from starrie divination: and Mark the known
Magician, confuted by Jrenaeus, who baptized in the name of the unknown father
of all things, and in the truth mother of all things, etc. A clear Altar
against Gods Altar. But to what purpose should we send so far to find
Heresy attended with Necromancie, when nearer home in later years it has
been, and is the great instrument to advance the Mahumetan and Popish
superstition? who knows any thing of the Papal stories, that knows not this
to have been the step to advance the man of sin, and that Astrological
conclusions, starrie predictions, and magical actions have not only been
countenanced and allowed, but also studied and advanced in their order of
exercises: To the further evidencing its existence in the Church; we might
muster up the censures of free Councels and Ecclesiastical Assemblies: the
condemnations of it by the Primitive Fathers: the wholesome Laws, Imperial,
Civil, Ecclesiastical against Diviners, Astrologers, and the like: the variety
of punishments, as banishment, imprisonment, confiscation, death to the
professors, or indulgers of starrie predictions, and confessions of some of
their own professors: all which do not only evidence its existence in, but
also danger to the Christian Churches in the fullness of what is reported to
have been confessed by one Cornelius Agrippa, once an Arch-Magician, who
bewailing his misspent youth in this Art, says, They that profess to it,
fear not to teach most pernicious Heresies and Infidelities: whilst they
profess with impious temerity, that the gift of Prophecy, the power of
Relig^on, the secrets of conscience, the command over Devils, the virtue of
miracles, the efficacy of supplications, and the state of the life to come, do
all depend on the Stars are vouchsafed by them, and may be known by them.
But thus much may be sufficient to evidence its concommitancie with this sin of
Altar-building, both before and since Christ came in the flesh, and to give us
cause, if we find the same to show it self in the midest of us (as it usually
puts up in troublesome times and places, as most suitable to their doubtful
destinies) to suspect Altar-building to attend it: but upon serious search, and
diligent observation we shall easily see to the sadning of pious spirits, not
only has Astrology appeared under our confusions and commotions, but also not
been rebuked, but rather indulged and countenanced, I, and by too many received
to the emboldening of its professors with wonted impudency to enter the lists,
and engage the contests for divining, predicting Astrology, so often foiled by
Civil and Ecclesiastical censures in the Church; nay, and by Heathens
themselves, strangers to the Church: their raging arguments produced against
arguments of reason and Scripture: the reviling terms against Divines and
Ministers of the Gospel, not only now living to defend divine providence from
their starrie encroachments, but even such as are long since rotted in the
grave, doing what in them is, to the killing of their labors, which do live,
and will live to their conviction and confusion: their declared enmity to
Religion, publishing and predicting as the pretended influence of the Stars,
the variety of confusions and sad divisions concerning it: evermore prophesying
evil to the Truth according to the wonted practice of its professors: and their
blazing forth the least of failings; (nay, sometimes imagined) in Divines, to
the rendering of their persons and function vile: whilst they sound the trumpet
of their own praise, often recollecting those things they have seemingly
foretold, and have accidentally come to pass, but burying in oblivion their
never accomplished predictions (which may set Mercury on) work, as Seneca once
wittily fancied, to entreat the gods to abridge the life of Claudius, if for no
other cause, yet of very pity and compassion to the poor Astrologers, as the
great Plague threatened to be in London 1652.
who had already been taken with so many lies from year to year, that if the
destinies were not more favorable then their ground was, sure the credit of
Astrology would decay for ever:) of which, if a man should, as it is reported
of the Lord of Arundel, note but their yearly Almanacks with repugnant notes at
the beginning, they would oftentimes prove more true then such predictions.
These things I say are not to be past without observation as the evidence of
that height of their existence and countenance in the midest of us (which may
create our jealousy, if I may not say conclude) the sin of Altar-building to
be on foot among us: Astrological impositions upon the peoples faith, lately
started up with peremptorinesse and impudence; with the peoples apt reception
thereof, as more infallible Prognostications of the government of the world and
Church then either Scripture-prophecie or promise provoked a reverend Divine to
redeem time from his more serious studies to the posing and puzling of the
Magical-Astrological-Diviner: Mr. John Gaul his Magastromancer, posed and
puzzled: see his Epist. to the Reader
induced by this very reason, conscience of duty (to use his own words) to
stand up, to speak a word for God, Christ, the holy Ghost, Church and Saints
against a press and pest of Magical, magephemerical, magnastrological, etc. of
books of late crept, nay, crowded in amongst us, to the dishonor of God,
denying of Christ, despighting the Spirit, cauponizing of the Word, disturbing
the Church, subverting of Religion, distracting of the State, scandalizing weak
Christians, and seducing of common people, yea, to the promotion of Idolatry,
Superstition, Heresy, Schism, etc.

We see then, my brethren, this sinful Art of Starre-divining, as a concomitant
of the sin after which we are enquiring, to be too evident in the midest of us:
I shall a little, and very briefly note to you the fitness of this sinful Art,
to characterize the sin of Altar-building, that to the quickening of your
affections, you may more seriously heed it, though it has been but seldom
hinted: and that in noting its nature, and the Churches observation concerning
it.

First, as for its nature: not to stand upon it as erroneous, and heretical as
it is in it self, the rules of it, and inferences from the same became
directly contrary to the doctrine of faith: not its aptitude to engage
needless scrupulosities and superstitious observations of this as ominous, and
that as lucky, to the enslaving a man's will in every action to the observation
of every circumstance, and subjection to the Stars: nor yet of its
uncertainty, whereby the event sometimes falls contrary to the prediction, as
Firminus, a friend to Saint Augustine found in observation of the fate of two
children borne in his house, at one and the same moment, which yet was
calculated by the stars to be the same, but by the Law and custom of the
Country proved quite contrary: I shall only note its nature in relation to
this sin; and we shall find it of a suitable nature to receive and propagate
innovations and false will worship, not only as it is Skeptical, certain in
nothing but the uncertainty of their own assertions: but also as it disposes
the Stars and Celestial bodies into the chair of divine providence, whilst,
as was before noted, it places all, even secrets and supreme happiness in the
power of the Planets, which doctrine must needs set them as objects of
admiration, and so of adoration: a very natural way to build Altars
objectively, by giving the worship and honor of the Creator and disposer of
all things to the creatures: without doubt this was to the Jews as to other
Nations, the leading principle to worship the Queen and the host of Heaven,
nay, further, dictates a doctrine of universal Toleration of all religions:
never in the least admitting any limitation or restraint which might be of too
sad a reflection upon it self: Hence Ptolomy says, that the disposition or
inclination which diverse Countries have to worship one God before another,
comes from the constellation of the Planets: as Jupiter and Saturn make a
Jew: Mars a Persian to worship the fire; Mercury a Christian: and with the Moon
an Antichrist: so that whilst this sinful Prognosticating Art makes the
Planets the authors, it must needs make them indulgers and approvers of the
exercise of all religions, or religious forms, though never so repugnant and
inconsistent each to other: (this is sure the reason why Astrologers have in
our late days Prognosticated very often the liberty of all religions to be
exercised, and no Discipline for the restraint thereof ever spoken for by
them:) and is a fit foundation to build many Altars upon, as observed
experience has too clearly evidenced, for as an every days Sabbath is no
Sabbath, so an every way of worship without confinement to divine prescription
is no way of true worship unto God; for novelty will be building when at
liberty: And Astrology it self may by this means come to be an Altar, a
religion as it was among the Heathen.

And lastly, it is enmity to Christian Religion, which nature must needs render
it very capable of introducing another, though directly opposite: this enmity
is evidenced by that antithesis it has ever stood in to Religion by the
Magical operators, and planitary predicters, notorious malice and envy in
defaming, disgracing, calumniating, deriding, contemning, opposing the
Ministers of the Gospel: and predicting frequently the decays of the
encouragements; nay, and the very falling of their calling, (promised to be
perpetuated till the Church be perfect in heaven: Lord Howard in his
Defensative against poison of supposed pr^phecie^. chapter 22. p. 111.
) nay, not only is their enmity against the instruments, which must hold up and
continue the Altar of God, Christian Religion, but by their fatal (yet hitherto
false) predictions against Religion it self; for in the first beginning and
tender spring of faith the observers of the Planets gave out in their
Pamphlets, That the Name of Christ should not be had in honor at the uttermost
above two hundred years, which falling out by tract of time to be an egregious
lie, Albumazar (to keep his disciples in life) adjourned the destruction of our
Religion two hundred years higher, supposing undoubtedly this should be the
utmost stint and period of our continuance, which (maugre their malice)
continues to this day, and shall continue; so that we see sufficient in its
nature to make it a character being so capable of being a cause of
Altar-building.

But let us pass on to the Observatitions of sincere worshippers of God
concerning it: and what wise observer is or ever has been in the Church of
God to whom it has not appeared that those Astrological artists ever were more
rife in Heathenish then in Christian, in Popish then in Protestant, in former
then in later times? that they were always most busy in turbulent, distracted
times and places, where wars domestic or foreign, fitted people for
sedition, faction or schism, etc. that the proper fruits of their Schools,
Societies, Religion, Practice, and Profession, were the nourishing of Nations
in Idolatry, Sorcery, Superstition and Impiety: that men of the greatest
learning, wisdom, virtue, conscience and piety, have not derided and despised
them whilst men of the contrary disposition have feared their
Prognostications, and believed their Predictions: but to close up all of much
that might be observed, that when and wheresoever their Divinations and
Presagings were most received: it was not a fearful presage of a decay of
Religion, and of a declining Church: in a word, that the Word Church, or true
Religion of God never flourished, or was established in any Kingdom or Nation
where Magicians, Diviners, Soothsayers and Astrologers were countenanced or
connived at; nay, where they were not condemned and suppressed.

Now, my brethren, these things considered, I leave it to every unprejudiced
man to consider whether the acting, advancing, seeking to, or suffering in
silence, Astrology, and its Predictions; give not just cause to Ministers of
the Gospel to complain of, and cry out against superstition, innovations,
Altar-building against Gods Altar, as the sad attendant on, or effect of
Star-gazing? and wheresoever we see in divided parties exerc^sing distinct
practices, this Art to be owned, allowed, pleaded for, and believed; there we
may conclude a just suspicion at the least of their departing from the Lord and
his worship, to follow their own inventions.

The third Character as the constant concomitant of Altar-building, is,
dangerous separations from the union of the Saints and body of the Church of
God. This is that which I have before noted to be the sad effect of this sin,
whether materially or formally acted, as we have instanced in Corahs and his
company's gathering a Congregation, and disjoyning themselves from the Camp of
Israel: Jeroboam and his subjects separation from the Temple, not to this day
cemented by many evidences and instances under the Gospel. Well may I then call
that a concomitant, which was before proved an effect of the sin, and well may
that be a character, which is both a concomitant and effect of Altar-building:
and now (my brethren) I would I could say with the Apostle, I rejoice to see
your order and steadfastness in the faith: your order in orderly union, every
member keeping its proper place without ambition or murmuration, and all
keeping close in that one body into which we were all baptized, but alas!
(horresco referens) I speak it to our shame and sorrow this day in the sight of
God, What man that can but half see, sees not factions, schisms, and sad
divisions to increase in the midest of us? some men not only professing to this
Minister, and crying him up, not only above, but against other Ministers; and
others owning that, and adhering to him and his principles, making them matters
of faith, because spoken by him, rather then grounded on the Word: so that some
are of Paul, some of Apollo, as if neither themselves, nor the Ministers were
of Christ: these contentions, strifes, divisions, the Apostle does not only not
commend whilst he dehorts from such dissensions, but expressly condemns them
as carnal: and seemees to hint the same to be a setting of them as objects of
their faith, worship, and so Altars against Christ the true Altar of them all:
whilst he expostulates, Is Christ divided? was Paul crufied for you? either
were ye baptized into the name of Paul? rejoicing he had baptized few among
them, lest they should say he baptized in his own name: which expostulations
are vehement affirmations, that such as denominate themselves by the name of
their Teachers, as having their persons in admiration, though never so eminent;
Cujus nomine in religione censeri volumus ab eo rede^ptos ejusque nos proprios
esse profitemur, baptismus est sacramentum confoederationis cum eo in cujus
nomen baptizamur. Par. in loc.
to divide Christ, to own their Teachers, as their Saviors and Redeemers, and
such into whose name and profession they were baptized, 1 Cor. 12.13, 14. not
only are we (I say) thus divided in our profession of relations to this and to
that Minister: but also in Church Way, some of Independent Church-wayes, some
of Arminian, some of Socinian, some of Anabaptistical, some of Seekers, and it
were well if some were not professedly of ranting Churches and Assemblies; all
which separate from the body of the Church, refusing to worship God with the^
in way of ministration by him prescribed, by it practiced: and such as do so
divide, never yet disproved the same, either in matter or form,
notwithstanding their calumniating charges of all out of their way, though
baptized, and approved pious, as in ways and hedges with the Heathen: as the
members of the scarlet-colored whore: brats of Babylon, subjected to
Antichristian Ministry, out of the way of Christ, and therefore to be gathered
into a Church way: and exchange their baptismal admission into the Church for
an admission by a Congregational Covenant; a word: profession of the faith
which is not in them; and engaging to join in such Assemblies, and be edified
in their principles of new light, though never so contrary to the old light of
Scriptures; nay, and undetected, and so subject unto changes: nay, let the
several subdivisions, and withdrawing of members from collected separate
Churches: the many Sects and sorts of Churches that have appeared and been
professed since the first rent from the body of the Churches in the Nation by
the old Brownists, and of late Independen^s, be a witness of this sad effect
and concomitant which so clearly characterizing the sin (whilst, as I before
noted, all of these Sects and sorts that thus separate themselves from the
Church, cannot be all, or any of them the way of Gods worship, who is one, and
will be worshipped by his own way, in his own Church.) may irritate our
jealousy, may as premises lead us clearly to infer the conclusion that Altars
are built, and in building against the Altar of God, with which our heart is to
be affected, and our selves humbled before God, as becomes sincere worshippers
at his Altar.

The fourth Character found to be the constant concomitant of building Altars
against the Altars of God, is deadly enmity to the Ministers of God which wait
upon Gods Altar. In all Religions, the Priest, or Priestly Office, (as
essential to the support of the Altar-worship) is ever advanced, protected, and
provided for by the friends, supplanted, opposed and destroyed by the enemies
of such Altar-worship: and it is to me very observable, that Gods charge of
constant waiting at his Altar, goes not without a Take heed thou forsake not
the Levite all thy days, Deuteronomy. 12 19. So that Altar-Ministery, and the Altar
it self, whether true or false, do always stand together: what rebellious
innovation read we in the story of Altar-building Israel, not accompanied with
a resistance of the Ministry appointed to wait at Gods Altar: the rebellion of
Corah and his company charge Aaron as well as, nay, more immoderately then
Moses, to have taken too much upon him: 2 Chronicles. 11.13, 14.
the unjust affectation of the Priesthood is eminently reproved by Moses, and
confuted by the miraculous budding of Aarons rod: and their Censers beaten into
plates: Jeroboam sets not up false Altars at Dan and Bethel without suspending
the Ministers of Gods Altar ab officio and beneficio, 1 Kings 31.4. 1 Kings
18.19.
from their work and wages, and the stretching forth of his hand against the
Prophet of God sent from Jerusalem: Ahabs Altars and Idolatry is not acted
without an Elijah's complaint, 2 Kings 10 2 Chronicles.
They have broken down thine Altars, and slain thy Prophets: and if ever
false Altars are subverted, and the Altar of God restored, if but by the
seeming zeal of Jehu, or the sincere zeal of Elias, the Priests of Baal must
be the sacrifice, that the Priests of God may be restored. 29.13.4 15.3.
It is recorded to the everlasting honor (and to the luster of the
reformation) of Asa, Hezekiah and Josiah, restorers of Gods true Altar, that
they set the Priests and Levites (Ministers of the Altar) in their places, and
provided their full maintenance to their encouragement; putting a period to the
sad complaint that Israel had now for a long season been without the true God,
and without a Priest to teach, and without Law; not only do instances abound
thus under the Law, (which we use the more, because of the proper use of Altars
under it) but also under the Gospel. Is it not clear to every reasonable
observant eye; that the Jewish and Paganish Priests opposed by themselves, and
provoked others against the Apostles of Christ? Do not the Apostolical Epistles
demonstrate the deadly enmity of the false Apostles against the true Apost^es,
calumniating them, subverting their Ministry, and dissuading from their
maintenance; necessitating their boasting beyond their purpose: and pleading in
the defense of Ministerial maintenance, as by the Altar-rule it was required,
when themselves had sufficient and abounded? Did not the rage of Paganish
persecution pursue an Ignatius or Policarpus, and such Ministers of the
Churches as the principal objects? will not an Apostate Julian subtly labor
to subvert the worship of Christ, by substracting the Ministerial maintenance:
subverting the Schools of their qualification, and by universal toleration,
supplanting their Ordination of Ministers. If ever Arrius will build his Altar
of denying Christ his Divinity, Athanasius must be the obj^ct of his
opposition: so on the other hand, if a Christian Constantine will own and
advance the Altar and worship of God in Christ, he will court and comfort,
cherish and support the despised and dejected Ministers thereof; largely
allowing of himself, and providing for their subsistence and encouragement:
for supersticious seducers, and will-worship-innovators know the Ministers of
the Gospel to be like the Dog in the Fable, defending the sheep from
dissipation and destruction by their wolvish property: and the sincere
worshippers of God well know that God will not be enjoyed immediately, having
appointed a Moses a Mediator, nor can we expect the tender of divine worsh p
in his immediate presence, who has appointed an Ordinance of intercourse
between himself and his Church; the Ministry of his Altar, which he has
promised to vindicate and preserve to the end of the world: when ever he
promised the communications of himself to, or the acceptance of worship from
his Church: so that enquiring after the actors of this sin of Altar-building,
we must observe who they are that express enmity, not to the persons of
particular Ministers only, but to the Ministry of Gods Altar, making it a
sufficient guilt, odium, and object of enmity to be denominated a Minister; let
us take notice who decline and despise it; Who are they that make this Office
the object of railing and reviling, denominating it Antichristian, needless,
imperious, proud, insulting, enslaving men to needless nicity, and cruel
bondage, and all because it corrects their error, curbs their superstition,
and commands in the Name of the Lord their obedience to divine prescriptions:
who they are that raise persecution against, and with railing terms render
Ministers as Ministers vile in the eyes of men; and by pretended revelations
and prophecy decry the Office, saying, This Antichristian Order and its
Ordination to this Office must meet with a period: proclaiming liberty to
Christians as Christians to invade this Sacred Function, and to speak in the
Name of the Lord uncalled, and unqualified, and that provoke by principles,
petition, or pretended example to destroy and have diverted the maintenance of
such as wait on the Altar, designed to them both by God and man: these, I say,
that thus appear deadly enemies to the Instrument of divine worship, the
Ordinance of waiting at Gods true Altar, the Gospel-Ministery, although with
seeming sanctity, and a shout of saintship, cannot be excused from just ground
(of suspicion at the least) of building Altars besides the Altar of God.

The fifth Character as the concomitant of building Altars besides the Altar of
God, is, the dispensation of divine worship, without the divine stamp of a due
Call and Ordination: God never yet appointed Altar-worship without an
Altar-office, which might not be common to every one, nay, which no man must
take upon him, but he which is called of God, as was Aaron. Heb. 5.4.
If Ministry be as (it cannot be denied) a distinct Office under Law or
Gospel, it must needs have a due Inauguration thereunto; for as in a State an
every man's Magistracy is a no Magistracy; so in the Church an every man's
Ministry is no Ministry: a sinful seeking of the Priests Office, upon the
pretense of the peoples holiness, to be witnessed against by the plates of
their censers, and the budding of Aarons rod is suitable to Corahs separate
rebellion: a Whosoever will, let him bring a bullock, and consecrate himself a
Priest, is a fit Canon of Jeroboams constituted Altar-worship at Dan and
Bethel: the highway to bring the lowest of the people into the Priests Office.
When did false Prophets run so fast unsent by the Lord, but when the Altars of
Israel were increased like the streets in Jerusalem? Not to multiply needles
instances in this clear case, let the observation of the Churches of God in all
ages witness the usurpation of the Ministerial Function never to be found in
the Church whilst the doctrine and worship of Christ was preserved pure and
uncorrupted, and never out of the Church when and where false doctrines and
superstitious innovations did abound: the promise of Christ concerning the
restoring of his Altar and worship came not without a promise to vindicate this
Office from the invasion of the uncalled tradesman to the shameful conviction
which shall extract his own confession: I am no Prophet, I am an husbandman
men taught me to keep cattle from my youth, Z^ch. 13.5. If therefore we would
find who they are that sinfully build Altars, we must consider who they are
that preach and practice ministerial discharges without due Ordination; who
they are that countenance and contend for this usurpation, counting it a
glorious liberty that every man may lay his hand on his own head, and speak in
the Name of the Lord: were the Lord as eminent and immediate in his vindicative
strokes for this sin under the Gospel, 2 Samuel 6.8
as under the Law, how many Vzzahs would be found dead for their uncalled
setting hand to hold the Ark of Gods worship, notwithstanding the pretense of
necessity: How many Vzziah-like leprous foreheads would be found amongst us, 2
Chr. 26.17, 18, 19.
of such that by at least eighty Ministers of the Lord have been warned; it is
not for them, but for the Ministers of the Gospel to offer unto the Lord. But I
shall conclude this Character as a just cause to irritate our humiliation
before the Lord with that observation of reverend Doctor Hall upon a case not
much unlike this, though something different: It is a dangerous thi^^ in the
service of God to decline from his own institutions; we have to do with a
power which is wise to prescribe his own worship (in matter and form) just to
require what he has prescribed, and powerful to revenge what he has required.

The sixth and last Character which I shall note to you, Blow at the root
Observe. 8. p. 157.
and I will but briefly note it, is doleful contests for universal Tolerotion
of all religions, which (a wi^e observant) notes is nothing else but the
putting of the true Religion out of all protection, whilst therein Satan
labors to exempt, privilege, and for ever to secure his Agents and Brokers
(the Seminaries and Teachers of soul-murthering doctrines) from being molested,
discouraged and disturbed in his work by any Government and Discipline
Ecclesiastical or Civil; whereby the hands of all in power are bound up (or
rather cut quite off) that they may never be able to serve God as they ought in
the protection and propagation of his Gospel and worship: who seriously
considers the strict Laws the Lord left the Jews for the keeping of them to
his true Altar, and sees not universal liberty leading from the same, to be
sinful: nay, who considers man's novellous nature, and sees not a necessity of
being kept to some one Religion by authority, knowing men are naturally bent to
mint Gods services in their own brain, and to go a whoring after their own
inventions, to the building of Altars beside the Altar of God: Was this sin
ever acted in Israel, where the sword was sharp and severe against innovations?
The same may be demanded concerning the Christian Churches, and upon the
contrary, was not this impiety evermore the effect of impunity and universal
liberty?

I have done with the first part of the enquiry, whether in the midest of us
Altars may not be seen besides the Altar of God? which we have too much cause
to conclude in the affirmative: I have also noted the concomitants as
Characters of this sin, so that the subjects of dangerous doctrine: of divining
predictions: of dangerous separations: of deadly enmity to
Gospel-Altar-Ministery: of dispensing divine worship without due call: and of
doleful contests of Toleration of all religions; may justly be more then
suspected abettors, advancers, if not actors of Altar-building: and who those
are, I leave to the observation of the wise, whose eyes are in their head: and
pass forward to the second matter of enquiry in order to our humiliation.

The second thing to be enquired, for the defect of which we are to be humbled
in the presence of a God of jealousy, is, Whether the sincere worshippers have
or do according to their duty see to this sin of Altar-building? wherein we
might enquire after their sensible observation of, and affectation with the
sin: their seasonable caution, and serious counsel to desistance; their speedy
accommodations of their brethren in matter of accidental temptation: and their
zealous resistance of the sin according to their places, which was before noted
to be acts of this duty in the religious Israelites: but instead of a spirit
faithfully discharging these duties, it were well, if to our grief, and Gods
great dishonor, some that have, and eminently do profess to the worship of
the true God in truth, and whose places more eminently engage their priority in
suspecting and seeing to innovation, superstition Altarbuilding were not to be
seen.

First, staid by their self-interest from furious driving (with a seeming zeal
for the Lord of Hosts) against the Altars and Priests of Baal, suffering
Jehu-like, Jeroboams Calves at Dan and Bethel, and the high places thereof to
stand unremoved and unrebuked, if not unobserved as to their sinful nature, so
soon as the house of Ahab is subverted and themselves established in the high
places of the Kingdom: as if Prelatical innovations and superstitious
ceremonies were to be destroyed as obstructors of their honor and high
enjoyments, not as of a sinful nature of humane invention, and against divine
prescription: alas! how many may we fear are so blinded with golden thrones and
great revenues, rhat they cannot see (or rather will not) and so deasned that
they cannot hear the reports of Apostasy, backsliding, error, heresy, and
erected innovations, whereby they depart from the Lord to build Altars besides
his Altar.

Secondly, if they be seen and heard, are not some that should be covered with
shame, and sit in sorrow for so grievous a guilt, and greatly provoking sin:
rejoicing and readily solacing themselves, and with Altar-building Israel, Ex^.
32.18
shouting not for grief, but great joy: counting, and calling it a glorious
liberty of conscience: reputing the time of the Toleration thereof the glory of
Gospel-dayes, rebuking the rebukers of so gross profaneness; nay, and what is
worst of all, with brazen faces, and as given up to strong delusions, think
they do God good service that so do: pressing into the presence of God with
solemn praises, as if God were an object of confused administrations:
Contemplation on the golden Calfe.
and direct opposite worships: May we not with sorrow consider with Doctor
Hall, that it is a miserable thing for Governors to humor people in their
sins, and instead of make ng up the breach, to enlarge it? Do we not know that
sin will take heart by the approbation of the meanest looker on? but if
authority once second it, it grows impudent.

Thirdly, some seeing the sin, and saying in their hearts, would it might not
be, remain sinfully silent, not considering that the wicked are apt to
interpret the silence of God himself as an argument of allowance: Psa. 50.22
and that he that sees the wickedness of the wicked when duly called to speak,
and warnes not from the same, Ezekiel. 3.18. Acts 2.26.
is chargeable with the guilt of the sin, and responsible for the blood of the
sinner: How far is this from an Apostolical spirit, who will speak, though by
speaking they create enemies?

Fourthly and lastly, see we not some speaking against the sin, yet slack in
their rebukes, much below the zealous resistance of the Jews in the text, who
mince not the matter, but in downright terms discover the nature of the sin,
and denominate it a rebellion against God and us: and dictate the aggravations
thereof to render it vile, and not only so, but with sword in hand, and
resolution in heart to reduce them to obedience, warn their desistance, but
how many Superiors are l ke old Eli in their rebukes? It is an evil report
that I hear of you, my sons, do not so evil against the Lord. Is it not sad to
see in very many families, wives, children, servants sinfully following
innovations and humane inventions against the truth and worship of God with the
silence, or at the best but slack rebukes of their husbands, parents and
masters? whose sovereignty exercising its just severity, might be an instrument
of keeping them more close to the Altar that is of divine prescription. It will
be no excuse in the day of the Lord, for our neglect or cool, lukewarm
discharge of our duty, to say we looked for God to reduce them into obedience
to his own will, when God has invested us with authority, as instruments to
this end: since God himself expects this from man, why should man expect it
from God? We might remember, though God could as easily have prevented and
redressed the Altar at Horeb by an immediate hand, yet he sends Moses down the
Mount to do it, by showing his severity: severe expressions of anger against
Altar-building, do very well become and suit with the meekest Mo^es.

I have done with the enquiry, I shall leave to your serious and second
thoughts how to find out the guilt and subjects thereof, only if such guilt be
found in the Churches of God in the midest of us: that Altars be built, or in
building against the Altar of God, and not regarded or seen unto: it is to us
matter of mourning; and to the exciting your humiliation, give me leave to
suggest to you two or three considerations as so many aggravations of this evil
so vile in its nature, as has been evidenced: but as to us will be found
thereby much more vile and grievous.

The first thing that may excite our sorrow is such a motive as is in the story
under consideration: viz. It is a sin committed whilst ^od is striking for
late iniquity: Is the iniquity of Peor, too little for us from which we are not
cleansed to this day, although there was a plague in the Congregation of the
Lord? Josh. 22.17. What a vile nature have we, that whilst our wounds are
green for a past, to run upon a new rebellion? did not our late days abound
with superstious innovations, giving cause to the Pap^sts insultingly to say,
we were posting toward Rome? were not many pious people burdened in themselves
to see Surplice-service, Altar-bowing, Eastern-worship, and the like,
introduced to, and imposed on the Church as absolute parts of divine worship?
Were not many faithful Ministers for their non-observance of such will worship
suspended, silenced, and for their zealous resistance many ways afflicted? Was
not the Lord provoked? did not his displeasure arise? have we not felt the
weight of his stroke, and smart of his rod? are our wounds yet healed, our
desolations repaired, and our glory restored? O then may it not be grief and
heaviness of spirit to see some so soon to be turned from innovations of
ceremonies to the bringing in of innovated doctr^nes, from such as were but
circumstantial, and conserved the substance of divine worship, to those that
are fundamental, in danger to subvert the whole frame of the divine Altar of
Gospel Worship? O how sad is the echo that (methinks) I hear uttered from
heaven against England, Why should you be smitten any more, ye revolt more and
more.

The second thing that may affect our hearts, and engage our hearty humiliation
before God for the sin of Altar-building may be this; that if it be found in
the midest of us unresisted, it is a sin committed under a solemn Covenant,
wherein we stand obliged to the Lord, and with cheerful hearrs and hands lifted
up to the most high God, have sworn,

That we shall sincerely, really, and constantly, through the grace of God,
endeavor in our places, etc. the preservation of the Reformed Religion in the
Church of Scotland, etc. And to bring the Churches of God in the three
Kingdoms, to the nearest conjunction and unifermity in Religion, in Confession
of Faith, Form of Church Government, Directory for worship, and Catehizing,
etc. Artic. 1.

Secondly, We shall in like manner without respect of persons, endeavor the
extirpation of Popery, Prelacy, etc. Superstition, Heresy, Schism and
Profaneness, and whatso^ver shall be found contrary to sound doctrine, and
the power of godliness, etc. that the Lord may be one and his Name one in the
three Kingdoms. Artic. 2.

Whatsoever is conceived, and has been pleaded by some for the cessation of
the obliging power of some Articles in this Covenant, yet I keow not any that
have denied its obligation, and yet binding force in these Articles, and to
these duties, unless it be such as profanely jesting with the whole, have
called, or counted it an Almanac out if date: whilst therefore we are under
the Oath of God, may we not be covered with shame to see it broken? Oh, can we
with comfort remember our past condemnation of Vows violation, and
dispensations from the obliging power of Oaths in others, and run our selves
under the same guilt? O perfideous Nation that will keep no promise made,
though to the God of faithfulness! O perjurious people, whom sacred bonds
cannot bind, nor solemn Oath oblige! Can you without blushing look upon the
Covenant hanging in the places of Assemblies, it may be many of your names
subscribed to it, as an evidence of your solemn obligation by it: and remember
that whilst you have sworn uniformity, you propagate, or at least indulge
multiformity of Religion? whilst you have sworn the extirpation of Baals
Altars, do you countenance or carry on the erection of Sup^^stition, Heresy,
Schism? whilst you have sworn to endeavor that the Lord may (...) one, and
his Name one: Do you cast his worship according to your wills, and cast off his
own standing rule, and indulge men's worshipping him, and professing his Name
according to their corrupt fancies, pretended to be conscience? think you not
God to be a God of jealousy, that will, and of power that can avenge the
quarrel of his Covenant? Against what sin has his severity been expressed so
much as those sins that have been acted after, and against solemn Oaths? Let
us with sorrow and shame remember that the Lord was wroth with Israel, and put
them out of his sight, because they forsook his Statutes and his Covenant: and
made Calves, and built Altars unto them contrary to his commandments, 2 Kings
17.15, 16, 17. and their obliging oaths.

But thirdly, we have the more cause to be humbled before the Lord, for that
the severe judgments of God may seize upon us, and we have cause with fear to
expect them: I have before noted that Altar-building does incur Divine
displeasure, and subject a people to the fury of the Lord: how may we mourn to
see the sin acted and allowed, which is the sad omen of approaching misery.

Fourthly and lastly, this may affect our hearts, and fill us with sorrow, that
sinful Altar-building is a sad provoker and symptom of the Lords departure;
Jer. 6.8.
the last, but heaviest of his judgments. God will stay and threaten many
miseries before it come to a least my soul depart from you: I cannot but much
observe the words of Phineas in this story, when the two tribes and half
vindicated themselves from the jealousy of their justly suspicious brethren
concerning their Altar-building, Recte colligunt allegati sehov^m apud
Israelitas presentem ^^^sse quia ^e igionis consensus adhuc ab ipsis colitur
Mas. ^n loc.
This day I perceive that the Lord is among us, because ye have not done this
trespass, Josh. 22.31. which words do clearly imply, that Altar-building
against Gods Altar, is an undoubted argument, not only of Gods future, but
present absence: for if by unity and consent in divine worship Gods presence be
argued; by the rule of contraries, difference in, and dissent from divine
worship must needs argue his absence: Contrariorum contraria est ratio:
Contrary reasons enforce contrary assertions. O then, my brethren, is it not a
woe to us, that God is departed from us, certainly Gods departure in respect of
his counselling, sin curbing, guiding and directing presence, is a sad presage
of his departure in respect of his blessing, preserving, protecting presence:
the final absence of God is hell it self: then every withdrawing of himself
must be a spark of that fire: Happy is the man or place with whom God stays to
chide; for whilst he stays to reprove, there is favor in displeasure; but
when he leaves either man or Church, there is no hope but of sin and vengeance*
the withdrawing of divine presence is notbing else but the presence of his
wrath: O can we read the Schisms, Errors, Heresies, and many innovations in
the midest of us; those sad effects and symptoms of divine withdrawing, as
written in most legible characters without grief in our hearts, and tears in
our eyes; nay, with a loud cry of golden liberty, and glorious times? O let us
smite upon our thigh, and say, What have we done? Let us sit in the dust and
sigh: Let us call for the mourning women, that they may lament: considering
that the most heart-piercing and doleful tune that ever Altar-building Israel
did lamentingly express as the very height of their maladies and calamities,
was the Comforter that should relieve my soul, is far from me, Lam. 1.16.

The second Use that I shall make of the Point, is of exhortation unto such as
profess (but are suspected in the Church of God) to be sincere worshippers of
God: and unto them I would in the Name of the Lord desire to think well of
their brethrens jealous enquiry after their courses, and suspicion of their
rare and unusual practices springing from unknown principles: and with a
spirit of meekness bear their just reproves and Christian cautions,
composing themselves to give an account unto their brethrens demands, and
readily to declare the grounds and reasons of their more then ordinary
undertakings: I do not deny but just actions may be unjustly suspected and
condemned to be sinful: but if this jealousy can plead ignorance, it will
thereby expect justification rather then censure: animosity of spirit, and
outcries of violence and bitterness against the modest demands of jealousy
does very much argue guilt: for it is an observation as true as common,
Innocence fears no trials. We shall find an example in this very story worthy
imitation, the ten tribes and a half heating of an Altar-building-work, by
their Ambassadors make a severe expostulating, reproving demand of the ground
and end of so sudden, strange, unconsulted, and undeclared action: yet we here
have no complaints of violence, bitterness, or censoriousnesse, but a speedy
and meek submission to their brethrens demand, readily declaring their motive
to this work (viz.) to engage posterity to Gods Altar before the Arc, their
end in the erecting this Altar to be, that it may be a witness of their
relation to the God of Israel: Where is the spirit of brethren which should
engage a ready satisfying of the suspicious demands of brethren? Where is the
spirit of due subjection to the authority of the Churches, which should declare
principles and practices, and submit them with meekness unto trial? If
brethren stand at distance from such and expressed offense against their
singular unusual courses, may they not reflect upon themselves, and conclude it
to be a self created cross, whilst in pride or peevishness they refuse to
declare and submit to censure the ground and end of their strange proceedings?
Have not many a Phinehas both jointly and singly desired of separating
congregational brethren, a platform of their pretended way of Christ, a sum of
their settled principles to which they would stick, without making new light
old: an express of the rules drawn from Scripture, which shall regulate their
practice and proceedings so different from their brethren, if I may not say
dividing from the body of the Church of God; that they might be compared with
the pattern in the Mount, the Scriptures of God, by which all the way of the
Churches must be judged? O that I might once more entreat in the name of the
sincere worshippers at Gods Altar, though not so immediately delegated as was
Phinehas, or some of the Ministers of Gods Gospel-Altar that have demanded it)
that they would at last (after all their protestations, that they would walk
closest with Christ according to Gospel-rule, and Apostolical practice: their
solemn promise to their brethen, the performance of which has been long,
though in vain expected:) approve their brotherly affection, and a due
subjection to the authority of the Churches of Jesus Christ, by drawing up a
plat-forme of the way in which they walk: accommodating their brethren with the
principles that rule their practice, submitting the same with alacrity, and
meekness, unto trial: that an inability or unwillingnesse to discover the
same, stir and strengthen not suspicion, and give us cause to conclude them
Lucifugae Scripturarum, decliners of trial. Let me once more note to them this
is necessary, that their principles may justify or condemn the practice of
some that have taken up the profession of Christ in their way; for if we must
gather their principles from present practice: their gathering Churches out of
Churches: their covenant-admission into Church Membership: their private men's
preaching and administration of Sacraments, with the Schism they have made
from that one body in which they were baptized: we cannot but be jealous with a
holy jealousy, that they do at the least formally build Altars against the
Altar of God.

The second exhortation which may rather be a dehortation, is unto such as are
turned aside from the holy command, and do either materially, as the Pap^sts
and others; or formally, as congregational Separatists, build Altars besides
the Altar of God: in the Name of the Lord desist your work, stay your
proceeding, cease to build; for your work will find no acceptance with the
Lord. Shall I use to you the dialect in the text, Rebel not against the Lord
and against us (your brethren,) to build you Altars beside the A^tar of the
Lord. Consider that although Gods patience may long bear, and whilst you
offer Incense to the Queen of heaven, and corrupt the worship of a holy God,
you may have plenty of victuals, you may be well, and see no evil; yet fury
will be provoked, and take away corn, and wine, and oil, etc. Hos. 2.
Consider, and lay it seriously to heart, that offering false fire to the true
God, and adoring a false god, are Homogeneal, of the same nature, Altars
against God: God is provoked to jealousy by the rivality of false worship, as
well as of false gods.

I shall not I hope again need to open the fury of the Lord provoked by, and
expressed against this sin: only let me in general note to you, that God has
resolved to cover Altar-builders with shame, and fill them with blushing,
notwithstanding his long silence he has resolved that they shall be ashamed of
their strange sacrifices, Hos. 4.19. and of the Oaks which they have made, and
the gardens which they have chosen, Isa. 1.29. Know, that if any will presume
to step out of his calling, and speak in the Name of the Lord, uncalled; that
God has said, who both can and will see it done: The Prophet shall be ashamed
every one of his Vision; and in their shame shall say, I am no Prophet, I am an
husbandman; for men taught me to keep cattle from my youth, Zech. 13.4. I
cease to admire, and cannot but adore the just dealing of a righteous God, that
the doctrine and practice of the Nicolaitans was usually an attendant, or
effect of the Heresies and Innovations of the Primitive times, and that sinful
separations and Altar-building innovations in matter or in form, has produced
indulgence of filthy and abominable Ranting principles and practices in our
days: when I seriously consider that sad denunciation of this shameful
judgment in Hos. 4.12, 13, 14. The spirit of whoredom has caused to err,
and they have gone a whoring from under their God, they sacrifice on the tops
of the mountains, and burn Incense upon the hills under the Oaks, etc.
Therefore your daughters shall commit whoredom, and your spouses shall commit
adultery: I will not punish your daughters when they commit whoredom, nor your
spouses when they commit adultery: for themselves are separated with whores,
and they sacrifice with harlots. Take heed lest God say unto you, as he once
said unto Ephraim, because they have multiplied Altars to sin, Altars shall
be unto them to sin, Hos. 8.11. For pretended piety in the increase of Altars
may be justly punished with obduracie in the sin, that God may say, Seeing they
will introduce sinful innovations contrary to divine prescriptions, they shall
so do to their shame and sin. The Lord persuade the hearts of such as
superstitiously build Altars in matter or form besides the Altar of God, to
return and sincerely speak the language of repenting Ephraim, What have I to
do any more with Idols? So, what have we to do any more with Altars,
Innovat^ons, humane inventions? we will wait on, and follow after divine
prescriptions.

The third and last exhortation is, to such as are sincerely, and indeed
worshippers of God at his own only Altar, holding fast the Covenant of God
walking according to divine commandment, and keeping communion with the
Churches of God; them I would exhort in the Name of the Lord to stick close to
the Altar of God, and set your selves in your several places against such as
build Altars against Gods Altar: Let not your souls be unstable in the ways of
the Lord, declining divine prescriptions, and embracing humane inventions, and
superstitious innovations: Let the world witness you to be conformable
Non-conformists, who not conforming to some Canons and Customs of the
Churches, contrary to, and inconsistent with the Canon of Scripture, yet
readily conform to the worship in matter and form, composed according to the
pattern in the mount, the Word of God, conserving the unity of, and communion
with the Churches of God, that continue the Altar according to divine
prescription: set your zeal against superstition, rushing from extreme to
extreme, schismatical societies, and heretical principles, and practice;
proclaim sincerity, and not schism; following after purity in divine worship,
and not faction: to have been the cause of that noncompliance which exposed
you to the unjust charge of Puritanisme, and separation from the Temple and
Altar of God. Oh be persuaded to shake hands with such as shake hands with God
and his worship. If any will cry, the people are all holy, to the decrying of
Gospel-Ministery, conclude them too profane for you to join with. Let not
example, or eminent professions of piety persuade you to receive principles or
practices unproved. Be sure to follow the counsel of God, to go forth by the
footsteps of the flocks, and to feed their kids beside the shepherds tents,
when you are in danger to turn aside by the flocks of Altar-building
companions: for unity to, and (as Diodate notes) imitation of the true Churches
of Christ, is a preservative against Apostasy to Idolatry. If the ten Tribes
would drive to the Altars at Dan and Bethel, draw (with the Levites, and all
that set themselves to seek the Lord) to Jerusalem, to sacrifice to the Lord at
his own Altar: though with the loss of your Cities, Suburbs, and sweet
enjoyments: though Israel play the harlot, let not Judah offend; come not to
Gilgal to transgresss, nor to Bethaven to swear by the Lord: put your selves in
days of general Apostasy, to be hid amongst the thousands of the Lord that
bow not the knee to Baal: and under the protection of that God, that can
restrain the fury of the fire, and rage of roaring Lions, when let loose
against his servants for their adherencie to his Altar and worship; manifest
your selves approved in the Lords Sanctuary, now Heresies are abroad, to a
discovery of the unfound. Will it not be an answer of confidence and comfort to
the Lords demand in a day of general defection and dolor, 1 Kings 19.10.
The children of Israel have forsaken thy Covenant broken down thine Altars,
and slain thy Prophets, and I, even I only am left alone? Is not constant
adherencie to the sincere worship Altar of God commended to us by a cloud of
witnesses, who suffered most exquisite torments for the same, not only by the
Jews and Pagans, professed enemies to the Altar of God; but also by the
Donatists, Navatians and Arrian Heretics, apostatized from the truth of
divine worship, besides Papists and Germane Anabaptists, who baptized such
baptismo flaminis with fire, as would not be according to their fancy baptized
baptismo fluminis with water; so that you see the counsel of God and cloud of
witnesses in the Church, charging you to take heed of will worship, humane
inventions, Altar-building beside the Altar of God.

Not only are you to be exhorted to stick close to the Altar of God, and take
heed of declining to, or turning after false Altars; but also in your places,
according to your capacity, set your selves against the sin of Altar-building,
sensibly observing, sadly bewailing, and speedily suppressing the sin in such
as act, or advance it. Never let it be said that professed worshippers at Gods
Altar shut their eyes at the increase of Altars against God, and remain silent
under the sleighting of divine prescription, and sinful innovating of
superstitious matter or forms in the Lords service. Sad is the age in which we
live; for that Christianity must be approved by apologizing for, nay, appearing
in the defense of universal liberty of all, or any way of divine worship: and
moderation made to consist in a mincing and extenuating of this sin of
Altar-building; nay, in a positive silence as concerning it: as if Moses heart
might not be soft toward Israel, whilst his fury is hot against their Calfe
and Altar: or Paul let his moderation be known to all men, and yet fervently
ejaculate a Would they were cut off that trouble the Churches by their
Altar-building superstitious doctrines. Be not deceived, my brethren, sins
complaint of violence and bitterness, must be no check to sincere zeal: what
if many things accompany Altar-building which are of the Lords own drawing and
directing; Halls Contemplations on the Calfe at Horeb.
may not Moses more hate the golden Calfe wherein is engraven the Idolatry of
the Israelites, then honor the Tables of stone, wherein God had engraven his
Commandments, and long more to deface the Idol, then care to preserve the
Tables? What soul knows the right nature of zeal, and subscribes not to that
unquestionable truth, that every man quoad captum, in their places, according
to their powers, are bound to defend the Altar of God against all contrary
Altars of humane erection? considering the sword put into the hand of the
Magistrate, the censures into the power of the Church, not only to be used
against sins of the second, but also of the first Table: and see not sufficient
reason to set it self against (much less to countenance and indulge) such as
set their post by Gods post, their threshold by the Lords thr^shold. The
general commands of God to destroy the Altars and places built against his,
with the exemplary zeal, not only under the Law, but also under the Gospel of
Civil as well Ecclesiastical powers, may be forcible inducements to the
resistance and restraining of Altars against Gods: as of Constantine,
Theodosius, Valentinianus and others; expressly decreeing, that in all places,
and throughout every City the Temples be shut up, and liberty be denied to
wicked men, to have access thither to commit Idolatry: as also that men be
restrained from making sacrifice, whereby they restrained false Altars, though
I confess they compelled not to the Altar of God, Bulling. 2. Decade 7, and 8.
Ser.
I shall never own or indulge such Papal cruelty, as did drive with whips the
Pagan Natives in America to the font to be baptized before they were catechized
in, and convinced of the doctrine of Jesus Christ, Ferus in Decla. in Josh. 22.
Vtinam talis zelus in nobis esset, and quidem non unum ^ltare erectum videmus,
sed innumera.
and divine worship: yet I wish Ferus wish that men in power in republiques
might imitate the Magistratical zeal of these Emperors, in nor only
restraining Heathenish, but also Arrian Heretical Altars, and contending for
unanimity in divine worship among such as have laid hold on Gods Covenant, and
are professed members of the Church: and that the authoritative Assemblies of
the Churches would follow the footsteps of the Apostolical Council at Antioch,
against the Altar of Circumcision: the Synods in Asia, at Ancyra, at Antioch,
in France, held against the Montanists Altar-building Heretics, when and
where they excommunicated Montanus: Synods at Rome in Anno 246. and 254.
against Novatus and his Heresy: at Antioch to the suppressing and condemning
the Heresy of Paulus Samosatenus, and of the Nicene and other Councels against
the Arrian Heresy: and also the authority that Jesus Christ has left in his
Church to the rejecting of Altar-building Heretics after the first and second
admonition: the charge of particular Elders of the Churches is charged on the
Elders of Ephesus, in them on all others to look to the Churches of God
committed to their charge, that they follow not seducers, which may arise from
among themselves to draw aside disciples after them.

Let us take heed of adding silence or sinful indulgence of Altar-building (as
the more sad symptom of Gods departure) to the too many eminent and too evident
signs thereof extant in the midest of us: what a black but of blemish was it
to Asa, Amaziah, and other reforming Kings of Judah, That the high places were
not removed, but the people yet did sacrifice? Will it not then be registered to
all succeeding ages to the infamy of our begun Reformation, that
Altar-building was acted by some eminent zealots therein, and superstitious
doctrines and practice eminently indulged by universal Toleration? The late
liberty of innovating superfluous and superstitious ceremonies consistent with
the substance of divine worship, though unfit to be annexed, was reputed a
posting toward Popery: but I am sure, suffering, and not suppressing Schisms,
all sorts of doctrines, though never so dissonant to divine dictates, and
liberty to embrace any religion without the establishing the Lords Altar, is,
and will be found to be the highway to Atheism. The Ministers of the Gospel
generally throughout the Nation, not many years since, acted by a spirit of
zeal, did Their Attestation to the solemn League and Covenant, against Errors,
Heresies, Sschissmes, and the toleration thereof
declare against Schism, Errors, Heresies, and the protection thereof by
universal Toleration: Oh my brethren, take heed you lose not your first love:
be entreated in the fear of the Lord to know the authority with which Christ
has invested his Churches, and entrusted you to the defending of his Altar,
when Magistrates will not (nay, it may be there is no Magistrate for to) do it:
unite you together in the fear of the Lord, exhibit and exercise the Discipline
of the Lord in the midest of his people. Let not the bounds of Suspension and
excommunication be utterly removed, as if never placed by the Lord about his
holy Mount: Let the men of the world see that Christ can have a Church in a
Nation formally no Nation, but a Chaos of confused people: second your
attestation with a first and second exhortation to Altar-builders, if they will
not cease, follow them with rejection and cutting off from the Sanctuary of
God. Consider seriously, that if the having in the Church them that hold the
doctrine of Baalam, and of the Nicolaitans: and suffering the woman Jezabel,
which calls her self a Prophetess, to teach and seduce the Lords people: be
the few things that God has against us; we shall have cause to fear that we
shall follow the seven Churches of Asia in their sad rejection for following
them in sinful Toleration. Let therefore the Priests and Princes; nay, all the
people of Gods Israel say to such of their brethren, as they suspect to depart
from the Lord; nay, and according to their capacity, labor to effect it, that
they may not rebel against the Lord, and against us, to build an Altar beside
the Altar of the Lord.

(...) FINIS.

