A COPY of the LETTER FROM His Excellency the Lord General CROMWELL, SENT TO
THE MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT.

Called to take upon them the Trust of the Government of this Commonwealth.

WHICH Began on Monday the Fourth of June, 1653. The day appointed by the
Letters of Summons from his Excellency the Lord Genesis Cromwell, for the meeting
of these GENTLEMEN.

With the several Transactions since that time.

LONDON: Printed by M. S. for Tho: Jenner at the South-entrance of the Royal
Exchange. 1656

A COPY of the LETTER From his Exccellency the Lord General Cromwell, sent to
the Members of Parliament, called to take upon them the Trust of the Government
of this Commonwealth.
FOrasmuch as upon the dissolution of the late Parliament, it became necessary
that the Peace, Safety and Government of this Commonwealth should be provided
for; and in order thereunto, diverse persons fearing God, and of approved
fidelity and honesty, are by my Self, with the advice of My Counsel of
Officers nominated, to whom the Charge and Trust of so weighty Affairs is to
be committed. And having good assurance of your love to, and courage for God,
and the interest of his Cause, and of the good people of this Commonwealth, I
Oliver Cromwell, Captain General, and Commander in Chief of all the Armies and
Forces raised and to be raised within this Commonwealth, do hereby summon and
require you, being one of the persons nominated, personally to be, and appear
at the Counsel Chamber commonly known, or called by the name of the Council
Chamber at White Hall, within the City of Westminster, upon the fourth day of
July next, ensuing the date hereof, then and there to take upon you the said
Trust, unto which you are hereby called, and appointed to serve as a Member for
the County of -- And hereof you are not to fail. Given under My hand and seal
the -- day of June, 1653.

O: CROMWELL.

Monday, June 4. 1653.
This being the day appointed by the Letters of S^mmons, from his Excellency
the Lord General Cromwell, for the meeting of those Gentlemen that were called
to the Supreme Authority, they met accordingly in the Council Chamber, where
being entered the Room, above one hundred and twenty in number, and being set
round about the Table, the Lord General standing by the window opposite to the
middle of the Table and having as many of the Army Officers as the room could
well contein, on his right hand and on his left, his Lordship made a very grave
Christian and seasonable speech and Exhortation, wherein he briefly recounted
the many great and wondrous mercyes of God toward this Nation, and the Series
of providence wherein the presence of God did wonderfully appear in carrying on
this Cause, and bringing affairs into the present condition, beyond all
expectation; ascribing the glory of all to God alone.

He set forth also in particular the progress of affairs since the famous
victory at Worcester, wherein that Arch Enemy of this nation was wholly
subdued. He likewise laid down the actings of the Army there upon, after diverse
applications to the Parliament, and much being wanting, and forbearance,
together with the grounds and necessity of their dissolving the said
Parliament, which his Excellency declared to be for the presevation of this
Cause, and the interest of all honest men who have been engaged therein.

Moreover, he very amply held forth the clearenesse of the Call given to the
present Members to take the Supreme Authority, and did from the Scriptures
exhort them to their duties and encourage them therein, desiring that a
tenderness might be used toward all godly and conscientious persons, of what
judgment and under what form soever.

Which being ended, his Lordship produced an instrument under his own hand and
seal, whereby he did with the advice of his Officer, devolve and entrust the
Supreme Authority and Government of this Commonwealth, into the hands of the
persons then met, who or any forty of them are to be held and acknowledged the
Supreme Authority of the Nation, unto whom all persons within the same, and the
Territories thereunto belonging are to yield obedience and subjection. And they
are not to sit longer then the 3 day of November, 1654. Three months before
their dissolution they are to make choice of other persons to succeed them, who
are not to sit longer then a twelve month; but it is left to them to take care
for a succession in Government: which Instrument being delivered to the persons
aforesaid, his Lordship commended them to the Grace of God.

This being done his Excellency and his Officers withdrew; and the said persons
so met, having the Supreme Authority put into their hands, after some short
space, adjourned till the next morning eight a clock, and appointed to meet in
the old Parliament House there to seek God for direction in this great work,
and for his presence and blessing therein. Hereupon, without doing any further
business, they all departed.

The Names of the Members of Parliament, which began June 4. 1653. With the
respective Counties for which they serve. depiction of Parliament
Berks.
Samuel Dunch Vincent Goddard Thomas Wood
Bedford.
Nathaniell Tailor Edward Cater Edward Cater
Buckingham.
George Fleetwood George Baldwin
Cambridge.
John Sadler Thomas French Robert Castle Samuel Warner
Chester.
Robert Duckenfield Henry Birkinhead
Four Nothern Counties.
Charles Howard Robert Fenwick Henry Dawson Henry Ogle
Cornwall
Robert Bennet Francis Langdon Anthony Rous John Bawden
Derby.
Jervas Bennet Nathanael Barton
Devon.
George Monk, one of the Generals at Sea. John Carew Thomas Sanders
Christopher Martin James Erisey Francis Rous Richard Swe^^
Dorcet.
William Sydenham John Bingham
Essex.
Joachim Matthews Henry Barington John Brewster Christopher Earl Dudley
Templer
Goucester.
John Crofts William Neast Robert Holmes
Southampton.
Richard Norton Richard Major John Hyldesley
Hertford.
Henry Lawrance William Reeve
Hereford.
Wroth Rogers John Herring
Huntington.
Edward Montague Stephen Phesaunt
Kent.
Lord Viscount Lisle. Thomas Blount William Kenrick William Cullen Andrew
Broughton
Lancaster.
William West John Sawrey Robert Cunl ffe
Leicester.
Henry Danvers Edward Smith John Prat
Lincoln
Sir William Brownelow Richard Cust Barn^by Bowtell Humphrey Walcot William
Thompson
Middlesex
Sir Willam Roberts Augustine Wingfield Arthur Squib
Monmouth
Philip Jones
Northampton
Sir Gilbert Pickering Thomas Brook
Norfolk.
Robert Jermy Tobias Fecets Ralph Walmer Henry King Willam Burton
Nottingham
John Oddingsels Edward Chid
Oxon
Sir Charles Wolsley William Draper Dr. Jonathan Goddard
Rutland.
Edward Horseman
Salop.
William Botterel Thomas Baker
Stafford.
George Bellit John Chetwood
Suffolk.
Jacob Caley Francis Brewster Robert Dunkon John Clark Edward Plumstead
Somerset.
Robert Blake, one of the Generals at Sea. John Pine Dennis Hollister Henry
Henly
Surrey.
Samuel Hickland Laurence March
Sussex.
Anthoney Stapley William Spence Nathanaell Studely
Warwick.
John St. Nicholas Richard Lucy
Wilts.
Sir Anthony Ashley Cooper Nicholas Green Thomas Air
Worcester.
Richard Salway John James
York.
George Lord Evr^ Walter Strikland Francis Lassols John Anlaby Thomas Dickenson
Thomas St. Nicholas Roger Coats Edward Gill
London.
Robert Tichborn John Ireton Samuel Moyer John Langley John Stone Henry Barton
Praise-God Barboue
Wales.
Bushy Mansel James Philips John Williams Hugh Courtney Richard Price John
Brown
Scotland.
Sir James Hope Alex: Bredy John Swinton Will: Lockart Alex. Jefferies
Ireland.
Sir Robert King Col. John Hewson Col. Henry Cromwell Col. John Clark Daniel
Hutchinson Vincent Gookyn
Called in by the Parliament since they sat.
Lord Gen: Cromwell Maj. Genesis Lambert Maj. Genesis Harrison Maj. Genesis Desborough
Col. Mat. Tomlinson.
Council of State.
THe Lord General. Maj. Genesis Desbrow. Maj. Genesis Harrison Mr. Major Col.
Sydenham Sir Anthoney Ashley Cooper Ald. Tichbourne Sir. Charles Wolsley Sir.
Gilbert Pickering Mr. Carew Col. Jones Lord Viscount Lisle Mr. Lawrence Col.
Mountague Mr. Strickland Cap. Howard The Lord Air Sir William Roberts Mr.
Sadler Sir Robert King Col. Henry Cromwell Dr. Goddard Col. Barton Sir William
Brownlow Cap. Stone Col. George Fleetwood Col. James Mr. Anlaby Mr. Bennet Col.
Rous Col. Bingham.
An ACT Declaring what Offenses shall be adjudged Treason.
BE it Enacted by this present Parliament, and by the Authority of the same,
That if any person shall maliciously or advisedly publish by writing, Printing,
or openly declaring that the said Government is Tyrannical, usurped, or
unlawful; Or that the Commons in Parliament assembled are not the supreme
Authority of this Nation, or shall plot, contrive or endeavor to stir up or
raise force against the present Government, or for the subversion or alteration
of the same, and shall declare the same by an open deed, that then every such
offense shall be taken, deemed and adjudged by Authority of this Parliament to
be high Treason.

That if any person shall maliciously and advisedly plot or endeavor the
subversion of the said Keepers of the Liberties of England, or the Council of
State, and the same shall declare by an open deed, or shall move any person or
persons for the doing thereof, or stir up the people to rise against them, or
either of them, they or either of their Authorityes, every such offense shall
be taken, deemed, and declared to be high Treason.

If any person not being an Officer, Soldier, or member of the Army, shall
plot, contrive, or endeavor to stir up any mutiny in the said Army, or
withdraw any Soldiers or Officers from their obedience to their Superior
Officers, or from the present Government as aforesaid, or shall procure,
invite, aid, or assist any Foreigners or strangers to invade England or
Ireland, or shall adhere to any Forces raised by the Enemies of the Parliament,
Commonwealth, or Ke^per; of the Liberties of England, or if any person shall
coun^efeit the Great Seal of England for the time being, used and appointed by
Authority of Parliament, every such offense shall be taken to be high Treason,
and also forfeit unto the use of the Commonwealth, all and singular his or
their Lands, Tenements, and Heriditaments, Goods and Chattells: Provided
always that no persons shall be indicted and arraigned for any of the Offenses
mentioned in this Act, unless such Offenders shall be indicted or prosecuted
for the same within one year after the Offense committed.

That if any person shall counterfeit the money of this Commonwealth, or shall
bring any false money into this Land, counterfeit or other like to the money of
this Commonwealth, knowing the money to be false, to merchandise or make
payment, in deceit of the people of this Nation: Or if any person shall
hereafter falsely forge and counterfeit any such kind of Coin of Gold or Silver,
as is not the proper Coin of this Commonwealth, and is or shall be current
within this Nation by consent of the Parliament, or such as shall be by them
authorized thereunto: Or shall bring from the parts beyond the Seas into this
Commonwealth, or into any the dominions of the same, any such false and
counterfeit Coin of money being current within the same as is above said,
knowing the same to be false, to the intent to offer or make payment by
merchandise or otherwise, or shall impair, diminish, falsify, clip, wash,
round, file, scale, or lighten for wicked lucre or gains sake, any the proper
moneys of this Commonwealth, or any other Realm; allowed and suffered to be
current: All such Offenses adjudged high Treason, their counselors,
procurers, aiders and abettors being convicted shall suffer pains of death. It
shall not extend to or be adjudged to make any corruption of blood to any of
the Heirs, or to make the wife to forfeit her Dour, or her title, action, or
interest in the same. July 17. 1649.

A Relation of the Mutiny on Tuesday the 22 of Nov: 1653. in the New Exchange,
of the Portugal Ambassadors Followers, etc.
THis night was a great Mutiny at the New Exchange in the Strand, such as has
scarce ever been the like: The business upon the best information that I can
have from those who were present in part of the business, and have conferred
with others upon the whole, is this.

On Monday night (which was the night before) three of the Portugal
Ambassadors family, whereof his brother was one, being at the New Exchange,
they talking in French spoke of such discourse of Transactions of some English
Affairs, which Col. Gerhard, Sir Gilbert Gerhards brother, understanding the
French Tongue, hearing, told them very civilly, that they did not represent the
stories they spoke of right; whereupon one of the Portugalls gave him the lie,
upon that they began to justle, and all three fell upon Col. Gerhard, and threw
him down, and got upon him, but tho he be but a little man, yet he threw him
off that was upon him, and so was bustling with him a good while; there were
some Gentlemen there, but knew not who it was they so assaulted, and so never
meddled with them, and yet one of the Portugalls with his Dagger stabbed Col.
Gerhard in the shoulder, and hurt him sore; but afterward Mr. Anfrazer spoke
to the Portugalls, that it was not civil nor handsome for so many to fall upon
one, three to one being very unequal, and endeavored to pull one of them off,
and so to persuade them to cease, and thereby he came to see who it was they
had assaulted, who finding it to be Col. Gerhard which he knew well, and seeing
them still pursue their rage upon him, he drew to relieve him, and after some
bustle the Portugalls went away, one of them having a cut upon his cheek; and
that night afterward near twenty of their Attendants came to the Exchange, and
would have quarreled with any body, and some cuffing there was by some, but not
much more that night, for it was late, and they returned home.

On Tuesday night, came about fifty of the Portugalls again to the New
Exchange, of which number were the Ambassadors brother, and two Knights of
Malta, and they were led on by a Portugal in Buffe, whom they call Captain,
one well known to some in the Exchange, and they had generally double Arms, all
or most part of them swords and pistolls, and coats of Male, or Armor, some
one thing, some another, to preserve their bodies from swords entering upon
them. They had also two or three Coaches that brought Ammunition, in which were
hand Grenades and Bottles, and some little barrells of powder, and bullets,
and other necessaries if occasion was. They had also some Boats ready to attend
them at the water side, if occasion was for them also.

Thus they came with a resolution to fall upon every English Gentleman they
should find in or about the Exchange; and entering in with this equipage the
people were exceedingly frighted. For first came in the Captain in the Buffe,
who led them, and after him the Portugal Ambassadors brother, and the Knights
of Malta, and so the rest, all with drawn swords, and in so furious a posture,
as if they intended to kill every body they met with, that stood before them.

Hereupon the people fled into the shops in the Exchange to shelter themselves,
and all that did not so they fell upon, though no man gave them the least
affront, yet they pistol'd and cut, and wounded many.

Mr. Greneway a Gentleman of Grayes Inn, Son to the Lady Greneway was there
with his Sister and a Gentlewoman whom he was to have married, who desired them
two to stand up in a shop where he saw them safe, and they would have had him
to have staid with them, but he said he would only go see what was the
matter; but he was no sooner parted from them, but immediately the word being
given by the Portugal Captain in Buff^, which was Safa, which was the word
when they were to fall on, without any affront offered toward them, one of
them pistol'd him, and shot him in the head, and he is dead of his wounds: and
many others they have dangerously wounded. Col. Mayo had twelve upon him at
once, yet drew his sword, and fought with them as long as he was able to hold
his sword in his hand, which being cut, he was forced to let his sword fall,
and then cut and wounded him in many places. Mr. Tho: Howard, Mr. Carter, and
diverse others were wounded passing by.

The Horse at the Muse had taken alarm before they returned, and returning
home, passing by the Muse, some of the Horse mo ing toward them, some of them
discharged pistols toward the Horse, and the rest run home to the Ambassadors
house; but the Horse guards took some of them and carried them into the Muse,
and sent word thereof to the Lord General; and a party of horse pursued them,
and beset the Ambassadors house. And Commis. Genesis Whalley sent into the
Ambassador, acquainted him with this horrible attempt and bloody murder of his
Followers, and showed him his men they had taken prisoners, and required the
chief of the rest of them to be delivered in the hands of Justice, which the
Ambassador was loath to do. But seeing he could not baffle them, to stop the
course of justce in so horrible a bloody business as that had been, he
delivered up his brother and one of the Knights of Malta, and some others, such
as they had then information was chief, and promised to secure the rest to be
forthcoming any of them when they should be demanded. After which the
Ambassador made his Address to the Lord General, and chiefly for his brother,
but his Excellency told him that it did concern the public, and therefore his
Addresses must be to the Parliament and Council of State. It is such a
horrible business that his Excellency would not meddle with him in it.

The Portugals that are in custody are prisoners at Jameses, and the business
is under Examination before the Council of State.

For his Highness the Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland,
and Ireland.
The Declaration, with the humble Address of the Generals, and the several
Commanders present in the Fleet, by them severally subscribed.
THat these Nations of England, Scotland, and Ireland, having been for some
years like the Bush which burned, but is not consumed: And though the Nations
round about us stand gazing on to see us made a desolation, as well as a
hissing unto them; yet we are hitherto by the mighty power of the Lord, and his
wonderful outgoings amongst us, made rather an astonishment in our
preservation, then a reproach, by our ruin and devastation.

In which great Work of the Lord we acknowledge with thankfulness your
Highness has been a glorious Instrument, and has undergone many hardships
and hazard of all that was near and dear unto you, even to life it self; and
understanding by providence your Highness is entrusted with, and has excepted
of the Protection of this Commonwealth in the Government thereof.

We are in hopes that the Lord intends a settlement of Peace to these poor
distracted Nations, and that our selves with all the people of the Lord shall
enjoy and partake of the same under your Highness Prot^ction, according to the
Rule of the Lord Jesus. And therefore we have thought it necessary as a duty
incumbent on us, to Declare that we shall willingly be obedient and faithful
to your Highness, in performance of your great Trust, and also in the utmost
hazard of our lives (with what else is near and dear unto us) be serviceable
unto you, in the station the Lord has placed you, against yours and the
Commonwealths Enemies, in our several places and capacities, during our
Employments.

And having had good testimony of your great affection and earning bow^^ls
after the weal of Gods people, we are emboldned an^ ^ncouraged in all
humility to make this following Addr^^^.

That your ^^^hnesse will be pleased to have a more special eye of fa^^^^ unto
them above all others, in regard they are near and dear unto him, who is the
Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, even our Lord Jesus For which cause he is
ashamed to call them brethren; And do humbly apprehend that their privileges
will be your privilege. And to account of them as of your greatest Jewels,
which will doubtless turn to your great advantage.

And hereby you will for time to come not only engage their hearts unto you,
who in times past have not stood at a distance from you, but your Highness
will also engage the great Jehovah, your and their Father, to be be a refuge,
shield, and defense unto you, as well as an everlasting rest for you, when all
the storms of this Commonwealth shall cease, which is and shall be the
unfeigned prayers of,

Your Highness most humble and faithful Servants. Signed by the Generals and
the several Commanders present in the Fleet.

Monday Dec. 12. 1653. It being moved, That the sitting of this Parliament was
not for the peace of the Commonwealth; and that therefore it was requisite to
deliver up unto the Lord General Cromwell the powers which they received from
him; and seconded by several other Members, and the Speaker with many of the
Members departed to Whitehall, being the greater number, and did by a writing
under their hands resign unto his Excellency their said powers.



Saturday, December. 10. 1653.
The Parliament this day resumed the Debate upon the Report made this day from
the Committee of Tithes, which is as follows.

1. That it be represented to the Parliament as the best way for ejecting
ignorant, profane, and scandalous Ministers; That Commissioners be sent from
hence into all the Counties, divided into six Circuits (besides London and
Middlesex) three Commissioners into each Circuit, to join with four or six in
every County (and each riding in Yorkshire to be as a County) and that in
every County the said persons or five of them (two of the Commissioners sent
from hence being always present) be empowered to eject all Ministers (of that
County) that are not of good behavior, and holy in conversation, or that are
not apt and able to teach, or in teaching hold not forth the faithful word, or
be not diligent, or labor not in the word and doctrine; or be greedy of filthy
lucre: And be also empowered to settle godly and able persons to preach the
Gospel in all void places, and to unite two or three Parishes together, so
that none be above three miles from the public Meeting Place.

2. That it be presented to the Parliament That Dr. Arrowsmith, Col. G^ffe,
Maj. Haines, Mr. John Owen, Mr. Thomas Goodwyn, Mr. Ben of D^rchester, Mr.
Fairclough the elder, Mr. Lockier, Mr. Caryl, Mr. Stephen Marshall, Mr.
Worthington, Mr. Turner, Mr. Tomes, Mr. Martin Holbech, Mr. Cradocke, Mr.
Jessey, Mr. Arthur Barnidston, Mr. William Greenhill. Col. Campfield, Mr. Dyke,
Mr. Stalham, may be sent Commissioners by three in a circuit for ejecting and
settling Ministers, according to the Rules prescribed.

3. That all such as are or shall be approved for public Preachers of the
Gospel in the public meeting-places, shall have and enjoy the maintenance
already settled by Law, and such other encouragement as the Parliament has
already appointed, or hereafter shall appoint: And that where any scruple
payment of Tithes, the three next Justices of the Peace, or two of them shall
upon complaints call the parties concerned before them, and by the Oaths of
witnesses, shall duly apportion the value of the said Tithes, to be paid
either in money or Land, by them to be set out according to the said value, to
be held and enjoyed by him that was to have the said Tithes; and in case such
approved value be not duly paid or enjoyed according to the Order of the said
Justices; the Tithes shall be paid in kind, and shall be recovered in any Court
of Record.

4. That upon hearing and considering what has been offered to the Committee
touching propriety in Tithes, of Incumbents, Rectors, Possessors of Donatives,
or propriate Tithes. It is the opinon of this Commit, and resolved to be
reported to the Parliament, that the said persons have a legal propriety in
Tithes.

The House having spent several days in debate of the whole Report, and
especially of the first of the four parts thereof; and the Question being put,
That this House does agree with the first clause of the Report, it passed in
the Negative.

Monday, December. 12. 1653.
It being moved in the House this day, That the sitting of this Parliament any
longer as now constituted, will not be for the good of the Commonwealth; and
that therefore it was requ^sit to deliver up unto the Lord General Cromwell
the powers which they received from him; and that motion being seconded by
several other members, the House rose, and the Speaker with many of the
members of the House, departed out of the House to White Hall, where they,
being the greater number of the members sitting in Parliament, did by a writing
under their hands resign to his Excellency their said Powers, and Master
Speaker, attended with the Members, did present the same to his Excellency
accordingly.

His Excellency the Lord General Cromwell and his Council of Officers met this
day, at which meeting, after a most excellent, wise, gracious, and pious Speech
made by his Excellency, full of Religion toward God, prudence toward the
State, and love and care toward this distracted Nation, some things were
transacted in order to a settlement, and sweet composure; the union of all that
fear the Lord is much desired, that so we may sit down comfortably under a safe
and well grounded peace.

The late Parliament having upon their Dissolution delivered up the power which
they received from his Excellency at their first sitting by a writing under
their Hands and Seals: his Excellency thereupon called a Council of Officers,
and advised with other persons of intererest in the Nation, how this great
burden of Governing England, Scotland, and Ireland, with the Armies therein,
and Navies at Sea, should be born, and by whom; who after several days seeking
of God, and advising therein, it was Resolved, That a Council of godly able
and discreet persons should be named consisting of twenty one: And that his
Excellency should be chosen Lord Protector of the three Nations. And on Friday
last his Excellency came down to West: and was instolled Lord Protector of the
three Nations, the manner whereof was thus.

December. 18. His Excellency the Lord General Cromwell about one of the cock in
the afternoon, went from White Hall to Westminster in his Coach, foot Soldiers
being on both sides the streets all along, and in the Palace at Westminster
were many Soldiers both Horse and Foot; his Excellency was attended by the
Lords Commissioners of the Great Seal of England, the Judges and Barons of the
several Benches in their Robes, and after them the Council of the
Commonwealth: And the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the City of London, in their
Scarlet Gowns, with the Recorder and Town Clerk, all in their Coaches, who
passed before his Excellency: and last of all came his Excellency in a black
Suit and Cloak in his Coach, with his Lifeguard, and diverse bare before him;
and many of the chief Officers of the Army with their Cloaks, and Swords, and
Hats on, passed on foot before and about his Coach.

In this equipage his Excellency, and Attendants came to Westminsterhall, where
was a Chair placed in the High Court of Chancery; where being come, the Lords
Commissioners of the Great Seal of England stood next to the Chair, the one on
the one side, and the other on the other side, and next to the Lord
Commissioner Lisle who stood on the left hand of the Chair, stood his
Excellency (all being bare, and his Excellency also) on every side of the
Chair; in the next place stood all the Judges and Barons on both sides; and the
Lord Mayor and Aldermen on the right side of the Court, next unto the Judges
and the Council, and the chief Officers of the Army on the left side of the
Court.

The Rules for this New Government were then read, which consist of many
particulars, expressed in an Instrument; the Instrument is large, which took up
above half an hours reading, and was read by Mr. Jesop, one of the Secretaries
of the Council. After which, the Lord Commissioner Lisle read a Parchment in
the nature of an Oath, to eng^ge his Excellency to perform on his part,
according to the Government before mentioned; During which t^me his Excellency
held up his hand, and having beard it read accepted thereof, and subscribed
thereto in the face of the Court. Then the Lords Commissioners of the Great
Seal, and the Judges, etc. invited him to take possession of the Chair, as Lord
Protector of England, Scotland, and Ireland, which he did, and sat down with
his head covered, the Court continuing all bare. The Lord Commissioners
delivered up to his Highness, the Purse and Seals, and the Lord Mayor of
London his Sword, which were presently delivered to them back again by his
Highness; and then after a salute, the Court rose.

First came the Aldermen and Council before his Highness, from the Court to
Westminster Hall Gate, where the Coaches were; after them the Judges, then came
the Commissioners of the Great Seal, one of them bearing the Purse and Seals;
and before his Highness ca^e the Lifeguard then four Sergeants of Arms with
their Maces, one being the Mace of the City of London, the second of the
Chancery, the third of the Council, and the other of the Parliament, born by
the sword bearer of London, Sergeant Middleton, Sergeant Dendy, and Sergeant
Berkehead; and the Lord Mayor of the City of London went before his Highness
with the Sword, and the Officers of the Army about his person; and in the
Palace they took Coach at the Hall Gate, and returned to White Hall in the
same equipage they went; the Lord Mayor rid bare with the Sword in the Boot of
the Coach with his Highness; and there were great Acclamations and shoutings
all along the streets as they passed.

His Highness the Lord Protector being returned to Whitehall, he went with his
Attendants to the Banqueting House, where they had an Exhortation made by Mr.
Lockier, Chaplain to his Highness; which bing ended, they were dimissed with
three Vollies of shot by the Soldiers, between four and five a clock at night.

December. 19. 1653. His Highness the Lord Protector, met with those named of his
Council, in the Council Chamber at White Hall, it being the place where the
Council of State used to sit and several things were Transacted in order to a
settlement; and this following Proclamation was ordered to be Printed and
published on the Monday following.

This day this Proclamation following was published at Westminster and in the
City of London, by diverse Sergeants at Arms with their Maces. The Lord Mayor
and Aldermen being present at the Exchange, etc.

By the Council, A Proclamation.
WHereas the late Parliament dissolv^ng themselves, and resigning their Powers
and Authorities, the Government of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, by a Lord Protector, and successive Trienniall Parliaments, is now
established; and whereas Oliver Cromwell, Captain General of all the Forces of
this Commonwealth, is declared Lord Protector of the said Nations, and has
accepted thereof: We have therefore thought it necessary (as we hereby do) to
make Publication of the Premises, and strictly to charge and command all and
every person and persons, of what quality and condition soever, in any of the
three Nations, to take notice hereof, and to conform and submit themselves to
the Government so established. And all Sheriffs, Mayors, Bailiffs, and other
Public Ministers, and Officers, whom this may concern, are required to cause
this Proclamation to be forthwith published in their respective Counties,
Cities, Corporations, and Market Towns, to the end none may have cause to
pretend ignorance in this beha^fe. Given at Whitehall this 16 day of December.
1653.

December 21. 1653.
His Highness, the Lord Protector, and the Council being thirteen in number,
sat in the Council Chamber at White Hall, where his Highness in a sweet
Speech to them, pressed the Council to act for God, and the peace and good of
the Nations; and particularly recommended to them, to consider and relieve the
distresses of the poor and oppressed: And several things were Transacted in
order to a quiet and peaceable settlement of these three Nations.

The Names of the Council.
Mr. Lawrence the President. L. Viscount Lisle. Maj. Ge. Lambert. Maj. G.
Desbrow. Maj. Ge. Skippon. Col. Jones. Col. Sydenham. Sr Gilb. Pickering. Sr
Charles Wolsley. Sir Anthoney Ashley-Cooper. Mr. Rous. Mr. Strickland. Mr.
Major.
A Declaration for alteration of several Names and Forms heretofore used in
Courts, etc.
OLIVER, Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland,
and the Dominions thereunto belonging, having the exercise of the chief
Magistracy, and the administration of Government within the said Commonwealth,
invested and established in his Highness, assisted with a Council, who have
power until the meeting of the next Parliament (which is to be on the third of
September next) to make Laws and Ordinances for the peace and welfare of these
Nations, where it shall be necassary, which shall be binding and in force
until order shall be taken in Parliament concerning the same.

And the said Lord Protector finding it to be most necessary that some speedy
and effectual course be taken for settling the Names and Forms to be used in
Patents, Commissions, and proceedings in Courts of Justice, the said L.
Protector, by, and with the advice and consent of his said Council, and in
pursuance of, and according to the power and trust reposed in him and them,
does declare and ordain, and be it by the Authority aforesaid declared and
ordained, That in all Courts of Law, Justice or Equity, and in all Writs,
Grants, Patents, Commissions, Indictments, Informations, Suits, returns of
Writs, and in all Fines, Recoveries, Exemplifications, Recognizances, Process
and Proceedings of Law, justice or equity within the said Commonwealth of
England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereto belonging, instead of
the Name, Style, Title, and Test (of the Keepers of the Liberty of England, by
Authority of Parliament) heretofore used, that from and after the 26 of December.
1653. the Name, Style, Title, and Test of the Lord Protector for the time
being, of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the
Dominions thereto belonging, shall be used, and no other, and the date shall be
in the year of our Lord and no other. And that all Duties, Profits, Penalties,
Issues, Fines, Amercements, and Forfeitures whatsoever, which heretofore were
sued for in the Name of the Keepers of the Liberty of England by Authority of
Parliament, shall from and after the said 26 of December. be prosecuted, sued
forth, and recovered in the said name of the Lord Protector, for the time
being, of the Commonwealth of England Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions
thereto belonging, and no other. And in all or any of the proceedings
aforesaid, where the words were, The Jurors for the Commonwealth, or, The
Jurors for the Keepers of the Liberty of England by Authority of Parliament, do
say, or present, from and after the 26 of December. it shall be, The Jurors for
the Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, etc.
do say, present, and no other, etc. And it is further Ordained by the
Authority aforesaid, That in all Oaths to be given to any Grand or Petty Jury,
or to, or for any Witnesses to give in Evidence to any such Jury or Juries, and
all other Oaths wherein the name of Keepers of the Liberty, etc. was wont to be
used, the same shall be given in the name of the Lord Protector instead of the
name of the said Keepers, etc. any Law, Usage, or Custom, to the contrary in
any wise notwithstanding. And it is lastly Ordained by the Authority aforesaid,
That such Forms and course of proceedings, as was heretofore used in the name
and time of the Keepers of the Liberty, etc. in Causes criminal or civil, and
of which no alteration is made in this Ordinance, shall stand and continue to
be so used and observed as formerly; and that all Indictments, Presentiments,
Inquisitions, Commissions, and Captions made with such Alterations, Additions,
or Omissions as aforesaid, or with such other Omissions, Additions, or
Alterations as shall be proper and necessary for making good of Indictments
Presentiments, Commissions, Captions, and Inquisitions, and supplying the sense
and meaning thereof, according to the present Government of this Commonwealth
under the Lord Protector as aforesaid, shall stand and be good and effectual
in Law to all intents and purposes, as if the same had been particularly herein
named, any Law, Custom or Usage to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

The Oath taken by his Highness Oliver Cromwell, LORD PROTECTOR.
WHereas the major part of the last Parliament (judging that their sitting any
longer, as then constituted, would not be for the good of this Com:) did
d^ssolve the same, and by a writing under their hands, dated the 12 day of this
instant Dec. resigned unto Me their powers and Authorities; And whereas it was
necessary thereupon, That some speedy course should be taken for the settlement
of these Nations upon such a Basis and foundation, as by the blessing of God,
might be lasting secure Property, and answer those great ends of Religion and
liberty, so long contended for; And upon full and mature consideration had of
the Form of Government hereunto annexed, being satisfied that the same, through
divine assistance, may answer the ends aforementioned: And having also been
desired, and advised, as well by several persons of Interest and Fidelity in
this Commonwealth, as the Officers of the Army, to take upon Me the Protection
and Government of these Nations in the manner expressed in the said Form of
Government, I have accepted thereof, and do hereby declare My acceptance
accordingly. And do promise in the presence of God, that I will not violate,
and infringe the matters and things contained therein, but to My power observe
the same, and cause them to be observed: And shall in all other things, to the
best of My understanding, Govern these Nations according to the Laws, Statutes,
and Customs, seeking their Peace, and causing Justice and Law to be equally
administered.

O. CROMWELL.
OLIVER CROMWELL, Captain General of all the Forces of this Common wealth, and
now declared Lord Protector thereof, did this 16 day of December. 1653. sign this
Writing and solemnly promise, as is therein contained, in presence of the Lords
Commissioners of the Great Seal of Engl. who administered the same Oath, and of
the Lord Mayor and Alderm. of the City of London, diverse of the Judges of the
Land, the Officers of State and Ar^y, and many other persons of Quality.

His Excellency Oliver Cromwell General of all the Fo^der of England Scotland
and Ireland Chancelour of ye University of Oxford (...) Lord Protector of Eng:
Scot and Ire:
Tho: Ienner fecit
portrait of Oliver Cromwell



The Government of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland.
1. THat the Supre^m Legislative Authority of the Commonwealth of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto belonging shall be, and
reside in One Person, and the people assembled in Parliament; the Style of
which person shall be Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland
and Ireland.

2. That the exercise of the chief Magistracy and Administration of the
Government over the said Countries and Dominions, and the people thereof, shall
be in the Lord Protector, assigned with a Council, the number whereof shall
not exceed 21, nor be less then 13.

3. That all Writs, Process, Commissions, Patents, Grants, and other things,
which now run in the name and style of the Keepers of the Liberty of England by
Authority of Parliament, shall run in the Name and Style of the Lord Protector,
from whom, for the future, shall be derived all Magistracy and Honors in these
three Nations; and shall have the power of Pardons (e^cept in case of Muder and
Treason) and benefit of all Forfeitures (...) ^he public use. And shall Gov^^^
(...) ^^tions in all t^^^gs by the (...) to these presents, and the (...)

4. (...): sit^^^ ^^all dispose an^ (...) ^^th by S^^ and Land, for the (...)
and goodli^^^ (...) consent of Parliament And (...) advice and consent of the
ma^^^ (...) dispose and order the Misitia for the (...) ^he Interva^^^ of
Parliament.

5. That the Lord Protector by the advice aforesaid, shall direct in all things
concerning the keeping and holding of a good correspondency with Foreign
Kings, Princes, and States, and also with the consent of the major part of the
Council, have the power of war and peace.

6. That the Laws shall not be altered, suspended, abrogated, or repealed, nor
any New Law made, nor any Tax, Charge, or Imposition laid upon the people, but
by common consent in Parliament, save only as is expressed in the thirtieth
Article.

7. That there shall be a Parliament summoned to meet at Westminster upon the
third day of September. 1654. and that successively a Parliament shall be
summoned once in every third year, to be accounted from the dissolution of the
preceding Parliament.

8. That neither the Parliament to be next summoned, nor any successive
Parliaments, shall, during the time of 5 months to be accounted from the day of
their first meeting, be adjourned, prorogued or dissolved without their own
consent.

9. That as well the next as all other successive Parliaments, shall be
summoned and elected in manner hereafter expressed; That is to say, the persons
to be chosen within Engl: Wales, the Isles of Jersey and Guernsey, and the Town
of Berwick upon Tweed, to sit and serve in Parliament, shall be, and not exceed
the number of four hundred. The persons to be chosen within Scotland to sit and
serve Parliament shall be, and not exceed the number of thirty. And the persons
to be chosen to sit in Pa^liament for Ireland, shall be, and not exceed the
number of thi^ty.

10. That the persons to be Elected to sit in Parliament from time to time, for
the several Counties of Engl: Wales, the Isles of Jersey and Guernsey, and the
Town of Berwick upon Tweed, and all places within the same respectively, shall
be according to the proportions and numbers hereafter expressed. That is to say,

For the Town of Bedford 1 County of Bedford 5. Abbington 1 Reading 1 County of
Berks 5. Buckingham 1 Alisbury 1 Wiccomb 1 County of Bucks 5. Cambridge 1
University of Camb: 1 Ely 2 County of Cambridge 4. Chester 1 County of Chester
4. Launceston 1 Truro 1 Penrin 1 Eastlow and Westlow 1 County of Cornwall 8.
Carlisle 1 County of Cumberland 2. Derby 1 County of Derby 4. Excester 2
Plymouth 2 Dartmouth, Clifton, and Hardness 1 Totnes 1 Barnstable 1 Tiverton 1
Honyton 1 County of Devon 11. Dorchester 1 Weymouth and Melcomb-Regis 1
Lyme-Regis 1 Pool 1 County of Dorcet 6. Durham 1 County of Durh: 2. York 2
Kinston upon Hull 1 Beverley 1 Scarborough 1 Richmond 1 Leeds 1 Hallifax 1 Cou:
of York, West Riding 6 East Riding 4. North Riding 4. Maldon 1 Colchester 2
Cou: of Essex 13. Gloucester 2 Tewksbury 1 Cirencester 1 County of Gloucester
except the said City 5. Hereford 1 Leompster 1 County of Hereford 4. St. Alban
1 Hartford 1 County of Hartford 5. Huntington 1 Cou: of Huntington 3.
Canterbury 2 Rochester 1 Maidston 1 Dover 1 Sandwich 1 Quinborough 1 County of
Kent 11. Preston in Andernes 1 Lancaster 1 Liverpool 1 Manchester 1 County of
Lancaster 4. Leicester 2 County of Leicester 4. Lincoln 2 Boston 1 Grantham 1
Stamford 1 Grimsby 1 County of Lincoln 10. Westminster 2 County of Middlesex 4
City of London 6. County of Monmouth 3. Norwich 2 Lyn-Regis 2 Yarmouth 2 County
of Norfolk 10. Peterborough 1 Northampton 1 County of Northampton 6. Nottingham
2 County of Nottingham 4, Newcastle upon Tine 1 Berwick 1 County of
Northumberland 3. Oxford 1 University of Oxf: 1 Woodstock 1 County of Oxf: 5.
County of Rutland 2. Shrewsbury 2 Bridgnorth 1 Ludlow 1 County of Salop 4.
Litchfield 1 Stafford 1 Newcastle on the Line 1 County of Stafford 3. Taunton 2
Bath 1 Wells 1 Bridgwater 1 Cou: of Somerset 11. City of Bristol 2. Winchester
1 Southampton 1 Pertsmouth 1 Isle of Wight 2. Andevor 1 County of Southamp: 8.
Ipswich 2 Borough of Bury St. Edmonds 2 Dunwich 1 Sudbury 1 County of Suffolk
10. Southwark 2 Gilford 1 Rygate 1 County of Surrey 6. Chichester 1 Lewis 1
East-greenstead 1 Arundel 1 Rye 1 Coun: of Sussex 9 Coun: of Westmorland 2.
Coventry 2 Warwick 1 County of Warwick 4. Worcester 2. County of Worcester 5.
Sarum 2 Marleborough 1 Devizes 1 County of Wilts 10. Coun: of Brecon 2. County
of Cardigan 2. County of Carmathen 2. Coun: of Carnarven 2. Coun: of Denbigh 2.
County of Flint 2. Town of Cardiffe 1. Coun: of Clamorgan 2. Coun: of Merionoth
1. Coun: of Montgomery 2. Haverford west 1. County of Pembrook 2. County of
Radnor 2.

The distribution of the persons to be chosen for Scotland and Ireland, shall
be according to such proportions and number, as shall be agreed upon, and
declared by the Lord Protector and the major part of the Council, before the
sending forth Writs of Summons for the next Parliament, etc.

11. That the Summons to Parliament shall be by Writ under the Great Seal of
England, directed to the Sheriffs of the several and respective Counties, with
such alteration as may suit with the present Government, to be made by the Lord
Protector and his Council, which the Chancellor, Keeper, or Commissioners of
the Great Seal, shall issue and send abroad by Warrant from the Lord Protector.
If the Lord Protector shall not give Warrant for issuing of Writs of Summons
for the next Parliament, before the 1. of June, 1654. o^ for the Trienniall
Parliaments before the 1. day of August in every third year, to be accounted as
aforesaid, That then the Chancellor, Keeper, or Commissioners of the Great Seal
for the time being, shall without any warrant or direction within seven days
after the said 1. day of June, 1654. seal, issue, and send abroad Writs of
Summons, etc.

12. That at the day and place of Elections, the Sheriff of each County, and
the said Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, and other head-Officers within their
Cities. Towns, Buroughs and places respectively, shall take view of the said
Elections, and shall make return into the Chancery within twenty days after
the said Elections, etc. wherein shall be contained, that the persons elected
shall not have power to alter the Government as it is hereby settled in one
single person and a Parliament.

13. That the Sheriff, who shall wittingly and willingly make any false return
or neglect his duty, shall incur the penalty of two thousand Marks.

14. That all and every person and persons, who have aided, advised, assisted
or abetted in any war against the Parliament since the first day of January,
1641. (unless they have been since in the service of the Parliament, and given
signal testimony of their good affection thereunto) shall be disabled and
incapable to be elected, or to give any Vote in the Election of any Members to
serve in the next Parliament, or in the three succeeding Trienniall Parliaments.

15. That all such, who have advised, assisted, or abetted the Rebellion of
Ireland, shall be disabled and incapable for ever to be Elected, or to give any
Vote in the election of any Member to serve in Parliament; as also all such who
do or shall profess the Roman Catholic Religion.

16. That all Votes and Elections given or made contrary, or not according to
these Qualifications, shall be null and void: And if any person who is hereby
made incapable, shall give his Vote for Election of Members to serve in
Parliament, such person shall lose and forfeit one full years value of his
real Estate, and one full third part of his personal Estate.

17. That the persons who shall be elected to serve in Parliament, shall be
such (and no other then such) as are persons of known integrity, fearing God,
and of good conversation, and being of the age of 21 years.

18. That all and every person and persons seized or possessed to his own use,
of any estate real or personal, to the value of 200 l. and not within the
aforesaid exceptions shall be capable to elect Members to serve in Parliam. for
Counties.

19. That the Chancellor, Keeper, or Commissioners of the Great Seal, shall be
sworn before they enter into their Offices, truly and faithfully to issue
forth, and send abroad Writs of Summons to Parliaments at the times and in the
manner before expressed: And in case of neglect or failer to issue and send
abroad writs accordingly, he or they shall for every such offense be guilty of
High Treason, and suffer the pains and penalties thereof.

20. That in case writs be not issued out as is before expressed, but that there
be a neglect therein, fifteen days after the time wherein the same ought to be
issued out by the Chancellor, Keeper or Commissioners of the great Sea that
then the Parliament shall, as often as such failer shall happen assemble and be
held at Westminster, in the usual place, at the times prefixed, etc.

21. That the Clerk, called the Clerk of the Commonwealth, in Chancery for the
time being and all others, who shall afterward execute that Office, to whom
the Returns shall be made, shall for the next Parliament, and the two succeeding
Trieniall Parliaments, the next day after such Return, certify the names of
the several persons so returned, and of the places for which he and they were
chosen respectively, unto the Council who shall peruse the said Returns, and
examine whether the persons so Elected and Returned, be such as is agreeable to
the Qualifications, and not disabled to be Elected: And that every person and
persons being so duly Elected, and being approved of by the major part of the
Council to be persons not disabled, but qualified as aforesaid, shall be
esteemed a Member of Parliament, and be admitted to sit in Parliament, and not
otherwise.

22 That the persons chosen and assembled in manner aforesaid, or any sixty of
them, shall be, and be deemed the Parliament of England, Scotland, and Ireland,
and the Supreme Leg^sl^tive power to be and reside in the Lord Protector and
such Parliament, etc.

23. That the Lord Protector, with the advice of the major pa t of the Council,
shall at any other time then is before expressed, when the necessities of the
State shall require it, summon Parliaments in manner before expressed, which
shall not be adjourned, prorogued, or dissolved without their own consent,
during the first three months of their sitting. And in case of future war with
any Foreign State, a Parliam. shall be forthwith summoned for their advice
concerning the same.

24. That all Bills agreed unto by the Parliament, shall be presented to the
Lord Protector for his consent; and in case he shall not give his consent
thereto, within twenty days after they shall be presented to him, or give
satisfaction to the Parliament within the time limited; That then upon
Declaration of the Parliament, that the Lord Protector has not consented nor
given satisfaction, such Bills shall pass into, and become Laws, although he
shall not give his consent thereunto; provided such Bills contain nothing in
them contrary to the matters contained in these presents.

25. That Phillip L. Viscount Lisle, Charles Fleetwood Esquire; John Lambert Esquire;
Sir Gilbert Pickering Baronet, Sir Charles Woolsley Bar. Sir Anthony
Ashley-Cooper Bar. Edw: Montagu Esquire; John Desbrow Esquire; Walter Strickland Esquire;
Henry Lawrence Esquire; William Sydenham Esquire; Phillip Jones Esquire; Rich: Major Esquire;
Francis Rous Esquire; Phillip Skippon Esquire; or any seven of them shall be a Council
for the purposes expressed in this Writing; and upon the death or other removal
of any of them, the Parliament shall nominate six persons of Ability,
Integrity, and fearing God, for every one that is dead or removed, out of which
the major part of the Council shall elect two, and present them to the Lord
Protector, of which he shall elect one, etc.

26. That the Lord Protector and the major part of the Council aforesaid, may
at any time before the meeting of the next Parliament, add to the Council such
persons as they shall think fit; provided the number of the Council be not
made thereby to exceed 21, and the Quorum to be proportioned accordingly by the
Lord Protector and the major part of the Council.

27. That a constant yearly Revenue shall be raised, settled and established for
maintaining of ten thousand Horse and Dragoons, and twenty thousand Foot, in
England, Scotland, and Ireland, for the defense and security thereof, and also
for a convenient number of Ships for guarding of the Seas; besides two hundred
thousand pound per annum for defraying the other necessary Charges for
administration of Justice, and other expenses of the Government; which Revenue
shall be raised by the Customs and such other ways and means as shall be
agreed upon by the Lord Protector and the Council, and shall not be taken away
or diminisht, nor the way agreed upon for raising the same altered, but by the
consent of the Lord Protector and the Parliament.

28. That the said yearly Revenue shall be paid into the public Treasury, and
shall be issued out for the uses aforesaid.

29. That in case there shall not be cause hereafter to keep up so great a
Defense at Land or Sea, but that there be an abatement made thereof, the money
which will be saved thereby, shall remain in bank for the public Service, and
not be employed to any other use but by consent of Parliament; or in the
intervals of Parliament by the Lord Protector and major part of the Council.

30. That the raising of money for defraying the charge of present
extraordinary Forces both at Land and Sea, in respect of the present wars,
shall be by consent in Parliament and not otherwise: Save only that the Lord
Protector, with the consent of the major part of the Council, for preventing
the disorders and dangers which may otherwise fall out both at Sea and Land,
shall have power until the meeting of the first Parliament, to raise money for
the purposes aforesaid, and also to make Laws and Ordinances for the peace and
welfare of these Nations, where it shall be necessary, which shall be binding
and in force, until Order shall be taken in Parl. concerning the same.

31. That the Lands, Tenements, Rents, Royalties, Jurisdictions and
Hereditaments which remain yet unsold or undisposed of by Act or Ordinance of
Parliament, belonging to the Commonwealth (except the Forests and Chases, and
the Honors and Manors belonging to the same; the Lands of the Rebels in
Ireland, lying in the four Counties of Dublin, Cork, Kildare, and Katerlaugh,
the Lands forfeited by the people of Scotland in the late wars, and also the
Lands of Papists and Delinquents in England who have not yet compounded) shall
be vested in the Lord Protector, to hold, to him and his Successors Lord
Protectors of these Nations, and shall not be aliened but by consent in
Parliament. And all Debts, Fines, Issues, Amerciaments, penalties and profits,
certain and casual, due to the Keepers of the Liberties of Engl: by Authority
of Parliament, shall be due to the Lord Protector, and be payable unto his
public Receipt, and shall be recovered and prosecuted in his Name.

32. That the Office of the Lord Protector over these Nations, shall be
Elective and not Hereditary; and upon the death of the Lord Protector, another
fit person shall be forthwith Elected, to succeed him in the Government, which
Election shall be by the Council, etc. Provided that none of the Children of
the late King, nor any of his Line or Family, be Elected to be Lord Protector
or other chief Magistrate over these Nations, or any the Dominions thereto
belonging. And until the aforesaid Election be past, the Council shall take
care of the Government, and administer in all things as fully as the Lord
Protector, or the Lord Protector and Council are enabled to do.

33. That O. Cromwell, Captain General of the Forces of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, shall be, and is hereby declared to be Lord Protector of the
Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereto
belonging, for his life.

34. That the Chancellor, Keeper, or Commissioners of the Great Seal, the
Treasurer, Admiral chief Governors of Ireland and Scotland, and the chief
Justices of both the Benches, shall be chosen by the approbation of Parliament;
and in the intervalls of Parl. by the approbation of the major part of the
Council, to be afterward approved by the Parl.

35. That the Christian Religion contained in the Scriptures be held forth and
recommended as the public profession of these Nations; and that as soon as may
be, a provision, less subject to scruple and contention, and more certain then
the present, be made for the encouragement and maintenance of able and painful
Teachers, for instructing the people, and for discovery and confutation of
Error, Heresy, and whatever is contrary to sound Doctrine: And that until
such provision be made, the present maintenance shall not be taken away nor
impeached.

36. That to the public profession held forth, none shall be compelled by
penalties or otherwise, but that endeavors be used to win them by sound
Doctrine, and the example of a good conversation.

37. That such as profess Faith in God by Jesus Christ (though differing in
judgment from the Doctrine, worship, or Discipline publicly held forth) shall
not be restrained from, but shall be protected in the profession of the Faith,
and exercise of their Religion; so as they abuse not this liberty, to the
civil injury of others, and to the actual disturbance of the ^ublick peace on
their parts, provided this liberty be not extended to popery nor prelacy, nor
to such as under the profession of Christ hold forth and practice
licentiousness.

38. That all Laws, Statutes, Ordinances and Clauses in any Law, Statute and
Ordinance to the contrary of the aforesaid Liberty, shall be esteemed as null
and void.

39. That the Acts and ordinances of Parliament, made for the sale or other
disposition of the Lands, Rents and Hereditaments of the late King, Queen and
Prince, of Archbishops and Bishops, etc. Deans and Chapters, the Lands of
Delinquents, and Forest Lands, or any of them, or of any other Lands,
Tenements, Rents and Heriditaments belonging to the Commonwealth, shall no
ways be impeached or made invalid, but shall remain good and firm: And that
the Securities given by Act and Ordinance of Parliament for any sum or sums of
money, by any of the said Lands, the Excise, or by any other public Revenue;
and also the Securities given by the public Faith of the Nation, and the
engagement of the public Faith for satisfaction of Debts and Damages, shall
remain firm and good, and not be made void and invalid upon any pretense
whatsoever.

40. That the Articles given to, or made with the Enemy, and afterward
confirmed by Parliament, shall be performed and made good to the persons
concerned therein. And that such appeals, as were depending in the last
Parliament, for relief concerning Bills of sale of Delinquents Estates, may be
heard and determined the next Parl. any thing in this writing, or otherwise to
the contrary notwithstanding.

41. That every successive L. Protector over these Nations, shall take and
subscribe a solemn Oath, in the presence of the Council, and such others as
they shall call to them that he will seek the peace, quiet, and welfare of
these Nations, cause law and Justice equally to be administered, and that he
will not violate or infringe the matters and things contained in this writing;
and in all other things will to his power, and to the best of his
understanding, govern these Nations according to the Laws, Statutes, and
Customs.

42. That each person of the Council shall, before they enter upon their Trust,
take, and subscribe an Oath, That they will be true and faithful to their
Trust, according to the best of their knowledge; and that in the election of
every successive Lord Protector, they shall proceed therein impartially, and do
nothing therein for any promise, fear, favor, or reward.

April 25. 1654. Four Ordinances were published touching Scotland. ^^^ting
Scoctland into one Commonwealth with England St Andrews ^^^osse ye Scots Arms
be born in the Arms of this Common-w^^t^
coat of arms of the Commonwealth
THirty persons to be called from Scotland in every Parliament. That Charles
Stewart, and all of the late Kings posterity, be disabled to enjoy the Crown of
Scotland, or Name, Title, Style, Dignity, Honors, or any Possessions of any
Hereditaments thereto belonging; As also the Convocation of the three Estates
of Scotland to be abolished. That Custom and Excise of Goods, be no otherwise
between England and Scotland, then from one place of England to another. That
Taxes be proportionable to England. And that all Possessors of Lands after Apr.
12. 1654. shall hold their Lands of the Lords, by Deed, Patent, or Enfeoffment,
to be renewed upon the death of every Heritor to his Heirs, under such Rents,
and Services as are due by Deeds now in being, without rendering any other duty,
service, vassalage or demand whatsoever, except Heritors where the same are
due. A Court Barron every three weeks, to Judge all Contracts, Debts, Promises,
and Trespasses not exceeding 40 s. sterling.

July 1. 1654. The High Court of Justice met in Westminster Hall, the Lord Com.
Lisle sat as President, their Commission was read, and the Court called over
by their names; Mr. Attorney Genesis Prideaux, Mr. Solicitor Genesis Ellis, and Mr.
Sergeant Glin, were Counsel for his Highness the Lord Protector. The Lieut.
of the Tower, first brought Mr. Somerset Fox, one of the Conspirators in the
late Treason, to the Bar, and Mr. Attorney Genesis then presented a Charge of High
Treason against him engrossed in parchment to the Court, which was read: The
Prisoner said very little to it, but made a Confession to the Court of so much
as (he said) he was guilty of, having some few days before made the like
confession, and given it under his hand as the true h, and accordingly owned it
in Court, his confession under his own hand was also read, which did discover
what was his part to act as an Agent in this bloody design. The Court having
satisfied th^mselves concerning Mr. Fox, the Lievt. of the Tower brought Mr.
John Gerrard, and Mr. Peter Vowell, to the Bar, where F^x also stood, and the
like Charge of High Treason was read against them also; which Charge consisted
of these heads, viz. The murdering of his Highness the Lord Protector as he
should go to Hampton Court on a Saturday prefixed: The seizing of all the Guards
about Whitehall, the Mews, and St. Jameses, and the making of themselves
masters of the City of London, and the Tower with all the Magazines within the
same: The proclaiming of Charles Stuart King, and chief Magistrate of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto belonging, and other high
Treasons tending to involve the Commonwealth in a new bloody war. To which
charge of High Treason the said Gerard and Vowel pleaded Not guilty, pretending
much ignorance, and that they were innocent of the knowledge of any such
design; and did very much press the Court to grant them Counsel to advise
withal, and that they might be tried by a Jury, which being not to be granted
unto them, and waved, several Witnesses were produced upon their Oaths to make
appear what they were charged with, as John Wiseman, Dr. Hudson, a blind man,
Mr. Charles Gerhard Brother to the Prisoner, Capt. Dale, one Mr. Wharton, and
others, who did sufficiently prove, That Mr. Gerrard was to command the party
who were to murder his Highness the L. Protector as he was going to Hampton
Court with thirty Horse; and that the said Gerrard had engaged to bring 25 of
the 30, and Maj. T: Henshaw was to bring 5 more: and it was also proved against
him, that he, with Maj. Henshaw, and the Witness J. Wiseman, did view the
several Guards at Whitehall, the Mewes, and St. Jameses, and had computed and
designed 600 Horse as sufficient to seize and secure those Guards, appointing
also a party of Horse to march into Tuttle-fields, as friends, and so to fall
upon the forces then mustering, and cut them off: It was also proved against
him by his Brother Mr. Charles Gerrard, that he was at several meetings at his
own Chamber near Essex house, and at other places with Maj. Henshaw, and Finch,
and others, about this design, and particularly at Mr. Jones his House in Rose
street in Covent Garden where in a Chamber Henshaw and Finch gave an account
that they had each of them listed 800 men to be ready at a days warning;
several other things were proved, which he obstinately denied; but confessed his
name was much used therein, but was no intent Actor. And for Mr. Vowell,
several Witnesses upon their Oaths did testify, that he was at many meetings
with Henshaw, Finch, Gerhard, and other of the Plotters to contrive the
management of this business, being a person thought more fit to be a
Councellor, then an Actor, and his reward should have been to be Master of
Suttons Hospital; and it was also proved against him, though he could not act
himself, yet he promised to procure those that should act, and did engage one
Capt. Billingsley, who undertook to provide Riders for the Horses who should be
taken out of Islington fields; it was also proved his buying of Pistols, and
many other things sufficient to prove his hand deep in the business. And for
Somerset Fox, he confessed so much as saved the Court much trouble in examining
witnesses: His part was, to engage as many Apprentices and Citizens of London
as he could in the business, that so when the falling on was upon the Guards
at White hall, the Mewes and St. Jameses, and Col. Ingeldsbies Regiment in
Southwark and the rest of the Plot was in agitation, there might be a rising
and tumult made purposely in the City, to employ what force was there, that no
help might come elsewhere; and the Lord Mayor was to have been seized and
carried to proclaim Charles Stuart King at the Exchange, and Dr. Wharton was to
see him proclaimed: yet notwithstanding all these witnesses, Gerhard and Vowell
denied they knew of any thing of such a design; but they were not so
satisfied, but that a base design was intended, too unworthy for a Gentleman to
have his hand in, as did further appear by the testimony of John Wiseman, who
did relate his going over into France with his brother in Law Maj. Henshaw,
where they met the said Mr. Gerhard at Paris, and there had free access to the
pretended King of Scots, about this design, and received great encouragement
in the business from Prince Rupert; whereupon Henshaw and Wiseman returned
into England, and Mr. Gerhard came over about 3 weeks after to put the
business in agitation, immediately upon his arrival, the said Henshaw, Finch,
etc. repaired to his lodging near Essex house, and received an account of the
business, and so proceeded to act, as the said Wiseman testified. The Witnesses
being all examined, and the Prisoners heard what they could say for themselves,
the Attorney Genesis Solicitor Genesis and the Council for the Commonwealth summed
up all the Evidences, and drew them into several heads, which they presented
to the Court with the Prisoners at the Bar, as objects of their Justice, the
said Gerhard and Vowell still remaining obstinate. The Prisoners were commanded
back to the Tower.

July 6. The Portugal Ambassadors Brother, and the rest, we^e again brought
to their Trial at the Upper Bench at Westminster and a Jury of 12 men, whereof
6 Denizes and 6 Aliens Impannel'd and swore: The Ambass: Brother pleaded very
hard his ignorance in the Laws of England, and desired Council, but that was
denied, and he told, That the Court were of Council equal, and alike to him,
as to the Commonwealth, and would do according to Law and the Justice of the
Cause; Hereupon many Witnesses were sworn and examined, and upon full hearing
of the Evidence, and what the Prisoners could say, the Jury withdrew, and in a
short time returned, and delivered their Verdict by their Foreman (all
agreeing) finding them all 5 guilty of the murder and Felony for which they
stood indicted; whereupon Judgment was afterward pronounced, after a short
speech made by the L: Chief Justice Rolls in the name of the Court, That they
should return from whence they came and from thence be carried to the place of
Execution, and there seveally to be hanged by the neck till they are dead. The
day appointed Saturday, but the Prisoners moved for respite till Monday, which
was granted.

This afternoon also the High Court of Justice sat in Westminster Hall, and
there was brought before them Mr. Gerard, Mr. Vowel, and Mr. Fox, who were
demanded what they had more to say for themselves, Gerhard and Vowell spoke
much to excuse themselves, notwithstanding what had been proved against them;
after which the L. President Lisle made a learned speech, to convince them of
the desperate wickedness of their design, and how fully the Charge had been
proved, and what punishments the Law had provided in such cases, after which
the Sentence of the Court was read severally to all three, to this effect, That
upon mature consideration of the Treasons and Murders plotted, and contrived,
by them against his Highness the Lord Protector, and the Commonwealth, and
raising a bloody war in the same, the Court did adjudge them to be hanged by
the neck until they be dead. Mr. Gerhard desired the Execution might be
altered, that he might be beheaded or shot to death, and therefore petitioned
to the Lord Protector.

About 4 in the afternoon, Mr. John Gerhard was brought to the Scaffold on
Tower Hill, his behavior was sprightly, the substance of his discourse
Cavalier-like, boasting himself of the profession of Religion which was
established by Queen Elizabeth, K. James, and Charles, to which family he
declared his affection. He acknowledged himself guilty of former sins (but
named them not) for which he had deserved death heretofore; but as touching the
Crime for which he was to die, he spent not many words, only he confessed that
he knew of the plot. At length he submitted his neck to the Executioner, who at
once severed the Head from the Body.

July 10. 1654. Don Pontaleon Sa, Brother to the Portugal Ambassador, and Mr.
John Gerhard, were both beheaded at Towerhill. depiction of a beheading at
Tower Hill
But a little before he lay down, came the Portugal Ambassadors Brother, Don
Pontaleon Sa. A very observable hand of Providence that these two persons,
Gerhard and the Don, who began that quarrel, in the prosecution whereof the
murder was committed at the New Exchange, should meet thus to die at the same
time and place, for different crimes. It is also to be noted, that God did even
mark out this Portugal for Justice; for when he escaped out of Newgate at
first, he was immediately found out: and now having by Order of the Court been
remanded to the Keeper of Newgate, he was very near an escape thence again,
but the Lord prevented him: For yesternight, being Lords day at night, a new
plot was laid for his escaping by two women, one was Mrs. Gourdon who brought
another woman, who under her woman's apparel had a Foot-boys suit on; the
woman's cloths being taken off, they dressed up the Don in them, and so he came
down with Mrs. Gourdon, to to the door, where the Keeper narrowly prying under
the hood, discovered the fraud, and spoiled the business. This failing, and
the hour of execution next day approaching, he was conveyed from Newgate to
Tower hill in a Coach and six Horses in mourning having diverse of of his
Brothers retinue with him, much lamenting his condition. Being upon the
Scaffold, he spoke somewhat to those that understood him, in excuse of his
offense, laying the blame of the quarrel and murder upon the English. So
after some few private words and passages of Popish devotion with his
Confessor, he surrendered to him his Beads and Crucifix, and his Head to the
Block, which was chopped off with somewhat more then a single blow. The rest
condemned about th t murder, were reprieved all, save an Irish man, who was
executed also this day early in the morning, at Tiborn.

In the morning also of this day, the Articles of Peace being fully concluded
betwixt England and Portugal, were signed by the said Ambassador, and
immediately thereupon he withdrew from his house out of Town.

It pleased his Highness to reprieve Somerset Fox, because of his ingenuous
confession, but this day the other two were executed for their Treasons against
his Highness and the Commonwealth. Vowel a Schoolmaster, was in the morning
executed upon a Gallows at Charing-Crosse, and in the same place it was
expected Gerhard should have suffered the same death, but he had the favor
granted him to loose his head: Vowel spoke little of the crime for which he
suffered, but the main of his discourse was to proclaim how great a Zelot he
was to the old way of Religion, and to the cause of the late King and his
family; wherein he let fall diverse expressions tending to sedition, and few of
repentance for his fault touching which he would not speak out, but willed the
Executioner to do his Office, and so after half an hours hanging he was cut
down, and conveyed away in a Coach.

The form of an Indenture between the Sheriff, and the E^^ctors of Person, to
se^ve in Parl. for Counties. depiction of Parliament
THis Indenture made the (...) day of (...) in the year of our Lord, one
thousand six hundred fifty and four, at (...) in the County of (...) Between
(...) Sheriff of the County aforesaid of the one part, and C. D. E. F. G. H.
and diverse other persons qualified and capable to Elect Members to serve in
Parliament for Counties, as is prescribed in the Government of the Commonwealth
of England, Scotland, and Ireland, witnesses, That Proclamation having been
made in every Market Town in the County aforesaid, within ten days after the
receipt of a certain Writ of the Lord Protector to the aforesaid Sheriff
directed, and to one part of these Indentures annexed for the Election of (...)
Knights, fit and discreet persons of the County aforesaid, for the Parliament
of the said Lord Protector, in the Writ aforesaid specified to be chosen, and
to be at the Parliament of the said Lord Protector, at Westminster in the
County of Middlesex, the third day of September next to be held; The aforesaid
C. D. E. F. G. H. etc. and diverse other Persons of the County aforesaid, who
were present at such Election, freely and indifferently have chosen (...)
Knights girt with Swords, that is to say, A. B. etc. to be in the Parliament
aforesaid, as in the said Writ is mentioned, who for themselves, as also for
all the People of the County aforesaid, have full and sufficient power to do
and consent unto those things, which in the aforesaid Parliament shall then and
there, by common consent and council, happen to be ordained. Provided, and it
is hereby Declared, That the persons so chosen shall not have power to alter
the Government as it is now settled in one single person and a Parliament. In
witness whereof, as well the Seal of the Office of the said Sheriff, as also
the Seals of the Electors aforesaid, the day, year, and place abovesaid, to
these Indentures are put and affixed.

The form of an Indenture between the Sheriff, and the Burgesses and
Inhabitants of Buroughs.
THis Indenture made the (...) day of (...) in the year of our Lord, one
thousand six hundred fifty and four, Between A. B. High Sheriff of the County
of (...) of the one part, and C. D. E. F. G. H. etc. Burgesses and Inhabitants
of the Borough of (...) of the other part, witnesses, That by virtue of a
Warrant unto J: K: (...) of the said Borough of (...) from the said High
Sheriff to him directed, for the Electing and choosing of (...) Burgesses of
good understanding, knowledge and discretion for Causes concerning the public
good of this Commonwealth, To be at his Highness Parliament to be ^olden at
Westminster the third day of September next; we the said Burgesses and
Inhabitants there, have made choice and election of L. and M. to be Burgesses
of the said Borough of (...) to attend at the said Parliament according to the
tennor of the said Warrant unto him the said I. K. directed in that behalf;
who for themselves and people of the said Borough have full power to do and
consent to those things which in Parliament shall happen: Provided they alter
not the Government from one single person and a Parliament. In witness whereof
we the parties above named to these presents interchangeably set our hands and
Seals, the day and year first above written.

January 22. 1654.
The five months (according to the instrument of the Government for the time
allotted to sit) being expired, his Highness the Lord Protector sent a message
to them to meet him in the Painted Chamber, about 12 of clock; where they being
met, he made a speech about two hours long for the dissolving of the
Parliament, and so declared than he did dissolve them.

Charles by ye grace of God, Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwell, etc.
portrait of Charles II
YOu will easily believe that I am very well persuaded, to hear how careful
and solicitous you are for my concernments, and of the course you resolve to
take: The truth is, I have been so tender of my friends, that I have deferred
to call upon them to appear, till I could find my self able to give them good
encouragements from abroad; but since I find that comes on so slowly, I would
no longer refrain those affections, which I must desire to be beholding to;
and have reason to believe, that if they who wish one and the same thing, knew
each others minds, the work would be done without any difficulty, and if there
were any handsome appearance in any one place, the rest would not sit still,
and I am persuaded I should then find supplies from those who are yet afraid to
offer them; however I am sure I would my self be with those that first wished
for me, and to that purpose I would keep my self within a reasonable distance.
Consult with those you dare trust, if you are already ag^eed upon a time, and
you cannot promise your selves any thing that you will be disappointed in, and
which is in the Power of

Your affectionate friend CHARLES R.
July 16. 1655.
March 13. 1655.
THis day his Highness, as also the Members of the Council, and the Officers
of the Army, were busy about the Plot, and to subdue the risings in several
places.

All the Horses about London were this day seized on by Order from his
Highness and the Council, to prevent any rising here.

This evening some hundred of Arms where brought into Whitehall from the Tower
by water in Boats, Backs, and Breasts, and Swords, which are there ready as
occasion shall offer for use.

His Highness and the Council sat very late (until after midnight) this
night, making all possible means for suppression of all tumults and
insurrections, touching which several Commissions, and Instructions, and
Letters, were dispatched to the several Counties, to the end the Commonwealth
may be established in Peace, that those who are risen may be suppressed, and to
prevent the like in other places.

A Relation of the several Risings, the truth whereof is as follows.
THere were some Cavaliers said to be risen about Merioneth shire, and other
parts in Wales, reported in all to be 7 or 8 hundred, but not like to be so
many of that party, for some of those that rise in Wales were Inhab^tants to
oppose any that should rise as was feared, which intended to join with those
of the Army.

Another party were risen in Nottingham shire, noised to be 500, but not
thought so many, toward whom a party from Col. Hacker marched out of Leicester
shire to suppress them; their intent was thought to be, to have joined with
another party at Shrewsbury which were discovered, and so their design
frustrated.

There were four men to go into Shrewsbury Castle, two in woman's apparel, and
the other two as their men to wait on them; who being got in, at a seasonable
time were to give notice by shooting off a Pistol to a party of horse which
they were to let in, and so surprise the Castle, of which Collonell Mackworth,
one of the sons of the old Collonell Mackworth deceased, now the Governor,
having notice, prevented their design; and has apprehended the Lord Newport,
one White, Sir Thomas Harris, and several of the Actors: about 100 horse were
found in a Barn, and the Arms under straw in the same Barn, which are taken,
and those parts secured. Chester was also intended to be seized on.

Those that were risen in Nottingham shire so soon as they had an Alarm from
Collonell Hackers Troops marching against them from Leicester shire, the chief
of the Cavaliers met in consultation what to do, and presently resolved to
disperse and be gone; because they were prevented of joining with those
intended to have risen at Shrewsbury, and that a party of the Army were
marching toward them, and they had no security to retreat any where; the
Countries about not rising as was expected, but rather opposing them: It was
debated what they should do with their Arms, for they had received a Cart
load of Arms, some would have had them thrown into the water, but it was
resolved to have them sent back to the house from which they were sent to them,
which accordingly was done, and the Cavaliers dispersed presently upon it; and
some of the chief of them are apprehended, and the Arms seized on.

York. March 26. 1655.
Sir Richard Maliverer, on Thursday night last, sent for all his Tennants to a
great Supper, and then invited them all to join with him in taking up Arms,
and told them they intended that night to take York for the King, and
appointed them a gate where he would meet them, some four went along with him,
diverse Gentlemen met them upon Hessay More, and Carts laden with Arms; after
they had been there a while, the appearance was so small, to what was expected,
that they parted again. Sir Richard Maliverer went home, and bid his Lady to
take the best course she could for her self, for he was necessitated to fly,
wishing himself well arrived beyond the Seas, and so departed from her.

The Intelligence touching the Cavaliers that were at Salisbury, is as
follows.
THe Judges came to Salisbury on Saturday last, being met by Mr. Dove the High
Sheriff and his men, and that diverse of the Cavaliers came into the Town, it
being a time (as they supposed) of least suspicion. On the Lords day about
midnight the Cavaliers randezvouzed, and were above 100. Monday morning early
they seized all the horses, seized on the Sheriff about seven a clock, would
have forced him to proclaim Charles Stewart King, which he refusing, they
wounded him in several places, cut him over the face with a sword, knocked him
over the head with a pistol, yet he told them he would loose his life before
he would do it, and though he offered them money and other offe^s, yet they
took him away. The Commander in chief was one Sir Joseph Wagstaffe, formerly a
Lieut. Collonell, at the beginning of the late wars, in the Parliaments Army;
but now revolted to the late King, was a Collonell under him; and now Major
General to this intended Brigade for Charles St^wart. And they plundered both
the Judges, the Sheriff, the Justices, the Lawyers, and Gentlemen, and all, of
all they could get fit to carry away; But afterward one Penruddock told the
Judges that Maj. Genesis Wagstaffe had given o^ders to assure them, that they
should receive no harm in their own persons. After that they had taken from the
Judges their Paroll, they let out the prisoners, some for debt (as Mr. Gokin
who was in for 1000 l. and others) and all the Thieves and malefactors, with
their Irons upon them, mounted those that would join with them, and went out
(after they had proclaimed Charles Stewart King) being about 200. And from
thence went to Blanford, encouraging their followers, that their chief Leader
was coming from France to head them with 10000 men, for they began to be
discouraged that the Country people did not rise and join with them as was
expected; so that some of them have left them, among which some of them are
come to Whitehall to beg pardon. They went from thence toward Dorchester.

The chief are said to be, M. Genesis Sir Joseph Wagstaffe Sir Henry More of
Berkshire John Penruddock Esquire; Maj. Henry Clark Esquire; Thomas Mumparsons Lieut.
Col. Boll Capt. Hugh Grove, Two of the Joneses, etc.


There are diverse of them taken.

Col: Penruddocke, Col: Jones, Mr. John Dean, And Mr. Lucas,
Were Executed, at the appointed places, on Thursday and Friday last, at
Salisbury and Excester, being the 3 and 4 of this instant May, 1655.



Sir William Ingram, Sir Walter Vavasor, Sir Hen: Slingsby, and diverse other
Gentlemen, are suspected to have had an hand in the business; a party of horse
is gone this morning to secure such as can be found: Sir William Ingram is
brought in already.

Part of the Instructions and Orders given to the Major Generals for
preserving the Peace of the Commonwealth, are as follows.
THey are to endeavor the suppressing all Tumults, Insurrections, Rebellion, or
other unlawful Assemblies, which shall be within the said Counties, as also
all Invasions from abroad, and to that purpose shall have power to draw
together the said Forces or Troops, and march into such places as they shall
judge convenient in England and Wal^s.

They are to take care and give order, That all Papists and others who have
been in Arms against the Parliament, or assisted the late King or his Son in
the late Wars, as also all others who are dangerous to the peace of the Nation,
be disarmed, and their Arms secured in some adjacent Garrisons, or otherwise
disposed of, as may be for the public service.

And to the end that the Highways and Roads may be more safe for Travelers,
and the many Robberies and Burglaries daily comm^tted may be prevented They,
with the said Captains and Officers shall use their best endeavors to find out
all such Thieves, Robbers, Highway-men, and other dangerous persons as lurk and
lie hid in any place within the several Counties, and the houses and places
which they frequent and usually lodge in, and take such course for the
apprehending of them, and also for the prosecuting them and their Receivers, as
is agreeable to Law. And they have hereby power to appoint such reward, not
exceeding ten pounds, to such person as shall discover and apprehend any such
Thief, Highway-man or Robber, to be paid unto them after the conviction of the
party so discovered and apprehended, which the Sheriff for the time being shall
pay, and which shall according to an Act of Parliament, entitled, An Act for
the better and more effectual discovery and prosecution of Thieves and
Highway-men, be allowed to him upon his account.

They are to have a strict eye upon the Conversation and carriage of all
Diaffected persons within the several Counties. And they shall give the like
direction to all the said Captains and Officers at their Meetings, to be
watchful and diligent in the same kind: As also that no Horse-races,
Cock-fightings, Bear-baitings, Stage Plays, or any unlawful Ass^mblies be
suffered or permitted within their Counties. Forasmuch as Treason and
Rebellion, is usually hatched and contrived against the State upon such
occasions, and much Evil and Wickedness committed.

They and the aforesaid Officers, shall labor to inform themselves of all such
idle and loose people that are within their Counties, who have no visible way
of Livelihood, nor calling or employment, and shall consider by what means they
may be compelled to work, or be sent out of the Commonwealth: As also how the
poor and impotent of those Counties may be employed, and better provided for,
then now they are, and certify the same to us, and the Council, for our
further Direction thereupon. And in the mean time, shall endeavor as far as in
them lies, that the Laws in such cases, made and provided, be put in effectual
Execution.

They shall in their constant Carriage and Conversation, encourage and promote
Godliness and Virtue, and D^scourage and Discountenance all Profaneness and
U^godlinesse; and shall endeavor with the other Justices of the Peace, and
other Ministers and Officers, who are entrusted with the care of those things
that the Laws against Drunkenness, Blaspheming, and taking of the Name of God
in vain, by swearing and cursing, Plays and Interludes, and profaning the
Lords day, and such like wickedness and abominations, be put in more
effectual execution then they have been hitherto.

They shall take an exact account of what proceedings have been upon the
Ordinance for Ejecting of Ignorant, Insufficient, and Scandalous Ministers and
Schoolmasters, and take care that the same be effectually put in Execution for
the time to come, in all the Counties aforesaid; and that from time to time,
they give an accout to us and our Council.

All those that had any way assisted the King, were Decemated; that is, they
were to pay the tenth part of their Estate, to the bearing of the charges of
the Army; which was settled in every County throughout the Land.

A Perfect LIST of the Names of the Persons returned to serve in this Parl.
1656. For the several Counties and Corporations within the Commonwealth of
England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto belonging.
Bedford.
WIlliam Butler Knight. John Harvey Richard Wagstaffe Samuel Bedford Richard
Edwards
Bedford Town.
Thomas Margets
Berkes.
William Trumball John Southby Edmond Dunche John Dunche William Hide
Abington.
Thomas Holt
Reading.
Sir John Barkstead Daniel Blagrave
Buckingham.
Lord Whitlock Sir Richard Piggot Richard Grenvile Richard Ingoldsby Richard
Hamden
Buckingham Town.
Francis Ingoldsby
Alisbury.
Thomas Scot
Chipping Wiccomb.
Maj. Genesis Tobias Bridge
Cambridge and Ely.
Sir Francis Russell Bar. Robert Castle Henry Pickering Robert West
University.
Lord Richard Cromwell
Cambridge Town.
Alderman Richard Tymbes
Ely.
John Thurloc William Fisher
Chester.
Sir George Booth Bar. Thomas Marbury Richard Leigh. Peter Brook
Chester City.
Edward Bradshaw
Cornwall.
Francis Rous John St. Aubin Anthony Rous Anthony Nicholl Richard Cartar Thomas
C^ely William Braddon Walter Moyle
Launceston.
Thomas Gewen
Truro.
Walter Vincent
Penryn.
John Fox
Eastlow and Westlow.
John Buller
Cumberland.
Maj. Genesis Charles Howard William Briscee
Carlisle.
Scoutmaster Genesis Downing
Derby.
John Gell Sir Samuel Slight Thomas Saunders German Pole
Derby Town.
Gervase Bennet
Devon.
Sir John Northcot Bar. Sir John Young Robert Roll Arthur Upton Thomas Reynell
William Morris Henry Hatsell Edmond Fowell John Hale John Dodderidge Thomas
Saunders
Excester.
Thomas Bampfield Thomas Westlake
Plymouth.
John Maynard Timothy Alsop Darmouth, Clifton, Hardness. Edward Hopkins
Totnes.
Christopher Maynard
Burnstaple.
Sir John Coppleston
Tiverton.
Robert Shapcot
Honyton.
Samuel Searle
Dorcet.
Col. William Sydenham John Bingham Robert Coker John Fitz-James James Dewey
John Trenchard
Dorchester.
John Whiteway Weymouth and Melcomb-regis. Dennis Bond
Lyme-regis.
Edmond Prideaux
Poole.
Edward Butler
Dirham.
Thomas Lithame James Clavern
Dirham City.
Anthony Smith
York. East Riding.
Sir William Strickland Hugh Bethel Junior Richard Darley Henry Darley
West Riding.
Lord Lambert Francis Thorpe Henry Tempest Henry Arthington Edw: Gyll. John
Stanhop
North Riding.
George Lord Evre Col. Robert Lilburne Luke Robinson Francis Lassels
York City.
Lord Widdrington Thomas Dickenson
Kingston upon Hull.
William Lyster Beverley, Francis Thorpe
Scarborough.
Edward Salmon Richmond, John Bathurst
Leeds.
Francis Alanson, Senior. Adam Baynes Hallifax. Jeremy Bently
Essex.
Sir Thomas Honywood Dionysius Wakering Henry Mildmay Carew Mildmay Sir Rich:
Everard Bar. Robert Barrington Dudley Templer Oliver Raymond Edward Turnor Sir
Tho: Bows Hezek: Hains. John Archer Sir Harbottle Grimstone
Colchester.
Henry Laurence L. Presid. John Maidstone Maldon, Joachim Mathews
Gloucester.
George Berkley John How John Crofts Baynham Throckmorton William Neast
Gloucester City.
General John Disbrow Thomas Pury, younger.
Tewksbury.
Francis White
Cirencester.
John Stone.
Hereford.
Maj. Genesis James Berry Edward Harloe Bennet Hoskins Benjamin Mason
Hereford City.
Wroth Rogers
Leompster.
John Birch
Hertford.
William Earl of Salisbury Sir Richard Lucy Bar. Sir John Wittronge Sir John
Gore Rowland Litton
St. Albanes.
Albon Cox
Hertford Borough.
Isaac Puller
Huntington.
Genesis Edward Mountagu Henry Cromwell Nicholas Pedley
Huntington Borough.
John Barnard
Kent.
John Dixwell Wiliam James Henry Oxinden Sir Thomas Style Bar. John Boys
Lambert Godfrey Richard Beale John Seyliard Ralph Welden Richard Meredith
Daniel Shatterden
Canterbury City.
Thomas St. Nicholas Vincent Denn
Rochester City.
John Parker
Maidstone.
John Banks
Dover.
Maj. Genesis Kelsey
Sandwich.
Mr Fir^erne
Quinborough.
Gabriel Livesey
Leicester.
Thomas Beaumont Francis Hacker William Quarles Thomas Pochen
Leicester Borough.
Sir Arthur Hasterig William Stanely
Lincoln.
Thomas Hall Thomas Lister Thomas Hatchet Edward Rossiter Charles Hall William
Wolley Francis Fiennes William Savile William Welby Charles Hussy
Lincoln City.
Original Peart Humphrey Walcot
Boston.
Sir Anthony Irby Grantham, William Ellis Stamford, John Weaver

Great Grimsky.
William Wray
Middlesex.
Sir John Barkstead Sir William Roberts Challenor Chute William Kiffen
Westminster.
Col. Edward Grosvener Edward Carry
London.
Thomas Foot Alder: Sir Christopher Pack Thomas Adams Alder: Richard Brown
Theophilus Biddolph John Jones
Monmouth.
Maj. Genesis James Berry John Nicholas Edward Herbert
Norfolk.
Charles Fleetwood Sir John Hobart Bar. Sir William Doily Sir Ralph Hare
Barronet Sir Horatio Townshend Phillip Woodhouse Robert Wilton Robert Wood John
Buxton Thomas Sotherton
Lyn-Regis.
Genesis John Dis^row Maj. Genesis Skippon Guibon Goddard
Norwich City.
Bernard Church John Hobart
Great Yarmouth.
Charles George Cock William Burton
Northampton.
Sir Gilbert Pickering Bar. Lord Cleypool Maj. Genesis William Boteler James
Langham Thomas Crew Alexander Blake
Peterburge.
Francis St. John
Northampton Town.
Francis Harvey
Nottingham.
Maj. Genesis Edw: Whalley Edward Clud Edward Nevill Peniston Whalley
Nottingham Town.
Col. James Chadwick William Drury Alderman
Northumberland.
William Fenwick Lord Widdrington Robert Fenwick
Newcastle upon Tine.
Walter Strickland
Berwicke.
Col. George Fenwick
Oxford.
Charles Fleetwood William Lenthall Robert Jenkinson Miles Fleetwood Sir Francis
Norris
University.
Nathanael Finnes
Oxford City.
Richard Croke
Woodstock.
Maj. Genesis William Packer
Rutland.
William Shield Abell Barker
Salop.
Thomas Mackworth Phillip Young. Samuel More Andrew Lloyd
Shrewsbury.
Col. Humphrey Mackworth Samuel Jones
Bridgnorth.
Edward Waring
Ludlow.
John Aston
Stafford.
Sir Charles Wosley Thomas Crompton Thomas Whitgreave
Litchfield.
Thomas Minors
Stafford Town.
Martin Noell
Newcastle on the Line.
John Bowyer
Somerset.
General Disbrow John Buckland Alexander Popham Robert Long. John Gorges
Francis Luttrell. John Ash John Harrington Lislebone Long William Whindham
Francis Roll Taunton, Robert Blake Tho: Gorges Bath, James Ash Wells, John
Jenkyn Bridgwater, Genesis Disbrow
Bristoll.
Robert Aldworth John Doddrige
Southampton.
Lord Richard Cromwell Maj. Genesis William Goffe Robert Wallop Richard Norton
Thomas Cole John Bulkley. Richard Cob Edward Hooper, Elder
Winchester.
John Hildesley
Southampton Tomn
John Lisle Lord Com. Portsmouth Thomas Smith
Isle of Wight.
William Sydenham Thomas Bowreman Andover, Thomas Hussy
Suffolk
Sir Henry Felton Sir Thomas Barnidston Henry North Edmond Harvey Edward Wineve
John Silkmore William Bloys William Gibbs Robert Brewster Daniel Wall
Ipswich.
Nathanael Bacon Francis Bacon
Bury St. Edmonds.
Samuel Moody John Clark Dunwich, Francis Brewster Sudbury, John Fothergill
Surrey.
Sir Richard Onslow Arthur Onslow Francis Drake Lewis Audley George Duncomb
John Blackwell, younger
Southwarke.
Samuel Highland Peter De La Noy
Guilford.
Maj. Genesis Thomas Kelsey Rigate, John Goodwin
Sussex.
Herbert Morley Sir John Pelliam John Flagg John Stapley Anthony Sherly George
Courthoppe Sir Thomas Rivers Bar: Sir Thomas Parker Chichester, Hen: Peckham
Lewis, Anthony Stapely Rye, Mr. Hayes Arundel, Sir John Trevor
Warwick.
Richard Lucy Sir Roger Burgoyne Edward Peyto Joseph Hawksworth
Coventry City.
William Purefoy Robert Beak
Warwick Borough.
Clement Throckmorton, jun.
Worcester.
Maj. Genesis James Berry Sir Thomas Rous Bar. Edward Pit Nicholas Lechmore John
Nanfan
Worcester City.
Edmond Giles William Collins
Wilts.
Sir Anthony Ashly-Cooper Sir Walter St. John Bar. Alexander Popham Thomas
Grove Alexander Thistlewaite John Bulkley Richard Grubam-how William Ludlow
Henry Hungerford Gabriel Martyn
New Sarum.
William Stone James H^ely
Marlebrough.
Charles Fleetwood L: Gen: Devises, Edward Scotton
Lancashire.
Sir Richard Houghton Col. Standish Col. Holland
Westmerland.
Christopher Lister Thomas Burton.
WALES.
George Twisleton Oriffith Bedwrda Col. Phillip Jones Evan Lewis Col. John
Clark James Phillips Lord Cleypool Maj. Gen Rowland Dakins John Gly^ Robert
Williams Col. John Jones Col. John Cartar John Trevor Edmond Thomas John Price
Hugh Price Charles Lloyd John Upton George Gwyn Henry Williams.
SCOTLAND.
Col. Mitchell Col. David Barclay Col. Winthrope Sir John Weyms L: of Boghe Sir
Edward Rhodes Godfrey Rhodes Col. Talbot. John Lockhart Lord Cocktum Mr
Disbrowe Judge Swyntoun Mr. Kerr Judge Advocate Whalley Judge Smith Col. Salmon
Sir James Mac-dowell The Earl of Tweeddale Robbert Woossey Sir Alexander
Wedderburn Col. Henry Markham Col. Whetham Lord President Broghill Lord Provost
Ramsey Commissary, Lockhart Scoutmaster gen^ Downing Alexander Douglas.
IRELAND.
Lord Broghill Maj. Genesis Jephson Vincent Gookin Sir John Reynolds Col. Abbot
Mr. Halsey Col. Sadler Maj. Redman Maj. Owen Sir Theophilus Jones Sir Hardresse
Waller Maj. Morgan Mr. Bisse Mr. Tigh Col. Fowke Maj. Aston Mr. Blagny Lieut.
Col. Newborough Lieut. Col. Berisford Ralph King Col. Cooper Lieut. Col. Tragle
Col. Ingoldsby Walter Waller Sir Robert King Col. Bridges John Davis Maj.
Potter Maj. Ratlife Col. Suttleworth.
FINIS.

