THE DANGER OF RICHES, DISCOVERED IN A SERMON PREACHED At St. Paul's, September.
the 28th. 1662. before the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor.

By THOMAS CARTWRIGHT D. D. and Chaplain to His Majesty.

(...).

Hierocl. in Carm. Pythag. LONDON, Printed by R. Davenport for John Baker at
the Sign of the Peacock in S. Paul's Church Yard. 1662.

To the Right Honorable, Sr. JOHN ROBINSON, Knight and Baronet, Lieutenant of
His Majesty's Tower, and Lord Mayor Elect of the City of London.
SIR,
NExt to his Innocence there ought nothing to be dearer to a Minister than his
Reputation, who as long as he lies under an ill character, will rather teach
the People to find fault with him than mend any in themselves; and therefore he
is concerned in duty to God, the Church, and himself, to clear his words from
all mis-prisions, and his actions from all aspersions which are at any time
cast upon them; in which respect it is, that I am now concerned to submit to
the public censure this following discourse, which I lately delivered in a
Sermon at St. Paul's; in which, as I did not desire to displease any, so
neither did I hope to please all, whilst in the prosecution and discharge of my
duty, I was to concern my self in the faults of the present, to counter-argue a
profitable vice, and so could expect no less than their displeasure, to whom
the overruling sentence of a guilty conscience should apply that hard saying
of my Text. The Treasure which I coveted was not their favor, but amendment,
and therefore if I lanc'd them to the quick, it was no more than I intended,
and I am glad to be assured of it, though by their displeasure; which whilst I
have gained from some of more note in the City than to be affronted by a
careless contempt of their censures, (by whom I have been traduced for
libelling Citizens, for such vices of which they were never suspected but by
me) I must either by a passive silence bear false witness against my self, and
wilfully betray my own innocence, which were a sin against my duty; or else to
right my self, and benefit them, appeal to others of more impartial judgments,
who may best discern whether the guilt and weakness which has been betrayed
were theirs or mine.

If I had no relation to the City but by the Honor which I have had to relate
to your self, I ought for your sake to have a better opinion of it, than to lie
under the least temptation of defaming it; which that I have not done at any
time, much less at this, will appear to them, who after the perusal of this
Sermon shall consider, whether there be not men in the City who came as ill by
their estates, and make as bad use of their riches; as any I here describe? and
whether they ought in charity to conceive, I mean any other than those when I
censure them? and being such as they are, whether they can deserve less? and if
they who undertake to judge me, be none of them themselves, why they should
partake of others sins, by disallowing of their deserved reproof? whether I had
better strive to please or profit? to gain men's affections by doing my duty, or
by omitting it? and whether I could have evidenced a greater respect to their
persons than by reprehending their vices, which wheresoever I find I am bound
to hate, but most in my best friends, to whom I chiefly owe that degree of
charity? I am apt to flatter my self into a belief, that such considerations as
these may save me the trouble of an Apology, and prevail with such sincere
lovers of plain dealing as your Honor, to judge charitably of what I now
humbly recommend to your Patronage of which as I have formerly found the
benefit, so I have still reason to be the more ambitious, because there is a
power in your judgment to oblige others to have a better opinion of

Your most obliged servant Tho: Cartwright.
Barking October. the 7th. 1662.
The Danger of Riches.
St. Matthew the 19th v. 24th. And again I say unto you, It is easier for a
Camel to go through the eye of a Needle, than for a rich man to enter into the
Kingdom of God.


I Am very much afraid that the first sound of these words, may have possessed
you with a timorous expectation, of a loud invective against your great Diana
of Worldly gain; and that consequently your prejudice may like a Sullen Porter
have barred up your ears and hearts against both the Preacher and the Sermon:
But yet, that I may be faithful to God and you, I must venture the loss of your
good opinion, to be instrumental to the saving of your souls.

I wish it were uncharitable to suppose, that there were any in this
Congregation, of the same temper with the young man in this Chapter, who could
be content to keep the Commandments as long as they might keep their moneys,
with whom as much Religion would go down as will advance their Trade, and who
could patiently hear of glorifying God, till we come to tell them that they
must do it with their substance; But when Godliness begins to incroach on their
gain, they care not how little they have to do with it; they then conclude it
high time with Demas to forsake St. Paul, to embrace this present world, and to
give the Devil his demands, fall down and worship him, rather than go without
the Omnia haec, all these things.

If this be your unhappy temper, I am fallen indeed on a thankless argument,
and such as I am afraid you will explode for an Heretical Doctrine, but yet I
must not retract it, having no less than the authority of Heaven to confirm it.

Nor do I think it the less seasonable to insist on the danger of Riches,
because you so generally complain of the want of them, but rather the more,
that so I may turn your complaint into a comfort, and teach you to applaud
(upon second thoughts) what you now perhaps unadvisedly bewail, I am come to
congratulate them who have such rubs as these removed out of their way to
happiness, and to rejoice with them that the bunch of the Camel is taken off,
to facilitate their passage through the eye of the needle; and to let them know
that this will not answer the providence of God by grumbling at the ease which
he has given them, but by expressing their thankfulness for that he has
plucked these thorns out of there sides.

So that whether your conditions give you occasion to use more moderation or
patience, I may very pardonably entertain you with a discourse of the danger of
Riches; the inordinate love whereof is the Prima peregrinos obscaena pecunia
mores intulit, and turpi fregerunt secula luxu Divitiae molles.
original of most of your miscarriages.

We find (verse 16.) a young man starting a very important Quaere to our
Savior, What good thing he should do to make him capable of eternal happiness:
whereupon our Savior refers him to the keeping of the Commandments (verse 17)
He instantly replied that he had gone as far as that already, having all his
time been a constant observer of the Law. (verse 20.) Our Savior approving
these gracious beginnings in him, speaks kindly to him and endeavors to win
him to that degree of contempt of worldly Riches which might give him the
advantages of relieving and supporting others, and thereby qualify him for a
capacity of being a true Christian in the Church militant, and a Saint in the
triumphant: He tells him that he must, upon contemplation of the reward laid up
in heaven, be content to part with all the wealth of the world, whenever it
shall be required of him, either directly, or by consequence, when he cannot
obey any particular precept without danger of being undone by it, which when
the young man heard he went away sorrowful, having a great estate, and not
being willing to pay so dear for perfection, as to part with that to purchase
it. (verse 22.) Our Savior observing his carriage, does thereby convince his
Disciples how very hard a thing it is for a worldly minded man to become a
Christian, (verse 23.) and that others might not cheat their souls, as he for
some time had done, with false pretentions to Heaven, and upon such slight
grounds arrive at so great a confidence, what he had before proved by that
example, he now explains by a similitude, where a rich man is compared to a
Camel, and the Kingdom of God to the Eye of a needle, and our Savior
positively declares, that he must part with as much of his humor before he can
be capable of being a Christian, as that beast must of its bulk to be qualifyed
to pass through so streit a passage as is the eye of a needle:

In which words we have 1. The deposition or truth to be believed, viz. that
it is easier for a Camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man
to enter into the Kingdom of God. 2. The Affidavit or authority which is ready
to vouch it. And again I say unto you.


1. As to the Deposition, we must remember that 'twas an ordinary Proverb among
the Jews, Hebrews and Arabs, An Elephant can not pass through the eye of a
needle, to signify the most impossible thing: This proverb Christ was willing
to change, from the Elephant (a beast which few of his Auditors had seen) to a
Camel, which was very ordinary in Syria, whose bunch on his back would hinder
his passage through any narrow entrance.

Theophylact and Phavorinus will have it rendered a Cable with which Mariners
use to cast their Anchors, and that which they phansy to be more agreeable to
the eye of a needle: but Erasmus confesses Suidas to be the first approved
Author in whom he found (...) used for a Cable (and after him Camers;) and
observing that Julius Pollux makes no mention of it amongst the tacklings of a
Ship, he rejects it as a Grammarian conjecture, and an interpretation of more
boldness than authority.

And such, as I conceive, or little better, is that other assertion which the
Postillers make frequent use of, that there was a Gate in Jerusalem called the
Needle, through which it was not impossible but difficult for a Camel to pass.

The very possession of riches makes the passage difficult, and gives us cause
to cry out (...), how hard it is? but the inordinate love of them renders it
impossible; so that if by a rich man we understand one who trusts in his
riches, (as the generality of them do) then it will come to the (...), How
impossible it is? and so the simile of a Camel and a needles eye will fit it.

Nor dare I tread so near upon the borders of blasphemy, as to venture to say,
that Our Savior ever spoke any thing by an Hyperbole, such rash expressions
arguing gross mistakes, being by no means chargeable on the infinite knowledge
of our Redeemer.

Nor yet have I any temptation to deny, but that some great and rich men, who
have been sometimes on earth, are now great Saints in Heaven, and that there is
still room for many more; for God can untwist those cords of vanity and
cart-ropes of iniquity, with which the worldlings are bound to their riches,
and make them, as he did Matthew the Publican, pass through the eye of a
needle; and as Zacheus notwithstanding his Camels back, his prodigious wealth,
to pass through that streit gate which gives entrance into eternal life.

But let me withal request you to remember that such miracles as these were the
rarities and reserves of heaven, and such as are not often seen; it is very
seldom that men are imparadis'd in this life and enthroned in the next, and
therefore considering the incomparable danger which they are in, Rich men had
need have many a charge given them above others, to take care of their souls,
lest valuing their coin above their conscience, 1 John 2.15.
by their love to the world, and the things that are in the world; it appears
that the love of the Father is not in them, Whosoever will be a friend of the
world is the enemy of God (says Saint James,) Jam. 4.4.
and therefore has little reason to expect a Kingdom from him: And that they
might not flatter themselves into a better opinion of their condition than it
deserves, Our Savior tells them in my Text, that it will be easier for a Camel
to go through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the
Kingdom of God.

Which truth though it have a sufficient Affidavit to back it, even him in
whose disposal alone the Kingdom is, to confirm it; yet because I am speaking
to Citizens, who will hardly think any security sufficient when we are about to
persuade them out of their profit, whose faith is not easily tempted to assent
to any thing against their interest, I shall add to the testimony which you
have had from heaven, the reasons upon which the difficulty is grounded, that
so the truth of the doctrine may not hereafter be disputed, nor you need a
second lecture of faith in this particular: now these are to be drawn either
from the streitness of the way it self, or from his incapacity more than other
men to pass it.

It is not every man who is presently capable of the Kingdom of God, much less
a Rich man, which incapacity proceeds, not from the nature of riches in
themselves, but from his proneness to abuse them, so far as to make them
instrumental to his own damnation, which they will be if he either come
wrongfully by them, or if justly and be not thankful for them, not content with
them, not careful to employ them to the ends for which they were given him; too
confident in them, too regardless of the temptations which the devil lies under
them to seduce and ensnare him, not willing to part with them as luggage when
they hinder him, or throw them overboard as too much lading when they are ready
to sink him, but suffering them, contrary to the intention of the Donor, to
steal away his heart, and ingross his affections wholly to themselves, so as
that he seldom thinks of the Kingdom of God, always undervalues it, never
really desires it: for each of which, when I shall have produced a particular
evidence, I will not be so uncharitable to you, whatsoever you mean to be to
your selves, as to doubt but that this doctrine will go down for a truth with
you, and be easily digested into such a practical undervaluing of these
perishing riches as may be fit for me to recommend to you, in order to the
salvation of your immortal souls: to each of which, with your patience and
pardon I shall crave to speak something, orderly, briefly and plainly.

Now first the passage into the Kingdom of God, may well be compared, as it is,
to the eye of a needle, and termed not (...) a broad way, but (...), a way full
of thorns, and beset with diffculties, which the loose livers of the world do
practically confess, whilst with a loytering formality they strive to avoid it.

It Is no such easy matter for a man to have his conversation in Heaven whilst
he walks on earth, to enjoy God in the Creation and to pass out of the sensible
world into the intellectual, to live above the world and himself, and not to
debase his soul in pursuit of low and particular ends and interests; to live in
it, and not be delighted with it, as having all things, and yet possessing
nothing; to carry himself above all that the world can do for or against him,
to bid defiance to all the powers of darkness so as not to shrink at any
danger, not be dishartned at any opposition of the enemy, to balk all the
flattering temptations with which he would inveagle us, to row against the
stream of the world and our own natural inclinations, to master our headstrong
affections with so streit a rein, and to break them with so severe a Discipline
that they run not away with us; to have our reason captivated to our Faith, our
Will to our reason, and our affections to both: not to remember our darling
sins without grief and disdain, nay not without hatred of our selves for having
ever committed and embraced them; by mortification and self-denial to pluck out
our right eye lest it offend us for the future, and never give over contending,
till we have destroyed the whole body of Sin; to love all good according to the
degrees of its eminency, God above all, and others more or less as they partake
of his goodness, not to be oversway'd by any prevailing lust, but to bring our
inward Man into Obedience to the law; duly to observe and attend upon Divine
Providence, and to bring our selves and all our actions into a compliance with
Gods will, Quis ad haec idoneus? Lord who is sufficient for these things? and
yet this and no wider is the way to Heaven, into which if many strive to enter
and shall not be able, what will become of them who never make it their
business to regard it? if the Righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the
Sinner and the unjust appear? it is beyond my Commission to give them any more
comfort than St. James has done; S. James 1.
Verse 5.1
Go to now, ye Rich Men, weep and howl for your miseries which shall come upon
you, ye have lived in pleasure on the Earth and been wanton, ye have nourished
your hearts as in a day of slaughter; and the entrance into the Kingdom of God
being so streit, you, of all Men are least likely to pass it, as will appear, ^.
A natura and ingenio divitis.

The simile of a Camel and the eye of a needle are exactly proportioned to the
Salvation of a Rich Man who is incapable of it; without a more miraculous
extension of the mercy of his Maker than is by himself known to suffice such as
have not been condemned to so much Worldly plenty. His trusts, joys, and
confidences are so contrary to a Christian, and so perfectly irreconcilable
with them, that there must be an extraordinary hand of God in the way of
converting Grace to make him who so excells in the gifts of Fortune, to deny
all and become nothing for Christ.

The Rich are apt to be more in love with the World than other Men, and so many
are the noysom weeds which grow out of such fat soyls, that it is very
disputable whether they who are always penuriously brooding over their
Fortunes are ever guilty of doing any thing commendable but but when they dye,
Avarus nisi cum moritur nil recte fecit. Seneca.
who whilst they live, are good to none, but worst to themselves; Avarus nemini
bonus, sibi pessimus, Sen.
the more rich they are, commonly the less Righteous, Goods and Goodness being
no intimate acquaintance. Raro simul hominibus bona fortuna bonaque men's datur.
Live.


A large Fortune and a narrow Soul are such great Comrades, that Plato would
not allow it possible for them to be parted. (...), and therefore of all vices
that of Covetousness, as it comes nearest to the Sin against the Holy Ghost. So
it was never charged upon any of Gods Children in Holy Scripture, of all who
came to Christ, only Judas the Son of perdition is branded with it, who was
therefore thought fit to have the keeping of the bag.

Nor would I be thought to concluded that this incapacity of theirs proceeds
from the nature of riches in themselves, which that they might not be disposed
as evils are sometimes given to good men, and that they might not be esteemed
as the best things are more frequently bestowed on the worst. Ne putentur malae
dantur and bonis, and ne putentur summa bona dantur and malis. Aug. Ep. 7. ad
Bonif.


But I think I preach to them who will sooner turn any thing than Stoics, and
therefore I shall not trouble you nor my self to bring Riches in more credit
with you, 1 Timothy 6.17.
for fear you have already a better opinion of them than they deserve. They may
be good Servants but they must be bad Masters; they are neither absolutely good
in themselves, nor infallible Testimonies of Gods favor: it is for the most
part a labor to get them and a load to keep them, and that the heavier,
because we may neither be the better with them, nor the worse without them,
since the best advantages of which they can boast are but those of an
instrument, which has but an inferior, subordinate and serviceable, even the
lowest degree of goodness that can be, and yet are many times unserviceable,
and useless for that too, whilst they seem to be what they are not, boast of
what they have not, and promise what they cannot perform, and so not only
perish themselves, but make their Possessers perish with them, which they will
infallibly do,

1. If they come wrongfully by them. God has locked up Gold and Silver in the
secret Mines and Caverns of the Earth, and yet though they are placed under
foot, Men will not overlook them, but rend open the Bowels of the Earth in a
resolution by any means to obtain them, though in the search after them they
lose both God and themselves; and well might they therefore be called Thorns,
as things for which they do commonly smart who lay their hands on them.

Qui divitiis simul vitiis incubat.
Sin is so commonly the Rich Man's Factor, who rarely scruples any wicked
action, if it bring in a considerable advantage, that the Proverb takes notice
of it, Dives aut iniquus est aut iniqui haeres, and we have one in plain
English which intimates no less saying, Happy is thnt Child whose Father goes
to the Devil, and so in earnest it is much to be feared they do, who morgage
their Souls to the Devil for a little present profit, and will not regard till
they cannot recover them.

They who get or increase their Estates by defrauding in matter of trust or
traffic, dissembling, lying, foreswaring, bribing, oppressing, exacting,
usery, theft, witholding their dues, Sacrilege, or by the fashionable way of
breaking when they have feathered their Neasts with other Men's Estates, and can
cheat them into a slender Composition, or by taking advantage of the buyers
ignorance, indiscretion or necessity, (and I must still put an, etc. to the end
of it, whilst I am speaking of a mystery in which some of this Auditory may
possibly be so well versed, as secretly to accuse me for want of a sufficient
enumeration) in all which ways they do more overreach themselves than those
with whom they deal, whilst by these very acts they sell their souls to the
Devil and take that unjust gain for the payment: I say they who have practiced
any of these unlawful ways of getting or increasing their estates, must first
make satisfaction to the parties wronged, before they can hope to be saved.

Now then, you are best able to consider how hard it will be for them who have
gone on in such courses, to call to mind how many, how much, and how often they
have deceived; and how much harder it will be to find out them or their heirs
to whom to make restitution, without which their Repentance will never avail
them. Examine your consciences and let them resolve you of this difficulty, for
your sakes I tremble to think on it.

If all of you come justly by your riches, (which all your acquaintance are not
bound to believe) yet a Camel' may easier pass through the eye of a needle,
than you into the Kingdom of God, if you are not thankful for them to him who
has blessed you with them, according to the measure of your enjoyments; this
being a debt wherein you stand bound to him for the free use of his creatures.
1 Timothy 4.4.
Now rich men owe more in this sense to God, than other men, and if it shall
appear that they pay less, their very enjoyments will rise up in judgment
against them. Woe be unto us if the more God in mercy remembers us, the sooner
we forget both him and our selves. Israel were no sooner possessed of the
promised land but they grew disobedient; fullness bred security, security
brought forth negligence, and that the contempt of their Benefactors, and I
wish this be not a catching disease amongst us likewise.

3. They who are not content with their riches can never be saved with them,
when therefore they debauch men's minds, and work them to a kind of
insatiableness, so that their souls are always in travel under the pangs, and
throws of a solicitous pursuit of more gain, they give them an earnest of
eternal torments in this life, Avaro se nihil desiderare posse perniciosius
quam ut longum vivat Sen.
and an infallible assurance of the arrears in the next. How usual is it for
rich men to covet more than they have with such intemperance, as to forget
their possession, and be sick for what they have not? Quod habet numerat
tantum, quod non non habet, optat. Manil. Esa. 5.3. Hab. 2.5.
How frequently does the desire of wealth, after it once exceeds its lawful
bounds, become as insatiable as Hell, and admit no stint or period of growth?
Cresit amor nummi, quantum ipsa pecunia crescit. Juv.
And how much discontent do they generally betray, either by the fear of losing
what they have, or the feverish desire of grasping more, insomuch as that they
tug at the world as at a narrow table-cloath, where none thinks he has enough
unless he get all?

4. That which renders rich men's passage into the Kingdom of God the more
difficult is because they seldom use or bestow their riches, to that end for
which they are given them. Qui bonis abundat bonum esse oportet. Great Accounts
must have great Audits, and the more plentiful the entertainment has been, the
larger will be the reckoning. Ingentia benificia, ingentia vitia, ingentia
supplicia.
Great benefits answered with great sins, will be attended with fearful
judgments. Now God gives men wealth not as to Treasurers, but Stewards, not for
their own uses, but his service, and he gives the poor many bills of Assignment
on their plenty, whereupon this must either burden their consciences, or
lighten their purses, and expect to be summoned to a Red rationem, to give an
account of their Stewardship: If therefore your love of riches has strangled
your love of God and your neighbor, Non diligit proximum qui diligit durum
Chrysostom.
so that you regard neither in the distribution of them, but defeat the main
end of your receipts, how dreadful will your guilt be, and how desperate your
condition?

5. If in times of difficulty and distress you place more confidence in your
money than your Maker, it will infallibly destroy you. If you set your hearts
upon your riches, place your contentment in them, and reckon them as your best
friends in time of need, you make them your Idols, and God himself but a puny
to the work of his own hands. Now how does the Omnipotency of money make all
people prostrate themselves to it, and worship it? Psalm. 49.6. Psalm. 52.2.
and how apt are they who have riches to place their confidence in them as
their greatest happiness? to trust in their wealth, and boast themselves in the
multitude of their riches, and how easily they will forget themselves and their
friends, and grow proud Vbi uber ibi tuber. Apul.
of their plenty, as if it would privilege them in any villainy Potentia
divitis quasi jus, quoddam ad delinquendum est, privilegium potestatis est, non
tantum inpune sed etiam just delinquere. Celad.
will be no news to tell you.

There is such an enchantment in wealth that it persuades men to sing a Requiem
to their souls, and to rock them asleep in the cradle of security, as if it
were able both to give them true happiness and to continue it; and therefore
Saint Paul bids us 1 Timothy 6.17.
charge them who are rich in this world that they be not high-minded, nor trust
in their uncertain riches, but in the living God who gives us richly all things
to enjoy; and indeed they have too much need of such caution, for they are apt
to turn professed Independants, in a conceit of their own self-sufficiency, to
show themselves insensible of their dependence on God, like the Prodigal when
he had got his portion out of his Fathers hands, to take their leave of him and
set up for themselves, Job. 31.24.
to make gold their hope, and say unto the fine gold, thou art my
confidence,whereas indeed they owe their superficial happiness merely to the
delusion of their fancy, nor have they any better pretense to it than that
they have not sense enough to know their misery.

For though the Devil like a cunning jugler as he is, have put the World like a
piece of money into their hands, and bids them hold fast, yet he by his
Leger-demain will quickly get it out again, and before they can open their
hands and their eyes they many times find nothing but that they are cheated,
viz. that their Riches have taken Wings and are fled away from them. A Prodigal
Son, an unfaithful Servant, an ill Debtor, a suit at Law, a fire by Land, or a
storm at Sea, may quickly impoverish you: But whilst I preach to Citizens who
of late years have as often miscarried as their Wives, and to Merchants who sink
as fast as their Vessels, I must be so modest as to remember that you are
better able to instruct me than I you in the uncertain and tricklish tenure of
Riches; and therefore I shall only beg that you would improve that part of your
knowledge to abate part of your Confidence, with which you can no more enter
into Heaven than can a Camel pass through the eye of a Needle.

6. If you are too regardless of the temptations, Magna illecebra delinquendi
est rerum affluentia. Ambr.
which the Devil hides under your Riches to seduce and ensnare you, (as Rich
Men generally are) you can never enter into the Kingdom of God. If you would
deal impartially with your selves and not turn Traitors to your own Souls, I
should not need to tell you how many Vices are apt to be engendered, and how
many mischiefs do proceed from the care of getting, the desire of keeping, the
fear of losing, and the grief for the loss of Worldly Riches, in which respect
they are termed by St. August. Pericula possidentium pretiosissima, speciosa
supplicia, beneficia viscata: insnaring courtesies; for the Devil is no such
frank Chapman as to sell his wares for nothing.

Munera magna quidem praebet, sed praebet in hamo. Nor would the World like a
cheating Gamster suffer you to win at first, but with a design to tempt you to
lose all, and your selves at last, and therefore Agur was so shy of the World
as to suspect some charge in its kindness, Prove. 30.8,9.
Give me not Riches, feed me with food convenient for me, lest I be full and
deny thee, and say, where is the Lord? and we are no sooner taught by our
Savior to pray for our daily bread, but as soon as those words are out of our
mouth to pray for the forgiveness of our sins; so apt are we to make the
blessings of God instruments of Rebellion against him, to inslave our faith to
our present enjoyments, and not suffer it to perfect its work in us, to turn
Infidels, and resolve to stop our ears and hearts against any Doctrine which
makes against our profit; let the Gospel say what it will, to allow it no more
Faith than it will pay for, which was the reason why so few Rich Men were
converted by our Savior, and why his Ministers cannot hope to prevail with
many, because what we proffer toward their conviction is like Lots Sermon to
his Sons in Law concerning the destruction of Sodom, they take us to be but in
jest whem we declare against such a thrifty vice, and will shut their hearts
and their purses, charm we never so wisely; and therefore St. Paul tells us
with Tears, that they are flat Atheists, 3. Philip. 8.
Enemies to the Cross of Christ, and our Savior passes an heavy doom upon
them; 6 Math. 24.
Woe be to them who are Rich, for ye have received your Consolation, you have
made a God of your Riches here (Jupiter est quodcunque cupis.) and you must
look for no Salvation but what they are able to purchase for you hereafter, and
that especially,

7. If you are not willing to part with them as luggage to quit your interest
and claim in them at the first call from God, and to dispose of your selves and
your Worldly enjoyments according to his pleasure, without any reluctance, they
will render your entrance into the Kingdom of God impossible. No Man can serve
two Masters, God and Mammon, nor at once be the favorite of the Prince of
light, and the Prince of this World; they therefore who divide themselves
between both are Servants of neither, and therefore this Young man was enjoined
to forsake all before he undertook to follow Christ.

We have all a race to run, and Rich Men are like Tortoises, clogged with such a
weighty shell, that they cannot draw it after them in any expectation of
obtaining it: the Soul cannot mount to Heaven when it has such a load as the
World hanging on its wing: Too much lading is many times the cause why the Ship
does sink; and in a short journey the more provision Travelers have, the
greater reason do they find to complain of their Burden. A golden Apple does
make Men stoop in their way toward Heaven, and like the foolish Virgins to
tarry so long behind for it till they are shut out; and such is the Genius of
Rich Men, that they would be thought very greedy of Salvation, and yet like
this young Man, when they are put to the proof they will part with nothing for
it, and if they cannot have Christ upon their own terms, they will not take him
upon his; and you may guess how passionately they are inamor'd with the world
by their grief at the parting with it. Sine dolor amittitur, quod sine amore
possidetur.

Nor is it enough to part with Riches out of your hands unless it be out of
your hearts too, for it is less mastery to forsake Worldly Riches than to
forsake the love of them. If we disquiet our hearts with a desire of any
Earthly thing which we have not, or are troubled at the loss of what we would
have again but cannot, as much sorrow and unwillingness as we have in the
losing of them, so much affection we had for the keeping of them. As therefore
you ever hope for the Kingdom of God, you must part with all in affection,
though not always in possession, and unrivet your hearts from the World, and
not hoard up and withold the things thereof from a charitable Communication,
but always in willingness and preparation of mind to be ready to surrender
them, and that actually too, when the Church stands in need of them, and
therefore the Hebr. 10.33.
Saints took joyfully the spoiling of their goods, knowing in themselves that
they have in Heaven a better and enduring Substance.

8. If you suffer them to steal away your hearts, and ingross your affections
wholly to themselves, a Camel may as easily go through the eye of a needle as
you shall enter into the Kingdom of God. He who ever hopes to be saved, must
reckon his best affections and designs, as too choice and precious a treasure
to be prodigally squandred away upon such sorry trifles as riches are. He must
not make his heart the worlds Warehouse, when he has once consecrated it as a
Temple of the Holy Ghost. A true Christian will never admit of such an
incurvation of his immortal soul, to things so much below him, as to love the
world against God, or more than him, or equal to him, or distinctly from him,
but only in a subordination to him, as being truly sensible that what affection
soever the world wins of him is lost to God.

And, Lord, how few rich men are of this persuasion, who think so highly of
their Riches, and act so vigorously for them as if their souls and they were of
equal Eodem scrinio servatur nummus and animus.
concernment? How incomparably do they degrade their souls in forceing them to
take up their happiness amongst such perishing enjoyments, and in bounding all
their projects and designs within the compass of this earth which they bread
upon?

Can those men ever hope to be heirs of Heaven, who are always aiming at ends
more ignoble than themselves, and shaping their minds as much as may be into a
conformity with that which they aim at, till they become as unstable,
inconstant, perplexed and tumultuous things, as the World it self is? So much as
their delight is in these transitory enjoyments, so much is abated of their
delight in God, and whilst they are so furiously driving on their thriving
projects and designs of rising in this world, they are turning their backs upon
Christ, and posting toward destruction.

They who are mancipatipecuniis, such drudges to their estates, as to suffer
them to overruled them, to such hard conditions may be said to have riches as a
man has a fever, which may be more properly said to have him under its tyranny;
(...), as Bion Lib. 4.
in Laertius, he does not possess his estate, but is possessed by it, which if it
be not the same is as bad as being possessed by the Devil.

The love of God and the world, are like fire and water which cannot consist in
intense degrees, but destroy each other, the more the heart gives place to the
care of that, the less room does it leave for the thoughts and remembrance of
God. Riches have a pilphering quality whereby they steal away the love of the
heart, engrossing it to themselves, warping the conscience, corrupting the
judgment, bribing it with a retaining fee, bespeaking it for themselves, and
diverting our desires from that end for which we ought to have desired them,
and therefore they who are thus cumbred and loaded with them, are in very small
likelihood of being Saints, First,

1. Because they seldom think of the Kingdom of God. Their minds are
perpetually rambling another way, and they so deeply engaged, and immerst in
the world, that they are unacquainted with the affairs of their own souls. All
their rooms are thronged with Crescentem sequitur cura pecuniam.
cares and turbulent passions, that unless God will be crowded up with the
world in so streit a lodging he must not look for entertainment there. When
they wax fat with the enjoyment of ease and plenty, they never think of another
world, because, they perceive the remembrance of it to allay their joy, and so
they have neither leisure, patience, nor discretion to mind it. They will not
suffer such troublesome guests as are the thoughts of Heaven, to lodge long in
their memories, but contrive how to put their doom out of their thoughts till
they put themselves into an incapacity of avoiding it; so that

2. They always undervalue the Kingdom of God, whilst they make Godliness
truckle under gain, and prefer riches above faith and a good conscience, as the
Gergesens did their swine, before our Savior, and as the cock in the fable did
the grain of corn before the pearl of inestimable price (...). Hesiod.
That which men value most they take greatest care of, Majori bono debetur
major amor, and therefore they who spend more time and care to secure their
estates than their souls, do sufficiently declare upon which they place the
greater estimate.

To part with good things to get better you will allow, I am sure, for a good
piece of merchandise Magna amittere ut majora lucreris non est damnum sed
negotiatio. Bern.
and therefore if you had so good an opinion of Heaven as it deserves, you
would lay up in store for your selves a good foundation against the time to
come, that you might lay hold on eternal life. 1 Timothy 6.19.


But alas! how seldom do rich men worship God sincerely, unless he descend like
Jupiter in a shower of gold; or esteem of any as worth their acquaintauce,
Quantum habes tantum vales.
unless they be such as they may probably get by; and then they are such Jews
that if a Calf be of Gold they will worship it, nay they would hardly desire to
live long themselves, but that they may have their breath gratis without paying
interest for it; if time should turn Usurer and charge his weekly revenues with
an excise, they would hardly be at the expense of a longer life, whilst death
were to be had for little or nothing. If Religion be so dear, as that it cannot
be kept without the distribution of their estates, as and when their brethren
shall need them, it is no pennyworth for them; If God shall put forth his hand
and touch their estates, the Devil (who knows their minds) will answer for
them, that they shall curse him to his face; Job. 1.9.
who finding what perpetual service this temptation of riches did him,
questioned not but that it would have overcome Job, and doubted whither our
Savior himself could withstand it.

3. Rich men do never really desire the Kingdom of God. They spread their Sails
to no wind that brings not in some present profit: and if they entertain
Religion, it is often as a journeyman to bring in their gain, they will keep it at
an allowance to serve their turn, and at best they will but admit it as a Guest
to take such as it finds, and if once it take the freedom to find fault with
their incomes, it must be packing. If it prove an enemy to and intercept them
from the prosecution of their temporal ends, they will have nothing more to do
with it.

Their desires which are both the truest measure of their present state, and
the surest prognostics of their future, are never really set upon Heaven, Qui
aliquid desiderat, desiderat etiam id quod scit necessario inde subsecuturum.
Medina. 1. 2. Qu. 5. Art. 8.
for if they did desire the end, they must likewise desire the way which alone
can bring them to it, without which it is a roaving velleity shot at random,
and levelled at an impossibility; now this that they do not desire has been
abundantly proved already, again, if they did desire it, they would be sick of
the want of it, and restless till they had secured it. Quod ardentius
desideras, cares aegrius Bern. 51. Sermon in Cant.


Put all these together and let your own hearts be Judges, and declare whether
a Camel may not as easily go through the eye of a needle, as a Rich Man to
enter into the Kingdom of God: And that you may not think me either Magisterial
or uncharitable, I shall request you in the Spirit of meekness not to take my
word for it, for I do not say it of my self, but it is the decree of Heaven, as
you shall see by

2. The Affidavit, or Authority, which is brought in the first words of my Text
to vouch and confirm it. A Doctrine which runs so cross to the grain of the
World, that we had need have Christ's Authority for it, and his express command
to publish it, which we have in these words: And again I say unto you. It Is a
hard saying, indeed and so much the harder, because it is his who is a complete
Judge of it; one who can neither be deceived himself, nor tempted to deceive
us; the God of truth asserts it, and, Quantus Author, tanta fides. Who would
have believed it, unless he had affirmed it? and who dares distrust it now we
have his word for it? If you studied our Saviors answer to Dives, you would
think that he assigned Heaven merely for an inheritance of such as wanted here,
and Hell for those who abounded; and as he denounced a Woe against them, Luke
6.24. so he forewarned his Disciples of the difficulty of their Salvation, and
when he perceived them to be offended at what he had said before, he repeats it
higher in my Text, and gives them the measure of the difficulty by a
similitude; and certainly it is as difficult now as when he first affirmed it.

Now the Children of God in all ages have believed no less; hence was that
strange complaint of the Spouse in the Canticles, 1 Can. 6.
my mothers children were angry with me, they made me the keeper of their
Vineyards: she reckons her preferment as the proper effect of their Anger, and
complains that they had wronged her with a mistaken courtesy, as if she could
not have been spited more than in being preferred to a dignity in Church or
State. And Jacob was of the same mind too, for though he loved Joseph above all
his Sons, yet he bestowed the Kingdom on Judah, lest the enjoyment of his
blessing in this World should have tempted him to insolency, and so to the
Forfeiture of Gods blessing in the next.

Alas the World never embraces any but it is like a Serpent in cruelty, and
therefore Jobs friends came to him not to congratulate, Job 42.10,11.
but to condole with him the restitution of his Fortunes, quasi foelix
consolandus sit de infortunio foelicitatis. Such a desperate thing is it for
Men to be bewitch't with this Circean World that they are never in greater
danger than when hedged about with the blessings of it; and the Birth of Men's
Estates does so often prove the death of their Souls, that the Heathen reckoned
that Man the most unhappy in the World who is always happy, or rather never
so, because always prosperous. Seneca.
Nihil est infoelicius eo cui nihil accidit adversi, and he condol'd his Friend
for that very reason for which others applauded him. Te judico miserum, quia
non fuisti miser; nor is it only in his, but in Abraham's judgment, that Rich
Men have very great reason to be jealous, lest the good things which they enjoy
in this World, like mis-imploy'd Talents, purchase for them evil ones eternally
in the next.

Since therefore they are such hindrances of your eternal happiness (which I
hope you are come hither to mend) methinks I might easily persuade you not to
be so over-fond of them as to make Ita lucrum temporale spectas ut non amittas
aeternum.
forfeiture of Heaven in the pesuit of them.

When the Devil greases you in the fist, and proffers to bribe you out of a
good conscience, return it with St. Peter's zeal, Thy Gold and thy Silver perish
with thee; and let not this be a principle or maxim of trade, That your stock
of money must be increast by any means, Facius rem, recte si possis, si non,
quocunquo modo rem, (I am afraid some of you understand it better, than an
easier piece of latin.) They whose Consciences without the help of the
Philosophers Stone can turn any thing into Gold and Silver may easily have them
in abundance; if any Man can persuade himself to cheat, defraud, dissemble, lie
demurely, foreswear strongly, bribe some, oppress others, wrong all, serve the
times that they may do as much for him, make use of all Men for his turn, and
swallow the greatest wickedness for the least advantage, it is a great deal of
pity that he should not be Rich, and I shall not wonder at his heap of Gold if
he can be content to treasure up so much guilt with it.

But I hope you do not so fondly overvalue Riches, and so ambitiously aspire to
them, as to pawn your Souls to the Devil to take them up, Ne sit lucrum in arca
and damnum in conscientia.
for that is to out-bid his market, and inhaunce the price of damnation,
whereas you may be sure to go to Hell a great deal cheaper than so. If you did
believe what our Savior tells you, you would be afraid and shy of them upon
any terms, but especially upon such, and neither think your selves frowned upon
when you wanted them, nor see any cause to be transported when you had them.

I grudge you not what may be sufficient, not only for the necessity of your
persons, but likewise for the decency of your Estates, the neglect whereof may
be sordid and deservedly taxible; but I would not have you so much in love with
the flesh pots of Egypt, as not to forsake them for your eternal Canaan, you
should use the World as a Traveller does his Inn, not as if you were to dwell,
but to bait in it. If you do not Brevissima ad divitias per divitiarum
contemtum via est. Si ad naturam vives, nunquam eris pauper, si ad opinionem,
nunquam dives. Epicur.
overvalue Riches, you will never want them, for it is Opinion and nothing else
which makes Men miserable. Learn to be content with any thing, and by this very
means you will enjoy all things, Omnia nimirum habet qui nihil concupiscit, eo
quidem certius quam qui cuncta possidet. Sen.
and he who fills the hungry with good things, and sends the Rich empty away,
will bless you with all Spiritual blessings in Heavenly places in Christ Jesus;
he will give you those Riches which shall be truly amiable, and the object of
your eternal love; and therefore fall not in love with the World, but him that
made it, in whose power alone it is to make you rich indeed, and contemn whilst
you are alive, what you cannot enjoy when you are dead: For no Man is truly
wealthy, who cannot carry away what he has with him, for what he leaves behind
him is not his, but another.

Never was there more need of a sursum corda than now, when the Churches
invitation to lift up your hearts, can hardly prevail with you to raise them
one jot above the World; and therefore since I have no great assurance to
prevail with you to forsake Covetousness, I pray let me press you to make the
best of it, to covet earnestly the best gifts, to be zealous of spiritual
gifts; Get wisdom, get understanding, and see that ye abound in grace, ( cujus
unius honesta est avaritia. Sen.) Strive to be rich in good works, and to get
an interest in Christ, who of God is made unto us Righteousness, Sanctification
and Redemption, and then you can want nothing but what to wish for. 1 Cor.
10.31. 1 Cor. 14.12. Prove. 4.5. 2 Cor. 8.7. De brev. vitae cap. 3. 1 Timothy 6.18.
1 Cor. 1.30.


Look a little into your Estates, and examine all the ways by which you have
got or increased them, whither they have been just or no? Consider seriously
that if he who gave nothing to Lazarus was condemned to fry in eternal flames,
what will become of them who took any thing from him? If they who found Christ
naked, and would not cloth him, must be damned, what will become of them who
found him clothed, and stripped him? He whom we hear of in Hell, is said to have
riches and yet his own too, not the Churches or his Neighbors Patrimony; he is
noted for faring deliciously but of his own bread, not for drinking Widows
tears instead of Wine, or eating up Gods People as they eat bread; we do not
read of his thriving by other Men's losses, making advantage of their falls, or
enriching himself by the mystery of breaking; he he is not accused for keeping
other men's goods, but for not distributing his own, and therefore Hell must
needs be het seven times hotter than ordinary, for oppressing, cheating,
sacrilegious rich men.

And as for that part of your estates which your consciences dare maintain you
came honestly by, receive it thankfully, enjoy it soberly and contentedly, and
communicate it charitably, that so by your present disposure of it, you may
make it subservient to an end above its native efficacy, and purchase for your
selves a revenue of credit in this world, and glory in that to come.

And this I may the more pardonably invite you to, both because I speak in an
age when men are out of charity with Charity it self, and few such perfect
Saints as to have their Religion at their fingers ends; and because Charity is
Ars Quaestuosissima, Chrysostom.
and riches yield more profit by their profusion than possession, so that by
parting with those which you cannot keep, you may gain those which you cannot
lose.

Quas dederis solas semper habebis opes.
Mart. You see it is a hard thing to use riches well, but it is so much the more
commendable and worthy of your ambition, and therefore I do not press you to
throw them away, but to lay them out with such prudence, as to make you friends
of that unrighteous Mammon, and to take Daniels counsel to Nebuchadnezar, Dan.
4.27.
to break off your sins by righteousness, and your iniquity by showing mercy to
the poor, that it may be a lengthening of your tranquillity, Honor the Lord
with your substance and with the first fruits of your increase; so shall your
barns be filled with plenty, and your presses burst out with new wine. Prove.
3.9,10.


Remember what your charitable Predecessors have done in this City before you;
but keep not a register in your memories, of what you have done in this sort
your selves; for the Welsh have a Proverb that they who have good memories give
but few alms; because they keep always in mind what, and to whom they have
given before.

Remember you are as much bound to be charitable as just, and to feed the poor
as not to oppress and murder him Qui succurrere perituro cum potest, cum non
succurrit, occidit.
and then you will be easily persuaded to use your riches as you do your water
with which when you are served yourselves, you let it flow freely down to the
use of others.

Nor have I any particular design to drive on, or the least intention to
confine your charity; but in all sincerity to exhort you to do what, when, how,
where, to whom, and as much as God and your own consciences shall direct you:
and if you have faith enough to believe, and patience to wait for the reward
which Christ proposes, it will go well with you and with your children after
you, let but charity guide your hands and glory will crown your heads eternally.

Nor are you my Brethren of the Clergy so secure, but that you may receive as
much prejudice by your riches as any other, take heed therefore that your
preferments, and revenues do not make you the worse for them.

It was Erasmus his wish after his refused offers of great preferment, to make
all even at his death, to be out of every man's debt, and only to have enough
left to bring him honestly to his grave. Let not that which has hitherto been
reputed the Vice of the City, be now justly chargeable on us of the Clergy; We
of all men are most strictly engaged to a perfect hostility against the
vanities of the world, and if we are not notoriously treacherous to our own
aims and interests, our actions will declare our sense of it.

I have no desire to judge you, who are so much my betters, but if it were
possible to direct you to prejudge and examine your selves, and so either to
anticipate or prevent any further censures. I hope that for which some persons
do condemn you, is too poor and inferior gain for you to stoop to. We have
friends enough in the World to secure us from that curse of our Saviors, Luke
6.26.
We be unto you when all Men speak well of you, and I would it were only our
innocence which was reviled. The mouth of Hell is now wider open, and the
Kingdom in greater animosity against us than ever, and therefore let not us by
our luxury and drunkenness, by our covetousness and griping, on any such sordid
means, as racking up our Tenants to the very summum jus give the credulous
People cause to believe that the defamations and libels which the railing
Sectaries have cast out against us, are true. After a long famine, you are
(blessed be God) removed to a plentiful table; but take heed of a surfeit, and
that your plenty does not make you forget him whose person you represent. Let
us remember our late afflictions and vows which we made in case of a
restitution, and let the hungry bellies of the poor and needy who have suffered
with, or like us, experience the benefit of our preferments, that the envious
eye of the worst of the Laity may not repine, nor the foul mouths of the scum
of the people rail at our large incomes. And finally,

Let us all suffer our hearts to preach over to our selves in private, the
dangers which have been hinted of Worldly Riches, and the greater hazard of
Salvation that they than other men, are in, who enjoy them, and then we shall
affectionately join with the Church in her collect for the last festival, and
pray unto Almighty God that he would grant us grace to forsake all covetous
desires and inordinate love of Riches, and to follow his said Son Jesus Christ,
who lives and reigns with him and the Holy Ghost now and ever.

Amen.
FINIS.

