REFORMATION NOT SEPARATION: OR, Mr. CROFTON'S Plea for Communion with the
CHURCH, under those Corruptions, and by that disorderly Ministration to which
he cannot Conform, nor by it Administer.

IN A LETTER, Written JVLY 20. 1661.

In, and from the TOWER of LONDON, to R. S. To satisfy the Weak, and silence
the Wicked, who insulted in, or were offended at his endeavored (and
clamorously reported as obtained) attendance on Gods PUBLIC WORSHIP in that
Place, during his Confinement.

NOW PUBLISHED, To silence Censures and Calumnies, satisfy such who would walk
uprightly in this hour of Temptation.

By the said R. S. to whom it was written.

Unto which, is added the Copy of another LETTER, Written on the same Occasion
and Subject.

Printed in the YEAR, M.DC.LXII.

TO THE READER.
READER,
IT is more than a Year, since it was clamoured, Mr. CROFTON goes to the
Church, and hears Common Prayer in the Tower of LONDON: Whereupon he was not
little Censured by some, whose Profession of Religion, and Relation to him,
required much more Charity.

Mr. CROFTON did then write unto me this ensuing LETTER, with Advice to
Communicate the same, for the Satisfaction of the Weak, who stumbled (to their
own wounding) and Silencing of the Wicked, who insulted, to the Grief of him
and Gods Church.

In Observation of this Instruction, I did (to save the labor of the Pen, and
make this Paper more profitable to the Church) put it into the Press; where
some good Friends did seize, and for present stisle it; choosing rather to
Communicate the written Copy as they could.

This Copy was imparted to many Christian Friends and Ministers, who seemed to
be in this matter otherwise persuaded; in special, Those of the Congregational
way, who seemed most concerned in the same; these were all requested to Correct
Mr. CROFTON'S Error, and Rectify his Judgment; but none would, or did
undertake the work, though assured he had an hearing Ear: Horresco referens;
though he has been most bitterly Censured, he never received any, the least
Admonition concerning this matter, one excepted; a Copy whereof, with his
Answer thereunto, being come to my hands, I have presumed to annex unto this
LETTER.

I presume (without Mr. CROFTON'S knowledge)

First, To make these Papers public, to evidence the little Cause men have to
represent Mr. CROFTON'S Nonconforming Communion, to be a Defection from the
Cause of Reformation, and Result of his Temptation.

Secondly, To let men see on what Grounds Mr. CROFTON has satisfied himself in
his solitary Estate, when he could neither Confer with Men and Books; that so
if they appear weak, some serious man, may by word or letter (whilst the Press
will not be allowed to speak) help him to Conviction; I cannot but determine it
unchristian, to condemn without Fraternal Correption, or an Essay for
Conviction; those Censures do reflect with Violence on the Censurers, which are
retorted with a what does your arguing reprove?

Thirdly, To help others to discover that Point of Piety which is proper for
their places and capacities, under the present Providence of God in, and
toward his Church in these Nations.

What lately was Mr. CROFTON'S Case, is now our own; we must either withdraw
from the Prayers and Public Worship of God in this Church, or attend it by
this disguised Ministerial Mode and Order; and with Grief I speak it, we are in
the dark, and we are left in the dark, our Prophets are gone, who should tell
us, and before their going have not told us, how in this Case Christianity does
require us to carry: Some general Cautions we indeed received in their last
Councels, but no clear Directions in reference to the special Case and
Condition into which we are resol^ed: I well know, most Presbyterian Divines to
be in Judgment the same with Mr. CROFTON; but their Prudence does prohibit the
Publication thereof to us, or at least in a particular Specification of our
present Condition.

I will not say, Mr. CROFTON by his Act or Apology, appears any very wise
Pilate, I leave those to whom it does belong, to judge his skill in the
Compass; but I cannot but say, he seems to be most Simply Faithful, in
fufilling his Ministry, proposing himself a pattern, and persuading his friends
and people to walk in the Exactness of Truth against all Extremes, though his
worldly and carnal Interest lies on either hand, and might easily induce him
to advance, or at least by his silence to abett the same. I cannot but observe
this is not the first time Mr. CROFTON has divided from the Policies of them
who could not disown his Principles, or Scripturally determine against his
Practice: And truly I wish men may consider, whether the Serpent do not
out-stretch and overreach the Dove, in those Policies which make Religion
(unto its reproach) a matter of Faction; and study to save, and recover
Reformation, by the appearance of a Bulky Party, for Separation? I cannot but
let thee know, I am thus far clear of Mr. CROFTON'S mind, Unwarrantable
Non-communion may not be allowed, no not for a day, though to saving
Reformation; for we may not do Evil, that Good may come thereof; and I cannot
be persuaded, I am disbanded from Christ's Army, so soon as I am superseded to
my Conduct; I must march under his Banner, when I may not be permitted to march
at the Head of a Company: And sure I am, it is more easy to fall into either
Extreme, than to walk between both uprightly, according to the Truth of the
Gospel.

Reader; I will stay thee no longer, only know, That this Season of Publication
of this LETTER, is by me chosen, or rather constrained by the over-prudent
Supersedeas before mentioned, and silence our over-general Cautions of our
pious Ministers in this Case, and hour of Temptation which is come upon us.

If any Minister be hereby provoked to beat out the Truth, which must guide the
Churches Practice: If any Christian do hereby receive Direction to dispel his
Doubts, and steer his Conversation: Or if any rashly censorious Saint be hereby
convinced of their uncharitable, unchristian Censures, and bitter words; by
which they have wounded themselves, and grieved him whom God has smitten, be
hereby convinced of their fault, so as to give Glory to God, and with Jobs
Comforters, confess their Guilts, I have obtained mine End, and hope it shall
not much displease my Pastor, on whom, I confess, I have herein too much
presumed.

I am thine in Union with the Church, And Simplicity of the Gospel. R. S.
Sept. 1. 1662.
REFORMATION no SEPARATION: OR, Zachary Croftons Plea for Communion with the
Church of England. In a Letter to a Christian Friend.
Christian Friend,
COnsidering we live in an Age exceeding scrupulous, and the actions of a
Prisoner are subject to Observation and Censure, without the least enquiry into
the reasons, end and inducements thereof: And well knowing my unhappy self to
be a man much mistaken and misrepresented; obnoxious to, and afflicted with the
groundless calumnies of the wicked, and censures of the weak: And being deeply
sensible of the sad doom denounced against such as administer Offense to any of
Christ's little ones; Mat 18.6.
and the great damage and danger of a groundless offense, choking the joy, and
curbing the duty of such as take it. (...) (who have for more then six months
been buried alive) do conceive a duty and necessity incumbent upon me, to
appear, and (by such utensils as a close and severe imprisonment will afford)
to speak for my self, in the cause of God and his Church (charged on my weak
hands) in reference to an act, which Conscience does constrain me to pursue;
and (or obtained liberty) to attend. In which I discern some ready to insult,
whilst others soon scandalized, beyond what the nature thereof may occasion,
to the one or the other; for God (whom I serve in the Spirit) is my witness, I
would give no offense, neither to the Jew, nor to the Greek, nor to the Church
of God.

The case is this:

SIr John Robinson, the Lieutenant of the Tower, did of his own accord (not at
that time, though often before, moved to it by or from me) on Friday the
thirteenth instant, send me word by my Keeper, That I should have liberty to go
to Church, and enjoy the Solemn Assembly, and Public Worship of God,
celebrated within this place (the which on second thoughts he has remanded;)
in the use hereof, I must of necessity attend that Order of Administration,
against which I have publicly witnessed, as that which is Corrupt and
Superstitious; yet conscience of duty does compel me to receive and use this
liberty (when I can obtain it) as a mercy from God, and favor from men, the
which I have often prayed for and desired. Hereupon I apprehend a clamor is
sent abroad, that Mr. Crofton is present at, and attends unto the reading of
the Service Book; in which some boast beyond measure, as having gained a
Proselyte; whilst others stumble, as if I started from the truth and work of
Reformation, and testimony which (through Gods grace) I have given thereunto.

My good Friend, you must know, this clamor is (as to the fact) as yet false,
the liberty being not yet obtained, but I confined to my Solitary Sabbaths,;
wherein I hope, I can profess, I am not alone, because the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ is with me: But indeed I must confess it true in (the fieri) my
desire, intention and endeavor to procure this liberty, so soon as I can, and
my resolution to attend those corrupt Administrations, and this disorderly
service of God, until God please to bring me forth, and make me drink the
waters of his Sanctuary in purer Vessels; and I cannot but protest, that the
one or the other, insulting, or offended at my so doing, may grieve me, and
wound their own souls, but cannot say they know me, who was ever satisfied (and
so declared my self in my public Ministry) as to this point; or that I
administer any cause for such insultation or offense: Yet to the end Gods
dishonor, Religions disgrace, their own danger by this their sin, may (if
possible) be prevented, I thought it my duty to signify to you, and require
you (as you have opportunity) to communicate to others, these following
considerations, as Apologetical reasons, for what I am convinced, is not only
lawful, but a positive duty, not without sin to be omitted, though the critisim
of our times, and my special case, may require an Apology for the same.

My long, close, Consid. 1. Deliberate thoughts, not distress of condition
provoke it.
and severe durance (much beyond any other Prisoner in this place) or any
carnal, self, politic Principle, has not been the impulsive cause of my
desire, or use of this liberty, but (as in my other acts, subjected to the
censure of men) pure conscience of duty toward God and my own soul, and the
preponderate dictates of my judgment (I hope in some measure also to discern
duty in difficult times and conditions) in sense whereof, I desired this
liberty the f^rst day I was committed to this place, and many times since; and
have often complained of it to God, and such men as came near me, as a defect
in the Government of this His Majesty's chiefest Prison in England, that care
is not taken, nor liberty allowed, for Christian Prisoners to attend upon the
public Worship, and preaching of the Word of God: I have in this respect
often preferred the Compters, or Newgate (more base and despicable in vulgar
account) before the Tower of London. It cannot I think be soberly (I am sure
not charitably) denied, that Christian Prisoners, ought to have Christian
liberty and accommodation, in a Christian Kingdom. It is supposed, a Prisoner
brings with him into this place, some horrid crime, and notorious guilt, by
reason whereof there is conceived but little between the Prison and death;
therefore the hand of Justice which punishes the offense, ought in Christian
pity to seek the salvation of the soul, and (if possible) prevent the
Malefactor from dying in, if he must dye for his sin. I have often thought,
that if the Heathen indulged Paul a liberty to Preach in Prison, Christians
might and ought much more allow a Preacher liberty to hear the Word preached in
Prison. I hope it will be no offense to mind this Age, that amongst other
evils reflected (by such as rose up against him) on the Government of King
Charles the first, his late Majesty of honorable memory, this was one, Exact
Collections, p. 6.
and not the least, Men were detained close Prisoners, without the liberty of
using Books, pen, ink, or paper, denying them all the comforts of life, not
permitting their wives to come to them; and for the completing of that
cruelty, depriving them of the necessary means of Spiritual consolation, not
suffering them to go abroad, to enjoy Gods Ordinances in Gods House, or Gods
Ministers to come to them, to administer comfort to them in their Chambers. Let
none therefore dare to censure this act as the result of a distressed
condition, or base compliance by constraint of Prison, against the persuasions
of Conscience.

Consid. 2: Solemn public Worship positive duty.
Communion with the Church visible, in all acts of solemn public Worship, is
an essential part of the Sanctification of the Sabbath, or Lords day, and
positive, indispensable duty of every particular soul called by the name of
God; to be only Superseded by a real, inevitable necessity, with assurance to
any, that God will have mercy, and not Sacrifice. This cannot be denied by any,
who observe God has denominated the Sabbath an holy Convocation. Levit. 23.
Synagogues were on this ground erected and frequented, in all the Cities of
Judah; that the Lord Christ, Luke 4 16. Acts 13 13, 14. and 17.2.
fulfilling all righteousness, and his Apostles in conscience of duty, made it
their custom to go to the Synagogue every Sabbath day; that the Apostles and
primitive Christians, from the very Ascension of Christ, John 20.19, 26. 1 Cor.
16.2.
held solemn Assemblies on the Lords day, the first day of the Week, and
charged the Saints of their age, and in them all others, not to forsake the
Assembling of themselves together, Heb. 10.25.
taxing the defect of some therein, as the manner of some is.

As Solitary Sabbaths are in themselves, so (God knows) they have been, and
are to me, the sting of an imprisoned condition: I hope I can say, without
vanity, as David in his exile, Psa 42.1, 2, 3.
As the Heart pants for the water Brooks, so pants my soul after thee, O
God: My soul thirsts for the living God; When shall I come and appear before
God? when I remember these things, I pour out my soul in me, for I have gone
with the multitude: I went with them to the House of God, with the voice of joy
and gladness, with the multitude that kept the holy day. I deny not God to be
served, and enjoyed in Solitary Worship, Psalm. 84.7.
but must needs observe, in Zion the Saints pass from strenth to strength,
every one appearing before God. Solemn public Worship is Gods chief
Ordinance, for the support of his peoples faith; this is denominated, the
Beauty of Gods Holiness: Psalm. 27.4. and 96.9. and 110.3.
To this his presence and power is promised, and in it chiefly predicated;
attendance on this, is charged as his peoples duty, and discharged as their
joy: The want of this is the Sacra fames, Spiritual famine, Amos 8 11.
under want of which David's faith was ready to faint, had it not been prevented
by a speedy and seasonable supply: When I sought to know this, it was too
painful for me, until I went into the Sanctuary, then understood I their end,
Psalm. 73.16, 17. This therefore is not to be slighted, or neglected, or
superficially desired, or used; but most highly prized, earnestly desired, and
joyfully embraced, and not voluntarily declined on every light occasion, and
trivial exception, or friendly persuasion; but the grounds must be plain,
clear, certain, and weighty, such as I may with confidence plead unto my God,
as the apology of my absence of choice, not constraint, in which I expect God
should have mercy on me, because and for that he cannot have Sacrifice from me,
which can be nothing but the restraining necessity of my condition, or my
running into sin to possess it.

My good Friend, you see my case is hard; and what now is my case, may ere long
be yours, and others of Gods people: You yet enjoy a liberty of worshipping
God, in due and right order, and may drink the Waters of the Sanctuary in clean
Vessels; long may you enjoy it, and if God take pleasure in me, he will in due
time restore me to it; but if not, let him do what seems him good At the
present I have no choice; if I will attend Gods public Solemn Worship, I must
do it in this place, and order, or not at all; whilst I dread to give the
least occasion of insultation to the wicked, or offense to the weak, my
conscience is under the apprehension and aw of a positive indispensible duty,
which I dare not decline, unless on reasons constituting a clear and
unavoidable necessity: my present restraint does indeed acquit me, and carry
the guilt (of my absence from Gods House) from off me to others, I duly
endeavoring, by all just means, to have the same removed; which once effected,
what moral bar will lie upon my mind, and in my way, as a formal sin, which I
cannot without guilt break through? that is the question I have desired
seriously to consult, and by Scripture to resolve: And on mature thoughts I
must profess I find not any, which will bear weight in the balance of the
Sanctuary, as that which I shall dare to produce before the Lord, when demanded
a reason of my voluntary absence; on which he may not pronounce, He was bidden
to the feast, but would not come, and therefore is not worthy, and hereafter
shall not: For I must profess;

First, I never did, could, or yet can deny, 1. The Church of England a true
Church and I a member.
the being of the Church of England (that is, the community of Christians in
this Nation, incorporated by Baptism, professing the true God and Jesus Christ,
and subjected to the Word and Sacraments, in the Ministry of Christ's lawful
Ministers (for I never believed any National Privilege, such as was peculiar
to the Jews, or the Hierarchical Order, and collective Constitution (which
cannot be denied to be a mere humane and separable adjunct, and is neither an
equal, nor regular Representation) could or did give that appellation) nor
disown my own relation to it; and must therefore see some good ground for my
non-communion with it, and for my choice of Solitary Worship of God, rather
then fellowship in its Solemn public Worship, where and whilst God affords
his presence, though with a grieved, striving spirit, I dare not be absent,
though thereby I might avoid some burden.

It is well known, I am not unacquainted with the Church renouncing, rending,
ruining principles of the Anabaptists, and old separating Brownists, nor with
the Paganizing practice of the (seemingly more sober and serious) Independent,
or Congregationalist; who sometimes indeed pretend to own the being of this
Church, but (by their Church-gathering, Self-Constitution, dispencing
Ordinances by their self-consecration; professed principle, that in England
there is much matter for, but not the form of a Church, and so no Church at
all, for forma dat essentiam; and with the height of confidence (to say no more
of it) proclaiming themselves the gathered Churches, contradistinct to the
Nation, and all Christians in it (as if they only were the first fruits of
Achaia, I mean England, an infidel Nation, who had never received the Gospel,
or Christ had not been preached among them, and professed by them, nor any of
her Inhabitants had been incorporated by Baptism, into Christ's Catholic Body,
but were to this day aliens and strangers to the Household of Faith, and
Commonwealth of Israel) do plainly declare so to all rational men (able and
willing to discern) that the being of a Church in England is by them disputed,
yea, denied: But these I never did, nor could approve, and therefore I must
presume, none that ever knew me, and my constant contests, by preaching,
writing, and suffering under and against them, can conceive this to be now any
scruple to my conscience, doubt to my soul, demur to my duty, or diversion to
my Communion with them, whose being a Church of Christ, I have ever, and openly
asserted and defended, and to whom I have ever professed my own relation.

Profane members destroy not the Church.
That these men urge, That many members in the Church of England, are rude and
profane in their Conversation, with their mouths confessing, but in works
denying God, and are not therefore fit matter for a Church, I do well know, and
to my grief and shame do know to be true, and visible, but to my comfort do
know to be an Objection of no weight; for our question is, concerning Communion
with, not the Constitution of a Church: That such matter should not at first
Constitution have been taken in, and having grown up, ought to have been cut
off, and cast out, I can and do yield, and consent; but that the disorder,
defection and profaneness of the members, or what is more, the Angels and
Ministers, has resolved the Church into a nonentity, and necessitated
non-communion, (save in a new Constitution and Church gathering) I cannot
believe, because I find nothing more plainer in Nature, then for a degenerate
Vine, to retain the name and nature of a Vine, when it brings forth little
save sour Grapes; Mat. 3.9.
nor is any thing more clearer in Scripture, then for the children of the
Devil, Matthew 3 9. John 8.44.
to have Abrahaem to their father, and be the children of God, and Covenant of
Graco, by visible administration: or for disorderly Christians in Corinth, to
be called, and owned as Saints and Believers, a man covetous, a fornicator, and
adulterer, an idolater, 1 Cor. 5.11. Rev. 3.1.
a drunkard, to be called a brother; Sardis having a name to live, but being
dead, is declared one of the golden Candlesticks, among which Christ walks;
and when Paul wrote to Titus, the Christians in Crete were abominable,
disobedient, and to every good work reprobate, Titus 1, 13, 16. yet was Titus
charged to rebuke them sharply, not to disown them, or decline communion with
them, or to gather the fit matter, and orderly Christians among them into a new
Church form; nor are any among them advised, or directed so to do; a Ram, and a
Goat cannot be denied to be of Christ's flock on earth, though they may be
turned on his left hand, at the day of judgment; Correction, and casting out is
the privilege of a Church member; and supposes its capacity in their object,
though an incestuous person: the profaneness of the members of this Church
may and must provoke my brotherly admonition, ministerial reprehension, and the
Churches Censures against them, but will never warrant my non-communion with
them, or voluntary absence from Gods solemn public worship celebrated among
them; because it does not ipso facto, by any due order, or divine direction;
discharge their relation to Christ's Catholic visible body, so long as God
knows them as his Spouse, and people, (though deserving) having not received
from him a Bill of Divorce; I may be burdened to see their lewdness and
lightness, but must not forsake the Bride-chamber, nor his worship therein
celebrated: without all doubt, the capacity of those within the Church (though
disorderly, and as such to be judged) is vastly different from Turks, Jews, and
Pagans, and those without the Church; who refuse to profess the true God, and
Christ, or obedience to them; the one being subjected to Gods special pastoral,
paternal care; in the case of their very disorder and aberrations; whilst the
other only enjoy Gods common providence as do other creatures, the works of his
hands.

What has been urged to nullify this Church from (what this kind of men will
needs suppose to be) the form thereof, Parochial distribution convenient and
good.
viz. that they are by Parochial constitution, and Christ never ordained
Parishes, has been often, and abundantly answered, by many, and among others,
I have already fully spoken to it in my Bethshemish clouded, and shall
therefore now only say, Parochial distribution is no constitution, nor any
essential form of the Church; so as that bare simple habitation within such
bounds, should ipso facto, without further capacity, or qualification make men
Church members; or their removal, or non-residence within this or that Parish,
(as do Merchants and Mariners) should discharge their relation to the Church:
but it is a Political order, and convenient distribution of the Church
Catholic visible; to particular Assemblies; for the due and more easy
Celebration of Gods public worship; the Lord Jesus founded his Church
Catholic, and universal, into which Baptism is the Ordinance of Catholic
incision, and imitation; and excommunication is the Ordinance of Catholic
excision, and discharge; but nature, and the necessity of order does divide it
into particular Assemblies, according to humane discretion: and no order can
more conveniently circumscribe particular societies of the Church, than
vicinity, and cohabitation; This the holy Ghost does plainly digitate, by
denominating the first plants of Christianity, Rome, Corinth, Galatia, Ephesus,
and the like.
by the places where they were planted, not by the first planters, or after
Pastors: blaming it as a Schism in the Church, to say, I am of Paul, I of
Apollo, and I of Cephas; and indeed this distribution does much facilitate the
inspection of the Pastor, or brethren, beyond what the Covenant constitution of
Congregationalists is capable of; whereby some living in York are members of a
Church in London. Parochial Division then being the benefit of the Church, and
members thereof in Christian Cities, Countries, and Nations, it is so far from
blame and avoidance, that it is to be commended, and approved by men of
prudence, and order, and can never necessitate, or warrant any man's
non-communion with the Christian Assemblies thus distributed, and conveniently
assembled.

Unto such as stumble themselves, and would have others so to do, at Communion
with the Church of England, because they do not know that it was rightly
gathered, Englands Church was rightly constituted at the first.
and constituted at the first; I shall briefly say, History, (the best evidence
of an ancient Act,) does assure us that the Gospel was first preached, and
Christianity was first planted in our Islands by the Apostles, or Apostolical
men, which (no doubt) did with all care, rightly lay here the right foundation
of Gods Church, and if we may (as in cases of this nature, we must) judge (a
posterior) the certainty of the root, by the extent, and quality of the
branches; the foundation by the Dimensions and duration of the Fabric; can any
man reading the English Stories of the eminent Martyrs of Christianity found in
this Church, in all ages, since the times of the Apostles unto this day, and
not conclude the Church was at first rightly planted, and founded? these men
shall do well to resolve the old question ever put by the Non-conformists to
the Brownists (these men's progenitors) if they be begotten to God, in what
Church, and by what Ordinances were they converted? was it not the Church of
England? we (whom they to serve their design, will own as Saints, and declare
fit matter for a Church.) must profess our selves sprouts from this plant;
their Charity is not sure so irrational, as to believe men may gather Gr^pes of
Thorns, or Figgs of Thistles, for if so, their gathering Churches will be found
needless, whilst Saints grow in Infidel soils, and Gods house existeth
without the laying any foundation.

These men shall do well to consider, Knowledge of a Church it first
constitution not necessary.
whether the knowledge of the mode and order of first planting and gathering
the Church, be necessary to every member related to it. In England we find
societies professing the true God, and Christ; baptized into his name,
worshipping him by his own Ordinances; this is the form of a Church; and does
suppose and imply a Root and Foundation, by which it is animated and preserved;
But must we needs know how it was at the first laid, or planted? though by
length of time it is worn out of sight, and overgrown with earth and weeds?
are we bound to renounce the Vine, and run out of the house, unless we pluck
up the root, and raze the foundation to satisfy our selves herein? if so, God
help the illiterate souls, and weak capacities not capable to conceive, or well
understand the same; is Christ's Church planted for an age only? that every
succeeding generation must transplant? gathering of Churches did indeed begin
the Acts of the Apostles; must it needs be continued to the end of the
Revelation? to the coming of the Lord to judgment? I find not Paul in his
joining himself to the Church, nor Priscilla and Aquila in their travels, and
communion with different Churches, make any demurre on this enquiry; and I dare
not think the holy Ghost would have concealed from us a point of so great
importance.

My good friend; upon the whole of this Objection, I must let you know that my
serious and deliberate thoughts do dissent from the Conclusions concerning the
matter and form of a Church, stated by the self-consecrated Officers of the
hundred and twenty self-constituted gathered Churches, which of late years met
at the Savoy: but assent unto the determination of Mr. Cotton in his advice to
the brethren of old England at the close of his way of the Churches in
New England, (viz.) The work is not to make them Churches, which were none
before; (for the Gospel having been preached in England by Apostles, or
Apostolical men, they were without doubt rightly planted) but to reduce them to
the Primitive purity they had in their first constitution.

And (here my friend,) I must desire the Independents will not be offended,
that I propose them as the present prime promoters of the nonentity of the
Church of England, by way of bar to Communion with her, and a principle of
separation from her: for that (notwithstanding their contrary professions of
what they cannot soberly, charitably, and rationally deny) their common
suggestion in England, is fit matter, but not the form, (which is the esse) of
the Church; their Savoy conclusions, and paganizing Church-gathering practice,
do loudly proclaim them the offspring of the Brownists, and posterity of the
rigid Separatists, ever withstood by the sober, and serious Non-Conformists,
since Englands Reformation: and in this point the summum genus, of those
several, specifical, self-constituted Sects, which have confounded our Church;
the odium of whose Schism from it, defended by Rebellion, Schism, and horrid
Treason is at this day most sadly (though falsely) reflected on the most loyal,
sober, serious, reforming, nonconforming Presbyterians; to the weakening their
hands, and retarding, yea diverting their progress in an humble,
argumentative, and patient pursuit of Christ's Ordinances, and due authority of
Christ's Officers, to be restored, and exercised in the Church of England; by me
ever owned, and now lamented, but not to be deserted.

Such as fancy the Church of England was lost in the deluge of Popery and
Antichristianism, Englands Church lost not its being in Popery.
may by their own observation correct the same; and be constrained to confess,
there is in this respect no more cause of stumble as to the entity of this
Church, then was as to the being of the Jews, when overspread with Idolatry, in
their many defections from God; for in Englands worst times they may find a
persecuted Elias, a John Wickliffe, with many other most eminent branches,
bringing forth the Clusters of Gospel Grapes, to the bleeding out their very
lives, besides Obadiah's fifties hidden in Caves, by the violence of
persecution; certainly the Root must abide, or how, or whence could these
branches spring? Yea, the winter storms of Popery passing away, and the floods
of Antichristianism asswaging, though not dried up, and the chief weeds of
superstition being plucked up, though some remain; how has this Church
revived, flourished, and sent out many most eminent and pious branches, without
any new plantation? Yea, conveyed unto themselves (who question her being) the
truth of Grace, and Faith in Christ Jesus, if ever they received it? I bless
God I have learned to discern between the subject, and its separable adjuncts
though never so vile, and do believe the Church to be Christ's Church, though
vitiated and defiled with Idolatrous administrations; all, nor indeed any
defection is an actual divorce; if adulterous Judah, Jet. 3.
on a summons to repentance, do return, and put away her abominations, she
loses not her relation to God; nor does the high places continued under his
reformation, make God or his people to forsake her; the Temple of God abides
his, when given to be trodden under the feet of the Gentiles: yea, when the
Antichrist the man of sin, sits therein; this notion may possibly sound
better to some ears from New England, than from the Tower of London; let it
therefore be thence received; If Antichrist must sit in the Temple of God, and
the Courts of the Temple be given to the Antichristiaen Gentiles for a certain
time to tread under foot, then there was a true Church state where he sat, and
whilst he sat there, and it was the true measured Temple, whose Courts he did
tread under fo t, nor can there be Antichrist, unless there be the Temple of
God and Courts thereof, where he is; and if ever Antichrist sat in England,
then there was the Temple of God there; before he sat in it, and whilst he
sat in it, as was also in other reformed Churches, the Temple or Church is the
subject wherein he must sit; the Antichristian seat is not the subject, nor
constituteth it, but is an accident vitiating the subject, and separable from
it; the removing therefore of Antichristianity, does not destroy the subject,
or make it cease to be; but changes it into the better state, in which it was
before thus accidentally vitiated: this is the assertion of Mr. Phillips of
Water-town in New England.

England was Christ's Church before the Antichristian deluge, under the power of
Popery; and since it was purged out, and so she at this day (notwithstanding
her backsliding) does abide; God provoked has not yet removed his Candlestick,
or given her a bill of divorce, as he justly may, and I fear yet will, if I
then deny Communion with such of her assemblies, I have a liberty to attend and
frequent, and make my appeal to God on the account of her nonentity; with a
Lord she was not, or I know her not to be the Church and Spouse, my heart would
condemn me in the guilt of a notorious lie, groundless, and uncharitable
Censure, and so make my wilful solitary devotion, exceeding sad, because
exceeding sinful.

Secondly, I hitherto could not, nor yet can, 2. Englands corruptions no
sufficient bar to Communion.
conceive the corruptions of the Church of England to be a sufficient ground,
or warrantable bar to my non-Communion with her solemn assemblies in her
public worship.

I do not say that Separation in all Cases is unlawful, Separation from the
world and Babylon allowed.
I well know Christians are called out of, and separated from the world, in
their first accession to the Church of Christ; but this is not our Case, who
(do as is before noted) own the Church of England as resolved into that
capacity: I know also separation from Babylon the seat of Antichrist is a duty,
directed and charged by the Lord, on all his people; and unto this also the
Church of England does profess, Englands corruptions paralleld with Isreal's
and others,
and cannot be denied to have attained, and therefore stands distinct from the
one, under the Epithet (Reformed) as well as from the other by the Appellation
(Church): so as that I dare not deem England the world, or Babylon, (those
objects of a serious, sacred separation, and non-communion) to both which she
is found contradistinct.

That there are in the Church of England (especially in her present relapsed
estate) many and gross corruptions, grievous to the Spirit of God and his
people, calling for the zealous admonitions, and most faithful rebukes of his
Ministers; is alas! too too legible, and apparent, to be denied by any; yet,
(when I consult the Scriptures) I cannot but find as great (yea if possible)
greater corruptions in those whom God, and his people owned as his Church, and
Spouse; and yet separation, or voluntary non-communion, was never practiced,
advised, or indulged, but the contrary thereunto.

Will any object unto us the profaneness of the Ministers, Profaneness of
Ministers and ministration.
rudeness and disorder of the ministration of Gods worship, we yield it is too
visibly true; but more vile administrators, or irregular administrations cannot
be, than were the sons of Eli in their service; who made the people to loath
the offerings of the Lord, and were rebuked, and described by Samuel, in 1 Samuel
2.12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. Now the sons of Eli were sons of Belial, they knew
not the Lord, and the Priests custom with the people was this, when any man
offered Sacrifice, the Priests servant came while the flesh was in seething,
with a flesh-hook in his hand, and he struck it into the pan, or kettle, or
Caldron, or pot; all that the flesh-hook brought up, the Priest took for
himself, so they did in Shilo unto all the Israelites that came thither, also
before they burned the far, the Priests servant came and said to the man that
sacrificed, give me flesh for to roast for the Priest, for he will not have
sodden flesh of thee, but raw; and if any man said unto them, let them not
fail to burn the fat presently, and then take as much as thy soul desires,
then he would answer him, nay, but thou shall give it me now, and if not, I
will take it by force wherefore (by this horrid disorder defended by violence)
the sin of the young men was very great before the Lord, for men abhorred the
offering of the Lord, and in verse 22. it is reported that Eli's sons lay with
the women that assembled at the door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation: O
horrid uncleanness, most heaven-daring villainy! yet I find not that any
God-fearing-Israelite forsook the Sanctuary, or durst forbear their Sacrifice;
nor did Samuel (who reproved, and denounced Gods judgment against this
profaneness) ever advise, or direct the same: the Scribes and Pharisees in
the days of our Savior, said, but did not; laid heavy burdens on the people,
Matthew. 23.
which themselves would not touch with one of their fingers; they under
pretense of long prayers, devoured widows houses, they would neither enter into
heaven themselves, nor suffer such as would; yet the Lord himself who reproved
them, heard them, and charged his Disciples to hear them, because they sat in
Moses seat; Let it be observed and remembered, the Authority may, but the
quality of the Minister does not add to, or abstract from the entity, or
efficacy of Gods Ordinances, 1 Cor. 9.27.
he may preach to my salvation, who is himself a castaway.

Do any object the preaching false doctrine; Corruption in Doctrine and Worship.
public reading the Apocripha as part of Gods Word; innovations in worship,
polluting Gods Ordinances, or injustice in discipline; I shall neither deny,
nor excuse the same: only say as the Apostle Peter to the Church in his days,
there were false Prophets among the people, even as there are false Teachers
among you; the true Prophets of God in Israel, 2 Pet. 2.1.
were ordinarily confronted by the false; there wanted not an Hannaniah, to
break the Yokes of Jeremiah; nor a proud Pashur to put him in the Stocks, in
the Gate of Benjamin, when he only declared Gods mind, warned of Gods
approaching judgments, and withstood the perjurious breach of the Oath of God,
which was upon the King, and Kingdom; nor is any thing more plain, than Isreal's
setting their posts, by Gods posts; their Altars by Gods Altars; Ezekiel. 8.6.43.8.
setting up in Gods house the very Image of Jealousy, insomuch that Gods
Prophets were ordinarily invective; and vehemently reproving in their
Ministry; and indeed extraordinarily raised up to that very end! yet we find
(not in all their Calls to Repentance) one Caution against Communion with the
Church, or Call unto s^paration: Mark 8.15.7.3.
In the days of our Savior, the Jews were so corrupt in their doctrine, that
he Cautioned his Disciples to beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, they made
the Word of God of none effect, by their traditions of the Elders; they
enervated the Law by most strait and false interpretations thereof; In worship
they innovated, and with great severity imposed, their own Inventions,
Pharisaical Rites, and Superstitions: they profaned the Temple, and made Gods
house a Den of Thieves; and in their Discipline they made acts of Necessity,
Charity and piety, censurable unto a casting out of the Synagogues; against all
which the whole Ministry of the Lord Jesus was highly invective, and severely
rebuking, yet he neither disowned them as a Church, denied communion with them,
all his time on earth; or directed any of his Disciples so to do, so long as
God continued his presence and Ordinances to and among them: but on the
contrary pleaded for them (as the very fountain of Salvation) in opposition to
the Samaritans, You worship you know not what, but we know what we worship, for
salvation is of the Jews: he sent his cleansed Lepers to show themselves to the
Priests, John 4.22.
and offer according to the Law of Moses; confined his Ministry and Apostles to
them, till after the veil of the Temple was rent, in token of the expiration
of their worship and departure of God; accounting them children, and all others
dogs; and charged the Disciples to hear them who sat in Moses seat; under all
their God-provoking Church annihilating corruptions, he neither practiced or
prescribed a non-communion or separation; 1 John 2.6.
And in all extremes, I desire to make him my pattern, and walk as he walked,
who never went astray.

Do any stumble at the profaneness of the members, and the neglect of
corrective discipline, rudeness and irreverence in the use of Gods Ordinances,
Prophadess of members, and disorder in Ministration.
confused method, and the disorder of popular acclamations in public prayer,
and other acts of worship; I wish I could say these stones lay not in their
way, or that they were in my power to remove them; but I think they run on a
much greater Rock, who run out of Gods Church, or from solemn public worship
because thereof: for the Church at Corinth was greatly corrupt, and provoked
the severity of Apostolical reprehension; and that once and again; 1 Cor. 5.1,
2.10.21.11.20.21.14.26. 2 Cos. 12.20, 21
there being amongst them incest not to be named among the Gentiles, and an
heaven-daring ostentation in it, instead of correction of it; a participation
with the table of Devils, by their attendance on the Idol-feasts of the
Infidels; a rude and deboist drunken Communion at the Lords Supper,
intermingled and confounded with the Love Feasts: intolerable disorder in
their public Assembly, all speaking at one and the same moment, their very
women not keeping silence; and that in different matters and tongues, every one
had his Psalm, his Prayer, his Revelation, his Prophecy, his gift of Tongues,
(in all which respects they were more confused than our popular acclamations)
and constrained the Apostles to check them, by the nature of God, as a God of
order, and not of confusion; in all these the Apostle advised, and endeavored
with all authority a Reformation, but not separation, or non-communion, nor
transplantation into a new gathered Church; I cannot imagine he would make
Schism from the Church, 1 Cor. 3.4.
a sign of a spiritual, who judged Schism in the Church an evidence of a
carnal mind.

Do men complain (as they have cause) that some Roman Rites, and order was
retained, Romans Rites.
when this Church was reformed; let them consider many pious Kings of Judah,
have their reforming governments stained with a but the high places were not
taken away, but the people went thither to worship: yet I find not that any
God-fearing Israelite, who loathed those Relics of Idolatry, ever barred
themselves because thereof, from Gods Altar and worship.

My very soul is grieved to consider Englands backsliding, Backsliding and
Lukewarmness
Indulgence of erroneous Doctors and doctrines, formality and lukewarmnesse in
Religion; yet when I observe that Ephesus who lost her first love, Pergamus
indulging the doctrine of Balaam, and the Nicolaitans, Thyatira suffering the
woman Jezabel, who called her self a prophetess to teach, and to deceive Gods
people; Sardis having a name to live, but being dead, and Laodicea, Englands
Counterpart, so lukewarm that no good is spoken of her; by all which these
Asian Churches were rusted, and therefore reproved by the Lord, yet not
rejected; but represented to the world as the Stars he held in his right
hand, and golden Candlesticks among which he walked; I dare not disown her
relation to God; disclaim mine own relation to her, nor voluntarily decline
communion with her.

Corruptions are not all alike.
My good friend, all corruptions in Gods Church and worship, are displeasing to
God, and distastful to his people embracing the simplicity of the Gospel; but
all corruptions are not alike in operation, quality, and extent, nor of a like
influence on Gods Church and worship: consider therefore some corruptions are
substantial, and intrinsecal, vitiating the very subject, and so universally
spread through the worship of God, that it cannot be used without sin; others
are circumstantial and extrinsecal to the same, vain, needless appendants,
superadded by man's will, but which notwithstanding Gods Ordinances remain
entire, and exactly his, and may be used without participation in the affixed
corruption.

Some corruptions incident to Gods Church and worship, I say are substantial
and intrinsecal, (not arising out of Gods Ordinance as the genuine product, and
effect thereof, but) entering into the very body of the Church and substance of
Gods worship, Corruptions substantial and intrinsecal.
as a Spider into wine, or venomous Worm into an Apple; so as to vitiate the
subject, (that it cannot be used with safety) and nullisie the very Ordinances
of God, that it alters their very nature to the loss of their efficacy, and
transmit certain destruction to such as sit under the same; yea, which is done
either by changing the matter, and retaining the essential constitutive form,
as by a solemn regular cutting off a Dogs head, or offering swines blood,
instead of a Lamb, or a Kid; a baptizing (as some have done) by fire i^stead of
water: or retaining the matter, but changing the essential form, as did
Jeroboam, and the Samaritans worshipping the true God, by the very Sacrifices,
and in the very order himself appointed; but before self-devised Symbols,
Calves to the one, and the Dove to the other, in a self-appointed place, Dan
and Bersheba to the one, Mount Gerizim to the other; and by self-consecrated
Priests, the lowest of the people, and so departing from the Temple in
Jerusalem, Gods Ark in it, and the Tribe of Levi: all which were essential to
the form of divine worship: and thus did the Corinthians eating and drinking at
the Idol Sacrifices, which the Apostle severely corrected, with a (ye cannot
par^ake of the Table of the Lord, and the table of Devils, ye cannot drink of
the Cup of the Lord, and the cup of Devils;) and by pointing them unto the
essential form of the Sacrament, the Cup of blessing, which we bless, is it
not the Communion of the blood of Christ? and the Bread which we break, is it
not the Communion of the body of Christ? Of this nature is Baptism, 1 Cor.
10.16.
by a Midwife, or any other private hand, though with water, and in the name of
the Father, Son, and holy Ghost; or by water and a lawful Minister, but in the
name of God the Father of all things, and Truth the Mother of all things; as I
have read some have done.

Corruptions extrinsecal, Corruptions extrinsecal and circumstantial.
and c'rcumstantial are Ordinances superadded unto, and so concomitant with, or
conversant about Gods Ordinances; but enter not into, nor do vitiate their
subject: the which (these notwithstanding) does exist in matter, and essential
form, perfect and entire; capable of due operation, in their own course and
nature; as stinking fish does nourish; or water pudled, or in an unclean
vessel, does quench the thirst; and these are either some matter superadded,
(not intermingled with, or destructive to Gods Ordinances, such as were the
high places, posts by Gods posts, thresholds by his thresholds, Altar by his
Altar in Israel, unto the very Image of Jealousy set up in Gods house, which
yet remained his, and as such was continued, preserved and acknowledged. The
Lord Jesus found the Temple his Fathers house of Prayer, though made a Den of
thieves; and such is our Cross in Baptism, though seemingly sacramental, yet
distinct from Gods imitating Seal of the Covenant; and such is a Roman linen
vesture in ministration of Gods worship by a lawful Minister; or some corrupt,
rude and unsuitable ministerial method and order, (which is the vessel, and only
instrument of conveiance though unclean) of administration: such was the
violent, and unfitting snatching of the Priests part of the Sacrifice, by the
sons of Eli, the confused acclamations of the Church of Corinth, speaking all
at once, different matters, in different tongues; and our imposed method,
disorderly method of public Prayer, by Versicles, Responds, abruptions,
abreviations and popular acclamations, with artificial singing by boys, and
base fellows thereunto appointed: under all which Gods Ordinances abide a
subject complete, truly, and formerly existent, and distinct from these
superadded corruptions; operative unto salvation; and therefore may not be
declined, or disowned.

Corruptions intrinsecal, are indeed such as do not only warrant, but
necessitate non-communion, yea separation of the highest nature, as a duty
indispensable: In sense hereof all those in Israel who feared God, and set
their hearts to seek the Lord, prayed for, and (according to divine directions)
departed from Dan, and Bersheba, forsook the solemn Assemblies Jeroboam had
constituted, and followed the Tribe of Levi, Gods only Ministers, unto
Jerusalem, Gods only place of public solemn worship; and our Savior resolved
the woman of Samaria her enquiry concerning the place of worship, with a ( ye
know not what ye worship; for salvation is of the Jews: This is the very ground
of the Reformed Churches departure, and non-communion with Rome; who though she
be (by original constitution) the Temple of God, is become the very seat of
Antichrist; and by the same so vitiated that her Ministrations are the cup of
abomination by which she has made the Nations drunk, having (by her
intercessions of, and to Saints, the Popes infallibility, divine power and
properties, and by her expiatory Sacrifices) disowned, and nullified (as much
as in her lies) Christ's mediatory offices: and (by dividing the elements,
destroying the outward sign, essential to a Sacrament, and on a fancied
transubstanciation, turning it into a Sacrifice for quick and dead) nullified
Christ's Ordinances: and (by many other intrinsecal evils) poisoned Gods whole
worship, and rendered it directly destructive to salvation; and is therefore
presented to us under the Appellation Babylon, in the very abstract; spiritual
Sodom, and Egypt; and so the object of our departure, advised, with (a lest ye
partake of her sins: which were and are so universally diffused, and has so
far vitiated the subject, that a guilt will be contracted by mere Communion.

Corruptions extrinsecal may, Extrinsecal corruptions warrant no separation.
and must grieve the spirits of Gods people; occasion their loud complaints,
his Ministers most zealous reproofs, and the stud^ous endeavors of all, to
prevent and remove them; because scandals to the Church, prejudicial (though
not directly destructive, to salvation) dishonorable to Religion, and the God
(whose prerogative it is to prescribe every pin, and the very snuffers to be
used in his House, 1 King 11.3^.
) and is therefore highly displeasing to God; provoking him to rend a Kingdom
from the house of David, to loath, and at least to leave his holy place, and
remove his Candlestick from such as will not fear him in the simplicity of his
own institutions; without the vain and needless Appendants of their own
inventions: But yet these cannot warrant separation or voluntary non-communion,
because the Church abides related to God as his Spouse; his worship and
Ordinances remain for matter and essential form entire, and exactly his own;
notwithstanding the concomitancy of some super-added matter; or the unfit
ministerial method, and order by which they are dispensed; and Gods presence is
to them continued, (though with a grieved, striving spirit, threatening his
departure) and thereby we are under a possibility of salvation; (though engaged
to more care and industry) this was the case of the Prophets, our Savior and
his Disciples, the Church of the Jews, and Primitive Christians, under the many
parallel (yea transcending to ours,) corruptions, before mentioned, without any
prescript, or practice, of Separation, or Non-Communion.

Christian Friend, it is too evident, That many and great Corruptions are to
our sin, and shame retained; The Case of England under corruption.
and to the aggravation thereof (with an high hand, and defiance of the God of
Jealousy) returned (after a Solemn and Sacred Expulsion) into our Church; but
yet they are extrinsecal, and not of the substance of Gods Worship, which for
Matter, and essential Form, remains entire, and properly his own: (though not
so acceptable) under, as well as without them; and will not therefore warrant
my Separation, or Non-Communion, so far as to lie at Home, or loyter in the
Churchyard, until the Common Prayer (whereby God is truly, though not orderly,
invocated, and worshipped; wherein I (as a Member of that Church) am
interested, and unto which, as it is Public Solemn Prayer (though in an
unsuitable Method) my Amen is an indispensable Duty) being ended.

The Administrations of Gods Worship among us, are indeed nauseous, and
unhealthful, but not void, or venomous; our waters are bitter, and pudled, but
not poisonous; our Pastures are trodden down, and the proud of the Flock do
push us with Horn, Ezekiel. 34.18, 19, 20, 21.
and with Hoof; but we are not yet driven out of Christ's Fold, not dare not we
say our Pasture is quite taken from us: To be plain, Under all our Corruptions,
we must not, we cannot, we dare not deny the Matter, and essential Form of Gods
Ordinances and Worship, is continued to us; though some superstitious Rites are
unto them annexed, which are apparent Appendants, redundant to, and separable
from, and not vitiating, destructive, or annihilating to their Subject; and are
therefore pretended and professed (by the Canons appropriated to this Church)
to be Acts of Order and Ornament, rather than of Worship, and Adoration to God;
and they are such wherein the people are generally passive, not active. Baptism
is fully and formally Gods Ordinance, though the Cross be needlessly, and
superstitiously added thereunto; and the Parent (by virtue of whose interest in
Gods Covenant, the Child receives the Seal) is unjustly excluded; and a
deputation of Godfathers and Godmothers, is groundlesly imposed: The Word of
God is not excluded, though now and then, a piece of Apocripha is unwarrantably
read in the public Assembly; nor does it cease to be the Word of God, because
it is unfitly mangled into parts and parcels, urduly fixed unto places,
unreasonably appropriated unto days and times, Surplices and canting quiering,
singing boys and men.
and published in unseemly vestures and voices. I confess their Common Prayer
is my burden, by reason of its defects and disorder, and the rudeness of the
Ministerial Method. I stand convinced, it ought to be altered; yea, ab lished,
See the Epistle to the Liturgical considerato^ considered.
by reason of its Symetry to the Romish Mass, superstitious Order, and
unsutableness to Solemn Public Prayer; yet I must confess, I find in it no
Matter to which (on a charitable interpretation) a sober serious Christian may
not say, nay, can deny his (Amen:) And though I distaste the Ministeri^l
M^thod, I cannot disown in it the essential Form of Prayer; (viz.) A calling
upon God in the Name of Christ. That Set-Forms of Prayer are used, is an Act
and Argument of weakness; that they are imposed on Gods Church and Ministers,
is an Act (I cannot acquit) of wickedness: And that this defective disorderly
Form, is retained, yea, by forc^ returned into the Church of England; I fear
will be found an Act and Argument of wilfulness against Gods mind; yet neither
the one, nor the other, makes it cease to be Public Solemn Pray r; nor do I
see on what ground I can deny, or refuse my (Amen) to what is prayed for,
because I know there are many things wanting to the Church, which are not, not
indeed can be by this Form expressed; or not joining desires to God with (and
as a Member of) his Church, because they are rudely and unfittingly expressed;
whilst the irregularity of that common Order, is no Bar to Gods acceptance of
my more regular (Amen) thereunto given.

Departure from Babylon, is the indispensable Duty, and will be the property of
all, whose names are written in the Lambs Book of Life; but the Object must be
Babylon in the very abstract; Setting the mark of the Beast on them who partake
with her, Rev. 13.8, 17, 4, 13, 8.
bearing in her hand the Cup of Abomination, and so appearing to be formal
spiritual Egypt an^ Sodom: I cannot believe every or any Society retaining
some B^^^ (...) ^stures, and Orders, with a protested and apparent recession
from Babylon, can be the Object thereof; and the last of these, is the capacity
of Englands Church: Certainly the Temple of the Lord is not to be disowned, or
renounced, because it has been sometime trodden down by the Antichristian
Gentiles, and vitiated by the seat of the Beast; when these are expelled,
though the dirt of their tramplings, and stink of their session remain behind
them: My good friend, let it be seriously resolved, is there no difference
between Israel and Judah? Rome, and a reformed Church? a professed sacrifising
Priest, and a Minister of the Gospel, fondly affecting and retaining that
Appellation? between a calling on the only true God, in the name of Christ,
though in a defective, rude, confused, and unfitting order, and praying unto
Saints and dumb Idols? between the disorderly administration of the worship,
for matter and form, Gods own appointment, and the Ordinance nullifying
administration in an unknown tongue, to which the hearers cannot say Amen? and
abstraction, or alteration of the Elements beyond, yea contrary to Gods
prescription, or what the possibility of nature, and entity of the ordinance
will admit? between Sacraments with some unwarrantable superstitious
Appendants, and a Sacrifice expiatory for the quick and dead? must we depart
from Israel, returned from Egypt and Babylon? though retaining the savor, some
of the Manners and Customs, and an hankering mind to go back unto those
accursed places? I pray God keep England (in her now retrograde motion) from
going back to Rome, then (through his Grace) I shall not dare to renounce her
Communion, though my soul mourn for her corruption: for so long as we enjoy in
her the very matter, and essential form of Gods worship, and Ordinances, though
in an humane, unfit, corrupt ministerial method and order, with some vain and
needless appendants of humane invention; we are not without confidence of Gods
presence, and a possibility of salvation; and we therefore are without a
sufficient ground for separation, or non-communion.

Consid. 3d. Communion is no bar, but a help to reformation.
Thirdly, let it be considered Communion with the Church, under many, and great
corruptions, is not inconsistent with zeal, care, and contest for reformation
thereof: the designs of Hell may agree in the end, but disagree in the means;
but it is not so with the determinations of Heaven; the Devil may suggest and
provoke the correction of sin, by sin; or make zeal to purity a spur to
separation, and the shiprack of virtue to, and in the Church; 1 Cor. 11.13,
14.15.
he can make the white Witch heal, what the black does hurt; by him one
Conjurer does bless, what another does curse; the Angel of light does often
expel, and lay the Angel of darkness; but yet they be both evil Angels; he
sticks not at, nor stirs against Piety, or Religion, provided it be but
sinful; he is content men go in a via lactea and sacra, to the place of woe;
and steer by Conscience (if erroneous) to their own condemnation: but it is
not thus with God, and the dictates of his holy Spirit; all his commands are
competible; his Graces concatenated; 2 Pet. 1.5, c. 7.
All the duties of a Christian are to be discharged without interfering,
interruption, or destruction by one another; he allows not one sinful step in
the way of salvation, though paved with never so fair a pretense of sanctity;
if therefore his people stumble thereinto, they must return and go back, if
they will go to heaven; no one duty, at any time damps zeal unto another; they
may be desparata, but never are opposita, different, but not contrariant one to
another, the discords in true Religion do ever constitute the clearest harmony,
all extremes are equally odious unto the God of order; excesses find no more
acceptance with him, than defects in Religion; be not righteous overmuch is a
divine dictate (though many times unduly, Eccl. 7.16, 17.
and unjustly pleaded by men) as well as be not overmuch wicked, Gods Israel
may not turn to the right or left hand, Deuteronomy. 5.32.17.20.18.14.
departing from the way of his Statutes: the true Christian must walk in all
well-pleasing, in every good word, and work, and hate every evil way: Col. 1.10.
It has been a scandalous Blasphemy (from its very first being) of
Christianity, to say or suppose it does direct its subjects to do evil, that
good may come thereby: sincere Saints are ever acted by the Spirit of peace,
and love, to seek and zealously pursue, the purity of Gods worship in union
with his Church; Romans 3.8, Reformation a duty.
zeal, care, and contests, for Reformation of Gods Church, and worship,
subjected to the least corruption, can never be denied to be the indispensable
duty of every Christian: It is true, these are to be expressed and acted by all
law^ul, and only lawful means, 1 Chro. 13.9.10, 11.
according to every man's place and capacity; the most dreadful shakings of God's Ark, will not warrant Uzza to step out of his place to stay it; nor will the
greatest sanctity in Israel, Numb 16.
authorize Chora to usurp the Priesthood: It is not a more poor apology, than
base, for the rebellion of Dathan, and Abyram, that all the Lords people are
holy; the God of holiness needs not, nor will he endure the help of our
iniquities: these Cautions observed, endeavors for reformation can be by none
omitted, or faintly pursued, without an inevitable contracting upon themselves
the guilt of those corruptions, which remain upon Gods Church and service; for
no rule (in reference to humane society) is in Morality, or Divinity more true
than this error, cui non resistitur approbatur, veritas non quae non defenditur
opprimitur, negligere quippe cum possis deturbare perversos, nihil aliud est
quam fovere, nec caret scrupulo societatis occultae qui manifesto sacinori cum
potest desinit obviare. Er^r not resisted, is allowed, for silence gives
consent; Truth not defended, is oppressed, for, Cowardice gives falsehood the
Conquest, to neglect when we can do it, to disturb the wicked, is to cherish
them, for concealment and indulgence is the guard of their design, nor can he
want a suspicion of secret conspiracy, who can, but will not hinder iniquity;
for such Connivance is an act and argument of affection: ^ Sam. 2.
let it be remembered old Elies sin, by which he fell under the severity of Gods
wrath, was his not reforming the abominations of his sons; The Reforming
Government of many pious Kings of Judah, are blotted, with a but the high
places (which the Temple restoted and frequented seemed not worth the heeding)
were not taken away: Israel is charged with the profaneness of Gods
Sanctuary, Ezekiel. 44.7.8.
by reason of the uncorrected neglect of the Keepers thereof, and the
non-resistance of false Prophets, is aggravated with a ( the Prophets prop^cy
lies in my name, Jer. 5.31.
and the people love to have it so;) It is a matter of admiration to a God of
jealousy, that his Church and ^^ship should be overspread with corruption,
without the ^^king, and expostulations of an Advocate for him; Isa. 59.16.
the (...) sa^ it, and it displeased him, that there was no judgment; and he
saw that there was no man, and he wondered that there was no Intercessor; 1 Cor
5.
the guilt of the incestuous person is by the neglect of discipline, charged on
the Church of Corinth; and the suffering the woman Jezabel, Rev. 2.20.
is the evil imputed to the Church of Thyatira: the light of nature, and
Scripture leads every one in his place and capacity to reform corruption, and
charge it on their conscience, as a positive duty.

To damp zeal, or bar endeavors for reformation, and to blame, and violently
silence Ministerial rebukes, and argumentation, or popular petitions,
supplications, mournings and murmurations, under and against the corruptions of
Gods Church and worship, is irrational, and irreligious; and the defense
thereof by this plea (viz.) these corruptions are confessedly consistent with
salvation; and such which notwithstanding the most serious and zealous
reprovers do not, and profess they dare not separate from, or deny communion
with the Church; is no other than hellish divinity, and Bedlam Reason, best
confuted by their wives rebukes of the Queen of S uts preparing her mistress
sack possets in the common w^shbowles (not to mention a vessel of more base
employment) or presenting to the table his dainty Cates in a dis^ licked by the
dog, and wiped with her dish-clout; the which though it be unhandsome, and
unwholesome, is not poisonous, and so directly destructive, as to drive them the
house or table; so as to beg or starve, rather than to eat or keep good
fellowship: such as shall thus do, must needs proclaim themselves ignorant of
the reproving invective Ministry of the Prophets, and Apostles; yea, of the
Lord himself, when and whilst they lived in Communion with the Church of the
Jews; the last of whom whipped the money changers out of the Temple, when and
because he acknowledged it, his Fathers house of Prayer; Joh. 2.16.
insensible of the sad and severe judgments of God on Eli and his sons for
their uncorrected disorder, which made Gods people loath the sacrifices of the
Lord, when they did not, nor durst leave his Sanctuary; and on Solomon for
building high places, 1 Kings 11.31.
though consistent with the Temple of the Lord; Ezekiel. 43.8.
and on Israel for building their posts besides his posts, their Altars besides
his Altars, and setting up the Image of jealousy in the House of the Lord,
which yet was not forsaken by him or his people: and unaffected with the nature
and holiness of God, who will have holiness written on all the vessels of the
Sanctuary, and the very bridles of the horses; Zack. 14.20.
and will have all things in his service done decently and in order, 1 Cor.
14.33.40.
because he is a God of order, and not of confusion; when Corruption in Gods
Church and worship can be denied to be sin, I will allow and advise Gods
Ministers to be silent; and when they grow substantial, and vitiate their
subject, I will allow and advise the Members of the Church to separate, but
till then I dare not give my consent, or Countenance unto the one, or the other.

Reformation and Separation (whereof voluntary non Communion is the privative
part, Separation no act of Reformation, but obstructive thereto.
and the first formal act) though (by the groundless Calumny of the enemies to
the one, occasioned by the rash inconsiderate zeal of the other) they are
confounded, are in themselves vastly different, and indeed inconsistent, and
destructive each to other; as much as is the Cleansing, and casting away a
vessel; purging, and parting from an house, this is duty, but that is horrid
iniquity; schisms in the Church are dangerous, and disgraceful, but schisms
from the Church, is thereunto destructive and damnable to the subjects thereof;
the purity of Gods Worship must be pursued in unity with the Church; and
Communion is implied in all endeavors for Reformation; desertion does declare
destruction, not repair of the house is desired, and designed; which of us
leave our houses because not so convenient, handsome or healthful as is
desired? or forsake our food because of a slovenly Cook or Carver? the
Scripture does detect much corruption in Gods Church, and the zeal of many unto
the Reformation thereof, provoking and pursuing it unto death, or very deep
distress, without the least direction unto, or allowance of separation or
non-communion; but with a most plain and clear charge and direction to the
contrary; Christ's Apostles, (as most zealous Reformers) did often, and openly,
and with much authority rebuke and resist the disorder of the Churches, and
corrupt administration of Gods worship, yet were so far from approving or
advising separation, that they have branded the subjects thereof, with these
and the like odious epithites, they were not of us, John 2.19. Jude 19. Heb
10.25.
and therefore went out from us, these are they who separate themselves,
sensual, having not the spirit, and taxes the voluntary non-communicants with
a defect, forsake not the assembling of your selves as the manner of some is. I
cannot without trembling consider, the circumcised Sects in the Church of
Colosse, are charged to have left the head, Coll 2.19.
by leaving the body, in which all the joints are knit together to the
nourishment of the whole; I cannot but assent to that maxim as most true, ex
Ecclesia nulla salus, the Church is God's Ark of salvation, out of which none
but mad men will leap, or leave it, on pretense of purging it, or putting out
of it unclean birds and beasts: in this case of contest for Reformation, and
communion with the Church under many and great corruptions; I must say as our
Savior of the lesser, and more weighty matters of the Law, Luke. 11.42.
these things ye ought to have done, and not leave the other undone; for
Superstition and Separation are extremes equally odious, and ominous to
Reformation; is it not obvious to every wise observer, that the Devil and
wicked men, do make the one the advantage of the other; and cast the odium, and
direct the force of each (as the turn comes, and opportunity serves) against
such who (steering by Scripture Compass) desire (according to their capacity)
to guide Gods Church, and themselves in her, between these two dangerous Rocks
into the Haven of rest and holiness.

Whilst poor despicable I in our late years, in my place and Calling,
withstood our Church-wasting separation, many professing piety, and pursuing
purity in Gods House and Ordinances, were (prejudiced (unto an high and open
persecution of me) by their own fancy that I asserted and advanced the
superstitions and disorders of our Church; by the return whereof God has
convinced them of their rashness, and constrained them to correct their
mistake of his unworthy reproached servant: and now God (blessed be his name)
having animated me with zeal for perfect, and complete Reformation, and acted
me in my place and sphere (as a Minister of the Gospel) to debate the
obligations thereunto, beyond my mean abilities, or the logical reply of the
adversaries thereof; (who bear away the victory by a thou lie Bellarmine; and
have confuted me argumento baculino, enforced by the severe moderation of
authority; incensed by the suggestion of Treason and Sedition secretly
whispered, and generally charged against me, whose loyalty is most legible by
both active and passive characters) and who have in all the writings which bear
my name, declared my abhorrency of Sedition and popular tumults,) and having
blessed me with an heart, and opportunity to withstand and witness against the
deluge of Superstition and Corruptions, which breaking over, and bearing down
sacred banks, does (to our s^ and shame) again overflow our Church and Nation;
how many do now dream I will indulge, and embrace Separation; or at least by my
voluntary non-communion (the first act thereof) give some countenance unto it?
as if between these there were no medium; but that the corruption of the one,
must necessarily generate the other, give me therefore leave to tell you, and
by you to tell others (in me concerned) I cannot but withstand the one, with
abhorrency of the other; and keep my distance from separation, whilst I desire
and endeavor, to stave off Superstition; lest I Shipwreck my self, or others,
on either rock; Superstition and separation strengthen each other.
I have observed, and our Church has experienced the same, that as
Superstition, Corruptions and disorder in Gods house and worship do (and
therefore call for the zeal and rebukes of Gods Ministers, and careful Remedy
by his Majesty's Prelates, by him entrusted with the Ecclesiastical good of
his Subjects) very much harden men of strong affections, and weak Judgments to
separate, furnishing them with a clamourous accusation, who discern not the
proper and genuine cause of their sinful Shisme, but readily father, 1 Cor.
3.3, 4. Gal. 5.19.20.21.
(what the Apostle has determined to be) the brat of their own lust, on any
thing which bears relation thereunto; though but a remote, and accidental
occasion thereof: so non communion and separation, is the grand Removal, and
most Plain ruin to reformation, that ever could be devised: Subverting the
house on pretense and instead of sweeping it; as if an house forsaken, and
pulled asunder (one running away with a post, another with a beam, to patch up
their own self-founded fabrics) were ever like to be purged, and preserved
from uncleaness and disorder: (my good friend) take notice of this; God
determined, and his people deserved the destruction of the ten tribes of
Israel, before those who feared God fled from among them, or forsook them.
Babylon is fallen, she is fallen, was the voice uttered by the Angel, before,
Come ye out of her my people was sounded to the Saints which follow the Lamb;
Conservation is the end of burdensome Communion, Ier. 13.2.7
and careful Reformation; but dissolution is the most certain sequel of
desertion; It is Gods and mush be his peoples last work to depart from and
forsake his Sanctuary; he stays long with a grieved striving Spirit: and
stands on the very threshold, with a wooing expostulation, Be thou instructed O
Jerusalem, Ier. 6.8.
least my Soul depart from thee, and I make thee desolate: (the very issue of
departure) let it be seriously resolved: did not Corah in his separating from
the Camp of Israel, gathering a Congregation out of the Congregation: and the
Circumcised Sectaries among the primitive Christians, strike at the
foundations, and seek to subvert the very societies from whence they separated?
and do not the practices, and some principles of the semi-separating (as they
would be deemed) self constituting Independents of our age, determine a
nonentity; by the non-formality of a Church in England, and ra^e the very
foundation thereof, and so condemn the very generation of the just, who have
lived and dyed members thereof, yea Martyrs to the truths of jesus Christ,
against Papal, as well as Pagan power and errors? The Anabaptists in Germany
have not been more odious, and obstructive to Luthers reformation; then the
Church gathering separatists of all Sects have been retarding unto a
retrogradation of that in England: in that the odium of their schisms seconded
with seditien, and centred in Rebellion, un o Regicide, with the confusion and
subversion of our Church and Kingdom, is (most sadly and shamefully, though
unjustly) imputed to all, who with humble and peaceable spirits, des^e and
endeavor the casting out corruption and disorder, from Gods house and
ordinances; and reflectes on the work of reformation it self, as if their
proper genuine and natural parent.

The reformation of the Church is a duty incumbent on every man and member
thereof; Reformation must be by lawful means
only it must be pursued in their places and capacities, by just and lawful
means without schism from, (or if possible) in the Church, or sedition in the
Commonwealth, both which my soul ever did abhor as disgraceful to Religion,
dishonorable to God, and destructive to Reformation: I never did, nor yet can
allow, or advise other means of reformation then Ministerial admonition to the
Church, Logical dispute, and Theological argumentation, and redaurgtion among
equals; humble proposal, petition, and supplication to superiors with a
patient, and submisse attendance on their pleasure and on God acting the same;
such as receive Kings as nursing Fathers to the Church, will rejoice in them as
Christians; much more as professedly reformed; and with all peaceable
submission, embrace such degrees of Reformation of the extrinsecall order, and
ministerial method of Gods worship (enjoying the substance in the essential
form thereof) as they will allow, until God incline their hearts to allow what
himself expects, and his people desire: soberly pursuing the been esse, with
joy in the esse of Religion, and in communion with the Church, waiting on the
truth of Gods ordinances, quietly attending their Superiors for purity and
regularity of dispensation; I find not that the men fearing God in Judah, did
tumultuously tumble down the high places, nor turn away from Gods Temple
because of them; yet their standing was the stain of Government to their
reforming Kings, to fly out of Gods house, or in the face of Gods Vicegerents,
because his own appointments are administered by instruments in order to his
service unsuitable, and to us offensive, is a frowardness which God cannot nor
will not admit, or indulge in any of his children. Ministerial reproofs and
admonitions, and vulgar mournings and murmurations, are loud alarums to God and
the consciences of men, and strong enforcements of Reformation: preces and
Iacrymae ever were and still are the only weapons of the truly Godly, Our
state and time calls for an higher degree of Reformation.
under and against the oppositions of just authority, and lawful Princes, such
as God has in his mercy, and by his miraculous providence restored to our
Church and Nation. I am afflicted by, and ashamed of the slow progress, and
shameful retrogradation of Englands Reformation, under and against public,
national, solemn, sacred bonds (whose obligation will abide before God, and
conscience, though the affirmations thereof may be interdicted by men) If
Calvini in his days could say, ( If Godly Religion had flourished in England
till that day (the time of Queen Mary her Reign) there ought to have been an
order of service better corrected, Epistle to the Chapter at Frankford
and many things quitte taken away. Can we without grief consider our Church
has enjoyed true Religion more then eighty years since that time: and yet we
ignorantly continue, and violently contend for that order of service, as if
ashamed to give place unto better things: yet, I dare not deny her to be a
reformed Church, or as such, decline Communion with her: in, and for whom the
Lord has emminently appeared: and out of whom he has graciously purged all
things venentous and destructive (though some things nauseous, and distasteful,
were continued, and are returned into her) having defended her against the
Spanish Ari^ado, and Popish Conspiracy by Gunpowder, and other agitations, and
attempts of Papal power and Antichristian rage; with an Almighty hand and
outstretched Arm. I do believe the infancy of Reformation might rejoice in,
and grow up under that order of divine service which the adult estate thereof
ought to cast off, as puerile and unsuitable: First degrees were matter of
Comfort, though not of Content to such who seek the simplicity of the Gospel:
remaining dreggs ought to be discharged, and I doubt not God will
(notwithstanding men's aversness, and opposition) in due time effect it: In the
mean time, i see no reason, to refuse to drink because my waters are pudled or
presented in an unclean Vessel, and I can come by no purer: remaining degrees
of Reformation must be so purified, that those obtained, may not appear to be
disowned or despised: though our order of Divine Service be a Roman dregge of
some dangerous distasteful influence, yet it is not Popery; shall we not bless
God, and rejoice in England as brought out of Babylon, though some Babylonish
Vestures, Rites, and Orders, which ought to be abandoned, are yet retained? I
conceive them ungrateful for the purity obtained, who run out of Gods, house,
for the Corruptions continued, and obtruded: I cannot but repute them over
forward, who shall refuse the Substantials of true Religion, and Christ's
Institutions, because of some rude Rough Appendants: shall we not acknowledge
Gods mercy in affording us, and humbly use the truth of Gods word because
transmitted unto us with some humane traditions? and the substance of his own
worship celebrated in a disorderly way, and method, with some foolish
Appendants, of men's inventions? (My good friend) my zeal, care and contests for
Reformation of this poor Church, have cost me dear: yet (if God suffer the
Charge to rise as h^g^, as did that of my namesake by the unkindness of King
Joash) not one mite too dear: I bless God however my passions work, I see no
cause to repent my bargain: I pray God glorify himself, and edify his people
by my bonds; only I must profess to all that fear God, I see no sufficient
cause to satisfy my Conscience, or to plead before my God, on which to refuse
Communion with her, and attendance on Gods solemn public worship under her
rude Ministerial method; for that duty is not warantably superseded by the
iniquity of another man; my sufferings, nor other men's sin, (under which I
mourn, because I cannot mend it) must not turn me out of Gods way, to the right
or left hand; superstition, and separation, must be shunned as Rocks equally
dangerous to Gods Church and worship: the profaneness of this and its Subjects
must not drive me: nor the pretended purity and piety of the other, and its
Subjects allure or draw me unto the positive evil of separation, or privative
evil of voluntary non-Communion; I pray and hope God will keep me upright
under, and against all temptations, from falling into the extremes of our
unhappy age and Church; and yet give me to see the purity of his worship in
Union and Communion with his Church here on earth; or possess me with his
undefiled, unstained glory in Heaven; for from the one I dare not depart until
I arrive at the other; least by shipwarck I should be deprived of both.

Fourthly, Let it be considered, Consi. 4th.
Scandal is an argument of no strength, when pleaded to supersede or condemn a
positive duty; Jobs friends, offense no argument, in this case.
(like miserable Comforters) were no little Scandalized, that he would not from
his Cross condemn himself as wicked; nor brand himself with Hippocrisy in his
past piety, to which they labored to compel him, by a right Theological,
rather then Logical argument. (though not fully asserted) they that plow
iniquity, and so we wickedness, reap the same; Job. 27.4.5.26.19.42.7.
sorrow is the fruit of sin; yet Job well knowing the Prosperity of the wicked,
and that God tries the righteous, would not let go his integrity; Nor to
justify them, would he let his lips condemn himself, but made his appeal to
God his witness on high, and record which is above; who interposing to moderate
the Question, Mark. 2.23. ad fin^m.
discovered their fallacy and determined they had not Spoken of him the thing
which was right, as did his servant Job; The Jews were offended that the
Disciples plucked the ears of Corn on the Sabbath day (appointed of God for
rest) and that our Savior on that day healed: yet our Savior mattered not
their offense as of any weight, but justified the facts by the positive duty of
preserving man's natural life; Luke 13.15.16.17.
If the Circumstantials of the first Table must give way to the Substantials of
the Second table of the Law; and if obedience to humane, must give place to
Divine command, and authority; much more must the offense of a brother, Act. 5
29.
vail to obedience to the will of God: In pleasing men, God must not be
displeased: every man must therefore please his neighbor for his good to
edification. but to please a brother by omission of positive duty (which is
formal, Romans 15.2.
fearful iniquity) is (by sinful strengthening his profaneness, Scandal is not
to be slighted.
or Error) aedificare in Gehennam, to edify both to Hell, from which the Lord
deliver me. Scandal is indeed an argument of more weight (when duly and fitly
pleaded) then to be slighted or supersicialy evaded: not to offend a weak
brother, Romans 15.1.
is charged as a duty: we who are strong ought to bear with the infirmities of
the weak, and not to please our selves! Its good not to eat or drink, nor do
any thing whereby thy brother is stumbled, Romans 14.21.
offended or made weak, are Divine directions and Gospel rules: fearful is
the sin of a Wilful Scandal, for that it is nor only a snare by which a
Brother is entangled, and laid on the rack of a Scrupulous conscience, and
tortured between his own doubts, and the contrary practice of the pious
professing obedience to Gods will, But also a stumbling-stone, occasioning to
him certain sin; by either acting under his own doubts and against his own
apprehensions induced by the bare ensample of another, or by uncharitable
censureing his brother, in what is to him lawful, and without his own liberty
and power to do, or not to do it; this is therefore represented to be the
destruction of the work of God: Rom 4.20
against this sign our Savior has denounced a most sad doom, Whosoever shall
offend one of these little ones, it were better for him a millstone were hanged
about his neck, and he were drowned in tthe depth of the Sea: the dread hereof
has seized on my spirit, in my present state and Case, that though it become
lawful, Mat. 18.8.
could I without sin withdraw from public solemn worship, in an unfitting
order, I would on sense of Scandal do it, Scandal is of force, and fitly
pleaded to supersede or condemn an action in it self indifferent, and so within
a man's own power to do, or not to do it; scandal is of force in things
indiffrent.
for or against which the conscience may be awed by a seemingly religious
reason; such was the observing, or not observing a day, the eating or not
eating of some kind of meats, or meats offered unto Idols, and the like
things, which in the Primitive Churches, and times of Christianity, the
Apostles (during the honorable obsequies of the expired law, which h^d
sometimes, and yet seemed, to charge them as duty, or forbid them as iniquity)
determined indifferent, and directed Scandal of the weak as the casting grain
in the aequilibrious mind of a man (satisfied in conscience) as to the doing,
or not doing the same; thereby guiding us in all things and cases of the like
nature; for the indifinite Universal, Eat, drink, Romans 14.
or any thing that may Scandalize, offend, or weaken a brother, advised in Romans
14.21. must be restrained to this species, and things of this kind: For what is
positively forbidden, or commanded, must not at any man's pleasure be done, or
left undone: simple scandal has no strength. To plead we are offended, and not
produce a reason, at least seemingly religious, is a most simple plea: 1 Pet. ^.
Jesus Christ is a stone of stumbling and a Rock of offense to many; and yet he
must be preached and professed unto bonds, and death it self. Such as in my
case pretend scandal and offense, I must advise and entreat to reflect their
thoughts, and take heed they do not mistake the case, and mistake the question,
and thereby take offense, where none is given: I confess the ministerial order
and method of public worship and prayer, is purely humane, within the power
of the Ministers thereof, and so indifferent, and ought not to be prescribed or
imposed; when it is as in our common divine service rude, confused, and
disorderly, its no less Scandalous to the serious Godly, then was the
administration of the Sons of Eli, or confused acclamations of the Church at
Cerinth; and such on which if I out of choice, at liberty to enjoy a more
serious and regular order, (according to the Kings gracious Indulgence granted
in his Royal declaration concerning Ecclesiastical affairs,) should attend, I
could not but give offense to such as seek the Simplicity of the Gospel; and
seem to them to allow, what I have concluded ought to be abolished, and to
build again what I have endeavored to destroy: for extirpation of every thing
which is evil (though but extrinsecall, and in the ministerial method of Gods
ordinances) being the extent of zeal, and duty of every member of the Church
to be endeavored in his place and calling, (though however not under a
special, solemn, sacred obligation thereunto,) non-attendance on that order
unto, and by embracing of more regular administration of the same ordinances in
Communion with the same Church, is the least Act I could do to the enforecing
that end; I cannot believe the pious Israelites would have brought their
Sacrifices unto the Sons of Eli (whose order made them loath the offerings of
the Lord, which they durst not withold) if they had enjoyed other Priests who
would have offered more conformly to divine appointment. But my friend, this is
not my case or Question, but whether solemn public Worship, which is my
positive duty unto the sanctification of the Lords day and as I am a member of
Christ's Catholic visible Church, and cannot by reason of my confinement be
enjoyed without my attendance, on that Irregular unsuitable method, and
confused order: may be warrantably supersed^d, and omitted on this ground and
reason, my presence at such administrations is offensive to some weak Brethren
zealously affected to the simplicity of the Gospel, were these corruptions
abstracted from, or opposed unto Gods worship, there were to me no case of
Conscience, but they are confounded with it, as the unclean vessel, or ill
favored carving with my food whereby I live) and therein I must profess it
satisfies not my conscience, nor seems to me to be of weight, that I must
offer my sacrifice, though by the loathsome order of Elies sons, or go to the
Temple, though my way lie by the high places, or assemble and send up my prayer
in Gods Sanctuary, though the Image of jealousy be set up in it, cannot be
soberly denied; nor ought any to be thereat offended; and I must needs resolve
in the affirmative, for the superadded vanities do not void Gods ordinance: nor
will defect and disorder, (with which my private capacity is not charged)
discharge my positive duty; I am not insensible that some will be ready to read
my allowance of the same, in my attendance on it, unto the hardening of
themselves in sin, or hindering themselves in duty, concluding, Communion in the
ordinances is a consent unto the order: to such I must say at their peril be
it; this scandal is taken not given; this inference is more than the promises
allow: the Communion of the Prophets, our Lord Jesus Christ and his Apostles,
with the Churches in their time under their many and great corruptions, was
not, nor logically could be interpreted, to be an argument of countenance, and
approbation of them, or abatement of the zeal against them; nor did they
thereby contraction themselves the guilt thereof; the spider which diffused in
wine, does vitiate its subject and make it destructive by the very act of
Communion, does spread his dirty webbs all over the Vine, and we ear the grapes
thereof, without the least of doubt, or danger: the Cities that suffer by all
unfit matter in their public ministrations, attend the good instructions, and
assent unto the due proposals, petitions, or demands, rudely uttered by their
Recorder: nor think they themselves concerned in the broken, blunt, abrupt
style, or confused indigested method of his discourse: the extrinsecal
adjuncts, and ministerial method of Gods ordinances, is charged on the
Ministers, not members of Gods Church: it may indeed add grief or pleasure to
the people, but voyds not the matter of Gods worship, or leaves any guilt on
them, who thereby receive, and celebrate it, but do not approve the same: the
spider may indeed suck poison of the grape, and wicked men may make my duty an
occasion of their iniquity: but neither the one nor the other gives thereto
any proper casualty: events, accidentalls are no arguments against my duty:
these are not more damnable to them, who infer them, then they would be to me:
if I by reasons thereof decline my duty: my own sorrow, nor other men's sin,
must never stave me off from positive duty: these stumbling stones and
scandalous inferences, do, and will ever lie in my way to Heaven: yea to my
natural life: Christ's sheep must drink, and may be hurt by pudled waters:
witho^t participation in the polluting pudling guilt only chargeable on the
Pastors, and proud of the flock, none can be offended that I worship God, Ezekiel.
44.
in the solemn public worship of his people: nor can without wounding their
own soul be offended that I do it in this order, (to me distastful not to Gods
worship destructive) until my liberty does manifest it to be an act of choice,
not of chance: if any hence infer and enforce a persecuting constraint, and say
these men may be compelled to that form of service they will not choose. I
shall grant it: but advise such to sit down and consider how this will sound in
Gods cares: or how themselves will like it to be confined to unclean vessels,
and order, because they can but will not choose in such to eat their meat; The
offense of any who are Godly will be my trouble, and their sin: but the
omission of duty though but for a day will be my transgression, as I dare not
admit that, as a reason of this, and must advise it be not pleaded.

Fifthly. Let it be considered in steering this course, Consid. 5. This
practice is not w^hout president.
using this liberty, and holding Communion with this very Church, under these
very corruptions, and by attendance on this very order of service, and solemn
public worship: I am not without the caution and conduct of the sober, godly,
learned promoters, and pursuers of a perfect and complete reformation: the
reformed Churches beyond the Seas and in Scotland obtained higher degrees of
reformation, and more purity of ordinances, then did England (for power and
dominion the chiefest reformed Church) yet these never did disown, or decline
Communion with her, nor advise any her Members thereunto, yet they did often
rebuke and complain of her lukewarm haesitation in the degrees of reformation
obtained, and retention of those corruptions which ought to have been expelled
among our selves: Tindall, Hooper, Ridley, Latimer, Farrar, Whitaker,
Cartwright, Baines, Sibbs, Preston, Rogers, Geree, Mr. John Ball, Langley,
Hind, Nicholls, with many others, the non-conformists of Lincoln, Devon, and
Cornwall) besides those of our present age, and yet contemporary with us) all
eminent Divines, and Holy men groaning under these retained corruptions,
praying for, persuading, and pressing after (unto many and great sufferings) a
progress in reformation, (unto the pure primitive plains and simplicity of
Christ's own institution) yet lived unto their last breath in constant Communion
with our Church, attending Gods ordinances under these very disorders and
irregularities: and did in many things administer according to the form then
and now imposed, and did dis^ast the non-communion of such who loytered out the
time of public prayer, because prescribed and confused: and by press and
pulpit pleaded against the separations of Brown, Barrow, Johnson, Can, and
their separating followers, and adherents, or non-communicating abettors; as
inferring that from the English Liturgy, which it would not allow; these good
men with zeal reproved the many Superstitions continued: but still denied them
to be any sufficient ground for Separation: from which they ever kept the
greater distance, as subverting the very foundation of the Church: and have
plainly trodden this tract, in which we must travel, pursuing the purity of
worship in Union and Communion with the Church.

I shall not fear to profess, these good men are the patterns to me proposed,
(next to the prophets, our Lord Jesus, and the Apostles) and cautionary boigh^
for the guidance of my zeal for the perfection of Reformation, against and past
the dangerous extremes of Sup^stitions, disorderly administrations of Gods
ordinances, and Churchrendring religion, subverting separation, nor am I herein
sensible that our case (because our capacity is so) is different from theirs:
only I wish it to be observed, the difference is graduall not Real, it lies
on the measure and mode, not in matter and Substance: they were bound to
endeavor an extirpation of the same evil but not by so strong an obligation:
They were in the infancy, we are in the adult estate of Reformation, and must
therefore esteem the puerilia, which were their pleasure our shame: The nature
and quality of the Corruptions, with the necessity of their expulsion were by
them under dispute, it has been determined, and that by an Authority (sometime
reputed just) and (whatever it will do in politiques) will in point of
conscience yet abide a dispute as to its lawfulness: they were entangled in the
snares of education, and under the insensible yoakes of unseasonable
subscriptions of approbation of, and promise to administration by this rude
order and confused method: whereby the conscience was awed, and the credit of
Religion engaged them (by a burdensome groaning spirit) to bear what they did
not see how they could regularly be released from: from all which we are free,
and most strictly tied by contrary obligations: but neither they nor we might
out of our places and Capacities attempt a Reformation by any sedition in the
Republique, or sinful Schism from the Church: Non-communion is no more
warantable to us under the strongest bonds to reformation then it was unto them
without them: because it is an evil in it self: The nature of the (retained,
returned) corruptions were the same to them, they are to us, but to neither a
justifiable reason for Non-communion: The administration of these good men in,
and by this corrupt order, I can better, excuse, then justify, or intimate: I
believe extirpation to have been their duty as it is mine: and I see not how I
may act, (though I as a private member may and must attend, assent and give my
(Amen) unto right matter, in that order and method with those corrupt
Appendants I am bound to extripate: (Abstinence from action being the least,
and first act of extirpation) in which the private Christian is passive, purely
passive, necessarily passive because he cannot enjoy or attend Gods worship in
this indispenceable duty of holy convocation without it: I believe the
ministerial method of public worship: to have been subject to their
Judgment, and within their power as Ministers of the Gospel and Stewards of
the mysteries of God himself, full and formal Judges of the m^de and order of
dispensation (not belonging to or charged on the private members, and objects
thereof as to me: In both which respects (besides that special capacity, in
which I conclude all the Ministers of our Church now stand by that special
obligation which the transactions of providence in our unhappy times brought u
on us, and our posterities, and successors: I have else where professed (and
must still profess it, as the result of my most serious and deliberate
thoughts) I can keep Communion under that form of worship, Epistle to
Considerator co^d^res.
whereby I cannot administer and heartily say Amen to the Master of those
petitions which are put up in an order so confused preposterous, and
indigested, that it seems to me to be so much below the gravity of the Church,
whose mouth I must be, the seniousness of the office whereby I minister, the
sanctity of the duty I am to perform, and the sacred nature of the object to
whom they are presented, that I dare not stand between God and his people with
the same; I presume no man will or can deny my capacity as a Minister, to
differ from the capacity of a private Member, and bar me against, or bind me
unto, what the capacity of a private member of the Church does not bar against
or bind unto: non-administration may subject me to a suspense of my Ministry,
when non communion cannot be warranted nor excused; the restraint of that must
not run me upon the sin of this: I must (with the pious Israelite) leave my
sacrifice before the Lord (though with my souls abhorrency of the profane
preposterous order of administration) when I dare not with violence snatch the
fat of the sacrifice, and act according to the method of the sons of Eli: I
must not leap out of Christ's fold, nor leave his pastures, when trodden down by
others, because I dare not present his sheep with puddled waters: in the one I
am passive by other men's sin, in the other my action makes the sin mine own:
Gods substantial worship must not be slighted or refused, because the sinful
order of men attend it: Strait is the gate, narrow is the way which leads to
life: whilst I fly from the sin of my Ministry, I may be, and must take heed I
be not split by flying into the sin of a Member of the Church: that guilt may
be charged on me in the collective body, which I must be innocent of in my
personal capacity; where the Constitutions of men include, the righteous
judgment of God will distinguish and discriminate; Ezekiel. 9.4.
all particulars are included in an universal defection, but do not perish by
it: God will not forget to mark his mourners under Isreal's abominations in his
worship, Numb. 14
which they could not mend nor avoid: his Joshua's and Caleb's, who follow him
fully, shall nonfall short of the land of promise, Confid. 6.
though all Israel fall in the wilderness.

Sixthly, Let it be considered, my communion with this Church under these
corruptions is not more consonant unto the example of these good men of our
Church, Communion under corrup. is consonant to my own professions.
and the carriage of other reformed Churches, then unto my self, who am (and I
hope through divine Grace shall be) semper idem: ever since I knew any thing of
Religion, and in any measure discovered the ways of God and his people, I have
grieved for, and contested against the corruptions of his Church, but avoided,
abhorred, and opposed separation from, yea a non communion with it, as the much
greater evil; though palliated with professions of piety, and pretenses of
purity, to the seduction of the simple: such as have sat under my ministry
(now clouded by a righteous God) reveiwing their notes, and reflecting their
thoughts on what I preached) will find a series of rebukes and admonitions
against separation and non-communion, though enticed by men seemingly the most
holy, and pretenses unto the greatest purity and sanctity: In the last Sermons
that I preached from John 4.22. from our Saviors practice and pleading for the
Church of the Jews, opposed to the Samaritans, I affirmed, Communion with Gods
Church under many and great corruptions is not only lawful, but an
indispensable duty; the which I amplified by showing the different nature of
corruptions, as nouseous and venomous, prejudicial to health and growth, or
directly destructive, as intrinsecal and vitiating to the subject, or
extrinsecal and conversant about the same; notwithstanding which the subject
remains the same, participation in which contracts guilt (as in offering
sacrifice to an Idol) or contracts no guilt to the Communicant (eating in an
amicable friendship what is offered to an Idol) such as put us out of a
possibility of salvation (the only ground of separation) or are therewith
consistent, imposed by others, and so their sin not sufficient to b^r our duty:
all which were applied to the Popish administrations, nullifying Christ's
Offices and Ordinances, and so necessitating separation, polluting by
participation: and Englands corruptions grieving God and his people, some 8.
some 7. some 4. years now past.
but preserving Gods worship in the substantial matter, and essential form
thereof, and so not sufficient to supersede communion: If you look into the
writings which bear my name in the world, you will find separation, because of
corruption, condemned by reasons, beyond what the most serious Church-gathering
Separatists ever undertook to answer, otherwise then by rage and reproach (the
dialect of restrained lust in that, as well as in this revolution): Read at
your leisure my Bethshemesh clouded: Saints zeal against sinful Altars: Virtue
and value of Baptism, written many years since, and you will see Mr. Crof^ons
communion with the Church of England, is not repugnant to his judgment, more
then seven years since declared, and in those very writings lately published
(before and for which men have (by Gods permission) brought my light under a
bushel) you shall find my zeal for Reformation consistent to union and
communion with the Church; nor did the force of opposing corruption drive me
(as I might probably have done) to let fall any expressions in favor of
separation: My logical casuistical Contests for Reformation, do very plainly
condemn, and protest against schism and sedition as thereunto destructive,
particularly in my Anal^psis to Doctor Gaudens Analysis, my Argument and Answer
is thus concluded: Whatsoever shall be the establishment in the Church, though
never so corrupt, yet whilst consistent with salvation, though it may occasion
to me suffering, and a suspense of my Ministry by Gods Grace, it shall not
effect on me, or such on whom I have influence, Schism from the Church or a
resistance of his Majesty's just Authority; And in my Epistle to the
Lyturgicall Considerator considered (in which I urge my apprehended grounds for
the alteration, and abolition of the Ministerial method of solemn public
prayer used in our Church) with a pro^est for Communion under it, though
against administration by it. I am so much affected to the peace of the Church,
that I have of late preached, what (God assisting I am resolved for to practice
(viz.) that many, and graet corruptions in Gods worship are to be grieved for,
and patiently groaned under, before Schism be consented to, or separation be
consulted: Provided nevertheless I be passive, not active in them? I can keep
Communion under that form of worship whereby I cannot administer and heartily
say Amen to the matter of those petitions which are put up in an order so
preposterous, and indigested, that I dare not stand between God and his people
with the same; The liberty that I now pursue; (when obtained and used) is no
more than a practice commensing on these professions, whereby they are made
more legible, not more censurable than they were before.

My good friend, These things considered, I must profess, when ever God shall
mollify the hearts of men, into whose hands he has given my present liberty;
I see not any reason (that I dare plead before the Lord, or reflect as a bar
on my Conscience) whereupon my solitary Sabbaths may be sweetened, and spent
with comfort; my passage to the public assembly and worship, though in this
order, and with these appendants which are burdensome to my spirit, standing
open; and so my absence being a voluntary act within my own power; If any man
professing the fear of God, can produce any, I should be glad, for I fear to be
charged with the omission of Gods public worship, celebrated in Christ his
Church, though with extrinsecal corruption, and in a rude Ministerial order,
which ought to be reformed; but will not excuse me, though unforced, by the
offense of some weak brethren zealously affected to the purity of Gods House
and Worship.

I am not insensible, that the Committee of discretion, will be no less ready
to call me fool, for steering this course, than they were for my entering the
Lists, in defense, and ^^o^cement of Reformation, wherein I am deserted by my
more prudent brethren;) for that I hereby strike ost from that party, on whom
my former contests did seem to (...) me; But to them I must briefly answer, I
am willing to be wise as a serpent, and resolved to keep my inno^n^ as a dove,
so long as these do correspond and agree, I have an heart to lodge them; but if
prudence once ob^ate or obstruct duty, or guide into, o^ guard sin, I fear the
serpent begins to wind too far, and getting in the head, will wind in the
body, and devour the do^, that some who have been objects of my opposition
(because subjects of separation) have in my present sufferings embraced me, and
showed kindness to me and mine, (beyond some more specially charged with it,
as their more particular duty.) I am very sensible, and thankfully acknowledge
to God and them; and hope they did not thereby design to charm my zeal
against what I ever cenceived to be sin, I confess it has been a check to my
comforts, to consider, some triumph in me and my sufferings, because opposed to
the superstitions and profaneness, (which they dislike) who agree not with me
in those positive truths, which I have asserted; and will be turned in their
hearts against me, when the same two-edged-sword in my weak hand, shall be
constrained to strike their more civil, seemingly sacred lusts; The Usurer
huggs, and has the Preacher home to dinner, when he preaches against the
prodigal profusal spending drunkard; who will hunt and hurry him out of the
Parish when he shall preach against usury: I cannot but tell you a passage
which here befell me; In my close confinement three persons, full of seeming
zeal to piety and purity, stumbled into my chamber, and saluted me with this
salutation, we are strangers to you, but in conscience of our duty are come to
visit you as a sufferer for Jesus Christ; to which kind and Christian
salutation I returned a short admonition that we might endeavor to understand
the truths of the Lord Jesus, and labor to agree in positives, for I feared
many rejoiced in my sufferings as negative, and against what is grossly evil,
who would not embrace the truths I did contend for; on which these persons zeal
boiled over into this angry Taunt; what I warrant you, you are yet for the
Church of England, and your parish Churches? to which I could not but Reply by
way of advice, not to deny the being of the Church, nor renounce union and
Communion with it, because of the corruptions in it; but their zeal brake into
rage, and railing, thou Antichrist, will thou yet uphold the Beast and Whore of
Rome? are you Antichrist still? with many more invectives and expressions of
outrage, which provoked me to give them this short farewell, Friends, reconcile
your selves to your selves, am I a sufferer for Christ, and yet Antichrist? if
you come not to visit me, come not to vex me; to all dissenting friends I
cannot but by way of thanks for all their kindness, entreat them to study the
truths of God I have asserted, and embrace not their force against me, but
against both extremes; for that love will not last, which is founded in
present contradiction, without consent in positives asserted; Love the Truth,
and me for the Truths sake, then shall ye have the comfort of loving indeed and
in truth; It was my hope, and is my prayer, that our retrogradation in
Reformation, would have made such who departed from us, to reflect with
seriousness (even unto Repentance) the experienced remorce of separating, and
Church confusion, to which Church-gathering has resolved us; but if men harden
themselves to uphold their sin, and strengthen their party, (to the utter
subversion of this poor Church) and paganizing this Nation, they must give
leave to trust God with their love and kindnesses, whilst to my power I resist
their lusts; and let them know I cannot be a Martyr of Faction; I hope I can do
all things, and suffer all things for the truth, and nothing against the truth:
and must all my days pursue Reformation of Gods Ordinances in Union, and
Communion with the Church, leaving my self, principles, and practices to the
judgment of God; knowing it is an easy matter for me to be judged and
misjudged by men, and yet abide what I am,

A servant to God, his Truth, and Church. Z.C.
Julij 20. 1661
AN APPENDIX To the foregoing LETTER: IN A LETTER, Written in answer to one,
signifying to Mr. CROFTON, the Offense which was taken at his going to CHURCH,
And being present at the COMMON PRAYERS IN THE CHAPEL IN THE TOWER OF LONDON.

For Mr. Z. C. Prisoner in the TOWER.
DEAR BROTHER,
YOU cannot enough believe, how much your renewed public Communion, with we
know not whom, in the Ordinances, which they think cannot but be materially
corrupt, especially in that place, has grieved and alienated the hearts of the
Godly; not only Members, but Ministers: Defend it how we can, They censure it
not only Impolitick, but Impious; hardening our Enemies, weakening our Friends,
undoing your good Testimony, and giving away the CAUSE, it being aeque, if not
aequaliter; as if you should Read and Administer the Form: They think there can
be no Obligation of Duty, or Edification warranting the one, which may not also
justify the other. The matter of Doctrine, and worship of Prayer, seems to be
not only the objectum ad quem, but also per quibus, whether things or persons;
wherein they take it for granted, the Common Prayer is corrupt: As when you
pray for Archbishops, Bishops, as Ministers of a superior Degree (and indeed
according to the new corrected Form of Ordination, of the only Holy Order and
Institution) wherein they are an Antichristian Order, etc. Or if only the
Circumstance of the Form were exceptionable, yet you judge the Nurse may as
well be bound in Duty and Necessity to give the Child his bread out of a
Chamber pot, as she her self, or the Child feed themselves out of it: Plead
then you must necessity, for both or neither; and they expect you should do
the other too (se defendendo) or else supersede this for the time to come: But
if you proceed, I persuade my self of that very many Brethren which are (...)
in the rest, you will be alone in this; for they can with more patience brook
to the present, where there be personal corruptions in the Matter, than where
there are circumstantial, material Offenses in the Form.

Yours, Bound in your Bonds. P. E.

For the Reverend Mr. P. E. to be communicated to other Christian Friends, and
the Brethren of the Ministry concerned in his Letter, as scandalized at my
Communion with the Church, in the Order of Service, by which I cannot
administer.
Good Brother,
GRace and peace abound; yours (no little aggravation of mine affliction) I
received, I thereby understand the grief, not only of Brethren in Christianity,
but in the Ministry; because of (what you call renewed) my Communion, with
their Church; in that Service by which I cannot administer: and what is to me
more grievous, their Censures of my act, as impolitick yea impious, hardening
our enemies, weakening our friends, undoing my good testimony, and giving away
the Cause: Sir, such is my esteem of the affections of the godly, that their
grief must needs be mine: God is my witness, I desire, seek, study their joy;
their grief for my duty, can only grieve me in by being groundless; whereby
they wound themselves, by wounding him whom God has greived; and that by most
bitter words, sharper then Swords or Razors, hardening our enemies, weakening our
friends, are easily borne, they are events by accident; beyond the nature and
intent of the Act, or the intention of the Agent; resulting from the
wickedness of the one, and weakness of the other: to deem this Act,
Impolitick, I take not ill; all my acts and writings have been such in their
account; the Censures of the Committee of discretion, are to me so common, that
they pass on me as things of course; branding with folly what could never be
convinced of iniquity; but impious does pierce mine intrails, to shun sin has
been my study, my smart; did not piety bar may policy, I could sleep in as
whole a skin as my more prudent Brethren; the fear of God, conscience of duty,
provokes this impious act; what a Monster of man has God made me? my course is
nothing but contradictions, treasonable loyalty; schismatical unity; impious
piety: yet this is not all, an undoing of my good testimony, and giving away
the Cause, and so an Apostate, can any thing cut deeper? be more clouding to my
sufferings? more deprive God of the glory thereof? it pierces my soul to cry
Lord judge between me and Brethren, my witness is on high, my Record is above;
I have charity for Jobs miserable comforters; they spoke well of God, though
their arguing reproved not Job, for they spoke with a mistaken zeal; I believe
they were Saints against whom Paul appealed; it is an easy thing for me to be
judged of men, my judgment is of the Lord; The Lord strengthen my patience
under this most provoking temptation, that I may with sobriety reason against
clamatous censorious Brethren.

My good Brother, where is sobriety? charity? is zeal for purity a Moses
Serpent, to devour these Graces of the Spirit? Cave.

Why is my now attendance on solemn public worship, branded to be renewed
communion, with you know not whom? if you mean this of persons individual,
truly as to the most I know not whom, nor can I think you judge it necessary; I
cannot in my first communion know it in any Congregation; is Church gathering
become a Presbyterial principle? is it the work of every age? is seven, not
seventy years an age? is non knowledge of Members a cause of non communion?
would not common charity make me know them to be a society of Christians?
worshippers of the true God in Jesus Christ, and are they not hereby members of
the Church Catholic visible, particularly divided by local circumscription? or
have we renounced this principle? is not the Liberty of the Tower a particular
Church, in a Presbyterial sense as well as Christ Church, or Alhallows Breads
street? If I communicate in these, must I not communicate with I know not whom?
may I not hear the Gospel preached, and (in calling on God in the name of
Christ, for things agreeable to his will) communicate with I know not whom? But
why is my communion r^newed? I never denied; I never ceased from; I never was
cut off from communion with the English Reformed Church, and its particular
Assemblies: must Independents be verified in the false reproach, (viz.)
Presbyterial Churches were gathered Churches? Presbytery interrupted was the
Church dissolved? and Communion abandoned? Cave. -- We have disowned, denied,
determined sin, and danger in these Notions; I have more charity than to think
my self out of Communion, because violently debarred from Convention with the
particular Assemblies of the Reformed English Church. God having at length
opened me a door of liberty to attend his solemn public worship in this place,
with this Assemb^y, why is my acceptance, and use thereof clamorously condemned
as an act not only impoliti k, but impious? do not you know this is the
execution of a resolution, neither new nor rash? not new, for I thus
determined, and thus practiced in my youth, when piety was reproached by
profane men, as Puritanism, and by the Brownists as corrupt Communion: I thus
determined, and declared in my public Ministry, and preaching for
Reformation: I thus determined in all my late disputes and writings; whilst I
was at liberty I thus practiced on accidental occasions; I (herein convinced,
and hereof persuaded) prayed the liberty I now enjoy, the first day I was
committed prisoner to this place, and have ever since petitioned to enjoy it:
this act you know is not rash, but the result of mature and deliberate
thoughts, besides what has passed between God and mine own soul; I have heard
and weighed the objections of separating as well as reforming brethren; and
after many expostulations I have (you know it) stated my Case of Conscience,
drawn up my reasons, communicated them to Brethren, and Christian Friends;
craved a Confutation from more than one; prayed fraternal Correption, by solid
and serious Argumentation; and professed a readiness to hear, and obey
Conviction: I wonder after all this, and Nine Months time to have corrected,
convinced my Judgment; I shall be censured for bringing it to Act, and you
should now call for an Apology.

Dear Brother, How long shall I complain? when shall I be known, and dealt with
as a Brother? Is it fair Play to revile, and not reprove? To condemn, and not
confute? Will you neither convince my Conscience, nor be content without
Censures, to see me obey it? Are you angry to be imposed on, and yet expect I
should live by an implicit Faith; and forbear what is to me a positive Duty,
on this bare Reason, The Brethren will be displeased? Let me say it without
Profaneness or Levity, Be not wise overmuch: The Offense of Brethren has its
place and weight in my Soul; but must be well grounded, before it counterpoize
Conscience of positive, indispensable Duty.

I well understand not the Epithites which vilify my present Act, because they
are general, and without Reason.

That it is Impolitick, I may not deny; I have ever been estranged to, and at
enmity with the Brethrens Policies and Fancy: If they had in some things been
as foolish as silly I, God might have had more Glory, Truth more Strength, the
Church more Purity and Order, my self more Liberty; their Comforts I know not,
nor will adventure to judge: What Policies this Act must relate unto, I know
not; unless, it be the strengthening, and so justifying those Schisms which
supplanted, subverted our Reformation, by those Seditions, Rebellions,
Treasons, which have made it Odious, and scandalized the endeavors thereof;
that the most Upright, and Innocent among us, are pressed under it. If Brethren
were sensible, That my Zeal for Reformation is reproached, repelled; and my
self, thus oppressed by these Schisms; they would not sure think it Policy to
strike hands with them; or Impolitick, to appear really, as well as verbally
against them. God knows I may not long speak, let me speak freely: Truly
Brother, foolish I, think it aque, and aequaliter politic, for serious sober
Reformers, to unite with Non-communicating, Separating, Congregational
Brethren, in the Church-confounding, nullifying principles and practices: As
for our late King-Killers to cry up the COVENANT* and confound the Quarrel of
the Parliament, with the Good Old Cause. Confound 62. with 52. and you may
reconcile 48. to 43. and soon return to 48. again: Agree these in
Ecclesiastics, and divide them in Civils if you can. I wish I could not scent
some Brethren (offended at my Act) as tainted already in their Civils: But I am
a Fool, be it so; yet a Fools Bolt is soon shot. If Presbyters will wisely
serve Gods providence, and do his Church proper Service, Now it is their Time,
and Business to witness Corruptions circa cultum publicum, will not warrant
Non-communion with secession or separation from a true Church, and such I yet
deem England: Correct this folly, and I may become wise; till then, I will
through Grace, joy in my folly. I have observed indeed Gods, and the Kings
Fools were never many: But truly, foolish I, could never judge it good Policy,
That Non-communion, Separation, and the Sectarian Spawn, should shroud
themselves, and be sheltered by Nonconformity and Reformation: Has not our
dear-bought Experience taught us, That the Repute of being the Parent of these,
has been the Remora, and Retroversion of that? Can we forget, how these, when
in Power, did divide, divert, and destroy Reformation; Paganize all England,
and plant One hundred and twenty gathered Churches, and thereby proclaim
Entity, not Purity of the Churches, was their Quarrel? And shall we not now be
so wise, as to disown, and deny them, as a Bastard brood: Now they are taken as
Vagrants, and whip't up to Non-conformists, as their reputed Parents? Can we
ever witness Relation more than by these affectionate embraces in this day of
Discrimination? O! that my Brethrens Policy were so wise, as to consider the
Duty and Necessity of differing Reformation and Separation, and thath they
would ponder the Honor and Benefit of Nonconformity, protesting, and
practicing against Non-communion, in this day, when its Enemy does confound and
destroy this for the sake, and under the name of that. But whither am I gone? I
must come back like a Fool, and tell you, I could never beat it into my Brains,
That it was good Policy to run out of an unclean disordered House, under
pretense of cleansing and regulating the same. My little will led me to abide
in it, and by a Scrub Beesom of a reproving M^nistry, such as I can get, to
bring the Dust about mine Ears: I judge it prudent filth which hangs on my
Clothes, in a regular endeavor to get it out of my House; I am mistaken, if
ever my House will cleanse it self, if I run and call all others out of it:
Once more, and all my wit is wasted; I am an Irish man, and never yet was so
wise to lie in the Field, open to cold and wet, because the Beasts, not only
stood, but unhandsomly dung d in my lodging Chamber? I have been used to
Impoliticks, but am unwilling to be better advised. Impolitick! That is
nothing, Fools may go to Heaven; but my Act is impious, This cannot be endured,
without good Evidence, it is an high Charge: I pray, wherein lies its impiety?
This seems contrary to the general nature of the Act; for that is a Religious
Attendance on the Solemn Public Worship of the true God in Jesus Christ.
Irregularity and Disorder may be an iniqui^y in the Administrator; but that the
Attendance on Gods Worship disorderly dispensed, is impious in Gods People, my
Bible does not teach; lend me yours, for I will not persist in any thing that
writes impiety on my Soul; my Charity will not allow me to charge them with
impiety, who voluntarily attend this Service, only because they do so;
misguided Zeal is not always impious. I dare not charge our first R formers,
and Marian Martyrs, to have gone to the Stake, under the Guilt, and in the very
Act of impiety? and yet many of them went embracing, commending, chanting, and
concluding their last Devotion and Breath, in the Words, and Order of the
Common Prayer. Gradual Defect, will not acquit their Act from impiety; if it
now be, it then was an Act impious to serve God by the Common Prayer. Our
measure of increased light, and many Obligations, may aggravate our persistance
in it, but will not alter the nature of the Act, in it self impi^us. Conscience
binds me to be present in the Solemn Convocation, and personally attend his
Public Worship; the which, when I come to it, is by the impious Administrator,
dispensed in a rude, disorderly, irreverend Mode, which makes it my burden,
and my Soul to loath, what I dare not leave, because it is for Matter and
essential Form the Lords Ordinance: Is this an Act impious? Let Brethrens Piety
work by Charity, to evince the Impiety; I will give Glory to God, and return;
till then, let me proceed without Censure.

You specify some Sequels of this mine attendance on Solemn Public Worship,
in this Mode and Order; but they are such, as will not convince the same of
impiety; you say,

I hereby weaken Friends, and strengthen Enemies: I pray you how, and wherein?
The Friends and Enemies of Non-Communion and Separation, from the English
Reformed Church, never came into the Calender of my Friends or Enemies; nor
were they ever owned by sober Non-conformists, contesting for gradual
Reformation: If such be hereby strengthened, and weakened; I bless God that I
have done my Duty, and that my practice does edify, whilst I am not permitted
to preach. I must confess, it is one end of my Action; I account it mine
Honor, really to witness against Non-communion, in my very Conflicts for
Reformation: But if Friends and Enemies to that Gradual Reformation, incumbent
on our age and hands, be weakened, or strengthened, it may be mine Affl ction, it
is not mine Impiety; for this Event is by accident, not natural and genuine;
the result of weakness in the one, and wickedness in the other, who consider
not that Nonconforming Communion, is an indispensable Duty, and essential to
Church-Reformation. I must keep in my house if I will cleanse it, though the
filth in it is mine Annoyance: Circumstantial Defects, Redundant Appendants,
and Disorders, will not warrantably discharge mine attendance on the
substantial, and truly existing worship of God: In this Case, give me leave to
say to stumbling Friends and Brethren, you have Zeal, but not according to
knowledge. I must by Union with the Church, seek Purity of Ordinances; and none
but wilful Fools, or mad Men, will run to the Channel to drink, because men at
Sea are glad to drink stinking water, or deny to wash the Vessel, or force all
for ever to drink in such unclean Vessels, because some through necessity can,
and do drink in such: And yet Brother, I cannot but tell you, I have the
comfort of my own Endeavors, to anticipate this accidental Event, by those
Papers which I passed into the City, with an intent to have passed them into
the World; in which you have my Apology for this Act: And in Answer to this
Objection, I pray God they who stopped their Publication, when they might have
done it, may seriously consider the service they have done the Church of God; I
could do no more to make even paths to weak feet; if those who should, would
not pave it, I cannot help it; I am innocent of the blood of all men, who
stumble at this Act (in it self lawful) and indispensably necessary, because of
those accidents which I have done my part to anticipate.

But you say, I hereby undo my good Testimony, and give away the Cause in which
I appeared, This bears indeed an Aspect of Impiety; an Apostate is odious to
God and men: I have ever resolved (and may ere long prove it) to dye, rather
than do this; my Conscience bears me witness, All this is come upon me, yet
have I not dealt falsely in the Covenant. Had this been objected by men who knew
not Mr. Crofton, who never read the Writings for which he suffered, it had been
a tolerable mistake; well may others, when my Familiars and Brethren so much
mistake my Testimony, and misread my Cause; well might Thomas Tomkins confound
me with our late Usurping Traitors, when my Fellow-Presbyters confound me with
Separatists. I observe you grant my Testimony given, is good; I wish it had
been owned with less fear and shame, I had been then more encouraged in it: But
I pray Brother, what was it? Was it the Cause of separation from, or
Non-communion with the English Reformed Church, because corrupt, or Backslider
in its Reformation? Have I been all this time a Martyr for Independency?
nothing less; Zachary Crofton a Separatist from, or Non-communicant with a
backsliding, corrupt, disordered Church, is as great, as clear a Contradiction,
as Zachary Crofton a Traitor to King Charles the Second: Which of the people
who sat under my Ministry, will say, I now undo the good Testimony I gave, and
give away the Cause for which I appeared? Do I now practice otherwise than I
have preached? Who has read the Books for which I suffer, and will say, I, by
this Act, Give away the Cause, and undo my good Testimony? Read my Bonds, page
35. Whatever shall be the establishment in the Church, though never so corrupt,
yet whilst consistent with Salvation, though it may occasion to me Suffering,
and Suspention of my Ministry, by Gods Grace it shall not effect in me Schism
from the Church. Read my Fetters, page 49, 50. This Reformation cannot justify
the Separation; for that the Corruptions established, were never made a
sufficient ground for Separation; sober, serious Non-conformists, who groaned
under the burden of th^se Corruptions, and for this Reformation, were grieved
by, and greatly contended against this Separation, as that which wanted
sufficient ground. Read again mine Epistle to Mr. Firmins Lyturgical
Considerator, in page 3. I can keep Communion under that Form of Worship
whereby I cannot Administer; and I can heartily say Amen to the Matter of those
Petitions which are put up in an Order so confused, preposterous, and
indigested; that it seems to me to be so much below the Gravity of the
Church, whose mouth I must be; the Seriousness of the Office whereby I
administer, the Sanctity of the Duty I am to perform, and the Sacred Nature of
the Object to whom they are presented, that I dare not stand between God and
his people with the same. This last is part of my Testimony concerning, and
against the Lyturgy it self: Now Sir, What is my good Testimony? Wherein is it
undone? Am I not practicing the Cause in the express state in which I stated
it? It was ever far from mine intentions to be an Advocate, much less a Martyr,
for Non-communion and Separation: Nonconformity and Reformation is my Cause,
has made my Testimony; if I undo, or give away this Inculca me tanquam salem
insipidum. Good Brother, read me right, and charge me not with Apostasy; who
drive with all my main, my good Testimony against the one, as well as the
other, extreme of Reformation: You wound your selves, and engage Enemies (by
your Censures) to Clamor, and call me Apostate: But you cannot convince me,
nor any that know me and my Testimony, that I am started one hairs breadth from
my Cause; this condemned practice, is the formal pursuit of my Contest; I must
therefore see very good grounds before I give back.

Having answered your Charge of Impolicy and Impiety, I must consider your
suggested Arguments against mine attendance on Gods Solemn Public Worship in
this place and order: And truly Brother, these are few and obscure, I
understand them not: You speak of Ordinances, which the Brethren think to be
materially corrupt: I can say no more to this, but only to request they will
speak out their thoughts, and specify the seeming corrupt matter, and then I
will judge concerning it: And when they come to do this, I think they will
find, Secundae Cogitationes sunt meliores; they will find it is the Mode, not
Matter, that is corrupt. You say, The Matter of Doctrine, and Worship of
Prayer, seems not only to be the objectum ad quem (I think quod more proper)
but pro quibus; whether things or persons, wherein they take it for granted the
Common Prayer is corrupt. This I profess I understand not; What do you mean by
the Matter of Doctrine, and Worship of Prayer? Are these terms Synonimous?
Intend you by them Doctrine suggested in, and by Prayer? Or the Credentials of
the Common Prayer Book, distinct from the Worship of Pray? I pray you explain
yourself, and then know, Think so, Seems so; and take for granted, may be
supposed grounds for your Censures; but signify nothing to my Conviction;
which must be on certainty if it supersede, what I conclude indispensable Duty:
Indeed your annexed instance makes me think, you mean the Matter of Doctrine
suggested by Prayer; for you specify Archbishops and Bishops, as a superior
Degree of Ministry; and if so, you will give me leave to tell you, you have
antidated your Objection; for our Books pray for none but Bishops and Curates,
or Pastors and Curates; so that till the time of change come, I may
(notwithstanding this Exception) continue my Communion; when the new Book
comes, I may consider the weight of this Plea; in the mean time I pray you
resolve me, Will single Errors preached, much less suggested in Prayer,
warrant Non-communion with a true Church, Non-attendance on Gospel Ministry,
and Gods Solemn Public Worship? What means, when binds that Rule of our
Redeemer, Beware of the Leaven of the Pharisees? I cannot understand by take
heed what you he^r? hear not them who teach for Doctrines the Traditions of
men. May not a personal Dissent be entered to a Petition, for a mistaken
Object, and suggesting an Error as its Basis? Or must the whole Prayer for
Matter generally good, therefore be disowned? This will necessitate, and was
the first cause of S t-forms of Prayer, and require that they composed, be not
only communicated fratr^bus doctioribus; but also to every indiv^dual Member of
the Church, who must join in Prayer; and so Sir, we fight well, to fly upon,
by flying from a Common Prayer Book.

You add, The Brethren think mine attendance on it is aequ^, if not aqualiter;
As if I should read or administer by this Form; and that there can be no
Obligation of Duty, or Edification warranting the one, which may not also
justify the other. To this I say, Th^nk so will not convince; but of such who
thus think, I would enquire, Is the common state of a Christian, different from
the special state of a Minister? And so the Capacities, Duties, and Obligations
of each different; so that the one may be continued, while the other does
cease. The one may, and must be acted, when the other is arrested, superseded,
or violently barred; if men of power in the Church will discapacitate me for
the one, does it ipso facto, discharge me from the other? Do our discapacitated
Common Councel-men cease to be Citizens? Or be they not bound to retain their
Relation, and participate or communicate in the common good of the City, under
what (they judge to be) the rude and disordered Government thereof? I do not
believe the Obligation of my Minist^y to be aeque, or aequaliter, necessitous
and extensive with that of Christianity. I must be, and act as a Christian,
when those conditions are required from me which I cannot yield, and without
which I may not be permitted to act as a Minister; and those conditions will
not discharge the Duties of the one, nor bar the Exercise of them which do bar
the other. I a Minister, stand in a general and special Relation to the Church,
and am charged with Duties proper and peculiar to each of these. I may be
sinfully imposed on, and restrained from my special, by those things which will
not bar the Duties of my general Relation and Capacity: I conceive
Administration of Gods Worship, is much different from Attendance on Gods
Worship; and I stand bound to the last, when I am (justly or unjustly) barred
from the first. Abiathar, and the Idolatrous Priests, were not barred from
serving God with the Church, when thrust from serving in the Priests Office. In
my general Relation, as a Member of the Church, I stand charged, and am
capacitated to judge the Matter, and essential Form of Gods Worship; assent to
which, is mine only Act: But in my special Relation, as a Minister, I stand
also charged, and am capacitated to judge the Ministerial Mode, and humane
Order by which Gods Worship is celebrated; and if herein I be imposed on, and
that by an Order rude, irreverend, and unsuitable to God, his Church, or
Worship; which right Reason, much less true Religion, will not allow me to
receive; I am interrupted in my Ministerial Office, the Formality of which is,
As a man to Modifie Gods Institutions, whereby an intercourse is maintained
between God and men; such imposition I judge to be a subversion of Ministerial
Office and Authority; not to be offered by others, or admitted by my self,
without great iniquity; and if it therefore be enforced by violence, that I
must be restrained from my Ministerial Modification of Gods Ordinances
according to mine Office, and Ministerial Gifts received; or I may not be
permitted to Minister, I yet stand in my Relation, as a Member of the Church,
bound to communicate: The Ministerial Mode imposed, and sinfully received (by
such as subjugate their Ministry) not vitiating the Subject, or nullifying the
Ordinances of God; will not warrant my Non-attendance on them: It is not
equally necessitous and obliging, that I a Speaker, pronounce a wild indigested
Speech, full of Incongruities, Nonsense, and Solecisms (from which a sound
mind does bar me) as that I join and concur in the Substantials thereof with
the Assemblies, so asking common and certain good things.

I may not cast off my general Relation, wherein I am purely passive, because
those things are to be personally acted in my special Relation and Capacity,
which I cannot without sin consent to do, and therefore must stand still. I
cannot beat it into my Brains, that it is aeque, or aequaliter to attend, and
give an Assent unto the Matter prayed, as to utter, pronounce, and express the
raw, rude, and disorderly Speech of the Speaker: Or that the Necessity or
Obligation of the whole House, in this general Order to present it self before
his Majesty, which will and does warrant the one, may justify the other; the
Speakers Speech is often censured, when the Commons concerned in it are
commended and justified.

But Sir, Rather than not enforce this Fancy, you will knock me on the Head
with a Chamber Pot; you urge my necessity to Communion, to be the same to
Ministration, and tell me, I judge the Nurse is bound in Duty and Necessity to
give the Child his bread (his milk had been more proper) out of a Chamber Pot,
as she her self; or the Child it self out of it: An homely Simile, but in a
starving Necessity, I do judge so; but I judge Similes do not currere quatuor
pedibus, there is no aptitude in this to my Case, that Necessity will constrain
me to take my Meat in an unclean Vessel; which will not constrain me to give it
in that Vessel to another. I suppose your Nurse is poor, who has no other
Vessel but a Chamber Pot; yet I must suppose her a good Huswife capacitated to
make it clean: But if her Superiors have stripped her of all other, and will
bar her from her cleansing this, I suppose she is not bound to play the Nurse,
and feed others, though she must thus feed her self; if filthy Parents will
have such Nurses, or none, I hope it is in my power to be none of them, I am
not bound to it, I am by Nature bound to deny it; and yet I must maintain mine
own being as well as I can: If the being of Christianity depend upon my
personal Ministry, as my being, or appearing a Christian, does on my Communion
with the Church visible, your Inference might be of some force, but this it
does not: That therefore you may understand the difference, keep to similitudes
more apt: The King has Decreed, All the Citizens shall each Month present
their Petitions by a joint Assent to the Expressions of a Speaker; the
Governors of this City direct a course by which to design different Speakers,
they consult Matter to be spoken, and the Mode of speaking; the first is good,
and allowed; the second is rude, and disordered; the Speakers can better
express the desired Matter, but shall not be permitted; are they aeque, or
aequaliter, ob^iged to speak in this Mode, as to attend this Assembly, and give
Assent to this common good Matter rudely expressed by others? Not speaking in
this Mode, they lose the Honor and Advantages of the Speakers; but not
attending, or assenting to the Matter, they lose the benefit and being of
Citizens; are these equally to be embraced and pursued? They are bound in the
one personally to Act, and denying to subjugate their Judicium rationale, to
the rude Prescriptions of others, they are barred from it; but resolved into
the common state, in which, assent to the Matter is their only Act, being
wholly and purely passive in the prescribed and imposed Form and Mode of
expression; in your Chamber Pot Case, you suppose Christianity to depend on my
personal Ministry (which my Relation as a Nurse does renounce) and then indeed
your Inference may be cogent; for then your Chamber Pot will square with du
Moulins, Fools Coat; but in my more suitable and sociable Case, I am bound to
attendance when, and where I am not bound to administer: The Necessity of
City-Interest and Relation, does bind me to attendance, and assent to
City-Petitions; but not to the Duty and Dignity of a Speaker, between the King
and the City, from which I am barred by the irrational imposition of an
irregular, undue Mode of expression, in which I must personally act, by a
suspense of my Judicium rationale, which I am bound to act in this more, and
beyond what I must judge in my more common Capacity.

Now Sir, I must tell you, I know not whom you intend by the Brethren, who are
(...), in the rest; sure I am, they are not Congregationallists, who have no
little blasphemed the COVENANT, by their late Professions for it, and by their
Martyrs pretenses to it, as the Bond of their most barbarous, pernicious
Treasons and Impieties; which was by themselves slighted as an Almanac out of
Date, and profanely, blasphemously violated before they could, or did consult
and perpetrate the same: I cannot suppose them to be the Brethren, for the late
specifical Difference, whose Policy propounded an interpretation of the
COVENANT, contrary to the literal sense, and Grammatical Construction thereof;
from whom, and which you know, I was (...); it has been mine unhappiness, that
few of the Brethren have been (...) in the present concernments of Reformation;
nor could I expect it, whilst I could not be heard to speak; nor was worth
reading when I had written.

Again, I must tell you that it is my Grief to observe that many are (...) in
Negatives, who are, and are resolved to be (...) in Positives: These agree with
me in, and against the Disorders which should not be, but dissent from me in
that Order which should be in the Church: They consent, when I say, Ministers
must not conform; but understand me not, or affirm me Antichristian, when I
say, Members must communicate. They own me as Zealous, when I cry to the sons
of Eli, You do wickedly, thus rudely to Administer; but disown me as impious,
when I tell Israel, You must bring your Offerings to the Lord, though by reason
of the profane Priests, and rude Administration thereof, your Soul does loath
them. They like me well, and cry me up, when I say, The Image of Jealousy
provokes God, and has brought him down from his Mercy-seat, to the Threshold
of the Temple; but look a squint, and cry down, when I tell them, I will
follow, not go before God; Israel must know, and appear in the Temple as Gods
house, though he be at the Threshold ready to depart, but not yet gone. How
long shall we represent the Spirit of Reformation, to be a Spirit of
Contradiction? and verify that odious Scandal, That Non-conformists condemn
every thing, but cannot tell what they would have. I have observed new light is
only reprehensive, but true light is also discretive and directive.

Good Brother, Desire such who in this are (...), to cast an eye on that Tract
(almost lost in our late Confusions) which Cartwright, Geree, Hildersham, Dod,
Ball, Hind, Nicholls, Langley, did tread out, between the Conformity thou (as
now) required; and the Non-communion by the Brownists, and Semiseparatists then
as now pressed, practiced, and contested for, with more reviling Censures, than
convincing Reasons.

I wish all those (...) Brethren, would seriously study the Nature of
Separation and Non-communion, and observe the quality and quantity of
Corruptions, which all who have written on that Subject, have concluded may be
in a Church, before they constitute a warrantable Cause of Separation, or
Non-communion. I have not met with any who would not allow, yea, require
Communion as a Duty with a Church whose Ministers are vile, Members wicked,
Ministration rude and disorderly, Censures wanting, or warding against the
power of Godliness; Worship polluted, and in which Idolatry is practiced, but
conjunct with Gods true Worship; their Altars standing by Gods Altar; their
Post by his Post; their Groves and high Places, in his holy Mountain, near unto
his very Temple. I will not in these Cases except Cotton, or H oker; by whose
Principles (the being of the Church admitted) I will be bound to defend my
present Practice.

Good Brother, Remember, Consider our difference from the former state of these
holy men is Gradual, not Real; the Duty or Impiety was in nature the same to
them, the measure and aggravation is more to us: They indeed acted beyond what
I can allow, and in what I can better excuse, than justify them; but their
Arguments for Communion, are armed with Religious Reason, beyond what can be
resisted.

If now, I am left alone (for I must yet proceed) I shall only note paucity of
Professors, is attendant on all Criticisms of Christianity, strait is the Gate.
Joshua and Caleb must follow God thoroughly, not turning to the right or left
hand. Gods Worship, disordered in its Ministration and Mode, I attend with
Grief; but the Corruptions being extrinsecal, not vitiating the Subject, under
which Gods Worship is for Matter and constitutive Form his own, I dare not
leave it, I dare not but attend it; violent Restraint removed, I have no ground
of Faith in neglect hereof, to expect special Grace or Presence; I cannot with
Confidence appeal to God, with Lord, Thou will have Me^cy, not Sacrifice. As a
common Christian, I am charged to judge the Matter; as a Minister, the Mode and
Order of Gods Worship; when it is convincingly demonstrated, that these two are
aeque, or aequaliter, necessitous and obliging, I shall either Conform, or
cease to Communicate; till then, I pray you Brethren, receive my Practice as a
Comment on my Cause and Testimony; and give me leave without your Censures
(provoking, justifying the Clamours of the wicked) to walk with my God in
Communion with his Church visible, conform to the commanding Dictates of my
Conscience; This is the Desire of, Sir,

Your Brother, Constant to God, And his Covenant. ZACHARY CROFTON.

FINIS.

