THE JUDGMENT OF M. CARTWRIGHT AND M. BAXTER Concerning SEPARATION And the
Ceremonies.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1673.

TO THE READER.
UPon this following Letter of T. C. there will need no other observation than
what Archbishop Bancroft long since made, Surv. of pretend. Discipl. c. 34. p.
447.
in these words:

But it most of all pleases me to see, how Master Cartwright draws homeward.
For as the Anabaptists by their madness kept Master Calvin within some good
compass, and as Master Beza has been compelled in some sort, to retire himself
from his former eagerness: so assuredly the phrenetical giddiness of these our
new unbrideled Schismatics, who for pretended purity are many degrees beyond
all the Savoyan Disciplinarians, has wrought a miracle (to my understanding)
upon M. Cartwright. For hear him, how for fear of falling into flat Donatism,
he was fain to plead against one (that had been his Scholar) in the behalf of
the Church of England, Th. Cartw. to Harrisen.
so bitterly before by himself impugned. The ordinary assemblies (says he) of
those which profess the Gospel in England, are the Churches of Christ: which he
proves in this sort; Those Assemblies which have Christ for there head, and
the same also for their foundation, are Gods Churches: Such are the assemblies
of England, Therefore, etc. Again, They that have performed unto them the
special Covenant which the Lord has made with his Churches, of pouring his
spirit upon them, and putting his word into their mouths, are the Churches of
God: But such are the assemblies in England, Therefore, etc. Hereunto may be
added (says he further) the judgment of all the Churches of Christ in Europe,
all which give the right hand of Society in the house of God, unto the
assemblies which are in England. Again, to prove that the Church of England is
the Church of God, notwithstanding it want the pretended Discipline; he uses
this distinction; that at it is in man's body, so is it in this matter; there
are certain-parts essential, and such as without the which a man cannot stand,
and some serving either to his comelyness or to his continuance. And of this
latter sort he makes the Discipline. And lastly, he write, thus; To say that
the Church of England is not the Church of God, because it has not received
this Discipline, methinks is all one with this, as if a man would say, It is no
City, because it has no wall: or, that it is no Vineyard, because it has
neither hedge nor ditch. Thus far Master Cartwright.

In which his manner of speech you find a very great alteration, from his
anoient style. And as concerning the necessity whereof I entreat, the wind you
see is turned. There is no more necessity in England of the Geneva platform,
than that every City in this Realm should be walled about. And besides, the
pretended Discipline is become not to be any longer of the essence of the
Church, but as appertaining to the comelyness of it.

And a little after,

And this I will add unto it, that if Master Cartwright would but confer with
some that haves kill in fortification, to know of him whether an old thick wall
of lime and stone, made many hundred years since, or a new slight wall
slubbered over, and wrought with untempered mortar some few years ago, whether
(I say) of these two walls are of better defense for any City: I should be in
good hope, that he would in short time, leave the Disciplinary walls of Geneva,
and content himself with the ancient fortifications of the Church of England;
and the rather, because he sees what a giddy and itching humor his novelties
have bred, in the unstayed sort of many fantastical people.

Now to what M. Cartwright has said in general to show that there is no such
necessity of Separation from the Church of England, as some of his followers
now pretend: may be added the Judgment of a later Writer (concerning those
particulars which are so much scrupled by them, who under pretense of greater
purity will needs cast out all decency and good order from the House of God:)
in a Book, entitled Five Disputations of Church Government and Worship.
Printed at London, 1659.

A LETTER of T. C. TO RICHARD HARRISON CONCERNING SEPARATION.
Grace and Peace, etc.
FOR so much as I left you the choice for the first conference, whether you
would have it in writing, or by speech of mouth; I attended some days for
Answer of that matter: which, because it was not returned, I esteemed that you
held you still to the request of your Letters; which was, to receive something
from me by writing.

For Answer therefore; So it is, that your Letters affected me diversely: for
where your first page had raised me up unto some hope, of re-uniting your self
with the rest of your company unto us, from whom you have thought good to
sunder your selves; the second page, which lays forth the condition of our
peace, did cast me, and as were, beat me from it again. Howbeit, the mercy of
God upholding me in some good hope of profiting you, or receiving profit from
you, I thought to cut out this time of my weightiest and most necessary
business, wherein I might give that contentment, which the Lord has enabled
mine hand unto.

Unto you, not unwilling to come to us, the passage (as it seems) is stopped
in diverse respects: The short whereof is; The receiving without public
repentance, of those which come from the Churches of England: where because in
the outward profession, that the Laws of the Land do justify the dumb
ministry, there appear unto you no lawful assemblies of the Church of Christ;
your fear is, least in uniting your selves with such, you should be unequally
yoaked, and made fellow members of some other than of that whereof Christ Jesus
is the Head.

First therefore, if it be showed, that the ordinary assemblies of those that
profess the Gospel in England be the Churches of Christ, it seemerh that the
way will be paved and planed for mutual intercourse between us.

Thus therefore it seems to be performed.

Those Assemblies which have Christ for their Head, 1. Reason.
and the same also for their Foundation are Gods Church.

But such are the Assemblies of England.

Ergo, They are Gods Church.

The Assumption is evident, in that, by believing that Christ is our
righteousness, we are members of his body, and thereby are lively stones laid
upon him as upon a foundation, and grow into one spiritual house with him. Now
that they have like precious faith with us, is convinced, not only by their
own profession, but by the testimony of the Spirit of God, who by manifold
graces poured upon them, does bear them witness that they be members of the
body of Christ, who as the Head has partaked unto them his Holy Spirit, even
to an apparent sanctification of numbers of them.

They which have performed unto them the special Covenant 2. Reason.
which the Lord has made with his Churches, by pouring his Spirit upon them,
and his word in their mouths, are the Churches of God.

But such are the Assemblies in England;

Therefore, they are the Churches of God.

As touching the Spirit of God, it has been said before: Whereupon it also
follows, that he likewise put his Word in their mouths, considering that the
Spirit of God is not given but by his Word. And seeing that the Lord in mercy
has set up diverse burning Lamps in those Assemblies, whereby light is conveyed
more or less into all the parts of the Land; it seems that the Church of
England should receive injury if it should not be counted among the Golden
Candlesticks, which serve to keep out darkness and night from the Lords House,
until such time as the dayspring, and Lucifer arise in our hearts.

If you say, All do not believe the Gospel truly, which profess; The same
exception lies against all other Churches, how reformed soever. If there be
fewer faithful in our Churches, than in others; The truth of the Church
stands not in number: for it there were in every Church one truly
undissemblingly faithful, all the rest holding the faith of our Lord Jesus
Christ in words only, yet should all those Churches be to us the Churches of
God. And if you say, that all those Assemblies, as it were all the branches and
arms of the Candlestick, have not light set upon them (the greater part of them
being damped by a dumb ministry) notwithstanding by the way you confess, that
those Assemblies upon whom the Lord has set up the lamp of a preaching
Ministry, are the Churches of God: which seems to cast down that hill which
stands in the way against our rejoyning, whereby you cannot afford us the
name of Gods Churches, because we have not the Discipline by him appointed. Now
for that other, whether they have some glaunce of knowledge by that dumb
Ministry or not, may afterward in another place be considered: For the
present, I answer, That even those Congregations, for so much as they both have
by some former Ministry or means which the Lord has used toward them,
received faith; standing thereby in our Savior Christ, as in the shaft of the
Candlestick, and being members of the same body, they may well receive some
supply of their wants, from the light that shines in the next branch unto
them; for if every Assembly being without a lamp of the Ministry, should by
and by be holden to be broken from the shaft of the Church-Candlestick, then at
every vacation of the Ministry, and whenever by death the Lord should put
out one of his lights, it should follow, that that Assembly by the fall of
their Minister into the grave, should from the highest heaven fall into the
grave of Hell. But you will say peradventure, that an Assembly that has a dumb
Minister, is in worse case than that which bath none at all: If that be
granted, it follows not therefore, that the Assembly which yesterday, being
without a dumb Minister, was the Church of God, should to day, having such a
one set over them, be the Synagogue of Satan. And here, methink, when you go
about to make nothing of the dumb Ministry, you ascribe more force unto it
than it has: for you make him not so much a guide, as an Head of the Church,
as that those which before in all equal judgment were to be deemed members of
Christ, by having of them should suddenly become members of Antichrist. I do
not therefore yield unto you in that you say, they are the chief always in the
Synagogue; our Savior Christ, in whom those companies do believe, being the
chief; with whom through faith they grow to be one body, rather than with Satan
by having.
hearing the dumb Minister, to be one with him. Say therefore, that it is a
fault in them to hear such a Minister, thrust upon them; yet that it is an
Apostasy from God, and an utter falling away from the Gospel, I se not with
what great appearance of truth it can be spoken. Moses, when diverse of the
people clave unto Coreh, Dathan, and Abiram, forsaking willingly the lawful and
ordinary Ministry of the Aaronites, did not therefore cast them forth from the
Lords host: And should the Churches of God, for hearing a dumb Minister, which
is thrust upon them, forthwith be reputed for runagates from the Lord?

Again:

The Lord is in Covenant with the people, 3. Reason.
to whom he gives the Seals of his Covenant.

This he does to our Assemblies in England.

Therefore, they are the Lords Confederates.

If you say, that the Seals set to by the dumb Ministry are no Seals, (which
afterward comes to be examined) yet you thereby confess, that those which are
ministered by sufficient Ministers, are true and uncounterfeit Sacraments of
the Church: whereby it falls out again, that you seem to hold, that the
Churches of England are not the true Churches of Christ, because they have not
his commanded Discipline. Hereto may be added all the Churches in Europe, all
which give the right hand of Society in the house of God unto the Assemblies
which are in England. Which argument of Churches Authority, although it be not
so strong as it will enforce, yet ought it to stay all sudden judgment unto the
contrary: and so long to cause silence, until the Cause being ripely on both
sides debated, the contrary of it which the Churches should do, through the
lightsomness of the truth thereof break forth. And if it be meet to proceed
softly, and as it were with a leaden foot, unto the Excommunication of one
only member of the Church of God; there ought verily to have been great
consultation taken, or ever the Churches of two whole Islands should have been
cast out: especially, when they be holden in by Voices, not only of diverse
persons, but of all the Churches to whom knowledge of their estate has come.
And if there were but one man worthy to be Excommunicate, yet if the greater
part of your Assembly would not yield consent thereunto, I hold it, that the
order of the Discipliae requires that the rest are to bear the person whom
they cannot remove: And therefore, though the Assemblies of England had
deserved, through want of Discipline, and of a preaching Ministry, to be cast
out from the account of the Churches of God; yet being holden in by the Voices
of the Churches themselves, ought to have been so far born with, as the
communicating should not make them guilty of a falling away from the Lord.

Now I come to those two Reasons whereby you think you may justly hold the
Assemblies in England for no Churches of God: And first of all to the reason of
the Discipline, for the want whereof you gave them all without exception the
black stone of condemnation from being the Churches of God: Where it is to be
understood, that as in a Man there are certain parts essential, and such as
without which the man cannot stand; and other some serving to his comelyness,
or to his long continuance: So it is in this matter; there is the foundation,
CHRIST, whereupon it is necessary that by faith the Assemblies be laid, which
grows unto the Lords building, without the which it cannot be his Church;
which thing being, whatsoever is wanting of that which is commanded, or
remaining of that which is forbidden, is not able to put that Assembly, which
by faith is laid upon Christ, from the right and title of being the Church of
Christ: for Faith can admit no such thing, which gives an utter overthrow and
turning upside down of the truth. By this title of the Faithful, the Apostle in
his Epistles notes out the Churches of God, it being all one with him to say,
To the Faithful, or To the Saints, as To the Church of such a place. Whatsoever
wants unto this, or is more than enough, that wants or abounds to the
disgrace or uncomelyness, or to the hazard of continuance, and not to the
present overthrow of the Church. Hereupon the people of Israel, which neglected
for the space of forty years the holy Sacrament of Circumcision, and the
Passover also as it seems (one only time excepted) ceased not therefore to
be the Churches of God, and to have the Sanctuary among them. And in this
respect the Dutch Assemblies, whereof the greatest part in High Germany (which,
beside the main of Discipline, which is common to our Churches, are groslly
deceived in the matter of the Supper) are notwithstanding holden in the Roll of
the Churches of God. In this respect also, certain Assemblies of our
Profession, which having the use of the Discipline permitted unto them, are not
suffered to have the use of the Lords Supper, are not therefore (when the Lords
Churches are mustered, and their names written and enrouled up) cast out as
unfit to be in any account of the Lords hosts. Without any part of that Order
or Discipline which the Lord has appointed, I grant there can be no Church of
Christ; or, that without some part of it, there can be no faith in Jesus
Christ: It is a part of the Discipline of our Savior Christ, that there should
be certain which should be chosen out of the rest to preach the Gospel, by
preaching whereof the Churches are gathered together: Where therefore there is
no Ministry of the Word, there it is plain, that there are no visible and
apparent Churches. It is another piece of the Discipline of the Lord, that the
rest of the body of the Church should obey those that are set over them in the
Lord: wheresoever therefore there is no obedience of the people to the
Ministers, that in the Lords name preach unto them, there can be no true Church
of Christ. But where these two be, although other points want, yea although
there be some defect in these, that neither the Ministers do in all points
preach as they ought, nor the Assemblies in all points obey unto the wholesome
doctrine of their Teachers; yet do they (for the reason abovesaid) retein the
right of the Churches of God. This is made plain by a similitude from the body
of a man, whereinto we are already entered: For if a man should have both his
hands and his arms cut off, his eyes put out, etc. yet as long as the head
stands, and other vital parts, he is to be accounted a Man, although a maimed
man: Even so it is in the Assembly; as long as it holds the head, how
defective soever it is otherwise, it has the due and right of the Church of
God. And although a man should have six fingers in one hand, and but three in
another, and albeit they should stand where the mouth does; yet all this
deformity should not hinder him from being truly holden to be a Man, although
it should be a great deformity in him. On the other part, if he had no Head at
all, or that there were no natural conjunction of the parts one with another,
but a whole and through displacing of every part from his proper seat; then
verily would he be denied to have either the proportion of a Man, or his life.
So likewise if an Assembly should not hold the Head, which is Jesus Christ, or
be nothing elss but a confused multitude, without part of the order which the
Son of God has appointed, the same is justly crossed out of the account of
Gods Church. Was not Jerusalem, after the return from Babylon, the City of the
great King, until such time as Nehemiah came and builded the Walls of the City?
To say therefore, it is none of the Church of God, because it has not received
the Discipline, metthinks it is all one with this, as if a man should say, It
is no City because it has no Wall, or that it is no Vineyard because it has
neither ditch nor hedge. It is not, I grant, so sightly a City, or Vineyard,
nor yet so safe against the invasion of their several enemies which lie in wait
for them; yet are they truly both Cities and Vineyards.

There remains that other point, which is against those Assemblies only
which have a dumb Minister: Of Assemblies of dumb Ministers.
wherein the part of your conclusion, That that Assembly where they be, is none
of the Church of God, is before answered. Therein rests that part of your
conclusion, whereby you infer, That the Sacraments ministered by them are none
of Gods Sacraments, and therefore that a man may not receive any part of them
at their hands. Here first I agree with you, that their Ministry is unlawful,
and to themselves, without repentance, a certain matter of destruction;
especially in those to whom knowledge of corruption is come: to the Churches
where they be, presently hurtful, and in the end without remedy, deadly: But
that they are no Ministers of God, so far as to receive the good they offer
unto us, that (I suppose) I may not yield unto: The ground whereof I take from
the former part of my Answer; That for so much as they are allowed by the
Churches of God, they ought, until remedy may be found of so great disorder, to
be heard and retained so far as they can give us any thing that is of Christ:
And for this cause our Savior commanded, that the Scribes should be heard,
Mat. 23. 2.
for that they taught truly; which honor our Savior would never have given
unto them, unless the Church-calling had moved him thereunto: Neither had it
been lawful for the people otherwise to have heard them; for it is evident that
their unfitness and unlawfulness in the Ministry (although another way) was as
great as it is in our reading Ministers. They were altogether deceived in the
Messiah; for neither knew they that Jesus was Christ; Joh. 9. 22.
nor yet that Christ, whom they looked for, Mat. 22. 42.
should be the Son of God, but held him for a bare and naked man. It appears
also that they taught the Justification by the Law of Works, not only in the
18. of Luke, but even in the same very place, where our Savior Christ
commands this audience: for speaking of the works of the moral Law, which
they would not touch with one of their fingers, he says, that they laid them
upon the peoples backs as burdens which cannot be born: whereby our Savior
(beside their Pharisaical pride and lordlyness in teaching) signifies that
they taught them to Justification; seeing that if they had only taught them as
testimonies and fruits or faith, they had not been intolerable, bur, Mat. 11.
as our Savior Christ says, an easy yoke, Joh. 5.
and as S. John says, not grievous nor heavy. Now the dumb Ministry is not
farther off from the justification of a lawful Ministry, than to teach
untruely in the chief grounds, of Religion; neither is the edifying of the
Church respected in making Laws for the Ministry, less hindered by an
unpreaching Ministry. And according to this saying of our Savior Christ, we
may see what the practice of the Prophets had been before; who although they
had oftentimes to do with false teachers and Priests that were dumb dogs and
not able to bark, Isa. 56.
yet (giving the people warning of their corruptions and insufficiencies,
threatening also the casting of them from their Ministry, in that good time
when the Lord shall take pity on his Church) they are never found to have
forbidden the people to have come unto their sacrifices commanded by the Law
unto them. Yea our Savior Christ that lived in the corruptest times of the
Church, and when things were most confused, and fewest steps of any lawful
Calling to be seen, yet commanded he the man whom he purged from Leprosy, Mat.
8.
to show himself to the Priests generally, without willing him to make choice
of a Priest better instructed or affected to the truth than the rest. The high
Priest, although he entered by Simony and reward to the Romans, yet
notwihstanding we see our Savior Christ bore him reverence for his office
sake, and (as before his Judge in Spiritual Causes) gave an account of his
doctrine. We have another example of reverence given to such Rulers, even in
things that were done by them wrongfully. For Jeremy being for a time suspended
from coming into the Temple, Jer. 36. 19.
being at liberty would not (least, as it seems, he should make a tumult)
enter the Temple; and therefore (having written that which he had to say) sent
Baruch to read his Sermon in the Temple. Moreover, when a Magistrate is not
able to do some part of his office, as for example, being able to do the duties
which are to be performed in peace, is insufficient for Martial affair, yet no
man refuses that which he is able to give, because he is not able to do all
that is required: Even so, endeavoring to our uttermost a sufficient
Ministry, I would think in the mean season, that the good things they are able
to give us, may be taken at their hands. And if any man say, that it is of the
substance of a, Church-Minister, to be able to teach; and therefore that he is
no Minister, that has not that ability: It may be answered, that it is of the
substance of a good and lawful Minister of God, but not simply of a Minister;
whereunto it is sufficient to have the Churches calling: As it is of the
substance, rather of a lawful Magistrate, to be able to judge between his
Subjects, than simply of a Magistrate, whom the election of the people, or of
other to whom his choice belongs, makes a Magistrate of the Lord, although
he be no lawful nor sufficient Magistrate. As therefore we call him a
Magistrate, who for the ignorance of his charge may be called an Idol
Magistrate; even so it seems that he may be holden for a Minister, which has
his Churches Calling, although he be not able to do the principal charge of the
Ministry. Neither does the place of the Prophet Hosee, Hos. 4. 6.
which says, because they have refused knowledge, they shall be no Priests
unto the Lord, stand against this: the Prophet rather giving a rule to follow
in the election or disposition of them, showing how far they may be used.

Finally, to that which is objected of communicating with their impiety, in any
taking any thing at their hands: I Answer, the same might have been laid to the
peoples charge under the Law; which is never done by the Prophets. Secondly, if
by communicating with him, we should make him Minister, I grant that a piece of
his guilt would stick to our fingers: but when that is not, I see not how, by
receiving the Sacrament of him, we partake more of his wickedness, than the Son
is partaker of his Fathers murder, because he receives of his Fathers gift
some part of his lands or movables: And so much the less there than here, as
the Father gives his own things, whereas the dumb Minister does only dispense
the gifts of the Lord. Wherefore it may be rather feared, lest in refusing the
Sacraments offered by him, we put the Lord away from us, whose they be; than in
taking of the Sacraments at his hands, be partakers of impiety, which is the
man's, and can take no hold of the Sacraments in any sort. For even as I, not
able to avoid him, may communicate with a Minister, that is an Adulterer,
without being partaker of his Adultery; so also may I communicate with a dumb
Minister and yet nevertheless be free from his impiety.

Thus you have mine Answer, written not without the fear and trembling your
selves make mention of; whereby it will not be hard for you to understand, how
both our desires of being united together may be performed: And although I
write in good assurance, especially in the former part as touching the rightful
title of the Churches of Christ to be due to the Assemblies of England; yet
remembering (beside the common frailties of our whole race) special breaches and
decaies in my self, I willingly hearken to any, much more to you (whom the Lord
has bestowed good graces upon) showing better things: for which cause if
further conference be needful, I must through business be forced to refer to
conference by mouth some time after diner.

And thus with most humble prayers to the Lord our God for his Holy Spirit,
where-through we may be able to discern the things that differ, to our
inoffensive walking in the sight of all men, even to the day of the Lord,

I bid you farewell. Yours Thomas Cartwright.

THE JUDGMENT OF Mr. Baxter CONCERNING CEREMONIES AND CONFORMITY.
THose Modes or Circumstances of Worship which are Necessary in Genere, Disp.
4. P. 361.
but left undetermined by God in Specie, are left by God to humane Prudential
Determination: (else an Impossibility should be necessary.) But many such there
are, that are Necessary in Genere, but left undetermined of God in Specie;
therefore many such are left to humane Prudential Determination.

. 5. Disp. 5. P. 400.
Yet it is in the power of a man to determine of such Modes and Circumstances
as are necessary to the performance of that Worship which God has instituted
in his Word; and therefore lawful Governors may in such cases bind us by their
Commands.

1. It is left to humane Determination, Ibid.
what Place the Public Assemblies shall be held in.

2. It is left to man to determine of the Time of Holy Duties, P. 401.
except only where God has determined of it already.

3. It is left to the Determination of humane Prudence, Ibid.
what Vtensils to employ about the Public Worship of God.

Here therefore we must thus conclude,

1. That every misordering of such great affairs, P. 423.
is the sin of them that do it.

2. But yet that the Subject is not exempted from Obedience by every such
mistake of the Governor: but by some he is.

. 67. If the mischoosing of such Circumstances, by Church Governors, be but an
Inconvenience, and do not destroy the Ordinance it self, or frustrate the Ends
of it, we are to obey: 1. For he is the Judge of his own work, and not we: 2.
The thing is not sinful, though inconvenient: 3. Obedience is commanded to our
lawful Governors.

We must obey in all things lawful. P. 424.
And when we do obey in a Case of Miscommanding, it is not a doing evil, that
good may come of it, as some do misconceive: but it is only a submitting to
that which is ill commanded, but not evil in him that does submit. It is the
Determiner that is the cause of the Inconvenience, and not the Obeyer. Nor is
it inconvenient for me to Obey, though it be worse perhaps to him that
Commands. While he sins in Commanding, he may make it my Duty to Obey.

. 6. Did. 4. We must distinguish between Ceremonies imposed by a Lawful
Magistrate, P. 396.
or Church-Governors; and such as are imposed by Usurpers, or Men without
Authority.

. 25. Prop. 12. It may be very sinful to command some Ceremonies, which may
lawfully, P. 398.
yea, must in Duty be used by the Subject when they are commanded.

. 27. Prop. 14. Yet certain things that are commonly called Ceremonies, may
lawfully be used in the Church upon Humane Imposition; and when it is not
against the Law of God, no person should disobey the Commands of their Lawful
Governors in such things.

Of Set-Forms, and the Book of Common Prayer.
Prop. 1. A Stinted Liturgy is in it self Lawful. 2. A Stinted Liturgy in some
parts of Public Service, Disp. 4. P. 358.
is ordinarily necessary. 3. In the parts where it is not of Necessity, it may
not only be submitted to, but desired, when the Peace of the Church requires
it. 7. The safest way of Composing such a Public Form, P. 359.
is, to take it all, for Matter and Words, out of the Holy Scriptures. 8. Yet
is not this of such Necessity, but that we may join in it, or use it, if the
Form of Words be not from Scripture.
Prop. 1. A Stinted Liturgy is in it self Lawful
This is thus proved:
Argument 1. That which is not directly, or consequentially forbidden by God,
remains lawful: A stinted Liturgy is not directly, or consequentially
forbidden by God; therefore it remains lawful.

The Major is undoubted's because nothing but a Prohibition can make a thing
unlawful. Sin is a transgression of a Law: where there is no Law, there is no
Trangression: And yet I have heard very Reverend men answer this, That it is
enough that it is not commanded, though not forbidden. Which is plainly to deny
both Scripture and Civil Principles.

Now for the Minor, P. 361.
That a stinted Liturgy is not forbidden, we need no other proof, than that no
Prohibition can be produced.

Argument 6. If it be lawful for the People to use a stinted Form of Words in
Public Prayer, P. 364.
then is it in it self lawful for the Pastors: but it is lawful for the People:
for the Pastors prayer (which they must pray over with him, and not only hear
it) is a stinted Form to them, even as much as if he had learnt it out of a
Book. They are to follow him in his Method and Words, as if it were a
Book-Prayer.

Argument 7. It is lawful to use a Form in Preaching: therefore a stinted
Liturgy is lawful.

1. Because Preaching is a part of that Liturgy. 2. Because the reason is the
same for Prayer, as for that, in the main.
Argument 8. That which has been the practice of the Church in
Scripture-times, and down to this day, and is yet the practice of almost all
the Churches of Christ on earth, is not like to be unlawful: but such is the
use of some stinted forms of Public Service: therefore, etc. That it was so in
the Jews Church, and approved by Christ, I have showed. That it has been of
ancient use in the Church since Christ, and is at this day in use in Africa,
Asia, Europe, even among the Reformed Churches in France, Holland, Geneva, etc.
is so well known, that I think I need not stand to prove it: yea, those few
that seem to disuse it, do yet use it, in Psalms, and other parts of Worship.

As for the Common Prayer it self, I never rejected it because it was a Form,
P. 421.
nor thought it simply unlawful because it was such a Form; but have made use
of it, and would do again in the like case.

Of Ceremonies.
The Ceremonies controverted among us, P. 409.
were especially, The Surplice, the Gesture of Kneeling in receiving the Lords
Supper, the Ring in Marriage, Laying the hand on the Book in taking an Oath,
the Organs and Church-Musick, Holy Days, Altars, Rails, and the Cross in
Baptism.

Of the Surplice.
Some decent Habit is necessary; either the Magistrate, P. 409.
or the Minister himfelf, or the Associatcd Pastors must determine what. I
think neither Magistrate nor Synod should do any more than hinder Undecency:
But yet if they do more, and tie all to One Habit (add suppose it were an
undecent Habit) yet this is but an imprudent use of Power. It is a thing within
the Magistrates reach; he does not an aliene work, but his own work amiss: and
therefore the thing in it self being lawful; I would obey him, and use that
garment, if I could not be dispensed with. Yea, though Secondarily the
Whiteness be to signify Purity, and so it be made a teaching sign, yet would I
obey.

Of Kneeling at the Sacrament.
But yet, P. 411.
as sinfully as this Gesture was imposed, for my part I did obey the Imposers,
and would do, if it were to do again, rather than disturb the Peace of the
Church, or be deprived of its Communion. For God having made some Gesture
necessary, and confined me to none, but left it to Humane Determination, I
shall submit to Magistrates in their proper work, even when they miss it in the
manner. I am not sure that Christ intended the example of himself and his
Apostles, as obligatory to us that shall succeed. I am sure it proves sitting
lawful; but I am not sure that it proves it necessary: (though very
convenient.) But I am sure, he has commanded me Obedience and Peace.

Of the Ring in Marriage.
And for the Ring in Marriage, P. 411.
I see no reason to scruple the lawfulness of it: For though the Papists make a
Sacrament of Marriage, yet we have no reason to take it for any Ordinance of
Divine Worship; any more than the solemnizing of a Contract between a Prince
and People. All things are sanctified and pure to the pure.

Of Organs and Church Music.
And for Organs, P. 412.
or other Instruments of Music in Gods Worship, they being a Help partly
Natural, and partly Artificial, to the exhilerating of the spirits, for the
praise of God, I know no argument to prove them simply unlawful, but what would
prove a Cup of Wine unlawful, or the tune and meeter, and melody of singing
unlawful.

Of Holy Days.
Nor for my part do I make any scruple In point of Lawfulness; For Convenience
is according to several accidents.
to keep a Day in Remembrance of any Eminent Servant of Christ, P. 412, 413.
or Martyr, to praise God for their Doctrine or Example, and honor their
Memorial.

But the hardest part of the Question is, Whether it be lawful to keep Days,
in celebrating the Memorial of Christ's Nativity, Circumcision, Fasting;
Transfiguration, Ascension, and such like?

And yet for all this I am resolved, P. 416.
if I live where such Holy Days as these are observed, to censure no man for
observing them; nor would I deny them Liberty to follow their judgments, if I
had the power of their Liberties; provided they use not reproach and violence
to others; and seek not to deprive them of their Liberties.

Yea more, P. 417.
I would not only give men their Liberty in this, but if I lived under a
Government that peremptorily commanded it, I would observe the outward rest of
such a Holy Day, and I would preach on it, and join with the Assemblies in Gods
Worship on it. Yea, I would thus observe the Day, rather than offend a weak
Brother, or hinder any man's salvation, much more rather than I would make any
division in the Church.

Of Altars, and Rails.
And for the next Ceremony, Ibid.
the Name and form of an Altar; no doubt it is a thing indifferent, whether the
Table stand this way, or that way: and the Primitive Churches used commonly the
names of Sacrifice, and Altar, and Priest, and I think, lawfully: for my part I
shall not be he that shall condemn them.

I conceive that the dislike of these things in England (the form and name of
an Altar, P. 417.
and the Rails about it) was not as if they were simply evil.

Whether we shall receive the Lords Supper at a Table, P. 401, 402.
or in our Seats; and whether the Table shall be of wood or stone? whether it
shall be round, or long, or square? whether it shall stand in the East or
West End of the Temple, or in the middle? whether it shall have Rails, or no
Rails? All these are lest to Humane Prudence.

Of the Cross in Baptism.
But of all our Ceremonies, there is none that I have more suspected to be
simply unlawful, P. 417.
than the Cross in Baptism.

Yet I dare not peremptorily say, that it is unlawful: P. 418.
nor will I condemn either Ancients or Moderns that use it: nor will I make any
disturbance in the Church about it, more than my own forbearance will make.

I presume not to censure them that judge it lawful; but only give the Reasons
that make me doubt, and rather think it to be unlawful, though still with a
suspicion of my own understanding.

FINIS.

