THE Hard way to HEAVEN: Explained and applied in A SERMON Intended to be
preached at Peters-Cornhill: but by Reason of the disorderly Concourse preached
at St. Katherines Creed-Church London: the 27th of July 1662. being the third
day after his release.

By Z. CROFTON Minister at Buttolphs-Algate.

Taken as (Preached) in Characters compared with his own Notes providentially
lost and brought to our hands. Now published to check and correct the
misrepresentation thereof by the Sons of slander and Subjects of weakness.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1662.

To the Reader.
Good Reader,
THe untrue and direct contrary reports of this Sermon, and its Author, extort
the publication thereof. Mr. Crofton will not do it, he contenteth himself in
the conscience of his integrity, and accounts it an easy thing to be judged of
men; yea of good men; his good name is the Churches advantage, and ought to be
preserved and defended against the calumnies of the wicked, and censures of the
weak, who wound not him without, more deeply wounding their own souls.

I having written this Sermon from his mouth in shorthand, and (by his Notes
lost by his Son, and by Providence directed to my hand) having supplied what
time and the disorder of the audience caused him to pretermit: I thought it my
duty to hazard the discontent of my friend and Pastor, and to present thee
with the same, that by unprejudiced reading thou may be undeceived, edified,
and enabled to contradict the clamours of the sons of slander, and check the
censure of the over-credulous subjects of weakness, though not of Sanctity.
Recantation is most strangely expected from him who never yet was charged, or
by argumentation was convinced of an error, on whom no terms or conditions for
obtainment of Liberty was once imposed, or so much as proposed by any person
whatsover, whose nonconformity was fully, freely, and (to the honor of the
honorable Persons before whom he was convened) acceptably declared, and the
occasion, yea formality of which is no other then a conscientious practice, and
profession of principles he ever stated in his late contests for Reformation.

I wonder to find some serious Christians scandalized at Mr. Crofton's
attendance on Gods solemn public worship, celebrated according to the order of
the Common Prayer Book, and to hear men censure him for the same, as if
defective and an apostate from the cause of Reformation; in which he appeared
with so much vi^our; I must tell the Reader, such as sat under his ministry
cannot but know and witness he ever adjudged against separation in his most
earnest persuading or endeavors for reformation, he always dissuaded
non-communion of members, as nonconformity of Ministers, and did constantly
and convincingly affirm, that ministerial disorder and corrupt appendents in
Gods worship was not a sufficient cause of personal absence or non-attendents
on the same, he ever concluded guilt on the Church Collective by these
disorders and corruptions, which did not stain individuals looking to their own
personal actings in their necessary attendance on Gods Ordinance: Verily we
must say Mr. Crofton in prison did only practice what he preached whilst at
liberty.

Such was Mr. Croftons care and condition in his late contests for reformation,
not to be esteemed an Advocate for separation, or an approver of non-communion
(much less a Martyr for them) that in his late writing he professes his
judgment and resolution against them.

In his Analepsis, or St. Peter's bonds abiding, thou have him thus professing,
I protest whatsoever shall be the establishment in the Church, though never so
corrupt, whilst consistent with salvation, though it may occasion to me
sufferings, and the suspense of my ministry; by Gods grace it shall not effect
in me, or such on whom I have influence, Schism from the Church.

In his Analepsis Anaelephthe, or the fastening of St. Peter's bonds, he avoweth,
this reformation cannot justify the separation, for that the corruptions
established were never made such essential parts of worship, as to make a
sufficient ground for separation. The sober, zealous Non-conformists, who
groaned under the burden of these corruptions, and for this reformation, were
grieved by, and greatly contended against the separation, as that which was
without sufficient ground, yea like Jesus Christ their Master, they kept
communion with a Church, whose doctrine and worship was in much need of
reformation, yea, and they taught men so to do.

And in his Epistle to Mr. Firmius Liturgical Considerator Considered, in which
he apologiseth for Ministers not reading (not for members not learning) the
Common Prayer Book; he tells us expressly his judgment and resolution in these
express words. I am so much affected to the peace of the Church that I have of
late preached what God assisting, I resolve to practice: viz. many and great
corruptions in Gods worship are to be grieved for patiently, and groaned under,
before Schisms be consented unto, and separation consulted, provided
nevertheless, I be passive not active: I can keep communion under that form of
worship, whereby I cannot administer and heartily say Amen to the matter of
those Petitians which are put up in an order so confused, preposterous, and
indigested, that it seems to me to be so much below the gravity of the
Church, whose mouth I must be, the seriousness of the office whereby I
minister, the sanctity of the duty I am to perform, and the sacred nature of
the object to whom they are presented, that I dare not stand between God and
his people in the same.

Let these passages and the like in his late writings be observed, as the best
of his Judgment and Conscience, and let malice it self read in his practice
the least contradiction to his Cause or Principles, or defection from the same,
or not read with half an eye an exact conformity to himself, and clear
obedience to his judgment, in a nonconforming communion.

Good Reader be pleased to observe, that Mr. Crofton's attendance on the solemn
worship of God in the Tower, and in the Common Prayer Book order, is so far
from being the result of his restraint, and effect of temptation, or any
condition in order to his release, that his judgment was ever for it: He never
did conceive that Order (though to be corrected) a moral sufficient bar to this
duty; and therefore the very first day he came in prisoner, he did desire of
the Lieutenant the liberty of going to Church, and not obtaining it, he did
demand it the next day from his Jailer; he did many times petition for the
same, and solicited the obtainment thereof many months before he did obtain
it: nay I must further acquaint thee; it is now near upon a complete year since
Mr. Crofton, it being rumored that he went to the Church in the Tower, and he
heard Common Prayer, did write a full Apology and defense of his practice
(which was then but in the view) in that case; this Apology passed through my
hands to many good people and Ministers, who would not undertake to convince
the same of error, though they continued to scandalize him and his practice,
and hindered the publication of the same.

These things I note unto thee Reader, that thou may see Mr. Crofton's
practice in this case is not new or rash, but resolved and deliberate, and is
so far from defection from, that it is an upright walking according to his
apprehensions of the Gospel. Howsoever I could, I will not now dilate in
defense of his principles and practice, nor break out to a large and sharp
invective against the licentiousness of the tongues, and the lying spirits of
seeming Saints so notoriously extravagant against a person so innocent and
upright, and therefore exposed to the violence and rage of men on both extremes
of Reformation; for hereby I know I should incense him, whose displeasure will
be great for doing this, which I could not in peace have left undone.

Let me assure thee, Mr. Crofton's judgment is in Ecclesiastics the very same
it was before his confinement; he then could not now cannot conform; he then
could, now can communicate, and give an Amen to the matter of Prayers, whose
order his judgment must and does condemn: He was then, is now zealous for
reformation, and against separation: He then resolved, and now resolves, to
seek Church purity by union with the Church, and to abide in the house; he
endeavors to cleanse, to bring his offerings unto the Lord, when that his
soul does loath them by reason of the profane hands and preposterous order, in
which the sons of Eli do present them.

I know it to be his burden to observe the bast^rd brood of non-communicating
separating Sects, taken (...) vagrants, and whipped home to their reputed
parents, to lie at the door and ^^rk under the wings of reforming
non-Conformi^^, who did ever disown them, and drive them out as not theirs, but
destructive to their honest design. I know Mr. Crofton to be zealous least the
policy of some, and weakness of others should so far embrace those, as to make
spectators think them their natural Children. I know Mr. Crofton is sensible
many are (...) to him in negatives, against profaneness, against superstition,
against corruption, against disorder; but are his (...) in positives for no
order, for no communion, for no Church. I am sure Mr. Crofton has sadly
resented that scandal under which Nonconformity groans, and is made odious,
viz. It is a spirit of contradiction against every thing, but for nothing. Mr.
Crofton well knows those who clamor against his communion, make Church
entity, not Church purity, their quarrel and controversy: He has observed
their Church gathering commenced and proceeded under the endeavors of
Reformation, and unto the supplanting and subversion thereof. Mr. Crofton is
convinced, that Christ's true Church, though corrupt, and Christ's own
Ordinances, though disorderly administered, are to be embraced, adheared unto,
and attended, when the flocks of Christ's companions are to be avoided. I am
confident Mr. Crofton is resolved to follow his Lord when come from the flock
to thethreshold of the Temple, but he dares not go before him. Reader, if this
be an error, help Mr. Crofton to conviction, and then thou may hear his
recantation; in the mean time join with me in prayer, that God will give
repentance to the men who have called good evil, and evil good, and
uncharitably represented a conscientious practice, of well considered, openly
declared, deliberately resolved principles, to be an apostacy, defection,
recantation, backsliding, base complying, and conformity.

The Lord increase the number of such Apostates, who will by preaching,
writing, and practice, under the reproach and rage of all men, show their
endeavors of reformation, in that strait gate and narrow way of careful,
industrious, nonconforming communion with the Church in Christ's Ordinances,
between those rocks which on each hand work its ruin: This is the hearty
desire and prayer of,

August 9. 1662. Thine in and for the simplicity of the Gospel. H. M.

THE Hard way to Heaven. EXPLAINED and APPLIED. In a Sermon Preached on the 27
of July 1662.
The Text Matthew 7.14. Because strait is the Gate, and narrow is the Way,
which leads unto life.
I Cannot but conceive many in this audience (acted more by curiosity then
Christianity) come with an expectation, that I will declare and discourse the
things of my self, or Gods dealings with me in my late condition: But I must
let you know, I must herein disappoint you; Experiencies of this nature is my
own Comfort, what was to me in common with other Christians, I shall declare to
your edification; and that is in general, the serious reflections of my
thoughts under the Strates of my late condition, concerning which I may say as
that eminent Martyr of our reformed Religion, John Philpot, said in the like
case, in the Lollards Tower passing through six or seven doors, I came to my
Logdeing thr^ugh many Straits, where I called to remembrance, Strait is the
Gate and narrow is the way which leads unto Life; The strait passages which
lead to glory, ought to be always pondered, but the thoughts thereof are most
proper, and profitable when we are locked up in them, and the sense thereof by
a necessity of suffering what we cannot escape without sin, the Heathen
accounted it their honor to represent virtue to be a Strait and narrow way,
and therefore it self the reward of all Industry in and for it, sure I am; it
is the Glory of Christianity, that it was never Propounded to the world as an
estate of ease: Christ was never Preached without his Cross, nor was Heavens
Glory ever declared without a determination of hardship in the attainment
thereof: Strait i^ the Gate, and narrow is the way which leads unto life; is
the Doctrine Preached by the Lord himself, and the truth thereof is daily
proved by the experience of his Disciples.

These words are part of our Saviors Sermon preached in the Mountain, in which
many particular Doctrines and special duties, were by him Stated, and directed:
whether this Sermon was a set Solemn and Continued discourse, of the Preacher
(as by its Circumstance it seems to have been, or the Evangilists Collection,
and composure of those many passages, and particular discourses which passed
from our Savior on several occasions, at sundry times (as Calvin does
conceive) I shall not now stand to enquire or debate.

In the foregoing verse our Savior persuades his hearers to an hard Task
Enter in at the Strait gate: and enforces his exhortation with, and by a
disparity of the different paths in which men pass unto different ends. For
wide is the Gate, and broad is the way that leads to destruction, and many
there be who go in thereat: because strait is the Gate, and narrow is the way
which leads unto life, and few there be who find it; the one is easy and
undoing, the other is hard and happy.

The Doctrine.
Our Text is the second and Counter part of our Saviors reason, (viz.) that way
which is hard in its passage, but happy in its end, And it is in its self an
entire proposition, and so shall stand for our point of Doctrine, which we
shall prosecute by way of explication, and application. Strait is the Gate, and
narrow is the way to life. First by way of Explication.

The Doctrine explained.
I will not spend time in noting to you the many Readings and v^^sions of this
proposition, only observe the ancient Copies to read the same as a proposition
of admiration. How strait is the Gate! How narrow is the way which leads unto
life! but this being an Emphasis in no hindrance of its agrumentation it gives
no cause of controverssie.

This proposition falls into two parts to be particularly explained.

1. The Subject or thing spoken of The gate and way to life.

The Subject.
2. The predicate, or thing spoken of it; It is strait and narrow.

Of these in order, and first of the Subject, or thing spoken of, and therein
we have two things also observable.

1. The End, Life; The end of a Christian, strife


2 The means under this Metaphor a Gate, a way, life is that end, and estate
which is to be aimed at, and driven unto by the Gate and way, which our Lord
Jesus Christ does advice and direct, this is the mark all must strive to hit,
the prize of our high Calling; All must press to possess; for this, lest by
shooting sho^t or wide, does utterly undo us, and sinck us in perdition: I say
it is Life an undoubted Blessings, a most eminent Blessing, Job. 26 4
the Emphasis, the Entity of all blessings, peace, plenty, honor, and dignity
are mere nullaties to dead men, a Worm is as much as a Crown to a man in the
grave; he who is not, cannot be rich or honorable; whatever be man's estate, he
is only happy by being; take away his life, Prove 3.16.8.35.
and you take hi^ all life is the chief of blessings to be pursued with utmost
Diligence preserved with utmost Care, and purchased at the dearest rate, All
that a man has he will give for his life: Not natural life.
The Devil well knew the worth of this Jewel, when he durst presume to put at
Job to pawn his conscience and Integrity: the insensible eternity of his life,
to the securing of a present transient puff thereof. But the life in my Text is
more than a bare naked life, it is the life which is in the right hand of
wisdom, which comprehends all goodness, real good; this is not a natural
life, though that is to be preserved and prized; yet for the securing of this
life, it is to be parted from and lost; of, Math. 16.25.
and in this sense, our Savior has determined he who will save his life must
loose it: Not spiritual life.
The natural life capacitateth to the enjoyment of the good things of God, but
this life gives us the enjoyment of our good God himself: this life is not the
spiritual life; I do not mean in respect of its nature and quality, for so it
is spiritual; but I mean, it is not such in res^ect of degree, and ope^ation,
whereby the life of Grace (the same in kind) is distinguished, as different
from the life of Glory: but eternal life.
this life gives us a Converse with God remote, and at a distance subject to
weakness and imperfection, and many heat chilling, almost heart killing
interpositions, and cloudy dispensations: But the life in our Text gives us the
enjoyment of God immediately in his presence: 1 Cor. 15.12.
fully in himself: perfectly seeing him and knowing him, as seen and known of
him, and eternal y without parting from him, or his parting from us, this is
the River of Life which runs in the City of God: into Rivers of pleasure in
his presence for evermore: Rev. 1.22.
it is therefore that which Christians in Scripture Language call the life of
God, the life of Christ; the life of Glory, life everlasting. It abides after
the natural life is expired, it abounds beyond what the spiritual life (as
distinct from this life) does or can extend unto. This life is the Emphasis,
the excellency of Eternity it being thereof the subject Eternity simply and in
the abstract, is an amazing dismaying property, a soul that sits, or walks
in the vale of the shadow of death, and casts his eye on the black,
boundless, bottomless Ocean of Eternity, finds the same to reflect,
affrighting dreadful apprehensions on his soul; which are appeased and made
comfortable by only discerning eternity is the adjunct unto nature: Men cannot
without dread and terror shoot the Gulf of natural death, because thereby they
pass into eternity, it is the assurance of life in eternity, which encourages
the soul in so sad passage, and this life eternal is the City, end, estate,
unto which the Gate and way in our Text does lead.

The means to life.
The means conducing to this end is by a Metaphor called and compared to a Gate,
to a way, and as such it does represent unto our serious observation, the
nature, the order, and the number of that means which does effect, or by which
men must work out their own Salvation.

Its nature.
First, this Metaphor does note unto us the nature of the means of Grace, which
tends unto Glory: It is a Gate; and a way: a Gate a way, are places of personal
motions under special prescription, and limitation unto some peculiar place or
end: and these places are denominated Gates and Ways in relation to their
termination, and the necessity of men's motion in them: a Gate: as that close
passage, by which if men do not enter, they can no way move in the Way, or
Street which leads further. The way is that narrow bounded passage, by, or in
which men can only move in safety, unto the place at which they would arive,
if they step out of these bounds they are trespassers and in danger, and
therefore by their personal motion, under these prescriptions, Prove. 3.19.4.11.
Psalm. 118.^9.
they can only arrive at their desired places: this then does teach us. The
means which must effect eternal life, is man's personal motion, and activity
under Gods prescriptions, directions, and limitations; these are the paths of
peace, the way of wisdom, and the Gates of righteousness, the termination must
be from God, but the motion must be from man, the Lord does set, but man must
keep within these bounds, direction is divine observation must be humane; every
man who will get Heaven, Genesis 17. C^l. 1.10.
must go to Heaven in Gods way: he who will win God, must walk with God,
according to the will of God. He that will wear the Crown of righteousness must
ran the race of righteousness, Heb. 12 1.
eternal life cannot be obtained by humane invention, nor without humane
motion, or industry, they will equally miscarry, who stand still in, or strike
out of the way, which God directs, and has determined: Israel could never
have possessed Laish though the Gates stood open, if they had stood still,
Judge. 18.
and not advanced toward it. Heaven is not the event of idleness, but of
activity: when the Lord has once bounded, determined, directed the Gate: the
way of life must move in it with all care and constancy, 1 Timothy 9.12. Luke
13.24. 1 Cor. 9.24. Phil. 3.14.2.12.
diligence, endeavor, industry is required from men for the effecting of their
Salvation; They are called upon to fight, strive, and wrestle, run, press,
proceed, in Gods Commandments: to work out their own Salvation: I could never
yet understand or approve the mute, non moving Religion of such Quakers who
pretend most to Gods Guidance. Miserable are the desires and hopes of life,
which strive not unto the attainment and security thereof; vain are the
professions of God, which provoke not motion toward God, such who call Christ,
Lord, Lord, hear him, and assent to the truth of what he speaks, but will not
do what he says, will find the Gate of life shut against them when they would
but cannot have admittance; not every one who says Lord, Lord, but he who does
the will of my Father, are in the Gate, the way, ver. 21.
and shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, says our Savior in this very
Sermon, and shortly after this very Text: God has determined his worship,
declared his will, appointed his Ordinances, Men therefore must with all care,
caution, constancy and diligence, attend, observe, and do the same, the Gate,
the way to life is man's activity in faith and obedience: man's labor in word
and Sacraments, Man's industry to do the several duties of his general and
particular Calling; having known the will of God, we must up and be doing,
having seen the way of righteousness, we must stretch our Limbs, and actively
strive and press forward in it: though man is Passive in receiving the first
Principles of Grace, and all subsequent strength to duty, he must be an Agent
in the pursuit of Glory. I never could believe man had of himself free will to
good; nor that man could ever enjoy God, without doing good, with the force of
a free will: God may turn our faces toward Zion, but we must go thither on our
own legs, they go from strength to strength every one in Z^on until they appear
before God, Psalm. 8^.7.
Christ Jesus may first apprehend us but we must follow after reach, forth unto
those things which are before us, press forward that we may ap^rehend that for
which we are apprehended of him; Phil. 3 12.
the s^rings may enforce, but the wheels themselves move in the clock, the
Spirit helps our infirmitie^; But we must pray, believe, etc. It is Christ
who strengthens us; but content in all conditions, ^.12.
knowled^e how to want, and abound, patience under provoking afflictions, must
be our own act: Salvation is God gift, but we must seek it, and receive it like
our selves, by serious, studious, zealous, constant motion in the way of God
commandments: he tha^ sits still when he sees his way, shall never come to his
journeys end; the natural language of saving conviction, is, what shall we, do.
Be assured (Christians) the who enter not the ^ate, Acts. 2 37.
move not in the way, get not unto life Be ye therefore not slothful but
followers of them, who through fai^ unto duty, Heb. 9.11.12. Its order.
and patience) in difficulty inherit the promise.

Secondly, in this Metaphor we may observe as the nature, s^ the order of the
means which leads unto life: it is a Gate, a way, fir^^ a Gate, then a Way,
men's motion unto entrance, and after progress in the way of Gods prescription,
and limitation: God is (...) God of order; nor must we think him more regula^
in humane society, the things of the world, then in the Affairs which concern
his own Glory, and his peoples Salvation; they who act prepostrously in the
things which conce^n men, do reproach the maker, and they who act (...)
offerously in the (...) thin^ which concern God, reproach th^i^ Redeemer,
nature a^^ necessity does make a Gate of entrance, proceed the w^ of progress.
to any propounded ^end: Inch ^tion must (...) before process: thoug^ there is
in some sense and ca^e an ^^trance without p^^gress in the wayk of God, there
cannot po^ss^ be a pro^^ess without entrance many may indeed begin in point,
but end in the flesh: run well in the first acts, but be hi^dred in the course
of Christianity: after they have known the way of righteousness, and escaped
the pollutions which are (...) the world through lust, they ^ay be again
entangled therein, a^ overcome and turn from the holy Commandment: some who
are (...) far from the Kingdom of Heaven, may fall short of it: and so^ who are
alm^st, may never be altogether Christians, but none (...) walk in him, who
have not first rec^^ied Christ the Lord: no^ can be edified, who are not entered
into the most holy Faith the Scriptures, and Ord^nances of God, Psalm. 119.130.
Heb. 6.1
do represent unto us the Gate before the W^y of Glory: the entrance of the
word of God which does make wise the sim^le, the first principles of the
Oracles of God, the f^undations of says, the first Conception and s^^ming
Christ in the soul; the Sacraments of God are suited to this order. Baptism is
a seal of an Imitation to the Church, engraf^ing into Christ, Incorporation to
the Saints: The Lords supper is a Sacrament of growth and continuance in Christ
of progress in the way of says, and true Religion and such a^ move not in this
order, cannot possibly pass unto eternal life: It is in Grace and Religion, as
in nature, and secular affairs, and in both: It is all one, not to undertake an
enterprise, or ^o invert the order of motion, necessary to any end: They that
enter not the Gate, may mo^^ and go for^ard, but not into the City: they who
lay not the foundation, may form a frame, but cannot build any standing
structure: such who secure not their Birth, and are not rooted in Christ,
cannot grow up in him: It is with many preposterous Christians, as with rash
g^ddy Concellors, who dispose the Conquest, and divide the Bears skin, before
they consult the war-fare, or go out to kill the Bear, or like wandering
beggars, who being in constant motion, neither know nor care whither they go,
so they have but an house in their eye: so many having heard of Heaven, and
Holiness wander with a blind affection any ways, in which they may keep that
within sight: but never consider whether they have entered the Gate of this
Enclosure: Let me tell you, many will prove this destructive to them, that they
take a view of the dignitys, without any care of the dutys of a Christian, and
grow great and strong in the joye, confidence, and expectations of Saints who
are strangers, yea enemies to the principles and practices of piety, to the
fund^mental doctrines of faith, and ordinances of worship; I have with
amazement observed deluded souls, to have passed from some gross profaneness,
Idolatrys, and Superstitions, and to wander in by paths, with the greatest
security, alacrity, confidence, joy, professing (to the Blasphemy of the
Gospel, Shame of Martyrs, and Scandal of Religion) the fullest assurance of
their interest in, and approach unto eternal life, that is imaginable: and this
not only under the greatest sufferings, but also the most gross errors, and
grievous sins, pride persidie, perjury, schisms, seditions, treasons, and
rebellions, which were even perpetrated under the Sun; Heb. 6.4 5
and what is more with an heaven daring boldness, affirming their abominations
to be the cause of God; I could never conceive other cause thereof then this,
they having gotten a sight of heaven, tasted the good word of God, and powers
of the world to come: giddily to run out without any consideration of the Gate
care of entrance, regard unto the Foundation knowledge of, First principals of
Religion; but with a blind affection, move forward in any estate? and it is
possible to move toward it, and not come into it, to keep it in sight, in a way
which leads not into it, they deceive themselves, defend all their errors and
Impieties, and will not hear of a deviation, because Heaven is in their Eye,
Life is within their view, glory is in their intention; as if Balaam were sure
to dye, the death of the Righteous, when and because he and all his
conspirations, and endeavors to curse Israel saw their glory and the good will
of God unto them: Beloved friends consider men's Estate is Converted, or
unconverted, as to God, Christ, and true Religion, the unconverted must make
sure they enter the Gate, the strait Gate learn Principles of faith, lay in
their Souls the Foundations of, Religion: the Converted must with care and
caution move in the Narrow way without deviation, or divertion without going
aside or going back: If you have not rightly entered talk what you will, I
cannot but suspect your seize in grace; many of you talk of Religion, and
seem to be zealous for it, forward in it whose confused notions, deluded
apprehensions, and deviating Conversations, do witness you have not entered
the Gate, or at least, and best are gone aside from the way that leads to
life: Look to Gods order, Job. 18.4.
if ever you will live with God in honor, whatever Religions humor may act
you to invite Gods order, you must know the Earth must not be removed for you;
if you will not exactly mind Gods method, you must and will miscarry in your
designs, 2 Pet. 1.2.20 21, 22, 23.
and intentions for his life and glory, for sad is their estate who profess to
pursue, and yet never enter the paths of peace, and more sad is theirs who
entered into the way of Righteousness, turn aside from the holy Comandements.

The number of the means.
The third thing which lies in this Metaphor is the number of the means of
Grace. It is a Gate a way, singular, not plural, one, not more not many much
of the difficulty in the souls passage to life, would be discharged by the
multiplicity of paths: the danger incident to the one, would be avoided by
entrance into another: whatsoever be the many special acts of holiness, the
Gate of righteousness is, and can be but one. The means whereby to get eternal
life is one and but one: in its general nature, it is special, it is singular:
you may observe they are predicated by unites, one God, one Lord, one Faith,
one Baptism, one Body, and one Spirit, Ephesians. 4.4, 5.
and indeed the speciality of it is fixed in one Person, the Lord Jesus Christ
who says of himself I am the Way: and well says the Apostle Paul, Christ is
not divided; John 14.10:
Christ may be differently dispensed by doctrines of Faith, differentent
ordinances for worship and directions unto duty, differently exhibited in his
different natures, God, Man, Offices, Prophet, 1 Cor. 1.13.
Priest and King, or different Acts of Med^atorship, as his Incarnation,
Converse among men, observation of the Law, death, resurrection, Ascension, and
intercession, or differently administered, that is, made known, and exhibited by
different Ministers in respect of their Kind, Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists,
Pastors and Teachers, or in respect of the different individual Persons under
any kind, as Paul Apollo, Cephas, and the like; but in these; all these, or any
of these, Christ is not divided; he is and must remain whole and entire, the
one, only way to life; These things of Christ may be dissantin^ae, they are
not, they cannot be opposita, for they then would be inconsistent, destructive
each to other: A Kingdom divided against it self cannot stand, Christ divided
does ce^se to be: they that embrace not Christ under all his exhibited acts and
Offices, under all his dispensed O^dinances, Doctrines and directions, in all
and every of his Ministers, enter not the Gate, walk not in the way to eternal
life: nor are these in any contrary ways, but the same one individual way
existing in so many distinct: and different steps such who dream of many, not
only different, but directly contrary ways to Heaven, do and will deceive
themselves and others: For that Gate and Way which admits no Tergiversacion:
nor regresse, no diversion, deviation or stepping aside, on either the right or
left hand, and is the same to all and every Traveller, can be but one: to
divide in the way is ordinarily incident to Saints: but to divide the way is
inconsistent with salvation: I have often admited, and must confess I cannot
understand that monstrous charity of our Age, that men should turn backs in
doctrines of faith and Acts of Worship, and yet shake hands with a friendly
confidence of meeting one another in Heaven: to constitute contrary Churches,
consecrate a contrary Ministry, and so create a contrary worship in the form
(and Forma dat essentiam,) though the matter be Gods, and yet expect that men
should know them as Saints, and call them Heirs of Salvation, and conclude them
in the Way to heaven, is as much as if men should conclude the ten Tribes, with
their new p^iests worshipping God according to the Law of Moses, in their new
planted Churches at Dan, and Bethell, were equally related to, interested in,
and accepted by God as was Judah, and those that feared the Lord, and fled from
this new contrary course of Religion, though for matter Gods own institution: I
am sure the Apostle was a stranger to this Charity, when he concluded of the
Separating Sects in his time, dividing in doctrine, and from the Communion of
the Church; Coll. 2.19.
that they held not the head, by which the body by joints and bands having
nourishment ministered, and knit together, increases with the increase of God.
I do not deny but Joseph's brethren may too unnaturally strive in the way to
their Father: but if any of them start from or turn out of the way, they are
not like to see him. Schisms I grant may be in the Church, and they are
sinful and sad, but Schisms from the Church are immediately subverting to
Salvation: unfitting contentions may arise between Paul and Barnabas, Acts.
15.39.
unto an undue heat, concerning Society with a defective brother, insomuch that
they may part asunder the one passing to Cyprus the other to Gilicia, an^ yet
both may meet in Heaven: But Barnabas and Peter's Contrariety to the course of
Christianity in a slavish compliance with the Circumcision, is to be
contradicted by a zealous Paul as destructive to salvation: Gal. 2.11 12, 13,
14.
I withstood him to the face, for he was to be blamed because he walked not
uprightly, according to the truth of the Gospel. Hooper and Ridley may with two
much heat expostulate the retaining Popish rites and Ceremonies appendant to
Religion in the reformed Church and yet agree in the strait and fiery pssage
to heaven But Saunders cannot in charity hope in heaven to meet Pendleton
turning back upon the Truth, or Grinwald who would not pledge him in the Cup of
his Martyrdom for the truth of the Gospel: I desire to have Charity toward
all men, but Charity must operate in due and proper Acts, according to the
quality of the Object, the charity which commends countenanceth and
concludes certainty of life unto the many wanderers out of heavens way, in the
by-pathes of their own fancy and humor, unto the contradiction of the Truth,
and casting off Gods Ordinances, and Gospel ministry, and cutting themselves
off from the communion of the Church, is a foolish pity, inconsistent with the
knowledge of Gods order for man's salvation: such as make many and contrary ways
to Heaven, may make a noise and professions of holiness in the world, but will
in the end find themselves mistaken and others by them misguided unto the loss
of eternal life, unto which there is but a Gate, a Way, one single Gate, and
Strait way, not to be declined: It is indeed true, the heavenly City is said to
have twelve Gates, but we must observe this City is the end, not Gate of the
Christians journey. The City of life, to which the narrow way does lead, and
the multiplicity of these Gates, are Meta^horically mentioned to amplify the
G^ory thereof: Man's dignity is ample, and abundant, free and full; but man's
duty is auxious and afflicted, strait and narrow; all that enter into the City
with 12. open gates, must enter at the one Strait gate; and travel in the one
Narrow way, which leads thereunto: such as walk at large in sight of Heaven
will find themselves locked out of this glorious palace, when their past
professions of Christ will make them think it hard.

I have done with the Subject or thing spoken of (viz.) the means of man's
Salvation, the Gate, the way to life: I must now pass unto the Predicate or
thing spoken of this Gate and Way, The predicate.
and that is, it is Strait and narrow.

This predicate does declare the property of the passage unto Glory: it is
strait and narrow or as some, strait and low: close and little, as others or
serious, and sorrowful: say others It is a Metaphor made use of, to make knwon
the Difficulty, and Danger which does attend Travellors in the Way to life and
happiness, as a strait Gate cannot be entered with ease nor without stooping,
and many times Stripping a man's self of all things superfluous, and many times
many things necessary; nor can men walk in a narrow way with any great pleasure
or freedom, no not without striving and pressing many times, to the pinching
of their bodies and perplexing their mind how to pass forward, and make their
way through unto the attainment of the desired end, and an arrival at their
intended places of life, and rest: such is man's estate in the use of the means
of Grace for the obtainment of Glory, in his entrance into and walking in
Christ Jesus our Lord: Heaven is not had with so much ease as most men imagine,
and the light negligent carriage of too many Christians gives men cause to
think. Religion is not a business of such facility to follow and maintain, as
many dream and suppose; a Christians Conversation is not so smooth and current
as many do conceive: Oh no: the Gate of righteousness is more strait, the way
of holiness is mo^e narrow: such who will enter it must strip themselves of all
superfluities of sin, and worldly substance; they must east off the works of
darkness, and a l that sin which c^mpasseth then about, Heb. 12.1.
and cast abroad their worldly comforts being read to distribute, 1 Timothy 6.17,
18, 19.
willing to communicate, selling that which they have to give unto the poor:
sometimes the passage may be so strait, that they must strip themselves of
their very necessaries, Lands, Livings, Friends, Houses, Brethren, Sisters,
Wife, Children, and Life it self (without which they cannot praise God, nor
p^ess in the way to life.) Lying dead in the way by pressing for motion, and
progress in the course of Christianity, is many times the event of the Saints
labor, and their actual formal entrance into the City of life: nor does the
straitness of this gate, or narrowness of this way; call for, and more
necessitate the soul to be thus stripped, then that when thus it do also st^op,
bow down, bend unto the very dust, and creep on its very belly: the will must
be subdued unto, resigned up to Gods will, in doing, in suffering: Thy will be
done is the Childs only cry; and in heavens way we must become Children, Isai.
55.7.
little Children: Man's reason must be resigned up to divine Revelation: The
wicked man must forsake his own thoughts, as well as the unrighteous man his
ways: Naamans proud heart must stoop to the Prophets counsel, and wash in
Jordan, or he must not lose his Leprosy: Gods Word must cast down every
imagination, and every high thing which exalts it self against the knowledge
of God, 2 Cor. 10.5.
and bring into captivity every thought unto the obedience of Christ. Whosoever
will walk with God, must walk humbly with God; Christians in heavens way must
like Christ, stoop at Gods will under the rage of men, bow down under the fury
of the Oppressor, and let the wicked pass over them: they must sometimes give
their back to the smiters, and their cheeks to them who pluck off the hair:
Isai. 50.6.
they must not hide their face from shame and spitting; they must in many
perplexities pass into the possession of Life and Glory: Heavens way is not
high enough for sinful man to stand upright in: they must proceed with pain
and grief, affliction, and anxiety: for strait is the gate, and narrow is the
way which leads unto life.

This Gate is said to be strait, and this way narrow, in many respects, or for
many reasons, which the learned do observe upon this Text: as because it is
repugnant to man's reason, distastful to man's lust, and affections, attended
with distress, great and many a^flictions: every of these reasons are true, and
good demonstrations of the difficulty of man's salvation: but I shall not insist
upon them, but propose to your consideration one which is more proper, and is
most specially intended in the Text.

Strait is the gate, and narrow is the way to life, for it is terminated,
limited, b^unded; and restrained; this gate and way is an Enclosure, on each
side of which are Bounds which cannot be broken. without danger; there are
Limitations which cannot be left in safety: and this is the reason of all that
difficulty and danger, anguish, affliction, to which men are exposed, because
they must walk, move forward within such strait bounds, and narrow Limits, and
may not, cannot with any safety turn back, or turn aside, when once entered into
this strait gate and narrow way.

Man's invention is indeed a large Field, and common Road; but Gods will is a
strait gate and narrow way: that once revealed, man is by and to it restrained,
and may not turn aside from it unto the right hand, or to the left: man's
passage toward heaven is like unto the passage into a prison, or rather a
Palace, where the entertainment is by a low, little Wicket, to which men must
stoop, and in which they cannot enter with any thing superfluous: and the
progress is over a narrow Bridge open on both sides, on which if a man do not
move with caution and circumspection, and tread with even steps, he will tumble
into the ditch; one wry step may prove his ruin. Holiness is like Jonathan's
motion to kill the Philistines upon an high rock, by a narrow path, on each
side of which is a precipice, and in which they cannot go but must creep on
their hands and knees: Godliness is a most regular militation, in which the
Soldiers are kept close to order, commission and instructions not to move one
foot without or beyond the same. Marescallo the French General first Knighted a
Scotch Soldier for an eminent service he had done, and then beheaded him, for
doing it without C^mmission; and the same God who blessed the house of
Obed-Edom for entertaining the Arc, made a Perez Vzza for Vzza's presuming
irregularity to uphold it when shaken in the Cart, and in danger to fall;
sincerity in Sanctity is a most strait line in which no part is crooked; an
upright man goes right forward in Gods way, without bending on either hand;
Christianity is a clear Criticisme; true Religion is reduced to a narrow point;
these are on both hands beset with sin; good is the Council of Wisdom, turn
not to the right or left hand, remove thy foot from evil, Pro. 4.2. What the
heathen conclude of moral virtue, is most true of Christian Graces (in medio
consistit virtus) true virtue is the narrow middle way, the extremes of which in
defect or excess are manifest and notorious vice: It is all one in nature to
shoot short, or wide of the mark; to be dashed on S^lla or Charybdis, to loose
Salvation by profaneness, or superstition; to subvert the faith, by ignorance
or error; to root up the Church by persecution or separation; to destroy Gods
worship by Irreligion or innovation to walk evenly, to sail steadily between
those extremes, and works which are on each hand, hic labor, hoc opus, is an
hard piece of work, which will cause much care, charge and pains.

I cannot but observe the Scripture Record does represent the Saints integrity
to have been prooved, and approved by an exact obedience in some narrow Crisis,
special Act, and particular point, in which they were most closely Pinched: The
whole Law was too large a field for man's obedience in innocence his willing
subjection to the sovereign power of his Creator, must be proved by the pinch
of one forbidden tree, whilst all in their first creation were appointed, and
all others were left common, and free unto his use. Noah must be the Preacher
of righteousness by preparing the Arc (an improbable instrument to save him,
when the floods should over-whelm Houses, and mountains) Abraham may follow God
he knows not whether, but must be approved the Father of the faithful, by
hoping above hope, unto the sacrificing of his son Isaac: we have heard of the
patience of Job, which is only remarkable in one point, he charged not God
foolishly; we have also heard of the passions of Job, he cursed the day of his
birth, but he cursed not his God; he challenged, but he charged not the Lord!
David's faith was approved by his loyalty, his enemies head was in his hand,
when his heart smote him for cutting off the Lap of his garment; what shall I
tell you of Moses, of Jeremiah, of Daniel, of the three Children, of the whole
cloud of witnesses, whose faith is found sincere by a single point of
obedience, Heb. 11. Christianity is a most narrow Crisis, and must be well and
warily di cerned; I cannot but wonder to hear some men when convincingly
pinched by a distinct discovery of their deviation from truth, and piety, cry
out against distinctions as Antichristian and impious: tell them they must
discern between Churches, Ministers, Ba^tismes; for these contradictions, or
contrary Constitutions cannot be Christian, and carry to heaven; they will call
off all possibility of conviction by crying out against l^gicall distinctions
in matters of Religion; I must tell such in, no case does that Rule (Qui been
distinguit, been docet) distinction is man's direction, hold good so much as in
the case of Religion and Salvation, which is many times won or lost, upon a
nice and narrow point, eating or not eating an Apple, butchering or not
butchering an only Son such who pretend to move in heavens way without
distinction, march with confidence, and security to destruction; distinction is
the ratio formalis of the strait gate, and narrow way; no difficulty, no danger
in a way, which needs no distinction; saving Grace is a discerning Spirit;
the spiritual man is a discerner of the things of God; distinction is the only
demonstration of sincerity, and soundness in the faith; Heresies must come,
that they who are sound may be made manifest; 1 Cor. 11.19. John. 10.
my sheep know my voice, says Christ; The devil is often turned into an Angel
of light to engage the Elect of God to careful considerate distinction; the
Spirit of God shall sometimes tempt the distinguishing power of ^ods people;
true piety must be approved, by a nick, or narrow point of obedience in every
condition, and relation, avoiding all deviations, as well as defects, and this
cannot be observed if not discerned; there is a simplicity of the Gospel, from
to which we must not be beguiled, a truth of the Gospel according to which we
must walk with right steps, the outlet of distinction, is the inlet of
delusion; neglect to discern the truth that you may embrace it in the love of
it; and you shall easily believe lies: the Cautions in Scripture are to no
purpose to men who cast off distinction; take heed what you hear, beware of the
leaven of the Pharisees, and the like, are insignificant directions to men of
no distinction: the neglect of distinction, will make Peter a sinful
Conformist, as well as those pointed at in Heb. 10 25. were sinful
non-communicants: there is no estate in which we are in the world, which is not
on both hands bounded with sin: are we Prosperous? it is a narrow point to
receive the Creatures of God with thanksgiving, to use them humbly and with
sobriety, not unto pride and tyranny, security and carnal confidence, in the
casting off God, or contempt of our brethren: with discretion to esteem, enjoy,
and use them as Gods good blessings, and yet not to abuse them to the
satisfaction of our sensual lust, and the entangling of our souls in sin: How
Hard do we find it, in the day of affliction, and distress, to shun sinful,
senseless Apathie, Stoicall stupidity, and impatient anxiety, peircing grief
or fear, heart-perplexing, God-provoking Cares and Complaints, not to lay
aside, nor let our natural passions break out, beyond the bounds of sobriety,
reason or Religion: to fear without fretting discern danger without
diffidence, to be angry without envy, to grieve without grudging: to mourn
without murmuring, to be stricken and smitten of God, afflicted all the day
long, and lie in si^ence, without repining or charging God foolishly: or
charging piety to be perplexing folly: but to lay our Mouths in the dust under
our opressed innocence, because the Lord has done it: to be reviled of men,
and not to revile again: to be oppressed and persecuted, yet free from revenge:
to bless them that curse us, and pray for them who despitefully use us, is a
lesson not easily learned: truly friends, my experience has found it a strait
Gate, a narrow way, to retain quick and lively senses, under the restraint of a
lively faith: to fear and grieve, and yet not fly in the face of men, or forget
God: I cannot but observe Apathy in afflictions is manifest profaneness: Isa.
42.25
and impatiency is no less then impiou^: God aggravateth Israel profaneness by
their Stupidity and shameful Apathy: Ier. 5.3.
when he set them on fire round about, they knew it not: It burned them and
they laid it not to heart, Isa 22.12 13, 14.
he observes as an argument of insensibility under his hand: He complains of
them, as impudently impious, because when they were stricken they did not
grieve: He charge it as an inniquity indelible to be merry and joviall in
Feasts, and full expressions of joy, when his providence and their perplexing
state does call for weeping and mourning: and on the other hand he rebukes
excess of passion as no less profane: Isa. 15.12 13.
Who Art thou that art afraid of the fury of the oppressor, and forgetest the
Lord thy maker: not to fear is inhumane; to fear without faith, is Unchristian;
not to care is contrary to reason, to care unto vexations diffidence,
concerning future events, is contrary to true Religion; not to mourn in, misery
is incongruous to men, (Subjects of sense and reason) to mourn as without hope
is incongruous to Christans, in whom reason is rectifyed, and directed to
expectation of a better change. The nature of patience does charge sin on both
extremes, it presupposes, it preserves passions existent; whilst it
abounds, restrains, regulateth the same; we have heard of the passions of
Job; I could never understand the patience, and meekness of Malefactors, who
suffered the utmost sorrows, under the greatest, most manifest Guilt, without
the least of grief, or fear, commotion of mind or perplexing apprehension; Yea
under the greatest ostentation of joy and peace, being cannonized by their
friends for Martyrs, on the only ground of their confidence: which (to the
Blasphemy of Christianity and its Martyrs) they call Christian courage, sure I
am that they who rejoiced with joy unspeakable and full of Glory, beleiving in
whom they had not seen, were in heavinese under all kind of grief, through
manifold temptations; and they who trusted in the living God, who had
delivered, and would deliver were by the power of their passions pressed out of
measure, and above their Strength; a due deportment in every condition as men,
and Christians, is a narrow strait, an estate of great difficulty and danger;
the same bounds and strait Limitts attend our relation and the duties thereof;
How hard for Subjects (as sincere David) to retain Loyalty and affection
toward oppressing persecuteing Princes? How hard for Servants to be subject to
their Masters, not only the meek and gentle, but also to the froward? to do
well and suffer for it patiently, is an hard saying, who can bear it: This
Straitness attends our whole Conversation, and the course of our lives in
common as Christians; to continue Communion with Christ's Church, under many and
great Corrupcions, and not to comply with and conform, unto sinful
impositions; not to leave Gods Ordinances when made grievious to the Soul by
humane Appendants, and disorder, not to cease the offerings of the Lord, when
the profaneness and violent disorder of the Sons of Elie make them loath the
same; to hear them who say, but do not; only because they are in Moses chair.
to beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, being bound to hear them, who
ordinarily teach for doctrines the traditions of men, and make the word of God
of none effect: to retain Church unity under its impurity, and attend
Gospel Ministry in profane subjects; to be zealous for reformation, without
running into, or striking hands with separation, is, hic labor hoc opus to
religious hearts who walk uprightly according to the truth of the Gospel, a
strait gate, a narrow way, a narrow Crisis and point of duty, which cannot be
declined without danger, sin lying on both hands, by defect, or excess to
destroy us: the way to heaven is apparently strait and narrow, because thus
bounded and terminated; and for this reason our Savior does declare it so to
be.

In this Sermon, our Savior does direct exact obedience into a narrow Crisis,
and place perfection in a strait punctilio: The scope and drift of the Sermon
is to show the bounds and limits of the way of life, the restraints of
Religion, which the error and superstition of the Jews had broken down, to the
facilitating of their passage to Heaven.

His most pleasing Preface propounds poverty of Spirit, mourning, meekness,
purity and pe^se^ution, and the like perplexing properties, as Conditions of
the Beatitudes he does declare: His directions unto duty begin with a
determination of dread, He that breaks the least of these Commandments shall
be least in the kingdom of Heaven: and so proceeding to terminate duty by a
clear exposition of the Law, he places the breach of the Law in a little,
narrow point. Murder he determines in a sc^rnful word in gesture: Adultery in
the cast of the eye: Disobedience in the neglect of a parent profaning Gods
Name in a groundless and trivial Oath: the whole matters of his Sermon are most
strict Rules, in the observation whereof he places perfection, in similitude
to God: and in this very Text the strait is opposed to the wide Gate, the
narrow to the broad way, the way of sin is an open Common, the champian ground,
in which the mighty Hunters against the Lord do sport themselves without any
limits: but the way of Sanctity is an Enclosure, a passage perilous, fickle,
difficult, dangerous, in which men cannot move without fear and care, without
pain and grief, without crosses and losses, without smart and suffering,
without pressing and striving, and yet out of it they may not turn to right or
left hand without certain ruin.

The way to Heaven is a red Sea passage, in which there is no possibility of
motion unto safety and life, but by going forward; for enemies are behind, and
walls of water do on each fide enclose us, if we give back the enemies will
destroy us, we cannot step aside but the Sea will drown us; by going forward we
may meet with a wilderness march, and many encounters with the sons of Anack,
and the Kings of the Countries through which we travel: but we are sure at last
to arrive at the Land of life and promise, for strait is the gate and narrow is
the way, which leads unto life.

I have done with the explication of this Proposition: before I pass to
application, I shall note and but note unto you the Arguments which do
convincingly demonstrate that strait is the gate, and narrow is the way which
leads unto life, and I shall not wander to seek them, they are suggested in
the Text, and are these.

Life is the end unto which this way does lead, and that you estate of
excellency, its obtainment and effecting must needs be by means of intricacy;
difficulty is inseparably attendant on dignity: the passage into a Princes
Palace is not common or easy, but by many strait gates and dark entries:
Pebbles lie common on the surface of the earth, but Pearls are hidden in the
bowels thereof, and must be dug out with difficulty and danger: Needs there
be any more said to convince you, that Grace and Holiness is a strait gate and
narrow way, then to tell you it leads unto glory: this estate was not
purchased without the Lord Jesus coming from Heaven, being tempted by the
Devil, tormented by men, forsaken by God, and his passing through the straits
of a shameful cursed death: and can we think it should lie common and open
without guard or enclosure, for any that will, when they will, which way they
will to enter into? It is below its worth, and should expose it unto contem^t.

This Gate and way is strait and narrow, because singular it is every one that
cries Lord, Lord: the way to Heaven is singular, but one enclosed, ^rescribed
way, though our corrupt nature be disposed to run at liberty, and profaneness
will bear no restraint, yet we must know we must keep close to Gods
Commandments, and walk in the one way, the one Gate of his appointment unto
life. Nature has made many ways to death, and but one way of difficulty and
danger to pass into life, and corrupt nature can and does create many ways to
Hell: but the gift of God is eternal life, to be obtained in, and by that one,
and only way, which he has determinated bounded and revealed.

This Gate and way to life is strait, and narrow, because few paucity of
Travellors does make, as well as proclaim difficulty in the way of motion: for
because few pass through it, it is untract, untrodden, not easily to be
discerned: Christ's flock is a little flock, the Elect are but a remnant: there
are but a few names who are found faithful: many may follow Christ but there
are few will sell that they have, and give to the poor some will deny
themselves, take up their cross and follow him many will call him Lord, Lord,
but few will do what he says: many may strive to enter in at the Strait Gate,
but few are able to effect it: nor is there any more plain and clear
demonstration of difficulty and danger then the paucity of those who pass
through it: a common Road, is a beaten Road, every man will travel the open
way, few will take pains to pass through straits to the poscessions of life
and glory.

This gate ie a strait, this way is narrow, for there is in it no entrance, no
process without diligence. our Savior did direct his curionists questions to
strive to enter in at the strait gate, but

The Application of this Doctrine might be large, and various, Application.
but time will not allow me to expatiate: but does constrain me to contract I
will therefore pass by those many Inferences which flow from hence, and
confine my self to my Text, and our Saviors method (viz.) an exhortation,
affectionately to embrace and earnestly to press forward in the strait gate
and narrow way.

My beloved, be entreated seriously to reflect upon your thought, s that strait
is the Gate, and narrow is the way that leads unto life, and let difficulty,
persuade, provoke your diligence consider the words and exhortation of our
Savior, enter in at the strait gate, and narrow way, so our Evangelists, does
report it: but Luke reports it, strive to enter in at the strait Gate: The
duty is the same in both these Evangelists, though the different occasions on
which it was persuaded, caused some difference in expression; but both the
sentences are considerable and have their Empha as St. Ma. presents it to us;
it guides our choice and affections to embrace: according to St. Luke, it
provokes our industry in pursuit of our chosen object, that we may not miss to
attain the end: enter in at the strait gate, that is, choose, and affectionately
embrace the way of danger and difficulty, in which you cannot move without ear
and cost, without courage and consideration, without pressing and perplexity;
although your nature cannot but affect ease, desire to walk at large, reluct
under the very thoughts of restraint, and regulation: be wise, be well advised
by me (says our Savior) who have, and know the issues of life and death, to
deny your selves, and direct your feet into the soul way, strait g^^e and
nar^^w paths: cast your selves under divine direction; pass your lives in an
exact observancy of divine prescription; receive the yoke, abide the bonds of
the Lord Jesus Christ; decline the way with, and in which flesh and blood is so
much, so well pleased, and resign up your mind, will, affections, actions and
passions, to the restraints of Reason, to the regulation of Religion:
answerable to this Exhortation is our Saviors Argument, drawn from the end
unto which this strait gate does lead: It leads unto life: as if he should
have said, you see before you different paths, you are to make your choice, be
by me advised to consider, that broad way, and wide gate, leads to
destruction; but this start gate and narrow way leads unto life: guide
therefore your affections by the end you aim at, and enter in at the strait
Gate. I this day set before you life and death, choose you which you will take:
I cannot but tell you, if you embrace the broad way, follow the multitude to do
evil, please your own lusts, and live as you list, without regard to, or
restraint by Gods holy Word, you shall enjoy present case, and future endless
misery: but if you decline this broad way, and enter the strait Gate, deny your
selves, enter the way of Gods Commandments, and walk uprightly in them, not
turning aside to the right or left hand, you must indeed undergo present
hardship, but shall hereby attain unto, arrive at eternal happiness.

Let the end, the last in your enjoyment be the first thing in your intention,
and you cannot stick in your thoughts what to choose: who will not labor for
life, rather then lie still and die? Who will not pass some straits to possess
such glory, rather then live in pleasure and lose salvation for ever? who at
the day of judgment will not choose the portion of Lazarus before that of
Dives? How sad a check is it to Dives comforts to hear the Lord say, Thou have
now thy good things, but shall he hereafter tormented? How reviving refreshing
is it to poor Lazarus, to know the Lord looks on his low estate, and
resolves, that he, in this life afflicted, shall be in Abraham's bosom
abundantly comforted, cost what it can, be it never so strait and narrow, enter
in at the strait gate, it leads unto life.

According to St. Luke, Strive to enter in at the strait gate; enter into it,
for life is the end of it, strive unto this entrance for you labor for life,
and that calls for the utmost diligence and violence of endeavors: strive
not feebly and faintly, but with force and vigor; press forward in it with
strength and vivacity, with power unto perplexity: strive unto, and again,
until you sweat, until you bleed again, press into this narrow passage, until
you be immured and perish, if need so require: stretch your limb^ until you be
not able to stand; walk with, wait on God, until and after you are weary: you
cannot live with God unless you love God, you cannot love God unless you
embrace him: pursue him with all your heart, with all your might, with all your
soul, with all your strength: you seek salvation, though it is not wages, you
must work for it, work out your own salvation with fear and trembling, with a
fear of diligence, not of diffidence and despondency: a sight of Isreal's glory
will make a cursing Balaam cry out, Oh that I might die the death of the
righteous, and that my latter end might be like his: but the laborious life of
the righteous can only secure the happy death which passes into eternal life.
Heaven is not had with a wet finger: short winded wishes will never set any in
the haven of everlasting happiness: the slothful in Christianity can never
inherit the promise the kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, the violent take
it by force fight so as to get victory, so run as to obtain, so wrestle as to
prevail, so strive as to be able to enter the strait gate, for strait is the
gate and narrow is the way that leads unto life.

Give me leave to enforce this general Exhortation, unto an industrious
pressing on in holiness, and heavens way, by some fe^ motives, which may
persuade with you, and make you see the necessity thereof.

Consider therefore:

Heavens way is an hard way, it is a way of difficulty, must be walked in with
diligence: it is a way of danger, must be traversed with care: it is a way of
dolor and distress must be moved in with deliberation and discretion: Heavens
way is an hard way, because as you have heard it is terminated and bound^d, out
of which there is no starting on either side, with the least of safety: Besides
that, it is thus hard in it self, it is made more hard by these things which
attend it, or rather us in the entrance into this Strait Gate: and narrow way
for it is to every the Sons of men.

A way of obscurity; hard to find out, hard to be traveled in, Heavens way
obscure.
it is a Mystery: Great is the mystery of Godliness: Mysteries are not easily
understood, it is a peculiar privilege, a special favour^ a gift from heaven,
from God, 1 Timothy 3.16.
to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven: this is not obivious to every
eye; the natural man receives not the things of God, for they are specially
discerned: this way obscure in it self is untrodden, few there be who find it:
Mat. 13.11. 1 Cor. 2.14.
the tract is small and little, not easily discerned the footsteps found, are to
be followed, but their impression is so little that they are soon worn out:
Examples of exact obedience are very few: one Noah serving providence in the
means of his own appointment, is the Preacher of Righteousness: to the old
world, one Abraham is the pattern of perfect resignation to God a sufficient:
one Moses for meekness; one Job, for patience, one David, for Int^g ity, and
so singular Saints have trodden, the tracts of special Graces, in the way to
Heaven: and their footsteps are to be found with most diligent search and
accurate observation: this obscure and trodden way to life: is perplexed with
many intricacies, and doubts, which do arise from the variety of Gods
providence, and variation of our condition how to carry in a single, how in a
married? ho to carry in an adverse, how in a a prosperous state, how to carry
in society, and variety of Society? how to carry in solitudes? how to live by
faith in all conditions? how to live under Gods Ordinances, under all
dispensations how to do the duty of a Minister and of a common member to the
Church? How to pursue the purity, and how to preserve the entity of the Church?
how to advance the power of godliness? and how to attend and edify our selves
by Gods Ordinances, under confused corrupt disorderly profane administration?
In a word h^w to perceive, and perform the Crisis and Punct^lio of Piety
pointed out, and to be put into art by and under the present providence, so as
not to fli^ into (...) on either hand, are such cases of conscience, and doubts
of mind which must, but cannot (with ease, nor without much diligence, and
difficulty) be resolved, for our guidance in the strait narrow paths, which
lead to life and glory.

Yet again consider this obscure, untrodden and perplexed way to Heaven: is
more hard to find, to enter, by the many by-pathes and delusive deviations
which lie on earth-side thereof: what necessity to try the Spirits: many Spirits
not being of God, so maerrors in doctrine, darkning the faith, such subtle
insinuations of seducers, drawing from the truth that the Ministers of God
cannot b^t fear, the people should be beguiled from simplicity of the Gospel:
And the people cannot but find by Peter's fall, it is an hard matter to walk up
rightly according to the truth of the Gospel, the Devil transforming himself
into An Angel of light is not soon or easily discerned, or discovered, good
men may be catched with error, yea Peter and Barnabas goodmen, and Ministers
may be carried away; with the dissimulation of seducers; for the false Apostles
appear even as the Apostles Jesus Christ; obscurity must provoke enquiry and
serious study, for the narrow bounds of truth and Piety are not discerned,
without much difficulty.

Heavens way opposed.
This is a way of no less ob^curity, then opposition: Christianity is a
constant militation; Whatsoever be the mutation of humane affairs in the world
the Church of Jesus Christ i^, and must be militant; till he come in Glory
being entered we make no progress in piety without blows; Godliness is the
taking of a Garrison, the Gate is hardly gained, Heb: 10.23
and that entered; every steep in the streets is to follow the stroke of a
begun victory: after, yea immediately after, they were enlightened, they endured
a great fight of afflictions: Israe^ possesses not the Land of Promise but by
the persuit of Egypt, passage through the Sea, Conflicts with, and unto the
Conquest of the Sons of Anak, and Kings of the Countries: and sincere Saints
must cut their ways to heaven: Ephe. 6.12.
Wrestl^ng not with flesh and blood, but against Principalities and pow^rs
against the Rulers of the darkness of this world and spiritual wickedness, in
high Places, so subtle and many are the temptati^n^ of the Devil, that it is
hard for the most serious soldier under Christ's Banner to be able to stand
against the Wiles of th Devil. Oh strait Gate: Oh narrow way; where our hands
must h w and cut open the way in which our feet must rread; if we will find
eternal life: this way is yet the more difficult and strait, beccause our
d^praved nature is averse unto this obscure, opposed way; The natural man is at
emnity with G^d; man's soul cannot receive righteousness, with out reluctance;
Romans 8.7.
holiness is not only Supernatural, and above our reach, but contronatural and
against our disposition, Constitution, and Inclination; Heavens way is uphill,
and against heart; we are loath to enter the Gate, and more loath to proceed in
the way to life; many strive but are not able to enter we are by nature of dull
Capacity to discern sloathfull to endeavor: and therefore move heavily in
undertakeing the profession of piety: we are by nature feeble, ready to faint
under difficulty; fearful uf heart ready to fall back, on the first assaults
of opposition; we are by nature of a wandering spirit ap^ to go astray. Errors
and Schism^s, are the fruits of our flesh; We can easily deviate into
by-pathes, Gal. 5.
turn aside from the way of truth; a direct Course is a matter of great
difficulty and much diligence.

Christians, if in good earnest you seek life, you must strive, you cannot
without great struggling unto and against, vanquish the difficulties of
obscurity, opposition, and your own averseness to the way to Heaven.

Strive to enter in at the strait gate, for your entrance is indispensably the
gate to life is but one, and no entrance into this gate without striving: No
possibility of salvation but in Gods way, be it never so contrary to our own
will: And so narrow is the punctillio of piety, and passage to life that a
passion, a point of good manners does many times divert us, and endanger our
salvation; David's fretting did almost, and Peter's fear did altogether trip up
his heels in the way of truth; he walked not with a right foot: yea Peter's good
manners must be sometimes rebuked by his Masters pity, If I wash thee not thou
have no part in me: Be Gods way never so repugnant to reason, a proud Naaman
must stoop to it, or retain his Leprosy to his ruin; be the gate to heaven
never so much against our Will, we must into it, for we have no other way: He
that loves any thing, though life it self, better then Christ is not worthy of
him. The gate and way to life is most certainly, Causa sive qua non; if we will
not strive we cannot enter; and if we do not strive, let us profess Christ at
what rate we will, and possess the dispensations of Christ's Gospel, privileges
of his Church, and presence, in what measure we can; when we would enter life
we may knock in vain, for the Lord will protest he knows us not, we were not
under his conduct in the way, and may not therefore come into his communion in
the end of our Religion.

Strive to enter in at the stait gate, for the success is certain Work out
(says he) your own salvation, for it is God that works in you to will and to
do of his own pleasure. Such as proceed in the conflict under Christ's Banner,
shall not fail of the conquest; such as persevere in pressing forward, shall
find the grace of Christ sufficient for them, until they apprehend that for
which they were apprehended of Christ Jesus. Our Savior indeed tells us,
many did strive but were not able; but you must understand it aright, they
strove unto, not in the act; they strove under the pangs of conviction, put
forth many good purposes; but these proved abortive, and never passed into act;
their hearts were never indeed set on God, on Christ, on Holiness; their
judgments were herein informed, but their affections were not herein inflamed;
for he that has an heart shall never want strength to go to heaven; strive in
the entering, proceeding act, and we shall prove he wh^ has begun his good work
shall and will perfect it, unto the day of his Grace.

Strive we to enter the strait gate, for the end is more worth then the utmost
of our endeavors; Heaven will make amends for all the hardship of the way
thither. How did the Patriarchs press on the bare perceptions of faith, not
having received the promise (which we have performed) but seeing them afar off,
Heb. 11.13.
saluting them at a distance; our Lord Jesus has led us this way, for the joy
which was set before him, he endured the cross, and despised the shame. The
conscience of duty will make a sincere Saint confess, that in the most exact of
his obedience, he is an unprofitable servant; but when we shall come to make a
sensible comparison between the dignity we receive, and the diligence we used,
the difficulties we felt, we shall find cause to cry out, by Grace we are
saved: The light and momentany afflictions through which we pass here, are not
to be compared to the exceeding, eternal weight of glory which we shall enjoy
hereafter. Our present pressing, fighting, striving in heavens way may cost us
many a weary step, and weeping eye, many sighs and groans, many prayers and
tears, many care^ and fears, many an aching head and heart: It may cost us our
best worldly enjoyments, dearest Relations, and our very life, but cost what it
will, it can never cost too dear: If once we arrive at this Haven we shall sit
down without the least repining, repenting thought that ever it cost so dear;
we would not for ten thousand times as much have lost eternal life.

Christian Friends, I hope the consideration of these things will excite your
diligence, and provoke you to press through the many difficulties and dangers
which are in the way to heaven, and stir up your selves to strive to enter in
at the strait gate, and go forward in the ^arrow way which leads unto life.
What now remains but that I present you with some few Directions, which being
well observed may facilitate your passage to glory, alleviate your burden, and
make Christianity, the course of piety, a course of more delight and ease.
Observe therefore these Rules for your help herein.

Go not without God; march after the Captain of your Salvation; his presence;
Jeremiah must stand as an iron wall, and pillar of brass against Kings,
Princes, Priests, Prophets, people, under the alone protection of, I will be
with thee, says the Lord; So also do the Ministers of the Gospel. Gods
presence is the best security in all our straits; his Spirit will guide us into
all truth, resolve all our doubts, and be a voice unto us saying, This is the
way walk in it. When we are ready to wander on the right or on the left hand,
his Providence will supply all our wants, his Grace w^ll support all our
weakness; in a word, whatsoever be our temptation his wisdom will find for us a
way of escape, that we may be able to bear it; for if God be with us, who can
be against us? what can be too hard for us? I know how to want, and how to
abound; I can do all things through Christ which strengthens me, was the
Apostles, and is every Saints experience.

Christian Friends, your progress toward heaven is as a Wilderness-march to
the Land of Promise; stir not without God. Take up Moses resol^tion, Verily if
thou go not with us, we will not go up hence: Be not put off with an Angel, the
Angels are undoubtedly ministering spirits to the heirs of salvation: We owe
much to God for the Ministry of the Angels, they pitch their tents about them
that fear him, and keep them in all their ways. But (my beloved) the
difficulties which attend our salvation can only be vanquished by a Divine Arm,
Isa. 49.25.51.14, 15.
they are too strong for any created being; to divide the Sea when the waves
roar upon the Captive exile, hastening to be delivered, it is the work of the
Lord of Hosts; to take away the captive from the mighty, and to deliver the
prey of the terrible, is the proper act of the mighty God of Jacob. Move not
without God, as ever you mean to move with strength and success; for of our
selves we can do nothing; the Lord is he who works our works in us and for
us, both to will and to do.

Get and study a right Map of Heaven; get the description of the City of life,
for the nature and situation thereof will not only inflame your affections,
and add wings to your endeavors, but will help us to guess how to steer our
course thitherward: To be well skilled in the Map, is the great benefit of
travel: And to have good intelligence of the enemies Quarters, is the great
advantage of Warfare: The paths of peace are only made known by Wisdom. The
Prince of life can only reveal the state and passage unto life: The Lord Jesus
resolved his Disciples to be more then half in Heaven, when he could assure
them they knew the place, and they knew the way. My beloved cleave closs to the
Scriptures, and study them, they show the new Jerusalem which is above, the
Rivers, Rocks and shelves, the Ports, Creeks, Straits and narrow passages which
you pass; the dangers and difficulties which attend you in your passage, the
people and Enemies you must encounter, and how you may direct your selves in
all these. Christians, know that the light of Nature is too dark to describe
the dignity or difficulties; the dictates of men, the traditions of the Church,
the determination of Council, the Laws of Princes, are improper, imperfect
directions to the duties whereby we travel to Heaven. I despise not those, but
give them their due honor: But I would have you to remember Isreal's
wilderness-march to the Land of promise was in every step directed by the
immediate Oracles of God: And the eye of Faith did direct the Patriarchs
through many narrow, strait passages, to seek the City not made with hands, and
the Scriptures were written that you may believe Christ is the way, and that by
beleiving you may have eternal life, search then the Scriptures, for in them
you think, and I am sure you have eternal life.

Gain an account what it may cost you to get to Heaven: Praemonitus, a foreseen
Charge is easily defrayed; our Saviors Advice is, that we be wise Master
builders, and politic Warriors, to forecast, a capacity to effect, before we
undertake an enterprise; and to complete the Fabric, before we lay the
Foundation; he who can account all things loss and dung in comparison of
Christ, will easily insult over difficulty in Heavens way, and triumphantly
resolve neither distress, nor tribulation, nor persecution, nor peril, nor
sword, nor famine, nor nakedness, shall be able to separate from his love of
Christ, Romans 8.38, 39.
but in these he shall be more then a Conqueror; they who consider it is
written of Gods Servants, for thy sake we are killed all the day long, and
accounted sheep for the slaughter, will not think much to lay down or lose his
life in the Gate, by pressing in the narrow way to life; Convince we our selves
that Christ will have our all, or none of us, he will be embraced above all, he
has declared whosoever loves Lands, Houses, or Wife, or Children, or life it
self better then him, is not worthy of him, we then shall easily deny our
selves, and take up our cross and follow him; Remember we, that through much
tribulation we enter into Heaven, that the true Religion and course of
Godliness did and does call for the loss of all outward comforts, and propound
future glory, a better and more during substance; we shall then take joyfully
the spoiling of our goods; expectation makes hard things to be born with ease.

Grave upon the soul principles of true Religion, the first principles in his
way, is to write his Law up in their hearts; uncatechised souls having confused
notions of faith, which through want of order, and ability, do perplex and
entangle themselves in the ways of piety, many times in a blind zeal they
confound the substance, and Circumstances of Gods Ordinances; and make a defect
in the one, equally heinous as in the other; and not knowing how to guide their
judgments, they charge upon themselves duties whereof their relation or
condition does deny them to be capable; be sure you lay in the soul the first
principles of the Oracles of God, and then leave them by a regular progress in
Christianity; sure I am, that some, yea many souls are ship-wract for want of
balanced judgments: many lose all by lifting themselves up to the dignities
of Saints, not once acquainting themselves with the duties of Saints; and
pretend unto the joys of beleiving, without once pondering the principles of
faith; the unacquainted with, will easily ere from the faith; seducers need no
better a Subject for their design, then simple souls affected to, but ignorant
of the truth, and way to life.

Get, keep, and exercise a spirit of discerning; In all your getting, get
understanding; Wisdom to guide our affairs will make our burden easy, the
spirit of grace and sanctification is a spirit of discerning, the spiritual man
judges all things; Heavens way is in nothing so strait and narrow as in the
bounds which restrain us; the dangers which on all sides limit it; true piety
lies in such narrow points that without a clear judgment and good
understanding we cannot hit it; the Devil and his instruments are so politic
and subtle, that without a spirit of discerning they will readily delude, they
lead captive silly souls; through want of wisdom we entangle our selves, and
many times make stumbling stones in our own way; want of judgment causes
superstitious scrupulosity, rash censuring, vain presumption, and feigned
reverence, he that is not able to discern between good and evil; will many
times condemn good as evil, and take evil for good; will through fear of sin
fly duty, or be bold to rush into sin without fear; he will not respect, or he
will renounce Gods Ordinances, because of men's disorders; or else he will
impose his own inventions, and think to please God by a voluntary humility. By
the spirit of discerning, beleivers must prove Doctrines, try the spirits,
distinguish Ministers, know the Devil when appearing an Angel of light; differ
Christ's Church, from the flocks of Christ's Companions, and discern Gods
Ordinances from humane inventions, conversant about them, or in their room and
stead, and direct their own conversation in, and according to the speciality of
duty, which the providence of God and their present state does require. And
know how to choose or refuse things indifferent, and sever them from things
necessary, and walk with even, upright feet according to the truth of the
Gospel. Follow God with the ease and freedom of those Travelers who see and
know their way; no difficulty like darkness in the things which are to be
believed and done, because life, and eternal life is dependant thereupon.

Give up your selves, your whole selves to the will of God. Subjection
judgment guide affection; piety, prevail against policy; what you should,
against what you would do. Let Gods Will once revealed become unto you the
reason of all obedience in action, and acquiescency in passion; pray heartily
and in truth Father in Heaven let thy will be done, captivate carnal reason,
and bring every proud thought and high imagination in subjection to the will of
Christ, debates of flesh and blood are distracting to the mind, and destructive
to the soul. Paul found not a more ready way then not to reason with flesh and
blood, when God was pleased to reveal himself to him. Let the eye of reason
read Gods will revealed, and then by faith silence the dictates, and lead
c^ptive this depraved power; resignation unto Gods will is the formality of
true obedience; therefore called obedience of faith, and this obedience can be
the one^y easy property of Gods Children. Gods will is and can be the only
warrant of his worship; to offer God man's inventions, is to go a whoring from
him, and to rebel against him; our Religion must be according to his express
direction. It is the great anxiety of the godly to know the will of God; but
obedience or a readiness and resolvedness to believe what he shall speak, to do
what he shall direct, and to suffer meekly what he shall dispose, is a
discharge thereof; for he that will do, shall know the Will of God: the bending
carnal, wrangling reason to the pleasure of the most high, will pass us with
much ease through the strait Gate and narrow way which does lead to life.

Go in good Company; it is not good for man to be alone, was Gods reason for
creating humane society; solitude is not more sad then dangerous; two are
better then one, if one fall the other will lift up; go therefore in company
toward Heaven; it is Gods direction that we should assemble our selves, and go
in troops to his Sanctuary, and call upon one another to go up to Zion:
Christian Souls stand charged with one another. It was a saying beseeming a
cursed Cain, Am I my Brothers keeper? Gospel Counsel is that Christians
consider one another, to provoke unto love and good works, that they exhort one
another daily, lest any be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin, and that
if any be overtaken with a fault, he be restored by a spirit of meekness. I
confess there are few who walk in Heavens way, and find out the strait gate and
narrow way, yet there are some and it will be hard indeed that we stand or go
alone in the perplexing paths of life; say therefore as David, I am a Companion
for them who fear God.

In the choice of your company be sure you look to two things; Keep in Gods
true Church, and under Gods true Ministers. These are the most certain conducts
unto glory, the very Ship and Pilots which convey us unto Life; by, and unto
these are dispensed the promises of Grace, and Covenant of Salvation; union
with, and subjection unto these, is our security in all straits, and propriety
in all the promises, God has promised nothing to individual persons, but all
things to and for his Church, and so to the Sons of Zion, as members of his
Church, non-continuance in Communion with the Church, is in Gospel language,
not holding the head, by which the whole is increased. Separation from the
Church is most certainly destructive; to be cast out of Christ's Church is the
severest doom on this side of the last Judgment; and to cast our selves out of
the Church, is the greatest and sadest sin that can be, on this side the sin
against the Holy Ghost: They are equally in danger who throw themselves, and
who are thrown overboard by others. I could never yet know how to differ the
estate (more then by the sin of it) of a self-excommunicate, and an
excommunicate by the Church: Gods ordinary power and presence of grace is
confined to his Church Catholic Visible (for of the invisible these things
cannot be predicated) and therefore ex Ecclesia nulla salus: All men of all
opinions concerning the form of the Church, do agree in this, That there is no
ordinary way of salvation out of the Church; and all Churches constituted of
old, or gathered of late oppose them elves, and are opposed to the world;
calling the men of the world into communion with them, as ever they look to be
saved; and cast into the World, and so unto Satan, the god of the world,
whomsoever they cut off from the Church.

The Church of God may backslide, and be defiled; the Ministers of God may be
careless and negligent; yea profane, proud and persecuting; the sheep may be
not only not looked after, but driven and violently scattered on Gods
mountains; their waters may be pudled, and their pastures trodden down; Gods
Worship may be defiled by corrupt Appendants, and so his Ordinances may be
disorderly administered, and his Word may be made of none effect by men's
traditions; the keys of the Kingdom may be turned against those who follow
Christ: and these evils are not only provoking unto Gods jealousy, but also a
sad Omen of his departure; and the Churches approaching devastation and
dissolution: But yet, whilst they continue really a Church, and relatively his
Church, and retain his substantial, essential Worship and Ordinances, and he
continues his own Minist^y and presence, though his provoked, reproving
presence; departing, expostulating presence, those that fear his name, and
mourn for the abominations they cannot mend, must not withdraw themselves,
despise or neglect his Ordinances, or decline his public, solemn Worship. When
the sons of Ely by their profaneness, and the violent disorder of their
Ministration, caused the people to loath the offerings of the Lord, I find not
that any did leave off or forbear to bring them: And when the Image of
Jealousy was in the Temple, and brought God to the threshold ready to depart,
I find not that the people fled from it. Christians, we must follow, not go
before God: When he removes the Candlestick, then we may seek light elsewhere;
but if his Ordinances abide his, though by dim and dark lights; they are in
Moses chair, and we must hear them. I could never yet understand by that
caution (Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees) hear them not; for they teach
for doctrines the traditions of men. I cannot but commend to your ferious
consideration the prayer of the men who did fear God, and Gods answer unto
them, in a case of disorder in, and defection from the true Church; it is in
Cant. 1.7, 8. Tell me, O thou whom my soul loves, where thou feedest thy
flock, where thou make them to rest at noon; for why should I turn aside by
the flocks of thy Companions? If thou know not, O thou fairest among women, go
thy way forth by the footsteps of the flocks, and feed thy kids beside the
shepherds tents: The men who feared the Lord were at a loss for to find and
determine the Assembly in which Gods gracious presence might be enjoyed: they
were afraid of falling into the flock of Christ's Companions, who were
separated Assemblies, gathered, self-constituted Assemblies; worshipping the
true God with his own Ordinances, as to the matter, but by a self-consecrated
Ministry in self determined places (and so defective in the essential form) and
for their profession, and pretense of relation to Christ called his Companions:
In this strait they seriously enquire and pray God for direction what to do,
and which way to turn; and he directs them by two marks, as standing and
infallible signs, by which to steer their course; The footsteps of his flocks,
the solemn celebration of his own Worship: And the Shepherds tents, the regular
existency of his Ministers, by the order of his appointment. Give me leave to
note unto you some observations of an Author, whose name has more acceptance
and authority with many among you then what I can say. He refers this
Scripture historically to the state of those who feared God under Jerobohams
schism and rebellion, and when Judah was defiled with Solomon's High Places and
Idolatry; and infers, A Church is black, its deformities stand in the fall,
Cotton.
and sins of the people and Princes; in their folly, declining to Idolatry, in
their schisms and rents from their mother; in their profaneness, apostasy and
rebellion in Church and Commonwealth.

He observes, there may be a true comely Church in the midst of these
deformities; the sins of the Princes and people may make the Church black, but
cannot take away her comeliness; run we not therefore from the Church because
of her blackness, but run to her and embrace her in the midst of her defections.

This teaches the children of the Church not to separate from the Church for
corruption sake.

It was a sin in them who were angry with the Church, as some of the separation
are and do depart from us: What, and if some cast off England shall we reject
her, because some of the sons of her Mother do so.

Here is showed two marks of the true Church of God; The footsteps of his
flocks, Assemblies of Gods people to his true Ordinances; and his own Ministers.

Thus far, and in these words does this reverend Author, though afterward a
great countenancer of the thing he here condemned. This I say Christians, it
may sound harsh in your ears, but you must let it sink into your hearts. The
Church defiled and disordered, must not be despised or declined; the Worship
and Ordinances of God uncomfortably, unprofitably administered; yea with some
superfluous Appendants must not be disowned, or determined evil; but embraced
and attended as his Worship. The crisis of piety in this case, is to maintain
our converse with God in his own Ordinances, dispensed in a mode, grievous yea
loathsome to our souls; continue our communion when we mourn for what we cannot
mend. Observe it, Christ's Ministry was most vehemently, convincingly,
enragingly invective against the erroneous Doctrines, profane and
supersticious lives of the Church of the Jews, and her Priests, and Teachers,
yet he continued communion with her, and appeared an Advocate for her against
the flocks of his companions, self-gathered, constituted Churches; we know what
we worship; Salvation is of the Jews: So long as Gods Ordinances are salvably
dispensed, take heed to your own personal actions, in any imposed or directed
evils, and disorders; mourn over the imposition and administration which may
extend a guilt on the Church collectively, but disown not the Church, despise
not the Ministry, decline not the Worship whilst they exist the Lords. Look to
it that your zeal to purity, break not unity; and your loathing humane
inventions, make you not leave Gods Institutions: You are Christ's sheep, as you
will be led, be looked after by the shepherd and Bishop of your souls, see to
it that you leap not out of his fold. You may have your waters pudled, your
pastures trodden, the proud of the flock to push you with horn and with hoof;
your Pastors may rule you with pride and with cruelty, Lording it over Gods
heritage; and you (they being careless of you) may be dispersed: But I beseech
you, when the great shepherd shall come to judge between sheep and sheep,
between you and your shepherds, let him find you on the mountains of Israel,
Ezekiel. 34.
though scattered and afflicted. Communion with the Church under corruption may
not be very comfortable, but be assured it shall be safe. Reformation must be
mournfully endeavored, but Separation will never effect it, it will for ever
hinder, supplant, subvert it. I must tell you my determination is by Gods grace
to seek purity of Ordinances in union with the Church, and by non conforming
communion to witness against, and endeavor to remove disorder and corruption.

Go continually Armed; your course of piety is a constant God, that you may be
able to resist in the evil day; have your Loins girt with verity, principles of
truth, the spirit of a sound mind; your breast guarded with the brestplate of
Righteousness, Ephesians. 6.12.
integrity of heart; your head covered with the helmet of hope, which will
under the greatest Billows and most roaring Waves hold your head above the
water; have your feet shod with patience, the preparations of the Gospel of
peace. In every step you set you have sharp shells, heart-peircing,
passion-provoking crosses, losses, distresses and afflictions, you have need of
patience, that when you have done the Will of God you may inherit the promise;
you cannot without patience continue in well doing unto the obtainment of the
Glory, honor, immortality, Romans 2.27.
and eternal life, which you do seek; take with you the shield of faith in Gods
declared will for Doctrine or practice, in Gods glorious properties, and
gracious promises, those will quench the most fiery darts of the Devil; take
unto you the Sword of the Spirit, the Word of God, to cut down your way, kill
your Lust, the Worlds allurements, and the Devils suggestions; thus armed stand
fast in your Christian resolution, but move forward; advance in your Christian
conversation, and you shall with ease encounter and overcome all opposition for
the Captain of our Salvation has led our enemies captive, and looks that we
defend our own souls against the subtle, malicious strokes of a subdued,
though our sworn Enemies.

Guess your way by the compass of the Covenant, the Lord Grace is the ground of
it, it was freely made, for we had no obligation on Gods Justice, or power to
constrain or exact it; Grace is the matter of it, I will be your God, you shall
be my people, you shall walk in my ways, my spirit shall be in your hearts;
Grace is the form of it, I will be your God, I will write my Law on your
hearts, I will put my spirit within you, you shall walk in my ways, my grace
shall be sufficient for you; Grace is the end of it, our sanctification here,
and our salvation hereafter, and the means necessary unto both in the way of
their obtainment; and our pursuit of them; This Covenant is the Contract of the
Bible, the compendium of the Gospel, Christ is Mediator, the Ministers are
dispencers, Ordinances are the dispensations, Faith and Obedience are the
conditions, Grace and Glory, with all good things is the matter of this
everlasting Covenant; this Covenant, like a Compass, points at all parts of
Heaven; when we are in the wide Ocean of the World, out of sight of any Land to
guide us, we may stear by this Compass to our desired Haven; when we are in
darkness and danger between the narrow Creeks, and strait passages of Sylla and
Caribdis, this Covenant is a light, a Lanthorn at Land to guide us, unto that
Nick and narrow point which will secure us?

Christians, the comfort of this Covenat is not known till being shut up from
men, secluded from Ordinances, and under the want of all means (it may be so
much as a Bible) you begin to reflect your Relation to God, Gods Dispensations
of grace to man, and call to mind the Indenture, and Charter which does secure,
declare, and direct both; This Covenant will dissolve our doubts, direct our
duties, and dictate our comforts in all straits, in all conditions, this and
that I must do, or not do; this and that I must expect, or not expect; this is
or that is truth, or Error will be easily inferred by him, who is interested
in, and understands the Covenant of Salvation; by this, when I a poor Gentile
consider Abraham is ignorant of me, and Jacob knows me not, can yet cry unto
the Lord thou art my God; by this when I am in the Furnace; I can cry unto the
Lord, my God, and apprehend him, answering me my people; I can understand by
this the word which speaks unto us as Children, say, my Son despise not the
chastening of the Lord; I hereby know correction, paternal castigation to be
the result of affection from God, and relation to God, and so when I sit in
darkness and can see no light, I can trust in the name of the Lord, and stay my
self upon my God, faithful in Covenant, who will not fail me; I hereby discern
sin, and detect error to be eschewed; discover truth and duty to be embraced
and pursued. In a Word, what the word does more amply and abundantly declare
when I am at liberty to use, the Covenant of Grace does suggest, and from
thence I may infer it for my comfort and guidance when restrained; the good
therein promised I may boldly challenge; the evil thereunto repugnant I must
rejct; the truth and duty thereby dictated I must receive, and do; you look
for experience, and I tell you this in the uprightness of my heart, in my late
condition the Covenant of Grace was my great comfort, the consideration of the
Covenant was my council. I would not for all the world have been ignorant of,
uninterested in, or estranged unto the Covenant of God: Go you and do likewise.
If you are confounded in your passage to life, it is for want of the Compass of
the Covenant, or skill to use it.

Go forward in Heavens way, being entered the strait non progredi est regredi in
heavens way; not to go forward is to go backward: The enemy will come upon you,
if you advance not against him: Remember Lots wife; take heed of backsliding,
you will thereby hinder your selves in heavens way, and wound your consciences;
take heed of Apostasy from the faith, you will thereby ruin your salvation and
hurt religion. Consider, The just live (that is persevere in grace and
holiness) by faith; but if any man draw back Gods soul shall have no pleasure
in him. Be it your care not to be found in the number of them who draw back
unto perdition, Heb. 10.3^ ^^.
but of them who believe unto salvation of their soul: Having begun in the
Spirit do not end in the flesh; inure your selves unto hardship, be steadfast
and unmovable, and you cannot but abound in the work of the Lord, nor shall
your labor be in vain.

Beloved Friends, the way to life being bounded with such dangerous precipices,
beset with such difficulties and opposion, and your depraved nature being apt
to wander, averse and indisposed to diligence and activity in holiness, you
cannot but find strait is the gate, and narrow is the way which leads unto
life, and few there be who find it. But I beseech you enter, choose to enter,
it is the way to life: Strive to enter, it is strait; observe, practice these
Directions now given, by Gods grace your entrance will be an act of ease and
success. Consider what you have heard, and the Lord give you understanding.

FINIS.

