Lieut: General Cromwells LETTER TO The Honorable William Lenthall Esquire Speaker
of the House of Commons, OF The Surrender of Langford-House near Salisbury:
With the Articles of Agreement concerning the same: Together with a Letter
concerning a great Victory obtained by Col: Rossiter, against Prince RUPERT and
Prince MAURICE, near Belvoyr-Castle in Leicestershire.

Also, another Letter concerning the taking of Two hundred Horse, and Sixty
Foot, by the Forces of Abingdon and Gaunt-House.

ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That these Letters be
forthwith printed and published: H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons,
October. 20. 1645.

To the Honorable William Lenthall Esquire Speaker to the Honorable House of
Commons.
SIR,
I Gave you an Account the last night of my marching to Langford House, whether
I came this day, and immediately sent them in a Summons; the Governor desired I
should send two Officers to Treat with him, and I accordingly appointed
Lieutenant Colonel Hewson, and Major Kelsey thereunto. The Treaty produced the
agreement, which I have here enclosed to you. The General I hear is advanced
as far West as Columpton, and has sent some Horse and Foot to Teverton: It is
earnestly desired, that those Foot might march up to him, it being convenient
that we stay a day for our Foot that are behind and coming up; I wait your
answer to my Letter last night from Wallop; I shall desire that your pleasure
may be speeded to me, and rest, Sir

Your humble Servant Oliver Cromwell.
Salisbury October. 17. at 12. at night.
October the 17. 1645.
Articles of agreement made between Sir Bartholomew Pell Knight, and Major
Edmond Vvedale, Commanders in chief of Langford Garrison; And Lieu. Col.
Hewson, and Major Thomas Kelsey, on the behalf of Oliver Cromwell, Lieu. Genesis
to Sir Tho. Fairfax Army.
FIrst, That the said Commanders in chief of the said Garrison, shall surrender
the said House and Garrison to the said Lieut. General Cromwell, to morrow by
twelve of the clock, being the eighteenth of October instant.

2. That all Arms and Ammunition in the said Garrison, be then delivered to the
use of the Parliament, without any imbezeling of them.

3. That the said Commanders in chief with fifteen Gentlemen of the said
Garrison, shall march away with horse and arms; And the private Soldiers
without arms to Oxford within ten days, And to have a Troop of horse for their
guard the first day, and a trumpeter with a pass the rest of the way.

4. That the rest of the Gentlemen not exceeding fourteen more, shall march
with their Swords, and Pistols, and horses, if they can lawfully procure them.

5. That the said Commanders in chief, shall have a Cart or wagon allowed them
to carry their goods to Oxford.

6. That if any Gentlemen of the said Garrison have a desire to go to any other
Garrison or Army of the Kings, They shall have passes to that purpose.

7. That the goods remaining in the said Garrison, shall be delivered to the
several owners thereof, upon demand within two days next following the date
hereof.

8. That Lieutenant Colonel Bowls, and Major Fry be left Hostages until these
Articles be performed.

John Hewson. Thomas Kelsey. Bartho. Pell. Edm. Vvedale.


The Substance of a Letter sent to the Honorable William Lentball Esquire Speaker
to the Honorable House of Commons.
ON Tuesday night last, the forces of Abingdon and Gaunt House, went to
Farringdon, and took two hundred horse, and sixty foot, and were like to take
the Garrison.

A Letter concerning a great Victory obtained by Colonel Rossiter, against
Prince Rupert and Prince Maurice, near Belvoyr Castle in Leicestershire.
SIR,
I Shall give you an account of what intelligence these parts afford. On
Tuesday morning we received intelligence that Prince Rupert and P. Maurice were
at Banbury upon their march toward Newark, some reported them to be twelve
hundred, others six hundred; Upon which Intelligence all the horse belonging to
this Garrison, being three hundred, and four hundred more which lay at
Stamford, were drawn to Melton by Colonel Rossiter, to interpose betwixt the
King and the Princes, or to join with the Horse and Dragoons under Colonel
Manwaring then at Leicester, and since gone to Derby to join with Colonel
General Points. Yesterday morning upon intelligence from Burleigh, that the
report of Prince Ruperts coming was false, and the King being returned back
to Newarke, our Horse were ordered to march back to Grantham, no sooner were we
marching, but from Leicester we recevied Intelligence that the Princes were
upon their march toward Belvoir, we pursued them with all speed, they faced us
twice as though they would have charged, but upon our advance to them they run
for Belvoir, we pursued them close to the castle walls, took a Major, three
Captains, sixty Prisoners, Prince Maurice's Trumpeter, Trumpet and Banner, and
about one hundred and forty Horses, we wounded and killed diverse, some of
quality, the two Princes hardly escaping with about one hundred more. Some of
the Officers we have taken, told us that the Princes sent the Lord of
Northamptons Regiment back to Banbury, and marched with this small party only
to speak with the King, and take their leaves of him. The King is now in
Newark, his Horse quartered betwixt Newark and Welbeck, part of them: and as we
hear, Sir Marmaduke Langdale with the rest marched Northward, it is likely to
releeve Skipton Castle, Colonel General Points is come to Derby, and Colonel
Manwaring is gone to him, which I hope will give us a further occasion of
sending to to you, Sir,

Your Servant.
Grantham October 16. 1645.
FINIS.

