A WORD OF REPROOF TO THE Teachers of the World.

Which may be of use for the trial of t^eir ways, and standing, that all who
are willing to be undeceived may come to an understanding to know what sort of
men in this Nation they are who serves not the Lord Jesus Christ but their own
bellies, who in words profess God and the SCRIPTURES, but in life deny both.

With an invitation and warning to them and all people to turn from iniquity,
and serve the living God, whose service is not known, but in the light; neither
is any service or worship accepted by him, but as it is acted in obedience to
his measure which is light, and has lighted every one that comes into the
WORLD.

Howl ye shepherds, and cry, and wallow your selves in the ashes, ye principal
of the flock; for the days of your slaughter, and of your dispersion are
accomplished, and ye shall fall like a pleasant vessel, Jer. 25. 34. Written by
a friend to all people, and a lover of the light, and the ways thereof, whose
outward name is STEPHEN CRISP.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate, 1658.

THis is written to go abroad amongst the Parish Teachers and their Flocks, and
is serviceable for them to consider of; for the Lord God of heaven and earth is
arising in his mighty power to plead the case of the poor and needy, and to
deliver the Lambs from the teeth of the Wolves and the Lions who catch for the
prey, and to make a separation in the flocks of the Idol Shepherds, and behold
his voice is uttered from Zion, and his word goes forth from his holy
habitation, who dwells in the light, and in it is his voice heard, which shakes
the earth, and makes its inhabitants to tremble.

Therefore all people fear the Lord, and mind that of him that reproves sin
and evil in the secret of your hearts which is the grace which has appeared
unto all of you; but has not yet taught all of you to deny ungodliness and
worldly lusts; but in the lusts of ignorance do remain, looking at a man
without you to be your Teacher, and so knows not the Lord to be your Teacher:
And for your sakes who are simple, in whom there is any honest desires, is this
given forth, that you may see your Teachers tried by their own rule, and found
too light and too narrow: Therefore all be warned for time to come, and in the
fear of the Lord will you come to know the beginning of that wisdom which
comprehends all those heaps of Teachers which feeds the itching ears.

S. C.

A word of REPROOF TO THE Teachers of the World.
THIS word is unto you, oh ye Priests, in vain is all your coverings: For the
light of our God is risen, and has discovered you; and his power has rent,
and is rending your coverings, and his controversy is proclaimed against you;
and he has brought forth his little Army, which is little in your eyes, but is
a mighty host in the power of his Spirit, upon whom he is fulfilling his
promise; that one shall chase an hundred, and ten shall put a thousand to
flight: And as our forefathers did, so do we (in this day of our God) by faith
turn to flight the armies of the aliens, and stop the mouths of Lions, and
obtain promises, etc. and you your selves are witnesses in your practices; who
are not able to stand, but flee when ever the life of God arises in any to
speak to you, though in never so contemptible an instrument in your eyes, and
so have many hundreds of you been put to flight without sword or spear; and
then you run from your God and from your worship to the house of your Armory,
where you are fitted with the weapons of the Beasts warfare (as whips, stocks,
prisons, and such like) in whose Army you are found fighting against the Lamb
and his Army; by whom you shall be overcome, and your carcasses cast into the
open field. And now is your works of darkness and great swelling words of
vanity brought to the light, and there tried and judged, which is our rule to
try and judge withal: And seeing you say the Scripture is your rule whereby
things ought to be tried and judged; you and your works shall be tried by the
Scriptures also, that so you may be condemned by both.

First, ye say ye are Minsters of Christ! Nay, but ye are his Ministers whom ye
serve and obey, and whose work ye do; now sin is the work of the Devil, and to
destroy it in the flesh was Christ made manifest in flesh: and you that deny
the destruction of sin in this life, you deny it in flesh; for he that
departs this life, goes out of the flesh, and leaves it, and so you deny
the work of Christ, whose Ministers you say you are; and he is no servant nor
Minister of Christ, who denies his work. Now read and consider, sin and the man
of it is against Christ; and the Ministers of him who is against Christ, always
strives to keep up, and to uphold that which Christ and his Ministers strives
to destroy and throw down, which is sin in the flesh; and so here it is plain
that you who strive to uphold sin, uphold Antichrist, whose Ministers ye are.

Again, Christ said to his Ministers, Go ye forth, etc. But where is your
going forth? when some of you have purchased to your selves places, and some
have gained by flattery, and some do hold by force and tyranny a certain place,
circuit, or quarter from whence ye seek your gain, and there are not ashamed to
sue by title, as Rector, Incumbent, or Lecturer of such a place. Oh horrible!
that ever such should say they were Ministers of Christ: Yea, and some of you
can boast and glory in your shame, saying in your Declarations, you have been
there in such a place some 20. some 30. some 40, years. Was ever such a thing
heard of concerning any of the Ministers of Christ? were not they approved in
their Ministry by trials, by travelings, by hardships and dangers both by Sea
and Land, in want, in heaviness, etc. But you have chosen the pleasures of
sin, and to live at ease in the flesh; but destruction and misery shall
overtake you in a day when you are not aware, who will not be warned.

Again, Christ said to his Ministers, All power is given unto me, and I am with
you: He did not say, all power is given unto me, and I will give it to the
Magistrates: and if any come to oppose you or your Doctrine, go to him, he
shall defend you; but they had the witness in themselves, and the power was
with them, and is with them to the end of the world; which stops the mouths of
gainsayers; which power is the power of Christ, which the Ministers of Christ
have according to promise; and the power of Antichrist, the Ministers of
Antichrist have, which is manifest in persecuting, in violence, in tumults,
and such like; which power is your defense, who say, ye are Ministers of
Christ, and are not; but are Ministers of Antichrist, and so proved liars and
condemned, and witnessed against, both in the light, and by the Scriptures.

2ly. You say you preach the Gospel.

Nay, that is not the Gospel of Christ you preach, but another which he that
brings is accursed: For, the Gospel of Christ is the power of God unto
salvation to them that believe; but what you preach is not so, no not to them
that believes it, who preach that they cannot be saved: So if they believe what
you declare, they must believe they cannot be saved while in this life: And so
it is not the power nor Gospel of Christ which you preach; but the power of
darkness to keep all in death out of the faith, which gives victory, and
through which the creature comes to know the Gospel, and the power which saves
and redeems up to God.

Again, the Gospel is everlasting, and none can preach it but they who have
received it; but you whose knowledge stands in carnal Arts and Sciences, and
Inventions, which came in time, and must perish in time; your knowledge cannot
receive the everlasting Gospel when it is preached unto you, much less preach
it unto others: and in that knowledge do you corrupt your selves and others, and
are like to perish in your corruption together, except ye turn to the light
which was before corruption, that it may show you corruption, and lead you out
of corruption, that ye perish not; for to such as are in the perishing way
which is corrupt, the Gospel everlasting is hid.

Again, that which you preach is not free nor without charge; but the Gospel
was so, and is so and as long as the force and violence, and pride, and
covetousness is found amongst you, which makes that which you preach
burdensome and chargeable to the people, cease calling it the Gospel of
Christ; for if you do call it so, the light in all consciences condemns you,
and the practice of Christ's Apostles condemns you, and the Scripture declares
against you, and your condemnation is just, and shall abide for ever.

3ly. You say you preach the Truth.

Nay, that is not the Truth you preach, for it sets none free; for many have
abode in your doctrine and worship a long time, some 20. some 40. and some 60.
years, and yet are not set free; but you have brought them to believe that they
cannot be freed, and so have caused them to err from the right path, and such
may dye in their iniquities; but their blood will be required at your hands who
have beguiled and deceived them.

But Christ Jesus the light of the world, who lights every man that comes
into the world, that all men through him might beleve. He said, If ye abide in
the truth, the truth shall set you free. He is the light, the true light, and
the truth that sets free; and you who deny the light that lights every man
that comes into the world, and yet say you preach the truth, you are liars,
and the lake is your portion except you repent.

Again, what you preach you sell, and so are declared against expressly in
Scripture, seeing you say you preach the truth: For what says it? buy the
truth, and sell it not. Read your condemnation all you who make bargains for
that which you call truth; and let the light in your own consciences judge,
whether you do not deny Scripture, yea or nay.

4ly. You say, he that preaches the Gospel ought to live of the Gospel.

I answer, He unto whom the Gospel of Christ is committed to preach, none can
hinder him of living of it, for it is his life, and he needs not an outward
law to hold up his livelihood. Neither did any that ever preached the Gospel
make use of any such power; but their power they had, and they have alone from
Christ Jesus, both from the inward and outward support: Have we not power to
eat? have we not power to drink, says the Apostle, who was a Minister of
Christ? but he had not power to make bargains with any people for a certain
establishment of a sum of money, and then to seek for an Augmentation besides,
as some of you do, and then to sue at law for default of payment; and if it
were paid, then to spend it in voluptuosness upon his lust as you do: Some in
the lust of drunkenness and gluttony, and some in pride in satisfying your
lusts in clothes and in building, and some in covetousness, making a god of
money: So you have chosen to your selves gods which shall perish with you, and
they shall not save you; but your nakedness and your shame the light has
discovered, who have refused to be covered by it: and while ye live in pride
and gluttony, in envy and covetousness, in strife and contention, this is not
to live of the Gospel; but this is the fruit of the corrupt tree which is for
the fire.

5ly. You say, the Labourer is worthy of his hire.

Yea, but he must have it of him that sets him to work, and has profit by his
work. Now he that works for one man, and would have hire of another, who set
him not on work, this is unreasonable; and so is it for a man to exact wages
for his work, when none has profit by his work, as is seen at this day among
you Priests, who are out of the reasonableness and good order which most men
besides your selves are in this respect.

Therefore be ashamed and amend your ways, and labor with your hands the thing
that is good, that you may come to eat of the fruit of your labor, and be
satisfied, and be not always like the greedy dumb dogs that can never have
enough; For now is the day come which has declared your work, and you are
comprehended and fathomed, and measured with an equal line, and your coverings
are too narrow, and the feet of your image is smitten, and the stone is
increasing to fill the whole earth; and then shall not your place be found, and
the recompense of your labor will be destruction, woe and misery which ye shall
receive of the hands of the righteous God, the Judge of Heaven and Earth, who
will judge every one of you according to your doing. And then shall all your
hard speeches which ye have uttered against the innocent be returned into your
own bosoms, and ye shall know that ye were warned, and the light in your
consciences shall in that day testify unto Gods righteousness in your
destruction.

This is given forth from the spirit of Truth, for the manifesting and rebuking
of the spirit of error, and written in obedience to the commandment of the
Lord in the year accounted, 1657.

S. C.

THE END.

