THE WAY TO HAPPINESS ON EARTH.

Concerning Riches. Honor. Conjugall Love. Eating. Drinking.


By R. C.

LONDON, Printed for G. H. 1641.

To the Reader.
HAving formerly written in general of this subject, Happiness on Earth, I
now begin to discourse thereof more particularly, in five several Treatises. I
have (as Scholars and Authors (I think ingenuously) use to do) searched the
opinions of many worthy and famous Authors, and in some places of this Book
made use thereof, but in such another new manner, method, style, and with such
new additions, intermixions and alterations, as the same also may justly be
said to be new, and mine. I have also endeavored (as well as I could) to
compose this Book in a serious, yet pleasing way, in a free style, and yet
compendious manner; only in some few (yet I conceive very necessary) places,
my Meditations have enlarged themselves.

And forasmuch as man's best actions are not without some imperfections, the
courteous and good natured Reader will I know, readily excuse small neglects in
good endeavors, especially in such a necessary and great undertaking, as to
learn The way to Happiness on Earth; which in these, and some other former
Treatises I have endeavored to show; and do intend (God willing) to write
further hereafter, of this so good and necessary subject of man's Happiness.

Farewell. Robert Crofts.

THE CONTENTS.
The first Partition, Of Riches.
SECTION I. THe excellency of Riches, and the miseries of the want thereof.
SECT. II. To avoid such courses as consume Riches, and the way to gain and
increase the same. SECT. III. Of the dangers and abuses of Riches hindering
happiness therein, which are to be avoided, especially of Covetousness. SECT.
IV. Our minds ought to be persuaded of the goodness and fitness of our
estates, and settled in a contented condition. SECT. V. Of the good, and divine
use of Riches.
The second Partition, Of Honor.
SECTION I. THe excellency thereof, and the misery of dishonor. SECT. II. How
Honor is to be attained unto. SECT. III. Of the abuses and dangers of Honor
which ought to be avoided, especially Ambition. SECT. IV. We ought to possess
our minds with such an habit of Contentment, as that we do not too much
fear the loss of Honor, or grieve at dishonor. SECT. V. The good and divine
use of Honor.
The third Partition, Of Conjugall, or Marriage Love.
SECTION I. THe excellency of the same in general, and the miseries of the
loss and want thereof. SECT. II. Showing how to love truly, enjoy our wishes,
please our Lovers, and increase love. SECT. III. Remedies and considerations
against the loss of Love, against an over-sottish, and doting love, and
against the miseries incident to cross marriages. SECT. IV. Of unlawful
Lusts, the extent thereof in our Age. The miseries and remedies thereof, with a
brief persuasion to marriage. SECT. V. The good use of Conjugall, or Marriage
Love, and so concluding with a brief discourse of divine Love.
The fourth Partition, Of Eating.
SECTION I. THe benefits of Eating in general, also the abuses of Eating, and
the extent thereof. SECT. II. The dangers and abuses of Eating ought to be
eschewed, since the same causes much evil, misery, and hinders happiness
therein. SECT. III. Rules concerning a right order and due proportion of diet,
with some cautions therein. SECT. IV. A moderate diet, and due order therein,
is sufficient, easy, pleasant, and most beneficial. SECT. V. The good and
divine use of Eating.
The fifth Partition, Of Drinking.
SECTION I. THe benefits of Drinking in general, also the Abuses and extent
thereof in this drinking age. SECT. II. The abuses of drinking, because of the
ill and miserable effects thereof, hindering happiness therein, are to be
avoided. SECT. III. Difficulties of forsaking such drinking abuses, and the
Remedies thereof, tending to increase our happiness therein. SECT. IV. Rules
concerning a right order and due proportion of drinking, and showing, that the
same is very sufficient, pleasant, easy, and most Beneficial. SECT. V. The
good and divine use of drinking.
Escapes in Printing.
PAge 45. line ult. leave out of p. 65. l. 5. leave out also p. 84 for moderate
read immoderate, p. 91. l. 6. f. yet r. is not p. 121. l. 15. f. worst r. most
p. 174. l. 10. f. never r. near and l. 12. f. near r. never p. 106. l. 10.
leave out of p. 215. l. 3. and 4. r. marriage love p. 243 l. ult. r. fool p.
276. l. 21. r. Church p. 288. l. 5. r. feel p. 320. l. 22. f. a wine r. of
Wine p. 323. l. 13. f. many r. may. Besides some few other literal escapes
which the ingenuous and courteous Reader may correct, or will pardon.

To his beloved friend, the Author on this BOOK.
THe matter, or the style I need not praise,
To the ingenuous man, it self will show.
Having read thy Book, I sweetly do rejoice,
And truly I admire what now I know.
R. R.

The Author upon sight of the Superscription.
THe matter, or the style I will not praise,
Yet care I not to whom it self do show.
Having writ the Book, I sweetly do rejoice,
But do admire so much I want to know.
Robert Crofts.

THE WAY TO HAPPINESS ON EARTH. The first PARTITION, concerning RICHES.
SECTION. I. The Excellency of Riches, and the miseries of the want thereof.
RIches and Honor (says King Solomon) come from GOD; And the blessing of the
LORD makes Rich. Prove. 10.22. Therefore in respect of the Author, God
himself, they are to be esteemed in their good use and fruition of much worth
and excellency, wherefore again (says the Kingly Preacher) Every man to whom
God has given Riches and Wealth, and has given him power to eat thereof, and
to take his portion, and to rejoice therein; This is the gift of God: Surely he
will not much remember the days of his life, because God answers him in the
joy of his heart, Eccles. 5.19.

The excellency of Riches also appears in respect of the good effects
thereof. Many good and excellent effects and benefits do often spring from
this fountain of Riches; Such as are, good education and learning, Also
Friends, Lovers, Acquaintance, (The rich has many friends, Prove. 14.20.)
Likewise Honor, Authority, Respect, Servants, Counselors: Also fair and
pleasant Houses, Orchards, Gardens, Fields, and Possessions of many kinds, The
choysest kind of Diet, both Meats and Drinks; The most pleasant Sports,
Recreations, and Pleasures of diverse sorts. In sum; Even all Terrestrial
Felicities seem to be at the Rich man's command: The doting world smiles as it
were only upon him, applaudes only his sayings, his doings, and bestows upon
him her choysest favors.

Riches also may be employed to many good uses and purposes, as well to Gods
glory, as to the good of our selves and others, The same may serve and be used
to the advancement of all Piety and Virtue. They may excite and encourage us to
all goodness; to thankfulness, to charity, to the Love of God who gives them,
To epsy, seek and enjoy the Riches of a divine Soul, which are all heavenly
Graces, Joys and Consolations: and those eternal most glorious Treasures
which are in God himself, in heaven. But of this more in the fifth Section of
this Partition.

And we shall the rather well esteem of riches, and more apparently, see the
worth and excellencies thereof, if we consider the miseries of Poverty and want
of Riches.

Poverty makes men subject to the saddest indurances amongst men, To be
reproach't, disdained; and that oftentimes even by their kindred and neighbors,
( Prove. 14.30.) though perhaps they be well deserving; And their good parts
also to be not regarded, but rather despised, only because they are Poor. The
wisdom of the poor is despised and his words are not heard, Eccles 9.19. So
as oftentimes their wisdom is (by this mad world) esteemed but folly. Poverty
makes many men to suffer hunger and thirst, cold, and want, to be liable to the
most common and grievous oppressions, wrongs, and abuses of cruel men. There is
not in the world such another object of pity, as the poor miserable man. Oh;
I wonder at the multitude of men in the world that can so insult over, oppress
and abuse poor miserable men as we usually see they do; the rather I wonder
thereat since God might justly have made us such, and more miserable then they:
what flinty and malign hearts have such men who can willingly rejoice and add
to the calamities of them who are already even nothing else but an heap of
misery.

Though Poverty to such as make a good use thereof is a happy estate, and a
pious wise man may be sweetly contented even therein, as shall be declared in the
fourth Section, yet we see too commonly that to many men in the world the same
is a miserable condition: For by reason of Poverty, many men as also their
children become ill tutored, rude, uncivil, Yea Poverty is an occasion that
some men turn Rogues, Thieves, Villains, that others will flatter, dissemble,
lie, swear, forswear, and prostitute themselves to diverse hateful vices and
impieties, also repine, grieve, and some even ready to make themselves away
through desperate grief and sorrow.

Riches therefore being so excellent and beneficial, as has been said, and
the want thereof so irksome and miserable, let us by all means endeavor to
avoid such courses as consume and waste Riches, and to use and take such ways
as may gain and increase the same: of which in the next Section.

SECTION II. To avoid such courses as consume Riches, and the way to gain and
increase the same.
FIrst (therefore) let us eschew idleness, laziness, carelessness, neglect of
business, of Time, of occasions and opportunities, all which do very much
hinder a man's estate in a life time. He becomes poor that deals with a
flacke hand, Prove. 10.4. Also Pride, high-mindednesse and vainglory; which is
the hinderance of many men's estate, and the undoing of some, who to show
themselves magnificent forsooth, do live much above their estate and degree,
especially some of our young Heirs, who after their covetous fathers decease,
do creep into Satin and Plush, turn Roarers, Blades, Gallants, learn to
swagger, smoke, drink stoutly, spend bravely, like Emperors, as they say,
and to cry, Hang money, fly Ducke, etc. So as, the one part of their estate
they hang on their backs, and the other part they turn down their throats.
So all riotous courses, all excessive and too costly banqueting, tippling,
roaring, smoking, whoring, immoderate gaming (as at Cards and Dice) for money,
also hawks, hounds, horses, and overcostly Recreations; which do much hinder
many men's estate, who otherwise in a life time might be much more rich and
wealthy. Such courses have been the bane of many whole Families, and of much
possessions.

Flattering fellows also, and Parasites (who are especially resident and to be
met withal in Tavernes and Taphouses) are much to be taken heed of; who by
insinuating into men's minds, and applauding their sayings and actions do
often deceive many (otherwise) wise men, who being tickled with their cunning
applauses, do suffer themselves by such men to be possessed even from
themselves, and to be carried away by them to all riotous and prodigal
courses. Certainly if there be any Dallilah under heaven, it is ill company, if
we will be led away and ruled by them, they will strangely blind us, and
betray us, These flattering Jackes do especially work upon our young
Flingbrain'd fantastic Prodigals, and often abuse them into ill bargains,
and cause them to lend them money, give them gifts, to become their Sureties,
pay their debts, and lead them to all manner of riot, prodigallity and
expenses, and in the end perhaps cheat or laugh at them.

You braine-sicke Hotspurs, Prodigal Heirs; 'Twere good for you if you were
wiser then to be flattered and gulled out of your lands and revenues by such
Syccophants and idle flagging companions, that fawn and seek to feed on you,
as the little bird Trochilus in the Jaws of the Crocodile; Be not Carrion for
such Crows to prey upon; You will at last ('it is like) have occasion to curse
them as Herod and Alexander did their flatterers in their greatest exigents.
Know that though you should spend all you have upon these Canibals, though they
should fawn and feed upon you like Harpies and Fleshwoolves, yet in the end
you shall scarce have as much relief and respect from them as the Prodigal
from his former Comrades, scarce so much as husks or swines meat, but rather
scorns, scoffs and derision.

They are inconsiderate men, and ill stewards of a good estate, who lavish away
the same especially in ill, company. He does Bounty injury that makes her as
common as a Strumpet by showing her too much abroad; and so make her and
himself but derided by the wiser sort of men. Who gives or spends too much,
more then his estate will allow, must fall or desist with shame. To live well
of a little is much more honor, then to spend a great deal vainly; it is not
good to make our too lavish kindness to others to be cruelty to our selves.
Though it be good to give, and freely to such as are in necessity, and in a
good manner to be liberal to our friends, yet a wise man will give or spend no
more then the safety of his estate will allow. He has the best fame that
keeps his estate, and yet not too niggardly.

In expenses therefore, as I think it is not good to be too pinching, so also I
think it bad to be too prodigal: yet I think it better to be too sparing
then too profuse; though neither of them good. It Is no disgrace to make our
ability our Compass to sail by; There is better use to be made of our talents
then to cast them away vainly, we ought rather to employ them for gain.

Let us take heed also that Lawyers do not pick our Purses, as the Eagle did
the meat out of the opened Oyster, and leave us only shells instead of meat to
feed on, lest we have need of as strong patience to digest this as the Ostridge
has a stomach to digest Iron.

There is a far better and cheaper way to reconcile differences, then by
Lawyers, namely by mediation of friends and arbitrators. Yet if a man be forced
to go to Law, and have a very good cause, I think it the safest way (even for
his estate, as well as for his credit and for example) to be diligent therein,
and go on soundly. But this going to Law, especially here in England, is so
tedious, so irksome, so servile, so costly, as that it should be a wise man's
last remedy and refuge.

To proceed. So also borrowing of money and paying interest, unnessary gifts,
lending of money and suertyship have impoverished many thousand men. All which,
and the like ill courses that consume and hinder Riches are to be avoided.

And further, let us take and use all such good ways and courses as may
increase or preserve our estates herein. The usual means whereby Riches are
preserved and increased are such as follow.

First, to be diligent, forward and industrious in our Callings, and in such
affairs as we undertake; The hand of the diligent makes Rich, Prou. 10 4.
Such men who are diligent, stirring spirits in the world, are much more like to
be Rich, then sluggish, careless men; Industry is never wholly unfruitful, if
it bring not joy with incomming profit, yet it is like it will banish vice, and
idle wastefull courses out of our busied minds. I have often found hurt of
idleness, but never of a lawful business; even that which is not profitable
in it self is yet often made so by employment. And diligence commonly brings a
recompense that sweetens it. I have seldom known an industrious man want, but
rather he still increases in Riches. With what proportioned success does that
family commonly flourish where an industrious discreet guide steereth in an
ordered course, as if some good Angel were always assigned with blessings in
his hand to crown diligence.

Also the better to thrive and increase in Riches, it is good not to neglect
but to take time and opportunities, to strike while the iron is hot, as the
Proverb goes, to use all good means to obtain some profitable grants,
offices, preferments, and dignities, such as they are most fit for and capable
of, and may by any good means accomplish either by themselves, friends, or
money, either in lawful cases; Also by procuring certificates, or letters
commendatory from such as have power therein, or otherwise, according to the
nature of the business. It is true indeed that a modest man, his desires are
more limited then his fortunes, which though mean, yet he is contented,
thinks the same preferment enough, and does something to deserve this; He is
hardly drawn to seek more and greater, though he truly deserves it; But now
since in this Age there are a multitude of impudent men (and some of them
worthless) who putting themselves forth, seeking first, and standing in the
way, preferment stumbles on them. Therefore many worthy men, as they are
unpreferred, so are they like to be, unless they can put on a brazen face,
which although it becomes them not, yet they think it not amiss to make a
virtue of necessity.

Let therefore the worthy and conscionable Lawyer and Physician, if they mean
to get preferment, use all good and honest means to enrich themselves.

By these generous and noble professions of Physic and the Law, many men
attain to abundance of Riches; wherefore it is that many Scholars apply
themselves in all haste to one of these.

So likewise such men have occasion and opportunity, may use all good means to
gain preferment and riches under the King, Queen, Noblemen, such especially as
are in places of greatest dignity and authority, and bear the greatest Offices.

The Farmer and Husbandman may likewise use all good means to gain some good
Lease or Tenancy, which are most usually to be gotten of some conscionable
Landlord, or some regardlesse prodigale young Heir. Also of some Corporation
or Company, of some College, the Church, or under the Crown; Of which be
diverse that may be good preferment, for a Gentleman. And so of all others..

It seems in some respects not amiss also that the Batchellour get as rich a
wife as he may with love, or one by whom he may gain preferment. It Is like the
Richest are sometimes or ought to be best educated; And though some proud
Coxecombes perchance will be the more malepart for their Riches, yet it is like
a good wife will not be the worse for a good portion, And if she be an ill one,
she had need of goods to make her better.

And further to this purpose. It is good for such as mean to thrive to look
into their estate to know what they are worth, and to take care that they be
not wasted by servants and officers. If a man do but save, it is like he shall
increase. And if he have the patience to attend but every little good occasion
of profit, he may easily thrive; These little occasions come thicker and faster
then others, and though they seem but small, yet in time the same will amount
to a good sum of Riches.

Also to consider of necessary charges and expenses; and to live within
Compass. So drawing in their estate as it may be least for show and most for
profit; as a man that is worth 500 l. a year, may well and in good sort live
after the rate of two or three hundred, and gain the rest. And so of a greater
estate; and likewise such men whose estate is mean and little, It is better
for them to live rather beneath, then either level or above it. To fall in
estate is a shame and disgrace, but to rise is honor and praiseworthy.

SECTION. III. Of the dangers and abuses of Riches hindering happiness
therein, which are to be avoided; especially of Covetousness.
WHile we have thus viewed the excellency and benefits of Riches, the miseries
of the want thereof, and the ways to gain and increase the same. Let us by
all means take heed of their abuses and dangers, which otherwise will hinder
our happiness therein, and on the contrary bring upon us much mischief and
misery.

On the one side the dangers of Riches are, Pride, Arrogance, Disdain,
Insolency, Presumption, Sloth, Sluggishnesse, Delicacy, and all
Licentiousness, which the same occasioneth to many men, so as their Riches do
but serve thereby to increase their misery and perdition. Many thousand men use
their Riches to the maintaining and countenancing of riot, lust, Intemperance,
Idleness, and all manner of sensuality, and evil pleasures (of the miseries
and remedies whereof I intend to write in due place) So as it had been better
for them to have suffered irksome poverty.

That man therefore who would be happy, in his Riches, must by all means avoid
these dangers and abuses thereof.

On the other side; the danger of Riches is that Common vice of many rich men,
namely, Covetousness. Let us, if we mean to be happy in our Riches, take heed
that we plunge not our selves into this unsatiable, sordid, and miserable vice,
lest that with Shemei, while we seek our servant we lose our selves.

How many men are there now in the world that do quite and clean lose the
felicity of a quiet life for to set up their happiness (though merely
imaginary) in the amassement of Riches. And if heaven hear their covetous
desires with design to punish them, and give them some favorable success to
their Cares, they become then even Idolaters indeed of those treasures which
before they adored but in hope; And so become miserable by too ardently
desiring that which otherwise might do them good.

It is now in our Age almost as it was in the Prophet Ieremies time; Even from
the meanest to the greatest, men are given to covetousness, and to deal
falsely, Ier. 6.10. Let us therefore view this vice and the effects thereof:
But first to prevent mistakes and Cavils; let me say that in the ensuing
discourse against Covetousness, I do not mean that honest and necessary
desire of Riches, and endeavors to gain the same (which every man ought to
have for the good of himself, family, and others) which may be called honest
frugality, and is commendable in all men; insomuch as no men are more
praiseworthy and happy in this respect then such as frugally desire Riches,
and provide for themselves and theirs; But now to define what I intend by
Covetousness and proceed. Covetousness is an over-greedy, unsatiable,
niggardly, sottish, and ravenous desire of Riches, from which springs
abundance of evils and miseries; The due consideration whereof is remedy
sufficient to flight our disorderly affections from the same; Let us therefore
view them.

Covetousness is the root of all evil, (Saint Paul says) from thence often
springs deceit, contentions, lying, Simony, Usury, thefts, quarrels, suites,
strifes, treasons and murders.

Insomuch that if a man's heart be very deeply set on Covetousness, he will
commit any vice or wickedness to effect his ravenous desires, Like that
Italian Monk, who being corrupted with money, poisoned the Emperor, Henry the
seventh. Or as that Citizens son of Venice, whose father having committed a
crime and hid himself, a reward was appointed by the State to him that should
bring his head; Whereupon his son slew him and brought his head to the Duke.
Or as Judas for money betrayed our Savior.

The Riches of the world if too much beloved, do attract and draw the eye of
the soul from it self, or at least so blindes the same as it cannot perform
such good actions as it ought either to the glory of God, the good of others,
or it self: for Covetousness banisheth out of the soul the most sublime and
heavenly graces, nobleness of spirit, humanity, courtesy, love, kindness,
mutual entertainments, natural affection, and reason. It turns the soul
into a low, earthy dunghill, temper and disposition, and causes men to become
very muckwormes and slaves to money. It draws away the mind from all more
excellent pleasures, and so blinds it that, it cannot see them. Tell the
covetous man of the choysest delights on Earth; yea, of Heaven it self, yet
he is so blind and brutish as to think all a kind of madness and folly
that is above his low sordid temper and disposition. So as Covetousness
bereaveth a man, or at least hinders him in all the pleasures of the earth
and of heaven also; and which is most strange, of that which he so much
desires, even the pleasures of Riches themselves; for he regards not what
felicity he may derive from the substance which he does possess, but ever
thinks how well he should be if he had some great matter which he has not;
and the want thereof almost continually grieves him; even like children and
fools, who will pule and whine for a toy they want or long for, of which they
are more sensible then of all the present good or future hope they have or may
enjoy. So that according to the Proverb, The covetous man sels his horse to
get Hay; which when he has t does him little or no good. He does even contemn
and neglect himself, and all other good pleasures and felicities to gain this
of Riches, which when he has he neither uses well nor enjoyes, but still
remains discontentedly unsatisfied. The more he has, the more he desires;
even his Riches are to him but as drink in a dropsy; for as those increase,
so his desires are still the more enlarged, even as the grave, the womb, the
earth, the fire, which are never satisfied. Prove. 30.15, 16. His heart may be
compared to those lean Kine (which Pharaoh saw in his dream) who devoured the
fat Kine and were never the fuller. That which he has is not regarded for
want of that which he has not, although he possess abundance. So
Covetousness is an unsatiable desire which continually (as with hunger) gnawes
and discontents the mind.

Though Covetous men have Houses, Lands, Riches, Revenues, Orchards, Vineyards,
Fields enough, yea, abundance (as Ahab King of Israel had) yet (as Ahabs did at
Naboths Vineyard) their eyes will envy and look obliquely at their neighbors
goods, houses, lands, etc. and especially their teeth will water at that which
their nose most drops over, that which lies most pat in their way, very near
and fit for them. They are even (as he was sick in the suddes and sullens for
want thereof, and lack some politic Iezabel to make them a caudle, though of
the blood of the Vinetor and Grape of the Vineyard; some wise Lawyer, cunning
snap, or politic pate of their own, to devise a way to get the same, either
by hook or by crook, as they say, though the Devil be in the Council,
either by oppression, extortion, or couzening circumvention. So envy also
pines the covetous man.

Also cares, plots, and ravenous desires to get Riches, do always possess
him; And what base offices, pains therein, and reproaches thereby, as also
what sordid and niggardly pinching of himself will he not endure to save and
gain a little money? Fears also of loosing what he possesses, grieves him. He
is always suspicious, grudging, complaining, and discontented. Sorrow and
grief also in parting from Riches does greatly vex him. He can scarce afford
himself and family necessaries without brawling, pining and grieving. The often
remembrance of losses and expenses past, does also much trouble him. In a bad
year, or at some great loss, he could even afford to make himself away. As
old Hermon who dreaming he had spent a sum of money, for grief, hanged
himself; Or as that covetous Phidon, who being fallen into desparation for a
great loss, went to buy a haltar to hang himself withal, but finding the
price too dear, leapt into a River. It is reported of another who being sick,
was told he must take Physic, or die, and being demanded of the Physician,
ten shillings to recover him, answered, the same might better be saved to
defray the charges of his burial; To which purpose is that ancient Epitaph,
Here lies Father Sparges,
Who dyed to save charges.


These covetous cares, fears and griefs, do often distemper the body; also
they are an occasion of restless unpleasing, and interrupted sleep, pining
and drying the body, causing in some men a wearish and pale constitution, and
shortning their lives. And sometimes by accident also covetousness may cause
loss of Riches, of honor, of health, and of life it self. Gehezi lost his
health by reason of his covetousness, Achan, Judas, Ananias, Saphira their
lives. Mauritious the Emperor was deptived of his Empire for his
covetousness. King Cressus of Lydia by seeking to increase his Riches, lost
his Kingdom, and after his life. So as it appears that oftentimes Riches do
covetous men no more good than Achans, Midas, or the Toulouse gold, or Judas
his thirty pieces of silver to the possessours.

When age and sickness approaches and appears to the covetous man, he is
stung at the heart to think he must part with his Riches, which adds to all
his pains and griefs and perchance kills him the sooner. So he leaves his
Riches (says God by his Prophet Jeremy) and at his end shall be a fool,
Ierem. 17.11. Such men therefore as mean to be happy in respect of their
Riches, must take Saint Paul's counsel, who says; Let your conversation be
without covetousness, and be content with such things as you have, Hebr. 13.5.
Let us then banish out of our souls this low sordid and miserable vice of
Covetousness, and endeavor to settle our minds in a contented and fearelesse
condition; Of which in the ensuing Section.

SECTION. IIII. Our minds ought to be persuaded of the goodness and fitness
of our estate, and settled in a contented condition.
LEt us endeavor to be thoroughly and firmly persuaded, that what estate soever
we possess, it is best (if not in it self) yet for us; and so convert our
minds to such a resolved habit of contentedness, as that we do not too much
fear the loss, or be grieved for the want of Riches.

Let us therefore use our best endeavors in all good ways for the attainment
thereof; let us be thankful to heaven for (and rejoice in) what we have, using
the same well, and still leaving the success and issue of all our good
endeavors to God, relying on, and trusting him in all things, so may we be
surely and truly persuaded, that what estate soever we possess is most good,
most fit for us, and be contented with all accidents and crosses; yea, even in
the lowest condition of Poverty; For the spirit of a man will bear his
infirmities; so that if we can live more for our souls then bodies we may
find Remedies against, yea, Contentment amidst Losses, Crosses, Poverty, and
Misery: Let us maintain confidently that a man may find Contentment in all
conditions with the only Riches of a tractable soul, resolved and resigned to
take all things as they come without ever distrusting or arguing divine
providence. He whose will submits to Gods will, lives ever contented. He is
most rich and happy. And why then should we not submit to his will, the rather
since he wills all things that are good.

All things work to the good of them that love God, says Saint Paul. To such
as rely on and trust him in all things, even crosses and poverty is ablessed
estate, and furthereth them in the happy way to heaven. And it is no matter
which way we go (whether through adversity or prosperity, riches or poverty)
so we come to heaven.

Further to this purpose that we may not too much fear the loss of Riches,
if we possess them, nor be too much grieved or dejected for their want; but
rather rejoice and be contented, even in losses and poverty, let us consider
(first concerning losses and crosses in Riches) That it is good for us sometimes
to be crossed. Nothing would be more tedious and noisome to our minds, then to be
glutted with continual prosperities, as with Iollities. What a proud and
foolish thing would man grow to be, if he should always attain his desires in
the world, and never be crossed; surely he would in time forget goodness, and
God himself. How far, how secure, should we run on in vice if some crosses
did not sometimes check us and make us rememher our selves. There are some few
perchance whose paths are washed with Butter, and the Rose Bud crowns them
even continually. They seldom meet with losses and crosses, but how dangerous
a thing is it to live in oyled vice, when her ways are made slippery therewith
and lead to ruin and misery. And without doubt that is not only the best,
but the pleasantest life that is sprinkled with the Salt of some crosses;
without this even prosperity and pleasures would be soon rank, tainted,
stale, and corrupted; and we should be even cloyd, and perchance glutted
therewith.

Some crosses, sorrows, losses and discontents do increase, quicken, and
en^ighten both our souls and our joys; when does joy relish more pleasant and
sweeter then after crosses and misery are past? And oftentimes those so far
do us good, as they make us better, more circumspect, industrious, courageous,
wiser, livelier spirited, then ever before; so as without them we should want
much of the joys and prosperity we have. I have very often observed in my
self and some others, that those crosses which in reason we thought would have
done us much hurt, have yet bin occasion of very much good to us. So as it
appears it is usually a fit mixture of adversity with prosperity, that makes
both good and pleasant to us, and our lives the happier ever after; And many
men after some (though perchance small) losses, crosses and wants, become
thereby so industrious and circumspect ever after, as they grow also very much
the richer thereby in a lives time, as well as the more joyful and happy.

However let us be contented, and even scorn to be of so frail and low a
temper as to be impatient at every loss and cross which happens; the rather
since no man lives without them sometimes. How contented was Thales and Bias at
the loss of their riches? Fabricius, Seranius, Marcus Curious, and others have
made themselves merry with their losses. Zeno thanked God after his shipwreck.
So let us endeavor to he contented.

If we should lose something, yet let us look to what is left, and let us
rejoice and be thankful that we have lost no more, and that we have yet
something left, perhaps sufficient, and much more then many others who deserve
the same better then we. If we should should lose all, yet Gods presence is
infinite plenty; Divine graces are eternal Treasures, if we have these, they
are better then all the Riches in the world.

And now concerning poverty it self; It is esteemed a very peaceable and quiet
estate. One says, that many wise men have seemed to embrace a quiet poor
estate as some divine thing.

Our Savior himself was poor on earth. Many of the Saints of God have been
willingly poor. How patient and contented was Job at the loss of his riches,
in his poverty. Saint Peter and Saint John could say, Silver and gold have we
none, The Devil says, All this will I give thee if thou will fall down and
worship me. How foolish are their conceits then who esteem a man the better
and happier for riches without grace; and grace we see is sufficient to make a
man so happy and heavenly as to be a Saint, without riches, as well as with it;
and so to make poor men herres of heaven.

Many Phi osophers and wise men have been voluntarily poor. Crates threw his
Riches into the sea, because he saw the same hindered his quietness.. Marcus
Curious, Phocian, Philopemen, Cinon, Anaxarchus, Anacreon, Xenocrates, and all
the Stoikes, Zeno, Diogines, Cleanthes, and diverse others have esteemed poverty
a happy condition, and preferred the same before much riches. And the rather
because riches to many men become snares and baits to vice and wickenesse, and
hinder men ofttimes in goodness; and he that is free from the cares belonging
to riches, has the more liberty to attend the divine and waightier affairs of
the soul. Therefore many both Christians and Philosophers, out of the
greatness of their courage, have endeavored to despise riches and forsaken
them, though perchance unwarrantably to discharge themselves of the good use
and exercise of many good duties and virtues that might be performed there by.
But to go on.

Although it be more praiseworthy to mount up to heaven through many
difficulties and temptations then otherwise; yet as it seems poverty is an
easier way to heaven, which our Savior implies, saying, it is hard for a rich
man to enter into heaven. Mark 10. Yet true it is, that as it is more hard and
difficult, so it is more commendable and glorious for a rich man to be pious
and virtuous. But indeed it is even rare to see rich men religious, for while
the earth allows them such pleasures they make it their heaven, and look for
no other; who wonders to see them neglect the better when they dote upon the
worse. And riches oftentimes also are occasions of vice and wick^dnesse, and by
our ill using of them, become even as snares of Satan to make us neglect God
and goodness, and hecome more evil and vicious. And hereby many rich men do
like Envy exttract evil out of good, their riches increase their misery.

How dangerous riches are to many men in this kind, See Psalm. 52.7. Eccles.
5.13. Ezekiel. 28.5. Matthew. 13.22. and 19.23. Mark 10.23, 24. etc. 1 Timothy 6.9, 10
Iam. 5. and many other places in the sacred Scriptures. So that it seems, it is
a greater danger to be very rich then very poor, for Riches often times make men
lose good ways, but poverty keeps them in the right paths.

Poor men are commonly more free from idleness, luxury, and intemperance then
rich men, and consequently from such Aches, Pains, Infirmities and loathsome
diseases, as are incident and often caused thereby to many rich men: and also
from pride, vain, glory, insolency, ambition, suspicion, fears, cares,
complaints, contentions, peevishness, discontents, disturbances, and all such
vexations as many rich men are usually possessed with, who (like Haman, Esther
3.5. and 5.9.13.) are commonly vexed at every triflle, whereas poor men are
usually more contented with all things, more virtuous, more meek, fearelesse,
free, and happy men; and seldom troubled with any more important thoughts then
how to find means to pass their time in the austerities whereunto they are
already habituated, and which are by custom made easy, yea, even pleasant to
them. They seldom envy or repine after others fortunes, as being equally
estranged both from their knowledge and reach; in which respects also they may
be styled happy men. They remain safe and at quiet, as it were in a harbor,
while great rich men are exposed to danger, as it were in a tempest, floating
on the maine Ocean.

The health of the body and the contentment of the mind are the only real
riches in the world; and we see that poor men are commonly more healthy then
idle intemperate rich men, and have better stomachs; their course fare tastes
as well to them as the rich man's dainties. Their cloth suite becomes them as
well and keeps their healthy bodies as warm as the gallants bravery, and they
are as well pleased therewith. The poor man and woman laughes at the gallants
slasht suit with gold lace, and new odd fashions, at the Madams strange
attires, at her naked breasts and arms, at the spots in her face, and thinks
them proud, foolish, wild and fantastic.

He is really the richest man that is most contented, and most rejoices in
that which he has though it be but competency, but a little; He that has a
mind contentedly good, enjoyes in it boundless possessions. And to view the
world; Who whistles out more content, and sings more merrily then the
low-fortun'd Countreyman, the painful Labourer, and the honest Plowman, and
who (say they) are better Commonwealths men then we; yea, even the Cobbler
under his stall will merrily chant away his time and his work. So it appears
that many poor men sing, whistle, laugh, are merry and rejoice at their work,
while many rich men are sullen, melancholy, and droope in idleness.

Who enjoyes more sweetness in pleasure than they which gain it by industry
and pains. Those fowls and fishes taste best which we kill our selves, when
we travel a birding or fishing. That bread tastes best which men labor for
themselves. And how do many poor laboring men eat their bread with joy, and
their healthy stomachs do well digest the same, while many rich men's stomachs
which. are corrupted by idleness and intemperance, do even loath their own
dainties. Yea, even the very sleep of him that labors and travelleth is
sweet (says the wise man) but (says he) the satiety and abundance of the rich
will not suffer him to sleep, Eccles. 5.12.

How happy then is the contented man, yea, though he be poor. And me thinks
Crato showed a braver spirit when he danced and laughed in his thredbare Clo^ke
and his Wallet at his back, then Alexander when he wept that he had not such
a huge beast as the Empire of this world to govern, and a richer world to
conquer and possess. So Crato wisely seemed to contemn, what Alexander cried
for.

So it appears that many poor men are commonly more Pious, more virtuous,
more healthy and more contented then many rich men; and though many rich men
are wise in their own conceits, Prove 28.11. yet wealth without wit, and
without modest worth and honesty, is but as a rich saddle to ride a fool or a
knave in; and a poor man that has understanding, searches him out, Prove.
28.11. he laughes at him in his sleeve, and contemnes him. King David says,
God shall destroy the wicked man, he shall take him from his riches, he shall
pluck him from his dwelling, and root him out of the Land of the living. The
righteous man also shall see this and fear, and shall laugh him to scorn, and
say, Lo this is the man that took not God for his strength, but trusted unto
the multitude of his riches, and strengthened himself in his wickedness; but
as for me I am a green Olive in the house of God, etc. Psalm. 52.6, 7, 8, 9,
etc. Thus the poor man may comfort himself and rejoice.

I am the longer in this Section, because I think it a very good deed to
endeavor to comfort poor men who have most need thereof. Blessed is he that
considers the poor and needy, etc. Psalm. 41. v. 2, 3. And indeed there are no
men that can enjoy riches more freely, fearelesly and happily, then such as
know how to be contented and happy in a poor estate. This knowledge frees them
from all the fears and unnecessary distempers, which many men take about their
riches. And me thinks there are no men more foolish (as miserable) then
discontented men. And so no men more wise (as happy) then such as can be
contented in all estates and conditions. Therefore to proceed yet further in
this so good and necessary discourse.

The poor and the rich are in this life equally travelers, both pretending to
heaven; Now if the rich pass through the fairerway, yet they re-encounter in
the end a thorn instead of every flower which they have past upon; every
pleasure is a grief in parting from; and past happiness is an irksome
remembrance; so that if rich men should laugh for joy in the presence of a
thousands delights, is it not to prepare in their breast the matter of as many
griefs, since every pleasure is a disposition to a kind of martyrdom, by the
necessary and infallible privation of it is sweets, whereof while we taste, it
menaceth us? So that in the end, especially at death, rich men seem to be more
miserable then poor men in their greater losses. And since we must all pass
through the necessary privations, losses and miseries of this world, is it not
better to suffer those evils which we cannot avoid sooner then later? The richest
of the world is at last found as poor as the poorest companion, and very
likely more miserable. It Is nor to be wondered at, if rich men be more afraid
of dangers and of death then poor men, since their greater losses, and also
their accustomed delicacy, makes the same to them more dreadful; whereas many
poor men seem to embrace death, and rejoice thereat, as if some good Angel
were come to free the^ out of the miseries of this life, and carry the^ to
heaven.

So as losses, crosses, dangers, sickness and death, are nothing so grievous
to the poor, as to the rich, covetous, ambitious, and voluptuous man; and it is
like if he can make a good use of his poverty, being the more virtuous and
pious thereby, that heaven will be so much the more pleasant to him eternally,
as he was here more miserable for a time, a moment in comparison; for joy after
misery past is the sweeter.

There are yet further meditations come into my mind concerning this blessed
subject. I hope there will be no Reader so malign spirited as to envy and
grudge the happiness of poor men, but rather let us greatly rejoice thereat.
Oh blessed be God that gives such, and so much happiness to many of those
poor people whom the stony evil hearted insolent rich men of the world do
oppress, abuse, scorn, contemn and trample upon. A truly good soul will
desire and rejoice to see every man good and happy, as well the poor as the
rich.

The Prophet, King David says, A little that the righteous man has, is better
then great riches of the wicked. Let therefore a poor man be religious, and
then though his estate be never so little, yet is he richer and happier the the
richest impenitent wicked man in the world. This little is a blessing to the
righteous, but to a wicked man, riches are but usurped, and being not used well
to the glory of God, but rather to ill ends, and in vicious courses, they do
but increase of his misery and ru^^e.

It may be said, that rich men may do more good then poor men having more
means; It is true, and blessed indeed are those rich men that live well and
do good with their riches. Yet why may not poor men do as much good,
especially to themselves as the rich. If Christ may be judge in this case, he
says, the poor widow gave more then all the rich ones, though she gave but
two mites out of her poverty, when they gave abundance out of their
superfluity, and consequently it is like she is more rewarded in heaven; Yea,
even the good will of the poor man and his wishes, to do good with his
riches, if he had it, is as acceptable to God as the rich man's alms; For God
accepts the will for the deed when ability to perform the deed is wanting.
How much more easy is it then for poor men to be charitable, and so to lay up
for themselves treasures in heaven, then rich men, since only his good will is
required, when the rich man's money also is requisite, (as in due and necessary
collections for the poor, and otherwise) which ofttimes comes even as hard and
heavily from some covetous rich men's purses, as drops of their blood. And in
truth many rich men are so far from doing good with their riches, as they do
ofttimes much hurt thereby. They become thereby the more insolent, dissolute
and vicious, and with their riches they countenance and maintain ill courses.
And their riches (as has been said) are to them even as snares and baits of
wickedness.

To the poor man therefore we may truly say, Had thou been rich, it is
like thou would have been proud, insolent, ambitious, covetous, an
oppressor, or an intemperate, licentious, luxurious, idle, miserable man.
Perhaps thy want of riches has been an occasion of thy conversion and
increase of goodness; If so, thou art a most happy man, thou art infinitely
more blessed then a wicked impenitent unconverted man, though he be the
richest, the greatest Monarch on earth.

Poor men, how happy are you, if you be Gods servants? even those eternal
riches of the kingdom of heaven belong to you as well as to any other, Luke
6.20. Rich men, how miserable are you, if you be impious and vicious? Then
weep and howl for the miseries that shall come upon you, etc. Iam 5.1, etc.
How is your estate worthy of pity rather then envy, if you have no other
Paradise then your riches? What if you be the worlds favorites, and she endow
you with her choysest treasures; yet since you want grace, your riches shall
turn but to your greater misery? Both rich and poor, let us bend our choysest
designs and endeavors to gain this inestimable Treasure of divine Grace;
without the same all other riches are worth nothing; with it even a poor and
small estate is sufficient to make a man truly rich contented and happy. He
that gains Heaven, though earth should allow him nothing, shall ^et have
plenty abundance, and that f^r better then the earth can produce, or man
imagine. Heaven is an object of consolation to the poorest and most miserable;
And certainly the more grace here, the more happiness there. And since many
poor men, servants, and others are more gracious and more pious then some rich
men, they shall be also crowned with celestial glory; when the other richer
ones shall perchance be excluded, or in a less degree glorious. Poor Lazarus
(though miserable and despised on earth) is now in heaven triumphing, enjoying
infinite eternal treasures.

Poor men; if you have grace learn then to be sweetly contented. Do not
murmur at the abundant riches and prosperities of some vicious men. Do but
consider as King David did, how they perish and come to a fearful end, and
you will have no cause of the least repining envy. Me thinks even in pity you
should think they have need of some happiness here, that shall have nothing
but woe hereafter. And since you are heirs to an heaven of eternal riches and
happiness; O be you sweetly contented with this your own happiness, and
rather pity then envy theirs.

God himself seems to have an especial care of poor men (as well as rich) if
they be his servants. As appears in diverse places of the sacred Scriptures. As
for example, The Lord hears the poor, Psalm. 69.34. He is favorable unto
them, and preserves their souls, He will deliver them, and their blood is
dear in his sight, Psa. 72.12, 13, etc. He avengeth and maintains their
cause, Psalm. 140.12. The Gospel is appointed to be preached to them, Luke
4.18. They are blessed and entitled to the kingdom of heaven, Luke 6.20. And
in this kingdom, surely the Prophet intends, when he says, That God raises
up the poor, that he may set him with Princes, even with the Princes of his
people, Psalm. 113.7, 8. O then dear souls, Though you be as poor as ever Job
was, yet lift up and so lace here your dejected spirtts; Here is cause enough
(if you be capable thereof) to make you exceeding merry and rejoice for ever.
You see that God himself takes an especial care of you, and that all his
graces and blessings, all the eternal treasures and felicities of heaven, are
exposed to your (as well as to the rich man's) aim; That infinite fountain of
all riches and happiness God himself gives, and offers himself and his
heavenly blessings to be possessed and enjoyed of the poorest soul, that will
by a divine lively faith apply this happiness to himself: Insomueh that you
cannot wish greater riches or happiness then you may enjoy in God, in heavenly
Treasures.

Be ye therefore contented, and rejoice even in poverty, and let no man too
much fear the loss, or grieve for the want of riches, since there is* or may
be such blessedness in a poor estate.

This discourse of Contentment, I think so necessary as I am yet unwilling to
leave the same. My meditations extend themselves yet further.

Why should we fear the loss, or grieve too much for the want of riches which
are so weak and worthless as they cannot so much as mitigate the least pain
(much less deliver us from death) or by infinite degrees satisfy our divine
souls, which are as far beyond them, as heaven is above earth. They are even
capable to eye, and desire, infinite and eternal happiness, heaven and God
himself. But riches are altogether insufficient to bestow upon us true and
lasting happiness; They have wings and fly away, as the wise man says, Prove.
23.5. One day saw Job the richest, and the poorest man of all the East. And
millions of men have found the truth of this by experience, that riches are
most uncertain, undurable. And although it be true that in themselves they be
something both, in respect of time and worth, and much to be esteemed in their
good use, even as the gifts and blessings of God, and from which does spring
many good and excellent benefits, as has been declared in the first Section;
yet in comparison of the eternal riches of heaven in God himself, they are
even as nothing, not to be regarded, but altogether vain, variable, undurable
and fugitive; unconstant as the moon, brittle as the glass, frail as Ice,
momentary as thought, in such comparison.

The possessors of them are also vain, fading and undurable. The mighty
Craessus (of whom it is said the Mines seemed to serve for a coffer, the Indies
for a cabinet, and the Ocean for a new river of Pactalus) is dead; What is now
become of Cyrus of Alexander, of rich Gobrias, Pollicrates, Lucullus, and the
rest of those who are registered in the catalogue of rich men, and of their
riches? Death has taken them all away.

Be contented then, fret not, envy not; and as King David says, Be not afraid
when one is made rich, for when he dies he shall carry nothing away, Psalm.
49.16. He is even as vain, as frail, as undurable, as his riches.

But rather let us lift up our souls (since the riches of the earth can no way
satisfy them) to those infinite and eternal riches of heaven, to God
himself. And when our souls solace themselves in those divine exhillerations,
which do and should often cheer and elevate a Christian heavenly mind. Oh how
poorly may we think of such drossy toys as are earthly riches in comparison
of these heavenly!

It is certain also, that no men can take greater pleasure and felicity even
in earthly riches, then such, who are able when they please to contemn them,
even as vanity in comparison of heavenly treasures. This divine contempt of
them puts away all fear of the loss of them, all distraction about them, and
so makes us enjoy the same more freely. Besides, it is a most excellent
pleasure to our souls to know themselves so high, so heavenly, as even when
they please upon good occasion to contemn the world, in such heavenly respects.

Let me yet go on further in this happy discourse of Contentment. There is
(says King Solomon) that makes himself rich, yet has nothing, Prove. 13.7.
And who is that think you? Surely it is the contented pious man. Saint Paul
says, Godliness with contentment is great gain: For we brought nothing into
this world, and it is certain we can carry nothing out; And having food and
raiment, let us be therew^th content, 1 Timothy 6.6, 7, 8. What remains then but
that we seek these true and permanent riches, which are contentment, and
divine graces; whereby we shall possess heaven and God himself.

That saying of Philosophers is most true, That he is most rich, who is most
contented; and therefore it is strange that some have put this apparent truth
into a Paradoxe, when nothing is more certain then it; the mind having no
more proper nor effectual riches then this of Contentment. A contented joyful
mind is the chiefest riches in the world. He that covets no more riches then
what he has, is, as if he poss^ssed all the riches in the world; To him that
desires but a little, a little seems much; and we know that a little is enough
to suffice nature, and to live well. If we desire and live according to nature
and reason as we should, we shall always find that which is sufficient; but if
we live according to common opinion, while we live we shall never find it. A
man that has but any Art or Science, yea that has but his hands at will, how
can he justly complain of want or poverty, since in nature and reason, so
little and so few things are necessary and sufficient, those few to be found
almost every where in such plenty, as being moderately used may suffice the
condition of every man.

How happily, and how healthfully do those creatures live which follow
harmless nature and reason. How well are they pleased with conveniences, and
care not for curiosities nor superfluities. It is a notable folly not to be
contented with so much as is natural and necessary. Sufficiency is a large
Seigniory, a Kingdom, if we could (as in nature and reason we should) be
contented therewith.

If we have much, yet let us not much regard the superfluity, but in our minds
rather set it apart for losses and crosses: We may take as much felicity in
sufficiency, as if we possessed all the world; which if we did, we could enjoy
the rest only by looking on, and contemplation. So may we while it is others.

How reasonable, how easy, how happy is it, for a man to be contented with a
reasonable mean estate; and having so, to think himself right blessed
therein, to live a life full of joy and happiness, to live and reign as a
Viceroy over his own affections; to be so far from grumbling and being
discontented, as to be rather very thankful and joyful, that his lot is
fallen into so fair a ground, as to have sufficient, and not to want what is
natural and necessary.

If we have not abundance, yet since we have that which is needful,
convenient, decent, and sufficient in all respects, why should we not be most
pleasingly contented therewith, as an estate that heaven seems to smile upon
with a gracious aspect, and promise of blessing, if we can but enjoy it, be
thankful and live well therewith. If we can do this, then may we be assured
the estate that God gives us, is best for us, whether it be little or much: he
was ever so careful of his children, as to give them that which is most for
their good. Unworthy men they are who can think God will suffer such to want
that which is good for them, who with a dutiful endeavor do depend on him. Let
us truly love, serve him, and believe, and upon my soul he will never fail us
in what is best for us; either he will give us that which we desire, or better,
if not in this life, yet most certainly in that which is infinitely better, in
heaven eternally, yea in both if it be good for us. Let me be so dutiful and
depend on him, and I have ground enough to be contented and heartily joyful..
Henceforth then it shall be my resolution to be contented and sweetly pleased
only with what God pleases I shall enjoy. Further, concerning Gods love, care
and providence toward his children. Read Psalm. 34 10.37.3. etc. 84.11. Matthew.
6.25. Luke 12, 23. And to this purpose Saint Paul advises us. Be content
(says he) with such things as ye have: For God has said, I will never leave
thee nor forsake thee, Heb. 13.5.

Some men would persuade us, that it is impossible to find any firm quiet and
contentment in this world, without wishing or desiring any other thing or
condition then we now enjoy, whether little or much. But if we will be guided
by divine reason and wisdom, what is more easy? what impossibility can there
be to regulate our wills to Gods? What reason is there to the contrary, but that
we should even with good grace and sweetest contentment obey our Sovereigns,
our heavenly fathers decrees, and live upon earth only of the pure gifts and
blessings of heaven; without wishing any other then what he wills and pleases?
If we could truly love and know God, it were impossible but we should be
infinitely pleased with all that he pleases, and with nothing else. Oh how
rich, how happy are they who are able to undergo what heaven has decreed
without complaint, without desiring any other, without arguing or distrusting
divine providence, still endeavoring to do the best they may, and still being
sweetly contented and pleased with what heaven wills. What greater riches then
this can a man wish or desire.

To conclude then, let us therefore above all, rely on the divine providence of
God, and trust him in all things. So may we assuredly know that what estate
soever we possess, is most good, most fit for us. This is the way to be
contented, so may we rejoice in the riches which we do possess, and not fear
the loss or want thereof.

SECTION V. Of the good and divine use of Riches.
IF God please to give us Riches, let us use them well. Though Riches be often
abused by evil vicious men to their great prejudice, and sometimes ruin; yet
prudent religious men can use the same, as also the benefits which spring from
thence to many good ends and purposes, as to the glory of God, and good of his
Church.

And although poverty may be a blessed estate also, to such as can use the same
well, as has been showed in the fourth Section. So likewise is Riches an happy
estate to such as can use them well, as has been also showed in the first
Section; as being the gifts and blessings of God: From which also spring many
blessed and happy effects in their good use and employment. And it seems more
praiseworthy, and a greater virtue to command and use Riches well, then to
contemn and neglect them, unless in some cases, as in comparison of heavenly
Treasures, divine Happiness. They who otherwise contemn and neglect them,
seem to do the same out of pride and presumption, contemning nnd neglecting
even the gifts and blessings of God, as if they were wiser in refusing, then
God in offering the enjoyance of such blessings, for so they are in their good
use: And also they do unworthily discharge themselves of many good duties,
exercises, and virtues which are required in the good and honest government of
Riches, in their acquisition and attainment, in their conservation,
distribution, good use, and employment. Not to desire, search, conserve, use
well, and so enjoy Riches in a good and virtuous manner, is rather weakness of
mind then wisdom.

The lawful enjoying of Riches, and the benefits springing from thence may
stir up our minds to their fountain, and so to enjoy God in them, and them
through him. And the same also may stir us up to many other good and divine
duties and graces; as first, to thankfulness and love of God who gives them.
To speak ingeniously (and my soul is very lively touched with what I speak)
every time when I consider how God has bestowed many inestimable gracious
favors upon me both concerning my body and soul. Among very many others, to
name only these, That he has elevated me above the temptations of poverty,
want, and misery, to which the greatest part of the world is reduced, and has
given me what I think is necessary and very largely sufficient for me, and
also has very often cheared, elevated, and enriched my soul too, with his
divine Riches of heavenly joys, consolations, and illuminations. Oh, I cannot
but ever greatly love his divine goodness, ever bless his gracious providence
and loving favors for the same; yet confess that I have no way deserved the
least part thereof, but rarher the contrary! The poorest, most disconsolate and
most miserable man in the world, wherein did I differ from him before time was,
when we were both nothing; and yet God has bestowed such blessings on me
rather then on him, whereof to reach the reason were to find the bottomes of
infinite mercies, to which I must remain for ever infinitely obliged. Oh God,
that thou would make me as I desire (if it might be) infinite thankful,
infinitely to love thee.

Also Riches should excite us to, and encourage us in all other duties of
piety; That since God has given them to us, we also should also serve him the
more freely, willingly, cheerfully and diligently. Let us then by all means
express our thankfulness, in our diligent and willing endeavors to serve and
please him.

And parsicularly, Riches should stir us up to charity toward the poor, the
rather since God might justly have made them rich, and us the poorest and most
miserable creatures in the world. Oh let us in the midst of our plenty,
remember, pity, and relieve the necessities and grievous miseries of poor
miserable men, according to our abilities and good opportunities. God has the
rather given us Riches, that we should do so. Let us take old Tobits counsel,
who says, Give alms, and turn not thy face from the poor, and then the face
of the Lord shall not be turned away from thee; If thou have much give
plenteously, if thou have little, give according to that little, for so thou
layest up for thy self a good reward, etc. Tob. 4.7, 8, 9, 10. Oh see what
gracious promises and encouragements are to this purpose! He that has mercy on
the poor, happy is he, Prove. 14.21. He shall be blessed, 22.9. He shall not
lack, 28.27. Blessed is he that considers the poor and needy, the Lord shall
deliver him in the time of trouble, etc. Psalm. 41.12. God loves a cheerful
giver, 2 Cor. 9.7. With such sacrifices he is well pleased, Heb. 13.6. He that
has pity on the poor, lends unto the Lord, and he will pay him again,
Prove. 19.17. It seems with infinite and eternal Interest, even with heavenly
treasures, Mat. 19.21. Luke 12.33. 1 Timothy 6.19. O then let us take our Saviors
counsel, Lay up for your selves treasures in Heaven, etc. Mat. 16.20.

But that which I have chiefly intended to discourse of in this Section
concerning the divine use of Riches is, That the same may stir us up to
search after, and enjoy in some measure, even on earth, those infinitely more
excellent and permanent Riches of God himself, of heaven; The Riches and
felicities of the earth are but reflections from the divine beams of heavenly
treasures and happiness, whereby noble souls are divinely directed and
illuminated by the help of these small rivolets, to search out that true source
and fountain of all happiness, God himself, and his heavenly Treasures, that
is, his divine graces and felicities; That treasure, those bright pearls
mentioned, 2 Cor. 4.6, 7. which shines out of darkness, and lightneth the
earthly vessels of our hearts, which is the knowledge of the glory of God in
the face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4.6, 7. How divinely does Saint Paul wish to
see and enjoy these Riches; O that the eyes of our understanding were
enlightened, that we might know what is the Riches of Gods inheritance in the
Saints, Ephesians. 1.18. Let therefore these external treasures of the earth stir
up our souls to the desire and acquist of the eternal and heavenly Riches,
which are infinitely more excellent, and of which these of the earth are but as
shadows and little forecasts.

It is the poor man's only hope to be rich in the world to come, and this
hope, if divine and heavenly enough, is sufficient to possess the poorest man
with Riches far more worth then all the huge amazements of earthly treasures.
The rich man also does, or may with reason imagine that if external,
transitory, terrestrial Riches, afford him some happiness, he shall be much
more happy in the enjoying of the eternal and heavenly.

Insomuch that even by reason, we may as it were by these earthly, in some
sort learn and espy those infinitely more excellent Riches of heaven; so as
children at first by learning a few letters, do afterward spell, read, and
so in time attain to much knowledge and wisdom; and then being good
scholars, they do in comparison of the more excellent things they have
learned, even contemn the reading of their A, B, C, and spelling books, yet
still scorn not to use these letters and rudiments of learning, but so, as
they can be above them, and use them as they please for their own advantage:
So we being at first but as children in the knowledge of heavenly things, may
yet even by the Riches of the earth in their good use and enjoyance learn to
spel and spy therefrom in some measure the Riches of heaven. And so having
from these transitory and earthly felicities, learned eternal heavenly
happiness, we may be able to be above, and even to despise these earthly in
comparison of the heavenly Treasures which are infinitely more excellent; yet
so, as that without such comparison, and in respect of their Author, of our
nature and necessities, and of their good use, we st^ll est^eme them well
accordingly, still use them for our advantage, and so in all respects to
increase our happiness, still endeavoring by these (as by letters) to read
and learn further into those more excellent treasures and felicities of heaven.
And they are so much more excellent, as that all the Riches in the world are
not comparable to the least degree of divine grace, since by the price thereof
we may buy the eternal Riches of God himself: The Lord is rich unto all that
call upon him, Romans 10.12. And these Riches are indeed infinitely beyond man's
weak expression or shallow earthly apprehension. Saint Paul himself it seems
could not find words to express these Riches, nor search the depth of them,
which made him to say, O the depth of the Riches of God. Romans 11.33. and to call
them the unsearchable Riches of Christ, Ephesians. 3.8. also the exceeding Riches of
his grace, Ephesians. 2.7.

In desiring these Riches, we cannot be too covetous; Covet earnestly the best
gifts says Saint Paul. O let our desires and our designs be eager in the
pursuit of these heavenly Treasures. And let the Riches of the earth help to
direct, encourage and incite us to the acquist of those divine Riches.

What though the blind buzzards of the world dote only upon earthly Riches,
and cannot see these infinitely more excellent heavenly Treasures? yet Gods
Saints (the eyes of whose understanding are enlightened, Ephesians. 1.18.) do very
perspicuously and gloriously view them, 2 Cor. 4.6, 7. And though we use these
earthly felicities as passage-boats and ships, the better to carry us to the
haven where we should be, to that cape of good hope, to those happy Islands,
the heavenly Canaan, yet do we not set our hearts so on these ships or boats,
as to neglect or forget our heavenly haven, but rather so, as the better and
oftener to remember the same, and to convey us thither. And we can with a most
willing mind, when God pleases leave those ships (as Saint Paul did his) to
arrive at this our heavenly country. Though as Travell^rs in an Inn, while we
are here, we refresh our selves with these, yet it is but the better to
encourage and strengthen us in our journey toward our heavenly home, where our
souls are already oftentimes solacing themselves with divine hopes, desires,
contemplations, joys of those heavenly Riches, whereof we are now heirs, Romans
8.17. Gal. 4.7. Tit. 3.7.

And we may truly say, That such men as terminate their hopes, desires and
affections, to possess those eternal heavenly treasures (which are only able
to quench the thirst of our souls) are the richest in the world. Whence it is
that a truly pious man can in comparison of these divine Riches, when he
pleases, trample under foot very generously all the treasures and Riches of the
earth, through the knowledge of those which his spirit possesses, while he
contemplates the eternal glorious Riches of heaven.

How rich is he, O Lord, who is thus heavenly minded, enough to contemn
worldly in comparison of divine treasures, and to enjoy earthly Riches only in
thee, and to thy glory. How contented is he who thinks and contemplates often
of eternal Riches. Oh, how happy is he that makes thy self his treasures. O
God, let it ever be the choicest desires of my soul to be so rich, so
contented, so happy. Preserve me ever if it please thee in this divine temper
(wherein I now find my self) already to mark out, and set up my repose, my
delight, my treasures above the world, with thee, O Lord, in heaven.

The second PARTITION. Of Honor.
SECTION. I. The excellency thereof, and the misery of Dishonor.
A Good name (says king Solomon) is rather to be chosen than great Riches,
Prove. 22.1. It is better than precious ointment, Ecc. 7.1.

Honor is defined by some to be the rumor of a beautiful and virtuous
action, which reboundeth from our selves to the view of the world; and by
reflection into our selves, brings unto us a testimony of what others believe
of us, which turns to a pleasing contentment and joy of the mind. By others,
true Honor is defined to be the shining brightness of virtuous and worthy
actions, reflected from our own conscience unto the sight and view of those
with whom we live. It may be called a graceful respect, or renowned
reputation, which every man ought to have in recompense of his worthiness,
declared unto the world by good and glorious deeds, and approved by the
acknowledgment of good and virtuous men. It is not then an imaginary fantasy,
but a splendent brightness which makes him that is the subject thereof to
shine forth as the sparkling rays of a precious diamond. And it shines most
brightly in such as are of greatest birth of greatest riches, of greatest
dignity and authority both in Church and commonwealth,

And forasmuch as it proceeds from virtuous and worthy actions, it is a
divine good, a caelestiall Treasure, viewed and approved of by God and Angels,
and is always accompanied with inward delectation and pleasure; And we are to
know that this divine approbation and inward delight of the soul is the only
reward that virtue looks for in doing good and honorable actions. The opinion
of men is much too weak a recompense for virtue, and not to be compared with
the inward delight of the soul; And virtue desires not a more ample or rich
Theater to show her self and her actions, then her own soul and conscience;
The testimony thereof she esteems much better then of all the world besides;
yet with modesty, in all good ways she disdaineth not (but rather endeavors
and rejoices to gain) this outward honor also. A good name amongst men.

And so much does virtue esteem of this honor which deservedly proceeds from
good and worthy actions, that amongst virtuous noble great spirits, nothing
seems to be more desirous and pleasant; insomuch as they will spare no labor,
no pain, but willingly and fearelesly will adventure through many
difficulties, many perils, obtain the same.

True honor and good estimation, is the most illustrious, most commendable, and
most durable good that a man has in this world, forasmuch as he leaves unto
the world a good testimony of his life, and to his own posterity a good example.

Honor also may serve to many good uses, as to countenance and uphold all
goodness and good men, to stir and inflame us to all good, pious, and
laudable actions, and thereby to look to that fountain of all honor and
glory, God himself, and those celestial rays of glory; of which these
terrestrial are but little reflections, those eternal crowns and kingdoms
of heaven. But of this more hereafter. And we shall the better esteem of
honor, and more plainly see it is excellency, if we consider the misery of the
contrary that is of shame and dishonor.

There is no greater grief and vexation to high and generous spirits, than
dishonor and ignominy; insomuch as they will take any pains and travel, yea,
and choose rather to dye then lose their honor, their good estimation.

True it is there are many impudent people in the world, who will not be moved
with dishonor and ignominy; but even with a face of brass will out-beard all
modest shame and honesty, very impudently oppose all goodness, and maintain all
wickedness; yet a generous modest man, a gallant and gracious spirit will be
very sad, and grieve exceedingly, when he has done any dishonorable actions,
and so to be disgraced, and lose their good name and honor.

Wherefore true honor, and good repute, being so excellent as has been said,
and the contrary so disdainful and miserable, the same is very requisite to be
sought after in all good ways and actions.

SECTION. II. How Honor is to be attained unto.
Honor or good estimation is commonly gained either by high and noble birth,
by riches, or by virtuous, pious and worthy actions, especially by such as are
most profitable to the Church or common wealth.

Virtuous, pious, and worthy actions are alone sufficient to ennoble men of a
low mean birth and degree, and to make them very illustrious and honorable.
Do that which is good (says Saint Paul) and thou shall have praise of the
same, Romans 13.3.

Abdolominus was a Gardener, and yet for his virtues was made King of Syria.
Iphicrates and Marius were meanly borne. Caesar was a potters son; so also was
Agathocles the King of Cicily, These for their virtues and valor attained great
honor. Pizarro that poor Spanish soldier, was by Charles the fifth, for his
valor, made Marquess of Anatillo. Pertinax, Valentinian, Probus Aurelius, and
others by their virtues and worthy actions became Emperors of Rome. And diverse
others in all ages have been advanced to great honor and dignity for their
valor and other virtues; And for those glorious actions which they have done
for the good of the common wealth wherein they have lived. Socrates, Virgill,
Horace, Homer, Demosthenes, Bias, and infinite others of low and unworthy birth
have been famous for their wisdom. And very many also (which is indeed the
best honor) have been famous for piety, and those worthy actions which they
have done for the advancement thereof; and so for the good of the Church of God.

However virtuous, pious, and worthy actions give true pleasure to the
conscience, and makes us honorable and illustrious in the sight of good men,
and most certainly (however the malign spirits of the world may censure) of
Angels, yea and of God himself, 1. Sam. 2.30. Psalm. 149.9. Psalm. 45.13. Cant.
6.10. John 1.12. Gal. 4.7. 1 John 3.2.

But in such as are of highest authority, of noblest descent, and parentage,
and of greatest riches, in Emperors, Kings, Princes, Nobles, Magistrates and
all Superiors, do worthy virtuous and pious actions, shine more splendently
and gloriously then in others.

And it is most usual, that such as are of greatest birth and authority, are
also of more courteous, fair, and so honorable deportment and carriage, and
of a more generous, heroical, and noble spirit then others; for honorable
descent, authority and dignity, are strong motives and spurs to the noble
exploits of virtue. They cannot but consider that it is a most unworthy thing to
belie a man's birth and authority, and most worthy to innoble the same by
honorable actions. Wherefore it is said that such as are of royal and noble
births, and in places of greatest dignity, majestracy and authority, either in
Church or common wealth, ought to demean themselves most worthily and nobly;
for virtuous, pious and worthy actions, are legitimate parents of true honor,
without which it can no more be, then a shadow without a body; for otherwise it
is only as a shadow of honor, and a bubble of vain glory; nor can such false
and vicious honor be any true pleasure to the conscience of such men, but
rather ought to be a grief unto them, knowing that themselves are foul and
darkesome within, however they may paint themselves with the gay outside of
ostentation and hypocrisy. And no wise man will bow to a molten calfe, though
made of gold; And little better or worse are vicious unworthy men (though
great) then Images, Calfes, Bruites; As King David signifies, Man that is in
honor and understands not, is like the beasts that perish. Or if the body do
bow to such a vicious unworthy man, the mind tells it, that it honors an
unworthy subject, and even then while the body bows, the mind contemnes him.
Nor does vice and wickedness show more deformed in any men, then in such as
degenerate from their high birth and authority, since their greatness draws
more eyes to behold their vices, and therefore commonly they leave a more
infamous and rotten name behind them to posterity. And if we peruse all
histories, we shall find that such as have given themselves to vicious
courses, are always registered as infamous for their unworthy governing in
their places of authority. And on the contrary, the friends and followers of
virtue to have been men of divine spirits, and of most heroical performances
for the benefit of mankind, and so registered for excellent in the list of
Princes, soldiers and Philosophers.

There are also diverse kinds and degrees of true honor, which are to be
attained unto by virtue in our particular and general vocations.

The first is, in respect of a man's self: For he that possesses virtue,
gives laws unto himself, and thereby endeavors to conquer his unruly and
moderate passions and affections (whereby he becomes Lord of his own
Dominions) and to make himself a perfect man by the exercise of good and
virtuous actions. Without this no man can be said to be truly honorable: For
what greater servitude and baseness, then to be in a slavish subjection to our
own disordered passions and affections: And what an excellent honor is it
(such as God and Angels approve of) to see a man conquer and be commander of
himself? This is the ground of all true Honor.

The second is in respect of a family; When a man has once gotten a habit of
virtue, and so knows how to govern himself, he shall easily be able also to
govern and instruct a family. No man lives more unworthily then he that
lives merely for himself. But he that imployeth his endeavors for the good
of his family, friends, kindred and neighbors, in good and laudable ways,
lives well, worthily and honorably.

The third is, in respect of the common wealth. There is great affinity between
a political and oeconimicall body; insomuch as some Politicians say, they
differ only in magnitude and proportion of business, and have likely the same
period: So that he who well knows how to govern himself and a family, may
by diligence, study, wisdom, and usual conversation in the affairs of
State, in the laws and customs of the country, be able to govern a common
wealth, or at least with no great difficulty to execute and perform the duties
of his office, place and dignity therein, in a laudable and so honorable
manner. Neither indeed ought we to give greater honor to any men, then to such
as employ themselves for the general good of the Church and common wealth.

And it is certain, that such as are truly honorable and generous spirits,
do feel themselves lively touched in soul with an earnest desire of doing
good unto those with whom they live, so that herein they are not daunted with
the greatness of pain, or fear of peril.

Let us therefore learn to demean our selves worthily and laudably in our
places and callings, whatsoever they be, as well particular as general: For
although the greatest honor is due to such as do acquit themselves of great
high places of authority, in Church and common wealth; yet honor, according to
each man's degree and desert, is generally due to those persons that do well
perform their duty in their professions, and vocations both general of
Christianity, and public good, and also particular, whatsoever the same be.

And since also he is to be esteemed truly honorable, who does well govern
himself in the ways of virtue and piety, and therein does worthily; (for true
honor only consists in virtuous and pious actions) Let us endeavor to apply
our selves to the acquisition both of moral and divine prudence, fortitude,
and all the most noble virtues and graces; to scorn and despise all unworthy
and base actions; and on the contrary, to addict our selves to the acquisition
of good and excellent (though difficult) things, to be resolute therein, and
courageous; to stand upon our own bottomes in all good virtuous pious ways,
and not to be led away with flatteries and idle opinions, nor with the
discouragements or barking reproaches of base, vicious, dissolute people; to
imitate as far as we may, the best men in their most sublime and excellent
actions.

But we are still to observe and remember this caution, that we should not
only be virtuous, pious, and do good only for outward honor and glory, as
if that were the solary and reward thereof; the opinion of men is far to
weak a pay for divine virtue and grace. And as the same is too modest, so also
too noble to beg such a recompense. We should persuade our selves that virtue
and divine grace (were it not to do good to others) desires not, nor seeks
a more ample and rich Theater, to show it self then her own soul and
conscience, no other recompense then the contentment and pleasures thereof in
its own witness of well doing, which is far better then the testimony of all
the world besides. Therefore a truly virtuous, pious man (who is truly an
honorable man, 1 John 3.2.) scorns to look for only outward rewards; he holds
it for a Principle, a Maxim, that the fruit of honorable actions is to have
acted them, yea to have endeavored them. Wherein he takes most pleasing
delight, and if any outward honor, as the good opinion of men, and so a good
name be added to this inward delight of his soul, he also modestly rejoices,
and well esteems thereof, yet but as an uncertain, frail (though good)
blessing, and not to be compared with the inward testimony and delight of his
conscience, in well doing. Yet he endeavors in all good ways with modesty
to gain this outward honor also, a good name, and the good opinion of men;
for virtue not only adorneth a man with true wisdom, modesty, and a pleasing
conversation, but also accompanies him with valor and magnanimity takes away
from him all base fear of danger and of death, and inciteth every one that is
endued with a generous disposition, to erect unto himself an eternal
remembrance, by virtuous, glorious, and so honorable actions.

To proceed more particularly. This crown of honor also duly belongs unto
two sorts of men; that is, first, to such as profess learning. Secondly, to
such as profess Arms or martial affairs. Forasmuch as the endeavors of the
valiant General, Captain, and soldiers, seems to aim almost wholly at
honor and the renown of men: I shall first, in this respect discourse of them.

Honor is most justly due unto those men, who spend their lives in the service
of their Prince and country, and voluntarily oppose themselves to apparent
dangers for the preservation of the common wealth from foreign invasions; and
to maintain our Religion, our Laws, and liberty, which next under God are the
necessary cause of our well being. Since they take such great pains in so many
and great dangers, for such high and worthy ends, this crown of honor
therefore in this respect most worthily appertained to such men; neither
shines it so magnificently and gloriously in any affairs, as in the
courageous attempts of martial enterprises.

Therefore it is that the golden Merchant (although he be a very profitable and
worthy member of the commonwealth) yet so much honored as the poor soldier,
for the one heapeth up a mountain of treasure, respecting chiefly his own
enriching; the other practices but few means to enrich himself, and those
also as instruments of honor; the principal end of all his endeavors being
referred to the maintenance of our Religion and liberty, to the good of our
country, to the faithful service of our King, and to the acquisition of
honor and glory.

Wherefore in ancient times, as honorable rewards of such men, have been given
crowns, laurels, garlands, statues, a certain form of accoutrements; the
honor of some surname, orders of knighthood, places of worth and dignity,
precedence in assemblies, pensions of money, and the like, have been worthily
bestowed upon such as have valiantly fought for their Religion, their Prince,
and country; and Arms have been permitted to noble personages, as the
recognisance of their honor. But it falls out sometimes, that some of these
and the like marks of honor, to such as have not deserved the same, are an
occasion of their greater disgrace; for high titles and great authority without
virtue and public utility, are deservedly contemptible: And also sometimes it
may be greater honor not to have these honorable marks, having deserved them
then to have them: It is more honorable unto me (said Cato) that every man
should ask me why I have not a statue erected in the market place, then why I
have it. These military martial affairs therefore do confer on men such
deserved honor, as crowns them with a shining light, reflecting a splendent
brigtnesse to posterity. Insomuch as diverse famous Philosophers and
Historiographers, as Socrates, Xenophon, Architas, Thucydides, Thales,
Epiminondas, and a milli-of other famous men have offered themselves to all
perils to gain honor and glory, and for the benefit and safety of their common
wealth. Yea, insomuch as many Emperors, Kings, and Princes have esteemed, and
do esteem it a great addition to their honor to maintain, and to be
martial defendors (if occasion be) of their Religion and country.

This crown of honor also most deservingly belongs unto them which profess
learning, especially those most honorable, sublime, and generous professions
of Divinity, Law and Physic.

Divinity (which concerns principally that most excellent part of man, the
eternal heavenly soul; and the professors thereof being conversant in the
knowledge of God and his true Religion, the science of living well and
blessedly for ever, and so in all supernatural, divine and eternal things) is
most honorable and most worthy the study and knowledge of the greatest Monarch
on earth. Nor can there be a greater addition to the honor of Emperors,
Kings, and Princes, then to be religious and worthy defendors of the true
Christian faith.

The law also is a generous and honorable profession (however it be abused, and
although there be many unnecessary sharking and unconscionable Lawyers, of whom
let us beware) the good use and intent thereof is most honorable and
excellent; As for the preservation of men's persons from death and violence,
their good names from reproach, slander, and infamy; also their goods and lands
from waste and spoil, and to dispose the property thereof. And in general,
for the good and prosperity of the weal public, and maintenance of all
virtue and true Religion. Insomuch as many Kings and Princes have thought it
their greatest honor to be well skilled herein, to make and establish good and
profitable Laws and Decrees; as Numa, Trajan, Antonius Pius, Severus,
Justinian, Lycurgus, and many others.

Physic also is an honorable profession (however there be many ignorant and
unlearned Emperickes in diverse Towns, which makes this noble and profitable
science to be evil spoken of by some) yet scholars do well know the Theory
of Physic is a spacious field of knowledge, requiring in the learned
professor, the Latin and Greek tongues especially; and to be well skilled in
philosophy and history, especially natural, to know the whole structure and
frame of the body of man, the operation of all vegetatives and minerals, both
simples and compounds, and so to enquire into the most secret and obstrusest
closets of nature; also skill in Astronomy, Astrology, and so much of the
juditials upon all manner of Calculations as may be well warranted and not
superstitiously affected; with much other kind of art and learning. Diverse
Kings, as Orsiris and Zesostris, Kings of Egypt, Mithridates King of Pontus,
Evax King of Arabia, and others have written tracts of this subject of
Physic; and Aesculapius for his skill herein was esteemed a god.

To conclude this Section; although it be true that few men are capable to
attain the top of honor, yet we ought not to be discouraged, but to make
more account of that little which we can attain unto (especially by living
well and honestly in our general vocation, and also particular, whatsoever the
same be) then of all the rest of our wealth. For why, even the mighty statesman
is in some respects beholding to the husbandman, merchant, seaman, all
arts-men, and mechanickes; so as he cannot live without them, like as they
cannot subsist without the statesman; God being pleased herein to show his good
providence, so uniting each man to other in an indissoluble knot of necessity,
and accepting of every man's good and virtuous endeavors as well in small
matters as in great; for true honor only consists in virtuous and pious
actions, which do shine forth most brightly in the sight of good men, yea to
the view, approbation, and delight of Angels, and of God himself, Psalm. 45.11,
13, 15, etc. Cant. 6.10. 1 Samuel 2.30. Prove. 11.20. Ier. 9.24. And though by
vicious men even these virtuous and gracious actions may be reproach't and
disesteemed in this life, yet shall the same be crowns of honor and glory to
us in the heavenly life eternally, when we shall shine as the firmament the
stars, and the sun for glory, Dan. 12.3. 1 Cor. 15.41, 42. yea in some sort
even as the glorious body of Christ himself, Phil. 3.20. 1 John 3.2.

So then let us endeavor to attain this true honor or good estimation, which
is gained by virtuous, pious, profitable and worthy actions, the rather since
the same appears to be the most illustrious, most commendable and most durable
good, that a man can possess, forasmuch as he leaves a good example to
posterity, a good testimony of his life to the world, and is crowned thereby
with everlasting honor and glory in the heavens.

SECTION. III. Of the abuses and dangers of Honor, which ought to be avoided,
especially Ambition.
LEt us consider, that we are by all means to eschew the abuses and dangers of
honor, which otherwise will hinder our happiness therein, and bring upon us
mischief and misery.

Many men while fortune smiles (as they say) abuse their honor and authority,
to the maintenance of themselves in, and to the support of all dissolute and
wicked courses, priviledging themselves therein by their greatness they grow
proud, stout, arrogant, insolent, forget God and goodness, and plunge
themselves into all licentious and voluptuous courses (of the miseries whereof
I shall write God willing in their due places) And at the last perhaps lose
their honor, and leave a rotten stinking name and memory behind them. However,
if men use (or rather abuse) their honor to vicious dissolute wicked courses,
the same will turn to their greater perdition. It had been better for such men
to have endured despicable shame, disgrace, and ignominy. These dangers and
abuses of honor, therefore, are by all means to be avoided.

A further danger of honor hindering happiness, and causing misery, is that
common vice of many great men, namely, Ambition. But first observe this
caution, That in this ensuing discourse against Ambition. I do not intend to
speak against that honest ambition, or desire of honor which stirs us up to
virtuous, gracious (and therein worthy and honorable) actions. I think it good
that we look up to the examples of those men who are most worthy and virtuous,
that we may out of an honest emulation and desire, mend our selves by
continual striving to imitate their virtues and nobleness, and so to do
worthily in all good and laudable actions for the benefit, as well of Gods
Church and the common wealth, as of our families and selves. But now to define
what I intend in this Section by Ambition. It is a vice of excess, and
contrary to modesty, which is a part of temperance; namely, it is an excessive
desire of outward honor. It is commonly an unsatiable desire, and composed
with pride, vain glory, insolency, and the like. It is the most haughty vice
of all others, and seated in the very soul it self, and therefore most
dangerous.

Before we view the evil and miserable effects thereof, a few words concerning
the extent. Men espying a bright luster and excellency in honor; they are
prone to run thereafter without the bound-markes of reason, and so plunge
themselves into this boundles and top-lesse vice of Ambition.

The gay and glorious outside of this Glow-worme, vainglory, accompanied with
outward pomp, pride, hypocrisy, vanity, and wickedness, so bewitcheth the
world to seek thereafter, as they are even mad to gain the same, and
endeavor by impudency, flattery, bribery, or any other baseness to attain
their desires. It is strange to think how some men will even sigh after this
false outside of honor, with designs to hazard life and soul for the
conquest of these vain felicities. Insomuch as many men in our times seem to
be of the same mind with those chief Rulers mentioned, Luke 12.42. who loved
the praise of men more then the praise of God, ver. 43.

But let us now briefly view the vanity, evils, dangers, and miseries of this
vice of Ambition.

What folly and vanity is it which makes men (as many do) take such pains
even with all vicious means, as flattery, bribery, impudency, and the like, to
gain that outward honor, which without the inward testimony of a good
conscience, is but as smoke, a vapor, air, breath, opinion, wherein he loses
his own liberty to follow the passions and humors of other men.

Ambitious thoughts make a man clean forget what he ought to be, and abandon
all actions of duty, transports him beyond equity and reason, and commonly
brings him to a great and miserable downfall. From this pernicious root of
Ambition, springs abundance of evils to the soul of man, for he that is
wholly infected with this vice becomes proud, ungrateful, insolent,
faithless, dishonest, envious, mutinous, an oppressor, an Atheist, a traitor,
a contentious and seditious person. Ambition has been the cause of diverse
murders, wars, and ruin of Empires, Kingdoms, Cities, and a multitude of
families and persons. Alexanders ambition was the decay of the Eastern world,
and Julius Caesar's of the most flourishing common wealth then being.

Ambition often trampleth and contemns even Religion it self: It will make
Jeroboam and Mahomet to tolerate any Religion so they may reign. Those
Arch-heretickes and Schismatickes of the world, what was it but Ambition that
puffed them up to be chief leaders, though in errors and lies. What was it
but ambition that stirred up, and continued the controversy of supremacy
between the Churches of Jerusalem, Antioch, Constantinople, and Rome, the
space of almost 300. years, until at last Phocas adjudged the supremacy to
the Bishop of Rome, which brought forth horrible tumults, deadly hatred, and
shameful schisms among the Churches. And since the ambition of diverse Popes,
when sometimes two or three have reigned together, has caused the
bloudshedding and ruin of many Christians. Also how much blood was shed by
reason of those ambitious divisions of Caesar and Pompey, of Scylla and Marius,
of Cneus Pompeius, and Quintus Fabius in Rome. Of the houses of Orleance and
Burgundy in France. Of York and Lancaster in England. How many ambitious
spirits have done hateful murders, that they might rule and reign alone, as
Abimilech, Athalia, Ioram, Zimri, Romulus, Dionysius, Busiris, Periander,
Semiramis Queen of Naples, Henry the fifth, and Antonius Emperors, Manfroy,
and Irene mother to the Emperor Constantine, Richard the third of England, and
many others, Bassianus the Turk; also Selimus, who killed Coruntus his younger
brother, and five of his Nephews, Solomon who murdered his own son the
valiant Mustapha, Adrian the Emperor many of his Emulators, Maximinus all his
Senators, Herod of Jury all the Synedrim and bloud-royall of the Jews, with
many others whom I might recount. Ambition was the ruin and perdition even of
the Angels themselves.

From this ambitious and inordinate desire, springs a multitude of vain
purposes, plots, cares, jealousies, envies, fears, griefs, and discontents.

Ambitious men think still their own condition not good enough, because
others are better, and pine with envy at the honor and prosperity of their
neighbors. It is a greater grief to an ambitious man to suffer one to go
beyond him, then it is pleasure to leave a thousand behind him. He enjoyes not
so much the honor he has, as pines with envy, desire, and acquisition of what
he has not, and what others have. Thus Themistocles is said to be more fretted
at the glory of Miltiades, then joyous of his own; and Aristides at his
emulated corrivals, then at all the honors he receives from the Athenians.

An ambitious man grieves, and is exceeding angry, if others neglect him, and
think him not so good as he thinks himself. If Haman be not bowed unto by
Mordecai, he is full of indignation and grief.

The remembrance of any disgrace or injury past, does often much grieve
ambitious men, and fears of that which may come perplexes them. And if they be
once crossed in their ambitious desires, and in stead of rising, fall, they
become exceeding sad and melancholy; insomuch as many ambitious men, after such
loss of their honor, or cross in their ambition, have seemed even to scorn
the world, and mankind, been ready to turn heretics, traitors, and
desperately to spend their days, and so end them.

These immoderate desires, cares, fears, and griefs do often cause the body to
pine and wither, increase melancholy, shorten life. By this aspiring vice of
ambition, many millions of men have wrought their own overthrow. Baasha,
Zimri, Shallum, and Pekah kings of Israel, Absalom, proud Iezabel, Haman,
Nebuchadnezzar, and Herod are remarkable examples of the miserable downfall of
pride and ambition. Histories make mention of thirty seven Emperors of Rome,
within the space of 100 years, only three of them died of sickness in their
beds. The rest came to untimely ends. The examples also of Pharaoh,
Adonizebeck, Agag, of Bajazet, and the Kings of Asia who drew that once
Scythians shepherds coach, also Valerian, Mauritius, Richard the second of
England, Francis King of France imprisoned by Charles the fifth, Robert Duke of
Normandy, and diverse others in all ages; yea the death and ruin of all the
Emperors, Kings, Princes, and famous men that ever were in the world, who are
now all buried in earth, and rotten in corruption, do show sufficiently the
vanity, uncertainty, and frailty of that honor and greatness, which ambitious
men so unsatiably desire and seek after. Insomuch as the grave and worms have
conquered and devoured the greatest conquerors, princes, and renowned men.

And as if honor and ambition did but the sooner hasten men to this ruin and
destruction, with what violence do many great men run into this vice of
ambition, till they break their own necks. They rise but to fall; as did
Julius Caesar, Pompey, Haniball, Marcus, Crassus, Marius, Spurius Melius,
Sejanus, Byron, Nicias, Agesilaus, Cumenes, Xerxes, Pyrrhus, and a million of
others, both ancient and modern.

Though ambitious men should attain to some height of their ambitious desires,
yea commence even the highest degrees of vain glory, yet would they not be
contented; they would still be ambitious, and wish (like Alexander) that there
were more worlds for them to rule and domineere over.

Although ambition be commonly noted to be seated only in generous, noble and
great spirits, yet there are some mean men of low degree that are touched with
this vice of ambition; there are some beggars that would very fain be men of
office and authority, though it were but to be revenged of the Constable, and
put him also in the stocks. Some Mechanickes would feign grow to be Gentlemen,
and rise higher, according to that old Epigram: Geta from wool and weaving
first began,
Swelling and swelling to a Gentleman.
Fortune still smiling on this doughty wight,
He left not swelling till he was a Knight:
And so forgetting what he was at first,
He swelled to be a Lord, and then he burst.


So ambitious men are never satisfied with rising till they fall to the grave;
they will ever be swelling like the frog in the fable, though it be till they
burst. An ambitious Gentleman would very feign be a Knight; a Knight a Lord,
and so a Count, a Duke, a King, an Emperor, and then of more larger, richer,
and better dominions, kingdoms, empires, worlds, etc. But they shall fall as
low as death. Nor does honor at all satisfy their ambition, but rather
increase the same. If perchance they attain to some high degree thereof, yet
they desire, care, fear, plot, grieve, envy, pine, and so still perplexe
themselves. So that it is an unsatiable desire, even as a bottomless gulf,
and therefore unnatural: For the Philosophers say, there is no vacuity in
nature; but this desire is ever empty, never satisfied. Honor it self does
but serve as more fuel to increase the fire thereof. The motions of an
ambitious man's desire are as Ixions wheel, ever turning and returning, never
giving rest, but always vexing and troubling the mind. What content can he
have who is haunted with such a hag as ambition. It appears therefore, that an
ambitious man is seldom contented, often vexed, never satisfied. If he attain
to be the greatest Monarch on earth, he is vexed at mortality, and grieves
because he is not a God. The Angels themselves who fell, are thought to be thus
ambitious, who aspiring to be as Gods, were therefore thrown down to the
depth of hell. And since persuading our first parents also to be immortal, and
as gods on earth, though they kept not Gods command^ment, Genesis 3.4, 5. And they
aspiring to this, by breaking the same, were therefore driven out of Paradise,
and exposed to shame, misery, and death.

They who do ambitiously dote after honor, think perchance the same will
prove rocks of defense in all exigents, when indeed they are like to find one
day the same to be but castles in the air: They imagine perchance like the
Nimrodian builders, that they shall thereby eternize their names, and so climb
up to heaven; but in truth they are like to fall to the lowest center of ruin:
for the higher ambitious men rise, the greater is their downfall and ruin.
When sickness and death appears, it is unspeakable how they grieve to see
themselves ready to be thrown down to the grave, and their honor to lie in
the dust. So is all their glory buried in ruin.

It seems God himself hates and resists haughty, ambitious, proud men,
Proverbs 16.5. James 4.6. and will consume them as stubble, Mal. 4.1.

Let us then, if we will be happy in respect of honor, take heed that this
boundless, perilous, unsatiable, and miserable vice of ambition do not
possess us. And in this respect of honor also (as well as of riches) let us
endeavor to settle our minds in a free, fearelesse, contented, happy condition.

SECTION. IIII. We ought to possess our minds with such an habit of
Contentment, as that we do not too much fear the loss of Honor, or grieve at
dishonor.
SEeing the excellency of honor, and the misery of dishonor, Let us in all
good ways endeavor to attain the same, and to avoid the abuses and dangers
thereof (of these I have written.) And also let us endeavor to use honor
well, and so we may freely and divinely enjoy it (of this in the fifth
Section.) But now also that we may be farther, and more freely happy therein,
Let us endeavor to settle our minds in such an habit of contentedness, as
that we do not too much fear the loss of honor, or grieve for the want
thereof.

Let us leave the success of all our good endeavors to God, relying on, and
trusting him in all things. So may we be truly persuaded that all things shall
convert to our good, That what honor or good repute soever we have, the same is
most good, most fit for us; yea, then we need not fear the loss or want
thereof, but may be truly contented, and rejoice even in reproach, dishonor,
and shame; which that we may, let us further consider and resolve.

And first concerning reproach, slander, and detraction. We may not think to
live in this world without evil words and reproaches, especially of dissolute
malign people. But let us endeavor with a manly courage, to contemn and
tread under foot the follies, the childish brawlings, and currish carping of
such men, as we would the barking of a dog. He, whose soul is truly innocent,
wise, and magnanimous, smileth at, and contemns the reproaches of foolish,
brainesicke, dissolute, malicious people. As for such as are truly good and
virtuous, they will not willingly reproach or wrong any man: and for the other,
their ill censures are not worth regarding, but rather to be contemned, yea, we
may rejoice thereat. It is a good sign, happy are we if we be reproached for
goodness, we may then rejoice with glorious heavenly joy. Saint Peter so
advises and tells us: Rejoice (says he) inasmuch as ye are partakers of
Christ's sufferings, that when his glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad with
exceeding joy. If ye be reproached for the name of Christ (so for any
goodness, any pious Christian actions) happy are ye for the spirit of glory,
and of God rests upon you, 1 Pet. 4.13, 14. Let us then when such vicious men
reproach us, endeavor to be the better, the more happy and joyful.

Let us endeavor to please God, and if we can, good men also, and then it
matters not to please others. To have every man speak well of us is
impossible, because however we demean our selves, some Cynicke will bark at
our ways and actions; A man must live as in a cell, be foolishly idle,
obscure, and weakly neglect to do all (though good) open actions, or else he
cannot escape the lash of censorious, detractive, reproachful, vicious,
malign spirits. If we should be vicious, profuse, and dissolute, we should
please (perchance) such as are so, but not God nor good men. And if we live
virtuously and piously, the world will hate us as separatists from the folly
and vices thereof, and then our reputations will surely be traduced by the
ignominious aspersions of malevolent tongues; for to be good is by many (yet
only by fools, and those whom King Solomon notes for the worst and most
fools, namely, wicked men) thought contemptible: But indeed he is wiser that
pleases one good, then a thousand bad men. And he is the best and wisest that
pleases God. And since God accepts of good wills and endeavors for deeds;
happy is he that endeavors to please him.

Let me here (if it be so) make a digression. Since in writing and publishing
this book, I have endeavored and hoped to please God and virtuous pious men,
and since I have been very much encouraged herein by some, I am content to be
reproached and reviled by malignant tongues, rather then forbear to do that
good which I hope the publishing hereof will do, rather then hurt; for I
expect to be reproched and abused by some such kind of men for writing and
publishing this (though it tend principally to happiness even on earth)
especially I expect the same from some who perchance (though in a general way)
will find themselves touched in this Tractate; namely, negligent, idle,
careless, prodigal people, and also covetous men; likewise, low, base,
unworthy minded men, and also ambitious spirits (of these I have written
formerly, the rest follow) also too rugged, overnice Tymons, Disdainers of
women and marriage, you may call them Love-haters; also doting, effoeminate,
sottish, phantasticke, adle-pated lovers; and likewise whoremasters. Further,
gluttons, gurmundizers, also tippling blades, roaring boys, and all intemperate
vicious persons. Also mere carnal, sensual fools, such as neither know nor
perceive those divine Riches, Honors, and delights of heaven (of which in the
last Sections of each partition is discoursed.) But especially I expect to be
reproacht by carping, barking, currish, rugged, malign discontented spirits;
such as envy, pine, and grudge at all happy pleasantness, especially at all
pleasing (though harmless and profitable) books, such as aim at delight and
happiness. But to say what I think, that such men are the most fools (as
well as miserable) who do wilfully live most discontented, sullen, envious,
malicious, and sorrowful; and that such are very likely the best and wisest
(as well as happiest) who do live most contentedly, lovingly, and joyfully even
on earth. That this is plainly true, I have endeavored to show in those three
former treatises, which I have written concerning this subject, Happiness on
earth. And of which I intend to publish more hereafter, as not knowing a
better, more profitable or pleasing subject, to study, think, or write of. But
whither do I wander; To return. Since I have endeavored in this book to
please God and good men, I will not care what others think or say thereof. And
if I did not think the publishing of this Treatise would do good rather then
hurt (and the rather I think so since I find so much good to my self in
writing thereof) and also if I had not been very much encouraged herein by
some who have read a former Copy hereof, whose Judgments and sincerity I
cannot but with very good reason trust and think worthily of, I should not
otherwise have presumed to publish the same; But since therefore I think and
hope the same will do good, I dare not, I will not hinder or neglect the same,
though I were sure that all the malign spirited men in the world would
reproach, detract from, and abuse the same and me, as much as possibly they
could.

I know it is very easy (for such as will be malicious) to censure and
contradict even goodness and truth it self; for truth is but one, and seeming
truths are many: and few works are performed without some errors, at least
seeming ones in some men's judgments, whose opinions are as various as false.
No man can write a leaf, but malice and opinion (being disposed to cavil) may
carp thereat. The cleanest corn will not be without some touch of soil, no
not after often winnowing; and so our best actions, our best works are but a
kind of Miscellany, not without some tincture of faults. And since we know
nothing in this world that man can do absolutely perfect, but stained with many
imperfections; It shall suffice to content my self, that for the present time
I have done as well as I could: And since I have endeavored to do well, mine
own soul and conscience in the witness of well endeavoring, shall be armor
of proof against all the assaults of reproachful and malignant tongues. When
I am older and wiser, I may chance do better.

Men think by censuring (though maliciously and uncharitably) to be accounted
wise forsooth, but in a wise man's judgment they show themselves but fools:
For this you may ever observe, that the most censurers, are commonly the most
malicious fools, or else the most ignorant ones: Frequent detractions,
reproaches and dispraises, are at best but faults of malicious or uncharitable
wit, and such wit is folly. And to speak sooth, (for why should we not call a
spade, a spade, as they say) Those men who do maliciously detract from,
reproach, and abuse virtuous, pious men, and their good works and actions, are
no better then knaves, (...) as some have charactarised such men to be knaves
in grain. This I speak only by way of admonition and prevention. Let not us
therefore by any means detract from, scandalize, reproach or abuse any man's
good, virtuous, pious actions. And if any man do so maliciously abuse us, let
us not be so unwise, as to grieve one jot at the malicious, detractive,
reproachful abuses of such fools and knaves; but rather to despise the same.

Though I know my endeavors and skill to be but weak and unworthy, yet since
they are well intended, I know, heaven accepts of a good will, and good
endeavors, for good deeds, though weakly, and unworthily performed; Therefore I
am contented: but if I could do very well indeed, yet will I look to be
repro^ched, abused, and scandalized; for proud, envious, malicious evil
spirited men cannot endure to see a man do or deserve well; they are very
squint-eyed, to note, pick, yea seemingly to m^ke faults in good men even of
their good act^ons, and deprave those things which their souls know to be
good, and so to blemish even the fairest reputations; Though they cannot without
a very impudent face directly reproach good actions, yet they will do it slily
and cunningly, with such ifs, buts, sour gestures, musty proverbs, and
detractive speeches as disrellish even the best deeds and goodness it self: So
as they would make men think that there is something so ill (though well, or a
small circumstance) as must annihilate, yea, villifie even the best actions. As
for one or two examples, I will now imagine an honest man and a deboist, idle,
swaggering, malicious man, talking together; The honest man saying, That the
Author of a certain good book was very well busied, when he was writing the
same, and that the other for shame cannot deny this, but rather think that he
was much better busied in writing the same, then himself is usually at the
tavern and tap-house; but now that he studies how to come in with some if, or
but, which he thinks will spoil all the commendations, and this is very like
to be the matter; namely, he says, the author had done well if he had not
printed the same, but this printing spoils all, etc. and perchance he then
brings out some old musty overworne proverb, whereby he would feign if he
could give you (though slyly) to understand that all authors are fools in
print, and that himself is a very wise man for saying so, though he very
foolishly condemn that which perchance himself is incapable of, much less to
perform; but he would not show himself (he says) to be a fool in print by
any means; And here Momus shows his wisdom, in that he so fears, and shames
to show himself what he is. He had rather perchance be a fool more
privately, then publicly: But what? shall a man be so weak, so poor
spirited, so simple, as to fear or shame to do well, because of the idle
detractions of such men. Bashfulnesse in goodness is at best but a frail
virtue, or rather a weak unworthy vice; A cowardly fear in well doing, and to
show the same is vicious* same (...) it is pity) do weakly forbear to do and
publish good actions for fear the malicious, detractive knavish men in the
world, should carp at, abuse, or misconstrue them; looking more to what they
shall be thought, then what is good to be done: But indeed, a spirit modestly
forward to show it self in (as well as to do) good and well advised actions,
is truly virtuous and commendable, and the rather if it can contemn, and be
above the malicious reproaches of detractive, carping, currish tongues.

And now concerning my self: Since I am conscious to my self, that I do
intend and endeavor well and honestly, I will think my self happy,
whatsoever the world judges of me. I will never be ashamed of that which bears
the seals of good endeavors and virtue. And why should I be ashamed to do
any thing in private, that I would not that men (as well as God and Angels)
should know of. I protest (before God) I would that all men in the world (if it
pleased him) knew all both the thoughts and actions of my life past, so as they
knew all as well good as bad, and my resolutions concerning future time. Why
should we endeavor to do any but good actions, and such as it is no matter who
sees how well we are busied. And what? shall we be ashamed to show that to the
world, wherein we have endeavored to do well? It is to be reputed an unworthy
fear and cowardice, that pulls a man back from endeavoring to do good, and
to show the same to the world, although there be many men in the world so
sordid and foolish, and others so malicious, bad and knavish, as to reproach
and abuse goodness. Having endeavored to do well, I will not be ashamed to
set my name thereunto, and after good advisement, to show the same publicly
in print; and if I may (as I hope) please heaven, and do (though but a little)
good thereby, it matters not for men's reproaches and abuses; but only to make
me the more happy; for Christ himself assures it, Blessed are they that are
reviled and suffer for goodness. So then let men censure me as they will for
endeavoring, to do well, and showing it, I am resolved to do more, and I
wish that many men more in the world, would be more diligent and forward in
this kind.

I will further imagine the said Momus is again discoursing to the same honest
man, and by some old, overworne, threadbare proverbs, and sentences, would
seem to make the honest man believe if he could, that almost all modern
authors have stolen out of other men's works, that they are thieves of wit, and
other as bad names as he can imagine, and so would very unworthily, if he
could, overthrow the best (I take it) of modern learning and very much
goodness; for (as I will imagine the honest man tells Momus) First, it were now
a folly for men merely to study, novelties; since as King Solomon in his time
could say, There is nothing new under the sun, so that now (as it is said) no
new thing can be said or written, which has not been before: yet (as one
says) as a child standing upon a tall man's shoulders, may see further than
the tall man himself: So modern writers, overviewing, new studying, refining,
and making use of others, adding their own inventions and experiments, and
duly sorting the same according to the new alterations and devises of the
present times, may excel the former and more ancient. And by composing the
same in a new manner, method, and style, and by altering, adding to, abridging,
and sometimes converting their matter to other purposes, it may seem to be
(and be as useful as if it were all) new, and which to do, is often as
difficult, and requires well nigh as much art, as wholly the invention of new
matters; and is better to be esteemed, because more authentical. Therefore I
think it now the best kind of study and learning, to search, and note the
opinions of the best and wisest former authors, and so to contract, refine, and
alter the same according to the present times, or to any good and necessary
purposes and occasions. Thus to do, is so far from theeving, stealing, etc.
as it is the best way that I can think of, to learn to be honest, just,
sincere, virtuous, pious, and ought rather to be called industry, diligence,
and the best way to goodness, and may be very well compared to the best and
most commendable industry and diligence of Bees, who do gather a sew combs of
honey from the sweetness of many and diverse flowers, and yet the flowers no
whit the worse, but still remain as good and pleasant as before. And I think
it as good, lawful, and necessary for a scholar to make use of books, as any
other profession to use the implements, tools, and instruments of their art
which they cannot be without; for what else is their principal art and
learning, but to read, note, study, collect, refine, contrive, digest,
contract, and so to show their learning, and instruct others: and what better
and more authentical way then this, so to search and note the opinions of the
best and most commendable authors. Also I know not a better course then this to
avoid idleness, and all manner of vices, and to increase in all virtue and
goodness. I think if all scholars, whether they be Gentlemen or others,
would thus busy themselves (though 'twere but a few hours in a day) they
would not (especially during that time) be at leisure to be vicious, but would
very likely gain very much unexpected, and even unexpressable happiness in
time thereby, and so not only do very much good to themselves, but to others
also if they would. And a most blessed age it were, if men would thus busy
themselves. Now therefore what a knave (I cannot term him bad enough) is
Momus, so to scandalize and reproach those courses which ought rather to be
highly commended, and called the best and most necessary learning, industry,
diligence, art, and way to goodness, happiness and the like: This I write,
hoping it may do good to some who may have leisure and books enough
sometimes, to exercise themselves in this way, and the rather since (concerning
my self) I have found so much good and happiness thus in reading, noting,
collecting, contracting, studying, digesting, and writing, as I protest I would
not lose for all the choicest earthly happiness that the world can produce, as
may be guessed by a former book which I have written, entitled, Heaven within
us, or, Divine Happiness on Earth. And so much pleasure have I taken (even in
being busy) herein, as I think never any man has in idleness or vicious
courses. And since I find this so good and happy a way, I am resolved often to
trace therein, though all malicious vicious men should continually reproach and
scandalize the same and me.

Yet once more I will imagine Momus telling the honest man, that the world is
already too full of books, even cloyed, pestered, annoyed therewith; and that
therefore new ones are superfluous; and the honest man telling Momus, that
there are not too many good books, and that men (especially scholars) may
easily enquire, and know which are the best, and use only them; That there are
as many, and diverse minds, as men, and therefore it is good that there be many
and diverse kinds of good books; That most men are but of plain and common
understanding, and therefore many plain and easy books are necessary, That
new things are most looked upon and noted, and therefore it is not amiss that
there be often new good books published, and the like. But admit it be so,
that the world is cloyed with too many books; therefore it is the more
requisite that men should endeavor to collect, refine, and epitomize the same,
and to publish that only which is good, necessary, and well pleasing to
virtuous, pious men; and in this respect (concerning my self also (if I have
failed therein (though I hope not much) yet I have endeavored to do as well
as I could; yet truly my own meditations, contemplations, and so additions in
the studying and writing hereof, have extended the book (especially in some
necessary places thereof, where I thought good) much longer then I intended. I
should perhaps have pleased some men, to have cited abundance of authors, to
show much reading, and intermixed a multitude of Latin phrases and sentences,
etc. (especially to please such who think all learning is comprised therein.)
All which indeed may be performed by a weak scholar in this age; insomuch as
a man may easily collect even out of modern English Authors, such matter
enough to make a book swel in Folio, to a great volume: but in this
compendious discourse I thought better to neglect the same, and so to be as
brief as conveniently I could. In this book I have endeavored to use such a
several style and language, as (according to my weak skill and judgment)
becomes the several matters discoursed of in the Treatise. And since I have
been very much encouraged in this way by many worthy friends, as well Divines,
as others (as I can show and it is well known) under some of their hands, I am
the more freely willing to commit the same to public view and censure,
notwithstanding the common and pernicious slanders and reproaches of Momus,
Zoylus, and their followers.

But (if I have digressed) to return. Let us further consider, that some
enemies and reproaches are even good and necessary for us, to purify, to try,
to quicken, and enliven all virtue and divine graces in us. Let us endeavor to
m^ke a good use even of reproaches, by being the better, more circumspect, and
diligent in all goodness, more wise, resolute and contagious therein, and then
happy are we; we may rejoice rather, then sorrow at such reproach, that
occasioneth such good effects. And (again concerning my self) I confess that
if I had not had some very strange eager enemies, and been reproached, it is
very like I had not had the leisure to have been happy. I protest me thinks I
do very plainly perceive that the same has occasioned my greatest joy and
felicity; yea, that all the enemies, reproaches, and crosses of my life, have
turned to the increase of my good and happiness; and that the remembrance of
them does now but serve to enliven and quicken my present joys. But to proceed.

It is common to all men to be evil spoken of and reviled, especially
religious and pious men most undeservingly; The Apostles, Martyrs, and all the
Saints have bin so abused, those men of whom the world was not worthy, Heb.
12.36, 38. We do but follow our le^ders; yea our Captain and Savior himself
has led this way, and he will crown such with eternal triumphant honor and
glory, who patiently follow him in suffering. It Is a comfort to have such a
leader, such companions.

Has God our Savior most loving-suffered so much to make us happy, and shall
not we (even willingly and joyfully) suffer so little for his sake as the
reproach of envious and malicious tongues. Let us be ashamed to go to heaven
without suffering something for our Saviors sake.

When ill men hate and revile us, it is a sign of goodness in us. Such men
would love us, if we did use and allow their courses. If we do well, they will
hate and reproach us. Let us then (as the Apostles did) rejoice that we are
worthy to suffer for goodness sake: Such reproach is a blessing, our Savior
says it: Blessed are you (says he) when man shall revile, etc. for my sake,
rejoice, and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in Heaven, Matt. 6.
What a weak conceit have we of heaven, if we cannot willingly suffer even
death it self for the least of it is rewards. If we were truly capable thereof,
how joyfully should we suffer the greatest torments on earth, to gain such a
reward; and glory to think at what an easy rate (in comparison) we should
gain the same. Puny Christians are we, not worthy the name, if we be
dishartened at the airy reproach of dissolute people, when our Savior says,
Great is your reward in heaven. Let it then be as heavenly music to our
ears, to hear such vicious men, so revile and reproach us: We shall be
rewarded with eternal honor and glory in heaven.

I reckon (says Saint Paul) that the sufferings of this present time are not
worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us, Romans 8.18.
And our light affliction, which is but for a moment, works for us a far
more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. Of this glory let us contemplate,
let us lift up our minds to those crowns and thrones of heavenly honor and
glory: from thence let us look down on those barking, bitelesse, vicious men
of the world, and so being above their malice and reproaches, let us contemn
the same, and pity them.

But say? admit we be justly spoken evil of, that we have plunged our selves
into ill courses and actions, whereby we have justly deserved to be so (for no
man lives without faults) yet let us be contented, let us make a good use of
our disgraces, so may they be an occasion of our rejoicing. Let them make us
see our ill deservings, repent, and amend, seek and return to goodness: Oh
blessed is such disgrace that brings forth so good effects.

And although there be many impudent, brazen-faced people in the world, who can
scoff at, and out-beard all modest shame and honesty, and shamelesly maintain
all vice and wickedness; yet a generous modest man will grieve, and be ashamed
of ill-doing. It is a sign of modest grace and goodness, to be ashamed of,
and grieved for our faults; it is then good hope that we repent and become new
better men; as King David, Saint Peter, Saint Paul, Saint Augustine, Mary
Magdalen, and infinite others have done, who had as great faults, and perchance
far greater then we; yet after seeing and being ashamed of their ill courses,
they repented, became new men, famous Saints.

So let us endeavor as far as we may, to imitate all good and excellent
men. It Is said of Themistocles, that he was a vain and vicious youth; but
after he made the world amends by his worthy deeds.

A generous and modest shame keeps us from doing ill, and makes us strive to
excel in all good things; insomuch, that such as are possessed therewith, are
like to be the best men of fewest faults: And of all others, these are they who
are most like to do great and worthy matters, while obstinate, shameless
people, who impudently maintain, and go on in a course of vice and wickedness,
without remorse, are like to come to dishonor and ruin: Such men indeed,
however they may be esteemed in this world, noble, brave, gallant blades; yet
while they remain unconverted in such vicious courses, they are base and
dishonorable servants and slaves to their own disordered lusts and
affections. Whereas (in a wise man's eyes, there cannot be a greater honor to a
man even in this world, then to become of such a noble temper, and free spirit,
as to conquer his irregular affections, and to return from vicious unworthy
courses, into the ways of divine grace and virtue, which makes a man to become
Lord of himself in this life, and at the end thereof (by Gods grace) guerdons
him with eternal honor in the heavens. And it seems God himself and Angels
rejoice at this; There is more joy in Heaven (says our Savior) for one Sinner
that repents, then ninety and nine just Persons, which need no repentance.
Happy are we, and with everlasting honor and glory shall we be crowned, if we
be occasions of such joy in heaven.

Now a few words concerning dishonorable and despised men, in general. Oh
what pity it is to think, how many hard and evill-hearted men there are in
the world, who being somewhat richer, and perchance therefore only better
esteemed in the world, do very insolently scorn, contemn, mock, scoff,
reproach, and abuse poor men of a low and mean degree. But sirs, think I
pray, Oh think that God might justly have made you the poorest, meanest, and
most despised man in the world; and that it shows a very malign and
satanicall heart, unjustly to despise, reproach, mock, abuse, insult over, and
so add to the grief and misery of such men who are already most low,
contemned, and miserable. But let such low, despised men, know that God
himself, who is most just, sees their misery and wrongs, and will one day
redress the same; And if they can be patient, and go on in well-doing, they
shall hereafter be crowned with glory, honor, immortality, eternal life, Romans
2.7.

And it is most like (however they may think otherwise) that disgrace, infamy
and contempt, makes many men the better, especially frees them from pride,
vainglory, insolency, ambition, and also makes them more humble and meek:
And with such God himself dwells, Esa. 57.15. He promises them grace and
exaltation, 1 Pet. 5.6. There are very many gracious promises in the sacred
Scriptures to the meek and humble. The kingdom of heaven is theirs, Matthew.
6.5. where they shall be crowned with eternal honor and glory, and set with
heavenly Princes, Psalm. 113.7. So if they can be the better and more humble for
their disgrace, wrongs, and low condition, their light momentary affliction
shall work for them a far more exceeding eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor.
4.17. Such heavenly glory and honor, as is not worthy to be compared with their
disgraces and sufferings in this life, Romans 8.18.

Despised men, you whom the world scorns and reproaches; how happy, how
honorable are you if you be virtuous and pious? Since God himself is your
father, and the kingdom of heaven your reward, since it is your fathers good
pleasure to give you a kingdom, Luke 12.32. Fear not then, but rejoice, for
you have so much cause of joy (if you can see it) enough to make you
unexpressably, yea infinitely and everlastingly joyful. To you Christ himself
shall one day say, Come you blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared
for you from the beginning of the world, Matt. 25. Be then but Gods servants,
and you are most honorable freemen. His service is perfect freedom. Then
however you may be despised, disgraced, and miserable in this world; yet are
you such of whom the world is not worthy ( Heb. 11.36, 38.) most illustrious,
and honorable even in the sight of heaven. You are the sons of the most high
God, guarded by Angels, and feared by devils. Eternity and the kingdom of
heaven are prepared for your honor and glory. Can you or dare you wish greater
honor and happiness? Who will not say then, but such men are most happy, and
right honorable?

Concerning poor despised men, you may see or collect more consolations before
in the first partition, and fourth Section.

Let us then be contented and not too much fear the loss of honor, or
grieve for the want thereof, since there may be such happiness even in the
good use of Reproach, Contempt, and Dishonor.

To discourse yet further concerning this subject of Contentment in respect of
honor also. Why should we fear the loss, or grieve for the want of outward
pomp and honor since (although it be true that in it self, and in the good
use thereof, it is of much worth and excellency, as has been showed, yet) in
comparison of the eternal glory and honor of heaven, it is to be esteemed
even as nothing, either in respect of time or worth. Insomuch as in such
comparison, it is more glory to despise honor, then to attain it, to contemn
and be above the world, then to conquer it; the rather, since after such
attaining and conquest, a man knows not what to do with it, and after a
moment of time, in comparison of eternity, it passes away from man, or man
from it.

Yea some have found that honor has been rather a loss then a gain, but an
occasion of envy, jealousy, opposition, storms, and sometimes of poverty or
death it self; Witness those worthies, Themistocles, Phocian, Aristides,
Scipio, Cicero, Seneca, Socrates, and diverse others. Many also have found the
same but honorable servitudes and troubles. All earthly things show to us
perchance better then they are, and sometimes the devil also may tempt us (as
he went about to tempt Christ) and so (in our contemplations) show us the
kingdoms and glory of the world; but not the dangers, troubles, cares, fears,
and vigilancies thereof: Thus especially he tempts ambitious men; but many men
who have duly considered these effects of honor, and how the same may often
hinder peace, quietness, also divine studies, and resolutions, have rather
thought themselves happy without then with it; insomuch as many Kings and
Princes have voluntarily forsaken and refused it. Dioclesian, Sylla, Carolus
Martellus, Ottanes King of Persia, Pope Celestinus, Edward the Confessor, and
eight crowned Kings of England, while it was held of the Saxons, and many
others, (though it has been thought superstition, and unwarrantable for men so
to forsake their dignities, offices and callings) have changed their Scepters
for books, knowing there was less trouble, and (perchance more peace, joy, and
felicity, in a study then in a kingdom. He that is guided by reason, and loves
himself, is contented with an indifferent fortune. Likewise diverse of the
saints in all ages, even the Apostles have voluntarily refused outward honor;
and our Savior himself, setting before him the glory of heaven (as it is said)
willingly endured the cross, and despised the shame. For in such comparison of
eternal and heavenly glory, this external, terrestrial honor, is not worthy
to be esteemed, but as altogether vain, as mere air, breath, clouds, mists,
vapors, shadows, dreams, yea less, even as nothing. It does not so much as
touch a man, only his name, which is nothing of his substance, a thing
separated in the air from him, very uncertain, fugitive, and undurable: So
that if an ambitious man were but awaked out of his vainglorious dream,
restored to his wits, brought out of fools paradise, he would plainly see how
in the prosecution of this vanity, he did but run paths very vain, devious and
dangerous, only to build castles in the air, or (according to a better
phrase) to sow the winds, and reap the whirlwinds. Then would he remain even
most sweetly contented with a mean condition.

So uncertain and undurable is honor, that one day has seen Haman honored
and hanged: So Nebuchadnezzar, a King and a beast, Bajazet an Emperor, and a
caged prisoner (I might instance in many more.) But if the renown of a man
does make a longer noise in the world, a life time or more, yet to what a small
purpose is it, since it is but a noise that passes away with a thought; and
since the man himself also passes away to nothing, or worse to death, the
grave, and corruption. Where is now great Alexander, whose valor could admit
no comparison, whose victories have spread through the Universe; as likewise
Cyrus his predecessor, who upon his golden chariot was attended with that
magnificent pomp, as made men idolatrize in admiration of it? So also Caesar,
Mark Antony, Pompey, Hanniball, Scipio and all the rest who have bin registered
in the world for famous? They are dead, and parted from their glory. And to
what a small purpose is all their conquests, their honor and glory come to,
since even the very worms have conquered them all, and reduced them to nothing
but corruption.

I am even astonished, when I consider that so great a number of Emperors,
Kings, Princes, Prelates, Nobles, who have commanded the world, should now be
conquered by so poor and contemptible things, as death, and the worms, and be
imprisoned for ever in a narrow darksome grave, and there to become only a
lump of filth, a box of pallid putrefaction, a nest of crawlers, so full of
gastlinesse and horror, as you would be even afraid to look upon them.

Let us be contented then, and not be ambitious, or envy any man's honor and
glory. No? not if an unworthy, vicious, impious man, should grow great and
honorable in the world. Be not afraid (says King David) when the glory of his
house increases, for he shall carry nothing away with him when he dies,
neither shall his pomp follow him, Psalm. 49.16. What difference is there
between the most honorable, and the most despised man in the grave. The poor
despised man's comfort is, his excess to heaven is as free (and it is like freer
with less impediments) then the other, and his departure from the earth, not
so grievous, since he has no pomp and glory, but rather infamy, disgrace, and
misery, to depart from, and (if he be a pious Christian) he expects a crown of
glory in heaven.

Why then should we too much fear the loss, or grieve for the want of
external honor and glory, since (as has been showed) in respect of the
eternal and heavenly, which we expect to possess, it is not worth our
thoughts, but (in such comparison) appears altogether vain, fading and
undurable, as also the possessors thereof. And it is most worthy consideration,
that such spirits as are divine enough to contemn earthly, in respect of the
heavenly honor and glory (which they look for, and in some sort already view
by a heavenly light in their souls) are the most happy men. The renown of a
virtuous pious man is much greater, and more glorious then that of Caesar or
Alexander; And this honor only lasts eternally. If we have this honor, it
matters not for any other; we need not care which way we go, whether thtough
honor or dishonor on earth, so we come to that glory in heaven. Let us trust
and rely on God, and we are however blessed. God makes us to be borne, and
live in what degree he pleases. If we live in a mean, low, and despised
condition among men till death, God has so ordained; So it must be: And if we
can (as if we were divinely wise, we may) even willingly, and with sweetest
contentment, obey his heavenly decrees, and rely on his divine providence,
without distrust, we are certainly happy. It should (and why should it not) be
an heaven of joy to us, to think that God (whom we should love Infinitely
above our selves) is in heaven, and that his name is glorified, and his will is
done on earth as in heaven.

To conclude then, let us in respect of worldly honor, rely on Gods providence
what ever befalls us, knowing that if we trust in him, we shall have that which
is most good, most fit for for us; Let us make a good use both of honor and
dishonor. And so we may (and let us endeavor to be) contented and rejoice in
this respect, and so in all things.

SECTION V. The good and divine use of Honor.
ALthough the vain immoderate ambitious desire of praise and honor be not
good, yet the moderate and virtuous desire thereof is certainly very
commendable, and also profitable, as well for private as public good; for it
contains men in their duty, awakens, stirs up, and inflames them to worthy and
honorable actions; and may serve to many good and divine uses. Such honor
(therefore) and good estimation, as we have, let us use the same well, and in
the good use thereof enjoy it freely.

However many vicious men use this treasure of Honor to many ill purposes, to
the countenance and furtherance of vice and impiety, and so perhaps to their
own ruin; and do desire and seek the same in a vain and vicious way, only
to satisfy their pride, arrogance, covetousness, and other ill desires; yet
virtuous pious men can desire and use the same to many good ends and purposes,
as to the benefit of themselves, their family, the commonwealth, the Church,
and in all respects to the glory of God, and so can truly enjoy much pleasure
and felicity therein; and embrace the same as a blessing and gift of God, as a
little foretaste of that honor and glory which they expect to enjoy in heaven.
And by this good and divine use of honor, to be excited to search, taste,
see, and enjoy (in some measure even on earth) that heavenly honor and glory,
is that which I principally intend to discourse of in this Section.

This terrestrial honor and happiness is a little reflection from the
lightening wherewith heaven illuminates divine souls, directing them to the
acquisition of the true source and fountain of all honor, glory, and
happiness, by the aid of these small springs and rivolets. Let then the
excellency and splendency of this terrestrial honor, stir us up to view,
search, and enjoy that eternal honor and glory of heaven, which in the sacred
Scriptures is called a kingdom in diverse places, the kingdom of God and of
heaven, Mat. 3.2. and 6.33, etc. A heavenly kingdom, 2 Timothy 4.18. A kingdom
prepared for, and to be given to us, Mat. 25.34. Luke 12.32. A crown which (in
expectation and in divine glorious and heavenly contemplation, and so in
vision) we may already have, and are advised to hold fast, Rev. 3.11. and we
are by that Prince of Kings, Jesus Christ, already made and called Kings and
Priests unto God his father, to him be glory and dominion for ever and ever,
Amen. Rev. 1.5, 6. Great men, ambitious men, despised men, all men hark to
this heavenly language, which most certainly tells us we may (and bids us seek
to) possess such a Kingdom, such a crown, such honor and glory, as if we
were truly capable thereof, would make us even on earth so high and heavenly
minded, as even to disdain (in comparison thereof) the most glorious earthly
honor, but only so far as it may serve to the furtherance and increase of
this heavenly honor and glory; and then should we bend all our choicest
desires and endeavors to seek this honor and glory of God, of heaven.

But by the way let me say, or rather let the sacred Oracles of God tell us,
that before this honor is humility, Prove. 15.33. Isa. 57.15. Mat. 6.5. Luke
1.52. 1 Pet. 5.6. and diverse other places. We should deny and esteem our
selves, as the Laodiceans, wretched, miserable, poor, blind, naked ( Rev.
3.17.) and so denying our selves, we should look up to Christ Jesus our
Redeemer and Savior, and as he counsels us ( ver. 18.) buy of him pure gold,
white raiment, etc. all divine and heavenly graces, and so thereby live well,
graciously, piously; for to such as so live, is this honor and glory promised,
Psalm. 84.11. and 91.14, 15, 16, and 149.9. Romans 2.7, 10. So then though we must
deny our selves, yet in Christ Jesus, if we be endued with his heavenly graces,
and so live well, we ought to think our selves rich, honorable, happy, and
illustrious, even in the sight of God and Angels, Isa. 43.4. that we are as
Kings children, and all-glorious within, Psalm. 45.14. fair as the moon,
clear as the sun, and terrible as an army with banners, Cant. 6.10. even the
sons of God, and heirs of the kingdom of heaven, John 1.12. Gal. 4.6, 7. 1
John 3.2. Kings and Priests unto God, Rev. 1.6. Such honor have all his Saints,
Psalm. 149.9.

So then let our designs be so high and heavenly, even as to acquire a
kingdom, a heavenly kingdom, the kingdom of God, Mat. 6.33. Luke 12. In him
let us seek for glory, honor, immortality, eternal life, Romans 2.7. We all
desire to be honorable, and the way so be most truly and highly honorable, is
to seek for this immortal glory of heaven, which is indeed the poor and
despised man's only hope and life, and ought to be the well reputed, and noble
man's only ambition; and this hope, this desire (if divine and heavenly enough)
and the acquisition thereof, is by Gods grace sufficient to ennoble even the
most despised man on earth, with honor and happiness, far more worth then this
world can give or imagine.

What now, if the dishonorable slaves of sin and wickedness (those whom God
himself has branded with the ignoble names of swine, Mat. 7.6. and dogs, Rev.
22.15. who neither see nor know those heavenly dignities, honors, and glories
of the Saints of God) should trample those divine pearls of grace, and bark
at those heavenly honored men, yet let us be contented; we know it is the
nature of the beasts and curs; and so let them wallow in their filth, and
snarle at us still, it matters not while we are so happy as to know these
truths (oh would they were so happy also) that we are so honorable as to be the
servants of God, yea his sons, and heirs of the kingdom of heaven, as has
been showed. And yet further, now lately searching those heavenly Oracles, I
find that God is pleased so to honor us, as to call us (so far as we are
good and happy) his own image, Genesis 1.27. Col. 3.10. yea the very divine
nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. the temples of the holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6.19 6.16. wherein
God himself dwells, Isa. 57.15. 1 John 4.12, 13, 15, 16. the beloved of God,
Cant. 1. etc. the glory of God and of Jesus Christ, Romans 3.23. 2 Cor. 8.22.
With diverse other, honorable, glorious, and heavenly excellencies, enough to
make us exceeding joyful and very gloriously high and heavenly minded, even in
the midst of all the reproaches and abuses that the devil and all his imps can
imagine against piety and pious men; and so to contemn the same, even as we
would the barking of a bitelesse cur, or rather (as has bin said before) to
esteem the same as heavenly music and blessings, since it does serve but to
increase this our heavenly honor and glory, Mat. 6. 1 Pet. 4.13, 14.

Now then let us raise up our thoughts and desires from this terrestrial, to
the heavenly glory; let it be our only ambition to rest in Gods favor on
earth, and to be crowned with eternal glory in heaven: And in the mean time,
let us often pray with Moses, O Lord we beseech thee show us thy glory, Exodus
33.18. and often endeavor already to soar aloft upon the wings of faith and
divine contemplation unto this heavenly glory, those everlasting heavenly
glorious crowns, and thrones, which we shall hereafter possess. Let this
earthly glory and honor be an help to direct our souls thither, and to learn
the excellency of that infinitely, transcendent eternal glory of heaven, from
which this earthly, as a little bright reflection does proceed.

And as children by the use and view of toys and trifles, such as they
apprehend, are encouraged to learn (and do thereby espy) the way to greater
excellencies, and after seeing the vanity of those toys, and looking above
them, do even contemn them in comparison of the more excellent things which
then they know: So let us (as children in Gods family) make a good use of this
earthly honor, and be thereby encouraged and excited to learn and search the
way to the eternal glory of heaven; of which this is but a shadow: And when we
are grown wise and skillful men in the knowledge of divine things, Let us then
in comparison endeavor to be above, and even contemn these toys and trifles
of the world, for such is earthly honor even in it is greatest excellency in
comparison of the heavenly honor and glory; and then let us untye our selves
from the overmuch, and vicious desire of terrestrial honor, which can never
satisfy us, and with a desire full of sprightfulnesse, love, and joy, elevate
our thoughts to heaven, to eternity; for certain it is, that those souls which
do often contemplate the heavenly glory, and do well know the excellency
thereof, are often raised far above all the greatness of the earth, inasmuch
as eternity is above time, and infinite glory above a shadow thereof. And in
these contemplations, they are often so transported and raised beyond and above
themselves, as if they were then capable of terrestrial and humane vanities,
they would not know themselves, while their souls do thus direct their looks,
desires, affections, and contemplations wholly to God himself to heaven.
Insomuch that while their spirits are so raised in such divine thoughts and
illuminations, they do seem very gloriously then to despise all the honor
and greatness of the earth, and with unexpressable delight to mark out the
thrones of their honor in the kingdom of heaven; where they know that a
crown of immortal glory shall for ever environ their heads. And in these
divine thoughts and elevations, they are often even astonished with such
wonderful delights and happiness, as they can find neither measure, nor
limits in these divine glorious amuzements, heavenly irradiations, and
elevations of spirit.

So not being able to find any thing on earth, worthy of their greatness, they
have designed the crown, and set up the throne of their honor and glory in
the empyrean heaven.

To conclude, Let it always be our glory to glorify our fathet which is in
heaven, Mat. 5.16. Ier. 9.23. They that honor me, I will honor, says God, 1 Samuel 2.30. Psalm. 9.14, 15, 16. O how honorable, how happy is he whom God is
pleased to honor. Teach (oh Lord) this secret divine language to my heart, to
desire only thy honor, thy glory, and that I may glory only in thee who art
man's sovereign glory, yea only, true happiness. Let me esteem this honor,
this glory, this happiness, as heaven already.

The third PARTITION. Of Conjugall Love.
SECTION. I. Of the excellency of such Conjugall, or Marriage Love in general,
and the miseries of the loss and want thereof.
KIng Solomon says, a prudent wife is from the Lord, Prove. 19.4. From the
beginning of the creation (says our Savior) God made them male and female,
for this cause shall a man leave his father and mother, and shall cleave to his
wife, and they two shall be one flesh, Mar. 10.7. Mat. 19. So it appears God
himself is the Author of this lawful, conjugall, or marriage-love. And
therefore in respect of him the Author to be very well esteemed accordingly.
Therefore in his sacred word (by King Solomon) he says, Rejoice in the wife of
thy youth, etc. See Prove. 18.2. Eccl. 9.9. and by Saint Paul, Husbands love
your wives as Christ loved his Church: So ought men to love their wives as
their own bodies, for he that loves his wife, loves himself, Ephesians. 5.25, 28.

Let me here again make a short, though perchance very necessary digression.
Since God himself (as has been showed) is the Author of this Conjugall, true
Love, and commends the same unto us. I do intend (God willing) to write on, of
this Subject, though all the severe Grandsires and Stoickes of the world should
frown, and the more nice then wise people tur^e aside their heads, and though
envious, malicious people, should pine and grieve exceedingly at such loving
felicities; though over-doting sottish and brain-sicke Lovers should be touched
to the quick in this ensuing discourse, and therefore kick, and though
whoremasters should be galled and lash, though Momus or jeering Coxecombes
should carp and scoff at this subject of Conjugall Love; and though mere
earthly sensual fools should not see or conceive the good and divine use
thereof, which is principally heavenly Love of God. And I protest I shall in
this discourse principally endeavor to please God (the Author of this Love)
that is, to do good, for I know all goodness pleases him, and what better
and more necessary endeavor, then to increase this so good and necessary
happiness of Conjugall, or Marriage-Love in the world, from which springs so
many good and happy effects therein, as in this, the next, the fourth and fifth
Sections of this Partitio^, I intend to show more largely. And in the next
place, I would gladly also please all virtuous, pious men, and of them
especially true-lovers, which I hope I shall, the rather since I have formerly
been much encouraged by such, and since I have followed (and learned the
substance of this Partition of) many wise and worthy Authors, who have
formerly written of this subject, done much good thereby, and are deservingly
commended for the same. And lastly, I write this to please and recreate my
self also amidst more serious studies and occasions. Now therefore let the
said severe Grandsires, Stoics, over-nice people, envious, malicious men,
over-doting, sottish, brain-sicke Lovers, carping, scoffing, geering coxcombs,
mere sensualists, or any other vicious men (for such only I think will)
frown, look aside, pine, grieve, be angry, bark, stir, kick, lash, carp,
scoff, soulely detract, or remain still mere sensual fools, I care not
since I have endeavored, and shall endeavor to do this good hereby: It
matters not to me what such men say,
While I please God, good men, my self enjoy.


And since God the Author of this Conjugall Love has commended the same unto
us in such a sweet amiable and pleasant manner, as is said, Prove. 5.18, etc.
Eccles. 9.9. Ephesians. 5. and diverse other places, and also in the Canticles, and
elsewhere, even in a misterious and divine way; therefore if I, or any man
endeavor to show and increase this happiness, and to do this so necessary
good in a pleasing ^^d harmless manner; what wise well disposed man; who but
some rugged, discontented, envious, carping, malign spirited men, will be
displeased therewith? I wonder why any should be so malign as to dislike,
grudge, or envy the felicities of lovers. I protest, I wish that all the
true-lovers, and married men in the world, might enjoy as much pleasure and
felicity in their loves and wives, as they can wish and think of, though it
were upon this condition, that my self should lose all my joys, hopes and
wishes herein, and never enjoy any. But now I return from whence I have
digressed, to show the excellency of this lawful, Conjugall Love; and because
this subject is so necessary, pleasant, and beneficial, I shall perchance be
the longer about the same.

From the Author, I proceed to the Object of this Conjugall Love: The
excellency thereof may further appear, in respect of the Object, which is,
woman, who is the image of God as well as man, Genesis 1.27. An help meet for him,
2.28. A part of himself, 31. Wine is strong, Kings are strong; but a woman is
stronger, and has dominion over Kings, says Zorobabel, Esdr. 4. All men
submit to Love, says the Poet. When that Hermits boy, who had always been
brought up in the wilderness, came first abroad in the world, was asked what
pleased him best therein; readily replied, Those things which you call women. A
virtuous woman (says King Solomon) is a crown to her husband, Prove. 12.4.
Much more (in diverse Authors) I find in commendations of women, and I wish
that they did deserve the same.

Loves excellency also appears in respect of the parties affected; The
bravest, the most noble, generous and gallant spirits are commonly most and
best taken, and possessed with this Love; wherefore it is called heroical Love.
It is said to be a true note of a worthy generous mind, and of the most
ingenious scholars, to be in love, especially in their youthful years; for
rude and dull understandings cannot raise their thoughts to be capable of
those high, sweet, and delicate fancies which we see that Love usually
produces, in such worthy, generous, and ingenuous minds.

And the parts of man affected also, are his most excellent parts, as the
heart, liver, blood, and brains (as Physicians say) and consequently the
imagination and reason. I say reason, for want of Love, shows want of reason,
either stupidity or peevishness in a man. Yet it is most certain that divine
Love is infinitely more excellent, and above this humane love, and such men as
are of a divine temper, may easily overcome the same; but we all have bodies
as well as souls; we are composed of humanity as well as divinity, and he that
never felt the power of this Love, may be esteemed as some Eunuch or sot, or
else of a super-humane temper. And on the other side, excess of love shows
weakness, dotishnesse, and folly, and then these excellent parts of man are
misaffected. Such love is without reason. But true love is most agreeable
thereunto, and therefore excellent.

And further, the excellency of this Conjugall or Marriage-Love, appears by
the effects thereof, which are many: To instance in some of them. This Love
excites men unto honorable actions and enterprises, takes away cowardice,
covetousness, rudeness, and makes men courageous, liberal, civil,
courteous, loving, ingenious, and of a graceful demeanor, quickens, enlarges,
and illuminates the mind. Insomuch as many worthy and ingenious lovers, their
minds have thereby grown so quick, aerie and spiritual, as their high,
soaring, nimble, and pleasing fancies, have conceived and delivered most
excellent, famous and delightful Poems, Histories, etc. as if the Authors
seemed to be more beholding to Love then to the Muses.

This Love preserves and increases mankind in a perpetual generation; and
unites Families, Provinces, and Kingdoms.

It is said there is no earthly happiness like this of the sweet society of
true-lovers in the way of marriage, and of a loving husband and wife; their
joys are doubled and redoubled by Love. How sweetly may they counsel assist,
and comfort one another in all things.

By this blessed union, the number of parents, friends, and kindred is
increased. It may be an occasion of sweet and lovely children, who in
aftertimes may be a very great joy and felicity to their parents; and these
may remain as living pictures, to show their memory from generation to
generation. Lysippus, Mentor, Polycletus, Zeuxis, or Parthasius, had near the
skill to engrave or paint the father and mother never so well and lively. And
great is the pleasure that loving Parents enjoy in their children.

A multitude of felicities, a million of joyful and blessed effects spring
from true love. And indeed this conjugall or marriage love and society,
sweetens all other actions, discourses, all other pleasures and felicities, and
even in all respects increases true joy and happiness.

This Love also may excite us to divine and heavenly Love. But of this subject
I intend to write in the fifth Section of this Partition.

This blessedness and excellency of Love will be more apparent, if we
consider the miseries either of the loss of such love before, or of the want
thereof after marriage. It is wonderful to think how many lovers for loss or
want of enjoying their wishes in this kind, plunge themselves into a multitude
of cares, fears, sorrows, blindness, dotage, servitude, slavery, mischief,
and miseries. Many men will venture their goods, fame, lives, and (as king John
for Matilda) crowns if they had them, to enjoy their loves.

Sorrow, dejection, much waking, sighing, neglects, peevishness, restless
thoughts, brutish attempts, want of appetite, palenesse, and leanness, are
common effects and symptoms of the want of enjoying, and of the loss of love.
And millions of men having lost their loves, become therefore melancholy,
discontented and dejected all their life time after; And many there be (says
Zorobabel) that have run out of their wits for women, and become servants for
their sakes, Esdr. 4.26. These things are commonly known; Bedlam has been
full of examples. Many also have perished, have erred, and sinned for women,
Esdr. 4.27. Examples hereof also have been common in all ages. Histories are
full of them: And many that have consum^d away, and died for want of enjoying
and losing their loves; yea, some for grief thereof have been their own
executioners, and made themselves away.

And after marriage, it is strange to think what jealousies, contentions,
fears, sorrows, strange actions, gestures, looks, bitter words, outrages,
and debates are between men and their wives, for want of true love and
discretion. And how many men for want of this love, have turned whoremasters;
and also diverse men, not loving at home, fly abroad, and so become Tavern and
Alehouse hunters, dissolute people, spoil themselves, and wrong their
families. These miseries have always been, and are so common to all men's view,
as they need but little disquisition.

Since it appears that true love is so excellent, and the contrary so irksome
and miserable, it is requisite therefore in the next place, that we do even
very diligently learn and view the way to this excellent happiness of
Conjugall or Marriage Love.

SECTION. II. Showing how to love truly, enjoy our wishes, please our lovers,
and increase Love.
THat we may truly love, obtain our Loves, enjoy them, and live well
together, first let us make a good choice in Love. Such are most like to
obtain their loves who choose well and conveniently; for there is no greater
motives to love then this, when there is a fit and convenient sympathy in all
things between them. He who has made such a good and convenient choice in
Love, may even justly hope to have almost gained his love already. One word,
one smile between such, will cause more love then many words and gifts between
others. Diversities breed nothing but disunion, and sweet congruity is the
cause of Love. Hence grows the height of love and friendship, when two
simillary souls shall join in all their commixions and this assimulation,
pure and good in all things. Those are observed to agree and love best, who are
both alike of good conditions, both wise and religious. And it is the crown of
blessings to live in such happiness, Prove. 12.4.

Let therefore piety and virtue be the first mover of our affections; and the
rather, to choose well, let us take that Divines counsel, who wishes us to
invite Christ to our wedding, and to pray to him for a good wife, or else none
at all, which he thinks best for us; for an evil woman (as the wise man says)
makes a sorry countenance, and an heavy heart, and a man had rather dwell with
a Lion, then keep house with such a wife, Eccl. 29.27. and he that has her, is
as if he held a Scorpion, ver. 7. What is to be seen among such husbands and
wives, as are of vicious and impious conditions, but strife, tumults, disorder,
suspicion, confusion, and misery in the end; whereas none live more lovingly,
pleasantly, and happily together, then such as are of gracious and virtuous
conditions. A virtuous and well given lover is much better to be esteemed then
a fine face with ill conditions. Let us not then be so sensual, as to love
only the face and corpse, but look higher, and see something in our lovers of
an Angelical nature, that is, a free, virtuous and gracious mind; which to an
understanding man, appears to be a divine Essence, and to which he mingles his
soul in Love; which (if truly thought on) will appear to be a far more
excellent and permanent Love then that of the body, and consequently more
pleasant. A virtuous pious wife is far more precious then rubies, Prove. 31.10
She is as the Kings daughter, all-glorious within, Psalm. 45. So then let us
sphere our Loves, and seek beauty rather in a mind then in a countenance.

In the next place after piety, virtue and good conditions, it is requisite to
look after corporal and external respects, and as near as we may, to choose
such as are of equal years, birth, fortunes and degree, of good parentage and
kindred, of such a countenance, complexion, and constitution as best agrees to
our love and disposition; for inconsiderate and unequal marriages are commonly
very pernicious, and a multitude of mischievous and miserable effects spring
from such marriages; As if a sound and healthy person marries one that is
diseased and impotent; if an honest man marries a whore; or an honest woman a
knave; if one that is well tempered in mind, marry a fantastic, adle-pated,
brain-sicke, scolding piece; or if one that is young, marry with an old doting
companion, or in any othar respects very unfitly, what better success can they
look for then Minos had with Pasiphae, Vulcan with Venus, Menelaus with Hellen,
Ptolomny with the whorish Thais, Claudius with the lustful Messalina, or
Hierome King of Sicily, with Pytho. What is like to ensue but suspicion,
jealousy, strife, shame, sorrow, discontent, and misery. Therefore it is very
requisite that men should love and marry such as are equal, fit, and
convenient for them.

It is a good time, as some say, for a man to marry between five and twenty
year old and thirty, and for a woman between her age of eighteen, and two and
twenty. And it seems better (says one) to love below then above ones self in
estate and degree; for (says he) this will the more oblige a lover to be the
more loving, diligent, and pleasing ever after. But notwithstanding we may
truly say, that although lightheaded, phantasticke, proud, malapert women (as
many of them are) will be the worse for a good estate and parentage; yet a good
woman (though there be not many such) will be rather the better then worse for
the same. But however it is thought best, as near as men may with convenience,
to choose such as are of fit and convenient years, birth, fortunes, degree,
parentage, constitution, and especially of like virtuous and gracious
conditions; for when two meet of the same good condition, what is it but the
same soul in two bodies, or rather in one body, since marriage so unites, as
they are no more two, but one flesh, Mat. 19.5.6. as it were two persons
intermutually transported into one another. So that even with the same reason
that we love our selves, we love those that are so like and united to us. But
yet it seems best to choose (if we may) such as are more virtuous and gracious
then our selves; for to live with such ('it is good hope and like) will in time
make us the more like them, and consequently, the better and more happy.

The choice hereof being esteemed the chiefest action of our life, most nearly
concerning us, and from whence springs our future good and happiness, ought to
be very diligently thought on, and considered; and especially that we choose
such a one, as from our hearts we can truly, and for good causes love dearly.
From such a loving, fit, equal and good choice, is like to spring abundance of
most sweet delights and felicities.

Having made a good choice, we may and should use all good means to gain
Love, to please our Lovers, and increase Love, which in such a good convenient
choice, is very necessary, and very like to be happily effected, even by such
ordinary and usual means, as are commonly used by lovers, and prescribed in
diverse Authors for the same purpose; but as for those common allurements and
occasions of love, which some Authors write of largely; as pleasant, comely,
and well composed gestures, pace, carriage, behavior; also of glances, smiles,
salutations, complements, conference, familiarity, gifts, tokens, favors,
letters, meetings, feasts, wine, music, amorous tales, singing, dancing, and
the like: I list not to treat of, and the rather, because (if all these things
were well used only to good purposes (as some of them are often too much
abused; yet) they are so usually practiced by, and even natural to lovers, as
they need but little disquisition.

Time, place, and opportunity often occasioneth love. Also importunity to some
kind of women; and sometimes also (I know that) neglect and scorn does in
some of these female kinds, much increase love; for some of them are of such
proud, imperious conditions, as they will insult over, and even scorn such
puny lovers, as will be pinned upon their sleeves. Hence it is, women are
compared to shadows; if we follow them, they will go from us; if we go away,
they will follow us again; wherefore sometimes to neglect, seems better then
importunity, and whetteth love Though indeed such as will not be gained either
without much importunity, or much neglect, are to be thought no whit the better
in that respect, but rather they may be thought the more nice, proud, or
scornful, or else that they think their lovers not good enough, or not fit
and convenient for them.

But that which in this respect I intend only to treat so at large, is,
Artificial discourse; yet before I begin, let me tell you that I think it a
very necessary and good deed, to endeavor to help and comfort such as are
afflicted and need comfort, and who need the same more then lovers. If you will
not believe me, look upon thereupon their pale cheeks, and sad melancholy
looks* Consider their sighs, etc. And to hel^ some of these, I intend to
endeavor in this ensuing art of discourse, and in the next Section after, to
show remedies and consolations against loss of love, against an oversottish
and doting love, and against the miseries incident to cross marriages, etc. so
as they may remain sweetly contented notwithstanding. I do also think it a
very necessary, charitable, and good deed, well pleasing to God and good men,
to endeavor to increase love, joy, and happiness, especially this Conjugall
or Marriage-Love and delights. Oh that ^ could invent and write of such sweet
and pleasing love delights and discour^es thereof, as might always possess
^he hearts of true and virtuous lovers, with as much joy and happiness in ^ach
other, as they can wish or think ^f.

Reverend and good old men, Give ^e leave also I pray to write a few ^ords to
you, before I begin to write ^his ensuing Art of discourse. If any ^f you
chance to read the same (though some of your age are grown much too severe and
rigid; yet) I cannot but hope that your goodness will remember your former,
more youthful, warm and loving hearts, and no whit hinder or grudge, but
rather be well pleased with, and rejoice to think of such joys and felicities
of lovers, as I shall discourse of, though perchance it be not solid, severe,
and serious enough, to agree with your age, yet I hope you will think it fit,
convenient, and good for young nuptial true-lovers, for whose sake it is
especially written. Yet I shall endeavor (according to my weak abilities) to
write the same in a serious, artificial, though pleasing, delightful way.

And if any man shall too severely and rigidly think the ensuing love
discourse too light of this subject, le^ me tell them I have many good
precepts, presidents, and good reasons for what I have done: But I intend to
answer such objections toward the end o^ this Section, therefore now to proceed^

Here follows the Art of Love-discourse.
THe Preface. Forasmuch as heretofore at idle times (to recreate and please my
self) I began to study the Art of Discourse in some cases; (though I love
silence in some other) I now think it not amiss (out of the same) to take a
little diligence and pains, or rather a little pleasure (further to recreate
my self, to please ^rue Lovers, to increase love and joy ^n them) and give an
instance only concerning this matter of Love.

Artificial discourse being added ^o other Love-devices, is most pleasant and
delightful, does much en^rease love, and add a greater joy and pleasure to
all other Love-delights, and felicities. We know, that even ^ommon frivolous
discourse being ^poken in the way of love, will much ^lease and take many
female Lovers, ^uch as are idle Complements, News, Tales, Jests, Songs, even
such as are very idle and frivolous, and though spoken and acted by some apish
coxcombe, swaggering fellow, or pot-companion, such as (especially light,
fantastic things, such as some Women are) will be over head and ears in
Love. But now if some well given, fair conditioned young man (for to such I
chiefly direct this discourse) shall withal add a sweet, pleasing,
convincing, and material discourse to his Lover (whom I will imagine to be
alike virtuous and well conditioned young creature) it will be indeed
sufficient sweetly to captivate, charm, and even overcome them, to fill their
hearts full of joy and pleasure, and so to inchant them, as it is like they
will ever after be joined together in an indissoluble bond of true flaming love.

Now for the manner and matter of our discourse; I have always thought it
vanity and lightness, rather then courtesy, to discourse (according to the
Gallants fashion of our times) by mere Complements Congies, apish gestures,
and mere finicall words; To say, Sweet Mistress, or Madame, I honor your
shoo-strings, the ground you tread upon, am proud to kiss your hand, it is my
ambition to be your servants servant, and the like; to present and offer, not
only our services, but lives to the command of our Mistresses, as we use to
call them, though God knows, we never mean to be their servants. On the other
side, I think it also folly to study, sing, and talk to them in high strains
of wit, and figurative exornations, lest they be not understood, and so
perchance laughed at. But in this respect a plain, yet artificial, pleasing,
material, moving, and convincing way is best.

I do not intend to prescribe a set Method to discourse in; for why, me
thinks a premeditated set discourse shows something a barrenness of wit,
though not of judgment: and is commonly uttered with little passion or feeling
(which is in some measure taken away by premeditation) and consequently not so
freely, lively, and with such a grace as otherwise, unless we can counterfeit
(like a Player) our passions, and have wit enough to come out, and in, upon all
occasions of discourse. On the otherside; we are not straitened in this subject
for want of matter to discourse of, on all occasions, even in an extemporary
manner; for every smile, action, object, event, or speech, may afford a Lover
matter of sudden discourse: and indeed love of it self if it be fervent, whets
the wit, and so stirs up the spirits, that we may say of Lovers, as of fine
wits; They can make use of any thing. But neither of this extemporary discourse
is my intention to write of, but rather a mixture of both, which I will call,
an habit of discourse, or, an extemporeall Method: A Method not so much to
discourse in, as to discourse by, in an extemporary manner; in such sort as a
man may be furnished with continual abilities of discourse in an extemporary
Method, (as I may say) or a sudden and well composed manner, without
brainsicke, light, idle, frivolous prating on the one side, or too much pumping
for wit on the other side; but with a ready, yet persuasive and material
discourse on all occasions.

But this Art of discourse in general, concerning all matters, will not easily
be given to weak Novices, (yet the mere observation thereof may do even such
men some good concerning this matter of love) but in general, It will rather
require that a man be well learned and experienced in the liberal Sciences,
especially such as he shall have most occasion to discourse of: So as he may
readily on all occasions dilate the matter of this discourse by the rules and
grounds of this art, which are as follow: By Number, Particulars, Observations,
Arguments, Examples, Comparisons, Similitudes, Contrarieties, Appendances,
Effects, Circumstances, and the like.

I shall first give an instance in this art of discourse very briefly
concerning this matter of Love, and that only concerning the excellency
thereof; And then a taste what is to be done to attain to this Art.

First then, for instance in this Art, concerning the excellency of Love, (which
though I have already given a taste of, I shall now speak thereof in a more
artificial manner and method, and to another purpose.) For this purpose, let
us imagine a man well skilled in this Art, that we may guess what such a man
can do, and imagine this able skillful man therein, have occasion to discourse
of this subject, The Excellency of Love, He can readily (even Raptim) discourse
thereof in diverse ways and manners. As for example.

First, either from the Number of benefits and excellencies flowing from
thence, which some reckon up to be sweet and pleasant thoughts, looks, smiles,
salutations, discourses, tales, jests, songs, poems, sports, embraces, (and to
speak more seriously) mutual kindnesses, helps, comforts, society, increase
of parents, kindred, friends, riches, sweet and lovely children, and mutual
enjoyments of all the blessings and pleasures that can be thought of, and as he
pleases, can apply all or any of these to his love, and when he sees occasion,
can sing to the same purpose, and to a pleasant tune, etc.

We Will sometimes sit, and sweetly chat,
And sometimes pretty stories tell;
We Will sing, and laugh at you know what;
In all delights we still may dwell.
What pleasures are on earth, I pray,
That you and I may not possess;
A million of the sweetest, may
Still crown us with true happiness.
And also he can from these felicities and benefits springing from love,
conclude the excellency thereof, apply it, and if he pleases, sing: Then surely
Lov's a blessed thing,
From whence so many blessings spring;
It is most certain, that there is
No earthly happiness like this.


And also if he pleases, can discourse of any Particular of this Number, yea
even of the least of them; as for example, of a salutation or kiss, telling
her (as some Poets and others teach him) that the Rose, Gillo-floure, Musk,
Nectar, Balsome, Ambrosia, are not half so sweet as her sugared kisses, and
this he verifies, etc. and can when he sees occasion, mingle therewith pleasant
Songs and Poems. To this purpose the Poet has a Song in his Comedy, which with
some alteration of words, and to another tune thus it goes:

To the Tune of the Delights.
Oh, that such sweet joy,
Should soon pass away,
Should so suddenly wast,
That such excellent blisses,
As are thy sweet kisses:
No longer should last;
So sugared, so precious,
So soft, so delitious,
So dainty, so sweet, so fine,
as the honey from the Be,
is not half so sweet to me,
As is one sweet kiss of thine.
Or from a very thought of love he can tell the excellency thereof, saying
that even the thought of true love is enough to fill the heart with joy, drown
all sorrows, and make us think our selves even in paradise, to imagine what
pleasures we shall enjoy hereafter:

To the Tune of the Fayry Queen.
Even but to think of this,
It is so great a bliss;
A joy excelling far,
All worldly thoughts that are;
That such who in true love are wise,
Enjoy an earthly paradise.
And so of the like concerninng any other particular of this Number.

He can further argue and conclude from any particular of this Number, the
excellency thereof diverse ways, as for example, from the less to the greater;
To instance again from a thought of love, he concludes from thence a necessity
of greater excellency in greater matters.

If but to think of love,
It be a joy above
All earthly thoughts that are,
Then surely to enjoy,
What we so think of may,
Or from Particulars to the Number in like manner: If from one or a few
Particulars of this Number of excellencies, and benefits, flowing from love,
spring so much joy and felicity, how much more does then proceed from them all?

When such, so many, sweet delights
Shall all at once within us meet,
Oh how we shall be rapt with joy,
And filled with pleasures extreme sweet?
And likewise concerning Time. As for example; He tells her, that to enjoy such
pleasure but one hour or a day, were enough to possess the heart with
mavelous joy; yea, although that hour or day were half a year hence, yet
the very imagination of it in the mean time, is sufficient to possess us with
very sweet pleasures till then; Much more may a longer time delight us. And so
he may sing to her again.

To enjoy such pleasures but one day,
It were enough to ravish even
Our hearts and minds with such sweet joy,
To think our selves almost in heaven,
If in one day be so much joy,
Such sweetest pleasures, such delights:
What pleasures may we then enjoy,
Perchance a thousand days and nights?
Or otherwise in diverse kinds. But to proceed.

Further, he can discourse and set forth the excellency of love by Examples, as
of Seneca and Paulina, Orpheus and Euricide, Mausolus and Artimesia, Mark
Anthony and his Octavia, Argalus and Parthenia, and diverse others; Histories
are replenished with Examples, and can show how such Lovers think themselves
even in the Orchards of Adonis, the Elizian fields, or Paradise, when they
enjoy their Love, they are so filled with delights.

If others in their Love do find
Such joy, such pleasures in their mind.
Why should not we? Let you, that is I,
Enjoy such sweet felicity.
Or by Comparisons, by way of interrogation, or otherwise; Did ever any Lovers
enjoy such delights, and shall not we?

Yes, we will sport, play, laugh, and sing,
Live joyful as a Queen, a King.
Or beyond Comparisons. Thaereus never took such pleasure in his Pamphila, as
I that is thou, will together; He thought none living so happy as they two, but
we may swear it of our selves.

Venus nor Cupid, Jove himself
Shall never know what we may tell,
What heavenly pleasures, whar delights
Within thy heart and mine may dwell.
Or by Contrarieties. That love is of so much force and excellency as the loss
or want of it often causes (in diverse people) extreme Melancholy, Sadness,
Grief, Madness, and sometimes death it self, as appears by the Examples of
Queen Dido, Queen Artimesia, Portia, Triara, Panthea, Medea, Parthenia, Romeo
and Juliet, Pyramus and Thisbe, Antonius and Cleopatra, Coresus, Calirhoe,
Clorus, Amyntas, Marcus Lepidus, Plautius, Numidius, Tiberius Gracchus, and
many others.

If it be death
To lose a loving wife?
To enjoy her then,
Is sure more worth than life.
Or by Similitudes, diverse ways, and in every particular, as for example; The
pleasure of love, may be likened to fire, an ardent flaming Joy; To water, a
fountain of pleasure. Gold, Pearls, Amber, Honey, the Rose, and sweetest,
gayest flowers, Musk, Nectar, Ambrosia, is not so precious, so sweet, so
delightful, as the pleasures of love; That the Elizian fields, or Turks
Paradise is not more pleasant. All these and whatsoever is most pleasant he
compares and likens to Love, for sweetness, pleasures, delight, etc. Yea, and
more seriously (if good occasion be) he can tell that this Conjugall, or
Marriage love is often used as a similitude or resemblance between Christ and
his Church, that the Canticles is wholly a Love-song to this purpose; And that
therefore it is to be thought, no humane earthly joy represents that of heaven
more than this of true love, though there be no comparison or likeness
between Terrestrial and Celestial happiness, either in purity, brightness,
worth, or duration of time, these earthly being as nothing, or as dross in
respect of the heavenly; yet in respect of our earthly and weak apprehension,
such comparisons and similitudes (since we find such in sacred Scriptures)
often are, and may be made: So some have thought
that love is even,
A Joy divine,
a taste of heaven.


Or by the Effects of love; To instance among many and diverse in a few. That
Love causes a man to carry himself fairly, courteously, honorably, and
virtuously to all men; It quickens and raises a man's spirits, fancy, wit, and
makes him become pleasant, neat, spruce, lively, a Poet, a Musician, a Dancer,
a man of fine behavior. It makes us enjoy all things in the world with a
sweeter pleasure than otherwise; for why, it possesses the heart with joy, and
a joyful heart takes pleasure in all things.

Thus Love does always fill
Our minds with bliss, that still
What ere we think or do,
It will delight us; So
Whether we study, work, or play,
True love will turn all into joy.
Further, concerning the Effects of Love, he can tell her that a Million of
other joyful effects spring from true love, which will now be too long to
discourse of. Therefore now only, that true love has such a virtue in it as it
will (says one) even turn water into wine. I had rather (says he) drink
water with thee, than wine with another, live meanly with thee, than richly
with another. Yea, he tells her that true love will turn even sorrow it self
to the increase of its joys; saying further, All the crosses that ever thee
and I have had, I hope we shall hereafter quite bury or drown them in the
fountain of our Love-delights, or rather make them serve as fuel to increase
the flame of our love and happiness; for love and joy after crosses past is
the sweeter, and livelier, as having been purified, enlightened, and quickened by
the same. And so for future time When crosses happen in our way,
We Will turn them in our love and joy,
And make them serve but to inflame,
Enlighten, and increase the same.


Or by Additions, Appendances, and Circumstances; as for example, That Love is
more splendent and excellent when it is seated in its Throne, and attended with
riches, honors, and other pleasures which seem to be Loves handmaids, who as
a Queen, graces all the rest, and adds glory, sweetness, and delight to them
all. And as a Circumstance he can discourse almost of any thing, and set forth
the excellency thereof, as has been showed by the attendants, riches, honor,
and pleasures, by the object, Women, by the Parts and Parties affected, which
are the most excellent parts of man, and commonly the bravest, noblest, most
generous, and ingenuous men. Also by the author, which is God himself, for
Love is a daughter of heaven, yea as some say, a little heaven upon earth; by
which also (as is to be showed in the last Section hereof) we may spy and
spell glimpses of heaven, and be the more enflamed (with divine and heavenly
love) to seek, and possess it. So as it seems we may enjoy two heavens.

In sweetest joys that be,
My dearest Love, then we
May pass our time away
All times by night and day:
What pleasure is on earth, (I pray)
Or heaven, that we may not enjoy?
Thus have I given a taste of Loves excellency by way of instance in this Art
of discourse. But I pray remember, it is but by way of discourse, and then I
hope you will pardon what is amiss, for you know that men will talk somewhat
largely to please their Lovers, and yet say they have given but a taste, when
they have done. Now I proceed and show further the use of this Art of discourse.

By this Order, or Art, we may discourse of any other particular whatsoever, as
for example, of the contrary to that which has been dilated, namely, the
miseries of Loves loss, which may even readily be dilated and expressed by
this Art, in this manner likewise; Either by the Number of miseries, the misery
of each Particular of that Number, with Observations in respect of Matter,
Time, Place, and other occasions; and each Particular demonstrated by diverse
Examples, Reasons, Arguments, Comparisons, Contrarieties, Similitudes, Effects,
Appendances, Circumstances, or otherwise; and set forth by apt expressions, and
particularly applied, and passionately enforced and uttered, according to the
nature of the Subject.

In this manner also we may discourse of any other subject upon occasion,
whether of riches, of honor, of health, of prudence, temperance, fortitude, or
of any virtue; or of poverty, disgrace, sickness, of covetousness, ambition,
intemperance, or of any other vice or misery; yea, or of Religion and divine
matters; and in truth there cannot be a better way even of Love discoursing,
than a religious way, (however seldom practiced, but rather despised by many
of Blades and gallant Dames of the world, as well as of the foolish and
blockish sort of people, who think and esteem all things above their vain
and phantasticke humors, to be folly and madness; But indeed) what better way
of Love discoursing can be, than a laudable and pious insinuation into the
mind of such as we discourse with (whether Friend or Lover) by heavenly
discourses, which also may be done by some such like Art as has been dilated;
insomuch, that if both parties be of a divine temper, their hearts may be
filled, possessed, and united with heavenly and glorious thoughts, joy, and
love. But these things I know will seem folly, mystical, strange, and as very
riddles to such whose mere natural minds are not raised to the knowledge of
supernatural and heavenly things. But such lovers, and friends, whose minds
are elevated to a supernatural and divine temper, their hearts can be filled
with heavenly joy in such discourses, and by the eye of Contemplation they can
see one another (in respect of their heavenly minds) like Angels, divine
creatures, and so love one another with an heavenly as well as earthly love.
Both which being united, do bind their hearts together with an indissoluble
knot, and fill them with sweet streams and fountains, both of terrestrial,
and of heavenly joys, and delights.

Now to proceed, and give a taste (as I said) how to attain to be a skillful
Artist in this, or the like art of discourse. Which because it may be said in
general, almost in as few words as particularly of Love, I shall endeavor
very briefly to show the same in a general way: which is, First, by often and
serious meditation to imprint into our minds, the grounds and heads thereof,
As Numbers, Particulars, Observations, Arguments, Examples, Comparisons,
Contrarieties, Similitudes, Effects, Appendances, Circumstances, and the like,
as perfectly as we do our A, B, C. whereby we may as readily call to mind
those grounds, as we can letters to spell words with, which is as fast as we
can speak. Or as in the Art of Brachigraphy, or short-writing, we readily
know at which end, side, or place of the letter to set the tittle, dash, or
ensuing letter, whereby we know what Vowell, Dipthong, or Word it signifies,
even as suddenly as we can think of any thing; Or as Preachers do especially
take notice, and imprint into their minds, the heads, divisions, and grounds
of their Sermons.

Secondly, having thus imprinted the grounds in our minds, we ought to be
furnished with sufficient learning and skill concerning the matter of our
discourse: (In general, to be skillful in such Arts and Sciences as we shall
have most occasion to discourse of, whether of Divinity, Physic, Law,
Philosophy, History, Poetry, or other; so as I might instance also in this Art
concerning the Divine, the Lawyer, the Physician, the Gentleman, and diverse
others as well as the Lover, in their several ways of discoursing, and also
concerning diverse usual occasions, if my skill would attain thereunto; but
this Treatise will not admit thereof,) that so by observation, reading, or
otherwise we might be furnished with sufficient learning, matter, examples, and
skill to this purpose, in such sort that we may (as some ancient and well
furnished Orators, Lawyers, Physicians, and others can in their several ways)
readily discourse (even Raptim) upon any Maxim, Ground, or Rule in their
Sciences.

So then, impressing the grounds of this Art in our minds, and furnishing our
selves with a ready ability to discourse upon these grounds, is the way to
attain to this Art of discourse. And although the perfection thereof be very
difficult to attain unto in such a ready manner; yet even the mere
observation or reading thereof, may lend us some light, and in this matter of
Love be an occasion of increasing the same, and of possessing our selves and
Lovers with very pleasing joys and delights.

Thus much concerning the Art of discourse.

Yet now me thinks I cannot but imagine that some too severe Cato, churlish
Timon, or carping Momus, will esteem this Love-discourse too light and wanton;
for I know there be many in our times so Stoicall, and rigid, as they will
scarce allow lawful, moderate, convenient, or necessary recreations, (for this
discourse was chiefly written for mere tecreation, amidst more serious
occasions, and so I desire it may be read) and that they esteem honest and
harmless Love-delights, and discourses (though in the way of marriage)
Profaneness.

But surely piety and virtue is neither so rugged, nor austere as some men
would make the same; and although their rigidnesse make them unkind, and
therein unjust to themselves, yet certainly in those things which are free from
impugning the Laws of God and humanity, we may at convenient times allow our
selves honest solaces and recreations, especially in such a necessary good, so
agreeing to the Laws of God and man, of Nature and necessity, of the
Preservation of Mankind. And we may know that it is good and commendable for
such as do, or intend to live in that honorable and blessed state of
Marriage, to be possessed with Conjugall love, and so good, that such men are
councelled in the sacred Book of God, to love their wives as their own selves,
yea, as Christ loved his Church, Ephesians. 5. And this Love is not only a remedy
against a multitude of irksome troubles, evils, and miseries, but an occasion
of very many blessings, and very much happiness indeed (as has been showed)
and therefore consequently such honest harmless Love-discourses, devices, and
pleasures as increase such love and happiness, are to be esteemed good and
commendable. And I conceive that no well conditioned happy man, none but
envious, malicious, malecontented spirits, or else ignorant, stupid, sottish
people, who are not capable of the excellency and felicities of such true,
heroical love, will hinder, dislike, or grudge true Lovers of such honest,
harmless, and commendable Love-delights and pleasures.

And I am not so Cynicall (as one says of himself) but that I think a modest
expression of such amorous, pleasing conceits and fancies as are free from
obscenity, and suit with reason and goodness, will yet very well become my
years, in which not to be in a good and convenient manner sensible of Love,
were as great an argument of much stupidity, and blockishnesse, as an
over-sottish and doting affection were of extreme folly. But what need I
excuse my self in this, when it is well known, that many whole Volumes have
been written of Love. And that diverse famous and worthy Philosophers,
Physicians, Historians, Poets, and others have written as lightly, and more
wantonly than I have done of this subject, and yet been highly commended for
the same, and I think in diverse respects they have done much good thereby,
increasing true love and happiness in very many that have read their books
and writings.

Yea, since (as before I showed) that God himself is the author of this
conjugall, or marriage love, and does in the holy Scriptures commend the same
unto us in a very pleasing way, as Prove. 5.17, 18. Eccles. 9.9. Mat. 19.4, 5,
6. Mark 10.7. Ephesians. 5. Chapter, and diverse other places; and in all that
book of the Song of songs, though in a divine way there are very many sweet
and pleasant expressions of love and the delights thereof, and that in a Song
or Poem. If then such pleasing expressions may, and is good to be used in such
a divine way, certainly it may and is also in this humane way of lawful love,
without all exceptions, but only by such as are either malicious, or too
severe, rigid, over-nice, and therein unwise men.

But since good things (yea even the best things) may be perverted and abused;
as Meat to Gluttony, Wine to Ebriety, Riches and honor to the increase of all
vices, so Love to Lust; I desire and pray you, Christian Reader, as you will
answer to God, that you will not so abuse (as to apply and pervert) any of this
Love-discourse to the provoking of unlawful lusts, but only to good purposes,
as to the increase of lawful and convenient marriage, and the honest,
harmless, and laudable joys, delights, and felicities thereof; And so I hope,
and doubt not but this discourse will do some good, and be well pleasing to
God and good men.

But yet perchance my Grandsire may say, It seems to him that such light,
vain discourses are of little power or persuasion to increase love and
happiness; yet if we think of the Parties by, and to whom these things are
spoken, that is, Lovers; who are a great deal more vain, wanton, youthful,
and not of such serious and sollid substance as my Grandsire is; we shall know
that such discourses are most apt and pleasing, and much more persuasive for
this purpose to increase love and joy, then other more grave and sollid. And we
know that Lovers esteem every word of one another discourse (though perchance
but slight matter) as if it were spoke like an Angel. And yet truly there is (I
wish my Grandsire may see it) a great deal of seriousness mingled in this
Love-discourse, and such as concerns the greatest, choycest, and sweetest
happiness of our lives; insomuch as indeed such artificial discourses, such
pleasant convincing persuasions and reasons are most justly, really, and
seriously sufficient, even to inchant and inflame a wise one, a Saint with true
Love and Joy; and surely the wisest and best Saint cannot be too loving and
joyful in this blessed and honorable way of conjugall, or marriage Love, no,
not joyful and loving enough herein; if you will not believe this, See again,
Prove. 5.18. Ephe. 5.25, etc. I know you will or must believe that.

To return. I know that such discourses will so increase Love and Joy in true
Lovers, that if there be a reasonable sympathy between the parties in age,
degree, fortunes, countenance, Constitution and good Conditions, and a willing
consent of Parents and Friends at first (though afterward great and strange
opposition should happen in many respects) it would be a mavelous hard matter
(if not almost impossible) to part and disunite their Love.

If such discourses then be of so strong effect and operation, as to join
hearts in true love, and increase it is Joys, notwithstanding many crosses and
great opposition, much more is it when those are past, when both parties and
their friends are well pleased, when all their thoughts are composed of
Kindness, Love and Joy. Medea's Ointment, Helen's Bowl, Circes Cup, Phaedra's
Ring, Venus Girdle, or Gyges Gloves cannot so sweetly inchant, move and please
the mind, so delightfully increase Love and Joy, as such discourses will (and
with good reason may) in Lovers.

SECTION. III. Remedies and considerations against the loss of Love, against
an over-sottish and doting Love, and against the miseries incident to cross
marriages.
But now here comes a question. What is to be done if we should lose our
Loves, etc. Indeed many Lovers for want of enjoying their wishes in this kind,
become extreme melancholy and sorrowful, and some for Remedy betake
themselves to ill courses, as Whoring and Tavern-haunting, and sometimes spoil
themselves. This is to leap out of the warm Sun into the fire. But if we
consider rightly, there is little or no cause why we should grieve for such a
loss, but we may rejoice notwithstanding. Of this hereafter.

But first of some Remedies and Considerations usually prescribed in Authors
against this malady, the loss of Love; As, to withstand beginnings, to avoid
all occasions, to go to some other Mistress, a better, if she may be gained,
or if not, yet to know, that of all necessary evils (such as men say Wives are)
any may serve for necessity, and because they are said to be evils, it is like
better to have none at all.

Though we Batchelours perchance may think wives fine things, yet such as have
tried will tell us otherwise, as that there are many thorns amidst the Roses
of Marriage, which hinder the pleasures thereof, and cause much sorrow. That
married men's shoes wring them and we know not where. That the love of the body
is at the highest, and will fall when it has gotten admittance into the hidden
and worst parts thereof, and that so it is of the mind: though our Lovers show
us their best conditions forward, yet when those hidden and worst parts of the
soul which they dare not show the world, are detected, it is like we shall
find them much worse then we looked for. How soon was Ahasuerus weary of his
Vasti, Mark Anthony of the daughter of Caesar, Philip King of France, of the
King of Denmarkes daughter, Selenchus King of Syria, of the fair Stratonices,
and Nero of his Poppea. And so, many in all Ages though they prosecute their
Loves before marriage by many and strange promises, oaths, and protestations
of Love, yet after they do distaste, and perchance (as Amon loathed Thamar)
they even loath their Wives.

We see after honey months past, Marriages often turn to repentance,
bitterness, dislike, contempt. How soon do many women wax stale, fulsome,
phlegmatic, out of fashion, infirm, diseased, or old, riveld, witherd; or at
their best, a wise man can very plainly and perpicuously see their greatest
beauty and loveliness so vain, fading, uncertain and undureable, even as a
bubble, dew, snow, smoke, wind, air, yea, even as nothing, for a thousand
years are even as nothing to eternity. And their beauty passes away with time
as swift as thought, and so after a moment of time in comparison of eternity,
comes to nothing; and in the mean time, a Feavour, small Pox, loss of an
eye, or limme, one of many and diverse several diseases, yea, even a little
scarre, or however Age and Time spoils the choysest beauties. And yet before
they are spoiled, even at their best and greatest beauty if thou saw them in
foul, ragged, nasty, Beggars apparel, or when they scold, brawle, are angry,
mad, gape, make ill favored faces, or (as one says) undrest, you would very
likely be quite out of love with, and perchance loath them. But let us look to
future time, they are creatures of an inferior nature (as beasts) who mind
only present things; A wise man's soul is of a future nature, as well as
present: It can see things to come also, as if they were present. If then you
have a wise man's eyes in your soul, and can but see (yea, if you will but
imagine or suppose that you see) the fairest, loveliest, and choicest beauties
as they shall be, when they are sick, old, withered, dead, rotten in their
graves, the same will appear so ugly, ghastly, terrible, dreadful, as you will
be so far out of love, as rather to loath and shun them. Yea, if thou could
but see what they are now already, that is, but earth, a mere excrement which
thou so admirest, thy soul would be at rest. Imagine her skin from her face,
or other parts of her body. There is nothing within but filthy Phlegm,
Choler, Melancholy, Blood, Gall, Spittle, Snevill, Snot, and other stinking,
putrid, excrementall, loathsome stuff. If you think I speak unseemly; in
this case it is a good deed and necessary, for it is a remedy against Love. I
hope (young man) you are now wiser than to grieve and pine away for Love.

Now come we to view the mind of women, and see whether we can find remedy
enough in consideration of their common ill conditions, to make even a pining
Lover out of love with them. They are many of them commonly noted to be proud,
idle, sluts, scolds, jealous, scornful, arrogant, and so imperious not to be
endured; light, peevish, froward, sad, lumpish, prodigal, discontented, and of
diverse other ill conditions. Yet I must confess I take this upon trust, upon
other men's words, I write only what I read, and hear them say of women; for
my own part I must confess, for ought I can see or find, women are as good,
and in some respects better than men, as modest, loving, kind, frugall,
temperate, constant, and the like virtues. But I am but one man, and one or a
few swallows makes no Summer, as the Proverb goes; Other men have said, and it
seems found otherwise. King Solomon it seems could not find one good woman
among a thousand, Eccles. 7.28. And he makes it a question; Who can find a
virtuous woman, Prove. 31.10. A good woman is a rare thing on the earth, hardly
to be found, it seems as Rubies, etc. ver. 10. and so perchance are good
husbands too, for I will confess now I am in the humor, whether it be true or
false, that for ought I know, men are as bad, or worse then women. So that what
can we expect among married people, but (what we often may see) brawling,
vexing, grieving, and discontentednesse. It is a kind of Purgatory to tie a
man's self to the vain humors, inconstancy, peevishness, jealousy, malice,
frowardness, lumpishnesse, rage, brawling, scolding, craving, evil desires,
obstinacy, and bad conditions of a woman. The wise man says, It is better to
dwell in the corner of a house top, or in the wilderness, than with a
brawling, contentious, angry woman, Prove. 21.9.19. He had rather dwell with a
Lion, and a Dragon, than keep house with an evil woman, Ecclus. 25.16. She
causes her husband to sigh bitterly, ver. 18. She abateth the courage, makes
a heavy countenance, a wounded heart, weak hands, and feeble knees, ver. 23.
She is more bitter than death, Prove. 7.26.

And it is observable that many men are commonly more sullen, dull, sad, and
pensive after marriage than they were before. We see married men seldom go
without care, sorrow, and heaviness, as if they were in fear, or
discontented, and many of them after marriage look like the pourtraicture of
misfortune. And yet these men before they were married thought a wife a fine
thing, and imagined a Paradise in gaining her. But when a man has got a wife,
it is very like he finds but Copper instead of Gold, a Snake instead of Fish,
or if a Fish, an Eele by the tail; a wanton Venus, a lustful Messalina, a
whorish Thais, or a scolding Zantippe, a brawling Juno, or else Pigmalions
Image, a very Picture, a silken-feathered goose, a fair Coxecomb, a very
babble, one that must be humoured in every toy, and trifle, or else it will
poute and brawle. So that by such a marriage, he gets Nettles instead of Roses,
a chiding as bad as half a hanging every day, also Curtain (and perchance
Curtezan) Sermons, Juniper, and bowlster Lectures every night. And so instead
of a hoped Paradise, he finds a real Purgatory. He has lost his liberty,
and is in as bad a case as a Bird in a Limebush, or a Mouse in a Trap.

Many men have been undone, and ruined by their wives. A great many sad
examples may be produced of the evils that have happened to men by women, but
this would be too long to recite, and there is matter enough besides for this
purpose to remedy pineing Love. We may read in diverse Philosophers, and other
Authors of many wise, witty, and merry speeches, opinions, and stories against
marriage. Since they are commonly known, I shall instance, and give a taste but
in some few of them. One says, that since women were made of the rib of a man,
which is a crooked thing, they have ever been of very crooked conditions. That
they brook their name Woman, a woe to man. That God made them for a help to
man, and they help indeed to waste his goods, to increase his trouble, care,
sorrow, etc. Another says, that during the time of ones marriage there are but
two good days, namely, the marriage day, and the day of the wives death. A
third, that he who wants trouble, should get to be a Master of a Ship, or marry
a wife. Another, that evil years, and wives never fail. Another, that if a
man would see a perfect and well agreeing marriage, the husband must be deaf,
and the wife blind, that he may not hear his wives brawling, nor she see her
husbands faults. Again, of him that said, before forty year old it was too
soon to marry, and after too late. And another, that women have but two
faults, that is, commonly to say ill, and do ill. They tell us also of an old
Proverb, That a good Wife, a good Mule, and a good Goat are three naughty
beasts. And of him that said, all the time he was unmarried, which was thirty
years, seemed to him but as thirty days, but the six years since he was
married, seemed to him six hundred years, they were so tedious. Of him also,
who when his friend wished him not to marry his son so young, but to stay till
he were wise, answered, not so, for if he once grow wise he will never marry.
And of another that next day after his wedding to a fine, young, rich wife,
being rebuked by his friends for being so sad and melancholy, showed them his
foot, saying, you see this fine new Shoe, but you know not where it wrings
me. They forget not also to tell of Jobs wife, that notwithstanding he had so
many afflictions, yet that he had one worse plague than all the rest, he had a
wife, and that the devil left her to vex him, and to tempt him to offend God.
They tell us also of him, who seeing his wife fall into a swift running River,
sought her up the stream, saying, she always used to go against the stream
of reason and goodness. And they tell of him also, who being with his wife at
Sea, in a storm, when the Master of the Ship willed that all ponderous
troublesome things should be thrown overboard, he took his wife, and threw
her over into the Sea. And of a man whose neighbors wife having hanged her
self in a Fig tree, he wished, Oh that he had a tree in his Garden would bear
such fruit. And of another, whose wife being lately dead, one of her friends
chanced to say to him that she hoped his wife was in heaven; Is she so (said
her husband) then I hope I shall never come there, for I would be very loath to
be troubled with her again. These things, I suppose, they tell us Comically,
and in Jest, and so I hope you are wise enough to read them.

But in good earnest again, Marriage is said to be a Rock, on which many men
cast themselves away, also a Yoke, and a bondage, a multitude of hindrances,
charges, cares, crosses, and annoiances are incident to married people. What
wise man would marry?

Some men are Cornuted, and father Children which are none of their own. To
many men their children prove undutifull, disobedient, arrogant, prodigal, and
become bitter Crosses to their Parents; as Ham to Noah, Absolon to David,
Hophni, and Phineas to old Eli. Of modern Examples to this purpose, there are
innumerable. If I should reckon up all the troubles, vexations, cares, charges,
hindrances, and miseries belonging to marriage, I should be very much too long
and tedious.

Besides, I might (for this purpose) tell how happily Batchelours live without
wives; how freely, securely, merrily, pleasantly, and without control.

There are yet further more generous, and sublime remedies, considerations, and
consolations to ease and cheer the soul of a discontented and pining Lover.
As to consider that S. Paul, and very many wise men, learned Divines,
Philosophers, and others, prefer a single life before marriage, I hope you will
believe them. And also that marriage corrupts many great and good spirits,
hinders many good and worthy actions and enterprises.

I have married a wife (says one) and therefore I cannot come. Luke 14.20.

Also to consider that it is fittest for such to marry who are of lower minds,
such as have the most gross spirits, more of earth than heaven in them; tie
such men to women, to the flesh, to mundane troubles, cares, dist^actions, etc.
Let the other be free and happy.

Also to contemn, and even scoff at Cupid and all his wooden darts, like that
young man, who could merrily sing Sir, Cupid is blind I say,
Though some have thought he sees;
And though he hit my heart one day,
A T -- in Cupids teeth.


So to endeavor to be Cupids Masters, to use him as we list; and if we chance
to play with him a little sometimes for recreation (as wise men do with a
fool, or Ladies with a little dog) yet let us also scoff at, contemn, and
despise him when we please and see good occasion.

But now concerning that which is the best and most glorious remedy and
consolation, not only against pining Love, but against all other mundane
desires, wants, losses, and crosses; which is to endeavor so to be possessed
and inflamed with divine love of God and heavenly joy in him, and so to trust
in his never failing providence, as to be most sweetly contented and pleased at
heavens will and pleasure, to rejoice even in losses and crosses, and think
them divine love tokens, as certainly they are to them who love him, Romans
8.28. He that loves God better than himself, cannot but be sweetly pleased
with his will in all things. So let us endeavor to love him above our selves,
and so to be pleased with his pleasure, as to say, yea, Vow to God and men to
this purpose (if there be occasion) as I do now, That since it is Gods will, I
wish no other happiness then what I do enjoy, but all things to be as they
are since he thinks good. Me thinks I neither dare nor can wish greater
happiness then to know that God (whom I would love infinitely above my self)
is infinitely happy. Let us then endeavor to be of such an heavenly temper, so
enlightened with divine Love and Joys, as to have little or no room left in
our souls for carnal, grosser love and joys, while we are elevated in
heavenly thoughts and contemplations; for certainly those spirits, which are
truly raised to the knowledge of divine things, and do well know the Art of
heavenly contemplations, are elevated above all the love and pleasures of the
earth, inasmuch as eternal heavenly felicities, are above humane, temporary,
earthly vanities, and not finding any thing on earth worthy of their love and
desires, they do note and set out their desires, their pleasures, and
felicities in heaven: So as they do in part beforehand taste of the sweetness
of those delights, which they pretend to receive at the end of their life,
which makes them very graciously to set under their feet all the Love and
pleasures of the earth, while their souls are in such contemplations,
directing their aims to heaven. And while they are in these divine ecstasies,
their spirits are so strong, as they do overcome their carnal desires, so
heavenly, as they do then esteem the greatest pleasures of the body (as this
of carnal Love) but as dung and dross in comparison of the heavenly Love and
pleasures which they enjoy in their souls. And in such contemplations and
comparison, they rejoice more in^contemning this earthly love and pleasures,
then in enjoying the same. What need we care for farthings, who may have gold
enough? for earthly, that may have heavenly happiness?

But as Saint Paul signifies, Marriage hinders this divine Love and heavenly
pleasures. He that is married (says he) cares for the things of the world,
how he may please his wife. But he that is unmarried cares for the things that
belong to the Lord, etc. 1 Cor. 7.32. etc. One doubted not to say, that if men
could live without desiring women and other superfluous things of the world,
they would be visited and very familiarly accompanied with Angels. And
certainly, there be many married men in the world, if they did but truly know
the excellency of such a contemplative heavenly life, and did seriously
consider how freely and joyfully Batchelors may live, they would even run
through fire and water to be so happy.

But now lest married men should be too much displeased, with what I have
written, Let me tell them, I write this chiefly to comfort, ease and cheer the
hearts of discontented, melancholy, pining, languishing Lovers: And herein I
think I have endeavored to do a very good deed, and to show very good causes
and reason enough to cheer, comfort, and rejoice the most sad, drooping,
languishing, and discontented Lover, if he be not gone out of his senses or
without reason. And let those displeased married men (if any be so) know or
think, that when we speak against Marriage, we mean only of unfit and
evil marriages: Such as that of Spungius and Philtra. They would quarrel,
swear, curse, fight, etc. Let such be always scoft at, and remain miserable,
till they mend their manners.

And least Batchelours should be too averse from Marriage, and such as lose
their first Love should forbear a second choice, which always drowns the love
of the former in oblivion, and is one of the best Remedies against Loves loss,
for here they find it again in another; Let us still say (as Saint Paul
says) That marriage is honorable in all men, and that it is good to marry,
though better to live single. And that a Consonant, equal, and fit marriage
when both parties be loving, kind, wise, constant, and of good conditions, is
even a Terrestrial Paradise, and from thence as has been dilated, proceeds
a mavelous deal of happy blessed effects.

But me thinks I cannot yet leave this subject of the vanity, frailty, folly,
and miseries of Love, (I mean now only of an oversottish and doting Love) it
is so necessary. For seeing the excellency of lawful Love, and the many sweet
and blessed effects springing from thence, it is great reason to take heed,
that we do not (as many men in the world have done) plunge our selves beyond
the Boundmarkes of Reason and Discretion, into an over-sottish and doting
affection.

Oh, how strange, and what pity it is to think, how many, otherwise most
famous, wise, and best of men, have been so bewitched and besotted with this
over-doting Love, (though but for a time, and after repented) in so much as
they have committed some Crimes, and many gross dotages for Love, as we may
read of Jacob, Ruben, Judah, Sampson, David, and Solomon (to omit the more
unwotthy ones) in the sacred Scriptures. To read and consider also of Caesar,
Haniball, Theseus, Achilles, Pompey, Mark Anthony, Troylus, Hercules, and many
other famous, great and noble spirits, also of Socrates himself, and many of
the wisest Philosophers, and many Worthies in all Ages; What mad, foolish, and
strange prankes, practices, and dotages, they have acted for Love? Also to
hear the Poets tell of men that degenerate into Dogs, Hogs, Asses, Bruites,
for Love; as Lycaon into a Wolf; Calista, a Bear, Elpenor and Grillus into
Swine by Circe, Apulaeus into an Ass, yea, Jupiter himself for Europa, Laeda,
and others into a Bull, a Swan, a golden Shower, a Satyr, a Shepherd, for
Love; expressing by their Morals, how men by their foolish over-fond Love and
Lusts make Beasts and Bruits of themselves.

How can we but strangely wonder to consider that so many thousand men created
after Gods own Image, Enobled with such an excellent soul, should be so
besotted with this over-fond and doting Love, as that they do even strive by
all means more to please their Lovers then God himself, and all the world
besides; and so neglect the love of that infinitely to be beloved, and
Glorious, Amiable, and loving God, for the love of so frail and vain a
creature. Yea, and even to worship and Idolatrize to her. So as they desire,
think of, dream of, delight in nothing more, and almost nothing else but her,
though millions of choysest delights, and felicities both earthly and heavenly
present themselves to their enjoyment if they had wit and grace enough to enjoy
the same. Yet they very foolishly neglect all these, and place all their
felicity in this weak, frail, vain creature.

She must be as they say, their Mistress forsooth, their life, their soul,
their Angel, their Paradise, their Goddess (indeed rather their Idol) their
every thing. Their mouths, hearts, eyes, ears, thoughts are never well but
when they are full of her. As he that is bit with a mad Dog, thinks all he
sees is Dogs, so this foolish, fond, mad Lover, thinks, says, and wishes, to
hear and see almost nothing else but her; and without her he is even all
amort, and as melancholy as a Cat. They are even as mad of love as if they had
eaten Hemlockes, and wanted Helebore, and in this madness so blinded they are,
and deluded, as to think their Mistresses the most beautiful, lovely, sweet,
amiable, neat, fine, witty, wise, and the only Paragon of their Sex, when in
the eyes of others that are not so mad, blind, and deluded, there is no such
matter, but rather they see them perhaps very homely, however vain, frail,
and perchance unworthy things. And yet these brainsicke, Inamoratoes, will say
and think forsooth that they are sweeter than all the several or compounded
flowers, and perfumes; fairer and brighter than Lillies, Ivory, Glass, Silver,
Gold, Pearls, Stars, Moon, Sun, Angels, yea, even as heaven it self. All
these are but thought on, and brought to express and delineate her. All
former, and all other beauties that ever the world could or now can show, all
the Nymphs, Graces, and Goddesses must stand behind, hold the Candle to, and
wait upon her beauties, worth, etc.

Also to think how servile and slavish they are to their Mistresses, even as
if they were their drudges, lackeyes, bondmen, they will refuse no labor, no
toil, saying, they will go as far as Jericho, and grand-Caire, or to the
worlds end for their sakes, undertake as great adventures, as all the Knights
Errants, suffer all perils, fight with all opposites, do wonders for her sake;
Yea, and as Dido for Aeneas Piramus with Thisbe, that they will even die for
their sakes. And also to consider how they plunge themselves into a multitude
of biting cares, fears, suspicions, perturbations, discontents, jealousies,
and sorrows; how they pine, languish, look pale, lean, an^ how they do even
neglect and spoil^ themselves. Yea, how that many have run into foul errors,
flatteries crimes, immodest prankes, impudency, slanders, detractions,
treacheries, enmities, hatred, malice, envy, cruelty, bloodshed, murders, and
madness for love.

And here perchance I also may be taxed of folly, for writing this
Love-discourse. Well, since I am in a humor, and in a Section to write of the
folly and vanity of Love, I would (if I thought it would do any good) confess
it. I know some very wise men indeed have confessed it to be a folly to love,
and to write thereof, etc. As one of the most famous of them says in one of
his Poems,

D. I. Done
I am two fools I know,
For loving, aad for saying so,
In whining Poetry;
But where is that wise man that would not be I,
If she would not deny, etc.

And perchance Momus will say that I am a third fool also that is in Print,
and here Momus shows his discretion, choosing to be perchance a Cobbler, or a
fool in Love, rather privately, than What do you think that I Will be so
disgracd
Quoth Momus, as to go beyond my Last;
No, no, said he, It is not my intent
To show my self to be a fool in Print.


He is perhaps so sottish, or brainesick, as not to be capable of such an
heroical, quickening, and delightful temper as true love; yet it is like he
can be foolishly fond, talk baudily, and do worse then he talks; but leaving
Momus again to his carping, fretting, pining, folly, I return and proceed.
The truth is, that lawful true love is good and commendable, and it is only an
over-fond, unfit, or undue Love that I write against in this Section. We may
plainly see the difference if we be wise; for from the one proceeds (as has
been said) a multitude of good, blessed, pleasant and happy effects, and from
the other (as has also been showed) comes a multitude of evils, sorrows,
strange dotages, and miseries. Insomuch as me thinks I could willingly again
write of the vanity and folly of this over-sottish and fond love, though I have
been so long already. It is a vehement passion and perturbation of the mind, a
monster of nature, a destroyer of wit and art. It often bereaves men of
manliness of spirit, and of divine Graces; and makes them sometimes to fall in
love even with painted vanities, mere outside creatures, things empty of
goodness, and composed of pride, folly, and wickedness.

If we love such as have no other beauties but their bodies, what do we but
love as irrational creatures do; Reason tells us we love that which the
scratch of a pin may deface, that which some Physicians say, is subject to
above three hundred common diseases, that which a short time spoils and
disfigures. That which is all loathsome within, and that which shall be
hereafter nothing but putrified and rotten corruption. Where is now the fair
Helena, Cleopatra, Arethusa, Hero, Lucretia, Irene, Lais, Cresida, Laurea,
Corinna, Roxane, Panthea, Leucippe, Ariadne, Polyxena, Lesbia, Rosamond, and
the rest of those admired pieces whom the world has seemed to adore, where is
now their beauty and glory? They are dead, become a sink of corruption, and so
ghastly as you would be afraid to look upon them. Think now you proud dames,
what Mettle you are made of, and let it give a check to your Pride.

Flatter not your selves before your glass, you mistresses, and madames of the
world, I mean you, who are empty and void of grace, and full of pride and
wickedness, you that take a pride to subject and charm diverse spirits, and to
bereave them of reason and grace; you that study each day new lessons of
vanity, pride, and niceness, to wound hearts whereby you undo fowls: Your
body is just of the same temper with the shadow which you see in your glass,
you are even as nothing. Or if you will that I say you are something, you are a
mere dunghill covered with snow, a sink of infection environed with flowers,
a rich coffer full of lothsomnesse; you are the fraylest and most changeable
things in the world; I dare hardly eye you any longer, for fear while I look
upon you, you vanish from my eyes, since you are ready to change, and to dye
every hour.

Me thinks I could even laugh at your vanities, and mock at those that admire
you so fondly. I could willingly turn back, and tear those former Love
discourses out of my book, in contempt of your frailties and vanities, were it
not for their sakes, who are indeed true-lovers. But for such lovers sakes
truly, who are not possessed with this over-fond and doting affection on the one
side. Nor with a stupid, blockish, or peevish Love on the other side, such who
are indeed virtuous, discreet, modest, loving, constant, of sweet and gracious
conditions: I could wish that I were capable to invent such sweet and pleasant
Love-straines, as might continually fill their hearts with as much joy and
delight in each others, as can be thought of. Let us then endeavor to be such
True-Lovers, and to all such as to our selves, let us wish all happiness.

But once more you doting and over-fond Lovers, hark ye; you that by reason
of your unusual fears, sorrows, suspicion, anxiety, dotage, neglect,
melancholy, sighs, much wakening, lean body, pale cheeks, hollow eyes, look
as if you were planet-strucke: I pray think seriously again, what a frail
piece of earth, vanity, and corruption it is that you so foolishly dote upon,
and 'twill make you wiser, and may set your heart and soul at quiet, in peace.

But now for some remedies and considerations against discontents after
marriage. Such men therefore who mistake themselves (as many do) thinking they
take an Angel by the hand at their marriage day in the Church, but after find
they have a Scorpion in their house, and in their beds; (for King Solomon
says, an evil woman is like a Scorpion) So if they should find and marry
some scolding, brawling, ill conditioned woman, yet let them be contented; Let
them be as wise as they may; and consider women's weaknesses and infirmities;
that if perhaps men had their bodies, they would be as frail and as passionate
as women. And if women were freed from the frailty of their Sex, they would be
as manly, and excellent as men. And though women have diverse natural
infirmities both of body and mind, yet a wise man will love his wife not a jot
the worse, because he knows the same are natural.

But few women are Angels, and he that would have a wife without passions, must
marry when the sign is not in heaven. And for this scolding malady, this is
esteemed a good remedy; To be silent and not regard her, or rather to smile and
laugh at her. Also let them with wise Socrates, learn the exercises of
patience, wisdom, and many other virtues from their wives malign conditions.

But let men see if the fault be not in themselves. The reason why many women
are so bad, is because they have ill husbands. Some men, as if their wives
(like Wallnut trees, and Stockfish) were the better for beating, will very
unmanly and uncivilly misuse them, and that perchance when themselves by reason
of their ill courses are justly in all the blame. And it is strange to think
how many crosses, and distempers in marriage many men do make more than they
find. They are of such cross and untoward conditions, that if they can find
none, yet they will make holes in one another coats, and pick faults even out
of matters of nothing, and make little faults great by their foolish
aggravations, to both their grief and vexation, so living together as two
snarling dogs in a pair of couples. And by their lewd, luxurious, foolish,
churlish, brawling, indiscreet, unconscionable carriage to one another, they
enjoy no content, but rather grief in their marriages; so making that an
earthly hell, which if they were both wise and good, might be a terrestrial
Paradise. The best remedy then for this, is to mend their ill manners, and to
endeavor to make one another as good as they can. Happy are they whose wives
are an occasion of their being good. And sometimes a good man may chance to
make a good wife of an ill one.

It is also fit that men should use their wives well, and maintain them in
good fashion, according to their means, and to let them have such reasonable,
and convenient liberty and Authority, as is fit a Wife (who is a man's second
self) should have and enjoy. For want of this, many women being too straightly
kept under, unkindly and churlishly used, are even forced to fly out beyond
Reason to become froward, contentious, jealous, discontented; and some to turn
Queanes even by compulsion.

Too much liberty and authority on the other side is not fit to be allowed
them, especially to such kind of Women as love not their own houses, but by
reason of too much gadding abroad learn more tricks then be good; who are
then only contented and pleasant; and at home nothing but brawle, and be
commonly sullen, froward, peevish, discontented, and of idle lewd conditions.

Let therefore both men and women endeavor to avoyde all occasions of strife
and discontent as much as they may; and such as cannot be avoided, either to
dissemble or contemn, and to make the best use thereof. And in all respects to
endeavor to live lovingly familiarly and pleasantly in such sort as becomes
them.

Saint Paul gives us excellent directions! So ought men to love their Wives
(says he) as their own bodies, for no man ever yet hated his own flesh, but
nourishes and cherishes it, even as the Lord his Church, Ephesians. 5.25. And
again, ye men, love your Wives, and be not bitter unto them, Col. 3.19. And to
women he says, Wives submit your selves unto your Husbands, as unto the Lord,
for the Husband is head of the Wife, even as Christ is head of the Church,
Ephesians. 5.22.

S. Peter also gives directions to this purpose in his first Epistle and third
Chapter. I will write the same at large for they are most excellent. He begins
with Wives, and is longest about them, they having as it seems most need of
Instruction. Ye Wives (says he) be in subjection to your own Husbands, that
if any obey not the Word, they also may without the Word, be won by the
conversation of their Wives, while they behold their chaste conversation coupled
with fear, whose adorning let it be the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit,
which is in the sight of God, of great price; for after this manner in the old
time the holy women also who trusted in God, adorned themselves, being in
subjection to their own husbands, even as Sara obeyed Abraham, calling him
Lord, whose daughters ye are as long as ye do well, etc. Likewise ye husbands
(says he) dwell with your wives according to knowledge, giving honor unto the
wife, as unto the weaker vessel, and as being heirs together of the grace of
life, that your prayers may not be hindered. Finally, be ye of one mind,
having compassion one of another, be pitiful, be courteous, not rendering
evil for evil, or railing for railing, but in contrariwise blessing, knowing
that ye are thereunto called, that ye may inherit a blessing. Thus much S.
Peter in his first Epistle, Chap. 3. ver. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.

So then, let men and their wives in all respects endeavor to live together as
they ought, according to such divine directions. Let them always be familiar,
kind, pleasant, and as loving as may be, and mutually enjoy together all the
blessings and benefits belonging to this lawful conjugall, or marriage love
and society.

And especially let them be pious and religious; Then though their beauty and
bodies should decay and become infirm, yet their very souls may be in love
with one another, which is far more excellent than bodily love. So while they
view one another as divine and celestial creatures, as the beloved of God
himself, their loves may still kindle and increase, until both they and it
ascend to that glorious Paradise of God, where love (all divine and heavenly)
flames beyond imagination, and endures beyond time, for ever.

SECTION. IV. Of unlawful Lusts, the extent thereof in this Age. The miseries
and remedies thereof, with a brief persuasion to marriage.
WHile we view the excellency of lawful and true love, let us also beware of
unlawful and raging lusts. There is well nigh as much difference (as one
says) between true love, and unlawful lusts, as between heaven and hell, for
lawful marriage, or conjugall love is honorable, blessed, and ordained of
God. A remedy against these unlawful lusts. And from this love springs (as
has been declared) a million of blessed and joyful effects. But all unlawful
lusts and the effects thereof, as fornications, adulteries, incests, and the
like, are cursed, and often forbidden, and threatened against in Gods sacred
Word, as all men acquainted therewith do well know, and from thence proceeds
a multitude of evil and miserable effects.

And yet in this age, how strangely do these evils extend themselves; so as it
seems it is now as it was in the Prophet Ieremies time; The land is full of
adulterers. Ier. 23.10. It is strange to think how many men range after many
several women. They run abroad as beasts run to rutt, after every Gill and
Queen they can meet with, though perchance their own wives be far more
comely, amiable, and chaste; yet will they like some goatish Procullus, or
lustful Clodius, take all they can get, and never be contented, unless like a
common Bull or Boar, they may run and range where they list, and would if they
could, have more severals than ever Solomon or Ahasuerus had, or as many as the
Turks, Muscovits, Zeriffes, and Persians have at this day. And although
perchance they often loath their own actions, yet in a while again they are
of another mind, and Stallion-like will again run after their Gils and
Truls; and so though perhaps they may be sometimes satiated, yet not satisfied:
Etna and Vesuvius will be as soon quenched with Oil, as their raging lust
satisfied. They will never be contented with that One whom they ought to love
truly, and enjoy only; but so inconstant and incontinent they are, that within
a few Moons after marriage they think themselves cloyed, glutted, grow
wisesick, and perchance prefer some ill favored, ill conditioned, common
queen before a good wife. She that before marriage was wooed by many monstrous
solicitations, oaths, promises, and protestations of love, is now undeservedly
distasted, and perchance loathed, (as Amnon loathed Thamar) or forsaken and
disrespected, (as Demophoon dealt with Phillis) and some idle stinking whore
respected before her, and this perhaps for little or no cause or reason, but
only because it is the nature and nurture of such beasts so to do; although
they be better in their own pastures, yet they will break over all fences of
credit, civility, conscience, and Christianity for new and other pastures, and
although the same prove to them as Rot-grasse to sheep, bring them to diseases,
undoing, shame, and misery.

But especially among idle, young, Tavern, Taphouse, Tippling companions, their
principal discourse tends to the increase of these unlawful lusts, as of
women and their appurtenances, of Cuckolds and Cuckoldmakers, what men wear
horns, what women britches, and what willing ones there be in the Town or
Parish, how such pieces are to be handled, and many ribaldry obscene
discourses, songs, tales and jests. Of such things is their chief mirth, and
their wit is never so prompt as here, especially among young men who usually at
their pot-meetings, pervert all occasions of talk into baudery, and out of all
other discourses, they commonly fall into this, and are most taken with it; and
this sets the young gamester on edge, and if he once get the trick on it, he is
very unlike to leave it, until the pox, shame, or some other mischief take
him. And in these Tavern and Taphouse meetings among such companions, to the
intent that wives may be out of request among them, and perhaps for other base
ends, they endeavor to possess one another, that change and variety is good:
(though indeed it carries away the mind from all goodness and true love, and
so divides and cloies it, that it hinders all true and most delightful
pleasures in love, and is often an occasion of shame and of diverse diseases,
always of sadness, repentance, or greater mischiefs; but these things are not
talked of, or perhaps scoft at, till by woeful experience they find and feel
them.) But these inducements to unlawful lusts, and whoring, they think are no
faults, but fine devices and mirth, while they speak but over the fields, and
under the Rose, as by the names of tricks of youth, playing with Mistresses,
grafting of horns, Cuckoldmaking, and the like fine words which they often use
and leave out, adultery, whoring, knaving, and such words, as being too plain,
too gross, and spoiling all the mirth; though yet there be some impudent,
brazen-faced, dissolute knaves, that over their pots, and among their
Companions will even brag of, and glory in their Whoring and wickedness.

Let us now briefly view the miseries of such unlawful Lusts and Whoring: The
same often causes to the bodies of many men loathsome diseases, as Pox, Gout,
Sciatica, Convulsions, Aches, and diverse others. It usually causes dullness
and weakness, Whoredom takes away the heart, Hos. 4.11. and often shortens
life

Clorus having done Floreta's work, she said,
I make no question Sir but you are paid;
And he was paid indeed; but to his cost;
Paid with a Pox he was: his life he lost.
By reason of this unlawfvll Lusting, Whoring and Knaving, many men consume
their estates; in Feasts, Banquets, Revelling, Pride, and Gifts, thinking
thereby to seem magnificent and please their Minions, who when they have
emptied their Purses, and (as the Devil serves Witches) sucked away their best
blood, they leave them to poverty, want, shame and misery.

These Lusts and Whoring, have also (in all Ages) been occasion of much
jealousies, strife, dissension, disturbance, and subversion of multitudes of
persons, families, towns, and kingdoms. The same has bin the ruin of strong
men, as Sampson of wise men, as Solomon, of Priests, as Helies sons, of
Elders, as in the story of Susanna. Histories are very full of Examples in this
kind, as of Caracalla the Emperor, Childericke the first of that name King of
France, Teundezillus King of Spain, Redoaldus King of Lombardy, Mulleasses
King of Thunis, Abusahid King of Fesse, and his six sons, of Tarquin,
Antonius, Cleopatra, Appius Claudius, Alexander Medices, Duke of Florence,
Galleatius, Duke of Millaine, Peter Lewis Duke of Placentia, Ione Queen of
Naples, and others innumerable. The same was an occasion of the destruction of
the old World, of Sodom and Gomorrah, of the Sychemites, of Troy, of
Persepolis, of Spain in the Reign of King Rodericke, and of many other Towns
and Countries.

From this root of unlawful Lusts springs also to the soul of man a
multitude of Evils and Miseries, such as commonly attend fornications,
Adulteries, Incests, Rapes, and the like; From hence comes Cares, Fears,
Jealousies, Perplexities, Enmities, Contention, hatred, heartburnings, Pains,
Sadness, Dullness; and sometimes fiery dot^ge, madness, breach of of Vows,
Treacheries, Duels and murders are hereby occasioned. Shame and Repentance is
certainly the end thereof, or worse, Despair and everlasting misery without
Reconciliation to God through Christ our Savior.

Thus it appears, though these unlawful Lusts may seem to promise much, as
the Harlot did to the young Man, to take their fill of Love, Prove. 7.18. Yet
this filling proves but emptiness, or rather fills the heart full of Evil,
Sorrow, and misery. The same brings forth but a Wind-egge, a Moon Calfe, some
imperfect Embrio, or Monstrous Birth; as Shame, Melancholy, Sorrow, Diseases,
Misery, and perchance Ruin both of Body and Soul; for an Whore is a deep
ditch, etc. Prove. 23.7. and 22.14. And he that goes after her, goes as an
Ox to the slaughter, as a Fool to the Stocks, and till a Dart strike through
his Liver, etc. Pro. 7.22, 23. So though the same seems to be pleasant as
Honey and Oil at first, yet the end is bitter as Wormwood, and sharp as a
two edged Sword, says King Solomon, Prove. 5.4. and her house is the way to
death and hell, verse 5. and chap. 7.27. Whoremongers and Adulterers God will
judge, Hebr. 13.4. and will be a swift witness against them, Mal. 3.5. Read
also, Prove. 6.32, 33. Job 31.12. 1 Pet. 2.11. 1 Cor. 6.15. 1 Thessalonians. 4.3. and
Col. 3.5. The serious Consideration of all these evils and miseries may justly
cause men speedily to repent, amend, and for ever greatly hate and endeavor to
avoid such unlawful Lusts.

You Courtiers and others who think it a trim piece of glory to get a
Mistress and a Ladies favor forsooth; you, who esteem and call your Minions
or Whores divine and caelestiall names, and would (like Adam) give Paradise (if
you had it) for an Apple, venture heaven to satisfy your base and unlawful
Lusts, you that adore these Victimes, and think your selves most happy when
you can tempt the chastity of these female creatures and overcome them to your
Lusts; what do you but with Ixion embrace a cloud for Juno? What do you
enjoy and adore but a Crust full of Corruption, that must shortly rot and turn
to Putrefaction? What a thing is this? a piece of Clay quickened with life
adores a Snowy dunghill; but there shall come a time when the crust of your
pleasures shall be broken, and you shall see what shame, grief, dullness,
aches, diseases, evils and miseries lies within; what have you done but acted
the Devils stratagems which he has taught you? Think what horror you shall
suffer at the day of judgment, unless you repent and amend.

Other Remedies usually prescribed against these unlawful Lusts are; A
moderate, cool, dry, and sparing diet, fasting, prayer, continual action in
some good business or employments, and to be always studying, contemplating,
or thinking of other good matters, especially of heavenly things.

But one of the best and most usual Remedies for such as are of an unruly
temper, is lawful Conjugall Love and Marriage, for such desires should be
contained in the chaste breast of one Companion only, and that in the way of
Marriage. Who does otherwise, transgresses the Laws of God, of Nature, of
Nations, of Families, and of Justice. He breaks faith, trust, and constancy,
brings in uncertainties, jealousies, discontents, and as has been showed, a
multitude of evils and miseries,

Let therefore married men endeavor to love their Wives as much as they can,
and let Batchelours, if they may marry such as from their hearts they can
truly Love, for true Lovers (as I conceive) may take more pleasure in the
enjoying one another, then if they might possess the Love and society of as
many Minions and beauties as they can desire in the world; for why, diversity
of Loves (as in objects to the sight) hinder entire and true pleasure in any.
And we know that one dainty dish most pleasing to our Palate is more
delightful, than abundance which cloyes our eyes and stomach.

I shall now endeavor briefly to persuade such as may conveniently (though a
single life be otherwise to be preferred before it) to this honorable and
blessed estate of Marriage. Marriage (says one) fills the world with men,
and heaven with Saints.

It has always been confessed by all reasonable men, That a Consonant
Marriage, (such as when both parties be equally matched in respect of years,
birth, constitution and fortunes, and especially of loving, kind, wise,
constant, and good conditions, such as live together like Abraham and Sarah,
Isaac and Rebecca, Petus and Aria, Seneca and Paulina, Cato and Portia,
Rubenus Celar and his Ennea, and the rest of those who are recorded as true and
happy Lovers) is even an earthly Paradise of Happiness. And no man can justly
blame such marriages, unto which the Laws both divine and humane exhort,
Nature provokes, Honesty draws, all Nations approve of, abundance of
felicity inviteth, and necessity of continuing mankind constrains. If all men
should live unmarried an hundred years, the world would be unpeopled; and this
alone may excuse and commend such men who like of Marriage better then single
life, since the one turns to desolation, and the other to increasing of
Mankind. The Grecians, the Romans did, and the Spaniards do (in honor of
Marriage) give privileges thereunto. Marriage is honorable among all men,
Saint Paul says, Among Christians, Jews, Turks, Pagans, (and why not among
Friars and Jesuits too, if they be men) in praise of which ordnance of God and
men, the pens of many Authors in all Ages have been exercised (yea of the
Papists themselves, who make it a Sacrament, and yet forbid the same to their
Priests.) The best and most learned Philosophers have praised and used the
same, as Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, Seneca, Plutarch, and diverse others.
Though there be many enemies to the name of marriage, yet few to the use of it.
He was made imperfect, that is not tending to propagation. He that is perfect
and marries not, is said to be guilty of a contempt against Nature and Justice.
And why should any man think that God is pleased with that rigid inhibition of
Marriage among the Papists, which crosses the current of Nature and his own
ordination. It is the doctrine of Devils, to forbid marriage, 1 Timothy 4.1, 3.
Some think the best chastity is Matrimonial or Conjugall Chastity; when
Paires keep themselves in a moderate intermutuall enjoyance, one constant to
the other.

And though (as has been said) a contemplative divine spirit can overcome
Nature, and contemn the greatest earthly joy and pleasure, in comparison of
heavenly delights, and take great pleasure in such contempt; Yet all men have
not this divine grace of Continency. And looking downwards again, we may
consider that we have bodies as well as souls, which require due and
convenient recreations. And though (as Saint Paul well observed) Marriage
hinders a heavenly contemplative life, in respect of care and other
disturbances; yet, in respect of all these forenamed considerations and many
other, it is good to marry, though better to live single, if we burn not, and
if we have divine grace enough to live continent. Whosoever finds a Wife (says
King Solomon, surely he means a good Wife) finds a good thing, and
obtains favor of the Lord, Prove. 18.22.

And since this Conjugall or Marriage society, is ordained and blessed of God
in Paradise in the state of perfection, approved of and commended by Christ
when he was on earth, and since by his Apostles and Saints, and is said to be
honorable among all men. A remedy against fornication, and unlawful Lusts, a
resemblance and figure between Christ and his Church. An uniting of two into
one flesh, and as some affirm, into one spirit also, saying that the spirits
of true Lovers do pass one into another, so (as Saint Peter advises them and
us) they may be of one mind (1 Pet. 3.8.) and since it is the sweetest and
nearest relation of Love, friendship and society, the occasion and increase of
children, families and all Mankind; it cannot be denied, but it is good to
marry, especially for such whose bodies and minds do sympathize, and who are
both of loving and good conditions. From such a marriage (as has been
dilated) springs the best and pleasantest delights and felicities of this
life.

To conclude then; let us wish all joy to such happy Lovers; Let all the Muses
sing the most delightful strains, and all the Graces dance the choysest Round
lays at their Wedding. Let all pleasantness, Love and Joy dwell in their
hearts. And as their years, so may their love and joy increase, that in after
times they may say, This is the twentieth or thirtieth year of our joy. And
let them still take King Solomon's counsel. Rejoice with the Wife of thy youth,
let her be unto thee as the loving Hind and pleasant Roe, etc. Pro. 5.19.

SECTION. V. The good use of Conjugall Love, and so concluding with a brief
Discourse of Divine Love.
SVch men who use these external Felicities of the World, (as this of
Conjugall or Marriage Love) to the glory of God, and to good ends, with
moderate delectation, are better to be reputed, then they who unduly,
inconsiderately, rashly, inconveniently, and superstitiously (as some Monks and
others do) neglect and refuse such a good, which God himself freely offers
and commends to our acceptance, and the rather since these external Pleasures
and earthly blessings may serve to many excellent uses, stirring us up to all
duties of Piety, to the Love of God, to joy in him, to thankfulness, and so in
all respects to his praise and glory.

But the principal good use of this Conjugall or Marriage Love, and the
felicities thereof, which I shall now insist upon, is; That by viewing, and
enjoying such pleasures and felicities of the Earth, we may look higher to
their fountain, contemplating the Love, Loveliness, Beauty, sweetness, and
excellency of the Creator and giver of these, who is infinitely more excelling.
And so to conclude this division, with this Section of Divine Love, a Subject
requiring our purest and most Angelical attention and affection.

True it is that all other excellencies are but dung and dross in respect of
God, yet by and through these lower Loves, delights, and felicities of the
Earth, these little glimmering Rays proceeding from that Sun of Glory God
himself, we may epsy some light of him, and of that eternal Love, Beauty,
Glory, and happiness, which we pretend hereafter to enjoy, and so in some
measure, spell and spy Heaven from the Earth. Neither ought we to disdain to
make such comparisons between corporeal and spiritual things, between Earth y
and Heavenly, though in respect of the excellency of the spiritual and
heavenly, there is no comparison; yet (as children have need at first to be
allured to the acquist of great and excellent matters, by such toys and
trifles as they apprehend, so) in respect of our weak apprehension such
comparisons and similitudes are and ought to be used in a convenient manner. So
as we may make a very good use of earthly felicities, in this respect (as men
do of Spectacles) for by and through the good use of these our dim eyes may
see the cleerer into heavenly Excellencies, and consequently be the more
enamored of them, and so stirred up to seek and enjoy them. And in this
respect of Conjugall Love, the sacred Scripture gives us many and fair
examples. As in diverse places thereof Christ and his Church are compared to
Lovers betrothed, and to be married together. And the Church is called the
Bride, the Lambs wife, Rev. 21.9. and the end of the world is called their
Marriage day. Rev. 19.17. S. John Baptist calls Christ the Bridegroom, and
his Chur: the bride, Ioh. 3.29 And Christ calls himself the Bridegroom,
Mark 3. That song of songs between two Lovers betrothed each to other, is by
the consent of all Divines a most pleasant Love-song between Christ and his
Church, I might instance in many other places.

What remains then, but that from this earthly, we look up, seek, and enjoy
that fountain and essence of all love, loveliness, beauty, sweetness, and
excellency; which is infinitely more loving, lovely, sweet, excellent, and
permanent than all the other beauties, delights, and excellencies of the world,
if they were all united together. If we could truly think what God is, how
lovely, beautiful, glorious, and in all respects infinitely excellent, our
hearts would presently be filled with love and admiration of him; insomuch as
then we should settle our dearest thoughts on him; and in his love we should be
filled with sweetest flames of joy and pleasures. One thing have I desired,
says King David, and I will still desire, to behold the beauty of the Lord.
His beauty infinitely excels the beauty and glory of the Sun, Moon, Stars,
Angels, heaven, or what is most excellent; when therefore we see the most
enchanting beauty, and loveliness the world can show us, let us think there
is yet infinitely more beauty and loveliness in God the Creator, and fountain
of this. Let us endeavor to see a kind of infinitely higher, purer, amiable,
divine and heavenly perfection even through the frailty of a face.

Who would not gaze himself into admiration, when he shall see so rich a
treasure as Virtue and divine Grace, dwell in so pure a Cabinet as a lovely
beauty or countenance. If such beauty and glory can dwell with corruption, what
excellencies are in the Saints above? Oh, if there be such beauty, loveliness
and pleasure in a creature, as that it has such power to draw thereunto the
eyes, ears, and affections of such as behold and consider it, how much more
beautiful and lovely is God himself, who is the Ocean from which these, and
all other excellencies spring? How should this divine beauty of God attract our
desires and inflame us with love and joy?

Me thinks I cannot leave this so pleasing, lovely, divine subject; therefore
yet again: If we so much endeavor, and be so much affected with the
comeliness of creatures, how should we be rapt at the admirable glorious
beauty and luster of God himself? Even the brightest, loveliest beauty on
earth, what is it but a very little derivative from that infinitely perfect,
and primitive beauty which is God? but a spark from that infinite fire. A
glimpse from that sun. And if this little image and Idea of beauty (which is
but corporal and external) so delight us; Oh, could we view and contemplate
that infinitely pure, and perfect beauty in God, How sweetly and necessarily
should we (as the Angels) love him, and be delighted therewith! Yea, if with S.
Peter we could truly epsy but one Ray thereof; We should indeed say, It is
good for us to be here, and greatly desire to build Tabernacles, and dwell
where we might ever behold such beauty, such glory, such happiness.

Also when we consider how our selves, and all true lovers freely, and gladly
offer love to one another, though we be but earthly creatures, Oh let us think
how freely God himself offers love to us, and how gladly we should embrace his
love, and as far as we can, love him again. He offers his love most freely
indeed to such as will accept the same. For Wisdom cries out in the streets,
etc. Prove. 8. How lovingly does he invite us to come into his fair Garden, to
eat and drink with him, to be merry, and to enjoy his presence for ever.
Cant. 5. etc. Oh what love is this! The infinitely glorious King of heaven most
freely offers infinite love to infinitely sinful and miserable beggars on
earth; so God offers love to man. Oh let not us be so infinitely blind,
foolish, and wretched, as to refuse the same, but let us embrace it with most
eager, swift, flaming desires and affections; and let us wholly dedicate our
loves and our selves to him. Let us love nothing else but so as it may increase
our thankfulness and love to him, our joy and glory in him, and as it may
please and glorify him. Let us deny our selves, and already endeavor to go
out of our selves to live above our selves with him, even a life heavenly on
earth. Let us so pour forth our souls into God, and insoul our selves into
him, as that his divine love and joy, yea, himself may wholly possess us; and
the rather since he loves us so freely, Hos. 14.4. and with an everlasting
love, Ier. 31.3.

When a foul is once thus possessed with the beauty, loveliness, and free love
of God to it, it will be often thinking of him, often mounting up to heaven, as
a vapor exhaled by that Sun of Glory; often gliding after its love, being so
attracted by the allurements of his most amiable, fair, divine beauty and
loveliness, and also the most free love and assistance of God himself.
Insomuch as it will be enlightened with glorious thoughts, high apprehensions,
ardent affections, and heavenly joys in him: For he draws us with the bands
of love, Hos. 11.4.

Yet further of this most excellent and heavenly subject, which we may the
rather remember and contemplate when we have considered the great love of true
lovers, and what they will suffer for one another sakes. But then, oh to
think of the infinite love of God to us, which infinitely transcends that of
humane lovers; to consider that this infinite glorious God should send his only
Son a part of himself to redeem and glorify us, who have so offended him;
that this part of himself, this very God, our Savior, Jesus Christ should
unvaile himself of all his glory, come to live on earth, and suffer so much,
such a death for such miserable wretches as we are, when we were his enemies,
to deliver us from death, hell, and all misery, and to merit for us heaven and
all felicity, it is sufficient to make us overcome (and with S. Ignatius even
to weep) with love and joy, to think that our Love was crucified for us. See,
what a Virtue is in the Passion of our Savior, that if our souls in
Contemplation of his wounds should resent the smart, yet knowing that he
suffered all this most willingly to make us happy, it is enough to make us even
swoune with love and joy, and be extasied with a thousand sorts of pleasures,
insomuch as to be willing even with sweetest joy to die of love for his sake.

Oh Lord, what are we that thou should daigne to accept our love, but that
thou should so desire it at such a rate as thy heart blood, is a miracle of
mercy, far beyond all humane and angelical apprehension; who, unless a devil
or a blind ignorant worldling will not greatly thank thee, and love thee, who
have and do so infinitely merit the same; and the rather also, since who
truly loves thee, shall for thy sake, and by thy sufferings and merits enjoy
infinite heavenly happiness, and may in some degree taste thereof even on
earth. Lord teach us a language wholly divine, and heavenly, to thank thee for
such Love. O love the Lord, all ye his Saints.

Moreover, when we think how lovers sweet discourses please one another, let
us then also contemplate our souls sweet conversation, discourses, and
soliloquies with our beloved God and Savior. Oh how our souls may be inflamed
with divine love and joy, when we contemplate these most sweet and pleasant
words of our beloved, calling us his Sister, his Spouse, his Love, his Dove,
etc. and saying, thou art all fair my Love, there is no spot in thee; Thou
have ravished my heart with one of thine eyes, etc. Cant. 4. And my beloved is
the fairest among women, the chiefest among ten thousand, looking forth as the
morning, fair as the Moon, pure as the Sun, etc. Cant. 5. That she is a Kings
daughter, As a Queen in a vesture of Gold of Ophir, embroidered raiment of
needle work, that the King might take pleasure in her beauty, Psalm. 45.
Clothed with the white raiment, the righteousness of Jesus Christ, crowned and
enriched with his tried and purified Gold, his heavenly graces, Rev. 3. O how
the sweet harmonious accents of these words do ravish the spirits, and
powerfully attract the hearts of all those thereunto, who are able truly but to
hear the Echo of them, and to perceive the sweetness thereof: Insomuch as
they are ready to borrow wings on all sides, and to fly out of themselves,
that they may be wholly possessed with the love and joy of their Savior.

Let us then feelingly speak to our beloved in the same language that he
speaks to us, then which indeed can be no better, no sweeter. Come then my
beloved, Kiss me with the kisses of thy mouth, for thy love is better then
wine; Draw me, and I will run after thee. Show me, Oh thou whom my soul
loves, where thou feedest, and where thou make thy flock to rest at noon,
Can. 1.2, 4, 7. Stay me with thy Flagons, and comfort me with Apples, for I am
sick of Love, Cant. 2.5. Come my Beloved, let us go forth into the fields,
let us lodge in the villages, let us get up early to the vineyards, let us see
if the Vine flourish, whether the tender Grape appear, and the Pomegranate bud
forth; There will I give thee my Love, Cant. 7.11, 12. Set me as a Seal on
thine heart, and as a Signet on thine arm; for Love is as strong as death: it
is a fire, a vehement flame, many waters cannot quench Love, and the floods
cannot drown it, etc. Cant. 8.6, 7. Let us also endeavor to be persuaded with
Saint Paul, that neither life nor death, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor
powers, nor things present, nor things to come, etc. shall ever be able to
separate us from the love of God which is in CHRIST, Romans chap. 8. verse 38.

True Love, suffers not for the subject which it loves; It has a power in it
to change the nature of things: From the time that a soul is chastely taken
with this passion, even the pains and torments thereof, are changing the name
and quality within the heart; They are Roses rather then Thorns; for if it
sigh, it is of Joy, and not of pain; If it be necessary to die for the glory
of this lovely cause of it is life, it is no death to it, but a mere Raped of
Contentment, which severs it self from it self, in favor of another self
whom it loves more then it self. So that if we were truly capable of the
Love, Beauty, Glory, and Excellency of our Savior, though with Saint Lawrence
we should broyle upon devouring flames, yet our hearts which would burn more
hot with the fire of his love, then that of our punishment, would quite
extinguish the same; for our hearts being all a flame already, and our souls a
fire, how could we expire amidst those heates, though our bodies were burned to
ashes, since the stronger must needs prevail? Insomuch as we should fee e the
delights of heaven in the fire; whereof we should make our selves a crown of
glory. It seems also Policarpus, Master Glover, Master Sanders and others,
both Primitive, and Queen Maryan Martyrs, were so warmed with those truly
Promethean fires of divine Love, as exhilarated their souls with heavenly
delights at the stake in the fire. So let us endeavor to be baptized with the
baptism of the fire of Heavenly Love and Joy; And then how willingly and
delightfully shall we suffer all the tribulations we meet with for his sake
whom our souls so divinely love and rejoice in, Jesus Christ?

Me thinks I could gladly dwell in this Discourse of Divine Love. The more to
inflame our Loves to God, see how he wooes us unto his Love by very many and
gracious Promises of Happiness in his divine Word to such as Love him.
Insomuch as all things shall work to their good, Romans 2.28. But I shall only
mention and conclude with that of Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 2.9. Eye has not seen,
nor ear heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man those things which
God has prepared for them that love him. Think then you souls of the World
what felicity this is. We know the eye has seen most beautiful, lovely, and
glorious things, the ear has heard rare consorts of Music and Voices. The
heart of man can imagine worlds of Diamonds more glorious then the Sun, and
millions of extreme Pleasures, Delights, and Felicities: What sweet Joy and
Pleasure has the heart of Man imagined of the Orchards of Adonis, the Gardens
of Hesperides, the Delights of the fortunate Islands, of the Elizian Fields and
Turks Paradise; but let humane Imagination think of all these at once; And
let them imagine also a Quire of Sirens; Let them join thereunto in consort
both the Harp of Orpheus, and Voice of Amphian, Let Apollo, and all the Muses
be there to bear a part; Let all the Graces, all the Nymphs be present in
this Imaginary Paradise. Let them search within the compass of Nature all the
choysest Pleasures which it has produced in the word hitherto, to charm our
Senses, and to ravish our Spirits. In sum, let them assemble in one Subject
all whatsoever is and has been most beautiful and delitious in the World;
Yet are all these but mere Chimera's, and as a vain Idea, a mere shadow of a
body of pleasure in comparison of these divine thoughts and pleasures which the
Saints may and shall enjoy in the Contemplation of God and of his infinite
Beauty, Glory, Love, and of the Felicities which he has prepared for them
that love him. Their thoughts and Contemplations, even in this life may be
composed of unutterable Glories, Crowns, Kingdoms, Divine Visions, heavenly
exultations of Spirit, of extreme marveilous Joys, Pleasures and Felicities.
It is impossible to express the pleasures of a heavenly soul. The
Contentments thereof are not to be so called. It Is Ecstasies and Ravishments
cannot be uttered: Saint Paul himself could not express the same; He could
not tell whether he were in his body or no. So as the heart that feels them
cannot comprehend them: Well and truly therefore does Saint Paul say, That
such pleasures have not entered into the heart of man, as God has prepared for
them that love him. Not entered into the heart of Man? This seems to be a
Riddle, how can man enjoy it then? Indeed he must be above a natural man,
above himself that enjoyes such pleasures; he must be a Partaker of the Divine
Nature, of a super-humane and heavenly temper; for all grace is above Nature.
And if by reason of our Frailties and Infirmities, we cannot attain to such a
height of Love to, and Joy in God in this life, yet if we endeavor truly to
love him, he (who always accepts the Will for the Deed, and whose power is
made perfect in our weakness and infirmities, as Saint Paul says) will
lovingly accept of our good Wishes, Wills, and Endeavors. And then there shall
come a time when we shall see God as he is, know him as we are known, love
him beyond expression, and enjoy in him infinite pleasures and felicities for
ever. And then we shall be made like him, as Saint John says, 1 John 3.2. In
such sort as fire by uniting it self to Iron, in an exceeding extreme heat
does purify the Iron, and convert the same into fire; In like manner (but
above all degrees of comparison) does God purify and reduce us to a being
supernatural and deified, unites and takes the soul into his own divine
Nature: And this fire which shall so unite us to God is Divine Love. And then
shall we have a new being, we shall be like him, 1 John 3.2. Phil. 3.21. One
with him as his members, and as a wife to her husband, Rev. 21. We shall dwell
in him, and he in us, 1 John 4.16. And then we shall also have a new name,
that is, of our Spouse, of our Beloved, of God himself; for says our Savior,
I will write upon him the Name of my God. Revel. 3.12. So as hereby the soul
becomes a part of God, and as it seems, may be said to be no more a soul,
but God himself, and with him, and in him enjoyes all happiness.

Oh then let us fervently wish, and long for this time which shall be at the
marriage of the Kings Son, to which the Angels shall invite us. Then shall we
celebrate an everlasting wedding feast, our souls shall be the Bride, and Love
shall be the banner over us; And then shall we enjoy infinite pleasures and
felicities for ever. How may the thoughts of this heavenly happiness delight
and possess us with divine Love and Joy before hand also, while we live on
earth.

To come toward a Conclusion. If we could truly say with King David's heart, I
love the Lord; and with Saint Peter, Lord thou know that I love thee; if all
our stream could run in that Torrent, to love only him, and all other things
but only for him, and so far as they tend to his love and glory; Oh then what
peace, what delight, what a heaven upon earth should we enjoy? If we were
capable truly to love and know God, it were impossible but we should be
infinitely pleased with what he pleases, and with nothing else. Oh Lord, if
thou would make me so love thee as I should, and as I desire, which is
infinitely, I should certainly enjoy such delights in thy love, as would
transport me to an heaven of joy immediately. Keep me (I pray thee with all my
soul) still in this mind, to wish no other happiness then what I enjoy in
thy love, of thy goodness, to thy glory; and which may increase my love to
thee. Me thinks I can desire nor wish no greater happiness than I now enjoy,
in knowing that God (whom I would love infinitely above my self,) is
infinitely happy. I do esteem it more happiness to me then heaven, already
to know that my Love, my God is in heaven.

THE FOURTH PARTITION: Of Eating.
SECTION. I. The benefits of eating in general; also the abuses of eating, and
the extent thereof.
BEhold that which I have seen (says the Preacher, Eccles. 5.18.) it is good
and comely for a man to eat and to drink, and ^o take comfort in his labors,
for this is his portion. And again. There is nothing better (says he) than
to eat and drink, Eccles. 2.24. The same is the gift of God. chap. 3.13. and
5.19. Job. 36.31. It is the blessing of God, Psalm. 128.2. Behold, (says God
by his Prophet Esaias,) my servants shall eat and rejoice, Esaias 65.13. They
shall eat and praise the Lord, Chap. 62.9.

By eating we sustain Nature, repair infirmities of the body, satisfy
hunger, please our appetites, and preserve life it self. Without this
happiness of Eating we should become on earth wholly miserable, enjoy nothing,
and must of necessity die and perish. For the most solid parts of the body are
sustained, strengthened, and repaired by eating, as the humid parts are by
drinking, and the aierie, or spiritual parts are by pleasant, and comfortable
savours, and wholesome air. Bread strengthens the heart of man, says the
Prophet, Psalm. 104.15.

Eating also serves to glad and rejoice the heart. And especially Gods children
and servants, should eat with joy and gladness. To such speaks the wise
Preacher, saying, Go thy way eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy wine with
a merry heart, for God accepts thy works, Eccles. 9.7. See also as before,
Esaias 65.13.14. and 1 Timothy 4.3. And so also for good society one with another,
as those ancient Christians mentioned in Acts 2.46. who eat their bread
together with gladness and singleness of heart.

The moderate, natural, convenient, and pleasant use of eating, makes the body
a fit and apt instrument for the Soul, yea it preserves and maintains the
whole body and soul in due temper and good disposition. Though it be true
indeed that moderate, due, and convenient fasting, and abstinence from meat
(according to the prescription of our Savior, and good customs of the Church
and Saints) is good and necessary, disburthening our bodies and minds of many
gross humors, vapors and spirits, and so taking away sloth, dullness, and
many distempers, making our souls to become the more Angel-like, free, quick,
and sprightly in the performance of all spiritual and divine exercises, and so
most apt and well prepared for the conceiving, receiving, and retaining of all
divine and heavenly contemplations, illuminations, and consolations. But this,
fasting, and abstinence is to be used only at due, and convenient times, and
upon occasions, and without superstition, and annoyance to the body and mind.
But usually, a temperate, cheerful diet is best, both for the body and mind.
And such as accustom themselves to a due, moderate, and convenient diet, are
commonly observed to be the most healthful, free, cheerful, happy men, most
fit and best prepared for the performance o^ all good exercises, both corporal
and mental, both humane and heavenly: but of this convenient diet, and the
good effects thereof, more hereafter.

Against the superstitious refusal of the good and convenient use of meats,
and other blessings of God (as many Papists and others do) I have written
formerly in the book called, The Terrestrial Paradise: and therefore here I
omit the same. Only now I wish the superstitious therein, to read the 14.
Chapter to the Romans: wherein it plainly appears, that such are the weaker
Christians, who are too nice, and superstitious in this kind; and yet also
that we are not to despise, judge, and offend those weak Christians, since
they do it to please God, though superstitiously; but rather that we should
endeavor to convert them from their superstition, mildly, lovingly, and
peaceably, Romans 14. And also, 1 Timothy 4.3, 4, 5.

By this blessing of eating also we may be stirred up to praise and glorify
God, as Saint Paul advises us, 1 Cor. 10.31. and so to love and rejoice in him
the fountain of this, and all blessings. Also to seek and enjoy the
celestial manna, and food of Heaven: that eternal feast of delights and
pleasures, which we expect to enjoy in God himself. Thus much of the benefits
of eating in general, and briefly.

In the next place according to my former method) I think I shall not need to
study a way for men to gain food or victuals, for he that has, or can gain
but a very mean estate of riches (of which I have writ before) cannot want
meat and drink largely sufficient: yea nature is so bountiful in this, that
who so has his Arms, and his hands at liberty, need not complain of want.
And it is Saint Paul's command, that if any would not work they should not eat.
2 Thessalonians. 3.10. Enough to suffice nature is everywhere to be had, and what need
we care for more than sufficient, enough is as good as a feast, as the
Proverb says, and indeed better than our usual feasts, yea meals, which are
commonly so intemperate, as we had better to eat much less than we use to
do. Therefore in these ensuing Partitions, I think that somewhat a differing
Method from the former is most necessary; and first to begin with the abuses of
eating, hindering happiness therein; the manner and extent thereof, and after
the dangers and remedies of these abuses; and then the rules, and right order
of a due, good, and convenient diet, also the felicities thereof, etc.

See then first the abuses, and mischiefs thereof.

Many men finding such excellency, benefits, and pleasures in eating (as has
been said) do plunge themselves beyond the good uses thereof into disorderly
and immoderate abuses, hindering themselves of much happiness therein, and
instead thereof causing much mischief and misery.

For now in this intemperate age, gluttony, and disorder domineeres. What a
numberless many of needless Cooks, Taverne-keepers, Comfitmakers, and others
are there in the world, who do daily bring in an unnecessary company of new
inventions, making much more business in the world than needs, in procuring
this and that kind of dainty dish from several countries, and after strange
and nice fashions; whereas with much less cost and trouble we might be much
better served with that which grows at home, and is easy to be found in every
village. Many men do incessantly weary themselves and others in searching the
world for rarities, and compounding of new delicacies to satisfy their pride,
vanity, curiosity, their licentious, unreasonable, unnatural, monstrous
desires, and to sacrifice to that Curtian Gulf, that devouring Minotaure their
bellies, whom the ordinary creatures cannot content in refreshing nature, which
is, and ought to be sweetly pleased, and contented with moderation and reason.
But these will needs overbalance, and overwhelme Nature with superfluities,
both in quality and quantity; insomuch as some, like gurmandizing Helluo's
will eat enough to suffice many reasonable men: some men will eat four or
five full meals in a day, again and again, before the former meal be well
digested. Others sit two or three hours at a meal, and so cause in time
abundance of crudities, distempers, corruptions, and dullness both to their
bodies and minds.

It Is strange to think how men will stretch their bellies to the largest size,
swell them as big as blown bags; stuff and cramme them even top full: so
long and often pampering their paunches, as if they did not eat to live, but
live to eat, and eat to dye before their time. So like cormotants, they eat
as if they had obtained Polyxenus wish, even to have their necks as long as
Cranes, the more pleasantly (or rather monstrously) to glut down their
gobbets, not regarding all this while, how they spoil themselves; but still
endeavoring by all allurements of Cookery, to provoke their Epicurean
stomachs (though already oppressed) by their too curious sallets, sauces, and
a multitude of idle devices. These abuses are so common, so little regarded,
and not blamed as they deserve to be, as methinkes I could afford to write them
over again. What excess, what a multitude, and exquisite preparation of
viands, and delicacies is now come in request, and it is our custom in our
greatest, and most sumptuous superfluities to crave pardon for not providing
enough.

In our age many men (with Alphonsus that Epicurean King of Arragon) could most
unworthily wish rather to live ten years in gluttony, and excess, than a
hundred with temperance, and sobriety; and so like Appitius, do swinishly set
their chief happiness in gluttony, as if they were no better than beasts.
They seem to love their guts better than God. Whose God is their belly,
according to Saint Paul's phrase, Phil. 3.17. Their eyes stand out with
fatness, Psalm. 37.7. Than like Iesurun, being waxen fat and grown thick they
kick, they forsake God, etc. Deuteronomy. 32.15. and break his Covenant. Chapt.
31.20. Then they say to their souls, eat drink and be merry, as he said
Luke 12.19. But if they repent not of their gluttony, idleness,
licentiousness, luxury, impiety, God will one day say to them as it follows,
verse. 20. Thou fool thy soul shall be required of thee.

Further, concerning the extent of these abuses. How much does this age go
beyond former Arges in gluttony. How abstemious were many Philosophers and
Heathens, as well as Christians. How sparing was Eliahs diet, That when he had
eaten, the Angel came to him the second time and bid him eat more, but our
superfluity is such, as we had need of Angels to come daily, and bid us eat
less.

It is true indeed that histories in former ages have found out, and branded
some belly-gods with infamy, and disgrace, insomuch as Maximinus, Geta, Galba,
Caligula, Heliogabulus, Sardanapalus, Vitellius, Tiberius, Lucullus, Sergius
Aurata, Abdius of Rome, Fabius, called also for his gluttony Gurges, and the
rest who are registered in the list of gluttons; rot in their corruptions, and
therefore lie more covered with infamy than with earth. But certainly never did
intemperance extend and spread it self in all respects more than in our times.
If ever that saying were true, it is in our age: That many more perish by
intemperance, than the sword.

Had Plato lived in our days, surely he would have turned his divine
eloquence to the praise of those Syracusians, whom in his time he taxed of
gluttony for filling their bellies twice a day: for these men in respect of our
usages and customs may seem great masters of temperance. He that with us in
our age eats but two good meals a day is applauded (and well he may in our
climate, if he be an able sound man) for a person of great temperance, and
singular good diet.

How many excellent, Heroical spirits, noble and generous Gentlemen in our
times, who have had ingenuous and liberal education, might have lived many
happy years in great prosperity, shined like bright stars in their Spheres,
and much good might have reflected from them to the Commonwealth, Country, and
to their friends also, if they had not too much prostituted themselves to
intemperate licentiousness, and so glutted and spoiled both their bodies and
souls.

SECTION II. The dangers, and abuses of eating ought to be eschew'd, since the
same causes much evil, misery, and hinders happiness therein.
THat we may avoid the abuses of eating, and so be happy therein; let us view
and hate the evil and miserable effects thereof.

Though King Solomon says, There is nothing better than that a man should eat
and drink. etc. Eccles. 5.25. that is in a good and temperate manner, yet a
disorderly and intemperate diet does a man very much hurt and mischief: It
does especially hinder and annoy Students, idle Gallants, and such as use
little exercise or stirring of the body, as shopkeepers, and diverse others,
who live in great Towns and Cities: for hereby health is decayed, the body
becomes sluggish, noisome, ill sented, and full fraught with mucke, and
excrements, causing crudities, rheumes, distillations, obstructions, oppression
of stomach, appoplexie, epilepsie, and many woeful distempers and maladies.
And such a disorderly intemperate diet, not only hurts our selves, but osten
propagates noisome hereditary diseases to posterity.

Hereby also life is shortened, as the Wise man signifies, By surfeiting (says
he) many have perished, but he that dieteth himself prolongeth his life. And
that sentence of his is worthy most diligent consideration, who says, The
sword has killed thousands, but g^uttony ten thousands. And that by the worst
kinds of diseases, and death, for by reason of a multitude of distempered and
ill humors caused by intemperance, is usually occasioned unnatural loathsome
diseases, and distempers, painful sicknesses, and violent death.

Let me here tell what is written of Gorgius. That he spent his whole
Patrimony, rich revenues in feasting and intemperance; spoiled both his body
and mind by gluttony, filled his belly full of noisome crudities and humors,
grew extreme fat and foggie, his cheeks became like blown bags, his belly
hung over his knees like an Artificial Penthouse; his legs by hydropticke
humors were grown big enough to bear Goliath, and yet so weak and
painful as they could scarce bear this gluttonous Monster: In sum, he
became filled with a multitude of noisome diseases, and so in raging pains and
distempers he died. Thus By riotous feasting Gorgius spent his pelf.
Spoiled his body, and so killed himself.


To proceed, by reason of a disorderly intemperate diet are engendered abundance
of unnecessary humors, stopping the passages of the spirits, cloying and
filling the joints, and the whole body too full of rheumes and moisture;
causing dullness, drowzinesse, stupidity, sloth, and lumpishnesse. Every man
may in time find in himself, how prejudicial, both to his body and mind a
usual, full, intemperate diet is in this kind.

Also by reason hereof, the spirits are annoyed and distempered, whereby the
passions become enthralled, and the mind prone to all sensual and evil
desires; insomuch as it is observed that many intemperate gluttonous men are
commonly enemies to virtue and goodness; examples and maintainers of
dissoluteness and impiety.

By this means of an intemperate disorderly diet, the memory and understanding
is also dulled and stupefied, and so the mind becomes heavy and unapt for
the performance of the functions proper thereunto; such as are, study, prayer,
meditation: In such sort as the quickness and activity of the soul is quite
dampt, utterly disabled, and made unfit for any good excellent employments, to
conceive or receive deep and divine contemplations, or heavenly illuminations,
by reason of the corruption and burdensome fullness of a distempered
disordered body.

Wherefore let us by all means avoid intemperate and disorderly eating: It
seems we should rather put a knife to our throat then spoil our selves with
gluttonous eating. Prove. 23.1.2. And when we have eaten and are full, then let
us beware lest we forget the Lord, etc. Deuteronomy. 6.11. Let us pray with wise Agur.
Feed me O Lord with food convenient for me, lest I be full and deny thee, or
lest I want, etc. Prove. 30.8.9.

So let us eschew all abusive intemperate eating, and accustom our selves to
such a good, moderate, and convenient course of diet, as I intend to treat of
in the next ensuing Sections; which if we use our selves unto (as shall be
dilated) will be sufficient, pleasant, and most beneficial.

It is only an ill custom that increases the appetite and desire beyond a due
measure and order, wherefore if we have by intemperance brought our stomachs
to an inordinate desire of eating: let us now alter the same by a contrary good
custom. It is safer for bodily health to decline an ill custom in this kind
by degrees, then suddenly, in as much as sudden alterations do much distemper
and endanger the body: but if the same be by little and little abated, it
brings the stomach by degrees to a good disposition and temper; and so
contracts the same as its former greediness will be abated, and it will be
contented with that which is sufficient, as appears by some students, and
others, who having lived a sedentary life, and used to eat three or four
meals in a day, finding the same to dull their bodies and minds, have abated
of their usual customs, and by little and little brought their stomachs to
desire but two meals in a day, so as they have been as well pleased
therewith, and so in much better temper then formerly. And let us know that we
may still eat such and so much as is necessary, sufficient, most pleasant and
beneficial in all respects, as shall be showed, and which is such a due
proportion and order, as is to be dilated in the following Sections.

SECT. III. Rules concerning a right order, and due proportion of diet, with
some cautions therein.
TO the intent that we may be happy in respect of eating, let us duly order
and use the same; otherwise being abused the same becomes evil, and will turn
to our annoyance and misery. We ought therefore rightly to order and moderate
our selves in this matter, eating so much, of such kind, and in such sort, as
may maintain our bodies and minds in good temper, and not any way distemper
and annoy the same.

But forasmuch as there is great difference in respect of the several kinds
of meat, of the climate, the time and manner of eating, and the age,
complexion, and constitution of our bodies, and of our accustomary manner of
living and exercise, this matter would require a very large discourse, but I
shall only endeavor to give a taste concerning some principal matters
herein, yet so much as perchance will be necessary in this compendious
discourse.

First, briefly then concerning such as are of a phlegmatic complexion, of a
dull, slow, lazy condition. It is best for them to use somewhat a sparing diet
(especially at supper) easy of digestion, dry, warm, free from vapors, not
too fat and foggie, roast rather then sod, bread white, and well baked, to eat
a crust thereof, or some other hard and dry morsel at the end of their meals
after drink. Herbs and roots, hot and dry are best for them; to name only
some few and common, as Marigold, Sperage, Persley, Penny-Royall, Rosemary,
Sage, Marjoram, Baume, Bettony, Hysop, Time, Savory, Origan, Stychas, Cowslip,
young Cresses, Vervin, Setwell, Germander, Angellico, the flowers of Meliot and
Camomill, Basil roots, and the rest which are hot and dry in operation. Also
Salt, salted meats, Mustard and the like are sometimes good for them, as
likewise Pepper, Nutmeg, Cloves, Macis, Ginger, Cinnamon, and other Spices.

Also concerning such as are of a Sanguine complexion, and of voluptuous,
vain, and sensual conditions, also for young men, a moderate diet, cool,
soluble, and of little nourishment, is most convenient for them; As also herbs
that are cold and dry in operation, such as are Endive, Succory, Sorrel,
Borrage, Buglosse, Strawberry-leaves, Cinqfoile, and others: Also let them use
Fumitary, Seen, and such others as purge and cleanse the blood: As also opening
potions, Julips and the like.

Now for such as are of a choleric complexion, of impatient, rash, or of
quick, active, sturring conditions, a larger quantity of diet may be allowed
to them then to the phlegmatic, so as their diet be not too salt, hot, hard,
and dry, but rather it should be cool, fresh, moist, and soluble; And they
may the rather eat such a more plentiful diet then others, because their hot
and dry bodies are better, and sooner able to digest the same; And because such
a liberal diet does allay the impatiencie, and the extravagant lightness and
wandering of their spirits. And therefore solid meats are not amiss for them;
Fishes are cooling and good for them, especially fresh Fish: Also all cooling
herbs, as Lettuce, Sorrel, Endive, Buglosse, Fumitory, Borage, Spinach,
Beets, Violet leaves, Primrose, Purslane, Water Lillies, and the like: Also
Cucumers, Melons, Apples, especially baked or sod, and after cold; Plummes,
especially Damsons, stu'd Prunes, and such other cool or moist things.

And also for such men as are of a melancholy complexion, of sad, timorous, and
sullen conditions; likewise for old men, a temperate diet is most convenient,
and such as is easy of digestion, warm, sod, young, moist, and of good juice,
and nourishment. Butter, Honey, and all such things as are hot and moist in
operation; As also all cordial herbs and spices which revive and quicken the
spirits, as Marigold, Rosemary, Marjoram, Sage, Baulme, Bettony, Hysop, Time,
Savory, Borage, Buglosse, Clove-gilliflowers, Cowslip flowers: Also Ginger,
Cloves, Nutmeg, Indian Nut, Cinnamon, Saffron, are said to be cordial; with all
other things which do revive and comfort the heart and spirits are good for
them.

But of these directions concerning diet, with diverse other tending to the
rectifying of humors, and to the health and welfare both of the body and mind,
I have written more at large in a former book called, The happy mind.
Therefore now I proceed.

Some Physicians say that the most soluble and lightest meat, that which is
easiest of digestion, is best to be first eaten at meals, because then the
same will better digest, and sooner descend after concoction, whereas if last
eaten after more hard and binding meat is by the same hindered to descend, and
so being digested before the other is apt to putrify and engender crudities,
the cause of obstructions and many diseases; yet some are of opinion that the
Stomach mingles all confusedly together, making thereof that which they call
Chylus; yet the safest way is best to be taken, and experience may teach us
that a due and convenient order is good. But indeed it is best (they say) to
eat but of one or two sorts of meat at a meal, or if of several, that they
differ not much in quality.

For the quantity, let the strength of our several stomachs be our best
guide; and let us keep rather within then exceed the same. Three reasonable
meals in a day is sufficicient for any complexion, and two for such as are
phlegmatic, which proportion is allowed and commended by the best Physicians
of our times, to such as are in health and of a good temper, and for our
climate in England. There ought to be six at least or eight hours between
each meal to such healthy well tempered men. And it is best to eat when the
stomach and appetite desires, and is by such a distance of time well prepared
for it, and the former meal well digested. And sometimes to forbear a meal,
or fast a day till the evening, or to eat but a little therein; (especially to
such as are phlegmatic) does cleanse and purify both the body and mind, and
makes the same the more free, apt, and fit for all good exercises and
contemplations.

Somewhat more may be allowed to be eaten in Winter then in Summer; and in our
Northern cold, then in a more hot climate. So likewise (which is usually
rectified naturally) children and old men by reason of the debilitie of nature
are not able to receive much at once, and therefore eat little, yet somewhat
often. Lusty young able men of strong constitution, good stomachs, and
digestion, usually do, and may eat more then weak, crazie, sickly people. A
spare diet, and especially a light supper is best for such men as are subject
to phlegm, rheumes, and defluxion, and it is good for them to stay up or walk
an hour or two after supper before they go to bed. Lean choleric men find
much hurt by long abstinence from meat, and so (it is said) do such as are
much subject to engender wind in their stomachs; therefore such may eat more
and oftener then the phlegmatic. It seems also by common experience that such
as live in the Country, especially in a clear and sharp air, and do use labor
and exercise, can well digest a meal in a day more (though their meals be
also larger) then such as live in close Cities and Towns with little exercise
of body.

Now to add some cautions in, and excitations too, the observance of the
former Rules, increasing our happiness therein. All which Rules and
prescriptions before mentioned in this Section, we need not too p^ecisely to
observe, as some men over nicely do, bringing themselves to overmuch care and
slavery, in the observation and caution about the number and diversities of the
same Rules, and diverse others, prescribed by many Physicians. For why, sometimes
upon occasion, if we be drawn into some excesses, diminutions, and
digressions, if they be not much nor often, are of little prejudice to bodily
health; so as our usual custom be to observe a temperate and good diet. And
also it is observed, they that tie themselves to a constant strict course, do
contract their stomachs to such a habit, as they are not able to endure errors
when they happen: Wherefore it seems sometimes it is not amiss to digress,
so as it be but seldom and little, and so as we return to, and usually keep
an orderly and temperate course therein.

Nor are we by any means to contemn such Rules, concerning an orderly and
temperate diet, but to embrace and observe the same, as far as we may
conveniently, without too much care and perplexity therein, for that, much,
long, or often digresses therefrom, are very pernicious and hurtful, and are
an occasion of almost all manner of distempers and diseases both of mind and
body. And we are to know, that as all virtue, so this of temperance is most
perfect and pure when it is observed in the most orderly and exact manner,
which if we cannot perform so precisely and exactly as we should, yet the
mere observance thereof may be in some sort beneficial.

Which Rules we shall not only be willing, but think our selves very happy
and much rejoice to observe, and use with all conveniencie, if we consider the
easiness, pleasantness, and sufficiency of such an orderly, convenient, and
temperate course of diet, and the many benefits which spring from thence,
especially to such as are studious and religious, of which in the ensuing
Sections.

SECT. IIII. A moderate diet and due order therein is sufficient, easy,
pleasant, and most beneficial.
THat such a due order and proportion of diet, as is prescribed in the former
Section, is sufficient and easy to be observed, appears; for as much as a
reasonable man desires no more, no otherwise, and he thinks it a most
pleasant thing to be temperate: whereas, disorder and intemperance displeases,
and perchance distempers him; yea, even very bruits may teach some men; they
are even as well pleased with convenient food as dainty, and eat not to
distemper, but satisfy; How seldom do we find any of them diseased,
unless by man's misusing them, otherwise they are usually sound and
uncomplaying.

And by experience we know that two or three reasonable meals in a day is
largely sufficient to content any stomach, which is not disorderly accustomed
to more.

And to the intent we may the rather know that such an order and quantity of
diet is largely sufficient, let me tell how diverse Physicians and others have
prescribed and used much more nice and strict allowances as one meal a day,
and some about fourteen or sixteen ounces; and do exact much more
observation and caution, about the quality of diet, the times of eating, and
prescribe such a number of Rules concerning the several kinds of diet, as
well compounds as simples, as would very much perplex some men, and bring them
to perfect slavery to perform so many and several Injunctions. And it is not
unlike but many of them have observed in themselves, such strict Rules as they
have prescribed to others, so far as conveniently they might, and that they
thought themselves happy in so doing. We read of the Inhabitants of the old
world, also of the Indians called Pandorae, and another sort called Seres,
likewise of the Floridans, also of a people called Macrobii in Africa, and of
the sect of Essaeans in Iudaea, that lived very long, and fared very hardly.
The like we read of the Romans, the Arcadians, the Portugals, and the Persians
in ancient times, that they used a very spare diet, whereby they lived long,
and had little acquaintance with Physic or Physicians. So also we read of
Gallen, Plato, Isocrates, Tully, and diverse others, that used a very temperate
sparing diet, and yet lived long. It is recorded of Herodicus, that being but
of a very crazie constitution of body; yet by virtue of a very precise diet
attained to the age of an hundred years. And of Socrates, that by reason of a
temperate sober diet, he had always a strong body, and lived all his time in
good health. And that Calanus the Philosopher lived so seventy three years
without any sickness. Asclepiades relied so much upon his good temperate diet,
that (it is said) he would lay a great wager against fortune, that he would
never fall sick, but die merely of old age. How course was the diet of Daniel
and his three companions, and of Saint John Baptist! It is strange to read of
the prodigious abstinence of diverse ancient Hermits, Anachorites, and Fathers
of the Church in former ages; who are registered in sundry Authors! Many of them
eat but once a day, and fared only with bread and water, or with herbs and
some other mean sustenance, whereby they lived very long and healthie. And of
that admirable example of the Venetian Lodo vicke Cornaro, who did eat and
drink very sparingly many years together by a just weight, by which means he
recovered his health, and lived long after, continuing an able man, both in
strength and senses, till he came to be above a hundred years of age! Indeed,
if we (especially in our climate) should attempt to observe and to keep
exactly, such a prodigious, severe, and strict course of diet, as some men have
thus prescribed and exemplified, it might hinder the vigor and welfare both of
our bodies and minds, causing much weakness, melancholy, and distempers; and
would be too great, rigidnesse, slavery, and superstition, unless the
temperature of our bodies required the same. Yet this good use we may make
thereof (to which intent I write the same) that seeing learned and wise men
have prescribed such strict and rigid courses of diet, and many men have lived
long and in good health by using such courses; and being accustomed thereunto
thought the same sufficient, and pleasant: how much more should we think a
far better, more reasonable, large, and dainty diet, (such as our later and
more experienced Physicians approve of, for our climate; namely, two or three
reasonable meals in a day, of such good and wholesome food as our Country
usually affords, in a due and orderly manner) to be most sufficient, easy to
be observed, pleasant, and delightful.

The stomach being used to such a temperate diet, and being thereby well
prepared, it makes ordinary diet equal, yea, more pleasant to the temperate
man, then rare dainties to the idle gluttonous man, whose body is usually
unhealthie, and stomach out of temper by disorder and excess.

And as such a temperate, orderly, and convenient diet is sufficient in all
respects for nature, health, and delight; so also is it most excellent and
beneficial. Though sometimes, variety of meat, and a free diet be not amiss
(especially for such as are choleric, lean, and such as use much exercise
and labor) yet let men (especially phlegmatic, gross men, also Citizens,
and such as live sedentary lives without exercises and stirring, and most
especially such of them as are studious and religious) seriously consider what
excellent benefits, many learned Physicians, do tell us, proceed from a good
temperate, spare, and mean diet; and as they see occasion, let them observe
the same. These ensuing considerations thereof require the soul to be at
leisure for them. I shall endeavor to collect briefly some of the principal
benefits thereof.

They tell us, that a temperate good diet is an occasion of good concoction,
which makes good blood, and ingendreth good spirits; That the same prevents
crudities, rheumes, obstructions, and such diseases as are bred thereby, which
are indeed almost all usual maladies: yea, that a tempe ate, spare diet
cures, or at least mitigateth all those diseases that have been so bred in us
by intemperance, disorder and fullness, though already seized upon us, by
making an easy and general evacuation in the body; consuming the crudities,
rheumes, and superfluous humors therein, extenuating that which is
over-thickned, opening obstructions, and so unlocking all the passages of the
humors and spirits. That hereby also headache and dizzinesse is cured, fluxes
stayed, loathsome Itches taken away; In sum, all the superfluous, corrupted,
and ill humors in the body whatsoever, are hereby drained and cleared. All
which is done easily, without disturbance, without pain, without cost and
loss of time, without stirring and distempering the humors; so as this most
excellent medicine of a temperate and spare diet seems to be the best
physic that can be. How many men do we read and often hear of, who have
been subject to Gouts, and other diseases by physic incurable, have yet
quite recovered their health, or at least their diseases have been much
mitigated, and eased by such a good, temperate, and sparing diet?

By such a good, temperate diet, the body is kept clean from all noysomnesse,
and filthiness, and made healthie, agill, lightsome, and expedite to perform
the motions appertaining thereunto. Sound and quiet sleep is also hereby
caused; the temperate man gets up at peep of day, (says one) fresh as the
morning it self, full of vigor and activity both of body and mind, well
prepared, and apt for all manner of affairs. The son of Syrach affirms
this. Sound sleep comes of moderate eating (says he) and a temperate man
rises early, and his wits are with him. Ecclus. 31.

Such a diet is also an occasion of long life. It is most certain and cannot
be denied, but a good, temperate, convenient diet does prolong the life of man;
in so much as by virtue thereof a man's life may be happily lengthned to
well-nigh a hundred years or more, as has been plainly showed by the former
examples. And experience (as well as millions of examples in former ages)
teaches that by reason of such a diet, many men attain to a good and happy
old age.

The same also is an occasion of a calm, quiet death; for such men as have
been accustomed to such a good temperate diet, having thereby prevented evil
humors, there is but little inward cause to molest them, so as their souls
part from their bodies easily and quietly, with little disturbance of nature
and passions.

A temperate and spare diet also takes away the occasions of sloth and
dullness, which are abundance of unnecessary humors, stopping the passages of
the spirits, cloying the joints, and filling them too full of moisture; these
being taken away, the spirits are cleared and purified: so as the mind also is
less clogged with the gross vapors of fullness and repletion; whereby the
senses are kept sound, the passions mollified, the affections well tempered,
evil concupiscence abated, and the whole soul freed from abundance of
encumbrances. Hereby also the reason is cleared, the wit sharpened, the
understanding soliditated, and the whole soul made more cheerful, quick,
sprightly, piercing, and free to apprehend, receive, and retain all good, all
divine, and excellent matters.

If we peruse all histories, we shall find, that such as are registered for
excellent in the list of Princes, Philosophers, and Soldiers, and as men of
excellent spirits, and of most heroical performances for the benefit of
mankind, are commonly also registered for the friends and followers of
temperance, as was Cyrus, Augustus, Alexander Severus, Socrates, Marcus Cato,
Epimnondas, The Roman Curii, and Fabritii, with many others. The Lacedaemonians,
as valiant as they were, made express profession of virtue and temperance. And
we may always observe that temperate men are commonly virtuous and pious men.
The wise man says. Blessed art thou, O Land, when thy Princes eat in due
season, etc. Eccles. 10.16.

To conclude, let us then most willingly embrace this divine virtue of
temperance: And so in a good temperate and convenient manner; let us eat and
drink with joy and pleasure ( Eccles. 9.7.) the rather since it is (as has
been said) so good, and so comely a thing so to do ( Eccles. 2.24.) and
likewise so sufficient, so pleasant, and so beneficial.

SECTION V. The good and divine use of Eating.
WHether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do else, let all be done to the
praise and glory of God, says Saint Paul. 1. Cor. 10.31. This is the best use
of eating, to the praise and glory of God. And as was saint Paul's precept, so
his practice: He took bread, and gave thanks to God, etc. Acts 27.35. For
this use (says he) God has created the same to be received with thanksgiving
of them which believe and know the truth, 1. Tim. 4.3. for every creature of
God is good, and nothing is to be refused, if it be received with
thanksgiving, etc. verse. 4.5. I have written formerly against Popish
superstitious refusal of the good use of meats, and therefore not now to
write thereof; only methinkes that the first five verses of this chapter (1.
Tim. 4.) is sufficient in this respect to give any reasonable Christian good
satisfaction. Therefore let not us superstitiously despise, and refuse the good
use of such gifts and blessings of God, but rather in a good and temperate
manner use them to the health and welfare both of our bodies and minds (as has
been showed) and as here Saint Paul advises us to the praise and glory of God.

And since our Country and condition affords plenty and variety for our
entertain, Oh let us be very thankful to our most gracious Creator, for the
liberal use of these his creatures, and acknowledge this unexpresseable
mercy, that we have not yet according to our demerits endured that grievous
and insupportable misery of hunger and famine, which other Nations, Kingdoms,
Countries, and Families have suffered, but have food both corporal and
spiritual, even Gods plenty! And in the midst of our dainties and varieties:
let us sometimes remember the misery wherewith poor hungry people are
tortured. Heaven might have given them plenty and us want. Oh then, let us
especially at seasonable times bestow some part of our plenty on their
miserable wants. Blessed are such as give of their bread and meat to the
poor. Prove. 22.9. Ezekiel. 10.7. Luke 14.13. Yea, Jesus Christ himself takes this
as done unto himself, and will reward the same of his free grace, with a
heavenly Kingdom. Matthew. 25. Then shall the King say, come ye blessed of my
Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, for I was an hungry, and ye
gave me meat, etc. verse. 34.35. Oh blessed souls that releeve Jesus Christ in
his poor members!

And let the sweetness, pleasantness, and benefits, of these terrestrial,
external felicities, excite us to seek for, and taste of that heavenly Manna
of divine grace, which is so excellent, that many Saints of God, even in this
life, have and do enjoy a continual feast within them, which is the
tranquillity of a good conscience. And indeed these pleasures of eating, and
other the like enjoyances (which are but little rays, glimpses, and reflections
of eternal heavenly delights) do principally serve to this purpose, to
enlighten and guide us to the search and acquisition of that fountain, that
ocean of all true delights and sweetness, that bread of life, God himself,
and of his heavenly pleasures and felicities, which we may already taste of in
some degree; for in the Church of God, in his divine service, love, and
goodness, there is plenty of spiritual dainties. He allows more to his
family then ever Solomon allowed daily to his. Every day is to them a
continual feast; a Christmas day, a feast above that of Ahasuerus, that of the
Roman Galba, or of Lucullus; a feast in his holy Mountain of Syon, a feast of
fat things full of marrow, etc. Esaias. 25.6. Wisdom has killed her Oxen
already, has mingled her Wine, has furnished her table, and most lovingly
invites us to come to eat of her bread, etc. Prove. 9.2.5. There is the milk
of the word, the bread of the Sacrament, the Oil of the spirit, that heavenly
unction which cheeres the countenance, and divinely glads the hearts of the
Israel of God. There the faithful espoused soul, the Bride of the Kings son
is invited and led into his fair banqueting house, and into his pleasant
garden of Myrrh and spices, eats. Honey with the Honey-combe, drinks wine
with milk; yea, eats and drinks abundantly of these heavenly dainties. Cant.
5. Oh, if we were but truly capable to relish the sweetness hereof, we
should be extasied with divine joy!

Yea, our beloved Savior Jesus Christ himself, offers, knocks, calls, and if
we will open unto him, he will come into us, and will sup with us, and we with
him. Rev. 3.20. Oh what heavenly cates, viands, and dainties can they want,
whom God himself pleases to come in unto, to dwell with, and to feast
withal! What happiness may they enjoy with whom the God of all happiness is
present; yea, who may enjoy God himself: for I am the bread of life, says our
Savior, John 6.48. which came down from Heaven, verse. 51. And he that eats
of this bread shall live for ever, verse. 58. yea, has eternal life, verse. 54.
It seems we begin eternal life already, enjoy Heaven on Earth in some degree;
yea, God himself within us, verse. 56. Oh happy, thrice happy, infinitely,
Eternally happy are such men then, who can taste of and enjoy this bread of
life, this heavenly bread of eternal life! Oh sweet Savior give us daily
this bread. Let us especially endeavor to taste and feed on this divine food,
by faith in our hearts, when we repair to the Sacrament thereof, even with
sweetest heavenly joy and thanksgiving.

Oh that men would therefore praise the Lord, for he satisfies the longing
soul, and fills the hungry soul with his goodness, Psalm. 107.8.9! Oh taste
and see that the Lord is good. Psalm. 34.8. The young Lions do lack and suffer
hunger, but they that seek the Lord shall not want any good thing, verse. 10.

To proceed, let this happiness of eating, make us often mindful of that
celestial, eternal love-feast, the Lambs Supper, Rev. 19.9. where Heaven
shall be our banqueting house; the Angels our attendants, and Jesus Christ our
Bridegroom, and where we shall enjoy millions of pleasures for ever. Then
shall we be abundantly satisfied with the pleasures of Gods own house. Psalm.
36.8. Then shall we everlastingly feed on that most delitious Manna, the food
of Heaven, the sweetness of eternal joy and happiness; which if we could but
truly think of, even in this life, it were sufficient to charm our spirits
with sweetest, divinest heavenly pleasures.

The sweetest delights are divine and heavenly, and the way to relish them
beyond all sweets is often to muse and taste of them, for having our souls
often contemplating and tasting such delitious heavenly dainties, the same
extracteth from thence this virtue, to bring us into a ravishment of delights.

How many men have been so transported in the divine contemplation of the
sweetness of God, and of his heavenly excellencies, as they have seemed
already to feast on the joies of eternity. O my sweet Lord, let me also I pray
thee often feast of thy heavenly joys: thou know my soul desires to taste
of no delights but thee, in thee, and for thy glory; and since all goodness,
all sweetness, and the fullness of all delights is only in thee (for what is
Heaven oh Lord without thee) let my soul I desire thee, be filled with thy
sweetness, and then surely I shall enjoy the delights of Heaven within me.

THE FIFTH PARTITION: Of Drinking.
SECTION. I. The benefits of Drinking in general, also the abuses and extent
thereof in this drinking Age.
MY servants (says God) shall eat, drink, rejoice, and sing for joy of
heart. Esa. 65.13.14. So then, if we be Gods servants, we may eat and drink
with merry hearts, for God accepts our works. Eccles. 9.7. This also is good
and comely, and the gift of God, Eccles. 2.24. and 3.13.5.18. etc.

As eating, so drinking also is a natural action and pleasure, necessary for
the sustentation and reparation of Nature, especially the humid parts of the
body. It preserves health and helps many infirmities. And for this purpose
S. Paul advises Timothy to drink a little wine, etc. 1. Tim. 3.23.

Drinking does help the distribution of food through the body, it does in some
sort nourish the body, and preserves life it self, without which man cannot
long well subsist. It seems to be of as great utility as meat, and the want
thereof more irksome and grievous.

It comfort the miserable, sorrowful, and heavy hearted, as King Solomon
signifies. Prove. 3.23. It is delightful, it cheereth and quickneth the mind,
Judges 9.13. It makes glad the heart of man says King Dav^d. Psalm 104.15.
Increases mirth. Eccles. 10.19.

To speak the same again. Hereby thirst is quenched, natural moisture
preserved, good digestion of meat caused, the spirits quickened, and the vigor
and welfare both of body and mind maintained, and sometimes love and
good-fellowship by mutual pledgings and entertainements is thereby increased.

This also may stir us to praise and love God for such his blessings, also to
look up to, and rejoice in him their fountain, and so to search and enjoy that
Celestial Nectar, that water of eternal life, those rivers of pleasures which
are to be enjoyed in and with God himself for ever.

Now concerning the abuses of drinking, and the extent thereof in this drinking
age. Our depraved nature finding and espying such delight and benefits in
drinking (see now a mischief) is prone to go beyond the good uses thereof into
abuses, so hindering our selves of the happiness which otherwise we might have
therein, and causing much evil and misery.

First concerning the manner of these abuses. Many young men of hot,
choleric, and sanguine complexions, and such as are of impatient, light,
unsettled, wavering, and phantasticke conditions, will commonly drink of the
strongest, stalest, wine and beer, adding more fuel to their already too hot
fires, over-heating and inflaming their bodies and spirits, making themselves
more hot, choleric, impatient, phantasticke, idle, etc. Some gross fat men
will usually drink sweet, muddy, thick, new wine, ale, and beer, increasing
their grossness and corpulencie: And so of the like.

But our most ordinary and general fault is, we commonly drink too much hot
and strong wine and drinks; It is a most usual custom when we meet together
to drink beyond a due measure and proportion. And some more then their
strength and brains will afford, perhaps till they are sick, sottish, wild,
or till they tumble, vomit, sleep, or the like. Others there are yet worse
swil-bowles, more notable, strong-brained drinkers, who will swallow whole cups
and cans in abundance, turn through their guts whole barrels in few days, as
much as would suffice twenty or thirty reasonable men, and yet seldom shrink
at it; of these ablebrain'd, Grand, Arch-drinkers, of their common ill
conditions, and how they are more dangerous and worse then weak brained
drinkers, I intend to write in the next Section.

Also in respect of time, both in excess of time, and at unfit times; It is
common that men will sit drinking five or six hours together in Taverns and
tipling-houses, yea, some whole days and nights. And the night (as if they
were in another Horizon, to make our night their day) many men esteem the
only time to roar in; As for sleep (then which indeed nothing is better for
them) they seem to hate it as deaths cater-cozen, and cannot afford to spend
the night so idely, as if God made stars to sleep by. So also when it is fit
they were about other better and necessary business and occasions. And some make
the Lords day of all the days in the week, the especial day to go to the
tap-house and tipple in, and that too as soon as ever they are out of the
Church; yea, many men even in the time of divine service will slide into a
Tavern or Alehouse, and think they are out of the Devils danger, if neither the
Priest, the Justice, the Churchwardens, their Parents, nor Masters see them.

Also in respect of men's estimation and affections. Diverse men love drink too
much, even against nature and reason. They seem to esteem Sack good liquor,
and idle tippling devices and courses above all the felicites of the world
besides; yea, above Heaven and God himself. So as their chief happiness
seems to be little better then the felicity of irrational creatures, a
littleshort pleasure in the throat, and some other idle fugitive delights, the
end whereof is commonly melancholy and sorrow; and yet how many men do esteem
it a brave worthy action to drink stoutly. Though in truth a Horse or a Cow
may do as worthy a business, yet this is the prime boasting and glory of our
swill-bowles and pot-gallants. They think it a victory, eve^ worthy a triumph
(though basely) to make another man (to use their own terms) foxt, flawd,
fuddl'd, paid, scowr'd, peppered, potshot, slasht, casheir'd, and the like.

Now concerning the extent of these drinking abuses, diverse Greeks, as
Agamemnon, Nestor, and Alexander, (yet in their later days only) are in
Histories taxed as infamous for abusive drinking; Also Romans, as Nero,
Caligula, that drink devouring Bonosus, Heliogabulus, and others. Some ancient
writers have taxed the Lydians, the Persians, the Thracians, the Caeltae, and
the Teutons, (by whom is meant the Gauls, and Germans.) But in our age these
abusive drinking courses do extend themselves in almost all the Countries of
the world, among all sorts of people. The Dutch men of all others have greatest
aspersions laid upon them in this kind. The Transilvanians, Wallachians,
Hungarians, and Polanders, are said to drink after the Dutch. The Danes,
Swedes, Norwayans, and of late years the French also are noted of excessive
and riotous drinking; yea, it is said, that abusive drinking is (not only) the
Epidemicall disease or vice (of our English Nation which abounds with an
unnecessary company of Tavernes and Tap-houses) but of the whole world it self.

These drinking abuses extend themselves in respect of all ages, sexes,
conditions, and degrees. Some old men who ought to give better examples will to
the Tavern, tipple, and abuse themselves: And young men also, some by that
time they come to three or four years standing in briches, can travel to the
Tavern and Tap-house, and at sixteen or eighteen years of age, they are
able to commence Masters in the Art of drinking. Some women also will tipple,
smoke, etc.

These drinking abuses are not only used by the most unworthy and worst sort of
men (which is common) but also, by many (else) wise men of good parts, worth,
and degree, and (which is to be sorrowed for) such as are of a fair, loving,
kind, free, pleasant, and sociable carriage and behavior, are often more
allured and carried away (both by inward and outward provocations) to these
drinking courses, then others sottish punie people and sordid Misers, who are
commonly in this respect free. Also these drinking abuses extend themselves to
men of all degrees; not only to Hosts, Tapsters, Pedlers, etc. but also to
many good Tradesemen, of whom many thousand spend on the Sunday and Holidayes
in Tap-houses almost as much as they gain in the week before, to the great
grief, and even undoing of their families; and it is commonly noted the best
workmen are the worst husbands. Also some Constables, Churchwardens, Sidemen,
Alecunners, and the rest, who by the Statute ought to present such abuses, will
herein often abuse themselves; so as it is need to present them. So likewise
some of all sorts, Merchants, Soldiers, Lawyers, Physicians, Gentlemen,
Gallants, and great men; will too much and too often go to and stay at the
Tavern, and tipple, roar, etc.

Seeing these drinking abuses do thus extend themselves, and are so common,
let us take heed they hurt not us.

Timothy was so abstinent in this kind, that Saint Paul bids him drink no more
water but a little wine, for his healths sake. But if Saint Paul were to write
to a number of men in our days, who are so busy with healths, etc. surely he
would charge them, as they loved the health and welfare both of their bodies
and souls, not to drink so much wine, etc.

SECT. II. The abuses of Drinking because of the evil and miserable effects
thereof are to be avoided.
LEt us now briefly view the evil and miserable effects of abusive drinking,
to the intent we may eschew the same, and be happy therein. These evil and
miserable effects are many and various (both concerning body and mind)
according to the several humors and complexions of men; and some proceeding
from excessive moist and cold causes, some from hot, some from corrupted, and
some of mixed causes and distempers. To instance briefly, and first concerning
such as are cold, moist, and phlegmatic men.

Though it be good and comely to eat and drink in a good and temperate manner,
Eccles. 5. Yet Physicians say, that overmuch moisture caused by much and
disorderly drinking (especially of strong drinks) does pester and dull the
brain by the exhalations of a multitude of unnecessary vapors; the
superfluity whereof (by reason of the weakness and coldness of the brain,
after the heat of the liquor is past) remains undigested and raw; and being
there refrigerated, is an occasion of much cold phlegm and rhumes, which
distill into the other parts of the body, and in time, perchance do corrupt
and putrify the same, and fill it full of ill noisome humors and distempers.
These distillations are the fountain and cause of diverse infirmities, as
obstructions, an ill stomach, and loathing of meat, ill digestion, unnatural
thirst, apoplexies and paralysies even depriving some men of their senses, also
a distempered lethargy, or sleepy laziness, yawning, dullness, and heaviness,
dropsies also, and purfinesse, fatness, grosenesse, sweld bellies, gouts, and
hydropticke humors descending into the legs: whence it comes to pass that
oftentimes those cold diseases are engendered in many men, who usually drink
strong and hot drinks, especially to such as are of the phlegmatic
complexion, and sometimes to the sanguine and melancholy. Also the body working
upon the soul by the mediation of spirits and humors, is a cause that from
these cold diseases do proceed many distempers in the mind, as dullness,
heaviness, forgetfulness, drowsinesse, laziness, and a mind unfit for any
good, worthy, excellent actions and contemplations, and in some men even a
deprivation of reason and senses. Hence it is (as we may observe) that there
are many dull, sottish, sleepie, lazy, heavy maudlin tiplers. Wine takes away
the heart. Hosea 4.11.

And also, that excess of strong and hot drinks causes inflammation of
heart, liver, blood, and of the other humors, and the spirits, especially to
such men as are of a hot, choleric, and sanguine complexion, from whence
proceed diverse distempers and diseases; as Vertigo or giddiness in the head,
and pains therein, lightness of the brain, weakness of nerves and
sinnewes, distemperature of spirits; alteration of color and complexion, and
causing in some men fiery looks, pimpled faces, and red noses; also to some
Pleurisy, burning-Feavers, and violent raging sickness and death. By reason
also of these inflammations of humors and spirits, and other hot distempers,
the mind being thereby tickled and distempered becomes vainglorious,
conceited; prone to sensual desires, riot, and all manner of prodigality: also
to anger, contentions, cursings, swearing, slandering, gybing, quarrelling,
fighting, and stabbing. Srong drink is raging. Prove. 20.1.

And further, that excessive drinking causes melancholy and sadness. True it
is, that wine and strong drinks, if moderately used, do heat and quicken
that heavy, cold, dry, thick humor of the spleen, called natural
melancholy, causing mirth and cheerfulness, even in the most surly and
severest people. But in excess, does cool, distemper, and surcharge the
stomach and spleen, with too great a conflux of ill humors, overwhelming,
wasting, dulling, and distempering those good and pure spirits, which otherwise
would cause cheerfulness, and being thereby mixed with such cold phlegm and
distillations as come from the brain after the heat of the liquor is past,
and the superfluous vapors refrigerated therein, occasioneth sadness, sorrow,
sullenness, and heaviness. And this may be noted in many men, who at first,
after they have drunk wine a while, are exceeding joviall, lively, and set
upon a merry pin; but after when they have surcharged their stomachs, and when
the heat of the wine is out of their brain, and the vapors thereof cooled
therein, and distilled, they become exceeding sad, heavy, dull, and
discontented. As for example, a man that is potshot (as they say) with good
Sack at night, look upon him next day in the morning, and see him like the
picture of ill fortune, sad, heavy, sullen, quarrelsome, and discontented, and
looking as if he came lately out of Purgatory.

And these be the effects which proceed from the spirits, of Sack and strong
liquor (if abused) so much approved of, and practiced by our brain-sicke,
dissolute, roaring Gallants, Pot-Poets, and Bacchanalian Students, who use to
tipple and talk Philosophy in the Tavern, and be addle-pated, and ready to
sleep at their books, and in their study, when they come there, and where
perchance they remain exceeding sad and melancholy till they return to the
Tavern again. Hence it is that the frothy wits of many of these our
Pot-blades, and their loud cracklings of laughter do stand at the courtesy of
the Barrel. Without Sack and good liquor their wits and spirits, like
themselves, are even all amort and defunct, chilled and frozen up, but the other
quart or pottle revives them again, and very likely sets their wits, their
spirits, and perchance their noses afire together. But this continues not; this
heat of mirth either is soon overwhelmed and drowned in their excess, and
then they become sickish, adle-pated, quarrelsome, wild, or sullen, or else is
soon cooled and refrigerated in their brain, and then they become very sad
and melancholy.

But see a further mischief, men being thus ingulpht in melancholy and
discontent, will yet again seek to remedy themselves by these drinking
courses which are indeed occasions thereof, and so hinder themselves from
seeking or finding the true means to be eased of this their discontent and
melancholy. It is reported of the Danes, Dutchmen, Polanders, and Boheminans,
that they will go and drink down their melancholy and grief; so with us,
many men will to the Tavern and seek out their joviall companions, as they
call them, to pass away the time in merriment, as they say, and to drink away
their melancholy and discontent; It is true indeed that moderate drinking,
mirth, and good company, is a very good remedy against discontent: But here is
the mischief, excessive drinking and abuses in this kind are occasions to
many men (as has been showed) of their greater grief and melancholy, and the
remedies which they seek herein to cure their disease by this means does
increase the same, so as they do but claw a scab that itches, and might
otherwise be healed. After all these frivolous deferrings, their melancholy and
grief will return and be worse then before, which appears in many men, who
by long custom in such abuses, grow to such an habit of melancholy and
discontent, as they become sad, sorrowful, angry, froward, and quarrelsome,
sometimes even among their cups and merriest companions; and as King Solomon
says, even in laughter their hearts are sorrowful. So that it is only
excessive and abusive drinking which is the cause of all this grief, misery,
melancholy, and discontent, and so hinders happiness therein: And if we
could refrain only the excesses and abuses thereof, it were a good remedy
against discontent and melancholy, and as has been showed, many good benefits
and felicities would spring from the good and moderate use of drinking, and so
we might enjoy the same freely, and be as good fellows, as merry and as
happy as may be; Of which more hereafter.

So it appears by what has been said, that to some men cold and moist, to
others hot distempers both of body and mind, and to many men melancholy and
sadness, are caused by excessive and abusive drinking. Now I might add, that
to some a strange mixture of diseases and distempers are hereby caused,
proceeding of cold, moist, hot, inflamed, corupted, and diverse mixed causes in
one body, in so much as some men thereby become rheumaticke, gross, fat, lazy,
dull, heavy, sullen, melancholy, and full of cold distempers, and yet inflamed
with heat and choler, and so also very wild, testy, braine-sicke, choleric,
and froward, as appears in many of our tun-bellied Hosts, Hostesses some Dutch
swill-bowles, and others. In so much as many of them become eve^ replete with
ill humors in the body and malign dispositions in the mind. Therefore let us
by all means eschew these abusive drinking courses.

Here let me write of a common error in the world, by which multitudes are
deceived and led away to these drinking abuses. The error is this, many men do
think the worst drunkards to be the bravest men; that is, men who can drink
abundance, and make a common custom of it, and yet bear it well, and come off
finely, as they say, and not reele, staggar, vomit, sleep, or the like; why,
such a man they commonly esteem no drunkard, or at least not so bad as
weake-brain'd, soon distempered drinkers, though these notable common
strong-brain'd drinkers have such gorges as to devour as much as would suffice
two or three families, who will glory to drink it off, if it were a mile to
the bottom, as they say, who will sit from morning till night, or from thence
till morning, drink with all companies, and yet scarce fail or blunke at it;
And yet such men forsooth are accounted no drunkards, but rather brave
fellows, the only gallants and sparks; boon companions, Low-Counrey
Soldiers, stiff blades, steel to the back, and the like; yea, they are
applauded and reputed by some the bravest men in the Kingdom. Now the truth
is, that such stout, able, impudent, roaring, fine, plausible, methodicall,
common strong-brain'd drinkers, are commonly the worst, most dangerous, most
exemplary drunkards, and most threatened in the sacred Scriptures. To make this
appear more plainly. First, as maybe noted, they are commonly as bad, or
rather of worse conditions then others of weaker brains. It is true indeed,
they all are bad, and that the weaker braind are more frail and open, and so
discover their faults and imperfections more apparently, and are then most
frail and faulty, when their brains are distempered. But these strong
brained, fine, plausible, common drinkers are usually (which is worse) more
slily, cunningly, closely, and pernitiously vicious. Many of them can strangely
countenance and color vice and lewdnes with brave shows, with Art and fair
terms, insomuch as they can maintain dissolute courses with a pernicious show
of a good face and good words, and seem to brag of, and glory in
wickedness. Yea many of them can impudently (as well as slily) maintain vice
and wickedness, and can outbeard goodness, and seem to dash it out of
countenance, and so openly and audaciously oppose virtue, piety, and the
professors thereof. And although they are politic enough to carry themselves
fairly in some companies, and seem then to be of good conditions; yet take
them among their fellows and familiars, such as are of the same garb, such as
will seem to approve of their courses. and you may observe how dissolute and
impious they are, even by their courses, as among diverse other their idle
obscene baudy talk, their swearing, cursing, ill wishes, ill counsel,
maintaining of vice, gybing, scoffing at, and abusing of piety and goodness;
railing at and reproaching of Ministers, Magistrates, and all good virtuous,
pious men, all that live above their swinish, idle, dissolute courses.
Secondly, they are more dangerous and exemplary; for weak brained drinkers,
almost every one sees their faults and imperfections, they are examples whereby
men use to take heed; yea, even themselves often are ashamed of and dislike
themselves, and often perchance repent, after they are sober, and if they be
not extremely besotted, there is hope of amendment; but the stiff able
drinkers, such as call themselves boon companions, being more cunning, more
plausible, more liked of, accompanied, followed, applauded and soothed up in
their ill courses (and so become conceited therein) seldom repent or leave the
same, but rather will boast, brag of, and glory in these their idle, lewd,
vicious courses. I wish there were not many Gentlemen of these ill conditions,
but such are indeed the shame of Gentlemen. And these notable, stiff, able,
strong-brain'd common drinkers, plausible blades, and as they call themselves
fine companions (though of many course conditions) are the principal occasions
that others are drawn to these ill courses; and therefore most dangerous, and
to be avoided. Thirdly, the Scriptures treating of drunkenness in the
greatest woes and threatenings thereof, chiefly and mainely aims at such men
as these; As for example, Woe (says the Prophet to them that are mighty to
drink wine, and men of strength to mingle strong drink, etc. Esaias. 5.22. etc.
There Is for strong-brain'd, able, mighty, stout drinkers. Again, Woe to them
that rise up early to follow strong drink, that continue until night, till
wine inflame them. Esaias. 5.11. also Prove. 23.30. There Is for them that rise to
be at it, and stay long by it. Again, Woe to them that drink by bowls, etc.
Amos 6.6. There Is for methodicall drinkers, such as drink by measures, by whole
cups, healths, etc. and will not leave so much as a pearl (as they say)
behind. Also Woe to them that go and seek out mixed wine, Prove. 23.30. There Is
for walking Drinkers, that go from one Parish, and from one tippling house to
another to seek it out. Also Woe be to him that provokes his neighbor to
drink, and makes him drunken; There Is for such plausible drinkers as allure,
draw, or provoke others to drinking courses, and for bragging victorious
drinkers, that think it a brave thing to fox (as they say) or fuddle their
neighbors and companions. Thus we see the most evil, pernicious, dangerous,
exemplary, woeful, and miserable drinkers, are the strongbrain'd, able,
devoted, common, methodicall, walking, plausible, provoking, victorious
drinkers, and that they are even worse then weake-brain'd drinkers, contrary to
the common opinion and error whereby many thousands are led to these abuses.

In the next place let me render some examples of the effects of excessive and
abusive drinking; and first for recreations sake amidst more serious discourse,
a few merry or ridiculous stories thereof, which I have read or heard of. One
being foxt, and coming late over a bridge, chanced to fall into a ditch,
knee-deepe in mud and water, where not being able to get out, fell asleep;
toward morning one coming by when he began to wake, heard him say aloud; Thou
whore, why do thou lay no more clothes upon my feet. Another seeing a
company come out of a Tavern door, looked up to see what sign it was, and
with looking up, reeled and tumbled down; being scrambled up again; Gentlemen
(says he) pray what signe's this? One answered, a sign that you are foxt.
Another very tall man being in a Winter night very late foxt, asleep in a
chimney corner, where the mantle was very low; The host not being able to wake
him, went to bed and left him, where he lay till toward morning, and having
soundly bepist himself, awakes, rises up, and not remembering where he was,
being within the mantle, knocks his head first at the one side, then at the
other within the chimney, and could not find a way out; at last looking
upwards, he saw light at the top of the chimney. and feeling himself very wet
and cold, apprehended that he was fallen into a Well, and began to call very
loud, and very pitifully for help; whereupon they in the house awaked,
wondered, rose to help him in all haste, but when they knew the matter,
soundly laughed at him. Again, a company being drinking in a chamber, one of
their heads ak'd, and thinking to steal away from them into another room to
sleep, found a pair of stairs, where he goes up into an old garret just
over their heads, which not being boorded, he dropped through the seiling just
down amongst them again; they were at first afraid, but after made good sport
in laughing at him. Another was so pitifully pot-shaken, that going to make
water, he took the end of his skirt in his hand and pist in his britches. I
hope you are wise enough to read these tales with a detestation of such foolish
and ridiculous actions, and the cause thereof, abusive drinking, as well as for
recreation. I might tell many more to this purpose, but these may suffice for a
taste of their rediculous courses.

But now to write more sadly, I might also tell many stories and examples of
hateful mischiefs and murders, that have been the evil and miserable
effects of these drinking abuses. But to speak only of a few, lest in this
brief discourse I become too tedious. A certain man beating his wife in his
drink, broke her arm and leg, and being rebuked for it, wished also he had
broke her neck. The son of Cyrill (in Hippo) in his drink would have violated
his sister, he beat his mother being great with child, killed his father, and
did other mischiefs; Oh mighty domination of the Devil, says Saint
Augustine. Alexander in his drink killed his dear friend Clitus, and being
come to himself, ('it is said) he would have killed himself for killing Clitus.
Examples of murders, duels, stabs, wounds, sad accidents, and of untimely
death, are very frequently registered and heard of, by reason of these drinking
abuses. And in our times, how many rash, braine-sicke, pot-valiant,
swash-bucklers are there, that seem to fear neither God, nor the Devil, nor
hanging; that although commonly themselves do all the wrong, yet will be
ready to draw their Rapiers upon every slight occasion (especially when they
get advantage of weapon or the like, and have some ready to back them if need
be looking on) and make no bones nor conscience to venture dying, hanging,
loss of Heaven, and damning for a trifle, and so to turn villains,
murderers, humane Devils, I cannot term them too bad; and I fear not to anger
the worst of them with speaking truth; And yet it is noted, that some of these
desperate, pot-valourous, foole-hardy villains (though they seem to be the
Devils Lievtenants) are oftentimes shamefully beaten; And it is like if they
were put upon a good cause, as the defense of their Prince and Country, that
they would (like that drinking Army which the Romans so easily conquered)
soonest turn cowards, or like those English men at the siege of Groyne in
Gallizia, where many hundred lost their lives by reason of their drinking. So
also I might write of diverse stories and examples how many men come to untimely
deaths in their drink or by reason of drinking. Elah, Zimri, Olofernes, came
to untimely ends in their drink. So also (as Histories report) did Fliolmus
King of Goths, Cleonicus King of Lacedemonia, King Hardecanutus of England,
and meaner persons innumerable. Master Ward in a Printed Sermon tells diverse
stories at large of above thirty several persons in the Kingdom that came to
very strange and untimely deaths, by reason of abusive drinking. And Master
Stowe in his Annals tells of a lamentable and remarkable accident of a
hundred and eighty persons that died in and by excessive drinking in less then
three days space. And how many men in our days by reason of abusive and
intemperate drinking (like Alexander) die even in the flower of their age, or
at least do much shorten their life.

I might further discourse concerning the evil and miserable effects of
drinking abuses, concerning men's credit, estates, families, the Commonwealth,
and also Piety and Religion, but these would then extend this Section too long,
And also since many Authors have written thereof at large, I will now
voluntarily omit the same and proceed.

SECT. III. Difficulties of forsaking such drinking abuses, and the remedies
thereof, tending to the increasing our happiness therein.
IF we consider rightly, we cannot but confess truly, that it is a
mavelous hard matter (in this age) to forsake these drinking abusive courses,
especially to such as have much used they same, by reason of many strong
provocations both inwardly and outwardly.

First inwardly, by much drinking, especially of strong and hot drinks, they
cause in their stomachs a strange mixture of cold, clammy, saltish, eagre and
tart humors (yet with some difference according to men's several complexions)
whereby is occasioned strange and unnatural thirst, and desire of such liquors
as they are most accustomed too. (So as they drink and are not filled with
drink.) Hag. 1.6. And according to that old Epitaph.

Bibax the tipler oftentimes would say,
That still the more I drink, the more I may
But see how death made his opinion just,
At last he drank himself as dry as dust.
And secondly, they have many outward provocations and allurements to these
drinking courses, such as are calling themselves, and being esteemed the only
gallants, blades, wits, good-fellowes, sparks, generous, joviall, merry
companions and the like, (though many of them are, such as before I have
showed) and among themselves they seriously (though simply) esteem such the
bravest men who can drink most, can play it off finely, as they say, with many
other fine terms (though the Brewers horses can do as brave acts as this to
drink much.) They have also many strange devices, and provocations, to allure
and provoke men to drink whole cups in abundance; They have an Art of
drinking, with diverse methods and mysteries therein, and there are Statutes
enacted among themselves, and Laws with forfeitures thereupon. And under
color of such customs, healths, pledgings, courtesies, and the like they do
strangly abuse themselves, and seriously jeere, laugh at and contemn such as
will not be also abused. And they have a trick, sir, notably to scoff at such
as will no^ pledge them so much as they drink and think it a very great
disgrace i^ themselves, and others to refuse the same; insomuch as some of the^
will swill down as much drink at sitting as would suffice a man two (...)
three weeks (perhaps till they a^ sick again) rather then endure such a
disgrace, as they think it, to refuse to pledge their companions, and so very
seriously (though very sillily) they even scoff one another into abuses,
folly, and misery; and in so doing they think themselves notable fine blades,
and very much contemn and reproach such as will not likewise abuse themselves.
Besides, in Taverns and Tap-houses mine Host, Hostess, the Vintner, Tapster,
peradventure a Wench and others are at their service, and here they may call
for what ^hey please, either fine, neat, brisk, ^parkling Canary, double
Beer, Ale, ^or what else you will. (But all for money sir, and it is like, a
halfe-penyworth for two pence.) Here they may ^eare of all the idle news in
the Pa^ish and Town, especially about Women, about Cuckolds, and the ^^ke, and
also where the best Wine, Beer, or Ale is; who was lately foxt, ^aw'd, or sent
to the dogs, as they ^^y; and who did that notable act to make them so, and
also what fine pranks and reakes he and they played, how much money they spent,
when, and how bravely, etc. and this idle discourse does notably take and
please their adle pated, fantastic humors. Here also they may have free
liberty (as it is a common custom) not only to laugh and be merry, to sing,
etc. but to scoff, jeere, rail, abuse, curse, swear, talk baudily, look big,
quarrel, fight roar, gape, and keep a mad quarter, to smoke, spet, to drink
notably, and to abuse themselves into all evil and misery, but all for money
sir. And here it is that they think themselves in their Kingdom.

However such outward provocations to such men, as are not used to them, and to
such as can see through them, will justly seem very slender, idle, and
ridiculous; and some of them irksome, vicious, impious and hellish, yet to many
thousand braine-sicke men in this age, they appear so excellent, as that they
very weakly and swinishly esteem such courses their choysest recreation and
sovereign felicity, wherein peradventure consists their greatest misery as
has been showed. And to speak more seriously. Certainly, if there be any
Dalilah on earth, it is ill company. If we use the same, they will so insinuate
into our minds, as it is very likely we shall first be drawn to a toleration
and allowance, afterward perchance to action, custom, and delight in their
courses, if we be not very cautelous, and wise enough to see the vanity, folly,
ridiculousnes, and impiety thereof: Insomuch as has been observed, that very
few men who have long and much used such drinking courses have ever forsaken
them, nor can they be persuaded thereunto by any means. And indeed if we more
seriously think of it, it will appear a mavelous hard matter for such a man
to forsake his chief delights, his old rooted customs, his habit, his very
nature as I may say. Insomuch as there had need to be prescribed supernatural
and divine remedies to convert such a man from himself; and indeed, unless a
man have supernatural and divine Grace in him, he cannot so much as truly and
seriously endeavor to forsake such rooted customary habits; and he that can
but only so endeavor (though he often fall through frailty) is to be well
esteemed inasmuch as we see in him a willing mind to forsake ill and do
well, which is the divine Grace of God in man, who accepts the will for the
deed, whose power (says Saint Paul) is made perfect through our weakness and
infirmities. And even in this life there are no actions more worthy of
commendations then to endeavor as much as we may to conquer our irregular
affections, and so to become Lord of our selves.

So also for a young man to be tempted by such and so many devices as are
commonly used in this drinking age, and that in his chief season of
temptation, if he do but seriously endeavor to avoid such courses, and so to
become temperate, staid, and frugall in these intemperate wild, and riotous
times, he is to be thought a gracious spirit. And if he be of such a divine
temper, that by reason of the heavenly mirth and music within his soul, he
can be above such low pleasures in comparison, and so can contemn the common
excessive swilling of many whole cups, and roaring, swearing, cursing, railing,
reproaching, abusing, gybing at goodness, ribaldish, scurrilous mirth, and
loud gapings of laughter at such baudy stuff, as music rather to please the
Devil then him, and so avoids all such ill courses; how may health,
prosperity, yea heaven and earth smile upon such a man. And also to deride and
scoff at these idle tippling courses, even in their own colors and height of
seeming felicity, is a masterpiece.

Neither do there want natural remedies in this respect of drinking, to alter
the ill disposition and temper of our bodies, and to rectify the disorderly
affections of our minds. As for example, if we be possessed with an unnatural
thirst and desire of strong and hot drinks, we may purge out that strange
mixture of cold, cla^my, eagre, salt, and tart humors, which are the causes
thereof. Or else we may alter the same by disuse of the occasions. Such men
therefore as have used to drink much Sack and other strong liquors, if by
degrees they pass from a greater quantity to a lesser, and so from hotter
liquors to cooler (which is better then sudden alterations and less distempers
the body) substracting the quantity and quality, by little and little, until
they come to a due proportion and order, their stomachs will then in good time
be so contracted again, and fitted for this quantity and quality, as they will
not any more be troubled with the former greedines thereof. And custom in this
kind is of such force that it makes small beer, yea water (as appears in
the ensuing alleged examples) to some men equal in delight and pleasantnes
to the choycest dainties, wines and strongest liquors to such as usually drink
no other.

But it is not safe concerning bodily health, wholly to alter an old rooted
natural custom. As for a man that has been much and long used to wine or
strong drink, now to forbear it altogether is not safe, but only in a
reasonable manner; for having brought his stomach to a natural habit and
desire thereof; it is not amiss sometimes within the limits of a due
proportion, and temperance to cherish himself therewith; especially, if he be
of declining and aged years, or of a dull, slow, heavy, sad disposition; to
refresh and cheer his aged, decaying, and dejected spirits.

There be also diverse remedies to rectify the mind herein, as to consider
all the evil and miserable effects of such abusive drinking (which are treated
of in diverse Authors, and common to the view of all men) especially to our
bodies and minds, as has been declared; which truly to think on, is in
reason sufficient to flight away our irregular affections from such excess and
abuses.

Also to think how vain, empty, and idle such outward provocations are, which
allure us to such courses; What are we a pin the better to be waited upon
sometimes a while by some (perchance misreckoning, nicking, frothing, cheating)
Tapster, Vintner, or the like, who are as well servants to every idle deboist
fellow as others, and whose service is commonly but to make your purse lighter?
Also what are we a jot the better for keeping company with fawning flatterers
and parasites, then whom indeed there are not more dangerous people in the
world? Or with dissolute braine-sicke phantasticke pot-gallants? Or what are we
a button the worse for their common, silly pot-jeeres, and barking reproaches,
whose drinke-sop adle pates we know are often pumping to reproach and abuse
such as profess frugality, civility, temperance, piety, and sober goodness,
and to speak against all excellent sublime things, such as are above their
weak, low, swinish capacities and customs, and thwart, or oppose their undue
vicious courses? Methinkes it should be as a divine consort of Caelestiall
music to our ears, to hear such men reproach and revile us; As has been
formerly showed, it is a good and blessed sign; It seems we are converted
from their ill courses and disallow them. Also what are we the better to hear
such company, brag, domineere, call themselves good-fellowes, blades, and the
like? Let us be much rather disliked, and reproached by such men, for being
temperate, sober, civil, stayed, frugall virtuous and pious, then bladed and
good-fellow'd with a hug for abusing and spoiling our selves. And further, what
are we the better to hear them roar, swear, curse gybe, scoff, sing idle
scurrilous songs, talk baudily and to little purpose, and sometimes perchance
as loud as they gape three or four at once; or to see them smoke their noses,
sit swilling off abundance of whole cups, perchance four or five hours
together, and pissing it out again, as if we knew no better actions? Or to
observe the idle silly orders and devices of such people, such as are filling
up the cup to the brimma; drink it off fairly, as they say, upon the nail,
to the little finger, not to leave so much as a pearl behind, or pin the
basket; calling the other pint or jugge when we have too much before; to see our
selves pledged, making wet reckonings, enforcing of whole cups, healths, and
the like: What need I particularise, almost all their pot devices and customs,
(to a reasonable man well in his wits, that is not besotted therewith) seem so
vain, absurd, silly, and rediculous, as he is even wonder-strucke to think
that so many wise men of excellent parts, in all places, are so besotted with
such silly devices, who otherwise truly (I mean the more worthy, courteous,
wise, and generous sort of such as are usually termed good-fellowes, etc.) do
as far excel diverse other niggardly, covetous, rugged, unsociable,
degenerate, and puny spirits, as Gold does Earth, or the Sun a Candle (until
they have spoiled themselves by drinking) and so would be esteemed, if they
would not use such degenerate courses.

Further to rectify our minds herein, let us know, that we may still drink
such and so much as is necessary, yea, most pleasant, delightful, and
beneficial in all respects (as is to be declared) and which is such a due
proportion as is to be dilated in the ensuing Sections, insomuch as we may be,
as merry therein, and as good-fellowes, yea, much better companions then in
excess and abuses (if we had reason to see it) and be happy therein.

I pray Sir, pardon me, if you think I have written any thing too bitterly and
tartly. Indeed I have been very sparing (except in some few very necessary
places) of gross and sower terms, in respect of some Authors, who have
written of this subject, hoping the same will the rather work upon courteous,
fair conditioned, kind, free, wise, pleasant, and sociable natures, such as I
know many are, who are too much inclined and most allured to those drinking
abuses: and if you think I have writ any thing too jesting or gybingly; who
will blame me (but such as are too severe) if I have written the truth in a
pleasant way; and I hope this also will the better work upon such natures
before named. And in good earnest now, (concerning my self) I confess that I
love sometimes to drink two or three cups of wine, or good liquor for
recreation among my friends, and although I dislike our common excessive
drinking courses, and some silly pernicious devices and customs of this
drinking age, and also although I love to be civil, and to hear other men
talk more then my self; yet truly I think very well of mirth and
good-fellowship in good sort, and it does me much good to see and hear men
drink, sing, discourse, be joyful, pleasant, and merry without abuses. But I
proceed.

SECT. IIII. Rules concerning a right order and due proportion of drinking, and
showing that the same is very sufficient, pleasant, easy, and most beneficial.
TO the intent that we may be happy in respect of drinking, let us use the
same in such sort as by a right ordering and moderating of every several kind
of drink, by suitable degrees and convenient proportions, the same may tend to
our well being. Such a moderation and proportion I mean, as is very easy to
be undergone, pleasant and beneficial; so much as brings strength and vigor,
both in mind and body, and on the contrary not so much as is troublesome or
breeding distemper therein.

To treat thereof briefly, it is best for young men, choleric and sanguine
complexions, usually to drink cool, small, and mild wine, beer, or ale; And
to avoid such as is very strong, hot, stale; and sower, as much as they may.
And for the phlegmatic, gross, fat, and melancholy men, it is best commonly
to drink such wine and beer as is thin, piercing, and pure; And to forbear
new, thick, sweet, and muddy stuff.

A cup or two of Sack, Metheglin, strong Beer, Ale, or other good liquor is
not amiss for old, weak, and decayed men; and for such as are heavy, sad,
and sorrowful, sometimes to comfort their drooping spirits: yet too much
strong and hot liquors (by reason of the superfluous multitude of vapors,
exhaling to the brain, remaining unconcocted, and after the heat thereof is
past, are there refrigerated into cold phlegm) does cause even to old, sad,
and drooping men, a greater heaviness and melancholy. However a reasonable
quantity does much cheer, quicken, and revive them.

The quantity most convenient is so much as by reason and our own experience,
does make our bodies and minds apt and healthy to perform their offices, and
no way distempers or hinders them. But for as much as our appetite is deceitful
(especially if by custom we get an ill disposition in the stomach) and is
always canvassing for sensuality, blinding our reason and carrying us beyond
the due measure of temperance and welfare; Let us therefore consider a due
proportion and measure.

Physicians say that usually three or four reasonable draughts at a meal is
sufficient for any man, and that between meals it is not good to drink above
the same proportion. This proportion of three draughts at a time, at the most,
was determined by the Synod of Nants, as being sufficient in nature and reason
for any man; and the same is approved of by diverse Philosophers, Poets, and
others. Or if you will (according to the laudable custom of some men) now and
then for recreation sit in a Tavern or Alehouse till you have drank each man
his pint of wine, or jug of beer, or thereabouts, and no more, is commendable;
so as the same be only sometimes (not commonly) and only for good recreation
or occasion, and without abuses.

But forasmuch as a different proportion is to be allotted in respect of ^ime,
age, complexion, and the like, ^his may easily be (and commonly is naturally)
remedied either by drinking greater or lesser draughts, or adding a draught or
two more in a day, when and to whom it is requisite. As in Summer more then in
Winter, the choleric more then the phlegmatic, so as it be not too strong
or hot; children usually drink lesser draughts then men; laborers may drink
more, and more often then idle people: So to drink when natural thirst
requires (if the body be not too hot, or distempered) is good, for very much
thirst is ill for the stomach, and it is good that the same be commonly kept
clean, and sometimes moist.

Physicians also say, it is not good to drink between meals, till after the
first concoction, or till two or three hours after the meal (unless much
thirst require) especially for such as are phlegmatic. But some think a good
draught or two of warm beer taken half an hour before meals is a good
preparative for the stomach, especially for such as are dry and thirsty.

Neither does it much matter concerning bodily health, if sometimes we be
drawn to digress a little from such a due order and proportion. To exceed
sometimes this quantity, and water the body by a more liberal drinking then
usual, is by some thought not amiss for health, so as the same be done but
very seldom, and so as we presently return again to our wonted and usual
sobriety; for such accidental and seldom excesses are of little prejudice to
health: And in this respect it is not good overscrupulously, and too precisely
to tie our selves to an exact proportion, lest we contract our stomachs to
such an habit as will not admit of any errors when they happen without
distemperature, but long and often excesses are very pernicious. However it is
good to have our minds directed to a perfect, precise, and exact measure, and
to have the same (as a pattern) diligently marked, and imprinted in our
minds, to the intent that we may imitate the same, or come as near thereunto
as we may, without too much niceness and inconvenience, knowing that all
virtue is most really and best performed when we observe the same in a perfect
manner. And also let us the rather as near as we can conveniently, most
willingly apply our minds thereunto, knowing that such a due proportion and
order as is before mentioned, is very sufficient, easy, pleasant, and most
beneficial, as now follows to be declared.

And first, that the same due proportion and order of drinking is sufficient
and easy to be undergone appears, inasmuch as a well tempered nature requires
no more; for what reasonable man (who has not by ill custom altered his
nature) desires to drink above three or four draughts at a time, or (if you
will) above a pint a wine or an usual jug of beer for his part at a sitting,
or otherwise any way out of good order; insomuch as he thinks it an easy and
pleasant thing to be temperate, whereas all intemperance and disorder
displeases, and very likely distempers him; yea, even brute, irrational
creatures are contented with and desire no more then sufficiency: It is only
an unrasonable nature, and perhaps corrupted by ill custom that makes us
desire more, for we know that one or two draughts at once, is sufficient to
quench thirst, and suffice nature.

And that we may the rather know how largely sufficient and easy such a due
proportion and order of drinking is; Let me tell you how some learned
Physicians and others do prescribe far more strict rules therein: as that
children, choleric, and young men should not at all drink any hot or strong
wine. That fourteen or sixeteene ounces of drink in a day is sufficient.
That above three draughts at a time is madness, and the like; now if wise men
have thought such overnice, and too strict rules and observances to be good;
then surely that which is better, more reasonable, and much larger is very
sufficient, and easy to be observed. So concerning examples. We read of diverse
men in former ages, as commonly before the flood, and long after, and since the
sect of Esseans, also the Iberians, some of the Indians, and in other
Countries, that drank only water, and yet were lusty, strong, and well
pleased therewith. So likewise of Philadelphus King of Egypt, Bernice Queen of
Syria, Porus and Phaotes two Kings of India, of Anchimolus and Moschus two
Philosophers, of Polemon the Academicke, of Archonides, Mago of Carthage,
Andrew of Argos, Julius Viator a Roman Knight, Lasyrtas, Lasionus, and of
Julian surnamed Saba, that is, old man; Also of Saint Anthony, and of diverse
Hermits, Anachorits, and others, who would drink no other but water, (as
likewise many men of later times) and yet lived very healthy, strong, and to a
very old age; Nor did they desire any other drink, being used to this, but
thought the same (to their taste and use) much better then stronger liquors.
Now although it were superstition, rigidnes, and folly in us to use such a
severe course, unless the temperature of our bodies required the same. Yet
this we may learn, that if such a more rigid and strict course, as to drink
so sparingly, and that only water, be sufficient, easy, and pleasant to them
which are accustomed thereunto, much more many such nourishing and pleasant
drinks as our Country usually affords, and such a larger proportion as is
prescribed suffice, and be very easily observed by reasonable men.

Further, let us consider the sufficiency and benefits of such a due
proportion and order, which does not only preserve us from a multitude of
evils and miseries, which excess and disorder causes, as has been showed;
but it is also sufficient in the largest degree to afford all benefits in
respect of society outwardly, and (...) the body and mind inwardly, that can
with reason be expected thereby.

And first in respect of society, or good-fellowship as we call it; Is not such
a due proportion as sufficient as a greater quantity to maintain amity and
friendship by mutual entertainments, courtesies, and expressions of love in
drinking to, and pledging of one another? He is an unmannerly, unreasonable,
and in this respect worse then brutish friend, that requires above four or
five draughts at once for an entertainment or welcome. So also, at feasts,
banquets, and merry meetings, to season our discourses and mirth, sometimes with
two or three cups of wine, or good liquor round about (so as without
compulsion, as at Ahasuerus feast, every man drink no more then he pleases)
as at the marriage feast in Cana of Galile to cheer the heart, is not amiss.
And is not this well and largely sufficient, why should we desire ^^^re? Or if
we will to the Tavern or Tap-house go to meet with our friends for good
recreation, or on other good occasions, may we not be good-fellowes, and
discourse, sing, laugh, be merry, and use sometimes honest disports, as well
with sufficiency as with excess? And (as in our Grandfathers days men were
wont to do) now and then sitting and talking an hour or two (upon the like
good occasion or convenient recreation) over a pint or two of wine, or each man
his pint or jug at the most, and that only with good and harmless company,
who do hatefully banish from their fair and honest society, all riot,
murmurs, quarrels, cursings, swearing, intemperance, and abuses; and where each
man's tongue pleasantly trowles in harmless manner, where the Muses and sweet
mirth agree; And now and then when each man pleases in a temperate manner to
add a cup or two of wine as a Cordial to sweeten and quicken all the mirth. I
pray tell me, is not this far better then to sit, according to the usual
custom of our times, roaring, bragging, quarrelling, talking baudily,
swearing, cursing, smoking, and in an unreasonable sort to sit sometimes five
or six hours or longer continually swilling and guzelling whole cups as fast
as we can drink, and pissing it out again, as if we knew no better actions.

Likewise concerning the body, such a moderate and due proportion and order is
largely sufficient, and most beneficial to sustain and preserve nature, to
fortify and warm the stomach, to cause good digestion and concoction of
meat, to refresh, nourish, and moisten the most dejected and dryest body, to
comfort and strengthen age and weakness, and to increase beauty and
cheerfulness; whereas excess and abuses, as has bin showed, spoileth,
surchargeth, annoieth, corrupts, puffs up, inflameth, distempereth,
over-whelmeth, or hinders the body in all these felicities.

And to the mind in like manner, the same due proportion and order is
sufficient to allay grief and qualify cares, in a far better manner then
excess and disorder can; and so to quicken the mind and make it pleasant,
lively, and cheerful, whereas excess and abuses dulleth and distempers the
brain, and increases melancholy and sadness after the heat of the liquor is
past, and the vapors thereof cooled in the brain, as has been showed;
besides many other annoyances.

And is not then a temperate proportion and order most sufficient, easy,
pleasant, and beneficial, how much better is it then by intemperance and
abuses to annoy our bodies and minds, and bring upon our selves a multitude of
ill and miserable effects. Let us then ever with open arms embrace this divine
virtue of temperance, since the same is so easy, sufficient, pleasant, and
since in all respects springs from thence so much happiness. And once again
let me say, that within the limits of this most excellent virtue of temperance
let us still be good-fellowes, as merry, joyful and pleasant as may be; since
it is also a good and comely thing so to do. Eccles. 5.18. etc. And since we
are also advised to eat and drink with merry hearts, etc. Eccles. 9.7. And (to
conclude as I began this Partition) since God himself says that his servants
shall eat, drink, rejoice, and sing for joy of heart. Esaias. 65.13.14.

SECTION V. The good and divine use of Drinking.
SO then, if we can avoid the abuses of drinking, let us enjoy it in the good
and temperate use thereof freely, and cheerfully with all the good pleasures and
felicities belonging thereunto; always remembering S. Paul's rule. Let all be
done to the praise and glory

Let therefore the sparkling colors, pleasant and delitious tastes, and
sweetness of wine, and other pleasing drinks, put us in mind of the
fountain from which they spring, God himself; At whose right hand are rivers
of pleasures for evermore.

He most lovingly invites us to taste of that eternal Wellspring of
happiness, saying, if any man thirst let him come unto me and drink, etc.
John 7.37. Ho, every one that thirsts, come, etc. Esaias. 55.1. Blessed are
they which hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be filled.
Matthew. 5.6. Let us then endeavor feelingly and with a heavenly elevation of
spirit, to say with King David, My soul is a thirst for God; yea, even for the
living God; And, like as the Heart desires the water brooks, so longs my
soul after thee, O God.

So it appears there is a spiritual thirst in the Saints of God, which
nothing but this spiritual drink, the Caelestiall Nectar of divine grace and
consolations can satisfy. This spiritual heavenly drink is in sacred
Scriptures termed a divine feast of wine on the lees well refined, etc. 25.6.
Wine and Milk, Cant. 5.1. choice mingled wine compounded even by wisdom her
self. Prove. 9.2. To which she most lovingly invites us, verse. 5. And this
wine is the Caelestiall Nectar of divine grace and heavenly consolations. Yea,
our Savior Jesus Christ himself is the spiritual Rock from whence this
heavenly drink springs. 1 Cor. 10.4. And most lovingly (at the institution of
that blessed Sacrament) He says, drink ye all of this, for this is my blood,
etc. Oh blessed, infinitely and eternal blessed are those happy souls, who
by a true and lively faith with most joyful thanksgiving can taste and drink
of this heavenly water of life, springing from this Rock our blessed Redeemer
Jesus, this Well of water, springing up unto eternal life. John 4.13. Oh
blessed Redeemer, sweet Jesus, we pray thee (with that woman of Samaria) give
us of this water, verse. 15. this living water, John 7.38. which is thy holy and
heavenly Spirit. verse. 39. Oh happy may we be then, to enjoy this heavenly
fountain, the God of consolations within us. We may enjoy even rivers of
living water, verse. 39. Me thinks I now taste thereof within me. I am all in
a divine Muze, full of joyful, glorious, heavenly thoughts, in consideration
of these soule-ravishing words and sentences of our blessed and most gracious
Savior, so full of delectation and sweetness, that such as have heavenly
souls to taste and relish the pleasantness thereof, may be often (much better
then with choysest wine) cheered and quickened, and so often filled with
heavenly joys and delectations; such a man's soul is often full of glading
vivifications, and divine soule-quickning irradiations (such as mere
worldlings are not acquainted with) insomuch as they can (with Saint Paul) be
filled with consolations, and abound with joys even in the midst of
tribulations, and (with Saint Stephen and other heavenly Martyrs) even in death
it self.

To proceed, as there is a spiritual thirst and a spiritual drink; so also
there may be as it were a kind of spiritual drunkenness in the Saints of
God. A holy madness as a Father calls it, that is, when the soul is elevated
and quickened with a divine taste of the heavenly pleasures in this life, as it
is above, and even besides it self with joy and delights. It seems Saint Paul
was in this ecstasy when he could not tell whether he was in his body or not.
2. Cor. 12.2. And St. Peter having tasted of this heavenly Nectar, seems to
say he knows not what; Master (says he) It is good for us to be here. Let us
build three Tabernacles, one for thee, etc. It seems he was transported beside
himself, having but tasted of this heavenly Nectar of divine and glorious
consolations.

And if we also could drink sufficiently thereof, it would sweetly enchant our
souls and bring us into a most pleasing ecstasy of heavenly joy; yea, even but
to think thereof truly, were sufficient to make us all amazed and transported
with heavenly amazements and delectations, not being able to find bounds nor
measure in this divine joy and happiness; the same would so sweetly and
gloriously cheer, quicken, enlighten, and elevate our spirits, as it would
make us even of a divine and heavenly temper already.

To conclude, let us acknowledge; In thee, O Lord, is the fullness of this
heavenly water of life, those eternal rivers of pleasures. Oh heavenly,
blessed Lord God, since in thee is all sweetness, all pleasures, all happiness,
Oh let it be the only thirst, desire, and delight of my soul to enjoy thee;
let this joy in thee be my heaven upon earth.

FINIS.

