DEFENSE Against the Dread of Death, OR, ZACH. CROFTON'S Meditations and
Soliloquies concerning the stroke of death sounded in his ears, in the time
(...) his close Imprisonment in the Tow^ of London, Anno. 1661, and 166^

Digested for his own private satisfaction and support in the vale of the
shadow of death.

AND NOW Made public for the advantage of such as abide under Gods present
Visitation in London by the Pestilence.

Printed in the Year 1^^^

To the serious dying Christian Reader; Especially those in and about London;
subjected to Gods visitation by the present Pestilence; and under a daily
exspectation of an arrest by death.
Christian and beloved Friends.
WHat was lately mine, is now become your sad estate; viz. the dreadful
expectation of deaths stroke; in the multitude of my thoughts within me, the
consolations of God did refresh and revive my soul: the kind of death which
threatened me, is different from what impendeth you; but the object of dread was
to me and you the same, (viz) Death: and the same apprehensions of its nature
which did affect me, must affect you with fear and hope: the ensuing
meditations ministered a check to my passions, and comfort to my spirit; by
these, I persuaded my soul to be willing, and contented, though not desirous to
part from my body; and to let me cheerfully lie down and dye: these were
digested on my personal account; for my private support and encouragement under
the fears of death: they having done their work were by me condemned to death,
at least to present darkness, but are now by your sad condition animated, and
restored; and the publication thereof is extorted by the importunity of some
special friends who had formerly seen and perused them; and in an affectionate
sense of your sad condition subjected to the terrors of night; the Arrow which
flies by day; the Pestilence which walks in darkness, and the destruction
which wastes at noonday: calling more loudly for Antidotes to the sting, then
to the stroke of death; have restlesly solicited these papers to be put into
your hands.

The dread of death is as common, as natural to man; as is the stroke thereof:
it never appeared with its pale face, to any subject of ^^^ht reason or true
religion; but with a terrifying aspect: the Heathen accounted it, of terrible
things the most terrible; they could no way render it comfortable; but by
representing it the sum, the completion, and so the period of evil and misery:
Cold comfort! The Scripture calls it the King of terrors: which of Gods
Saints have not feared to dye? David was beset with the terrors of death: Paul
could not desire to be unclothed: The only begotten Son of God, had his soul
heavy unto death, and in a fearful agony deprecated the stroke thereof: the
Saints never cursed the day of their birth, and cried out for their death; but
in the extremity of their perplexity, and in the prevalency of their passion;
evidenced by this very character: men exempt from frenzy; and not
miraculously, extraordinarily acted by a divine spirit, as were the three
Children, and other Martyrs: must be the subjects of stoical Apathie, senseless
stupidity, strong delusions, or a reprobate senc^, if they fear not the stroke
of death: I envy not some (who have I thought dyed too stoutly in such a cause)
their courage and con^^dence in outfacing death: But this I must say to all;
Christianun agere, is not, hominem exucre: Christians cease not to be men, nor
is it fit they should so do. Bernard well notes of Peter the Apostle, Bernardi
Tract. de gratia and Libero Arbitrio.
that his sin was not in the simple fear of death, Mortem evadere voluit; quid
istud criminis fuit? voluit mori; inculpabilis est: To be unwilling, afraid to
dye, is lawfully humane, and not blameworthy in a Christian: It is equally
monstrous in nature, and a judgment from the Lord not to fear to dye: and not
to mourn for the dead. I must say with the holy Greenham, They are as well to
be liked who fear death, as those who joy at it: And I for my part fluctuating
on the waves of violence and uncertainty, in an evil age and world; must say as
this good man, Greenh. work. p. ^
Notwithstanding my many crosses which hinder the comfort of my life; I do not,
I dare not desire to die.

Death is in its nature most terrifying to the soul; yet its dreadful
circumstances and concomitants do ordinarily more affect the sense, and provoke
the passions. Seneca placed the most dread in the Scaffold the Ax, the
attendance, the spectators, the executioners, and march to execution, that
pompa mortis: These were no meanly affecting circumstances to me in my
expectation of a violent death; to you the suddenness, the solitariness, the
certainty of the stroke, by an inevitable noisome contagion, may appear most
grievous. He who dies in due course of nature, meets with dread in death;
but he that dies by some special kind of death, as by sword or pestilence has
his dread aggravated; and more eminently needs the defense of a lively faith,
to repel the terrors of a lively sense, which can and must be the result of a
rational and Christian apprehension of deaths changed nature and quality, with
the sequels thereof through Christ the Lord of life; these will alleviate the
burden, abate the strength, abstract the sting, and alter the countenance of
death; of any kind of death.

Familiarity breeds contempt, and casts out fear: the Fox by frequency
plays boldly with the lion. We read of an Hungarian Prince, who affected his
youthful brother, rebuked his daily meditations of death, with an unexpected
summons to execution: Men little think of dying therefore are the terrors of
death so stinging. Plato persuading to thoughts of death, (...)
defined true Philosophy to be a meditation of death: Certain it is, that they
who will truly Christianize, must be much in consideration of death; and
careful to dye well. When men are every moment obnoxious to the sudden and
certain strokes of death, it is time (if ever they will be wise) to labor to
represent death lovely to their souls: funeral Sermons ^ound best in the ears;
spectacles of mortality is the most pleasing sight; and meditations of death
the most delighting study, not only to the mortified Christian, but also to the
dying man. Croesus the rich King of Lydia, when captivated, stripped, and tied
alive to the stake which must make his funeral pile; could affectionately cry
out, O Solon, Solon! and preach to Cyrus his Conqueror Solons Dictates of
Mortality, which in his prosperity he had despised. And Seneca declining in
Neroes favor, and drawing nigh to his violent death, did best discern, and
most clearly declare that man's felicity was after death. The profane men,
which in health neglect and despise Gods Ministers, and cannot endure to hear
of death, or Jesus Christ; can on a sick bed send for them, gladly hear the
Doctrines of Mortality; and cry out I must die, O Chist save me! O Christ save
me! Nor is it marvel for every Balaam ready to curse Gods Israel on the sense
of deaths appraach, cannot but wish to die the death of the righteous.

I would willingly hope, those who have now the charge of your souls, are
tender of you as Nurses, and careful for you as Parents; and that with due
affection and fidelity they labor to fit you for, and encourage you under the
strokes of death: Never (I am sure) had you more need: never were you more
likely to hear the Charmer, and to receive instruction, then in so sad a day of
visitation from the Lord. I wish I were without any grounds of fear to the
contrary. I lately traveling about my rustic affairs, met many Ministers from
your City, among other Citizens, withdrawing from that place of danger: their
recess I could not but observe with grief and anger; thinking who must minister
to you ghostly council, now your souls are in the shadow of death; how must it
sting your serious hearts to see your lovers and friends stand at a distance,
and your Prophets all gone.

I am not so uncharitable as to conclude the recess of any, not specially bound
to stay in infected places, to be sin: I believe men that fly from the
Pestilence, are no more Atheistical, or to be blamed as such, then those who
fly from the Sword: I judge the recess of many, may be a prudential serving of
Gods providence, unto the withdrawing of the contagion, naturally communicating
it self in vicinity: but, I cannot but judge Magistrates to keep order;
Physicians to help nature; and Ministers to prepare for and encourage against
death are bound to stay, and in the discharge of their duty to trust God with
their lives.

I cannot secure Ministers their lives in contagious places; I well know that
Histories tells us some of the Ministers and Deacons which ministered to the
Saints in Alexandria, Eusebius. Hist. l. 7. c. 22.
in the great Plague which there raged, dyed thereof: And that the Families of
Bullinger, and Beza were herewith infected, yet themselves escaped, and were
preserved; yet God has ordinarily saved the lives of those who in love to
immortal souls, have adventured to loose them: Mr. Sam. Fisher, whose
meditation on death in the time of the Plague in Salop, we have public among
us; is yet alive to tell unto Gods praise, how himself, and Reverend Mr. Blake
were preserved in their Ministration to that place, in the time of a raging
Pestilence: If despised I might be so bold, I would desire your present
Ministers, to consider the late Bishop Halls advice in this very case; he
having justified the rece^^ ^f private persons; thus conculdeth concerning
Ministers; You urge the instance of your Ministers, how unequally, Bp. Halls
Epist. Dec. 4. Ep. 9.
there is not more lawfulness in your flight, then sin in ours: you are your
own, we are our peoples: you are charged with a body which you may not
willingly lose, nor hazard by staying: we with all their souls, which to hazard
by our absence, is to lose our own: we must love our lives, but not when they
are rivals with our souls, or with others: how much better is it to be dead,
then negligent? then faithless? if some bodies be contagiously sick, shall all
souls be neglected? to run away from a necessary and public good, to avoid a
doubtful and private evil, is to run into a worse evil then that we would
avoid, etc.

Whilst worthless I am dead as to my Ministry, I hope I may be alive as to my
Meditations: And freely by an harmless Pen Minister them to you; especially on
a subject so innocent, so necessary as is Death; Its Dread, and the Defense
against it: I beseech you receive these as ministerial suggestions for the good
of your souls: they were indeed only spoken to my dying self: Put your souls
in my souls stead, and they will speak to you: the special kind of death which
I dreaded, may make some things seem improper to your present state; but the
general matter and scope of them, is to obviate death, as such in its general
nature; and so they are applicable to any kind of death: I beseech you prepare
your selves to dye, and thereby persuade your souls to be willing to dye: you
and I must dye, it mattereth not what kind of death we dye: be we careful to
dye in the Lord, and for the Lord: so shall death consummate our misery, and
conveigh our fouls into the fullness of felicity. Austin well notes, Quid
interest an Febris (Let us say Pestis) an ferrum nos de corpore solverit? noli
qua occasion, Aug. Epist. 122. ad victori.
sed quales ad se exeant, dominus attendit inservis suis: It mattereth not
whether Sword or Plague kill us: Saints are subject to any, to every of them:
God does more regard the disposition of his Dying Servants, then the means of
their death: the change of quality in us, changes the quality of death unto us.

Now that God may fit you for death, familiarize to you that King of fears; fix
your souls on Christ, who is life in death: and so fill your hearts with those
comforts, which may prevail with you to dye willingly, until he please to
accept an atonement: and call back the destroying Angel is and shall be the
most affectionate, and constant prayer of,

Yours in the Lord, for the good of you^ souls, whilst he is, Z. C.
July 20th. 1665.
A DEFENSE Against the Dread of DEATH; OR, Z. C. his serious Soliloquies, and
Meditations of Death; under the alarms thereof, sounded in the time of his
Imprisonment in the Tower of London, An. 1661.
The PREFACE.
THe wrath of the King, is the messenger of death; O sad messenger! O evil
tidings! what is more unwelcome to man? what is more distasteful to nature? can
it choose but dismay my soul, and affect my spirit? is not Death that, which
nature has determined to be of Terrible things the most Terrible? does not the
Scripture denominate it, Job 18.14
The King of Terrors? does not the sense of death daunt the courage of the
stoutest men of War? damp the comforts of this World? does not this discompose
the most composed Christian, and most serious Saint? were not the snares, the
sorrows, the shade of Death, the things which David (that good, that stout man)
did so passionately bewail, Ps. 18.4, 5. and 116.3.
and pray to be delivered from? the fear of Death made upright Hezekiah, Isa.
38.
To chatter like a Crane, and mourn like a Swallow; The Devil well knew what he
said, Job 2.4.
when he said, All that a man has he would give for his life: The Lord of life
entered not the List, to encounter Death, without an heavy spirit; he needed
some comfortable companions to watch with him under this conflict; he was not
ashamed to profess, My soul is exceeding sorrowful unto death; Mat. 26.38, 39.
and once, again, and a third time to pray, Father, if it be possible, let this
cup pass from me.

Shall I exspect to be exempt from; Shall I be afraid or ashamed to express the
passions which were existent in all Gods Saints, and from which my Lord and
Master himself was not freed? I am a Christian, but yet a man; I am a Minister,
but yet a man; if I dye, as I now fear, I dye innocently; Lord thou know I
dye for righteousness sake; I shall be a Martyr, though of the lowest orb;
this may mitigate dread; but it makes no change in me, or in death, yet
terrors attend it, and passions abide in me. The most resolved Paul, was so far
from being ashamed, 2 Cor. 1.8, 9.
that he was desirous the Church should know he was pressed above measure; when
he despaired of life, and received in himself the sentence of death, and 5.4.
the most desirous to be clothed with their House from Heaven, could never yet
desire to be uncloathed of their earthly Tabernacle; nature can be much more
content to be changed, then to dye.

Death draws me out of the bosom of the Wife of my delight; divides me from
my Children, the glory of my youth; drives me from my Kindred, Acquaintance,
Friends, and all humane society; Can I part from these with dry eyes? can men
think I bear to these a natural affection, and expect I should bid adieu to
them, not affected with natural passion? does nature and religion direct me to
love them? and will they not allow me to grieve when I leave them?

Death does discapacitate me for the service of my God and his Church; the
grave cannot praise him; Death cannot celebrate him; They who go down into the
pit cannot hope for his truth; will not Christianity, true Piety, teach me with
dread to discern this estate? am I persuaded my life is more profitable for the
Church? can I then avoid St. Paul's strait? Phil. 1, 21, 22, 23, 24.
and be easily resolved what to choose; though to me it is more profitable that
I dye?

Death does destroy my being; when I am dead I am not; can dissolution choose
but dictate dread to sensible, much more to rational beings?

Death is the wages of sin; the witness of Gods wrath; and the curse of the
Law, and by its circumstances made such with an emphasis; can then a man of
Religion, receive the same without reluctance and great remorse?

Death is the inlet of mine immortal soul, into the Ocean of eternity; can I
apprehend it without amazement, and great astonishment?

Let malefactors outface; outdare this King of dread; and obtain to themselves
the name and honor of Martyrs, by their only abandoning the fear of death; I
dare not imitate, I must not justify, I cannot, I will not follow them; these
fig leaves will not hide their sin from the face of God.

My soul! keep thy passions within bounds, then fear not to give them vent; and
to express the same before God and Men; impossible est hominem exuere;
Christianity does not require thee to turn stoic, and cease to be a man; Let
the fear of Gods casting thee into hell, have the pre-eminence; then cease not
to fear men's killing thy body; sell not thy self, to save a natural life; and
then spare nothing to redeem the same from death; by the exception of this one
thing thy self, make the Devil a liar, as did Job; and then be not troubled, to
set thy seal to a truth spoken by the father of lies, (viz.) that all that a
man has he would give for his life; Let not the dread of death transport thee,
to accept deliverance on terms of sinning against God; then be not afraid or
ashamed to let men observe thee subjected thereunto; mourn not as without hope;
then spare not to mourn that thou must part from them, whose duty it is to
mourn over thy grave.

I bless God, I see in nature much; in Scripture more abundant reason to make
me willing; none to make me desirous to dye; I look for those things, and that
estate which I will not exchange for my natural life; but I could be glad to
enjoy my life and them; The cup of death is bitter; my stomach rises at, and
against it; I cannot but pray, Oh my Father! If it be possible let this cup
pass from me; If it be possible let this cup pass from me; Good Father, Let
this cup pass from me; yet, I hope I shall never want grace to subjoyn, not my
will, but thy will be done; not my will, but thy will be done; not my will, but
thy will be done: whilst Death is Death, and I a Man, I cannot but dread it; I
cannot desire it; I will therefore endeavor to defend my soul against the
dread thereof; and check my passions, by contemplating what may make me content
to undergo, and cheerfully to stoop unto what I cannot, I dare not desire; any
more then I can avoid, or dare decline it when directed by a righteous, yea, a
gracious God to arrest me; my soul, silence; support thy self, considering,

SECT. I.
DEath is of all things most certain; Death is most certain.
most sure to overtake me; to befall me, dust I am, and to dust I must return;
my life may be a while prolonged; but nothing is more certain then that death
will ere long put an end unto it; man that is born of a woman, is but of few
days.

My natural constitution is corruptible; In man's natural constitution.
not only obnoxious to the assaults of violence from without; but also subject
to innate corruption, principles destructive to it self; my body is at best but
an earthly Tabernacle, always out of repair, and ready to fall; patched up by
daily bread, which will not be able to sustain its being, when the grinders
begin to fail; the Keepers of this my house do already tremble, my strong men
begin to bow; many diseases now grow upon me; these are the Harbingers of mine
approaching death; I do already bear in my back, the stone which will ere long
most crrtainly batter in pieces the earthen vessel of my body; this Pitcher may
a little while go to the Well, but it will at length come broken home.

The contrary elements and qualities, whereof my body is compounded; and by
which it does now subsist, do conclude the certainty of my death; heat and
cold, moisture and draught, are enemies each to other; by their opposition my
being is upheld; and yet, the militation of these in me, tend to the
annihilation of me: The hand of violence may indeed hasten on me that estate,
which nature will most certainly, most speedily effect: the Plumb which is not
plucked, will fall: the Grass which is not cut, will wither: the stoutest Oak,
of longest growth, will at last come to dust, if it be not consumed to ashes:
my strength is not the strength of stones, nor is my flesh ^rass; I am as a
dried leaf; my life passes away as a Weavers Shuttle, and withers like the
grass; the Ax or Halter can only hasten, what my study and labor is sure to
produce in a little time; if Death could not otherwise destroy my being, these
instrmuments (enforced by men's cruelty) should never do it, but it is an easy
matter to break a bruised reed, and to force a dying life to breath out its
last breath.

My soul! my bodily constitution does not more dispose me to dye, then Gods
determination does bind me unavoidably to undergo it; By Gods determination.
Heb. 9.27.
It is appointed unto all men, and so to me, once to dye: The conclusion God
made with man in Paradise (when he made with him a Covenant of life) was, Genesis
2.17.
In the day thou eatest of this fruit, thou shall surely dye: the sin was
committed, the covenant was violated; this condition was judicially denounced,
and duly executed; Romans 5.12.
by one man, sin has passed on all men, and death by sin; the severity of God,
has by a most righteous sentence, subjected all men to the stroke of death; am
I a man, and expect to be exempted from the common fate of my nature?

Immortality in the estate of innocence, Immortality not natural.
was of grace, not of nature: created, compounded man, was capable of
dissolution;) that grace was once forfeited, never restored; nature therefore
returned to its course, will inevitably work my ruin; and resolve me into the
nothing, or the dust, out of which I was first made.

The Lord Jesus Christ has indeed, Christ redeemed not from the stroke of
death.
undoubtedly redeemed me from death; but, it is from the sting, not from the
stroke of death; he does secure me from the curse, the consequences of death;
but he stays not the returned course of nature, from passing on my being;
hunger, cold, neakedness, sickness, sorrows, the assaults of violence, with all
other man-destroying-accidents did befall himself, and are incident unto me; and
are as certainly as effectually destructive to my being since, as before
Christ's death and resurrection.

I do most certainly believe, Some may be changed, yet not I. 1 Cor. 15.51.
at the coming of our Lord in glory, all shall not dye, some shall be changed:
but I have no assurance that I am of that number; nor is it probable; for
though I live in the last and worst days of the world, that last day is not so
near me as my lives end; the great things which must be accomplished before
that great and terrible day of the Lord come, cannot be effected in those few
days nature will permit me to live; nor is it probable in this present age; I
will not envy the Saints then living, the happiness of never dying, but my
soul; I see no reason of hope, that I should partake thereof.

Nature disposing me unto death; God having determined death to pass upon me; I
cannot avoid it; it will with certainty overtake me at the last: It may
overtake me sooner then I am aware or look for it; I have not the certainty of
one days exemption from this most certain condition; I am subject to many
casualties as well as diseases; a tile from an house, or a fall from my horse,
might soon kill me if I were abroad; Death comes on me where ever I am, as an
armed man whom I cannot resist; and come to me the worst that can come, it is
but death, which I can no way shun, or long avoid.

My Soul! be wise; make a virtue of necessity; stoop quietly under that stroke
from which thou can not stir: Startle not in sense of that state, from which
there is no starting: Whether I consume my self, or be cut down by others, it
is but death; this estate does unavoidably attend me: Let me be content
cheerfully, submissively to bear the evil I am no more able to divert, then to
desire; shall I stomach to entertain the guest, whom I daily expect, and who
comes with command, and irresistible power; whose coming I cannot prevent or
delay; who being come, will not be dismissed or sent back for one moment: I
will bid welcome the certain unavoidable event, though hastened by an uncertain,
unexpected stroke.

SECT. II.
DEath is not more certain to me, Death is a common state.
then common to men: this is the lot of all men; the man lives not who shall
not feel the stroke of Death; strong or weak, rich or poor, noble or ignoble,
good or bad, must all die: Great men die.
The power of Princes may precipitate and hasten the death of others, but it
cannot protect themselves from the stroke of death, no not for a moment; as for
those who have riches, Ps. 49.7, 8.
there is not one of them can redeem his brothers, no, nor yet his own life
from death; when I die I shall rest with Kings and Counselors of the earth;
Job 3.13, 14.
with Princes who had gold, who filled their houses with silver: Death has
subdued the most dreadful Conquerors of the world, and devoured the most
puissant Armies: Strong men die.
Where are now the Sons of Anack? what is become of the Giants of whom we read?
are they not dead? could Sampsons strength repel, or David's Worthies stand
under and against the stroke of death? Best men dye.
Piety is no privilege against the arrest of death; John 8.52, 53.
are not the Patriarcks fallen asleep? where are the Fathers of old? do the
Prophets live for ever? the best that ever lived, died: death is an high way, a
beaten road, this tract is trodden; Abel, Adam, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, David,
Daniel, Peter, Paul, James, John, yea the Lord Christ himself are all dead;
these with multitudes of all sorts, ranks, qualities, languages and degrees,
have gone this way before me; why then do I fear to follow after them?

Death is not more common in its general nature, The kind of death is also
common.
then in its special kind: Violent death by all ways of ignominy, and
instruments of cruelty are common to men; especially to Martyrs, and Gods most
faithful Ministers: this way Gods Prophets, Vrijah, Isaiah, Zechariah, and
others: Christ's Disciples, Peter, Paul, James, John and others: The Primitive
Fathers of the Church, Polycarpus, Ignatius, Justinius and others: And our
first Reformers from Popish blindness, and abominations, Cranmer, Ridley,
Latimer, Hooper, Rogers, Bradford, Tailor, Saunders, and many others went out
of the world: What day returns without the death of men? what age of the
world has passed not stained with the blood of Martyrs, or violent death of
holy men? what kind of death peculiar to malefactors, has not Gods Ministers
and Martyrs, the zealous reprovers of public sin, been subjected to, and
undergone?

My Soul! be thy condition what it can, thou must conclude, there does no
temptation befall me but what is common to man, 1 Cor. 10.13.
yea to the best of men, and to the chief of Martyrs: what if the way be dirty
and dreadful, tedious and tiresome; shall I draw back? or not drive after so
many, so good, such excellent men as are gone before me, Levius communia
tangunt, say men by nature; how easy is a common yoke? whilst then mine is the
common state of men, and good men; abate thy fears, advance thy courage; follow
with cheerfulness and content: Let the motto of the happy, unhappy Lady Jane
Gray give check to the admiring censures of the spectators of my death; Non
aliena putes, homini qua obtingere possunt;

Sors hodierna mihi, tunc erit illa sibi. I tread no untroden tract; I am not
the first, I shall not be the last that dye; I go the way that many, most, and
best have gone before me; and others must daily and hourly follow after me:
whatsoever is my chance, death is the condition common to men; and the grave
does know no difference between them who run out the course of nature, and
those who are cut off by violence; One dies in his full strength, Job 21.23,
24, 25, 26.
being wholly at ease, and quiet, his breasts are full of milk, and his bones
are moistened with marrow; another dies in the bitterness of his soul, and
never eats with pleasure; these both lie down alike in the dust, and the worm
shall cover them, without any difference or distinction; Let me dye which way
God has determined, by sickness, or by sword, in my bed, or on a public
stage, in old age, or in the prime of my days; in course of nature, or by the
hands of violence, I can but dye; and dye I must, for I am a man; and death is
common, certain, and natural unto man.

SECT. III.
DEath this common state, My death is decreed by God.
with all its circumstances is determined by the Lord: whatsoever does relate
unto this condition, is concluded in the councels of the most high; these no
man can alter, or avoid; God is of sovereign power; his purposes must and shall
prevail against all powers whatsoever; what is by him decreed must stand most
certainly to come to pass.

My time is then in the hands of the Lord, he will preserve me from the force
of any disease, and fury of the oppressor, until the date by him determined be
expired; my time is appointed on the earth, Job 14.5.
my days are determined, the number of my months are with the Almighty; he
has set the bounds thereof; These I cannot, I must not expect to pass; nor can
the distempers of nature, most violent diseases; or the fury, malice, or power
of men, break in upon them, to anticipate their course, or accelerate their
period; I cannot, I shall not be cut down before the time; nor any other way
then that God has decreed; shall not I be willing to go, when and how God will
have me go?

The decrees of Heaven are unalterable, and unavoidable; it is man's duty to
submit to them without demur or debate; Shall I, can I profess a filial
relation to God, and obedience to the will of him my Father, and not resign up
my self, my time, and my life to be disposed by God? is a reluctance in this
case competible with my prayer, thy will be done? or consistent with that my
resolved supplication in this very case, not my will but thy will be done? men
are but like diseases, executioners of Gods decree upon me; they have against
me no power but what is given them from above; though therefore I am loath to
leave my cottage, and present sensible comforts, shall I dare to resist? or
refuse cheerfully to yield unto, and resign them at the pleasure of mine
absolute Lord and Sovereign, by which alone, I hold them?

Consider, Oh my soul! it is the Lord (more righteous then to do me wrong, more
gracious then to do me hurt) who does dispose my time and state; Let him do
what seems good unto him: There is a season to every thing under the Sun;
Eccles. 3.1, 11.
there is a time to every purpose unthe Heaven: Gods time is the set time to
all things; and the best time to the Sons of men: every thing is beautiful in
its time; so shall death be to me, when my time is come; when men's work is done
it is fit they go to bed, lie down and sleep; man goes forth to his work, and
to his labor, Ps. 104.23.
until the evening: When Corn is ripe it must be cut done; I shall not fall
without Gods determinate counsel; shall I dare? can I desire to contradict
that? I shall not be cut down until I be ripe; and my cutting down be
seasonable; can I wish to stand longer? I have lived, shall I not now be
content to dye, according to Gods determination?

SECT. IV.
THe assaults of Death, are the assaults of an enemy, Death is an enemy, but
conquered.
armed with power and irresistible. This is very true! but yet, Death is the
last enemy I must encounter; and cannot be otherwise conquered then by my
falling under its stroke: my whole life has been a militation; and my death is
but a military finishing of my course: my willingness to dye; mine encountering
this King of terrors with a Christian faith; with a calm, quiet, and composed
Spirit; can only make my dying words trumpet with triumph, 2 Timothy 4.7.
I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course.

I have all my lifetime fought with Death, as Sampson with the Philistines; it
often assaulteth me by hunger, nakedness, cold, infant-weakness, sickness,
natural diseases, and the assaults of violence: shall I think it strange to
receive another onset, and to take one turn more with my constant enemy? Shall
I fear by the power of grace, to vanquish him, whom I have by the strength of
nature, and help of art, I many times resisted and repelled.

O my soul! Sin my Dalilah, has deceived me; and spoiled me of my natural
strength; I cannot now, as formerly, fight with, and beat back this Philistine:
mine only conquest of him, is to fall before, and with him: when he has
divided my body from my soul, he has done his worst; and will soon find a few
such victories will waste his strength, so that he shall not be able to keep
the field; to appear in the world; or to assault the sons of men.

My soul! consider thy present state; compose thy self; cry unto God for
strength of faith; that thou may by dying, be at once revenged on thine
enemy: I shall when dead, be for ever freed from that warfare, with Satan, Sin,
and the World, which I have been constrained to wage all my life long: I shall
then no longer fight for my strength, youth, growth, credit, comforts, and
conscience, all which I have all my time defended with much difficulty, and
great danger: Death mine enemy, shall then set me free from the Devils
temptation, the worlds enticements, the outrage of men, the arrows of the
Almighty, and the lustings of mine own flesh; all which have all my days stung
my soul, and battered my body. My soul! take courage unto this last encounter;
herein my willingness to dye, is the victory; my fall is the fullest conquest
that I ever did, or can make: be herein the more courageous, considering,

Death is, though an enemy, yet a conquered, and disarmed enemy: Christ, that
Captain of my salvation, has tried the strength of death, and subdued it; he
by dying did overcome death, and him who had the power of death, (viz.) the
Devil: herein Satan was out shot in his own Bow, and caught in his own snare:
what gained the Philistines by bringing forth Sampson to make them sport; and
to be insulted over, in the house of Dagon; but their own destruction? the very
same has death and the Devil gotten by bringing the Lord of life to dye on the
Cross; and to the Grave which could not hold him; these by getting, have lost
the victory: O blessed Paradox! by this my faith, and my soul can outface,
out-brave death; whilst my nature, and my body does dread the assaults, and
stroke thereof. Death struck the Lord of life with its sting; and lost its
sting by striking him: and in him, all that are his, do ever since insult over
death; with an, O death! 1 Cor. 15.55.
where is thy sting? O grave! where is thy victory? Since this foil death is
befooled of its conquest over them whom it most insultingly strikes with
success, and cutteth down with power; for it prevailing, loses its design:
The design of Death is to seal man under indelible guilt; to set him under the
curse of the Law; and at everlasting distance from the Lord: verse. 56.58
The sting of Death is Sin; the strength of Sin is the Law; but thanks be unto
God, who has given us the victory, through Jesus Christ our Lord; for hereby
death does (to all that are in Christ Jesus) effect what is directly contrary
to its design, it discharges that guilt under which they greived all their
days; and releaseth them from those curses of the Law, by which they were
chastened in this life; and it transmitteth their souls unto the immediate and
eternal enjoyment of God and Christ; and although it holds the body for some
time, yet, it divides it not from Christ, to whom it is inseperably united;
and by whom it shall be raised up, to be reunited to the soul, and perfectly
possess God for ever.

My Soul! why art thou afraid of a Be which has lost its sting? why do thou
dread an enemy vanquished to thy hand, and sprawling at thy feet? Has David
killed Goliath, and shall not trembling, affrighted Israel up, and pursue the
Philistines? has the Lord Christ gotten and given me the victory over death,
by discharging thy guilt, and bearing the punishment thereof in his own body,
unto the satisfaction of the Law; and will thou fear to encounter the fiercest
assaults thereof? What? shall a conquered enemy disanimate the Conqueror?

My Soul! in the world thou have tribulation; in death thou have terror; but be
of good comfort thou art now engaged in the last encounter with both; and the
Lord Jesus has overcome the world, and conquered death: Triumph in death; for
thou shall by dying, be made triumphant over Death, the World and the Devil:
Thy warfare is now accomplished; let me now in my last act play the man, and
show the valor of my Faith and Patience, unto the due restraint of my now
provoked fear and passions: Then this shall be the matter of mine eternal
happiness and honor, that I have warred a good warfare; I have fought a good
fight, I have kept the Faith.

SECT. V.
DEath is a curse, The cursed nature of death is changed.
the punishment of man's sin, the expression of Gods wrath, and the execution of
the Law; and dreadful sentence pronounced against man. It is so, in its nature,
and of it self: But it is not such to all that are thereto subjected: the voice
from heaven has proclaimed them Blessed, Rev. 14.13.
who dye in the Lord, and has rendered two reasons of the blessed state of
their death: First, they rest from their labor; they then reap no punishment,
Heb. 4.10
but are indeed blessed; for he that is entered into his rest, cease from his
own works (of sin and sorrow) as God ceased from his. Secondly, Their works
follow them, unto their acceptance with, and recompense from the Lord.

The nature of death is changed to such who are in Christ, Death to Christ's
friends is a sleep.
and to such who die for Christ; the friends of Christ do not dye, but sleep:
Job 7.21.
I account sleep a special blessing of God, for the refreshment of nature: my
sleep is the image the similitude of death: Death is the truest, the only
sleep of a true Beleiver; when I sleep I am as dead; and when I dye I shall but
sleep: I shall indeed sleep longer in my grave, then in my bed; but I am sure I
shall sleep more quietly; without affrighting fancies, or disturbing dreams,
and I shall at length awake and arise: when my weary day is ended, how willing
am I to lie down and sleep? My Soul! art thou not willing thy weary body should
have rest? to dye is to a Saint no more, then to undress and go to bed, to lie
down and sleep; Joh. 11.11
Let what will become of Dives, our friend Lazarus sleeps.

The righteous when they dye, are taken from evil to come: Isa. 57.1, 2 and
26.20
death is their defense from danger, distress and dread; their grave is Gods
pavilion and receptacle, into which they his jewels are gathered, Mal. 3.17.
lest they should be left in the commotions of the world; in which, they his
trusty friends and confederates are secured from the storm and blast of the
terrible ones, raised up by the Lord to shake terribly the earth: my Soul! what
though the Chambers of death be dark; will thou deem it a curse to be gathered
into them by Gods special grace; that thou may not feel, hear or see the
evil, which his wrath and vengeance is about to bring on the places of thy
present abode? The just by death enter into peace, when the whole world is full
of Wars; they rest in their beds when the house is all in an hurly burly, and
unquiet tumult: Death is the Saints cessation from labor and travel; their
security from lamentation and trouble: their estate of quiet and ease, and
their entrance into rest and glory: The very wicked (who with Balaam, are ready
to curse them whilst they live) would gladly share lots with them in their
death: The worst of men are so apprehensive and affected that their latter end
shall be exceedingly good, that they cannot but wish to dye the death of the
righteous.

Death is indeed a curse to sinners; but the course of nature unto Saints: The
direful executioner of Gods wrath and law, to all who die in their sin; but a
messenger of divine favor to all who die in the Lord; an harbinger of peace to
all who walk in uprightness: A grim Porter to fetch home to their fathers
mansions, all that are Gods children. Death is indeed a dismal doom on the sons
of the first Adam,; but the discharge of all sin, sorrow, pain, and travel to
all the sons of the second Adam: death is in its nature vile and odious, Ps.
116.15.
but precious in the sight of the Lord, is the death of all his Saints: death
is exceeding dreadful to such who are obnoxious to its sting; but the stroke of
death is desirable, to all such who are acquitted from, and armed against its
sting.

Death by violence contains in it a curse, A good cause, and conscience, make
death a blessing.
with an emphasis; and increase: yet, a good conscience, righteousness toward
God; and the testimony of Jesus; being the cause procuring the same; makes the
most base, ignominious, and cursed death, a condition of glory and blessedness:
the blessing of them who dye in the Lord; does most certainly, eminently, and
especially appertain to such who dye for the Lord. Phil. 1.29.
It is a singular gift to believe in Christ; but to suffer, and that unto
death, for Christ, is a peculiar gift, of special grace; all Saints share not
in it; attain not the honor of it: Stephen stoned for enforcing the truth of
Religion (by the strength of reason, Act. 7, 55, 56.
not to be resisted by the adversaries,) saw, Heaven open to receive him at his
death: The slain for the Word of God, and testimony which they held, are lodged
under Gods Altar in glory; Rev. 6.9.10, 11.
and before the Throne of the Lamb; they are clothed in white robes, to attend
the Lamb: the most cursed and ignominious death is changed and made glorious to
just men, by having passed on Gods best servants; most zealous and faithful
Prophets; yea, the only and beloved Son of God, the Lord Jesus, our Savior,
has made death, every, any kind of death the blessing of his people.

My Soul! mistake not the nature of death, unto the increase of thy dread: mind
the condition; make sure of the qualification which changes its nature; and
then death will loose its affrighting vizard, and have another aspect in thine
eye; and thou will incline to give it a more free acceptance: am I in Christ? I
am then redeemed from the curse of death; can I? dare I desire to divert the
course of nature? Beware, O my soul! who am I? Shall the earth be removed for
me? Job 18 4.
shall I think to alter Gods purpose? or to change the course of Gods
providence toward men? shall I not be satisfied to be saved from the sting,
unless I escape also the stroke of Death? God never purposed, Christ never
promised to free me from this; why do I presume to dream of it, to look for it?
Shall my dread of the stroke, darken the glory of Christ's love, or damp mine
apprehensions, and esteem of the unspeakable, undeserved mercy of being saved
from the sting of death? God forbid. God has extracted the poison; shall my
stomach nauseate and rise against this cup, only because it is bitter? Oh no;
I will rightthankfully take it, as the cup of salvation; and dismiss my dread;
and dutifully submit my self to the Will of God, only wise; my most gracious
Father: O my God, not my will but thy Will be done.

God has accounted poor, weak, worthless me, worthy of the Ministry of the
glorious Gospel of his dear Son, he has at this time culled me from among my
brethren, to bear a special Testimony to his truth; to the power, plainness,
purity, and simplicity of Christ's ordinances, worship and officers; and to
those degrees of reformation in this Church and Nation, which have been
protested and solemnly sworn to the most high God; herein I have believed; for
these I have spoken, written, and disputed; and shall I now fear to suffer?
shall I now dread death, the crowning act of all my zeal, diligence and
fidelity? is not this part of the cross of Christ? and so, the glorious crown
of a Minister of the Gospel? have I any thing wherein to glory, save the Cross
of Christ? and shall I fear to be seen in my Masters Livery? the honor of my
now expected death, is an high favor, a peculiar privilege, an effect of
special grace; and therefore sufficient to persuade me to be, not only
willing, but desirous to be offered up by death; to, and for him who accounted
not his life dear for me: Death in, and for this cause, is not more my duty
then my dignity; the more ignominious it is, the more glorious; it shall
receive the due recompense of reward; 2 Timothy 2.12.
If I suffer with Christ, I shall be glorified with him; and reign with him.

I have all my days wandered in this world like a Pilgrim in a strange Country;
it is now my Fathers pleasure to call and send for me home; shall I refuse to
go in the hand of a grim Messenger? because of his ghastly look, and affrighting
countenance? may not the same bloody hand conduct me to my Fathers House, which
does cut down mine and my Fathers foes? what though the stroke of death be the
same to good and bad? the sequels of Death are not the same to both: the Red
Sea may pass Israel into the land of rest, and yet ruin the Egyptians: the
same Sheriff who does execute Traitors and malefactors, does put good
subjects into the possession of their proprieties; though he be dreadful in the
one, his very posse comitatus is desirable to the other: Shall I foolishly
draw back, fear to be possessed of mine inheritance incorruptible, and
undefiled, because I must be brought, and put into it with Halberts, Bills,
Swords, and the Sheriffs train and power?

My Soul; cheer up; reflect on thy self; Christ his love; and Gods grace;
notwithstanding my many slips, falls, and infirmities; I will presume to say, I
have lived the life of the righteous; the Covenant of God is on my flesh; with
God I have desired and endeavored to walk; though I have sometimes wandered,
and gone astray like a lost sheep: I have embraced Christ my Lord; and to him I
will cleave, as to my deer Redeemer; I shall therefore dye the death of the
righteous: although I may be struck, I shall not be stung by death: Death may
pass upon me as the course of nature, and as an expression of humane rage, but
not as the curse of God; or execution of his Law: Let me make it my care to see
my quality changed whilst I live; and then I am assured God will change the
quality of my death when I dye.

SECT. VI.
IF I now dye, as men's rage does threaten; mine enemies desire and hope; my
friends fear and deprecate; and my self have cause to expect; I dye as a
Malefactor; and by the sentence of a righteous Law, well, and what then? Such
is the Stat. of Ed. 3. the only law declaring Treason.
if I do thus dye, my guilt is real or reputed.

Suppose my guilt were real (for Lord thou know mine innocence wherein I
stand defamed) to die a malefactor is not inconsistent with eternal salvation:
I may die for my sin, and not dye in my sin: I may be most justly punished by
men (that others may hear, and fear, Deuteronomy. 13.11.
and do no more so wickedly) for that sin which may be pardoned by the Lord: I
may be condemned in the world for that crime, which shall never be charged on
me by my God: my present punishment may provoke my repentance; and my
repentance will most certainly procure me Gods, if not the Kings mercy: Divine
grace is not barred by humane justice: the theif crucified with Christ,
received (and confessed so much) the due reward of his evil; Luke 23.41, 43.
yet this hindered not his souls being that night in Paradise with his Savior
and fellow-sufferer: The crime, not the condition, must divide between God and
the soul; as it does divide the soul from the body: but repentance is the
sponge of guilt; where God gives repentance, he denies not remission of the
most egregious crime; to the most heinous offender: The hand of humane justice
may be the help of the sinners repentance; and then Tyburn, or Tower Hill may
be as near, as good, yea, a much better way to Heaven then any other: Happy is
the stroke of justice, 2 Chronicles. 33.12.
which may save the soul from hell. Manasseh's fetters made him see, confess,
and abandon his sin: the Elect of God are not exempt from the greatest crimes;
they may fall into and commit them: But this is their happiness, they are sure
to repent thereof; and therefore they shall not be eternally condemned for
them. I envy not some late condemned, executed malefactors, The murtherous
Judges of his late Majesty K. C. first.
their confidence of salvation, and eternal life; but I heartily wish that (for
the glory of God, the honor of Christian martyrdom, credit of true Religion,
the real comfort of their friends; as well as their own salvation) they had
more freely and more openly owned their guilt (most odious in the light of
nature, much more of Scripture) confessed their sin; and justified God and man
by their contrition, and due confusion under the just sentence of a most
righteous law: I cannot but think repentance had been more proper matter for
their professions, then their insultation and rejoicing in their sufferings, as
if in and for the Lord; and their peace, joy and courage, whereof their
surviving friends boast; not observing the same abstracted from that
humiliation, and pensive demeanor, most Christianly suitable to so just, and
sad sufferings.

If there be in me any real guilt, for which I have deserved to dye; I pray God
convince me of it (for I yet see it not) and affect me with it: if in any thing
I have violated the Law, though through error, or ignorance, God give me grace
to justify the righteousness of that law by which I may be condemned; and then
if my suffering the sentence of the law work in me a sense of guilt, unto a
penitential submission under the hand of God, through faith in Christ my
Savior, I shall see cause to confess Gods abundant goodness, in saving my
soul, by the condemnation, execution, and loss of my boby.

But O Lord, thou know the crime by which I stand defamed; and for which, I
may be unjustly condemned, is reputed and not real; for my heart never yet
admitted, or entertained the least evil thought against the King, the Lords
anointed: if then I dye in mine innocence, and as a malefactor; my death may
administer to me more joy then grief, more comfort then contrition, more
confidence then confusion; for howsoever men may condemn me, God, and mine own
conscience will acquit and justify me: Nor am I the first, the only one, that
has been oppressed in judgment; this is one of the common evils under the
sun, belonging to Gods immediate and peculiar vengeance: Eccles. 7.15. and 5.8.
there is a just man that perishes in his righteousness; if thou see the
oppression of the poor, and the violent perverting of justice and judgment in
a Provinces marvail not at the matter; for he that is higher then the highest
regards it, and he is higher then they. I pray God prevent Englands King and
Kingdom from slaying poor, In this God has graciously answered my desire.
envied, and despised me; for mine innocent blood will hurt them, more then
their stroke can possibly hurt me; they can but kill my body; work for me the
glory of a martyr; send me to my place and state of rest: but this will hazard
their souls, gall their consciences, cast them under the guilt, and odium of
violence, persecution and murder by the sword of justice; stain the land with
blood which will cry for Gods vengeance and their repentance; As for me, I am
in your hands, do with me as seems good and meet unto you; But know ye for
certain, that if ye put me to death, ye shall surely bring innocent blood upon
your selves, upon this City, and upon the inhabitants thereof; for of a truth
the Lord has sent me, and stirred me up to speak and write all the words which
I have sounded in your ears.

The reproach of my suffering as a malefactor, will indeed, and for a time
cloud my credit; darken my sufferings, and deprive God of the honor of them,
making them a stone of stumbling to many; a rock of offense to the weak and
wicked: but they shall not in the least eclipse the glory of my sufferings, and
innocence, in the sight of God and good men; or in the sense of mine own
conscience: As for me; let all men know, I wait for a resurrection of names, as
well, as certainly, as a resurrection of bodies, when the great Judge of all
the Gods on earth, shall appear to call over the process, take cognizance of
the error, and reverse the false judgment passed by the sons of the mighty.
Whilst my God, and my conscience witness, true Religion, enforced by right
reason, to be whole, the only, and the real cause of my suffering; why should
I be troubled at the clamor, and seeming black charge of Treason, whilst the
fulfilling my ministry, and the faithful dischardge of my duty, is the real
ground, and only cause of men's wrath, and my death; Shall I be dismayed, that I
am Arraigned, Condemned, and executed so, as to be reputed a Malefactor? have
not all Gods Prophets and Apostles been presented to the World as evil doers?
and as such, exposed unto, and derided in their sufferings? was not Jeremiah
charged with Treason? Jer. 37.13, 15. Act. 24.5
and Paul with Sedition? and both as such imprisoned and afflicted: Elijah was
the troubler of Israel; was not Amos expelled the Court as a Dangerous Preacher
against the King; was not Michaiah carged by the King, to be one that bare ill
will to the King? was not this the very lot of Christ himself? suffered not
that righteous one, as a Blasphemer, and as an enemy to Caesar? shall I be
deterred from following my Master? from drinking of the cup, whereof my deer
redeemer has begun? from traveling in the beaten road of all Gods Prophets?
the very way prescribed by the Lord himself? has not the Lord Christ declared
humane rage and reproach, to attend all who faithfully reveal his will, and
men's sins? is not unjust reproach in my death, part of Christ's cross, and my
Crown? why then do I dread and decline it? if I be reproached for the name of
Christ, I am happy, 1 Pet. 4.14
the spirit of glory, and of Christ rests on me.

It is the cause, not the pain, makes the Martyr, or Malefactor, my soul, be
not troubled at the kind, or clamoured cause of my death: were I indeed really
guilty; did I receive the due reward of my sin, I must then have laid my mouth
in the dust, confessed my sin; given glory to God, accepted the punishment of
mine iniquity, and by an humble act of faith applied the blood of Christ to my
soul; then I might rest assured that I was condemned in and by the world, that
I might not be judged of the Lord. But whilst if I dye, as I now dread, I dye
innocently, for a good conscience, and for the Testimony of the truth; Let me
rejoice that God has accounted me worthy to be reputed the off-scowring of
this world, and enemy of mankind; for my judgment is of the Lord, who judges
most righteous judgment; and though my brethren cast me out, Isa. 66.5.
and cry; Let the Lord be glorified; yet, he will appear to my joy, and they
shall be ashamed; when Jesus Christ shall come to judge, clear, and crown me as
his Martyr; it shall not repent me that men condemned and cut me off as a
Malefactor.

SECT. VII.
IN death I shall feel pain; Death is painful, but puts an end to pain.
It is like I may; yet, God can make it easy: I feel more pain in the
precursors, then I can feel in the stroke of death: the pain and extremity of a
killing disease, is often, and ordinarily more, then the pain of death; it is
usually such as makes life a burden, and death defireable; how many in the
burnings of a Feavor, a fit of the Stone, or Collique, have wished for death to
ease them of their pain? my fear of pain in death is much greater, then what I
shall feel in the stroke thereof; the pomp and passage unto death, does, and
will more perplex my soul, then the pain thereof can possibly pinch my sense:
but suppose the worst; yet,

The greatest pains of death are tolerable, and pass away in a moment: with how
much ease did the Lord Jesus give up the Ghost, in that dying act, the dreadful
expectation of which, made him sweat blood and water? how many of the Martyrs
have with most calm and composed spirits, lien under the most cruel and
exquisite torments; and as Lambs before the Shearer, breathed out their last
breath in the greatest pains of death, that envy could devise, or enraged
malice could inflict? Hawks (that holy Martyr, in our Marian Persecution) in
the midst of the flames, did not forget to lift up his hands toward Heaven,
before he gave up the Ghost; as a token to his Friends, that the raging pain of
that siery death was tolerable. All Gods Saints have lien on this rack; and
sitten down on this little ease; and shall I give back because of a little
tolerable pain? Be the pains of death never so peircing sharp, and intolerable;
yet they are short, soon pass away; and are the Period of all pain; in respect
of this, nature has conceived, and Scripture has expressly concluded, Eccles.
7.2.
better is the day of a man's death, then the day of his birth: all my life has
been nothing else but sorrow and pain; my days have hitherto passed in anguish,
affliction, and anxiety; yea, my resting time, place, and state, has scared me
with Dreams, Job ^.13, 14.
and terrified me with Visions in the night, so that strangling death, any kind
of death, has been more desirable then life; Shall I now fear that one
stroke, which though it cut me to the heart, will at once cut off all my pain
and grief? does not nature teach men to choose the pain of cutting off an Arm or
Leg, rather then to lie continually under a festring, burning, and incurable
wound? Plotinus the Philosopher, accounted men's mortallity, Gods special mercy,
as the expiration of their misery: Cato Major, that wise Roman, reflecting the
pains he had endured, professed if he might be rendered young again, and renew
his age, he would not desire it; he would refuse it: Did the pain of life, take
away the pain of death to Heathens? and shall it not much more do so unto
Christians, who have other, and better hopes of future happiness then they ever
knew or expected?

My soul! stir up thy self, make out a little faith and patience to endure this
one pinch, and stroke of pain, which shall presently cease and be the period of
all thy misery; the cure of all thy maladies; and will heal thee of all thy
fears, griefs, cares, diseases, and distempers: the afflictions of my body, and
anguish of my mind: though I walk through the vale of the shadow of death I
will fear none ill; for Lord thou art with me: be with me O my God, that I may
not over-passionately fear that little short pain I must feel; make thou a
lively faith in me, to bear up under, prevail against, and triumph over a
lively sense; that so my last little pain being past, I may possess eternal
health and ease; and therein rejoice, for that although the stroke of death did
for present cut, it did for ever cure my soul.

SECT. VIII.
DEath will deprive me of all sensible pleasure: it will so; Death depriveth of
pleasures, but they are sensible.
and it is no matter; for this pleasure was at best but sensible; my soul found
no pleasure in it; nor did it satisfy my very senses; these were tired in the
possession, and use of these; Eccles. 1.8
The eye is not satisfied in seeing, nor the ear in hearing: The necessary
novelty is an undeniable evidence of the vanity of these delights. Sinful.
It were well if I could say these pleasures were only sensible, my soul has
on woeful experience found them the pleasures of sin; Heb. 11.25.
not only the reward, but also the cause of sin: I never could possess them
without sin; I have in this respect paid full dear for all the pleasures I have
enjoyed under the sun; they have stolen too much of mine heart and affections,
they have eaten into, and eaten up too much of my precious time; they have
dulled my senses; stupefied my soul, and discomposed me unto the duties of
holiness; they have been baits and snares, whereby I have been entised unto,
and entangled in sin, they have diverted my soul from seeking, and solacing it
self, in more serious and satisfying delights: the sinfulness of my pleasure
has eaten out the sweetness of my pleasure.

These pleasures of sin are but for a season; are often changing, Short.
and do soon vanish; will certainly expire; cannot endure for ever, and leave
bitterness behind them when they go away; they have cost me more smart and
grief when they have been ended, then they did afford me joy or content whilst
they continued: I may willingly dismiss those pleasures, which I have bought at
so dear a rate; possess so uncertainly, and for so short a season; and proved
so vain, empty, and dissatisfactory.

My Soul! Let me cheerfully, contentedly cease from my pleasure among the
living on earth; whilst I shall therein cease from the sinning and sorrowing,
necessarily attendant on, and inseparably annexed unto my pleasures: and yet
consider, all joy is not at an end with me when I die; Joy succeeds and yet
remains
I pass not from all pleasure, when parted from these; I only leave what is
sensible and sinful; but death shall transmit my soul into Gods presence, in
which are rivers of pleasures for evermore: Psalm. 16.11
can I think the fullness of lasting joys, solacing my soul in the sight of God,
will not compensate my loss of the sensible pleasures of sin, which are but for
a season? did these cast the scales of Moses judgment and affections in his
time of life, Heb. 11.25, 26, 27.
youth and strength, causing him to despise the Crown and glory of Egypt; and
to choose affliction with the people of God, rather then to be called the son of
Pharoah's Daughter? And shall not the sense and expectation thereof make me
content to leave the delights, which I cannot longer enjoy? It was my duty to
have refused them sooner; I may well be content to relinquish them now, I can
enjoy them no longer. My soul! yield unto, rejoice in, and bless God for that
necessity, which does enforce thy duty; and willingly leave those pleasures,
which would have left thee in bitterness, if thou should longer abide in the
body, the only subject capable of these sensible pleasures.

SECT. IX.
DEath will deprive me of all my outward comforts, Death does deprive me of
outwardcomforts which I have long enjoyed to supply my necessity.
goods and possessions in the world, Wife, Children and Servants which
ministered to me; Be it so; it is Gods mercy I have enjoyed them for so long a
time; I am in the possession of them a tenant at Gods will, he does not the
least wrong to take them from me; so kind has God been to me, he has let me
possess them, whilst they could do me good, and I had need of them: when I am
dead they connot minister to me; I shall have neither need nor use of any, or
all these comforts: I may well be content to leave what I shall not lack, what
I cannot use; it is I confess a mercy to have them; but it speaks
imperfection to have need of them: is it not much better to be in an estate of
perfection without them, then to have these comforts to me continued, and my
self abide imperfect?

Death does deprive me of some comforts; Such as content not nor continue.
but they are such which afford no true content; nor are they of any
continuance: they are, though the best things under the sun; yet at the best,
they are but things under the sun; Eccl. 1.1, 2
and all things under the sun are vanity and vexation of spirit: they give a
little, and indeed but a little content to my sense; but not any to my soul;
they were not obtained without care, retained without fear; nor will they now
be relinquished without grief: I cannot deny them to be flowers, flowers of
beauty and pleasure; but I must confess I ever found them fading, and full of
pricks: I have not enjoyed them without vexation; and if I live longer, I shall
ere it be long lose them, and have them taken from me; they all have the wings
of the morning, and fly away in a moment. I can already say of some, what I
shall soon say of the rest; I had servants, trusty and faithful to me; but they
are gone: My means by my ministry.
I had goods yearly renewing my store, but it is taken from me; I had Children,
sweet babes, the chief of natures blessings; but my Joseph's my Benjamins are
not; mine outward enjoyments have been to me a Gourde of refreshment, and
present delight; Jon. 4.6, 7
but a Jonahs Gourde of vanity, in the root of which is a worm, which does and
will soon make it wither: if I pass not from my present comforts, they will
pierce my soul with care and fear, and at last perish in mine hand; I may well
be content to die from those comforts, which are sure to die from me; and leave
me in sorrow, even in worldly sorrow which works death: 2 Cor. 7.10.
What great difference is it for me to be parted from my comforts, or to have
my comforts parted from me? can any thing but a childish temper, make me cry,
when those pleasing toys are taken from me, which I freely leave when tired
with them: or which I fling from me with fury when I feel my self hurt by them?
what cause have I to be thus dismayed, to be divided from those comforts which
I have thus long enjoyed, to supply my need yet with certain dolor, and
uncertain durance? shall I so foolishly love, as not be content to leave what
loadeth me with care and fear; yet cannot last; but will be gone from me, if I
stay longer in this world?

Death takes me from my outward comforts; but yet, I leave them to, and for
the comfort of my relations and friends, which stay behind me; they will have
the use of them, they will do them good; though I leave them, they are not
lost, my turn is served by them; shall I grudge that others have them to serve
their turn, as they served mine? has it not been my care to get goods, that I
might leave them to my Relations? and shall I now be unwilling to leave them
that little which I have gotten? and which can now do me no more good?

Though death deprive me of some useless movables; yet it leaves me my most
precious jewels, and chiefest substance: the graces of my soul, the glorious
privileges of my faith, death cannot touch, or take from me; and these are
more worth then all the world: My soul! play the Merchant, be content to see
thy luggage, and empty cask cast overboard, to save thy choice commodities, and
thy pearls of price: death may take me from riches, it cannot touch my
righteousness; it may anticipate my pompous Funeral, but it cannot hinder my
graces from going with me to Heaven; though I must at death leave my outward
comforts, this is mine advantage I may retain, and carry with me mine
integrity: My soul! death shall not meddle with thy best treasure; be therefore
content to part with thy worst enjoyments; thine outward comforts: whilst thy
tottering tabernacle must fall, thine earthly cottage must be burnt; rejoice,
and bless God that thou can save any thing; much more, that thy best goods,
thy substance is escaped and secured; for being herewith stored, thou shall
possess an estate much more plentiful and pleasant, then what thou had in
this life and world. Death cuts me off from my relations, but casts them on
God.


SECT. X.
DEath will cut me off from my dear Relations, whose dependence has been on my
care for them; but, it will then dispose them under the more immediate care,
protection, Psalm. 68.5. Hos. 14.3.
and providence of God, who is, judge of the Widows case, and with whom the
Fatherless find mercy. It peirceth my soul to hear the Wife of my bosom cry, Oh
Husband! What shall become of me, when thou the covering of mine eyes art taken
from me? and to hear my Children cry, What shall become of us, when our
careful, compassionate Father is gone? be still my soul! submit, yield unto my
God; even so father, for so it seems good unto thee: Is it not my duty by an
act of faith, to cast my fatherless Children on the Lord? have I not taught,
and often assured my Widow, she must trust in God? was it not the Lord who
provided for them by me? in vain had I risen early, gone to bed late, and eaten
the bread of carefulness, if God had not built my house: Shall I think the same
God cannot, or shall I fear he will not provide for them without me? they may
be put upon some more sensible straits, to exert some more special acts of
faith; more eminently to exercise some graces; but they have the same
assurance, and some better security, that they shall enjoy food convenient, the
Fountain abides full and flowing, though not by the same pipe and conduit
which is cut off: it is Gods property, and promise, to take care of the Widow
and Fatherless: especially of such who are so made for the testimony of his
truth: Why do I disquiet my self for the sadness of that condition, which
sets my dear Relations in a more special dependence on God; and secureth to
them the more peculiar providence of God? I love them; I have looked after them
whilst I lived; I will now leave the care of them to him, who expressed it by
me; who can and will express the same without me; who is charged with them by
his own property and promise; who is more immediately, more eminently bound to
look after them, by taking, thus taking me from them.

O my God! give my Wife and Children a fear of thee; submission to thee; and
faith in thee; be thou the Husband of my Widow; and the Father of my fatherless
Children; that to the praise of thee who failest not, they may tell the world,
the unbeleiving world; they lost nothing by loosing, thus loosing me: they
traded to good advantage, by freely, willingly, cheerfully, contentedly, giving
up a most loving Husband, and tender Father, to the pleasure of a gracious,
faithful, never failing God; who stays with them, and cares for them, when
he by death does take me from them.

SECT. XI.
AFter death, Death hinders me from knowing what is done under the sun; and so
I shall know no evil.
I must lie down in the pit, I shall be covered with darkness; I shall not know
what is done under the Sun; This will indeed be my state: but yet, whilst I lie
down in the pit, I shall abide in safety, and be delivered from my brethrens
rage and fury; My Brother Reuben proves most faithful and affectionate, by
letting me down into the pit; he thereby secureth, not only my life, but also
my liberty against my brethrens malice; their hands cannot then reach me to do
me hurt; they cannot draw me thence, to sell and enslave me to any Ishmaelite,
their envy may enquire for me, but they shall not find me; I shall be preserved
in safety, and preferred to glory, when their entangled state shall affect
their hearts, and make them with bitterness to remember, and confess, they are
verily guilty concerning their brother, in that they saw the anguish of his
soul, Genesis 42.21.
when he besought them, and they would not hear him: my being put into the pit,
is the passage to glory God has determined for his beloved Joseph's.

If darkness cover me; it does the better suit my sleeping state, and
capacitate me thereunto; light is indeed pleasant to the eye, but it is
perturbing, preventing, when men desire to sleep: my gracious God lays me in
the grave, as in an house of darkness; and as on a bed of silence; that my
wearied body may the better sleep and take its rest; until it shall be awakened
by his last trumpet; which shall summon me to meet my Lord in glory.

I have no great cause to be troubled for that, Nothing but evil under the sun
to be known.
I shall not know what is done under the Sun: for there can be little done
against me, after I am dead; nothing that can hurt me: suppose men's foolish
envy should digg up my stinking carcass, to burn or bury it under the Gallows;
they may annoy themselves, they cannot afflict me: sure I am, they can do
nothing under the Sun, which shall concern me when I am dead; why shall I be
so curious, as to covet the knowledge of other men's affairs? I might possibly
know some good by my life; but that will be but very little; but I were therein
sure to know very much evil; and such evil as would and must afflict me: whilst
I know nothing under the Sun, I shall not know the profaneness, blasphemies,
impieties, injustice, oppressions, violence, superstitions, perfidies,
perjuries, and persecutions which are done under the Sun, all which would call
for, and constrain grief in my soul, and tears from my eyes; seeing I could not
know a little good, without knowing so much evil; shall I not be content to be
freed from a so vexatious burden as is the knowledge of things under the Sun; I
hate life, Eccles. 2.17.
because the work which is wrought under the Sun is grievous unto me, for it is
vanity and vexation of spirit.

What if I do not know what is done under the Sun? After death I shall know
much good.
I shall know much better things: my soul the seat and subject of mine
understanding, shall be acquainted with, and fully apprehend the glories which
are above the Sun: I shall then know the depths of divine mercy, the mysteries
of man's salvation; 1 Cor. 13.12.
I shall then know as I am known; I shall perfectly know God and Christ; shall
I stick to entertain such an exchange of objects to mine understanding? is not
my loss great, and greatly to be lamented? by which I only loose the knowledge
of vanity, which would not make me happy; and iniquity which would make me
miserable; but gain the knowledge, the perfect knowledge of good, much good,
true and substantial good, only good, without the least mixture of evil; and
that in an estate, in the enjoyment of perfect glory?

SECT. XII.
AFter death there shall be no remembrance of me: No remembrance of me after
death, nor of my sin.
but its no matter; a great name, foolishly purchased by the great precipitacie
of some in the world; is nothing but a great bubble of vanity, which will wear
out at last; time will eat it out of the strongest Cities, or marble Monuments:
and I hope when I am forgotten, my sin and shame will also be forgotten:
serious thoughts suggest unto me content, the little good I have done should be
forgotten, so that my folly and wickedness may not be remembered: and yet,

My soul! be not dismayed, the Scripture does declare the memory of the just is
blessed; Psalm. 10.7. and 112.6.
and the righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance; God has provided
that his peoples names shall live, when their dead bodies shall consume in the
grave: the Lord has used me whilst I lived, as an instrument of his truth and
honor; can I dye, and be forgotten in his Church, or among his people? shall
not my works follow me? shall not my works praise me in the gate? can the
sinners by me reproved, or the Saints by me converted to, or confirmed in the
truth, remember themselves, their sin, or duty, and forget me? God has blessed
me with many lasting memorials of nature; a fruitful progeny: I need not build
tombs, or Cities and call them after my name: for when I am dead my sons will
preserve the memory of my name: the rotting of the name is a curse, entailed on
men of rotten lives, and is ordinarily effected by Gods cutting off the budding
race, and hopeful progeny: whatever has befallen me in this life, God has not
suffered this cause procuring, or producing this effect, to be my lot; I will
not therefore torment my self with a fear that it should follow me when dead.
Notwithstanding my sinfulness, my care shall be that my life and death may make
it legible, that my name is written in the book of life; and therein I have
cause to rejoice, more then if the devils we^^ subject to me: Luke 10.20
I have laid ho^d on Gods Covenant; he has given me a place in his sanctuary,
better then a name of sons and daughters: my name can never be blotted out of
that book; mine interest and relation by that covenant shall ever be
acknowledged, and remembered; I therefore cannot possibly be buried in oblivion.

SECT. XIII.
DEath will remove me from my place, Death will remove me from my place, but it
is movable.
that it shall know me no more: it will so: but shall this dismay me? am not I
a pilgrim in this earth as all my fathers were? the Patriarchs passed their
time on earth in moveable tents, Looking for a City whose founder and maker is
God: Heb. 10.10.
the houses in which I have lived, have seemed to be more lasting structures;
yet they never were to me any durable stations; I have not indeed removed my
tents, but I have been often removed from my tents: I have ever been in a
shifting state; moving from one house unto another; from one place to another;
and this has been to me very tedious and irksom: my Father did indeed raise
many stately structures; In Dublin in Ireland.
not one of all his sons possessed them, or any of them; the brick walls may
bear his name, none of his children do or can inhabit them: God has made
constant motion my condition; he has wisely moved me from place to place, that
I might be in love with no place under the sun: if I have liked mine house and
place never so well, I have by one means or other been forced to leave it; and
that either because it was none of mine, or else men's persecuting rage would
not suffer me in peace to possess it; or because my Masters work has been done
in that place and called me to another: How often have I been forcibly removed
from people whom I have dearly loved, and from places where I thought I had
pitched my tent; and resolved to rest? I dug a grave for my children,
wherein I intended to have been intombed my self; and yet my dead babes are
dispersed; their graves are at a distance each from other; and it is very
unlikely my grave should be with any of them. If Death remove me from my place;
it does nothing but what has been common to me all my life, I will not
therefore think it strange once more to remove my place; but will readily,
contentedly pack up and be gone; for this remove shall be my last remove, for
this remove shall be my best remove: for this remove shall move me from Earth
to Heaven: and there I have an house of mine own; a better house then any this
world affords; an house not made with hands; an eternal house; whose builder
and maker is God; a Mansion house, prepared by Christ my precursor, for to
entertain me, and wherein I must and shall abide for ever; an house which time
cannot waste or ruin; nor humane force pull down, or raze; an house most
pleasantly situated, accommodated with all conveniences, exempt from all
annoyances, and amply furnished with what may make it to me an happy
habitation; an house it is for which I shall pay no rent, or taxes; in which I
shall not live a tenant at will, but I shall possess this house fully, freely
and for ever; being once settled in it, I shall not desire to leave it; I shall
not be sequestered out of it; and (that which is worth all) this house is mine
own house, mine inheritance, purchased for me by my Savior, and passed unto by
the gift of my gracious Father, none can dispute my title, or by an Ejectione
firma, force me out of my house: My soul! Shall I not be willing to go to, and
live in mine own house? and that being so well situate, so conveniently
formed, so well furnished; rather then in a strangers inconvenient house? Shall
I not prefer an house of Gods building, before the best of man's? shall I not
choose an eternal, rather then a decayed, falling, ruinous habitation? My soul!
be not troubled at this remove; thou beleivest in God, believe also in Christ;
he has said, in his Fathers House are many mansions, John 14.1, 2.
if it were not so he would have told us; he is gone before to prepare a place
for his removing people; shall I not up and after, such an harbinger? to
possess the glorious mansions of his most gracious provision?

Why is my remove by death my terror? my trouble? this remove will transmit me
into a station, not more permanent then glorious: I am removing to a better
house; yea, to possess a KINGDOM: A Kingdom, not like the Kingdoms of this
world; not a narrow, empty, envied, distracted, divided, shaken, sinful,
transient, and temporal Kingdom; not a Kingdom subject to wars, tumults, fire,
famine, pestilence, ruin and desolation; and yet with ambition men do seek,
with joy they remove into, with difficulty and danger they obtain these
miserable earthly Kingdoms: but my Kingdom, to which I shall pass, is a
spiritual, heavenly, unshaken, united, ample, abundant, undefiled, undisturbed,
peaceable and everlasting Kingdom; not subject to any invasion or usurpation;
to any confusion or commotions; to any mutations or violent revolution; to any
alteration or danger.

Seeing it is the will of my heavenly Father to give me a Kingdom; such a
Kingdom; and my Kingdom is not of this world; why should I be unwilling to
leave this world, and to go to my Kingdom? will any Prince desire to live out
of that Kingdom to which he is heir? Since O my God! thou have given me a
Kingdom; give me a spirit fit for, and desirous of this thy Kingdom; Let me
live, and dye worthy the hopes of thine heavenly Kingdom; let not this
beggarly, and these base appendants make me draw back when called to pass into
my Kingdom: Up my soul; enter this strait gate into thy royal Mansion; stoop
under this cross that thou may receive the crown of righteousness, and life;
the incorruptible crown of glory: ambition makes men, whose portion is in this
life, most desperately daring, to adventure their all for a poor
Cottage-Kingdom, subject to commotion: shall not grace make me much more
willing to put off my natural life; that I may put on this living immarcessible
Crown, which cannot sit on a mortal head? and to pass from an house of bondage,
through a red Sea, to a land of rest and pleasure; a station permanent; and to
a Kingdom of glory? I will cheerfully remove this once; seeing I shall remove
to so great advantage; and after this I shall remove no more.

SECT. XIV.
DEath will take me from off my work; Death will end my work yea and my day.
after it Christ's Church shall enjoy no benefit by my Ministry; I must now, no
longer labor in the Lords Vineyard: It is very true; and this cannot but
reduce me to a strait, and put me to a stand what to choose; for if I live in
the flesh, the Church will reap the fruit of my labor; that I abide in the
flesh is for them more profitable; Phil. 1.22, 23.
nevertheless, for me, to dye is gain; I shall be hereby eased of the charge
and care of immortal souls; of the pains and burden of my Ministry; of the fear
and dangers which attend my duty; of the toil and travel of all my labor; and
of the tiring brunt of my working day; all which have made me often wish, my
day were enden, and that my night were come; There are twelve hours in the day,
Joh. 11.9.
wherein men work, and then comes the night, wherein no man works: My day
is not measured by my work, but my work is proportioned to my day; though I
could by my natural strength; I cannot work longer for lack of time; when my
day is done, my work is done; and shall I not be content with the end of both?
if my Master ease me of my burden by ending my day, have I any cause to
murmur? and yet,

The hinderance of my work shall be no hinderance to my wages: Wages shall be
sure.
my two talents, well improved for a little time, may approve me faithful when
my master comes; Matthew. 25.22, 23. and 20.9.
and so will pass me into my Masters joy, as certainly, as if I had traded with
ten talents, and for a longer time: he who works in my Lords Vineyard but one
hour, shall receive his penny, as well as he who has endured the heat and
brunt of the day: I have all my days stretched forth my hands to a stiffnecked
and stuborn generation, who would not hear; men's obduracy has made my ministry
a work of difficulty and danger; I have in it been often tired, and willing to
lie down and rest; yet I never durst look back, nor take my hand from the
Plough, on which my God has laid it; but I shall now find my recompense is
with the Lord, and my reward is with my God, shall I repine to go to him to
receive it? I will rejoice I have been so long serviceable in Gods Church, and
an instrument to glorify him on earth; and it shall be my joy, that I must now
cease from my labor, go home to my Master, and be glorified with him in the
heavens.

I shall when dead, labor no more in the Lords Vineyard; but I shall now drink
my self drunk of the fruit of his Vine, with himself in his Kingdom: I shall no
longer serve God on earth; but from henceforth I shall sing praises to him for
ever in the heavens: though the Church militant must loose my labor; it shall
not loose my masters care, he will thrust forth other laborers into his
Vineyard; and the Church triumphant will enjoy my company to enforce their cry;
Rev. 6.10
How long Lord, before thou will avenge our blood on those who dwell on the
earth? come Lord Jesus, come quickly: I have done the work of my generation;
what can I do, or desire to do more? I have dispatched the business charged on
my hand; shall I be unwilling to sit still and take mine ease? I have delivered
the embassy, to me committed; shall I not willingly return at my Lords
command? My soul! bless God that he would employ weak, worthless me, and that I
have done so much, and such work in his house, as I have done; Let me be no
less willing to rest, and take my ease, then to work at my masters bidding.

SECT. XV.
DEath will dissolve my being; Death dissolveth my being, and discharges my
burden.
when I am dead, I am not: but it will also discharge my burden; when I am not,
I am not greived: my self, my sin, and my sorrow, shall all cease together, and
at once, better therefore is the day of my death, then the day of my birth:
through all my life I have found little, very little that is desirable; but
much, which I may well spare; very much whereof I may desire to be eased; for
the discharge hereof I may well bid death welcome.

What has been my whole life, but an estate of sin, sorrow, of pain and
travel; a condition, full of cares, fears, greifs, temptations, afflictions,
crosses, losses, persecutions, reproaches, dangers, and great distresses,
sicknesses and sinful weaknesses, and soul-perplexities? man that is born of a
woman, Job 5.7.
is born unto trouble, a^ the sparks fly upward: these are so natural to me,
and inherent i^ me, that they exist in, and subsist with my very self; I cannot
be and be without them; I cannot lay them down, without laying my self aside:
vanity, vexation, and trouble, qualify my life as inseparable to it; why am I
perplexed with an apprehension that such a life draws to a period? I have all
my days been persecuted by humane rage and power, and so should be still if I
live longer; I may well be contented to be resolved into an estate of peace:
when men have killed my body, they have done their worst, their all; they have
me not to insult over; they do much better for me then they are aware of; they
give me a writ of ease from all my travel, and trouble; in the grave the wicked
do and shall cease from troubling; Job 3.17, 18.
the weary shall be at rest; the prisoners do rest together, and they hear not
the voice of the oppressor.

My soul! were there no more in death, but this release from grief, pain,
sorrow and travel; thou may well resign me up to the stroke of death; I may
be content not to be, that so I may not be so miserable; well may death be
sweet to me, to whom my whole life has been so bitter: how many have desired
death, because of the danger, distress, and dolor of their lives? how many
have sinfully destroyed their lives, to deliver themselves from their cares,
fears, greifs, wants, and woeful pains? I desire not, I dare not, I will not
tempt God, and murmur against his providence, by hastening my death, by a
violent, untimely, unlawful, unnatural act of self-violence; all the days of
mine appointed time, I will wait till my change come; but I may very
cheerfully, willingly, yield unto that stroke which is sent of God to ease me
of so great a burden: the rather, because Death is my discharge from sin, as
well as from sorrow; and death only can be the discharge thereof: In iniquity
I was conceived, Psalm. 51.5.
in sin did my Mother bring me forth; sin is to me as natural as my self; it is
inherent in my being; it was born with me; it has grown up with my ^ody; that
will not, that cannot be divided from this; this corruptible body, is the
uphold of the body of corruption; these two do stand, and will fall together:
This dying flesh is not only the subject of sense, but also the seat of sin;
the members of my body, are the instruments of sin, unto, and until death: how
tormenting has life been unto my soul, by reason of temptation unto sin? the
constant militation of my flesh, has made my life a continual conflict: how
have I feared to nourish my body, because thereby I made provision for the
flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof? I could never yet tame sin, but by
buffetting my flesh, and by abstracting from the supports of my being.

I cannot be rid of sin, till I be released of life: Oh the care to avoid, fear
to commit sin, to which I have been subject! how many times have I been forced
to embrace sorrow, to shun sin? and to sit alone, exposed to scorn and misery,
because I durst not run to the excess of riot with other men? Mortification of
sin, has been the main of my business, since I saw the sinfulness of sin: and
yet do I what I could, it would and does exist in me, and prevail upon me; to
the often checking my comforts; hindering my communion with God; and wounding my
conscience by omissions of, and defects in duty; by commission of heinous sins,
and many abberrations from my heavenly father, forced to fetch me home by
paternal castigation: though Gods grace has maintained in me a constant
militation, tha^ sin could not reign in my morta^ body; and my Father has ever
kept me under the rod of correction; yet, the law in my members has rebelled
against the law in my mind; and led me captive unto sin: the best of my life
has been a candid confession, and a continual complaint, that the good I would
do I do not, and the evil I would not do, that I do; and an affectionate
outcry; Oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of sin?
I must, I may whilst I live, make it my care to keep under my body, lest my sin
overcome me; and yet whilst I abide in the body, I shall bear about a body of
corruption; the death of this shall be, and it only can be the destruction of
that: Only in the grave I shall cease to sin; when I am not, I shall not be
sinful; I shall not be a sinner.

My Soul! Do thou desire to be freed from the suggestions, temptations, and
inclinations to sin? and yet tremble at the thoughts of dissolution, which
will, and only can deliver thee from them all? be assured after death thou
shall not be greived for, because thou shall not be stained with thy daily
guilt: thy sinful nature shall then no more greive the Spirit of thy holy God:
Have thou waged a mortal warfare against thy sin, all my life? and will thou
now give back in the last mortal stroke? though this fall upon thy self with
some violence, it will certainly give thee the full conquest over thy lusts
with which thou have so long contested; fall willingly under that fall, which
will make thee full victor over these cursed Philistines.

Come O my soul! be willing to stoop that thou may lay down thy load; submit
freely to that stroke, which will for ever set thee free from all sin, and from
all sorrow: cease to complain that thy life has been tedious, and tiresom,
troubleous and toilsom; or show thy self content and truly glad to be eased:
desire to be dissolved, that thy burden of sin and sorrow may be discharged. Be
still O my soul! the stroke of death is dreadful; but it once struck, does for
ever dismiss and destroy the suggestions of Satan, the motions of sin, the
actings of unrighteousness, the apprehensions of Gods wrath, and afflictions by
men's rage and envy, with all other evils: who would not bear some dread to be
delivered from so great distress; when I am dead, I shall cease from my labor;
I shall rest from mine own works of sin and sorrow; these are indeed most
properly mine own works; produced, procured by my self; created, continued by,
and with my self; acted by, existent in, and with my self; to be only desolved
and destroyed with my self: whilst I am, I am as, yea, above others of my
brethren, the Butt of Satan's rage, and men's malice; the subject of strong
passions and finful motions: whilst I have lived, I have not done duty to God
without great defect; I have not delivered my Masters message among men,
without great danger; Satan has hunted me into sin, and wicked men has hunted
me into sufferings; they have lien in wait for me; they have labored to make
my tongue my trap, and to ensnare me by my words: but I may now be content,
these can follow me no further; they shall now lose the sent; the grave shall
be my borough, in it I shall be quiet; I shall then be out of the reach of
lust, care, trouble, sorrow, sickness, temptation and persecution; I shall now
no more be heard to grieve or groan: I will therefore be willing to cease to
be, that I may cease to be the subject of so bad, so sinful qualities.

SECT. XVI.
DEath will destroy my body: Death destroys the body but not the soul.
be it so: that is all it can do; it has nothing to do with my soul, that
remains immortal; it shall be saved, and set in Abraham's bosom, ^n eternal
happiness, as soon as it is out of my body; it shall be associated to the
spirits of just men made perfect: What need I care how it goes with my worser,
whilst I have secured, and it goes so well with my better part? my soul is an
immortal being; out of the reach of humane rage, and the stroke of death: What
if men and death kill my body, if God will not cast my soul into hell, I escape
well, and much better then I deserve; for sin had shipwracked me both soul and
body; I had forfeited both to divine Justice: my soul being saved, I live in
death: O blessed paradox! oh happy state I not to dye in dying! My body is but
an earthen vessel; I need not be much troubled if this be broken; so that my
heavenly treasure be secured and preserved: my body is only the cabinet, I see
no great cause to be troubled if that be lost, whilst the jewel of my soul is
safe; Paul might well call on the Mariners to be of good cheer in the tempest,
which tare their tackling and sunk their ship, being able to assure them, Acts
27.
no man's life should be lost but the ship only: I travel with my soul through
briars and thorns, shall I wonder that I am pricked, and that my clothes are
rent off me? My soul is of such value, that all is to be adventured and thrown
overboard for its salvation; What shall it profit a man if he gain the whole
world and lose his own soul? Matthew: 16.26.
my body is dear to me; I will do what I can to preserve it; but my soul is
much dearer; this must be defended by exposing my body to danger and
destruction; skin for skin, riches, honors, pleasures, peace, all my natural
comforts, and outward blessings, I would give for my life, but these, and life
and all will I give for my soul: 1 Pet. 1.18.
My soul is redeemed not with corruptible things, as silver and gold; but with
the precious blood of Jesus Christ: Christ laid down his life to redeem my
soul; and shall not I willingly lay down my life to keep my redeemed soul? O
thou the Shepherd and Bishop of my soul, keep it within thy sheepfold, until
thou shall lead it unto thy glory; I will not then be solicitous, what may
befall or become of my body, seeing I am under a necessity of suffering loss; I
will rejoice that my loss is not greater; such as might have undone me for
ever: welcome death to my body; temporal death which consists with the life
and immortality of my soul; and passes it into the fruition of eternal life:
my soul may be saved by, and under the loss of my body; but my body could not
be saved if my soul were lost: Oh strange! Oh blessed trade! the loss I am like
to sustain, is mine infinite gain; this loss of my body shall save my soul; for
in the cause of Christ and his Church, he who would save his life must lose it.
Mat. 16.25


SECT. XVII.
DEath will separate my soul from my body; Death seperateth soul and body, but
not me and God.
it will so: but it cannot separate me from God; and that was the design of
death; it cannot separate either the one or the other from the love of God in
Christ Jesus; I am persuaded neither life, nor death, nor Angels, nor
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, Romans 8.38, 39.
nor things to come, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us from
the love of God, which is in Chrict Jesus our Lord: shall not this inseparable
love to me, meet with an answerable return of love from me? and make me with
confidence and resolution conclude tribulation, nor distress, nor persecution,
nor famine, nor nakedness, nor peril, nor sword, shall not separate Christ from
me? as it is written, for thy sake are we killed all the day long, and
accounted as sheep to the slaughter; love is a principle of union; it cleaves
to, and looks after its object, in its most low estate, and lost condition.
Death shall not make me to be despised or forsaken by my God; This God is my
God, Psa. 48.14.
my God for ever and ever, and he will be my guide unto death; yea, in, and
through the vail of the shadow of death, his rod and his staff shall comfort
me: and 23.4.
the Lord his esteem of, and relation to my soul and body, abides as well, and
as much, (though not by the same acts and expressions of affection) now they
are separated from, as whilst they were united each unto other: God does
triumphantly observe the faith and patience, by which I endure the tearing of
them each from other; for the testimony of his truth: he does dispatch his
Angels to attend my death; and to conveigh my soul into Abraham's bosom, to the
immediate enjoyment of himself: nor does he disregard my body, when divided
from my soul; or disesteem the dust thereof; he causes it to be mourned over
by my friends, and natural relations, and to be buried with the greatest
solemnity, poor, they can observe; yea, he loves it, and looks on it as
united to Christ, though laid in the grave, or dispersed on the earth; all my
members are written in Gods book, Ps. 139.16
not one of them must be lost or miscarrie; they shall not be neglected: my
dust is precious in Gods sight, not a grain of it shall be lost after it is
sown in the earth it shall most certainly spring up as precious seed; watered
with the dew of heaven; the word of the Lord to Zion, and all her sons does
assure them and me, that her dead men shall live; together with his dead body
they shall arise; awake and sing ye that dwell in the dust, Isa. 26.19.
for thy dew, is as the dew of herbs, and the earth shall cast out the dead.

My body remains Gods Jewel, when it has lost that luster the soul did give
it; God locketh it up in the grave as in his cabinet: God well knows my body
is liable to danger, in the day of his wrath against the inhabitants of the
earth: the grave is the receptacle from distress whereinto he does gather it:
know my soul and body, you when divided, do abide objects of Gods compassion,
complacency, and care; enter into your chambers, though dark; quietly shut your
doors about you; the wise God is willing to hide you for a little moment, until
his indignation be past.

My soul and body are dear companions; it is not strange to see these two
parted with dread, and grief: and yet, nearest relations, dearest friends must
shake parting hands each with other in this world; brethren that have lived
long together, and love most dearly, must leave each others company at their
Fathers pleasure; and for their future good: this is my case in death: my soul!
be contented; take cheerful leave of thy body, thou art returning to the father
of spirits. My body! consent willingly to shake hands, and shut out thy soul;
thou must for a time be shut up by God, from falling under those desperate
dangers, and deep distresses, which are more dreadful, and intolerable, then
is death it self.

The design of death, in dividing my soul from my body, was to divide both from
God: but this is impossible: for union with Christ and with God in him, is
inseparable; no case will make them cast me off; no condition can cut me off
from them; whom they love once they love to the end, forever. Joh. 13.1.
Christ's union is with me; my self; my whole self; the whole, not any single
part of man; no part of me, can therefore be by the power of death dismembered
from him: death may militate against Christ's body, it may rend and mangle his
members; but it cannot destroy his body, his mystical body; it cannot divide
any his members, nor any part of his members from him: death shall ere it be
long, by the sound of the last triumphant trumpet, at the glorious and general
resurrection, know, and prove, that the union between Christ, and the bodies of
his people, is as real, as inseparable; as the union between him and their
souls: Christ will not lose any part of his purchase; he paid a price for man;
for whole man; for our bodies; and for our souls; both are his: all enemies
that interrupt the union; that intercept the communion which is between Christ
and his members, must be destroyed, and the last enemy to be subdued is death:
when the Grave, the Sea, and Hell shall give up the dead bodies which are in
them, as in repositories for a time, I shall then find the design of death in
dividing my soul, from my body, is failed, disappointed, and become frustrate;
it never could divide either of them from God my Father, or from Jesus Christ
my Redeemer: nor shall it be able long to keep these parts of me asunder, and
at distance each from other; for my union with God and Christ, does
necessitate; and will most powerfully, irresistably effect the reunion of my
soul and body, at the resurrection; that I, whole I, my self, out only part of
my self, may enjoy them for ever.

Let my God, and my Savior, do with me what they please; so they will but
please to be with me in life, and in death, whilst I am: and with my divided
parts when I am not; I will then persuade, prevail with my self, contentedly to
enjoy them in my divided parts; until the time return, that my parts reunied,
my whole self, may be placed in an inseparable possession of them, in perfect
glory, world without end.

SECT. XVIII.
When I am dead my body will be covered with worms; Worms will eat me when
dead, but conscience will not bite me.
and will feed upon me: but it is no matter; I shall not see their scrawling; I
shall not feel their gnawing of my flesh: and if I did; yet that is nothing,
whilst my soul shall escape the gnawings of an accusing conscience, that worm
which never dies: there is more mercy in being freed from this one worm, then
from many thousands of those silly, weak, dying worms.

Why should it trouble me to become the companion of worms? must not I say
unto the worm, thou art my Mother, Job 17.14
and my Sister? what am I my self, but a worm? a weak creeping worm? Psa. 22.6.
David did apprehend himself a worm; a King and yet a worm; and Bildad, Jobs
friend, notes of man in general, Job 25.6.
that he is a worm: whilst I then am my self but a worm, let the worms feed
sweetly upon their fellow: when I am dead I can do man no good; why should I
not be glad any creatures can fare the better for my death? the worms cannot
cover me from the sight of God; they may crawl upon my body; but it is not
thereby made loathsome to the Lord. They may devour my flesh; but the worm which
never dies, shall not distress my soul; I will not therefore appear so weak as
to afflict my self, with the apprehensions of the power and prevalency of those
silly creatures; to which I must be subject, but of which I shall not be
sensible.

SECT. XIX.
IN Death I shall see corruption; In death I shall corrupt, but rise again.
my body will corrupt; be covered with dishonor; consume away to dust; moulder
away to nothing: this I cannot deny; for it was peculiar to the holy one, the
Lord Christ, and to him only, to dye, and not to see corruption: but yet, I do
believe the resurrection of my body: God can preserve my dust, and make my dead
bones to live: my body is united unto Christ, death cannot destroy that union;
my body united to Christ, shall by the power of his resurrection be most
certainly raised up at the last day; that I may sit with him in heavenly places.

God is the God of Abraham, Isaac, Mat. 22.32
and Jacob; he is the God of the living, and not of the dead: though therefore
the bodies of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, be dead, and buried, and have seen
corruption; and be dissolved into nothing; yet, they shall live again; they
retain in the grave, an animating principle, which will produce its effect;
they shall be raised up; and exist in their individual, specifical persons; and
subsistencies: this was the Lords Argument to convince the Sadduces of the
resurrection of the body; this privilege was not peculiar to those Patriarchs;
for I also believe that my redeemer lives; and that he shall at the latter day
stand upon the earth; Job 19.25, 26, 27.
and though after this skin, worms destroy my body; yet in my flesh I shall
see God; him I shall see for my self; whom mine eyes shall behold; and not
another, though my reins be consumed within me: My present life does witness
the first Adam to be a living soul; my resurrection from death, and the grave,
must witness the second Adam to be a quickening spirit.

My body is part of my self; it must not, it cannot be lost: its separation
from my soul, makes me cease to be; this separation continued, would continue
me a nonentity for ever; my self is redeemed and related to the Lord; and my
soul, or my body is related to him, but as parts of my self; these divided must
be reunited, that my self may exist to enjoy my redemption by him, and my
relation to him: though the Lords special care is for my soul, as my better and
more noble part; he has not excluded, he does not despise, he will not neglect
my body: My soul, and body are now joint subjects of grace, they must therefore
hereafter be joint subjects of glory: they have in this world been joint agents
o^ duty to God; and joint patients in dolor for God; they must therefore in
the world to come be joint heirs of dignity; and joint possessors of comfort
from the Lord.

After all the changes which shall or can pass, and return upon my body; God
will gather up my dust; bring together my scattered bones; raise up this very
body, and reunite it to this very soul: my body which shall corrupt and consume
to nothing, shall be raised, the very same for substance, that it now is; but
it shall then be clothed with more excellent qualities, most suitable to the
excellency of my soul; in that estate of glory, it shall be raised up to enjoy:
my body is now sown in corruption, 1 Cor. 15.42, 43, 44.
but it shall be raised in incorruption; it is sown in dishonor, it shall be
raised in Glory: it is sown in weakness, it shall be raised in power: it is
sown a natural body, it shall be raised a spiritual body: what then do I loose
by having my body for a time resolved into nothing; consumed into dust? I loose
nothing but the enjoyment of my self, for a little season; which being expired
I shall return and reenjoyn my self to very much advantage: does not the
Husbandman joy to see his seed rot in the ground? because he hops to receive
the same body with better qualities: shall not I through grace, be willing to
be resolved into nothing, that I may be restored better? O fool! 1 Cor. 15.36.
no seed is quickened unless it first dye; my soul, resist not the pleasure,
rebuke not the order of my Maker: if he kill to make alive; dissolve that he
may restore my body, with the most blessed change of qualities, to the same
substance; will thou dispute or decline his will? come, be content; cheerfully
shake hands with my body; and let it go; leave it; look no more after it;
though it be lost from thee, it is not lost from God or Christ; nor is it lost
for ever: when Christ shall appear, I my self shall, my whole self, consisting
of soul and body, Col. 3.4.
shall appear with him in glory, for he will raise me from the dead, Phil. 3.2.
and change my vile body; that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body.

I cannot but pray, that God would deliver me, my body; from wicked men, who
are his sword, his hand, to cut it down, and reduce it into nothing; yet my
father, not my will, but thy will be done; I will submit; I will be content; I
will wait my appointed time, till my change shall come; and I will retain the
confidence, and possess my soul in the comfortable expectation of my
resurrection; for as for me, I shall behold thy face in righteousness; Psa.
17.15.
I shall be satisfied, when I awake, and arise in thy likeness.

SECT. XX.
DEath is that dreadful gulf, Death enters m^ into eternity; bu^ it is of
good.
which once shot, lancheth mine immortal soul into the ocean of Eternity:
Eternity! what is that? a word of astonishment! an estate of amazement! I
cannot look into it without heart-sinking thoughts, soul-troubling
apprehensions: It is a depth unfathomable; a length and breath immeasurable; an
height undiscernable; a continuance undeterminable, and unexspirable: but yet,
Eternity is in all these respects, an estate most proper to mine immortal soul:
herein an eternal subject, shall solace it self, in its eternal object unto all
Eternity.

Times return has been the lamentation of my life, Times return is troublesome.
because it was the limitation of my comforts: were mine estate never so
pleasant to me in respect of my health, wealth, plenty, peace, friends and
familiars, or the like enjoyments; the discernable approaching period of them,
has bidden a stand to my delight in them; and damped mine affections toward
them: The things which are seen are temporal, but the things which are not seen
are eternal: 2 Cor. 4.18.
sensual pleasures have the wings of the morning, they pass away with time; but
Eternity is an adjunct, a property which stampeth no mean degree of excellency,
on those glorious invisible objects, which are proposed to our faith; to
counterpoise those visible but temporal good things, which captivate our sense.

My soul! in Eternity thou shall not be tired, with telling the fleeting hours;
with observing the rerurning days, months or years: thine expectation of good
or evil shall not then be tedious: thou shall be by death transported and
resolved into perfect, full, and for ever enjoyment of perfect good: and that
without alteration, or degree; without increase or diminution; without
consumption or expiration: Thou shall now possess an everlasting noon day; thy
sun shall no more rise, nor set; time shall be to thee no more; thine autumn
shall abide fresh and green, fair and fruitful, without the least change by the
increasing reviving spring, or by the chilling, clouding, killing winter: thy
stars shall not be clouded, thy moon shall know no changes in this estate of
Eternity: There shall be no Sun, Moon or Stars; thou shall not need, and
therefore thou shall not have those directions, and determinations of time; for
thy day shall abide in its perpetual brightness, without any dawning, or the
least approach of night.

Eternity existeen not in it self: Eternity an adjunct to the best things.
it is a property which passes on some condition: (...) adjunct quality which
stands not alone, but existeth in its subject. My soul look unto, and secure
the subject, then will thou soon see, that Eternity is a quality greatly
desirable; an adjunct unto thy great advantage; when death shall determine thy
days it shall lanch thee into; but it shall not leave thee fluctuating on the
uncertain waves of Eternity; for the spirit goes unto God who gave it; and as
the tree falls so it lies; thou shall most certainly be set in that estate,
which must be thine Eternal estate, without any possibility of alteration, or
expiration: thou by death sailest into the sea of Elernity; or rather thou
passest through the red sea, unto the resting, refreshing shores of eternal
salvation, an eternal inheritance, eternal glory, and eternal life: these are
the blessed subjects in which thin^ Eternity must and shall exist: Ha^^ thou
not in this life tasted the ^weetness of those objects? have thou not proposed
these as that silver bell, for which thou have run the race of righteousness?
are not these the recompense of reward at which thou have looked, as thine
encouragement to all thy travel, and in all thy trouble; in expectation of
these, I have despised the shame, and endured the cross: can I choose but desire
these should be? can I choose but leap for joy to know that these invisible
things are eternal? My soul, stand still upon thy dying shore, take a second, a
serious view of eternity, as affixed to thy salvation to thine inheritance, to
thy glory, and to thy life, and tremble, be troubled at the thoughts thereof if
thou can; thou will be more ready to tumble thy self headlong into, then once
to turn back from thine Eternity.

First then, Eternal salvation.
Death determines all my woe; it gives me an immunity from all evil; it
passes me into the possession of salvation: salvation from sin, from sorrow,
from weakness, from sickness, from all defects, and deformities, from all
infirmities and imperfections, from diseases of body, disgrace unto my name,
and distempers of mind; from all the envy of Satan, rage of men, and wrath of
God; is the happy and certain sequel of my death through Christ my Lord. Can it
possibly greive or amaze me to see, and to know that this salvation is eternal?
or that I am going to possess and enjoy it for ever? shall my heart ache to
appprehend it shall never ache more? shall I blear mine eyes with weeping,
because God is about to wipe all tears from mine eyes for ever? Have not I
believed and preached this salvation, and the eternity thereof? shall now mine
entrance thereinto, be mine affliction? I have professed, my self did and
would, and I have earnestly persuaded others, to persevere in piety, pressing
to salvation, and waiting for the time when there should be no more weeping or
woe, no more pain or grief; no more fear or sorrow; no more distress, death, or
danger: and shall I now give back, when God has brought me to that time? shall
I dread the discharge of evil, which I have all my days desired and groaned
for? or shall the eternity of this immunity, embitter mine expectation, or
enjoyment of it; do I retain the sense of evil, and can I desire to return to
it again? have not the Paroxismes of a Fever; the Fits of an Ague, of the
Stone, or Colic, perplexed me, and made my strength to fail? have not the
threats of humane rage filled my soul with terror, and exceeding dread? have
not mine apprehensions of Gods wrath, and eternal woe, which my sin has
deserved, filled my heart with horror, my soul with fear and grief, and my
bones with trembling? shall I now fear to be put into that estate, wherein all
these evils shall end for ever? wherein I shall never more feel it, I shall
never more fear it? Oh blessed Eternity! annexed unto so great salvation!

2. Mine Inheritance is eternal.
Death puts my soul into the possession of mine inheritance: the inheritance
which Christ has purchased for me; which God has promised to me; the
inheritance among the Saints; the inheritance of the Saints in light; the
inheritance of an house in heaven; the inheritance of the blessed mansions of
God; the inheritance of a Kingdom; the Kingdom of Heaven, the Kingdom of God;
in this inheritance I shall inherit the confluence of all honor and happiness;
in this inheritance I shall sit down a Coheir with Jesus Christ, the only
begotten, the only beloved Son of God: shall it greive me that this
inheritance is eternal? is not Eternity the Emphasis, the excellency of this
inheritance? my soul could never be so much ravished with the plenty, pleasure,
situation, society, greatness, and glory of this mine inheritance, as it would
be damped and deadned, discouraged and discomfited with the vanity, the
transiency of the same: what a cutting consideration would it be, to think
there were but a possibility of a cutting off from this inheritance? or of my
being cast out of it, though but for a time? unto this inheritance I have been
called by the glorious Gospel; I have been sealed by the blessed spirit of
adoption; I have received in my self the earnest, the first fruits of this
inheritance; I have been thereby encouraged in mine expectation, and enflamed
in my desire of a full possession thereof; shall I now draw back, and decline
mine inheritance, and the enjoyment of it, because it is incorruptible and
fades not away? because it is eternal, without end? I have ever deemed and
determined the most rich and honorable inheritance on the earth, a pompous
vanity; because it is temporal and transient: Shall I now dread to enter into
the possession of that inheritance which is Real, because Eternal? can I be so
foolish as to desire the worm of time should eat into my fair estate, and make
my flourishing inheritance to fade; I have all my days lived a child in nonage,
longing for, and looking at, but kept out of mine inheritance, but I am now at
age, I shall now become a man, a grown man, and enter upon and into mine
estate: and this is my comfort, mine advantage, I shall abide a man, a perfect
man for ever; the second childehood of old age shall not overtake me, to
deprive me of, or discapacitate me to enjoy this my heavenly inheritance: Oh!
how have I longed and labored? how have I panted and prayed? how have I
pleaded with God? how have I pressed against the power of men and Devils, to
get into the possession of this inheritance? now I am come to the door, shall I
stand at the Threshold? shall I dread to enter in, sit down, and possess mine
inheritance, because it is eternal? will eternity be the burden of my heavenly
estate?

My soul! embrace death, the door, the dark entry which passes thee into thine
inheritance; proceed with joy, with courage; praise God for the eternity of thy
future state: is not this my substance, much better, because more enduring then
all my worldly goods? has not the hope of this, made me content with the loss,
and to take joyfully the spoiling of those? shall desirable, delight, eternity
dismay my soul entering into the possession of what I have so much esteemed, so
long expected? who would not exchange a Lease for life, for an inheritance to
be enjoyed for ever? who would not part with all, to purchase, to possess such
an inheritance, a Royal, Heavenly, holy inheritance? and shall I not gladly
breath out a dying life, to affix, and secure eternity to this mine inheritance?

3. Eternity is affixed to glory.
Death shall invest my soul with GLORY: Eternity must needs be the sparkling
luster of GLORY: mine Inheritance shall be a Glorious Inheritance; and so much
more glorious by being eternal; mine inheritance is a palace, not a poor
cottage; a mansion, not a moveable Tent; a Kingdom, not a Country Village; an
Heavenly, not an Earthly Kingdom; a Kingdom of God, not of men; and is not this
a Glorious Inheritance? would not any man desire to enjoy this for ever? Mine
Inheritance, or estate in this world has ever been poor, vile, and base; but
my soul shall now pass into Glory; and be invested with nothing but Glory; I
shall when dead know by experience, what I have long desired, earnestly prayed,
and industriously labored to know by the Spirit of wisdom and understanding;
(viz) What is the Riches of the glory of the inheritance of the Saints; Ephesians.
1.18.
Now I have finished my course on earth, I must go to Heaven; that I may there
receive my Crown; may course here has been the continual exercise of Grace; my
condition hereafter must be the constant enjoyment of Glory: the place in which
my soul must now abide; the business in which my soul shall be employed; the
company with which my soul shall associate; and the qualities with which my
soul shall be endowed, are all glorious; these things are all transcendently
glorious; I cannot but desire they should be; my soul cannot but leap for joy
to think these glories are Eternal.

The place in which my soul shall abide whilst parted from; Heaven a glorious
place.
yea when reunited to my body, is glorious, transcendently glorious; for it is
Heaven: My constant future residence must be in the Court of Heaven; the Heaven
of heavens; the third heavens; the Paradise of God; the place into which the
Apostle Paul was taken up; in which he heard words not fit to be uttered; 2
Cor. 12.2, 4.
and in which he saw Glories which he could not declare; the Court of the great
King; the King of Saints; and the King of Kings; the peculiar Palace of Gods
most glorious presence; the holy, the heavenly Jerusalem; Rev. 21.
the great City, whose gates are pearl; whose pavement is gold; and whose
foundations are precious stones; unto which the Kings of the earth do bring
their glory and honor; in which there is no need of Sun, or Moon; for the
glory of God does lighten it; and the Lamb is the light thereof; into which
there shall in no wise enter any thing which defiles, neither whatsoever
works abomination, or makes a lie; but they only whose names are written in
the lambs book of life. My soul! Do thou linger to go unto, or do thou fear
too long continuance in this place of glory? How have humane senses been
ravished with the glory of the structures raised by humane Art? how much have I
admired the glorious workmanship of God in the bespangled firmament, the most
curious enamelling the same with the Sun, Moon and Stars? and yet these are but
dark shadows; most imperfect representations of Heavens glory? and how far? how
freely did the Queen of the South travel to see? with what ravishing
observation did she admire? how blessed did she esteem the men who did reside
in the state of Solomon's structures? will thou my soul flock to God and see,
yea and fit down in the place prepared by the Lord, for his blessed ones,
before the foundation of the world was laid? the glimpse of this glorious
Kingdom, when the Lord Jesus was transfigured, did so ravish the three
Disciples, that they thought it was good to be there, and began to cast how to
build tabernacles, Matthew. 17.2, 3, 4.
that they might there abide: Can I choose but long to see, and to set down my
station in the very place its self where our Lord is ever in the truth and
fullness of his glory? Come my soul! go forth with joy, and thou shall at once
possess that place of glory, from which thou can no more remove, nor wilt
desire to do it: in which the eternity of thy residence, is and will be the
excellency of thine enjoyment; it would more grieve thee to go from, then not
at first to have come to Heaven.

The business in which my soul shall be employed in this glorious place, is
also glorious: In heaven the work is glorious.
for after death attendance on, and acclamation of praise to God and Jesus
Christ, shall be the whole the only employment of mine immortal soul;
beatifical vision shall be its business: I shall then know God, as I am known
of God; I have here believed in him whom I have not seen, rejoiced with joy
unspeakable and full of glory: but shall then see him, in whom I have believed;
I shall see the Lord Jesus Christ, not darkly, as in a glass, but face to face;
how full? how unspeakable? how glorious must needs be the joy which reflecteth
from my sense? how must it needs transcend that which was only the result of
faith? my soul when parted from my body shall (as the glorious Angels now do)
minister continually in Gods immediate presence; and behold his glory: Happy
were Solomon's servants who stood continually before him, and heard his wisdom;
Behold my soul! a greater then Solomon is here; thou shall attend on, minister
before, and hear the wisdom, and behold the glory of the God of Solomon's
wisdom, and glory.

The souls which come out of great tribulation, are arrayed in white robes, and
advanced unto continual attendance on the throne of God; to serve him in his
Temple night and day; where the whole of their business is, and for ever shall
be to sing Halelujahs unto the Lord; to admire the majesty, wisdom power and
goodness of God; to ascribe wisdom blessing, honor, power and glory unto God,
for ever and ever; to him who sits on the throne, and to the Lamb for ever:
Gods service was on earth my perfect freedom; it must needs be much more such
in Heaven: when I am once arrived at this estate of Glory, I shall be indeed,
and for ever delivered from all mine enemies; that I may serve him without fear
all my days, which shall never end.

Oh the honor of relation to such a Master! oh the happiness of employment in
such business! It is a good thing to sing praise unto our God; it is pleasant,
and praise is comely: Oh the glory of attendance on so glorious Majesty! my
soul, can thou wish thy time in a relation so honorable; in an employment so
happy; in an attendance so glorious, were as the days of an hireling? God
forbid: Love thou the service of thy God? shall the length of thy servitude
dismay thee? Will thou not consent, yea desire to be boared through the ear,
that thou may abide in this thy masters service for ever? Do thou long to
turn thy faith into sense? thy hope into fruition? thy prayers into praises?
thine apprehensions of God and Christ, into immediate attendance on them? is it
possible thou should dread the eternity of this estate, thou so much, so
earnestly desire? art thou my soul capable of surfeiting with spiritual
joys? do thou not love and long to drink thy fill, to be drunk with the
rivers of pleasure which flow continually in Gods presence? how have I mourned
under the withdrawings of Gods presence! shall I now fear to approach his
presence, only because I shall never more be banished from his Court and
presence?

My soul! cheer up; in Heaven, the frowns and frettings of thy Master, shall
not make thee weary of waiting on him; his terrors shall no more make thee
afraid, the splendour of his Majesty shall not dazzle thine eyes, nor
discapacitate thy vision of him; thy work shall not there be tyring; thy
service shall not then waste thy strength; wear thy clothes; or dull thy
spirits; that thou should wish for a return of time, wherein to take thine
ease, obtain refreshment, or renew thine apparel: so eminent is this relation;
so easy, so excellent is this employment; that the Eternity hereof is mine
exceeding, mine infinitely great advantage; I long to enter upon it; I shall
never desire to leave it; mine eternal enjoyment of it, is mine only hope, my
Glory.

The Company with whom my soul parted from my body, In Heaven I shall have
glorious company.
shall associate, is no less glorious then the place of my future residence; or
the business of my future employment: when I dye I shall be admitted into, and
entertained by the assemblies of the first born; whose names are written in
heaven; and the spirits of just men made perfect; and the glorious Angels:
those shall henceforward be my companions for ever: Oh blessed company! who
would not long to be with them? who would not gladly go to them? who can with
any possible content think of parting from them? how foolishly loath am I to
leave my friends on earth? yet I have not enjoyed their company without a
cross; many of them have scorned me; many of them have slighted me; many of
them have failed me; many of them have fallen out with me; many times they have
provoked my passion, greived my soul, and vexed my spirit; all of them have one
way or other given a check to my comfort and content in their society. I now
parting from them, shall pass into, enjoy and never more be parted from much
better, more desirable, and more pleasurable company.

I shall now associate with Angels, those glorious creatures, the beauty of
whose feet mortal eye can hardly look upon and live: those holy spirits, who
wait immediately on God; and with all power and speed perform, the pleasure of
the most high; those active spirits which are sent of God, to minister unto the
heirs of salvation, these are now attendant on me, though I see them not; they
do me many good turns, though I perceive it not; by them I am guarded in many
dangers; they keep me in all my ways; they pitch their tents about me; they do
me much good, and yet I understand not their nature, office, or ministry; but
now my Soul! they attend my death, to perform their last work to me; to receive
thee, and carry thee into Abraham's bosom, and to place thee in fellowship with
themselves: thou shall thenceforward know them, their natures and offices; thou
shall familiarly converse with them, and not be affrighted by them; nor shall
thou be weary of their company; these will not scorn thee; these will not vex
and grieve thee; but as fast and faithful friends they will with freedom and
fullness communicate themselves unto thee; to the abundant increase of thy joy,
which will be the more abundant by the eternity of thy abiding with them.

My soul! though at death thou art taken from among men, and made a mate for
Angels; yet thou shall not only converse with these glorious creatures,
different in nature, and seemingly above thee; thou shall now also associate
with the spirits of just men made perfect: thou shall sit down with Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of God: thou shall now be placed under the
Altar, among the souls of them who were slain for the Testimony of Jesus: I
have taken abundant pleasure in the fellowship of the Saints on earth; yet
there infirmities have many times occasioned to me great vexations: Oh how
pleasurable will their company be, now they are made perfect? I have had
reverend thoughts of the Saints departed; the Fathers of Old; and the Martyrs
of latter days: how precious do I account the memory of Adam, Enoch, Noah,
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, David, Solomon, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel,
Daniel, Zachariah, Peter, Paul, James, John, Ignatius, Polycarpus, Justin,
Athanasius, Wickliff, Hus, Luther, Calvin, Beza, Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer,
Hooper, Glover, Rogers, Laurence, Bradford, with many others; of these I have
only heard, and read, I never yet knew them: but now my soul shall go to them;
now my soul shall know them; it shall dwell in house, and be most familiarly,
most intimately acquainted with them; and not only with these, but also with
all the elect of God, whose names I have not yet heard of: this blessed society
shall so much increase the joy of my soul, as to make Eternity the height of
its desire, of its delight: who would not live for ever in so good a
Neighborhood? it has often greived me to part from good men on earth; I now
lament that I must leave my godly friends on earth, and go to Heaven without
them; and yet this my loss is made up by the enjoyment of others as good, yea,
much better: and I have an assurance, that those I leave behind me, shall come
to me; though I cannot come back to them: but Oh what an hell would it be, if
time could cut me off from the blessed fellowship of these glorified Saints and
Angels! My soul! put out; pass freely into the Ocean of Eternity; seeing thy
voyage is made so comfortable, by sailing in such blessed company. ^orious
^ualities ^all en^ow my ^^ul.


The Qualities of my soul shall be suitable to this heavenly place, work and
company; for these also shall be Glorious: after death, conformity to God; and
exact similitude to the Lord, 1 John: 3.2^
shall be the endowment of my soul: we are now the Sons of God; it does not yet
appear what we shall be; but we know, when he shall appear, we shall be like
him; for we shall see him as he is: Oh blessed vision, which transformeth its
subject! the sight of God and Christ by faith, as they are represented to us in
the Gospel, does on earth begin that change in man's soul, which is completed
by the beatifical vision of their real existency in themselves: there can be no
symmetry, without similitude; no communion without conformity; two cannot walk
together except they be agreed; there can be no satisfying apprehension of the
object, but by a suitable organ; Like to like, is the formal reason of all
true, and full content; they that will see God and live, must be holy, as God
is holy; and perfect, as God is perfect.

My soul! passing into immediate communion with, must be made conformable to
God: his image stamped on man in his creation, was the principle and capacity
of communion with God: this defaced by sin, man was driven, and has been kept
at a distance from God; but this shall be now restored to, and completed in my
soul; that it may return into constant communion with God: all that disparity
and disproportion which rendered God dreadful and destructive to my being; and
therefore deterred mine approach to him; shall at death be utterly and for ever
discharged: My soul shall then indeed be holy as God is holy; and perfect as
God is perfect: it shall not only have perfect qualities, the principles of
union; but also those degrees of perfection which shall capacitate it for full
communion with my God, Christ, and his Holy Angels, and glorified Saints; even
the utmost degree of perfection such a creature is capable of; and an estate of
so glorious communion does call for, and require.

The faculties of my soul shall be enlarged, unto the perfection of knowledge
and affection: I shall after death, be able to pry into the deepest mysteries
of man's fall, and salvation; of the glorious unconceivable subsistency of the
Trinity in unity, three persons, in one undivided essence; of the miraculous
hypostatical union of the two natures, God and Man in one person; of the
blessed incarnation, and whole work of redemption, which is nothing but a Cabal
of mysteries: I shall then comprehend incomprehensible glory, without the least
defect, doubting, or difficulty; I now know but in part, I shall then know
perfectly; knowledge, righteousness, and true holiness, those parts of the new
man, shall then attain to a perfect virile strength and stature; the divine
nature whereof I here partake shall then be in me complete: I shall then know
all things fully, and with full content: mine affections will then most freely
close with, and take full complacency in those glorious objects, mine
understanding shall then know and comprehend my: mind shall not know more of
God and Christ, then my soul shall admire, mine affections embrace, unto the
fullness of my comfort, forcing out the loud halelujahs, and acclamations of joy
and thanksgiving to God for ever: the imbicility of the natural man, which
could not; the enmity of the natural man, which would not discern and savor
the things of God, shall now be discharged, destroyed for ever; for now the
natural man it self, shall expire and cease to be.

Such shall be the changed estate, quality and endowments of my soul, that the
things which were to it tiring, dulling and difficult, because supernatural;
irksom, grievous and hateful, because contranatural; shall become easy and
encouraging; lovely, acceptable and delightful, because connatural; the very,
proper and only element in which my soul can live and enjoy it self: in this
respect nothing could be so dismaying, afflicting and tormenting to my soul, as
interruption, intermission, or expiration of enjoyment by the return of time;
Oh folly! to dread Eternity, which must exist in the exercise and enjoyment of
these glorious qualities of my soul! the disparity and disproportion which
keeps my God and me at a distance, shall now be discharged, and quite
removed; can I desire the time in which they shall again return upon me? has
not the loss of Gods image in me, and thereby the loss of his presence with me,
cost me dear enough already? I cannot enjoy God for ever, unless I be like God
for ever; my perfect proportion to God must fit me for perfect possession of
God: welcome then Eternity in conformity to God, my only capacity of eternal
communion with God.

4. My future life is eternal.
Though I dye, I shall dye but once; my death shall be mine entrance into life;
and my life shall be eternal; the second death shall have no power on me:
seeing I must once dye, oh how happy am I that I do not live to dye the second
death! the first death divides my soul from my body; but the second death
would have dividid my soul and body from God, and that for ever: but this death
shall not befall me; for there is no condemnation to them who are in Christ
Jesus; Romans 8.1.
the Lord has justified me; who shall condemn me? he has delivered me from
the dread of the first, by redeeming me from the power of the second death: I
may be of good comfort, I shall not dye, but live; I shall live in death; I
shall pass through death to life; and whilst life is the subject, who would not
desire to have eternity the adjunct? My soul, can thou choose but joy, to know
that thy life is eternal life? do I dread to die, and tremble to think of
Eternity in life? O strange contradiction! the result of a weak faith, and of a
clouded reason: nature has taught me to desire and endeavor the preservation,
and if it were possible the perpetuation of my natural, sinful, sorrowful life;
shall not grace much more make me to rejoice, that my holy, happy life endures
for ever? that I shall eternally live in the salvation of God, to enjoy mine
inheritance among the Saints and Angels in light; to attend on, contemplate,
and have communion with God and Christ? were not eternal life affixed to these
enjoyments, what would they avail me? what? should I delight to tantalize in
the waters of life? Eternity abstracted, I do but catch at the happiness I
cannot hold; I do fall under Moses his chance, Moses his curse; he led Israel
to the banks of Jordan, to the borders of Canaan; he went up to mount Nebo, and
saw the goodly land, but he entered not into it; he enjoyed it not; he died in
the mountain: I have preached Eternal life; I have persuaded men to pursue it,
to press after it; I have led them to the brink of the grave, and am ready to
lie down and dye, and now I dread the eternal life that attends me. O my
folly! but blessed be God he has not been provoked; he will not be by me
persuaded to blot my name out of the book of life; but having purposed,
purchased for me, and promised to me salvation, an inheritance, an estate of
glory; he has secured me my life in, and unto the possession thereof; and made
eternity the blessed, inseparable property of them all.

My soul! where art thou? what? art thou lanched into? lost in eternity before
out of my body? return; recover thy self before thou go hence, and be no more
seen; look back on thine own thoughts; survey the land which the prospect of
thy faith has descried in the ocean of eternity: O the immensity! O the depth
of eternity! this is an astonishing ocean; an amazing sea; whilst I stand on
the banks of a temporal life, how do I tremble to look upon eternity, in its
abstracted nature? but stay my soul! let us be wise; let my faith follow this
flood; and deliberately observe how it streams it self in the Paradise of God;
into eternal salvation; oh wonderful! Eternal inheritance; O this is desirable!
how do I long for it? Eternal glory; that is delightful! the rays thereof
ravish my heart: And Eternal life; O the emphasis, the excellency of all the
rest! shall I dread to shoot this gulf of death? shall I fear to lanch out
into the depth of this eternity? can these blessed, desired, never enough
desired things be abstracted from? be enjoyed without eternity? if they could,
would they be so good? would they be such things? is not eternity the very
formality of them? is not eternity that massy substance, affixed to the
exceeding weight of glory, which counterpoiseth, weighs down, and witnesses
the levity of those afflictions which we now suffer for a moment? Eternity is
the sting of sorrow, but the strength of joy; the horror of damnation, but the
honor of salvation; the dread, the dolor of the reprobate: but the desire and
delight of the Elect; the plague, the sting of the gnawing worm, and tormenting
not consuming fire; but the pleasure, the luster of the wedding garment, and of
the cooling, refreshing streams of the waters of life: My soul; Christ my
Savior has redeemed me from the one, and sealed me to the other of these
conditions; fear not therefore to go out of this body, to pass through this red
Sea; this dark, dreadful, dismaying gulf into the Ocean of thine Eternity;
remember, consider thy Lord long since declared, strait is the gate, and narow
is the way which leads unto life: I will by Gods grace stoop at this strait
gate; I will press through this narrow way; seeing life, so rich, so glorious,
so blessed life is the end thereof; to be enjoyed for ever.

The Conclusion.
. MOst blessed Jesus! thou art the Lord of life and glory: of thine own good
will in compassion and pity to lost man; thou did leave the delights of
Heaven, and of thy fathers bosom; and wast clothed with man's mortal nature.

Thou have subjected thy self to death; to the most violent, shameful, and
cursed death; that thou might sweeten and sanctify this cup; in which all
thine elect and Saints must pledge thee: thou have tasted death for all men.

Thou having felt the sting, and encountered the strength of death; did
conquer and triumph over the grave: thou have gotten; thou have given all that
believe in thee the victory over death: thou art in thy Church, and to thy
Saints, the first fruits from the dead; thy glorious resurrection is our
pledge, and assurance that we shall not be always held under the power and
dominion of death; but that we shall be raised up, to reign with thee for ever.

. I thy weak and worthless servant, am under the expectation of death; and (if
thou restrain not the wrath that is in man) it may be a violent, and shameful
death: under the dread hereof, I look unto, and desire to encourage my self in
thee, the captain of my salvation.

Be not far from me my God, and my Savior, in this hour of my temptation; but
let thy grace support me under the stroke; and save me from the sting of death;
strengthen my faith unto the full apprehension, and due application of thy
death, and resurrection; to the curbing of my passions, and check of my fears;
that I may willingly, cheerfully, follow thee through the vale of the shadow of
death: O be my God! my God and my Guide unto, and under death.

. Death is natural to man; common to all men; but its nature is changed unto
some, and but to some of the sons of men; this dreadful Executioner of thy
vengeance on the wicked; is but a grim messenger to fetch thy children home;
this thy Sheriff, executing Malectours; puts the heirs of salvation into the
possession of that inheritance thou have purchased for them, and appointed to
them; the wicked dye, when thy friends do but sleep and rest in their beds.

Be pleased O my Redeemer! to know me, and make me know my self to be one of
that number, to whom the nature of death is changed; to whom it may not, it
cannot be apprehended, or appear so dreadful: evidence and clear up to my soul
and conscience, that real, supernatural change of quality in my self; which may
convince me of, and secure unto me, the contranatural change of the nature and
quality of death, to and upon me.

. Union with thy glorious self, can only secure against the sting, and
encourage under and against the terrifying apprehension of the stroke of death:
unite me O Lord unto thy self! communicate to me thy grace; that only evidence
of my union with thee; that assurance, that only; that full assurance that
death shall not divide between thee and me; death shall not separate my soul
from thee; death shall not separate my body from thee; but my dust shall be
regarded by thee; my death shall be precious in thy sight: make (O my God) the
graces of thine holy spirit so legible in me; that I may thereby make my
calling and election sure; and read readily that name that none can read but he
who has it: and that I may be certainly resolved in my self that my name was
written in thy book of life, before the foundations of the world was laid.

. Thy grace (O Lord) has been extended to me; make me to see it; teach me
seriously to reflect it, unto thy praise and the encouragement of my soul
under, and against the terrors of the dread of death.

I am through thy grace and abundant mercy, called by the name; I have been
born within the pale of thy Church, and under the Covenant of thy salvation: I
was dedicated to thee and thy service as soon as I was born; thy covenant was
then set on my flesh by baptism, and I now bear it on my flesh; I dare not with
profane Esau, despise this my birthright; but must, and by thy grace I will
rejoice, that I partake of the fatness of the Olive; and that I am a branch
from an holy root, sanctified by, and unto God.

Thou did bless me (O Lord) with Christian nurture and education; I have
known thy word from my childhood; thou have seasoned me with, and sanctified me
by thy truth; thy word is truth; it has been the delight of my soul; and the
direction of my life and faith.

Thy spirit has been and is in me, the spirit of conviction and of burning, by
it I see the finfulness of sin; and possess with grief and shame the iniquities
of my youth, and the evil of my ways and doings: it lusts against my flesh;
and draws, disposes my mind to serve the Law of God, when my flesh is forced
to serve the Law of sin.

Thy glorious Gospel, thy gracious spirit (O Lord) has convinced me of, and
affected my soul with mine own guilt; thy fathers wrath and justice, and the
salvation wrought out by thee, and by thee alone; I do believe there is no name
by which men can be saved, but thy name most blessed Jesus; thou art the true
Messiah; the only Mediator between God and man; the all-sufficient Savior of
all that come unto thee: unto thee (O Lord) I come, weary and heavy laden with
my sin; Oh give me easy! pressed with a dread of thy fathers wrath; plead my
cause, satisfy for me his offended justice; be the propitiation for my sins:
oppressed with my lusts; Oh save me from my sin; subdue corruptions in me;
change my nature; be to me a perfect Savior, for to thee I run, on thee I
rely; thee I embrace with all my soul, to be my Lord and my King; refuse,
reject me not, O God of my salvation.

I have resigned up my whole man to thy most holy word and will; and desire to
walk in thy most holy ways: thy love shed abroad in my heart, has enflamed me
with a love to thy name, to thine ordinances, thy people, and thine house; the
zeal of thy house has consumed me; I have through thy spirit, embraced,
esteemed thy truth in the love thereof; and thy people for the truths sake
which is in them.

For thy sake I have denied all outward comforts; I have taken up my cross and
followed thee; Consider, remember (O Lord) my present bonds; for thy sake I am
killed all the day long; I am accounted as a Sheep for the slaughter; the
reproaches of them who reproach thee, are fallen upon me; all this is come upon
me, yet have I not departed from thee; nor dealt falsely in the Covenant, in
which thy glory is concerned.

. These things O Lord I do reflect, not as matters of merit in me; or as
engagements on thy justice to do me good; for I well know they are not mine
own; and if they were, and were perfect; yet, I must (when I have done the best
I can) acknowledge, I am an unprofitable servant; all I can do is due to thee;
the best of my actions are but the debt I ow thee: but alas, my best actions
are full of sin, my righteousness is as a filthy rag, and a menstruous garment,
which needs thy propitiation and thy fathers pardon; and must be perfumed by
the incense, which is on the censer, in the right hand of thee my high Priest.
Yet O my Savor! I reveiw these things in me, as the effects of thy grace to
me; and of thy spirit in me, and as infallible evidences of thine union to me;
for flesh and blood could not reveal, nor work these things in me: by thy grace
sanctifying my nature, my soul is and shall be saved: o refuse me not! deny me
not to be thine! O let thy spirit of adoption seal up my relation to thee! and
mine interest in thee! let me not remain in the dark, or be deceived in a
matter of so great concernment to me, clear up to me by certain premises, the
truth, the realty of mine inseparable union with thee! else I am undon, and
have said nothing to my soul, in all that I have said against the dread of
death.

. Grant unto me O Lord; the remission of all my sins; the sense of the guilt
thereof does sting my soul; under the apprehensions of mine approaching death:
Whatsoever does befall me in this life, I beseech thee suffer me not to dye in
my sin; Oh convince me of, humble me for, and turn me from all iniquity, and
every reigning lust: but graciously cast it behind thy back; blot it out of thy
remembrance, that in the day it is sought for it may not be found against me:
sin has passed on me, and death by sin; but deliver me, O my Savior, from
falling by and under the second death, from which there is no possibility of
redemption.

Secure unto my soul thy sufferings, as the full ransom of my soul, and the
satisfaction to thy fathers law, and justice for mine offenses; and for my many
great trangressions, so shall I be able to meet death with boldness; I shall
then insult over that King of terrors, with on O death where is thy sting, O
grave where is thy victory; I shall then triumph over death; and him who has
the power of death, the Devil: If my heart deceive me not, I would not sin that
grace should abound; but now (blessed Savior) that I have sinned, I do, I dare
not but earnestly beg thy grace may abound, that I may in my death through the
pardon of sin, sing unto thy praise, thanks be unto God who has given met he
victory through Jesus Christ our Lord.

. O thou the only high Priest of my profession! thou can be touched with mine
infirmities; thou know the power the prevalency of my natural passions,
under the apprehensions of mine approaching death: thou ever live to make
intercession for me: graciously rebuke my passions, restrain my fears, revive
my faith, renew my hope, and establish my heart under and against all those
amazing, affrighting apprehenfions of death, which nature dot^ conceive, sense
does dictate, or Satan does suggest unto my dread. Compassionately grant me the
comfortable supports of thy presence, grace and spirit, whilst I walk in the
vale of the shadow of death; that I may with all patience and meekness lie
down, and receive that stroke of death which I cannot avoid, and yet cannot be
willing to receive. That I may with submission drink that bitter cup thou
put into my hand, concerning which; my nature not corrupted with sin could
not but pray, Father if it be possible let this cup pass from me: give me an
heart groaning to be clothed on, with my house from heaven; whilst I cannot
desire to be uncloathed of this earthly tabernacle: and seeing my presence in
the flesh, is mine absence from thee O Lord; persuade me to be willing to be
dissolved, that I may be with thee, which is best of all.

. As a man I cannot desire, I cannot but fear to die: be pleased (O my Savior)
to convince me of, and afflict me with, the happy sequels of my death; that the
sense thereof may make me contrary to the power and property of my nature
desirous to die: let not the dread of death drive me to accept on sinful terms
the deliverance from the most violent, and shameful stroke thereof: enable me
to live, the last breath of this my dying life in the ways of thy truth and
holiness, to the praise of thy grace, and in this last act to play the man,
courageously evidencing my self affected with a clear sense that all the evils
of death are discharged, and assured that I am united to thee who art the
resurrection and the life; through whom, though I die, I shall live again; and
having fought the good fight of faith, and finished my course of nature; I
shall escape the curse of death, and be received into eternal life and glory
with thy self, thy blessed Saints and Angels for ever; guide me all my days by
thy counsel, and at last receive me into thy glory: Into thy hands I commit my
spirit, it is thine own thou have redeemed it, and thou will keep it until thy
glorious appearance, blessed Jesus, my Lord and my Redeemer. Amen, Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

