Bazilica Chymica, and Praxis Chymiatricae OR Royal and Practical CHEMISTRY

In Three Treatises.

WHEREIN All those excellent Medicines and Chemical Preparations are fully
discovered, from whence all our modern Chemists have drawn their choicest
remedies.

BEING A Translation of Oswald Crollius his Royal Chemistry, augmented and
enlarged by John Hartman.

To which is added his Treatise of Signatures of Internal things, or a true and
lively Anatomy of the greater and lesser WORLD.

AS ALSO The Practice of Chemistry of John Hartman M. D. augmented and enlarged
by his Son.

All faithfully Englished by a Lover of Chemistry.

LONDON, Printed for John Starkey at the Mitre in Fleetstreet near Temple Bar,
and Thomas Passinger at the Three Bibles on London Bridge 1670.

TO THE READER.
THat Arts, and all things have their Vicissitude, Alienation, Death, and
Renovation, daily experience, and the Testimony of our Forefathers, clearly
evidence. Their vicissitude, by time, and our unconstancy; their alienation, by
our improvidence, and neglect; and their Death, by our corruptibility: but
their renovation from God, and Nature, in raising up, and qualifying one, or
more, singular Man, or Men, who restore and renovate, what the unconstancy,
neglect, and corruptiblity of their Ancestors, have altered, perverted, and
obliterated. If the uncertainty of mundane things be such; it is no wonder,
that what in one Age is highly esteemed, in another becomes nauseous,
contemptible, and at length totally obscured. For usually, as soon, as any
Science is invented, and put in Practice, it, as we, immediately tends to
change, depravedness, and annihilation. Thus has it happened to the Spagyrick
Art, which for Antiquity is scarcely inferior to any, and for its use and
benefit in the Medicinal part, most worthy of esteem: yet because Alchimy, and
true Medicine (like Pylades and Orestes) were inseparable, without the
dissolution of either, so soon as the Hermetick Science expired in the
primitive Physicians, that Medicine by a like Fate was extinct also. For, when
Impostors assumed these Arts, and converted the true, and genuine use of them
into abuse, they successively declined, and thence forth were enervated, and
forgot, so, as both the one, and the other remained as dead, and if in the
World, were not known, or discovered for many Ages, until that incomparably
guifted Naturalist Theophrastus, presented both in their pristine beauty to the
World. But at first sight neither could find acceptance, especially among the
Learned, who with Tradition were so egregiously blinded, as between their
judgment, and the vulgar censure (which decries all for monstrous, that it
self has no knowledge of) was little or no difference. Yet, in success of
time, by the indefatigable Industry of their Patron, they were admitted by
some: afterward, the necessity of that time gave being to experience, whereby,
what was before censured, and condemned by all, was then approved, and received
by many. Nevertheless, as it has happened in (...), so, at that time also
evil, and corruption intruded, and mixed th^n ^ves with these most noble
Sciences: and even in that very Age, the contemporaries with PARACELSVS were
Pseudochimists, and (...) Apostates from the true light by him discovered: the
cause of their Apostasy, (as he himself declares) was filthy lucre; which has
been the utter ruin of all necessary disciplines, unto this very day.
Notwithstanding this, of his Disciples not a few, with great diligence followed
their Masters footsteps, and although they could not arive to so great, an
height of knowledge, in the unutterable Mysteries of God in Nature, as he did;
yet with sincerity, and uprightness, they pressed after so exact an imitation
of him, as by God and Nature was permitted to them; especially in the Medicinal
part of his Doctrine. In which, they could in no wise proceed aright, without
the knowledge, and experimental understanding of ALCHEMY in its manual
Practice; therefore, they first set their hands to the work, as PARACELSVS
himself did; and afterward practiced Medicine to the glory of God, and for the
good of their needy Neighbor. Among these, our Author here was not the least,
as by the subsequent Work is evident; who although a man undoubtedly of as good
literature, and consequently as well educated, as any in his time, disdained
not to foul his fingers; but, in his younger years, studiously labored in
Pyrotechny first; and so, from a Chimical Laborator, ascended to the degree of
a Physician; not forsaking his wonted diligence, and usual observance of the
wonders of Nature, discovered by Vulcanick Operations. Nor was he unmindful to
take a View of Natur's own Work, in her signating individuals of her own
producing; as is evident by his subsequent Book of Signatures. Thus, in this
Author you have his Royal Chimistry, which is the operation of Art, vegetated
by humane industry; and his Signature of things, which is Natur's own Artifice,
by Man observed.

Wherefore, if a disposition in Nature, and the desire of doing good, prompt
any Man, to seek after the knowledge of this necessary Science; and his Genius
dictate, that the true entrance thereinto is by Industry, and manual Labor:
for a guidance in this, he now has the Tyrocinium of Beguinus in the English
Tongue; which opens a gate for any ingenious intellect, with great facility to
enter into Alchimy. And for an introduction into Medicine, here (...) presented
this Author Oswaldus Crollius, etc. and at the end of his Books, the Practical
Chemistry of Dr. Hartmannus, a Man of no less experience in preparing, and
adhibiting Spagirick Remedies, then himself, as appears by his Learned
commentations on the present Work. Both together seem to make an entire System
of Chimical Medicine. The annotations are all printed in a Roman Letter and
what is of the Authors, is easily distinguished by the Interposition of
Letters, thus (a) Alphabetically, directing to the peculiar Notes thereupon.
After the Annotations, and among them, you have several experiments of the
Animadverter pertinently interwoven, and inserted. By which the present Work is
not (as has happened to many) obscured, and made worse, but illucidated,
enlarged, and rendered more plain, and better to be understood.

Therefore heartily accept of these; time may bring to light more necessary
Books of this Kind. In the mean while, if these be ingeniously used, no Man (I
hope) will have cause to repent the employing of his time therein. Farewell.

A POSTSCRIPT TO THE READER.
READER, for thy better understanding of the Ensuing Work, I thought it
expedient to advertise thee of these few things.

1. Where the Commentator Dr. Hartmannus referrs to his Practical Chemistry,
which in most places (according to the Latin Idiom) is called Practica
Chymiatrica; there his own Work hereunto annexed, is intended.

2. Where he says: See my notes set forth by Gluckradius, or my notes on
Tyrocinium Chimicum, or my notes on Beguinus, there, all one and the same is
intended, viz: the Tyrocinium now in English) on which the said Dr. Hartman did
animadvert, and those his animadversions, together with preparations of his own
interwoven, were once set forth by Gluckradius, etc.

3. Whereas the number of Pages, quoted by the animadverter, directing to
particulars in his Practical Chemistry, are here omitted in the printing; you
having these two Authors in one Volumne, I conceive the omission thereof will
in no wise be injurious: for since both Books were Printed at one time, the
Figures could not possibly be inserted.

4. Note. At the end of this Authors-Book of Royal Chemistry, follows his
Treatise of Signatures, at the end of which I have added a Compendious Table of
that Treatise. After this you have the Book of Practical Chemistry at the end
thereof I subjoyn a Particular Table or Catalogue of Deseases, in the same
series, and order, as they are comprised in the said Practical Chemistry. Then
follows a general Table of the Remedies, and Preparations contained in both
Authors.

The most Material Errata's in the Royal Chemistry are thus corrected.
For Wild-Alexander P. 7 L. 10 read, Stone-parsly. For Wild-Alexander P. 49 L.
30 read, Stone-parsly. For Wild-Alexander P. 62 L. 46 read, Stone-parsly. For
Wild-Alexander P. 76 L. 9 read, Stone-parsly. For Wild-Alexander P. 84 L. 42
read, Stone-parsly. For Wild-Alexander P. 144 L. 33 read, Stone-parsly. For
Wild-Alexander P. 145 L. 22 read, Stone-parsly. For Vervein. P. 13 L. 2 read,
Speedwell. For Vervein. P. 44 L. 46 read, Speedwell. For Vervein. P. 84 L. 49
read, Speedwell. For Coltsfoot. P. 45 L. 7, 17 read, Asarabacca. For Coltsfoot.
P. 134 L. 42 read, Asarabacca. For Coltsfoot. P. 142 L. 36, 38 read,
Asarabacca. For Coltsfoot. P. 147 L. 31 read, Asarabacca.
Page 13. line 15. for Angelina, read, Angelica, ibid. for Goats-eare, read
Goates-Rue, p. 15, l. 22, Scena, r. Sena. p. 17. l. 15. Blot out Faculty p. 22.
l. 31. for Pour off, r. Pour of. p. 24, l. 16, for Coper, r. Copper. p. 27,
l. 10. for For in, r. For, also. p. 29, l. 5, Add is to be put, l. 6, for,
From the uppar covering, r. Below the Lowerhole. p. 30, l. 21, for Take
levigated, r. Talk-levigated. p. 33, l. 34, for Begore, r. Before. p 40, for
Drosie, r. Dropsy. p. 38, l. 4, for Power r. Powder. p. 43, l. 33, for Magna's,
r. Magma's. p. 44, l. 41, for Cidron r. Citron. p. 45, l. 13, for Benzonie, r.
Benzoin. p. 48, l. 41, for mixed, r. mix. p. 49, l. 35, for Horse-tayle, r.
Mullein. p. 57, l. 35, for apples, r. Fruit. p. 72, l. 22, for Hamorchagia, r.
Haemorrhagia. p. 73, l. 46, for Nelissa, r. Melissa, or Baume. p. 111. l. 17.
for Wine, r. Vine. p. 112. l. 5. Blot out, it. p. 113, l. 29, for, and, r. end.
p. 121, l. 3, and 4, for, and with its body rendered grateful, r. again into
Body. p. 140, l. 28, for, Daudanum, r. Laudanum. p. 141, l. 32, for,
Hearts-blood. r. Hearts blood. p. 145, l. 39, for, Hogline, r. Hog-lice, p. 147,
l. 19, for, Drosie, r. Dropsy, p. 149, l. 17, for, Srigensis, r. Strigensis, p.
161 l. 1, for Longwort, r. Mullein. p. 173, l. 20. (...) Lotomes, r. Loton's.

Errata's in the Treatise of Signatures.
Page 2, line 22, for Thiapsia, read Thapsia, p. 2, l. 25, for Coltsfoot, r.
Asarabacca. l. 34, for Aconitum, r. Salutary Aconitum. p. 3, l. 26, for
Horsetongue, r. Throatwort. p. 9, l. 22, for Small Bone, r. Suture. p. 11, l.
32, and 40, for longwort, r. Mullein. p. 12, l. 1, for Michoachan, r.
Mochoacan. p. 35, l. 4, for conceived. r. convicted.

In the Margent Page 28 for Aroth read Azoth In the Margent Page 32 for The
read These In the Margent Page 33 for Tcarry read Starry
Royal (a) Chemistry.
THE Curation of all Discases (b) pertinently to use the Significant
Expressions of P. Severinus) is two sold, viz. Universal and Particular.

UNIVERSAL, Is that which exterminates the Roots of Diseases, howsoever
implanted in Humane Bodies, whether Hereditary from the Parents seed, or
afterward generated from evil use of aliment, or otherwise caused by External
Impressions. This is performed by the Natural Balsome of remedies,
consentaneous to Humane Nature, (d) by Resolving, Consuming, and Dissipating
the seminary Tinctures of Impurities; but Corroborating, Consolidating, and
Preserving the Innate Balsome; for (according to Paracelsus) as long as the
Radical Humor is not diminished, no Disease is perceived. There is one common
Mummy of all men, viz. the spirit of life. The Medicine therefore may also be
one. For the Disease in man's Body is nothing else but an Affect whereby the
Mumy, or operation of the Spirit of life in man is hindered.

This is proved by various examples, as of the Sun, Salt, Food, Poison, Air,
and Fire, with which all men are indifferently affected. If the greatest of
these Affects be curable, then the least may certainly be healed.


And whilst every kind of Malady, is removed by one and the same Medicine,
Pluralities, Particularities, and Orders of Indications, have no place.

Not without cause therefore Lully says, that one Supreme and Universal
Medicament, to which all particular Medicines are reduced, may be administered
to Humane Bodies, without the knowledge of the Distemper; because prudent
Nature, by her own instinct has given to it, Virtues of curing all natural
Infirmities, and of rectifying her self. There are four principal (e) kinds of
Diseases, exaited (f) and confirmed, which absolutely need Universal Curation,
( viz. Epilepsy, Gout, Dropsy, Lepronsy) to which stock, all other inferior
Diseases, as to Fountains and Principals are deduced. This Universal Cure is to
be desired: but very (g) few are worthy of this Divine Gift. Raymund Lully
diligently and faithfully advises Physicians to strive for perfection, and
seek after the Universal Medicine, which is the only Sanative of every
Infirmity, (h) and the perfect Confortative of Spiritual Virtues, since that in
it, as in one proper Subject is made a real and Universal Conjunction,
Congregation, and Collection of all operative Virtues, of the whole Medicine in
the course of Nature; which Virtues are distributed by three natural familiar
means, (i) otherwise particularly, or without Order, Who so has (k) an
Antidote for all Diseases in this World, the same has the Gift of God, which
is an Everlasting, Incomparable, and Innumerable Treasure.

What Infirmity soever is not by the administration of this natural competent
Auxliary cured, (where this help is denied, w^must consider it, as the finger
of God;) the evil notwithstanding is rendered more tolerable, till it shall
please the Almighty to grant deliverance.

PARTICULAR, is, which does not always extirpate the Roots themselves, (l) or
Seminal Tinctures, but very often manifests its virtue in mitigating Dolours,
Symptoms, and Paroxisms, prohibiting their growth, not suffering them to come
to Exaltation, appointing Evacuations of Excrements; and comforting debilitate
Nature, with corroborating Remedies, consentaneous to the natural Spirits,
often varied according to diversity of Distempers. Nevertheless, this
particular cure, is not to be contemned; for it often, in most grievous
Diseases, performs the Office of the Universal; because God by his great mercy
has manifested certain particular and general secrets, some which in
themselves, contain the nature of the whole Heavens, (m) others of the whole
Air, (n) and others also of the whole Earth, (o) by which, Diseases are easily
known and cured: for Specific and Appropriate Remedies made Spiritual, do
often emulate the Universal Medicine, destroy the Roots of Impurities, and
confirm the Virtue of the Natural Balsome. So as we shall be happy in defect of
the Universal, if we may at tain to particular, subalternate, specific and
individual Species of Curations. Thus far Severinus.

Material Diseases are (p) expelled in a particular way.

First, By Universal Emunctuaries, through which, by the help of Remedies, (q)
Nature is wont to repress and expel the Sickly matter, in the seven following
ways, viz. By Vomatives. Catharticks. Diuretics. Diaphoreticks. Confortatives.
Anodynes. Odorificks.


Secondly, In a particular way, Diseases are removed by appropriate and
Specific Remedies, (r) such as these, Specific Of the principal Members of
Man's Body. Capital, viz. Epileptick. Apoplectick.
Ophthalmick. Odontalgick. Pectoral. Cordial. Stomachal. Uterine. Febrile.
Pestilential. Podagrical. Nephritical. Hydropical. Dysenterical. Venereal.
Venenate. Vulnerary, Ulcerous, Pustulous.


(a) This Book is Entitled, Royal Chemistry, for as the Royal Court of a King
or Pri^, is most Magnificently and Sumptuously furnished, with most precious
Utensils, and Necessaries. So this Book is furnished with no other, but the
choicest singular Remedies *.

(b) In the Preface, these words of Severinus the Dane are used, from the 14.
Chap. of Idea Med, Phllof. Many think Peter Severinus not to be the Author of
Idea, but rather Pratenses, whose Verse annexed to the end thereof, being
compared with the whole Writing, seems to declare the same.

(c) Seed must be distinguished from Sperme. Sperme is the whole Substance,
discernable by sight, but the Seed is a peculiar part, in every Grane, or
Sperme, unperceivable.

(d) Remedies ought to be like the Natural Balsome, this is a principal Axiom
of Physicians, declared by Hippocrates in his Introduction to the Method of
Healing, lib. 2. de flatibus and 2. aph. 22. By Contraries, contraries are
Remedied; Opposite to this seems the saying of Hermeticks, like are cured by
their like; but here is no appearance of Contrar^ety, if both be rightly
understood. For Medicines ought to be like to Nature, or the Balsome and native
heat, which, in expelling the Disease, they should help, but to the Disease it
self, they must be contrary.

(c) All Distempers are

The four Simple Diseases, to which all other Diseases are referred. Viz. 1.
Leprosy with which of Affinity are all Diseases of the Skin, as All Ulcers,
Itch, Scab, Scabs, Alopecia, Scurf of the Head, Scales, Clefts or Chops,
Foulness of the Skin, Fiery Sores, A Disease causing the hair to fall off.
Whelks, the dead Evil, Cancer, Carbuncle, Fellon, Inflammation, Vitilago,
Morphew, Scurviness, Running Sore of the Head, Gutta-rosacea, Ringworms,
Tetters, and such like.
2. The Gout is accompanied with Cholicks, Gravel in the Reins, all Dolours of
the Teeth, Arthrites, Dolorous fluctions, Pains of the Head, and such like.
3. Dropsy, of Affinity therewith, are Fevers. Imposthumes of the Womb,
Jaundies. Chachexies of every kind.
4. Epilepsy, to which are referred Diseases of the head and others, as
Chatarrhs, Paralysy, Palvitation of the Heart, Cramp, Vertigo, Melancholy,
Apoplexy, Suffocation of the Womb.



Mixed and transplanted, whence Podagrical Chatarrhs. Paralysys. Leprousness,
Arthritick Fevers. New Diseases, The Frenck Sickness, or Lues venerea, English
Sweats, Petechia, Prunella, Dysentery, Pleurisy.



Or, Diseases are First, or only Epilepsy. Gout. Dropsy. Leprousy.
Secondary, and all depending.


(f) Therefore are also called Astrale.

(g) Arguments of such as deny the Universal Medicine, may be seen described by
Doringius, in lib. de Medicina and Medicis.

(h) Yet Experience teaches, that if in too great a Dose it be exhibited, it
causes death, though most pleasantly. Therefore it most certainly takes away
all sense of pain.

(i) Vegetables, Minerals, and Animals.

(k) Arnoldus Villanovus is reported to have had it, and Basilius the Monk, who
concealing its name, called it Asa-Phalaja, as if he had called it (...), that
is, Security. Paracelsus, and others, also Crollius confesses that he saw, and
tasted it, with Michael Sandivogius of Polonia.

(l) Sometimes the Roots and Seminal Tinctures are removed by this particular
Cure.

(m) As Gold has the Signature of the Celestial Sun.

(n) As May Dew.

(o) Ros Solis.

(p) Which are joined with the Impurities, and Tartar within the body.

(q) Another Cure is A universal and perfect ablation of all Impurities, or
Roots of Diseases, by an unnecessary comixtion placed in the natural Body,
which is performed by the Natural Balsome of Remedies, consentaneous to humane
Nature, by resolving, consuming, and dissipating the Tinctures of Seminary
Impurities, but strengthening, consolidating, and preserving the Innate Balsome
of the Microcosm: and this is required in Diseases. Hereditary and which are
come to perfection. Perfected as Epilepsy, Gout, Dropsy. Leprousy.

A particular, which does not always Extirpate the Roots themselves, or Seminal
Tinctures: but very often manifests its virtue, in mitigating Dolours,
Symptoms, and Paroxisms, prohibiting their increase, not suffering them to come
to Exaltation, appointing Evacuations of Excrements, and comforting debilitate
Nature, with Corroborating Remedies. This has place in the Diseases hereafter
named, which as yet are not come to perfection, and in such as are either of
the same kind, or of affinity to them.


1. Universal Curation, is made by Ablation, Resolution, and Annihilation, also
process must be made as in the Particular.

Ablations, Resolutions, and Annihilations are made by 1. Vomitories. 2.
Catharticks. 3. Diuretics. 4. Diophoreticks.


2. The Universal Cure is performed, by Corroborating the natural Balsome, by
Consolidations, Regenerations, Refections of natural vigor, Humectations, and
by such things as remove the Malignity.

All these are performed Particularly by Confortatives, Anodynes, With addition
of Sweet Odours Moistning things allaying heat. Things quenching thirst.
Opening a Vein.


Particular Curation is only made by Specificks. But these Specificks have
always Universal properties for they take away, resolve, and consume; they are
also particular, and singular, in all and every individual part.

(r) Remedies Chemical, and Specific.

First, they must be rightly prepared. Secondly, being rightly prepared, they
must be exhibited in convenient Vehicles. Thirdly, These also must be given in
a just dose and quantity.

Also these Specificks, or more special Remedies are so ordained, as that they
are not administered with happy success, unless by the Physician who is well
instructed in the Method of Healing; whence, as Crollius argues, it is no
wonder, if Empericks, without diseretion applying these Notable Medicaments,
attain not the desired end.

I. Universal Digestives or Maturative Medicaments.
IN Diseases, (a) which consist of moveable, (b) superficiary Impurities, which
have not fixed roots, (c) nor are come (d) to difficult Coagulations, known by
the signatures of the Dolours, (e) and inconstant and sudden violence of
Symptoms, such are, very many (f) Fevers, Catarths, Coughs, Hoarsness, and
such like Aflects, which need not the help of Digestives, but may safely, and
suddenly be removed by purging, and cleansing Remedies. But high Feverish (g)
Impurities, and I^flammations, which have more difficult Tinctures, difficultly
resolvible, because the re^tions, and coagulations of the Vapors are fixed,
(which are very often latent in puts (h) suspected, and consentaneous to the
Minera's of such Distempers,) are most sa^ly and conveniently cured, by the
Digestion of Hippocrates, Mitigation of Paracel^, or Epicrasin of Galen, for
these curative indications are of like virtue; and have not the crude faculties
of common-purging Medicaments, which, acting with their cru'e and corporeal
spirits, exasperate the fervent heats of diseased spiritual Impurities. After
the fervency is abated, and the resolved matter admits of a suitable
coagulation, ^cause the spirits are at liberty, Purgations easily operate.

In Chronical Diseases, (i) as Epilepsies, Quartanes, Cholicks, Gravel in the
Reins, Gouts, and all Tartarous affects, Dropsy, and all Leprous-affects with
their Radical Impurities, are by Resolution, not Digestion, properly and
principally cured. For here signs of Digestion are in vain (k) expected: the
cure must be instituted, with Resolution, Consumption, Destruction, and
Ablation; which, with Mitigation annexed, will more (l) happily be effected.
But many species of the aforesaid Diseases, (m) by reason of the violence of
Symptoms, and Inflammations, require Indications of concoction and (n)
contemperation: and in this case Hippocrates prescription is of force, viz.
Digestives (o) are only to be used, where increase of the Disease requires.

(a) Presently purge in distempers, which consist of moveable superficial
Impurities, known by Signatures of the dolours, and inconstant, and sudden
violence of Symptoms. But where there are more dangerous and inflammatory
Impurities, first use Concoction.

(b) Such as are easily removed.

(c) Which are not venenated.

(d) Obstructions.

(e) By Impressions and Tinctures.

(f) As of the Stomach, Reins, and Ephemera.

(g) Quotidians, and Quartanes.

(h) Which were before obnoxious to these Distempers, and in whom, already part
of the evil causing the disease abides, which from any other external
Consentaneous cause, easily recovers strength, and is thereby rendered more
powerfully evil.

(i) Viz. Beginning.

(k) From the beginning, or at first.

(l) If digesting be added.

(m) All Symptoms, and Accidents.

(n) Diseases that are called Chronical, Co-coctions.
of themselves need not these Digestions, but with respect to their Symptoms
they may. Also in Vngarick and lignant Fevers, Concoction is not to be expected.

(c) (...) Dis^ases do (...) (...), which (...)

1. In moveable Impurities. 2. In Superficiary. 3. Having fixed Roots, as
Fevers of the Ventricle. Catarrhs. Coughs, Hoarsaess.
4. In sharp diseases, or such as are more dangerous, in which the impurities
are movable, by resolving. 5. In such as easily yield to Medicine, and are not
come to difficult Coagulations, as Sharp Fevers. Imposthumations.

Such as they not the crude faculties of Purging Medicines, want digestion,
such are 1. These that have most hard Tinctures, which have s^xed coagulated
Vapors difficulty resolvible. 2. Chronical Diseases of themselves want not,
but, with respect to their Symptoms they do. These therefore do, and do not,
want Concoction.


Con^tion is Treated of by Hippocrates, in lib. de veteri Medicina. Concoctions
are performed by contemperation, mixtion and mutual digestion of things
permixed.

Vitriolate Tartar (a).
. Salt (b) of Tartar most white, dissolved, filtred and coagulated often,
according to the Chemical Art, with water of Agrimony; (c) for Example thus:
iiij of this dissolve it, Res. Ive.
in a Cellar, upon a Marble (or Beneficio manicae) into an Oil. Having this Oil
pure,. Oil of Vitriol (d) exceedingly well rectified ij, and in a large Glass
instill it drop by drop (e) upon the Oil of Tartar: If two small a quantity
(...) of Vitriol be pour^ (...) makes it vonative only.
then make a most white Coagulum, draw off the supernating humidity, with
gentle heat, to the consistency of a Salt, so thou have fixed, white,
Vitriolate, Tartar (f).

OBSERVATIONS.
1. A mean must be observed in pouring the Oil of Vitriol, least the taste of
the repercussive Salt, be too sharp, but it must be rather somewhat nauseous:
for if two much Oil of Vitriol be poured in, it purges not out all; otherwise,
it operates by the four Emunctuories, as by Vomiting, by the (g) Excrements,
(if mixed (h) with Purging Medicaments) also by Urine and Sweat.

2. It is absolutely necessary, by a Glass with a very (i) straight neck, to
pour on the Oil of Vitriol, so as by certain Artifice, it may very leisurely,
and successively, instill upon the Oil of Tartar, hereby you will find, that
the good Spirits will be retained, which otherwise, by the mutual heat of an
hasty mixture, by Evaporation, elevate themselves, and vanish.

3. The Glass by the conjunction of these two Fires, waxes hot above-measure.
(k) By the like mutual heat, Excessive heats.
it is observed, the Epilepsy is generated, viz. when the spirit of Life in the
Microcosm, is disturbed with Heterogeneal heats, the like boiling is perceived
(l).

4. Who so would add, to two (m) parts of Oil of Tartar, one part of Salt, or
Liquor of Coralls, must add it, before the Oil of Vitriol be instil'd thereon.

A Digestive of this Vitriolate Tartar may be prepared, after the following
manner, which in urgent necessity, must preceed (n) purging Medicaments.

. Vitriolate Tartar j. Dissolve it in two (o) small measures of Wine, adding of
the ^tion of Raisons, and Cinnamon, according to pleasure.

Of this mixture, give two or three days, (p) if need be, in the morning after
the taking a rere Egg, one (q) draught, at dinner, another, and the third about
the Evening. Afterward a Cathartick of Panchymagogon may be exhibited. In all
Fevers, and also in the Quartane, it is wonderful excellent, for it most
Powerfully resolves the Tartar (r) in man's body.

Virtues of the Vitriolate Tartar.
1. In Hemicrania, Jaundies, and all Obstructions of the Bowels, it must be
exhibited to the sick for certain days together in the mornings, in White Wine.
Wine, or other (s) appropriate Liquor, and if need be, the Dose increased.

2. In the Stone, it is given in Water of Wild- Alexander, or Pellitory of the
Wall, or White Wind (t).

3. It is a most efficacious Dioppilative of the Reins, ss. of it, (u) with
Julipe of Roses ij, and water of Cinnamon ss, (w) being mixed and applied.

4. In Contractures and Obstructions of the Veins, taking their beginning from
Tartar, this is excellent being certain times exhibited in water of the
Decoction of Raisons and Cinnamon. Dose (x) 6 or 8 granes.

5. It provokes Sweat in Water of Cardu-Bened. or White Wind.

6. In the Dropsy, (y) gross and Whey-like Humors are hereby expelled, thus:.
j. and mix it with ss. of Solutive Honey of Roses, of Wine essencified with
Ele. campane (z) ij. Give this (aa.)

7. In suppression of the Menses (bb.)

. j. Give it in Syrrup of Read Mugwort
Motherwort, or Betony, or mix it in Honey of Roses dissolved in
Peneroyal-water.

8. Also it may be profitably exhibited in Fevers (cc.)

9. It purges by the inferior parts, and removes all Obstructions, if mixed
with Catharticks, or exhibited in Solutive Syrup of Roses, or Violets, or with
Solutive Honey of Roses.

10. In Melancholy, (dd) and hardness of the Spleen, it is given in appropriate
waters. (ee) Dose from ss, to the full Dose. (ff.) In Metheglin for amending
the taste, it is most commodiously exhibited.

(a) Salt of Tartar, Vitriolate, or essencified fixed Salt of Tartar.

(b) Salt of Tartar is made, by Calcination to a whiteness, from the Caput
Mortuum, after distillation of Spirit of Tartar, which is afterward by being
placed in a Cellar, or other moist place dissolved into an Oil per diliquium.
Some, instead of Salt of Tartar, take Cream of Tartar, according, to the
Prescript of Quercetanus, and others.

(c) Or other expedient water, as of Succory, Endive, etc.

(d) Or common, or of Copper, and Iron, touching which we treat below, in the
Stomachal Specific.

(e) By reason of their great heat; for if they be hastily and unconsiderately
mixed, these Contraries do so fight among themselves, that by reason of the
great boiling, occasioned by their exceeding heat, a large Glass is very much
shaken, or broke thereby. Whilst you hear no noise in the Vessel, you may pour
in the Oil of Vitriol.

(f) Also it may be thus prepared:. Tartar calcined, extract a Salt with
distilled Rain water: of this Liquor ij. Spirit of Vitriol without Oil and
Phlegm iij instill this into the Liquor of Tartar leisurely; no Coagulum will
precipitate the bottom, but abstract a part, and Evaporate it, then what
remains in the bottom will be like little stones. Or, to rectified Salt of
Tartar pour Spirit of Vitriol, abstract it, only drawing off the Phlegm;
repeat the so long, until the Spirit of Vitriol, after distillation he intires
and wholly freed from all its Acrimony. Note: If Salts of Vegetables
exceedingly well cleansed and purged from all Impurities, be dissolved in
proper distilled water, and afterward joined with them best Spirit of Vitriol,
and in the preparation process made, as is even now declared, an excelent
digesting, yea almost a proper purging Powder may be prepared, which in Fevers,
and other Diseases will be most profitable.

(g) Seldom by Vomiting, unless the Ventricle abound with corrupt Humors.

(h) If with Extraction or Rosin of Scammony it be mixed, or impregnated with
Tincture of the same. See Praxi of our Edition.

(i) This is useless, the drops can scarcely be so retained.

(k) Viz. Of Nature and Potentials.

(l) See Libavius synt. tom. 1. page 353. where he with vehemence instances
this place, to uphold his own custom thereby.

(m) This observation is not necessary.

(n) In Chronical, and Diuturnal Diseases.

(o) Rather in one.

(p) Or more, and sometimes to 14 days.

(q) It needs not.

(r) By the Tartar is understood a certain obstruction, for where obctruction
is, there also is Tartar, as some think, others think the contrary.

(f). Of Hen-broth 10 spoonfulls, heat it in a Porringer over a gentle fire,
add a convenient Dose of Vitriolate Tartar, and with a Silver Spoon continue
stirring it till it be dissolved, and the Broth be made sharp. Also to render
it more pleasant, add a little Oil of Cinnamon.

To this universal Digestive of equal virtue is Cream, or Christalls of Tartar,
which formerly by Quercetanus was called by this name. Beguinus in Tyrocinio
calls it essential Salt of Tartar. The Man^er of preparing it, is thus: The
most white crude Tartar, grossly bruised, and very well washed in simple water,
until all the Impurities be removed, and the Powder remain very white without
any filth; must afterward be put in a large Earthen Pan, and covered a hands
breadth with clear Fountain water, and boiled a little, till it seem to be
covered all over with a Skin, then it must be removed from the fire, and set in
a cool place, where the Christals leisurely will appear, which must afterward
be removed and collected, together with the little stones, which under the
water cleave to the sides of the Pan, these, when dried, must all be reduced to
powder: (this Cream is very profitable for such, as with difficulty purge by
the inferior parts.) This boiling and collection of the Skin and Chrystals
must be^r peated often, till a sufficient quantity be gathered. This is a
Principal Deoppilative, for, by the Tartars acting in the Spleen, and Mesentery
Veins, the Belly is kept soluble, the Dose must be often repeated. In all other
Virtues, it is equivalent to Vitriolate Tartar.

Outwardly Unctions must be adhibited thus:. Oil of Capers j, Oil of Violets
ss. Powder of Harts-torgue, and Binde-weed of each j, Saffron ss, white Wax a
convenient quantity. Make the Unguent. But if the Ostruction be Contumacious, a
Plaster made of Ammoniack, dissolved in Vineagar of Squills, and spread upon
Leather, must be applied. For these do wonderfully dissolve Obstructions, and
help the diseased. See Praxin of our Edition, page --

(t) Of Onions, Stawberies, or Saxifrage.

(u) Or j.

(w) Or iiij.

(x) By repeating it Morning, Noon, and Evening, for many days together, the
Cure is happily effected, Especially if j of Spirit of Tartar be added. See
below of Spirit of Tartar Tit. 5. of Diaphoreticks.

(y) Viz. Confirmed.

(z) Of the Root, which is of Excellent use in the Dropsy.

(aa) It must be often repeated, till the Disease decline.

(bb) At the precise time, according to the Versicle.

Luna vetus veteres, Juvenes nova Luna repurgat.
(cc) Especial in tedious Fevers, and in the Cachexy, and such distempers as
incline to the Dropsy. Also in Melencholy and Phlegmatic Fevers it may be
given with Oximel, or Burrage water. It is not judged convenient for Choleric
persons.

(dd) Viz. Hypochondriack.

(ee) Of Hart's-tongue, Binde-need, and Flowers of Linum. It will be very
properly mixed with Leaves of Galyopsis. Galyopsis is a Specific in affects of
the Spleen: I believe it to be Malzatella, or yellow Archangel. See Praxin of
our Edition, page

ff Dose rather from j. to ij.

II. Vomitories.
TO incite Vomiting, Antimonial, Vittiolate, and Helleborine (a) Faculties are
of singular use, for these leave no depraved matter in the Ventricle, but all
(b) impurities do eradicate (c).

A most Excellent Vomitory of Hellebore, is described by the Famous Physician
Conradinus, in lib. of Ungarick Fevers: In this place we treat of Vitriol; and
a little after follow the preparations of Antimony.

(a) White Hellebore.

(b) That is, all Humors.

(c) The process of Conradinus his Vomotory is thus; For in the said Book it is
found imperfect.. Root of Bryony, and Sow-bread, of each ij, white Hellebore j.
These Roots being first very well washed, and afterward dried in the shade,
reduce to Powder, pour upon it Spirit of Wine, to cover it 2 or 3 singers. Set
it in Balneo for certain days in Digestion, then distill it by Alembeck with
gentle heat; this being done, take out the Feces, dry them, and reduce to
Powder, upon which again pour the Spirit of Wine before distilled off, and
leave it for some time in a hot place, the Glass being exceedingly well closed,
and afterward filter it. This is the true Vomitory of Conradinus. Its use is
thus. Cut off the extremes of 2 or 3 Feathers, which moisten in this water for
a little time, these, thus imbibed, immerge in a draught of Malmsy, or other
rich Wine. Afterward give the sick to drink of the Wine, the Feathers being
first wrung out into it, and he will vomit freely.

Gilla (a) of Theophrastus, or, Salt of Vitriol.
Chrystals of Vitriol, prepared of Copper or Iron (as a little after is
described in the Stomachal Specific) resolved in the acid Phlegm (b) which
first comes off in the Distillation of Common Vitriol, and together circulated
for 8 days. Of this circulate Liquor is given from j to ss. or ij (c).

This Liquor far more Efficatious, and Commodiously operates, than the Salt of
common Vitriol, or Goslariensis, by what means soever (d) extracted from the
Caput Mortuum.

(a) This is called Gilla by Paracelsus in lib. of Natural things, Chapt. 8.
where he Treats of the Faculties of Crude Vitriol, and Colchotharis, (otherwise
it is called Der roth Peinty,) Grilla rather than Gilla, this seems to be a
name secretly given to Vitriol: But the Liquor of Vitriol, which is so
excellent in those great Affects of the Brain, as Vertigo, Phrensy, Mania, etc.
In 3 and 4. Chap. 2. he calls an Arcanum, which is Extracted of Gilla. Whether
it be called, by this, or the other name, it matters not: For, without doubt,
Paracelsus, in the former place understood Crude Vitriol, because another
different Species may be made of Mars and Venus. Also the Dose by him
perscribed, is only 6 Comets, that is, 3 Drops, which perhaps make 1 grane and
^, which he says must be repeated, if Vomiting he not procured by the former.
Therefore this Dose of our Author is too great, and is only proper for Crude
Vitriol often washed, and exhibited in water of the lesser Century, which
chiefly has Emetick operations: but in Vitriol dissolved, and Chrystallised,
the same Dose must be used as is prescribed by Paracelsus.

Sharp Phlegm of Vitriol.
(b) Acid and Aromatic Phlegm of Vitriol: That which is in the following
manner prepared, is best.

. Of the best blew Vitriol a convenient quantity, distill of the Phlegm by
Alembeck in Ashes, so as none of the Spirits may ascend with it: the same
Phlegm again pour upon the Caput Mortuum, often cohobate it, and the seventh
time urge it a little more strongly. This water acquires to it self a
delightful Odor, especially if after the last distillation, it be for some
time circulated with moderate heat.

It is otherwise an Arcanum, in pain of the Head, and Epilepsy, if half a
spoonful be taken in the morning fasting, and late at night, by it self: It
also kindly opens the Belly.

With this Phlegm, Gilla of Paracelsus, and Vomitive Vitriol, may more rightly
be administered.

Note: In exhibiting Vitriolate Vomitorys, care must be taken not to give it in
the Asthma, and other Affects of the Breast. For Crude Vitriol is venomous,
causing the Asthma, and oftentimes by Suffocation Death it self.

Such as use Crude Vitriol for recovering hoarse Speech, are at length
afflicted with grievous Diseases caused thereby.

(c) It is seldom given above j.

(d) For these extracted Salts are rarely efficacious.

But the Salt of Vitriols, which is extracted only from the Caput Mortuum, out
of which flowers of Sulphur by Sublimation are elevated, of which we hereafter
treat, in the Pestilential Specific, exhibited with Fennel- water, or Wine,
from 6. granes to 8. or 10. does very easily procure Vomiting, sometimes purges
downwards, and sometimes by Sweat.

White (a) Vomitive Vitriol.
Or, Dissolve white Vitriol in Rainwater, and Evaporate it, till it (b) appear
all over crusted, afterward set it for four days in a cold place, and it will
begin to Chrystallise (c), gather the Chrystalls, and again evaporate the Water
as before: this labor, by Coagulating, and Dissolving, must be repeated the
third time exactly: Lastly, proceed three times in the same manner with
Rose Water. Which being done, dry the Chrystalls over a gentle heat, and they
will spontaneously become a white powder. This is a Lenitive Vomitory, and a
kindly (d) purger of the Brain.

Use and D^se of Gilla and Salt of Vitriol.
If of Gilla, j. must be taken (e) with Wine, this does (f) speedily procure
Vomiting, whereby the Stomach is unburthened, and the natural Vigor preserved,
and no detriment at all procured thereby (g). In Fevers (h). In Maw-worms (i).

In all kinds of Infirmities of the Ventricle (k).

In Salt Defluxions.

In Synovia: here j. may be exhibited in a (l) Draught of Beer.

In the Pest. (m). In Dolours of the Back, ss. in hot Wine (n).

It helps in cure of green-Wounds, if continually (o) for four mornings
together, ss. be taken in hot Beer.

Dose of either from j. to ij. with respect to Sex (p), and Complexion.

The Salt may be mixed with Sugar Candy, and (q) afterward dissolved in
Fennel-water, and given hot.

Also it may be given in Flesh-broath, in a draught of Beer, or (r) Wine, in
Water mixed with Honey, or in conserve of Roses.

In Children for the Worms, 4, 5, or 8. granes, may be exhibited in a spoonful
of Malmsey-Wine.

This Medicament operates variously, viz. (s) by Vomiting, by Siedge, also
sometimes it procures Sweats, and causes Sleep.

(a) By the Germans it is called Salitzstein over Augenstrein, from its use in
Affects of the Eyes.

(b) Swimming a top.

(c) This is difficultly done.

(d) Because it purges all Fluxions.

(e) Rich-wine, a little rectified with infusion of Galangal, or Nutmegs.

(f) Not always because Natures are diverse.

(g) This is very much to be doubted, for, Experience provet, that this Gilla,
or Vomitory, does exceedingly hurt the sight, yea so, as in some, who have very
often used it, their sight has been plainly lost.

(h) With Water of the lesser Century, Cardu. Bened. and Endive.

(i) With Water of St. John's Wort, Tansy, and a Decoction of Hartshorn.

(k) In Water of Majoran, Betony, and Melissa.

(l) Wine is hurtful in Synovia, but Beer, by reason of the Hops and Barley,
(the Decoction whereof, may also be outwardly applied,) by a Specific
property, is very beneficial.

(m) With Water of Cardu. Bened. and Meadow-sweet; a Suffumigation of Vitriol
very much corrects the Air.

(n) Wine is not very convenient, by reason of the Fever, which for the most
part is wont to attend Dolours of the Reins, from whence Dolours of the Back
are occasioned: But if no Fever be, it may be given in Wine, otherwise in
Fennel-water.

(o) If so be the bones be not also hurt.

(p) This Dose, in urgent necessity, may in eight or ten days be doubled or
trebled. Also it may be as often repeated.

(q) Such is a Penotum, thus made. Salt of Vitriol ss. dissolve it in
Convenient water, add a sufficient quantity of Sugar Candy, filter it, and give
it the sick blood warm, it will cause Vomiting without Dolor.

(r) In the Epilepsy, it must be given in water of Flowers of Peony or
Missletoe. In Suffocation of the Matrix in Water of Mug-wort, or Buglosse-wine;
for by its sharpness, it repells the putrilaginous vapors of the Matrix. In
Poisons, it is given in Water of St. Johnswort impregnated with tincture of
Saffron.

(s) Not with respect to the Medicament, but by reason of the disparity of
Subjects.

Aqua Benedicta.
Martin Ruland the Father, in his Century of Emperical Curations, very often
mentions his Aqua Benedicta, which he also calls Vomitory and Ruptory, and in
Century 5. Curat. 5.95. he says, it is compounded of Crocus of Metals; of
which the quantity of a Pea, being macerated in Water, Wine, Beer, or
Methegline; of which infusion afterward; or else boiled in these Liquors) being
streined is given to drink from ss, to ij. What this Crocus of Metals is, or
how prepared, very many have eagerly desired to know, What is this Crocus of
Metals.
even to this day; whence Commentaries made by diverse, have been extant
thereabout, who have also been of Different Opinions. See Josephus Quercetanus
in Pharmacopoea Chap. 7. in the end de Aquis. Also in Alexicacum Tyrocinium
Chymicum Chap. 12. lib. 2. which is published with my Notes communicated to Dr.
Beguinus. Also Libavius in either Treatise, and others. This is certain, it is
prepared of Antimony, or Stibium, (which Quercetanus calls Saturnine Magnesia)
but how, or in what manner, they do not all agree. Libavius in his second
Treatise, sets down a manual Description of Ruland's Crocus of Metals, but it
is lame and unprofitable for Aqua Benedicta, and therefore less useful for
Libavius himself, that great Chemical Practitioner. It is true there was a
process of Ruland's the Son, taken out of [his] seventh Disputation, which was
in my custody, and (being by theft obtained) was afterward by Libavius vended
for the Fathers invention. Among the many forms, or methods of operating, most
exquisite of all, is this which follows, being very often approved by use, but
it requires an expert Artificer and diligent Preparer

Preparation of Crocus of Metals.
Pure Nitre, well cleansed from all impurities a pound or two: Of Antimony a
like quantity: First, with very gentle heat make the Nitre flow in an Iron Pan,
but so, as the Pan be not vehement hot, or any ways red; remove it from the
fire, and add the Antimony exeedingly well reduced to Powder. If they suffer
themselves to mix without inflammation and noise, it will be very well. If
otherwise, forbear a little, till the Nitre be come to a convenient coolness,
at first pour on the Powder very leisurely, afterward it will abide a more
hasty commixtion; but you must be sure to stir these very well with an Iron
Spattle continually. When all these are exactly mixed, set fire of the whole
with a live Coal, or rather red hot Iron; when it makes a noise the Crocus of
Metals is prepared. The Antimony thus elaborated, is left very like to a Crocus.

Use of Crocus of Metals.
The Use, and Dose is general, from six granes to twelve, macerated, and in
urgent necessity boiled, with Water, Wine, Beer, Methegline, or any other
Liquor, which may be convenient for the Disease, whereto it is applied: of
which Solution, or Decoction, may be taken from ss. to ij. either hot or cold.
It is called Aqua Benedicta, because with the greatest safety it may be given
to the Sick even in Diseases uncureable, either by it self, or mixed with other
Liquors, as is declared by Ruland himself, and verified by daily Experience.

1. It is given, in Dolours of the head, often occasioned by Impurities of the
Ventricle, with Water of Buglosse, Verveine and Betony.

2. In the Epilepsy, with Water of Peony, Flowers of Tilia, black Cherryes, and
conserve of Lavender.

3. In the Bastard, and Real Plourisy, with Water of Carduus Maria, Cardu.
Bened. and Rhoeados.

4. In Inveterate Coughs, Asthma, Inflammation of the Lungs, and Quinsey, with
Water of Violets, Coltsfoot, and Hyssop.

5. In Hypocondriack Melancholy, with Water of Maidenhair, or a Decoction of
Ceterach.

6. In all Affects of the Ventricle, with Water of Mint, and Wormwood.

7. In all Fevers, especially Quotidians, and intermitting Tertians, with Water
of Century Minor, ^ardu. Bened. Succory and Sow-thistle.

8. In the Fest, where from the beginning Vomits are necessary, with Water of
Meadow-sweet, Cardu. B^ned. Asn-leaves, Angelina, Scorzonera, Goats-ear.

9. In preservation from the Gout, and all its Species, with Water of wild
Betony.

10. In all coagulation of blood, in what part soever of Man's Body, Before
Suppuration.
if not Suppurated, with Water of Chervill and the lesser Comfry.

These Vomitorys ought to be given in the beginning of a Disease. Moreover, the
use of this is excellent in Clysters: For if ss. or j. of Crocus of Metals, be
macerated, or boiled in appropriate Water, or Wine, and this, when streined, be
mixed with a sufficient quantity of Decoction of emollient Simples to make a
Clyster, it will be very commodious. See Quercetanus, chap. 7. Lastly, of
Crocus of Metals may be prepared a famous Ophthalmick Water; of which see
Quercetanus in the same place.

Dr. Hartmanus his Aqua Benedicta.
In Medicinal use, where Vomitorys are chiefly necessary, the Water, which,
according to Rulana's institution, I call blessed, is of singular use; of
which, in his Physical Centurys he makes such frequent mention. The preparation
of which I described the last Summer, in Tyrocinium Chymicum (set forth by
Gluckradius) explained by me, in the twelfth Chapter, entitled Of Liver of
Antimony. Here therefore the same may properly be transferred. I have also used
this in my Physical Practice, and ingeniously confess, in Diseases requiring
the use hereof, nothing has been more familiarly used by me; moreover, praised
be God for his Divine Benediction, which, I may truly say, has always
attended me in exhibiting this most noble Medicine.

Yet of equal Virtue to this, is a Simple infusion of Glass of Antimony by it
self, without any other addition, either of Fluor, or Borax, or any other thing
whatsoever, prepared in white Rhenish-wine. Briefly thus j. or ij. of Glass of
Antimony, infuse it in 3. lib. or 4. lib. of Wine, in a Glass firmly closed,
set it for a certain time in the Sun, until the Liquor be tinged with a
Citrine color: afterward filter it, What kinds of Diseases are cured by
Vomiting.
and keep it in a Glass exactly stopped. The use of this is from j. to iij. or v.
at most, given in distilled appropriate Water; this is usually given to provoke
Vomiting with very good success, especially in Diseases which, neither will,
nor can, be otherwise cured, than by Vomiting: Such are Coughs, Pleurisys,
Quinsys, want of Appetite, inordinate Belchings, and infinite others, which are
harbored in the first Region of the Belly. Moreover, this is wonderful, in
infusing of Glass of Antimony with Wine, that the repeating the infusion once
or twice, does not exhaust its emetick Virtue, An admirable property in Glass
of Antimony.
but it may be infused again, and again, almost ad infinitum, and still applied
as at first, for it is not plainly discernable, at least very little, to loose
of its former Virtue. Where its Cathartick force consists.
Whence it is sufficiently manifest, that its Cathartick property, is more
especially placed in the Spiritual Substantiality, than in the Corporality: The
Spirits being the Administrators, and Effecters of these Operations. When as
this powder of Glass of Antimony shall, by very often Infusing, be rendered more
slow in Operation, if it be dried and again melted into Glass, it afresh, by
infusion, recovers its pristine virtue, and so may perpetually be of use. Which
I thought good to signify to the Ingenious.

But I require, A Caution
as indeed I always did, that as these things are diligently and exquisitly
prepared, they also with Prudence, and great Circumspection may be Administered;
because they are evident and swift in Operation, therefore they require the
greater knowledge in exhibiting Moreover, there is also a Syrup confected of
Aqua Bened. in like cases familiarly used by me: its preparation is thus.

Dr. Hartman's Vomitive Syrup.
. Glass of Antimony, or Crocus of Antimony (for either of them will serve,
being of like virtue,) impregnated with a tincture, as is showed above, vj. of
odoriferous Rose Water ss. Powder of Cinnamon ij. Leave these for four and
twenty hours in a hot place, afterward strein it, in which, when streined,
dissolve of most white Sugar viij. Boil it to a convenient Consistency, and
according to Art make a Syrup.

Note:

Cautions in exhibiting Aqua Benedicta, and others in this place exceeding
necessary.
1. There are two sorts that need relief by Vomiting, which are not alike able
to ^ear it: Some who easily vomit, having a strong Stomach, whose passages of
the Breast are large and wide, their Head sound, accustomed to Vomiting, and in
whom the sickly matter easily comes upward.

There are others, straight Breasted, who by Pysicians are called (...), weak
and wanting strength, and who very difficultly Vomit; also such as are
obnoxious to Cephalalgia, Haemorthagia, Suffusion of the Eyes, Diseases of the
Lungs, Swounings, and Suffocation of the Matrix; such must not rashly be
provoked to Vomit; which (...)-chemists and Empericks, too often do; and
audaciously and wickedly sport themselves in others ruin.

3. When the Physician is about to exhibit Aqua Benedicta, and other Vomitorys,
(...) ^ld accurately consider circumstances; that he give not too much or too
little; that it be seasonably administered; that, that be not first done which
should be list, etc.

4. The most convenient time to exhibit Vomitorys, is in the increase of the
Moon: for then the humors ripen and swell, which safely and easily are
excluded by Vomiting.

5. The Sick in time of Vomiting must keep himself very warm, and foment his
Vitals with hot cloths: Lastly, by taking cold, griping in the Guts, to (...)
seen, is procured.

6. Beer must not be given presently after taking the Von^, but after the sick
has vomited once or twice, it may. For otherwise the Vomitory force is
hindered, not increased.

7. When the evil is pretty well come up, and bitter matter does also come
forth: (...) may more largely be given, and toward the end to wash the stomach,
and that the remaining evil may the better be expelled.

8. But the Beer must be blood-warm, for so it causes nauseousness; not hot
because therein the stomach takes delight; neither must Wine be given.

9. A draught of sharp Broth is very beneficial, if it be very seasonably
exhibited. For sharp things cause the Relics of evil to precipitate the
inferior parts, and are afterward expelled thereby.

10. In Choleric Natures, the Choler being last vomited, must not be suddenly
stopped, not permitted to abide, and gather again in the stomach, but daily part
thereof must be expelled, either by repeating the Vomitory, or by exhibiting
precipitating Purges, or Diuretics, not Volatile, or Spirituous, but such as
are sharp and salt, as Wormwood-wine, Infusion of Wormwood, Binde-weed, Carduus
Bened. Scena, Rubarb, Century.

11. In the use of Vomitorys, the sick must not sleep too soon, especially in
such Bodies as abound with Choler, least by sleep the Choler ascend to the
Brain. Yet when the sick have sufficiently vomited, sleep may commodiously be
used.

12. When strength is decayed by Vomiting, hot Wine, as a confortative may
safely be given; with some drops of Oil of Cloves applied warm with a
Linen Cloth to the bottom of the stomach.

13. After Vomiting Confortatives are required, especially such as be sharp. In
this case excellent is Coral fermented, and mixed with Conserve of Roses.

14. The sick, by intervals, may eat a piece of the upper crust of Bread
tosted, and macerated for a quarter of an hour in Wine, or Beer, or any other
Broth; and in case of abundance of Choler, it will be best to sprinkle Nutmeg,
and Cinnamon upon the Tossed.

15. If Vomiting, after the exhibiting these, be too inordinate, the present
remedy is a draught of Milk boiled with Bread, or a spoonful of Syrup of
Mastick, with Spirit of the same, or else old Treacle; Or apply a plaster of a
crust of Bread to the stomach, or a Cataplasme of Ferment and Mint. If these be
not sufficiently efficacious, the present and infallible remedy is, to give a
Dose of Laudanum Opiate. Other Vomitories see Practica Chymiatrica of our
Edition, Page

III. A Resolving Mundefying Cathartick of greater virtue, than such as are of
Scammony and Coloquintida (a).
Observations.
1. EVery Laxative, according to Paracelsus, hath-three principal properties,
viz. it frees wearied Nature, by Evacuation, and comforts it when debilitated,
also it mitigates (b).

2. Purgations, which infer dangerous Symptoms, from the venomous Relics (c)
of Proprieties, and cause dejection of natural Vigor, must always be avoided.

3. In the true method of Purging, (in which we esteem not the number of
dejections or abundance; power and excellency of faculties, but rather respect
the removing the Roots, and Impurities of Diseases, by remitting Symptoms and
strengthening Nature) we judge Remedies have performed their Office, when
either by absolute (d) Consumption, or sensible Excretion they take away
Impurities, whether Urine, Dolours, or Dejection be moved thereby.

4. Catharticks, operate not according to the force of the quality, (e) viz. of
Hear, Cold, Dryness, and Moisture, but by an occult Propriety, and Specific
form; namely a propriety of the whole substance, which by the impulse of heat,
and incitement of the Celestial power, expells the humor familiar, and
affinity to it self, by Excretion.

5. In Diseases Chronical, (f) Critical and of long continuance, not
Purgations, but Arcanums (g) must be used, for these are not cured, but by
Spagirick degrees (h).

6. In Chronical Diseases, if Purgations be instituted, they must be done
slowly, leisurely, and with time.

7. Although strong, and violent Medicaments, must not rashly be used, not the
Body be inconsiderately moved, as Plato advises in Timaeum, (i) and long before
him Hippocrates, who refused to cure Democritus his Friend and Familiar, with
Hellebore, and such like, affirming, that no Medicament was solutive, that did
not in some measure participate of the force and substance of humane Bodies:
And for this cause Avicen rightly says, Medicines (k), although they be not
venomous, yet (l), to take them, may be troublesome to Nature: Nevertheless the
now fixed roots of Diseases require Antimonial, Vitriolate, and Mercurial
Purgations; we should do well (m) to abstain from these, Intemperance the Nurse
of Physicians.
unless a better and more harmless (n) way of preparing them were found out,
were it not by the Intemperance of this present Age, which despise our
Forefathers Frugality, we are compelled, and also invited to the use thereof.

(a) Mercurials and Antimonials rather, but Purgations of Scammony, and
Coloquintida, are useful.

(b) Both Disease and Symptoms.

(c) Or, not removed, or not corrected.

(d) Universal.

(e) The only quality of the Cathartick is not communicated by the Liqu^r of
Infusion, but is resident, and settled in a certain peculiar Substance, which
accompanies the purging property, and every Operation. 1. It may be questioned,
touching the subject of the purging faculty, wherein it consists?

Not in the quality alone, because that moves the faculty, Where the Subject of
the parging faculty consists.
and is in separated Elements: So are the Elements of Wine, burning Fire, or
^ery Air, Phlegmatic water, and Terrestrial Salt of Tartar, of which conjoined
the Substance of the Wine consists, by the propriety of temperament it is
moderately bot, viz. it heats, but inflames not. But this fire is in the Spirit
or separated Air, wherein is no temperateness, but is a pure quality; such as
is found in fire it self. Therefore this faculty is not at all in a
Temperament: for Temperament is a connection of many Contraries. It therefore is
in some Hypopatical principle or in Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury: it is rather in
Mercurial Salt, than in others, this appears in purging Extracts made with
Spirit of Vinega^. For these do not equally purge with extracts otherwise made,
for example, Sulphur when extracted with Spirit of Vinegar, has a remaining
Salt: but the Diaphoretick force of Sulphur must be extracted with Spirit of
Wine.

2. It may be also questioned, how these purging Medicaments operate? 1. (...).
(...), they attract the humors according the Sentence of Galen. 2. They excite
the expulsive faculty faculty. 3. By reason of Similitude of Substance, they do
either in quantity, or quality, How these purging Medicines aperate.
augment the humors, with which, Nature being overburthened, endeavors
expulsion. 4. Or else Solution, with its Mercurial Virtues, attended with
Arsenical, Antimonial Spirits, is appointed to perform this office.

(f) In which, Purgations are of no force.

(g) Specific Medicaments, Spagirically prepared.

(h) Operations.

(i) Almost at the end of its (...).

(k) To wit, more strong purgations.

(l) In the total.

(m) Viz. From such as are Crude and not rightly prepared.

(n) Chemical.

Mineral Turbith (a).
Because, among sundry most excellent purging Medicaments, of which we in this
place treat, we have first pitched our intentions upon Mercury, the impurities
of which although they be very deeply (b) mixed, yet by an ingenuous preparation
may be removed (c); we shall proceed in describing the use thereof.

It is hitherto vulgarly thought the Hermetick Philosophers, only used this
Mercury as a Servant, (d) and fugitive Slave: neither can it be judged, that
any one does understand by their Philosophical Writings, that they without any
detriment would drink this Mercury. The true Philosophic, and most noble
Lympha, rarely discovers her self to many, nor will she attend upon any but
true Philosophers. Although she be sought of many, yet very few there be that
find her. In Cabalistical Philosophy, this is denoted by the Virgin Mary (as
our Savior is denoted by the Ferment of Medicine), because they affirm that
she, before, in, and after the Birth, was always a pure Virgin. But to our
Medicinal Institution.

This Vulgar (e) Mercury in a certain preparation, dose, and mixture, becomes a
divine (f) Medicine, and in very many Diseases, far more efficaciously
operates, (if it may be believed to be the same,) than that purified Panacea of
former times, (g) which is prepared of powder of native Cinnabar, (h) most
finely beaten, with Saffron, and Shell-fishes mixed; in the trial of which, by
applying a small part to the fire, I have very many times found, the crude
Mercury to ascend in a fume, which has whitened a piece of Gold Coin.

In preparing Mercury, diverse ways have been experimented by Chemical
Practitioners: Some of which (and not evilly) have endeavored to perform it by
Spirit of common Salt Aquafortis, and Oil of Vitriol, others by it self, or
with Flints, which is done in (i) length of time.

(a) Every purging Medicament which is made of Mercury, With many Chemists
Turbith, or Turpetum is nothing else, but precipitate Mercury.

(b) More opinion, than really so in it self.

(c) By a dexterous hand joined with legitimate Operation; these are the words
of Severinus in Idea Medicinae.

(d) Because it is used for preparation of Gold.

(e) That which is brought from Spain, or Hungaria is best. There is some
brought from Poland, which is too watrish, and is far inferior to the Spanish.
The best Mercury is thus known, A Trial of the best Mercury.
put j. of it in a pure Silver Spoon, and over Coals let it evaporate, if it
leave a yellow or white spot in the Spoon, it is certainly good: but that which
blacks the Spoon, ought to be purged, before it be applied to medicinal use.

(f) It cannot commodiously be mixed with Conserve, because without some
chewing it can hardly be taken; all precipitates chewed hurt the Teeth.

(g) Anwaldinus had the true Panacea, Panacea of Anwaldinus.
which he exhibited, it was indeed made by another, of whom he received it, and
brought it with him out of Italy, and with the same he cured many grievous
Diseases.

Afterward, that at length the true Panacea might not be wholly lost, he
compounded another Medicine, which Crollius speaks of, and to it added a small
part of the true Panacea, by which means the said Medicine is said to
participate of the virtues of the true Panacea.

(h) Minium.

(i) The precipitation of Mercury with Flints, is with ij. or iij. at most,
with almost 2^, of small stones like Beans, which must be so long retained in a
fire of Sand, until by its often Circulations, it at length be plainly
precipitated, and stick to the Flints, from which the Mercury may be separated,
by shaking the stones together. Dose from four granes to six.

In Precipitating Mercury, there is not a more secure and commodious way, than
this following.

Precipitate Mercury.
Mercury well purified ss (a) upon it pour rectified Oil of Sulphur, (b) per
Campane, (for this Oil, before all other corrosive Oils, and far more
powerfully, than Oil of Vitriol, (c) precipitates and coagulates it, so as it
will endure the stronger (d) fire) this Composition for two days digest in
Sand, afterward by Retort fortified with Luting (e) leisurely distill (f) it,
the Liquor that comes off, again pour on, and repeat this the third time.

The fourth time there may be again poured on a little fresh Oil of Sulphut,
(g) and about the end, increase the fire that the Retort may wax hot, and in
distilling so abstract it, as by the Distillation the Mercury may be (h)
precipitated into a white Mass. Afterward break the Vessel, (i) and take out
the matter, and upon a Marble grind it very well, then with distilled
Rainwater hot, wash away its Saltness diligently in a Glass with a wide mouth:
work it very well for four hours together, see it be all well under the water,
before you pour it off: This edulcoration must be so often repeated, till no
saltness be perceived in the water poured on, and the Mercury remain converted
to a most yellow-powder, (k) which afterward, being first dried, put it to a
Phial with a long (...) which must be closed with Bombace, and placed over a
most vehement (l) fire in Sand to digest for eight days, if it happen any of
the Mercury be not sufficiently precipitate, it will spontaneously sublime it
self in the neck of the Glass, which afterward, with an Iron Ring heat red hot,
break off, and the upper part in which the affixt crude Mercury sticks, warily
and gently take off, but the mass remaining in the bottom take out, and upon it
thrice burn Spirit of Wine, afterward carefully put it up for use. Thus
prepared it may securely be inwardly given.

I have sometimes precipitated Amalgama's of Gold and Silver, apart, for two
years, and although it was reduced to a perfect red Powder, yet it was not at
all duly fixed, nor could it, without further preparation, be safely applied to
medicinal use.

Who so would prepare a precipitate of this kind, by Amalgamations, in three or
four Months, with the adhibiting of due proportion of fire, (m) he will see
fair shoots, like unto Cypress growing in the Glass, (n) and by often taking
out the matter and grinding it, he will have by the violence of the Fire an
Earthy-matter, (o) which afterward by Oil of Sulphur, as abovesaid, may be
precipitated, (p) and fixed, into a yellow powder.

Observations.
1. A sign that it is well precipitated is, if it be strongly (q) stirred with
Gold, and the Gold be not at all made white thereby, as is wont to be when it
is only touched with crude Mercury.

2. It is not needful that it be altogether fixed, (r) for so it looses its
purging Virtue.

3. There is no precipitate which may not be reduced, (s) if it be plainly
fixed, it cannot operate in man's Body, (t) by reason of its Crudity, (u) it
performs its Operations.

Virtues.
Mercury (w) is the Balsome of Nature, in which is an incarnative virtue,
whereby it wonderfully restores and purifies the microcosmick Body (x) infected
with Lues venerea: for when the whole mass of blood all over the body is
corrupted and infected with Seminarys of many Diseases, then these Mettalicks,
(y) ratified like fire, acquire such force of penetrating, that they pass
through the whole habit of the Body.

1. It is a Remedy against Infirmities caused by putrefaction of humors, and in
desperate Diseases, (z) there is not any found that more speedily yields relief.

2. It drives out all vicious humors and defluxions (aa) of the Brain.

3. It purifies the blood in the Veins, and the marrow (bb) in the Bones.

4. In the Dropsy it is an appropriate Remedy, for it has an Expulsive virtue
(cc).

5. In the Gout, it is given with Pills of Ruffus, (dd) and Oil of Honey.

6. In the Pleurisy, with a specific Vehicle (ee).

7. It is excellent against Poisons and Scabs (ff).

8. In all Fevers, continual, and intermitting, with Pills of Ruffus, always
adding four or five drops of Oil of Vitriol.

9. It is a general Remedy in Lues-venerea, (gg) which of the most grievous
Lues is worthily called the only (...): for it heals, and eradicates all
venereal Ulcers, and such like Defluxions, by re-iterating the Dose.

10. In the Jaundies (hh) nothing more excellent.

11. It is also given in the Pest, with Pestilential Pills of Rufsus.

12. In Malignant, (ii) and Ferid Ulcers, mixed with purging Ointments.

Paracelsus in curing Lues-venerea, exhibited it with Electuary of juice of
Roses, and Phaedro with Spirit of Tartar, most happily removed Venereal tumors.

Heuserus p. m. (kk) affirmed to me, that he, in his most frequent exhibiting
thereof, never found any detriment to ensue, unless sometimes in Choleric
vomitings the sick have complained of Dolor, and sometimes of some heat in the
throat, and mouth, which presently by applying a Gargarisme, (ll) or if in the
throat, by the use of Terra Sigillata, was removed.

Dose and Use.
From 3, 4, 5, to 6. granes especially in strong bodies.

It is given with appropriate Pills (mm).

In Dolours of the Head, with Pills of Cochium.

In Dolours of the Arms, with Pills of Hermodactyls (nn).

Or mixed with purging Extracts.

It better operates in Juice of Liquorsh, than in Treacle: It is also given in
Conserve of Roses, (oo) or Sugar of Roses, or it may be swallowed in a piece of
white Bread, with a little Wine, drunk after the swallowing it.

(a) Purification of Mercury is described below, in Arcanum corallinum. The
same may be done with a ^ixivium of Calxvive, and Ashes of Harts-ease, or else,
a Lixivium of Ashes of Sope-wort. The like is performed by distilled Vinegar,
and common Salt, by often stirring the Mercury in them, and often washing it
from its filth, by changing the Liquors. See my Notes in Tyrocinium Chymicum of
Beguinus, set forth by Gluckradius, lib. 2. cap. 13. Yet better, and more
convenient is the instituted Purgations following.

A most excellent Purgation of Mercury.
Crude Mercury, what quantity you please, in a long Glass no part cut off, pour
on the best Spirit of Wine, that it may cover it two fingers; afterward
between your hands shake it very well together, diligently minding to keep the
Orifice of the Glass well stopped, with your thumb; and you will see all the
Mercutial blackness, separated in the Spirit of Wine, and to the sides of the
Vessel; the Spirit of Wine, infected with this foulness, pour off, and pour on
fresh Spirit of Wine, and as before by shaking separate the remaining
blackness. Repeat the operation till the blackness be wholly removed, which in
some Mercurys, (which are very foul) is almost a fourth part of their weight:
Draw off the Spirit of Wine, by distillation in Balneo, leaving the blackness
in the bottom. This Spirit of Wine, as also others thus used, carefully keep.
By this purgation, the Mercury as a witness of its purity, famously discovers
it self, in a most bright and perfect Celestial Color. But the blackness must
not be wholly thrown away, for it is useful in killing Lice and Worms, and may
be used in a Girdle to that purpose, or as shall be otherwise thought fit.

(b) How Oil of Sulphur per Campane is made, is described in Tyrocinium
Chymicum, etc. lib. 2. cap. 4. Entitled, Spirit of Sulphur.

(c) For Sulphur, seems to have more apt Spirits for precipitation, which is a
certain kind of sixation. Yet equally sufficient is Spirit of Vitriol; for it
wants not power of fixing. Spirit of Vitriol and Sulphur differ not.
Therefore Spirit of Vitriol and Spirit of Sulphur are almost one, and the
same: for from the same sharp principle, Mercurial Vitriols are derived.

(d) After absolute precipitation.

(e) That needs not.

(f) With gentle heat.

(g) In a new and excellently well luted Retort.

(h) May be left.

(i) With an Iron ring red hot, or with Sulphureal threads

(k) It will presently wax yellow, where the Water is poured on.

(l) Not very vehement, least it again flow.

(m) As is taught in Tyrocinium Chymicum, etc. cap. 19. lib. 2. Entitled,
Another precipitation of Mercury.

(n) Viz. from the Amalgama it self.

(o) Remaining in the bottom.

(p) Other and various precipitates may hereto be transferred from Tyrocinium,
etc. lib. 2. cap. 13. Also there is a famous precipitate described in Disputa.
Chymicotechn. by Rhenan in Lib. Solis e puteo emergentis, etc. Thesi. 120. page
34 and 35. of the same Book. Here in this place we shall also set down
excellent Precipitates, and of great virtue.

A famous Precipitation of Mercury.
First make an Aquafortis, of Nitre 2 ^. Vitriol 1 ^. Alum not calcined vj.
Common Salt vj. mix them. Distill it, and in the usual manner make a Water, as
is described in Tyrocinium lib. 3. cap. 2. Mercury purified what quantity you
will, dissolve it with the Water as much as you can, (Note, that the Mercury
must be dissolved with the Water as much as possibly it can be, otherwise it
will not freely be precipited,) the Mercury being thus dissolved, pour upon it
of cold fountain Water ij. or iij. and leave it in a still place without fire
for certain hours, that the Mercury may spontaneously be precipited. When the
Mercury has thus precipited it self, pour on good store of cold Water, leave
it to settle for a time, then power off the Water, and pour on more, and leave
it again as before, this do so long, as till no Acrimony in the precipitate
Mercury can at all be perceived. Then take it out, and in a Bolt-head with a
large Orifice without an Alembeck, digest it with most gentle fire, until it
be dry. The dried powder take out, and to one part of this precipitate, add
four parts of most sharp distilled Vinegar, put it in a Cucurbit well closed,
and digest it for one day or two in Balneo, afterward without distillation of
the Vinegar, in a Bolt-head with a large Orifice, dry it as before, which when
dried keep for use. Dose from one grane to five or six. If necessity require
one grane may be given to Infants, that have obstructions of the Belly. No less
famous is the Precipitation following, though compounded, yet it is of singular
virtue.

Solar precipitate Mercury.
of pure Gold, excellently well purified ss. reduce it into thin small pieces,
and in the usual manner dissolve it in Aqua Regis, with common Salt, not
Ammoniack, for that renders the Mercury volatile; Glass of Antimony ss. and
Mercury well cleansed iij. Dissolve these in Aquafortis apart, and in several
Glasses, and so as all the Solutions may be very clear, and transparent. All
these waters mix, and by Alembeck abstract the Water, and pour on fresh Aqua
Regis, draw it off again and again, and so continue repeating the Operation,
till the Precipitate, being put upon an Iron plate red hot, yield no fume at
all. Which sign appearing, diligently in a Crucible calcine the whole
Precipitate; for so all the Spirits of Aqua Regis, will be expelled and
dissipated. Afterward with it six times distill Spirit of Wine, that the
Mercury may be wholly fixed. Lastly gently calcine it.

1.

2. In the Dropsy it is a great Comforter, because it expells the Water, and
dryes up the Fountain.

3. It helps such as are afflicted with the Falling Sickness.

4. It resists the Cholick.

5. It mitigates the Quartane.

6. It is proper for the Jaundies.

7. Ectichiomen, Cancer, Fistula's, and other Ulcers it cures.

8. In the Pestilence, and Poisons it is helpful.

Aurum-vita.
Aquafortis made of Vitriol, Nitre and Alum iiij. Salt Ammoniack j. mix it,
and distill it by Alembeck in Sand, as Aqua-regis is made. In ij. of this
dissolve of fine Gold ff. keep the Solution in a hot place: then in 1 lib. of
common Aquafortis, dissolve of crude Mercury well cleansed vj. Afterward mix
the Solutions of Gold and Mercury together, and in a little time all will
appear very black, then by Alembeck in Sand distill it with gentle heat,
increase the fire gradually, till what is in the bottom begins to be red, and
the Spirits are seen to evaporate, afterward augment the heat, that the
Cucurbit in the bottom may be very hot. Take it out, and the powder that shall
happen to be sublimed, if any be, mix with it, by stirring it with an Iron rod,
and in a Crucible calcine it till the Spirits be well separated: Then with
sweet Water remove all its Saltness; Lastly, after corrected Spirit of Wine
has been distilled with it, by often cohobating, keep the powder of
Aurum-vitae for use. Which is famous in the Pestilence, and other Diseases very
many.

Yellow Diaphoretick Precipitate.
Mercury by common Salt and Vitriol sublimed, as is described in Tyrocihium
Chymicum, etc. lib. 2. cap. 18. Entitled Sublimate Mercury. of this Sublimate
Mercury, what quantity you please, boil it in fountain Water, with very gentle
fire: then in this Solution being very clear, and pute, ( viz. separated from
its feces, either by inclination, or by filtring,) leisurely pour off Oil of
Tartar made of its own Salt per deliquium, a sufficient quantity, and presently
the Mercury will precipate the bottom, like powder of a yellow Color. Draw off
the Water by Inclination, and edulcorate the powder by often washing it in
distilled rain, or fountain Water, or until the Water, with which it is washed,
retein no more favor of sharpness; lastly, diligently, and with very gentle
heat dry the powder, and keep it for use.

The virtue of this is only Diaphoretick, Dose and Use.
Dose from 5, or, 6, to 7. granes, in Treacle or Mithridate, or the extract of
either of them, it must be taken in a morning fasting twice or thrice a week.
It wonderfully dissolves all obstructions, especially in the Jaundies,
therefore may safely be used instead of a digestive, being exceeding profitable
and necessary for to open stoppages of the interior bowels, and very often in
opening obstructions of the most grievous Evil. Moreover, against Venoms it is
a powerful Remedy. But how this Precipitate, with Sublimate Mercury should be
transferred to a Sweetness, and afterward to a purging property, shall be shown
a little after, when we treat of Panchymagogon dulce. After these forms, may be
made a Precipitate more proper to Lues-venerea, of which I have made mention in
my Notes on Tyrocinium Cyhmicum, etc. lib. 2. cap. 13. The genuine description
wereof may be found in I he^bus Medico-chymicis, etc. Which here also follows,

Anti-venereal Precipitate Mercury.
Mercury well cleansed 1 lib. Dissolve it in a sufficient quantity of
Aqua-sortis, made with Vitriol 3 lib. and Salt Peter 2 lib. Afterward distill
it by Alembeck in Sand leisurely, that the Water and Spirit may come forth. But
as soon as you perceive the Spirit to arise, increase the fire, that the glass
may be a little hot, and appear somewhat redish; for, so in the Alembeck, and
to the sides of the Cucurbit, the unprofitable yellow, and duskisn flowers will
elevate themselves from the Mercury. Cool the Vessel, and take out the matter;
break the Cucurbit, and rejecting the unprofitable flowers sublimed to the
sides, you will find in the bottom a red powder, which in an Earthen Platter,
wash so long with hot Water, as till no sharpness at all remain. To this
powder, when dried, pour Oil of Salt of Tartar, till it be covered two fingers,
abstract the Phlegm by distillation in Sand thrice, but the third time
increase the fire, that the Cucurbit may with the heat be somewhat red, and by
this means, a small portion of the Mercury, crude or living will ascend, which
from the residue must be diligently separated. The matter remaining in the
bottom take out, and beat it grossly to Powder, and with sweet Water hot, wash
it often, till no Saltness or any other Impurity do remain, and the powder be
left red and clear, which dry, and in a Cucurbit imbibe it with Water of Eggs,
and seven times abstract the same Water from it by Alembeck in Sand. What is
left in the bottom, again wash often with hot Water, and pour upon it seven
times, rectifyed Spirit of Wine, then distill it, repeating the Cohobations as
often. This being done, take out the Powder, and pour on Alchohol of Wine, that
it may be well moistened therewith, Red Alcohol.
then set fire to it, and keep it stirring with an Iron rod, until by burning
the Alcohol be wholly consumed.

Dose of this Precipitate three or five granes. To which for a while may be
added of prepared Scammony, the Preparation of which I describe below, of
Purging Medicaments, or of my Panchymagogon, as much as shall be sufficient to
make it up into Pills. Also it may be mixed with juice of Liquorish. This
precipitate in the Dropsy is a principal help if exhibited (as was first by mey
in 3 or 5 granes of Diagridium. It is necessary in this Disease first to
exhibit Turbith, afterward Diuretics may be applied. Caution.
For this is always minded by the skilful Physician, first he carefully
endeavors to expel the Water by the Excrements, in exhibiting a Cathartick
three or four times, certain days together, or by intermission, afterward by
Urine: otherwise the whey-like humor is devolved to the Reins, and passages of
the Bladder; from whence afterward, most pertinacious Symptoms are wont to
arise very often. Of all which, we treat below in the Hydr^pical Specific. But
how some Precipitates are wont to be made, which are of various Colors, I
think good in this place to set down their Way of Preparation.

1. Mercurius Gryseus: only purging.
Common precipitate Mercury, yellow, or white, wash it often with Rose. water,
then dry it; afterward imbibe it with the best Spirit of Wine, and add equal
parts of Camphire dissolved in Spirit of Wine, join the Solutions, and with
gentle heat, by distillation draw off the Spirit of Wine, to a dryness: and so
you will have Mercurius Gryseus. Dose of this from three granes to six, mixed
with Extract of Treacle, and exhibited six hours before the coming of the Fit,
dot^ wonderfully repel all Fevers, operating only downward. Also in the Pest,
and other Epidemical Diseases, especially in the English Sweeting Sickness, it
is a precious Anti^te.

2. Incarnative precipitate Mercury.
Dissolve j. of Quicksilver well cleansed, in ij. of Aquafortis, to the
Solution add of common water hot iij. And afterward pour on so much of the
fresh Urine of a sound Man, as may be sufficient to moisten the Mercury. And
the Mercury will be precipitated Incarnate. Which must be often edulcorated
with Water; it only works downward. Dose from 6. to 11. granes.

3. Yellow Precipitate.
In like manner pour common Water, upon Mercury which has been first dissolved
in common Aquafortis, afterward leisurely add corrected Oil of Tartar, (drop
by drop) and the Mercury will be precipitate, of a dark yellow Color like
Lome; which must by simple Water be well edulcorated from its corrosives: this
also operates in the Body only by expelling the impurities through the
inferior parts. Dose from 6. to 10. granes.

4. Green Precipitate.
Dissolve Quicksilver well cleansed in common Aquafortis, iij. Also dissolve
ss. of Coper in the same. Join the Solutions, and in Sand distill off the
Aquafortis, toward the end, urge the Fire somewhat more vehemently, that the
greatest parts of the Spirits may be removed. What is left in the bottom, dry
and digest with Spirit of Vinegar, for one day and night. Lastly, boil it that
the most powerful part of the Mercury may be dissolved in the Vinegar: the
Vinegar impregnated gently distill in Balneo, and the green Precipitate will
remain in the bottom. This must not be washed, but exactly dried. It is a
Specific in the virulent Gonorrhea, even in that which is declining to
Lues-venerea. Dose from 2, 3, to 8. granes. Although the Gonorrhea be seen to
cease, yet by the exhibiting this Specific it returns. Therefore convenient
Doses must for certain days be re-iterated, until all the flux cease, and be
perfectly removed: for, this Medicine, both moves the Gonorrhea, and also takes
it away. See Practica Chymiatrica of our Edition, page. (...) Of Luesvenerea.

Note: This Caution of Mercury and Antimony.

Mercury hurts Choleric persons, Caution.
because very much it attracts the Humidities to it self, which is plainly seen
in Ulcers, and Affects of the Internal parts. So as when this Medicine is
removed, the Choler more violently afflicts. But what Mercury does in Choleric
persons, the same does Antimony in Phlegmatic; therefore these Medicaments,
can seldom or never answer the end, if unadvisedly exhibited.

(q) For by this means the Mercury looses nothing of its pristine nature, it
had with Gold. The precipitate is therefore better, and may more securely be
inwardly taken into the Body.

(r) That it may abide a vehement burning.

(s) To its former shape, to volatility.

(t) By purging.

(u) Not of the total, and natural crudity, but somewhat diminished, the Salt
Spirits, by which it is either precipitated, or sublimed, do effect the same.

(w) Rightly prepared.

(x) Especially.

(y) And of the Salts cooperating.

(z) Viz. That is either Purging or Resolving.

(aa) Which it also caus^th, being unseasonably exhibited; especially if it
provoke Salivations, where they are not required. For, unless in the Venereal
Disease, all Salivations are Enemies to the Brain.

(bb) And purges out the latent evil in the Muscles, Skin, and under the Skin.

(cc) The Whey or Water.

(dd) Rather in Pills of Hermodactyles. Pills of Russus out of Egineta lib. 2.
cap. 36.. Aloes, Ammoniack, of each j. Myrrh ss. with juice of Lemmons make it
up into a Mass.

(ee) With Water of Flowers of Corn Poppy, Carduus Bened. and Carduus Maria.
Mercury precipitate with Gold, is chiefly conducible to the Pleurisy and
Asthma. In strong Constitutions the Dose is 2. granes the first day, the second
day 4. and the third day 6. in Extract or Pills of Agarick, as much as shall be
convenient to make them up into Pills. Also in Infants that are afflicted with
Coughs, and Shortness of breath, or fullness of the Precordia 's, (Hertzgespan)
this is wonderful profitable: if the first day be exhibited half a grane, the
seconday a grane, the third day a grane and half, in some Pectoral Syrup.

(ff) And the Pestilence.

(gg) The Virtue of this consists not in Anointing, or Fumigation, as is usual
with the Italians.

(hh) Yet the yellow Diaphoretick Precipitate, of which above, does in the
Jaundies wonderfully help.

(ii) This Precipitate in Malignant and fetid Ulcers, is better mixed with
common Oil, than with purging Unguents; and that may be thus done: common Oil,
or Oil of Roses 1 lib. Mercury precipitate j. boil them in an Iron Pan, with
gentle heat, until the Oil be of an obscure dark color, afterward strein it,
and keep it for use in a convenient Glass. This Oil mixed with Unguents, or else
by it self in Fistula's, and other Vlcerous places, admirably heals.

(kk) John Heuserus Physician to the Elector of Colen, who published Paracelsus
his Works.

(ll) With Sage, flowers of Prunella, Cervicaria, and other Astringents.

(mm) It may best be exhibited with Rosin of Scammony rightly prepared, of
which below.

(nn) Such is Vegetable Panchymagogon, described below.

(oo) Not well, because they must be chewed in the mouth, and so may cause
Salivation.

Arcanum Corallinum of Paracelsus, (a) or red Sublimate Mercury not corrosive.

Mercury 1 lib. purge it six or seven times with a (b) Lixivium of Calxvive,
and Ashes of Harts-ease; afterward with Salt and Vinegar, continue washing it,
till it have a Celestial Color, and so it will be fit for Sublimation.

of this thus purged 1 lib. Of Saltpeter (which must be diligently purified,
(c) and separated from all vulgar Salt, (d) otherwise the sublimate powder will
be above measure corrosive: a trial whether the salt be duly separated, is thus
made, if the Saltpeter be put upon an Iron plate red hot, and it all burn up
and fly away, leaving no sign of Salt remaining) and of Vitriol calcined to a
redness, (e) of each (f), 2 lib. pulverisate all these and mix them, and upon
them sprinkle most sharp distilled Vinegat, and with a wooden Pestil
incorporate them well together, till the Mercury (g) seem to be mortified:
afterward put the whole Mass into a conveniently large (h) Cucurbit, the sides
of the Cucurbit being not spotted, (i) or first wiped clean, begin the
Distillation in sand (k), at first with moderate fire one night, that the
phlegm may come forth; afterward by gradual increasing and continuing the fire
for 24. (l) hours, sublime the matter; the crude Mercury will ascend to the
head of the Alembeck, (m), with a very dark Color, in the middle of the
Alembeck the powder will be of a yellow Color, a little above the matter (n)
of a red Color; the Glass being first broke, gather all the sublimate powder,
as well the red as the yellow; and take of Saltpeter, and of Calcined Alum,
(o) of each 1 lib. (the calcination of Alum is made in a Crucible, after the
common manner, not with too vehement fire, least the spirits vanish) beat these
together, and incorporate them as before, moistening them with the phlegm of
the former distilled Vinegar, then sublime them in a new Alembeck as before: in
continuing the fire the space of 12. hours (p), the Operation is effected; and
the powder will ascend, below of a most red color, a little above that yellow,
and in the top black: After the Vessel and matter are cooled, break the Glass,
and warily take all out; that which is red, and sticks to the sides of the
Glass a little above the Caput Mortuum, is pure and fit for use (q), this keep
apart, and Edulcorate it with Cordial-waters (r); Lastly, upon it often burn
Spirit of Wine. The yellow also gather apart, and in a Crucible with moderate
heat calcine it, that it may be red, and afterward in the same manner (s)
edulcorate it.

The black feces in the top, and the Caput Mortuum in the bottom (t) throw away.

This great Secret was Invented by Paracelsus. Heuserus prepared this Sublimate
of Turbith, and in many desperate Diseases most happily used it.

Use and Dose.
In the Dropsy, French-Sckness, (u) The Gout.

Dose from 3. granes to 5. in Treacle, Juice of Roses, and Pills of Catholicon
(w).

Moreover, there are two most secret Ways of (x) preparing Mercury to be
medicinal for Man's Body.

In the first, Mercury without any addition, with certain Instruments, per se,
is reduced to a most red Cinnaber.

In the second, the corrosive spirits of Vittiol, and Salt, are mortified in
sublimate Mercury, from which strange, yet homogeneal, and simple Artifice, is
made a Crystalline powder plainly insipid: this is one of the most excellent
Catharticks in medicinal use, radically expelling all noxious humors from the
Body of Man. This seems not strange to them, who know Mercury to be the Balsom
of Nature, in which is an incarnative and regenerative Virtue, wonderfully
renewing, and purging from all Impurities.

(a) Libavius in the latter Tome of Chemical Arcanums, (evilly put together)
this Arcanum Corallinum, attributed to our Author Paracelsus, he denies to be
his; but af^ms that either Crollius, or Heuserus was the Inventor thereof,
because in Paracelsus his Works it is not so extant, and he himself makes
mention of another Coralline, in lib. 3. de male curatis aegris restituendis,
cap. 25. The relation of either of these is no Argument. Although in the
public Writings and Works of Paracelsus it be not extant, nor does agree with
the Description of that Coralline, which Paracelsus sets down in the aforesaid
lib. 3. de male curatis, etc. Yet the Treatise declares him to be the Author;
which he by writing sent to a certain friend of his, to whom he was willing to
communicate, the key and manuduction unto his Books; but by none has hitherto
been published, yet has layn hid among some few, as especially with Heuserus,
who set forth Paracelsus his Works, but of late by Rhenan in lib. Solis e
puteo, etc. it was in part divulged. Indeed in the beginning, and end of the
same Description in his Chirurgy, he commends it to the Reader, where treating
of the Coralline Arcanum, he discovers its most excellent Virtues, but no where
has set down its genuine preparation, unless in that place above alleged of
the other Coralline, which little or nothing answers the Description of this.
Therefore it is a question whether Libavius saw Paracelsus his Key, or at least
whether he read Geber 's Book of Fornaces, or the ninth Chapter of the same,
and whether he understood, and perfectly knew how Mercury with Saltpeter is
sublimed red, and splendid.

(b) How rightly to purge Mercury, see above of precipitate Mercury.

(c) If you would prove the goodness of Nitre, put the Nitre upon a burning
Coal, if it all fly away, it is good: but if any part remain, it is evil.

(d) For^in.

(e) That is, Colcotharis.

(f) Vitriol either of Copper, or Iron.

(g) That it appear not at all.

(h) Earthen.

(i) The matter to be put in must be immaculate.

(k) Or in a naked, or open fire.

(l) Or more.

(m) Of the Cucurbit.

(n) Not to the sides.

(o) This must be thoroughly and warily done, lest if too lightly calcined the
Mercury revive, and if too strongly, the Spirits vanish.

(p) If in the last two hours the bottom of the Cucurbit be very hot.

(q) Because the Mercury has acquired a Coralline Color.

(r) Of Melissa, Burrage, Buglosse, Rosemary blossoms, Roses, Violets, and
such like.

(s) Or which is better, put the red, and yellow flowers, mixed together in a
Phiol, and s(...)t them in fire of Sand for certain days and they will be red.

(t) Yet they may be kept, for from thence Mercury may be revived.

A more Compendious way of preparing the Coralline Arcanum.
The ingenious Sagacity of some, has found out another way of preparing the
Coralline Arcanum, much more easy and excellent than is described by our
Author. It is after this manner:

The Caput Mortuum of the Aquafortis, which is made of Vitriol and a like
quantity of Nitre, what quantity you please, and from it with hot
Fountain Water extract a Salt. Of this Salt very well dried. vj. of crude
Mercury well purged ij. Nitre purified ij. Mix them and grind them well
together, imbibing them with Vinegar, until in those Salts the Mercury be
quite consumed. Then in a Cucurbit with Alembeck, after the usual manner
sublime it, and at first some part of the crude Mercury will be sublimed, some
part will be white, other will be yellowish but very dusky; other of it will
ascend of the color of Saffron, but some will be most red, without any
corrosiveness: gather the Saffron-colour and red, rejecting the rest, and when
mixed put them in a Phiol or Bolthead, and in sand extreme hot, or otherwise per
se sublime it, that all may be very red, afterward wash, or edulcorate it and
upon it burn Spirit of Wine. Dose as of the former. It takes away Scabs,
Ulcers, Cancers, Fistula's, etc. It is the true Treacle of Metals. Paracelsus
calls is Mercurial, or Metallic Laudanum.

A most Compendious way of preparing the Coralline Arcanum.
of Mercury excellently well washed and purged iiij. the best rectifi^d spirit
of Nitre as much, dissolve the washed Mercury perfectly and wholly in it, so as
none temain undissolved; The solution in a convenient Phiol, that has a long
Neck, boil in a fire of Sand, and the spirit it self will come forth partly red
and partly white; and the Mercury by degrees settle in the bottom in Crystals;
continue boiling it till all the spirit be removed, and the Mercury reside in
the bottom like a white stone. The next day take out the matter, and grind it
very small, and you will find the quantity of the Mercury increased jss. To
this in a Phiol, pour fresh Spirit of Nitte, and boil it for one whole day.
Note: In this Coction you shall scarcely perceive it to boil, unless sometimes
it will rise with noise and violence, elevating at self, (as it were wholly)
but it does no hurt at all: continue boiling, and the third time pour on as
much fresh Spirit of Nitre as before, and boil it again, and indeed with a
stronger fire, than at first. Some Spirit of Nitre will pass the neck of the
Alembeck, but without any redness, nor will it strongly boil, continue the
Operation, till all the Spirit of Nitre be removed. You will see in the bottom
an excellent corallate Mercury, which afterward by burning, calcine a little.
It is sweet without any Corrosiveness, whose use is the same, and indeed more
powerfully efficacious, than that of Crollius.

In a Phiol Hermetically sealed set it for eight whole days in hot Ashes, and a
Tincture of Gold may from it be extracted, red like blood, leaving in the
bottom a white substance of Gold, in another Phiol Hermetically sealed,
coagulate it with gentle fire in an Athanor, into a red stone, which upon a
Porphery stone in a cold moist place dissolve into Oil, which afterward purged
from its feces coagulate, and repeat the same coagulation the third time. This
principal Elixir of life, and Mercurial Laudanum, carefully keep in a Glass
well closed. Dose one grane with extract of Treacle,
which is wont to be called fixed Silver, recovers it is pristine color, if
precipitated by Antimony. See Paracelsus his great Chirurgy.

Dr. Hartman 's Minoral Laudanum.
From the Coralline Arcanum may be made another, and indeed very excellent
Alexipharmacum. Thus: Extract it with distilled Vinegar over a gentle fire,
until the Vinegar be of a dark yellow color; afterward draw off the Vinegar,
and from the remaining Extract, with Spirit of wine abstract a redness, which
removed, the remaining powder will be red. This keep for use. Of which two
granes in convenient Liquor exhibited in the Evening, open the Belly, cause
swear, and procure Sleep. I call it Mineral Laudanum.

(u) Also Scabs, Ulcers, Fistula's.

(w) Or in Extracted Panchymagogon vegetable, or Ext^act of Trochus of ^lhanda^.

(x) The two ways of preparing Mercury, which our Author mentions, but explains
not, are northy to be known and described, though he writes they are most
secret. These I now make known to all. The first way is a precipitation by it
(...), without the additament of any other thing whatsoever, yet it is
compendious, not requiring much labor, if prepared with Instruments
artificially made.

The second is Mercurius Dulcis, as it is called by Beguinus or Quercetanus his
Panchymagogon, prepared with Sublimate Mercury and Quicksilver crude, and
purged, of each certan weight, mixed, and then sublimed.

The way of precipitating Mercury per se.
In Glass-houses are made Phiols flat and broad, within not a Cubit in breadth;
high, and very close neck'd, so as the Orifice is no bigger than a needle may
be put through, nigh unto the bottom there is a hole, through which crude
Mercury very well was^'d, and purged from all impurities, that it may cover the
bottom, and some part of the Glass from the upper covering be vacant. This
therefore must be so exactly placed in Sand, that no part of the Mercury, by
the unequal placing of the Glass be higher or lower; when this is done, boil
it, at first with gentle heat, afterward with more strong fire, until of it is
own accord, it become a most red powder like Cinnabar; which must be diligently
edulcorated with Cordial Waters, or with Spirit of Wine. Dose from four granes
to six. It powerfully provokes Sweat, and being six or seven times exhibited in
Lues venerea, it wholly eradicates, and exterminates the Disease, if other
things necessary in this Cure be duly performed also. All Fevers both constant
and intermitting it perfectly expells.

Mercurius dulcis, or Quercetanus his Panchymagogon.
Mercurius dulcis, the mitigating Dragon, as it is called by the Author of
Tyrocinium Chymicum, etc. lib. 2. cap. 18. is made of Sublimate Mercury, and
crude Mercury in certain weight conjoined and sublimed anew. For by this means
the corrosive Spirits in the Sublimate, are removed with homogencal Artifice,
that is, by the crude Mercury are mortified, and the whole Composition, (whence
it is called (...), that is,) without any sharp favor, tending rather to a
sweetness, is prepared. Of it Quercetanus makes mention in Tetrad. of most
grievous Affects of the head. Tyrocinium in the before alleged place, adds in
the preparation his Colchothar, that is, Vitriol calcined to a Redness, but
unnecessarily. For per se, without the addition of any other thing different
from Mercury, they easily unite. The manner is therefore thus:

Mercury sublimed, pure and perfect, as I describe in my Notes on the same
Chapter of Tyrocinium, etc. viij. crude Mercury well purged vj. Grind them
together part after part, then mix them in a Stone Mortar, until the crude
Metcury be consumed in the sublimate, then in a Phiol, of a convenient
magnitude, that it may be half full, sublime it in sand, until the whole
ascend to the upper part of the Phiol, which for the most part, is wont to be
in eight or ten hours. Break the Glass, and the crude Mercury which comes forth
in this first distillation curiously separate, and what remains sublime in the
former manner, this do the third, and fourth time, without the addition of any
other external thing, and the sublimate will be clear like Crystal, which is
easily cleansed from all its Acrimony. For the Vitriolate Spirits, forcible,
and abiding in the Sublimate Mercuty, by homogeneal Artifice, as the Author
speaks, that is, by the crude running Mercury are rectified. These Spirits
depart not by the mutual action and passion of mixtion and agitation, leaving
the powder as it were dead, as Libavius judges: but they absolutely die, as the
same or other sharp Spirits are wont to be mortified. The sublimations ended,
the thick mass reduced to powder, must be often washed with Rose Water. Of this
may be given fifteen or twenty granes, or in strong Constitutions thirty
granes, with some purging Extract, Trochus, of Alhandal four or five granes,
made up into small Pills. It expells all noxious humors without perturbation.
It is given in all Affects, will be more evident if to sixteen granes of this
be added two granes of Flowers of Butter of Antimony, or Mercuri^-vitae, being
before the exhibiting, well and long wrought together, with a Pestil, not
Metallic, nor Wood, for these will stick to the matter, (they ought to be
three hours working together, and so they will the better Operate, the more it
is beaten, the better is the Operation, and it will not too extremely provoke
Vomiting;) the second day it may again be repeated if need be: if nothing of
evil be, it expells nothing. After taking it the Patient should rest. Some have
used this medicament several months. Note: it must not be exhibited in any
Vehicle, Caution.
as in Liquor, but only made up into Pills.

In Tyrocinium Chymicum there is instituted another Mercurius dulcis, but not
so good as this. The Preparation of which is in this manner.

Another Mercurius dulcis.
of crude Mercury, and made in distillation of Butter of Antimony with
Sublimate Mercury, ss. red Vitriol iiij, Salt fuse vj. mix them together and in
a Glass Sublimatory pour upon it Aquafortis (in repetitions of the Aquafortis
it must not be poured on, but mixed when the sublimate is mixed with the Caput
Mortuum) the Mercury will be sublimed most white, which mix with the Caput
Mortuum, and again sublime it and repeat it the third time. of this sublimate
iiij. add of the same crude Mercury made of the Regulus of Antimony, of
Leaf-Silver, page 68.
Take levigated of each, j. Make a powder: in a Phiol, as before sublime it in
Sand four times. Afterward put it in a new Glass, and in hot Sand for a whole
hour or more sublime it; for so it will be exceeding white. The French Sickness
newly taken, it perfectly cures; being exhibited eight or ten days together in
the palpe of a roasted Apple, and a convenientorder of Diet observed. Dose from
six to fifteen granes.

There are other ways of preparing Mercurius dulcis.

Also other Mercurius dulcis of as great, and greater virtues, may be made; as
thus

1. If crude Mercury well purged be dissolved in Spirit of Nitre, of which the
Author speaks below, and by distillation the Water be often abstracted, and the
Mercury dried, and Edulcorated, and afterward, with an equal weight of other
crude Mercury, be certain times sublimed, it is made sweet, and gently purges
by the inferior parts. Dose from six to twelve granes.

2. In the same manner, if the yellowish Precipitate Mercury, which is above
added to the Authors Precipitate, be per se sublimed, it becomes sweet, and in
a small quantity, viz. eight granes, it moves the Belly.

A Water profitable against Scabs, Fistula's, and malignant Ulcers.
Here in the last place it will not be incongruous to add after all these
preparations of Mercurius dulcis, a most profitable Water in Fistula's and
Malignant Ulcers, may be prepared, not only for cleansing, but also for
healing; but more especially in Lues-venerea, wherein they are so inveterate,
as they admit of no Curation whatsoever, unless mixed with Mercurials. It is
also powerful in curing the Scab, without any detriment. Fallopius calls it
Water of Alum.

Put fresh Calx-vive into boiling Water, leave it for some time, then filter
the supernating Water, and in 1 lib. of it, in boiling dissolve j. of Mercurius
dulcis, Strein it, and keep it for the aforesaid uses, only washing the
affected parts with the Water. It is profitable in all Inflammations, also in
French Ulcers, either open, or black.

Flowers (a) of Butter of Antimony.
Antimony Ungarick, and Sublimate Mercury, (b) of each (c), 1 lib. grind (d),
and mix them diligently, and in a Glass retort fortified with Luting (e), in
Sand distill them with moderate heat, until the Liquor (f) come forth like
Butter or Ice, if it stick in the neck of the Retort, as it is often wont to
do, then with a live Coal moisten it, least the distillation be by the
Obstruction (g) hindered.

This Liquor is vulgarly (h) called Mercurius vitae, yet it is exceeding
corrosive: there have been some (i) so rash, as wickedly to sport (l)
themselves with it, in others detriment.

If hot Water be poured upon it, the corrosive Salts will be (m) dissolved, and
the white Flowers (n) be precipitated, which must most diligently by often
edulcorating with hot Water (o) be cleansed from all its saltness: this powder
dried must be kept for use; which in strong Complexions exhibited, is inwardly
given with greater success, than the vulgar white Flowers of Antimony, prepared
(p) by sublimation.

Whosoever would rectify this Antimonial Butter, (q) he must do it before the
Water is poured on; for so he will have more excellent Flowers (r). Whether any
thing in Chemistry, (s) can exceed this Oil, let them judge who know how to
ferment it with Gold radically dissolved, and to reduce it according to
requisite Art, (t) by Philosophic rotation.
fire (u).

Use and Virtues.
In the Pestillence, and in Diseases of the Head.

In Fevers (w), if it happen to move vomiting, it need not be (x) feared.

In Lues-venerea (y). In the Leprosy.

In the Dropsy (z), where for the most part without Vomiting, it operates by
the inferior parts.

In Malignant Ulcers.

Dose.
Two, three, or four granes (aa), with Panchymagogon, or Conserve of Roses,
Violets, the Yolk of an Egg, and Syrup of Quinces.

Diligently observe, that always after exhibition of purging Antimony, the sick
contain himself in Bed (bb), and a little after the taking it some Broth be
given, so he will vomit with less trouble, than otherwise, if he had an empty
stomach. The exhibiting broth, or hot beer, may be re-iterated two, three, or
four times, if need be.

(a) Properly they are not flowers, for they are not elevated by sublimation,
but are rather precipitated: that is, by pouring common Water upon the Buttery
Liquor of Antimony; after which all the Liquor being poured off, the white
powder appears, which our Author calls Flowers. Beguinus lib. 2. cap. 12. of
Tyrocinium, calls it Mercuris vitae, or Emetick Powder. It is also called
Angelick Powder. In Italy Algoreth Powder; for Algoreth Physician of Verona
gave it his own name. Otherwise it is called the White Eagle.

(b) Commonly by Salt and Vitriol.

(c) Some, as Beguinus, take but half so much Antimony.

(d) Upon a Marble, but beware of the fume which in grinding is elevated: for
from the Sulphur of Antimony, and sublimate it self, it is venomous.

(e) It needs not if distillation be made in Sand, and the distillation is best
in Sand.

(f) Externally to the neck of the Retort.

(g) Viz. Of the Retort it self. In the end of the distillation of all the
Liquor, increase the fire more vehemently, and for some hours add fire of
suppression; (the fire of suppression which is made upon Sand is not
prejudicial, as Libavius unadvisedly determines) when all is cooled, gather the
Cinnabar, which sticks at the end of the neck of the Retort, and afterward
twice or thrice sublime it, A Diaphoretick of Cinnabar.
whereby it will be more pure, and subtle. Of it is prepared an excellent
Diaphoretick, if equal parts of it be mixed with Magistery of Man's Skull,
Coralls, and Pearls. Its use is excellent in the Epilepsy, and Paralysy, which,
by sweating only, and repeating the Doses, if it be used constantly twice a
Week, for certain Weeks together, after the use of other necessary appropriate
evacuations, (with Laxative Powder of Scena, of Wierus his Description) are
happily removed thereby. Dose from ten granes to sixteen in Water of Senecio,
Fiery sores of the head.
often given to provoke Sweat. Fiery Sores of the head, especially in young
Women, who are very obnoxious to such affects, it wonderfully heals.

Note: It is otherwise not so efficacious, if the fiery sore be caused by the
boiling up of the Menstruous blood; or if grievous dolor of the head otherwise
be. See Practica Chymiatrica of our Edition, page,

(h) By Empericks.

(i) Viz. of them.

(l) Otherwise this Liquor, or Oil of Antimony, is of external use, in the
Gangrene, The external use of Oil of Antimony.
and Sphacelus: for in gangrenous Members, it separates the sound part from the
putrified, only by anointing the putrified part round about with this Oil, the
putrefaction is kept from the sound part, not suffering it to spread, and so
the following Section may more happily be instituted. So also if round about a
Pestilential Carbuncle a circle be made with this Oil, it will die by little and
little, and at length fall off, which afterward with convenient plasters may
be thoroughly and perfectly cured.

(m) Of Vitriol and Salt.

(n) That is, the Mercury it self is freed from the corrosive Salts, by sweet
distilled Water.

Philosophic Spirit of Vitriol.
(o) Rather cold, otherwise the flowers will be yellow; that water, which is
said to imbibe the corrosive force of the Salts, if by gentle evaporation in a
Glass, it be delivered from its phlegm, and the remaining sharpness, be by
retort expelled, it renders Spirit of Vitriol excellent, which I call
Philosophic. This comes not from the Vitriolate Salt in the common manner, but
from that most thin Vitriolate Substance, which sublimate Mercury, (from the
Antimony, by the former distillation reduced to an Oily Liquor) before the
subliming, has extracted from the Vitriol and Salt, and together with it is
become a Liquorous matter, that which is only by the benefit of Antimony, is
transmuted: this afterward by the adjecting of simple Water, is separated from
the Mercury precipitated into a white powder, and remains in the Water. And
this vitriolate Spirit is of more powerful virtue, than that which is prepared
in the common manner. Of this three, four, or eight drops at most, given in a
draught of Wine or other convenient Vehicle, in Fevers it mitigates, Lues
venerea it asswages; in the Spleen and Mesentery-veins it opens the
ob^tructi^ns, and ^omp^es the V(...)ntricle, debilitated by the contraction of
Phlegm; but especially, the Pe^tilence, being given in Water of Me^ow-sweet,
and Cardu-bened: it happily cures. In Hypochondriack Melancholy, it is
admirably useful. Also with it are extracted tinctures of Minerals, and Corals,
and Pearls d^ssolved. So Practica Chymiatrica of our Edition (not the
counterfeit, published at Frankfort) page.

(p) This Powder given with convenient Water, pu^ges by the superi^r, Mercurius
vitz, Corrected.
and inferior parts. The same is more happily effected, if the Emetick Powder
be diligently edulcorated and dried, and then in fire of Sand in a Bolt-head,
or Phi^l be digested, until it begin to be red. This Powder afterward, often
extracted with Spirit of Wine, is given in a dose of four or five Granes; which
by the inferior parts only, purges all kind of Impurities.

If with common Salt it be often, and long beaten, Mercurius vitae Cathartick.
and the Saltness afterward by washing in common water be removed, it obtains
only a Cathartick property.

After another manner the Emetick-force is taken from the Mercury. Pour Nitre
into a Crucible, add to it leisurely Mercurius vitae, stirring it very well;
then remove the Crucible from the fire, which being cooled, you will find the
Mercury in the bottom like a Regulus, this taken out Edulcorate with water.
From the Mercurius vitae first draw off the less fixed parts by Retort (for by
this means, if the sire were at first more strong, the Oleaginous liquor of
Antimonial Butter, would also come forth, which left in the Retort remains
fixed) afterward, with vehement fire make it flow in the Crucible, Glass of
Mercury.
and it will become a transparent-glasse of a dusky color, or else if longer
continued in the fire, of the color of Hyacinth, which with less trouble
purges, being given from two Granes per se, to three Grans in Infusion; it
often also excites vomiting. Also the same Glass, which by some is called
Amber of Antimony, is extracted with distilled Vinegar, and afterward two or
three Granes exhibited provoke sweat.

(q) This is altogether necessary.

(t) More Subtle.

(f) Tra^smutatory.

(t) Fire of Athanor.

(u) Our Author was seduced in that persuasion, for Metallic Tinctures have
been sought by many from Corrosive Salts, but this Operation to be in vain,
experience proves.

(w) Long begore the fit.

(x) Because Fevers are sometimes harbored in the Ventricle, and first
Passages.

(y) So my Notes set forth by Gluckradius lib. 2. cap. 13. entitled of
Mercurius vitae.

(z) Repeat the Dose continually for three days, three or four granes, and
afterward let the sick drink a Decoction of Sarseparella.

In the Drosie, but Note: in the Aged this Operation causes the falling of the
Fundament, which is afterward difficultly, or hardly at all, sanable. Beginus
with D. Vaterius Physiiian of Montispeliensis.
Mountpelier with this Mercurius vitae cured two Quartanary Hydropicks, given
over by the chiefest Physicians.

(aa) At most.

(bb) Viz. Least he take cold, which is the cause, and Author of grievous
Symptoms. Caution.
Note: in all Purgations heed must be taken, that the head, and feed be not
cold.

Flowers of Antimony corrected. (a)
First white flowers of Antimony, prepared after the common Chemical manner,
viz. by sublimation in Pots artificially set one within another: or them which
by the benefit of a Retort are prepared, when Pulverisate Ant money is mixed with
pure Sand, and by the violence of fire without any Caput mortuum reduced to
flowers. Afterward Salt of Tartar, by frequent solution, ( b and coagulation
perfectly purified, what quartity you please, and pour on so much distilled
Vinegar, as may be sufficient to dissolve the Salt, abstract the Vinegar with
gentle heat in Balneo^ or evaporate it: pour on fresh distilled Vinegar, and,
as before, abstract it in the same manner, repeating the labor, till (c) the
Vinegar by distilling, go forth of the same taste, which usually is after the
eighth or ninth Imbibing and Distillation. Of this Salt, therefore, impregnated
with Spirit of Vinegar, and dried; ss. White flowers of Antimony j. Mix them,
and in a Crucible placed in the fire (d) melt them, the liquid Mass almost red
like blood, pour upon a Marble, where when cooled, it will be of an ash color;
afterward grind the matter, and in a Glass pour upon it the following
Aromatisate Aqua Vitae. Galangal. Gallia Moschata. Cloves. Cinnamon, (e). Mace
of each ss. Saffron iij.


Grind these moderately, and pour on them Alcohol (f) of Wine, in gentle heat
of ashes extract a tincture, afterward by Inclination, remove the tinged spirit
of Wine, and pour on fresh, until it will yield no more tincture: then pour all
the tinged, Arematisate Spirit, upon the Tartar and Antimony melted together,
as abovesaid, adding of Salt (g) of Pearls and Corals, of each ij. In a Glass
well closed digest all these for two days in gentle heat of ashes: afterward
with a convenient head, distill off the Spirit of Wine with gentle heat, in the
bottom will remain the tincture of the Aromaticks with the powder of Antimony
and Tartar; abstract these to a dryness. So thou will have the best prepared
Antimony, which in color will be like to Cloves. Keep it in a Glass well
closed, because in the Air it will resolve: Without any fear, it may safely be
exhibited inwardly.

Use, Virtues, and Dose.
These flowers are wonderful operative in the Pest.

In sharp Fevers. Mania. Love-potions. Madness. Fascinations.

All Diseases in the Body which take their beginning from Choler, it helps.

Also Epilepsys, and other Diseases very many.

It ^xquisitely expells noxious humors by the inferiors, by the superiors, by
the pores, and by insensible transpiration.

Dose from seven Granes, to eight and ten, especially in strong constitutions.

(a) Flowers of Antimony crude are not fit for Medicinal use, unless first
corrected: the same may rightly be said of the Glass, which the Author
observes, that both must be corrected before exhibited for Medicine. Flowers of
Antimony, in the Common manner are prepared by Sublimation, viz. In certain
Pots applied to the Orifice of a Cucurbit, and set one within, and also above
another, as is described in Tyrocinium lib. 2. cap. 18. Both white, yellow, and
red flowers, may be made of Antimony.

White Flowers of Antimony.
The expedient way of preparing the white Flowers is mentioned by the Author,
and also in the aforesaid place of Tyrocinium. But the work will more happily
succeed, if an earthen Cucurbit be made of good matter, well coated, and have
near the bottom a hole; and this be afterward placed firmly in a Furnace, and
other Blind-heads with holes in them be aptly set upon it one within another,
and those in number six or more: And on the top placed a glass Alembeck with a
neck, to which a greater or regal Cucurbit, may be fitly joined for a Receiver.
First, therefore, increasing the fire gradually, till the empty vessel be very
hot, which is placed undermost, take one Spoonful of Antimony pulverisate, and
through the hole of the lowest pot leisurely, and at times, inject it. It will
presently melt, and by force of the fire the Flowers will a^cend into the
superposited Blind-heads. The Antimony must be injected with an Iron.
Instrument, crooked at the end, with which, through the hole, the Antimony may
be often stirred in the Cucurbit; for so the Flowers will the more speedily be
elevated. All things being rightly done, the Flowers will ascend to the top of
the glass Alembeck, with some part of the sharp Phlegm, which must be
gathered in the Cucurbit annexed to the neck, as aforesaid. Liquer against
worms.
For it is powerfully excellent in expelling Maw-worms; three, four, or five
drops of it, being exhibited in a Decoction of Gentian root.

This is the way of preparing the white Flowers.

Red Flowers of Antimony.
Red Flowers of Antimony are made, when powder of Antimony mixed with Sand, is
expelled by an earthen Retort, or Cucurbit obliquely placed. For so the
Antimony comes forth, in yellow and red Flowers, into the receiver, or great
Cucurbit annexed. All the Flowers, both white and red, may be taken out; the
red are more vehement, than the rest. Also, the Flowers of Antimony are made in
the common manner, by Sublimation in Pots, aptly placed upon an earthen
Cucurbit one within another, increasing the fire gradually till at length it be
more vehement, and the Flowers come forth, as well yellow, as white. Note. But
little Antimony must be put in at one time.

The most commodious way of all is in the following manner.

First let an earthen Cucurbit be made, not of great bulk, or belly, but almost
of an equal bigness, from the upper Orifice to the bottom: to which, instead
of a Receiver, aptly conjoyn an other vessel, or oblique Instrument of like
matter made, and well annealed: of two foot in length, and in the extreme part
thereof shaped like a head, with a neck adjoined, through which the Phlegm may
pass into another Receiver, for that purpose annexed.

The most commodious way of preparing Flowers of Antimony.
viiij. of Antimony, and in the said Bolt-head or Cucurbit, with the other
convenient oblique instruments, urge the fire at first slowly, afterward
increase it, and at length make it more vehement for thirty hours; and the
Antimony will come forth in Flowers, partly red and partly purple, into the
Receiver adjoined to the head, without any Caput mortuum, only from the crude
Antimony it self, to the upper part of the Cucurbit, Crystals will be elevated.
After the end of the operation diligently gather all the Flowers. Dose two or
three Granes. These Flowers are indeed Vomitive, (the red are more vehement)
but if they be calcined, or circulated with spirit of Wine and Honey, all the
violence will be removed, and they only retain the faculty of dejecting: for
the violence arising from its crudity, is mitigated by the digestion of these
noble Menstruums. Spirit of Wine must be poured upon Honey, and set for some
time in a Sublimatory, afterward distilled, toward the end of the distillation
the fire must be increased, that the spirit of the Honey may also come forth;
which must afterward be joined with spirit of Wine, for the use aforesaid. Also
the same Flowers being put in a Glasse-dish, and covered only with Paper, and
placed in a Furnace with moderate heat, for the space of a Month, or two in the
Winter, and daily stirred twice a day, (if not stirred they will wax black)
will continue red, yet be porose and light. These only move the Belly without
vomiting. Dose from five granes to eight.

Double Antimonial Pills.
Moreover, from white Flowers very noble Pills may be made, which admirably
operate, and for the most part move the Belly, yet they do also often procure
Vomiting, and that the more strongly, when the Menera's of Impurities in the
first region of the Belly, by the rule of Indications require extermination.
But this vomitive Faculty, may be taken away easily, leaving it with the only
force of purging by the inferior parts. Therefore I call them double; the
formet are Emetick, that is, (...), purging by the inferior and superior parts.

The latter only purge the Belly. The Composition, and use of both, hitherto
by me kept in secret, I now faithfully communicate. First of all, make an aqua
fortis of Vitriol calcined to a yellowness, and common Salt of each 3 lib. to
which add of Potters Earth twice or thrice so much, and mix it. Afterward by
Retort in open fire draw off the the water, then in Balneo remove the Phlegm,
that the Spirits may only remain. Then white Flowers of Antimony, add an equal
part of the said water, and with gentle heat in Balneo remove the unprofitable
Phlegm; for the Spirits cooperate with the Flowers, and only send forth a
waterness. Pour on fresh prepared Water, and as before draw off the Phlegm;
this do so often as till the Flowers be sufficiently impregnated with the Spirits
of the Waters, and the Waters retain in them no more Spirits. The Flowers thus
impregnated, distill by Retort, and diligently receive the watery humidity
which first comes forth; for it must be separated from the matter. But when
some white, weighty, and small drops, begin to descend into the Receiver, apply
another Receiver, and gather the Oil till no more will come forth, but an
unprofitable Caput mortuum is left behind. (This Liquor comes forth just after
the same manner as Butter of Antimony, or Mercurius vitae; wherefore it may
here seem to be taken for it.) This Oil in the Receiver, by little and little,
Co-agulates and Crystallises, which must again the second time by Retort be
purified: the same Oil will come forth, but more pure and excellent. This Oil
is the Basis of the Emetick Pills, as well as of those that only purge the
Belly.

For if a small part of this Oil, be injected into distilled Rainwater, it
will be precipited into a most white, rate, and soft powder, which in the
distilled water must be often washed from all its acrimony; and afterward mixed
with as much purging extract, as shall be convenient to incorporate the Powder
into ^ills; of which from one grain to three given per se, purge out all
noxious impurities both by the superior and inferiot parts. But if a small part
of this Oil be injected into an equal weight of Oil of Tartar, made per
diliqu^um, and for one or two days left together, and at length by often
washings, purified, and edulcorated, it will be reduced into Flowers very soft,
and delicate, which in like manner mixed with purging Extracts, and made up
into Pills. Dose from one grain to four, do only purge the belly, and that
gently without pain or molestation. But either of these sorts of Pills, in all
diseases where Evacuation is needful, may most commodiously be adhibited. Which
we in other Specificks advise about.

Hence it is manifest, and experience proves, that the preparation of Antimony
is not only one, but many, which may only purge, and that very kindly, by the
Inferior parts; which is contrary to the Opinion of our Author below, Error of
Crollius and others.
where he treates of Panchymagogon, and many others, who are of the same
opinion with him, because they know not, affirm it to be plainly impossible.

Anno 1614. October 31. I gave one of these Pills, weighing at least one grain,
to my Son Jacob; it moved his Belly strongly six times, without any pain, and
with admirable success.

The Emetick force of Flowers of Butter of Antimony, or Mercurius vitae, is
from the Antimony it self: yet this is taken away by being wrought together
with Salt only, that it hardly retains a Cathartick virtue. Moreover, with
easy Artifice, Flowers are made, which only parge downwards, in this manner.

Dissolve calcined Tartar in hot-water filter it, and ^terward with gentle
evaporation remove the Phlegm, ( Note, If Salt of ^tar often impregnated with
Spirit of Vinegar, be mixed with thrice so much Argilla, and afterward distilled
by Retort, there will come forth a most excellent Arcanum of ^artar, useful in
all affects of the Ventricle, Reins, and other obstructions) the Solution
cleansed put into a vessel and keep. Put Crude Antimony into a Crucible, when
melted put it into the former Solution and the Flowers of Antimony will be
precipited very red. Of which, first cleansed from all their saltness, with
common Water, and then dried, six, eight, or ten granes, add of Sulphur of
Vitriol two granes; give this to drink in Syrup of Maidenhair, or other
convenient Extract. This wonderfully, but very gently, exhausts all impurities,
even from the most remote parts, in Fluxes of the Head, and the noxious humors
of the Gout.

Sulphur of Vitriol.
Make Sulphur of Vitriol thus: Vitriol calcined in a Hot-house, or in the Sun,
to a whiteness, what quantity you please, dissolve it in hot-water, pour upon
it drop by drop Oil of Tartar, and the Sulphur of Vitriol will precipite the
bottom; which diligently edulcorate and dry. This is also profitable in
Assects of the Lights. These preparations being familiat with me, have hitherto
been kept secret.

Tincture of Gold.
Note, If this Oil of rectified Flowers, be conjoined with Calx of Gold,
diligently prepared, and set in digestion for a Month, the Gold will Extract a
Redness; if distilled with the same Oil the Gold will be ele^ated, which by
Spirit of Wine is dissolved into an Aurum p^tabile, not to be contemned. Its
virtues are Diaphoretick, for if three, four, or five granes of it be exhibited
in Wine, Sweats are presently procured, in so great a measure, as the Patient
must necessarily change his shirt. But the Oil of Antimony, which comes
forth^rom the Gold in this first distillation gently purges, and resolves all
obstructions, and is otherwise of singular use. (b) This is necessary,
otherwise, it would not be useful. (c) At length. (d) Sudamly. (e) Or the true
Cassia Lignea, which is better. (f) Otherwise it is called powder without
humidity. (g) Or of Magistery.


Electuary (a) of Antimony.
Glass of Antimony, prepared when Sol and Luna are in the sign Aquarius or
Pisces, grind it subtily, often pouring upon it distilled Vinegar, (b) which
afterward dry in Ashes; so you will have a white Mass, which grind to powder.
Of this power ij. Treacle (c) Androm. ij. Nutmegs. Mastick, of each ij. Orange
Peels. Red Corals prepared, of each ij. Cloves. Seeds of Fennel. Coriander
prepared, of each ij.


Pulverisate these exceeding well, mix them, and with Conserve of Quinces make
a Mass according to art, of which make Pills, in magnitude like Peace.

Virtues.
It wonderfully helps in the Pest, Quartane, Dropsy.

In Long, and inveterate Diseases.

In Diuturnal putrid Fevers.

In Cachexy, Melancholy, Madness, Delirium.

In Symptoms of Poisons drunk.

Dose.
To the weaker sort one Pill is given. (d) To the stronger two, with respect
always to the strength of the Patient.

Cautions in exhibiting Antimony and Turbith.
1. In Exhibiting these two Catharticks, diligent heed must be taken, least
Constipations be (e) dolours of the Cholick, or one of the principal members
hurt, (f) as the Lights, (g) or the Liver, which by grievous vomiting, are
oftentimes further endammaged.

2. In such, as to whom Antimony is exhibited, a vein must by no means be cut,
either before, or after the taking it (i).

3. Where it provokes vomiting, a draught of Pease-broath gently boiled must be
given, or Hen-broath without fat or warm beet, repeating it often if need be,
that the sick may more easily vomit, and the Medicine more swiftly operate.

4. They must always be given two, or three hours before and after meat (k).

5. In Choleric persons, and such as difficultly vomit, and are naturally
weak, it (l) must not rashly be given, least the stomach by the use thereof be
debilitated, and distended, so as the natural vigor be wholly dejected.

6. To those, it may rightly be administered, who are prone to vomiting, having
a strong stomach, the passages of the breast large and wide, (m) and who are
otherwise accustomed to vomiting, and in whom the matter easily comes upward.

7. I^ the Disease be contumacious, (n) the matter must first be ripened for
two days with ^urb^th, (...)) afterward Antimony may be exhibited.

8. In the Pestilence, if Antimony be administered, this must be always
observed, that the same time, some maturating Attractive, (p) be also applied
to the Bubo or Carbuncle, (q) otherwise it will be hard like a S^rrhus, and
that hardness will continue for several months.

In Hypercatharsis, to suppress the overmuch vomiting give fresh Treacle, or
juice (r) of Quinces: Apply to the ventricle a Plaster of a Crust (f) of
Bread; and to the soles of the feet toasted bread sopt in Vinegar.

If exceeding dolor of the head be, apply to the head and forehead linen
clothes, moistened in water of Lettice (t) and Roses, with Vinegar and Oil of
Roses.

(a) It is called Electuary of Antimony, because glass of Antimony rightly
prepared, and often corrected, conjoined with other Theriacal Species, Glass
of Antimony.
is a medicament representing an Electuary; the use whereof is excellent. Gla^e
of Antimony is so called, because it becomes transparent like to glass; from
the only powder of Antimony, with long and gentle heat calcined to the c^lour
of Ashes, in the Month of January or February, according to the Authors mind,
melted perse, is more commendable for this composition, than the other, which
in the vulgar manner is wont to be made of Borax and Crude Antimony; for it is
more excellent, The time of preparing glass of Antimony.
and by reason of the Celestial Influences, of Sol and Luna, being in the
watery Signs Aquatius and Pisces, is rendered more happy and powerful in
Operation.

(b) To correct glass of Antimony, our Author takes strong distilled Vinegar,
which surely is not improper, but better, and indeed nearer to fixation, is
that correction of the same glass, which is made with Oil or Spirit of
Vitriol; for so the more light and crude part, from which their so great
vomitory force and violence arises, by more strong maturating, are rendered more
gentle, purging very easily, and almost only by the inferior parts. Process
in the correction of glass of Antimony may be made, thus: Glass of Antimony
dried, and reduced to most fine powder ij. Glass of Antimony corrected.
Instill upon it Spirit or Oil of Vitriol corrected ij. diligently mix them,
afterward in a Dish with gentle heat dry it, then pour on the sames quantity of
Spirit of Vitriol, and evaporate it; repeat the operation seven or else nine
times, always provided, the powder of glass of Antimony be every time very
well dried, before the instilling the Oil of Vitriol. This powder in the same
proportion afterward mixed with the Theriacal Species described by our Author,
and what you desire, you will have more excellent.

Another preparation not unlike to this, is described in Practica Chymiatrica
of our Edition page. which in Conserves, Rotula's, confected Pears, and in
other confected fruits may be exhibited without nauseousnesse.

Other glass of Antimony excellently corrected.
powder of Antimony very fine, mix it with a like quantity of common Salt,
sublime it in a luted pot, and the Antimony will rise like a Saturnine matter,
by boiling dissolve the Salt and powder of Antimony; afterward diligently dry
it, and by moderate heat again calcine it in a pot always stirring it, and
intending the fire, till all wax white; grind it very well, and in a duplicate
Crucible make it flow in an open fire; this being done remove it from the fire,
and pour it drop by drop into a Basin, then it will be of a red color. Dose to
Infants one (...), to them of ten years of age two granes, to them of forty
years five granes in Wine, it only purges by Siedge, but in Honey by the
Superior parts.

Balls made of glass of Antimony, good against Fevers.
There is also another preparation of glass of Antimony, familiarly used by me
in ^s, the composition of which in this place I shall communicate, the use is
as in the ^brile Specific, of which afterward. Glass of Antimony prepared in
the just time, if possible, and most diligently whitened with Spirit of
Vitriol, and afterward finely Pulverisate ss. alias jss. Sugar Candy iij.
Wheat Flour iiij. Select Saffron j. Boil them with gentle heat in common
Water, to the consistency of a Poultis, yet diligently beware, least in the end
in the too much hardened, or burnt, but let it be almost as stiff as bread; of
this make Balls, and lay them up carefully. They will keep in their integrity
four years, after which time they will contract an hoarinesse, and become
unprofitable.

Dose and Use, see below in the Febrile Specific.

(c) In more vehement Purgations, some granes of the true Bezoar-stone should
be added, as Boethius in his Treatise of Gems advises. Note. By the same
reason, mineral Boezoar, may also profitably be added.

(d) Either by it self, or swallowed with convenient Liquor.

(e) Of the belly.

(f) Vehemently, otherwise in more light affects, the use of Antimony is not to
be feared, ^or it much helps.

(g) But it is happily exhibited in the Plurisie, inflammation of the Lights,
Asthma, Empyema, and Imposthume. Therefore it is not to be understood simply of
the Lungs hurt, for in the Affects thereof it is an healing Remedy, except only
in old inveterate Ulcerations. In Empyema it is a great Arcanum.

(h) A Caution of Antimony. The too frequent use of Antimony, extracts the
innate humidity, and causes Convulsions, wherefore in dry and choleric bodies
it must not too often be used.

(i) What causes the Author had, that before, and after the taking of Antimony,
a vein should not be cut, Whether after the taking of Antimony a vein may be
cut.
I understand not. For Antimony is endued with like purging virtues, as all
other Catharticks are. Hellebore, which abounds with Antimonial properties,
moves vomiting more vehemently: but who has at any time, before or after
exhibiting Hellebore, forbid Phlebotomy where need required? Therefore it is
not to be feared, in the exhibiting of Antimony. Moreover, experience proves,
besides the Testimony of Ruland the Father, and others, that either before or
after the giving of Aqua bened, which is wholly Antimonial, in the Plurtsi^,
and other diseases, the cutting of a Vein has been used, and that happily to
the repelling the disease, from whence no peril has ensued.

(k) Read, before: seldom after.

(l) Viz. Antimony and Turbith.

(m) Also a long Neck.

(n) Chronical.

(o) Read the Universal Digestive, or Vitriolate Tartar.

(p) Emplayster.

(q) See below the Pestilential Sp^cifick.

(r) Or, crude juice of Quinces, or one pill, or one d^se of Laudanum Opiat,
which also very sw^ly stays vomiting. See Practica Chymiatrica of our Edition
page.

(s) Beiled with Wine and Vinegar.

(t) Rather of Vervein. See Pract. Chymiatrica, etc. page.

Panchymagogon (a).
Among all Cathartick Medicaments, although I have spared neither cost nor
labor, yet by very often experiment made, I have hitherto found none, which
are with less trouble taken, and do more happily perform the desired
Operations, than Panchymagogon.

If Antimony (which, among the vulgar, by reason of its vehement vomiting, is
infamous and abominable) could so be prepared, as it might only perform its
office by the inferior (b) parts, without the usual violence, which for the
most part is by me removed in my antecedent preparations, there could hardly be
given a more pleasant Cathart^ck in the things of nature.

But a preparation of this kind has been often attempted, yet not performed
hitherto, although by the benefit of Pirotechnia it has been endeavored,
wherefore not found out by any Chemist, notwithstanding of it, for Ostentation
sake, as well as of Aurum potabile, many do falsely glory. Species of Diarrhod.
Abbat.

Diamber, (c) of each j.
From these with Spirit of Wine, (d) by digestion for four days daily stirring
it, extract a Tincture, and keep it a part; Then Pulpe of Coloquintida (e) vij.
Turbith Gumos. v. The best Agarick, j. Root of the true black Hellebore, j.
Choice Scammony, vj. Leaves of Sena iiij. Choice Rubarb iiij. Seeds of Wallwort
beaten, iij. Elatery, ij. Hermodactyls, iij.


Break and bruise these well together, and upon them pour the Spirit of Wine
Tinged (f) with the Species, as aforesaid; afterward for eight or fourteen
days, macerate them with gentle heat in Balneo, (beware least the Spirit of
Wine break the Glass) remove the tinged Spirit by Inclination, and pour on
fresh, this do so long as till all the tincture and purging property be
extracted: Lastly, the tinged Spirit of Wine (g) mixed together, abstract by
gentle heat in Balneo, until a thickness like Honey be left in the bottom:
About the end, add Oil (h) of Cinnamon, Cloves, and Nutmegs, of each ten drops,
Salt (i) of Pearls, and Corals ij. Salt extracted by Art (k) from calcined
Feces, with shavings of Cranium, (l) being mixed herewith render it more
efficatious. There is not given a better Cathartick, which purges with less
molestation.

Use and Dose.
Of this Composition may be taken from j, to ij, with Malmesy, (m) or other
rich Wine, or with broth, or other appropriate Liquors.

Some in the use of this add some drops of Oil of Vitriol.

In powder of Liquorish, without molestation it expels all noxious humors.

This may de made up in Pills, and swallowed alone, or, which is best,
dissolved in a draught if Malmesy Wine.

Another Description.
Pulpe of Coloquintida, vj.

Agarick, choice Scammony, of each ss.

Black Hellebore.

Species of Diarrhodon Abbat.

Alias Aloes succotrine.
Aloes in juice of Citron, of each, j.

From these, with Spirit of Wine, extract and Essence, from which, afterward in
Balneo, the Spirit of Wine must be separated. And, because in extraction of
purging medicaments, the purgative faculty is wont to be debilitated, (n)
wherefore some add to one part of extract, another of crude purges, add there
ore to the above said, before the extract in the bottom remain plainly
thickened.

Trochus of Alhandal vj.

Diagridium prepared.

Agarick Trochiscate, of each ss.

Aloes Epatick j.

Pulverisate all these, and reduce them to a mass of a just consistency. Dose
from (...) to fifteen and twenty granes, in form of Pills.

(a) This description of Panchymagogon, was invented by Isaac Holland, for it
is found in his vegetable work; and is very commendable. Tyrocinium Chymicum,
among other Extracts, quotes this lib. 2. chap. 9. Moreover, it is called
Panchymagogon, because it attracts all humors.

(b) Which, Whether Antimony only purging by the inferior parts may be.
to his desired wish that Antimony might be prepared only purging downward, the
Author adds declaiming judgments, of opinions varying from his, which is the
experiences, and testimony of so many famous men. Antimony, as we have already
said, is prepared with a purging faculty only; for all the Emetick force of
Antimony may be taken away, by requisite Art, so as it shall neither purge by
Siedge, nor by vomiting, but diaphoretically only. If therefore Art can remove
all power of purging, it most certainly can retain in it the Cathartick
property, and mitigate the other, or else wholly remove it. For if either part
of its operation be alterable, according to variety of prepapations, it may
also be abolisht or retained, according to the same diversity. And a little
before our Author prescribes correctories, with Aromaticks, for flowers of
Antimony, least they should too vehemently provoke vomiting; where we in our
Notes of the same flowers of Antimony, describe circulation with noble
Menstruums of Spirit of Wine and Honey, and afterward a simple digestion, by
which they are rendered operative only by the inferior parts. Likewise flowers
of Antimony by being wrought together for some time with common Salt, lose
their vomitive faculty.

Purging Spirit of Vitriol.
Moreover, if Pulverisate glass of Antimony, or flowers of the same, be
infused in a Bolt-head, with Oil or Spirit of Vitriol, not rectified (which
must be well minded) the glade or flowers being covered two fingers with the
Oil or Spirit, and left for some time in a warm place, a dark red extraction
is made. Of which, from four to ten drops, exhibited in some convenient liquor,
purges the impurities of the belly by Siedge only, without any detriment,
nauseousness, or vomiting; it is a very profitable Cathartick, and in many
diseases admirably useful: yet it will be better, first to prove its virtue by
experience, before it be too much commended.

(c) To these may be added others, as of Mastick, red Roses, Anniseeds,
Fennel-seeds, of each iss.

(d) Others, more commodiously, make the Extraction with Cinamon-water prepared
with Wine.

(e) Of that which has been long kept.

(f) The Chemical Essence.

(g) Dissolve in that Menstruum, Aloes succotrin. j. filter it, and and is to
the former.

(h) The Oils, before they are adjected, should first be dissolved in a little
Spirit of Wine, for so they will be the better-mixed with the Extracts.

(i) Magistery rather.

(k) With water of Fennel.

(l) Or, bones of the Microcosme, calcined.

(m) If it be hard, it may be tempered with Spirit of Roses or Violets, and
afterward dissolved in Malmesy-wine.

(n) Whether in preparing purging Extracts, Spirit of Wine, for a proper
Menstruum, may be adhibited; after many others, is questioned by the Author of
Tyrocinium Chymicum, lib. 2. chap. 9. of Extracts. He rather judges, that in
some the purging virtue, by digestion with Spirit of Wine, is impeded; but he
leaves it so, as it seems, to require a subtle arguing; for it does not
infringe the virtue, nor does it attract it to it self. The faculty of purging
Extracts, is fostered in the volatile Mercurial-salt, wherefore it desires a
like Menstruum; of like nature with that which should be extracteds but Spirit
of Wine is Sulphurous, and retains the nature of Sulphur; so that he attracts
from things, what is of of his own nature, viz. Sulphur; leaving the
Mercurial-salts untouched. Wherefore it is rather to be used for Extraction of
such things, whose essence consists in Sulphur, such are Diaphoreticks, than of
Catharticks, for which it is not so proper. Yet this our judgment cannot
overthrow the Opinion of those, who endeavor to persuade the contrary, viz.
that no purging force is left in the^ after they have been infused with Spirit
of Wine; for, say, they, a certain Cathartick virtue may be extracted from
Spirit of Wine, from which it is not easily separated, but when it is about to
be separated the Spirit of Wine is also abstracted with it. The contrary of
this experience declares. For first, how can the Spirit of Wine attract to it
self, what is not of its own nature, as is already said? Secondly, If it
plainly extract the purging faculty, how is it, that when extracts of this
kind, by this Mehstruum debilitated, (as they say) being afterward well dried,
and other convenient Menstruum pour on, do still retain their purging faculty
so apparently manifest? And lastly, where they say the Cathartick virtue,
cannot easily be separated from the Spirit of Wine, this also experience
manifestly repugness For who will deny, that Spirit of Wine, used instead of a
Menstruum in Extract of Coloquintida, cannot easily be separated from the
purging Tincture? Wherefore the purging virtue is not fixed in Spirit of Wine:
for the remaining Magna 's after Spirit of Wine has completely performed the
office of Extraction, being afterward excited with other Menstruums, do still
retain their purging faculty, by the Spirit of Wine not attracted. Yet rightly
to prepare purging Extracts, except in Coloquintida, Scammony, and Elatery,
whose violence by Spirit of Wine is corrected, other Menstruums are more
proper, such as Metheglin. Canary Vine, Whey of Milk, Water of sweet Apples,
Betony, Fennel, Anise, Roses, Meadon-sweet, Cardu-bened, Fumitory and such
like; especially, if with these be conjoined some drops of Oil of Tartar, made
per deliquium, for so they will the sooner attract, and take to themselves the
Mercurial Salt. From all which it is sufficiently manifest, what is the cause
in Extracts their purging property is debilitated, so as many times we are
enforced to give some purges in the Substance. For which cause, this must well
be noted and considered, viz. what Menstruums are to be applied to this or that
Extract.

Anno 1615. in the Month of December, I thus prepared this Panchymagogon.
choice leaves of Sena iiij. Root of the true black Hellebore iij. Turbith
gummos. Polypode of the Oak. Most white Agarick. Pulp of Coloquintida, of each
ij. Peth of Carthamus-seeds, jss. Choice Rubarb. Hermodactyls, of each jss.
Fine Scammony j. Elatery ss. Species Aromatice Caryophyllata iij. Species of
Diamber. Rindes of Citron, of each ij.


Make the Extract with Cinamon-water made with Wine. Of this simple Extract
there was viij. I added Balsome of Aloes iij. I also added Magistery of Pearls,
and Corals, of each ss.

Oil of Mace, Cinnamon, and Cloves, of each ten drops.

Dose from ten granes to j. with respect to the disease, and Patient. See Pansa
in his book of proroguing life, part. 2. page 113.

Anno 1629. in the Month of October, I prepared this Panchymagogon. Aloes
Succotrine lib. The best Rubarb. v. Choice leaves of Sena iiij. Most white
Agarick iij. Choice Turbith ijss. Root of most white Mechoacanna ij. Root of
true black Hellebore ss. Pulp of Coloquintida j. Root Chelapu. Scammony, of
each v. Root of Esula prepared ss. Hermodactyls iij. Sharp Cinnamon. Most white
Ginger. Mace, of each ij. Galangal j. Wormseed Cloves. Cardamum. Rindes of
Citron. Squinanthum, of each j.


Make infusion with a sufficient quantity of Spirit of Wine, and 1 lib. of
Anise of Fennel-water, let them stand for eight days, in the mean while
stirring them every day; afterward strein, and express them strongly through a
linen cloth, and make an Extract; add in the end, the other things, which
Crollius adds, especially add to the Extraction Species of Diamber, and
Diarrhodon, mix them all exactly.

Another way not less noble.
Leaves of Sena without all the stalks ij. Choice Rubarb jss. Root of black
Hellebore of Austria j. White gummose Turbith. Polypode of the Oak. Trochus of
Alhandal. Agarick Trochiscate, of each ss. Peth of Carthamus-seed. Choice red
Mirth, of each iij. Species Aromat. Caryophilat. Diamber, of each ij. Rindes of
Cidron j.
Cut and bruise these very well, pour upon them Spirit of good Wine, and Water
of Cinnamon, of each 1 lib. and; extract the Spirits, afterward press them out,
extract the feces again only with Cinamon-water, afterward strein it well,
according to Crollius his mind. To the Extract and Extract of Aloes made with
water of Betony, or Vervein iij. Make a mixture, then by heat reduce the whole
to a convenient Consistency, adding Oil of Cloves ten drops. Dose from ten
granes to twenty.

Another description.
Rubarb. The best Turbith. Pulp of Coloquintida. Most white Agarick, of each
ij. True black Hellebore jss. White Hellebore ss. White Ginger^. Root of
Cucumer wild. Hermodactyls. Euphorbium of each ss. Squinanthum. Root of
Coltsfoot, of each ij.
Digest these in a close vessel for twenty four hours, in a sufficient quantity
of Water of Anise, then boil them with gentle heat, till half be consumed, to
which, when streined and thickened, add. Scammony pulverisate vj. The best Aloes
succotrine j. Amber-greise seven granes. Camphire ss.


Benzonie, Musk, of each seven granes, moisten them with Oil Anise.

Another Panchymagogon.
root of the flower de luce. Cypress. Coltsfoot. Angelica. Lign. Aloes, of each
j. Root of wild Cucumer ij. White gummose Turbith j. Saffron ss. Squinanthum
ss. The best Rubarb. Most white Agarick, of each j. True black Hellebore.
Diagridium, of each jss. Pulp of Coloquintida vj. Aloes succotrine ij.
Dissolve the Aloes and Diagridium, in a sufficient quantity of Water, let them
stand in Balneo three days or more, very often stirring them: Infuse the rest
in a sufficient quantity of Spirit of Wine, stirring them sometimes; afterward
Evaporate them to the consistency of an Extract: mix both Extracts, and to them
add Musk, Amber, Camphire, of each ten granes.


Reduce it to a Mass, of a just consistency to be made up in Pills, moistning
it with Oil of Anise.

Extract of Mechoacanna.
root of choice Mechoacanna not putrified iij. Turbith gummose, and white j.
White ginger ij. Root of Polypode ss.
These cut in a gross manner, pour upon them of the best Spirit of Wine and
Water of Betony, and of that Water which is abstracted from Aloes, of each lib.
macerate them for two days in a hot place, and vessel well-closed; then with a
Press strongly express the Juices: on the remaining feces again pour Water of
Betony, as much as will cover them a little above, when sufficiently macerated
express them; join the expressions and add Most pure Manna ij. Scammony well
cleansed j.


Mix these, stirring them well together, and add Spirit of Vitriol five drops,
Oil of Cinnamon three drops. Dose j. more or less.

Extract of Coloquintida and Scammony, useful to incorporate prepared flowers
of Antimony, of which mention is often made above.
Coloquintida not fresh, but that which has been kept some years, without the
kernels lib.

Pure and choice Scammon iij.

These, being cut, extract with Spirit of Wine, till all be extracted out of
it, rejecting the feces distill off the Menstruum to a consistency, and the
Spirit will serve for the same use, by distillation coagulate it, and put it up
for use. Dose per se, from twelve to fifteen granes. It is very useful
incorporated with others, made up into Pills.

The true preparation (a) of Scammony.
Choice Scammony not adulterated lib. beat, and sift it, afterward pour upon it
a little juice of Roses, or which is better of the wild roses, (b) expressed and
streined, (add one or two drops of Spirit of Vitriol. The juice must be kept
for use in a cold place least it grow sower) and in the Sun, or behind a
Furnace dry it. This imbibition, and drying, must be renewed (c) twenty or
thirty times: for so the noxious, and viscous malignity of the Scammony is
easily dissipated, which, otherwise, by cleaving to the foldings of the
Ventricle is wont to excite great dolor and anguish. With the former juice may
be mixed half so much of the expressed juice of Quinces purified, whereby it will
be more efficacious, and with less trouble purge the belly, and with this
prepared Scammony, the purging force of all Catharticks may be excited, and
sharpened.

Dose and Use.
In many Diseases wanting evacuation. (d)

Dose five granes. In robust constitutions from twelve to fifteen and tweenty
granes may be given (e). Formed into Pills or ground to powder after drying,
and fifteen or twenty granes of this powder may be exhibited in Syrup of Roses.

The best preparation of Scammony.
Choice Scammony prepared with juice of Roses, by re-iterated imbibitions, and
dryings, as is already said; then good Alcohol of Wine (f) without phlegm (in
which have been first macerated for twenty four hours, seeds of Anise, Fennel,
Cinnamon, and Spikenard, of each a little) as much as may suffice to extract the
Tincture, or Essence of Scammony; pour it upon the Scammony moderately dried,
that it may cover it three or four fingers, and let them stand in Balneo three
or four days, every day often moving them, so the Spirit of Wine will extract a
Tincture: The pure tinged Spirit by inclination separate, and pour on fresh
Spirit, repeating the labor often, until the Alcohol be more tinged.
Afterward, the tinged Spirits joined, extract in Balneo and the Scammony will
remain in the bottom like Honey, which in a convenient vessel, must be further
dried with gentle heat. Of this Extract, which it is yet sost, like bread newly
boiled, j. of purified juice of Quinces iiij. of juice of Red Roses, well
cleansed j Mix in a convenient glass, the Juices and Scammony with gentle heat,
stirring them leisurely with a Silver Spatula, that the juices may be exhaled,
and the Extract acquire its former consistency; but before all the humor be
plainly exhaled, to j. of Scammony, add of Salt, or Magistery of Pearls, and
Corals, of each j. Make it up in Pills.

So you will have the most excellent Cathartick, purging without Molestation.

Dose.
From ten granes to twelve and twenty.

Note. In Extraction of Scammony, that it may be proper, it must first be well
settled in the juices, before the humor be exhaled. Also when two parts of the
Spirit of Wine or Liquor, is by Alembeck drawn from the Tincture, you may
desist, and when the ^alneum is cold, take out the glass, in which you will see
the Scammony dejected to the bottom, or else hang in the remaining Liquor,
like pitch of a bright color.

In this place, by the way, the ingenious may be advised, that the Esence of
one, or more Catharticks, extracted with Spirit of Wine, and mixed with the
same; may in due proportion be incorporated, (about the end of the boiling over
a gentle fire, with Electuary of Quinces or Citrons, and afterward according to
Art be boiled to a just consistency, so the purging virtue conjoined in the
Electuaries will remain, after evaporation of the Spirit of Wine.

These Catharticks in a just Dose, and very small quantity, Untruths in
Physicians are allowed by Plato, when for the benefit of the sick.
in urgent necessity, with honest fraud, ingenious and officious guil, may be
exhibited to delicate and squeamish persons, with great emolument, and no
molestation, or trouble to the sick.

A more short preparation of Scammony.
(a) Indeed our Author here proposes a profitable, yet very laborious
preparation. This following which I prepose is more short and easy; yet not
wanting its (...) ^^rtue.

Fine or choice Scammony, grind it very small upon a Marbel, imbibe it with a
little Spirit of Vitriol, or Sulphur made per Campane, adding three or four
drops (or more according to the quantity of the Scammony) of distilled Oil of
Anise or Fennelseeds, The true correction of Scammony by Spirit of Vitriol.
diligently grind them long together, till they become a Mass clammy like
Pitch; which keep in a Bladder, or as other pillulary Masses are wont to be
kept. This preparation, with Spirit of Vitriol, is plainly Philosophical. For
as Antimony attended with a vehement hot quality, which proceeds from the
Mercury, and corroding volatile Salt, is corrected perfectly by this Noble
Menstruum: So here the corroding property of the Salt can no more be of force,
but is transmuted by the mortification, effected through the contrary acting of
Spirit of Vitriol, and Oil of Anise, and reduced to a beneficial Operation. It
is necessary, the same way and method be always observed by the Chemist, in the
requisite and dexterous preparation and correction of Euphorbium, which indeed
should by no means in Pills or otherwise be admitted for medicinal use, until
this genuine preparation be first prudently performed. Dose of this prepared
Scammony from fifteen to twenty granes; it purges gently without molestation.
The same may be used instead of the Extract of ^oloquintida and Scammony,
before prescribed for incorporating Mercurial and Antimonial Pills. The use of
this is plainly necessary in Mineral Turbith, of which two, three, or four
granes, in fifteen granes of Scammony thus prepared, exhibited in Lues venerea,
and the Dose often repeated, powerfully expells the disease. Some correct
Antimony with juice of Selandine, and that very well. Moreover, in the same
manner are prepared all purging Juices, Aloes, Elatery, Gumdeperu, etc. For
hereby their vehemence is mitigated, and so rendered more suitable to be inwardly
taken, in form of Pills or otherwise.

(b) Viz. an half part. For this Juice is astringent, and hinders the purging
faculty.

(c) Scammony not prepared. Scammony not prepared is hurtful.


1. Begets corroding winds.

2. By its abundant sharpness inflames the spirits, and so excites Fevers.

3. It vehemently attracts and opens.

4. It by its sharpness endamages the Intestines, causing the Dysentery and
Tenesmus.

5. It is prejudicial to the Heart, Liver, and Ventricle, by the propriety of
its substance.

(d) Especially in Choleric persons.

(e) The same Doses may be used in other purging Extracts, yet always with
consideration of their powerful faculties.

(f) Also Scammony, by macerating is extracted with Majoran-water, or other
odoriferous water hot, which being afterward separated, fresh water is again
poured on, till it will no more be extracted. The Water is abstracted in
Balneo, and the Scammony left in the bottom pure and Candid. Which being done,
according to the Authors prescript, it must with purified Juice of Quinces and
Roses, be reduced to the consistency of Pills.

Specificum purgans of Paracelsus (a).
First, The purification of Vitriol from Sulphur is made in the following
manner.

Vngarick Vitriol, (b) and in a Copper Vessel dissolve it in common water,
being dissolved sprinkle upon it common Oil of Tartar, (c) 3. lib. of Vitriol,
iiij. of Oil of Tartar, or there about are required; let them cool together,
afterward what is clear pour off, (d) for the fetid Sulphur, unapt for this
Operation, sinks to the bottom like Clay. The pure Solution evaporate, till it
begin to be as it were crusted, afterward in a cold place the Vitriol will be
converted to Or small stones.
Chrystals, which diligently keep.

Secondly, Distillation of Spirit of Tartar is thus instituted. Crude white
Tartar, (e) upon it pour one measure (f) of Spirit of Wine, close the orifice
of the vessel very well, and in a Hot-house, set it to digest for forty days
together. Afterward distill it in a gentle heat of Ashes, until some yellow
oily drops begin to come forth, then cease. The Spirit that is come forth keep
a part, the remaining Caput mortuum with strong fire evaporate, so long as till
the Tartar be moderately calcined, not to a whiteness, but so as it remain of a
dark color: upon this Tartar pour the Spirit before distilled off, set it to
putrefie in Balneo for three days; this being done, distill it first in Sand,
afterward by Alembeck luted not too high in a most strong open fire, so the
requisite Spirit of Tartar will come forth.

Thirdly, Of the former remaining calcined Tartar (from which the Spirit is
extracted) 1 lib. Of the Vitriol, as aforesaid, prepared 1 lib. beat them, (g)
and mix them in a large glass, pour upon them the before distilled Spirit of
Tartar, adding a measure of old rich White Wind: the glass closed with a
Blind-head, set for forty days in gentle heat; the time expired, begin to
distill it, at first with most gentle fire in Sand, that the subtle Spirits of
Wine, Tartar, and Vitriol may ascend, which diligently gather, and keep a part.
When the phlegm comes off sweet, that also gather a part: afterward again
grind the matter, (for it will be crystallized) and in a Retort well coated,
distill it in an open vehement fire, yet first begin leisurely least the matter
melt, afterward with most strong fire (as is wont to be in preparation of Oil
of Vtriol) force it, till all the Spirits be come forth. These last Spirits
mixed with the former subtle Spirits, but the middle sweet phlegm reject, as
useless.

Fourthly, From the Caput mortuum according to art, by the benefit of common
Water (h) extract a Salt, if need be reverberate the matter, and again extract
it. This reverberation and extraction repeat, until all the saltness be
extracted. Mix the Extractions (i) of Salts, and by evaporating abstract the
Water. Upon a Marble grind the Salt, which when ground, put into a long body
with Alembeck annexed, pour on it the proper Spirits, viz. the first subtle,
and the last strong Spirits, till the Salt be covered three or four fingers
above, (if some phelegme do yet remain mixed with the Spirits, it will be no
inconvenience) place it in Balneo for certain days, then the spirits from the
Salts will extract their own proper Essence, (k) whatsoever is dissolved and
extracted, by inclination gently pour off, and put on more of the remaining
spirits, re-iterate this labor, till the spirits in extracting be no more
colored.

Fifthly, These spiritual extractions mix, and in Balneo cohobate for fourteen
days, always re-pouring on what comes off: Lastly, in Sand strongly distill
whatsoever will come forth, and what remains force in an open fire, till the
Salts, together with the Spirits, be come forth.

Sixthly, The Salts with the Spirits in Balneo cohobate often, and the Salts in
a gross and visible manner will begin to settle in the bottom, (whence the
Liquor becomes white like Calx of Silver dissolved in powerful (l) water) then
in Balneo, with (...) heat, the proper Spirits may be abstracted, and the
matter in the bottom remain thick like a Poultis.

And so Specificum purgans, not without great labor and is time prepared.

A more easy way of preparing in re-iterating the Operation the second time.
The remaining Spirit last abstracted after the first absolute Operation, may
be kept for the second preparation, so the labor will be more easy, viz. ^he
Salt of Vulgar Vitriol, and Salt of Tartar, (m) in equal weight, and from them
with this Spirit extract an Essence or Salts, and in the same manner proceed in
all.

But because a purgative in great abundance cannot very quickly be made, nor
ought only the mineral noxious (n) fumes be removed, but also the earthy (o)
impurities o^ the Microcosme quite exterminated i it will not be improper here
to set down the preparation of extracting volatile Salts by Alembeck from
certain herbs, which afterward in equal weight with Specificum purgans being
mixed and exhibited, will render the work more easy.

Salts of Herbs are thus prepared.
Black Hellebore. Herbs and Roots (p). Carduus Bened. Herbs and Roots (p).
Masterwort Herbs and Roots (p). Roots of wild Alexander. Century. Tormentil.
Herbs and Flowers of Succory. Angelica. Pimpernel. Selandine. Herbs, Saint
Johnsworty Vincetox. Aron, Horse-tail.
Cinquefoile, of all these a like quantity, as shall be thought fit. Dry them
in the shade, not in the Sun; cut them and put them in a little Barrel, upon
them pour water, wherein a little Hops and Ferment has been gently boiled;
Ferment them in a Hot-house, (q) often stirring them for three Weeks; (r)
afterward, distill them in vesica cuprea, as the manner is, with refreshing of
the Spirits, as is wont to be indistillation of spirit of Wine. This Spirit
moderately rectify, (t) not perfectly, viz. to the highest perfection. (u) The
remaining Feces to those the like dried Herbs may be added, and so you will
have more abundance) (w) reduce th Ashes, and from them extract a Salt; to the
Salt when dried, pour on the proper Spirit, that being set in Balneo for
certain days, the Essence may be extracted, pour off the essencified spirit,
and pour on more, repeating the labor till no more can be extracted (x). Mix
the extractions, and cohobate it certain days in Balneo, if any Feces happen to
settle in the bottom, these separate by filtring through Brown Paper)
afterward in a boiling Balneo distill it, then the Salt will ascend together
with the spirit: If any thing by chance remain, pour on more spirit, and again
cohobate it, and then distill it in Sand: what comes forth receive and pour
upon it a good quantity of its own Phlegm, (y) let them stand in a cold place,
then the subtle distilled Salt will sink to the bottom; remove the spirit by
inclination, and keep it for a second use of Extraction; that which resides in
the bottom, may be a little edulcorated and dried in a Hot-house, then will
remain (z) Salt of Herbs in Medicinal use most efficacious; whose use according
to Theophrastus, is thus.

Of Specificum (aa) purgans one part, of Essence, of Oriental Crocus one other
part extracted with Spirit of Wine, from which the spirit of Wine is not
separated, circulate these two or three Weeks, and keep them for use. It may
also be given without Essence of Saffron, but with it is better for comforting
the heart.

Virtues, Doses and manner of exhibiting.
In all diseases needing evacuation, it is given without any danger. (bb) In
all putrefactions and superfluous humidities of the Body, from what cause
soever produced.

It is given in Wine upon an empty stomach, in Wormwood-wine, Malmesie, Broth,
or Juice of Roses.

Dose according to age, as to those of twenty, thirty, forty, and fifty years,
four granes are given. To Youth of fifteen years, three granes; to Children and
Infants, two granes. Let the Patient keep himself warm in Bed for one hour
after the taking of it, then he may rise, walk, or sit; if in three hours it
operate not, the same Dose again exhibit, let him fast three hours after,
keeping himself warm (cc) from the Air all the whole day. Which way soever it
operate, it matters not, whether by Vomiting, Siedge, Sweat, or Urine. The
following day, let the Patient rest: The third day, increase the Dose one half
part (as if before four granes were given, now give six) observing the order of
the first day; the following day again let him rest. If necessity urge, give it
the third, fourth, fifth, and sixth time, as long as the Disease remains (dd).
This is a sufficient (ee) sign; whilst impurities are in the Body it purges,
and discuses through the Members, and especially in the Center of the Disease
causes dolor; but in defect of impurity no dolor ensues, and it hardly at
all purges, because it does not, after the manner of common Catharticks, work
upon the radical humor (ff).

(a) Paracelsus lib. 4. Archidox. briefly describes the preparation of
Specificum purgans. For he appoints Magistery of Vitriol, with Magistery of
Tartar, to be joined in equal parts with Essence of Saffron, and to be digested
together in a Pelican for one whole Month. But how the Magisteries should be
made, he expresses not; nor in any of Paracelsus his Writings is any necessary
way of this preparation (...) Yet ingenious Artificers have, as much as they
could, undeavoured to follow the Author's mind. This description proposed by
Crollius, does not indeed want certainty, but is exceeding tedious, and also
very laborious; wherefore we have no cause at present to acknowledge this for
geiuine. Since Paracelsus his Antifices conformed to the prescripts of Nature,
Paracelsus his preparations easy, not difficult.
we well know not to be very difficult: And that by him much the more easy by
so much the more ^^occult, and by Periphrasis both of words and descriptions,
are left sometimes according to the manner of Paracelsus obscure. We shall
first consider the Authors words, afterward faithfully from proper Experience
and Practice, declare a more easy way of Preparing this Specificum purgans.

(b) Blew Vitriol.

(c) Made per deliquium.

(d) From the Feces.

(e) Cream of Tartar is better, of which in the universal Digestive.

(f) Four pound.

(g) Mixed with dry Argilla, or other Earth, which must be three times as much,
(...) the master. If Argilla be not mixed, the matter will melt.

(h) Hot.

(i) The former and the latter.

(k) With a certain yellowness tending to redness.

(l) Aqua fortis.

(m) Extracted either a part or together.

(n) That is, impurities exalted, as in sharp diseases, the Pest, etc.

(o) The Tartar in Chronical diseases.

(p) Some plainly omit Masterwort, Angelica, Pimpernel, Selandine, Vincetox,
(...) foil.

(q) Or other hot place.

(r) Until they be seen to contract a certain sharpness.

(s) Read of Juniper, or of other spirits from Vegetables, or else from Seeds.

(t) Distill it with gentle fire.

(u) Not wholly, but that it may retain with it some phlegm.

(w) Of Ashes and Feces.

(x) Or, which is better, proceed forward with these, as is below described in
distillation of spirt of Tartar.

(y) Before, aften rectification of the spirits of the Residue.

(z) In the bottom.

(aa) That is, of Specificum purgans, of the Essence of Saffron, and of the
vegetable Specific, of each an equal part.

(bb) Without considering what humor it is that offends, whether it be choler
or phlegm.

(cc) Otherwise grievous Symptoms follow.

(dd) Yet always respecting the nature of the diseased.

(ee) Of purging.

(ff) That is, it destroys not the natural Vigor.

A more easy way of preparing Specificum purgans of Paracelsus.
A more compendious and less laborious way of preparing this Specific, has
been by me invented, and often practiced, which is, thus. Of spirit of Tartar
distilled, as the Author prescribes below in Diaphoreticks, without any
addition of spirit of Wine, 1 lib. Add to it of spirit of Wine 2 lib. and of
rectified spirit of Vitriol ij. Pour these when mixed, upon the Colcothar of
Vitriol, and Caput mortuum of Tartar, (from which a Spirit has been extracted,
and is afterward calcined to a dark color) and in a vessel well closed, digest
it in Balneo for certain days. Then distill it by Retort in an open fire, yet
at first with exceeding gentle heat, least the spirits which are very thin be
exhaled and perish: In the end urge the fire more strongly. This distillation
is scarcely finished in three days. From the Caput mortuum remaining after
distillation, being first well and vehemently calcined in a Potter's Furnace,
in the usual manner extract a Salt, and with the before distilled spirit,
digest it in Balneo for fifteen days, then mix them with dry Argilla or the
Pumex-stone calcined, and by an Earthen Retort in an open fire distill it; so
with the Spirit the Salt will come forth made spirituous, and be mixed in the
same liquor. This liquor, according to the Authors mind, by re-iterations
cohobate, that is, distill it often, or else leave it to digest in Balneo,
until the Salts begin to appear, spontaneously settling in the bottom, and
then the desired end of the operation will be accomplished. By this means will
be gained more, than half the time, which in the Author's preparation is
consumed; nor is this at all inferior to it, but, by reason it is more
compendiously and less laboriously prepared, is rather more excellent.

Dose and Use, as of the Authors.

The Magistrale method of Arcanums and Vegetables.
There may also from the before recited Vegetables (necessary for use with
Specificum purgans) as also from all others, subtle Arcanums be extracted;
which indeed are not known to many, yet they are plainly Philosophical; for all
their virtues are entirely preserved, whereas in other preparations not thus
perfected they grow crude; moreover these Arcanums are reduced into a liquor,
grateful both to the Palate and Stomach, of which a very small part, is of as
great virtue, as other preparations far more largely exhibited. This method I
commend to all my Disciples, and as I sincerely deliver it, so I desire it may
as faithfully be kept. From certain Herbs and Roots, but chiefly from them of
which our Author makes mention, either all green, or some dried, (for in one
and the same time they cannot all be had) fermented a little and digested,
extract a spirit and Phlegm; the spirit partly separated from the phlegm keep
a part, as also the phlegm.

From the Caput mortuum calcined in the common manner, with the phlegm extract
the Salts, by boiling it to a Lexivium, which Evaporated to a certain thickness
like unto Oil, join with its own spirit before reserved, and mix it with three
or four times so much Argilla or calcined Pumex; and by Retort, leisurely
augmenring the fire, distill it into a most large Receiver, in the bottom of
which is first placed a moderate quantity of the same Vegetables mixed together,
or one only, if the distillation be of one, (these must not be plainly dry, but
somewhat withered, viz. the Elementary or accidental humor must be only in part
removed) the Spirit, together with the Salts made spirituous, will come forth,
and falling upon the injected Vegetables, will calcine them, which will easily
be discerned contracted in themselves, and the liquor of a ruddy color. The
distillation ended, gather all which shall be in the Receiver, and by Retort in
a close reverberatory distill it, and the liquor will come forth red, with some
stink, this in all Vehicles may afterward be mixed, for it contains in it self
the whole faculty of all the mixture. Dose j. etc. either by it self, or in
other appropriates. If the Specificum purgans made of Vitriol and Tartar, as
abovesaid, with Essence of Saffron, be mixed in equal weight with liquor of
this kind, or with that which is made from the Herbs our Author appoints, or
else with any other prepared in the aforesaid manner, provided they be
appropriate and convenient, and the composition afterward given to the sick,
much more happily effects the Cure; and by this means the Radical vices.
Realgar's, and impurities of the Body will more exactly be exterminated.

IV. Diuretic (a).
BEcause the impurities of all Diseases admit not of expulsion by the inferior
parts, therefore Diuretics and Diaphoreticks are also needful (b).

(a) Various Diuretics diversely prepared are exhibited, yet not vulgar: They
are of and.

1. Is the distil^ 'd Water of Peach-kernels macerated with Alalmesy-wine, of
which one spoonful exhibited is most efficacious.

2. Is most white Flints of the River burned, and often extinguished in rich
Wine, tell they be plainly reduced to powder, which is wont to be the third or
fourth extraction.

3. Oil of Wax, three or four drops exhibited in Water of the greater Urtica,
the affected part being also anointed with the Oils of Wax, Tiles, and
Scorpions, do powerfully expel the Stone, and Urine.

4. A Diuretic Julep, and Oximel Diuretic, see practic. chymiatrica of our
edition, page.

(b) Yet Diuretics must not always and every where be applied.

I. Salt of Amber (a).
A little after in the description of Oil of Amber, I shall declare the
preparation of this.

Dose and use.
From three granes to four, six, eight, and ten, in Water of wild Alexander, or
Restharrow. It admirably expells the too long detained Urine (b).

(a) Some from the Caput mortuum of Amber (strongly calcined, and afterward
distilled into an Oil) by the benefit of common Water, extract a fixed Salt,
which purified by frequent Solutions and Coagulations, they join with volatile
Salt; of this Composition j. with ij. of Missletoe, exhibited in Water of the
Roots or Flowers of Peony, either before or in the fit, being three times
taken, they perfectly cure the Epilepsy, if not transplanted from the Parents
to the Children, and also all other necessaries be first duly observed.

(b) This is also a Secret in helping the difficult Birth.

II. Spirit of Salt (a).
Salt of Cracovia, (b) Native or Sea Salt, dried or (c) calcined 4 lib. pour
upon it Rainwater, mix and impast (d) it with fresh white Argilla, finely
powdered, and sifted (or, which is better, instead of Argilla, take the matrix,
or outward covering (if it can be had) that encloses, and cleaves round about
Terra sigillata, out of which Terra sigillata is taken, as a Kernel out of its
Shell, for so the liquor will be rendered more efficacious for medicinal use)
and make it up into Balls, or long Rolls, which, first dried to a hardness
behind a Furnace, put into a conveniently large Retort very well coated, that
it may not be quite half full, Add to which a capacious Reciever.
and gradually increase the fire, till the phlegm be come forth, afterward
force it in a strong continued open fire, until all the white Spirits are come
forth.

The Distillation is the same, as is wont to be in preparing Aqua fortis (e).

Use and Dose.
Two or three (f) drops in Water of Cardu-bened, and Pellitory of the Wall,
presently expells the detained Urine. Of like virtue is Aqua vitae per se,
being perfectly rectified from all its phlegm.

Observations of the Spirit or Oil of Salt.
It is to be admited, that this Spirit has a singular Antipathy and contrary
nature to common Salt.

First, With respect to Thirst. Common Salt provokes thirst: This Spirit takes
away thirst, which is apparently manifest in Hydropical persons.

Secondly, Common Salt is biting, and preserves from putrefaction: This Spirit
without dolor, by corroding, in the space of one day, takes away (h)
whatsoever in wounds or other affects is obnoxious to putrefaction.

Thirdly, With respect to taste, common Salt is sharp and biting: This Spirit
has a Pleasant bitter, alias, pleasant austerity.
(...) Taste, and a smell like the expressed juice of wild Apples.

Here follow the virtues and use of this Oil, according to Paracelsus.
Simple Salt of all Condiments, the Condiment whatsoever is unsavory, and
uncouth to the Stomach, it renders savoury and apt for nutriment; and since it
knows not putrefaction, it excellently preserves all things from putrefying,
and is healthful for the natural body, and so conducible to humane nature, as
without it, we know not how to live: This applied to other Bodies removes all
humidity, and what is left of the solid substance it astringently contracts,
whence the condited bodies become dry, and are preserved from putrefaction. If
the virtues of crude Salt be so great, then surely, much more powerful are the
Spirits conveniently prepared there from.

1. Paracelsus used it in all diseases, by exhibiting three drops once in a
Month. (i) It renews (k) the body, especially if certain leaves of Gold be
dissolved in it; for Salt preserves all things. (l) Also this spirit of Salt
may very commodiously be mixed with Oil of Vitriol, (m) and afterward in
diverse diseases inwardly exhibited with admirable success, especially in
Hydropical bodies, with Water of Wormwood.

2. Leprous, (n) and other such like Diseases, as well of Men as Women, being
taken in Wine it cures, and purifies the blood.

3. In the Dropsy, mixed with Salt of Wormwood, or some drops daily given in
Water of Wormwood, until the Dropsy decline and be removed, which will be in a
few days.

3. To comfort the Head, in Water of Lavendor, Majoran, Sage.

5. To the Heart, in cold cordial waters, as of Violets, Roses, Borrage, and
Melissa.

6. To the Stomach, with Mint-water, so the appetite to food is increased.

7. To the Liver, with Succory, Lettice, and Carduus-bened.

8. To the Spleen, with Endive and Purcelane.

9. In the Pest, with appropriate Cordial Water. Also the Region (p) infected
may be anointed therewith, whereby the Tumor will inwardly break away, and the
venom by another Emunctory be expelled without Detriment.

If four drops of this be mixed with ss. of Electuary (q) Juniper, and
exhibited to provoke sweat; it, by Paracelsus, is singularly commended in the
Pestilence and Poisons, because it comforts the Heart, and purifies the Blood.

10. If given in Vinegar, it cures the English sweat (r).

11. It purges the Reins and Bladder, and breaks away the Stone, used with a
Bath (s) it certainly helps.

12. Certain drops given in Water of Mugwort.
Motherwort, (t) expel the Mawworms.

13. In Burstings, (u) Paracelsus anointed the place affected with this Liquor,
(w) applying also a proper Bath, (x) giving certain drops inwardly, so in few
days the Patient will be cured.

14. In the Cholick, (y) two or five drops given in strong Wine, is a present
Remedy (z).

15. It expells Fevers (aa) yea, even Diuturnal, four drops being exhibited in
Aqua (...) (bb).

16. In the Jaundies, (cc) three or four drops given are profitable, being
continued, till the Patient be restored, which will be in three Weeks (dd).

17. In the Iliack, Dysentery, Paralisy, Apoplexy, and Gout, in appropriate
Waters (ee).

18. It also cures internal Ulcers.

Dose.
Four, five, six, or seven drops, in a spoonful of Malmesy-wine, Cinamon-water,
or other appropriate Water.

It Is external use.
1. Mixed with appropriate Waters, it is profitably applied by anointing, to
the affected part in the Gout.

2. It penetrates all veins, flesh, bones, and helps forward the cure of Ulcers.

3. Where Members are contracted (ff) and moved out of their place, whether
there be only contracture or imposthumation, anointing, with appropriate
unguents, must be appointed.

4. All Ulcers evilly cured, infanable, and fetid, as Fistula's, Cancers,
Wolfes, and such like Phagedaenick evils, by continual anointing may be cured
in a short time.

(a) Spirit of Salt is more excellently made, if with Sea Salt, Spanish, or
French Salt, mixed with Crude Terra sigillara, in a three or four fold
proportion, in a strong, and open fire gradually increased, it be by Retort
distilled. But in these distillations of Salt, the whole Salt at first comes
not forth in Spirit, but part thereof still resides in the Caput mortuum,
therefore the Salt by common water, must be freed from the Caput mortuum, by
boiling the Caput mortuum in the Water. This Salt join with the Spirit first
drawn off, and in a hot place digest it for some time; afterward mix it with
fresh Terra sigillata diligently dried, distill it as before, by repeating the
Operation, the whole substance of the Salt will come forth like Spirit. For as
much as of the Salt in re-iterated digestions shall by the Spirits be
dissolved, so much, by the repeated distillations, is the Spirit increased;
till at length the whole Salt come forth spirituous. With this more pure Spirit
the best Aurum potabile is prepared.

Compounded Spirit of Salt.
There is another more elegant and pure Spirit of Salt of greater virtues, yet
compounded of Nitre and common Salt; the compendious preparation whereof, is
thus.

Most pure Nitre and common Salt decrepitate, of each what quantity you please,
mix it with a three or four fold quantity of Read Argilla.
Terra sigillata well dried, and then in an open fire after the usual manner
provoke the Spirit. Of this Spirit 1 lib. add of common Salt fuse iiij. Digest
it for some time that the adjected Salt may by the Spirit be dissolved, and
forthwith distill it by Retort. By this means you shall both increase the
Spirit, and render it stronger, which, in the same plain manner, with new Salt
fuse taken in the same quantity, you may increase as often, and as long as you
please. From this Spirit, in Balneo abstract the phlegm, and then by Retort
rectify the Spirit, which join with a like quantity of Alcohol of Wine,
afterward by circulating and cohobating the Spirits ( viz. of Wine and Salt)
together, they become inseparably united. This Spirit so powerfully resists
thirst, that dropsical persons taking it, do not greatly desire drink in three
days.

Also from Sea salt a sweet Oil may be made in this manner.
Dissolve Sea Salt in distilled Rainwater, filter it, and in moderate heat
calcine it, always stirring it that it flow not, and this do fifteen times or
oftener; afterward extract the same Salt with the best Spirit of Wine, which
being removed, the Salt will Cristallize; from these Crystalls impasted with
Argilla, or crude Terra Sigillata, extract a bright Spirit, which afterward
join with Alcohol of Wine, and distill them together, by often cohobations.
Very great ostentation has been used by Chemists, touching the sweet Oil of
Salt, as if they could never sufficiently praise it is virtues. This sweet Oil,
or sweet Spirit of Salt, from Salt it self, by no distillation, can be made
without Spirit of Wine, or Oil of Tartar. The Spirit of Wine only is that
which procures this sweetness, whether from the beginning it be joined with the
Salt in distilling, or afterward with it, the Spirit of Salt be often distilled
by cohobation; for so, and not by any other means, all the Acrimony of the Salt
is removed, and the Spirit rendered sweet and savoury. The like may be done
after the same manner in other Spirits.

(b) Especially old. The new Salt difficultly sends forth (...) spirits, but
that which is twenty or thirty years old does much more easily.

(c) That is, decrepitate or lightly burnt.

(d) Salt fuse plainly from it self sends forth no spirit, unless by times and
discontinuance.

Crystals of Salt sweet like Sugar.
(e) Salt also, by a genuine and Philosophic preparation, may be reduced to a
perfect sweetness, thus. First, Let a large and strong earthen Retort be made,
so as upon the superior part of the Belly an Earthen Pipe may be made, from the
exterior part, to hang perpendicularly almost into the middle of the body of
the Retort, the Orifice of which without must be wide, but within more straight
and close. In this Retort, put of common or of Sea Salt (which is better) 3. or
4 lib. and with a most capacious Receiver annexed set it to distill, gradually
increase the Fire, till the Salt within be in stax; then through the Pipe
inject one or two drops of cold water, then close the Orifice of the Pipe with
an Earthen Stopple before prepared, and the abundance of spirits in the Retort,
by that allaying humidity, will be dissolved. The use of cold Water must by
repeating be continued, till the whole mass of Salt be by this means reduced to
Spirits (...) from which, by gentle distillation in Balneo, remove the phlegm;
what remains set in a cold place, and it will be crystallized like to Nitre;
the Crystals being sweet as Sugar, may afterward per deliquium be dissolved
into a Liquor. Of five or six drops, Cure of the Dropsy.
For the essential humidity, which in Hydropicks is much exhausted, the spirit
of Salt helps, and corroborates the Ventricle and interior parts. But otherwise
Salt as a mixed body does not strengthen the essential humidity, but rather
abates and weakens it; and so thirst, by taking Salt is not diminished but
increased. If to 1 lib. of Salt dried, be taken 2 lib. of Coals pulverisate,
and these exactly mixed from 1 lib. of Salt you will have 1 lib. of spirits.

(f) To eight or twelve granes.

(g) This no otherwise can be, but by reason of the mixture for Salt, as a mixed
body has in it self diverse parts, each of which have other qualities, and
other effects; but being conjoined they only manifest the peculiar property of
the mixture.

(h) For it is th^n, therefore easily penetrates.

(i) Rather in a week.

(k) This may rather be said of the compounded Oil made of Salt and Nitre.

(l) Read Conserves.

(m) In a large proportion.

(n) The Leprosy of the Greeks is sanable, but that of the Jews, unless by the
singer of God cured, is unsanable.

(o) Of the Skin.

(p) Region of the Body.

(q) Of Honey.

(r) And other superfluous humors.

(f) With emollient Diuretics, as Pellitory of the Wall, Mallows, and Melilet.

(t) Or of Honey.

(u) Newly taken.

(w) With the grease of a Hedghog.

(x) Which is made of Cammomil, Melilot, etc. with a convenient Ligature.
Balsom of Salt-gem, See Practica Chymiatrica of our Edition, of Bubonocele,
Enterocele, and Epiplocele, page.

(y) Especially in the flatulent, if the belly be free.

(z) The Compounded is better, chiefly when mixed with spirit of Wine.

(aa) Especially of the Ventricle.

(bb) Exhibited before the Fit.

(cc) Plainly inveterate in a Decoction of Straw-berries morning and evening.

(dd) Sooner.

(ee) Oil of Beech distilled in May, of Ash, of Fearnbrake.

(ff) Paracelsus in this manner proceeded in such cases.

He mixed Oil of Salt, with an equal portion of Oil of Vitriol and Spirit of
Turpentine, each of which he prudently and leisurely poured on a part, to
prevent the danger of violent heat and noise. The matter, when thus mixed, will
appear viscous, black, and full of phlegm; therefore, when all is well mixed
rectify it, mixing a few Crystals.
stones in the spirit of Turpentine; afterward anoint the contracted members,
first washed in the following Bath. Tops of Origan. Juniper. Oake-leaves.
Wormwood. French Sage of each four or five handfuls. Apples of the Fir Tree six
or seven.


Boil these in common Water, as long as shall be expedient, repeat the use of
both these, till all the Members be restored; one cure is usually performed in
eight days space. This is of great use in dryness of Members, Inschwindung der
Slieder. In Inveterate Contractures add Oil of Amber. It is very convenient
after anointing, to wrap the affected Members in Fox-skins. See Practica
Chymiat. of our Edition, page.

Spirit of Salt Nitre (a).
In the same plain manner, (b) and with like regiment of fire, spirit of Salt
Nitre is distilled, which comes forth by a red fume. This is to be noted, that
to one part of purified Saltpeter, three parts of Argilla is wont to be added,
and so are made up in long tolls and dried, that they may be rendered fit for
use.

Dose and Use.
In the Cholick: (c) and this seems not strange to any man, since in like
affects some exhibit Crude Nitre; for the heats and malignities of the Saline
Spirits in the Microcosm, by the due and exact use of this are wonderfully
inhibited and represt.

In the Pleurisy and Prunella (d).

This mixed with a like quantity of spirit of Wine, is given in a draught of
warm Fountain Water, from ij. to j.

If used in the Cholick, then outwardly the Navil must be anointed with expressed
Oil of Nutmegs, with a little Civet mixed therewith. This does not only
assuage the intolerable dolours, and continual anguish, but also discusses, and
resolves the malignant, crude, nitrous, and vicious humors, which if not
obstructed are apt to spread to the joints, and nervous parts, which not rarely
happens, by reason of the certain Sympathy which those humors (being somewhat
mixed) have with such parts, from whence follows impotency, laxation, and
resolution of the joints much to be pityed. About the end of the cure, (e) the
use of Elecampane efficaciously expells the resolved Salt. Moreover, the hidden
virtues of Nitre or Fusile Salt, have always been highly prized by the Sons of
Hermes.

(a) Nitre is Animal, Vegetable, and Mineral, and in all these is perceived to
manifest its virtues. In the end of the distillation of this Spirit, all being
cooled, and left for some time until the Spirits be well settled, which is wont
to be in the space of five or six days and nights. Note, That in the
phlegmatic whiteness, the Corrosive Spirits lie hid, being less useful for the
Chemical Physician. But of these red Spirits, from 1 lib. you will scarcely
have jss. or ij. Wherefore it is best to receive the phlegm, and the red
Spirits both a part.

(b) The operation will better be without making them up into Rolls, viz. if
the Earth be only mixed with the powder of Salt-nitre, and so the distillation
instituted.

(c) Before the use of this Spirit, ij. of Fountain Water blood-warm; the
mixture of Spirit of Wine and Nitre causes Sweats, and speedily removes the
dolours of the Cholick. See Practica Chymiatr. of our Edition, of the Cholick
passion, page.

(d) This Spirit is also given in Fevers, in stead of a cooling Medicament,
with con^nient vehicles, viz. in Water of Endive, Succory, Sowthistle, and to
quench thirst from six drops to eleven exhibited, is oftentimes more
convenient, than Lapis prunella it self, because that sometimes causes
nauseousness.

(e) Not in the end only, but also in the beginning, a Decoction of Enula is
wonderful prevalent.

Of Roots of Enula cut into small pieces j.

Fennel-seeds pulverisate ss.

Water of Melissa 2. or 3 lib.

Boil them in a double Vessel one hour and half: afterward strein it through
Hippocrates sleeve of which, when streined, give the first draught about the
Evening going to bed, the second in the Morning, the third also in the Evening,
and so go on, if need be, and the cure will be effected.

V. Diaphoretick.
SWeat in the Pest, and Ungarick Disease, (a) is the universal evacuation of
the venom of the whole Body, not in the blood only, but also in the habit (b)
of the Microcosm, and so expells whatsoever evil is latent in all the parts. By
the benefit of Sweat, the venom, which, by affecting the circumsercuce, There
are some Diseases which admis (...) of Cure, but by Sweat, and the ^munctories
of the Pores, as thy Wes^lence and Pleurisy.
transmits his cold influence to the Heart, is happily excluded; for as by
attraction we necessarily receive breath, (c) together with it we also attract
the venomous Air, wherefore it is needful that it be exterminated from all
parts by Sweat, there being no part of the body, although small, but is apt to
receive the Air, therefore all may evacuate the evil by the (...). So Sweat is
the universal Evacuation, and indeed, almost the third part of all Diseases
incident to humane Bodies may be cured by Sweat.

Diaphoretick (d) Antimony.
1 lib. (e) of Mercury sublimate with Vitriol and Salt, add of Antimony
Ungarick 3 lib. grind them together and mix them: In a glass Retort (f) well
coated put the mixture, annexing a Receiver well luted, make the distillation
in Sand, well governing the fire, that the drops congeal not like Butter in the
neck of the Retort, which if perceived, presently take a live coal, holding it
so near the glass with the tongues, as may moisten the matter, but not hurt the
glass, this must be done as often as need is. The liquor come forth rectify once
(g) afterward moistened with heat, (h) pour it into a large glass (i) that has
a long neck, and pour upon it Aqua Regis (some use only spirit of Nitre (k)
very leisurely, viz. drop by drop, to prevent the danger of noise, (l) and
overmuch heat, when you perceive the matter to be plainly dissolved and settled,
then proceed thus, to lib. of the Oil (and so proprotionably) add one loton of
Gold, (m) first dissolved in Aqua Regis a part, so the mixture will be clear,
not disturbed, and in color be most red; unless you thus proceed the solution
will be unsettled, and the gold not truly incorporate it self, and after
abstraction small shining sparks of the gold will appear. The whole clear and
most red Solution put into a Cucurbit well luted, with a head and receiver
aptly fitted, observing degrees of fire, begin to abstract the phlegm, (this
Operation is performed in two days space) afterward increase (m) the fire so as
the bottom of the Cucurbit may be very hot; a little will sublime it self,
which, when the work is ended, and the vessel cooled and broke, reject as
useless: the residue, which is left in the bottom or sticks to the sides,
being in color of a dark yellow, like most dry and gaping earth, having almost
no Taste. It will stick to the tongue without corrosion, like burnt or calcined
Hartshorn. From 1 lib. of Oil after drying, you will have of this Earth lib.
half a pound (n). This fixed Calx needs not be edulcorated unless you will, but
must be burnt in a Crucible for half (o) an hour: It is mavelous to see what
a Test of the fire this sustains in the Crucible, and all corrosiveness is
mortified.

In Chemical use, although this thirsty Earth be fixed, yet by the benefit of
vulgar Sulphur, (p) being therewith conjoined by Art, by peculiar industry may
remain mixed with gold when in flux, yet in the fire it does not always answer
the desired end.

In Medicinal use among Spagirick Remedies, this is one of the principal ((...))

This cost me almost 200. dollers, which with others, I now freely communicate
to the candid Reader.

Virtues and Use.
It is a Principal Arcanum in diverse, and almost all Diseases, operating most
efficaciously by Sweat and Urine; it purges not, (q) but for the most part
moderately excites Sweat and Urine, (r) not debilitating the sick; by reason of
the addition of gold (f) it comforts Nature.

In Lues Venerea (t). In the Pest (u).

In the Gour. (u) In the Dropsy. (x) Fevers (y).

In obstructions and dolours of the Spleen (z).

In the Stone. (aa) Dose three, five, seven, or eight granes in convenient
waters.

There are various descriptions of Mercurius vitae, by which some endeavor to
reduce this corrosive Oil, by the use of Hartshorn Estencified with Essence
of Saturn into a Diaporetick powder. The Operation is laborious, (bb) yet the
wished and desired event, by proper experience, has not at all been found; for
as you that powder retains its Acrimony, nor is it so fixed, as this of ours is
by the said corrosives fixed, which in this Operation all dye and vanish, which
is exceedingly to be admired. (ee) Therefore, Courteous Reader, be content with
this description, than which scarcely another more excellent can be offered.

(a) In all malignant Fevers.

(b) Vix. in the whole Substance, Membranes, Muscles, and Flesh.

(c) The Air by anhelation.

(d) Diaphoretick Antimony hitherto I have called Mineral Bezoar, which has
very often been commended by Quercetanus himself; neither do I think that this
has been so much enquired after and searched out, by any one, as by my self,
and indeed that which gave me occasion of this serutiny, was from Brother
Basilius Valentinus, who in his Additament to Philos^ phical Keys, in the Title
of Antimony, where be treats of Butter of Antimony, concludes and pronounces
these words. The same Oil (for so he calls Butter of Antimony) may further be
prepared, with adjection of Water, made of the Serpent of the Rocks and
necessary spice, not that which is brought from the Indies. Again, this powder,
says he, is endewed with admirable virtues, to exterminate many old and
ulcerated diseases. In which words Basilius the Monk couches the occult
preparation of Bezoar.

For from Saltpeter, with common Salt, he makes a water; by the benefit of
which, either alone, or with Aqua Regis, the exceeding corrosiveness of the
Butter is plainly mortified, and so the whole is converted into a
Bezoardick-powder.

Libavius in Explicating, variously turns himself, so as he rather makes it his
business to carp, than enquire. So in the other Tome of Chemical Arcanums,
Chap. 31. of the Nature of fire, and in the same Tome of Hermetick Apocalypsy,
the former Part, Chap. 9. and 10. This is sure, that Libavius, as of others, so
of the preparation of this Bezoardick, judges like Argos; abroad,
clear-sighted; but at home, he is like Tiresias; having never joined his
talkative tongue with Chemical Experience, or if at any time he do, it is not
as becomes a good Artificer. Therefore I admire not at the Man's audacity of
writing, and happily I may publicly show, whether he has been so much
occupied in his Laboratory, as he professes he always is: --

Moreover, neither Crollius, or my self, have at any time broached willingly
any uncertainty, and this may be truly said, that, that was never the mind of
either of us; but that we have described the same Diaphorick Antimony to be
red, either in proper, or other words, as Libavius, at the end of the 18. Chap.
of the former part of Hermitick Apocalypsy, dares injriously to affirm, is an
absolute falfity; the forbearance of such like assertions would better become
Libavius. Rubeus, in his little Book of Distillations, (besides which nothing
is set forthly him) in the whole 22. Chap. he treates of Stibium or Antimony,
and the vari^^^ preparations thereof; and in the end, he makes mention of a
Medicine of Sublimate Mer^^^^ Regulus of Antimony, and Gold; dissolved all
apart, in separated Waters, and (...) ^^^utions joined distilled and cohobated,
are at length converted to a red Powder. But (...) is this distant from
Diaphoretick Antimony?

First, Although here Antimony is adjoined for preparing the Butter, yet little
or nothing of us substance goes into in; there the Regulus goes forth and is
wholly fixed.

Secondly, Sublimate Mercury, with that red Powder, hardly remains rea, but in
several distillations of Aqua fortis it at length ascends, and although
something do remain, yet the same in calcination, wholly passes into fume; but
this Sublimate Mercury, which is Butter of Antimony, is fixed.

Thirdly, the red Powder of Rubeus is corrosive, but the Mineral Bezoardick is
not so.

Lastly, The Powder of Rubeus is the same with Aurum vitae, and therefore is
numlated among Precipitate Mercuries, and is Cathartih. But our Be^ardick, viz.
that of Crollins and mine, is not such. Wherefore let Libavius cease aspersing
others with his slanderous tongue, lest in the end he hear a worse report of
himself.

The manners and pestilent envy of the Man are known, which to fear, or
commend, is not the part of a Cordial Man.

(e) Our Author in the precedents, viz. in preparing of Flowers of Antimony, of
Sublimate Mercury, and crude Antimony, be takes equal parts of both; to take
the same also here will not be improper.

(f) If the glass be not strong.

(g) By Retort.

(h) Or Water, or Fire, or Sand.

(i) A large Cucurbit.

(k) And that I judge to be better.

(l) Closing is afterward, lest the Spirits exhale, and leave it still for
twelve hours or more

The true Preparation of Solat Bezoar.
(m) This adjection of Gold is by no means necessary or profitable, which is
evinced by the following reason and experience. For the Gold is reduced to its
pristine body, therefore can by no means act, and so not render the Powder of
Antimony more virtuous. But if the Gold were from its corporeity, plainly
reduced to a spiritual substance, then indeed its addition would be very
profitable. Yea, if Gold in a very small quantity be added to this Bezoardick,
it would increase its virtue. If you would make Solar Bezoar, and loose neither
labor nor cost, thus proceed. We say below, that in the first distillation,
the Spirit of Nitre or Aqua fortis (which is the Menstruum) comes forth from
that Butter in a most red transparent color, and it afterward again comes off
from the Water of its own Root, viz. it is conjoined with the Antimony, by
cohobations often re-iterated.

That Menstruum which first comes off keep, and with it dissolve fine pure Gold
what quantity you please, from the Gold dissolved abstract the Menstruum with
gentle heat unto and oyliness, or till the matter be skinned over, pour on fresh
Menstruum, and again abstract it, this do the third and fourth time; distill it
by Retort with a long Neck, and well coated, and also hermetically closed,
always with gentle heat, lest the Spirits come forth. These distillations
finished, this same Solution impregnated with the Gold by those Spirits, with
somewhat more strong fire by Retort force; what shall be distilled off re-pour
on, and this do so long until the Gold it self be elevated of a most red color
like a Ruby; this Gold made spiritual, join with Butter of Antimony dissolved
in Spirit of Nitre, or Aqua Regis, repeat the former necessary distillations,
till with it it be united and fixed: And after extreme calcination, it may be
prepared into a Bezoadick of a purple color, (which is a sign the gold is
spiritually dissolved and united) of singular virtue in medicinal use.

A Solar Diaphoretick of Korndorfferus.
Of that Gold also is made that great Diaphoretick of Bartholomew Korndorffer^,
who was Paracelsus his Master^ Namely, with most excellent Alcohol of Wine it
is dissolved, and separated for the Feces; this Solution in a Pelican, placed
in a most certain heat of Balneum, is digested for one month^ In which space of
time the Gold spontaneously soparates it self from the Spirit, and in the
bottom of the Vessel rests a part, leaving the whole Menstruum alone to float
above; which by inclination warily separate. Wash the Calx of Gold often with
sweet waters, and with gentle heat dry it; then in a Phial of a just proportion
Hermetically sealed; at first, with gentle heat of Athanor, afterward more
strong; fix it until it be reduced to a purple powder, which lastly, dissolve
in Spirit of Wine. This given in a very small quantity, viz. three o^ four
drops, by preserving life and health, expells all diseases by Sweat. This is
such a Diaphoretick as hardly any other may be compared with it.

(m) Whether this first distillation be stronger or not, it is not much
material: for with the same Menstruum the cohobations must be often repeated,
yet so, as always a little fresh spirit of Nitre (which I judge better) or Aqua
Regis be added. By reason of the repeated cohobations more of the Powder of
Antimony is fixed, which otherwise by one only (although in the end more strong
distillation) would be lost. This is one of those things touching which I
sometime writ to Ruland, wherein Crollius is silent. The other is, that in the
first distillation of the Menstruum, that, or the spirit of N^tre, especially
if more swiftly urged, becomes plainly red; and that redness proceeds not from
it self, but from the Antimonial spirits. (For Stibium contains in it self a
sertain volatile redness) conjoined for the preparing of Antimonial Butter,
that is, for reducing sublimate Mercury into a certain buttery mucilage, and
this conversion they principally operate by often cohobations, whereby at
length with the Bezoardick Powder it is fixed; and by this means rendered more
excellent. This redness of Aqua fortis is egregioussy profitable to render the
substance of Gold volatile, and to revoke it into a certain spirituality.

(n) If it were distilled the third time with the Menstruum, from Butter of
Antimony 1 lib. you will have xij. or else after the repeated cohobation xvj.

(o) Yea, for twelve h^urs.

(p) The (...) is thus: two parts of common Sulphur, to one part of this fixed
Earth, viz. Mineral Bezoar, grind and mix them upon a Marbel, afterward melt
them in a Crucible, and in melting cause the Sulphur to take flame, which
permit, till it cease of it is own accord, then the Powder will be left of a
grisly color, which cast into gold when in flux is mixed therewith; but from
j. of it, scarcely iiij. will be left; yet these in the vehement fire are
liable to be lost.

(q) Neither by the inferior nor superior parts.

(r) In some, but seldom.

(s) And also without Gold.

(t) By it self not very well, but other necessaries being first applied, it
may afterward be given with other sudorificks, especially with Water of
Ars^smart.

(u) In Water of Medow-sweet, Scordium, Scorzonera.

(w) In Water of Fearn-brake and Germander.

(x) In Water of Wallworts

(y) In a Decoction of the lesser Century, or fobrifugal Water.

(z) In a Specific Water for the Spleen, Water of Hart's-tongue, etc.

(aa) In Water of Rest-harrow, Saxifrage, Strawberries, and wild Alexander.

(bb) Yet this operation wants not its evidence, therefore not wholly to be
contemned: First, Hartshorn is impregnated with the Essence or sweetness of
Saturn, in the same manner as is ^hserved by Artificers, who often from the
ashes and burnt bo^s of great Ammals make (...), (or Capella's.) These Balls
only made of burnt Harts-hor^s first essen^ with the sweetness of Saturn,
heath^t under a Tile^ as is wont to be do^e, afternard g^th (...) to pou^er;
then join this Powder with an equal part of Butter of Antimony; a^stract the
same Butter by di^illation thri^, afterward by most strong spirit of
Wine-vinegar six it: repeat the cohobation, as is above declared By this means
there wall be no fear of its cor^ess; for the corrosives a^ partly taken away
by the burnt Hartshorn, and Essence of Saturn, ( of which see below of Sugar
of Saturn) and by the Vinegar d^, and are rea^y mort^, and a a^lesome
substance is only left fit for the medicinal uses above described.

(cc) Yet there remains some Acidity.

Diaphoretick Antimony, or fixed Ant^mony.
There is another Diaphoretick Antimony, which is made by only calcining the
same with Nitre. For by this calcination thrice repeated, which otherwise
Chemists call Detonation, all the Sulphurous and Mercurial parts perish, and
the earthy part is only left, which obtains the force of drying and provoking
Sweat. Beguinus describes this in Tyrocinium Chymacum lib. 2. chap. 12. in the
title of Diaphoretick Antimony, and indeed rightly. But experience, in
elaboration of this Medicament, has taught liquefaction, which the same
Beguinus grants; this ought not to be metallic, but only so much may be added
to the mixture, as shall be needful to make it flow like Salt. Moreover, after
the three calcinations with Nitre, it must always be washed with hot sweet
Water, and the Powder dried, which will be very white. In which operation the
Author of Tyrocinium and others acquiess. But far more subtle is the Powder
made, if after the last calcination, and some liquefaction the whole be beaten,
and for certain hours boiled in Fountain Water, and the Decoction while it is
hot filtred, and left in a cold place; for so by this boiling, that which is
more subril is dissolved in the Water, and at length precipited into an
exceeding white and thin Powder, which must be often washed and dried. And if
distilled Vinegar be put into the same filtred Decoction, the Powder more
easily and speedily descends, and is of greater virtue. Basilius Valentinus, in
his Triumphant Chariot of Antimony, under the title of fixed Flowers of
Antimony, or white Powder of Antimony (for so he and others call it) does
highly commend this for imposthumes of the interior parts; fifteen granes of
this being taken five times certain days together. The same he says is
exceeding prevalent in Lues-venerea, used in the same manner and Dose. And
indeed he is not beside the mark. In the latter Affect with Spirit of Guaiacum
exhibited, it wonderfully renews the whole substance of the Blood, and
perfectly exterminates the Neapolitan disease.

Various Mineral Bezoardicks.
Mineral Bezoar is either made by it self, that is, without any addition of
other Metal, or it is made with them.

Simple Mineral Bezoar.
First, that is made by it self, which I call simple, of which Quercetanus
makes often m^ation; afterward from the most excellent Sennertus, by my
communicating is expres^ more clearly in the Institutions of Physic, lib. 5.
sect. 3. chap. 8. It is made by it self thus: Either from the only Butter of
Antimony rectified, afterward thrice distilled with the Spirit of Nitre, it at
length calcined is made a simple Bezoardick of a most white form and color,
and of great virtue. Or else after Butter of Antimony is once made, then with
Scoria of Regulus of Antimony made without ^on, first with distilled Vinegar
(some use Spirit of Wine) a red Tincture is extracted, and the matter reduced
like to powder, and upon this Powder Butter of Antimony is again dishill'd; so
the same is made of a most red color. If this therefore in the usual manner be
fixed with Spirit of Nitre, it is made a simple Bezoardick, a proper Antimonial
Tincture, of rare and singular virtue.

Scheunemannus his Bezoardick.
Another Mineral Bezoar or Nepenthes is described by Scheunemannus, in his
little Book of the Fountain of Saint Anne, which he calls Hydromantia, page 59.
To the maimed Dragon, that is, Regulus of Antimony he adds Mars to be devoured
before the fight, which being devoured, he produces to the fight, that is, to
be distilled, and presently great ebullitions are caused, that is, they
vehemently wax hot, and so the Butter is distilled with apparent serenity, that
is, after all are come forth, the Iron left after distillation he washes: and
in the heat of the Sun revives, that is, he dissolves it in Spirit of Nitre,
which afterward with the Dragon, that is, with the Butter and Spirit of Nitre
he dissolves, and distills, and so in the manner otherwise usual fixes it. See
more in the same Author.

Solar Bezoar.
First, from our Author this is described, viz. he adds Gold, but it is very
corpulent, not rendered subtle, and then, therefore less useful to augment the
virtue, as we have above sometimes demonstrated. This is more excellent.
Dissolve Gold in Phylosophick Water, or Aqua Regis made of Nitre and Ammoniack,
the preparation of which is described in my Notes on Tyrocinium, etc. lib. 2.
chap. 3. From the Solution by Retort often distill the same Water, then pour on
fresh Solution, until by Retort the Gold come forth most red, which afterward
precipit to the bottom with vulgar Mercury, (the Mercury ought to be well
purified, otherwise the noxious Feces of the Mercury will remain with the Gold)
then the precipitate, delivered from the Mercury by calcination, comes forth of
a purple color. This powder again dissolve in Aqua Regis, and to the Solution
join Butter of Antimony in a ten-fold proportion with the same Aqua Regis, by
Retort draw off the Menstruum, often repeating the distillations, afterward by
calcination reduce it to Powder, which, if the calcination be strong, will be
of a purple color. This Bezoardick is worthy of great commendation.

The same may be effect, if you shall join Gold dissolved in Spirit of Nitre
(fortified and impregnated, as before is showed) with Butter of Antimony in the
aforesaid proportion, and by repeated cohobations often separate the Menstruum,
and at length by calcining, deduce it to a Powder red in color.

Lunar Bezoar.
1. Dissolve fine Silver, or capellate in Aqua fortis, abstract it in Balneo to
a dryness or oyliness, from this, with Spirit of Wine, draw forth a green
Tincture, which (a ^ttle of the Spirit of Wine, being separated from the
Silver) join with an eight fold proportion of Butter of Antimony dissolved in
Spirit of Nitre, and according to Art by distillation fix it. So you will have
a green Bezoardick, most profitable for affects of the Head, especially for
Erysipela's of the Head in young Women it is very useful. See Practica
Chymiatrica, page.

2. Or from Silver, with common Sulphur calcined, with Spirit of Urine (of
which in Microcosmical preparations, under the Title of Urine, to extract
Vitriol from Metals, I speak) extract a blew color, which is otherwise called
Ultromarine or Lazurine, this dissolved in Aqua fortis, join with ten times so
much Butter of Antimony moistened in Aqua fortis, repeating the before appointed
labors, you will have a Lunar Bezoar of the same, or else of greater virtues.

3. Or fine Silver, dissolve it in Aqua fortis, precipitate the same with Oil
of Salt of Tartar made per deliquium, or by Solution in common Water in a large
Vessel. It will precipitate the bottom like Bombace. Asterward edulcorate it,
and with distilled Vinegar extract it, then it will acquire a blew color, but
if it stand longer a green. With this tincture proceed, as with the residue.

4. But most excellent of all, is the following Lunar Bezoar; if Silver with
Spirit of Nitre be reduced to Vitriol, and with Butter of Antimony, according
to Art, made into a fixed Powder. For by this meant, the substance of the
Silver, is by the Spirits of Nitre, rendered more apt and easy to be
incorporated with the Butter of Antimony, and is made more efficacious for
Medicinal use.

Saturnine Bezoar.
In like manner Saturnine Bezoar is made of glass of Saturn (which is made of
Minium and Flints melted together) which must often with the same Butter of
Antimony be rectified; which being done, extract a tincture, and in the
aforesaid manner fix it with Spirit of Nitre. It in all affects of the Spleen
is a powerful remedy.

Joviale Bezoar.
Regulus of Antimony made without Iron vj. to which when melted add of the most
pure English Tin, in like manner melted iiij. Or that it may be made du
Amalgama.
Make an Amalgama. Afterward, upon a Marble, reduce it to a most subtle Powder,
to which add of the best Sublimate Mercury an equal part, that is, x. and by
Retort, as above, etc. then by three times distilling with Spirit of Nitre fix
it, afterward calcine it, and while it is burning, extinguish it in Spirit of
Wine, dry it, and keep it for use. The Powder will be grizly. Dose from one
grane to two. It most powerfully provokes Sweat, and is of admirable use in
opening obstructions of the Liver.

Martiale Bezoar.
From Crocus of Iron, made only by the benefit of fire (as is described in
Tyrocinium, lib. 2. chap. 15.) with rectified Butter of Antimony, by digestion
abstract a most red Tincture. The Butter of Antimony impregnated with the
Tincture, in the usual manner fix with Menstruum of Spirit of Nitre. It is a
Specific, and most excellent remedy in all fluxions of the Belly, especially
in such as take their beginning from the Liver. The color of it is like the
color of the Liver, Leverfarb. See Scheunemannus in Hydromantia Paracelfica,
page 59. where he has a Martiale Bezear.

Venereal Bezoar.
In the same plain manner, from scales of Brass, by digestion with corrected
Butter of Antimony, is drawn a Tincture, which by often distillation with
Menstruum of Spirit of Nitre, is fixed. Besides its other virtues, it obtains a
most certain alexiterick force, in every kind of Gonorrhea.

Mercurial Bezoar.
From glass of Mercurius vitae (the description of which is already delivered)
with reclified Butter of Antimony, a red Tincture is extracted; the same
therefore, by Spi^ of Nitre fixed, becomes an excellent Bezoardick, in virtue
not inferior to the former.

Note. If you join Mereurius vitae with Butter of Amimony, and afterward with
Spirit of Nitre fix it, what I pray will be the Effect thereof? Is not the
exceeding purging property by the same Butter corrected, and so should be given
in a greater Dose? Diligently consider.

By this means it is manifest, Bezoardicks or Diaphoreticls may be made with
all Metals, in which the virtuous parts of those Metals, conjoined with Butter
of Antimony, and by the noble Menstruum of Spirit of Nitre fixed, are converted
to excellent Memcines. Likewise very many other things may, with these in the
former manner, be described and prepared, which perhaps was not thought of by
the former Age.

Now let Libavius go, and contentiously declare to the World, that no new thing
is discovered.

Spirit of Tartar.
Of the best white Tartar ( viz. which in breaking shines) (a) 6 lib. wash it
with Rainwater warm, (b) until in it no dusty filthiness be perceived, then
wash it with warm (c) Wine very well, and dry it in the Sun, or in a Hot-house,
and reduce it to Powder. Or wash, and dissolve pulverisate Tartar in hot (d)
Rainwater, what remains in the bottom undissolved, boil in Rainwater that it
may dissolve, afterward silter it, evaporate the Water leisurely, and put this
last part in a cold place, that the Tartar may again be Crystalized, (e) and
this is purified Tartar, (which also per se is Cathartick, (f) if j. be taken
in flesh-broth) and is hereby rendered most apt for distillation. Put this into
a Cucurbit luted, (g) and in an open fire distill it like Aqua fortis, yet with
great circumspection this must always be minded, that the Receiver being large
and capacious, be exceeding well Luted to the Head, by reason of the subtle
penetrancy of the Spirits, least the virtue of this spiritual Water vanish into
Air. At first let the fire be gentle, afterward make it more strong, till all
the Spirits be come forth, and the Receiver filled with Clouds, again become
transparent and clear. Use your endeavor so to temper the fire, as it may not
be too vehement, by reason of the penetrancy of the Spirits. The Water first
comes forth, then the fetid Oil; separate these by a Separatory: (h) the Water
or Spirit which first comes off, correct and rectify in a Cellar, by placing it
^; days in cold or moist Sand. The Oil must be corrected with distilled
Vinegar, by Retort in an open fire, where with the Vinegar it will come forth,
sometimes of a red, and sometimes of a Citrine color; and so the Vinegar
receives the Empyreuma of the Oil, and the Oil it self is rendered sweet in
favor, and of the color of Gold. The Water or Spirit, must afterward be
distilled by Alembeck in Ashes, and rectified twice or thrice, that it may be
pure, and not of so evil savor, yet the smell cannot be wholly taken away
without loss of the virtues. If from the Caput mortuum of this, by Art you
extract a Salt, and with it rectify this Spirit in Balneo, (t) then the great
stink (k) will for the most part be removed: for in the same manner, (l) all
Oils by abstraction with their own proper Salt, may be rectified from the
stink that usually attends them.

Or in digestion circulate (m) this Spirit with a like quantity of Spirit of
Wine, so the odor will be more pleasant; or you may rectify it upon Cloves.

Or else some drops of Oil of Vitriol digected, with two or three spoonfuls of
Spirit of Wine, and afterward mixed with Spirit of Tartar, amends the odor.

Some mix it (n) with a little Rose Water, to render it more savoury.

Olservation.
The evil odor of Spirit of Tartar is not to be wholly removed nor feared,
since it has the signature of stinks, vi^. when in the Pest, or other venomous
discases, it is exhibited with great help to the sick, it abundantly expels the
venenate humors by f^tid ^eats.

Virtues and Use.
1. Almost all other Medicaments and Arcanums, this only excells in removing
all obstructions (o) and putrefactions.

2. If it be given thrice a day, it much helps in the Paralysy, for it
penetrates and corroborates (p) the whole Body, which is chiefly required in
this disease.

3. It is happily used in the Dropsy, with Water of Soldanella and Wallwort: It
may also be given with Oil of Vitriol, then it expells the Water by Urine, (q)
whatsoever is not this way effected, is any other way difficultly cured (r).

4. It corrects the evil of the Menses retained (s).

5. In the beginning of the Leprousy it helps (t).

6. In the Erysipela, with an equal weight of Treacle, (u) about the end of the
disease j. being exhibited, yet so, as in strong bodies, the cutting of a Vein
precede.

7. The Jaundies, and all diseases arising there from it (w) expells.

8. In Lues venerea, (x) it is a singular medicine, if exhibited with Mineral
Turbith; for it expels the internal Lues from the Center, the remaining scurfs
being afterward anointed with Oil of Guaiacum fall off.

9. From the center to the circumference and superficies, it expells every
latent Scab, Tetter, or other Pimples (y).

10. It provokes Sweat.

11. It helps in the Pleurisy and Quinsey (z).

12. In diseases of the Head it is also useful (aa).

13. In Fevers, (bb).

14. In Contractures. (cc) For by the use of this, I saw David Syderocrates
Spirensis a quondam Physician, with the application also of external Balsoms,
perfectly cure the once noble Lady Catherine Bappenheimia, now at rest in
Christ, who with Cholick dolours, was neither able to stir Hand nor Foot.

15. In pricking dolours of the sides (dd).

Dose j. to ij. in Specific and convenient Waters.

True Sulphur of Tartar (ee) (exceeding combustible) has always been greatly
esteemed by expert Philosophers: It is extracted by the benefit of the
Homogeneal spirit; it by some has been circulated, with dissolved Gold, but
whether the end answer their greedy expectation, let experience judge.

(a) This is a sign of good Tartar.

(b) It is not always recessary it should be warm.

(c) It needs not.

(d) By bor^ng.

(e) Partly to the superficies of the Decoction, partly to the sides of the
vessel.

(f) It is otherwise called cream of Tartar, of which we above treat in the
beginning, under the title of universal digestive; it is indeed a spirit most
commodious for this preparation, for by boiling, it is made more pure, wh^nce
also the spirit is rendered more subtle.

(g) An Earthen Retort.

(h) It is better at first not to separate them, but reserve them to a further
rec^fication and fortification of the whole Spirit, which is done by the proper
Salt, joined to the aforesa^ Spirit, and united with the whole; this may thus
be performed: From the black Capat mortuum in the usual manner extract a Salt,
as is done in Specificum purgans. This Salt by certain solution and
coagulations well purified, join with the whole which came forth in the former
distillation, and in a vessel well closed aigest it in Balneo, until all the
Salt be plainly dissolved. Which, when you so find, impast and mix the whole
with dry Argilla, and then by Retort in an open fire urge it, so the whole Salt
will come forth with the Spirit and the Oil rectified, and spiritually subtle,
inseparable from the Spirit of Tartar. Afterward the setid Oil must be
s^parated from the Spirit, and both the Oil and Spirit rectified according to
the Authors mind. Thus all Salts may be extracted.

Note. The conjoyning of the Salt with the Spirit renders it more penetrative,
and so more powerful in operation.

(i) It is better first to render it spiritual, with the same Spirit, than that
the Spirit be rectified by it.

(k) Some thus prepare it more happily for removing contumacious, enormous, and
difficult obstructions.

Aperitive compounded Spirit of Tartar.
Of the simple Spirit drawn from Cream of Tartar, as is already said, 1 lib.
Spirit of Wine iiij. To these when mixed add of Vitriol, with moderate heat
dried to a redness, 2 lib. leisurely moisten it in the aforesaid Spirits,
digest them for eight days in Balneo, afterward by Retort, gradually increasing
the fire force all. Then the whole being come forth, pour it upon the black
Caput mortuum of Tartar, from which the simple Spirit is made; digest it for
twenty four hours, afterward the Water imbibed with the tincture of Tartar by
inclination separate, the remaining feces of Tartar calcine to a whiteness,
from which, with the Water before tinged, by placing it in a hot place for
twenty four hours, extract a Salt; this Water by filtting purefy. This from j.
to ij. in appropriate Waters is given with very good success, in contumacious
obstructions of the bowels, discoloration, wateriness, between the skin and
flesh, and diuturnal Fevers.

(l) Salts in gentle distillation retain the evil savor, which arises from the
combustible Oil, yet if from both removed, they would be rendered more pure.

(m) It were also good it were essencified with its own Salt, yet is very
expediently done either with Wine or Cloves.

(n) This operation ought to be very exact, otherwise by mixture it may be
rendered more weak.

(o) In obstructions and putrefactions it ^s very powerful from the Salt,
either separated from the blood, or resolved. Yet in obstructions more
excellent is aperitive compounded Spirit of Tartar.

(p) It frees the Nerves from tough phlegm, and viscous putrilageousness,
which in this dis^ase is chie^y required.

(q) After the use of other necessaries.

(r) Therefore the former preparation with Spirit of Vitriol is not to be
contemned, but the m^re approved of.

(s) In water of Mugwort, or infusion of Borrage-flowers.

(t) In Wine.

(u) In Water of Elder-flowers or Senecio.

(w) In a decoction of Strawberries or root of Selandine, yet the (...) this
case Butter.

(x) Afterward sometimes Spirit of Guaiacum may be given with Water of Arsmart
gathered in the latter end of September and October. The blemis^ (...) Lues
Vener^ (...) taken away by anointing with Sugar of Saturn dissolved in
Rose Water.

(y) In Balsamic Fumatory-water.

(z) In Water of Carduus-bened, Carduus Mariae, and Corn-pop^y.

(aa) In Water of Majoran and Vervein.

(bb) In a decoction of the lesser Century, Sowthistle, Tobacco.

(cc) In contractures occasioned by the Cholick, vehement purgations must at
first be jorborn. Here Vegetable Purgations are more convenient than Mineral.
spirit of Tart^r after the use of our Vegetable Panchymagogon, or Extract of
black Hellebore, may be da^ given, as also to provoke Sweat, but not too much;
for reason and experience teach, that to this case we must leisurely proceed,
afterward Topics may be used, among which the Galbanet of Paracelsus is most
excellent, the preparation of which, and manner of applying, See Practica
Chymiatrica of our Edition page. This no Contracture can resist, so as if the
Phisicians judgment correspond with the Patients desire, the sick may be cured
^n fourteen days or little more.

(dd) In Water or Syrup of Flowers of Corn-poppy, or Water of the Flowers of
the Slow-tree.

(ee) This Caustic Sulphur of Tartar is a Tincture extracted of the same,
which in Medicine is of admirable use. Some, and that lately, have sought from
this Sulphur the Medicine of Metals; but what they have therein done, has
neither been agreeable to the ^d of the more sincere Philosophers, nor to the
convenience of Nature. We therefore leaving such to their diversity of
Opinions, shall in this place treat of Medicinals. The genuine preparation of
this Sulphur follows.

Sulphur or the true tincture of Tartar.
First, let Salt of Tartar be so prepared, as by frequent Solutions,
Coagulations, and Fusions, it may at length acquire a perfect purity. This thus
purefied put into a strong Crucible in vehement fire, and when in Flux keep it
so, until it be converted from a green color to a blew, and be of so great
Acrimony and Erosion, as if a little of it be put upon the tongue it burns like
fire.

Extract it with Spirit of Wine, viz. Homogeneal, pouring on the same very
gently, not hastily; till it be covered with the Spirit three fingers, and so
leave it for some time in a cold place, afterward in Asnes gently boil it, and
repeat this extraction as long as there shall be any need thereof. The Spirit
of Wine separated by distillation, a liquor will remain red as blood and of a
fragrant odor: Which lastly, join with fresh Spirit of Wine to cover it one
finger, and in a Phiol with gentle heat of Athanor digest for some time, and it
will remain a liquid red.

Of this from four to eight drops exhibited in rich Wine, vehemently by Urine
expels the Diseases of the inferior Bowels. In Hypochondriack Melancholy,
Dropsy, Cachexy, and all obstructions, it is a most excellent Remedy. And which
is most of all to be admired, the barenness of the Womb, whether from the
frequent use of Purgations or of Powder of Serpents, or else by nature or age
it be contracted it wonderfully helps, and the lu^icity of the Intestines
restores to their Pristine state, exciting the expulsive virtue; if for certain
days two or three drops be taken in Wine before sleep. It takes away the Stone
of the Reins and Bladder. From 1 lib. of the Salt of Tartar thus prepared there
^cely remains iss. The sign of perfection is, when in Flux it acquires a blew
color. See also Practic^ Chymiatrica of our Edition, page.

Diaphoretick in peracutis of Paracelsus, or Mixtura simplex.
Para^elsus in his Counsels to Physicians, which are extant Tom. 5. (set forth
in Germany in quarto) page 128. makes mention of a certain Diaphoretick in
peracutis, the description of which he also has in his Book of the Pest, ad
sterzingenses Tom. 3. page 116, and 117. of the same Edition. It is of
admirable virtue, therefore not to be neg^cted, some in their daily practice
call it Mixtura simplex; yet of it self it is a compounded Medicine of Spirit
of Tartar, Spirit of Treacle, Myrrh, and Spirit of Vitriol: but afterward being
profitably used, as a basis for other compositions necessary in many diseases,
and with diverse mixtures conjoined, is therefore called mixtura simplex. It
consists of three Spirits, viz. Spirit of Treacle Camphorate, Spirit of Tartar,
and Spirit of Vitriol, worthy of labor and consideration. The preparation of
it is thus: First make Spirit of Tartar, as we have already said; then make
Spirit of Treacle in this manner, Of old Treacle Andromach, v. Fine red Myrrh
ijss. Oriental Crocus, ss.


To these, when mixed in a Cucurbit, pour of the best corrected Spirit of Wine
x. with a convenient Blind-head aptly fitted and closed, set it for sometime
behind a Furance, or in the Sun. Afterward put on an Alembeck with a Neck, (but
before this be put on, into the mixture must be put ij. of choice Campher
beaten) aptly fitting a convenient Receiver well luted thereto; and with most
gentle heat of Balneo, at first distill a Liquor, afterward with a boiling
Balneo, and the excellent Spirit, together with the Camphire will come forth.
The vessel cooled, again pour upon the matter the same distilled Liquor, before
drawn off, the vessels being very well closed, first digest, and then distill
it as before, repeat the labor the third time. And so you will have the best
and most excellent Treacle-water, exceeding penetrative, which given with
certain drops of its own Oil, separated from it, is very profitable in the
Pest and Poisons. Dose three or four drops.

Then make Spirit of Vitriol in this manner.

Of Ungarick Vitriol, by solution and coagulation, excellently well cleansed
and purified what quantity you please, imbibe it with the best Spirit of Wine,
that it may be made like a Paste. Afterward by Retort, with a capacious
Receiver annexed, in a strong open Fire first distill off the Spirit of Wine,
and then the Phlegm also, always observing degrees of heat; at length with
most strong fire force it, that all the Spirits may come forth. After the
vessel is cooled by distillation in Balneo, first separate the Spirit of Wine
from the distilled Spirit, and afterward the Phlegm; the remaining Spirit of
Vitriol by Retort in Sand force, and you will have corrected Spirit of Vitriol.
Of these three Spirits make the Diaphoretick in peracutis of Paracelsus, in
this proportion. Spirit of Treacle-water Camphorate v. Spirit of Tartar iij.
Spirit of Vitriol j.


Mix these, and keep them in a quiet place, in a vessel very well closed. The
Dose of this Diaphoretick in peracutis is j. in a convenient Vehicle or Liquor,
with respect to the nature of the Disease and Patient. It is a principal
Diaphoretick in several most gr^vous, especially sharp diseases. In curing the
Epilepsy it happily excells, in the Pl^isy it is present Remedy, it dissolves
obstructions of the Bowels, asswages Inflammations, and by Sweat expells the
venom from the Heart to the exterior parts. It allays the heat of Fevers, and
consumes their matter: Profits Melancholy, heats the cold Matrix, and removes
hysterical Suffocations, provokes the Menses, and hinders their preternatural
Flux.

Transparent Gold.
For a third and fourth Diaphoretick, in stead of a Crown, I here add
Transparent Gold, which is also barbarously called Perspectable, and Panacea,
compounded of Sulphur of Antimony. The former is translucid glass of Antimony,
with which in melting Gold is mixed, from which mixtion and transparency it
takes its name. The preparation is after this manner:

Of most pure Gold ss. Ungarick Antimony viij. put them together in a Crucible
placed in the fire, when in Flux pour it out, yet beware it be not converted to
a Regulus. This mixture grind exceeding well, that it may be a most subtle
Powder, which calcine (after the same manner, as Antimony is calcined when
prepared into glass) until it yield no more fume. When you have the Powder
thus fixed, set on the Fire a Pot, that it may be very hot, and be as it were
reduced to glass; afterward pour the Powder into it leisurely, while it is so
very hot, and let it flow so long, as till it be plainly converted to a red
transparent glass, which you may prove with an Iron Rod; and you will find the
Gold in the bottom of the Crucible half diminished. Pour it out into a Basin,
and you will have the Transparent Gold with glass of Antimony in equal weight
mixed. Of this Transparent Gold Pulveritate what quantity you please, upon it
pour Spirit of good Wine very well rectified, till it be covered four fingers,
the vessel being very well closed, set it in digestive heat, and the Spirit
from the Gold will extract a most red Tincture, which keep for use. Of this
Spirit from j. to iij. or more exhibited, provokes Sweat, cleanses the blood
from all impurities, and Tartarous seculencies, the resolved Salt of the
Microcosm, from whence the Dropsy proceeds, it coagulates, and exterminates
noxious phlegms from out of the Body. It helps such as are afflicted with the
Gout, delivers both from the pain and disease, especially if taken with Arcanum
of Flints, of which below in the Podagrical Specific. Dolours of Lues vencrea,
in the Periostium of the Arms and Legs it wonderfully remove; moreover in the
cure of Lues, especially in delicate persons, it is very profitably used in
changeable decoctions, as of China, Sarsaparilla, and Guaiacum. It cures
Ulcers. In the Pest, and other Epidemical Diseases, it is a principal
comforter. This Spirit neither provokes vomiting, nauseousness, nor siedge;
which properties the vulgar glass of Antimony has not, for that purges with
great violence, as is well known, therefore to be noted in the white stone.

Panacea of Sulphur of Antimony.
True Sulphur of Antimony is like Panacea, with Regulus of Antimony (made and
melted, as is now said, in Transparent Gold) conjoined and fixed. It has in it
self an Hydrotick virtue, therefore being duly and rightly prepared, may be
useful in expelling all diseases incident to humane bodies. Its preparation is
thus. From Cinnabar of Antimony, which comes forth in the distillation of
Flowers, and Butter of Antimony, as abovesaid. Red Sulphur may aptly be drawn
in this manner: Make a most strong Lixivium of Ashes of Harts-ease, and a like
quantity of Calx vive, as the manner is, with which boil Cinnabar of Antimony,
first exactly purified and pulverisate for three or four hours; the Lixivium
will be of a red color, and the Argent vive will flow in the bottom of the
vessel; the tinged Lixivium, by Inclination separate, and while it is hot
filter it through Paper, let it rest for eight hours or more, and so the
Sulphur of Antimony will sink to the bottom in form of a red Powder, which must
be separated from the Lixivium, and often edulcorated with common Water,
afterward with gentle heat dried. Of this and Regulus of Antimony of each j.
Oil of Sulphut made per Campane, or Oil of Vitriol iij. Digest them in a
glass Retort for certain days in a hot place, then distill it in Sand, thrice
cohobating it, the last time urge it in a fire of the fourth degree for twelve
hours, and it will all remain fixed in the fire. Of this j. of Salt, or
Magistery of Corals ij. mix them exactly, and make a Powder. Dose from ten
granes to fifteen and twenty. Repeat the exhibition often in diverse diseases,
especially Epidemical and Malignant. See Practica Chymiatrica of our Edition,
page.

VI. Confortative.
COmforting and corroborating (a) the internal and innate Balsome, clarifying
and cleansing all the Spirits and Elements of the Microcosm: In which,
according to Paracelsus, the curation is not effected by respecting either heat
or cold, (b) but by the virtue of the Arcanum, which is therefore to be
considered.

Cures that are performed by corroborating, asswaging, and mitigating remedies,
are more safe, certain, and excellent; because they come more near to the
nature and proprieties of the innate Balsome; wherefore these Confortatives,
with the former indications of Curing, viz. with purging, resol^ing, and
cleansing medicaments, also with Diuretics and Diaphoreticks ought to be mixed
and conjoined.

Nature is comforted by (...), or by insensible transpiration, also oftentimes
critically, (c) by Haemorchagia, spontaneously excited; so she is wont to expel
and discharge the diseasy matter, to the great delight and desired health of
the sick.

Salt (d) of Oriental Pearls.
There are diverse ways (e) of dissolving Pearls, some use Spirit of Vitriol,
rectified Spirit of Guaiacum, also Water of the crusts of Oak (f) bark: but it
is most simply and best performed by distilled Vinegar.

After solution abstract the Vinegar till it be dry, then dissolve the Salt in
distilled Rainwater, or (which is better) in May Dew, gathered upon Wheat,
filter it, and by evaporation dry it, repeat this labor five or six times,
until it be a most white Salt, freed from all its Acrimony.

The Use and Virtue of Salt of Pearls.
It is a most noble Cordial, not much inferior to Aurum potabile, being very
like in temperature and operation.

1. In Contractures, Resolution of the Nerves, Convulsion, and Phrensy (g).

2. It keeps the Body sound, (h) if hurt, restores it to its pristine state of
health, amonds Women's Milk, and the seed of either Sex corrects (i) and
increases.

3. To comfort the Brain, Memory, and Heart it is very beneficial, being
exhibited in Water of Cinnamon, Borrage, Bugloss, Sage (k).

4. It is a Prophylactick against the Apoplexy, and Vertigo (l).

5. It dryes and consumes all the depraved humors (m) in the Body, from whence
all kinds of the Gout and Fevers are wont to proceed (n).

6. It is good against Tabes, dryness, and aged witheredness (o).

7. In the Dropsy, it is useful for a confortative, after the use of more
general Medicament (p).

8. Against the Stone it is admirable (q).

9. It renews, increases and confirms the radical humidity, whereby it
preserves from extreme debility in Age (r).

10. It is a most certain preservative against the Paralysy, if ten granes be
taken twice a week in Malmesy wine (s)?

11. It mitigates the Venereal evil, ten granes being taken ten days together
(t).

12. In the Epilepsy, it is a singular Medicament. It must be exhibited morning
and evening six weeks together (u).

13. It preserves from the Gout, if ten drops of the Salt be daily used, and
the use continued for twelve days (w).

14. It fortifies the humor of Life, and internal Nature in all Members (x).

15. Against trembling, palpitation of the Heart, (y) and swounings in
Cinamonwater.

16. Also it strengthens the Child in the Womb (z).

Dose.
Dose of the Salt from ten, twelve, fifteen granes to j. with convenient
waters, as Water of Cinnamon, Bugloss. Also it may be given in May Dew, (aa)
gathered upon Wheat or other grane.

Or with Water of Rorella, or Ros solis, Herbs and flowers which in distilling
send forth yellow drops.
(bb) which in distilling comes yellow, as Water of Saffron, which is strange;
and the like is seen in the expressed juice of flowers of Longwort, being set for
some time in the Sun, and then distilled.

Note, If Pearls be dissolved in (cc) Botrin-vinegar, and the Salt edulcorated,
and in a Cellar, in the proper Months reduced to a liquor, and some drops (dd)
of this liquor be put into the best Alcohol of Wine, (to the admiration and
pleasure of the beholders) the Wine will be coagulated like Butter, stiff, that
it may be cut (ee).

(a) Viz. the general Specific.

(b) In exhibiting Confortatives, the qualities of the disease need not
accurately be enquired into, whether they be hot or cold.

(c) Nature must always be comforted before the Critical days.

(d) It is called Salt, because it resolves like Salt, but properly it is a
Magistery. For they are called Magisteries, in which the whole remains entire,
which in this preparation by distilled Vinegar may be seen. If in this
Solution, made by purified Vinegar, Spirit of Wine be poured, a little after
the Pearls per deliquium will be precipited; for the Spirit of the Vinegar is
mixed with the Spirit of Wine. And so the Pearls, freed from their grosseness
by the sharp Spirits, are visibly seen to come forth. This powder dried is
easily dissolved, nay, it is said, that in the Palm of the Hand it will melt.

(e) There are very many preparations of Pearls found out, and especially the
Salt of them no way inferior in virtue to that which is prepared according to
our Author's mind. Yet we will not contemn the vulgar preparation of Pearls,
since from them so prepared, are those two necessary compositions sold in
Shops, viz. Consection of Pearls hot and cold. Which though vulgarly prepared,
yet are they freed from impurities, being washed with Water of Roses, Cloves,
Nelissa, and Violets, and afterward upon a Porphery-stone, ground without the
help of any Metal, till they be rendered very thin and subtle, being ground in
the same manner, as Painters grind their colors to make them smooth. Yet by
this Levigation, the Pearls are scarcely so finely pulverisate, as to be
delivered from all their corporeity. Therefore they require Spagirick
elaborations, which may better improve their principal virtues, and render them
such as are the Salt of our Author, Magistery, and Quintessence.

Salt of Pearls is so called, because it comes nearest the form of Salt: we
shall not here (...)tion the third hypostatical principle, which may be drawn
from this Salt of Pearls, after the Sulphur and Mercury are removed; but
especially treat of Pearls reduced to a Liquor, by the benefit of a dissolving
Menstruum, and afterward, the Menstruum being removed, converted to the
likeness of Salt. The Author commends distilled Wine vinegar, as a proper
Menstruum for dissolving Pearls, but as he herein is not beside the mark, so
the use of other juices, for that purpose, are not to be contemned. Some by
express Juice of Lemons and Liquor of Beech, do thus perform the Solution of
Pearls.

Juice of Lemons expressed and purified 2 lib.

Liquor of Beech gathered in the Month of April 8 lib.

In an Earthen glassed Pot, gently boil these to 7 lib. to which add 1 lib. of
Juice of Lemons, then distill it in a Cucurbit twice or thrice. This Menstruum
keep in a glass well closed. Afterward Pearls washed in Wine, and dried whole,
put them into the same Menstruum, and they will be dissolved into a Liquor,
like new Wine or Must. Which afterward in Water of Melissa, or other Cordial
Water, exhibit from j. to ss. The most common Solution of Pearls is with
Vinegar, viz. if the process be so made, as the Author appoints. Some prepare
Vinegar thus: From Ashes of the knotty Herb Kalt 1 lib. (from which are made
Lixiviums and Sopes, also Glasiers use them to purisy their glass) with the
best distilled Vinegar vj lib. very leisurely poured on the Ashes, to prevent
the danger of overmuch heat, they distill it by thrice cohobating; whereby the
Vinegar is made sweet, and hardly at all biting; yet of exceeding virtue in
dissolving Corals and Pearls.

Moreover from that Solution of Corals and Pearls with distilled Vinegar, are
made Magisteries of the same; of which see Tyrocinium Chymicum, etc. with my
Notes lib. 2. chap. 19.

Oil of Tartar made per deliquium, being put into this Solution, causes it to
war white, by which means the Pearls and Corals dissolved are freed from the
Menstruum, and leisurely settle to the bottom; the dissolving Menstruum must be
often removed, and the Precipitate washed with sweet water and dried. The
preparation of resoluble Magistery of Pearls, by Juice of Citrine. See Practica
Chymiatrica of our Edition at Lipsensis, page.

Among these Menstruums, the priority is easily obtained by a certain secret
spirit, with its own phlegm, known to few. If Pearls ground a little upon a
Marbel be dissolved in this phlegm, and the Solution afterward freed from the
feces, be precipitated with a little of the other Spirit insused upon it, it
will be converted to a liquid, like Sperm, of so great volatility, that in
sight it will plainly vanish into Air.

This way is prepared Magistery of Corals and Pearls, Buttery Magistery of
Pearls.
it is called Buttery Magistery of Pearls, because it melts in the mouth like
Butter, of which below in Magistery of Corals.

Magistery of Pearls of Reverius Physician to the King of France. See Practica
Chymiat. of our Edition, page.

It is a singular preservative from the Gout.

Arcanum of Pearls.
A most excellent Arcanum of admirable virtues is prepared of Pearls, by the
benefit of Spirit of Lignum Guaiacum, which is thus made: From a sufficiently
large quantity of shavings of Lignum Guaiacum, Spirit of Lignum Guaiacum.
by Retort in a fire of Sand (or in an open fire) draw forth the sharp Spirit,
with which will come forth the fetid Oil; but this must be separated from the
Spirit, and reserved for other uses; (yet this Oil may be rectified with
toasted bread, and a little Tartar, so it looses all its fetid fatness; the
preparation also see in Practica Chymiatrica of our Edition, page.) With this
Spirit rectified, extract powder of Pearls, first subtly ground upon a
Porphery, placing it in gentle heat to digest, and the Extraction will be most
red. Re-iterate this extraction twice or thrice; afterward in the fire gently
calcine the Powder of Pearls, and again extract it, always with fresh Spirit of
Guaiacum.

Lastly, Most strongly calcine the Pearls, and with that Menstruum extract the
same Salt. All the Extracts mix, and by Alembeck in Balneo draw off the phlegm,
until upon the Superficies of the Extracted Liquor, a Skin appear of diverse
colors, which is a sign that the phlegm is abstracted, and that the Arcanum,
or only Essence of Pearls, is remaining in a coagulated form with Spirit of
Guaiacum, which are difficulty separable. This Essence or Arcanum of Pearls,
with a sufficient quantity of Water of Melissa, is suddenly dissolved, and
converted to a bright red color, and of excellent taste. Dose of the Arcanum
from six drops to fourteen.

Quintessence of Pearls.
Salt and Magistery of Pearls in Medicine are exceeding profitable, yet more
excellent is their Quintessence, which is the more interior, and more pure
Juice or Liquor by many Solutions, and digestions diligently from them
extracted. The way of Preparing it is set down by Anselmus Bood in his little
Book of Gems, chap. 38. Lib. 2. page 87. But in some part, the Description is
Imperfect, the following is more exact. A choice quantity of Pearls must be
dissolved in Spirit of Wine-vinegar, and this not otherwise performed, than is
described by the Author, viz. by distillation remove the Menstruum, and again
dissolve the Salt of Pearls in fresh distilled Vinegar, and removing the feces
abstract again by distillation the same Menstruum; this operation of Solution
with Spirit of Vinegar and Coagulation, (always rejecting the feces) must be
continued, until no more feces, after the last Solutions, do at all remain, and
so the Pearls will be freed from all impurity. Then with Rainwater, or
May-dew, the purified Salt of Pearls must be dissolved, and this watery
Menstruum often removed, the Spirits of the Vinegar remaining with the Pearls,
by distillation in Ashes must be drawn off, when the watery Menstruum remains
sweet, after abstraction it is a sign the Spirits of the Vinegar are separated.
To this most pure Salt of Pearls in a Phiol, pour on rectified Alcohol of Wine,
till it be covered two fingers, the glass well closed set to digest in Balneo
for eight or ten days, in which time the Pearls will send forth their Essence,
upon the Superficies of the Spirit of Wine like to thick Oil, which warily
separate; pour on other Alcohol of Wine allowing the like space of time for
digestion, gather the Essence, this do, till no more Essence appear to rise,
and the whole Salt, leaving very few feces, be converted into an Essence. This
again with Spirit of Wine circulate for some time, afterward separate the
Spirit by gentle heat in Balneo, and keep the Essence. Moreover, if the same
Essence of Pearls be with Spirit of Wine by Retort in Balneo, or a dry
Reverbetatory certain times cohobated, then it will all come forth of greater
virtue, by reason of its exceeding subtilty: It is useful; in the like diseases
the Salt of Pearls is used. Dose from six drops to ten or fourteen.

(f) Of Shoots and Tops.

(g) In Water of Buglosse, Enula Campane, Flowers of Tilia, Lyllies of the
Valley.

(h) In Malmesy-wine, or Cinamon-water.

(i) In Water of Fennel.

(k) In Water of hearts, of the Heart and Boar, or in Saxon's Cordial-water.

(l) In Water of Lavender, Black Cherrys, Flowers of Tilia, Lillys of the
Valley, Epileptick Water of Langium, Anhaltina.

(m) And fluxions.

(n) In Water of Serpillum, better in the Essence thereof extracted with Wine.

(o) In Water of Coltsfoot, Lungwort.

(p) In Water of Vincetox, Germander.

(q) In Water of the greater Urtica, Radish, Rest-harrow Wild-Alexander.

(r) In Cinamon-water.

(s) In Water of the Herb Paralysy. In this case wonderful excellent is the
Arcanum of Pearls, of which above.

(t) In Water of Arsmart.

(u) In Water of Flowers of Tilia, Peony. The Arcanum of Pearls is here more
useful.

(w) In Water of the greater Colewort.

(x) With Malmesy, or Breast-milk.

(y) In Saxon's Cordial-water.

(z) In Aqua vitae mulierum, or Embrionate Balsome.

(aa) Distilled.

(bb) Gathered at the rising of the Sun, in the decrease of the Moon.

(cc) That is, made of Turpentine, or else dissolved in Spirit of Salt Nitre,
and edulcorated: In the Month of June, July, and August, in a Cellar dissolved
into a Liquor.

(dd) Injected.

(ee) Yet with heat it may be reduced to its pristine form.

Salt (a) of Corals.
In the same manner Salt of Corals, of the Shells wherein Pearls grow, (b) of
Crabseyes, and other crusted Stones (c) is prepared.

But all these Salts, must in a Cellar upon a Glass-table or a Porphery-stone
be resolved into a Liquor, in the Months June, July, or August, for then by the
Antiperistasis, Cellars are more cold; but the resolving them in other Months
is vainly attempted, or at least it will much more difficultly be effected,
than in the proper Months.

The true tincture (d) of Corals genuinely prepared, has been hither to known
to no man; for the best, which is believed to be extracted from the affusion of
Water of Honey, is rather the Tincture of Water of Honey, than of Corals. There
are many Menstruums, which standing for some time in digestion do of their own
accord war red; (as in Spirit of Turpentine, though often rectified, is plainly
seen) and so the incircumspect are deceived judging they have the Tincture it
self of the thing dissolved, when it is only of the Menstruum dissolving. Nor
does Spirit of Wine poured upon Salt of Corals, although it be colored by
digesting in Balneo, extract the true redness. There are some who dissolve
Corals in Spirit of Salt, afterward pouring upon the Solution the best
rectified Spirit of Wine, which swimming on the top, they say, attracts to it
self a Tincture, and afterward the separation by a Separatory, and abstraction
per se in Balneo, being performed, the true Tincture is extracted.

Use and Virtues of Salt of Corals.
As Corals wonderfully increase, so also admirable are their Arcanums,
Mysteries, and wonderful secrets: for as when whole and shining, according to
the Commentation of Paracelsus, they are excellent against Phantasy,
Phantasmes, Spectrum, Evestrum (e) and Melancholy: so the Salt in Medicinal
use, has in it self singular Virtues.

1. Such is the force and nature of Salt of Corals, as it so renews and
cleanses the blood in the whole Body, that all diseases and affects, which
take their beginning from corrupted blood, are in short time removed and
healed, and the body, as it were, renewed, is restored to its pristine health
and vigor.

2. It resists all immoderate fluxes in Women, being taken in Water of Plantane
(f).

3. All fluxes of the Belly (g).

4. All deflux, and rejection of blood, the Hemtodes (h).

5. To mundefy, or renovate the blood, in Water of Funitory or Succory.

6. It resists putrefactions, strengthens the Heart, and vital Spirits, and
preserves the body from violence of poisons (i).

7. It comforts, and corroborates the Stomach, and innate heat (k).

8. It removes all obstructions, especially in the Lungs, Liver, and Reins (l).

9. It resolves the congealed blood (m).

10. In most vehement suffocation of the Matrix, (n) when all other things are
without success: also in superfluous Menses, in Water of Mugwort, Melissa, and
Peneroyal.

11. In the Dropsy, Cramp, Paralysy, and Epilepsy, in Water of Cinnamon,
continuing the use for some time.

12. Against the Stone, in Water of Rest-harrow.

Dose.
From six granes to ten, of j. or ij. with respect to Age, and the vehemence of
the Disease.

In a rete Egg, in stead of common Salt in broth in rich Wine, or Cinnamon
Water. Also of this, Tablets may be made.

Externally applied it cures Ulcers (o).

(a) To prepare Salt of Corals, the same Menstruums are convenient, which were
before used in Solution of Pearls; neither is there any other way of preparing
Magistery of Corals, than is ^re used in preparing Magistery of Pearls Yet for
greater light-sake, Butery Magistery of Corals.
call observe this following preparation of ^ery Magistery of Corals, made with
Magic fire. Of red Corals, exceedingly well pulverisate, what quantity you
please, your upon it Magick-fire, that is, dissolving Spagirick Spirit, it
presently begins to boil, as soon as ^ro is put under it moreover in Voiting,
it at first appears red, but this does presently vanish, and the Spirit appears
co^ like the white froth of boiling Mill, the gross and feculent watter
settling to the bottom. This milly foaming Spagirick Spirit, very gently
sepanate from the feces, and in a more strong fire of Sand distill it; in the
bottom will be left a powder plainly impalpable, which with distilled May-dew,
must be often edulcorated, and dried in the Sun. This keep for use. It melts in
the Mouth like Butter. It is a great Arcanum in correcting the inordinate flux
of the Menses, and in corroborating the Stomach, in dissolute Diseases, as
Dysentery, Diatrhea, and Epilepsy.

(b) Mother of, Pearls, perlenmutter.

(c) Crystals Judaist-stouts, Flints, Lynxes, Sponges, Pench^s.

(d) Although the way if making Tincture of Corals be difficult, yet that it is
not plainly impossible, experience pro^ neither is that which is made by the
extraction of Honey, rather to be esteemed Tincture of Honey. For the Spirit of
Honey rightly prepared dissolveth Gold, with Sulphur and calcined Mercury, (as
(...) in Tynocinium Chymicum, lib. 2. (...) 16.) and draw forth the Tincture
thereof, which arises from the Gold dissolved in the same Spirit (...) Much
more therefore may it draw that self Tincture of Corals, which afterward by a
better Menstruum, Tincture of Corals by Spirit of Honey.
viz. Alcohol of Wine, is set at Liberty. This Tincture of Corals by Spirit of
Honey is most rightly prepared after this manner. With Bags filled with Sand
(about the bigness of a man's Fist) injected into Honey, according to the law of
Art by Alembeck in Ashes make Spirit of Honey. This poured upon fragments of
Corals first calcined with Nitre, is presently colored, which pour off from
the feces, and with the same Spirit of Honey gently abstract it in Balneo. What
remains in the bottom, twice or thrice dissolve in distilled Water, evaporate
the Water, and coagulate the matter; this being done with Spirit of Wine,
extract a most red Tincture, afterward abstract the Alcohol of Wine to a
convenient consistency.

Thus by Spirit of Honey the true Tincture of Corals is extracted.

There are very many Tinctures of Corals carried about, yet they are not true,
but invented only to deceive, which indeed seems also to be the doubt of our
Author, who liberally professes he never saw the true, and genuine Tincture of
Corals. Nevertheless, by Experience it is found, that Corals send forth their
Tincture, and commit it to noble Mestruums, if all things be rightly done, and
other necessaries in just order and rule be adhibited.

We shall here describe two ways approved by Experience.

The first way of preparing Tincture of Corals.
First, Dissolve Corals in most strong Vinegar, as our Author teaches, the
Menstruum removed by distillation, gather their Salt. This Salt afterward must
be so long impregnated with distilled Vinegar, as till no more of the said
Spirit can at all be received into the Salt. Which being done, thus proceed: To
every pound of Salt of Corals, add the first time of most sharp distilled
Vinegar ij. then gently distill it, and the unsavory phlegm only will come
off. The second time add iij. of the former Vinegar, and again gently distill
it; so go on every time adding of the Vinegar, and increasing j. and distill it
until the Vinegar come forth as sharp, as when first poured on. See Tyrocinium
chap. 3. lib. 2. of Quintessence of Corals; yet the Process of Beguinus is not
perfect.

This impregnated Salt, putresy in a hot Balneo for twenty days, and afterward
by Retort, in a close Reverberatory or dry Balneo distill it, yet so as the
unprofitable phlegm be first evaporated, afterward the Spirits coming forth
white, receive a part in a capacious Recipient, and so go on, until all the
Spirits, with the Oil as red as blood, be come forth. This Spirit has a good
odor, and burns like Spirit of Wine, which must afterward by Retort be
rectified with the remaining red Oil. This noble Menstruum, produced partly
from the Vinegar, and partly from the Corals themselves, extracts a most red
Tincture, from fresh Corals poured into it; which, if afterward freed from the
Spirit by distillation, and then conjoined either with other cordial and
appropriate Water, or cohobated with them till it be rendered volatile, is a
most excellent Tincture of Corals, of most pleasant taste, and delectable odor.

The second way of preparing Tincture of Corals.
There is another Tincture more excellent than the former, although that
Menstruum extracts a Tincture from the Corals, yet it may be judged to be
rather from the distilled Vinegar; than the Corals themselves: This way,
because not sincere, cannot be very satisfactory to the ingenious, therefore
another way is found out whereby the Tincture may elegantly be extracted from
the Corals; which is thus: First, Calcine the Corals whole, not pulverisate, in
a fire of Reverberation, at first gentle, so as the live flame may but just
touch the Superficies of the Tests ( viz Iron Pots.
Dishes) placed in the Reverberatory Furnace, in which the Corals are put. By
this means in the first degree of fire the Corals will wax white, absconding
their native color: therefore the fire must be gradually increased, till from
their whiteness, they be converted to a yellowness, and from the yellowness
reduced to a perfect red, the whole substance of the Corals being rendered
spongeous and light: This operation for the most part is finished (...) two or
three days. When the Corals are thus made red, by the benefit of degrees of
fire, they are rendered fit to depose their proper Tincture into an other
Menstruum. If therefore these Corals thus prepared be injected into Spirit of
Wine, or Alcohol of Spirit of May-dew, they a little after into that same
Alcohol spontaneously send forth their Tincture, their feces remaining in the
bottom without any virtue. The Menstruum of Wine, by distillation being
somewhat separated, the Tincture remains most red, with a certain sweetness. It
is of such great virtue, that after the use of this sometimes repeated, it is
impossible any impurity in the blood of the whole body of Man, can remain. It
is given in convenient vehicles, from three drops to six, eight, or ten. Indeed
this Tincture of Corals ought to be highly esteemed by the Physician, for its
stupendous virtues, being exceeding suitable to the humane spirits. Note. There
is a tincture of Corals described in the two Parts of the Marrow of
Distillation of Conradus Kunradts.

(e) It is otherwise the perpetual and eternal Evestrum in the four Elements of
the World. It also signifies a prophetic Spirit, which presageth by a
precedent sign, and predicts something of certainty.

(f) Of Tormentil of the Oak: Of Frog-spawn.

(g) In Water or Decoction of Root of Tormentil.

(h) In Water of Plantane, Shepherds purse.

(i) In Water of Borrage, Buglosse, Cordial-water of Saxony.

(k) In Water of Mint, Peneroyal.

(l) In Waters of Sorrel, the lesser Century, Bindeweed, Liverwort. Hence it is
our Author above in the universal digestive, persuades to mix Salt, or Liquor
of Corals with digestives, that they may be more Deoppilative.

(m) In Water of Chervil, or the lesser Century.

(n) If you take Tincture of Gold made with Spirit of Honey, and Tincture of
Corals, of each six or seven granes, and mix them with six or seven granes of
Magistery of Pearls, you can have nothing more excellent in deplorable Affects
of the Womb.

(o) By sprinkling it on, or mixing with Playsters.

Liquors (a) of Gemms, as Rubies, Granates, Hyacinths, Topazes, Amethysts,
Chrystals, and also of Flints are thus prepared.
With Sulphur (b) the Powders of them (c) are three or four times burnt in an
open (d) fire, with a covered Crucible, afterward the fire must also be over
the Crucible, that it may be wholly covered therewith. Wash out the Sulphur,
and the Feces, (e) when well beaten, mix with a like quantity of Salt Nitre
well purified, and calcine them in a covered Pot in an open Fire, till they
flow; the Salt from the Powder, by reason of its corrosion, must be washed with
hot water, afterward upon the edulcorated Powder, pour Menstruum of Turpentine,
(f) diligently the first hours keep them stirring, least the matter congeal, so
they will be resolved: the Menstruum (g) afterward abstract (h) by Alembeck,
and the Salt remaining in the bottom dulcify often, always filtring and
evaporating the distilled Water. The same Salt in the above named Months put
upon a Marbel in a Wine-cellar, that it may resolve into a Liquor. (i) The
Feces remaining in the bottom, after sufficient extraction of Menstruum poured
on, may again be burnt with new Sulphur, and used for a further extraction of
Salt in the former manner.

(a) Liquors of Gemms are also numbered among Confortatives, not as the opinion
of some is, because it seems so by reason of the nature of precious stones; but
because these are derived from the same principle, as other Metals and Minerals
are. Therefore with them, in consentaneous proprieties, and colors, and also
other accidents, they correspond. So that deservedly the Liquors or Essences of
them, which are their more pure parts, freed from their elementary fetters, and
the substance of hard Coagulation, are to be esteemed; since they may be
inwardly taken with safety, and more satisfaction to the Physician, than if
unprepared, broke to pieces, or in powder, either by it self taken, or mixed
with other Medicaments. Note. The Problem of the Bezoar-stone, why we use it
crude; it is, because it is light and kindly, and may easily be shaved, it
sticks in the water, or easily melts in the fire.

(b) In equal parts.

(c) Made in an Iron Mortar.

(d) Applied leisurely round about.

(e) The Caput mortuum of Gems and Stones.

(f) Distilled upon Horse radishes.

(g) Pregnant with the Solution of Gems.

(h) In Sand.

(i) If upon the said Liquor, good Alcohol of Wine be poured, it from the
Liquor imbibes the Tincture or Sulphur to it self, and separates it from the
Salt underneath, remaining with the Alcohol supernating; both being separated,
reduce the Tincture (by abstracting the Menstruum) to a thick substance. But
from the Liquor of Salt draw off the Spirit of Wine, and with fresh Spirit of
Wine, and a like quantity of Vinegar of Turpentine distill it by Re^; after the
Menstruum is removed, the Salts will come forth in the likeness of Oil.

Radicate Vinegar which Huserus called Vinegar of Turpentine, the true
Menstruum of all Hard Stones.
Of Turpentine 2. or 3 lib. (a) pour upon it of distilled Vinegar (b) 2 lib.
and according to art distill them in Sand, at first with gentle heat, until the
Vinegar with the Spirit of Turpentine be come forth, afterward increase the
fire, and a yellow Oil will come forth, (and a sharp red Water, when the red
Oil begins to come forth cease the Operation.) Separate the Spirit of
Turpentine and Oil from the Vinegar, by a Separatory, and rectify (c) the
Vinegar alone upon Ginger (d).

Of this Vinegar (e) abundance should always be prepared in readiness, for with
it in the same manner are dissolved all Stones, used by Paracelsus, against the
disease of the Stone; as a little after shall be shown in its own place.

(a) Or 4 lib. of Turpentine, or which is best, of the thick Feces, that
remains in the bottom of the Vessel.

(b) That is Spirit of Wine-vinegar.

(c) Twice or three, until no Feces remain after distillation, but wholly come
off perfectly purified.

(d) It is better without Ginger.

(e) Also in another manner a most sharp Vinegar may be made; of the best Honey
one part, of River-water eight parts, boil them together till half be consumed,
or by boiling, as is otherwise wont, it be made into Metheglin: afterward put
this into a convenient Vessel, and by a hole on the top, hang in a Linnen-bag
Seeds of Rocket, a convenient quantity, leave it in a hot place, or set it in
the Sun, that it may be hot, and by little and little it is converted to a must
sharp Vinegar, which being distilled, dissolves Flints, and other stones also,
without any proceeding calvinations, being likewise commodious for many other
uses.

(f) Also the phlegm of the same Turpentine per se, with the distilled Spirit,
being often rectified, may be kept, and afterward joined with most strong
Vinegar, and used in like Operations of Solutions, but the former way is
stronger and better.

Oil of Cinnamon.
Oil of Cinnamon (a) legitimately prepared, amongst the most efficacious
Spagitick confortatives may properly be numbered.

Although the way of its preparation be obvious to all Chemists in their daily
use: Yet of this it is needful to advise, that Aromaticks, about to be
distilled, must not be reduced to Powder, as some preposterously are wont to
do, but only broke to pieces and moderately bruised, otherwise they will yield
you not half so much Oil, as I have sometimes found, to be their loss that so
operate.

This way more abundance of Oil may be had, than by the vulgar distillations.
The most choice Cinnamon break it to pieces, put it into a glass Retort, and in
a vaporous (b) Balneo distill it, then the Water and Oil (c) will come forth
together: The same Water pour upon fresh Cinnamon, and go on in distillation,
(d) which continue for some time in the same manner, and you will have great
abundance of Water and Oil; the Feces (e) in the bottom will be altogether
dry, black, and unsavory.

Virtues and Use.
1. It comforts all the principal Members of the Body, especially the cold
Stomach, Heart, and Brain, it takes away the stinking Breath, and causes the
sweetness thereof (f).

2. It answers the natural Balsom in the Body, (as also Oil of Cloves does the
same) it consumes the inward putrefaction; all fresh Wounds or Ulcers outwardly
it consolidates (g).

3. It takes away the cold Cough, and dolor (h) of the Head.

4. It Exhilarates the Heart, and comforts all the Members, if with it anointed.

5. It provokes the Menses (k).

6. It accelerates the Birth (l).

7. In dejections of the Mind it is a singular medicament, so also is the
Essence of Saffron extracted with Water of the Vine, (m) it is a principal
medicine where any one, through too much sadness, is almost come to desparation
(n).

Dose (o) two or three drops in Wine, Water of Melissa, or other Specific.

This way Oils may be drawn from all Aromaticks, far more efficacious and
subtle, than are prepared by the vulgar way, viz. from Cloves, Nutmegs, Mace,
etc.

If these Oils be applied in medicinal use, the application must be when the
Belly is soluble, and in such as be with Child (p) not above one drop must be
exhibited: the use of Oil of Cinnamon is more convenient in the Winter, than
the Summer.

There have been some, who with these Aromatic Oils, from Calx of Gold (q)
peculiarly prepared, have extracted a colored Essence, which medicinally
applied has yielded no small benefit to the Sick.

(a) More excellent is Oil made of the true Cassia-lignea, evilly by some
reported to be of a middle property, between Canella and Cinnamon; for it has
in it a certain and more gentle mucilaginousness, discernable plainly by
chewing, which in Cinnamon is not found: Moreover the taste of Cassia-lignea
has a stronger sharpness, and greater Oleaginousness; wherefore the Oil also
from it distilled, must, according to reason, be far stronger, and of greater
virtue.

(b) In a dry Reverberatory.

(c) But if in the end you urge it with more strong fire, the Oil ind^ed will
come (...) fetid, yet will be free from any Empyreuma, in the same manner as
the Author speaks (...) of fetid Oil of Tartar. It is a most excellent
Vulnerary, suddenly healing the old, as wel^ fresh wounds. It is made much more
powerful in Cassia, with a Mucilage.

(d) That is, with fresh rinds of Cinnamon, being first digested in heat.

(e) In preparing Salt very profitable, if the Feces be calcined with Sulphur,
it is (...) Crystalline.

(f) With convenient and appropriate Vehicles.

(g) Viz. if so distilled, otherwise, if with Wine, it is sharp and corrosive.

(h) In Tablets of Bechica.

(i) Hence some with it ancint podagrical Members.

(k) In Water of Mugworth or Sage, Penerayal, or of flowers of Cheiri.
White-violets, rather Wall-flowers.


(l) In the same aforesaid Waters.

(m) Gathered in the Month of March from Vines cut, and afterward distilled,

(n) And in Hypachondriack Melancholy.

(o) Dose from four drops to night.

(p) By reason of their obstruction.

(q) Here the craft and imposture of diverse Empericks, is to be detected,
whilst with Anmatick Oils, False Aurum p^abile.
especially the distilled Oils, they have endeavored to make, and to this day
do, Aurum potabile ( rather putabile) whereby every good man may know these
Beasts from true Chemical Doctors and Physicians.

Thurneisserus, and after him Huserus, and from them many others, with
distilled Oils of Aromaticks, especially Oil of Cinnamon, Cloves, Thyme, and
Tilia, with Oil of Camphire, filings of Gold, or the Calx thereof, have
reduced to a certain colored Essence, which they called Aur^m potabilo, and
fold it for the same at a very great price. But falsely. The Process is this.

First, Choice Camphire must be dissolved in Aqua fortis made of Nitre, and a
like quantity of Alum, and a little after the Camphire will swim at top of the
Water like yellow Oil, which must be often separated and kept a part. Then you
must have in readiness the Oils of Cinnamon, Cloves, Thyme, and Tilia, and
also a most subtle Calx of Gold. Then of Oil of Cloves v. Oils of Cinnamon.
Oils of Thyme, of each ij. Oils of Tilia j. Oil of Camphire dissolved in
Aqua fortis iiij. Most subtle Calx of Gold iiij.


Set all these in their proper Vessels a part, well slopt, that they may be in
readiness, for the operation must be very speedy; moreover, two Concha's of
glass, large enough to mix the superiors, must be at hand well cleansed. In one
Concha put the Oil of Camphi^e, in which inject the Calx of Gold, and on them
pour the Oil of Cloves, all will presently wax hot, and seem to boil; then
immediatelly pour it out of this Concha into the other, so continue pouring the
whole mixture backward and forward, that while it waxes hot, and is seen to
boil, the Calx of Gold may be mixed with them, and in the bo^ling be as it were
dissolved; for all will become most red, and thick, like blood. When this
emptying from vessel to vessel is performed, likewise add the rema^ning Oils,
and as before by pouring and repouring, backward and forward, mix all
diligently. Note. The glass Concha's, and also the Oils must be requisite for
this operation; the Oils must be pure without any watery phlegm, otherwise the
operation cannot be rightly effected. This Composition Thurneisserus kept as a
great Secret, and sold it exceeding dear, viz. ss. of it, for eighteen
Imperials. But the Hermetick Philosopher esteems this Emperick and gross
operation, worthy of contempt; for it is false, and far distant from the truth.
Indeed Camphire with Aqua fortis is reduced into an oily Liquor; yet with it is
conjoined the Spirit of Aqua fortis, therefore it is not true Oil. Now when
this Liquor is mixed with other fat Oils, there is a mutual ebullition, which
is not otherwise occasioned, but from the Saline Spirits of the Aqua fortis,
otherwise in like manner with other Oils sighting, by reason of their contrary
nature. Hereby little or nothing of the Gold is dissolved with them, or if any
be, it is not done by any of the Oils; but merely from the Corrosive Spirits
themselves, being heated by the working together of the Oils. Moreover the
same Oils, without any Calx of Gold, of themselves, being confusedly mixed, in
the manner we have already said, will become thick and red; therefore this
redness is from themselves, and not from the Gold. What good can be hoped from
colorable craft of this kind? Surely none, It is very like our Author knew
little or nothing of these deceits, otherwise he would have admonished
therefrom, rather than seem to defend so great folly.

Elixit (a) Proprietatis of Paracelsus.
Myrrh of Alexandria.

Epatick Aloes.

Oriental Crocus, (b) of each iiij.

Pulverisate all these diligently, and put them in a glass, moistning them with
the best Alcoholisate Spirit of Wine, afterward pour upon it rectified Oil of
Sulphur made per Campane (that Oil must be prepared from yellow Sulphur in
rainy weather, (c) so (...) will have the more abundance) until it be covered
four fingers, set (...) late for two months, (d) then what is tinged and
extracted by (...) separate, upon the matter temaining in the bottom pour good
Spirit of Wine, and by circulation for two months again extract a Tincture,
separate it, and mix it with the former colored Liquor. The Feces in the
bottom gently (e) distill, what first comes forth add to the former Tincture,
and again for a month without distillation (f) circulate them. This is sweet in
taste, not bitter, nor does it at all smell of the fire, as in distilling
vulgarly is wont to be. This must be diligently observed, that the matter must
first be moistened with Spirit of Wine, (g) that it may be like a Paste, and
then the Oil of Sulphur poured on, otherwise the whole matter will be burnt to
a blackness; (h) this is that Paracelsus studiously concealed.

Virtues and Use.
This, as Paracelsus says, is the Balsom of the Ancients, of very thin parts,
moderately hot and dry, and so preserving from putrefaction. It is a perfect
Elixir, in it are all virtues of the natural Balsom, and a principal
conservative virtue, especially in the aged.

1. In affects of the Breast and Lights it is admirably useful (i).

2. It is admirably efficacious against corrupted air, and the grievous
Contagion of the Pestiferous Lues (k).

3. It draws out diverse humors of the Ventricle, (l) comforts the Stomach with
the intestines, and preserves from dolours (m).

4. Hecticks, Catarrhs, and Coughs in Genere, it comforts and cleanses the
Breast (n).

5. It is profitable in coldness of the Head and Stomach (o).

6. It cures the Hemicrama and Vertigo (p).

7. It drives away dimness of Night (q).

8. It comforts the Heart, and strengthens the Memory (r).

9. It by little and little asswages Itching, and also the dolor of Ilium's,
Bones standing out of their place.
and the Ribs (s).

10. It dissolves the Stone of the Reins (t).

11. It cures the Quartane (u).

12. It preserves from the Paralysy and Gout. (w).

13. It sharpens the intellect, and all the Senses (x).

14. It removes melancholy, and causes cheerfulness (y).

15. By most strong conservation it hinders Age from surprising Youth too soon,
and retards hoariness (z).

16. It prolongs Life, abbreviated by excess in eating (aa) and drinking.

17. Wounds and inward Ulcers, it conglutinates in short time (bb).

18. Lastly, all infirmities, both hot and cold, by a certain propriety it
cures.

Dose.
From six granes to ten and twelve in Wine, or convenient and Specifick-water.

(a) Elixir in genere, is a Medicine healing all humane diseases, and removing
the impurities of imperfect Metals. Elixirs are Chemical Species, compounded of
more Species of Simples of diverse kind. Of such a Species is the Elixir
Proprietatis of Paracelsus, by him so called in his eighth Book of Archidoxes,
in the sixth Title of Elixirs. But why he calls it Elixir of propriety, the
reason seems to offer it self: For in it are plainly found natural harmonious
proprieties, to effect that to which it is appointed. These faculties therefore
are not knit together in the ingredients by preparation, but are natural and
proper in them, only they more happily discover themselves, when a true
extraction of their virtues is dexterously made, of which our Author rightly
advises. For Paracelsus left the description hereof somewhat imperfect.

(b) Saffron of Ungaria or Austria is better, because it may better be had
without Sophistication.

(c) Or in a Cellar.

(d) So are the words of Paracelsus, in his eighth Archidox. See Phytopaum in
Vincetox.

(e) In Balneo, least it smell of the fire.

(f) In a Vessel well closed.

(g) Impregnated with Angelica, Valerian, Enula, Worm-seed, Butter-bur, and
Pimpernel.

(h) From the spirit of Sulphurs, acting upon the Myrrh and Aloes, by reason of
their fatness.

(i) In Water of Coltsfoot, Hysop, Lungwort, Scabious.

(k) In Water of Meadow-sweet, Vincetox, Valerian, etc.

(l) By cleansing.

(m) In Water of Mint, Peneroyal, Wormwood-wine, and Malmesy.

(n) In Water of Betony, rather in Arcanum of Coltsfoot.

(o) In Water of Ginger, in Spirit of Calamus Aromatic.

(p) In Water of Borrage and Bugloss.

(q) In Water of Fennel, Eyebright, Rue, Selandine, Valerian.

(r) In Aqua Magnanimitatis, in Water of Rosemary-blossomes, or rather the
Arcanum thereof.

(s) In Water of Elder-flowers, Commomil, Sloes.

(t) In Water of Saxifrage, Rest-harrow, Wild-Alexander

(u) In Water of Watercresses, or a Decoction of Rapes.

(w) In Water of the herb Paralysy, Germander.

(x) In Aqua Magnanimitatis.

(y) In Malmesy-wine, or Wine of Melissa.

(z) In Cinnamon Water.

(aa) In Spirit of Juniper Berries.

(bb) And averts their evil in Water of Vervein.

Confortative Balsomes (a) thickened by the benefit of Wax.
Because Aromatic Oils in a liquid form, for danger of spilling or breaking
the glass, cannot be conveniently or commodiously carried; Chemists began to
consider of a way of thicking them, so as diverse of them, in boxes of Tin or
Silver, well gilt, may the more commodiously be carried about, and be always
ready at hand in urgent necessity.

To prepare these the way denoted by the ingenious is sufficient, viz. that to
the preparation of any of these Balsomes, there is required as much Oil by
distillation drawn forth, as Tincture extracted by Alcoholisate Spirit of Wine,
and thickened by separation from the same Spirit: Also the Salt by the benefit
of Water after calcining extracted, a Medium, which gives a just consistency to
these, is white wax shaved, and often boiled in Rose Water, that its Acrimony
may be taken away that thereby no strange quality of savor may be inferred.

All these, if mixed by a true and Chemical Artificer, Odoriferous Balsoms of
Aromaticks, and Vegetables, may be thereby rightly prepared, as well for
external, by anointing the Nostrils and Temples, as for internal use, being
according to the use and propriety of Simples most efficacious.

(a) Confortative Balsoms are no other than Aromatic Oils compounded, and by
the addition of other things, which are as it were Bases, are made more thick,
and so may the better be carried about and retained. Moreover, to the
Composition of these Balsomes, whether a certain weight of Principles, ought,
or possibly can be observed in all, is much to be questioned. We deny it. For
some are more dry, and plainly have a dry Tincture, such is Cinnamon; some have
most oily Tinctures, as Nutmegs, Mace, Fennel, Anise, Cloves; some obtain a
middle Nature, as Ginger. Therefore as their Natures are more dry or moist, so
also varies the Oil in weight. But in general, so much of the consisting Basis
must be mixed with the Oil, as may suffice to coagulate it, which afterward
with the Tincture may the m^re happily be mixed. For Example in Balsom of Fennel
observe this rule of weights.

Balsom of Fennel.
Tincture of Fennel, extracted from the Seed by Spirit of Wine iij. White wax
ss. Oil of Fennel ij.


The well cleansed and shaved thin, melt with gentle heat, to which, when
melted, add the Oil, and from the fire mix them by stirring them with an Iron
Spatula, till the mixture come to a Consistency; afterward add the Tincture
extracted with Spirit of Wine, and again mix them. When all are wrought to a
convenient Consistency, and cooled, add of Salt of Fennel to every j. of the
whole ss. which in all will be ij. and so keep it for use. But because wax
through age or long keeping may be rank, and so in such compositions yield an
ungrateful favor, and by reason of its Emplastick Nature and gross Essence,
prohibites perspiration (Galen lib. 7. Of Faculties of Medicaments) is often
wont to close the Pores, from whence a sterile operation of the Balsoms must
necessarily follow; and barren operation is always attended with fruitless
effects: In the composition of these Balsoms wax seems to be unprositable;
that therefore these inconveniences may be avoided, prudent Physicians from
expressed Oil of Nutmegs by Spirit of Wine extract a Tincture, until the
remaining substance be wholly white; which when it is plainly unsavory and
capable of no other quality, they take it in stead of Wax or Manna, to reduce
their Balsoms to a Consistency, viz. they mix the Oil,

Tincture, and Salt of Aromaticks, in that Magma. Others take the thick
substance, which is left after expression of Oil of Nutmegs, and extract it
with Spirit of Wine, proceeding, as is already said. Excellent useful in
confecting Balsoms of Vegetables, is the Marrow of Harts-bones, taken out, and
melted, and reserved for use. This may be a genuine Basis also, and exceeding
convenient for the impasting of Oils, and Principals. Balsom of Cinnamon, see
in Practica Chymiatrica of our true Edition at Lipsiensis, page.

Essencified Amber.
Among Confortatives, recited by our Author, rectified Amber is not mentioned,
whose use has been often commended by Rudolphus the Emperor; the composition
whereof he received from Elizabeth Queen of England, by whom it was also much
used. Of Ambergreise pure and good eight parts, of most odoriferous Musk one
part, and a little most white Sugar candied, pulverisate all these, afterward
upon a Marbel with burning Spirit of Roses, (of which see Tyrocinium lib. 2.
chap. 2. under the title of burning Water of Roses) grind them together, and
that long, often pouring on some of the burning Spirit of Roses, that the whole
may be like a Poultis. This put in a glass diligently closed, and set it in a
convenient place under the Earth for one month, or one month and half, until
the whole be homogeneal. Then again by grinding temper it with fiesh Spirit of
Roses, and as before set it under the Earth, afterward reserve it for use. Dose
the quantity of a small Pea, in Wine. It is a principal confortative of all the
Bowels, especially it powerfully provokes the generative faculty. See below in
the Venereal Specific of Satyrion, and Bread.

Spirit of Soot, the Description, and Use, see Practica Chymiatrica of our
Edition page.

The description of English Aurum potabile, and Liquor of Hyacinth, with their
use is extant in Practica Chymiatrica of our Edition Lipsiensis, page.

VII. Anodynes, (a) Mitigative, Asswaging, and Somniferous.
THere are many Diseases, which without Anodynes cannot be healed. Therefore in
curations of all Diseases, where watchings and dejection of the natural vigors
are concomitant with the dolours, intrinsecal appropriate Anodynes may be
administered, that the anxious roots of most dangerous symptoms being removed,
Rest, the friend of Nature may be readmitted. For Sleep is the Arcanum in
Medicine, far more worth than Gemms and precious Stones. And who so can
commodiously apply a Somniferous Arcanum, taken from a true Essence, to
distressed Nature, when inquietudes and watchings augment the distemper, he
shall surely acquire great commendation of the Sick, and render the desired
Cure more easy.

Laudanum (b) of Paracelsus of laudable Virtues.
Opium Thebaick (c) iij. Juice of Henbane, in due time gathered, jss and first
thickened in the Sun, jss Species of Diamber and Diamosk faithfully prepared, of
each ijss. Choice Foreign Mumy ss. Salt of Pearls. Of Corals, of each iij.
Liquor of white Amber, extracted by Alcohol of Wine. Bone of the heart of the
Heart, of each j. Bezoar-stone. Unicorns-horn, animal or mineral, of each j.
Musk, Amber, of each j.


In defect of genuine Aurum potabile, without any corrosives may be added these
Oils. Of Anise, Carraways, Orenges, Citrons, Nutmegs, Cloves, Cinnamon, Amber,
of each twelve drops.


Make of these, according to Chemical Art, a Mass or Extract, out of which, for
necessary use, Pills may be formed.

Observations in preparation of Laudanum.
1. The juicy Roots, and exterior Rinds (rejecting the inward woodiness) of
Henbane, young and fresh, must be gathered, (d) the Sun and Moon being in Aries
or Libra, before Full Moon; some gather them, if possible, just when the Moon
Changes in the said Signs. The juice expressed scum'd and filtred, must be
coagulated in a hot place, to the consistency of Honey, and afterward hardened
in the Sun; from this, with Spirit of Wine, a tincture is extracted.

2. Opium must first be purged in Liquor of Hysop, or distilled Water, (e) as
is wont to be done with Aloes, afterward with Spirit of Wine extracted (f).

3. The juice of Henbane and Opium, (before they are mixed with the residue,
they must first by digestion be freed from their Venom and Sulphur) are
noxious, (the evil manifests it self upon the superficies like a foam) whence
various, and grievous symptoms happen to the sick; by the use of Opium and
henbane, before they be duly purged, which hitherto has been considered by
very few, therefore I am not willing to conceal a thing so necessary, whereby
it is apparent true Chemical Operations are absolutely needful, and beneficial
to all in general.

4. In extracting these, extraction must be made with rectified Spirit of Wine,
afterward, by how much the longer they are digested together, by so much the
more powerful will the Operation be.

5. In Women, and such as are Hysterical, by reason of suffocation of the
Matrix, Amber and Musk should be omitted in the Composition; or to suppress
their Odor, some granes of Castor may be added to each Dose, before exhibited
to Women.

6. The Feces of Opium, Henbane, and of the Species of Diamber, etc. after the
tincture is extracted, must be calcined, and from them a Salt extracted
according to Art, which about the end must be mixed with the whole Composition.

7. From all these, which are extracted with Spirit of Wine, after digestion
for two Months; the Spirit of Wine in Balneo must be again abstracted, almost
to the consistency of Honey, and then the Salts of Pearls and Corals, and the
Mumy beaten, also the Bezoar-stone, Unicorns-horn, (g) Bone of the heart of the
Heart, Musk and Amber, pulverisate, must be mixed and because the distilled
Oils are difficulty mixed with the Extract, and are always wont to swim on the
top, to all the Oils, in (...) mixed together, some drops of Spirit of Wine are
wont to be poured, and aligently mixed therewith, so they will be united and
afterward may easily be mixed, and mixed with the whole composition; which,
afterward being fermented by digestion ^r a Month in a Vessel with a
Blind-head, set in most gentle heat of Ashes, are rendrost of greater efficacy
and operation.

(a) Anodynes commonly are paregorical, and remove the disease, the (...) of
dolours and anguish, are for the most part by the introduction of sweet sleep
assuaged, (...) often while the disease rests with the Body, the causes of
dolours are also exterminated; so great virtue is placed in a moments time of
Mitigations. Whosoever therefore can conveniently, to nature it self, apply an
essential Anodyne, duly and rightly prepared, he will, and may worthily,
rejoice, that he is instructed in the Attalick Treasure, and both int^al and
exterby which he may obliterate dolours and anguish of what kind soever, both
internal and external. For to it, in time of greatest need, as to an holy
Anchor of Safety, he may be take himself, which, neither Cholick, Feebleness of
the loins.
Lumbago, Cardialogy, Deliriam, Watchings, inquietudes of Fevers, Vomiting,
Pleuriss, Gout, Stone, Catarrh, Suffocation of the Matrix, the Falling-sirling,
nor other diseases very many, are able to resist. There are infinite
descriptions of Laudanum set down by many, and they are peculiar, every one
ascribing his to be according to the Authors mind. Paracelsus lib. 7. Archidox.
Aescribes an Anodyne Specisick, which they for the most part imitate, changing
some few things. For always the Basis of the whole composition is Opium, yet we
are not ignorant that Paracelsus bad another Laudanum, but metallic, made of
gold, the composition of which he no where makes mention of. Our Author is not
althogether a stranger to Paracelsus his Laudanum, nor has he in his
description been far beside the Mark. Yet whether this commendable Laudanum,
should admit into-familiarity the discommendable Tincture of Henbane, has
always been doubtea by me. I have rendered sufficient reasons to the contrary in
my Treatise of Opium and Laudanum opiate, and in my Notes on Tyrocinium
Chymicum, set forth by Gluckradius lib. 2. chap. 9. of Extracts; which, because
they are sufficiently pregnant and worthy, and in Confecting of Laudanum, are
observed by the Studious, I think good here to repeat them. This our Authors
description, although by the other ingredients, exquisitely and diligently
prepared, it may seem to be very healthful, cannot be judged free from some
danger^, because the Opium it self, being really possessed with fetid (...)
Sulphur, although in Liquor or Water of Hysop it be washed, or else extracted
with Spiret of Wine, it cannot be freed therefrom by that means. It indeed is
sufficient that it be first well corrected, and afterward mixed with a few
things, which we have at large described in our before alleged Treatise and
Notes on Tyrocinium, etc.

The Specific Anodyne of Paracelsus.
The Specific Anodyne, according to the mind of Paracelsus, set down by him in
his Archidoxes is thus described. First, Make Water of Frog-spawn, as out
Author teaches below in compounded Frog-spawn. Of this distilled Water of
juice of sower Oranges, or else of Lemons, of each vj. Of crude Opium Thebaick
yet better if separated from the Sulphur) j. Of Cinnamon, Cloves, O^iental
Crocus, of each ss. Set them in the Sun, or Horse-dung, to macerate for a
Month, afterward express and strain them, then filter it through Paper, and
Aromatize it with Amber iiij. Musk ss. Of the Solution or Salt of Corals, and
Peatls, of each ss. From the remains reduced, to Asles make a Salt, which mix
with the whole, and keep it for internal use. Dose from j, to iij.

(b) It is called Laudanum, because it is a Laudable Medicament, by reason of
its famous effects and operations, which with good success we have
experimented, in allaying dolours of the most grievous and fierce distempers.
It is also called Nepenthes, because it asswages grief.

A sincere description of Laudanum Opiat.
The sincere and easy composition of Laudanum Opiat, with Opium, (for there is
a Laudanum also without Opium, made of Sulphur of Vitriol, of which a little
after) in use by me is this. Of Thebaick Opium, good and not perished, what
quantity you please, cut it into pieces or small thin slices, and in a
glass-dish over a gentle heat of Sand or Ashes, dry it so long, as until with
your fingers, you may easily crumble it to powder, and it yield a good and
pleasant odor, for at first the gross and fetid Sulphur gives forth a very
unsavory smell. This fetid Sulphur being removed or evaporated, in which all
the narcotick, and stupefactive force consists, extract the corrected Opium
with distilled Vinegar, pouring it on till the Opium be covered five or six
fingers, leaving it for some time in a hot place. The Vinegar, colored by
filtring, separate from the Feces, and again pour upon the Feces fresh Vinegar,
repeating the former digestion till it be tinged with a red Color, then
separate it in the former manner, and cease from further Extraction; all the
colored Vinegar distill in Balneo unto the consistency of Honey or Extract of
the Opium. To which, if their be j. add of Magistery, or Salt of Corals, and
Pearls (of which above in Confortative Specificks) of each ss. Extract of
Saffron made with Spirit of Wine ij. mix all diligently, and keep them; in the
end add some drops of Oil of Cloves. This Laudanum is almost inculpable, and
may securely be exhibited without all fear of any peregrine affection; which
can scarely be hoped of our Authors preparation, though very industriously
compounded. Dose from two granes to three.

The use of Laudanum Opiat.
The general use Laudanum Opiat.

1. It asswages all dolours.

2. It induces sleep.

3. It stops all Fluxes.

4. It consumes the heat.

5. Comforts Nature, etc.

It is of special use in the Phrensy, Delirium, Fevers, Pleurisy, Vomiting,
Gout, Lumbago, Suffocation of the Matrix, the Falling Sickness, etc. Unless the
dolor be exceeding vehement, it must but once, not twice, be given. Crellius
gives it thrice, viz. in the Evening, Midnight, and Morning.

Laudanum without Opium.
Touching Laudanum, in which is contained no Opium, and yet is an Anodyne, from
vitriolate fixed Ancdyne Sulphur, (which our Author denies that he ever saw
below in the Stomachal Specific) many things, both by Quercetanus, In consilio
de nobili virgin, and also Libavius in his Treatise of Arcanums are spoken and
declared. Yet it is very like to me, neither of them knew the way of this
preparation, much less the elegant Composition of the most excellent Laudanum,
and from it of the other two, viz. of the Epileptick, and Hysterial. That I may
not seem to hate the one, or abscond the other, I shall teach a most easy and
true way of preparing Anodyne Sulphur of Vitriol, and after ward shall heartily
explain how with the same, the other two most excellent Laudanum's are made.

Filings of Iron, most pure without any dust one part, Vitriol Ungarick that is
blew, or Vitriol of Copper, of which below in the Stomachal Specific two
parts. Grind them and mix them diligently, in a glass Cucurbit cut off half
way, imbibe them with distilled Vinegar, that it may cover them half a finger.
Afterward boil and coagulate them in a fire of Sand till they be dry, afterward
in the end urge the fire a little more strongly, that it may be somewhat red.
To this powder pour other fresh distilled Vinegar, to cover it four fingers,
leave it in a hot place for certain hours, and the Vinegar will be tinged,
which pour off through a Filter, and pour on other, this in like manner tinged
remove by inclination, without disturbing the Feces as before; and so proceed
till the Vinegar be no more tinged. In this collected and tinged Vinegar, is
burning Sulphur of Vitriol; if, for a trial, from a small part of it the
Vinegar be evaporated, and what shall remain be often edulcorated with pure
Fountain Water, and then diligently dried with gentle heat upon Brown-paper,
you will see in putting fire to it, it will presently take flame, and be by the
fire wholly consumed like other Sulphur. This (...) Sulphur of Vitriol is thus
fixed and rendered Anodyne. In the Vinegar impregnated with Tincture of Sulphur,
pour a sufficient quantity of Oil of Tartar drop by drop, and the Sulphur will
speedily be precipited and fixed. The distilled Vinegar supernating, reject as
useless; the powder remaining in the bottom, with Fountain water wash often
very curiously, and you will have Sulphur of Vitriol Anodyne and fixed; so very
much spoken of and desired by many, and which is the Basis of the following
Laudanums known to few. See also Practica Chymiatrica of our Edition, page.
Afterward,

Powder of Red Sanders.

Citron, of each j.

Mace.

Galangal.

Black-pepper.

Long-pepper, of iij.

Lign-Aloes.

Cardamum the greater.

Cardamum the lesser, of each ij.

Extract all these, in the usual manner, with Spirit of Wine. In the same
manner, with Water of Succory, extract

Red Myrrh.

Egyptian Mumy, of each j.

And both Tinctures diligently gather, filter, and conjoyn them; when when well
mixed, add of Narcotick Sulphur of Vitriol ij.

Circulate them in a close Vessel in Balneo for five days, afterward by
distillation extract the Menstruums, to the consistency of Honey, to which add

Extract of Saffron ss.

Salt or Magistery of Pearls.

Of Corals, of each j.

Reduce it to a Mass. This indeed is a great and most excellent Anodyne.

Epileptick Laudanum.
Of Laudanum of Sulphur of Vitriol ij.. (This Laudanum is made in the same
Preparation, Rule, and Measure of Ingredients, as in Laudanum Opiat, only for
the Essence of Opium, Anodyne Sulphur of Vitriol must be taken:) True Oil of
Camphire ss. and so it will be an Epileptick Laudanum, which most certainly
cures the Falling Sickness. The genuine and true description of Oil of
Camphire. See in Practica Chymiatrica of our Edition, page.

Dose from two granes to four, either in the fit, and so it will be speedily
dissolved, or afterward daily a little taken, and continued for some time,
especially about the New of the Moon, other necessaries in this cure being
observed; the fit it self is not only dissolved, but the disease also totally
exterminated.

Note. The Oil of Camphire is quickly exhaled, therefore it will be better, if
not totally mixed with the whole Epileptick Laudanum, but rather in the Dose in
exhibiting proportionally added. See Practica Chym. page.

Hysterical Laudanum.
Of Vitriolate Laudanum ij.

Extract of Warts, growing in the Feet of Horses iij.

Mix them diligently, and keep the mixture for use. It is a present remedy in
Suffocation of the Matrix, if exhibited from one grane to three in appropriate
Liquors. Extract of Lichenes, or Callis equorum, its preparation is extant in
Practica Chymiatrica of our Edition, page.

(c) Thebaick is the best and most excellent, it is so called, because it is
brought from Caire, and is whitish, as also Galen says. There is some brought
from Syria, Alexandria, and other Regions, black, and not so good. Yet of no
less virtue, than the former, is that which is daily brought from Cambaja.

(d) In the Month March.

(e) This observation is of no use.

(f) Opium and juice of Henbane, difficultly depose their venomous Sulphur in
Spirit of Wine, but rather the same by the Spirit of Wine is rendered more thin,
whereby it afterward becomes more efficacious, and makes the Composition of
Laudanum so much the worse; therefore this Preparation of Laudanum I cannot
approve of. The best of all is that above delivered, which is first made by
gentle Evaporation of the Opium, being cut into very small pieces, and
afterward with gentle fire Evapprated, until all its former fetid Odor be
extinct, and it yield a most grateful and pleasant smell: after the same Opium,
being freed from the noxious Sulphur, is extracted with distilled Vinegar.
Moreover I would not extract Opium with Spirit of Wine, because, as is showed
above in Vegetable Panchymagogon, it rather augments the force of Sulphur, than
the Mercury and Salt. There is in that Sulphur a most powerful Narcotick force,
which is an Enemy to Humane Nature; but Vinegar, especially that which is pure,
takes from the Sulphur, but other principals it attracts not. Therefore in this
kind Vinegar is best.

(g) As from Laudanum in the Preparation, Essence of Henbane is worthily
excluded and omitted, so there are others which may be excluded, as
Vnicorns-horn, Bezoar-stone, Amber, Musk, the diverse and precious distilled
Oils, which do not so much increase the virtue of the Medicament, as the
price, and render the Dose, though in a very small quantity, nauseous: Indeed
the most exquisite Artificial Medicines, the more simple, the more perfect
ought to be esteemed. For they oftener, and easier accomplish their end, because
they are (...), and emulates the first Nature, which by moderate paces
performs its journey, to the accomplishing of the desired end.

Electuary of Laudanum.
Opium.

Juice of the Roots of Henbane, Essencified, of each j.

Essence of Mandragora root extracted with Spirit of Wine, vj.

Species of Diamber prepared without

Musk and Amber, iiij.

Salt of Pearls, of Corals, of each ij.

Carabes (a).

Mumy, of each iiij.

Oriental Crocus ij.

Unicorns horn j.

Terra Strigensis j.

Clarifyed Honey xij.

Dissolve the Essence of Opium and Henbane (if the Essences be too liquid,
first sufficiently Evaporate the Spirit of Wine from them, with gentle heat) in
Honey over a fire, after they be well mixed, add the Salts of Pearls and Corals,
afterward the other powders finely beaten, viz. Carabes, Mumy, Crocus,
Unicorns-horn, Terra (b) Sigillara, with the species of Diamber, leisurely
mixing them by sprinkling upon the former ingredients blood-warm, make all up
in form of an Electuary diligently.

Virtues and Use of Laudanum.
It is a Laudable Medicament, which plainly answers to its name, if called
Laudanum.

It is strange, and indeed very strange, why by some the use of Opium, inwardly
taken, should be scared, since Lauaanum Opiat is perfectly freed from all
Venomes and Impurities, by being conjoined, and diligently mixed with most
excellent correctories. Which of Compositions of the Ancients, and of such as
are fold in Shops, which are compounded of Opium and Henbane-seed, cannot so
truly be affirmed, as of Philonium-Romanum, Persicum, Tarsenses, Athanafia
Magna, Aurea Alexandrina of Nicholaus, Triphera, Treacle, Mithridate Andromach,
Trochus of Alkakengy, Pills of Cynoglosse, etc.

This Specific Anodyne (...), is the last refuge in greatest extremity.

1. In all sharp dolours cold and hot, both external, and internal, it is of
admirable use; also, where, through vehemence of anguish the sick are almost
destroyed, especially in the cholick dolor, being exhibited in Mint-water, (if
at the same time the Belly be soluble.) In the Stone of the Reins, Pleurisy and
Gout.

2. In resisting defluxions of all humors, and thin Catarrhs, especially if in
their beginning: also in all Fluxes of the Intestines, whether occasioned by
corroding and peccant humors, or else from purging humors, being then given
with Mastich and Terra Sigillata.

3. In Watchings and immoderate Inquietudes, both internally and externally; if
externally it be applied, then four or six granes, with three drops of Oil of
Nutmegs, or with a little expressed Oil, make a Suppository of Linen, which
being put up the Nostrils induces sleep to admiration: when the sick soundly
sleeps, it may be taken out. So the desperate Haemorrhagia of the Nostrils has
been cured, from sixteen granes of Laudanum Opiat made into two Pills, and one
Pill put up either Nostril.

4. In every kind of Fevers, with Water of Wormwood and Rue, (which are
Febri^ugal Specific Waters) if the heat endure long, after four hours
re-iterate one Dose. In Burning Fevers it quenches thirst, and procures sleep,
especially when in Fevers slumbring with laborious watchings is intermixed.

5. In the Asthma and Pthisick, if used in Water of Hysop, they may be long
fomented with it. In the Cough there is need of caution, least exhibited, when
the strength and natural vigor is much dejected, and so be retained, with the
abundance of sickly matter in the Breast: for, although it assuage the Cough,
and procure sleep, yet it augments the streightness of the passages of the
Breast. Wherefore in the Cough it is best to give the less of it, and also to
mix with it things extenuating and abstergent, (d) as Oximel, (e) or that which
is made of Marrubium; then it is given most powerful, when that which is added
renders it thin and sharp. For, in exhibiting such there is no more danger,
than in giving an Antidote; because those which are thin render it moderately
thick and contemperate, whereby the dolor is removed speedily. In the
inveterate Cough Tragagant (f) is added with good success.

6. It conserves the native heat, corroborates the spirits, and augments the
natural vigor, especially that in which Musk is (g).

7. It is efficacious against Melancholy Affects, Sadness beyond reason, and
Cardiack passions (h).

8. We happily use it in Vomiting, in Singultus, in the loosened, and
debilitate ventricle (i).

9. In excretion of blood, (k) and the immoderate Flux of the Menses, with
Crocus Martis, (l) and red Corals.

10. In the Phrensy, and Mania, with Aqua vitae, both inwardly and outwardly
(m) by anointing the Temples.

11. In the Epilepsy, it is wont to be given with Spirit of Vitriol, and
Essence of Camphire, extracted with Oil of (n) Almonds.

Dose.
From two, to three, or four granes, if the Belly be soluble, it efficaciously
operates. It is given in Specific and Appropriate Waters, and mingled with
them according as diseases require, and with respect to the seven principal
Members. If the distemper be vehement give one Pill in the Evening; long after
Supper, at Midnight, another; and in the Morning the third (o).

The use of the Electuary is the same, only the Dose must be increased. It is
given from j. to jss. in Appropriate Liquor, Wine, or Cinnamon Water. To Women
in Childbed and Infants, it may also safely be exhibited (p).

(a) Of Amber.

(b) Sigillata of Silesia.

(c) They only comfort, but do not well correct the Medicament.

(d) Vinegar of Squils.

(e) White.

(f) Species of Diatragacant.

(g) In Cinnamon Water, or Malmesy-wine.

(h) In Water of Borrage, Buglosse, Melissa, and decoction of these Flowers.

(i) In Water of Mint, Wine, and Cydoniate Water of Cinnamon.

(k) Essence of Crocus Martis.

(l) If a Vein be broke.

(m) It must never be externally adhibited in the Substance, but dissolved, as
Gallius teaches.

(n) Of Sweet.

(o) Repeating the Dose always after six hours, if the dolor be not abated.

(p) Viz. in urgent necessity.

VIII. Odorifick.
HUmane nature is delighted with Odours, and the Spirits thereby greatry
refreshed. Therefore Philagrius on Aetius, not improperly says; that Nature is
willingly embraced with delectable Odours, and so recreated thereby, and as it
were revived, that she recovers her wonted vigor, before oppressed by the
fierceness of the Disease.

For the Odor, drawn by the Nostrils, is conveyed to the Heart and Brain,
and by it the comprest and suffocated Spirit is excited, and its further decay
apparently hindered. Yea, there are hot Regions, whereas Pliny (a) notes, a
certain People live by Odours only. With respect to health, the Air is of very
great moment, for whosoever sickens by the infection of evil Odor, (b) is
difficultly cured, because the ungrateful Odor, with the Spirit, subtly
penetrates all parts of the Body, especially the Brain and Breast. With the
Odor of Elixir of Life, compounded of various Aromaticks, Baptista (c) Porta
says, that he has by manifold experience found, the expiring spirit of many
to be retained: for the principal Members and vital Spirits, (which by every
kind of Venom are first of all molested and infected) are wonderfully
refreshed by Aromaticksmells, and the venomous Fumes excluded. It is needful
the Spirit, with Spirit (d) and Odor, be recreated and restored. There are
sweet Odours agreeable, and communicable to our Spirits, the only Authors of
Humane Life. We see, that to ungrateful Odours, we stop our Nostrils, and hold
our Breath, that we may not receive the Stinkes, which we no sooner perceivably
retain, but we are debilitated. When by these our spirits with Swounings or
Convulsions are oppressed and dejected, as soon as we are again sensible of sweet
Odours, we are immediately elevated and refresht. In like manner, we know the
Mouth of the Matrix is turned upward and downward, according to the motion of a
pleasing smell: So not only in the Pest, but also in Ungarick Fevers, and such
like venomous diseases, the Spirits, which by attracting the Contagion, are
infected and contaminated, may (and also ought to) be amended and restored with
perfumes; as may be seen in Conradinus his Book of the Ungarick Fever, wherein
he describes Candles, and various odoriferous Waters.

In preparing this odoriferous Specific, which by the flagrancy of its Odor,
is wonderful forcible in restoring the deficiency of the Vitals, who so would
follow the process of Paracelsus in his Archidoxes, (e) in preparing it by
digestion, he may with me loose both labor and cost. For ^ivet, Gumms, and
Tragacant in digestion are rendered of evil favor.

Mace. Cloves. Choice ^innamon, (f) of each ij. Amber (g) griese j. Musk (h)
ss. Civet (i) ij. Gum Arabic j. Tragacant, first dried upon a Furnace ij.


Grind these two gumms with the Musk. With all, diligently beaten, mix the
Civet, and pour upon them Water of the best Nampha, (k) or of odoriferous
Damascena, (according to pleasure) the Water being prepared of Specific
Odours, and Rose Water, in which by digestion for eight days, a little of
Paracelsus his Carbos (l) or occidental Civet is mixed. Pour of this Water
through a Cloth or Sieve, as much as small be sufficient to incorporate the
whole, diligently stirring it that it may be a Mass; of which afterward make
the likeness of Apples, or Pentacles of Gordis, and in a glass keep them to
harden without digestion.

Or it may be thus prepared. Waters of Rosemary. Lavender. White Lillyes.
Basilicon. Roses. Majoran. Spike,
of each what quantity you please, for the moistning of Mace, Cloves, ^innamon,
of each ij. these Aromaticks being first reduced to a most fine powder, and
moderatly searsed, add of pulverisate Amber ss. Musk of Alexandria ij. ^ivet j.
All being diligently mixed, add pulverisate gum Arabic ij. work them
exquisitely together, and leave them (but first add to the whole Tragacant
pulverisate iiij. working it together as before) for one night till all be well
incorporated, the next day make them up into Cakes, dry them in a hot place,
and lay them up for use.

Virtues and use.
As Civet by its own Odor expels ordure; so this Odoriferous Specific ejects
diseases from the sick. And as Tirus is mixed in composition of Treacle, that
it may cause the virtue of the other Ingredients to penetrate the principal
Members; so also here for greater penetration Carbos is added, whose prevalent
ungrateful Odor (yet by digestion, as by Experience I have found, it is
transmuted into a most sweet and delectable smell) does far sooner penetrate,
than all operations of Lillyes, as Theophrastus truly denotes.

This Odoriferous Specific is of principal Use, when Medicaments, cannot be
taken into the Body, as in the Apoplexy and Epilepsy. For many with such Odours
are helped, and exceedingly refresht, not that the Disease is plainly taken
away or cured, but the way for the cure is prepared; because by the virtue of
this Odor, communicated to the Body, the Blood is moved, and the Heart above
measure comforted.

In Apoplexy, Epilepsy, Cholick, Suffocation of the Matrix.

In Pestilential malignant Air.

In comforting Venus (m) Men may also use it.

It may be mixed with a little expressed Oil of Nutmegs, that it be like an
Ointment, and so in the above named Diseases may the more commodiously be used.

(a) Lib. 7. chap. 1.

(b) Interior, because the Brains and Lungs are infected.

(c) In Natural Magic.

(d) The words of Conradinus, lib. 4.

(e) Lib. 7. Entitled of Odoriferous Specific.

(f) Or Cassia Lignea, which is better.

(g) Better is Species of white Bitumen.

(h) Sanies vom Biesenthier, Musk of Alexandria is best, but it is sold
exceeding dear, viz. j. for seventeen Coronats.

(i) If the Virile Member or Navel of Women be anointed with Civet, libe^ter
vitos admittunt.

(k) Read, Naphtha: It is made of flowers of Oranges; See Renodeus lib. 1.
sect. 6 chap. 4. page 449.

(l) Carbos of Paracelsus, of which he no where makes mention, only in his
Odoriferous Specific, Archidox. 7. but left its naked name, without any
signification, which what it should be, many have doubted. This is nothing
else, but humane Sulphur or Ordure, set for some time in digestion, and freed
from its stinking odor by long digestion, whereby it is spontaneously rendered
of most excellent Savor, as in the before alleged place Paracelsus teaches,
and our Author both here, and in the following page well observes. He calls it
Occidental Civet, respecting the difference between it, and that which is
brought to as from the Oriental Indies. That Civet which is brought from the
Occidental Indies is consentaneous to us.

But the Occident in Man are the Posteriors, as the Orient is attributed to the
former parts. So therefore by the similitude of Occidental Civet he understood
Mans-dung, by long digestion converted into a most pleasant Odor, which
Paracelsus called Carbos, in his Book which he writ ad Carboantes Friesenden,
in which he placed all his secrets.

(m) By anointing the virile Member.

(n) Externally to the Nostrils.

A Specific (a) Medicament of all the seven principal Members.
Conserve the principal Members, says Paracelsus, and Death will not easily
invade; for without the Conservation of the principal Members, no Disease can
be cured. If you would preserve Life, you most not only endeavor to conserve
the Heart, but also the Brain, Liver, Lungs, Spleen, Reins, and Gall. For
although the Heart be the Center and Root of the Body it self, yet if any other
principal Member be destroyed, Death unavoidably follows.

Oil of Amber three or four times rectifyed with Majoran-water, ij.

True Spirit of Vitriol (b).

Salt (c) of Cranium of the Microcosme, of each ss.

Tincture of Oriental Crocus ij.

Tinct. of Granes (d) of Alkermes ij.

Salt of Pearls, Corals, of each j.

Oil of Cinnamon, Mace, of each ss.

Milk of Sulphur, j.

Extract of Spodium, jss.

Magistery of (e) Tartar j.

Diaphoretick Antimony ss.

Tincture of Crocus of Iron.

selandine.

Rubarb, of each ss.

Liquor of Crystal, Of the Stone (f) of the Microcosme, of each j.

With the Essence of Treacle extracted and thickened, (g) Honey of Juniper,
Conserve of Roses, adding according to pleasure Sugar of Roses, reduce all the
above said diligently mixed, to the consistency of an Electuary, adding of Musk
and Amber of each j.

By reason of the Sympathy of Ventricle with the other Members, ij. of Oil of
Vitriol of Copper may be added, with ss. of the distilled Oil of Nutmegs.

Use and D^se.
The use of this Medicament is chiefly in deplorable Diseases, where, by the
Physician, there is no need of a strict enquiry touching the state of the Sick,
or the kind or species of the evil.

And because in all Distempers internal, necessarily one (or more) of the seven
Members is affected, this also in all Maladies may most safely be exhibited.
For without the conservation of the principal Members no Disease can be cured.

Dose from five, six, or seven granes, to ten. In Wine, Water of Carduus-bened,
or other appropriate, according the seven Members.

(a) Hitherto Universals have been spoken of, now follow Particulars, which are
in number eighteen.

(b) Philosophic Spirit is more excellent.

(c) Or Magistery.

(d) Which is made by extraction of the sweet smelling Apples. See also
Practica Chymiatrica of our Edition, page.

(e) Of Vitriolate Tartar.

(f) See my Microcosmical preparations.

(g) Extracted with Spirit of Wine.

Specific Capital.
Paracelsus attributes many virtues to the volatility (a) of Spirit of Vitriol
in curing the Epilepsy: but as yet no cause has been given to me, of seeing
the faculty of it, practiced by a Chemist, nor could any one affirm to me, that
the confirmed Epilepsy could be removed by Spirit of Vitriol only, (b) vulgarly
and simply prepared.

This following Spirit I have found most efficacious in Medicinal use.

Spirit of Vitriol.
Vitriol Ungarick, (c) or of Cyprus, or Roman-vitriol, (d) they are much alike,
(although that in Silesia in the Mines auffdem Regmaucel, (e) Huserus made very
much of it, for he prepared his with Minera of Gold, Silver, Iron, and Copper)
dissolve it in distilled Water or May-dew, (f) strein the Solution, afterward
place it in Digestion in Heat of Ashes, Sand, Horse-dung: let it stand for a
month, then it will eject the Feces to the Superficies, which must be
separated; again set in digestion so long as till it reject (g) no more Feces:
Afterward strein it, and what is clear distill (h) in gentle heat in Balneo or
Sand, for the space of two or three hours, and the phlegm will come forth,
which receive a part, afterward the Spirits follow, (when they begin to ascend,
which by tasting you may easily perceive by its sharpness, and you will see, as
is wont to be in distillation of Aqua vitae, the Spirits ascend in the Alembeck
like streiks) which by changing the Receiver must be gathered (i) a part. This
Spirit of Vitriol reduced to a pleasant odor, and grateful sharpness, in which
there appears no sensible corrosion, nor remaining austerity, but a spiritual
sharpness, when put upon the tongue, is a profitable medicament, and in
curations very necessary. Who so would further proceed in this distillation, by
augmenting the fire, the Oil will come forth, which he must gather a part; and
of this rectifyed Oil, let him take one part, and of Spirit of Wine
Alcoholizate four or six parts, and for certain months (k) digest them in a
Balneo of dew, afterward distill it, and he will have Oil of Vitriol swimming
(l) on the top of the Water, of most pleasant odor and excellent taste, (m)
which, being separated by a Separatory, in medicinal use is of admirable virtue
(n).

(a) The v^latility of Spirit of Vitriol, in curing the Epilepsy, is highly
commended by Paracelsus, to be exceeding profitable, which is not impossible,
so all things necessary be rightly, and duly instituted in the preparation. It
is very like here, our Author Crollius, not thinking of another preparation of
Spirit of Vitriol, in the volatility of which this excellent virtue consists,
describes and makes this, viz. from the whole being distilled, after the
pouring on of Rainwater, or distilled May-dew, the most subtle Spirit of
Vitriol comes forth with its volatility, being most pleasantly sharp; which by
experience is proved in distillation of Crude Vitr^l; but of purged and
pu^ifyed Vitriol, when the phlegm comes forth, the external vessels, viz.
Alembeck and Receiver, vehemently wax hot, which is not only from the phlegm
it self, for when that comes not, during the whole time of the operation and
production, this heat of the instruments is perceived. And during the time of
the coming forth of volatile Spirit of Vitriol, for the most part in the glass
will appear little veins or strerks, and with the Arematick and volatile Spirit
it self comes forth a sharp moisture, which in the following manner is purdy
drawn forth and separated. Vitriol well parifyed and digested, distill it by
Retort in an open fire, so as immediately after the phlegm all the Spirits may
follow with it, or as much as can be done in short time. These being in the
Receiver, while all is very hot, remove that Recipient, and apply another
speedily to the Alembeck, well and aptly fixed, and wartly placed. And you will
presently see the volatile Spirit to pass the Alembeck into the Receiver, which
gathered a part, diligently keep. From six or eight pound of Vitriol you will
scarcely have of this volatile Spirit above iij. or ss. at most.

(b) The Epilepsy not hereditary, that is not transplanted but otherwise
caused, by Spirit of Vitriol only and simply prepared, may be cured, if in
preparation and administration all be rightly done. Dissolve true Vngarick
Vitriol (not corrupted) in distilled May-dew, the Feces removed, and the
Menstruum taken off, (not quite) but so as just enough to cover the Vitr^ol
remain, set it in a cold place to Crystallize, afterward in the Sun or a
Hot-house dry it. Of this Vitriol dried five or six pound distill by Retort in
an open fire, both the Phlegm and all the Spirits. The Cuput Mortuum taken out
grind, and join it with the Phlegm and Spirits; repeat the same distillation
by eight times cohobating, and the ninth time the work will be finished. You
will have a most penetrating Spirit of Vitriol, a principal Arcanum in the
Epilepsy. For if of this ss. or j. be given in j. of Water of Peonyroot or
Lavender, just at the time of the Fit, it removes it: and if afterward (other
things requisite, both in meat and drink being observed) it be daily taken,
especially in decrease of the Moon, it most powerfully expels the Disease.

(c) The green is best, not the blew.

(d) It is pune.

(e) There Robbers used to take Cloths, and other things from Travelers.

(f) Either distilled, or at least filtred, because it is gathered from impure
herbs.

(g) Also there are dregs at the bottom, and fetid Sulphur.

(h) Distill it to a Skin, and in a cold place set it to Crystalize, and gather
the Crystals, as often as you can. Five, or six, or seven pound distill it by
Retort in an open fire.

(i) Urging it so long until all the sharp Spirits come forth.

(k) For one, two, or three. In a Phiol hermetically closed.

(l) It can scarcely be believed, since nothing swims on the top.

(m) Also this Oil of Vitriol is made sweet in this manner.

Sweet Oil of Vitriol.
Boil this Oil in a new Iron-pan, with common water, so long as till the
corrosive Salt may be gathered in the bottom of the Pan, and then the remaining
Oil will be sweet. The same performs red-hot Iron, being often extinguished in
the Oil of Vitriol. But from these (...), the virtues of the Oil are much
diminished, therefore its medicinal effects cannot be great.

(n) Of greater efficacy is Philosophical Spirit of Vitriol, described above in
Butter of Antimony; it is indeed of wonderful virtue in the Epilepsy, Apeplexy,
and all Affects of the Head and Ventricle, especially the volatile Spirit,
whose preparation is known to very few, it is not at all Corrosive, but has a
grateful sonerness, and its virtues are more evident.

Another Description (a) of Spirit of Vitriol.
Of crude Vitriol, cleansed in the manner described a little above, 2 lib. or
more, distill it, and with most strong fire force it, that the Spirit and Oil
may come forth: To the Liquor come forth, add two parts of distilled
Rainwater, and in Balneo again distill it; then the Spirit of Vitriol rendered
most subtle in this rectification with Rainwater, will be elevated and come
forth, leaving a most sharp Oil in the bottom. This Spirit mingled with the
Rainwater is exceeding penetrative, and in the Ungarick Fever and other
Burning Fevers, is wont to operate most efficaciously.

(a) Here in this description, our Author is almost come to the true
description of volatile Spirit of Vitriol.

But it is only volatile Spirit of Vitriol, mixed with Rainwater, which Water
is difficultly separated: yet according to the method I deliver above, you may
have the volatile Spirit apart. To exterminate the Epilepsy of Children, most
efficacious is my Antepileptick Spirit of Vitriol of Children, the description
and use where of There faithfully communicate.

Antepileptick Spirit of Vitriol of Children.
Ungarick Vitriol, exceedingly well purifyed 4 lib. add of Urine of Children,
fresh gathered 8 lib. In a vessel well closed digest them for some time in
Balneo, afterward in the same distill a double Phlegm (till the matter be dry)
the first of which is a famous Paregorick in high and Podagrical dolours,
applied by gently somenting the affected part therewith: The other is an
excellent Opthalmick, for all kinds of Affects of the Eyes, most profitable.
The Caput Mortuum pulverisate distill by an Earthen Retort in an open fire, at
first very gently, afterward more vehemently urge into a capacious Receiver for
that purpose annexed; the Spirits being come forth, after them a most precious
Liquor will issue out of a Sulphurous smell and fourish taft, which by Retort
rectify once or twice, and in a glass very well closed keep it for use. This
all Epilepsy of Children does perfectly expel. Of this j. Water of Peony-roots,
and Flowers of Tilia, of each j. mix them and keep it.

Of this mixture give (in the Fit, before the Members be contracted and rendered
con^sive) half a spoonful, and a little after they will recollect their senses
and come to themselves, which perceived, give a little more, and so also the
third time. But if the Fit be about to return, repeat the same process thrice,
and doubt not but the second time, this disease very familiar with Children and
Infants, may be wholly rooted out and expelled, especially if afterward
Confortatives be applied to the Brain, such are Magistery of Corals and Pearls,
and Magistery of Mans-skull; and also our Antepileptick Tablets, which are
described in Practica Chymiatrica of our Edition, not that of Franckfort, page.

An Epileptick Medicament.
First, It is strange that in Changes of the Moon the Brain is disturbed, in
her Increase it moistens, and in her Decrease it dryes, as is plainly to be
seen in Epilepticks, who in the increase of the Moon perceive themselves worse.
It is convenient to imbibe Vitriol (a) calcined to a yellowness, with Spirit
of Wine, that it may be made a Mass.

Of this 1 lib. and a half.

Shavings of man's-skull that has been Executed.

Missletoe of the Oak (c).

Elks-hoofs.

Granes of Peony, (d) of each j.

All these cut, beaten, and afterward mixed, distill by Retort observing
degrees of fire, lastly with violent heat force it.

Of the Liquor come forth, first rectified in Balneo, as above.

1 lib. of Castor.

Species of sweet Diamosch, of each ss.

Anacardine (e) vj.

Afterward add Spirit of Wine 4 lib.

Salt of Peony j.

Liquor of Salt of Pearls, of Corals, of each j.

Oil of Anise, of Amber, of each ij.

Mix and digest them in Balneo for a Month.

Use and Dose.
Half a spoonful of the said Liquor, or one spoonful, is given in Water of
Peony, after the taking of this let the Patient fast three hours.

(a) Purifyed.

(b) Never buried, or never committed to the Earth.

(c) When it ought to be gathered. See Practica, etc. of our Edition page.

(d) Gathered in the Month of July, before the rising of the Sun.

(e) Viz. Honey of Anacardine.

(f) To the cure of the Falling Sickness also, and of the most inveterate,
wonderful prositable, and very powerful is.

1. The Arcanum or Spirit of Cerebrum humani, the preparation of which is
extant is Practica Chymiatrica, page. It is taken in the Decrease of the Moon.

2. Is double Epileptick Powder, made of Cinnabar of Antimony, of famous
virtues. See the Description and Dose in Practica Chym. etc. page.

3. Powder of the Backbone of a Whesel, or of the Backbone of a Serpent or
Viper.

4. Preservative Powder of the Dung of a Black-cow, see Practica, page.

5. Powder of Livers of green Frogs, with which the most Excellent Frederick
the fourth Elector of the Palatinate, was freed from a grievous Epilepsy, of
high and fixed roots, which he had contracted in his Youth, and never in all
his life after had any one Fit.

6. An Amulet of a Shrub found in the Willow-tree, even in the most inveterate
Epilepsy, of all other internals it easily obtains the priority, which without
all impiety and superstition, both in gathering and applying is admirable.
Although no certain reason of this Amulet can be given, its acting being
abstruse and remote from sense: yet hitherto being very often confirmed by
experience, the certainty of its virtue is apparently manifest. Touching which
more at large in Practica Chym. of our Edition, page.

7. There is also an Antepileptick Confection in use, which by other Physicians
much commended, is said to be delivered by Paracelsus himself to Ferdinando
King of the Romans, which without doubt wants not singular virtues; this I
thought good here to annex to the former.

Antepileptick Confection of Paracelsus.
First, From three Skulls of Men not buried, that perished by a violent Death,
and dried in the Air, being somewhat grossly pulverisate, by retort at first in
gentle fire of Sand, afterward gradually increased, and at length by fire of
suppression distill a Liquor, into a large capacious Receiver for that purpose
annexed, which Liquor by distillation draw off from the same Feces the third
time, at length by Alembeck rectify it. Of this Liquor vij. or viij. Add
Species of sweet Diamosch ss. Castor, Honey of Anacardine, of each iij. and
again by Retort in Ashes distill it: Lastly, add of Liquor of Pearls iiij. Oil
of Vitriol, or rather the Antepileptick Spirit above described j. Of this
mixture to the Epileptick person daily give one spoonful, in a morning fasting,
continuing it for nine days together. With this only Medicament, it is reported
Paracelsus effected wondrous cures. And at Caesar's request communicated it to
him, but asked the King, whether the Compounders of Syrups could effect such
things.

8. To the same Paracelsus is ascribed the Essence of Mans-skull, which by
reason of its mucilaginous consistency he was wont to call it Galreda of
Mans-skull, others call it Gelatina, of like virtues in expelling the
Falling Sickness, which is more pernicious than the Lernaean Hydra.

Galreda, or Gelatina of Mans-skull.
Filings of Mans-skull never buried, and freed from all accidental humor, with
Salviat Alcohol of Wine, covering them six fingers, digest them half a Month,
then in the manner of Aqua fortis by Retort force it, repouring on the
distilled Liquor, with the Caput mortuum again digest it, and as before distill
it, repeat the same operation the third time. Then circulate the whole abstract
for some time, and by gentle heat in Balneo, abstract the Alcohol of Wine, and
the remaining Essence, like a Coagulum or Galreda, keep for use. This is a true
curative of the Epilepsy, if certain granes of it be exhibited in a convenient
Vehicle.

The 9. is Potable Silver or Tincture of Silver, the description whereof see
Practica Chymiatrica, page.

10. Is Epileptick-water, see Practica, etc. page.

11. Is Magistery of Mans-skull, which is thus made: Upon Cranium-pulverisate
pour Spirit of Vitriol, and ferment it, afterward twice or thrice abstract it,
and a most excellent Magistery of Mans-skull will remain.

Apoplectick.
A famous Apopletick Aqua vitae.
Flowers of Lillys of the Valley, (a) Of Tilia. Peony. Primroses. Lavender.
Sage. Betony. Rosemary.


Black (b) and sweet wild Cherries, gathered in the decrease of the Moon, (c)
of each a convenient quantity. All these being beaten and mixed, (or the Flowers
apart, and Cherries apart distilled,) add Mustard Seed (d) beaten one or two
pound, set it in putrefaction, pouting upon it a convenient quantity of common
(e) water, in which a little Hops and Ferment have been boiled, that the whole
may be fermented, afterward according to Art distill it, and from thence draw
forth an inflamable Spirit, (f) which circulate with a like quantity of the
preceding Spirit of Vitriol; and of it in the Apoplexy give half a spoonful,
respecting both the Disease and Patient, to which may be added one drop or two
of Oil of Amber (g).

Externally also, the Temples and Crown of the Head may profitably be anointed
with that Liquor.

(a) Dried.

(b) Fresh.

(c) The time of gathering them needs not so exactly be observed.

(d) That is Flower of Mustard Seed.

(e) May-dew gathered upon Wheat is better.

(f) Which keep apart, and in like manner the phlegm of the Caput Mortuum,
with the phlegm make a Lixivium, which by Evaporating reduce to the
Consistency of Honey, and with the reserved Spirit, with a sufficient quantity
of Argilla, impaste it; and by Retort, upon other Flowers a little dried,
distill it into a most capacious Receiver, this red Liquor afterward from the
Flowers rectify by a Cucurbit, and what first comes forth, distill by a Phiol
with a long Neck.

(g) Most excellent indeed is this our Authors Antapoplectick-water, that used
by me is more simple, being made only of Flowers of Lillys of the Valley, and
of Lavender, the description whereof is extant in Practica Chymiatrica of our
Edition, page.

Of admirable virtue is this Water in the Apoplexy: For it preserves from it,
and if the body be already afflicted therewith, it dissolves the disease. In
the Paralysy of the Tongue, it is singularly profitable. Dose half a spoonful.

Oil of Amber.
In preparing this, there is need of more, than common diligence, for, it
requires convenient and due fire. The most pure and white Amber (not yellow)
(a) which in the Sea is merely generated of Bitumen, we use in Medicine.

Therefore Fragments of white Amber ( viz. 2 or 3 lib.) and in a gross manner
beat them, but grind them not to powder; first wash away the filth, if any be,
with common water, put them into a Cucurbit or Alembeck, not too high, and upon
them pour Water of Roses and Betony (b) (this is done that the Oil may not
burns and that by the Vehicle of these Waters, it may more easily begin to
distill^ put on a capacious Head, with a sufficiently large Neck, and a
Receiver aptly placed and annexed; the joynings of the glasses being every
where well closed, distill it in Sand, observing a convenient and constant
degree of fire, yet so as it wax not cold, (for then it will be black like
pitch, and break the glass) and the distillation be at an end. Also beware the
fire be not too hot, for so the Recipient will be endangered.

First. The Water and white Oil will come forth with the Spirits like Clouds,
afterward the Spirit will come no more forth visibly, but in the Head streiks
will appear, as is seen in distillation of Spirit of Wine; at length the yellow
Oil comes; here cease from distilling, or change the Recipient, and gather the
Oils a part.

Lastly, in sublimation the Salt ascends, in the bottom the Capu^ Mortuum
remains like crumbs black and light.

Before the Oil of white Amber be rectified, it must be first well washed in
common water, stirring it about often; afterward rectify it with Water of Roses
or Ma^an, by gentle heat in Balneo. After this rectification, it may also be
further rectifyed, by being oftentimes mixed with fresh Rose or Majoran water,
always after separation of the Oil from the Water, renewing the same Water. So
the fetid odor is wont to be removed.

From 1 lib. of this Amber after rectification, you will scarcely have above
three or four Lotones of true white oil.

Salt of Amber.
The Salt, elevated in sublimation by force of fire, gather and dissolve it in
Majoranwater, filter the Water, and in Balneo leisurely abstract it; again
dissolve, filter, and coagulate it, this re-iterate often; then you will have a
most efficacious Diuretic Salt: of which mention is made above (c).

Virtues of Oil of Amber.
It may deservedly be called the most efficacious European Opobalsamum, because
by its own faculty it exceeds all other Remedies in curing the Apoplexy and
Epilepsy. It was once called Sacred, by reason of its occult and admirable
virtues.

1. In the Pest, one drop morning and evening chafed about the Nostrils,
prevents from venomous Infection. It is sometimet given from j, to ij. in Water
of Carduus-bened.

2. It is exceeding profitable to such as are in danger to be afflicted with
dangerous diseases of the Head, as the Apoplexy, Paralysy, and Epilepsy. For if
one or two drops of this Oil be taken upon an empty Stomach, (d) in
appropriate Waters, viz. of Betony, Tilia, Lavender, Black Cher^ies, etc. there
will be no fear of being invaded by those diseases. A like efficacious are
Tablets of Rotula's made of Sugar, and mixed with some drops of this Oil. And
for any one that is already infested with the Apoplexy, Epilepsy, or Paralysy,
there is not a more excellent Remedy, than some drops of distilled Oil of
white Amber, infused in Epileptick (e) Spirit and exhibited. It is also
profitable to anoint the Neck and Nostrils with the said Oil, and certainly
the disease will be expelled thereby, and the diseased speedily recover sense
and motion; in like manner a persume of the same white Amber, sprinkled upon
burning coals, and conveyed to the Nostrils of the Epileptick in the time of
the fit, very much abates it.

3. The Nerves, Veins, or Nervous parts, infested with the Cramp, or such like
contractures, may profitably be anointed with this Oil. (f) It is thus used,
mix a little of it with Ungents, with which anoint the affected parts, by which
the Nerves are wont to be restored.

4. One or two drops, mingled with Water of wild Alexander, and inwardly taken
expells the Stone, and other superfluities of the urinal passages (g).

5. If ss. or j. be infused in Water of Mugwort, Vervain, or Malmesy-wine, and
be drunk by a Woman in labor, it accelerates the Birth (h).

6. It is profitable in cold defluxions of the Head, for by the continued use
of this they are consumed, and the Brain comforted.

7. If the Nostrils, and pit of the Breast or Heart, be anointed with some
drops of this Oil, in Women which have suffocation, precipitation, and
strangulation of the Womb, it abates the motion of the Matrix. Of like
Efficacy are Rotula's of Oil of Amber made with Sugar, if one or two of them
be taken.

8. It also helps in Swounings, Languishing and Palpitation of the Heart.

9. It comforts not only the Faculty of the Vital virtue of the Heart, but also
of the Animal virtue of the Brain, and natural vigor of the Liver; and
therefore in concoction and digestion it is of admirable use.

10. In Fevers, three drops in Water of Carduus-bened, being taken before the
fit, (i) and the sick laid to sweat in Bed, expells the Fever.

11. In retention of the Urine, three or four drops taken in Water of
Strawberries or Wine, wonderfully provokes Urine (k).

12. In drying up the Catarrh it is helpful (l).

13. Dolours of the Teeth, occasioned by defluxions, it cures, if mixed with
Plantainwater, and the mouth gargled therewith.

14. In the Jaundies, it is given with Water of Endive, Bindeweed, Succory,
Selandine.

15. In the Cholick j. or ss. given in Beer.

16. In suffocation of the Matrix seven or eight drops in Water of Peneroyal.

17. In accelerating the Birth and after burden, seven or eight drops in Water
of Savine or Mugwort (m).

18. In retention of the Menses, seven or eight drops in Water of Melissa.

19. In Contractures, some Contractures of Hands and Feet have been restored by
anointing with this Oil of Amber.

20. In Vomiting Blood, three drops in Water of Coltsfoot, Tormentil, Sloes.

21. The Vertigo and Scotoma it cures.

22. Stupefaction of the Brain, it miraculously removes.

23. It comforts the Sight, with Water of Fennel.

24. In prickings of the Sides it is efficaciously adhibited.

Dose.
From four, six, seven, ten drops, to j. respecting the disease and complexion
(n).

(a) But if white Amber cannot be had, which is more rare and precious, than
the yellow; the yellow, if by Artifice first reduced to a whiteness, may be
equally as good; which may thus be performed.

The Artificial Preparation of white Amber.
Yellow Amber 1 lib. put it in a strong Earthen Cucurbit, upon it put of
Sea Salt, or in defect of that Salt-gem, or of the best common Salt 2 lib. Pour
on as much Rainwater, as shall suffice to dissolve the Salt, which being
dissolved, pour on more fresh Rainwater, afterward put on a Blind-head upon
the Cucurbit, and boil it continually with constant fire for fourteen whole
days; then take out a small part of it, break it, and try it: If it be
sufficiently white, forbear any further boiling; if otherwise, continue it
longer, till it be perfectly white. Note. In the boiling, care must be taken to
supply the defect of Water, by still adding as ost as need is, other hot water.

(b) Some only distill by Retort, without the Vehicles of distilled Waters, yet
always observing the various Oils that come forth, which they diligently
gather apart. First the white Oil comes forth, afterward the yellow, then the
red. These Oils they afterward rectify. By others are added fragments of
Amber, or white pure sand, or else calcined Flints; for all these are of such
force, that they do as it were suppress the boiling Amber, nor do they permit
that by Retort it run or flow into the Receiver: which indeed is a more
commodious way, and for distilling of Oil of Amber more secure.

(c) In the Chapter of Diuretics.

(d) By continuing the use thereof.

(e) Against the Epilepsy and Apoplexy.

(f) To corroborate the joints, Oil of Amber, with a like quantity of Oil of
Vitriol, is an excellent Remedy in corr^orating the joints.

(g) The Gravel and Tartar, especially of the Reins, if one or two drops of
Oil of Turpentine be mixed therewith.

(h) It will more strongly operate, if five or six drops of Oil of Cumin, or
Carraways be added.

(i) Yet with that which comes first forth in the preparation.

(k) Or in Wine of Flints, of which above in the Chapter of Diuretics.

(l) A bag of powder of ground Pine, sprinkled with Oil of Amber, and worn
upon the Coronale Suture.

(m) Or if eight or nine drops be put upon the Navel, it expells the young,
either alive or dead.

(n) It is very profitable to the Navel. It may externally be used in the
following manner.

The external use of Oil of Amber.
Oil of Amber j. Honey 1 lib. Common Salt ij.


Mix them, and instead of a Plaster, apply it to burning Ulcers: it extracts
the heat, asswages the dolor, and also cures, die Mundsuche.

Of this Oil j. diligently mix it with 1 lib. of Opodeldoch, it so exceedingly
comforts, that it preserves Ulcers from all accidents, especially it defends
them from heats and humors: also it draws out little Bones from Wounds,
Splinters, or small parts of Lint, by the imprudence of the Chyrurgeon too
deeply illapsed.

Apoplectick Balsome (a).
Expressed Oil of Nutmegs ij. (b) Ambergreise j. of the black (c) jss. Musk jss.
Civet ijss. Distilled Oils of Lavender, in which flowers of Lillyes of the
Valley have been steeped ss. Of Cinnamon ss. Majoran ss. Cloves six drops.
Amber j. Rue ss.


From all these, mixed according to Art, in a just Consistency, make a Balsome:
If it be thought good to add Peruvianus his Odoriferous Balsome, it may be
added to the whole.

Virtues and Use.
1. It wonderfully helps such as are afflicted with the Apoplexy, Epilepsy, and
Vertigo, if the extremities of the Nostrils, Temples, and Crown of the Head,
and also the Palate in urgent necessity, be anointed therewith day and night by
intervals.
For Preservation.
2. Against malignant and Pestiferous Air. 3. It refreshes all the Animal and
Vital Spirits. 4. It is an Arcanum in the Cholick, (d) if the Navel be anointed
therewith. 5. Distempers of the Matrix it wonderfully resists, if the
Ventricle, Navel, (e) and also the Naturals of a Woman afflicted with
Suffocation be therewith anointed, hereby she will presently be refreshed: If
at the same time also to the Nostrils, fetid odours be applied, as Castor, Assa
faetida, etc. (f)

The external use, as before: If with a little of this Oil, the extremities of
the Nostrils be anointed, that sweet odor will scarcely vanish in a day or
two. (g)

(a) It is called Austriack. It is most profitable to the Aged. This
Composition is by some ascribed to Craton of Krassthelm.

(b) The quantity of ij. of Oil of Nutmegs is too much: This Composition is
thereby made more hard, and unsavory to be taken; therefore j. of it is enough
for the other ingredients.

(c) White is better.

(d) Especially by reason of the Civet, which otherwise anointed is wont to
disturb the Belly.

(e) Especially, if of it in Linen a Pessary be made, and put up the genitals
of Women.

(f) Also Oil of Anthrax, S. of Pit-coals, or a fume of Partridge-feathers, or
else of the proper Hairs burnt, Oil of Mans-blood, or of G^ats-blood.

(g) It must be kept in a vessel of Gold or Silver Gilt. The elegant
description of our Apoplectich Balsome. See in Practica Chymiatrica of our
Edition at Lipsiensis, page.

Opthalmick.
Of Malmesy Wine 1 lib. Distill'd-water of whites of Eggs boiled hard 1 lib.
Water of Mans-blood j. Water of white Roses, of red Roses, of each iij. Water
of Selandine, Rue, Eyebright, Fennel, Valerian, Fumitory, Peneroyal, of each
ij. Virgins-honey one spoonful and a half. Roch-Allum ss. Sugar Candied, White
Vitriol, of each ss. Campher iij. Salt of Eyebright, Fennel, Saturn, of each
j. Salt of Pearls, Corals, of each ij. Cloves, Ginger, Mastich, of each j.
Aloes ss.


Tutia prepared, (that is, in Rose Water, and a like quantity of Cretick-wine,
six times extinguished, and finely Pulverisate) jss.

Grind of these, such as are to be ground, and mix them, put them in a close
Vessel, and let them stand in digestion of heat for one month, or, which is
better, expose them to the Air, Sun, and Dew for forty days, afterward the
liquor may be commodiously used.

This may, according to pleasure, be prepared, and exposed in an Aurichaelcine
Vessel.

Note. The Aloes, with the aforesaid Waters, must first be mingled, and by long
stirting together, be as it were, reduced to Water, and become like filth, (a)
and be imbodied with the Water, then added to the rest (b).

Use.
1. In all Affects of the Eyes, as Inflammations, Bloodshot, Cloudiness,
Fistula's, and such like.

The way of Application.
Let the sick in Bed, lie upon his back, and with a black Feather (of a Hen)
inject a tear, or drop of the Water, into his open Eyes; let the sick open and
shut his Eyes often, that the Water put into the Cavities, may be diffused
all-over the Eyes, do this twice or thrice a day, and he will be cured.

If Cloudiness be above, or below the Cornea, make a powder of Sugar Candy,
burnt Alum, and the Bone of the Fish Sepia, (c) but beat it very small, and
searse it through a very fine Searse, that it may be an impalpable powder; when
the Patient goes to Bed, through a small Quill, blow a little of this powder
into the Eye, and presently instill one drop of the Water, (d) let him close
his Eyes and sleep, for it will very quickly wash out.

Or if there be Spots in the Eyes, with ss. of this Opthalmick Liquor, mix of
Oil of Brick four times rectified, and of Oil of Fennel once rectified, of
each four drops, also two drops of rectified Oil of Amber, and of this Liquor
twice in a day, viz. morning and evening, inject one or two drops into the Eye.

A wonderful and stupendous Opthalmick is made of Crabs and Selandine, which,
if in due time, and with requisite Artifice it be prepared, does most
excellently restore the sight almost quite lost, and all wounds (e) in the
space of twenty four hours conglutinates.

(a) Shavings or fragments.

(b) In Balnco, if Aloes Succotrine be digested in Water, it will be
spontaneously resolved, and leave the Feces behind.

(c) Calcined.

(d) Of the Opthalmick.

(e) Except a Nervous wound.

(f) For the Imbecility of the Sight, and other Chronical vices of the Eyes,
various Waters are given. This which our Author proposes, although it have many
ingredients, yet that, which is prepared of the best, is best. There are two
only which from a Specific propriety many ways sharpen the Sight, and restore
the Eyes howsoever hurt, almost to a miracle. Those are Arcanums of Valerian
whole, and of Eyebright, plainly Philosophically prepared, after the same
manner I have noted before, viz. where the Water, with the Spirit, is drawn
forth by distillation, and then from the Caput Mortuum a Salt extracted, which
with the same Spirit drawn forth by distillation, in digesting is united, and
afterward with the same in an open fire rendered spiritual, is distilled upon
the like Herb, before put into the Receiver, as above is described in Spirit of
Tartar; which extracting an Essence from that Plant, at length by Retort in a
fire of dry Balneum is produced, and worthily may be called an Arcanum. Dose
from three drops to eight or ten. See also Practica Chymiatrica of our Edition,
page.

Moreover, if to Opthalmick-waters, be added a little of the Specific of Gall
of the Pikefish the desired effect more swiftly follows, yea, hereby even Haws,
Cloudines, and the Pin and Web of the Eyes, most happily vanish. See Practica
Chymiatrica, page.

Of the Whites of Eggs also is prepared a most excellent Water, which
consolidates all kinds of wounds in the Eyes without any scar, and is of
admirable virtue; the way of preparing it, see in Practica Chymiatrica, page.

Also the description of the Opthalmick-water, made of Selandine and Crabs, is
extant in the same page, which has recovered Eyes hurt almost to desparation,
and their Wounds most virtuously in twenty four hours conglutinates. For
dimness, redness, and tears of the Eyes, our Water made of Sugar Candy, and
purified Vitriol, is described in Practica Chymiatrica, page.

There is also described the Opthalmick-water of Succory-flowers, page.

There is likewise another most excellent Water, powerful in removing Haws,
Suffusions, etc. of the Eyes, and for clarifying the Sight, of admirable
virtue. Water of Roses, Selandine, Fennel, Eyebright, Parsely, of each ij.


Add of Sublimate Mercury, most finely pulverisate ss. when it is dissolved.
filter the Water, and keep it. Of this daily, in the morning fasting, put one
or two drops into the affected Eyes.

Hereto may be referred Saphyrine-water of Anhelmus Boethius de Boodt, Tract. de
gemmis, lib. 2. chap. 43. page 95. An Opthalmick-water Angeli Sala, made of
English Tin. Also an Opthalmick-water of the same Author, made of Copper,
described in the Spagirick Review of the seven Planets, page, 88, and 91. which
are of admirable virtues.

Odontalgick (a).
An Anodyne Oil.
Oil of Cloves rectifyed ss. dissolve in it ss. of Campher, add afterward
Spirit of Turpentine (b) four times rectifyed ss. This mixed liquor keep for
necessary use.

Use.
One or two drops, with Cotton put into the hollowness of the Akeing-tooth, or
applied to the Tooth affected, removes the dolor (c).

Another Water of Like efficacy.
Betony, Origan, Sage, Mentastrum, Wild Mint.
Water-pepper, or Arsmatt, Shavings of Guaiacum, Shavings of Tamatick, of Box,
of each one handful.


Pour upon them Opiatick Spirit of Wine, ( viz. that which is left in
Preparation of Laudanum,) till they be covered three or four fingers, let them
stand in a warm place, the Vessel being well closed, till the Spirit be tinged.
Of this tinged Spirit let the Patient hold a little in his Mouth, to that part
where the Akeing teeth are, after some time he may let it out, and take in
more, if need be. If the the Tooth be hollow, dip a little Cotton in the
liquor, and put it into the Cavity. This most efficaciously asswages dolours of
the Teeth (d).

(a) Various Odentalgicks are in use by Practitioners. The following, by me
familiarly used, are most safe.

1. Is a Sorrel-root cut into small pieces, dried, and applied to the
Akeing-tooth, it extracts the superfluous humor, and so removes the dolor: It
is gathered in Spring, and Autumn, see Practica Chymiatrica of our Edition,
page.

2. The like performs a decoction of the greater Burr-root, made with Vinegar,
being held for some time in the Mouth: and a decoction of the Root of Urtica
Major, performs the like, if the dolor arise from distillation of Rheum, see
Practica, etc.

3. If powder of Galls be ten or twelve times Imbibed in Juice of the Root of
Bastard Pellitory, dried and mixed with Ferment, and made up into little Balls,
and so applied, it suddenly mitigates most vehement dolours of Teeth, renders
them more fast, kills the Worms growing in their Cavities, and extracts all
defluxions falling upon the Gums, and comforts them very much.

4. Oil of Box, the preparation of which, and way of applying, is extant in
Practica Chymiatrica of our Edition, page.

(b) It may be omitted, by reason of its ungrateful Taste.

(c) The same performs Oil of Campher, also Oil of Lignum Heraclinum.

(d) For instammation of the Teeth, very profitable is a decoction of Guaiacum,
with the White of an Egg, and sixed Nitro, being detained in the Mouth. Also a
small part of Laudanum Opiat, temper it with Oil of Cloves, and with Cotton
apply it to the Ak^ingTeeth.

Pectorale.
Milk of Sulphur.
Of yellow Sulphur beaten or sifted, or of flowers of Sulphur, (b) one part,
and Salt of Tartar three parts, (c) put them in a glass with a large Orifice,
place the glass (first well Lured) in Sand, pour upon the Sulphur and Tartar
distilled Rainwater, till they be covered six fingers; the fourth part of the
glass, which is vacant, must stand above the Sand: put fire under it
successively, that it may boil, diligently stir it with a wooden Spatula, until
the Sulphur in the boiling be almost all dissolved, which will be in the space
of five or six hours, for then the Liquonwaxeth red, moderately thickning it
self, like a Lixivium: If the Water in boiling be evaporated (d) pour on other
hot water. Lastly, when the Sulphur is almost all dissolved, and the liquor on
the top remains red, the thickness of two or three fingers, then while it is
hot filter it through Brown-paper, and presently, before it be cold, upon it
pour Wine (e) (some use distilled Vinegar, but Wine is better) gently, yet
somewhat swiftly, and with an high descent, so long as till it acquire the
color of thick Milk. This afterward in a peculiar glass keep apart, and
proceed in the same manner with the remaining hot Solution and Wine: Lastly,
all the milky liquor mix, and set it in a warm place, until the whiteness of
the Sulphur have separated it self, by descending from the Wine to the bottom,
being then of a blew and red color; afterward abstract the Wine by
inclination, and pour on distilled Rainwater, mixing them: let them stand one
day and night, then again pour off that Water, and pour on fresh; repeating the
labor often, until no more blackness, or impurity appear in the Water, nor any
sensible fetor: then after due Residence, and Effusion of Water, dry it by it
self in a Hot-house, and keep it, being like fine Flower, or else before it be
plainly dry, mix it with Cinnamon Water, or other appropriate Water, and before
it be adhibited to Medicinal use, diligently stir it (f).

Virtues, Use, and Dose, of Milk of Sulphur.
1. It is a Balsome of the radical moisture. 2. It comforts the natural vigor.
3. It purges the blood from all impurities, from whence many diseases are wont
to arise. 4. It is a preservative in the Apoplexy. Convulsion of the Nerves.
Leprosy. Lues venerea. 5. It is a Specific of the Lungs, in preserving from,
and curing of the Asthma (g). 6. It takes away the Cough, although of long
continuance. 7. It consumes, and drys the fluxes of the Head. 8. It comforts
the Brain. 9. It impedes the windinesses of the Ventricle, and the Cholick. 10.
In such, as are afflicted with Hectic, (h) and dry Fevers, by its peculiar
property of comforting, it much helps, if mixed with Cinnamon Water, that it
may be like liquid Milk. 11. The Pthisical, (i) it admirably helps, by acting
upon the radical humor, according to the Testimony of the sick. 12. In
Arthritis, Podagra, and Sciatica, with other such like diseases, it is
exceeding profitable. 13. Like an occult fire it consumes the Disease, no
otherwise than common fire consumes the wood.


Dose (k) Mix as much of the powder with the Vehicle, as may tinge it, as it
were with a white color. In the evening and morning give one spoonful: before
the exhibition diligently mix the liquor.

It is given in distilled Waters, of Cinnamon, Melissa, Lavender,
Epileptick-water or Spirit of Wine.

(a) Some call it white Sulphur, Magistery, Cream, also Butter of Sulphur,
Supereminency of Sulphur. The Author of this Composition was Dr. Samuel
Schleget, Phisician of Princ^ Anhaltinus, wherewith he cured a Nobleman, and
had for the Cure 500. Co^ats.

(b) Which are better.

(c) Fuse.

(d) Put on a Blindehead, so the Water will not evaporate.

(e) A little sharp, otherwise it will not do.

(f) Here many things seem Hyperbolical to Libavius.

(g) The expressed juice of Nuts, especially mitigates the Asthma, being tempered
with distilled water of the fruit of Madder. This is admirably dissolved,

First, If one sponful of the Water, which is made of most white Sugar, and
Radishes cut into small pieces, and stirred together, being set for some time
to simmer over a gentle ^re between two dishes, be given fresh: made morning
and evening. See Practica Chymiatrica, page.

Secondly, The juice of Briony, or of the White Wind, exceeds all. The way of
preparing which, See also Practica, etc. in the Chapt. of streightness of the
Breast, page.

(h) Of the first and second degree, for so great fiery^ess is not proper for
these.

(i) In Water of Coltsfoot, contrary to Libavius, who thinks it not proper in
hectic, dry and lean persons, because of its exceeding force of drying.

(k) Quercetanus exhibits j. for a Cathartick.

Cordiale.
It is the principal part of a Physician, that would Cure the Sick, first to
comfort the Heart, and afterward assault the Disease. Those to whom the
harmonious Analogy of Superiors and Inferiors has been known, and who from
suffrages of Astrologers have learned that to the two greatest Lights of
Heaven, the two principal parts of Man, viz. the Heart and Brain, are
attributed, cannot deny, that the greatest Confortative of the Heart, in things
of Nature, latently rests in GOLD, sealed with seven Seals, (a) as in the
foregoing The Author's Preface before published.
Preface is sufficiently denoted. Vulgar Physicians confess Gold comforts the
Heart, which is nor to be understood of common dead Gold, by its Aspect only to
exhilarate the Heart, but of the Phylosophick living Gold, regenerate, and more
than perfect, resolvible in every Liquor. Although some Gems are preferred
before Gold, yet it is not because they are better than it, but that they are
more rare, and found in far smaller quantity. For, Nature has endowed Gold,
with no contemptible virtues, which, who so knows how to draw out, and by
ingenions Artifice is able rightly to use, he will find Gold, which seemed dead
and barren, to be so lively and pregnant, that it germinates, and of it self
progenerates new Gold, with new and infinite en^rease. Indeed the generation of
Metals is not so obvious to the Sight, as of Vegetables and Animals, the reason
is, that gross Terrestinal Mole, by which the Vegetative Spirit, locked up as
it were in a Castle is impeded, whereby it is less able to perform its office
of geenrating its like. If this by Art can be freed from that Terrestial House
and Sepulcher, and loosened from all its impurities; without doubt, as all
other creatures, it will equally participate of the generative virtue, and
bring forth fruit according to its seed, and so Metal will bring forth Metal,
and Gold generate Gold.

Whence, the true Philosophers have exquisitely prepared a wonderful, and
greatly to be desired Medicine, with which the impurities of imperfect Metals
are removed, and all vices of affects in uncurable Diseases of Humane Bodies,
In Gold is the Reservacle of all Magisteries; for the Quintescence of Gold
resists tho operation of the Sun and the other Planets, in the Body of Man.
perfectly exterminated. Happy is that Physician, yea, thrice, and four times
happy may he be esteemed, who, the three principles of the true universal
matter, exceedingly well purifyed, and in due proportion joined by Natural
Rotation, is able to reduce it through all requisite colors, into an
incombustible Phoenix, by the benefit of which, Gold in flux, may actually be
vegetated and animated, and the Phoenix it self, in an inseparable manner, be
converted to Gold. Fortunate, I say, is that Physician, who, the Celestial ^ol
being auspicious, according to the rules of Magical Anatomy, and Phylosophical
Pyronomy, There are four principles of Nature.
knows how rightly, and harmoniously to apply Metallic Sol, dissolved, and
regenerated by that variously named Hyleal-water (b) in an appropriate Vehicle
of vegetable Sol, Among the Celestials, Sol, obtaines the priority.
or of Spirit of rich Wine, to the Animal Sol, or Microcosmical Heart of Man,
viz. to the Spirit of Life, Among Vegetables, Wine.
as to its own Image. Since the Giver of gifts, Among Animals Man.
has not as yet favored me in this part, as I have before said, although I
have tried various ways, And among Minerals, Gold.
and from almost a hundred descriptions of Aurum-potabiles or rather Putabile,
after the expense of time and charge, have in vain examined many of them by
fire; also in this place I would not delude the candid Chemical Reader, because
I promised in this Book to deliver my Experiments (...) only: yet, that I may
satisfy the earnest expectation of some, one only description, (...) long since
faithfully communicated to me, a little after I shall insert, which although it
seems not estranged from Truth, and not unapproved by Experience, yet to the
desirous Reader, I here present to be by him examined. The method and ways of
vulgar Alchymists in preparing Aurum-potabile are improper, inconducible to
Humane Nature, and far distant from the purpose of Philosophers, also
whatsoever by this Name they boast of, and falsely speak: For that which is
reduced to a corporeity, is it self crude, and undigested: Nature transfers the
good to better, by way of alteration; but this Gold, described by them, has
neither suffered alteration, nor natural solution, therefore is not meliorated.
And although many by Spirit of common Salt, some by Alcoholisate Spirit of
Wine, others by Radicate Vinegar; some by Corrosive Salts first, and afterward
by Spirit of Turpentine, or Aromatic Oils, and such like deliraments, have
endeavored to dissolve Gold, as a metallic Stem, which, from the Province of
Animals and Vegetables they undeservedly exclude, yet in vain all these have
labored, The Aurean Heaven is manifested without any comixtion of Impurity. So
feculent and ponderous Lucifer once was cast out from the spiritual Heaven.
as experience testifyes. The Philosophers Water of Sapience is one, which
delivers all Metals and Stones from the impure Bond of Quaternary (c)
Coagulation, naturally and Phylosophically: nor is there any other way under
Heaven, of dissolving the body of Sol naturally, than by the universal
Mercurial Menstruum of Philosophers, The Ancients not without cause say, in Sol
and Salt all things are contained, viz. not in the excrementit^ous part, but in
the Centrale universal Balsom of Nature, which from every Age has been called
the true Halchymia. Read. Rodagitius his inferior Zodiac of the Hyemal Signs.
of all things in Nature the most Secret; which, while through ignorance, and
difficulty of acquiring, we want: We are wont, as in defect of Partridges, to
satiate our hunger with courser Meat; as a Cook, when wanting Oak-wood to dress
his Meats, makes use of Beech, or other less serviceable fuel.

Moreover Gold, in which is the adequation of Elements, (d) is the universal
Subject to Animals, Vegetables, and Minerals, the life of all things: And as it
has a singular concordance with the Celestial Sun, so also it possesses a
great affinity and harmony, (e) with the Humane Body in its internal form.

Also, Also Lullyes Heaven of Philosophers of Centrale Salt.
as the Celestial Sol bears it self toward other Planets^ for like a King it
sits in the midst of them, in Light, Magnitude, and Beauty, exceeding all,
illuminating all, and distributing the virtue to them, which they dispose to
inferiors: So, in like manner, the Phylosophick Sol bears it self toward other
Metals; for, of Metals Gold is the most pure, (f) in which is manifest the
splendour of the Sun, and Celestial Fire, and in its most perfect Body, the four
Elements are harmoniously conjoined.

The Ruble has in it self the effect of all precious Stones, To this
Phylosophick Heaven we apply its Terrene Stars, which are Plants, Stones, and
Metals.
so also Gold (the Noblest of all precious Stones) has in it self the virtue
of all ductible Stones, viz. of Metals, because in it self it contains every
Metal, and tinges, and vivifies them. As in Animals, of all parts the Heart it
self is most excellent throughout the whole Body, so in the Heaven and World,
the Sun exceeds, being the joy of every Creature in the whole universe, and
such as are in it have the Dominion.
And as the superior Celestial Planets receive splendour and light from the
Celestial Sun: Plainly, in the same, and like manner, the Terrestrial Planets,
or Metallic Bodies, receive their splendour, light, virtue and rays, from
Gold, as from a Phylosophick, and Terrestrial Sun. Here it is manifest, why the
most Ancient Cabalists, and wife Men skillful in Natural Magi^k, who obtained
their plenary Knowledge of Nature in the light of GOD, likened the beginnings
of all things in the whole universe, to the point of a strait Line, or
Circumference: and why Characters, and Names of the Celestial Planets, are
imparted to Metals, viz. by reason of their singular correspondency, and
because among themselves, without any great disterence, they may be easily
understood.

In Gold, the King and Head of Metals according to Hermes, See Menandem
Hierohlyphicam.
viz. in body most pure and perfect, domabile by no Element, and by God and
Nature exquisitely, according to matter and form elaborated, are insused, not
only all Celestial virtues of the Planets, and other metallic, and mineral
Bodies, but also of Vegetables, and Animals. This dispensation, and conjunction
of the Elements, is so tempered, Gold is every Nature.
that no violence of Fire can separate, nor seculency of Earth vitiate, or
limosity of Water contaminate, nor contagion of Air obumbrate or corrupt.
Whence by the wise, as well by reason of Celestial, as Terrestrial latent
virtues, every Man is called Microcosmus and Adam, that is to say, the and
persection of Natures work. Yea, the septenary number of perfection is truly
completed, beyond which, Nature (without the help of Art) in its own power and
operation, is not able to proceed, but sabbatizes, and acquiesces therein. Yet
that it may be understood, how the Celestial Bodies of Planets, and Stars, and
how the Elements, and Vegetables also, communicate their virtues to Gold under
the Earth, we shall sincerely leave these following, to be considered, and
examined by the judgment of the prudent. The whole Machine of the Creation,
according to the Hebrew Cabalists, is divided into three Orbs or Worlds: Into
the Elementary, viz. this sensible, and lowest, which consists of Heaven, and
Earth: Into the Intellectual, or Angellical; and into the Archetype. Exodus 26.
30.
These three Worlds are most evidently figured by Moses, in that admirable
framing of the Tabernacle, demonstrated in the Mount, according to the
Archetype. In this sensible World, is the Elementary, and Celestial Region.

The Elementary is concluded, The Counsel of the Supreme Order, the middle
order interprets to the Inferior.
and encompassed with the exterior Heaven or Firmament, which contains in
itself four Elements, liable to corruption and generation. In the Celestial,
the Planets, and other Stars, or Celestial Bodies, have their gubernation, and
perform their office. The second Region, is the habitation, or place of Angels
by the Learned Rabbis called, The World of Intelligences. The third contains
the Archetype World.

The Divine Power and Will, before it communicates itself to the inferiors,
first descends to the Intelligences or Angels, from them to the Spheres of the
Firmament, Planets and Stars: lastly, it comes into the Elementary World, or
into the Region of the four Elements, where (as the Hebrens speak) the ultimate
Execution of the Divine Will and Pleasure, The third is moved by the second;
the second is governed by the first.
is fulfilled and performed. In every of these three Regions, God has placed a
similitude, or exemplar of his Divine Omnipotency, not to that end it should be
equal with Himself (or the Creator:) so as by itself, of its own accord, be
able to do all things; but that those Effigies may be as Representations, only
signifying, and demonstrating the Divine Essence; by which, God exhibites his
Omnipotent virtue and power, to be perceived and discerned by Sight, as is
witnessed by Paul, Romans 1. GOD to the Gentiles, GOD in the disposion and
ordination of things by degrees, has always placed the more noble in the
highest degree.
or Men has made known his Invisible Essence, that is, Eternal Life, and the
Deity he has made manifest by his Works, viz. in the Creation of the World. In
the Archetype are Idea's, and divine Dignities of GOD. In the Intellectual
World, he has placed Angels, or Intelligencies: But in the Celestial Region,
or this sensual World, All Souls to that one Soul of the World, and all Planets
to the Sun only, as King over all, ought to be referred.
he has placed the ^rimum Mobile, or, as others speak, the second Motion after
Angels, or the first Corporeal Creature, and Fountain of all Life and Motion.
In this Celestial Region he has put the Sun, It shines over all, and is the
ferment of humane sapience.
as King, and Governor of the Stars, and Fountain of all Light; for the Soul,
or middle Nature of the World, chiefly inhabites in the Sun, which filling the
whole Globe of the Sun, like a Spirit pours forth its Rays every where through
all things, distributing Life, Sense, and Motion, to the whole Universe,
passing through all Essences. Therefore in the Sun, as in a Receptacle, and
everlasting Fountain, all virtues of Nature are contained. And as in the humane
Body, the Heart is the Spring of vital Spirit and Blood, imparting motion, and
vigor to all the other Members: So the Sun, is in like manner the Heart of the
Heavens, The force of the Sun peculiarly shines in Stones, for whilst in every
natural thing the spirit of it is seated, so much the more will it be
manifested in Gold, and in Stones, which helps their Nature laboring with
defect, and restores them.
which as Governor of all Elementary virtues, infuses and spreads its Rays,
through the Universal Nature. In the Elementary World Gold is as it were a
Receptacle, and subject of all Elementary Celestial, and Super-celestial
Virtues; which after they are delapsed downward, from the Supercelestial and
Celestial Influence, into this Elementary World, by concentring themselves into
this one Metal, are conjoined, and so finally, being gathered, in it are kept
and concluded. For the most secret Celestial Spirit of Gold, distributes to all
Creatures of the whole World, Life, Substance, and Essence, for which cause, it
will not be improper to judge, it most nearly bears the Image of God. The same
Spirit in the Heaven, is most liberally diffused, by its motion, and virtue:
But in the Earth, especially in the Center thereof, most closely contracted, is
condensed, and as it were incorporated into the substance of them, which in the
Center of the Earth have their being: In Metals, it is wholly shut up,
Therefore Paracelsus, not without Reason, in lib vexationum has constituted
triple Gold.
and fixed; and that this may more clearly be explained, it is thus to be
understood. When the Sun goes its Circuit about the Heaven, and passes through
the ways, or passages of his Celestial journey, where he comes to the Houses,
and appointed places of the Planets, Metals are appointed the lowest place of
the Circle, they in the middle of the Center of the Earth lie bid.
or other Stars, by his governance they are all agitated, being not conjoined
with his presence they are troubled, but when in corporal conjunction they are
exceedingly delighted (by comforting the force and operation, which they have
in the Air, viz. with Mars he excites heat, with Saturn cold,) and he every
where infuses light, life, and motion, even to the lowest, and most profound
parts of the Earth. Whence by Heraclitus it is called the Celectial Fountain of
Man; by Orpheus, the Light of Life, and the Eye of the World, or the Vivifying
Eye of Heaven, which is said to inspire heat, light, and life into all things.
It is the nature of external fire, to enliven all occult, latent fires; So the
Sun, in like manner, is ordained by GOD to the same end, that it might enkindle
all occult, and latent fires, for the spears of the Plan^ts, which appear not
to us, of themselves are dead; but when by the Sun set on fire, they are
lively, and according to their proprieties operate. The Sun by Paracelsus is
called the Spiracule of life of the Elements. By Plato and Zoroaster, it is
named Celestial and Invisible Fire. The Father of Lights infusing, and
communicating the splendour of his fire, first imparts it to the Sun, and other
Celestial bodies, then, as it were, by middle Instruments, instills it into this
our Fire. Hence it is, that in the Sun the force, and virtues of all the
Planets, are found. And Jamblichus truly faith, That whatsoever gift we
receive, we have it from the Sun, either from it alone, The Sun receives from
none, but burns and enlightens always of it self, and by God only it governed.
or else from it by others; for although we partake of virtue from others, yet
that is taken from the Sun. Therefore in the Sun, the heart of Heaven, as in a
potent Spring or Fountain, are found Celestial, occult operations, of the
Celestial Bodies. The heavenly Queen, You can proceed in nothing rightly
without the benefit of Luna, because she by the virtue of Sol is governess of
generation, augmentation, and decrease.
and Wife of Sol, viz. Luna, of all Celestial influences and virtues, the
ultimate receptacle, who receiving, as it were, into her womb, the rays, and
influx of the Sun, and other Planets and Stars delivers them, as the fruit of
her Womb, to the inferior World, near unto herself. It pleased the most wise
God, to Create, It is called Luna, because it shines by the light of another,
for of it self it shines not but receives all its splendour from the Sun.
and put the sphere of the Moon, in the lowest place of the Celestial Bodies,
and in the highest of Elementary motions, that from it, they might receive the
virtues, and celestial Influences of the Stars; and the Moon filled therewith,
Without the Moon, (...) a Medium, we are altogether unable to attract the
super^our virtues.
does from it self redispose them into all Elementary things, or distribute
them into the Elements, through the whole Globe of the Earth, and by this means
the peculiar, and proper innate Astrum of every thing conspiring with the
superiors, is excited. Hence it appears, how the soul of the World, by
supercelestial, Although the Moon from all Stars receives virtue, yet as often as
she is joined (...), and in conjunction with the Sun, she is most powerfully
replenished with an enlivening virtue, and from his Aspect borrows her
complexi^h.
insensible, and invisible fire, moves the light, and fire of the Sun, which
afterward moves the virtues of the Stars, and at length, by the Moon, disposes
it to the Earthy Globe, by distributing even to the lowest, and most profound
part thereof, in like manner, as Man's seed is cast into the Globe, or Vessel of
the Matrix. By reason of the singular conformity, concordance, and similitude,
the celestial Sol, and terrestial Gold, have usually between themselves, the
ancient Wise Men, and Cabalists, would represent, and describe the celestial
and terrestrial Sol, with one and the same Hieroglyphick character. viz. on
entire Circle, and a visible Center; so the character of Sol has reference
both to Heaven and Earth, for it denotes the celestial Circle, motion, and
influences, and the Terrene Centor, and fixed Nature. Whosoever knows reason of
the true point and center, nothing of things of nature can lie hid, of which ^e
has not perfect knowledge: Since that in it the root, and foundation of hidden
things consists, undoubtedly from hence the natural Basis of all Arts, and
Sciences are principally to be drawn, and obtained. Now we come to the
description of Aurum potabile.

First is required Calx of Sol, which before, although for other uses, I have
thus prepared.

Of common Aqua fortis half a pound, dissolve in it of Salt Ammoniack j. (g) or
as much as can be dissolved with small heat: So you will have Aqua Regis, in
which dissolve of Gold, as much as will be, (b) afterward pour the Solution
into a large Glass, and upon it instill drop by drop (to prevent the danger, and
fervency of its boiling) good Oil of Tartar (i) dissolved per se in a Collar:
In defect of this, Salt of Tartar dissolved in common Water may be taken: there
is required a good quantity of Oil of Tartar, then the Gold by repercussion
falls to the bottom. When the whole C^lx of Gold is dissolved, and seen to
settle to the bottom (which you will perceive by the color of the Aqua Regis,
that should be white, but if it still remain yellow, it is a sign the whole of
the Gold is not yet precipited, therefore more Oil of Tartar must be very
leisurely poured on; be thou faithfully advised here by my loss) then after it
have settled in a hot place for certain hours, pour off the superior Liquor,
and Edulcorate the Calx (in color it will be pale, almost like
Terra-sigillata) four or five times with common Water, afterward in Balneo
prudently, and leisurely with most gentle (k) fire, dry it, or which is safer,
set it in a Hot-house in a Glass-dish, to dry of its own accord, without
applying to it any heat of fire: The Calx must be stirred with a Wooden
Spatula, not of Iron, and afterward for security, carefully kept in a
Glass-vessel.

Note, There is great danger in drying it any other way, than in the two
former; for as soon as ever it receives the heat of the fire, or by strong
stirring, with an Iron Instrument, it presently takes flame, and vanishes into
Air like a purple fume, with exceeding no^se and sound like Gunpowder; so as
after, not one Atome thereof can be found. I have known some, who in doing this
imprudently have endangered their lives. There are some, who with good success,
exhibit some granes (l) of this volatile Calx, medicinally to be inwardly taken
into the Body, in stead of a Diaphoretick. If a little common Sulphur, beaten
small be mixed with this Calx, and afterward in a Crucible burnt in the fire,
the most subtle Calx of Gold (m) will remain of a brown, or dark red color, by
this operation losing all its percussive force, which is strange, and worthy to
be noted (n).

j. Of this Volatile (o) Gold, more strongly and powerfully operates, than half
a pound of Gu^powder. If one grane or two be put upon a Knife, and that set
fire of, with a Candle, it sends forth a great sound, like the report of a
great Gun fired, and the sound is so very loud, and piercing, that it seems to
hurt the Hearing of the Bystanders.

The Operation of this Powder, is contrary to the Operation of Powder of
Pyrium: for as this exercises its force by ascending upward, so the other
manifests its power by operating only downward.

^tain Scruples being put upon an Iron-plate, of a convenient thickness, and
afterward fired with a live coal, by penetration will make a hole through the
Plate.

I judge Salt Armoniack (p) to be the cause of this percussion. My Reasons
herel shall present to be considered, until more probable shall be added by
others.

As Salt Nitre, and Sulphur (q) are enemies, and cannot be reconciled each to
other, as we see in the fiting of prepared Gunpowder: In the same manner Salt
Armoniack, and Tartar are contraries; when therefore Salt Armoniack is joined
with Oil of Tartar, his enemy, by their mutual fight, they cause Gold, before
dissolved in Aqua Regis, to fall, and the Oil of Tartar smites the Spirit of
Nitre, which is exceedingly well purified, in this conflict the Spirit of Nitre
joins himself with Sulphur of Sol his ad versary; and because that Sulphur of
Sol, by nature is exceeding pure, and far more subtle than our vulgar
combustible Sulphur therefore is more forcible, and in smaller quantity
performs its slupendicus operations (r). In the same manner plainly, as we find
from common Sulphur, and Saltpeter conjoined in Gunpowder, and afterward
fired, a great noise and cracking is made.

This Calx melts in Oil of Salt like Butter, and this is because of the
remanency of the dry Spirits of Salt Nitre (s), yet this is not a true, and
radical Solution, because it may again be reduced to a corporeity.

Thus far is my Experience, which, to our most noble Emperor Rodulphus, at his
request, with certain other secret Medicines, I communicated. Now sollows the
further process of Aurum potabile, which, received as a singular Gift, though
not experienced by me, I here (together with others) freely, willingly, and
faithfully offer, to the ^hymical Students.

The Urine of a sound Man drinking Wine, about twenty measures, put it into
diverse Glass Alembecks, abstract from these twenty measures, so much phlegm,
in Balneo, as only one (t) measure may be remaining, the phlegms abstracted
reject as useless, the remanency gathered into one, mix, and in Sand abstract,
as much as will be distilled forth, in the end, increase the fire strongly, and
a little will sublime it self; that sublimate mix with the distilled Spirit
(u), the Salt remaining in the bottom, take out; the distilled Spirit will
stink, of which will scarcely be one whole measure, when this operation is
performed. This Spirit rectify in Balnco, reserving the first fourth part,
which is stronger, and better, and must be taken from the latter. Afterward
Fresh-rain, or Fountain Water, pour it upon the reserved Spirit, and let it
exceed the same in weight four fold; adjoyn a Receiver, aptly fitted, when
sharp drops fall, and come forth almost like^lce, pour on Rain, Fountain Water,
as before, and again distill it, if no more sharpness come forth, then cease:
The Spirit of Urine first comes off, the Rain water, with the evil odor
remaining.

Of this Spirit of Urine one part, of the best Spirit of Wine one other part,
mix them, and let them stand in gentle heat one day and night, afterward distill
them together, until these two Spirits be coagulated together: and so the
Spirit of Urine is prepared for this work x).

Now is required Oil of Salt, the preparation whereof is thus: Salt fuse, what
quantity you please, put it into a An earthen Retort.
Retort, well coated, adjoyn a capacious Receiver, closing the junctures very
well, when the Salt is in (y) flux then the Spirits come forth into the
Receiver; or, if the operation be performed with Argilla, then Water may be put
into the Recipient, that the Spirits coming forth, may the sooner mix
themselves therewith; but the distilled Spirit, before it be used, must often
be rectified upon fresh Salt-fuse, that it may be stronger, for of it self it
is too weak (z), for this operation.

Afterward the Calx of Sol. above said, and pour on it the Oil of Salt (aa),
and, that it may the better be dissolved, abstract the Oil of Salt again to an
Oylyness, and then re-pour it on, often repeating this labor of cohobation,
until the Calx be well dissolved.

Of this Solution one part, of the Spirit of Urine prepared one other part,
instill the Spirit of Urine upon the Solution, in a large Glass, drop by drop,
always stoping the Orifice of the Glass, until the noise cease: Set it to
putrefie in Balneo for four weeks afterward by Retort in Sand force it,
obserying degrees of fire; first gentle, afterward more strong, that the Retort
may wax hot; then the Gold for the most part will ascend, which sublimate
Powder diligently keep, the Oil of Salt coming forth by it self, also reserve.
Then this sublimate Sol, upon it pour Spirit of Wine, and with gentle hea^ it
will be colored pour on fresh Spirit of Wine, the former being removed by
inclination, continue removing the tinged Spirit, and pouring on fresh, till
the Spirit be no more colored. This Spirit of Wine may be abstracted to an
Oylyness, or so tinged with the Essence of Gold reserved for medicinal use. The
Calx of Sol remaining in the Retort, again dissolve with Oil of Salt, and
digest it with Spirit of Urine, in the manner ascresaid, reiterating the
labor, till no more of the Gold be remaining. If Spirit of Wine, with the
extracted tincture of Sol, be for certain weeks set in digestion, then the
whole will become volatile Gold, and ascend the Alembeck. This process,
whosoever will may try.

If the Solution be red (bb), it promises much; indeed solutions of Gold by
corrosives made yellow, are not said to be radical Solutions, which when poured
into Tin, or Silver vessels, affects them with blackness, for Phylosophick
solutions, which are most red, leave no such impression; moreover, they tinge
imperfect metals, and by no Artifice, unless by way of projection, can be
reduced to a corporeity. Lully says it is better to eat burning fire, No man
once endamaged, will use the same thing, by which be was hurt, the second time.
or behold the Eyes of the Basilisk, then in stead of Aurum potabile, or a
Medicine by Science unknown, to apply poison, because Sophisticate Gold, from
fire contrary to Nature with which the Sophister works, is full of all
impurity; for through the sharpness (contrary to humane Nature) of the
preter-natural fire, the natural heat is mortified, and dissolved, and the
Spirits of the heart resolved, in which the natural heat is conserved.
Therefore Peter Severinus (cc) in his Idaea truly affirms, that the Balsoms,
and desired proprieties of most perfect bodies, are contained in such strong
corporeal prisons, by reason of the perfect combination of Elements, that the
favor and benevolence thereof, due to humane nature, cannot be demonstrated. A
manifestation of occult things may he made, because all Herbs and Minerals are
within blood, and of a sanguine color, and so, being prepared, may alter our
blood, and elevate it to their own complexion. Therefore the virtues of Gorals,
Pearls, Gems, Gold, Silver, and other metals bewail themselves, that they are
come into the Mundane province, and incontinently accuse the impious rashness
of mortals, because they are unmindful of their predestinations (to which the
providence of nature had ordained them) and have converted the Majesty of
things of this kind, to strange and implous uses, compelling them to cover the
impurity of the skin, and ignorance of the mind, and to undergo the gr^vous
offices of Avarice, Pride, Luxury, Persidlousness, Adultery, Discord, and of
death it self, viz. by transferting such things to an unn^tural use, and
exercising usury with them.

But who so has attained to the fountain of the universal Menstruum, according
to the true relation of Philosophers, by the blessing of the Almighty in this
great gift, can, not only all, and every metal, but also stones, both noble,
ignoble, and mineral, by the benefit of this naturally, It is needful that
Death precede Regeneration.
and radically (dd) dissolve, which resolved and potable liquor Regenerated,
(ee) the Feces being spontaneously (ff) separated in the bottom, may afterward,
by a piously learned Physician, be legitimately accommodated to humane uses,
according to the exigency of the disease, and with stupendous success
administered.

In this place I would heartily admonish the sincere Reader to beware of
certain impestures, By this Powder of Volatile Gold, simple, and unwary men,
have diversely been deceived, by malicious Deceiver.
Agyrtes, litera longa dignis. I once communicated this to a superficiary
Philosopher, who most exquisitely covered his deceitful, hypocritical, and
serpentine mind, with a Phatisaick piety and sincerity, which Powder (after the
percussive force, by the admix^on of Sulphur (gg), according to my advice, was
diminished mixing before such as were ^acquainted with his impostures, with the
loss of others, and his own profit, he attempted in the sight of many to
multiply Gold. The same Theif, after he understood by me, that Silver was
dissolved in vulgar Separatory-water, and by that vulgar Salinewater, dejected
repercussive to the bottom into a white Powder, which the third, and fourth
time edulcorated, is afterward in a Pot melted in the fire, and being poured
out has an horny-form. This horny-silver unknown, easily melting at a Candle
or Fire, and that may be cut with a Knife, he mixed with Lead (hh) and other
minerals, and with this famous, and damnable imposture, after ceneritious
examen, he falsely affirmed to be the transmutation of Lead into Silver.

(a) That is, in Phlosophi^k Gold.

(b) That is, primordial, viz. material Mercury of Philosophers.

(c) That is, Humor dementis.

(d) Not vulgar, but that most pure spirit, which pa^eth through the whole
Globe.

(e) Effectively.

(f) It has in^ins^cal impurities, which are found by Philosophic Solutions.

(g) Sublimate with common Salt.

(h) As may be.

(i) A little phlematous.

(k) By reason of the danger it is liable to.

(l) Three or four granes in a Conventent Vehicle, is a famous Sudorisick, and
Bez^ardick Medicine.

(m) Which, if afterward urged with sire of reverberation, in the usual manner,
will be of a dark red color like Crocus Martis.

(n) The same cracking, and volatility, may be wholly taken away from this
Solar Calx, by the p^uring on more abundance of Oil of Tartar. That is to
say, i^ upon the Solution of Gold made with Aqua Regis, Oil of Tartar be so
long poured, as until the whole composition be black as Writing-ink, although
there be no certainty of the Gold's being repercust to the lot me, but never
afterward. Yet if a collect on of what is first rep^rcust be made, (as our
Author speaks) it may acquire a fulm native force, which is altogether
wonderful, that one and the same thing should be the cause of two most
different es^ects, which indeed otherwise in nature is scarcely found pessible.
Idem nimirum qua^idem, non efficit nisi^dem. The same cannot be the cause of
opposites, unless in it they should concur, and diverse Principles should so
concur in on^, as to make a necessity for one, and the same, to be the cause
of Opposites.

So we see Oil of Tartar, in due proportion infused, makes Gold repercussive,
and fulminative. But it takes away the same faculty being poured on in due
proportion, and exceeding, viz. until the whole waxblack.

(o) It is called Aurum fu'minans, Ceraunocryson, and by the Germans das
Schlaggold, from its effect.

(p) We deny it. If that were the cause, then to every such effect it would be
required, but this is not: therefore it cannot be that: For Mars dissolved in
Aqua fortis receives no Ammonick, yet repercust in Oil of ^artar, acquires the
same fulminative force.

(q) Coal of Tilia is added, therefore it is easier fired.

(r) The only cause of Fulmination, consists in the Gold, Nitre, and Oil of
Tartar. For the Spirit of either strongly cleaves to dissolved bodies;
therefore their mutual action, one with the other, either by heat, or fire,
excited, is injurious to the Gold it self.

(s) For the Spirit of Nitre more easily dislolveth Gold, than any Aqua fortis.

(t) It is false, for in the Phlegm is the Spirit.

(u) Which was distilled from the last measure.

The best way of distilling Spirit of Urine, and of Wine.
(x) In true preparation and distillation of a universal Menstruum for the
Solution of Gold, proceed in this manner.

Of Urine of Children of twelve years of age, and under a convenient quantity,
in Cucurbits well closed putrefie it in Horse-dung, for a whole Philosophic
month, viz. forty days. The time of putresaction being ended, distill the
Urine by Alembeck in Sand, into a large capacious Receiver, until all humidity
be sufficiently removed. After it has been the third time distilled from the
Caput Mortuum of the Urine, rectify it, that the Spirits may be justly
elevated, (you may take of Urine 10, 20, 30, or 40. measures.) Therefore with a
Phiol of a long Neck, with Alembeck, and Recipient aptly closed, with a small
sponge a little moistened in Oil Olives and gently squeesed, put into the
Orifice of the Neck, begin to make distillation in a fervent Balneo. So the
Spirit of Urine will be elevated like Crystal, and cleave to the sides of the
Alembeck, without any watery humidity concomitant, and the Spirit alone will
come forth volatile: This distillation must be continued till the whole
elevation be completed. The Feces, remaining in the Phiol after the Spirit,
reject; but what comes forth by sublimation, and cleaves to the Alembeck,
gather, and dissolve with distilled Rainwater, in the like manner, with a
Phiol as before, and by an ole aginous sponge, distill it, repeat this
operation six times, always taking fresh distilled water. Lastly, this spirit
of Urine brought to the highest purity, in a Phiol hermetically closed, digest
in gentle heat of Balneum of dew, for ^teen days, until it be all resolved into
a limpid liquor. To which afterward add an equal weight of Spirit, or Alcohol
of Wine, made of Wine it self, and corrected, both which set in a most cold
place, and after one or two hours is past, they will be coagulated to a most
white Salt. Which Salt, in a Phiol hermetically closed, by gentle heat of
vaporous Balneum, in the space of twenty or thirty days, is converted into a
liquor, which carefully keep.

Alcohol of Wine from the most rich Wine is drawn forth in this manner. Rich
Wine of Spain or Hungaria, digest it for sometime in Horse-dung, or in stead of
that, in Balneo for fourte^n days, afterward, by a Phi^l, distill the Spirit,
and rectify it often by the same Phi^l, until it come to a perfect subtilty;
mix 2 lib. of this Spirit, with 6 lib. of the same Wine fresh, and distill it:
and again, the same quantity of 2 lib. neither more nor less, with homogeneal
fresh Wine, by distillation draw off, repeating the same labor eight times,
always adding fresh Wine, and as often distilling it, this 2 lib. of most strong
Alcohol keep for use, in a vessel hermetically closed; for it is a most
penetrating subtle Spirit. The remaining Wine keep, for the drawing forth other
wi^ey Spirits by distillation.

Put this Spirit must be most diligently kept in a vessel hermetically sealed,
as aforesaid. See also Practica Chymiatrica of our Edition, page.

(y) This was the fault of the Printer, or else the Author has erred: For it
cannot be, when all is in flux the Spirits should ascend, therefore Argilla is
mixed therewith, that the Salts may not flow, which, when they flow, are so
fixed, that no Spirits can ascend.

(z) Or proceed in the same manner, as is above prescribed, in preparation of
Spirit of Salt.

A more sincere continuation of Aurum potabile.
(aa) This solution of Calx of Sol by Oil of Salt, and afterward expelling the
same by Retort, with Spirit of Urine, is not necessary, neither is it
sufficiently safe. Therefore we will leave the Author to his own mind, and come
to a securer institution of a more genuine preparation. That Calx of Sol,
before by extreme reverberation reduced to a persect brown color, (or dark
red) must be dissolved with the Menstruum, first completely perfected from
Spirit of Urine, and Spirit of Wine together. It must be dissolved, I say, with
gentle heat, and the solution will be red as blood. This solution afterward, in
a vessel hermetically closed, digest for a month. The solution separated from
the Feces, and the Menstruum, or dissolving Spirit, abstracted by most gentle
heat in Balneo ( this Menstruum may afterward be applied to the same uses, and
may so be used, as often as need is, almost perpetualty.) The Gold remains in
form of a most red Oil, yielding of it self a delectable odor, resolvable in
every liquor; moreover, this Oil may very properly supply the place, and be
used in stead of the true Aurum potabile. Likewise, it may be exalted, or
rendered more pure, viz. when, the solar spirit, being separated from its Body,
the Tincture only in which its most powerful virtue soly consists, is by
distillation elevated. Therefore we distill not the Solution of Gold in Balneo,
but in Sand in a low vessel, with somewhat more strong fire: for so, after part
of the Menstruum, with its remaining part, the Tincture of Sol^t self, passes
the Alembeck like blood, leaving in the bottom a black, dry, spongy, and light
Earth: but the Menstruum it self, which comes forth with the Tincture of Gold,
we separate by Alembeck in Balneo, just blood warm; the Tin^ure remaining in
the bottom of the Vessel, we dissolve three times, with most subtle Spirit of
Wine, and the same as ost, or oftener, we again separate. This is that Aurum
potabile and indeed the very same which is daily used in England, by Docter
Franciscus Antonius Physician of London, indeed it is not the true Philosophic
Aurum potabile, for to the, that of England is many ways inferior, and is quite
another thing; nor can that of England su^ain a most just (...), of the true
Aurum potabile. For this is reduced, and with its body rendered grateful, which
from the true Aurum potabile is plainly different. Moreover in Medicinal use,
it indeed almost performs the same, which Chemists judge is otherwise to be
hoped for from Aurum potabile. Although this act more remissly than the true,
yet in ^alted, or astral sanable diseases, it may mediate, though not alike
virtually.

A Type of Corporeal Aurum potabile.
The Fountain of the Universal Menstruum, resolves Substances; or Bodies in the
Ternary, that is, consisting of three principles, viz. Mercury, Salt, and
Sulphur, of which all, and every individual body, is made. The Mercurial is
part of the great Magistery of the Wise, therefore is required to the
Composition thereof, and with the other Essential parts in that Magistery by
Philosophic Rotation is conjoined, and reduced to one. This Water in preparing
the Philosophic Stone, is a famous Specific, yet it also comprchends in it
self generality, or universality, for which cause it is called Heaven,
receiving in it self the Astrums of all things, that is, their Essences, and
distinct Measures (...), which otherwise in Spagirick resolution of Bodies, in
the three principles are conspicuous, so as it is a substancified, or essential
birth in it self unutterable. For it is the subject of all mutability,
attracting to it self, and afterward enlivening, that is, in action and
operation (which is the part of a Philosopher to generate and revive^ rendering
it powerful and efficacious. The Example of this we have in corporeal or vulgar
Gold, which indeed can never be rendered Philosophically potable, unless by this
only universal Menstruum, the Gold be reduced to a corroborating faculty.
First, A most subtle Calx may be made, and that indeed in the same manner our
Author prescribes. Of this Calx, and of the universal Menstruum, or Mercury of
Philosophers, of each a like quantity: Join them in a Cucurbit, the junctures
of the Vessels being well closed and luted, distill them with most gentle heat
in Balneo, and repouring on the Menstruum, repeat the same distillation once
and again. Afterward add fresh Menstruum, and in a dry Balneo, by Retort urge
it more strongly, and together with it, the Calx of Sol will come forth,
leaving very few Feces. That which is come forth, in a Pelican, or other Glass
hermetically closed, digest in gentle heat of the Sun, or a Hot-house, until
the Gold be Philosophically resolved, and from the Menstruum it self, reside in
the bottom of the Vessel, and be spontaneously separated, both from the
Menstruum, and all wateriness which from the Gold warily removed, dry the Calx
very gently, for it is exceeding volatile. Being dried, put it in a
proportionable Phiol, that is, such an one, whose fourth part only may be
filled with the Calx, this Hermetically sealed, place in a most kindly and
gentle heat of Ashes for fourteen days, prudently taking head, least the Calx
of Gold by vehemence of heat ascend, and be sublimed. Afterward place it in
Sand, and keep equal degrees of fire for eight days, till the Gold, like a Bery
obscurely red, be at length made most fixed. Of this j. grind it exceeding
small, pour upon it of most pure Spirit of Wine ij. dissolve it in gentle heat,
and keep it. If any part of it the first time be undissolved, pour on other
Spirit of Wine proportionably, and again dissolve it, and diligently put up all
in glass Vessels, and keep them. This is the true Aurum potabile, made of
corporeal Gold; its use in Medicine is only ten or eleven drops, mixed with 2
lib. of the best Wine, and of this mixture j. jss. or ij. drunk once or twice
in a Month, for certain Months to preserve health, and by this means its virtue
is Diaphoretick. But in expelling most dangerous diseases, the use hereof must
be contempered according to the prudence of a skilful Physician. It is wont to
operate diversely, expelling what is hurtful, by every Emunctory.

(bb) This Solution is red, but he does not rightly proceed.

(cc) Chap. 15. page 391.

(dd) It is impossible.

(ee) That is reduced to the degree of perfection, and highest purity.

(ff) By the benefit of heat in Balneo or of digestion.

(gg) The percussive, or fulmlnative force is taken from Gold.

(hh) For Horney Silver cannot be otherwise reduced to a corporeity, than by
the benefit of Lead.

Stomachal Oil of Vitriol of Mars and Venus.
The way of preparing Vitriol of Copper and Iron without Corrosiveness.
The whole Artifice is, that the Metal (a) be well calcined with Sulphur.

Of Iron or Copper-plate (for they are both prepared one way) what quantity you
please, cut it into pieces of the magnitude of half a doller, place them one
upon another with pulverisate Sulphur between, over, and under them in a luted
Pot, set it in fire of Rotation, (b) at first let the fire not touch the Pot,
but leisurely increase it nearer, and nearer, at length make it more strong; so
the Sulphur burning, the aforesaid plates will be calcined, which is performed
in an hours time: when all are cooled, take our the black coaly matter, which
will be like burnt Brass; when beaten fist it, and put it into an open Earthen
Glased Pot, (as is done in preparation of glass of Antimony) stir it diligently
from top to bottom, over a fire of Coals, that it may not melt, and the Vitriol
be converted (c) to Copper: Stir it with an Iron (d) or Copper (e) Instrument
(according to the Vitriol you intend to make) from side to side, when it sticks
to the Iron it is enough, and must be taken from the fire. Weigh this Calx of
Copper when Pulverisate, and to every pound of it three Lotones of Sulphur, and
put it into an Earthen Pot, keep stirring it over a gentle fire for a quarter
of an hour (f): Lastly, the Pot will wax hot, and the Copper be soft like a
paste, and stick to the Iron. Let it cool, then beat and sift it; and again to
1 lib. of it, add three Lotones of Sulphur, and as before calcine it for a
quarter of an hour (g). Repeat this labor five, six, or seven times, then the
Calcination will be absolute. Note diligently, that the Calx be always well
dried, and to every 1 lib. there be precisely taken at least jss. of Sulphur.
This Calx of metal ground very small, pour upon it, in a Wooden vessel, very
hot water, the Calx will dissolve, and the Water from the Copper, will acquire
a blew color, strain it, when strained by moderate boiling over a fire,
evaporate the water, until it appear, as it were, crusted; that which remains
set in a cold place, that it may crystallize, so you will have a most excellent
blew Vitriol from Copper, but from Iron it will acquire a green color. The
Feces remaining in the bottom of the Water dry, and if not dissolved, again
calcine with Sulphur, as before you did, observing the former weight (b),
afterward make a Lixivium, which, when filtred, evaporate; this labor repeat,
till the whole calx be converted to a Lixivium. Then put it in an Earthen
vessel of Gorlick, or Wallenburge, or in a large Glass Cucurbit, (beware it
break not) and cause it to evaporate, until it begin to be crusted; set it in a
cold place, until the Vitriol of Copper settle to the bottom in streiks, and
crystallizeth, being of a sweetish taste (i) pour off the Water, and dry the
congealed crystals: The remaining Water again boil a little, set it in a cold
place, that it may crystallize, re-iterating the labor till the whole be
converted to Vitriol: Also little sticks may be put in, that the Vitriol may
the better stick. The Sulphur (k) of them settling to the bottom, keep a part,
for its proper use.

From these two Vitriols of Iron and Copper, Spirit and Oil, in the vulgar and
known way, may Chymically be prepared, of far greater efficacy and virtue, than
from common Vitriol (l).

By this means the acid Artificial Fountain is obtained. Here is Esurive
Vinegar in this Vitriolate Sulphur prepared without corrosiveness, a perfect
Arcanum in cotrobo^ing the languishing Ventricle. See Theophrastus in his Book
of Long Lise, and i^ lib. of Tartar about the end.

Virtues and Use of this Oil of Vitriol.
Paracelsus (m) calls it the fouth part of Pharmacopolium and to every preparer
of Mediciues he so commends it, as to serve in stead of an Angular stone, in
his Shop.

1. We use six or eight drops in Wine, Water of Mint-crisp, or which is better,
in hot fresh Broth: In debilitate cold Stomachs, because it provokes digestion
(n).

2. In the Stone and Gravel, in Water of Rest-harrow.

3. In Suffocation of the Matrix, in Water of Mugwort.

4. In Fevers of the Stomach, Heats, and Thirst, twelve or fifteen drops. In
Water of Century, Roses, Rosemary-blossoms, or in Wine.

5. In all diseases of the Head, in Water of Lillies of the Valley, and of
Lavender.

6. In the Jaundies fifteen or twenty drops, given to provoke Sweat, in Water
of Selandine, it is very efficacious.

7. In the Pest (o) mixed with Sugar Candy, and Electuary of Juniper, so also
we use it for a preservative of health.

8. Externally in A ^isease that makes the hairs fall off.

No man without dolor recovers health, like a Woman with Child, who without
pain cannot be de^ed.


Alopecia and Tinea, by anointing, either by it self, or with Water of
Selandine, it cures.

9. It takes away all Tetters, Scabs, Itch, and whatsoever evil that is wont to
cleave to the Skin, the depraved erection of the Yard, and such like. But the
anointing is not performed, without great dolor to the Patient, but for a
defensive an Opodeldoch must be adhibited.

10. Being mixed with Treacle, and given to provoke Sweat, it restotes such, as
are injured by anointing with Quicksilver, and evilly affected Oil of Vitriol.

11. After the body is evacuated, with Treacle or Appropiate Waters, it may be
exhibited, almost in all Diseases, for by its Acidity it consumes all
putresaction, and by its subtilty removes all Obstructions of the parts.

Dose.
The way of Exhibition, is a changing (p) of its taste to a sharpness. It is
given in Water of Sorrel, or other Specific Water; only so many drops as may
not set the Teeth on edge, yet so as to the taste it may be rendered gratefully
sharp. It must never be used alone, (q) but with a Vehicle, and that sparingly.
I have heard that a certain (r) wicked Chymist^ by the unseasonable, and
immoderate use of this Oil, brought a certain good Man (his Name unknown) to
the Grave. When we use this, we always stir it very well with the Vehicle, for
otherwise by its ponderousness it sinks to the bottom.

Cautions.
1. By reason of its sharpness it profits the languishing Ventricle, in which
there is no Choler or Impostimme, otherwise there is a mutual obu^ition, and
exceeding heat caused, (therefore in choleric persons the use of this, by
reason of the hurt coming the^ by must be forborne) as we see in Oil of Tartar,
and Aqua fortis, which are unrecon^lable each to other: the like reason is in
the Liver (s).

2. The use of this Oil must be in a convenient Vehicle, hot, afterward let
the sick co^tain himself in Bed and Sweat. For we see its operation in the
great world is not performed in the cold, but in the heat; it is also of like
operation in the Microcosm.

Moreover, this Oil of Vitriol tinges, (t) with a very fair and durable color
expressed Juices, Of Pallid Roses, Violets, Flowers of Peony, Wild Poppy, Also
Extract of Alkerms (u).


And Oil of Cloves, if duly mixed with either of these.

Sweet Oil (x) of Vitriol, as also that of Antimony touching which, so many
glory, nom^n ha^ hitherto seen; nor that genuine Vitriolate fixed (y) Sulphur,
to which Anodyne, Paracelsus attribute stupendous virtues.

Greenish Oil of Vitriol is of admirable virtue in Medicine (z). It may be
prepared, if purified Vitriol distilled with most vehement fire, and after
extraction, and purification of the Salt from the Caput Mortuum, (which Salt
must by no means be further burned, or calcined in the fire) it be circulated
with the Salt, in Balneo for a convenient time.

This Oil operates variously, viz. by Vomiting, Seidge, Urine, and Sweat. Dose
six, eight, or twelve drops in convenient liquor.

(a) Mars and Venus.

(b) To be circulated.

(c) Which will be, if the matter melt.

(d) If Iron.

(e) If Copper.

(f) In like manner stirring it.

(g) Viz. with addition of fresh Sulphur.

(h) To 1 lib. of the Calx, almost three Lotones.

(i) Yet Vitriol of Copper will wax more sweet.

(k) That Sulphur indeed is not true Sulphur, but is an excrementitious Earth,
like Oker, which has an emplastick virtue, but commodiously cannot be applied
to any other use. It is neither Anodyne, nor Paregorical, nor has it any other
virtue that may be transferred to Medicinal use.

(l) There is also another way more compendious, by which Vitriol is made of
Venus and Mars but it is Hermaphroditical, and has the nature of both, viz. of
Venus and Mars, for it is made with both, and has been in use with Basilius
Valentinus the Monk.

Hermaphroditical Vitriol.
First make Oil of Vitriol, in the manner as is above described, in the Spirit
of the same and exactly according to that preparation. Of this make some
quantity. Then have in readiness very good filings of Iron, not pulverulent,
nor rusty, but fresh made: upon them pour the Oil of Vitriol, according to
descretion, yet not too much. Add of distilled Rainwater thrice as much, as
the quantity of Oil poured on, viz. if the Oil be very sharp, and it
presently begin to boil. The whole labor must be begun, and ended in a
capacious Cucurbit, and the pouring on the Oil of Vitriol, must be repeated by
times, often; leaving it for some time, until it be cool. Afterward pour it
off, and filter it, and you will have a very fair and green liquor, which
evaporate to a skinniness, and leave it in a cold place, so you will have a
very fair green Vitriol, made of Copper and Iron, sweet, and of admirable
virtues. With the filings of Iron, after the first Solution, as also in other
subsequent Solutious, go on, in like manner dissolving with Oil of Vitriol,
and if need be distilled Rainwater, until the whole may be turned into a
liquor, and of it green Vitriol confected. Whence may be made a red Oil, and
indeed after the very same manner our Author proposes. The virtues hereof in
Medicine are the same. The use of Hermaphroditick Vitriol. See Practica
Chymiatrica of our Edition, page.

A famous Stomachical Specific is found in Salt-Armoniack, or Salt-Regis,
which is made with Urine and Soot, but first it must be rightly purged,
afterward sublimed, the way of preparation and use, see in Practica Chymiatrica
of our Edition page.

Of like virtue from Vegetables are the Arcanums of the lesser Century, and
Peneroyal Philosophically prepared.

(m) In his second Book De Rebus.

(n) With Oil of Vitriol, for the Stomach, I familiarly use distih'd Spirit of
Malmesy, only made of Malmesy, in 2 lib. of which I macerate one handful, or
one handful and an half of the herb Peneroyal; of which Essence I exhibit one
spoonful, with as many drops of Oil of Vitriol, as are requisite to render it
gratefully sharp, and the desired effect usually follows.

(o) See the Pestilential Specific.

(p) That the Teeth be not stupefied.

(q) Viz. Internally.

(r) Thomas Erastus, who with Oil of Vitriol killed a certain Doctor, and
Consiliary of the Palatinate.

(s) Where Choler is harbored.

(t) It is manifest by extracting, Tinctures may be drawn, as in expressed Juices
of Roses, and Conserves of the same.

(u) It makes it red.

(x) Of sweet Oil of Vitriol mention is made above. Of sweet Oil of Antimony.
See the Triumphant Chariot of Basil. Valent.

(y) Of which above. See also our Treatise of Opium, and Laudanum Opiat, where,
how it should be prepared, and exalted into a Noble Laudanum, it is at large
discoursed of.

(z) Some prepare it per descensum, others per canales, but it answers not the
end. This positive way of our Author is most convenient of all.

Uterine.
Mugwort (a) opens all obstructions of Women. Before, the Menses, and after the
Birth, a decoction thereof is used to purge the Matrix, with one or two drops
of Oil of Amber.

I. Elixir Uterine^
Castor one half pound (b). Saffron ij. (c)


Extract a Tincture from both a part, with Spirit of Wine, and separate the
Spirit to the remanency of Extracts, to which when mixed, add Extract of
Mugwort iiij. (d) Sa^t of Mother of Pearl j. Distil^'d Oils (e) of Angelica,
Anise, Amber, of each ij.


Mix them together, and digest them all for eight days.

Use and Dose.
Dose of this Elixir j. or ij. just at the coming of the hysterical fit (f)
then the Sick will quickly be healed (g). If for certain Months an equal Dose
be used, at the time the Menses are wont to flow, the Disease (h) will not
return.

II. A Compounded Powder.
Described by Paracelsus (i), made of Lichenes, or Callis Equorum (k), growing
in the legs of Horses, it is also most efficacious in Suffocation of the
Matrix. The fume of it being taken (l) by those afflicted with the Hysterical
passion, through a Tunnel (m) wrapped about with Cotton, over a close Chair
morning and evening, or at the time of the Fit, it sufficiently expels the most
desparate Suffocation of the Matrix: More inwardly, in the mean while, may be
given Spirit of Vitriol with Salt of Corals (n), in Water of Melissa and
Mugwort.

(a) Viz. The red, but the Arcanum thereof is better.

(b) Cut very small.

(c) Unbeaten.

(d) j. of the Arcanum is better.

(e) The Oils must first be dissolved in Spirit of Wine, and afterward added.

(f) Of what kind soever.

(g) Sweats being by this medicament provoked.

(h) The Hysterical disease.

(i) De moribus Amentium Cap. 4. Tom. 4. Its Composition is thus. Of the Warts
that grow on the Knees of Horses j. Assa fetida j. Horn of Goats-hoof j.


Reduce them to Powder: Of this Powder j. sprinkled upon burning Coals, and the
fume thereof received into the genitals, through a Tunnel, or other convenient
Instrument, speedily removes all Suffocations.

(k) For so they are called, growing about the inside of the Knees of Horses.
From them they are not to be taken, (for that is dangerous,) but they fall off,
of themselves, which for the most part is at the same time, when Horses also
change their Coat, which usually happens in the Months of February and March,
then these are to be gathered. In the middle of these Warts, is found a white
bright Matter, which is like the Crystalline humor in the Eye-Horse-keepers
say, if these be violently taken away, contractures of the Legs follow. If the
fume of this Powder of Warts be so admirably efficacious, that it resists even
the most desperate Suffocations of the Matrix, how much more excellent will the
Extract of them be, if made after the manner described in Practica Chymiatrica
of our Edition, where we treat of Suffocative Laudanum, page.

(l) Into the Matrix.

(m) Or the Neck of a Retort.

(n) O^ Quintessence of Pearls, of which above.

III. Extract of Ox-spleen.
Paracelsus (a) in his Archidoxes, in lib. of Mysteries, makes mention of this,
that it removes all obstructions of the Spleen, and provokes the Menses.

the Spleen of an Ox, cut it into thin slices, macerate (b) it for certain days
in Spirit of Wine, essencified with Myrrh, afterward dry it in the Air. Proceed
in this manner, for otherwise, if you would dry it by it self, it will stink:
afterward with Spirit of Wine extract an Essence, and to render it more
savoury, add, according to descretion some drops of Oil of Angelica (c).

Dose j. in appropriate Water.

Observation.
In provoking the Menses, the usual time wherein they are wont to flow in the
sick, must be diligently observed, for then for the most part pain is wont to
be about the Reins and Loins, and so by helping nature, the Remedy will operate
more efficaciously.

(a) Lib. 7. Tom. 6. page 82. In Specific of the Matrix.

(b) It needs not, for it may presently be dried in an Oven.

(c) Extract of Bullocks-liver is better, which is thus made.

Extract of Bullocks-liver.
The Liver of a young Bullock, cut it into small thin pieces, dry them in an
Oven, and reduce them to powder, add adust Wine, distilled from the gross
Feces, and with it extract the more subtle substance of the Liver, as much as
can be extracted; when no more extraction can be made, dry the powder of the
Liver, as before; and the second time, with Spirit of Wine, as before, extract
it, and this labor repeat also the third time; conjoyn all the extractions,
and by distillation reduce them to a certain consistency; then add the proper
Salt, extracted from the Caput Mortuum of the Liver, with distilled Water, and
mix them. The use of this is the same, as of the extract of Oxspleen; but far
more ready and expeditious. Dose j. in Water of Mugwort, Savine, Sage, and
other appropriate Waters.

IV. Salt of Tin.
Ashes of Tin, prepared in an open fire, without sophistication from it, not
with Water, (as by vulgar descriptions is vainly taught) but with distilled
Vinegar, extract a Salt, which afterward by filtring, and with most gentle heat
in Balneo, separate from the Salt, and seven times edulcorate it with
Rainwater (a).

Virtues and Use.
It is a secret and most efficacious in Suffocation, the Navel being anointed
hot therewith: As soon as the Matrix perceives the heat, it is presently settled
in its own place, nor does it afterward any more remove.

Dose, three granes, three or four Mornings together in Water of Mugwort, or
other cordial Waters.

A singular Water, in which the aforesaid Salt is wont to be exhibited, to such
as are afflicted with Hysterical Passions.
Root of Dittany j Seed of Daucus j. Choice Cinnamon, Cassia lignea, Melissa,
of each ij. Oriental Crocus j. Fresh Castor jss.


From all these mixed make a powder, pour upon it of Water of Rue 2 lib. and a
half. Let them stand four days in Infusion; distill it in Balneo, and keep it
for use.

In one spoonful of this Water blood-warm, is given three granes of the Salt,
three or four mornings, upon an empty stomach, the Patient fasting three hours
after.

(a) Then dissolve it into a Liquor per deliquium.

Liquor of Tin.
Crystals of Tin for the aforesaid use, against Suffocation of the Matrix, and
other evils, may be made more excellently in the following manner. English Tin,
dissolve it in Aqua fortis, which is made of Nitre, and Alum, and the Tin a
little after the pouring on the Aqua fortis, will appear in the bottom like a
white Calx. This Calx dry, and in a Cucurbit, with pots placed upon it, as is
wont to be done in subliming white Flowers of Antimony, sublime it, and so the
Spirit of the Tin will be elevated in the form of most white powder, or of fine
flower. This powder dissolve in distilled Vinegar, and extract it for three
days, daily stirring it twice, or oftener. The Solution, and extraction often
repeat, still pouring on fresh Spirit of Vinegar. Lastly, in Balneo distill off
the Vinegar to a dryness. What remains extract with Spirit of Wine, no
otherwise than as before was done with Vinegar. Separate the Spirit of Wine to
a moderate consistency, and set what remains in a moist place, that it may
crystallize, which Crystals afterward per deliquium resolve into a Liquor.

This Liquor is otherwise profitable for the French-sickness, all fetid Ulcers,
Fistulas, Canker, Wolf, Noli me tangere, and other grievous diseases, it cures,
from one drop to two, or three at most, the Dose being often repeated. In those
of ripe age it vehemently, and largely moves the Belly.

Febrile.
If the Fever (a) arise from Mercurials (b), they are abstemious.

If from Sulphur, they Vomit what they eat.

If from the proper Salt, they have an inordinate appetite (c).

If from the Liver, the thirst is vehement, which is cured with Laudanum (d).

If from the Stomach, they are exceeding slothful, yet without thirst, they
smell what they conceit: This is cured with Coralline (e).

First, A purgation (f) must be appointed with mineral Turbith, or
Panchymagogon, or white Flowers of Antimony. The peccant humor being removed
afrerward exhibit this following powder.

The long Shells of Shell-fishes, which are found nigh to the Shore of
Fish Ponds and Lakes, pour upon them Vinegar prepared of Wine, let them stand
for a night, then the filth will be extracted, which diligently shave off with
Iron instruments, used by Goldsmiths for such purposes, afterward by calcining
the long s^ells to all^es reduce them to a whiteness, and then into a fine
powder (g).

Use and Dose of the Powder.
Dose ij. in the time (h) of the fit, in a draught of hot Beer, with a little
fresh Butter. This is seldom taken twice, or the third time, because the first
draught for the most part cures by sweat, therefore after the taking, the Sick
should be laid to sweat in Bed.

Note, That Medicaments, according to the mind of Paracelsus, may safely be
exhibited, in Fevers, just in the time of the fit, as a little before, that
they may operate together with the fit. Oil of Vitriol j. Salt of Wormwood (i)
jss. Water of Succory j. mix them.


After the taking of this draught, let the Patient be well covered in Bed,
exp^cting sweat, it expels all Fevers (k). To the strong this Potion is given
whole: To the weaker in the following Dose. Oil of Vitriol ss. Salt of
Wormwood j. Water of Succory j. mix them.


(a) The form of a Fever is in Sulphur, or in the heat of Sulphur. The
Quotidian is in the Stomach, the Tertian resides in the Liver.

(b) Excrements.

(c) Sodam den God.

(d) Opiate.

(e) Arcanum.

(f) Purgations in Fevers are necessary. Nor indeed, can the peccant Matter be
any way more commodiously exterminated, than by purgations. Beside those
Catharticks described by our Author, those above by me alleged, are of
admirable use, as Aqua-bened. And the Ant monial Febrile Pills, taken before
the assault of the sit, as soon as there is any sign of its beginning to
approach. It wonderfully exhausts the Minera's of Fevers, and other Symptoms.
See Practica Chymiatrica, page.

A principal Specific in Tertian Fevers, is the comp^unded Water of Ants,
which see in Practica Chymiat. page.

In the mean while, it is the part of a prudent Physician, diligently to
consider, whether the Patient be disposed to Vomiting, and whether the sickly
cause of the Fever may be expelled by Vomiting; and also whither the strength
of the Patient can bear it; if not, he must have recourse to other more
mitigative and convenient. Among Febrible Specificks, Salt Ammoniack, well
cleansed and prepared, obtains not the lowest place, of which a little after
the Fit, six or nine granes being exhibited, in the Arcanum of the lesser
Century, or in a Decection of Succory, after universals before used, if hereby
sweat be largely provoked, the Fever is certainly removed and expelled. The
same Dose may be re-iterated, if the first or second time the desired end be
not answered. See the preparation hereof in Practica Chymiatrica, page.

(g) Some use these shells purged from all filth, and made transparent, all
mucilagenousness being wholly taken away, without any other calcination, reduce
them to powder, and keep it for use.

(h) But not unless in the strong, for the weak cannot bear it.

A singular Water, in which the aforesaid Salt is wont to be exhibited, to such
as are afflicted with Hysterical Passions.
Root of Dittany j Seed of Daucus j. Choice Cinnamon, Cassia lignea, Melissa,
of each ij. Oriental Crocus j. Fresh Castor jss.


From all these mixed make a powder, pour upon it of Water of Rue 2 lib. and a
half. Let them stand four days in Infusion; distill it in Balneo, and keep it
for use.

In one spoonful of this Water blood-warm, is given three granes of the Salt,
three or four mornings, upon an empty stomach, the Patient fasting three hours
after.

(a) Then dissolve it into a Liquor per deliquium.

Liquor of Tin.
Crystals of Tin for the aforesaid use, against Suffocation of the Matrix, and
other evils, may be made more excellently in the following manner. English Tin,
dissolve it in Aqua fortis, which is made of Nitre, and Alum, and the Tin a
little after the pouring on the Aqua fortis, will appear in the bottom like a
white Calx. This Calx dry, and in a Cucurbit, with pots placed upon it, as is
wont to be done in subliming white Flowers of Antimony, sublime it, and so the
Spirit of the Tin will be elevated in the form of most white powder, or of fine
flower. This powder dissolve in distilled Vinegar, and extract it for three
days, daily stirring it twice, or oftener. The Solution, and extraction often
repeat, still pouring on fresh Spirit of Vinegar. Lastly, in Balneo distill off
the Vinegar to a dryness. What remains extract with Spirit of Wine, no
otherwise than as before was done with Vinegar. Separate the Spirit of Wine to
a moderate consistency, and set what remains in a moist place, that it may
crystallize, which Crystals afterward per deliquium resolve into a Liquor.

This Liquor is otherwise profitable for the French-sickness, all fetid Ulcers,
Fistulas, Canker, Wolf, Noli me tangere, and other grievous diseases, it cures,
from one drop to two, or three at most, the Dose being often repeated. In those
of ripe age it vehemently, and largely moves the Belly.

Febrile.
If the Fever (a) arise from Mercurials (b), they are abstemious.

If from Sulphur, they Vomit what they eat.

If from the proper Salt, they have an inordinate appetite (c).

If from the Liver, the thirst is vehement, which is cured with Laudanum (d).

If from the Stomach, they are exceeding slothful, yet without thirst, they
smell what they conceit: This is cured with Coralline (e).

First, A purgation (f) must be appointed with mineral Turbith, or
Panchymagogon, or white Flowers of Antimony. The peccant humor being removed
afterward exhibit this following powder.

The long Shells of Shell-fishes, which are found nigh to the Shore of
Fish Ponds and Lakes, pour upon them Vinegar prepared of Wine, let them stand
for a night, then the filth will be extracted, which diligently shave off with
Iron instruments, used by Goldsmiths for such purposes, afterward by calcining
the long shells to ashes, reduce them to a whiteness, and then into a fine
powder (g).

Use and Dose of the Powder.
Dose ij. in the time (h) of the fit, in a draught of hot Beer, with a little
fresh Butter. This is seldom taken twice, or the third time, because the first
draught for the most part cures by sweat, therefore after the taking, the Sick
should be laid to sweat in Bed.

Note, That Medicaments, according to the mind of Paracelsus, may safely be
exhibited, in Fevers, just in the time of the fit, as a little before, that
they may operate together with the fit. Oil of Vitriol j. Salt of Wormwood (i)
jss. Water of Succory j. mix them.


After the taking of this draught, let the Patient be well covered in Bed,
expecting sweat, it expels all Fevers (k). To the strong this Potion is given
whole: To the weaker in the following Dose. Oil of Vitriol ss. Salt of
Wormwood j. Water of Succory j. mix them.


(a) The form of a Fever is in Sulphur, or in the heat of Sulphur. The
Quotidian is in the Stomach, the Tertian resides in the Liver.

(b) Excrements.

(c) Sodam den God.

(d) Opiate.

(e) Arcanum.

(f) Purgations in Fevers are necessary. Nor indeed, can the peccant Matter be
any way more commodiously exterminated, than by purgations. Beside those
Catharticks described by our Author, those above by me alleged, are of
admirable use, as Aqua-bened. And the Ant monial Febrile Pills, taken before
the assault of the fit, as soon as there is any sign of its beginning to
approach. It wonderfully exhausts the Minera's of Fevers, and other Symptoms.
See Practica Chymiatrica, page.

A principal Specific in Tertian Fevers, is the compounded Water of Ants,
which see in Practica Chymiat. page.

In the mean while, it is the part of a prudent Physician, diligently to
consider, whether the Patient be disposed to Vomiting, and whether the sickly
cause of the Fever may be expelled by Vomiting; and also whither the strength
of the Patient can bear it; if not, he must have recourse to other more
mitigative and convenient. Among Febrible Specificks, Salt Ammoniack, well
cleansed and prepared, obtains not the lowest place, of which a little after
the Fit, six or nine granes being exhibited, in the Arcanum of the lesser
Century, or in a Decoction of Succory, after universals before used, if hereby
sweat be largely provoked, the Fever is certainly removed and expelled. The
same Dose may be re-iterated, if the first or second time the desired end be
not answered. See the preparation hereof in Practica Chymiatrica, page.

(g) Some use these shells purged from all filth, and made transparent, all
mucilagenousness being wholly taken away, without any other calcination, reduce
them to powder, and keep it for use.

(h) But not unless in the strong, for the weak cannot bear it.

(i) Or Spirit of Salt of Wormwood ss. to fifteen granes.

(k) The head of a Serpent hung about the Neck before the fit, in intermitting
Fevers, is an approved Remedy; also powder of Serpents may be given. See
Practica Chymiatrica, page.

In Quartanes Avenzoar commends the use of Peach-kernels. Gaunerius a decoction
of ^es. I have exhibited beth, with great success, says Crato Epistle 203.

Pestilential.
Pestilential Elixir.
SInce the P^st (a) is the anger, and peculiar judgment of God, after
reconciliation to God, and our Neighbor, and the emendation of Life, the
following Medicines may commodiously be used.

Flowers of Sulphur spagirically prepared (as a little after is described, iij.
pour upon them Oil of Juniper (b) berries in Balneo first rectified, till they
be covered four fingers, (in the same manner Balsome of Sulphur may be made,
with Spirit of Turpentine, (c) the Tincture is afterward extracted with Spirit
of Wine, for Asthmatical Affects) Oil of Amber, by three times rectification
in Balneo, freed from its vehemence of odor, a fourth part (d) of the quantity
of Oil of Juniper Berries poured on; set these in a fire of Ashes or sand,
often stirring them, that the Flowers of Sulphur may gently, without adustion,
be dissolved and melt. Then of Venice-treacle 1 lib. from which, with the best
Spirit of Wine, extract a Tincture, which, from the Spirit of Wine separated,
keep a part; with the same Spirit of Wine extract Roots of Elecampane,
Angelica, and Juniper Berries bruised and mixed, of each iij. and the Tincture
from the Spirit of Wine separated in Balneo, mix with the Tincture of Treacle;
then pour on the Oils of Juniper and Amber essencified, with Flowers of
Sulphur, and first filtred through Book-paper; circulate all together over a
most gentle heat of Ashes for four days. This performed, you will have a
Secret, which in the Pest, and Epidemical diseases, by the blessing of God is
wont miraculously to show its Effects.

Virtues, Use, and Dose.
In the Pest it is a preservative and curative.

Dose one or two drops in Wine or Vinegar every morning; or for several weeks,
eight or ten drops taken once a week, to provoke Sweat upon an empty Stomach.
It preserves from putrefaction, and leaves no impurity in the body.

If the Patient be already infected with the Pest, let him as soon as he is
assaulted, take from j. to ij. in Wine, Vinegar of Rue, or other appropriate
liquor, and Sweat, this powerfully expels the venom from the Body.

(a) In curing the Pest, of Divine Anger the most severe Scourge, no Man has
at any time been so happy, nor durst to glory, that he of himself was able to
expel it with a Specific, or Appropriate Medicine. All endeavors of the
Physician therein, if God permit not, are deficient and vain, what mitigation
soever of the Pest be thereby made, it is not efficacious enough to preserve
life. Although by diverse, many, and various exquisite Medicines are produced,
confirmed both by Reason and Experience; yet they are here imperfect, and
oftentimes of no virtue or power. Yea, even the Magistery of the wife it self,
against this most pernicious Malignant Lues, possesses not a sufficiency of
strength, but fails, and becomes as it were useless. So much is hereby
manifest, that we have reason to judge, that an infallible Specific, or
Appropriate particular Medicine, cannot be promised by anyone, and do rather
believe, the atoms of Infection may be seen flying in the Air, and this not
from se^ immaginary delusions, but really from the Sertes of truth it self.
Whatsoever Pest^al Medicaments are proposed by our Author, and also by me, must
necessarily be censured with the same censure; they may sometimes profit, but
can scarcely be esteemed general. In the year 1611. in that grievous Pestilence
at Hassia, and the Neighboring parts, my Pestilential-water, seasonably taken,
did much help. The Composition thereof I have ingeniously taught in Practica
Chymiatrica, page.

And in my Germane Treatise, set forth in the year 1623. Of like virtue is
compounded Oil of Camphire, especially that which is made with Oil of Cloves,
and Salt of Wormwood, which (...) gratia, is added by me at the end of my
Commentaries. Here to also may be referred Elixir Proprietatis of Paracelsus.
Solar Bezoar, Transparent Gold, Panacea of Sulphur of Antimony.

(b) In Balneo rectified viij.

(c) Rather with Oil of Anise.

(d) ij. ij.

Flowers of Sulphur.
The use of Crude Sulphur in Medicine ought not to be admitted, unless that may
be had, which is found in Mines, and is called Scissile (a), by nature
purified, which with Flowers of Sulphur, prepared by Art, is of equal virtue.
For as here by artificial, so there by natural fire, the more pure part of the
Sulphur is elevated to higher places, and so must needs by reason be judged
better digested; therefore when Scissile is at hand it may be used instead of
the Flowers: But because nature seldom supplies us with abundance of
Scissile, Chemical Physicians began to think of an Artifice, whereby in defect
thereof, they might be supplied.

In the Fields of Cracovia (b) in Polonia, it is found cleansed with wonderful
Artifice of Nature; and once with desire I saw it in the Kingdom of Naples,
near the Sulphurous Pits, where the Sulphurous Mountain perpetually burns. The
Sulphur in that place, is wont to sweat out of the Stones like Dew; that flower
is most sweet, of which, if a true Spagirick Artificer could have abundance,
from it he might draw a Magisterial Chemical Medicament. The Sulphur that is
there made, may afterward by the force of fire, be thoroughly purged from the
Stones and Earth (c).

Near Salisburge, in the Copper-mines, where they boil Vitriol, from the
Minera, by Assation, as they call it, the Sulphur is wont to fly from the
Minera, which afterward sticks in the Chimney like fine flower, which Chimney
is therefore studiously built to receive and retain that fume. This Flower of
Sulphur is well purified, and being Sublimed from the Minera of Vitriol, it
retains in it self a certain sharpness.

Therefore this, in defect of flowers Chymically prepared, may very
commodiously be used, as I have often found by Experience.

Of most yellow Sulphur (for that which is of a red color, has much of
Arsenick, (d) Realgar in it, and for Medicine ought not to be used) one pound,
Salt-fuse half a pound; make the Salt first flow in a Crucible, then pour it
out, and cool it upon a Marbel or in a Mortar of Ungarick Vitriol purified, and
calcined half a pound pulverisate, and mix these together, put them in a glass
Cucurbit, (with a convenient Neck not too capacious) with Argilla beaten very
small, put on a high and large Alembeck, with a Recipient annexed, place it in
Ashes or Sand, yet take heed it be not encompassed too high with Sand, least
the superior part waxing hot cause the flowers to melt, and when you suffer it
to cool, you will difficultly take off the Alembeck, unless with a live coal
you melt the congealed matter. If the Head be well fitted, it need not be
Luted, if you will you may paste a little paper round about. These things thus
performed, begin to distill at first with gentle fire, after three hours the
Phlegm will begin to come forth, and so continue four or five hours. The fire
must be gradually increased with great coals, that the vessel (e) wherein the
Sand is contained may be red hot, If the fire be continued, so as the Sulphur
in the Alembeck seem to flow, then it will quickly be Sublimed; yet the fire
must not be excessive, for so it will not ascend of a yellow color, but black.

The flowers elevated in the Alembeck, may soon be taken out, if round about
paper be held, while the Alembeck is lifted up, to prevent the flowers falling
into the Sand, if at the same time the Cucurbit be very hot; without delay
cover the Orifice thereof, least the Sulphur by the ingress of Air, as is often
wont, be fired. The flowers taken out of the Alembeck put it on again, and
continue the fire ten hours.

After the sublimation is ended, when all are cooled, and the Alembeck removed,
take out the flowers, and mix them with the former. The Caput Mortuum, in every
sublimation, will be porous and light, being sprinkled upon hot coals, it will
not at all burn, which is a sign it is deprived of all virtue.

These flowers mix with new Salt, and Vitriol, observing the former proportion,
and proceed in sublimation altogether, as the first time, which the oftener it
is done, the more subtle will the flowers be, and be made more and more pure.
The third time do in like manner, yet you will have fewer flowers, for from
three pound thrice sublimate, you will have but xx. In this third Repetition it
will be expedient to desist, not only because it is much deminished, but
because the profitable parts of Sulphur are apt to fix themselves.

One half of these Flowers, mixed with the following Gums, reduced to most fire
powder, keep for use, as Paracelsus (f) advises, in lib. Paragraph. and lib.
de Nature. in lib. and cap. of Sulphur.

Of the simple Flowers of Sulpher thrice elevated, jss. Choice Myrrh, j. Aloes
Epatick, j. Saffron xv. granes. Terra Sigillata j


Sugara sufficient quantity, dissolved in Rose or Pectoral-water, make a Mass,
of which Rotula's may be formed.

The other part in the following manner Sublime, although there be some who
think Gums in Sublimation will be burnt: The Elevation may be gently made
without Adustion.

Therefore of the said Flowers one pound and a half. Colchothar, vj. Salt fuse
v. Myrrh of Alexandria. Frankincense, of each iij. Aloes first purified with
juice of Citron, iiij. Mastich, iij. Saffron, ss.


All beaten together, and well mixed, put into the former (g) vessel, if it be
whole, or into a new one, adjoining an Alembeck, set it in a Furnace (h) and
put under fire, as was done the first time; after twelve hours take out the
Flowers which ascend into the Alembeck; again, put on the Alembeck, and
continue the fire for other twelve hours.

Note. If you put in too much matter at one time, then it will burn, the depth
of three or four singers is enough. Then from one pound you may have xij. of
Flowers, if you have less, put on the Alembeck again, and continue the fire for
other twelve hours.

The Waters distilled from either of the Sublimations, as well of the simple as
compounded Flowers of Sulphur, gather in a Recipient, for that purpose annexed,
and keep a part, these afterward rectified in a boiling Balneo, mix with that
Water, which is extracted from the last compounded Flowers; it needs not any
rectification, by reason of the Gums, it is of a milky color, and sharp taste:
These must be gathered a part, that they be not mixed with the dark colored
Oil, which is wont to follow.

This Water is called Ens, or Milk of Balsome, of the same use as the Flowers.
In the Pest, Fevers, Pleurisic, Cholick, Affects of the Lights, Obstructions of
the Liver.

Dose, according to the nature of the Sick, and judgment of the Physician.

Virtues, Use, and Dose of Flowers of Sulpher.
1. In the Pest it is a principal curative and preservative, for it resists the
impression, and preserves from putrefaction; with extract of Elecampane (k), it
operates in time of Infection almost to a miracle.

Dose j. in Water of Carduus bened, or in j. of Syrup of Citron, and ij. of
Water of Melissa (l). This draught preserves and cures without any other
Medicine, as (...), the Pest, Pleresie, all putrefactions and imposthumes.

2. Its daily use is (...) of all Diseases, with accidents, and a conservative
of nature and health.

3. It is given in all Diseases, that have great need of drying.

4. It causes sweat in Lues-venerea (m).

5. In all Affects of the Lights, in the Asthma, Cough newly taken, and
inveterate. In pectoral Catarths, Phlegmes, etc.

6. In the Pleurisy.

7. In the Cholick.

8. In imposthumes and putrefactions of the body.

9. In all Fevers it preserves, takes away all Febrile impurities, and the more
light peripneumonick affects, safely and suddenly.

10. It is a preservative also in the Epilepsie (n).

11. Its a conservative of Wine, if mixed there with, it hinders generation of
the Stone.

Dose j. to the robust, to the younger soft, ss.

For preservation, eight or ten granes are given.

The Flowers may also be mixed with Sugar, and with Dragacant, dissolved in
Pectoral-water, and made up in Tablets.

Caution. The Oil and sublimate Flowers of Sulphur, must not rashly be
exhibited to Women with Child, because they provoke the Menses.

(a) Federschwefel.

(b) I have sublimed Sulphur of Cracovia, with fixed Nitre, the Flowers were by
edulcoration whitish, the Nitre sustained the fire two hours it was so fixed.

(c) Sometimes.

(d) By reason of permixtion of adjacent veins of Arsenick-mines, or their
pernicious vapor.

(e) Capell or Catinus.

(f) Tome 3. page 174.

(g) Viz. From which the Flowers at first were sublimed.

(h) Of Sand.

(i) Astrale.

(k) Which is very powerful in the Pest. Dose from j. to j.

(l) Of Meadow-sweet.

(m) And in all diseases.

(n) In a conventent Vehicle.

Treacle Water.
Venice Treacle, v. Red Mirth of Alexandria, ijss. Choice Cinnamon, (a)
Oriental Crocus whole, of each ss. Campher, ij.
Pour on them the best Spirit of Wine, exceedingly well rectified, (or, if it
be at hand, that which is prepared of the Seeds, or Roots of Angelica, for it
is more efficacious) till they be covered three or four fingers, and in a glass
well closed, with gentle heat of Ashes extract a Tincture; by inclination
remove the tinged Spirit, and pour on fresh Spirit, so long as till it will
yield no more Tincture. The tinged Spirits afterward abstract to a mediocrity,
let the residue remain with the extracted Essence, to which add vj. of Spirit
of Tartar, and so circulate and digest them together for eight or fourteen days.

Virtues, Use, and Dose.
1. In the Pest it is of principal use, and of this the Infected in twelves
hours (b) must take one spoonful, in three spoonfuls of the best Wine (c), and
sweat three hours, after the taking this Potion, the Patient must abstain from
meat and drink at least six hours.

2. It purges the Head, Breast, and all the principal Members of the Body, and
if with impurity they be contaminated, it removes the evil, and reduces them to
their pristine and natural state, and preserves them so, as afterward they may
not easily be hurt.

3. It very well helps (d) such as have been anointed with Quicksilver, (e)
for by its penetration it searches all the Nerves, Muscles, and Marrow, and
whatsoever evil it finds it corrects and expels.

4. In rectification of the blood (f) Lues Venerea (g) Putrefaction (h), Worms
(i), Prickings of the sides (k), Palpitation of the Heart (l), Fevers (m),
Jaundies (n).

Also it may be mixed with other Diaphoreticks (o).

Dose, from half a spoonful, to one spoonful, in (p) Appropriate Water, in a
draught of Wine, Water of Melissa, or Cardu-bened.

(a) Or of Cassia-lignea. The difference between Cinnamon and Cassia is; Cassia
in breaking has no strings, but Cinnamon many.

(b) Viz. from the first infection.

(c) Or Spirit of Wine.

(d) Spirit of Vitriol being added, as much as is needful.

(e) In Lues-venerea, or the most contumacious Scab.

(f) In Water of Succory.

(g) In a decoction of Guaiacum, or Water of Arsmart.

(h) In Water of Coltsfoot.

(i) In Water of Tansy, of flowers of Peaches.

(k) Viz. of the superior parts, especially caused by coagulated bloods in
Water of Chervil.

(l) In Water of Melissa.

(m) In Water of Tobacco, or other Water.

(n) In Water of white Horehound.

(o) As Diaphoretick Antimony.

(p) In wounds, especially with Shot, to prevent Convulsions, and correct other
accidents of wounds, it is of singular use. See Wurtzius lib. 3. chap. 17. of
accidents of wounds, at the end.

^exton of Paracelsus (a).
I.
First, Make an Instrument of Steel, The nature of the spiritual Magner,
Sympathical or Antipathical, although invisible, yet from its Affect is
sufficiently sensible to be of admirable virtue.
in which may be formed Cakes, weighing about tss. There must be three parts of
the Instrument; the upper part must be like a great Seal, on which a Serpent
must be engraven on the lower part, which represents a small Signet, a Scorpion
must be figured. The hollow Ring of Steel about one finger and half high
transverst, contains the matter put in, that it fall not out, but by pressing
above and below be formed. The Sculpture of the Instrument must be made at the
certain position of the Celestials, viz. Sol and Luna entering the Sign (b)
Scorpio: At the same time also the Pentacles must be scaled, or at least, when
Luna attains the Sign Scorpio; for so the superiors with inferiors in
sympathical undissolvible union are conjoined and united. The form of the
Instrument.
medical implement medical implement medical implement

(a) Others read Xenzethon, Zenexton of Paracelsus lib. 2. de Peste cap. 4.
Hydrargyry, or Quicksilver is a Pagoick Amulet, (as it is called) being
enclosed in a Filberd-nut, and hung about the Neck. This has a Magnetic
attractive virtue, it attracts to it self the Pe^lential venom, as a certain
homogeneal thing, yet not so, as by its attracting the venom, it should render
it more obnoxious to the body, for by this attraction the venonate humor is
dissipated. The same is affirmed of Arsenick, which kind of Amulet was first
invented by Jacob Carpensis, and by others afterward enlarged and approved of.
With the same Amulet ^drian the sixth chief Bishop of Rome, was delivered from a
most grievous Peslilence, a Fallopins, Montanus, Heurnius and Crato say.

(b) In Scorpio conjoined, which is in the Month of October, the second or
third day.

A Mass for making of constellate Amulets or Pentacles.
Of Toads (a) well dried in the Air, and heat of the Sun, and in the open Air
(b) pulverifate, (artificially beaten with a Pestle, stopping your Nostrils
(c), or turning away your Head) ij.

Note, Unless they be well, and quickly dried, they stink, and are difficultly
beaten. Eighteen Toads yield ij. of powder.

Zenith (d) of young Maidens, as much as can be got. White Crystalline Arsenick
(e). Red Arsenick, or Auripigment ss. of each. Root of Dittany, Tormenttl, of
each iij. Pearls not bored j. Corals, Fragments of Oriental Hyacinth, Oriental
Emralds, of each ss. Oriental Crocus ij.


By reason of its odor, some granes of Musk or Amber may be added.

Pulverisate all these most subtly, afterward dissolve Tragacant in Water of
Roses, till it be like a mucilage, with which impaste the powders, and form
them (the Sun and Moon being in Scorpio, or at least the Moon) into round
Pentacles, and imprint them with the former two Seals, engraven under the same
influences. Or if you had rather, make Scutums, having the form of the Heart,
afterward dry them sew them up in red Silk, and hang them to the region of the
Heart, between the Shirt, and other garments.

Use.
Externally it is hung about the Neck with a silk ribbon, the Shirt being
between, to the Region of the Heart. It not only preserves from the Pestilence,
but hinders whereby the body is the less infected with Venomes, or Astrale
Diseases; it attracts the venom from within, and externally consumes it.

Zenexton for Rich and Noble Persons.
II.
A Casket must be made of most pure gold, with a pipe full of holes fixed in
the middle, fastened to one side as a Basis. In the former part of this,
externally must be placed an oriental Sapphire of most excellent color, aptly
fitted; and in its circuit four stones of Toads, or of the Spiders, which in
their back have the form of the cross; for this kind of Spiders have certain
small stones, which if hung about the Neck, are present remedy in the Pest. In
the other, or hinder part, one Hyacinth of a just magnitude must in like manner
be fitted. These thus performed, a live Toad, whole without loss of any blood,
and by a thread tied to the right hinder foot, hang it up toward the Orient,
until it be perfectly dry, and may be pulverisated, beware no rain touch it,
mix this powder with a little of the best and most excellent Vinegar, until it
have the form of Paste, with which the whole Casket within must be every where
fitted. Then into the Pipe, which is in the middle of the Paste, certain rags
or small pieces of Linen (first moistened in the Menstruum of a Virgin, which
has not exceeded the fifteenth year of her age) must be put, that the Pipe may
be full, and the pieces of linen lie compact together; the holes of the Pipe
must be of such a magnitude, as through them (...) powder of the Toad may be
touched by the linen rags. For by their mutual operation the sympathy of each
is begotten, which afterward gradually converted, does so powerfully by
Antipathy contrary and resist poisons, that he who in the time of Postilence,
we^rs this Amulet hung about his Neck, may most certainly be said and accounted
(the providence of GOD permitting) to be thenceforward free from all danger of
Infection. This they who know the true reason of its compounding, by experience
and lively demonstration well understand. Note, The gold Cane or hollow Pipe
after it is filled, as before said, should be admirably well closed, therefore
a Stopple to screw in that it may be very close is absolutely necessary, which
with the Casket and Pipe ought to be prepared, as appears in the following
Figure. The form of the Instrument.
part of an instrument for administering medicine part of an instrument for
adminsitering medicine

(a) Whole without any pricking.

(b) In the month of July.

(c) It needs not. For the Toad has venom only in the humors. A Toad dried or
burnt, is a great secret in the most desparate Dropsy.

(d) The first menstruous blood.

(e) To prepare this Mass, some only use red and white Arsenick, with Tragacant
dissolved in Water of Roses, and so made up into Pastils. Others further add to
ss. of either Arsnick, root of Angelica, Wormseed, Dittany, Saffron, of each j.
and with Tragacant make them up into pastils. But where are many ingredients,
there is also much error.

Other Zenextons.
Besides the Amulets or Periaptons, to be worn about the Neck in time of
Pestilence, described by our Author, there are very many other, which indeed
change not the kind or matter, yet in preparation are different from them. Such
is the exquisite artifice of humane ingenuity, that it changes the same things
into diverse figures, thereby demonstrating the nobility thereof. Quicksilver
in a Filberd-nut cut open, and afterward exactly closed, and hung about the
Neck, has obtained a principal name of a Periapton, afterward Arsenick in the
same fence related, and first used, as is above expressed. Both of which may,
keeping the same matter, be reduced into a more apt form, of which we shall
here treat, and first of Mercury.

Mercurial Zenexton.
Mercurius viv. one pound. Ungarick Vitriol, Common Salt, of each iiij.
Green-brass or Verdegrease half a pound.


Boil these in Wine-vinegar, or Water, in a new Iron Pan, always gently
stirring it with a Wooden Spatula, until the Vinegar, or Water, be changed to a
redish color, and the Mass of the ingredients be like a Poultis. This Mass,
rejecting the liquor, dry warily, and the remaining Mercury strain through a
linen cloth, as much as you can get to pass through: The Mass remaining in the
linen, spread upon a clean Oaken-board well planed, like as a Plaster is
spread, but with some convenient thickness, and immediately impress it with a
constellated Seal, also, if you please, you may observe the time of Luna's
ingress into Scorpio. The figures impressed, separate one from another by cutting
them round with a Knife, or with a peculiar circulate Instrument, made for such
purposes, that the figures so cut may be like money, and leave them upon the
board for one night. In the mean time the Mercury will be coagulated and
hardened, that when removed from the board, it will sound like metal. These
sealed moneys keep for use, which is thus, put each of them into red Silk, and
as the usual manner is, let them be worn about the Neck. If in succeeding time,
the red Silk be changed into a blew color, take it off presently, and burn it
in a clear fire; but wrap the same Tablet in fresh red Silk, and again hang it
about the Neck, and afterward observe its change of color. For it is found by
experience, that in time of Pestilence, or other Epidemical Diseases, as often as
the red Silk, in which these Tablets are put, is seen to change its color,
Venom is indeed attracted, but not quite consumed; therefore, least its
abundance should hurt the body, the burning of the Silk, contaminated with
venom, is found out; which in the use of this Periapton, must most diligently
be observed.

Zenexton Arsenical.
Arsenick mixed with other Mineral Species, as well as Mercury, in a double
manner may be reduced otherwise into forms. The first whereof is thus, Red
Arsenick, Crude Mercury, of each half a pound. Auripigment, Crude Sulphur, of
each iiij.


First mix the Mercary with the Sulphur in this manner. Melt the Sulphur in a
Pot with gentle fire, afterward in the same, always stirring it, mix the Crude
Mercury, until it was black, and the Mercury be wholly consumed in the Sulphur.
Then grind the Mass, and mix it well with the other species; all these in a
Cucurbit, with Alembeck aptly fitted, sublime in the usual manner, and the
parts by sublimation elevated, will be of an excellent red color; gather all
the sublimate, and rejecting the Feces, reduce it to powder, which with
Tragacant dissolved in Rose Water, make up in Tablets; these in the accustomed
manner sealed, in Sindon or other Silk, must be worn about the N^k, not
neglecting to observe what is mentioned in coagulated Mercury.

Arsenical Magnet.
The latter form of preparing Arsenick into a Periapton, is thus. Crystalline
Arsenick, Yellow Su phur, Crude Antimony, of each iij.


These all Subtly Pulverisate and mixed put into an Earthen Vessel and over a
gentle fire m^e it leisurely melt, yet beware of the fume; keep stirring it
with an ^ro^ Spitula, until it be ductible like to Turpentine, and of a dark
red color. After all are cooled, the matter will wax hard like pitch, but
before this be from the matter, while it is soft, with your hands moistened,
with Oil of Roses, form Cakes or Tablers, w^ being hung in Silk about the
Neck, do in like manner preferve from in^ection. ( Note, The fume must
carefully be avoided, because from the Arsenick it is venomous.) This need not
be seared, although it be compounded of pernicious venomes, for the Sulphur
mitigates the virulency, both of the Antimony and Arsenick, and disposes them
to a more beneficial nature and property. Moreover, from this Composition is
made a famous potential C^ustick, which causes no Inflammation, but without
dolor corrodes the Skin. From it is also made a most excellent attractive
Plaster in the Pest, which Imposthumes and Carbuncles, does most speedily
ripen, breaks them, and exceeding powerfully attracts the venom, In like
manner, being for two or three days applied to putrid and venomous Ulcers, that
easily admit not of cure, it attracts the venom to the superficies of the
Ulcer, and condenses it into a very black and putrid Escara, which supplied
with fresh Butter, or Oil of Roses, is speedily removed, the bottom under the
Ulcer being lest red and clear. The Composition of the Plaster is thus,

A Plaster of Arsenical Magnet.
xGums of Serapinum, Ammoniack, Galbanum, of each iij.


Dissolve these in a sufficient quantity of Vinegar of Squills, afterward
express them through a linen Cloth, and by boiling thicken them, and keep
them. Then Of Wax, The best Turpentine, of each iiij. The aforesaid compounded
powder iij. Oil of Amber ij.


Mix the Waxand Turpentine with gentle heat, when removed from the fire stir it
well, that it may be reduced to the consistency of an Ointment, afterward add
the strained and dissolved Gums, with the Powder and Oil, which again by
stirring diligently mix, afterward make it up in Rolls, and in Bladders,
anointed with Oil of Scorpions, reserve them for use. See Practica Chymiatrica
of our Edition at Lipsiensis, page.

Podagrick.
The Gout beginning, and not contracted, according to Severinus (a), with one
Unguent or Balsome may be cured, with the admixtion of such things, as resolve,
mitigate, and corroborate.

The confirmed Gout, which has Roots difficultly resolvible, placed either in
the Blood, or in the Flesh, or else in Synovy it self, cannot be cured with
external resolving, mitigating, and corroborating Balsomes only. Therefore
Podagrical Purgations must be adjoined, and mundefying remedies, Diaphoreticks,
Diuretics, Consumptions, and perfect Ablations, by moistnings and insensible
transpirations, are to be appointed. Podagrical and consent meous Evacuations
are added (b) by us.

Paracelsw (c) says three things are required to the Cure of the Gout, viz.
Resolving, Mitigating and Corroborating (d).

Among Resolving, Paracelsus (e) commends Arcanum Corallinum; also this
following Arthritick Powder.

Hermodactyls, The best Turbith, Diagridium, Leaves of Sena, Shavings of
Cranium (f), Sugar, of each j. mix them and make a subtle Powder.


Dose ss. in the morning, with Water of Arthritick Ivy (g), for three or four
days together.

It purges securely, and gently, all Podagrical defluxions.

Instead of Mitigatives, the two Balsomes following may be used.

Among Corroboratives and Medicaments hindering defluxions, Spirit of Vitriol
is numbered, used with Salt of Pearls (h), and Medicinal Wine of Paracelsus
(i), made of Caryophyllata and Acorum Galangal, which drys and hinders
defluxions.

Pedagrick Balsome I. (k).
Vitriol calcined to a yellowness two pound. Virgins-honey with the Comb one
pound. Spirit of Wine one pound. If the Spirit of Wine, which is lost in
preparing Daudanum Opiat be at hand, it is better. Turpentine, iiij. Verveine,
Rosemary, of each vj. Calcined Flints half a pound.


Mix all these when beaten, and put them into a conveniently large Glass, well
fortefied with Luting, adding a Head proportionable, with a capacious Receiver
annexed, all the junctures being very well Luted, set it to Digest in gentle
heat of Sand, for three days, afterward leisurely Distill it, at length urge it
with strong fire, as long as you perceive any drops or Spirit come forth, when
all is come forth let all be cooled. The Caput Mortuum or spongious black
Feces, reverberate to a whiteness, and on them pour the liquor before come off,
and the second time Distill.

Virtues and way of using.
It is a most efficacious Balsome: It deceives the expectation of no man, being
rightly prepared and adhibited; for it speedily and suddenly asswages
Podagrical dolours, if the place affected be anointed therewith, after the use
of Paracelsus his purging Powder of ^ermodactyls, or Arcanum Corallinum (l).
Linen cloths moistened in this Balsome, and applied to the affected place
blood-warm and so left till they be dry, afterward moistened again, and applied
till the dolours cease, do visibly extract the vapors. If the affected part be
afflicted with too much heat and redness, it may be mixed, with the expressed
Juice of Flowers of Longwort (m), which has been set for some time in the Sun.

(a) Chap. 14. page 361, 362. Podagrical persons for the most part live: yea,
there have been very few that have dyed of the Gout only.

(b) Must be added.

(c) Lib. 2. of long life Chap. Tom. 6. 157. and 200.

(d) As the same almost in all diseases should be observed, so also in the Gout.

(e) Lib. of Diseases ari^ng from Tartar, tom. 2. chap. 3. Also tom. 4. page 38.

(f) The Bones of the (...) are better than ^ranium. If the Gout (...) the
Fect, take the Bones of the Fect, and so forward. Paracelsus in the before
recited place, adds not Shavings of Cranium, but Humane Bon^s, and these he
mightily commends, nor is it without reason, especially if they be hurnt ^r
calcined. For the Salt which is in them, being Cal^ne^ opens the Belly, and
expells the ^ar ar from the bones, and Ligaments.

(g) Of Strawberr^es and Mil^.

(h) To preserve from the Gout, Riverius, Physician to the King of France, is
wort to prescribe Magistery of Pearls, in a peculiar manner prepared. See
Practica Chymiatrica, page.

(i) The description see Practica, etc. page.

(k) In distillation of this Falsome it is better thus to proceed. First, from
Calcined Vitriol and Honey with Calcined Flints, of each an equal quantity,
distill a Spirit, with great first gentle, for it will easily b^il, from this
Spirit remove the Phligme by distillato in Balneo. To the remaining Oil, add
of Mastich, Olibanum, Red Mirth, Man-grease, Opopanax, Bdellium, of each ij.
These mixed again Distill once, after ward with the same Spirit mix an equal
portion of Spirit or Wine, and keep the while for use.

(l) Or Essence of the Root of black Hellebore, of which see Paracelsus lib. of
black Hellebore, Iom. 7. p. 67. 121.

(m) Or with Frog-spawn. The description of compounded Water of Frog-spawn, and
of young Bullocks-dung. See Practica Chymiatrica, page.

Podagrick Balsom, II.
Oil (a) prepared of the inferior Mandibles of old Horses, which have been
long exposed to the weather.

Or Oil (b) of Mans-bones (that has perished by violent Death, either Hanged
or Broke upon a Wheel) that have been exposed to the weather many years.

Or Oil of Hearts-blood.

Of which soever of these be taken (it must first be rectified per se) j.

Oil of Tiles (c),

Of Turpentine,

Of Juniper, of each iij. mix them and Distill all once in Balneo, and
afterward anoint the affected part: This perfectly exterminates all Podagrical
dolours, arising from a cold cause (d).

(a) It is thus made. The bones broken very small are put into a convenient
Vessel; the Water first ascends, afterward the Fetid Oil, which is corrected
upon Colcothar.

(b) Paracelsus calls it L^quor of Mummy. lib. 2. Of Long Life, chap. 1. tom.
6. page 157. Also Mumia Patibuli, tom. 4. page 35.

(c) Which is otherwise called Philisphick, and is thus made.

Storax Calaminate three parts, Turpentine two parts, oil of Philosophers one
part, digest them for some time, afterward Distill them by Retort, and what is
distilled forth keep for use.

(d) If from a hot cause, j. of Campher is dissolved in the Distilled Oil.

An Anodyne Unguent.
Flowers of wild Roses ten handful, Herb, and exterior (a) rind of fresh
Henbane six handfuls, Boil them, and afterward Beat and Express them; the
Expression Strain, when Srained, Abstract the Water in Balneo, that the
residency may be like honey. This Liquor in a Glased-pot cause to evaporate a
little, stirring it continually with a Wooden-pestle, until it be thick,
afterward pour upon it of Not Bores-grease.
Hog's Grease two pound, and mix them; then while it is hot remove the mixture
from the fire, when it is somewhat cooler, it will be convenient to add j. of
Opium pu^verisate, and dissolved in Wine, and of Saffron pulverisate the
quantity of two Fisberd-nuts, Extract of Flowers of Longwort (b) ss. (c) and
mix them diligently by continual stirring, until it be cool, and the Unguent be
of the color of Ashes.

Virtues and Use.
It is singular in asswaging Podagrick and Nephritick dolours, if the place
affected be anointed hot there with (d).

When you would apply it to Nephritick dolours; it would be worth while, if in
the beginning of the Composition, two or three handfuls of Juniper Berries, be
with the Henbane beaten and expressed.

(a) This Unguent only effects a palliative cure, but it does not absolutely
remove the disease, by repercussing it presently asswages dolours. Therefore
warily and prudently, least the disease be made worse, all such things are to
be used by the Physician; for it will scarcely otherwise be, but that from the
use of things of this kind more contumely, and disgrace, than praise or
commendation, must necessarily arise.

(b) That is of Root and Rind.

(c) Made with Spirit of Wine.

(d) Hereto may be referred from Practica Chymiatrica, page. Salt Ammoniack,
Antipodarick-water of Ruland, which Martin Ruland the Father, in his Centuries
of Emperick Cures, wonderfully commends, for removing all Arthritick dolours,
page. In happily effecting the Cure of the Gout, this must principally be
observed, that yearly, in the time of the Equinoctials or Solstices, viz. about
the same time, when for the most part the Podagrick-fluxions are wont to
assault the body, be well cleansed, and especially that an exquisite order of
Diet be appointed; after the body is cleansed, Corroboratives, and
Diaph^reticks must be exhibited; for by this means Podagrick-fits seldom or
never return, or if through any light external error, assaults do at any time
happen; yet they are never very grievous, nor are the dolours continual or
insolent, but such, as with external Balsomes may easily be removed.

Among the number of Purging Remedies, besides those prescribed by our Author,
there are others; as first, Arcanum of Coltsfoot, or Essence of Roots of true
Hellebore, which is extracted only (in the Vulgar manner) with Spirit of Wine,
often given either alone, or with Arcanum of Coltsfoot, in due preparation
mixed, and taken every morning, for some time before the ^onted time of
Podagrical Assaults: It frees the whole body from Arthritick Fluxions, and this
so much the more effectually, if with this Evacuation, a temperate order of
Diet be observed, and Melissate-wine, with Root of Caryophyllata be drank for
the first draught at Table, yet sparingly. These things happily performed, if
any gress impurities be yet remaining, those, either with Arcanum Corallinum,
or with Paracelsus his Arthritick Powder, may sinally be exterminated; and then
recourse must be had to Confortatives and Diaphoreticks. P^culiar Diophoreticks
are two, viz. The Extraction of Oil of Transparent Sol, of which (...) in
Diaphoretick Specificks, and my Antipodagrick Pills; b^th which (...) taken for
(...) days, with Arcanum of Flints, by Sweat through the a hole (...), do
powerfully purify the knittings of the Jo^ts, or extreme parts, and comfort
them so, as they are rendered unapt to admit of Arthritick Fluxions. These two
are especially (...) to you, because neither the Gout newly aontracled, nor the
most inveterate, if not (...) this requires an external Cure, viz. the Apertion
of the Skin, of which afterward, can (...) abide, after the use of those, yet
the Divine Benediction, with the Physicians p^dence, must always concur;
otherwise these, and all other things, may be of (...). ^y (...) Pills have
hitherto been common to none, or to very fen, they are (...) by John Rhenan in
his Key and Manuduction to Paracelsus his works, which is (...) an^ to his
Chymotechnick Disputation, set forth under the Title of Solis e put^o
emergentis, page 18, 19. whence these may properly be hereto transferred, for
they are there ex^ly described, and without any difficulty posited. For the
external cure of the Knotted (...) I commend my Plaster described in Practica
Chymiatrica, page; whichly reselving does not only assuage the dolor, but also
extracts the Tephaceous matter, or Coagulated Tartar, from the Joints, the Skin
being gently opened. Hereto also pertains Liquor of (...).

Liquor of Soap.
Venetian Soap, cut it, and on it pour good Spirit of Wine, Distill it once or
twice, repouring on the same Spirit, leave it in a hot place, and afterward
Filter it through Paper; it will be like Oil, of a brown or dark-red color,
with it anoint the affected part, and great ease will speedily follow. Some
boil root of white Hellebore, with Oil of Peter, and anoint the dolorous part
therewith, whereby the pain is presently removed. Inwardly a more excellent
cannot be given than Tincture of Antimony. See Practica, etc. page.

Nephritick.
There are diverse kinds of the Stone (a), in degrees and number of parts
different; all take their beginning from the more subtle impute part of
Aliments, apt for Coagulation, after separation from the more benign
Alimentary food, and by the benefit of the Spirits, or supervenient heat of the
parts are rendered absolute. Acquiring diverse forms, according to the variety of
matter, from whence they proceed, and according to the manifold diversity of
the parts, wherein they are generated, produce Symptoms conformable thereto,
and in great affinity conjoined therewith.

From strong Digestion the Stone is eas^y generated. If the expulsive faculty
be weak, then the coagulative force of Salt causes the increase of Tartar.
No weak Digestion has ever produced the Stone, unless in debilitate
Digestion, by strong expuisive force, it be expelled, and not separated: There
is no man in whom Tartar is not found, (which the Spirit of Salt is wont to
Coagulate) and which Purgations do not remove.

Care must be taken, that sharp Medicaments be not exhibited to those afflicted
with the Stone, who are otherwise healthful.

Salt good against the Stone.
The virtue of Remedies against the Stone (b), faith Paracelsus, is not placed
in their longitude, but only in the true preparation thereof, Therefore of
Crabs Eyes, Stone of the Microcosme (c), Judaick Stone, Stone of the Lynx, of
the Sponge, of the Eagle, of Crystal, of Flints, of Ciprine-stones, taken out
of Perch-fishes.


Of these what quantity you please, dissolve in distilled Vinegar (d),
repeating the Aflusion often, till all be dissolved, and from them, by
abstracting the Vinegar, prepare a Salt.

This Salt being first often edulcorated, and purified with Rainwater ( viz.
by dissolving, filtring, and evaporating) is used either by it self, or
resolved in other liquor.

Crusted stones, such as Crab's-eyes and Ciprine-stones, need not calcination,
for they are easi^y dissolved in Vinegar, as Pearls and Corals.

But the flinty, as Crystal, Flint, Judaick-stone, Stone of Lynx, of the
Sponge, and of the Eagle, must first be Calcined with Sulphur and Salt Nitre,
as is above described in Liquors of Gems, afterward dissolved with Turpentinate
Vinegar, and the Salt Edulcorated, kept for use.

From these Specifick-stones, by reason of the various forms of their
Signatures, you will have a universal Remedy against the Stone and Tartarous
Diseases.

Every one of the above named Specificks, rightly prepared, is sufficient,
being applied according to its known Signature.

Montanus (e) thinks Crystal to be Paracelsus his Ludum-humani, because it
contains in it self all Anatomy, Signature, and Cure of the Tartar in the
Microcosme. It is impossible in curing this Distemper, that all Species thereof
should particularly be known; for of the Stone and Tartar there are more than
five hundred kinds, every of which does want its peculiar Specific Remedy.

Use, Virtues, and Dose of the Salt.
In all kinds of the Stone, in what Parts or Members soever they be.

Dose for preservation, from j. to ij. in convenient Syrup, every quarter of
the Moon.

Dose of curation, ij. to j. in Specifick-waters, as of Rest-harrow, Saxifrage,
Pimpernel, wild Alexander.

To Women it is given in Water of Melissa or Juniper Berries.

Two Observations.
1. Note. This Salt must be very often Dissolved and Coagulated, lastly,
Digested with the best Spirit of Wine, and abstracted strongly in Ashes,
re-iterating the labor, so the Salt is made Volatile (f). For after every
putrefaction ss. of Salt ascends. That Essence of Wine, according to
Paracelsus, ought not to be separated from the Volatile Salt, that it may the
more powerfully operate upon the interior Tartar. For when the Alcohol of Wine
is fermented with the virtue of the Stones, then it obtains the power of
resolving the Stone in the Body of Man, as Alcohol of Wine fortified with
Tartar, is said to extract a redness from Gold and Coralls.

2. A singular Powder against the Stone.
Let no man doubt of their effects, because Flinty-stones are first Calcined
with Saltpeter, that they may the better be dissolved by the Radicate Vinegar
above expressed, otherwise their Solution could not be effected. For Crude (g)
Salt Nitre purified, with Sulphur, with a little Saffron, Mace, and Powder of
Citron-stones, in the Disease of the Stone, is a most efficacious Remedy. (a)
Of generation of the Stone. See Anselmus Boethius of Boodt, lib. 2. page 302.
(b) Viz. of the Reins and Bladder. (c) Drawn out by medicine, or cut out. (d)
Or radicate. (e) Strigensis. (f) This comes forth with the Spirit of Wine by
Retort. (g) It is a most certain and efficacious Remedy, viz. if to j. of
Nitre, be added of powder of Ciprine-stones six granes, of Mace ten granes, of
Saffron five granes, and all well mixed to gether.


More Nephritick Specificks in expelling the Stone have been prepared;
Compounded powder of Crab's-eyes.
as, 1. Oil of Crabs eyes, the preparation whereof see Practica Chymiatrica,
page

A Specific also is thus prepared in form of Powder: From yellow Scoria's of
Regulus of Antimony, with Wine extract Sulphar of Antimony, as much as you
please; ^ibe that powder (as often as you think good) with Wine of Sulphur of
Antimony, and as often gently dry it, till it have acquired also a yellow
color, which keep in a hot place. Of this, from three granes to six, exhibited
in a conventent Vehicle, either in Wine, or Broth, or else in Water of
Rest-harrow, Radish, Horse-taile, Pimpernel, or Wild Alexander, do happily move
the Belly, and together with the Urine expel the Stone.

2. Is a famous Nephritick prepared of those hard knots which are wont to grow
upon Eglantine, or the Dog, or wild Rose, by the Germans called, Extract of
Knobs of Cynosbatus.
Sch^ffapssel, Schlassluntizen, they grow in the extreamitres of certain
sproutes of the same tree in Autumn, and they remain till after Winter, being
cut in the middle they are hard and tough, in their center for the most part
are found little worms, and sometimes instead of worms flies and spiders,
Paracelsus in his Herbary calls it, the expulsion of my Stone; for there is not
among Vegetables any thing more powerful to expelevery kind of the Stone, the
virtue whereof Paracelsus experimented in his own Body, and therefore gave it
that name. Donzellinus in Consilliis Gatonis makes mention thereof Consil. 148.
The preparation of them, yet the powder should first be gently sprinkled with
some drops of Oil of Tartar made per deliquium, and so the whole Essence may
more happily be extracted. Dose from ss. to j. in convenient liquor re-iterated
often. The description hereof see more in Practica Chymiatrica of our Edition,
page

3. Famous is that Lithontripon of Millepedes, of which Dioscorides lib. 2.
chap. 34. or Asella's, or rather, by us called Hog-line, Onisks, that is, th^se
worms, which are under or about Water-tubs, and also in Wine-Cellars, breeding
from the Stones of the Walls, and from their multitude of feet they are called
Mille-pedes. These worms are thus prepared into a Medicine.

Powder of Onisks.
Of Onisks, what quantity you please, wash them diligently with Wine, afterward
in a new Earthen Glassed-pot, covered on the top, and well luted, dry them in
an Oven, that they may be reduced to Powder very subtly; Imbibe the Powder
with Wine, let it Imbibe as much as it can, afterward dry it, and again Imbibe
it, this do three or four times. Lastly, again reduce it to Powder and Imbibe
j. of this Powder, with a little Water of Strawberries, and a dram of Oil of
Salt, then dry it, and reduce it again to Powder. This keep in a Glass or
Silver Vessel, admirably well closed from all impurity. This Powder is useful
in most grievous dolours of the Stone, most vehemently afflicting, especially
in the Bladder, either by reason of the magnitude or multitude thereof; the use
of this is very noble and most efficacious. This prepared Powder may be thus
administered; from iiij. to j. with vj. to x. of the Decoction of^fed Vetches,
and ss. of Spirit of Wine; give this upon an empty stomach every day or every
other day for twenty or more days together, always before the Exhibition
hereof, applying an emollient Clyster, and diligently providing through the
whole course of the Cure, that the Belly be kept Soluble. For the most part it
is wont to happen, especially at first, and in those whose temperament is more
hot and dry, that the whole body is hot and feverish, and also very thirsty,
with dolor in the breast; this is occasioned by the operation of the Medicine
upon the Stone it self, which it wonderfully resolves, and by a thickish filth
exterminates; therefore prudently the Patient must be appointed to abstain from
all hot things, Wine, and Aromaticks, and a convenient order of Diet observed;
but to quench the Thrist care must be taken, therefore in this case the only
thing proper and excellent, is a Julep made of Waters of Beanflowers, and of
Strawberry-flowers, of each vj. tempered with Spirit of Salt to a grateful
^arpness, or with jss. of Lap^-prunelia. The Urine the first days of the Cure
is wont to come forth in small quantity, and very thick, but afterward more
abundantly and happily all impurities of the Bladder are ex^erminated. This
Medicine has been very often proved. In Chollerick Persons it must be given in
smaller Dose, or but every other day. 4. The Oil or Liquor of ^rystal is by
many commended, as the only Remedy in dissolving and expelling the Stone from
out of the humane body, which may be prepared in the same manner, Liquor of
Crystals.
as is above described i^ Liquors of Gems; it indeed in this case is very
profitable, but in its administration singular pruderce is required; for this
Liquor is neither to be given much at once, nor continually especially when the
Nature is languishing. Therefore from ten granes thereof to sixteen drops, may
scarcely with safety be given at once, nor that for any days together but
leisurely, viz. not till the operation of the medicament successively be
finished, and the scope of the Cure (which we would it should) do require it.
5. Paracelsus of Diseases ^rising from ^artar, in his Treatise 2. chay. 4. tom.
34. in a wonderful manner commends the preparation of Ludum-humani, but has no
where left its genuine preparation. Therefore I have heartily delivered it in
Practica Chymiatrica of our Edition, page.

Hydropick.
Our Aliments, Meat, and Drink, have in them three Excrements, one is Water,
the other Sulphur, the third Salt or Tartar. If this Salt, the medium of the
other two, from the Astra^fire, conjoined with its own proper Elementary fire,
be injured (a), then from that resolution of Salt, the Dropsy is made and
generated.

An Hydropick Purging Specific^.
Of Roots of black Hellebore gathered in due time (b) iij. Note, That from the
Hellebore (c), in the preparation of the Essence, the venomous (d) scum must be
diligently separated. Colloquintida (e), ij.


Extract an Essence with Spirit of Wine, and then separate the Spirit from it,
to the consistency of Honey. Of this four granes, Mercury precipitate with Oil
of Sulphut (f) two granes; mix these, and make them up in form of Pills.
Exhibit them three mornings together (g), afterward take Flowers of Sulphur,
thrice sublimated with Vitriol three parts, and add it to the extracted Essence
of Crocus Martis; this Essence is best extracted from prepared ^recus Ma^tis,
by the benefit of C^yle of Vitrio^ in digestion, with which a good quantity of
common Water must be mixed, and atterward from it strongy abst^acted that the
extracted Powder may re^ prose. Of this mixed Powder ex^ibit ss. in Conserve of
Roses, in the morning, at noon, and in the evening. Sweat must be provoked with
Oil (h) of Guaiacum rectified with Treatle-water (i). Dry and convenient meats
must be ^aren, drink must be springly taken, what is, must be Wormwood (k) Wine
Chalybeat (l).

(a) Dissolved.

(b) In the Month of October.

(c) True black Styriack.

(d) Roots of Austriack Hellebore, send not forth such a S^um.

(e) Of that which has been kept some years, not fresh, and freed from its
K^nels.

(f) As is abovesaid.

(g) Yet so, as always the latter Deses, be double, or tr^ble as much as the
precipitate Mercury.

(h) The Spirit is more converient, nor is it so ingrat^ul.

(i) Mixtura simplex.

(k) Also funiper-wine, or a decoction of Juniper Berries.

(l) Purging Specificks in the Drosie are very many. The most excellent of
which we shall here rehearse. Our Author above, among the virtues of
precipitate Mercury, attributes to it this, that in the Dropsy it is an
Appropriate Remedy, having in it self a property of expelling the whey-like
humor, which is undoubtedly true; and moreover in this Hydropick Specisick, he
joins it with the Extract of black Hellebore and Colequintida, that their
virtues may be rendered more strong in expelling, and also the doses of
precipitate Mercury, for their more commodious exhibiting he appoints to be
made up in Pills. Therefore this precipitate Mercury, is by him highly praised
and commended, and not without cause, for it powerfully helps in this case. Of
like virtue is Mercurius vitae, or Flowers of Butter of Antimony, of which
above, if from four granes to twelve thereof, be exhibited for three days
together in extract of Hellebore and Colequintida; they happily expel the
resolved Salt. But afterward Sweats and Wrine must be provoked, with a
decoction of Sarsaparilla, Lignum Sanctum, or root of Coltsfoot, adding always
a little Spirit of Tartar, or other Diaphoreticks and Diuretics, of which
above; but especially adding Arcanum of Wormwood, or Carduus Benedictus. But
this is to be noted, that the exhibiting of Mercurius vitae three days
together, in those of ripe age, is often wont to cause the falling down of the
Fundament, which is afterward rarely, or at most very difficultly cured. Yet it
is neaful in cure of the Dropsy, that such Purgations be adhibited in the
beginning, but afterward Diuretics and Hydroticks must succeed. For otherwise,
viz. (...), this will happen, the Whey, or Watery humidity will all be devolved
to the Reins Urinal Passages, from whence afterward, by reason of aggravation,
very often most pertinacious Symptoms are wont to arise. Moreover in
preparation of the Extract of Root of black Hellebore, it will be more safe
instead of Spirit of Wine, to take Wine it self, with which the Root must only
be gently Boiled without noise, and this done with fresh Wine, so long as until
all the Essencified force be Extracted from the Root, afterward by evaporating
or distilling reduce the Extract to the thickness of Honey. For Spirit of Wine,
by reason of its attraction, which it rather acts upon the Sulphur, then the
Mercurial liquor, in which the purging virtue consists, is less profitable,
therefore Wine is better.

Extract of the Root of Esula minor described by Ruland in his Centuries, being
very often by him commended: It is indeed very efficacious; And is prepared in
the following manner.

Ruland's Extract of Root of Esula.
Of the Roots of Esula minor, such as are sold in Shops, boil them gently with
simple Water, take off the Scum, till no more will rise, remove it from the
fire, pour off the Water and when strained keep it for use, and pour on other
fresh Water, and again boil them; all the Water collected, exhale to the
thickness of Honey, afterward temper it with Spirit of Wine, and in a Vessel
well closed, keep it in a warm place, that so the adjected Spirit of Wine by
gentle Evaporation may be removed. Of this Extract is given from j. to iij. in
Wine, or Whey of Milk. It happily expells the Water between the Skin. In this
manner purgations are instituted, to which others may also be added; such are,
first Diaturbith with Rubarb in a solid form; also Trochur's of Alhand^, from
which by Extraction only with Spirit of Malmesie wine Ruland's Golden Spirit of
life is made; for these in like manner may be helpful to Extract the Water, or
resolved Salt. These following from a certain propriety help in the Dropsy, as
first Water of Earthworms, which is thus made.

Water of Earth-norms.
1. Of Earthworms, which are found in turning up the Earth, what quantity you
please, purge them with Moss that grows upon trees, by putting them alive with
the Moss into an earthen-pot, by the same Moss, often changed they will cleanse
themselves from a limpurities; this must be done with fresh Moss twice or
thrice; afterward feed them for sometime with the Yolk of an Egg boiled hard,
and in a clean earthen-pot sprinkle it upon them, which they will devour, and
by eating it be changed into a yellowish color. Then put these Worms into a
Glass or Test, with a very straight Orifice, but at bottom broad, close the
Vessel diligently, and work it all over with Dough of a convenient thickness
round about, that it may be like Bread ready for Baking, and in like manner
leave it to Bake with Bread in an Oven; when it is cold remove the Bread, and
in the Glass, you will find the Worms changed to a most excellent Water, with
very few Feces settled to the bottom, which throw away, but the pure Water keep.

Dose half a Spoonful, with Syrup of Cinnamon, which is made by extracting the
Cinnamon with Malmesie-wine, and afterward with Sugar reduced to the Consistency
of a Syrup, but this Dose must be often repeated.

2. Green dung of Geese, the weight of 3j. with one Spoonful of the Distilled
Urine of a Goat or Calf, being drunk, and the Dose repeated often, wonderfully
drys. For this is manifest in all of them, that is, wheresoever Geese-dung, and
Goats, or Calves-urine falls upon the Earth, they cause that place to be wholly
dry and parched, in like manner therefore it takes away the superfluous
humidity in the Body.

3. Salt of Frogs and Toads, from four granes to six, often drunk in Wine.
Powder of Toads, made of Toads, exceedingly dried in an Oven, and as it were
calcined, ss. of which given in Wine, or other Liquor, wonderfully by Urine
expells the Dropsy, as is sufficiently manifested by experience; since the
first Inventor hereof, even at the point of Death with this disease, was to
admiration restored to his pristine state of health.

4. In the Timpany, of admirable use is Arcanum of Cumin, or of Carraways
Philosophically prepared, if after the use of other more gentle purgations,
(otherwise the disease is exesperated) some drops of this, with Sudorificks, or
else with other Specificks, be often drunk.

Dysenterical.
If the Digestion be good, and there be no Separation, then follows the
Dysentery (a).

If Separation be (b), and no Digestion (c), then the Lientery.

If neither Separation, nor Digestion, then the Diarrhaea.

If putrefaction of matter of the Stomach (d) be, then follows a Flux of the
Pelly, with various colors.

A Dysenterick Powder of admirable virtue.
Amber, Sanguis Draconis (e), the Stone Haematitis, Red Corals, Seeds of
Purcelane, of Plantane, of Anthora, Root of Tormentil, Terra (f) Srigensis, of
each ij. Nutmegs in number four. Cinnamon ss. Crocus Martis (h), Talk calcined,
Mother of Pearl calcined, Bones of the Microcosme calcined, of each j.


Grind the Stones together upon a Porphyrystone to most subtle sine flower,
afterward from all the rest beaten very small, with the Flower of Stones
conjoined and mixed, according to Art make a Powder (i).

Virtues, Use and Dose.
In all dolorous defluxions of the Belly, from what cause soever they take
their beginning, and although diuturnal.

In the Dysentery, Lientery, and Haemorthagia of the Nosthrils. In Sanguinary
Fluxes of Women, although great and contumacious, also in such as are with
Child. For in some it presently stops the in ordinate flux, in others, by
repeating the same Dose some hours after, long after meat, or the following day
in the morning, it very seldom needs be repeated the third time, it delivers
Women from that evil, although it be very grievous.

Dose from j. to jss. or ij. with iij. or iiij. of distilled liquor of Plantane.

Externally in the Dysentery the following Plaster is profitably applied to
the Region of the Belly.

Treacle, and Terra Sigillata of each a like quantity make a Plaster, and
apply it blood-warme.

(a) The Archeus of the Stomach, contains in it self a virtue, and nature of
separating the edoriferous from the fetid, the evil from the good. What is good
brings no detriment; but what is evil, only is cause thereof. There is no Food
which has not in it fetid, and immature Sulphur, and that is not of a laxative
and elementary nature. The office of the Sto^ (...) parate these things, and to
convert them (...) and expel them. Dung is (...), but the (...) and immature
Sulphur of Al^ments, for Nutriment unprofitable (...) therefore the Stomach
endeavor to (...) more than is appointed by Separa^ (...), that (...) if
beside the good and the bad, it go about to digest the immature Sul^ (...)
v^nome, which is separated from the Food, causes the Diar^ (...) also end avour
separation in the Spirits, the same causes the Diarrhea, (...) that separation
is instituted, so is the disease of the Flux. If it move such (...), as are not
put into it, as wh^ ^t drans to it self the Nutriment of the parts, or the
(...) in the Blood, Flesh, and other Members, with that Appetite it causes the
Diseas in the body; for as soon as it draws the Nutriment from the Body, and
whilst it (...) to drink up its sincere Blood, it necessarily falls downward,
and thince is caused the (...). Therefore, as often as the Stomach languisheth
with desire of ea^ing immature (...) is captivated with too much pleasure of
separation, and this it endea^ (...) parate one from another, by which too much
separation the Flux of the body unavoid^ (...) follow.

If nothing (...) separated and d^gested, the Lientery is caused there from. If
there be no (...), and yet digestion, an immouerate Diar^e^ of Excrements by
the Belly is caused.

(...) flow forth by S^edge, it is called a white D^sentery.

If there (...), that is slomy durg cleaving to the soldings of the interiors,
and fat (...) and abundantly be evacuated with the Excrements, it is called
also a white Dysentery.

If by Urine, the drink undigested, be copiously expelled, it is called
Diabetes.

Sulph^rous diseases, with no Salt, are rightly cured by Mercury alone, unless
some accident interveen; or by uniting and mixing Sulphur therewith, that
defect may be supplied. Sulphurous dung is corrected, and the Archeus of the
Stomach comforted, by the use of perfect Sulphur only. These Nature needs in
this disease, with which an Astringent is wont to be joined from the commixtion
of these, a Specific of Sulphur is made, which compleates a perfeet Cure; if
any thing lie resolved in the Intestines, that with a Clyster of sweet Milk,
may easily be expelled.

(b) It must be read, if neither Separation.

(c) Read, if there is no Separation and yet Digestion.

(d) Without Separation of the Stomach.

(e) Red gum.

(f) Sigillata.

(h) Or of that which the Author afterward teaches. Note. In the Dysentery,
Astringents are not to be used (...) as is Crocus Martis taken in the beginning.

(i) This Dysenterick powder of our Author, is compounded of many crude things,
indeed it is constructive, but it seems not at all to be Specific. For so many
crude things conjoined together cannot be Specific, because such only are
called Specificks, which from their Essences, or Species (for their Species and
Matter in Medicine, contrary the distemper) constitute a middle Ens, which by
its own propriety repugnes the disease, yet to Nature is exceeding friendly.
Therefore as there can be no Ens, unless made by Separation, so Specificks
without that cannot be existant, nor truly can they be so called.

Moreover in Fluxes of the Belly, especially in malignant constringing Fluxes,
respect should not so much be had to Restrictives, as to Confortatives; without
which there is very often great error committed, and the disease not assuaged,
but aggravated. Other Specificks therefore are to be used. In this case of
great use are,

1. Tincture of Emralds.
Essence or Tincture of Emralds, the preparation of which I have delivered in
Practica Chymiat. page. Of which from six drops to ten, exhibited in Water or
Arcanum of Plantane, or Tormentil, resist all fluxes of the Belly, but
especially they cure the Dysentery.

2. A more excellent Dysenterick is Sulphur of Sol, which from its (...)
propriety mightily helps in the resolved Sulphur of the (...), Sulphur of Sol.
if exhibited in Water of Mint, Torm^, and other apprepr^ates; the description
hereof I have faithfully communicated, in Practica Chymiatrica of our Edition,
page.

3. The (...) performs, and indeed with great felicity, the English Aurum
potabile, Aurum-potabile.
the virtue of which is wonderfully in abating all Flaxes of the Belly. The
description thereof is also extant in Practica C^ymiattica, page.

4. In Diuturnal or Dysenterick fluxes, taking their beginning from the Liver,
wonderful profitable is Salt of ^orals, Salt of Co^als.
made by simple Resol^ing in Vinegar, and from thence certain times revoked,
and at length exhi^ted j, or jss. in Water of Peneroyal, or Plantane (...), and
repeated often if also other things p^rtaining to diet be diligentl^ ^served.

5. The same performs Laudanum Opiat of my description above delivered; its use
being seasonably abhibited it may properly be commended with the former.

(k) Also this fomentation in the Dysentery, externally (...), is very
profitable. Wermewood, Mint, Roses, of each one handful. Calamus Aromatic,
Galangal, W^rmeseed, of each ij. Roots of round Aristol chy, number 6.


Cut, mix and boil these with Vinegar and Wine. This Vinegar take up with a
large Sponge or in it ^mbibe a piece of Bread tosted, and apply it to the
Region of the Ventricle; this wonderfully helps.

Essence of Crocus Martis.
The blew Scoria (a) of Iron (at Norimberge, where Steel-plates are made, the
best may be had) shining like Glass, rejected in those places, where Minera of
Iron is melted, grind it to a very fine Powder, put it in a Glass, and upon it
pour most sharp distilled Wine Vinegar, set it in moderate heat for fourteen
days, and the Vinegar will be tinged with a red color, Filter it, and Abstract
it in Balnco, the remaining red matter Edulcorate with Rainwater, Abstract the
Water, and pour on more, repeating the labor three or four times, that the
savor of the Vinegar may wholly be removed. Also it may first in a Pot placed
in hot Sand, be a little Calcined, keeping it always stirring that the
sharpness of the Vinegar may vanish, and afterward Edulcorated with the Water,
as aforesaid. If all be rightly performed, part thereof afterward placed in a
Cellar upon a Marble, will be resolved into an Oil. This Essence of Crocus is
far more efficacious than the vulgar ^rocus Martis, in Reverberation made per
se by putting a rod of Iron or Steel into a Glass Furnace, or by moistning
Plates of Steel with Vinegar, and afterward in a Reverberatory, reverberating
them to a redness, that they may not turn black.

Virtues of the Essence of Crocus Martis.
1. It is profitable in resisting the Menses, and other unseasonable Fluxes.

2. It helps in the white defluxions of Women.

3. Gonorthea.

4. Hemrodes.

5. Dysentery and Diarrhea.

6. In incontinency of Urine (b).

7. In Haemorrhagia internal, and external; if of this from j. to ss. thickened
with Juice of Quinces, or taken with itj. of Conserve of Roses, or a little of
it sprinkled upon the blood flowing out of the Wound, are of admirable virtue;
although shavings of Mushrums growing out of Beeches (c), do far more
efficaciously stop all external Flux of Blood, almost to a miracle.

8. In all deplorable obstructions of the Liver and Spleen. But it is needful,
that those which take this, be first purged with attenuating and opening
Medicines. To those that are troubled with obstructions of the Spleen, in Water
of Citerach, Maidenhair, Tamarisk (d). In affects of the Liver, in Water of
Intybus, Succory, Agrimony; it helps in Spitting blood.

9. In dislolute Diseases, as the Dropsy, and others, where Consolidation is
needful.

10. It corroborates the Ventricle, and takes away nauseating, being taken in
Conserve of Roses, or rich Wine.

Dose.
From eight granes to ten, twelve, or fifteen, in Red-wine, Water of Plantane,
Shepherds-purse, Tormentil, or in Conserve of Wallwort.

(a) It is found, da man Riesen schmelizet.

(b) In Diabetes.

(c) The Beech-tree, being cut at the Root below the ground, and afterward well
moistened with hot water, mixed with ferment, in a few days produce, Mushrums,
grateful to the taste, Brutling, Birckesch Wemme, which being dried, and
reduced to powder, stop all external Haemorrhagia The same performs the
Constellate Fly, breeding in the Craniums of Men that are Hanged, or Break upon
a Wheel.

(d) Of Fearnbrake.

Venereal.
A Confortative Vegetable, from the description of Paracelsus (a) with addition.
Essence of Satyrion.
As Rubarb by a little boiling, loses its purging virtue; so also Satyrion (b)
by drying; for although the root dried be extracted with Spirit of Wine, yet
its operation is found to be in-efficacious; and experience proves, that a
Water distilled from the root thereof green does more powerfully operate, then
powder of the dry root. Therefore from the root, while it is filled with its
own moisture, may be drawn forth a virtue in this manner.

First, Choice roots of all the Species of Cynosorchis, juicy, and full,
gathered in the Spring, what quantity you please, beat them in a Marbel Mortar.
Note, That always one of the two Testicles, viz. that which is weak, soft, and
withered, must be thrown away, because by a contrary virtue (which Paracelsus
calls Saturnine) it represses and extinguishes the venereal faculty: Add to the
roots one, or two (c) pieces of new, and most white Simnel-bread, mix all in a
Stone Mortar diligently, and to cleanse it from its claminess, pour on a
sufficient quantity of Malmesy-wine, Bread and Wine are the chief props of
Sustentation, and of precreation singular mediums, because Sm^ Cerere and
Baccho triget Venus.
afterward in a Vessel, with a Blind-head; set it to digest in Balneo (a) with
most gentle heat: After this has been digested for a month or two, express the
Juice with a Press, (Calcine the Feccs, and extract a pure Salt, (e) in taste
sweet, not urinaceous, as other Salts of Vegetables are wont to be) and when
strained, put it again into a Vessel, with a Blind-head, and as before, set it
in Digestion for two months, then a most yellow Liquor (sometimes also red)
will be Separated on the Superficies, the impure Feces remaining divided in the
bottom, which reside below in form of Hypostasy, or Sediment. The Liquor,
Separated by Inclination, keep for use; to which add its proper Salt (f), and a
little Salt of Pearls (g), also one or two drops of Oil of Cinnamon, Mace and
Nutmegs, so the Medicament will be rendered more gratefal and efficacious.
Aurum-potabile may be added (h), if that which is true, and genuine, and not
contuminated, or corrupted with Corrosives, can be had (i).

Virtues, Use, and Dose.
In these Roots of various Species, a wonderful Signature is to be found,
almost of all external Members of the whole Body, and of both Sexes. They
therefore, not improperly are believed to comfort the whole humane Body.
Phaedro calls this Root red Mumy, and faith it has a singular (...) with the
Microcosme. The Extract of these is one of the principal Confortatives of the
whole Body (k): In Comforting Venus it is a most excellent Medicament, and is
given with good success, in cold and maleficiate Bodies. The same powerfully
restores lost virility in the Aged.

Dose from j. to ij, and iij. in Muskadine, or Malmesy-wine, at the time of
going to Bed. Or it may be mixed with Conserve of Roses, of which may be given
the quantity of a Filberd nut, drinking after it a draught of Malmesy wine or
Muskadirse.

(a) Paracelsus, lib.. of Long Life, chap. 11. mentions Extraction of Root of
Satyrion, which in his Herbary he otherwise calls Buteomen, but in short, and
obscure words. Orchidum Candied, and other Medicina^ Species, are also known to
be much commended in exciting Venus. If therefore the vulgar preparations of
them, and Waters distilled there from, be so powerful, of how much more
efficacious virtue would their Essences or Arcanums be? Our Author here has
diligently explicated the Essence of Satyrion, according to the mind of
Patacelsus, to which he has also given his name. But more excellent is the
Arcanum of the same Root, Philosophically prepared, in the same manner, as
above in Vegetable Panchymagogon, and hitherto often in others I have expressly
declared.

(b) Viz. Red.

(c) Half, or a third part.

(d) Rather in Horse-dung.

(e) The Extraction of Salts from Vegetables, is commonly thus made, when from
the Ashes of them, by the benefit of common-water, a Lixivium is made, and from
the Lixivium evaporated, a Salt; which is afterward purified, either by melting
in the fire (yet thus it loses much of its virtue) or by many Solutions, and
Coagulations, often repeated. But this preparation of Salts of Vegetables is
not very genuine, for they easily melt, and contract a Vrinous and Lixivious
odor and taste; moreover, I know not, but with them they may retain the Nature
of Salt of Tartar, to which they also come very near, and from it, either by
taste or odor, are difficultly distinguished. Therefore our Author rightly
advises, that the preparation of Salt of Satyrion may be Legitimate, viz. that
it savor nothing at all of them.

The way of preparing Crystalline Salts of Vegetables, or transparent like
Nitre.
Ashes of any kind of Vegetable, with an equal part of Powder of choice
Sulphur, Calcine or Burn them in a Fire not very gentle, so all the Lixivious
fat from the Ashes will perish with the Sulphur. Then of these Ashes, with
common or proper Water, draw forth a Salt, by Distilling the Extractions to a
skinniness, and afterward setting them in a cold place to Crystallize. As much
Sulphur as Ashes must be taken. These Salts are best of all, and do wonderfully
operate, nor do they taste at all like Lixivium. So Salt of Wormwood, in this
manner prepared, purges the impurities of the Ventricle, and Breast by
Vomiting; if j ss. thereof be Exhibited in ij. of Water. Salt of Imperatory,
made the same way from the Roots, Exhibited from four granes to eight in Juice
of Elder-berries, takes away all Fevers.

Another way.
Ashes of any kind of Vegetable, and disolve it leisurely in distilled Vinegar,
fortisyed with a small quantity of Aqua fortis, the Solution temper with a
sufficient quantity of distilled Common-water, or of simple pure
Fountain Water, Filter and Evaporate it, till the Superficies of the Solution
begin to be skinned; leave it in a cold place that it may Crystallize, gather
the Crystals, and wash them in cold Water, gently dry, and keep them; or else
by grinding reduce them to Powder. These Salts are pure, having a sweet taste,
not melted in the Fire.

(f) Before prepared in the said manner.

(g) Or Magistery.

(h) The English is in this case very powerful.

(i) It would be most efficacious, if to the Ingredients appointed by our
Author, a little Essencified Amber be added, viz. to j. of Liquor of Satyrion,
ij. of Essence of Amber.

(k) Therefore worthily also may be numbered with Confortative Specificks.

(l) From ss. to j. if Amber be admixt. Otherwise to Conserve Chastity of
admirable use is burning Spirit of Saturn, of which below. Also Sugar of
Saturn; for if four or six drops be put into the Navel, and the Yard anointed
therewith, the desire of Women (in Men) is deminished. Which if again you would
augment, use a dry Bath, and anointing of the Navel with Oil of Nutmegs.

(m) Other Venereal Specificks are also given, to excite the Venereal Faculty
in the weak and impotent. Many of this kind have been carried about. Excellent
is this following, which is also attributed to Paracelsus.

Of A Venereal Specific.
Castor, Galangal, Mace, Cloves, Anise, Long-pepper, Venetian Borax, of each
ij. Boletus Cervini, jss. Savory, Root of Satyrion, Valerian, of each j. Stinx
of the Sea without a tail, Aron, Cardamum, of each ss.


Mix and reduce these to a most fine Powder, which temper with Essence of Amber
a third part, make this up into Pills with Spirit of Wine. Dose ss. or j.
leisurely swallowed, being first suffered to dissolve in the Mouth. Moreover in
these, and the live Venerea^ Specificks, care must be taken, least violently,
and through the blind force of desire the Body be destroyed; for sometimes such
Medicaments render the Nature so strong, as that the Soul with the Life also,
are together expelled. Too much of any thing is an Enemy to Nature.

2. Powerful to excite slowness, or debility of Copulation, is Oil of Nutmegs,
if some of it in a dry Bath, be diligently and strongly chafed into the Navel.
For it is a Consortative of the whole Nature, and of the Marrow also in the
Bones.

3. The Dung of a Partridge, dissolved in the Gall of the same, and the Glande
of the Yard anointed therewith, increases the Venereal Faculty in a wonderful
manner.

4. Venus being in Leo, dig up a Root of Satyrion, and mix it with Oy^e of
Juniper, drink certain drops of this mixture, and you will perceive its
operation.

5. Roots of Satyrian Candied, these were used by the Elector Ernestus
Coloniensis.

Venenate.
I. Treacle of Mumy.
OF Mumy (a) only is made the most excellent Remedy against all kinds of
Venomes.

First, A Tincture of Mumy is prepared in this manner.

Choose the Carcass of a red Man (b), whole (c) clear without blemish, of the
age of twenty four years (d), that has been Hanged, Broke upon a Wheel, or
Thrust-through, having been for one day and night exposed to the open Air, in a
serene time.

This Mumy (e), from the two Luminaries (f), once illuminate and constellate
(g), cut into small pieces or slices, and sprinkle on them Powder of Myrrh, and
of Aloes, but a very little, (otherwise it will be too bitter) afterward by
Macerating, Imbibe them for certain days in Spirit of Wine, hang them up a
little (h), and again Imbibe them (i), then hang them up to dry in the Air;
this so dried will be like Flesh hardened in Smoke, and be without stink.
Afterward with Spirit of Wine, or Spirit of Elderflowers, according to art
extract a most red Tincture (k).

Also Oil Olives may (l) a part with the dried Mumy (for the moisture (m) in
digestion causes an intolerable Stink) be Macerated for a Month, and so be
Tinged therewith; this Tinged Oil Olive, may afterward at pleasure be added to
the Tincture of Mumy, before it be mixed with the Treacle.

Therefore of the Tincture or Extract of Mumy made with Spirit of Wine, from
which the Spirit is afterward abstracted, half a pound. Treacle Andromach iiij.
Oil Olives mumiat ij. Salt of Pearls and Corals, of each ij. Terra sigillata
ij. Musk j. Mix and digest these by Circulating for a Month.


Virtues, Use, and Dose.
By this Treacle of Mumy very many Diseases are perfectly cured.

1. In the Pest, so great is its virtue, that if administered before Infection,
there is thence forward no danger of venom, and who so uses j. hereof in the
morning, will not be Infected that day.

(...) taken (n) in Treacle or in Water of Carduus^.

(...), Blanes, and the Pleurisy (o) j. is administered. Then (...) is ^ed, and
who so attams that hour, as to take (...) be certain of recovery.

(...) of (...). Dose from ss. to j. or ij. in urgent necessity. (...) drunk
poison, the said Dose in j. or ij. of Oil (p) of Almonds, that (...) V^mit,
the Operation of the Medicine must be expected in Bed.

By this means all venomes of Beasts, or Minerals, may be expelled.

(a) (...) in this place our Author means not that Liquid matter which is found
in (...), in which Humane Bo^es, embalmed with Aromaticks, have been (...) But
according to Paraceisus it is the flesh of a Man, that perishes by (...) for
some time in the Air; its Extraction, but mistically, Para^ (...) lib.. (...)
Long Life, chap. 10. It is otherwise by him called Mumia pa^.

(...) Al^pharmacons, which are here placed by our Author, are such as (...)
had, and therefore are worthy of all commendation. If there be other (...)
published, yet varying here from, are not worthy to be compared with them.

(b) Because in them the blood is more sincere, and gentle, and therefore more
excellent. Note. Red (...) are all Mercurial, and tend either to good or evil.

(c) Not ma^ed,

(d) Or there about.

(e) That is, Musculous flesh, of the Thighs, Breasts, Arms, and other parts.

(f) Sun and Moon.

(g) Viz. From the impression of the Luminaries.

(h) For six or ten days in the Sun.

(i) With the same Spirit of Wine, which is made of Elder-stowers, first
^ermented, asterward in the m^nner of other Spirits Distilled.

(k) By digesting.

(l) Some prepare Mummy, cut in pieces, but not very small, with Myrrh, and
Epatick Aloes a part, not altogether, but piece by piece, without Spirit of
Wine, or with Sublimed Flowers of Sulphur, with Saffron, Myrrh, and Aloes, and
so leave it for a Month in some commodious place, that it may be dried very
leisurely; then with fresh Oil Olive, for another Month they putrefie it,
Express it, and from the Oil with Spirit of Wine, or of Elder, Extract a
Tincture, which by Distilling off the adjected Spirit, they reduce to a
Consistency.

(m) For so has it been done by some, who putrefie fresh Mummy, not dried,
with Oil Olive in a place moderately hot, but with so great a slink, as
greater cannot be. This a^seth from the (...) of that humidity freshly mixed
with the Oil; yet this by drying is removed, although ^t be afterward
putrefied in Oil, yet no evil savor is excited, being Circulated in the
Winter in Balneo, in the Summer in the Sun.

(n) O, with Treacle-water, or Water of Meadowsweet.

(o) Malignant.

(p) Or, if the Patient abhor it, it may be given in other appropriate Water.

II. An Arcanum of Theophrastus, most excellent against every kind of venom,
of which kind are Sublimate Mercury, Arsenick, Wolf-bane, Powder of the Adamant
(a), Person of Spiders and Toads, Thora, the Brains of a Cat (b), Menstrues.
The fresh blood of a Storke (c), as much as is contained in its Body, in a new
Glass Cucurbit, Distill it in Balneo; the Water which comes forth diligently
keep, and the Coagulated Blood dry in a warm place, and grind it to Powder.

The Ventricle (d) in like manner must be dried, and in a Crucible burnt so
(...) the Fire, as till it be reduced to Ashes, from which, with the Liquor of
the (...) ^ood Extract a Salt, which diligently keep, and afterward conjoyn
with the (...) Blood. Put this mixture into a Capacious Glass, and then add of
most choice white Amber (e), j. Red Corals, and Berries of Uva versa (f) (black
and full ripe) dayed, and Pulverisate, Effence of Mummy (g), Root of Anthora,
of each ss. The Bezoar-stone (b), vj. The best Treacle jss.


These with Oil (which is made from Pine-nuts, with strong Expression)
incorporate, and mix all together, and then pour on so much Oil, as may cover
them three or four fingers; afterward the Orifice of the Vessel being
diligently closed, set it in the Sun. The older this Composition is, it the
better, and more powerfully operates.

Use and Dose.
The use hereof is, that in all corporal venom, of it is given ss. with a
draught of Water, Wine, or which is better, in Milk blood-warm; after the
taking this, there will scarcely be a sixth part of an hour past, before the
Patient vomit up the substance of the taken venom (k), and be delivered from
the danger thereof, who afterward maybe refresht, and strengthened with
Confortatives. This is best done, if in fresh Milk (l) hot, powder of red (m)
Corals be first taken once a day.

By this Arcanum some great Persons (n) intoxicated, have been restored to
their pristine health, after they had in vain used Essences, Monocerotis, and
Treacle-waters, with innumeral other things of this kind.

(a) Whether Powder of the Adamant be venomous, see Boethius in his Treatise of
Gems, chap. 2. lib. 2.

(b) It is venom when Cats seek after Venery.

(c) Of one, or more, young or old.

(d) Of the Storke.

(e) Oriental.

(f) Finbeer.

(g) Before made with Spirit of Wine.

(h) True, or Mineral.

(i) That is, externally taken.

(k) Either by Vomit, Siedge, or Sweat.

(l) First hot.

(m) ss. or, which is better, of Magistery j.

(n) Especially Count Lodowick of Nassaw, Brother of William Prince of Urania,
who was intoxicated with poison, by the Duke of Albany's Soldiers, and was not
helped by any other Remedies; (I think it was with powder of Serpents, etc.)
This was done at Berges in Hannovia.

III. ^
Alcohol of Serpents (a) especially of Vipers, is a Remedy against all Poisons,
as well (...).
At (...) excoriation, the intestines, Head and Tail being thrown away,
(separate the (...) intestines, and keep it for a singular Ophthalmick) the
other flesh, with the (...), after gentle drying, either per se, or in Balneo
(c), is redu^ (...) Alcohol, and in medicinal use, being taked into the Body,
drives all the ve^ (...), as the stone Theameaes expel^s Iron far from it self.
If any (...) acknowledge this Testimony and Experiment, this renders not the
truth (...) unless he can evince the contrary by Experience. This medicament
(...) bought for a great price, and by them confidently used, which they (...)
very well ^o, for never any Physician by the use thereof has at any time
endan^ (...) repute.

(...) from ss. to j. in a draught of Malmesy-wine, in Broth or other generous
Wine.

The efficacy of this Medicament begets not admiration in them, who know that
in Nature, for the most part in the greatest poison, lies hid also the greatest
Medicine; and because in Nature of times more evil than good is copulated in
Wheat cannot be had without Tares, no^ Haney without a Sting.
the Microcosme, therefore some people eat Vipers flesh to preserve long life,
and without any preceding horror or subsequent danger. Not without cause Baldus
Angelus, in his little Book of the admirable nature of Vipers, breaks out in
the following true expressions: This one thing comes to my mind greatly to be
admired that is the death of the Serpent, whose subtilty exceeds all other
Creatures in the Universe; this also is strange, that from the death of the
Viper-serpent, and by its flesh all grievous direases and poisons are cured,
and the sick restored to their pristine state of health: But that by the
continual eating o^ Vipers fles^ they should be preserved from all diseases,
this certainly is above and exceeds all admiration.

For the present, courteous Reader, it shall suffice, only to treat of certain
elementary, material, internal diseases which naturally, viz. from the Ens of
Nature are generated, and from obstruction and Tartar take their beginning and
of such as arise from the Ens of poylons, and how these comforted by nature are
cured with due and assigned Medicines.

Of Astral, Entitys of Diseases according to Paracelsus are five

For be divides diseases into Natural, and into them coming as a Scourge from
God.

The Natural are comprehended in four entitys, viz. Natural, Astral, Venenate,
and Spiritual, the fist is such as are inflicted as a Scourge

These Astral and Firmamental Infections are known by the ingenious Physician,
and Firmamentally cured, for Art has obtaired a Medicine which impowers the


Spiritual, Imaginary, Votal, and diseases procured by Enchantments, which take
their beginning from the En^ or Spirit of the Stars Paracelsus has written
peculiar Books, to which I remit the desirous Reader. For as diseases arising
from depraved meat and drink, from Animals, Vegetables, and fruits of the
Earth; with Arcanums of Herbs and Roots are healed; so if from Metals and
Minerals, with their Arcanums also, in such Arcanums of Vegetables are refused.
In the same manner plainly, the greatest part of diseases, coming from
Celestial Influence, and from the Astral Impression of the greater and lesser
Worlds firmament, admit not of cure with promiscuous Remedies, as by Arcanums
of Herbs, Minerals, and Metalls, but by Astronomick Influence, the cure is
instituted with such things only as have an Analogy to the greater and lesser
World, in which is the true Magnetic force of the Firmament, and a Celestial
Impression of resisting diseases, caused by the Firmament of the greater and
lesser World, as is apparent in Arsemart, the greater Comphry, Phytian has to
know and capell Firmamental diseases.
Dragonwort, and the greater Wallwort. If supernaturally, the disease or dolor
take its beginning from Enchantment or by Magical Impression of Ascendants, the
endeavoring the Cure by the three former ways is fruitless and unprofitable;
but according to Paracelsus, process must be made Magically and Supernaturally,
and the evil by the same means it was inferred must again be expelled. In the
aforesaid Simples there is an Influential Attractive, and all according to
Divine Ordination, Magically, Astronomically, and Magnetically cure; because in
them is Medicine, and in Man the Magnet.

For as the Sun and Stars have power of attracting humidity from The Magnet of
Man is Magical Cure, in which is a Celestial Impression after Contact of the
Herb, the Herb until it be putrefied, attracts Medicine into the Ulcer, and so
cures it.
Inferiors, so Man (by the Magnetic attractive virtue placed in him, attracts
Spirit inslead of Nutriment, as a Loadstone draws Iron) and Inferiors have the
same power of attracting from Superiors, as we see in time of the Pest; and
these Attractions are Natural, not Sorceries, Incantacions, or Superstitions.
Moreover, various are the natures and proprieties of diseases; as Phaedra has
most diligently noted, who says, some diseases require Remedies both Internal
and External. Some extrinsecal Diseases, and intrinseca Ulcers admit not of
Remedies. There are also some internal Maladies, which cannot endure the
application, either of inward or outward Medicines Moreover, there are some
diseases both internal and external, which are cured by words only, in which
according to Art the influence is impressed; some by constellate Herbs, some
which neither by Remedies, constellate Herbs, nor Words will admit of any cure
as some Wounds or Ulcers may be cured with Herb Sanikell.
Diapensia, or Ladies Mantle.
Alchime^la, by sticking a Knife in the Earth nigh to the Roots thereof, yet
warily, that the Root be not pricked with the Knife for so the Patient will be
rendered uncurable. So it is reported, a certain ancient Woman by Alchimella
only, was cured of a Cancrous Ulcer, and various Carcinoma's. Also many
desparate Ulcers by Characteristical cure with Firmamental virtue, have been
perfectly healed. These things will seem strange to none that have read in the
Works of Agrippa, that in constellate Denominations, Characters Stones, etc.
exceeding powerful influences or virtues lie hid, which when produced into
action, are taken for no less than Miracles; the same Cornelius in like manner
affirms, that words pronounced, presently cause Creatures visible and
invisible, not only in this our World, but in the Watery, Airy, Subterraneal,
and Celestial World, to be obedient. But these great things, so well known to
our first and ancient Fathers, to hint only in this place will be sufficient.

(a) The Antidote of Serpents or Vipers, has not long been used in Medicine,
yet of late years hither to nothing has been more common, and that not only
among great Persons, but also among others, and Men of the inferior sort. Salt
of Vipers was once in great use with Galen, and from Vipers, that great
Confection of Treacle, first took both its virtues and name. The Vipers are to
be taken in the beginning of the Spring, before they have conceived Eggs, for
then they are not so juicy, and moreover they seem to want their more plentiful
and excellent Balsome.

About Gregorys day they come forth, but not before nine of the clock. Their
taking is not dangerous, if he that takes them be not timorous, nor if after
taken he hold them not by the Head: For Vipers are wont to bite first of all as
soon as they are taken, from which bi^ing he may be safe, if he be before
provided with a preservative Powder, or presently after the biting take the
curative Powder.

This Powder is very easily prepared, nor is there any Artifice required, only
that the excoriation be rightly done, which is also easily performed by tying
strings about their Necks, and hanging them upon a Staple, and with a sharp
Knife, cutting their Skins round about the Neck, and so pull off their Skins,
as Eales are wont to be excoriated; afterward the Inte^, Head, and ^ayle (...)
then away, but they may be kept for use. For the Intestines dried, and reduced
to Powder, medtate in Epidemical Affects of every kind of greater and smaller
Animals, especially of Sheep and Horses, if some granes of that Powder be given
inwardly with Salt. The Head is a profitable Periapton in intermitting Fevers:
The Tail dried, by touching removes dolor of the Teeth. The fat of the
Intestines, if mixed with the grease of a Quart, and the fat of the Fish
Thymalus, it is not only Ophthalmick, but it takes away Hans, and other Vices
of the Eyes, and wonderfully clears the Sight.

The whole remaining flesh must be washed, with the Backbone gently dried,
either lest to dry of it self, or else dried in an Oven when the Bread is drawn
out, and pulverisated. To which we add the Hearts, Tongues, and Livers, for a
greater increase of virtue; otherwise they may be kept apart to make a
Prophylactick Powder against Venomes of every kind, it will keep several years.

Dose of this is very small, from four granes to six, and ss. or fifteen
granes. But of it may be exhibited j. or ij. at most. Nor is the use of this
only in expelling, or enervating Poisons taken, (after the taking this
Alexipharmacon, all venoms, without any sensible Exacuation, do abate, yet
nothing of detriment arises therefrom,) but also in other diseases it is
singularly profitable, as by experience is apparently manifest.

1. In the Ungarick Disease, or the continual Burning Fever, with convenient
Vehicles it is given to provoke Sweat, which being well and rightly performed,
the disease is easily removed.

2. In the Plurisie, especially if malignant, there is nothing more excellent,
if a Dose thereof in Water of Scabious, be seasonably exhibited, and sweat
thereby be procured.

3. In Tabes, or the Pthisick, caused by sharp Defluxions of the Head falling
down upon the Lights; it is exceeding powerful, if j. of it be mixed with j. of
Table-Salt. But the Salt must first be put into a Turned-cup of Wood, with a
like convenient Wooden-stopple, well Luted and Calcined in the Fire, till the
Wood be consumed; then mixed with the Pulverisate Alcohol of Serpents; and
eaten with all Food.

4. In the Dropsy, in like manner, its use often repeated, is exceedingly to
be commended. Other things which are said of this Powder I abruptly leave:
Those which I have added, I know, by often experiment, both of mine and of
others, to be certainly approved. See Practica Chymiatrica, page.

(b) With Wine.

(c) It will be evilly dried in Balneo, by reason of its stink.

(d) In Broth of Rich-wine, or other convenient Liquor, Sweat for the most part
follows the taking thereof.

Externals.
Vulnerary (a), Ulcerous, Pustulous, Mundefying, Mitigating, Consolidating.
A most Efficacious Vulnerary Balsom.
Whereby all Wounds, and Pricks, or Cuts of, the Members, Joints, or Nerves,
also hurts with Darts, or Bullets, without any supervenient Symptoms, may
safely be Cured.

Flowers of St. John's Wort one pound. The Flowers must be gathered in the
Balsamitick time, with the Rising of the Sun, in the Exaltation (b), viz. about
Midsummer, before the New Moon. Flowers of Cheyry, Longwort, Selandine (c),
Century minor, Aristolochy, Prun^ (...), The middle or greater Country, of each
jss. Leaves of red Roses, jss. (d) Foreign Mumy, Mirth, Frankincense, of each
jss. (e) Mastich j. Liquid Storax ij. (f)


These Cut and Beaten put into a convenient Vessel, and on them pour two (g)
measures of good Spirit of Wine set them in Digestion behind a Furnace, or in
the Sun; afterward pour off the tinged Spirit, and with a Press express the
Feces: then add to this tinged Spirit (unless for greater efficacy you would
re-iterate the maceration (h) of the Flowers) Oil Olive, that has stood eight
days in Digestion upon the sat Shavings of Fir, of our Turpentine (i) five
poun^, and Rozin of the Larix-tree, washed in Water of St. Johnswort one pound
and a half. Again for fourteen days digest all. (...)ly, abstract the Spirit of
Wine in Balneo, then the Balsome will remain in the bottom red like blood.

In the Winter, the Seeds of all the aforesaid Herbs, or as many as can be got
being put into the Balsome, and set for some time in Digestion, renders it far
more efficacious.

Virtues and Use.
1. In Wounds of every kind, the feathery soft down that grows about the Seed
of Carduus-bened, or in the Poplar-tree, moistened in the Balsom blood-warm, and
put into the Wound, first washed with Wine afterward the following
Stictick-plaister applied, and kept on, until neither Veins. Arteries, For
Nerves, nor the mark of the Swathing, nor any thing of that kind appear.

1. In all Tumors, Inflammations, Contracted, and bruised Members, in Ruptures
of Bones.

3. Against bitings of Dogs, not neglecting other Remedies (k), if the bitings
be venomous.

It is a most efficacious Balsome in healing Wounds and Pricks.

(a) There are three genuine, and artifical ways, whereby consolidation of all
Wounds, may be rightly, and duly performed. The first is of Balsoms. The
second of Stictick Playsters. The third of Vulnerary Potions. Of the two
former, and indeed very well our Author appoints. But of Vulnerary Potions we
shall add some thing. Vulnerary Balsomes there are many prepared; yet this is
to be observed, that those balsoms which are made by distillation, are less
fit, by reason of their too much penetration, and the Empyreuma, which for the
most part they contract by distillation. In preparing Balsome of St. Johnswort
this method may be observed.

Balsome of St. Johnswort.
All the aforesaid Flowers dry, or dry them with the Roots of the greater
Comphrey, and round Aristolochy; afterward add the other Species, and boil them
in Wine until it wax red; express it, and then boil them in Wine with Oil
Olive and Turpentine, till it be consumed; strain the Oil through a Linen
Cloth, and keep it. It is almost of equal virtue with the former, unless the
former by the greenness of the Ingredients be rendered a little more prevalent.

The fetid Oil of Cinnamon as I have abovesaid, by use is found to be a famous
Vulnerary Balsome, it is not its distillation, but its insited thickness, and
propriety, that obtains this faculty of consolidating.

Oil of Walnuts made by Expression, and afterward by Boiling, reduced to a
Liquid Substance, is highly commended in this case.

There is likewise a famous Vulnerary Balsome made of Wax, Galbanum, and Mirth,
together with fragments of Tibes one part and half, or in a double proportion
Distilled. But Oil of Wax per^s^, is an excellent Vulnerary Balsome, presently
healing Wounds. Note. What of all these are Writ by Felix Wurtzius.

(b) Viz. Of the Moon. But the Exaltation of the Moon is in the Sign Cancer.

(c) Fresh.

(d) Rather ijfs.

(e) Or iij.

(f) Read iij.

(g) That is, eight p^und.

(h) With new Spirit of Wine.

(i) Germane Turpentine.

(k) That is, in internals, especially with powder of Serpents, or other
Alexipharmacon's, above preseribed, to the envenomed.

A Stictick (a) Plaster.
In the compesition of every Stictick Plaster of Health, according to
Paracelsus, the Engredients considered off are to be of four several kinds.

1. Healing, which is made by Wax and Colophony.

2. Acc^ents which are removed and impeded by the benefit of Gums, viz.
Opopanax, Galb. Sagap. Bdelli. Ammoniac, E^emi.

3. Putrefaction (for every wound to accidental putrefaction is obnoxious, it
generates worms, and excrescence of evil flesh, which is removed and prevented
by the help of great consolidatives, as Mastich, Mirth, and the like.

4. To preserve from filth seab, dryness, contracture, synovia, and such like
accidents, minerals are added, viz. Lithargy, Minium, Antimony, Ceruse,
Marcasite, Calaminaris, etc.

A most excellent Stictick Plaster for Wounds and Ulcers caused by a struck,
etc.
Minium (b), Calaminaris, of each half a pound. Lithargy of Gold and Silver, of
each iij. Oil of Linum, of Olives, of each one pound and a half. of Bays half
a pound. Wax, Colophony, of each one pound. Turpentine, Vernix, of each half a
pound. Opopanax, Galbanum, Serapinum, Ammoniack, Bdellium (c), of each iij.
Carabecitrin (d), Olibanum, Aloes-epat, Mirth of Alexandria, Aristolochy (e) of
both kinds, viz. long and round, of each j. Foreign Mumy, Magnet, Haematitis,
of each jss. Red and white Corals, Mother of Pearls, Sanguis Draconis, Terra
medicat, Strigensis, (f) White Vitriol, of each j. Flowers of Antimony (g) ij.
Crocus Martis ij. Campher, j.


In preparing these, I observe the following method.

1. The five (h) Gums macerated in Vinegar, and boiled, are expressed through a
thick Linen cloth, the boiling is twice repeated (the Dose of the Gums may be
increased, by reason of the Feces remaining after expression, which are thrown
away) afterward over a gentle heat, in a clean pan (i) they are thickened to a
convenient consistency.

2. The Oils of Linum and Olives, are put into another Pan, and the Lithargy
of gold and silver is added, they are boiled and stirred together, till the
Oil be colored afterward the Calaminaris is added, and a little after the
Minium, all these kept connnually stirring are boiled for almost two hours
together, till they be boiled enough, which is proved, if a drop being put upon
your Nail condense and harden, and will no more dissolve.

3. Then also about the end add the Vernix, Oil of Bays, Wax, and Colophony,
all being well mixed, and melted, and removed from the fire, make the Pan with
the Gums leisurely to heat, and successively pour out the Liquor from the
second Pan to the Gums, by most diligent stirring incorporate them over most
gentle heat; beware the mixture boil not (for so the Gums will be clotted, and
difficulty mixed with the Oil) afterward in stirring add the powders, and
diligently work all together for an hour; lastly, add the Camphir, first
dissolved in Oil of Juniper (k): If it happen to be too soft, a little more
Wax and Colophony may be added.

The way to try its just consistency is thus: Dip a stick into it while it is
hot, and let some drops fall into Water, if the matter be soft, and stick to
your fingers, boil it longer, till it be hard. Then take it from the fire, and
pour it into a large Basin full of Water, and with your hands (first anointed
with Oil of Camomil, Roses, Juniper, Earthworms, and St. Johnswort, of each a
like quantity mixed) knead and work it very well for three or four hours, that
it may be like an Amalgama; make it up in Rolls, which wrap in Leather (l), and
keep for use.

The ^irtues of this Plaster are innumerable. In the Sublunary Globe there is
not found a more efficacious.
1. A^inst fresh, and also inveterate Ulcers and Wounds, wheresoever they are
in the Body, and also in the Head.

2. It days and cleanses Wounds, produces good flesh, consolidates, and heals
more efficaciously in one Week, than another in a whole Month.

3. It (...) not good (...) to putrefie, moreover, corruption and excrescence
of evil flesh it powerfully prevents.

4. In Nerves out off, or bruised, it is a most excellent Remedy.

5. It extracts from Wounds, Iron, Wood, Lead, and a^l other things which
should be extracted, by outward application only.

6. It cufes the ^ings and Wounds (m) of mad Animals; for it attracts the
Ve^ome.

7. It ripens all Imposthumes (n) by application only.

8. Against the Caneer, Pistula, King's Evil, and Persian-fire, it is an
excellent Re^.

9. (...) dolours of all kinds of Wounds or Hurts.

10. (...) it is very beneficial.

11. Where the Head is swollen, the Hairs being Shaved off, this Plaster is
applied wi^ (...).

12. (...) upon the Back, It removes the dolours thereof.

13. (...) Flous of the Skin external and internal, it heals by application.

14. (...) vitues entire fifty years, in which time it is equally efficacious,
as when (...).

(a) The^ is also another, of which Paracelsus in his Chyrurgery makes often
mention, (...) it by a Barbarous Name. Oppodeldoch, but its genuine preparation
he has (...) left. The Compesition Felix Wurtzius has in his Chyrurgery,
chap. 2. part. 4. A^ Bo^tius of Boodt, from Wurtzius cites it in his book of
Ge^s, lib. 2. chap. 233. page 226. yet conceals the Authors name.

Another description of Paracelsus his Oppodeldoch.
Thereis also another description of the Oppodeldoch Plaster, greatly in use
by Par^celsu^: The preparation thereof is thus.

Gall^m, Op^x, of each iij. Anmoniack, Bdellium of each j.


Macerate these for eight days or more in distilled Vinegar, strain them, and
thicken them gently to the Consistency of Honey, then.

Lithargy most finely Pulverisate half a pound.

In ^al^ a pound of commen Oil, boil it with gentle fire, and continually stir
it with a Spatum, till it acquire a darkish color, then add of Wax one pound,
which being mo^ted, mix all with the above named Gums, and a little after add
Oil of Bays iij. stir them most diligently, till all be exactly mixed. Remove
the mixture from the fire, ^d then add the following Powders finely beaten.
Crocus Martis, Foreign Mumy, Magnet prepared, Magistery of white and red
Corals, of each ss. La^ alaminatis prepared, (...) Mirth, Masculine
Frankincense, Mast^h, R^und Aristclochy, of each ij.


These Poweders infuse into the liquid Plaster not hastily, but very
leisurely, diligently providing that all be most exactly united. Lastly add,
Powder of Amber j. Oil of bays j. Tur^entine ss.


Mix and melt these a part, dissolve in it of Campher j. and then add of ^ow
(...) Oriental Crocus ss.

This Solution made a part mix with the Plaster while it is hot and do this
prudently, that all may be conjoined, and united by little and little. Then
make Rells, mo^ining them with Oil of St. Johnswort, and lay them up for use.
This Physter c^es all Wounds caused by Pricks or Guts, without any
putrefaction; it impedes excre^ of Hest, producing only so much as need is. Old
Ulcers first cleansed are in like manner cured with this Flayster; but if you
would have it more strong, to cure every kind of (...), and Corroding Ulcer.
Crocus of Metals, of which above, Vitrol calcined to a redness, Mercury
precipitate per se, of each a like quantity, mix and reduce^ to Powder. Of this
Powder mix ss. with every ss. of the (...), being frist melted in a Pan, and
afterward the Powder mixed therewith, adding also a little Oil of surpentine.
This Plaster is most excellent, serving for all uses, of which also the Author
advises.

(b) Not Native but prepared.

(c) E^mt.

(d) That is, Amber.

(e) Viz. of the Root.

(f) Sigillata.

(g) (...) white.

(h) Bead six.

(i) With go the heat.

(k) Di^ill'd or expressed.

(l) O^a Swines Bladder.

(m) A Specisick for the Biting of a Mad Dog, is, that the Liver of that D^g
that Bit the Patient, be applied to the Wound. Also the Tooth, with which the
Wound war made, if ag in it be rub'a there with. Likewise the skin of the Mad
Degrees applied to the Wound.

(n) For the same Opopanax, which is added dissolved in distilled Vinegar, is
also successfully applied to a Pestilential Bu^o.

(o) ^merg Ch^gious many Vulnerary Potions have been invented. Whether
Vulnerary Potions beuseful.
Of which Felix Wurtzlus best advises, in his Chyrurgery, Chap. 5. part. 4.
the Considerations and Adm^nitions of which Good Man, with (...) Com^ositions
of these Vulnerary Potions, have obtained a good commendation of all that hear
of them. If from things Simple, such Potions may be prepared, in my judgment it
would be much better, if Arcanums of them were Philosophically made, which with
others might be Medicinally used, or by themselves given in far smaller D^s^s.
For these are very penetrative, and one or two Doses, effect as much as many of
the Vulnerary Decoctions. The Arcanum of Prunella is admirable, and may serve
instead of all other. For if j. ss. or j. thereof be given in Wine, it
presently demonstrates emendation of the Wound, and good success, to which in
operation there is none found equal.

An Efficacious Medicinal Stone (a).
Green Vitriol one pound. White Vitriol half a pound. Alum (b) one pound and a
half. Anatron (c), Common Salt, of each iij. Salt of Tartar, Salt of Wormwood,
of Mugwort, of Succory, of Arsemart, of Plantane, of each ss.


Put them in a glased Pot (d), pour on a little (e) Vinegar of Roses, boil them
with a gentle fire of Coals, often stirring them; when the mixture begins to
thicken, add of Venetian Ceruse half a pound, Bole Armenack iiij. Diligently
mix all, until by the force of the fire the mass be converted to a moderate
hardness like a Stone, which afterward, by breaking the Vessel must be taken
out, and reserved for use.

If you would add Gums, viz. Myrrh and Frankincense, boil them but gently, that
they burn not, and their virtue vanish in the fire.

Virtues and use.
The virtues thereof are almost innumerable.

1. It presently takes away all Ulcers (f) in the exterior parts of the Body,
they being first washed morning and evening, and cloths moistened in the
Solution hereof laid upon them or Lint put in them.

2. It removes all defluxions (g), cleanses and comforts the affected part.

3. It drys Wounds and old Ulcers, (h) arising from immoderate use of Venery,
if a Linen cloth imbibed be put thereon.

4. It fastens the Teeth, and preserves the Gums (i) from putrefaction.

5. It restrains tears of the Eyes, redness and dolours of the Eyes, it
removes, and takes away dimness, if the corners of the Eyes externally with a
Fether be moistened here with.

If in Ophthalmy it be used, it may be dissolved in Water of Roses, Eyebright,
or Verveine. Verveine is gathered in June and July, before the Sun rises, and
with Wine first digested for a Month, afterward distilled.

6. It cures Erysipela's, and the Holy-sire, clothes moistened being laid on,
and when dry again moistened, in the space of twenty four hours the evil is
removed, and if any holes be, they must be washed with this Water.

7. The Scab of the Hands and Body are cured by it, if therewith washed in the
Evening.

8. Against Tetters, but then it must not be too much-allayed with Water, that
it may the more powerfully operate: so also against the Tinea (k).

9. It is most happily applied to a Cancer of the Breast, that is already
opened; also to the Cancer of the Mouth (l), or any kind of affect of the Gums,
Noli me tange^ or other vices of the Mouth; Ulcers of the Throat and Scurvey it
cures, by the Mouth being Gargled therewith, and it afterward spit out, or else
washed by a Pencil dipped the rein.

10. It admirably mortifics and cleanses any old ach (m) or grief, without any
molestation to the Patient.

11. Where there are white Bladders and Pustles in the Feet (n), they must be
washed with this Water.

12. A Cloth moistened with this, and applied to an Imposthume (o), mitigates it.

13. To all kind of Blasting it is applied with Linen moistened in it.

14. The fiery Sores of the Fundament of either Sex are cured, if clothes
moistened be applied

The way of using.
One ounce of this Stone must be dissolved in one pound of Rain (p) water, or
Riverwater, not Fountain, after filtration, and rejecting the feces, the clear
water we apply as need requires. (l)

(a) The medicinal Stone is otherwise called Lapis Salutis, Lecause it is
prefitably used in Chyrurgy, that is, it is a medicine only externally to be
applied. Others more briefly prepare it, yet in virtue not (...) to it.

Another more brief description of Lapis Salutis.
Vitriol one pound. Nitre half a pound. Ceruse, Alum, Bole-armenack, of each
iiij. Salt Armmoniack, ij.


Pulverisate all well, but first grind the Ceruse and Bolus on a Marbel, and
pour on them Vinegar, till they be covered two fingers, in a conveniently large
pot, boil them gently, keep it easily boiling, till all be converted to the
hardness of a Stone.

Another Description of Mr. John Greiff.
Alum iiij. Ungarick Vitriol ij. White Vitriol, Tartar, Borax, of each j.
Mastich, Frankincense, Salt Ammoniack, of each j. Ceruse vj. True Bole-armenack
iij.


The Alum, and both kinds of Vitriol, with the rest grossly beaten together,
in a large glased Earthen-pot, boil with most strong Vinegar, over a
gentle-fire, to the Consistency of a Stone.

(b) Crude.

(c) Gall of glass, Glase galle, it is found sticking to the sides of
Fornaces, where glass is made.

(d) Of a convenient magnitude.

(e) Not very much.

(f) And which may be referred to Ulcers.

(g) Not of the Head, but of Ulcers.

(h) Venereal.

(i) By gargling with Plantane-water. Note. Vitriol will black the Teeth, which
must afterward be purged with common Dentifricks.

(k) By the Germans Erbgrinde.

(l) The Quinsey, and inflammation of the tangue.

(m) Made by accident, bruising, or other external violence.

(n) Inclining to the Gout.

(o) Of what kind soever.

(p) Or other distilled appropriate Water.

(q) Of this kind there is another Water, used in the like cases, which may
serve instead of Lapis Salutis, being useful and convenient, its Composition is
thus.

A Mercurial Water.
Sublimate Mercury, ground very small upon a Marble ss. on which pour of
Plantant Water one pound and a half, disolve it by gentle boi^ing in Baln^o, by
filtring se^ate it from the Fe^s: afterward pour it into a most clean Tin-pan,
leave it for a (...) time, and it will black the Pan. Which perceiving put it
into another clean Tinpan, that the former may be cleansed from its blackness,
then again pour the Water into the cleansed Pans this labor repeat often till
the Pans be no more black't with the Water, but remain white, as before they
were used, which is wont to be after ten or twelve times.

This Water reserve for use, it is white, of color, and very useful in healing
Ulcers, as well in the Mouth, as Yard, especially such as arise from Lues
Venerea; also in mortifying (...) it is very powerful. If you desire it should
be stronger, six times Infusi^in the Pans will be sufficient, for so it will be
more strong. Its use is only with a Penful by gently touching the Ulcers. It is
also powerful in generating flesh.

Salt, Butter, Sugar, or Honey of Satur^e.
Minium, (a) or Ceruse of Crete not adulterated, moistened and mixed with
distilled Vinegar and afterward dried. To this matter, when grownd, pour
distilled Vinegar, till it be covered three or four fingers (b), set it in a
hot place, (not in a Hot-house where people dwell, for the fume (c) of this
Vinegar infused upon Saturn is hurtful) or in Ashes, to digest for two days,
daily stirring it four times, and the Vinegar will be changed into a yellow
color, sweet of taste, (vessels for this use should be Glass, for Earthen (e)
vessels are apt to leak, or be penetrated by the Vinegar) pour off the Vinegar,
and reiterate the labor by pouring on fresh, until it be no more colored, nor
wax sweet. Abstract the remaining Vinegar in Balneo, and what remains in the
bottom will be like Gumm, (f) to which pour distili'd Rainwater, that it may
again be dissolved, and the remaining Feces of the Vinegar will sink to the
bottom; go on, and continue pouring on fresh Water to the Ashes (g), until no
more can be extracted. The Water filtrated evaporate (h), and you will have a
Salt, which in a moist Celler may be resolved into an Oil. This Salt, the
first time prepared, may be calcined (i) a little (not too much, least the
better Spirits fly away) and growned upon a Marble. Afterward distilled Vinegar
again pour on, that it may be dissolved, set it in hot Ashes for three or four
days, often stirring it, what is clear pour off, filter and evaporate,
rejecting the Feces. If this labor be re-iterated certain times, the Salt will
be exceeding fair and crystalline, which, lastly, may be dissolved in
Fountain Water, and that afterward evaporated, or per se, in a Cellar resolved
into an Oil,

Virtues and Use.
1. This Sugar of Saturn makes all sublimate (k), and corrosive Mercuries sweet
and unhurtful (l); therefore in Corrosive Ulcers, which arise from Salt it is
an excellent Medicament. As also in Vegetables, common Sugar tempers and
corrects their acrimony and bitterness; so this Sugar of Saturn, mitigates and
amends minerals, and Mercurial, Arsenick, both in the greater and lesser World.

2. Against putrefaction of the Mouth it is a most excellent Remedy.

3. In malignant Ulcers, Corroding, Cancrose, and such like Saturnine evils,
also in the Woke it is very efficacious.

4. Against Ring-worms.

5. It purges and cleanses old Ulcers, Impostumes, and Wounds, how singular a
Remedy this is in affects of this kind, can scarcely be expressed.

6. Paracelsus esteems this as a singular Arcanum against every kind of
Blasting Inflammations, Tumors, and the Persian-fire, if mixed with Water of
Plantane, or Nightshade, and applied warm by linen clothes moistened therein.
Also blew cloth dipped therein, is wont to be applied to the Persian-fire.

7. Against red Pimples of the Face.

8. It presently takes away Tumors, if applied with Oil Olive and Camomil mixed
with Rose Water.

9. In Inflammation, and redness of the Eyes, it is best in Water of Eyebright
and Roses.

10. With Oil of Turpentine mixed, it cures all Ulcers, Wounds, and contracted
Members, being constantly for sometime anointed therewith.

11. Against Cancers and Fistula's.

12. Its use is most excellent in Ulcers of the Breasts.

13. All Tumors, Inflammations, and dolours of the Members, by its external use
are removed.

14. In the Cholick, some drops of this Oil may be inwardly given in
White Wind.

15. In great internal Inflammations, three granes are wont to be given in
Water of Roses and Plantane. Also Spirit of Wine may be poured upon this, that
it may subtly extract, and this essencified Spirit may be given instead of
the Salt. Saturn is naturally cold, therefore contraries all Inflammations.

16. In the Quartane, and affects of the Spleen, also in prickings about the
Navel.

17. Also it may be mixed with Playsters, and Ointments, or per se, be resolved
into Oil, or applied in appropriate Water.

18. This Salt being inwardly taken, by its coldness represses Venereal Lust:
Those that are devoted to a single life, and would use it, may thus do it, viz.
being mixed with some other Oil, they may anoint the external Region therewith.

From this Sugar, by artificial distillation, an inflamable Spirit (m) may be
drawn, with which, fortified with its proper Salt, some have endeavored to
make Calx of gold (diligently prepared by the benefit of Aqua Regis) potable
(n). Let experience be the punishment to such as so believe.

(a) Is Saturn calcined.

(b) Or more.

(c) Evaporation.

(d) Noxious, especially to the Head.

(e) Unless they be well Acnealed.

(f) Like Honey.

(g) Feces.

(h) Unto a Skinniness.

(i) This calcination is unprofitable, for this Salt easily flows; it may
indeed be dried, but calcined difficultly.

(k) Therefore also precipitate.

(l) Burning Spirit of Saturn, how it is made, see Tyrocinium lib. 2. cap. 4.
de Spiritibus. -- Lastly, and in distilling together, Oil and Spirit of Saturn.
a red Oil comes forth in red drops, and then the whole which is come forth
seems to be red. If therefore it be rectified, you will have four several
Menstruums, viz. the burning Spirit, which first comes forth; then the yellow
Oil, which comes forth next; the third is the Phlegm, the fourth is the red
Oil, which in rectification remains in the bottom. The rectification is thus
made; all which in the first distillation comes forth from the Sugar by a small
Retort; with exceeding gentle heat in Balneo distill it, and they will all come
forth severally, which must be kept a part.

(m) The Spirit comes forth only ar^p by drop, without any veins (or streiks)
appearing in the Neck of the ^ tort. The yellow Oil comes forth with oblique
veins, like burning Wine. The Water or Phlegm with strait veins. These
separations are greatly to be esteemed; for with the Spirit and Phlegm, is
made a very excellent preparation of Pearls; they being beaten in a (...) are
presently dissolved in the said Phlegm, afterward dissolved and separated from
the Feces; with a little of this Spirit poured upon them, they are again
precipited into a Liquor like a perme, of so great Volatility, that it has
been known even in sight to vanish into Air. A famous Cordial
These afterward extracted with Spirit of Wine, or with the same Spirit of Wine
plainly by Retort agitated, afford a Cordial of so great virtues, as from no
other preparation of Pearls can be obtained. Dose one drop, or two in ^ordial
Water.

(n) What our Author has hinted here, of Aurum potabile made with Spirit of
Saturn, Auram potabile of sour.
is not without some cause; yet true Aurum potabile is not thus made. This
indeed is true, if Calx of Gold (made as the Author above appoints in Aurum
potabile) be, with the yellow Oil, that in rectification comes forth in the
second place, for certain days Circulated, the substance thereof will be
d^olved into a Liquor, the use whereof against Po^sons is not to be contemned.
Yea, it has been often sear, that from four drops of this to eight, being
exhibited to such as have been judged at the ^oint of Death, they have to
admiration been recovered thereby. It helps much in the Falling Sickness,
Apoplexy, Paralysy, and other diseases of the Head.

The Composition of Sperniola (a).
Gather Frog spawn (b) in March, three days before the New Moon, distill it per
se in Be^o, for so it will not stink. Having this Water, Of choice Myrrh,
Fran^ia ense, of each ij. Sa^ beaten ss. Camp^er iij.


Gri^ (...), and mix them: It is necessary that this Powder, in a convenient
Glass, be twenty or thirty times Imbibed with the Distilled Water of
Frog-spawn, yet so as it be always, well dried every time of its own accord
before it be again Imbibed. Afterward keep it for use.

Imvardly into the Body is given the quantity of half (d) a Filberd-nut in
Plantanewater, in the internal Haemorrhagia, when all other Medicines are given
without Success.

Virtues and Use.
1. By its coldness it coagulates the Blood; for, in stopping internal
Haemorrhagia, flowing out of the Nosthriss and Throat, when all are desparate,
three or four granes may fasel; be exhibited into the Body in Water of
Shepheards-purse (e).

2. If it be dissolved in Vinegar, and externally applied to Erysipela's (f),
or to hot podagrical dolours it much helps.

3. The external Haem ^rrhagia (g) of Wounds it stops by application.

4. If put upon the A disease in the singers.
Panaritium for two hours it kills him (h), or if the finger be wrapped in a
skin, moistened first therewith, and when dry again moistened, and this repeated
often (i).

5. It also mortifies the Cancer, but more efficacious is the Water of
Frog-spawn alone.

6. In contumacious fluxes of Women, two or three granes are inwardly given
with Water of Mugwort.

7. In Water of Frog-spawn distilled per se, if a little Alum be dissolved, by
Lim^ cloths moistened therein, it is commodiously, and with good success applied
to (...)call dolours.

(a) Sperniola with Paracelsus is Frog-spawn, which in the beginning of the
Spring is found in Lakes, Ditches, and Standing Waters; which afterward, by the
benefit of the Sun, are concocted into living Frogs. This must be gathered for
Medicine in the Month of March, and that three or four days before the New
Moon, and applied to use. Skillful Chyrurgeons in crude Frog-spawn Imbibe
linen clothes often, and as often dry them: which afterward they use in
removing all kind of inflammations of Wounds; yea, if upon them Cloths, Playders
be spread, they wonderfully repress those affects. In Erysipela of the Feet or
Ha^s, or of any other external Member, often returning, nothing is more
profitable than it, viz. if only such dried cloths, prepared with crude
Frog-spawn, be applied to the affected place and the Members a rapt therein. In
the Shins, or Legs, Erysipela's are easily assu^ages, if of these Linen
cloths, Stookings be artificially made: But these must be Imbibed seven times
or more, with the same Frog-spawn, and as it were boiled mit, and then dried.
Forth se may dure many years, if not wiped or washed with other water. From the
use of these, the Erysipela neither easily returns, nor is difficultly removed,
for presently after application, both dolor, tumor, and also the redness cease.

(b) In the Full Moon it exceedingly stinks, but being prepared in the New
Moon, it dures thirty years

(c) Very fine.

(d) Or three granes, or five.

(e) Of Melanthium.

(f) It must be applied hot, or blood-warm; otherwise the Erysipela will be
ulcerated, with the cold.

(g) In some Stove.

(h) Read it.

(i) The Panaritium is killed by being held in Water of Frog-spawn, but in that
immersion so great torment is excited in the Finger, as unless the Patients
Hands be strongly held, he shall scarcely be able to bare it. The blood of a
Mole taken in Paper, and applied to the Finger much helps.

A Cosmetick against Blemishes of the Face.
Of the best purified Mercury (a), from which all blackness, is diligently
removed by washing half a pound, mix it afterward with a like quantity of
sublimate Mercury pulverisate, in an Earthen (b) Unglased Pan; put these into
an Alembeck of a straight Orifice, pour on distilled Vinegar, until they be
covered three or four fingers, let them stand three or four days, daily
stirring them certain times, then it extracts a white powder, the whitish
Vinegar by Inclination separate (c), the white Powder spontaneously settling to
the bottom from the Vinegar, for certain days keep so, rejecting the Vinegar.
This labor must be re-iterated very often, until you have abundance of that
white Powder, which afterward dry per se, and lay it up for use (d): It is not
Corrosive, therefore, unless you will, it needs no washing.

Use.
Externally only it is applied, by anointing with the proper Spittle, or with
Water of Beans, against all blemishes of the Face. Also Tetters. Moreover it is
a great Incarnative Medicine (e). In application beware you touch neither Eyes
nor Teeth (f).

(a) (...) above done in Arcanum Corallinum.

(b) Or in a Stone Marbel Mortar.

(c) And pour on other Vinegar.

(d) By anointing with Water of Flowers of Nymphaea, or Oil of Sweet Almonds.
Note. (...) tick Persons cannot without difficulty use this Cosmetick; for
Mercury lives humidities, with which the Phlegmatic abound.

(e) For it Playsters especially the greater Basilicon, it is frequently
required in French Ulcers. If with Unguents, or chiefly with Pomada, or
Unguentum Populeon it be duly mixed, all Scabs of the Hands, and of the whole
Body, it happily extinguisheth.

(f) It indeed cleanses particular blemishes of the Face, from the Crude, and
Sublimate (...) long heating mixed together, and afterward extracted by
distilled Vinegar, but to (...) for a Cosmetick is not the part of so prudent a
Man. For although it may for (...) time cover the Wrickles of the Face, and
also other incommodities thereof, yet it is wont (...) ^fully to hurt the Head,
and all parts thereabout. For to the beginning of the Nerves, that (...) to the
brain, Mercury is an enemy; because it resolves, and causes the generation of
greater (...) Moreover it infects the Teeth with an unextinguishable blackness,
re^ (...) makes them putrid and ulcerous, and Strikes the Case of the Teeth
without (...). Therefore in the end, our Author not in vain admonishes least
in application the Eyes or teeth be touched. Which although it be studiously
avoided, yet very often also, without any corporal touch for Lithargiry easily
pass's through skin and Flesh) it, in its usual manner causes this Infection.
Therefore I persuade all to abstain from the use hereof. There being (...)
other Fu^us's, or Cosmeticks found ^ut, the most excellent of which are
desirable; and by young Gentlewomen bought at a great pri^. Of which I shall
add one or more.

A Cosmetick made of Bulls-galls.
Galls of Bulls dry them gently in the Sun, afterward pour upon them Spirit of
Wine, and draw forth a Tincture, which will be a little red, anoint the Face
with this Tincture, and leave it on for three or four days, yet so, as the
party, whose Face is so anointed, neither go out a doors, or freely expose her
self to the Air. The time being elapsed, the Face must be often washed with
Water of Bean-flowers, or of Nenuphar, or Polyginatum, also before anointing
the Face may be well washed, with the same Waters. so, almost to a Miracle the
Skin of the Face, and Neck, is rendered most gratefully white, delicate, and
amiable. The Spanish Ladies, and also the English, have some ^ucus's for the
Summer, and others for the Winter. In the Winter they apply the Essence of
Bulls-gall, as is abovesaid; but in the Summer the Juice, or fresh distilled
Water from bitter and unripe grapes; for this cools much, and keeps the Skin
cold, yea, it causes that Sweat corrupts not the Countenance. Moreover, this
Election in the Summer is made by those who only study pleasure: For those that
receive Kisses from such Gentlewomen in the Summer time, do for the most part
perceive that coldness to be contrary to the heat of the Summer season. But a
redness or rosy color of the Cheeks may also be made with the following
elegant Cosmetick.

A Cosmetick of Crabs.
From River-crabs boiled, of the Flesh that remains in the extremes of their
great Claws, a convenient quantity, dry them gently, afterward extract them
with Spirit of Wine, and in will be admirably tinged. The Menstruum removed by
distillation to a certain mellaginousness keep it, and with a little of it,
anoint the Cheeks first, according to pleasure, afterward over it with an other
albefying Cosmetick.

A ^smetick of Talk.
Some earnestly desire a Cosmetick of Talk of which if rightly prepared j. may
cost 80. or 100. Coronats. The following preparation thereof seems not to be
beside the mark, if so be all thin ^be rightly prepared. First an excellent
Spirit of Vinegar must be made of Spanish Wine, viz. by gathering the remaining
half of several distilations, and from thence draw forth a most sharp Spirit,
which is absolutely necessary, otherwise it will scarcely answer the end. Then
elegant, and exquisite (...) etian Talk, cut it with a Knife into as small
pieces as you can, in a glass Conc^a pour on or the most sharp Spirit of
Vinegar, what quantity you please, leave it in time of heat in the Sun or else
set it to digest in Horse-dung for a month, and daily add (...) more of the
Spirit of Vinegar, until the Vinegar be, as it were, mucillag^ nons, or (...)
which is a sign of perfect Solution. This while matter by Retort, (...),
observing degrees of heat, Distill into a (...) apacious Receiver; first the
Vineg^ ones forth, afterward an excellent white Oil, separate these one from
the other. With the Vinegar the Hands must be washed, but with the Oil the
Countenance must be (...). Some say if the Face be first diligent y washed from
all impurity, this one (...) hold for a month without ^ing.

The Sympath ^k Ointment, or Stellate of Paracelsus.
The fat of a Boar. ^line,^


The older (b) the (...) the fat. The fat of either Animal must be boiled in
Red Wine for half (...) afterward poured out into cold Water, and then with a
Spoon the (...), and whatsoever settles to the bottom throw away. Which being
(...) worms (c) (...) with Wine, or Water, two Sextaries, dry them in a covered
Eartnen-pot, in a Bakers Oven, yet beware they burn not, afterward grind them
to Powder. Of this Powder, Of a Boars Brains dried (d), Of red odoriferous
Sanders (e), Of Mumy (f), Of the Stone Hamatitis, of each j.


Then take of Usnea (g), shaved off the Cranium of one that has perished by
violent Death, the Moon increasing, and being in a good House, if it can be at
the time, when she is in the House of Venus, not of Mars or Saturn, about the
weight of two Filberd-nuts (h). From all these beaten, and mixed together with
the fat (i), according to Art, make an U^uent, which in a Glass well closed, or
in a Box, must diligently be reserved for its proper use. If it happen the
Unguent be in process of time dried, it may be again softened and moistened, with
the aforesaid fat or Virgins-honey.

This Ointment must be prepared when Sol is in Libra (k).

Use and Virtues of this Sympathetick Unguent.
This Cure is not performed by Fascination, as unskillful persons vainly judge,
but by the Magnetic attractive virtue of this Medicament, caused by the Stars,
which the Air mediating, is brought to and conjoined with the Wound; and as a
spiritual operation the effect is produced.

It is made, I say, by the Astral and Elemental Conjunction: For as the heat of
the (...) with the Earth. so Arsement (l) agrees with the Disease: the Sun
being absent (...) moved, so it is also here. There are three things which
cause such an admirable effect by this Medicament.

1. Syn pathy of Nature.

2. Influences of Celestial Bodies, operating by the Elements.

3. Balsom (m), which is naturally in every man, is endewed with virtue of
healing.

By this Ointment all Wounds are cured of either Sex, with what weapon soever
made, (if neither Nerves, Arteries, nor one of the three (n) Members be hurt)
if so be the Weapon can be had, although the Patient be many Miles distant. And
because it is (o) of a conglutinating, ripening, and renovating nature, if duly
applied, it permits not any noxious Symptoms to superveen.

Observations.
1. Anoint the Weapon with which the Wound is made for several days together,
if necessity urge, and the Wound be great; otherwise the second, or third time
anointing may be sufficient; it must be kept in a clean Linen cloth (p), and
in a warm place, not too hot (q), least it infer danger on the Patient:
Beware also, that no dust fall upon the Weapon, nor wind blow upon it in a cold
place, for so it may occasion the Patient to be distracted.

2. Before you anoint the Weapon, consider whither the Wound were made by a
prick, if so then begin the anointing at the point (r) on the upper part (s),
or at the very extreme (not below), and so descending (t), otherwise the Sick
may receive dettiment.

3. But if you cannot know how far, or how deeply the point entered into the
flesh, it will be expedient to anoint the Weapon all over, otherwise only so
far as any one is hurt therewith may (u) suffice.

4. It is not needful, as the custom of Barbers is, to sew up the Wound, but
that only with a clean cloth, first moistened in the Patients Urine, it be daily
bound about (w).

5. The same day the Weapon is anointed, he must abstain (x) from Venery.

6. Before the anointing of the Weapon, the blood that flows out of the Wound,
must speedily be stopped.

7. Instractures, and ruptures of Bones, a little of the powder of the greater
Wallwort (y) or of roots of black Hellebore, may be added to the Unguent.

Having the Weapon with which any one was hurt, and you desire to know whether
the Patient will live or dye, you may make trial thus (z). If that Weapon be
heat upon Coa^s, as hot as you can endure it to hold in your hand, and then
upon it you sprinkle most fine powder of red Sanders, Haematitis, if it sweat
drops of blood, the Patient will dye; if not, he will recover.

But if we would know, whether the Patient govern himself rightly in meats, and
drinks and other requisites. This is known when in the defensory, spots of
blood appear, if not, than he has carried himself well.

Moreover it is to be Noted.
1. Not having the Arms or Weapon, with which the hurt is inflicted,
nevertheless every Aperture, and violent hurt of the Skin, through which the
blood comes out, may be cured with this Unguent, if so be a little soft piece
of Wood (aa) be moistened in the cruent Apertion, and afterward the blood
cleaving to it, be dried on (not in the Sun nor by the heat of Fire)
spontaneously, and per se, and then put into the Box, wherein the Ointment
aforesaid is kept, and left in it.

2. If the Wound be very deep, and great, it may several mornings be cleansed,
and bound with a fresh Linen cloth; without all other use of external Oils,
Unguents, and such like: This Wound howsoever inflicted, will be Cured per se,
and it suffices that the stick be only once moistened in the Cruent opening, or
Wound, and afterward remain closed in the Box of Ointment, until a plenary
Sanation be.

3. But as often as any new Wound is to be cured, there is always required a
fresh piece of Wood, moistened in the blood, and dried, as before said, etc.

4. If a Wound will not bleed, it must be scarified with the Wood, till the
blood issue out. So also in healing dolours of the Teeth, the aching Tooth must
be so long scarified with a Penknife, till blood gush out, the Knife, after
the blood is dried on, being anointed with this Unguent, the pain is presently
removed.

If a Horse have a Nail struck into his Foot, first draw out the Nail, and
afterward anoint it, and the Foot of the Horse will presently be cured, without
suppuration (bb).

In the same manner all Animals, having flesh and bones, may be cured (cc).

Let the great Physician, at whose WORD, Medicine, by him created, is rendered
efficacious, give a legitimate use of these, to all those, that rightly and
piously use his Grace and Benediction. To him alone who is most High, be all
praise and glory, forever and forever, AMEN.

(a) Viz. iiij.

(b) Yet not exceeding seven years of Age.

(c) Regenwerme, In Affects of the Nerves, they are of great use.

(d) In its proper Bladder, with the Urine of the same, a little macerated, and
afterward dried.

(e) Citrine, not red.

(f) Of the common, viz. Egyptian, not Mumia Patibuli of Paracelsus.

(g) They are better, from such as are Hanged.

(h) That is, j.

(i) Of the Boar or Bear.

(k) That is, in Autumn.

(l) If it be put upon the Member till it be hot, and afterward buried in the
Earth, that it may putrify, the Wound is cured.

(m) Of the blood.

(n) Viz. the Heart, Brain, and Liver.

(o) Understand the Unguent.

(p) Or else in Goats Leather.

(q) Not Squallid.

(r) The Weapon.

(s) From the very Point.

(t) Toward the Hilt.

(u) If by a Cut, from the Edge toward the Back.

(w) Or moistened in Water, or Wine blood-warm.

(x) Also he that anoints it.

(y) Or Osteocolla.

(z) This must be done before the Weapon is anointed.

(aa) Or a piece of Willow.

(bb) Touching the composition and use of Hopliotrick unguents, or Armourary,
or Tromatick, that is Vulnerary, for (...) is a Wound, by those of Jonia it is
called (...) thence (...) vulnerary, which is the same in signification with
(...), that is, glutinatory; in a peculiar, and indeed Thetick Treatise (...)
Libavius long discourses; yet lately in his Tom. of Chemical Arcanums, cap. 22.
the 1. Part of Hermerick Apocalypsy, against this Oyntmert proposed by our
Author, he inveighs Sophistically, and according to his manner and custom, he
argues very dirtily. But we matter not Libavius his Sophistication so much as,
we respect experience, by which we manifestly perceive, that the effects are
drawn from the virtues, and power, existant in things themselves, although we
may bewail our ignorance in the Fridden Causes of this Magnetic virtue; yet to
it, being by a certain necessity compelled we must subscribe, and admire the
wonderful power thereof. That wounds should be cured by this Ointment, and
themselves not touched therewith, but Weapons, or what is used in their stead,
only by anointing; this no man knows a reason of, or has hitherto understood,
nor has any man found it out: yet in the manifest light of Experience, it is
known these things lie hide; as yet, while these things are daily done, the
true and adequate causes by searching could by none be found, but we still left
as impossible to be known. The Magnot draws Iron, each of these is affected in
it self in a wonderful manner, but who has been so ingenious at any time, that
of this mirability could render the true and essentially infallible Reason and
of that which only (and (...)) causes this effest? The same may be judged of
this Unguent, and we must not presently term things Diabolical Arts, although
beyond our opinion, they be very efficacious, nor should we call in question
the relation of the thing, or obstinately deny the cleaning of a Wound to it
assigned, howsoever the same be done, or that it can be consolidated with, or
without anointing of the Weapon, when as we should first enquire into the
weight of its causes. But gainsayers of this kind say.

1. How comes it, that by this Chyrurgy, little or nothing is effected in
Wounds, if Usnea, taken from the Head of such as are Hanged, be not mixed with
the Ointment?

2. How is it, that the Weapon is in vain anointed, unless tinged with the
blood that flows out of the Wound?

3. How is it, that dolours or refreshment, can be procured to the sick, by him
that cures, according to his pleasure, and by intervals?

4. What cause is chere, that fractures of Bones are not cured, or at least,
not so equally well unless either Osteocolla, or root of the greater Comphrey
be added to the Ointment?

5. Why in a Wound made either by a Prick of a Cut, must the Weapon be in a
several manner anointed?

6. Lastly, if the wounded transgress the limits of Diet appointed by the
Physician, how comes it, that it is presently discovered in the ligature of the
Weapon?

These, and such like they allege, who strenuously oppose this Experience of
Martial Chyrurgy. Libavius here believes none, but will have it to be only of
Natural things, and Sympathy is the continuation of Nature and Convenience
thereof: for although the Bodies of the Magnet and (...), be a part and
disjoined, yet in them Nature is continued so, that also they agree in one. Why
therefore between the Wound and the Unguent it self, may not we afstem, there
is a certain continuation, and that by reason of the Sympathy? But what that is
in which it consists, and how it comes to be, and what is the cause thereof,
this indeed is that which is sought after. No man as yet durst attribute to
himself, so great a divinity of in^nuity, as that he was able to explain all
these things infallibly. Yet there is no necessity that (...) should acquiesce
in our not knowing, but as far as our mind is able, we should endeavor to
(...) and them. That there is a Sympathy in this Cure is manifest, in which
first the subject, or matter is to be considered, which is the blood it self.
Secondly, the Efficient, by which, that is, the secret Spirit of the World
enlightening all things. The third is the Instrumental Cause, without which the
Cure is not performed. We therefore say, the Basis of the Martial Unguent, is
Usnea, or the Animal Coagulated, viz. Corporeal Spirits: for when a Man is
Stranguled, the Vital and Natural Spirits are carried upward, and not finding
passage, by reason of the solid hardness of the Cranium, in the (...) with the
Animal, are included, and encompassed as it were in a strong (...) of time they
come to be united into one, and by the circumserence of the (...) then by the
assistance of Mercury, or the Spirit of the World from Neptune by showers,
dens^w, and frosts, as external vehicles poured into inferiors, Usnea is made,
viz. the (...) of this medicament, which in it self contains all animal, vital,
and natural (...) which in the same manner afterward it communicates to the
unguent. As (...); although, whilst it issues hot out of the wound, the
volatile spirits presently vanish into (...) Spirits in the salt of the blood,
remain fixed in it, for they are not expelled, but are (...) ed in it self, of
which they are a part, and by no means in themselves can be (...) Therefore it
is in the blood that something is yet remaining, in which such operations (...)
made.

When the weapon is anointed with the medicament, which is done actually warm,
prsently the fixed salt of the blood in the Ens or weapon magnetically, and
naturally, and (...) own incited virtue, attracts the animal Spirit from the
Unguent, which two Spirits (...) intervening of the Spirit of the World, which
through all things is diffused, and (...) and is the conveyor of all Idea's,
Seeds, and Things, by its comple^ion the (...) of (...) things; of all things
that are done the nearest Author, and so Actives, according to proportion, by
applying to Passives, in an amicable connection, and copulation, are (...) true
Spirit of the World is the universal Mercury, Natures first born Son, as yet
(...) the general state of Virginity existing, and putting on the nature of all
things, with which it is associated, is no other then the Celestial Mercury.
Hence it is, that, whatsoever ^ther of profit, or disprofit, the co-agulated
Spirit, without the veins, is sensible of, the same it presently communicates
sympathetically, to its own kind residing in the veins, and this is not done
but by the medium of the universal spirit, opening the closures of all bodies,
which rejoices, or suffers therewith, And therefore it is, that the sick is
pained, if the weapon be (...) to the fire, or exposed to the turbid or cold
Air; viz, because the animal Spirit, which is without the Man, first suffers,
and afterward communicates its passion, to that, which abides in the body of
the sick by the same vehicle, by which not only these, but all other things of
the world are done. So on the other hand also the same sympathy is manifested,
as if the sick shall eat either Onions, Garlic, or Mustard, and exercise the
venereal Act, it presently may be observed in the weapon: viz. because the
animal spirit in the man first suffers, and afterward causes the spirit, on the
weapon homogeneal to it self, to participate of its suffering. This therefore
is the cause of this action: and from hence other questions may be resolved and
happily explained.

1. Argument. The Agent and Patient here obtain a just proportion: for the
blood with which the weapon is smeared is already dead. Resp. The blood with
which the weapon is anointed, although it no more retein the living form, viz.
of the Man, yet it remains in form of the mixture, which effects the thing, so
that still in it, is an active and passive property.

2. Argument. The Remedy is applied to heal the body, yet the whole is not
healed, but only the wounded part. Resp. 1. This Axiom is not general. 2.
Remedies are not always applied to the affected part, as is seen in Amulers.

3. Argument. How the Cure which is here administered to the weapon, will be
communicated to the affected part, when oftentimes the sick may be some miles
distant. Resp. 1. The Etym^n of the denomination answers this: If it be a
Magnetic cure, a certain space by which it draws is presupposed. 2. The
communication is made by its magnetic force, in the same manner, as the odor
of a Carcass is communicated to the nosthrils of Vultures many miles off. 3.
Although we confess the way of this communication is unknown, yet it does not
follow, that therefore presently it must be proclaimed Ma^ical. So it may be
affirmed the flux, and reflux of the Sea is magical, because it has been
sought out by many, and yet it still remains unknown. The same also may be said
of infinite others, for there are very many things latent in the Abyss of
Nature, and the least part of natural things is obvious to our Intellect, the
residue succeeding Ages will scarcely find. Now because these things are (...),
to us unknown, they must not therefore (...), be rejected, or termed Diabolical.

4. Argument. Here to the cleansing of the part, is applied the proper Urine,
Ligature, observation of Diet, etc. Resp. These help somewhat to the
consolidation of the Wound, as a cause, without which it is not effected. But
that the effect of this operation is limited to the space of a few days,
experience manifestly proves the contrary.

(cc) To close all, I shall here faithfully communicate to my candid Disciples,
two Medicines Chymically prepared, whereof the first is Oil of Campher, and
its composition with other Alexipharmacons, whereby it is rendered efficacious
against the Pest.

The other is a Diaphoretick Precipitate, of Native Cinnabar, in its own three
principles rightly separated, and afterward from them rightly conjoined. Which
Precipitate is assuredly like a certain universal, useful in all kinds of
diseases.

A singular Alexipharmacon.
Of Campher jss. Oil of Sweet Almonds, or Spirit of Turpentine, or which is
best, and most precious of all, Oil of Cloves iij. Salt of Wormwood ijss.
First grind the Campher as fine as possibly you can, and then leisurely
imbibing grind it with the Oil, until it be plainly like a Poultis, then also
add the Salt of Wormwood, and grind it for some time, till all be exceedingly
well mixed. These by Retort, with a very short Neck, in a dry Balneo, which is
closed in a Reverberatory, distill into a Receiver, not very great but short,
observing degrees of Fire, at first gentle, afterward increased, but not very
strong, until the Oil it self come forth, and with it the Campher, in form
pliant and buttery, together with many white Spirits issuing out all at once.
In the end, least an Empyreuma be made, especially if the Oil of Almonds be
not distilled off, (in the rest it is not so like to be) the Recipient, with
the Oil that first came out, must be removed, and then the fire increased,
that the Salt of Wormwood remaining in the Retort, may be well cleansed from
its Stink, and Calcined, and the Retort also in the Fire be very hot. Afterward
take out the Salt of Wormwood, grind it, and in another small Retort, re-pour
on all that Oil which was distilled off in the first distillation, and in the
same manner, as before, distill it, and after all the Oil is come forth more
clear than at first; again Calcine the Salt, and the same Stink it receives
from the Feces of Oil of Sweet Almonds, will be by this means taken away. The
same labor repeat also the third time, viz. rectifying the same Oil upon the
said Salt. Lastly, in the said Oil, now, by reason of the Campher, nothing
buttery, but very pure, extinguish a convenient quantity of pieces of Tiles
heat red hot, and this must be minded, that as while you are putting those into
the Oil, the Vessel must necessarily be open, that presently after it be
diligently closed with its proper Stopple, (for the Oil will be inflamed) and
then by Retort with a gentle Fire distill it, and the Oil will come forth
clear and transparent, which must be separated from the Phlegm, if any be. In
the mean time, whilst this Oil is made, the other Ingredients for this
Composition may be prepared; as extract of Mirth, Aloes, and Saffron, as also
Gum of Sulphur. The extracts are made in manner, as is taught in Tyrocinium
lib. 2. cap. 9. with Spirit of Wine but the Myrrh and Aloes, must first be
dissolved in stilled Vinegar, that it may be separated from the Feces, the
Vinegar afterward being removed, the rest is performed with Spirit of Wine,
according to the prescript of Art. Gum of Sulphur is made after the manner
prescribed in Tyrocinium of Balsom of Sulphur; but in the end, the Spirit of
Wine from the extracted Sulphur must be separated, that it (...) side in the
bottom, and in a cold place coagulated till it be like Gum. The (...) on of all
these is thus. Oil of Campher, Extract of Myrrh, of each j. Extract Aloes ss.
Extract of Sastron, Gum of Sulphur, of each ij.


Mix all diligently, and keep it in a clean Vessel. Dose from two to three
grants taken every morning with Treacle-water, or within twenty four hours
after the first infection, taken twice or thrice to provoke Sweat.

An excellent Diaphoretick Precipitate.
First, make Spirit of Nitre, as teaches Tyrocinium lib. 2. c. 4. of this one
pound, Salt gem as much, being very subtly pulverisate; mix them, and in a
convenient Retort, with a Receiver annexed, placed in a close Reverberatory,
distill a most red Water, which keep. Then Native Cinnabar of Hungaria most
red, which is the Minera of Mercury or Quicksilver, well cleansed from the
Earthy Scoria's, as much as you please, this leisurely dissolve in the
aforesaid Water; and especially see that you warily proceed; for all will
vehemently wax hot together, therefore a little piece of Minera must be
injected, and moreover, for its total Solution, (which will be of an excellent
green color) a large quantity of Menstruum is required. This Solution clear,
and from the combustible Sulphur, which either swims on the top, or settles to
the bottom, by inclination separated, distill by a Cucurbit in a Fire of Sand.
First the Menstruum comes forth, and the Principles of the Minera it self
remain in the bottom, now indeed by reason of this Solution, and ablation of
the Menstruum discontinued, but afterward they must be separated. After the
Menstruum is all separated, urge the fire a little more strongly, and to the
sides, or upper part of the Cucurbit the Sublimed Mercury will be elevated most
white, but in the bottom the Sulphur and Salt subjected together will reside.
Break off the Cucurbit, that the Mercury may be separated from the other
principles, and not confusedly mixed but be gathered a part. The common
Sublimate diligently gathered, in a Cucurbit with distilled Vinegar, by gentle
Boiling (...) a Fire of Sand, dissolve; separate the Solution from the Feces.
The Vinegar being lear, yet containing in it self the Mercury, abstract to a
dryness: what remains, with Rainwater or May-dew, again by boiling dissolve,
reject the Feces, and distill the Water into a Magma somewhat black, the same
with fresh distilled Rainwater again dissolve by Boiling, reject the Feces, as
before, and again distill it; this do also the third and fourth time, viz.
until the Mercury after the fourth distillation remain most white.

Then to it pour excellent Alcohol of Wine, and in a Vessel with a Blindhead,
divest it certain Weeks, or for a whole Month in Balneo. In the mean while, the
other principles also, which resided in the bottom, after the Sublimate was
removed, separate and clarify, in which observe this method. Upon them pour
distilled Ram-water hot; ^sently the Salt by dissolving it self, goes into the
same Water, but the yellow Sulphur ^mains alone. If any of the Salt shall still
cleave unto it, that must be removed by reito^ted washings with the distilled
Rainwater, and mixed with the former extraction of Salt. Both afterward must
be purified, also with Spirit of Wine only. Therefore ^om the Salt first remove
the distilled Water, with which you extracted it, and the (...) dissolve with
the best Spirit of Wine, the Feces removed, the Solution will be (...) to
yellow; distill off the Spirit of Wine to a skinniness, and the halt (...) will
be ^lated in the bottom like transparent Vitriol, which diligently gather and
keep. The Sulphur, being first often washed with hot distilled Water, and dried,
in like manner with Spirit of Wine digest for some time, and the same afterward
abstract from the Sulphur. Thus the two principles of Salt and Sulphur purified
will be in readiness; to the same purity also the Mercury must be reduced.
After it has been digested and dissolved for the appointed time with Spirit of
Wine, (all that Composition will be elegantly red) by Retort into a most
capacious Receiver, distill off the Spirit of Wine, at first with gentle fire
of Sand, afterward urge the fire, and the Spirit of Mercury will come forth, by
often extending it self through the whole Recipient, and by subliming like
Crystal. After the distillation is exactly performed leave all, and after
twenty four hours the Crystallizare Spirit of Mercury, will be dissolved in the
Spirit of Wine first distilled off, which must afterward be separated from the
Spirit of Wine, by gentle heat in Balneo. The Spirit of Wire first ascends, and
leaves the Spirit of Mercury in the bottom of a Cineritious color, which also
keep. Having all these three principles, process must be made to an hemogeneal
conjunction of them, which to perform, thus proceed. First make a Conjunctive
Water of the same Minera, after this manner. Dissolve Minera of Ungarick
Quicksilver vj. in a dissolving Water made of Nitre and Salt-gem. The Solution
separated from the Feces, distill by gentle heat in Balneo, to a thickness like
Oil; pour on fresh dissolving Water, and again distill it to an Oyliness, this
do five or six times. Afterward in a Vessel well closed, set it to putrefie in
Balneo for fourteen days, then distill it with gentle fire of Sand, until all
superfluity of Water from it be separated: When the white Spirits begin to come
forth, change the Recipient, and apply another very well luted, in which
receive the Spirits, together with the Water with them distilled, afterward
urge the distillation till the Vessel be very hot, and keep the Water. In vj.
of this, dissolve of the Salt above made ij. and circulate it for some time in
Balneo; afterward upon ss. of the Sulphur, pour of this Water ( viz, in which
the Salt is resolved and digested) jss, and in gentle heat of Balneo separate
the same Water to a convenient thickness; then the second time pour on the same
quantity of the Water, viz. jss. and by distilling in Balneo abstract it, and
so go on, until with ss. of Sulphur, j. of Salt be entirely incorporated; which
by the weight you may know, and if of both be made one certain viscous liquor.
To ss. of these, add ij. of the Spirit of Mercury above prepared, and in a
Phiol Hermetically sealed, boil it in an Athanor, prudently adhibiting degrees
of fire, until all be reduced to a red powder, which will be in the space of
three or four Months; this Powder thus prepared, and afterward corrected with
Alcohol of Wine, keep for use. It is a Universal Medicine, of which one grane
or two at most, exhibited in any disease, with convenient Vehicles, wonderfully
help the internal Balsome, to expel an Enemy internally harbored, either by
Vomit, Siedge, or Sweat.

Sit nomen Domini benedictum.
FINIS.
EPILOGUE.
NOw let the Supercilious Academick (...), contemners of Chemical Medicaments,
be (...); that with menaces, and violent Objurgations, hitherto foolishly
deride, condemn, and with a thousand mockeries, despise the faithful verity,
and divine Science of our Fore fathers, whose honorable estimation of this
Celestial gift, was conformed to the Majesty they beheld therein. Let them
forbear, I say, any more to brand the ^sciples of Hermes with marks of (...),
Envy, Ignorance, and Fraud, or to require ocular demonstrations, and plain
manif^stations of their artificial Labors; or else in a new, and unusual way
of learning imperiously to exact Spagirick Secrets from Carbonary Physicians,
(as they are pleased to call them;) which occult, yet exceeding profitable
Medicines, by the assistance of Divine Virtue, I have, this once, in ample
manner communicated to the Republique. This one thing from the most severe
punisher of all Falsehood and Injustice, with earnest prayers I desire, that to
All, who with ardent invocation of the Almighties help, and with a grateful
mind use these rightly prepared, to the praise and glory of the Creator, profit
of their needy Neighbor, sincere, and due honor of the Chemical Science, and
having received them acknowledge the liberality of God, and freely impart them
to the Spagirick Commonwealth, Grace, and all benediction in Healing may be
increased and multiplied: But to unworthy Deriders, who with feined Contempt
use these Gifts of GOD p^ly (as to this day is manifest, many wicked Galenists
have done, bunting after praise, and estimation to themselves, by the (...) of
others) and with internal perfidiousness, cease not to asperse, both in word
and deed, Spagirick Benefactors, that all may fall out contrary. That this may
be ratified and confirmed, let the most holy TRIVNITY, which has given to me
both will and ability, grant, that these Chemical labors, and Spagirick
granes, separated from contemptible things, not without great industry,
perfect, and most frequent examinations, may be consecrated to perpetual memory
of posterity, and let the whole Spagirick Senate and People, with me Cordially
say

AMEN. Vive, Vale Lector,
si quid scis rectius illis, Candidus imperti: si non, his utere gratus.



FINIS.
A TREATISE OF OSWALDVS CROLLIVS OF SIGNATURES OF Internal Things; OR, A TRUE
and LIVELY ANATOMY OF THE GREATER and LESSER WORLD

LONDON, Printed for John Starkey at the Mitre in Fleet Street, and Thomas
Passenger at the Three Bibles upon London Bridge. 1669.

OSWALDVS CROLLIVS, PHYSICIAN AND Hermetick Philosopher, HIS PREFACE TO THE
READER
Of Signatures, or a true and lively Anatomy of the greater and lesser WORLD.
IT is greatly to be desired, That the Herbarists of our time, who are ignorant
of the Internal Form, knowing only the Matter, Substance, and Corporiety of
Herbs, would employ as great diligence in enquiring into the Signatures of
Plants, as they are aocurate in various, and often very frivolous debates about
their denominations; hereby far more abundant and fruitful utility would
redound to the Weal-publique of Medicine. But since for the most part (as
almost in all Arts is wont to be) leaving the sweet and pethy kernel of
Sciences, like Plebeans destitute of internal Eyes, and only considering the
external face of things, they are at length wholly occupied about the exterior
hitter Rind: Hence it is, that many Nomenclators of Herbs are found, which
magnificently describe the Receptacles, habitations, and External Vestments of
Plants (in which their virtues, as in Domiciles, are hospited:) But the
footsteps of the invisible God in the Creatures, The place in which God is
said to exist, and from the sign God himself or his Essence is known: For all
Creatures in their properties do as it were dem^nstrate the presence of GOD.
the Shadow and Image of the Creator impressed in the Creatures, or that
Internal force, and occult virtue of Operation, (which as Natures Gift is
insited, and insused by the most high God, into the Plant or Anima, from the
Signature and mutual Analogick Sympathy and harmontous concordance of Plants,
with the Members of the Human Body,) is by the prudent Physician only inquired
into: and thence by the industrious help of Vulcan, or Anatomick Knife, is
drawn out and applied to its proper use, not drousily passed over in noxious
Silence, as is by Vulgar Herbarists too frequently done. Although from the
Nonuments of others, without any Foundation of Signature, or separation of the
true from the false, very many Heteroclite Virtues are described, and assigned
to several Herbs; yet Experience, the alone and only Mistress of things,
testifies that they are insussicient to answer the desired expectation of
Physicians and Patients. If Experience, the Mother of Verity, may be credited,
we need not infer many reasons for the proof hereof. There is required a higher
ingenuity, and more subtle Inquisition, Diverse and manisold sormes are the
Signs directing to find every singular Mystery.
then can be obtained by sight of the Eyes only. If the plenary and intimate
Knowledge of Plants (such as Nature has reserved to be searched out, and
subtly understood by the studious lovers and admirers of Natural things) we
would as perfectly comprehend, as some hundreds of them, at first sight,
without the knowledge of their Internal Virtue, may in the vulgar manner, The
qualities of Simples are not to be considered; but their Arcanums.
by their Names be discerned: Yet names of Herbs have not the virtues,
therefore their Bodies are to be examined, that we may know, what purges, what
yields odor, what heals fevers, and what cures wounds. Moreover, that
fallacious and unjust censure of the Four Qualities, viz. Hot, Cold, Dry, and
Moist, cannot sufficiently manifest their Virtues, such qualities being but the
Shadows of things, as Colors, not having roots, or powerful operations. They
will not run this hazard, who knowing the Virtue from the root of the Center,
not from the Superficies; and, leaving the subtilty of fruitless names, do from
things themselves, by intimate and profound speculation, more exquisitely
search out the Truth. In things occult consider the manifest foot steps of
Nature divinely impressed, and diligently enquire after the hidden dowryes of
Herbs, by inspecting their external Form, and by taste perceiveing what the
difference is between the shell, and the Kernel, between the House and the
Inhabitant, unless unadvisedly to Wood and Stones, they give the denomination
of true representations, or leaving Colonies, institute a Corporation with
disjoined Cottages. In all external things the exterior Case is only the
Receptacle of innate and inherent Virtues, infused by God, as the Soul into the
humane Body. That Philosopher most rightly sought to understand the Ingenuity
and Knowledge of the Interior Man, not by the name, but by expressions, (which
are true characters and indications of the mind, and internal faculties,) who
whilst a Youth stood mute before him, thus compelled him; Speak, O thou Young
Man, if thou meanest I shall know thee. Indeed, by the interpretation of the
voice, the Arcanums of the Mind are opened. In like manner, Herbs Magically by
their Signature bespeak the Physitian's through Introspection, and to him by
Similitude Manifest their Interiours, concealed in the occult Silence of
Nature. For there is (according to the words of the most excellent Baptista
Porta) a way of demonstrating by similitude, wherein very often the chief
Artificer is wont to manifest divine and occult things, according to the
supreme similitude of Idea's; nor could he do these in a more excellent or
admirable way. If we feign that Plants do speak, and be willing to manifest
their secret commodities wherein they excel, howsoever they express themselves,
and in what manner soever they are about to speak, their Language is not
perceived by all, like as the Speech, and Characters of writing, to several
Nations, are proper and peculiar; whence it is needful, that either all be of
one Nation, or all be able to speak infinite Languages, if all should alike
understand; which by Divine Institution is not permitted. So the exquisite
Artifice of Nature in her similitudes of things, though hriefly, and
sufficiently perspicuous to all, yet is perceived only by few. All Herbs,
Flowers, Trees, and other things which proceed out of the Earth, are Books, and
Magic Signs, communicated to us, by the immense Mercy of God, which Signs
are our Medicine. But that by their Knowledge we may come to the true and
appointed Medicine, I shall offer somewhat to the Ingenuous. Whosoever desires to
be an expert Physician, and to have knowledge of those things which point to
Medicine, by that Art, which Nature externally proposes by Signs, he may
understand what those internally signify: for every thing that is intrinsecal,
bares the external figure of its occult property, us well in insensible as
sensible Creatures. Nature as it were by certain silent notes speaks to us, and
reveals the ingenuity and manners of every Individual; As is aptly declared in
that Metaphorick saying of Adamantius Polemon, (...): And as our intimate
manners, from external figures of the Body may be found out; so from the
exterior Signatures of Plants, Man may be admonished of their interior
Virtues. For Plants do as it were in occult words, manifest their excellency,
and open the Treasures of hidden things to sickly Mortals; that Man, of all
Creatures the most miserable, may learn in grievous Diseases, where to find
relief. And as Externals lead to the knowledge, both of the Internal Man, and
of Diseases; so also by the like Anatomy, are found out Medicines necessary,
and conducent to the Humane Body; for these have affinity with Astronomy, and
Philosophy. But that which gives knowledge of the hidden Virtue, is Magic,
which in the Light of Nature is Doctress, and of all Natural Philosophy the
most perfect and consummate Science: and indeed, nothing more increases Piety,
nothing, I say, more powerfully excites us to the veneration and love of GOD,
then the true knowledge of him, then the incessant Contemplation of the immense
and wonderful Works of the Almighty, Chyromancy from the Cabalistick Arts is
said to be the Inventrix of Medicine,
Then that Natural Magic (always declaring and showing to us the Internal
Kernel, or signated by the External Rind, or Signature) the Offspring of
Heaven, Daughter of Arts, and Inventrix of Arcanums, by which we are compelled
to say, The whole Heaven, and all the Earth, are filled with thy Majesty, and
Glory, O Omnipotent Creator! We see among Men, Nature is so esteemed by some,
Physicians, like Virgins, ought to look at those things which are before their
feet, not ambitiously hunt after foreign things. The Product of our own Region
(...) sufficient.
that what is peregrine and accidentally comes to their knowledge, they very
much admire; but what they have nearer home, by reason of its familiar use,
they despise: So also, for the most part it happens with the admirers of
Transmarine P^nts, That through desire of Novelty, our own domestics, which
our Orb brings forth, they have in contempt; yet, then those Outlandish they
are far better, fresher, more choice and whole some, because they grow under
the Influence of our part of Heaven, and to each of our Natures are more
convenient, may at home be gathered in due season, and with much less
difficulty and cost be obtained, and by the Father of Mercies destinated to our
use in exigent necessity. What necessity therefore is there to use those
foreign Species, if our own Earth produce the same, and equivalent in Virtue
and efficacy? Physicians by use have found out a Medicinal Earth, which GOD
has given to us in many places of Germany, in efficacy, goodness, and virtue
not inferior to that of Turkey; I mean Terra Siletin of Strigensis, which the
wise and experienced John Montanus discovered first of all; after him, in very
many places of Germany, John Bertoldus Oschatiensis Siletius, a curious and
diligent searcher of Subterrane things, found it in the Field of Solmensus, and
diverse other places of Hassia. Not far from the Lake Acromium in the Dominion
of the Illustrious Maximilian, Marshal of Bappenheimium, near the Castle, which
from a long Stone takes its name, in a certain divided Rock, great abundance
was by Nature dug out, included in a Shell, or Matrix, like a Kernel
admirably purefied, (the marks whereof are witnesses to this day) which in my
Physical Practice I have used with good success. Our most noble Emperor
Rhodolphus the Second, at Brundusium, in his own Garden caused to be dug up,
besides the Bolus, two Axungias, as Paracelsus calls them, of Sol, and Luna,
Part of which I received from his Majesty as a Gift, and proving the goodness
of them, I found it of the same nature as the true Lemnia is, and most
efficacious, in virtue not at all inferior to the Earth of Turkey. So God is
pleased bountifully to supply our wants in diverse manners. The virtue of many
things are unknown to us, only through our own negligence of experimenting them.
Whilst the true Unicorns Horn by reason of its rarity is highly prized, there
is another (...) which is called Mineral, and sometimes is dug out of Pools
or Mountains; As once in Moravia three miles from Brunna (about the time when I
was preparing Medicine with the most excellent Dr. John Bergerus of Pannonia)
not far from the Territory of the Abbot of Abroviensis, under a most high Rock,
were dug out the bones of two unknown Animals of unusual Magnitude, together
with two of the same likeness younger, which without doubt perished in that
solitary place in the time of the Deluge of Waters; some relics of which
Bones, and wonderful Teeth, certain Months after coming unawares to the same
place, and being thereof advised, I caused to be dug up, and in Medicinal
use found them not to want much of the efficacy that is attributed to
Unicorns-Horn. In the same Region, not far off, is the stupendous Antrum, in
the hollow of a Mountain in Italy, in the Village of Costozza, between Patavia
and Vicentia, wherein strange and wonderful Artifice of Nature is found, whilst
from the superior part drops distill down into that Cave, and by many
intricate turnings and windings in their fall, they are immediately converted
to a strong hardness, (by the mediating of Spirit of Salt) and by their high
descent, diverse Stony Statues, and Forms, are shaped: The Earth is Gods
Pharmacop^lion, and much by the virtues of Herbs may be effected, if we be not
ignorant of the excellenty of very many.
Moreover, this stone reduced to fine powder, and j of it given inwardly, is
wont essicaciously to provoke sweat: and in bones broke, contracted and bruised
Limbs, being externally applied, mixed with convenient Playsters, it is
exceeding helpful. If by the benefit of distilled Vineg as, it be resolved into
a Salt, in the Stone, and knotted Podagrical Assects; by reason of its
Signature, it efficaciously operates: for these two Diseases, with the
contracture, by reason of the cementous Wines in Moravia, are very samiliar;
and therefore Nature has near at band provided suitable, connatural, and
domestic Remedies. Where Evil or the Distemper is, there, most near, When with
Simples we may effect the Cure, compounded Medicines must not be adhibited.
by Nature is exhibited a seasonable Remedy, that the means of recovering
health may not be far from us. Therefore Ruellius not improperly says, That no
part of Medicine is more uncertain, then that, which from another Orb, then our
own, is procured. And Paracelsus, the most diligent searcher into the light of
Nature, worthily deriding the disingenious curiosity of many Physicians, who
(neglecting the knowledge of the internal virtues of Plants, by their
signature,) desiring only to be acquainted with Herbs by name, says, that
every Plowman has the true Pharmacopolion before his door. Those who with most
simple Herbs, and Roots, effect the Cure, Sanation therewith is best of all
performed, as is witnessed by Carrichterus; for the Medicinal Essence, or
Magic Gold, is as equally well contained in them, as in others more precious.
As the Earth in every Region exhibits food, and clothing, if not to answer
voluptuous superfluity, yet sufficient for natural sustinence: So also Nature,
the same Another and Parent of all things, which provides abundantly for all,
has disiributed a necessary sufficiency of Medicaments. Every particular
Country has in it self the Matrix of its own Element, and to it self exhibits
what is necessary. To all Earths, and Regions, to every Nation, Climate,
Heaven, or Age Nature bath produced, and tempered appropriate Herbs, peculiar
to every Earth, Region, Nation, Climate, etc. In which, as in all other
Creatures, the Masculine, and Feminine kind is found, (as in things Created,
the Divine Providence has not in vain distinguished the Male, and Female)
which in Use and Application, must not confusedly, without distinction of Sex,
be adhibited: According to the Climate of Regions and its diversity, so are
Men, Custems, and the Virtues of Plants varied.
For as the Man and Woman in Nature are distinct, so also should their Remedies
be, and ought rather to be Simple then Hermaphroditick; yea, some only profit
Youth, others Age, as we see in Hellebores. So also Paracelsus advises
Physicians to be mindful of the distinction of Herbs, Age, Medicines, Diseases,
and the Moon: Truly therefore Agrippa says, It is the part of Fools to fetch
that from India, which we have at home, and to judge neither our own proper
Earth nor Sea sufficient; and things of our own Country, Peregrine; things
frugal, costly; and things easily acquired, difficult; and before them to
prefer what is brought from the utmost parts of the Earth. And as we see Turks,
Indians, Ethiopeans, and Christians, are in manners, and nature different: So
also Vegetables, according to the Four parts of the World, and diversity of
Climates, undoubtedly differ, and very often; what to others is Aliment, to us
is Medicine; Galen Lib. 2. Of the Facultier of Aliments.
as has been sufficiently attested by most grave Men, of which also infinite
other Testimonies might be given; yet this one only example hereof I shall
offer, touching the Root of Aron, which confirms the Truth of the above said.
The Root of Aron in our more cold Climate, is so hot, and biting, that it
instames the mouth and jaws of those that chew it; but that in Lydia, which
grows near the City of Cyrene, in the exterior form plainly answering ours,
is said to be sweet and pleasant to the taste, that men may use it like Rapes
in their foodwithout de^iment. And although the foreign have greater Virtues,
as those who are negligent to inquire into our own, and always with a
peregrine arrogance hunting after Outlandish things, affirm; which seek not
common Health, but a compendium of their own business, persuading us, that none
but precious things can profit: Yet we judge those healthful only to men living
in those Climates, where they are created and produced, For if Peregrine
Medicaments be so convenient to our Bodies, without doubt Nature would have so
ordered (which for all has provided in abundance) that with us also the same
should be brought forth. Therefore transmarine Medicaments, and such as in our
own Country are not produced, by reason of the diversity of Climates, and
Influence, they cannot be so friendly, and familiar, and also because they are
either not in due time and place gathered (whence often very great peril
ensues) or else the worst and dead parts of them only are by Barbarous
Merchants sent to us; or by age, corruption, putrefaction, longitude of the
ways, and frauds of Sophistications, the greatest part of their invisible
internal Virtues are depraved, eat out, consumed, corrupted, and adulterated.
Domestics, which GOD has in abundance furnished us with, And although rewards
are commendable, yet that which by Physicians ought ^ost to be anned at, is the
Cure of the sick.
begin to wax vile, both because in preparing they required the says and
proper diligence of silken Physicians declining labor, and also because the
greatest part of Vulgar Apothecaries, cited by the spurrs of Glory and Avarice,
neglect their proper duties often and more frequently intend Evacuation of the
wealth of the Sick, then the refection of the Body. Hence great detriment
ensues to the whole Common Wealth, and Shi^ wrack is made of the Lives of many,
(witness those who buy their Death for much money) whilst with us nothing
almost is worthy of any acceptance or esteem, that is not believed to be
brought from the Red Sea, as I may say, or from the farthest Gades, or Indians,
or else of what the World, desirous and willing to be deceived, No Created
thing in Nature is found, that may not be converted to Medicinal use.
is so persuaded. God has Created nothing in vain, but he has endowed every
Creature, though never so abject, with peculiar virtues, according to his
Divine Will and Pleasure. Sirac. c. 6. ver. 2. 3.
For which Cause, Ostentimes under a dirty Coat great Wisdom lies hid.
they far otherwise understand, who observe Nature in the least and most abject
Creatures, to be most excellent, and where it seems to be desicient in Body, to
abound in Virtues. The Worm and juice of Murex give the Purple, the most
sumptuous Color of Kings. Bees of unimitable industry yield most sweet Honey.
The weak Reed bares Wheat, the most desirable staff of Life. The Vine of all
Wood the most abject, Levit 26. Psalm. 104. ver. 15 Ezech. Cap. 15.
yields Wine, which moderately taken, The faithful Soul is the Sanctuary of
God. 2 Cor. 4.
wonderfully cheers the Heart of Man. The Intellectual Soul hospited in the
Body of Man, The Heavenly Signature is not from the Form, but from the Heart;
that is, it manifests Men by their Works and Fruits.
as in an Earthen Vessel, and frail Test: all which not without great Reason of
the Eternal Sapience are so appointed. So our Savior reproves the Fox like
mind of Herod; and John Baptist taxes the Pharisees with Viperine Subtilty.
Paracelsus, the searcher of Secrets, in his writings, earnestly persuades the
true Physician, that is desirous to be instructed, both in the Science and use
of Medicine, to be well acquainted with the Signatures and Hieroglyphick
Characters of things; and among other excellent Services done to the Republic
of Medicine, he declares, that there are three ways, by which Nature
pretermitting no notable thing, manifests Man, and all Created things. First,
by Chyromancy, which is the Natural Astrum of things, and comprehends the
External parts of Man, as Hands, Feet, Lines, Veins. Secondly, by Physiognomy,
which compriseth the Face, and Head. Thirdly, by the Habit, and Proportion,
Manners, and use of the whole Body, denoting the Senses of the Mind, and
Cogitations of the Heart. After him John Baptista Porta of Naples, a Famous
Phyropta, and most prudent Emulatour of Nature, in his (...), has set forth an
excellent Work for Public Profit. From these more perfect, I also thought it
expedient to take occasion of this matter, to write of these high and accurate
things. He which comes in Autumn, (to whow I hold a Light) may taste the sweet
Cane, and eat more ripe Fruits. These few observations of mine, consigned (for
it is difficult to tread in unknown paths) to the Students of Signatures, who
with me, are not ashamed to learn, I freely would have Common, which both by
reading Paracelsus, and Porta, and also by my own Experience, I have found
conveniently and Analogically harmonious: for it suffices to Publish what we
know, till greater Light be manifested. Many things by most learned men might
be obtained, if through false Ambition they do not persuade themselves to be
sussiciently learned already.
It had been well, if that so much desired Book of the most excellently learned
Carrichterus, Of Plants and Signatures of Things, had been set forth to Public
view, wherein in a wonderful and harmonious manner, he conforms the Terrene
Stars of Plants, to the Stars of the Firmament; the knowledge of which would
indeed be gratefully received by the Botanick Public weal.

Stars, according to Paracelsus, are the Forms and Matrices of all Herbs; and
every Star in the Heavens, is no other, but a Herb pref;igured in a spiritual
and Catholic manner, representing the like of every Vegetable in the Earth. So
every Herb is a Terrene Star growing toward Heaven; and every individual Star,
is a Caelestial Herb in a Spiritual Form, in nothing differing from Herbs
growing in the Earth, save only in the Matter: Therefore Stars by their
Excrements, and Nostoch, prenunciate all future Diseases. Likewise the
Caelestial Herbs tend downward toward the Earth, and respect their proper Herbs
procreated by them. This Foundation being known, known also will be the
Constellations and Composition of Celestial and Terrestial Herbs, Viz. This is
the Star of Rosemary, Wormwood, etc. and has the Virtues of them. Also in
Terrene Herbs this will be observed, that as many Colors of Flowers, so many
Virtues of Herbs. Nothing is placed in the Family of Plants either unadvisedly
or in vain, but in a rare manner, from their seasonable ordained Causes, are
produced in exact number, time, and place. And as in things Mute the Gesture is
instead of Speech; Syrac. Cha. 39. ver. 26.
and other Animals wanting speech, All things Created by GOD, subsist in Order,
Time, Measure and Weight.
by the Motion of the body declare the Affects of their Sense: So also God to
every Plant has insited its discoverer, that the Genuine Virtues of Herbs
latently abscondited, Wisdom 11. ver. 12.
by their External Signatures, that is, Every work manisests and declares its
Workman and Builder, which in Medicine is an Arcanum and Mystery. So the
Anatomy of Forms, shown the Natures of things.
by the similitude of their Form and Figure (as by Index's of their Office,
Essence, and Latent Virtues) may be their Aspect be known, discovered, and
manifested: yea so, as in the manner aforesaid, by their Signatures they
Magically seem to speak to us. For, as Men who in digging find a Treasure, are
wont to note the place by some certain Sign: So also GOD Himself has signated
very many things in Nature, which he has not apparently manifested, by which
only Signature we may, through diligent inquisition find them out. We see Moses
not to be mindful of Gemms, and Metals, created in the hidden Parts of the
Earth, although in them the greatest Arcanums of Nature are contained; but he
only mentions those which are Created obvious to the sight of all. It pleased
the Almighty absconditely to Create Metals in the lowest place, that we might
know, in them are inwardly hidden occult Virtues of Nature. By which Name in
the Occult sense of the Sacred Scriptues also, GOD knew things precious, with
labor acquired, would be more acceptable, then such as are obvious to sight,
which for the most part men are apt to despise.
the Spirit of GOD is prefigured by Metals, and Gems, created in the inmost
and secret parts of the Earth. But if this seem strange, why God should Create
some Creatures openly, and abscond other of his Creatures from sight; I shall
offer these following, diligently to be considered by the true searcher of
Hermetick Medicine. Those creatures which GOD Created in the Center of the
Earth, as Minerals and Metals, (the Sapience of hidden things, viz. Of the
Creature, or Nature) the most High made them for men only, as for the Spirit of
Life, having its seat in the Center of the Heart of Man, by conserving and
strengthening the Natural Balsom: Moses in his Description of Heaven and Earth,
by simple words has concealed ineffable Arcanums of Mysteries.
as Herbs existing in the superficies of the Earth (a manifestation of Wisdom,
that is, of Nature or Creature) are appointed to conserve and help the external
Mass of Man's Body, and likewise for all other living Creatures. For God has
placed the greatest good in the most secret place, and the lesser obvious to
Sight. In the Center he has Created all Virtues collected together, which in
the Superficies are dispersed, and diffused: and which is wonderful, all
Celestial Stars, which in Heaven are manifest in their Corporiety, in the Earth
also with their Spirits lie occultly closed: And as the Celestial Sol by its
spiritual heat Generates all things in a Terrestial manner; so the Terrestial
Sol by its spiritual heat, creates, and regenerates all things spiritually. By
the Celestial Sun, the Spirit of the LORD in Nature operates in all Naturally;
In the Terrestial Sun the same spirit effects all things, but spiritually. For
the spirit operates by no other Medium then by the Sun, because in the Sun
only, and not elsewhere, he has Corporally placed the Tabernacle of his
Habitation. Psalm. 19: ver. 6.
Like as the Superior Sun is in Operation twofold, viz. without all things
corporally, and manifestly, and within all things occultly: so also is the
other Sun biparted, sometimes without all things manifest, and corporal,
sometimes within all things occult, and spiritually: And as the Supernal Sol is
intrinsically spiritual in all things, By the Sun, that is, by the Heart of the
Macrocosme the Heart of the Microcosme has is Life.
and the Natural heat of all; So the Terrene Sol is internally the spiritual
Native heat in all things, the Balsome, Light, and Oil of all things. It is
called the Spirit of Life latent in all things: This by its own proper and
genuine name, is called Sulphur of Nature in all. If we derogate not from the
Faith of the most Ancient Philosophers and Cabalists, (whose Study was to
ascend from the Signs to the Signated, from the Creatures to the Creator, and
by the Angels to God, and with him be conjoined, and so according to
Pythagoras, Deified) who told to us the truth; Viz. That Superiors are in
Inferiors, and all Inferiors are in Superiors; yet, not that they are so in
themselves, but according to the Nature, and manner of Superiors. For as a
whole Tree comprised in its Kernel, Astrally is a Tree, so the explicit
sensible World is in GOD dealiter complicite. Which HERMES ter Maximus, a King
adorned with a Triple Diadem, (or from a certain right of Antiquity) Father of
all Philosophers, has confirmed by an indubitate and most plentiful
manifestation From his treble virtue he is called thrice Great, and because he
was a King, Philosopher, and Prophet, Monarch of Triple Philosophy.
of truth, at the beginning of his most famous Table of Emralds, which before
all Gems of the whole Universe may deservedly be preferred: saying, whatsoever
are below, are also above, only in a more noble and perfect manner. In the
Angelical, and Intellectual World the same Essences are, as are in this visible
Machine, but Spiritually, and Invisibly: In the Supreme Divine (...),
Increate, Insinite, Incomprehensible, Archetype World, The World of the Deity,
or Paul's Third Heaven: above or without God there is no other World or Heaven
to be found.
both Angels and the World are One, and together, in a most perfect Divine
manner. Therefore things here below manifest what are above, Corporals declare
Intellectuals; by the Natures and Properties of Inferiors and Terrestrials,
The Creatures are full of GOD.
we ascend into the Natures and Properties of Superiors Psalm. 34. ver. 4.
and Celestials; for indeed, these Inferior, External things, are both Visible
exemplary Notes of Superiors, This is the Mirror in which the ^ternal
Artificer exhibits himself to be contemplated by his Creatures.
and Symbols of Internal Invisible things, by which we are led from seductory
Temporals, to what are sempeternal and Spiritually excellent. Every Creature,
and this ample Machine of the World, The chief Aspect of GOD is face to face;
the other is that with which his Back parts are seen.
in which the Invisible Creator exhibits himself to us, to be seen, heard,
tasted, smelt, and handled, is nothing else, but the shadow of GOD, and figure
of Internal Paradise, GOD is known in his Works: therefore nothing is converted
to evil, or joined to Destruction.
Viz. That Aspect with which Creatures clearly see, and understand, the
Back-parts and Effects of the Creator, by the knowledge whereof, the Creator is
known to be the Artificer, and First Cause, acting all things: For every
Creature is Created, that it may be a Testimony to the Word of the Creator, by
which it was made: And whosoever separates the knowledge of all things from their
Maker, he only has the shadow of Universal things. But because all things of
the Archetype, Whatsoever is in all worlds together, that also is contained in
each of them; nor is there any one of them in which all are not, that are in
any or each of them, as is attested by Pythagoras, Ana^agoras, Piatone.
Genesis, 28. ver. 12, 13.
which in this Visible World corporeally appear, are contained in an Invisible
and Spiritual manner; and because all things from within, flow into the
Compound, and nothing is taken from without, the Light of Nature by Ascending
and Descending, entering in, and passing out, is proved to manifest it self.
There are numbered Three Worlds, and these three are one Universe, whilst one
World is with in another, Viz. GOD, Angels, and the Visible Machine. Every
Inferior is governed by the Superior, and receives the influx of its Virtues,
so as the Archetype it self, and supreme Maker of all things, by Angels,
Heavens, Stars, Elements, Animals, Plants, Metals, and Stones, infuses the
Virtues of his Divine Omnipotency upon us, for the service of whom, all these
things were by him made, and Created. Man is said to enter, or ascend, when by
Jacobs Ladder, he is lifted up from the lowest to the highest; ascending from
Sensibles to Intellectuals, from Creatures to the Creator himself. The
Cabalists of the Hebrews say, there are Fifty Gates of Intelligencies; they are
degrees or limits of all things gathered from the First Chapter of Genesis, by
which, as by Symbols, or Notes, we are led to the knowledge of all things
Visible, and Invisible. But a man is said to go out, or descend, when he turns
from GOD to the Creatures, from Intellectuals to external Forms, from the
Center to the Circumference. As for Example with my sensual Eye, I behold this
Kernel of an Apple, but leaving the Corporiety, I turn my self from the
External Form, to the Internal Invisible Seed, and with the Eye of my Mind I
contemplate the whole Tree, with the Root, Trunck, Bows Sprigs, Leaves,
Flowers, and Fruit, comprised in One, and in due time manifested to have
received its proper Body; but this Seed takes nothing of those Corporals from
without, but of it self from its own Penetrales sends forth all of them
gradually. When therefore the Astrum, or seed of this kind, is the Image or
shadow of the Angelick Substance, and it comprehends in its inmost parts, the
whole Corporeal Mole of the Tree, without quantity, and quality, etc.
Certainly, One Angel will comprise the Seeds of all things Spiritually in
themselves, much more easily, excellently, higher, and better then Nature; for
by how much the more simple, by so much the more perfect, absolute, and
powerful; and whatsoever an Inseriour power can do, the same can a Superior
Power perform, and much more excellently and efficaciously. An Angel therefore
giving to Man Bread, Wine, Fruit, and other things, that grow out of the Earth,
he takes nothing at all from without himself, but from within, of his own
Penetrales, because he is the perfect Image of GOD, he produces and increases
when he will, and as often as he will, without diminution or decrease: for an
Angel bears all things about himself, and has them in a Spiritual and
Angelical manner; Even as the Fire from it self gives forth to infinity and
always remains Uniform.
yea he comprehends in himself the whole Machine of the World, and is all
Inferior things: And whatsoever Nature, and Art, by Nature, can do, that also
the Spirit, or Angel constituted, and elevated above Nature, and Art, can much
better, and more spedily perform. Who so with his Intellect and perfect sight
of the mind, does diligently consider this Centrale, or Circular Philosophy, it
will not be difficult for him to believe, that an Angel, either can include the
whole great Celestial Firmament in Camaaea, or the whole World in his Fist.
Since that the Angel is the perfect and absolute Image of GOD, and in his own
Abyss compriseth, has and possesses all things, it cannot be denied that he
is the First, and Supreme Cause, existing of himself, Independent, and
complicates with himself all things Invisibly, and Spiritually, in his own
Abyss: yea, all things are in the Fountain of Unity most simply. For all
Created Beings are produced from him, who is All in All, Viz. the First and the
Last, Cause of all things: not from prejacent Matter, nor from any other does
he take any thing, nor without himself receives ought whatsoever. For, as is
above said, whatsoever an Inferior power can do, and have, the same can a
Superior power do, and have, but much more excellently, and efficaciously, yea
Superexcellently.

There is no comparing of the Finite with the Infinite, God is ineffable and
innominable, in Nature he is called, Trigrammus. In the Law, Tetragrammus. In
Grace, Pentogrammus. The State of future Happiness.
of the Creator with the Creature. GOD is the Center and Circle of himself,
inhabiting in himself; that is, in the Abyss of Insinitude (the Hebrews call it
Ensuph, incomprehensible Infinity) where to all Eternity no Place, no
Beginning, or End, can be found out, or thought of. Nor was, or is he made by
any other, nor by himself; for by another He could not be made, because none
was before him, otherwise he could not be the First Cause: also himself he made
not, for from Nothing, Nothing is produced; always therefore he is (...)(and
this is an Essencial (...), Ineffable Name, by reason of his dreadful Majesty,
and Incomprehensibility [Schemhamphoras], the Name of GOD is called Great, and
Terrible, which is above every Name) that is, without a former Cause, without
Time, Place, or End; receiving nothing from another, but in Himself having all
things sufficient, GOD was before the preduction of things, from without naked
and alone, until it pleased his Divine goodness to go forth in production of
things, and as it were in a manner to Clothe himself,
deficient in no one thing, and in all his Lovers effecting an essential
Conformity to Himself, that they also without them want nothing, but possess
all things within them in his Country, and this is the Kingdom of GOD in
Believers, who dwell in GOD, and GOD in them to all Eternity. But wherefore GOD
Created not the World sooner, by reason of the humble Obedience, Reverence, and
Fear due to the Creator, it is not permitted to the Creature, that Sin may be
avoided^ to enquire.
Therefore JESUS CHRIST, the Word, and Son of GOD the Father, and the Deifying
Wisdom, the true Master, was made a Man like unto Us, that he might make us
Sons of GOD, as he himself is, who is Blessed for evermore.

GOD therefore is the Unbegotten Lord of All, The Word of GOD is the First Idea
of all things; so this extrinsecal World is Made and Formed according to the
Figure of the intrinsical, Viz. Intelligible World, by the most excellent
Builder of all things.
the Beginning, Middle, and End of Vniversalls, wholly without any necessity of
Nature, in his own Will most free, and from his mere Goodness, for his
infinite Glory, made all things from his own Bosom, or from the most profound
conceiving, and recess of the Divinity, ( Hermes says, from the Bowels of
Darkness) by his Word; First, he produced Light, that is, Angellical
Substances; saying, Fiat Lux: from the Light proceeded the Angellick Stars;
from the Stars Bodies, or this visible Machine of the World, compacted of Four
Elements, and so all things are in All in their own manner; and one abides in
another; as the Seed in the Tree, and the Tree in the Seed, these two, although
destinct, yet are One. All Bodies, or Visible Elements, GOD is the En^ of all
Entityes, that is, the Place, Original and Comprisement of all things Created;
from which all are, and to which all endeavor to return.
are in the Invisible Stars, or Spiritual Elements, and Stars are in Bodies: the
Stars are in Angels, and the Angels are in the Stars: Angels are in GOD, and
GOD in the Angels: yet always so, as the Superior it self may be without the
Inseriour, but not on the contrary. For the visible World, or no Corporeals can
consist without the presence of the Stars; no Stars have Being without Essences
of Angels be present; Angels cannot subsist without the uncreate GOD, on whom
all these have Dependence. GOD being known, Angels are known, Angels are most
certain Mirrors obnoxious to no Corruption, which manifest the Divinity in them
by continual Contemplation.
for they are the perfect and absolute Image of GOD: Angels being known, known
also are the Stars; from the Knowledge of the Stars, all Created things, and
this Visible World, are Manifest: This Visible World being known, at length
Man, the Microcosmick Son of the World, comes to be known; for such as is the
Son, such is the Father through all things; as from Visibles we understand such
as are Invisible. All things from within flow to Inferiors, and Externalls:
What are in Superiors are also seen in Inferiors, but degenerated in
condition, and adulterated.
For on GOD depend the Angellick Substances; on Angels the Stars have
dependence, that is, the invisible Virtues of things; and on the Stars depend
visible Forms, that is, Bodies. therefore as in GOD all are Divinely, All are
in GOD, as Numbers in Unity, and all Lines of the Circumserence in the Center,
and in Angels Angellically; so in the World all things are Corporally; or
Mundanely. As the Light shines in Darkness, so the Superior in the Inferior
manifests its Brightness: on the other hand; Whatsoever is in the Visible World
sensibly, the same is in Elements, and Stars Astrally, that is, Spiritually:
and whatsoever is in the Stars astrally, the same is in Angels Angelically;
what is Angelically in Angels, the same is in GOD Divinely. By this Chain, or
Golden twist, in a Divine manner let down upon our frailty on Earth, our Mind,
or Intellectual Soul, by Divine assistance, through the order of Creatures,
from the lowest to the middle, and through these ascends, and is lifted up to
GOD himself, the only Chief and Supreme Good, to which, as to the desired End,
all Creatures with strong endeavor and vehement earnestness aim to come. Romans
8 Verse 21, 22.
The whole Machine of the World in GOD, is nothing else but GOD, and in Angels
is an Angel, in Stars a Star, in the Seed the whole Tree is latent, viz. Root,
Trunk, Bows, Leaves, and Fruit; from a Barley Corn proceeds Root, Reed, Spike,
other Granes, and Chaff: Also these proceed from the Seed, because in it they
were all latently comprised. In like manner the whole Machine of the World in
the Angel is Angelically latent, but in GOD Divinely. The Supreme Creator of
Nature, has created in one Moment, without occupation of time, all which he
determined to make, and of them has made an admirable separation, or Division,
as it pleased him.
The Seed is a Tree Complicate, the Tree is a Seed unfolded and explicated: An
Angel is a Star Complicate, Stars are an Angel unfolded. Unity is a Complicate
Number, Number is an unfolded Unity, GOD is, in whom, or in the Archetype, the
World is Complicate in a Divine manner: The world (as I may say) is GOD
unfolded. For the most excellent GOD containing in himself all Light, by the
Rays of his Majesty, that is, by his begotten Son, he created Angelical Light,
and imparted to them all things, by the Angels this Light flows into the four
visible Elements, or Stars; from the Four visible Elements, or Stars, it is
instilled into Corporieties, the visible effects whereof in production of
fruits we sensibly behold. In the Microcosme also it is manifest in like
manner, that Inferiors are in their Superiors, the last in the first, and
again the former likewise in the former, and another in another, even to the
highest. For the Five Senses are in the Imagination, the Imagination is in
Reason, Reason is in the Mind, the Mind is in GOD, GOD is in none, but himself,
for he is the Seat and Habitation of himself, because he is all things, The
Habitation of GOD is not distinct from his Essence, which is divinely in all
places, if distinguished from his Divine Essence, it is an Argument of
deficiency in GOD.
and is from himself, and by himself, from whom, as from a mostplentiful and
everlasting Fountain of Unity, all things flow; therefore all things derived
from the Chief Good, ought to be returned unto GOD, as to the proper Original
from whence they proceeded. But since these things appertain not to this place,
and there are very few, who in their weak Cottages, and narrow bounds, can
comprehend so great Riches, and inexhastible Treasures, and a further
manifestation hereof ought not to be so vulgarly communicated; I will please my
Genious with the quiet silence of Harpocrates: Difficultly are these things
comprehended by those, who have not drunk of the Cabalistical bottomeless
Fountains, Jam. 3. Ve^s. 15.
and who have known no other then that shado^y, Animal, and Mundane Sapience,
which to the Celestical is plainly foolishness. But to return to that from
whence I am digressed. It is exceeding necessary in the Republic of Medicine,
For as man is known by his fruits; so the Herbs also by their fruits of
Signature.
that this Divine study of Signatures (which some Herbarists indeed mention,
but they leave it to others to be learned and proved) should more and more be
manifested. Paracelsus not without a sollid cause judges him unworthy of the
Title of a Physician, who from the Signated Sign, that is, with Chyromancy, and
Physiognomy, prepares not his Medicine; whilst by reason of the Admirable,
Essential, and Harmonious Anatomy of the Greater and Lesser World, A Physician
is not without cause by (...) called (...).
the Observers of Ancient Medicine, (without danger of the life of the Sick)
neither can, nor ought to be without the Science. The Anatomy and Forms of
Herbs, must be agreeable to the Anatomy and Forms of Diseases. For unless
Physi^gnom^n^, and Chyromancy both o^ D^seases and Remedies, with the certain
and Essential Anatomy, be known to the Physician, he can hardly with good
success perform their Cure.
For every disease (as we have discoursed thereabout before in the Preface of
our former Book) and its Medicine, are of one Physiognomony, Chyromancy and
Anatomy. And he, who wants the understanding of this Foundation, and is
destitute of the knowledge of the Philosophic and Medicinal Alphabet, cannot
be anexperienced Physician. For the Characters of Nature, and these Natural
Signatures, which from the Creation, not with Ink, but with the very singer of
GOD, are imprinted in all Creatures (indeed every creature is a Book of GOD)
are the better part of true Literature, by which all occult things are read and
understood, the four Qualities being of less value, serving only as the
external Rindes of internal Virtues. For the invisible and internal things are
always more noble, more excellent, and more powerful, then visible externals,
which are less perfect and more impure then their internals. So the House with
external things is built for the Inhabiter; but the Inhabitant is more noble
then all the Wood and Stones, and the whole Edifice, Signature in Philosophy
and Medicine is the principal Foundation.

Romans 1. Verse 19.

Wis. Chap. 15 Psalm. 19.

Therefore Hermes says, every created thing discovers the Majesty of GOD, and
for that Cause GOD was pleased to Create all things, that through every of them
we might discern him.

For there is nothing found in the World which wants a spark of Divine Virtue.

Chyromancy and Physiognomony show the Signs of all future Members.

This signated Foundation drawn from the light of Nature, is obtained by Magic
Science.

This Art from the Light of Nature, by Divine Grace was communicated to Adam,
Genesis a-Vers. 19, 20.


because he is a living and a rational Creature: Without Physiognomony, and
Chyromancy, (by the service of which not only the whole Man, whose Interiours
by some External Indication are discovered, but also Specificks, and occult
Virtues of all things, yea even all the Secrets of Nature, are manifested,)
searcely any Arcanum of Medicine can be obtained, which may sustain the trial
of Experience. For the Creatures are Instructors to the Physician created by
GOD.

Our first Father Adam, in the state of Innocence, from predistinated Art, that
is, from Art signated, had absolute knowledge of Natural things, and to every
thing he gave a proper Name, thereby also expressing its internal Nature: for
GOD, by the breathing of his Divine Spirit, taught that only one Man the
Virtues and Nature of all things.

There may be some who hereafter may judge these Labors of ours Imperfect:
Those, for the Public profit of all Students in Medicine, I would most
lovingly entreat, that better then these, and in more commodious order, they
should communicate to Posterity. With as much Ingenuity, Study, and Industry,
with as much labor, and care, and also with the best of my Judgment, I have
endeavored aptly to compile this. Therefore Courteous and Candid Reader,
because there has not wanted a good will, though possibility of a more
exquisite completing this necessary Work, (in great things it is enough only
to will, nor can every thing at all times be done) this my enterprised Study of
Signatures, receive in good part, and enjoy this our Tyrocinium, until GOD
shall stir up any one, who assisted by his infinite Goodness, may set his
helping hand to the further increase of this most laudable and plainly
necessary Study. AMEN.

OF SIGNATURES OF PLANTS Representing Humane Members.
Of the Head.
1. POPPY with a Crown represents the Head and Brain; therefore a decoction
thereof, in many affects of the Head, is profitably exhibited.

2. Walnuts have an entire Signature of the Head; the exterior Rind, or herby
encompassment, of the Pericranium: Wherefore Salt of the Rindes, for wounds of
the Pericranium, is a singular Remedy.

The interior hard Rind, or woody shell, of the Cranium.

The thin skin encompassing the Kernel, of the skin and membranes of the Brain.

The Kernel has the figure of the Brain it self; therefore it is also helpful
to the Brain, and abates the force of Venoms. For if the Kernel beaten, be
moystned with the Quintessence of Wine, and applied to the Crown of the Head,
it comforts the Brain and Head powerfully.

3. The little Leaf of the flower Peony, before it is blown, has the
Signature, and a certain Analogy with the Sutures of the Head, also with the
small Veins encompassing the Brain: The Flowers when blown, represent the
external skin of the Cranium; and in like manner afterward, the seeds shooting
out like lightning, expel the Epilepsie, or Syderate Disease.

4. Agarick, is an excrescency of the Larix Tree, like to a Mushrum, and it
purges the Head.

5. Scylla, which is commended in the Epilepsie.

Of the Hairs.
1. The Down that grows upon Quince-Apples has some resemblance of the Hairs
of the Head: therefore a decoction thereof, in restoring hairs fallen off in
Lues Venerea, is most efficatious.

2. Long Moss that grows upon Trees, is like unto Hairs; therefore its
decoction is in like manner commended for Hairs fallen off.

3. There is a certain Herb that grows in Moorish places, its form is wholly
like long Hairs, it floats in waters, and may be known by its small white
Flower; of which a Decoction is very beneficial (as also of the former being
outwardly adhibited) in restoring Hairs fallen.

4. Mayden-Hair, Trichomanes, and Polytrichon of Apulia, are also Capillare
Herbs, which by their rising tusts, and small strings, express the likeness of
Hairs: these cause Hairs to grow thick, crisped and comely.

5. Thiapsia, having a Lease like Fennel, or hairy. Avicen says, the like
cannot be had, in yielding relief in Alopecia.

Of the Ears.
1. Leaves of Coltsfoot have the Signature: therefore of the Flowers thereof
Conserves are prepared, which eaten, comfort the hearing and memory very much.

2. Here it is to be noted, That Perewinckles, which have the (...) long Ears,
being boiled in Water, and Salt, and scumm'd, and afterw^ (...) ed and
macerated in Oil of Amber, and then distilled, thence is drawn a most excellent
Oil for recovering lost hearing. It is a creeping thing of most accute Sense.

Of the Eyes.
1. The black Seed of the Herb Paris, or of Aconitum, have the Signature of the
Ball of the Eye; therefore the Oil thereof Chymically drawn or expressed, is a
most efficacious Medicament for all Affects of the Eyes. By some it is called
Anima Oculorum.

2. The Flower of Eyebright has the Anatomy of all Vices of the Eyes;
therefore it wonderfully helps the Diseases of the Eyes.

3. Camomile, Said to be the White Violet.
Caltha, Hawkweed, (with which the Hawk discusses the dimness of his sight)
Argemone, Anemone, Scabious, Flower of Attick Star-wort: All these by reason of
their Signature help the Eyes.

4. Flower of Wild Tansey represents the ball of the Eye; distilled waters
thereof is a singular Ophthalmick.

5. The Stone commonly called Beloculus, because (it being white) in the middle
thereof is the likeness of the Ball of the Eye, whence it takes its name; this
wornupon the hand wrists, or held in the hand, is said to clarify the sight.

Of the Nese.
The Leaf of Water-Mentastrum, has the form of the Nose; it is that Herb,
which has close rough leaves, and bares a reddish Flower inclining to white.
Its extract is a specific in lost smell.

Of the Gumms.
The lesser Houseleek adhereing to Walls, has the Signature of the Gumms;
therefore its expressed juice in the Scurvy, or sore mouth, is very much
commended.

Of the Teeth
1. In Henbane the receptacles, or the Husks of the Seed, have the Figure of
the Jaw, wherein the Teeth are set; therefore the Oil thereof, or liquor
expressed per se, or a Decoction of the Root with the Herb Arsemart, made in
Vinegar, by washing the Teeth hot therewith, wonderfully abates odours of the
Teeth.

2. Kernels of Punick Apples represent the Teeth; for vices of the Gumms, and
to fasten the Teeth, the decoction thereof is very profitable.

3. Pine Kernells admirably represent the fore-Teeth; therefore Leaves of the
Pine boiled with Vinegar, assuage dolours of the Teeth.

4. The Herb Dentaria, the Root of which by a wonderful Artifice of Nature, is
made like Scales joined one within another.

Of the Throat.
1. Wintergreen.
Pyrole, we use it in Gargarismes.

2. Horse-tongue.

3. Cervicaria.

Of the Liver.
1. Liverwort, Lichen.

2. The Mushrum of the Beech and Oak, these have a peculiar Signature of the
Blood operating in the Liver: Whereby the powder of either of these stops the
Blood breaking out at the Nostrills, and wounds, almost to a Miracle, being
sprinkled upon the Wound, or put into the Nostrils.

3. The Herb Jecoraria adhereing to Walls of Fountains, which against Affects,
and the Scirrhus of the Liver, is a peculiar Remedy.

4. Pears have some resemblance of the Liver, therefore they also are helpful
in distempers of the Liver.

Of the Heart.
1. The Fruit of the Citron Tree represents the Heart.

2. Two Roots of Anthora have the effigies of a small Heart.

3. Wood Sorrel, in the top of its tender stalk, brings forth Leaves in the
form of the Heart.

4. Melissophyllon bares Leaves like the Heart.

5. Cardiaea, or Molucca, in their Leaves have like resemblance.

6. Nard, Myrobalanes, and Quince Apples.

All these are admirable beneficial to the Heart.

Of the Lungs.
1. Lungwort cleaving both to Stones and Trees.

2. There are certain species of Lungwort, which have dark white spots in them,
like the spots of the Lungs; therefore a Decoction of all in various Effects of
the Lights, is very conducible in restoring them to their pristine State.

Of the Paps.
The Eyes of a Peacocks-Taile have the Form of the Breasts and Paps: these
therefore drunk help the evil affected Paps of Women.

Of the Gall.
The green Herby encompassment of the Wall-nut, if the juice be expressed green,
it is like the juice of the Gall, both in Color and Taste, and is very
conducible in purging the Gall.

Of the Spleen.
1. The true Scolopendrium, Wall Fearn.
Asplenum, and Cetrach.

2. Hart's-tongue, and the vulgar Phyllitis.

3. The Lupine by its Effigies demonstrates the Spleen: a decoction thereof
profits the Spleen, when affected.

Of the Ventricle.
1. The Leaves of Sowbread only, for the Root is Profitable to reduce
Paralytick Members.

2. Ginger.

3. Galangal, it is an external Ventricle, by which it helps the internal.

Of the Navel.
Venus-Navel, or Peniworth, bears a round concave Leaf, smooth, femenine,
imitating the Navel, thick, carnose, and juycy: Dioscorides affirms, it excites
Amorous Affections; Physicians say, the Navel is the seat of Luxury.

Of the Intestines.
1. Calamus Aromaticus.

2. Cassia Fistula.

Of the Bladder.
1. Alkekengy, Halicacab, Vesicaria, bearing the likeness of Human Bladders,
within is a Kernel encluded, the use of which is famous in provoking Urine, and
expelling the Stone.

2. The creeping Vesicaria, the Bladder-nut-tree.

3. Colutea.

4. Nightshade.

Of the Privities.
1. Aron is almost the essigies of the Genitals, it demonstrates the whole
Instrument of Generation.

2. Some think Satyrion Erithroneum, or the true Satyrion of Paracelsus, to be
Aron, or all the species of Dragon-wort, which have the whole Signature of the
Secret parts, and after Maturation, the Herbs lie upon the Earth crooked like a
Serpent.

2. Beans have also the entire Anatomy of the Privities, and glande of the
Yard; therefore condemned by Pythagoras: the flower of them from the propriety
of its similitude is wont to be adhibited in Inflammations of the Naturals.

3. Succory resembles the Yard; the Decoction thereof both inwardly and
outwardly exhibited, is of singular use for such as are debilitated by
Enchantment.

4. The hallow stalk of Hawkweed, a draught of the Decoction thereof made with
common water, daily drunk hot, is a Specific in purulent inflammation of the
Yard.

5. In the Vetch, and especially in the Lupine, the Form of the Yard appears.

6. The Fruit of the Pine represents the same; therefore its Kernels, and
Pistach-nuts eaten, stir up the Venereal Faculty.

7. The Acorn has the perfect representation of the top of the Yard, which the
Preputium covers.

Of the Stones or Genitalls.
1. Of the Scallion kind, all the Species of Orchas, from their similitude of
the Testicles, are exciters of the Venerial Faculty, where it is defective: one
is dissolved in the Liquor of another, the Superior is greater, and fuller,
and is powerful in provoking Copulation; the Interior is softer, and withered,
inhibiting the Procreative Faculty. Nature industrious in the Generation of
Mankind, by this representation signifies, that these are powerful in Venerial
Virtues, Conception, and Offspring; as they also have the odor of the Seed.
So the Essence of Satyrion in restoring extinct virility in Men is most
Essicacious; Indeed, these do so exactly rese^ble the Testicles of Men, and
Luxurious Animalls, that whosoever sees them, must needs confess he knows them.

2. Tragorchis, Goat-Stones, it smells after the manner, as is the smell of
Goats, and its bearded hairiness resembles the Goats-beard; of all Scallions
the most powerful, as the Goat of Animalls is most Luxurious.

3. The false Hermodactile of the Italians and of Mathiolus.
Satyrion Erythronium, that is, red Satyrion, the exterior Rind of the Root
is pleasingly red, but within it is white: it as powerfully excites Lust as the
Scincus, being only held in the Hand, and more if drunk in Wine, as
Dioscorides, and after him Lobelius, testify.

4. The greater Dragon-wort, having a round headed-root, like to the Testicle,
being taken in Wine, excites Venus.

5. Porrum is so like to the external skin of the Cods, that it is become a
Proverb: this also excites the Venereal Faculty.

6. Flowers of Cycosorchis invite Men to Pleasure, and Lasciviousness,
inciting, provoking, and increasing Venery.

7. Boletus of the Heart has the Signature of the Secrets: therefore it not
only comforts, being inwardly given, but is also very commodiously Externally
applied in effects of the Testicles.

8. Phallus, by Adrian Junius in a peculiar writing of his, is commended for
the same use.

9. Grape-stones have the Signature of the Genitalls of either Sex: Therefore
the Ancients not without cause, said; Without Bacchus, Venus waxes Cold.

Of the Matrix and Womb.
1. Round Aristolochy, that which is true, exactly imitates the Form of a
Womans-Womb; and it admirably helps Women in Childbed.

2. Pease.

3. The Interior green Rind of the Beech, has the Signature of the Matrix,
with Sanguineus Veins; therefore a Decoction thereof purges the Matrix.

4. Savine has the Signature of the Veins of the Matrix: and is therefore
powerful in dissolving the Tartar in Women's Veins.

5. The Pomgranate, or Punick Apple, is smooth, and covered with a Membrane,
which is called Malicorium, the Rind gapes in the Sun, and is opened with
every most light force of Air; so it is with the Matrix, when the time of the
Birth is near.

6. Sowbread, by the round encompassment of the Root, most accurately
demonstrates the Effigies of the Matrix: Theoprastus says, this Scallion is
very forcible in exciting amorous Affections.

7. Leontopetalon, whose Root by its hairy and soft down, does exactly resemble
the Feminine Secret: this Diascorides says, being hung about the Neck, incites
amorous Passions.

8. Mace has also the Signature of the Matrix, for Mace includes (it is the
Signature of the Child in the Womb) the Nutmeg, as the Womb includes the Young.

Of the Reins
Purcelane has the Signature of the Reins.

Of the Secundine.
Nymphea represents this; Therefore is beneficial in expelling the afterburthen.

Of the Backbone.
1. Horse-tayl.

2. The Female Fearnbrake: therefore its Decoction (in the Sciatica, and
dolours of the Back), and fomentation with Wine, and Water, used many days
together, by its Signature is a most powerful Remedy: for it not obscurely
represents the effigies of the back.

Of the Shin and Bones.
1. Gratia Dei, or Storks-bill, has the Signature of the Shin-bones: the
powder of which, is singular in broken-bones.

2. Ossisana, or the Gravelly-stone, which is found near Spira, and
Darmstadium, is miraculous in conglutinating broken bones, and this by reason
of its Magical Signature.

Of the Nerves, and Veins.
1. Plantane has their entire Signature, yea, the Chyromantick Figure both of
the Hands, and Feet; as the Hands of Herbs are the Leaves.

2. Savine has also the Signature of the Veins.

Of the Pores of the Skin.
The porous Leaves of St. John's Wort have their Signature: these remove all
obstructions of the Pores, and expel Sweat.

Of the Hands.
1. Palma Christi.

2. Fig Leaves; these therefore in dolours of the joints yield relief.

SIGNATVRES of DISEASES.
Of the Apoplexy.
1. LIllies of the Valley, the Flower has the Signature of a Drop, because it
hangs like a Drop; it in this Disease is therefore of great use.

2. The Stone of the Carp-Fish, existing above the Eyes, is commended in that
Apoplexy, which invades the Patient with commotion and contraction of the
Muscles above the Eyes.

Of the Stone.
All things which expel the Stone in the humane Body, are Magically signated
from the similitude, and by their resemblances signify the Disease.

1. The Crystal, Flint, Citrine Stone, Judaick, and Stone of the Lynx: the
Urine of the Lynx coagulates into a Stone, therefore its Urine is exceeding
profitable to expel Gravel in the Bladder.

2. The Stone of the Microcosm.

3. Roots of Saxifrage.

4. Grummel, or Millium Solis, has the resemblance of the Stone, being bright
and round, like Pearls, with a stony hardness; which with other like Stony
Seeds, is of excellent use for diminishing the Stone.

5. The Fruit and Husk of Restharrow.

6. Jobs-teares, in effectual dissolving the Stone, can never sufficiently be
commended.

7. Fruit of Alkakengy.

8. Kernels of Cherrys, Peaches, and Medlers.

9. Fruits of Red-Roses; also very many others, which grow in Heathy places,
which are red in color, and ripen in Autumn.

10. Onions have also the Signature of the Stone.

Of the Cancer.
1. Dactyletus, which being drunk cures the Cancer, according to Paracelsus:
some think it to be the Foreign Hermodactyl of the Shops, with a round Root,
contracting it self into a Gentre, after the manner as a Cancer is wont to do.

2. Lunaria, which has the Signature of the Cancer: with this Carrichter
affirmed he cured all Cancers of the Breasts.

3. Ros Solis, or Rorella.

Of the Chelick.
There is a Caterpiller breeds in Corn, which represents the Intestines;
therefore a Decoction thereof is singular in the Cholick.

An Eale is also good in the Cholick.

Of Skarrs.
1. Olives.

2. The Elm.

3. All Trees bearing Rosin, which have cloven Barks, by most certain
experience are found exceeding profitable for all Skarrs and Wounds.

Of the Dysentery.
1. Root of the Clay colored water Acorum dug up in May, is a singular
Amulet, being hung about the Neck, as low as the Region of the Ventricle: for
it has the color and Signature of Excrements.

2. Also Elder-berries in this case yield Relief.

Of Erysipela.
1. Seed of Sower Sorrel, which always has a fleshy color, not plainly red:
its Decoction drunk is most efficacious.

2. Colchothar of Vitriol strongly calcined, being externally applied first
dissolved in Plantane Water, is of admirable use.

3. Acorum of the Fens, worn for an Amulet.

Of Epilepsie.
1. Misselto of the Oak with its own Glue ripens the Disease.

2. Circulary, and blackish Granes of Peony, especially those that first issue
out and ripen (because those that are ripe spontaneously fall from the Heads)
expel the Disease.

3. In the Epilepsie, the Cross or small Bone, where the junctures meet in the
Craniums of Epilepticks, as some will, but others, of those that are strangled,
is a most excellent Remedy: because in the Epileptick Fit, the Patient
laboring therewith is almost strangled, and the Spirit of Life included,
seeking passage out, is suffocated; then from the junctures of the Head it is
necessary this vehemence be separated. It is given in the beginning of the Fit,
under the exaltation of the Moon.

4. A Sparrow in the falling-Sicknes is commended by Paracelsus.

Of Excrescence.
Agarick, and other Excrescence of Trees, which grow out upon Bows, and
Leaves, against the order of Nature, these mitigate and remove preternatural
Excrescencies of Humane Bodies.

Small Pox or Measles.
1. Rape Seed.

2. Lentills; therefore a Decoction of them is very beneficial.

Sores of the Fundament.
Scrofularia the greater, and lesser, have the entire Signature; so a Decoction
thereof in exterminating Sores or Piles of the Fundament is internally taken
with good success; also an Amulet made of either Scrosularia, and hung about
the Neck to the Orifice of the Stomach, is exceeding beneficial.

Of the Fistula.
Water Bulrushes have the Signature: therefore a Salt from them Artificially
extracted, may very profitably, both inwardly, and outwardly, be taken and
applied.

The Herb Rapunculus having a blew Flower, has the same Signature and Virtue.

Of the Child in the Womb.
The Stone Aetites, otherwise called the Stone with Child, because in shakeing
it is found to rattle, having another Stone within it; so it has resemblance
to the Woman with Child, and also to the Child in the Womb: this being tied to
the left Arm of the pregnant Woman till the hour of the Birth, and then applied
to the Left thigh, happily facilitates the Labor, and accelerates the Birth
without danger: after the Birth, it must immediately be removed, lest the Womb
it self follow.

Of the Young growing to the Womb.
Granes of the Flowers of Tilia help by similitude, they grow to the middle of
the Leaf upon a small stalk. Five or six of these Granes must be given at one
time to the Woman, whose Child cleaves to the Womb. They are gathered about the
Feast of St. John Baptist, and the exterior Rind is cast away.

Of Fascination.
All Herbs growing in clefts of Stones, or through the holes of any kind of
Stone, yield relief.

Of Bursting and Rupture.
1. Root of Aron.

2. Perfoliata.

3. Hernidria.

4. Root of wild Purcelane.

5. Ash-Leaves also have the Signature; therefore the affected place being
anointed with the Oil distilled from the Wood thereof, is most efficaciously
mitigated.

6. In Leaves of the Elm in the Month of May, certain little bladders are
wont to break out, and grow to the Leaves, very full of Vulnerary Juice, which
in Burstings is very profitable.

7. Apples growing upon Oak leaves, are gathered in May, which suspended in
Glasses, and set in the Sun, are spontaneously reduced to a Liquor: this Liquor
by anointing very much helps.

8. By Magic Signature, Animals which extend and contract themselves are
observable: So the Elephant extends and ret racts his Snout; therefore Spodium
Calcined is here profitable.

9. In like manner the Tortoise contracts himself: the powder thereof Calcined
is also beneficial.

10. Hirudo Spinosa also contracts it self; therefore a water thereof
distilled, or burnt to Ashes, has in this Affect wonderful Virtues. Some have
been cured only by anointing with Oil of the same.

Of Haemorrhagia.
1. Red Sanders, the Decoction of which made with red Styptick Wine, admirably
resists the Haemorrhagia.

2. Root of Tormentil.

3. Blood stone.
Haematites, Coroneolus, especially the Stone Sarda, and Coral, all which from
their Anatomy stop the Flux of Blood, being included in the Hands.

4. The sixth kind of Storks-bill is called Sanguinary, having a red Root, is
powerful resisting all inordinate Fluxes of Blood, it is highly commended.

5. Calcanthum burnt, which obtains the color of Blood, this to admiration
restraines Blood breaking out from the Veins of the Brain, and from the Breast.

6. The Male Anagallis, with a Sanguineous Flower, being held in the Hands till
it be hot, is reported, to be of so great power, as it hinders the flowing of
Blood from a Vein that is cut.

Of the Hemrodes.
All hairy Plants, and soft downy Leaves of Herbs, which are covered with a
Wool like Fleece, and are as it were hoary; in the most grievous Hemrodes, not
abiding any hard touch, are, by their Sympathy therewith, very beneficial.

1. Leaves of Longwort, which are thick, and downy, arrayed as it were with a
Robe of Cotton, therefore the Decoction thereof much helps.

2. Buddings of the Poplar Tree, macerated in Oil Olive, and set for some time
in the Sun, are in this case wonderful profitable: The Seed being of a
Sanguineous color, plainly represents the Posteriors.

3. The Herb Hares-Foot, is also downy, and its Decoction profitable.

4. Scrofularia, which abounds with little hairy downy knobs.

5. The lesser Aron, asswages Inflammations, and the Hemrodes.

6. Among the various distinctions of Longwort, there is one kind called
Wolfes-taile, which, by reason of its soft downy hairs, it imitates: its
Decoction in this case is very profitable.

Of the Dropsy.
1. Root of Briony has the Signature of Hidropic^l Feet, therefore its extract
expells the Water.

2. Root of Michoacan.

3. Dentaria, or Anchlattum, has the Signature of the Hydropick inflation of
the Heart.

4. The Peth of an Elder stick, being pressed, leaves the signs of the
Impression, the same we see in the feet of Hydropicks: therefore the juice of
the Tree, as also the distilled Water of Mushrums of the Elder Tree, are very
beneficial.

5. Peach Apples have also the Signature: Therefore the Flowers, Leaves, and
Kernells being dried, and Pulverisate, and all in due quantity exhibited,
gently purge in the Dropsy, and other Tumors.

Of the Jaundies.
1. Selandine, Saffron, which two from the similitude of a yellow Color, yield
relief. Also Root of Curcuma.

2. Centaury.

3. Lice and yellow Scarabes.

4. The interior yellow Skin of White thorn: Also the middle yellow Rind of
Elder.

5. A living Tench put upon the Navel till it die, especially in the inveterate
Jaundies.

6. A yellow Stone, found in the Gall of an Ox.

7. Root of Orchanet, red in Color, and bitter in Taste. A Decoction of these
is very beneficial.

8. Blossoms of Rosemary peculiarly help. Dose ss.

Of Pimples.
1. The Rind of Beech, interlaced with white spots, that it resemble a
Starling, removes all Spots and Pimples of the Face.

2. Elder Flowers, are also spotted: therefore a fomentation of the Flowers
boiled in water, is here much commended.

Of the Leprosy.
1. Strawberries have the Signature: therefore the distilled water of them
abates the redness of the face in Leprous persons, if drunk, and the Spots also
anointed therewith. Raymond Lully commends the use of Strawberries also
macerated in Spirit of Wine very much, for allaying the violence of the Leprous
Affect, in his Book of Quintessence.

2. Vipers, therefore the Flesh of them prepared is given against the Leprosy
with good success.

Of Maw-wormes.
1. Vetches have the Signature of Maw-wormes, therefore a Decoction thereof is
powerful in expelling Maw-wormes.

2. In the interior cavity of Knobs of Eglantine, or the Dog-Rose, are some
times small Worms included, which reduced to powder, many happily use in
expelling Worms of the Intestines.

Of the red Menstrues.
Red Motherwort, therefore the Herb is endued with most efficacious Virtues, in
stopping and correcting superfluous Menses.

Wasted or Consumed Members.
The Willow bares no Seed, but a twig of the same Tree cut off, only by the
infixion into the Earth grows: therefore a Bath made of the Decoction of
Willowes, is most excellent for decayed and weak Members.

Of Blemishes.
1. Garlic.

2. Arum, Arisarum.

3. Dragon-wort.

4. Arsemart.

5. The lesser Swallowort; all these are Plants Figured with Blemishes,
therefore they remove the Blemishes of our Bodies.

Of Knots in the Flesh.
Herb Mercury is knotted, therefore its Decoction with Mechoacan takes away the
knots of the skin.

Of Prunella.
1. Salt Armoniack, therefore its Distilled Liquor, with juice of Seagreen, is
an admirable Medicament for the sore Throat: for it extracts the Tartary
Sublimate Realgar, adhereing to the Throat, or Neck, and affecting the Tongue
with blackness.

2. Flowers of Prunella, which represent the Form of the Throat, are very much
commended in this Disease.

Prickings of the Sides.
1. Carduus Benedictus by its prickles bespeaks the Cure of the Plurisie, as
also,

2. Carduus Mariae: the Distilled Liquor, or Decoction of either very much
helps.

3. Hippogloss bares one leaf that is exceeding sharp, not without great
admiration of the beholders, and rarity of Nature: which by the Experiment of
those of late times, has been found exceeding powerful in removing prickings
of the Sides.

4. In prickings in the Body, the Jaw Bone or Cross of the Pike-Fish, beaten
and given to drink, is an excellent Remedy.

5. Consolida Regalis, of which 3. or 9. Flowers are commended.

Of Phantasmes.
1. The Strings upon the Leaves of St. John's Wort have the Signature, which
being porous, and gathered in due time and manner, expel all Phantasmes and
Fantastic Spirits from and without Man, without any Superstition, which
Spirit also compells the Spirit of Worms into another Phant^sie, that their
Animal Spirit is constrained to fly before this Spirit.

The Greek name denotes, that, (...), above representations, and Spectrums, it
has Dominion, it is also called Fuga Daemonum: therefore a fumigation made of
the Seed thereof, as the most expert Philosopher Lully says, drives away all
Demons from the propriety of the Body, or from the House.

Portus Neapolitanus affirms, that Malignant Spirits assaulting, can neither
endure the smell of it, nor abide it near them. For as the Celestial Sol, by
its Light drives away all malignant Spirits, that rejoice in Darkness: So St.
John's wort (among Solar Herbs accounted the chief) by Paracelsus dignified with
the Name of the Terrestrial Sol, is found to be of like efficacy.

2. Rue, by reason of the sign of the Cross impressed on the Seed.

3. The Cross growing upon the greater Juniper berries, which are equal in
Magnitude with Fil^erd Nuts; such in my Travels I have seen to grow in
abundance in a Neapolitane Field, near the Shore of the Tyrrhene Sea:
Experierce demonstrates, that these are exceeding powerful against the assaults
of Malignant Spirits.

4. Antirrhinum against Phantasmes, and Incantatious, for the Seed is almost
like a Skeliton, and it represents the Skull of a dead Man.

Of Panaricium.
Archangel, or the White Nettle has the Signature: it therefore being bruised,
and applied, presently kills it.

Of the Pest.
1. A Toad Shellfish, and a Frog: therefore they are profitably applied
externally, for they powerfully extract the Venom.

Signs of future and present Pest appear in the spotted Tongues of Frogs, and
when they come together in Troops, mutually tear one another, they are wont to
presage great Mortality.

2. The Signature of the Blane, and Carbuncle is in the Saphir, in which is a
peculiar Virtue of taking away Blanes, and Carbuncles, and of causing an
Eschara. In a Lizard the like force is in extracting the Eschara.

3. Gamandrea with a round Apple, has also the Signature of the Pest:
therefore the Infected macerate this Herb in their daily Drink (but it must be
the same Herb growing in their own Climate) with good success. So the little
Knobs growing upon Oaks, either Green or Pulverisate, are happily applied in
the Pest. Likewise the powder of Nutmegs Macerated, and applied, extract the
Venom.

Of the De^uxion of Seed, or the Gonorrhea.
The Dead Nettle, or Galeopsis: the Decoction thereof made in Wine, is very
much commended by Carrichterus.

Of the Kings Evil.
1. Scrofularia.

2. The lesser Scrofularia, or the lesser Selandine, whose Strumous Root seems
to grow with many granes of Corn set together.

Of the Squinancy.
Mulberries have the Signature of the Squinancy: therefore the juice thereof,
and of the Leaves, in a Gargarisme, are very beneficial.

Of Scabs.
Scabs of the Body and Feet.
1. Crab Apples, or Apples of the Pitch-tree, coated with little Scales: a
Decoction of them with the Caput Mortuum of Vitriol is a most excellent
external Remedy.

2. Scabious has in the uppermost heads of the Stalks, Sockets of the Flowers,
compacted as it were of Scales, orderly placed: In Scabs it is a mitigating
Remedy.

3. Polypode, has a resemblance of Scabiness in its back part; therefore from
its propriety, a Decoction thereof is profitably applied to all Scabiness of
the Body, or Feet.

Of Scales or Scurf of the Skin.
1. The Vine, and Trees bearing Rosin, which as it were reject their exterior
Bark, are useful to make the Skin smooth, and remove the vices of Scalines.

2. So in Scales or Scurss of the Head Fearn-brake, or Wall-Fearn yield Relief.

Of Feet rough and Scaly.
Scoria's of Iron have the Signature of the Scaly Lips of Ulcers: for as these
Scoria's in melting are ejected from the Iron to the Superficies: so also by
the Internal Archens of Man, or by the Art of Nature, a Separation of Mineralls
and Excrements is made in the Microcosmick Body: therefore Crocus Martis, and
Oil of the same, are in such cases very beneficial.

Of the Cramp.
1. Snayles at the least touch contract themselves: In white Snailes there is a
very small Bone found, when cut in the middle, which being diligently taken
out, and wrapped in Paper, is exhibited with admirable success in the Cramp.

2. The Ham of a Hare, an Animal most swift in course, is also profitable in
the like Case.

Of Bunches.
1. Gladiolus, having a knotted Root, the knots being one above another, after
the manner of small Scallions, the inferior weak and thin, the Superior
strong and lively: this certainly removes preternatural Tumors, or Bunches.

2. Scrophularia has a sharp Root, endowed with little Tumorous and Pap-like
Heads, with a swelling Turse-like Substance underneath: in Strumous and
swelling Ulcers, by mediating it yields relief.

3. Figgs grow in manner of Bunches, therefore are good against the same.

4. Spunges of the Sea.

5. The Strumous Root of Flower-de-Luce asswages Bunches.

6. There is also a lesser Scrophularia, called the little Herb with Ivyleaves,
has very many small pendent Roots, in a certain hard knob, as granes of Wheat
gathered in a heap, whereof three or four hang out longer then the rest. These
used fresh, are found by experience to have great virtue in removing
preternatural Tumors, fiery Sores, and Piles of the Fundament.

7. Salt of Vngaria, or Transylvania, Native, has many Clots like to Bunches
in humane Bodies; the frequent use of which, as also of Salt-Gem, Paracelsus
highly commends in removing such like Tumors.

Of Black and New by a struck.
Sugillations.
1. Arsemart has a Leaf blotted, with a blemish almost like to a blot in
writing, which has a resemblance of the New or horned Moon, and is good in
such like affects.

2. The Lesser Selandine also, by reason of the Magi^k Signature of the Leaves,
is in this case a Specific: for it does not only by being mixed with Ointments
take away external Blemishes, but also being macerated in Wine, and daily drunk
three or four times, it miraculously expells the congealed Blood from within
the Body.

Of Tartar of the Ventricle.
Wood-bine, or Bindeweed, has the Signature; a Decoction thereof is
exceedingly commended.

Of Retained Urine.
1. The Peth contained in the hollowness of a Goose Quill, dried and
pulverisate, and afterward drunk in Wine, does admirably expel the toolong
retained Urine.

2. The Soul of a Herring (as it is vulgarly called) representing the color of
Silver, and also the hollowness of the passage of the Yard, being reduced to
powder, and exhibited, is wont most efficaciously to provoke Urine.

Of Poisons.
1. Star-wort, the greater Dragon-wort, in every lease has the Figure of a
Serpent; whence by Magical Indication we are confirmed, that a Decoction
thereof, against the hurt of Serpents is most efficacious.

2. The lesser Dragon-wort, as a wonder of sporting Nature, arises out of the
Earth, at the exact time when Serpents first appear, nor does the Serpent at
all appear, whilst it is wholly hid in the Earth, by the officious bounty of
Nature demonstrating a Remedy, and premonishing the time of Danger.

3. Bisiort, Dragon, Briony, against biting of Vipers, and Serpents.

4. Adders-Tongue, as also the preceding Herb has the Figure of the
Serpents-Tongue, wherewith he desires to hurt.

5. Among all the kinds of Garlic, the wild, or Serpents-Garlick, is signated.

All Plants which represent the spotted Skin of a Serpent, and show the various
colored spots of Vipers, that have the Effigies of Serpents, from every part
conspicuous, are powerful against their bitings.

Of Warts.
Knots of Reeds have the Signature of Warts: therefore Warts by a Magnetic
Cure are removed by them.

Of Wounds.
1. Sapena, of the Shore, or Water-Pepper, growing in waters, whose Streams
gliding softly along have no strong Current, by reason of its Sanguineous Spots
in the Leaves, mediates in supervenient Symptoms of fresh Wounds: so the Flux
of Blood appears to be the only object of Arsemart, signated by his
Sanguineous-Stalk: This Arsemart is by Paracelsus called the Terrestrial
Mercury; and he says, that in it is a Carnal Influence, or an Influential
Attractive, no otherwise, then as the Sun, and all Stars attract from
Inferiors, and Inferiors again from their Superiors: the Leaves have the
Signature of Drops.

2. Leaves of St. John's Wort having innumerable little holes which seem to be
made with the point of a Needle; therefore are profitable in all External and
Internal hurts of the skin. And because the Flowers also after putrefaction
retain the form of Blood, they are peculiarly assigned to Wounds.

3. Millfoile, and Betony, having Leaves cut and jagged.

4. Bastard Fel-wort, or Crossewort, the Root of which, when dug up, has
almost the Form of a Cross.

5. Ascyrum.

6. The Elm also has porous Leaves; and so all Plants having such like porous
Leaves, are useful in healing Wounds of the Body.

MEDICAMENTS helpful by SIMILITVDE.
IT is also to be noted, that certain Medicaments profit by Similitude, and in
a wonderful manner deliver from Diseases, as we have found by experience; the
reason is, because one has the Anatomy of the other; for to what may we better
compare a like, then to its like?

Arsenick helps Arsenical Ulcers. Among all Fruits of the water, there is not a
greater Venom then Arsenick, in which, according to Paracelsus, all Venenosity
of Rosinous matter are united as one Body.

Wolfe-Bane given in hot Wine to such as are bitten with Vipers, or struck with
a Scorpion, is found by the Experience of many skilful Physicians, to be a
healing Remedy; so Poison for the most part, with Poison is repelled.

Boletus of the Heart is a Mushrum, which arises from the seed of that Animal,
and is applied for Venereal uses.

A Crab, because its Body swells, therefore being boiled with honey it asswages
Cancers, and Chilblanes; it is also profitable to sprinkle on them the powder
of River Crabs.

Also a living Crab tied with a Ligature upon the Cancer until it die, the
Cancer is bettered thereby; if ulcerated, it is afterward Cured with any
Opodeldoch: Thus one Cancer both kills and Cures another.

The Cardiack Passion is removed with powder of a Partridge's Heart.

The Hairs of a Man, if distilled, a juice comes forth, which used by
annoynting is profitable in prolonging the Hairs of the Head.

The Brains of a Swine is very beneficial in the Frenzy; therefore they also
which have lost their Memory, eat Hogs-brains with Nutmeg, and Aroma^isate
Cinnamon, with good success.

The Heart of a Wag-taile in Coagulation of Blood, and when the Heart is cold,
is hung about the Neck for an Amulet very profitable.

An Essence prepared of Bones of the Heart of the Heart, corroborates the Heart
of Man in the Cardiack-Passion, and Swounings.

A small piece of the Navel string of a new born Infant, included in a Silver
Casket, or Ring, and worn so as it touch the flesh, I have found and received
from the certain experience of many, that it extenuates the violence of the
Cholick-Dolours.

Mans-Scull helps the Epilepfie, the former part, not the hinder part, being
taken; also the Cranium of a Man profits the Man, and of a Woman the Woman.

Wild Cucumers, or the Fruit thereof, when full ripe, with very gentle handling
are broke, and as it were with a touch only spontaneously eject their juice:
so, the use of this coagulated juice, or Elatery, by this Magic Indication,
does vehemently expel the Whey-like Humors of Humane Bodies.

In the Dysentery, with very good Success, is adhibited that red Pethy
substance, which in junctures of Stone Quarries is found, and gathered; it is
vulgarly called the Stony Liver.

With the Epilepsie, Elkes and Swallows are corrupted: so also against the
same Disease, specifically like an Amulet, the right Hoof of the hinder Foot of
the Elke, part thereof being put into the left Ear of the Epileptick, just at
the approach of the Fit, delivers him from the violence and danger thereof,
usually absolutely prevents it: and of Swallows a singular Antepileptick water
is prepared.

The Young Serpents exclude their Skin, with which at the time of the Birth, if
the Traveling Woman be Girt close to her naked Body, her Labor is
facilitated, and the Birth hastened.

Yellow Choler is expelled with Rubard of the same Color.

In the Neapolitan Field near the City of Soma, there grows Mushrums our of
Stones, that have been certain years buried in the Earth, which being dried and
pulverisate, and ss exhibited in appropriate water morning and evening, most
miraculously breaks away all Stones in the Humane Body, and expells them like
fine Flower.

Gladiolus bruised, and applied, by its Similitude extracts Splinters and
Thorns.

Globus or a Ball, that is gathered together by Scarabes, extracts Leaden Balls
from the Body.

Hemrodes manifest themselves in obscene places, they are cured with the
aforesaid Scarabes, which breed in the Excrements of Horses, being first
reduced to powder, and then sprinkled on the affected place.

Hydrophobia is expelled by throwing the person affected suddenly and
unexpectedly into the water: So fear by Fear is discussed.

Seed of Goats-tongue, Echium, like Vipers-heads: therefore it mittigates in
bitings of Vipers and other Serpents, and is a Prophilactick Medicament.

Worms of the greater and lesser World, are a Remedy for Worms in the Body of
Man: If the aforesaid Worms be dried, and reduced to powder, and afterward
exhibited in Goats-milk, the Maw-wormes in the Ventricle and Intestines will
immediately die, and be ejected, and expelled from the Body.

A living Earth-worm tied for 24 hours about the Panaricium, until the Worm be
dead, and the Evil will be killed.

The Wolf in the humane Body is cured by the benefit of Unguents, and
Cataplasmes prepared of the flesh and fat of a Wolf.

Powder of the Matrix of a Hen, injected into the Neck of the Matrix, dryes up
the preternatural humidity, and takes away Barrenness in Women from thence
caused, and helps Conception.

Clefts in Women's Breasts, are healed by annoynting with the prepared Gluten of
Cowes Vdders.

There sometimes in the Posteriors grow soft tender cruent Sores, like to
Mullberries, which with the fruit of Mulberries, and powder of the Leaves, are
healed.

The Crystalline humor of Ox Eyes distilled, in all vices of the Eyes is very
beneficial.

The Skin taken off from the Feet of Geese, in coldness of the Feet (as also in
Panaricium) yields relief, a Decoction thereof being made with Mugwort boiled
in it, which is very profitably applied.

A Bulls Pisslle or Yard of the Heart, takes away (...), and excites the
Venereal Faculty; for the Nature of these Animals is Lascivious.

The immoderate Flux of the Menses, whilst with them the pure blood begins to
come forth, are stopped by three or four drops of that most pure Blood that
comes last forth, being exhibited to the Patient without her knowledge, in a
draught of Bear or Wine.

The Lunes of a Fox, are profitable in Affects of the Lights.

All Animals that have in them a renovating Faculty, as Vipers and Serpents
have, Renovate our Bodies, and repair decaying Youth.

The Blood which issues out of the Nostrils and Veins being dried, and as it
were reduced to powder, and afterward snuffed up the Nostrils, and sprinkled on
the Veins, stops the Haemorragia. It may also be inwardly given.

In like manner, Blood that issues out of Wounds, being again put into the
Wounds while it is hot, stops the immoderate Flux of Blood.

The Liver of a Wolf helps the infirmities of the Liver.

The Herb Sagittalis growing in Meadows by Ditch-sides, and having the Figure
of an Arrow, draws heads of Arrows out of the Flesh.

Root of Scorzonera bares the effigies of a Serpent called Scorzone, against
the bite of which, it is an only Antidote.

If a Serpent be suspended and suffocated with a linen Thread, that little
string in the Quincy and Impost hume of the Jaws is very beneficial.

Against the Synovia, if a little of it be given the Patient upon a small piece
of Bread, it is present Remedy.

The Secundine is expelled with a Secundine washed, and in an Earthen Pot dried
to powder, and ss of the powder exhibited in Hen-broth.

The skin of a Wolfs Stomach worn, helps the digestion of the Stomach: also the
skins of a Swan and Vulture tawed, are of like effect.

The evil savor of Spirit of Tartar, expells the stink of putrid Humors from
out of the Humane Body in time of the Pest.

The Tartar, or Salt of Man's Urine, is singular against the Tartar and Stone in
the Microcosme.

The Knotty Root of Tormentil bruised, and applied, takes away Knotts of the
Skin.

The Writhing of the Intestines in the Cholick is helped with a girdle of Wolfs
Guts dried, as also the Excrements thereof worn.

Swellings, or Tumors like Gums.
Gums, which grow in our Members, are dissolved and mitigated with the Gum that
sweats out of the Cherry-Tree, being dissolved in Vinegar and applied.

In Measles of young Infants, a Decoction of Rape-seed and Lentils, by
Similitude yield Relief.

Deer, and Serpents, which live in unfrequented places are not afflicted with
the Vertigo; therefore their Fat, if with a little of it the Temples be
anointed, is exceeding powerful against the Vertigo: as also the Quintessence
of Storkes, is alike efficacious, because they are wont for long time in the
Air to fly in a round Circle.

The Vital Spirit, Paracelsus calls them Das Ferch in the Germane Idiome.
or Life in the Muscles, in Form resembles the Soul of a Herring (as they call
it) or Silver, or Argent. Viv. when it waxes cold in the Blood, it must be let
out with a prick or cut, when it appears in the Blood coming out with it, it
must presently without delay be given to the Patient to drink, while it is
warm, and no small benefit will accrue thereby.

The Bladder of an Ox, in all Diseases of the Bladder is helpful.

The Bladder of a Swine, that has not touched the Earth, being applied to the
Privities, as Pliny says, provokes Urine.

A Sheep or Goats Bladder burnt, and the powder drunk with Vinegar and Water,
by those who cannot retain their Urine, profits much.

The Bladder of a Carp dried and pulverisate singularly profits such as are so
hurt in Childbirth, as they cannot hold their Water, and such as involuntarily
let go their Water.

When Black Bladders arise in the Feet, Vva-versa, or the wholesome Wolfebane
with black Leaves and Berries, has the Signature, and is therefore very
profitable. With this Herb Phaedro Magnetically (as also Para^elsus with
Arsemart) performed Cures to admiration, in deplorable Ulcers, as he himself
affirmed.

The Ventricle of a Hen, Viz. The Interior Membrane, in the evilly affected
Ventricle is very profitable.

Civet expells Cholick Excrements.

Venomous Diseases are for the most part healed with Proper Antidotes.
WOlfe-bane, as above said, cures bitings of Vipers and Scorpions.

A Shive-mouse, which bites venomously, if dissected and applied to the part
bitten, expells the Venom and Cures.

The Stingings of Bees, is cured with Honey.

The Toad-Stone found in the Head of a Toad, cures Diseases thereof.

Powder of Toads, applied to Venomous bitings attracts the Venom.

Such as are Pist upon by Toads, successfully ease themselves with application
of a dried Toad.

The Biting of a Mad-Dog, is cured, if first the Hairs of the same Dog be
applied to the Wound externally, so the Venom is extracted, in like manner if
they be burnt and drunk; also if the Liver of the same Dog be roasted, and
eaten by him that was bitten, he will be free and safe, and not troubled with
fear of Water; likewise the Tooth wherewith the Wound was made, taken out and
wrapped in a little of the skin, is profitably worn about the Arm, as an Amulet.

The Fat of a Crocodile cures the biting thereof.

The Powder of Mice burnt, cures their biting.

Such as are Pist upon by Mice, are healed with Ashes of Mice burnt, sprinkled
on the affected place, before the flesh be corroded.

The Bone of the Heart of a Heart, cures the Venom taken by eating of
Harts-Tayle.

The Grease of Serpents is also commended against their biting.

Against Venoms of Serpents, the Heads of them beaten, or the Entrails,
especially the Gall, applied to the part affected.

The same Scorpion which has hurt a Man, being beated and applied to the
affected place, is a Remedy of its own hurt, by a certain obscure discord of
Natures: from whence the evil arises, from thence also comes the Remedy.

So also Oil of Scorpions against their Woundings.

If Poisons of contrary faculties be sometimes mixed and conjoined, they are
Remedies, not dangerous. There have been some who have cut off a Pestilential
Bubo, dried it, and reduced to powder, have exhibited it to the Infected, in
like manner, as Oil of Scorpions, against Venom of Scorpions is administered,
and so Venom attracts Venom of its own kind.

As an Egg congealed by cold, by being put into most cold water that is ready
to freese in frosty weather, is restored to its pristine State: So also Members
vitiated with cold, are healed by being put into, or bathed with cold Snow
water; so Cold extracts Cold.

In like manner, Members above measure hot, are restored by application of the
best rectified Spirit of Wine, (which is mere Fire, or the Quintessence of
Sulphur) so heat by Magnetic virtue extracts heat.

How exceeding necessary the knowledge of Chiromancy is for an expert Physician,
has been already spoken of; for from Chiromantick Lines, convenient Remedies
for the body of Man may be known.

He that in his Hand has an Architect-Line is obnoxious to the Cholick, and of
it he will die; therefore the Architect-Line in leaves of Herbs, is a Medicine
in the Cholick.

So also the Line Anchora, is the Line of Apoplexy: therefore the Line Anchora
in the Herb of Achorum, is a Medicine for the Apoplexy.

CORRESPONDENCIES OF SIGNATURES OF THE GREATER and LESSER WORLD.
In the World. In the Lesser, or Microcosme. In the Greater, or Macrocosme
PHysiognomony, or the form of the Face. The Face of Heaven. Chyromancy.
Minerals. Pulses. Motion of the Firmament. Breathings. East Wind, West-Wind.
Horror of Fevers. Motion of the Earth. Lientery, Dysentery and Diarrhaea.
Showers. Wringings and Gripings of the Cholick. Cholick in Man, as of Winds in
the Great World. Violence of Winds. Difficulty of making water in the
Nephritick Dolor. Corruscation. Apoplexy. The same that Generates Thunder and
Lightning, the same Generates the Apoplexy, the Operations of either is
admirable.
Eclipse, Conjunction, Thunder and Lightning. Tabes, Pthisick, or dryness of
the Microcosme. Drowth in the Macrocosme. Dropsy. Inundation, Deluge.
Epilepsie. Tempest.

The same which causes Storms and Tempests in the greater World, the same
also causes the Epilepsie in the lesser World Tempests demonstrate the Cause,
Nature, and Original of the Falling Sickness.
; and as a Tempest changes and weakens the Animal Sense and Intellect, apparent
in the unusual crowing of Cocks, also by the unaccustomed singing and noise of
other Birds and Beasts, and by the more vehement stingings of Flies and other
Insects; so in like manner it is in Epilepticks.

In the Microcosme. In the Macrocosme. 1. When a Tempest is near there is a
change of Air. 1. A change of Reason when the Epilepsie begins to assault. 2.
Clouds succeed 2. Dimness of Sight, Sleep. 3. Winds 3. Inflation of the Neck
and Belly. 4. Fraction and Thunder 4. Fraction of the Bladder, and Concussion
of the Body. 5. Great flashes of Lightning 5. Fiery and sparkling Eyes. 6.
Showers 6. Foamings. 7. Thunderclaps. 7. Forcing of the Spirits, and tearing
of the Ligaments. 8. Serene time. 8. Return of the Senses and Speech. Afterward
the Clay and Earth moystned with the Rain, is by the Sun again dried So Man
coming to himself, the Sun of the Microcosme again restores the Reason, Mind,
and other functions of the Body, after requisite rest, into their Pristine
State.

As Quarries of Stone are the Bones of the great Mother; so are the Bones in
the Body of Man. As many kinds of Wood a^ are in the World, so many kinds of
Bones in the Humone Body.
As the Earth by Stones is fortified, so the Body with Bones is Strengthened;
Minerals are Stones of the Earth, and the Bones of the Microcosme are like unto
Gold, partaking of the same Nature.

Earth The Form of all Humane Members is found in Vegetables, Stones, and
Minerols.
Flesh. Great Floods. Great Veins. The Sea. The Bladder. The seven Metals in
Mountains, or the seven Celestial Planets. The Seven Principal Members in Man.

And as in the Earth Flowers show the colors of Stars; so the Stars in Heaven
represent the fruits of the Fields on Earth.

There is nothing in the World, the property of which is not found in Man the
Microcosme. Wan is known by the Nature of Animals, whose Primum Esse bares Rule
in him.
For the most glorious God has not Created any Creature more wise, and noble,
then Man, because in him the order and Primum Esse of all Animals is found: and
since he is the Comprisement of all Creatures, he (like a certain Poetic
Proteus) into the shape of all Flesh, and into the ingenuity of every Creature,
transformes himself; imitates and invents whatsoever is found in them: for, as
the most learned in occult Literature, Picus Mirandulanus affirms, the
Celestial Father has endowed Man, when born into the World, Whence the
Chaldeans say. Man is an Animal of a vartous multiformed and changable Nature.
with all sorts of Seeds, and Sprouts of every kind of Life, which whosoever
pollisheth, grow up, and bring forth their proper fruits in him: if Vegetable,
he is made a Plant: if Sensual, he becomes Brutish: if Rational, he becomes a
Caelestial Animal: if Intellectual, he will be an Angel, and Son of God; and
not receiving satisfaction in the Creatures emptiness, throws himself into the
Center of Divine Unity; is made one Spirit with God, walking in the solitary
Clouds of the Father, has Dominion over all things, and exceeds all other
Creatures.

And this Condition, unto which, in an Universal manner, The wise man Rules,
Commands, and Compels the Stars.
Man is appointed, the same Picus worthily says, is not o y envied by Brutes,
but also by Stars, Hos. 2. v. 18.
and ^ultra mundane minds. But animal, and astral Men, Job 5. v. 23.
eating of the Tree of proper Pride, who neglecting the Eternal Patrimony in
this World, live Captives of the Stars, Hence is the Vulgar saying, we e^ber
are have been, or may be What he is.
and suffer themselves by the spirit of the Stars, (which by the wise, or
rather by the Spirit of God in the Sapient is ruled,) to be governed and
subjected, after excitation, Eccl. 7 v. 21.
may in themselves (as a little after is said) observe the Nature and Spirit of
their fore Fathers lurking in them. There is no man so holy, and just, in whom
those occult Seeds of Malignant Stars are not latent, suffocating and
suppressing the daily Prayers of the Wise, that by increasing they may manifest
themselves; so in the Ungodly, destitute of the preserving grace of God, they
easily break out. Therefore the Prophet David complains of the public Malice
of the Men of Belial, etc. 2 Samuel Chap. 23. ver. 6. 7
Christ and his Apostles were Astronomers unknown: For Believing or being
Regenerated, they were not subjected to the Stars, but were Lords of the
Firmament, Man has an Eternal Father, to whom be ought to live, not to the
Animal Spirit.
and of the Seven Spirits in the Firmament. The Son of God called his Disciples
supernally Regenerated, after the abjection and valediction of all Astralls,
Lights of the World, and Salts of the Earth.

Paracelsus says, GOD gave unto man the A^al Body, not that he should live in
it, but that he might inhabit it for a time.
Whilst Man without the exercise of Reason, lives according to the Brutal
Spirit, it is not injurious to call him by the name of a Beast; But he who
according to the Spirit of Man, lives like a Rational Man, ought to be called
by the name of a Man: So our Savior called Herod a Fox.

MEN take their SIGNATVRES
Courageous, Bold, Strong, Mag^animous, From Lions and Eagles. Faithful
Friends, from Dolphins, whose faithful Freindship toward Men in History is
noted. Likewise a sign of friendship appears in Swine, one being hurt, and
crying out, all the rest that hear it, run together in troops, grunting, and as
it were, offering their assistance. The contrary is seen in Dogs, if one be
hurt, and by his howling signify it to others, they all run a way. True and
constant Friends: The Ivy, which after Death also cleaves to Trees with its
tender-branches, loosing as it were its sprouts among the Leaves, embraces them
though dead. Dissembling false flattering Friends. The Crocodiles, who with
tears, in token of Compassion, deceive. Superficiary Friends, changing their
affections with the change of Fortune. Summer Birds, who when heat attends us,
will also be present, but cold assaulting, they forsake us. Great Walkers to
and fro. The Crow, who upon dry sand walks to and fro, often by himself.
Flatterers From Cats and Dogs, flattering with their Tail: for these Animals
are more accustomed to familiarity with men then any other. Adulterers, from
the Fish Sargus, which coming out of the Sea, seeks after other Mates, and is
wonderfully Lustful after she- Goats, as by Opianus is described. Invadit
Sargos Caprarum mira Cupido.
Qui madidi simas cupiunt tractare Capellas.
Montanis gregibus, quamvis tot agmina Ponti.
(...)
Uncharitable Struthiocamelus. Covetous, and Austere -- Ravens. Chaste and
unmarried The Unicorn therefore, not without a Mysterious signification, See
Paracelsus in his Aroth.
by venerable and prudent Antiquity has been painted inclining his Head into
the Bosom of the most holy Virgin Mary. Cruel and Impious, A Lyoness. Such as
bring danger on themselves, Thrushes, who from their own bo dies void their
proper evil, viz Birdlime, with which they are afterward taken. Devout, 1.
Young Ravens. 2. Larks, which are observed before and after meat, to fly up
toward Heaven, singing, and lauding God in their proper manner. So also in
Elephants there is a certain hidden Reason of Nature, Religion, and Ve^n ration
of the Stars.
Desperate, From the Elephant. Scholars easy to be taught, or having an
aptness to learn From the Ape, Popenjay, and Elephant. Scholars unapt to learn
From Rams, and Asses. Dissolute and Vagabonds, From Boars. Foolish, From
Cattle. Cruel and Savage Tigers. Fruitful and Childbearing Women: From the
Hare and Cony, who are most fruitful; for they Generate and bring forth ten
times in a Year. Thieves, From Crows, and Starlings. Horrid, Struthiocamelus.
Groaning, and Lamenting, Turtles, and Pigeons. Unclean, and Filthy, Swine.
Impudent, and Importunate Flies, who though often beat away, will always
return. Envious Back-biters, Dogs. Inobedient, and Rebels A Wren. Ungrateful A
Cuckoo. Unruly, and Disdainful A Bull. Evil-speaking Enemies, The Snake. For
this Animal uses no other Member then his Mouth. Offended with all From Eales,
for these keep themselves apart from all Fishes, and are not at any time found
joined with others. So. are also Owls, disjoined from the company of all other
Birds. Very Angry, From Indian Cocks, who, through too much Anger swel.
Robbers, From Bears. Weepings, From Vines pruned. Lustful, From Sparrowes.
Liberal, From the Cock, to whom Nature has Communicated such a property, that
breaking its own sleep, advises Mortals of their Labor, and the approaching
Day. (...) Talkers, From Popenjayes, Starlings, Jack^^^es, and Magpies, which
have a Singular natural faculty in imitating Humane voice: Whence, Pica loquax,
varias modulatur Guttere voces,
Scurrili strepitu, quicquid and audit, ait.
Luxurious, and strong in delights of Love, From Coneys, and the Fish Scarus
Hating Light, Owls, and Bats, which are Nightbirds. Great Persons not
admitting of any equals, or striving for Dominion; From Bulls. Laudable and
mutual Love in Wedlock, From Pigeons, which are the most chaste of all Birds.

The Male, and Female, as it were by Nuptial ties, cleave each to other by
mutual consent, with such admirable Chastity, as neither offers to desire to
change its Mate. If with unlawful Love any be taken, so as the Males cast their
Eyes with desire upon another Mate, the same other Males will tear in pieces;
so in like manner the Females, if any of their own Sex be culpable, punish them
with Death, as Aelianus testifies. The same Author further says, that Pigeons
are not suffered to copulate with strange Mates; nor is the Wedlock from their
beginning instituted, to be at all altered or changed, nor any other celebrated
with either, unless they be both single, or Widows. From Adultery they are
most Chaste; they never forsake the company each of other, after the First
Institution of their Society, unless by Death separated. In the Birth the Male
is present, and performs all needful Offices: the Male finding the Female
(when she has brought forth Eggs) too negligent, beats her with his Wings, and
compells her to enter the Nest, and also to sit upon the Eggs: they both sit by
turns, the Male in the day, and Female in the night. If the Male dye, the
Female mourns and wastes it self, abstaining a long time from all Food: So
great is the mutual Love of Pigeons; also the Femal admits not of the Male,
before they have kissed each other.

Meek and gentle, From Lambs. M^litious, From Owls. Timorous and fearful, From
Hares. Melancholy and filthy, From the Lapwing, which is colored with Black
spots, and by reason of its melancholy Complexion, it delights in Deserts
a^dunfrequented places, a most filthy Bird, abiding in Sepulchers, and
anointing his Nest with most stinking filth. Clean, From Catts. Mute, From
Fishes; therefore the Pythagoreans, as Athenius says, abstained from Fishes.
(...)
Musical, From the Linnet, and Nightingale, which with the pleasantness of
their voices wonderfully delight, and then which, there are not among Birds,
any that with more melodious singing yield pleasure to all that hear them. Of
all Birds the Nightingale only waketh in the Night while she sits upon her
Eggs, and as it were, to pass over the tediousness of the Night-season, sweetly
sings. Talkative, prattling and scolding Women. From a company of Geese and
Ducks cackling together. Or else from Grasshoppers, who some times so eagerly
streine their voices that they break asunder. Hurtful, From Mice. Idle, From
Grasshoppers. Obstinate and Lacivious, From a Calf. Parasites, and Jesters, From
Apes ready to imitate all things Parricides, From Hippopotamus, which declares
the ingratitude and injustice of Parricides. Petulant and wanton, From Goats.
Lovers of Children, From the Swan and Swallow; for they are exceeding lovers of
their Young. A Swallow hatches no less then five young ones, in the bringing
up; and feeding of which, both the Male and Female labor with admirable
equity; they in feeding begin with that which was first hatched, and the other
orderly, as having Reason. Pious toward their Parents, from Storks, and the
Bird Cucupha, which Birds are most pious signs of Gratitude; for these only
render thanks to their Parents by sustaining them in Age. Prudent and
Circumspect, From Serpents. Those that make a Prey of others, from the
Pike-fish and Hawk. Ovid says, Odimus Accipitrent, quia semper vivit in Armis.
Kickers with the heel, From Mules. Laughers, From the Bird Maeus, which
imitates humane Laughter, and checkling so exactly as is miraculous. Two of
this kind of Birds were brought out of Turkey for a Present to our most noble
Emperor Rudolphus, one of which, by the negligence of the Gardners, flew away,
the other is at this present kept with other foreign Fowls, in his Majesty's
Garden at Prague. Wise and Provident, from Ants, and Bees, who know how to
Provide for Winters necessity, both food, Prove. 6. ver. 8
and convenient lodging-places. Prove. 20. ver. 25
It is strange that Ants should observe the course of the Stars; they are said
in time of Interlunes to cease from Labor, but in the Full Moon they work in
the Nights. Full of Knowledge and humble, from Ears of Corn loaded, which
always bow, and incline themselves down-ward. Void of Science, yet willing to
seem Learned, from empty Ears which stand bolt upright. Also from the Feces or
Scum in boiling Flesh, which is always went to swim on the top. In the same
sense, empty Vessels yield a great sound, but full ones make no noise. Simple,
From Pigeons. Exquisite Artifice, From the Sea Parsnip, which in an occult
manner sixes its Root in such things as lie or grow in the Earth, that might
hinder its extension downward. Exceeding sleepy, From the Hedghog, and Dormouse
who, sleep all Winter, and do so as it were expire in sleep, that with the pain
of fire they can scarcely be awakened: being dissected, remains unmovable as
it were dead, until in boiling Life is perceived, for when the Water begins to
boil, the dissected Members declare they were alive.

These perhaps (as is by some in Histories, reported, that the Storkes, and
Swallows, remain as dead all the Winter, and in the Spring time revive) gave
their Signatures to the men in Russia, who perished in Woods, in a sharp
Winters-frost, and as is reported, revived again in the Summer. Those Animals
which all the Winter without food sustain their life in Caverns, live of their
own Substance; as we see in Trees which retain their Leaves perpetually green,
it is because a sufficiency of clammy juice is in them contained.

Foolish, Slow, and Patient, From the Ass. Earnest in entreating, From Dogs.
Proud, From Goats, Horses, Peacocks. Sad and Melancholy, From Night Birds
which are Saturnal and Melancholic. Triumphing over Enemies from fighting
Cocks, who being overcome are silent, but if Conquerors they Crow, and as much
as in them ^es sing, and with stately paces, erect their most excellent ensign
of Nature, Viz. their Comb, not without great manifestation of Pride.
Changeable, From the Camelion, who through too much fear changing his color,
seems to be multiformed. Turn-coats, deceitful, and fraudulent Hypocrites. From
Foxes, the Polypus, and the Fish Sepia, which wants not its cunning; for
as soon as he perceives himself in danger, or sees devouring fishes near,
poures out Ink, which is his proper Blood, and so by darkning the Water,
escapes unhurt. Nimble and swift of Foot From a young Goat. Devouring,
Insatiable, and Ravenous. From Wolves, who devour Flesh and Bones. Vengeance
taken of themselves, for wickedness perpetrated. From the Camel, who having
unawares copulated with his Mother, after he understands it, he with his own
proper Teeth bites off his Genitals, thereby taking vengeance of himself, as it
were for Incest. Uxorious, and Jealous From Dunghill Cocks, who when the Mother
Hen is dead sit upon the Eggs, and exclude the Young, and they keep silence at
the same time, as conscious to themselves, that they are obliged to the Dead.
Moreover they contend among themselves, as also Hearts do, for the Females, and
wound each other so, as sometimes Death ensues.

And so consequently from these, others also have like affections.

Very many Mechanics have learned their Science and Artifice from other
Creatures. As
THe Art of Building, From Shell-fishes, Swallows, and the most industrious
Bees. The Art of Embroydery, Tapestry, and of weaving Hangings, representing
various colors. From the Green-fields painted with Flowers of various Colors,
and representing unexpressible varieties of them. To Institute and lead forth
Colonies; from Bees in their swarmings, Institutions of Labor, and Office,
etc. Also Cranes, who for their joint Commodity journey very far, as in the
Winter from Scythia to Nylus. The manner of Watchings, From Dear, and Cranes.

Cranes are Fowls that make great noise; whatsoever they perceive, by voice
they signify it to others: they have watchings in the Night-times; he which
watches holds in one foot a little stone, which if by sleep let fall, his
negligence is discovered. They choose out of themselves a Captain, who cries out
while the whole Company sleep. When in an exceeding great Multitude they fly,
by course they appoint such as shall cry out, who while the whole company are
flying cries constantly, till they descend upon the Earth; then the Captain
with loud acclamation cries out, that all may come and feed together; if
through too much crying he be hoarse, they substitute another in his stead.
When they journey, by the sharpness of their Senses, they reduce their body in
form of a Triangle, that with more ease they may cut the Air, then each of them
leisurely, as Oars are moved, from each side stir their wings, that without
too much weariness they may fly far: If the Winds, or Storms arise, not
front-wise (they fly in form of the Lunar Globe, for more security in danger)
but in a moment they change the form of their body like a Wedge. If by the
Eagle they perceive themselves in danger, they cast themselves Circular in form
of a Globe, and then make a show as if they prepared to encounter him, which
perceived by the Eagle, he returns and leaves them. In flying, they lay their
necks upon the backs of them that fly foremost ( Hearts in like manner do the
same when they Swim over Rivers) and so render their labor more easy; and if
the foremost be weary, they afterward fly hindmost, receiving the like benefit
of laying their necks upon the others backs. When they rest, all sleep, save
only the Captain, who by his voice signifies what he perceives. In like manner
Geese celebrate Nocturnal watchings, and by their voices testify their
wakefulness.

Of forming the Science of Love, From Crabs, Crocodiles, and Shel-fishes Of
gathering things round on a heap, or of making balls. From Scarabes, who also
instruct Physicians in forming Pills.

The Scarabes has as many feet as there be days in a Month, in which the Sun
compleats his course through one of the Twelve Signs: This apparently
demonstrates the Conjunction of Sol, and Luna, by rotation from Sun rise, to
Sunset. Out of Horse or Bullocks dung, a little Ball is formed representing
the Globe, which lies buried for Twenty eight days, and is so long concealed
in a hollowness of the Ground, whilst Luna passing its course again returns to
the Signiferous Interlune, then this little Ball opened, declaring the
Conjunction of the Stars, produces a new Off spring; nor is there any other
Original known of this Scarabes.

The playing with Hand-balls, From young Catts.

Soldiers are taught Duelling or single Combats, From Game Cocks, who with
wonderful fury Fight with each other; are elevated in Fight, proud and
pertinaceous: To these by a certain prerogative in Nature is given, that they
only among Birds wear a Crest, (as it were a Helmet) and on their Legs Spurs,
and about their Necks long Feathers, as it were denoting Arms, and expressing
their Marshal Nature. When they enter the List, though their Supreme Ensign of
Pride be Elevated, yet they incline their Comb downward, lest it should in
Fight be offensive: When in Combating they are Victors, then by swift motions
of Eyes and Head, by proud and elated stretching out of the Neck, by setting up
the Tail, stately paces, and loud Crowing, they manifest their Triumphant
insultings over the Vanquished. But when overcome, they are silent, yet but
evilly bare their servitude.

The Art of Swimming, From Geese and other Fowl, and also Animals using the
Water. Nautica, From Squirrels. Page 100.
The Art of Spinning, From Silk-wormes. The making of Carts: The backs of the
Beasts in Autumn are always bare, and without hair, being worn off with this
way of carrying.
From Murments, who lying upon their Backs, suffer themselves to be loaded with
what is needful for future necessity, and by the Tail suffer themselves to be
drawn by their fellows to their appointed place.

The same exquisite providence in the Beavers (being Animals using the water)
is observed, who build Huts, or dwelling places on the Banks, or Shores of
Rivers, with two or more stories, that if the water increase, and ascend, their
Lodging places may be secured from the swelling of the Waters, and that in the
decrease thereof they may the more commodiously descend into it: when they are
about to build, they choose a Tree, convenient for the purpose, and in suitable
lengths, with their Teeth which are most sharp, they gnaw and bite it off; and
then what they so bit, that in its fall it be not injurious to them, they
warily strike several times to cause it to fall from them; and having thus
done, they cause the oldest among them, who by Age is otherwise unfit for
labor, to lie down upon his back, on him they lay one piece of the Tree or
more, who that the Wood may not fall off from his belly, carefully supports it
with his Feet, and the residue by his Tail draw him with his burden to their
intended building.

Weaving, and Hunting, From Spiders.

Physicians and Chyrurgions are taught many admirable Remedies of Diseases,
from Brute Animals, in whom is a Natural Skilfulness, and an innate Medicinal
ART.
THe Herb Dittany profitable for extracting Arrows, splinters, or other
accidentals incident to Wounds; also the fixed Virtue inherent in the Center of
this Plant, the taking out of which, Hearts have taught, who being struck with a
Dart, or otherwise shot (if not Mortal) with a venerate Arrow, by eating of
this Herb, For by the Animal and Starry (...) of Br^, fast (...) Animal Spirit
of Man is afterward learned, who in himself ^th all Callected and ^rised that
in over Animals is dis^st.
eject the Weapon, and expel the Venom.

Wild Goats show Surgeons the way of Curing Imposthumes; who wander upon
the Mountains, and feed upon odcrate Herbs, and especially Nard: by these the
blood putrifies between the Skin and the Flesh, and filth is conceived, which
Imposthumises; but before it spontaneously ripen, and come to break, the Beast
oppressed with the noxious pricking of the itching humor, rubs himself against
Stones and Shrubs, until his Imposihume break, and the whole filth from the
Bagg he poures out upon the Stones, in the same manner, as the filth from a
full ripe Imposthume, bursts out: The Ulcer afterward, by fresh return of Blood
again corrupts, which filling the same Bag again breaks out into a like
Imposthume, and the Beast in like manner eases himself.

The Serpent has taught the curing of Eyes evilly assected, with Fennel: also
of Wounds, with Dragon, Briony, and Comfrey.

In like manner Cats, to comfort the sight, demonstrate the famous use of
Valerian. So Swallows show that Selandine is a wholesome Herb for the Sight,
who with it heal the Eyes of their Young.

The cutting of a Vein, and Soarrification, from the Seahorse is manifested,
who, when by overmuch eating he finds himself distempered, rubs himself against
Reeds, or what else is hard, until the Vein breaking, a sufficient quantity of
Blood is let out; the Aperture afterward he stops, and heales with the
application of Mud and Dirt.

Bears, for their weakness of sight, are wont to choose as a Medicine Stings of
Bees, to draw blood, instead of a small Knife, and so find a Remedy for their
Distemper.

In the like manner, Dimness of sight among Goats, who feeling their sight
affected, do most admirably heal them; for as soon as they find their Eyes
pained, and evilly affected, they go to a Red Thorn, and holding their Eyes
near, suffer it to be pricked therewith, presently the humor offending is
removed, and no Wound made in the Ball of the Eye, but the sight well
recovered, as Aelianus testifies.

Horses of Hungaria, with their proper Teeth, by a Natural instinct, cut their
Veins, and let out the corrupted Blood.

The use of Clisters we have from the Bird Ibes, which showed the first use of
Clysters, he has a custom of Purging himself, by putting up part of his
crooked Bill into that part by which the food is discharged. Also from the
Herne, who with his Bill infuses Seawater instead of Clysters.

Of Vomatives and Catharticks we have the use
1. FRom Dogs, who, when evilly affected, with green things Purge themselves
upward and downe-ward

2. From the Sea gull, who, by the help of Trees growing close together,
pressing himself between them, unloads himself of his too great abundance of
Food.

3. The same from that devouring, and always insatiable Animal, which by the
Latins is called Crocuta; by others, by reason of his greediness called Gulon
Boofagon. This, when he is above measure filled with feeding on a Carcass,
(from the indigested food, by the powerful heat of the digestive Faculty, the
most noble part of Nutriment is separated) between two close Trees, or Stones,
he so forcibly crowds himself, that he excludes the feces deprived of all
Virtue and profitable Essence, both by the Anterior and Posterior parts, still
retaining the Alimentary humor in his Stomach, whereby for a long time after,
he miraculously susteins his Life, and upholds his Strength without Food.

4. Pigeons, Jack-dawes, Partridges, and Black-birds, with Bay Leaves, and
Remedies to them known, yearly Purge themselves. With the Bay-leaf Hearts also
expel the Venom of the Chameleon.

5. So Hearts a little before the Birth Purge themselves with the Herb Seselis,
which is otherwise called Cervaria.

Apes, in the Sphygmick Art far exceeding Men, manifest the knowledge of the
Pulses; for when by trial of his Pulses, one of them finds himself assaulted
with Death, or a putrid Disease, by an unusual sound of the Nostrils, he
presently makes it manifest to others.

The knowledge and observation of Laws seems to be taken from Storks, who, as
Lions, punish Adultery with Death. Beside the Historical Relation of Guilhelmus
Parisienfis, I have understood from a very credible Person, that by the smell
of the Male, a Female Stork was conceived of Adultery, and by a Multitude of
Storkes gathered together by the Male, detected of the Crime, and as it were by
the judgment of the whole Multitude condemned, and near the City of Spira, in a
Wood was torn all to-pieces. These things may seem strange, and as not worthy
of belief, but that the credible History of Antiquities make them known.

The Hermeticks and Learned Philosophers, So also the Elements pu^ing off their
old and corrupted Garmants are renewed, and as it ware with new youthfulness
invested.
have found out the way of renovating Youth, from the Kings-fisher, the Eagle,
Crab, and Serpents, etc. which yearly put off old Age with their old Skins, and
renew their strength, and as it were wax young. If as we plainly see, this be
granted to Brute Animals, Crabs by eating Frogs renew themselves.
may it not be possible to effect the like in intelligible Man, who is Created
after the Image of God? Men's by the use of Spiders.


The Eagle by abjection of his Feathers, lays down old Age, and recovers
Youth. Eagles by Shel-Fith.


Adders in Springtime cast their skin, and another grows, Serpents by eating
Toads.
and whilst they are renewed; The Heart by devouring Serpents.
they are also profitable in renewing Hearts, and help in renovating our Bodies,
For he in the Coverns of Serpents by most vehement respiration, attracts them,
and so de^ours them.
and retarding old Age. For Provident Nature (as is already said,) shows us,
that there are very many Animates, (as Serpe^ts and Lizards, among Marine,
Lobster, Crabs, etc.) which in Spring, and Autumn put off their Age, and lay
down their crusted Skins, admonishing Man, that as they possess their Quality,
they may afterward in him be profitable for putting off and innovating the
Skin, or renovating the natural Vigor. When the Heart perceives himself oppressed
with Age, with his sent by the Nostrills, from the benefit of Nature, he finds
out Serpents lurking in their Caverns, which killing with his heels he devours,
and after the perniciousness of their Venom is overcome, he is thereby renewed
and restored to his former Youth.

Men from the Examples and Prudence of these Animals, Sothe Land T^ad altracts
the Weasel, and the Weasel Mice.
as also from their exquisite diligence in preventing approaching Death, and
prolonging their Natural Lives by Natural Industry, have been moved, and
excited, to enquire after the Virtues of Herbs, Stones, and other things,
thereby to rectify their Bodies by many, and almost Miraculous means.

Roger Bacon says, he once sought after a subtle Serpent, and having found
him, cut him into several pieces, yet the skin of the Belly and above it
remained whole; this Serpent as well as he could recovered a certain Herb, by
the touch of which he was presently healed; and the Experimentator gathered
that same Herb, which was of admirable Virtue. Thus Humane ^alon ex^ by
examples of this ^ind, may find out better ways, then these of brutes, and far
exceeding all Bestial Prudence.

Of our future Resurrection and Transformation, besides The R^ngs Fisher, and
the Bird ^is among all Birds, in themselves ^ve the greatest Arconums, the
essence whereof receces no^ from its own Domicil
the indubitable Testimony of Sacred Scriptures, among so many Naturalls that
yearly after the Winters burial, in the Spring time of Resurrection, recover
themselves, we have two most manifest Examples, Viz. in the Ant, and Silk worm;
not to mention the Kings-Fisher, from its fir^ Entityes nourishing it self, and
yearly renovating his Skin and Feathers after Death. Also Flies, Swallows,
Night-birds, who are said, after a Winters burial in a hor place, to recover
Life by heat in the Spring time.

The Ant is of all Anima^e the most laborious, in whom is insited the whole
Promise of Nature, that after the finishing its Course it might come to a
better State, and obtain a plenary Rest, to which, as to a Mark, it rends with
greatest endeavor: Therefore when by i^slant labor it arrives to old Age, and
is spent with labor, Nature, by a strange and most worthy Metamorph^sis in his
Age, as a Solace and Recompense for former labors, creates him Wings, and from
a small creeping Animate he is made a flying Infect.

So also we see the Silk worm (from a very small Seed, by the benefit of the
Springtime- Sun excluded) a wo^ abject, and deformed, which having finished
its appointed labor, dies, and from the former Skin put off, the same Worm is
changed, and by a new Resurrection converted into a living Butterfly.

We here studying brevity, to the studious in Signatures of hidden things, This
Regeneration of Anim^es is a true Transplantation, from the ^ing R^ot by
addition of Now Graf^s.
and to such as labor in searching out like Mysteries latent in the Cells of
Nature, commend, and propose these, that from our Example, they may further
prove other, and with more happy success and great contentation, find through
the whole Longitude and Latitude of Nature, the admirable consent, and
harmonious Concordance of all things; therefore to the curious Enquirers after
the occult Areanums of Nature, we do not only willingly, and lovingly, but also
faithfully point out the direct way with the Finger, that ought to be observed.

Moreover, how in Wheat is the Signature of our First Parent, how the Mystery
of GOD born of the Virgin, [is apparent] in Artificial Incision of the Vine: of
the two headed Eagle, and other Mysteries, by artificial Scrutiny found out:
and what are Gladiolt, Thunder bolts; Roots of either Victorialis weaved with
intricate foldings, and gathered in a constellate time; as also of Herba
Cruciata, powerful against hurts made with Weapons, fignated with Natural
Magic; at this time it is sufficient that we have treated of, and revealed the
Offsprings, and our-goings of true Magic; more may not be expedient, least we
offer matter of contempt to litigious Sophisters, or afford occasion to wicked
Men, of divising Mischief; but by the ingenious desirous of learning wonderful
things, we shall be favorably judged of. If this my Labor finds candid
acceptance, as being my first Work, it may excite me to a further Evulgation:
As,

First, Magnetic, Magic, and Characteristick Curations.

Secondly, at what time of Constellations, the greatest part of Medicinals
ought to be gathered.

Thirdly, of finding out, and curing of Fascinations, and maleficiate
Enchantments.

Fourtnly, (...), of recovering health in many Diseases, or Insallible presages
of Death.

But not too far Crollius.

Nam jam summa procul villarum Culmina fumunt,
Majoresque cadunt altis de montibus Vmbras.
This Laborious Navigation (by the favor and assistance of the most excellent
wise GOD) being finished, and this Philosophic Bark directed to an happy Port,
by him who deserves all Laud and Praises in the quiet of the Night, and
forever. To thee therefore O Sacred Silence (in whose indeficient Light alone,
we behold indubitate verity) to Thee, I say, sitting upon the Throne, whose
Magnitude of unutterable compassion is incomprehensible, together with the
immaculate Lamb, be Praise, Thanksgiving, and Glory for ever and for ever. With
thy ineffable Clemency and Graciousness be pleased to grant, that all who
labor in newness of Life, by da^y Mortification, and plenary self Denial, may
cordially, and with their whole Heart fear thee, and through the assistance of
thy Grace, obey thy Commands, and in the infirmity of this Flesh, religiously
observe, love toward their Neighbor, (this indeed is the most true Worship of
God here in this malignant World) and that their words and Actions may always
be conformed to thy Divine Will and Pleasure, until at length, putting off
these Mortal and perishing things; we together with the whole Company of the
Blesled, be able to approach to the chiefest good, the Principle and Fountain
of all things, and by the knowledge and fruition thereof to rejoice with
Everlasting Blessedness, Amen.

A Corrolary.
THE most ancient wise Men, See Menand. Hierogly. of John Dee, London.
whom in the Greek-Tongue we call Philosophers, if at any time they found
Arcanums either of Nature or Art, that they might not come to the knowledge of
impious Men, they were accustomed to hide them in diverse manners and with
occult Figures. So also Hermetick Philosophers were wont to decipher
Terrestrial Planets, by certain Hieroglyphick Notes, in which, to the Sons of
Art, their latent Virtues, and admirable properties, were plainly exposed to
their aspect and understanding, and by such easily perceived, though to others
they were not at all known.

Now that Signs of this kind may be delivered from Sepulture, or Interment, I
thought it worth while, that with the Characters of other Minerals, devised by
Provident Antiquity, to divert the profane and unworthy from exercising this
Noble Art, they should by me for the sake of Hermetick Disciples be
communicated (together with my former Work) to the Spagirick Commonwealth.

FINIS.
CHYMICALL CHARACTERS
Notes of Metalls
Saturn, Lead. Jupiter, Tin. Mars, Iron. ^ Sol, the Sun, Gould. Venus,
Copper, Brass. Mercury, Quicksiluer. Luna the Moon, Silver.
Notes of Mineral and other Chymicall things
Antimony. antimony ^ ^ Arsenick. arsenic arsenic Auripigment. {orpiment}
{orpiment} Alum. alum ^ Aurichalcum ^ ^ ^ Ink ^ Vinegar vinegar Distilld
Vinegar. {vinegar distilled} {vinegar distilled} Amalgama aaa E ^ ^ Aqua Vitae
^ Aqua fortis, or separatory water aqua fortis Aqua Regis or Stygian water aqua
regis Alembeck alembic Borax ^ ^ Crocus Martis ^ ^ Cinnabar {cinnabar}
{cinnabar} Wax {wax} Crocus of Copper or burnt Brass ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ Ashes ashes
Ashes of Hearts ease potash Calx ^ Caput Mortuum ^ Gum ^ Sifted Tiles or
Flower of Tiles ^ Lictum sapientiae ^ Marcasite ^ ^ ^ Sublimate Mercury ^ ^
Mecury of Saturn ^ Balneum Mariae ^ Magnet ^ Oil. {oil} ^ ^ To purifye
{purify} Realgar ^ ^ ^ Salt Peter. {nitre} Common Salt. {salt} ^ ^ Salt Gemme ^
Salt Armoniack {sal ammoniac} {sal ammoniac} Salt of Kali ^ ^ Sulphur {sulphur}
^ Sulphur of Philosphers ^ Black Sulphur ^ Soape ^ Spirit ^ Spirit of wine ^ ^
To sublime subli ^ Stratum superStratum or Lay upon lay ^ Tartar tartar ^ ^
Tutia ^ Talck talc A Covered pot ^ Vitriol vitriol Glass glass Urine
Notes of the four Elements
Fire. fire Air ^ Water. {water} ^ Earth earth Day {day} Night {night}
FINIS
A COMPENDIOUS TABLE OF THE Foregoing Treatise of SIGNATURES.
PLants representing the humane members. As The Head Page 1 Hairs Page 2 Ears
Page 2 Eyes Page 3 Nose Page 3 Gums Page 3 Teeth Page 3 Throat Page 3 Liver
Page 3, 4 Heart Page 3, 4 Lungs Page 4 Spleen Page 4 Ventricle Page 4 Navel
Page 5 Intestines Page 5 Bladder Page 5 Privities Page 5 Stones, or Genitals
Page 6 Womb Page 6 Reins Page 6 The Secundine Page 7 Backbone Page 7 Shin and
Bones Page 7 Nerves and Veins Page 7 Pores of the Skin Page 7 Hands Page 7
Signatures of Diseases.
The Apoplexy Page 8 Blemishes Page 13 Bunches Page 16 Burftings Page 10, 11
Cancer Page 8 Cholick Page 8 Cramp Page 15 Dropsy Page 11, 12 Dysentery Page 9
Epilepsy ibid. Erysipela ibid. Excressencies ibid. Fascination Page 10
Fistula's Page 10 Gonorrhaea Page 15 Haemorrhagia Page 11 Hemrodes Page 11
Jaundies Page 12 Kings Evil Page 15 Knots in the Flesh Page 13 Leprosy Page 12
Maw-wormes ibid. Members consumed Page 13 Menses inordinate Page 13 Pimples
Page 12 Panaritium Page 14 Phantasmes Page 14 Pestilence Page 14 Poisons Page
17 Prickings of the Side Page 13 Prunella, or Soar-throat ibid. Quinsy Page 15
Scabs of the body, and Feet ibid. Scaly and rough Feet Page 15 Scarrs Page 9
Scurfs of the Skin Page 15 Smallpox, or Measils Page 9 Sores of the fundament
Page 10 Stone Page 8 Sugillarions Page 16 Tartar of the Ventricle ibid. Urine
retained Page 16, 17 Warts Page 17 Wounds ibid. Correspondencies of the greater
and lesser World Page 23, 24, 25 Mechanic Sciences from Animals Page 31
Medicaments helping by similitude Page 18, 19, 20, 21 Physicians taught
remedies from Animals Page 33, 34 Renovation of youth learned from Animals Page
35 The Resurrection witnessed by the Ant, and Silkworm Page 36 Signatures of
Men taken from Animals Page 26, 27, 28, 29, 30 Venomous Diseases healed by
proper Antidotes Page 21, 22 Vomitories, and Catharticks from Animals Page 34
The wonderful providence of Storks Page 31, 35 Of Murments Page 32 Of Beavers
Page 32 Of Ants Page 29


The End of the Table.
PRAXIS CHYMIATRICAE: OR THE PRACTICE OF CHEMISTRY. Written in LATIN BY JOHN
HARTMAN, M. D. And augmentend and enlarged by his Son with considerable
Additions:

Faithfully rendered into ENGLISH.

LONDON, Printed for John Starkey at the Mitre in Fleetstreet near Temple Bar,
and Thomas Passinger at the Three Bibles on London Bridge 1670.

PROAEMIUM.
TO proceed happily in Chemical Practice, two things are most requisite. First,
that the Physician rightly know the Disease. Secondly, that he have convenient
choice Remedies always at hand. The former is known by Pathology; the other
which is called Therapeusin, is chiefly Chimical. In Pathology, The most
learned Fernelius advises. In Therapeusin, which looks to Medicine, Chymicals
are most excellent, Viz. Specific and Homogenial Remedies, in which two, the
Spagirick method of Healing wholly consists. Therefore before we come to
Diseases and Symptoms of particular parts, it will not be improper to insert
universal Medicaments, reduced into certain Classes, from which general
Curations for peculiar Diseases may be taken. Since in Physical Practice, the
most frequent intention is Evacuation; we judge, not without Reason, that the
Physician understanding the Principal Nerve of Practice, will prudently affect
the same by a right Administration of speedy, safe, and pleasant Remedies.

In the Cure of Principal Diseases, of which we are about to treat, it would be
of excellent benefit to the Sick, if the universal Evacuations hereafter
appointed almost for all Distempers, might preceed all other Medicine.

Nature by four ways is wont ordinarily to expel the Malignity of every
Disease. 1. By the Superior Parts. 2. By Urine. 3. By the Excrements. 4. By
the whole Circumference of the Body. The Physician therefore as Natures
Minister does imitate her, in appointing also four Classes of evacuating
Medicaments, as Vomitories, Purges, Diuretics, and Diaphoreticks; and these,
according to diversities of Diseases and Symptoms, he takes sometimes from
Vegetables, and sometimes from Minerals.

But in several Diseases, through defect of Natural Vigor, or vehemence of
Dolours, it very often happens, that the Sick had need be comforted, and the
Dolours assuaged, therefore Confortatives and Anodynes are most needful, which
in particular Cures must first be used.

TO THE READER.
COmmon Fame is styled a Liar, and not without cause; but EXPERIENCE is well
known to be the Daughter of Truth. Wherefore, since Fame, in the absenee of
EXPERIENCE, has infamously belyed Alchimy, inso much, as almost all Chimical
Remedies, have been reputed no less hurtful, than Poison, it was necessary,
that Experience should be introduced, for enervating the villainons intentions
of that STRVMPET. This being done, (the Almighty so favoring us) it is now on
all hands granted, that Spagirick Medicines are safe. Therefore the Hermetick
Science seems to begin to reassume its pristine Splendour, and Medicine by it to
be renovated, and reduced to a more excellent, and sublime Condition; in which
Renovation, the deplorable estate, and Condition of the sick is meliorated,
their grievous afflictions being removed with greater facility, and ease, than
formerly, they could find. Yet that nothing may be wanting to inform, and
instruct the ingenious and well disposed of this Kingdom, in the most necessary
Science of Medicine; this Book, with the Precedent, are presented to them, in
their own native Tongue; which undoubtedly will be more acceptable, than if
they had still remained in the Latin Dialect. Both these Authors were
Physicians of Germany, and Imitators of that wonder in Nature, PARACELSVS, the
Prince of Physicians, and Philosophers. The Author of this subsequent Book, was
a Laborious, and Judicious Practitioner of Medicine, and a dexterous and expert
Artist in Spagyrick Preparations, as is evident, by the Processes of his
Practice in healing the sick, etc. here inserted in his Practical Chemistry.
The order and method of which by him therein observed) he gives you in his own
Proemium, placed before the subsequent Work. In which Work more may be learned,
than in many other Volumnes of far greater Bulk: for he treats of all Internal
Diseases, incident to all parts of the Microcosme; and briefly touches on some
external Affects, etc. and of their Remedies, with a proper and suitable way of
adhibiting; showing a direct method, by which all Accidents, like to be
supervenient, are to be removed, etc. Thus have you in this, and the precedent,
as it were, the entire Body of Physic; God grant it be rightly used. Farewell.

A POSTSCRIPT TO THE READER.
Where the Author in his subsequent Work says. See Crollius. See my notes to
Crollius. See Crollius Notes, etc. there is to all be understood of the
precedent Work, Where he says: See the Practicks; the common use of other
Practitioners is intended.

And where he directs to Beguinus, etc. He intends the Tyrocinium now in
English.

Material Errata's are thus corrected.
For Coltsfoot. Page 2 Line 8, 12, 25 read, Asarabacca. Page 79 Line 22 read,
Asarabacca. Page 99 Line 22 read, Asarabacca. Page 106 Line 36 read,
Asarabacca. Page 139 Line 25, 26 read, Asarabacca. Page 143 Line 31 read,
Asarabacca. Page 163 Line 12 read, Asarabacca. Page 168 Line 41 read,
Asarabacca.


For Wild Betony. Page 37 Line 44 read, Mother of Thime. Page 51 Line 25 read,
Mother of Thime. Page 127 Line 03 read, Mother of Thime.


For Betony. Page 52 Line 37 read, Fluellin. Page 54 Line 18, 47 read,
Fluellin. Page 62 Line 39 read, Fluellin. Page 65 Line 33 read, Fluellin. Page
170 Line 1 read, Fluellin.


For Water Betony Page 78 Line ^9 read, Water of a Smiths Forge. Page 89 Line 9
read, Water of a Smiths Forge. Page 98 Line 34 read, Water of a Smiths Forge.
Page 122 Line 14, 46 read, Water of a Smiths Forge.


For Wild-Alexander Page 65 Line 29 read, Stone-parsly. Page 99 Line 22 read,
Stone-parsly. Page 100 Line 45 read, Stone-parsly. Page 109 Line 26 read,
Stone-parsly. Page 110 Line 23 read, Stone-parsly. Page 117 Line 25, 42, 50
read, Stone-parsly. Page 118 Line 9, 22 read, Stone-parsly. Page 130 Line 17
read, Stone-parsly.


Page 2. line 3. for Conradinus, read, Conradinus. p. 11, l. 39, for Must be
clossd often, r. is often Stopped. p. 14. l. 45. for Salt of Tartar, r. Oil of
Tartar. p. 25. l. 42. for Creses, r. Crises. p. 28, l. 27, for Sklandine, r.
Celandine. p. 38, l. 1. and p. 31, l. 19, for Cloves, r. Caryophyllata. p. 39,
l. 33, 34, for Equiming, and Swinting, r. Squinting. p. 55, l. 3, for
Horse-tongue, r. Urularia. p. 57, l. 31, 32, and p. 58, l. 3, for Aaron, r.
Aron. p. 72, l. 28, for by a bladder, r. per Vesicam. p. 76, l. 20, for Scucum,
r. Scutum. p. 87, l. 34, for Longwort, r. Mullein. p. 91, l. 7, for Mint and
Saracens Herb, r. Herb Saracens Mint. p. 93, l. 43, put out Herb Robert. p.
109, l. 44, for Flowing, r. Following. p. 127, l. 23, put out Suppository. p.
128, l. 1, put out Tinctures. p. 117, l. 25, for Onions, r. Ononis, or
Restharrow. p. 170. l. 3. for Lungwort, r. Mullein. p. 149. l. 2. for vidently,
r. Providently. p. 110, l. 39, for Dross, r. Crocus. p. 122, l. 3, for Tunnel,
r. Syringe.

For Coats Page 91 Line 16 read, Ashes. Page 133 Line 24 read, Ashes. Page 140
Line 33 read, Ashes. Page 174 Line 44 read, Ashes. Page 175 Line 11 read, Ashes.


In the margent Page 120 put out Ragwort. Page 174 put out Page 377.


Practical Chemistry.
Digestives.
AMong familiar Digestives, besides those sometime used in Dogmatick Medicine;
the most requisite for the diseased principally in use, is: First, Tartar
Vitriolate described by Crollius, of which is made a digestive: This being
dissolved in Wine of Squills, and digested with Raisons and Cynamon, rightly
prepared as Crollius teaches, is boasted of, as the only thing which, if in due
measure exhibited, powerfully helps the needy by digestion and mitigation in
sturdy and chronical diseases.

Secondly, Crystal of Tartar, by Quercetanus often commended, and hitherto
also approved by use, vulgarly called Cream of Tartar: It is of singular use in
diseases needing digestion, but chiesly in the Stone of the Reins or Bladder,
to which it is principally applied. Dose, from ss to j In Melancholy it is a
principal Deopilative, which by the Tartars acting in the Mesentery keeps the
belly soluble. It is given in flesh-broath or wine, repeating the Dose often.

Vomitories.
Among Vomitories Aqua bened. obtains the priority, being properly so called
by Martin Ruland.

2. Syrup of Aqua bened. of which in my Notes to Crollius.

3. White Salt; the use of this is more rare, being dissolved in Mint or Barley
water, from ss to j will provoke vomiting. If thou desire to cleanse white
Vitriol, dissolve it in the lesser Centaury water; being dissolved, filter and
coagulate it; again dissolve, filter and coagulate, and the third time do in
like manner: Lastly, dissolve it in Rose water; being dissolved, filter and
digest it for six days in hot ashes; separate it from the feces, and what is
pure evaporate till it be dry. Dose, ij with conserve of Roses in Wine,
Metheglin or Barley broth, to which may be added according to discretion,
syrup of Sorrel or Oximel.

4. Gilla of Paracelsus quoted by Crollius.

5. Platerus his Vomitory of green Nuts, Radish roots, and wine-vinegar..
Wallnuts gathered about Midsummer, Radish roots, of each two parts, distilled
Wine-vinegar three parts; bruise the Nuts and Roots together, make a digestion
with gentle heat for five or six days, afterward distill it by a Lymbeck in
Balneo. Dose, from iij to ss. Let half or a third or fourth part of the Dose
(...) fortified with Aqua bened.

6. Concadinus his Vomitory, of which see my Notes to Crollius.

7. Parings of Nails, in Wine or other Liquor.

Note. In the Dropsy, the parings of the Nails of hands and feet being appryed
to the navel of the Diseased, are said miraculously to expel the water. D. C.
H. Basil.

8. A Coagulum of Coltsfoot, of the whole herb, (viz.) roots and leaves, with
spirit of Wine, a tincture is extracted, which mixed with its own salt
purified, and set to digest in Balneo with gentle heat, the spirit of Wine is
drawn off to the consistency of a Coagulum.

More excellently thus: In the month of May. roots of Coltsfoot with the
leaves, a sufficient quantity; dry these diligently in the shade, put a fourth
part of them bruised into a convenient glass, and pour upon them rectified
spirit of Wine till it rises four fingers above the Herbs: The Glass
exceedingly well stopped set in a close place very warm, that the spirit may be
tinged in color by the green flavor. The tinged spirit separate from its
feces, and keep it in a vessel well closed. From the three remaining parts
burnt to ashes, with warm water extract a Salt, this dried put into a Crucible
in strong fire, when in flux remove it from the fire, and dissolve it in warm
water, then dry it again. On this Salt the tincture aforesaid filtred through
brown paper must be powered, and in a Cucurbit the spirit of Wine abstracted
with gentle heat.

This is given in Barley broth from j to ij, or j, with Metheglin, and with
Oil mixed with water in diseases requiring vomatives. Some only take four or
five Coltsfoot leaves, which they macerate in Wine six or eight hours, and
gently pressing the Wine with the leaves, give it to the sick, who vomit
without trouble.

9.. Antimony lb j, juice of Berber lb vj; let them stand in the Sun or other
warm place for a month, then pour off the juice, extract the water to the
consistency of a, which reserve for the drying of Ulcers. Of the remaining Oil
twenty drops provokes vomiting without trouble. This is frequent in Wertemberg,
Basil.

10. A most excellent vomitory water.. Glass of Antimony, Hyacinth prepared and
pulverisated according to Mathiolus, Salt of Carduus bened. of each xl Gr.
Vervaine v. Cynamon water thirty drops; set them in Balneo blood warm for
twenty-four hours, afterward filter them and keep for use. Give of this to the
Patient iij, iv, v or vj, that it may be full, forcible, easy or weak as need
requires in purgations.

11. Vomiting and purging Vitriol is a most approved remedy in Fevers; And a
cool purge of Angeli-Salae: See Crollius Notes.

12. Aqua bened. of Ruland is a famous Vomitory, and is thus prepared.. Liver
drawn out of Antimony and Vitriol, of each an equal part, boil them for five
hours in water, then let them stand, and the water separated from its feces
strain through a woollen cloth, and leave it all night, that a redness may
remain in the bottom, or sprinkle some drops of Vinegar, that the redness may
precipitate. The water impregnated with vitriol separate, and the other that is
poured on, pour off, until the body have wholly lost its saltness; the water
removed, dry the Crocus. j of this macerate in iv or v of white Wine or other
convenient liquor, set it in a hot place all night, or if you have present need
of it, boil it in the same liquor: This thus prepared may be drunk either hot
or cold. The virtues, use, and caution hereabout, see my Notes on Crollius.

13. Extract of Hellebore.. Roots of Sowbread and Briony of each ij, let them
be well washed and cleansed, then dry them carefully, and reduce them to powder,
on which pour spirit of Wine till it rises four fingers above the powder, set
it in a warm place to digest for three days, then distill off the spirit of
Wine with most gentle heat; beware least the vehemence of the fire destroy the
matter; therefore as soon as it comes to the consistency of honey, it is best
to remove it, and dry it in a glass dish with gentle heat. The dry matter break
to pieces by degrees, and on it pour the spirit of Wine before abstracted, set
it in a warm place for two nights, then filter it, and the filtrated liquor
keep for use. Dose, six or eight drops in a draught of warm water or wine; or
if desired more strong, it may be taken in a decoction of radish roots with
syrup, or of sorrel alone, according to pleasure; it provokes vomiting without
molestation.

14. Electuary of Antimony.. Glass of Antimony without Boras ij reduced to a
very fine powder, distilled spirit of Vitriol ij: Mix these diligently in a
Mortar, or on a Porphiry stone, afterward dry them to powder in a dish over a
gentle fire; this powder mix with the Species recited by Crollius in Electu.
Antim.

15. The flowers and glass of the same are endued with like virtue, if for one
night they be steeped in Wine or other convenient liquor; (five grains of it in
iij of Carduus bened. water, and j of Cynamon water,) the wine being clear may
be given in the morning, from ss to j. If you desire it should provoke
vomiting, you may put j of the flowers, Crocus or glass of Antimony, in lb iv
or thereabout of whitewine, or Carduus bened. water, with a little Cynamon
water added thereto. These in a vessel close stopped keep for use. Of this liquor
when need is may be given iij or iv, either by it self, or with syrup of
Sorrel, or with Oximel.

16. Some give Gum de Peru, according to the strength of the Patient, with two
drops of Oil of Cynamon, or water of the same in fat broth.

Note. If a vomit or purgation prove too immoderate, the present remedy is a
draught of milk boiled with bread, or a spoon full of syrup of Mastich or old
Treakle, and presently eat a piece of bread sopt in Malmsie wine. Likewise it
is profitable to apply a plaster of bread to the belly, and soles of the feet.
Also a Pill of Laudanum Opiat is present remedy. Sometimes it is necessary, if
the sick be not easily prone to vomit, to help nature with broth given without
bread, barley-broath, or oil mixed with water.

Purging.
Cathartick Vegetables.
1. Laxative powder of Diasena.. Leaves of Sena, Cream of Tartar, of each j.
Anniseeds, Cloves, Cassia lignea, Galangal, Diagridium, of each j; Reduce these
to a most fine powder. Dose, from ss to j ss at most, taken in the whole
substance in convenient liquor. In infusion the Dose to ss.

2. Panchymagogon Vegetable of Crollius, and that which has been by me added,
or any other compound of both. Dose, from Gr. xvj, to ss: See Crollius his
Notes.

3. Extract of Rubarb, which is made no otherwise then with water of Succory,
Endive or Centuary, with certain drops of the Oil of Tartar, without any other
composition; yet it may, if need require, be sharpened with Diagridium, also
with Gum-guttimaw, prepared into an Elatery by grinding it upon a marble with
certain drops of Spirit of Vitriol, Oil of Anniseeds, Fennel, Cynamon, Angelica
and Citron, with respect both to the Disease and Patient.

4. So is the Extract of Sena, with water of Cynamon after the same manner
prepared, as the Extract of Rubarb. Doses of these from j to ij.

5. Extract of Mechoachanna.
Mechoachanna made with Vinegar, and reduced to a clammy substance.

6. Extract of the root of Esula-minor is prepared after the same manner: See
Crollius his Notes.

7. Extract of the root of the true black Hellebore, with Majoran water, or
water of Melissa, and Oil of Tartar. Dose, from ss to xvj or xx Gr. Some
extract it with good wine: See Crollius his Notes.

8. With these may be numbered the roots of Hellebore prepared with Phlegm of
Vitriol, and is thus prepared:. Roots of true Hellebore, moysten them with
Phlegm of Vitriol that first arises in rectifying spirit of Vitriol, in a
glass dish over a gentle heat of Embers, then by stirring them with a wooden
spattle, the stink exhaled from the roots, takes with it the venom to it self:
Continue moistning them, and keep them in a gentle heat till the stink be all
evacuated, and the roots yield a grateful odor, wholly waxing black. Dry them
carefully, yet so as they may remain somewhat moist. Dose, from ss, to j.

9. Extract of Coloquintida.

10. Scammony wrought together with Vinegar, or the Extract of Scammony simply
made with Vinegar. Dose, from Gr. viij to xij.

11. Hereto may be referred Rulands Golden Spirit of Life, which is nothing
else save the essence of the Trochus of Alhandal extracted with spirit of
Malmsie wine. Dose, from ss to j.

12. Specificum-purgans of Paracelsus: See Crollius Notes.

Electuary of Sena Leaves.
. Electuary of Cinnamon six drams, leaves of Sena Oriental v. make infusion in
lb iv of the best wine, for two days keep it in a warm place^ Boil them
gently, and press them out: Extract through a strainer ix of the pulpe of
boiled Raisons, put to them v of pulpe of Cassia: If you desire it should be
stronger, add ij of Electu. Lenit. and of Oil of Nutmegs made by expression ss:
Make these into an Electuary. Dose, from vi to viij or x by it self, or with ss
of Diatartar.

Panchymagogon Vegetable.
V. Of Coloquintida the pulpe truly cleansed from the kernels vj, Leaves of
Sena Orient. without stalks iv, Rubarb ss, Wallwort seeds j ss, root of black
Hellebore prepared, Agarick-trochiscated, of each j, Cinnamon, Cloves, of each
ij: These being bruised, steep them in spirit of wine not rectified, covering
them three fingers in a vessel exceedingly well closed. Set it to digest in a
warm place for sixteen days, that the spirit of wine may be tinged, pour off
what is tinged, and pour on more till it will yield no more tincture. Then. of
Elatery ij, juice of Aloes j, pour on them good spirit of Wine, adding some
drops of Oil of Vitriol or Oil of Sulphur per Campane, in a vessel exactly
closed, set it in a warm place for certain days, then pour it off through a
filter, press it with your finger, and thicken it with gentle heat, and put it
to the Extract above made.. Also a convenient quantity of the best Scammony,
grind it very small upon a Marble, and imbibe it with spirit of Vitriol, adding
some drops of Oil of Anniseeds (to j of Seammony is added spirit of Vitriol, or
Oil of Sulphur per Campan. ss, and Oil of Annis. six drops,) work these
diligently into a Mass clammy like pitch. This tincture does excellently
correct Scammony; for when the power of heat grows strong, which arises from
the Mercury and volatile Salt, by this means the corroding property of Salt, by
mortification, through the contrary working produced by spirit of Vitriol and
Oil of Anniseeds, is deprest and reduced to a beneficial operation. Evaporate
the aforesaid extracted Mass, with Rose or Majoran water till it be dry. Then.
the former pulverisate Extract, and add of the Extract of Scammony vj, and Oil
of Nutmegs by expression ij; beat these up in a Mortar, and keep them for use.
Dose, from Gr. xiij. to j. or ss. made up in form of a Pill, or taken in
Prunes, Raisons, or a roasted Apple. The Extract of Scammony alone moystened
with syrup of Roses may be taken from Gr. xij. to xx. It purges gently without
molestation: Also the same Extract may be used instead of Coloquintida, being
incorporated with Mercury, prepared as shall be thought fit.

Extract, or Rosin of Scammony.
. j.. of the best Scammony beaten small in a Mortar, anointing the Pestle with
Oil of Almonds, put this in a glass, and pour upon it Endive or Rosewater, till
it be covered three fingers, then stop it very close, and set it in a warm
place for three days. The water tinged with a duskie color cleanse from its
feces, filter it, and take of the Menstruum, by a kindly heat, or in Balneo
Mariae, that the Extract may remain dry like powder. Of this give jv. v. or vj
Gr. with j. of vitriolated Tartar, or rather vitriolate Tartar impregnated with
the tincture of Scammony.. Afterward the tincture of Scammony, filter it, then
mix it with ij of Vitriolated Tartar, so mixed set it in Balneo, and by drying
remove the Menstruum; It purges downwards, and removes all obstructions, if
mixed with v. Gr. of Cathartick; it may be given in Panchymagogon, in solutive
syrup of Roses or Violets, or dissolved in honey of Roses. Or thus,. Of
vitriolated Tartar j. of Honey of Roses j, Elecampane wine jj, mix them.

In the Dropsy, for the expelling gross and watery humors, and in Melancholy
and Phlegmatic Fevers, it is given with good success, being wrought together
with Oximel, and the water or decoction of Bugloss.

In the Quartane, omitting generally all others, these subsequent Pills are of
excellent use. Extract of Germander, Centuary minor, of each ss, Black Pepper
Gr. jv. Oil of Aniseeds, Gr. iij. of Cynamon Gr. ij. make them up, and take
them all in the morning.

Cream of Tartar in convenient broths, or such as are boiled with Wild
Alexander and Fennel roots. Dose from ss to j or ij. This may be fortified with
Salt Gems or Diagridium; As for Example,. Cream of Tartar, j, Diagridium iij.
Gr. Mix this in Broth, and give it to the sick three hours before meat: Or,.
Gum De Peru.
Guttemaw vj. Gr. Cream of Tartar j. Mix them.

In Hypocondriack Melancholy nothing more excellent; For, if for certain days
ss or jj, be given in the decoction of Capers, and outwardly to the left
Hypocondriack a plaster of Gum-ammoniack dissolved in vinegar of Squills be
applied, it mightily helps the Aged, and such as have obstructions in the
Stomach.

In Obstructions,. Cream of Tartar, and vitriolate Tartar, of each ss. Or Cream
of Tartar iv. Salt of Wormwood j: Make a powder.

This Cathartick is famous for expelling Melancholy, if ss of Cream of Tartar,
and j. of vitriolate Tartar be added, with viij or x Gr. of Extract of Scammony
in broth or wine: This by loosening the belly does not only remove all
impurities, but is also exceeding aperitive; therefore may be used in all
manner of obstructions, instead of a digestive or opening Medicine: The manner
thus;. Cream of Tartar from ss to j, of Tartar vitriolate from j. to ss, it
must be taken in broth: If used instead of a digestive or aperitive Medicine,
give it twice a day three hours before meat, with broth, or with ij. of
Electuary of Sena, or syrup of Canella, or any other proper Electuary, liquid,
or syrup whatsoever. Let the Patient after taking of it walk a little.

Laxative Anniseeds.
Annis. is made laxative, when to every of confection of Annis. are added ij of
powder of Scammony, or if thought fit, of Mercur. vitae, or dulcis, according
to discretion. Also it will not seem incongruous, if with the infusion of
Antimony, or Crocus of metals, or glass of Antimony, sugar of Roses be
dissolved, (after this manner Catharticks are made) and cerefully mixed with
the whole, as Crollius teaches: Or if you will prepare Scammony thus; Upon the
powder sprinkle certain drops of spirit of vitriol, work it exactly together,
then dry it again and pulverisate. Dose of Annis. from j. to Infants and others.

Laxative Raysons.
Raysons are made Laxative, if macerated in some purging decoction; when they
have imbibed a sufficient quantity of the decoction, take them off. If you
desire to have them stronger, add the infusion of flowers of glass of Antimony,
or rather Crocus of metals, according to discretion.

Mineral Catharticks.
1. Mercurius dulcis, or Panchymagogon of Quercitanus, fortified with Mercu.
vitae, so as xvj. Gr. of Mercu. dulcis may hold ij Gr. of Merc. vitae.

Note. This mixture for certain hours must be well grownd upon a Marble, for so
the vomative force of Mercurius vitae will be weakened, and with the Mercu.
dulcis will so much the more kindly work downward.

2. Pills of the flowers of Antimony corrected work much downward.

3. The Emetick powder, or Mercu. vitae, with the flowers of butter of
Antimony, have place also among vomitories, being powerful in purgation and
vomiting. Such are the flowers of Antimony corrected or turned into a buttery
Oil, and precipitated in common water. The vomitory force is taken away by
working it with common Salt upon a Marble for some time, and afterward the Salt
taken away by edulcoration with common water: The remaining powder given in the
former usual Dose moves the belly much.

4. Sol vitae or precipitate, described by Rhenan, p. 34 and 35.

5. The Coralline Arcanum of Paracelsus, made by Crollius.

6. Sweet Oil of Antimony. The Antimony must be calcined to a perfect
whiteness, then in Balneo with vinegar (some use spirit of wine) extract a
saline essence, pour off the vinegar, and extract the same essence again with
rain water, filter it through brown paper often, by repeating the labor the
salt becomes most bright, which in a cold Cellar will moisten and dissolve into
a red Oil sweet as sugar, seven drops of which will gently purge the belly.

. Antimony melted with Iron, calcine them first with Sulphur, afterward alone
as for Glass, and then thou may have the astringent sweet Oil of Antimony.

7. Gum of Antimony, common Mercu. vitae, put them in a Retort, expel the
volatile parts with gentle fire: They may be distilled in Oil, that which
remains put in a crucible, when it becomes glass of the color of Gum, remove
it. Dose, ij or iij Gr. by it self, or in infusion.

8. Purging Glass. The glass of Antimony is made into a true Chilist laxative
in the manner following:. Glass of Antimony pulverisate j, leisurely pour upon
it Spirit of Vitriol well rectified j, mix these diligently in a Mortar, and in
a dish dry them gently over a soft fire; afterward pour on the same quantity of
spirit of Vitriol, and dry it again; this do seven times, always taking heed
the powder be well dried. Then. Mastich j, pour upon it lb j. of spirit of
wine, let it digest for four hours; pour off the spirit of wine, and in it
macerate the prepared glass of Antimony for three days. These flowers or
glass, with the sp. of wine, put into a Crucible, and set fire of the sp. of
wine till it be all consumed, that it may be done effectually; when the flame
finds no more matter to feed it, then set the Crucible in the fire, that all
the spirit may be exhaled; the remaining powder continue drying in a glass dish
over a gentle heat of ashes for twelve hours. Dose, from iv. Gr.

That these Medicaments may be taken with more delight, they may be mixed with
conserve of Roses, or conserve of sugar of Roses, or any other, to a just
consistency. When it begins to wax hot, take it out of the dish, and spread it
upon a clean table, and with a knife shape it in form of Tablets of a
convenient magnitude; to every Tablet put iv. Gr. of pulverisate flowers, or
glass of Antimony; these, when aptly formed, dry: Or,. Sugar of Roses, with a
little Rose Water, beat these in a Mortar to a mass. To some of this add a
Dose of prepared Antimony, mix it well, and with some convenient Instrument
shape it in your hand to a form, and so proceed until you have a quantity. Or
you may knead wheat flower with Rose and Cinamon-water, and so make a mass:
These two sorts of Cakes must be boiled in some convenient vessel, and each of
them be sprinkled with a Dose of the prepared glass of Antimony, or confected
Pears, in each of them make a hole, and therein put the said purging Dose,
exactly closing up the hole again; make the Confection not too moist. The same
may be done in any other Confected fruits.

9. Laxative Mercury.. Mercu. viv. a convenient quantity, upon which pour Oil
of Sulphur per Campane, let it rise a fingers breadth above the Mercury, set
this so long in hot ashes till by heat the matter be coagulated, which will be
within three hours; cover the vessel, with paper, through which the volatile
spirits may have passage; Then cool the vessel, and take out the matter, and if
any of the Mercu. viv. happen to remain in the bottom, separate it; the
pulverisate matter put into a Crucible, and let it stand in an open fire for
one hour till the whole be red hot. This being done, remove the Crucible, and
put the matter into warm water, and it will become a most bright powder; pour
off that water, and pour on other, so wash it, and then dry it. Put it
afterward into a convenient vessel, and digest it with spirit of wine fifteen
days. Then pour off the spirit of wine, and lay the Mercury a drying upon hot
iron plates, that it may be exceedingly well dried. Dose from vj Gr. to x.

Note. That Mercur. dulcis sublimate may be given to xvj. Gr. In a body of evil
digestion it purges much more then in another not so evil; to such it may be
given to xxx Gr.

10. Panacea, common white Mercury. Dissolve Mercury in Aqua-jortis, in the
solution pour salt water, that the Mercury may be precipitated, which cleansed
by often washing from all its saltness, may be given with Turpentine from v. to
x, or xvj. Gr.

11. Flowers of Antimony corrected; the flowers must first be whitened in the
following manner.. A pot or large Cucurbit of Earth, nigh unto the bottom of
which there must be a hole, unto this being set in a furnace must be applied
four or five other pots with holes in their bottoms, so as they may aptly set
one within another; on the uppermost pot, place a Limbeck with a crookt neck
bending downward, make a gentle fire that the undermost pot may be degrees wax
hot, then through the hole in the lowest pot inject ss of pulverisate Antimony;
which being done, the flowers will presently ascend into the upper pots, then
forthwith stop the hole with a convenient stopple, leave it for an hour,
continuing the fire that the lowest pot may be hot; the hour past inject
another ss of pulverisate Antimony, and again leave it for an hour: This labor
must be repeated often. In the beginning some Phlegm is always wont to distill
through the a Limbeck; when it so does, stop the neck close with paper, and
continue the sublimation as aforesaid. For the Correcting the Flowers, water of
Honey may be thus made;. Honey, and distill it with gentle fire, or in Balneo;
that which first comes off will be unsavory; (yet that which follows will be
sharp as vinegar) this with an equal portion of rectified spirit of wine mixed,
pour into a convenient glass upon the Flowers, covering them with the water and
spirit four singers. In this manner the Flowers may be circulated in the Sun,
or other hot place for a month, then the Menstruum being removed, dry the
flowers, and keep them for use. You will see the violence of flowers of
Antimony arising from their crudity, taken away by digestion in this noble
Menstruum, and so will move the belly without vomiting. Dose v, vj or vij Gr.

12. Mercury with Sol.. Of Sol purified one part, of Quick silver six parts,
make an Amalgama according to Art, evaporate the Quicksilver from the Amalgama
over a gentle fire, the calx of Sol will remain in the bottom.

. This Calx of Sol, with other six parts of Mercury carefully work it again
into an Amalgama according to Art, so as all the calx may be dissolved in the
Mercury and become one Homogeneal body. Put this Amalgama into a small Retort
luted, and pour on Aqua Fortis, till it be covered three fingers, place the
Retort in ashes to digest for a day with moderate heat. The next day with a
stronger fire cause the Aqua fortis to distill into the Receiver adjoined to
the Retort; still increase the fire till the bottom of the Retort be very hot,
and all the Corrosive Spirits of Aqua fortis be distilled: Then let the vessel
cool, and take out the matter, crumble it to pieces, and again put it into the
Retort, and pour on the Aqua fortis before extracted; distill it again with
strong fire as before, that the Retort may be very hot in the bottom. This
being done, cool the vessel and take out the matter, which will be exceeding
ruddy; what shall happen to be sublimed to the sides of the Retort, throw
away.. A square plate of Iron, heat it in the fire very hot, then sprinkle the
Mercurial powder upon it, that it may be very well dried, that that which is
volatile may be evaporated: When the plate waxes cold, take off the matter, and
in a close vessel preserve it for use. It purges very gently without
provocation to vomit, unless it be hindered by the impurities of the veins in
the upper region of the Belly or Ventricle. Dose from iij Gr. to viij, with a
little Turpentine, or extract of Coloquintida, or in defect of these with Pills
of the lesser Cochia, or others. It is a most excellent Arcanum in the Dropsy,
French Sickness, all scabbiness and desluxions: Likewise when the body abounds
with Phlegmatic humors, it is of singular use.

Note. In the administering Mercury howsoever prepared, this must be diligently
minded.

1. That Pills are the most convenient; for otherwise the Mercury lying too
long in the mouth, may cause the Ptyalism, and occasion tumors and inflammation
by attracting from all parts the watery humors through its affinity with the
same.

2. In incorporating Mercury always observe, to every drop of Mercury must be
added one drop of Oil of Sulphur, for this will repress its malignity, fix its
volatility, because it tends upward, and corrects the symptoms which it brings.

3. At the most within two hours after the taking of Mercury let broth be
given, and half an hour after that, Food, that it may not too long remain in
the Ventricle.

4. It must not too often be given to Chollerick persons, by reason of its
attracting watery humors, which may be prejudicial to them.

5. That it may be given with Turpentine, or extract of Coloquintida:. Of
Coloquintida, not fresh, but what has been kept some years without the kernels
lb ss, pure Scammony iv. cut them, and extract them with spirit of wine before
used, or not rectified: Take off the feces, and put the tinged Menstruum into a
Cucurbit, and in Balneo with spirit of wine reduce it to the consistency of
honey or Pills.

Diaphoreticks.
1. Mineral Bezoar alone. Dose from Gr. vj to xij or more in some convenient
vehicle, either Card. bened. water, Cinnamon water, or Treacle: See Crollius.

2. Mineral Solar, Bezoar, Dose the same.

3. Lunar Bezoar, which is thus made; Dissolve silver in Aqua fortis, let it
digest so long till the solution become a green juice, abstract the Aqua fortis
by a Limbeck to the consistency of honey, and from the silver with spirit of
wine extract a green tincture; this extract repeat often till it will tinge no
more: The Spirit of wine taken away, add to the remaining tincture butter of
Antimony dissolved in Spirit of Vitriol, and by distilling it till it be dry,
two or three times fix it, in the same manner as common Bezoar is fixed.

4. Diaphoretick Antimony, or flowers of white Antimony fixed: Dose from ss to
j. It is often given with conserve of Roses, or some other convenient water, or
with Treacle: It powerfully expells old inveterate humors by sweat.

5. Panacea, or fixed Sulphur of Antimony, is made in this manner. From the
Cinabar of Antimony gathered in the neck of the Retort after the distilled
butter of Antimony, the red Sulphur must first be drawn forth thus: Make a most
strong Lixivium with ashes of Hearts-ease, or Calx vive, as the custom is,
with which exactly purified and filtred, boil Cinabar of Autimony pulverisated
for three or four hours in an Iron skellet. The Lixivium will still remain red
by reason of the Sulphur, but the Argent-vive will run in the bottom in flux.
The Lixivium tinged, by inclination separate, and while it is hot filter it
through brown paper, and put it again where it was for certain hours; so the
Sulphur of Antimony will be precipitate in form of a red powder, which
separated from the Lixivium must afterward be edulcorated with common water,
then dried with gentle heat. Of this Sulphur and Regulus of Antimony. Of each
Gr. v. and j. of Oil of Sulphur per Campan. or Oil of Vitriol iij. digest them
in a glass Retort for certain days and nights in a warm place; then distill
them in sand at least three or four times, increase the sire vehemently for
twelve hours, and the whole will remain fixed, which take out and wash with Rose
water. Of this j, Salt or Magistery of Corals ij, mix them exactly, and reduce
them to powder. Of Panacaea or Sulphur of Antimony, the Dose is from Gr. x to
xv. It wonderfully provokes sweating, chiefly in Malignant and Epidemical
Diseases, being given in proper sudoriserous waters. It is sometime given in
Conserve or Mithridate, or with a decoction of shavings of Hartshorn.

6. Aqua Pestilentialis of Crollius in Specificks: Dose from ss a spoonful to
a spoonful.

7. Paracelsus his Diaphoretick in per-acutis, or Mixtura simplex. Dose j.

8. Alcholisate spirit of Tartar, of which Crollius. Dose from j. to ij.

9. The Bezoar-stone Gr. vj or vij, if daily, as in Quotidian Diseases; in
Palpitation of the heart Gr. ij or iij are used in convenient liquors.

10. Cinabar of Antimony, with a like quantity of Magistery of Coral and Pearls
mixed. If an equal weight of Magistery of Man's scull be added to this mixture,
it will be an excellent Diaphoretick in the Epilepsie. Dose of the former Gr.
viij to xij. Of the latter from Gr. xvj to xx.

11. The Arcanum of Cardu. Bened. Dose Gr. v. vj or viij.

Also Salt of Card. Bened. dissolved in Spirit of Salt Nitre, and again reduced
to Crystalls. Dose j. It is highly commended in Quartanes.

12. English Aurum Potabile, Dose, one drop dissolved in Malmesie.

13. Dr. Hartmane's Stove, thus made: Make a square Cup-bord of oaken bords,
five foot in height, two foot in breadth, and four or five foot in the length.
In the upper covering there must be a hole, through which the head may be put,
the boards of the Cover must therefore be moveable. In the forepart make a door
with a glass window, that may open and shut; in the hinder part make handles of
Iron wherewith to move or carry it: In the bottom make a wooden grate, in the
middle a seat, with a footstool near adjoining to the grate to set the feet
upon; Under the wooden grate of all the four sides, make moveable wooden
shutters, through which in Iron pans (Tin pans will be spoiled with the
vinegar) may be put hot vinegar, or burning wine; the vapor arising from the
wine or vinegar, will strike through the Stove all over the body, except the
head. Sometimes a decoction of ( Aromatic odours, or) Herbs, with respect to
the necessity of the Disease, may be conveyed hot through a wooden pipe, the
vapors of which, together with burning spirit of wine put into the Stove will
much better provoke sweating: Perform this as need shall be, and reason direct.

14. Flowers of Antimony:. Calcined Antim. lb ss, Salt of Tartar j; sublime
these, that the flowers of Antim. together with the Salt of Tartar may be
elevated to the second and third Pot; then wash them twice in simple
Rose Water: So thou have Diaphoretick flowers.

15.. Hartshorn prepared j and ss, Magistery of Pearls j, Bezoarstone Gr. v;
make a powder: It may be taken with j of Carduus Bened. water.

16. From A soft sandstone.
Tophus stones or Harts-horns green with the blood in them, is made a
sudoriferous Medicine, most profitable for all malignant Diseases, being cut
into very thin slices, and distilled in a Retort set in Balneo, either with
dew, or by it self with a little good wine, until all the liquor go off. Dose
ss a spoonful by it self, or with a little Opiate, or Conserved flowers of
Citron Oranges, or in convenient liquors, in all burning, malignant and
epidemical Fevers.
Diseases.

17. Treacle-water,. Aristolochy of both sorts, Angelica, Dragon, Cypress,
Tormentill, Scorzonera, Elecampane, Pentaphyl, Valerian, Dittany of each j.
Wormseed, Pimpernel, Olsnicium, of each iij; Bayberries rectified iij; Juniper
berries vj, Citron seeds j and ss; Card. bened. seeds, and of Mountain Siler of
each j; Galangal, sweet Aloes, Citron, Sanders, of each iv; Orange-peel,
Citron-peel, of each j; Flowers of Citron vj; Flowers of Scordium j handful;
of Devils-bit, Verveine, Card. bened. Scabious, of each ss a handful; Flowers
of Berrage, Bugloss, St. John's Wort, of each ss a handful. Juice of Sorrel ^ j
and ss; of Sage, Scabious, Borrage of each ss lb, of the best wine lb iv; of
Camphire j and ss; of the best Methridate j and ss; Treacle Androm. ij; wine of
Pomgranate lb j; Spirit of wine iv: Cut, bruise, and infuse these together, for
eight days digest them in a warm place, and afterward distill them in Balneo.

18. Treacle Vinegar.. root of Bistort, Gentian, Pimpernel, Angelica,
Tormentill, of each x; Bay Berries, Juniper Berries, of each j; Nutmeds v;
Shavings of Lignum Sanctum ij; Worm-seed ss; white Sanders iij; Leaves of Rue,
Worm-seed, Scordium of each ss a handful; Flowers of Tunica, Bugliss, of each
one handful and ss; Treacle Androm. Mithridate, of each vj. Pownd, bruise, and
make these into Vinegar, infuse them in wine for eight days, then distill them
in Balneo.

Diuretics.
1. Water of Peach-kernels, macerated in Malmsie or other rich wine, for five
or six days, afterward distilled in Balneo or ashes: One spoonful of this
given is exceeding efficacious.

2. White Flints gathered out of the River, burn them in the fire, and
extinguish them in rich wine; do this often until they be wholly reduced to
powder: One draught of this wine filtred will presently expel urine, by reason
of the Salt of flints: for Salt within the body stops the Urine, which is cured
by other Salt.

3. Two or three or four drops of Oil of Wax, in the water of great Nettle
roots, will forcibly expel Urine: The reins and sides must be anointed with
Oil of Scorpions and Wax, also the Peritoneum with the same Oil.

Oil of Wax.
. Of Wax lb j of wood-ashes after the Salt is extracted iv, distill them in a
low Cucurbit or Retort in ashes over a gentle fire: That which first comes off
will be coagulated like butter; wherefore the Orifice of the Limbeck, or neck
of the Retort, must be closed often; with a hot cole moysten what sticks in the
neck, that it may descend into the Receiver: It must be rectified once and
again by common water put into the Retort.

4. Volatile Salt of Amber, of Crollius; see his Notes.

Salt of Amber.
The fixed Salt of Amber is made of the Caput Mortuum, calcined in an earthen
furnace after the distillation of Oil, and of the extracted Calx of Salt: Dose,
from j, to ss in convenient liquor.

5. Spirit of Salt, especially Sea Salt provokes Urine exceedingly: Dose, from
iij drops to vj or x, with Fountain water, water of Wild-alexander, or Alkakeny.

6. Spirit of Vitriol made of Vitriol per se: the same Dose with two parts of
Vinegar.

7. Aqua-vitae, j spoonful.

8. Tincture or sulphur of Tartar: Four or eight drops of this given in wine or
other liquor will vehemently by Urine expel diseases of the bowels; and to
admiration, the barrenness of the womb, occasioned either from Medicaments, or
by the contraction of Nature, will wonderfully restore; it is most commodious
for the Aged: See Crollius his Notes.

9. A Diuretic Julep:. Salt-Prunella from ss to j; water of Onions, and wild
Alexander from iij to jv; of the prepared Syrup of Onions or Violets only, or
of the juice of Borrage or Lemons ij.

10. Diuretic Oximel in most frequent use with some Physicians is thus made;.
Valerian, Vincetox, Eringo, of each an ss. Herb Origan, Hysop, Betony,
Scabious, Hore-hound, of each j handful; Fennel-root, wild Alexander, of each
vj; Anniseed, Fennel-seeds of each ij; Broom flowers, Elder-flowers, of each
iij parts; Honey strained lb ij, Vinegar of Squills lb ss, Fountain water iv
lb; mix them, and let them gently simmer over a fire for a little time, then
set them in a warm place to cooperate for eight days; boil them, and press
them out: Make an Oximel according to Art. Dose, from ij to iv, or vj in urgent
necessity.

Confortatives.
1. Salt of Pearls, and Magistery. Dose, from Gr. vi or x, to xx.

Note. In Crollius Notes, you must not exceed Gr. xv.

2. Syrup of Pearls: There is syrup of Coralls prepared by Quercetanus, which
is also said to be Confortative; in imitation whereof, the syrup of Pearls may
be made, if according to the Authors mind, the Pearls be dissolved and digested
in purified juice of Lemmons, and of that solution a syrup made, as he teaches
in syrup of Corrals.

3. The Arcanum of Pearls: Dose, Gr. xv or xx: By reason of the spirit of
Guaiacum, with which it is prepared, it most excellently purges the blood in
Lues-venerea: See afterward in the Venereal Cure.

4. Salt of Coralls.

5. Magistery of Corals.

6. Tincture of Corals. Dose, from Gr. vi to x or xv: See Crollius.

7. Elixir Proprietatis of Paracelsus. Dose, from drops vito xxv in convenient
vehieles: See Crollius his Notes.

8. Oil of Cinnamon: Dose, from Gr. iij to iv.

9. Confortative Balsoms, concerning which see Crollius, etc. Balsom of Cynamon
is thus:. Oil of Nutmegs made by expression, what quantity you please, extract
the Tincture with Spirit of Wine, until the Oil settle in the bottom white,
and as it were without savor:. This, and add to it of the extract of Cinnamon
vj, set it in hot ashes, till they be incorporated, which being done, add ij of
distilled Oil of Cynamon; mix these exceeding well, and keep for use. Dose, Gr.
vj in water of Melissa, or other Cordial water, or else with some Conserve or
Cordial Opiate: It comfort all the principal parts, especially a cold
stomach, the heart and brain; wherefore in swounings, and defect of the mind,
it is a singular remedy: The heart may also be anointed with it.

10. English Aurum-Potabile.

11. Transparent Sol, of which Rhenan. lib. sole e puteo, etc.

12. Confortative-water.

13. Aqua Magnanimitatis, of which in The marrow of Distillations, Lib. 2. Tr.
8.

14. Rectified Amber, which Rudolph the Emperor used often, they say he
received the Composition from Elizabeth Queen of England; which is thus,

. Of Amber-greese pure and proved eight parts, of most odoriferous musk one
part, of most white Sugar ss a part: All these must be thoroughly well beaten to
powder with burning Spirit of Roses; as long, and as often as you are pouring
on the Spirit of Roses, you must keep stirring of it; then again by little and
little pour on more till it be almost dry; then as before, beat it up, and keep
for use. Dose, the quantity of a small Pea in Wine, or other Convenient Liquor:
It exceedingly comforts the bowels, and mightily stirs up the procreative
faculty.

15. Spirit of Soot, with the Oil of the same; which is thus:

. Of the best soot, bright like black ( Rosin or) Gum, (that which sticks to
Furnaces is more proper being better) what quantity you please; fill a Retort
of glass well coated, or of earth up to the neck, apply to it a most capacious
Receiver, distill it by degrees in an open gentle fire at first, afterward
increase the fire that the Phelgm may be drawn off, with all the Spirits, which
will begin to wax white, together with the Oil, which at first will be
yellowish, afterward red; separate the Phlegm by a separatory: The Spirits with
the Oil digest over a fire for some time, afterward pour on half so much Spirit
of Wine, and distill them often. With the Spirit of Wine will come forth the
Spirit of Soot together with the Oil, in smell like Camphire; most excellently
well rectified. Calcine the Caput-mortuum, and from thence extract a Salt,
after the usual manner, which reserve as a most excellent Curative in ulcerated
Cancers: This Salt is extracted with Vinegar, in which Liquor being set in a
cold moist place, it is again dissolved; with this a Cancerated Ulcer being
anointed two or three times, the venom will like a vapor be visibly
extracted: Then being gently anointed with the aforesaid Oil several times, it
will begin to skin, and in five or six days of its own accord be perfectly
cured. Dose of the Oil is from two drops to three in Wine, or any other
convenient vehicle; of the Spirit from Gr. vj to ss: Three drops of the Oil
given in Vinegar to one in an Agony, will wonderfully refresh and restore him:
Therefore in the greatest danger we may safely use this Medicine; if after the
taking of this the sweat plentifully issue forth, it is a certain sign of
health and recovery; if otherwise, death ensues.

If with our vulgar soot, Soot of the Larix or Oak-tree, be mixed, and after
the usual manner, a corrected Oil be drawn forth, it will be much more
prevalent in the Falling Sickness, Swounings, and drawing together of the
sinews, it will comfortably dissolve, and all the Animal Spirits powerfully
excite and coroborate.

16. Essence of Pearls.. Salt of Pearls made with Vinegar, what quantity you
please, and pour on rectified Spirit of Wine till it be covered three fingers;
in a vessel hermetically closed, set it in hot ashes to digest for eight or ten
days; In that time the Pearls will send forth their Essence like to thick Oil
upon the superficies of the spirit of Wine: Separate this Oil by inclination
with spirit of Wine, from that which is underneath, and keep it in a vessel
well stopped: Pour fresh spirit of Wine upon the remaining Oil, and digest it as
before, and take off the Essence as often as any rises, and put it to the
former; Having gathered all the Essence, put it in a Cucurbit, and with most
gentle heat draw off the spirit of Wine, till the Essence remain in the bottom
like Oil. Dose, vj drops in Conserve Opiat, or other decoction.

This Essence may most profitably be given with the following mixture;. Seeds
or Melissa j, Lettice ss, Fennel-water x, water of Roses iv: Make a mixture,
whereof. iv, of Essence of Pearls ij, mix them; three spoonfulls or more may
be given, one spoonful morning and night, or any other time, if necessity
require. Now if the abovesaid Operation seem too laborious, you may take
Citrons, pare off the rindes, and press out the juice, and set it for certain
days in Balneo, that it may purify; then take Pearls bruised and washed in
White Wind, put them in a glass, cover them three fingers with the said juice,
and set it in hot ashes for eight hours, you will see the Pearls dissolve and
be turned into a buttery Liquor; upon this pour distilled May dew, or
Melissa-water, that the solution of Pearls may dissolve into it; pour off the
water, and again pour on a sufficient quantity of the aforesaid juice, set it
to digest, and pour on water as before; what is sufficiently dissolved take
away. This labor must often be repeated, until almost all be dissolved, and
the feces left very thin: Put all these Liquors together, and set them in ashes
over a gentle fire, and suffer the water and juice to be exhaled. You will find
an impalpable powder, easy to be dissolved in any Liquor, whose use is from
Gr. vj, to ss, with water of May-dew distilled with Manna, or with
Cinamon-water distilled with Rose or Bugloss-water, or with Conserves of the
rindes or flowers of Citron.

17. Liquor of Hyacinth.. Of powder of Hyacinth what quantity you please, with
Sulphur vive of the like weight, (Minerals thus conjoined cannot be reduced to
the form of a plaster) mix them in a strong Crucible, with a cover on the top,
not luted; Calcine them first in an open gentle fire, then increase the fire,
at length make it most strong, until all the Sulphur be exhaled, and the
powder when taken from the fire has no more savor of the Sulphur: Then with
common water diligently wash it, and mix it with a convenient portion of
prepared Vitriol-water, or of Salt Prunella, and in an open fire Calcine it
again, until with the Salt-nitre it become a mass red hot in the fire like
Metal: This being done, put it into warm water, that the Vitriol may be
dissolved; the powder of Hyacinth left in the bottom wash with hot water,
until there be no more savor of the Vitriol; afterward dry it, and pour upon
it the Vinegar following;. Of Vinegar lb vj, ashes of the Herb Kali lb j, (if
you cannot get Kali, make Turpentine Vinegar, of Vinegar and Turpentine,
distill them together in a Retort, separate the Oil and Spirits from the water)
pour the Vinegar into the Retort upon the ashes leisurely, least it wax hot:
Distill them in hot ashes, make a Cohobation, in three times the Vinegar is
made sweet, and not at all tart, yet of great force for dissolving all precious
stones: Put the aforesaid powder into this Vinegar, set it in hot ashes for two
days, keeping it always stirring. Two days past, take off the Tincture, pour
on other fresh Vinegar, and take off the Tincture, until all the powder be
dissolved, and the feces left very thin in the bottom: All the Solution filter
and exhale till it be dry; the salt of Hyacinth will remain, which must be
often dissolved and coagulated with common water, till all savor of the
Vinegar be removed; or else sprinkle in the solution some drops of Salt of
Tartar made per diliquium, and the salt will precipitate the bottom, which with
common water poured upon is freed from all its sharpness. The use of this the
same as Solution of Pearls.

Vinegar of Turpentine for Extracting Stones.
. Turpentine lb iij, pour upon it lb iij of Vinegar; distill them in sand
until a red Oil rise up, then change the Receiver, separate the Oil of
Turpentine from the Vinegar by a separatory, and rectify the Vinegar alone
with Ginger.

18. Extract of Alkermes.. Granes of Alkermes a sufficient quantity, bruise
them, and pour on them a convenient quantity of Rose Water, tharpened with some
drops of spirit of Vitriol or Sulphur, that the Rose Water thus sharpened may
cover the Granes four fingers: Digest them in a hot place for four days. Take
off the tinged water, and pour on more; do this as long as it will yield any
Tincture. Distill the Tinctures in Balneo, or hot ashes. The same extract may
be made like other extracts with spirit of Wine.

Or press the juice of ripe Granes of Alkermes with a Press, digest it four
days in Balneo, until the juice be clear, and the feces remain in the bottom.
The juice being clear pour it off, filter and pour it into a Cucurbit; distill
it in Balneo, the distilled water and juice keep apart, for in time of need
they may be joined and made into a Liquor: The same juice cleansed may be kept
for use, if boiled with ss so much Sugar candied, either in hot ashes or Balneo
to the consistency of a syrup. Dose, from j to ij.

English Aurum potabile.
19. Of Franciscus Antonius. First, sine Gold must be dissolved in Aqua Regis,
( oqua regis is made with ^ j of aqua fortis, with iv of salt Ammomack
distilled together by Retort in s^nd) the Solution being clear, pour it into a
large glass, wider at the top then at bottom, and upon it pour Oil of Tartar
made per diliquium drop by drop, until the oqua Regis become clear and white:
If this sign appear, be certain all the Calx is descended to the bottom. Let it
rest all night, and in the morning take off the Liquor, and wash the Calx four
or five times in common water, then dry it with most gentle fire.

Note. Beware least the heat exceed, for as soon as ever the Calx touches the
fire, it immediately takes flame and vanishes into Air; wherefore it is safer
to dry it so much the more diligently in a Chimney corner, or in the Air,
stirring it with a wooden Spattle.

To this Calx add half so much of pulverisate Sulphur, mix them together, and
in a Crucible in an open fire suffer the Sulphur to be set on fire; do this at
first with a gentle fire, but in the end for one hour make a most strong sire,
that the Calx may in a manner be reverberated, and become very little, which
preserve in a Phiol very well stopped.

Then make spirit of Urine.. What quantity you please of the Urine of a found
man that drinks Wine, put it in a Cucurbit well closed, and set it in
Horse-dung, or some other hot place to digest for forty days; the time of
putrefaction being past, distill the Urine in sand by a Limbeck, with a large
Receiver annexed, till all the moisture be distilled; when it is distilled the
third time, rectify it per Cohobia from the Caput mortuum, that at length the
spirits may be duly elevated: Therefore put it in a Glass with a longer neck,
with its Limbeck, and Receiver very well closed, distill it in sand, and the
spirit will be elevated in the Limbeck like Crystal, not at all attended with
any watery humidity: This distillation must be continued till all the spirits be
ascended. What rises by sublimation, must be dissolved in distilled rainwater,
and in a Glass as before distilled: This must be done six times, in every
repetition taking fresh rainwater; then put the Crystals in a Glass
hermetically closed, and digest them for fifteen days with gentle heat in
Balneo, until they become an exceeding bright Liquor: To which Liquor must be
added an equal weight of good spirit of Wine well rectified, and together for
twelve days in Balneo be digested and united.

Now. Calx of Sol, and on it pour the Menstruum made of the spirit of Wine and
Urine, till it be covered three singers, digest it with gentle heat till it
become red as blood: Take off the Menstruum so often as tinged, and digest it
in Balneo for certain days; then with most gentle heat, extract the tinged
spirit, without disturbing the Feces; the salt will remain in the bottom in
form of most red Oil, of it self yielding a delectable odor, resolvible in
what Liquor you please: This Oil may therefore be used instead of the true Sol.
Distill the same solution in Balneo or sand; after the first part of the
Menstruum, with its remaining part, the Tincture of Sol will ascend through the
Limbeck in color red as blood, leaving in the bottom, black, dry, sooty, light
earth. That Menstruum which comes forth in the Tincture of Sol, must be
separated in Balneo blood-warm, and the Oil remaining in the bottom only kept
for use. This is that Aurum potabile, (which in England is used by Francisous
Antonius Physician of London) so often spoken of in Germany, and other places;
of which Gr. iv, vj or viij, in what manner soever exhibited, do wonderfully
increase strength, and are powerful against every Disease, evacuating almost
all by sweat, and sometime expel the malignity through the Emunctuory places.

Another way.
A thin plate of Gold dissolved in spirit of Salt, abstract the Menstruum, the
Calx will remain in the bottom, to which must be poured another Menstruum made
of the best rectified spirit of Wine and Salt of Wrine, (this Menstruum must be
set in gentle heat for fifteen days, that it may be united) thus is Sol
dissolved. This, together with the Menstruum must be distilled by a Limbeck in
sand, which being done, separate the Menstruum by gentle heat in Balneo, the
Tincture of Sol will remain in the bottom.

20. Lastly,. A Capon or Partridge whole, or some part of the flesh of Veal,
cut them all together in very small pieces, and break the bones in a Mortar,
and put them in some convenient Glass or Tin pan, with a little Cinnamon or
Saffron, close the Glass (or Pan) very well, and put it into a pot full of
boiling water, make it boil with a good fire three hours: Then take out the
flesh, and press out the Liquor which will be excellent in taste and smell, and
presently be congealed; but the flesh will be hard and unsavory. One spoonful
of this Liquor is given either by it self, or with other broth.

Medicines procuring sleep.
Anodynes.
1. General Laudanum Opiat, (see Crollius his Notes and Opiology, etc.) is made
as well without Opium as with it, that is, the Anodine is prepared with Sulphur
of Vitriol, corrected and fixed.

2. Epileptick Laudanum, see afterward in Epilepsie.

3. Laudan. Suffocat. Dose, of all these from Gr. ij, iij or iv, etc. See below
in suffocation of the womb.

Laudanum without Opium.
. Filings of Iron most pure without dust one part, common Vitriol two parts,
beat these and mix them; afterward in a Cucurbit pour on Vinegar, till the
matter be covered a little space above. Boil it, and coagulate with gentle
fire in sand till it be dry, which being done, increase the fire that it may be
somewhat red; Cool the vessel, and take out the matter, grind it, and pour on
Vinegar again till it be covered three fingers; digest it till the Vinegar be
tinged, which will be in three days or thereabout: Take off the Vinegar
without disturbing the feces, and pour on more as often as you can take ^st any
Tincture, until it will tinge no more. Upon the tinged Vinegarultred, sprinkle
some drops of Oil of Tartar made per diliquium, and the Nurcotick Sulphur will
sink to the bottom, which must be often washed in common water, until the
water receive no more taste or sharpness from the Vitriol; for if this were not
done, by reason of the present Salt of the Vitriol it would be nauseous, and
provoke vomiting. Now. powder of red Sanders, and Citron, of each an Ounce;
powder of Mace, Galangal, Pepper, Cardamum, of each iij: Make a Laudanum.
Extract also j of Egyptian Mummy with Succory water, the Tinctures diligently
taken off and filtred mix with ij of Narcotick Sulphur: Digest them all
together in a close vessel with gentle heat for fifteen days; afterward take
off the Menstruum, which will be almost of the consistency of honey: Then add
ss of extract of Saffron, of the salt or Magistery of Pearls j. Keep this mass
for use.

It is a most excellent Anodyne proper for the procuring sleep in all griefs,
especially inwardly taken. Dose from Gr. vj to x in Pills, or with some
Conserve, or other convenient Liquor.

There is very often such watchings and inquietude, that accompany the
diseased, so as they every whit as much weaken the Natural vigor, as the
disease it self; unless these symptoms be taken away, the disease can by no
means be cured, but these being removed oft-times the curation is rendered
easy: Therefore all diligence must be used to procure sleep, which is a friend
to Nature. Sleep is the Arcanum of Medicine, which being introduced, the
dolor, and anxious enormities are altogether stupefied, and very often while
the disease rests with the body, the cause of the grief is also extirpated:
Wherefore it behooves a Physician to be instructed in some essential Anodyne (as
much as to enjoy the Treasures of Attalus) who in the time of greatest need may
betake himself to the Holy Anchor of Health, which the Anodyne reaches to.
There are appointed by the Gallenists, Philonium Romanum Persicum, Athanasia
magna, Aurea Alexandrina, New Treacle, Trochus of Alkakengi, Pills of
Cynogloss, all which if exhibited in due time, and just proportion, with
convenient Liquors, are often times very profitable: But more excellent then
all these, are the famous Chemical Laudanums, which are made of Opium, a
principal somniferous Anodyne, and of Sulphur of Vitriol, exceedingly well
corrected and freed from all manner of venom and impurities, which cannot be
affirmed of the abovenamed: Wherefore the force of these is most efficacious,
and the use more safe.

Laudanum with Opium.
. Of the best Opium a convenient quantity, cut it into small thin slices, and
in a glass dish dry them over a gentle fire, until it will easily crumble to
dust in your finger, and do smell well, that is, if by exhalation the stink of
Sulphur be wholly taken away, of which it smelt very strong at the first; then
extract it with Vinegar poured upon it, to cover the powder five or six
fingers, digest it in sand for three days. The tinged Vinegar separate from
the feces, silter and distill it in Balneo to the consistency of honey, which
dissolve again, silter, and by distillation draw off the water: Keep the
Extract.. Saffron a convenient quantity, extract it with spirit of Wine,
always pouring on other spirit of Wine, till it will yield no more Tincture,
what is tinged distill by a Limbeck, that the extract may remain in the bottom
like honey. Then. of the Extract of Opium j, Salt of Pearls vj, mix them, in
the end add of Musk j, Amber j, Oil of Cloves six drops or ss: Keep this for
use in a close vessel. Dose from Gr. iv to vj in Pills gilded, or in some
proper Liquor, or syrup of Poppy, or confection of Mother-wort. If the grief be
vehement, or there be watchings, three hours after Supper give one Pill, at
Midnight give another, and if no abatement be, about break of day give the
third. Also outwardly apply an Alabaster ointment.

. Of the Unguent of Alabaster ij, of Laudanum Opiat j; make an ointment, or
dissolve it in water of Nightshade, Roses, Poppy, etc. Dip linen clothes in
the solution, which apply; as shall be spoken of in its own place.

Another Laudanum.
. Species of Confection of Amber j, pour on the best rectified spirit of Wine
till it be covered two fingers, let them stand in Infusion fourteen days,
afterward pour off half the Tincture, and add iij of Opium; set it again in
Infusion for fourteen days, which ended, pour off what is clear, and with most
gentle heat separate the spirit of Wine to the consistency of a liquid syrup.
To this Extract add Solution of Coral, of Pearls of each j; of the best
prepared Amber, ss; Hartshorn j, and pour on the remaining Tincture of species
of Confection of Amber, and set them in the Sun, or other hot place: Lastly,
Add Musk, Amber of each Gr. vj, Saffron ss, Oil of Cinnamon, of Cloves, of each
four drops, mix them. Dose from Gr. ij to iij.

Pains of the head.
1. In dolours of the head, of what kind soever, Aqua bened. is of principal
use, a Dose being given upon an empty stomach: See my Notes on Crollius.

2. Of the same Effect also is syrup of Aqua bened.

3. Purgations are made.

1. By Laxative Diasena.

2. Panchymagogon Vegitable.

3. Roots of Hellebore prepared.

4. Scammony prepared.

5. Mercurius dulcis.

6. Mercurius vitae.

7. Flowers of Antimony prepared and corrected.

8. Specificum purgans of Paracelsus, which is exceedingly commended: See
Crollius Notes.

Internalls.
Among Internals are reckoned Cephalic Pills of Laudanum not purging, but
confortative; they are thus made:

. Oil of Camphire Gr. vj, (Oil of Camphire is made by being dissolved in a like
quantity of Oil of Spike) Extract of Gum Landanum made with spirit of Wine j,
the best Musk Gr. iij: Make a mixture with Majoran water, and Gum dragant, the
Pills weighing each of them Gr. iv. Dose of Pills ij or iij, which must be
reiterated often if need require. Let them be given long after meat, about the
Evening.

Phylosophical spirit of Vitriol in wine exhibited, may worthily be numbered
with these.

Every Dolor is removed three ways.

1. By such things as remove the cause, and contrary the disease.

2. By Anodynes, which are paragoricall, and do mitigate, pacify, and gently
assuage the Cause.

3. By Narcoticks which make the dolor not to be perceived; these do not
properly take away the pain, unless happily by sleep, (which being inwardly
taken they Cause) it be mitigated and dissolved. Vehement dolor discovers the
Narcotick to be a mitigating Anodyne.

If therefore the grief arise from an intemperate heat of the brain, or from
the exhaling of hot vapors, as in Fevers; at first strive to evacuate them by
a Clyster, then cut a vein; if the Headache, or indisposition of the whole
body still remain, or which is worse, if the body look very ill, apply to the
parts of the Precordia Cuppinglasses with scarification; yea they must also be
often applied without scarification in great dolours, on the very same day.
Then apply to the forehead an Anodyne thus made.

. Laudan. Opiat ss; water of Nightshade, of Roses, of each iij, Rose Vinegar j
and ss; mix these: moysten linen clothes in it, and apply to the forehead.
Also let the sick often smell to Rose water, in which Camphire is dissolved,
and sometimes wash his face with the same. Inwardly, let such things be given,
as may alter the intemperance, drive forth the noxious humors, and which have
the force of Anodynes; Such are the Laudanums above mentioned.

If by this means the dolor abate not, use Vesicatories, which apply to the
forehead or nape of the neck.

But if the dolor arise from an intemperate cold of the brain, either with or
without matter, the Medicines aforesaid must be forborne, and such things
applied as are in common use with Practitioners: Among which, most proper to
the disease are these: Vinegar and Oximel of Squills, water of Elder flowers,
Oil and water of Peneroyal, Rosemary, Dill and Wild Alexander; which two last,
or one of them, must be outwardly applied, not omitting the former, which
remove pains of this kind, digest and dissipate the matter, or so dispose of
it, that afterward with Errhinis and Apophlegmatism's they may easily be
expelled and dissipated.

An Unction of these applied to the Temples, Forehead, and Suture Coronale is
very convenient; also Oil of Nutmegs made by expression, and Apoplectick Balsom
applied to the Nostrills, and Balsom of Amber, and of Cinnamon: Likewise caps of
silk or linen quilted with Aromatic Spices, and Cephalic Herbs; and such as
are made with four parts of Millet, and one part of Salt decrepitated. The caps
must be well warmed and applied to the head three or four times a day.

And if by ordinary Remedies the dolor be not assuaged, it will be necessary
to draw blisters in the lower parts behind the ears, lay upon them Colewort
leaves, and keep them open. If you would heal them up, anoint them with white
Ointment of Rhasis. Also if the disease continue long and be rebellious, a
potential or actual Seton or Cautery may be applied.

If the dolor of the head arise from the foulness of the stomach, and be
constant, or by Intervalls; infusion made of Crocus of Metals, or flowers of
Antimony, in Betony or Mint water, may be often exhibited.

In dolours caused by cold humors Mercury with sublimate Mercurius vitae or
Panacaea, are very profitable. Also very useful are gross powders prepared of
Aromaticks, and Coriander, Confection of Anise, Diarrhodon, Abbatis and
Diamosch, and such like made into Rotulaes, and taken after meat. These usually
cure the stomach, and also the head, which must likewise be comforted with
sweet Balsoms, and other such things, being as well taken inwardly, as
outwardly applied.

In every pain of the head distilled water of Verveine is commended as a proper
Arcanum, iv of which being taken with four drops of spirit of Vitriol, will
aslwage the pain: Also Perveine whole bruised, or part thereof, and applied to
the head; or whole, hung about the neck with the root upward; this is an Amulet.

Note. The Vervaine at first is pulled up with the root, afterward the root
must be wrapped up in that Earth.

Externals in pain of the Head.
1. Epithema of Gammaris.

2. Spirit of Wine, which is excellent in pain of the head caused by excess in
eating or drinking, especially if the Testicles be fomented with a sponge
moystened in Wine vinegar or common water.

3. Epithema of Wormseed; Powder of Wormseed macerated in water of Elder
flowers (or common water) or of Roses or Betony, and applied to the nape of the
neck.

4. In Hemicrania, especially in an Imposthume, Cucumer root applied, by a
certain propriety yields relief, being boiled with Verveine and Sea- Wormwood
of each an equal part, in Wine with some Rose Water added.

This Epithema is profitable in Vngarick Fevers.

5. A Compound water thus:. Water of Roses, of Elder flowers, of each iv;
Camphire ij, the best Musk Gr. iij or vj; Extract of Caroline ss Oil, of Spike
ij: Dissolve the Camphire in the Oil of Spike, afterward mix them all, and
apply them to the aking-head in mighty fervent heats, (but in Fevers before
the Sun be hot,) also to the Temples and hand-wrists.

6. A Specific in cold pains of the head, such as young women are often
troubled with, when they feel a cold moisture in the hinder-part of the head:
It is thus:

. Long-pepper (not other Pepper) beat it somewhat grossly in a Mortar, afterward
Extract it with spirit of Wine, and keep it: Make use of it after this manner:
Make a bag with white Amber somewhat small, moysten it with the Essence of
Long-pepper, and apply it hot to the Suture Coronale; this wonderfully helps
where need is, but first the stomach must be thoroughly cleansed by evacuation.

7. In grievous dolours of the head (with watchings occasioned by raging
distillations) the Laudanum Opiat must be applied, the other Laudanun's in this
case are of no force.

8. A few river Crabs moystened with Rose-vinegar, bruised and applied round
about the head instead of a Plaster.

9. Plantane root hung about the neck, by a certain propriety, asswageth the
pain of the head.

10. Ivy leaves macerated in Vinegar and Rose Water, afterward dried and
applied to the forehead and temples: This is excellent in the raging momentane
headache.

11. Verveine, as abovesaid, is a famous specific used inwardly and outwardly.

12. Peach kernels with Betony or Verveine water bruised and applied, do
wonderfully help in pains of the head arising from a cold cause.

13. Ointment of Alabaster.. Of the tops of the black-berry-bush two handfulls,
leaves of Rue one part; Cammomile-flowers green iij; Alabaster stone most
finely pulverisate lb ss, Oil of Roses lb j, wax ss, White Wind lb iv; put
these in a new Earthen pot well glazed, for three days let them stand,
afterward boil them till the Wine be consumed; let it cool, and add the whites
of four Eggs. Make the Unguent.

Talking idly in sickness.
1. In Cases of this kind Aqua bened. and such like are given.

2. The green juice of Silver (otherwise liquor and potable Silver, such indeed
may be had: For the true Tincture is the Universal Menstrnum,) which is made
after this manner.. Of the best purified water of Tartar two parts, of white
Terra Sigillata one part; grind them to most fine powder upon a Marble,
afterward in a Crucible well covered and luted set it in a wind Furnace; at
first increase the Fire carefully by degrees, that at length in a more vehement
Fire, it may remain for twenty four hours as it were in slux, (by reason of the
Terra Sigillata, the matter will not slow, but it will look as if it did:) when
it is cold you will find the water of Tartar like green glass in the bottom of
the Crucible, this take out and gently reduce to powder. Of this,. one part; of
the Calx of fine Silver dissolved with Aqua fortis, and after the usual manner
precipitated with Copper (in good store of water) and afterward diligently
edulcorated from all its Aerimony, two parts; mix these exactly one with the
other, then put them in a Box made of Clay well cemented and luted, place it in
sand, and at first make a gentle Fire, increase it by degrees, after some time
make it stronger both over and under, that the vessel may be hot, and the
matter Cement for twelve hours, yet so as it slow not; if it do, you must
repeat your labor. Cool the vessel and take all out, grind it very well, and
in a Cucurbit with a broad bottom pour on the best spirit of wine, and extract
a redness, (the redness proceeds not from the Silver, for that yields a blew or
greenish color) let them stand six, seven, or eight days; pour off the Spirit
of Wine, and pour on more, digest it as before, repeat this often till all the
redness or yellowness be extracted: Keep all these Extractions, the Silver in
the Cucurbit after Extracting the redness will appear bluish; this therefore
dry leisurely, and upon a Marble grind it to powder; Keep it carefully: But
take all the red Extractions, and distill them in Balneo; draw off the spirit
of Wine, and the redness will all remain in the glass like blood: This with the
reserved bluish silver grind upon a Marble very small, and with them mix twice
so much Calcined flints (which are calcined by burning them often, and
quenching them in water) these diligently mixed put into an Earthen
Sublimatory, or low Cucurbit, and set them to sublime in sand, increase the
Fire by degrees unto a strong fire, and then the Silver will ascend perfectly
blew like a Sapphire, leaving in the bottom a thick black substance. This black
matter carefully taken out grind upon a Marble, and wash it often with hot
water, afterward in an Iron vessel Calcine it with moderate heat, until it be
a most thin Calx, (as in Antimony, always moving it with a Spattle.) From this
Calx extract a salt with the spirit of Wine before distilled from the redness,
which must cover the Calx three or four singers, and be digested three or four
days in Balneo in a close vessel: The spirit of Wine beginning to wax somewhat
white, take off the feces, and go on Calcining and extracting till it be
enough, that is, until no more salt come forth, nor the Spirit wax white. All
these Extractions put together, and draw off the spirit of Wine by distillation
in Balneo, until there be left a fourth part in the bottom. Set it in a cold
moist place, and the salt of silver will granulate, and become transparent like
Crystal; the remaining spirit of Wine, with the former extracted salt,
distill to a fourth part, and the salt again granulated take up, and so go on
till all the salt be gathered. The salts collected, diligently dry and keep for
use.. Of the blew silver before sublimed and elevated two parts, of the salt
now collected one part, beat them well together in a mortar, and in sand
distill them by Retort into an Oil, or bluish silver liquor, (somewhat
inclined to green) which liquor diligently keep. Dose, from three drops to four
in a convenient vehicle. In all griefs of the head, chiefly in the Frenzy,
Hypochondriack Melancholy, Paraphrensie, Mania, and Apoplexy, Paralafie,
Epilepsie, lost or weak Memory, Vertigo, Catarrhs, etc. It is a principal, sure
and approved remedy in all Diseases of the brain; this has miraculously
restored some that have for many years been bound in chains.

Insania, Mania, and Melancholy.
In Insany, Mania and Melancholy, the blood of an Ass is also commended for a
specific Remedy; (the blood of the Ass will keep a year.) This Summer 1615 it
restored a certain Carpenter; the blood was taken from the veins behind the
ears, in which new clean linen clothes never used before were macerated and
after dried.

Note. The Analogy, the Ass is a Melancholy Animal: The use of the clothes
macerated as aforesaid;. The quantity of two fingers breadth of the said
cloth, and the length of your thumb, steep it in a draught of Fountain water,
until the color come forth and tinge the water; This water give to the sick
once every morning for three days, and if possible lay him to sweat, which
this blood will drive out.

Mania.
The perfect Cure of Mania is thus:

1. Exhibit a vomitory with Aqua bened.

2. After vomiting, for certain days let him take the decoction of Anagallis
that bears a purple flower, without any addition. Wine must by no means be
given.

3. Prepare a Lixivium thus:. Cephalic Herbs what quantity you please with
their flowers, boil them in Fountain water, then. of Bayberries, and roots of
black Hellebore, of each a convenient quantity, bruise them together grossly,
and sew them in a bagg longer then wide; boil the bagg a little in the
aforesaid Lixivium; And for nine days together, take every day lb ij of the
Lixivium, warm it hot, and with linen clothes moistened in it and gently
squeezed, foment the head (being shaved) for one whole hour together; afterward
apply the aforesaid bagg to the Suture Coronale while it is hot with a good
ligature, let the Patient lie upon a bed, and if possible take his rest; then
there will be a wonderful purging through the Emunctuary places of the head,
and the belly be somewhat soluble; (this is taken from the use of Hellebore
among the Ancients, which was rather outwardly then inwardly applied.) Thus the
fumes inherent in the Cranium and brain, are wonderfully dissolved, which by no
other remedy could be removed.

4. Box leaves are commended in Mania; (I have not proved this but have heard
it commended). Of Box nine leaves, cut them very small with a knife, give them
in one or two spoonfulls of water of Lavender upon an empty stomach, not
omitting the things aforenamed, which if possible will provoke sweating. Repeat
this two or three times.

5. The last refuge in this Disease is the opening the Cranium with a Trepan:
See below in the end of the Chap. of Frenzy and Paraphrensie.

Melancholy.
In Melancholy are Purgations as well as Vomitories.

1. Laxative powder of Diasena.

2. Roots of Hellebore prepared.

3. Specificum purgans of (...) is most Excellent.

To comfort the Brain; of singular use, (...)

1. Elixir Proprietatis of Paracclyus.

2. Essence of Saffron, extracted with distilled water or (...) of Vines is
made of Vine branches cut, and distilled that (...) keep.

3. Liquor of Silver, of which above.

4. Extract of Alkermes, with the Extract of Gum Landanum with a little Amber
and Musk added thereto, and made up in Pills.

Note. Extract of Alkermes must not be made with spirit of (...) other
Menstruum, only the juice of the sweet smelling Apples is (...) Extract may be
the longer kept, if after the Confection is propered it be mised with Spirit of
Wine: the other Preparation see above in the Chap. of Confortatives.

5. Extract of the Azure stone.. Of the Azure siene as much as you please, burn
it six or seven times, and as often quench it in spirit of Wine, until it be
reduced to powder, and with water of Melissa, cleanse it from its earthy filth,
then reduced it to very fine powder, and with spirit of Wine digesrit in a warm
place for three or four weeks; afterward draw ost the spirit of Wine by
Distillation, and that which remains carefully keep. This is the Extract of the
Lazure stone. Dose from ss to j. In Melancholy, Epilepsie, Vertigo, and
momentane Headache: In the Quartane it is an excellent Remedy, being exhibited
with appropriate Liquor.

Paracelsus, as a specific Medicine for Melancholy prescribes flowers of
Antimony to be taken with a little Treacle, two, three or four times, by reason
of the contumacy of the Disease.

Powder of Fumitory has been often given to Melancholy, persons, and they
have been cured: Also water and conserve of Elecampane, and Essence of the
lesser Selandine, in hypochondriack Melancholy wonderfully help.

Zwingerus in the Hypochondriack.. Of the five opening roots of each ss,
Bugloss, Cardu-bened. of each one part, Wormwood a little, Fennel seeds j, wild
Saffron, ss, Leaves of Sena ij and ss, Agarick, white Tartar of each ss a dram,
Ginger, Cinnamon, of each j; Cleanse these and put them in Wine; Three Cups of
this must be taken every morning for three weeks together, or till the Disease
be removed.

Of great Renown among Physicians is this Secret Water in Hypochondriack
Melancholy most convenient;. Flowers of Borrage, Bugloss, Staecados of Arabia,
of each ss, Rosemary, Majoran, Melissa, of each ij ss, Root of Bugloss ij,
Piony j, Water of Bugloss, Borrage, of each iij, Syrup of Pomgranate ij ss,
Powder of Cinnamon gross, Galangal, Cloves, Sassron, Seeds of Basilicon of each
j; Pour upon them ^rx;. iij of Rhenish Wine, let them stand in infusion two or
three days; then distill them in Balneo.

An Excellent Digestive in the Hypochondriack:

. Of Crystal Salt of Tartar j; of Oil of Fitrial, or spirit of Sulphur, twenty
Gr. Mix them with Liquor of Prunes or other broth; repeat the use of this two
or three days; afterward purge with (...) of Chelagagick and Phlegmatic
Herbs, with their Correctories and Carmitiatives.

A Diseas^ when one fears water.
Hydrophobia.
In Hydrophobia Mixtura simplex is a most Noble Medicine, because it provokes
sweat, which in this case is absolutely necessary.

Love-potions.
In Love-potions (or the danger coming thereby.)

1. Vomitories are necessary with Aqua bened. or Electuary of glass of
Antimony: Crollius.

2.. A fresh Secundine (the powder will not keep above two years) cut from it
the umbelical vein and outward skin, dry it in an Oven, that it may be reduced
to powder. Of this powder give to the Patient (twice a day, two days together)
from j to j and ss, with ss of Extract of Treacle, or with the water or spirit
of Treacle; or it may be given in Mixtura simplex j, with one spoonful or two
of juice of Watercresses; together with this following Plaster applied to the
stomach.. Powder of Coloquintida ij, Scammony j, root of Masterwort j and ss,
Salt Gems, and of both the kinds of Hellebore, of each j, Rinds of Quinces ss:
To these, when reduced to a gross powder, add Oil of Elder and of Wax of each
alike proportion as much as shall be needful: Make a Plaster, spread it upon a
little piece of Sheepsleather, and apply it to the stomach, and keep it not
above ss an hour, afterterward sweat will come forth. The Patient hereby
refreshed, must for certain days take this following Electuary:. Juice of
Melissa, St. John's Wort, of each ij, root of Vincetox ss, of the Magnet that is
good and will attract Iron ij, of Clarified honey a convenient quantity, make
an Electuary. Dose from j, to j and ss upon an empty stomach, and continued to
the declining of the Disease. Also in the Afternoons, Tincture of Coralls from
Gr. vj to x may be daily exhibited.

Frenzy.
In the Frenzy and Inflammation of the Brain and Membranes, with a sharp
Fever concomitant, the Medicines commonly used are proper, therefore not to be
rejected: The beginning of Cure in the sharpest Malady of this kind, is rightly
performed by the cutting of a vein, without respect to time or hour, fullness of
the stomach, restriction or evacuation; If the pain in the Head be great, the
cutting of a vein must be reiterated the next day, which in urgent necessity
must be done forthwith, if strength will bear, and the blood come forth freely
without the application of any cooling soluble Clyster, though the stomach be
full: But if Age, and decay of strength hinder, then Cuppinglasses must be
applied to the parts of the Precordia, and the hinder part of the neck with
Scarification. All diligence must be used that the sick may rest, least he
loose his strength by throwing himself hither and thither: The juice of Comfry
mixed with honey and applied to the Nostrills, is profitable in the Frenzy. It
is also commodious in the beginning of the Disease to moisten the Head with
Vinegar and Rose Water mixed; for this drives out and alters the humor.

Make an Irrigation with Oil of Roses iij, of Camomil j, Vinegar of Roses j and
ss; with this blood-warm chafe the Suture Coronale, the hair being first shaved
off.

In exceeding inquietudes, and tiresome watchings, if the strength be mightily
weakened, and the Fever increased, a Dose of Laudanum Opiat must presently be
given, after eight hours repeat it until the Sick have taken ss: In the defect
of Laudanum Opiat, dry a little Opium, reduce it to powder, and dissolve it in
water of Nymphaea, or in milk, or some cooling decoction, with syrup of Poppy j
to iij of the Decoction, water or milk.

But if (which indeed always is) the sick desire drink;. Of water of Nymphaea
iij, of Roses and Bugloss of each vj, syrup of red Gooseberries or Lemmons ij
and ss; Salt Prunella j, or j and ss: Mix these, let the sick use it for
ordinary drink: For watchings it will not be incongruous to apply to the
Forehead a liquid Epithema, repeating it often when the clothes are dry; it
may be thus made:. Water of Nightshade, of Lettice, of each ii, Rose-vinegar
ss, Laudan. Opiat j, Camphire Gr. vj, mix them: Also the Nostrills may be
anointed with the following Unguent;. Unguent. Populeon j, Essence of Opium Gr.
iij, mix them; Or,. Oil of Nutmegs made by expression j, Laudan. Opiat ss, mix
these for procuring sleep.

To temperate the heat of Melancholy, Gr. x of Salt of Pearls may be given
with Borrage or Bugloss water: Also the Legs and Arms may be washed in the
following Decoction.. Leaves of Horsleek Nymphaea, the white Vine, vinum
fortes, Roses, of each a convenient quantity, tops of white Poppy and
Letticeseeds according to discretion: Also cooling Epithema's may be applied to
the heart, to which may profitably be added, Essence or Extract of Sassron j
and ss, or the Saffron it self with some Grains of Camphire.

Epithema's may also be applied to the Testicles, with a little Vinegar added
for penetration; and the Face often washed in Rose-vinegar; the Body parged with
Extract of Rubarb, or its infusion in Succory-water.

If by this means the Disease be not abated, it will be very expedient to take
a young Whelp, after the entrails are taken out, cut it open in the back, and
apply it hot to the forepart and Crown of the head; Or instead of this, apply
the Lights of a Beast hot, or a Pullet cut open in the back; when you perceive
they begin to cool, put them in hot water, wherein the tops of Poppy, and
flowers of Nymphaea have been boiled; when they are hot, wipe off the water
with a sponge, and apply them again; for that gentle moist external heat,
temperates the internal heat by moistning. Yea, the like of our degrees of
heat, mitigate the cause of dolours, digest and reduce them to a temperature,
and whatsoever is more then Natural by gentle rarefaction dissipate; wherefore
this has procured to it self the repute of a principal Remedy by what is
abovesaid. In the rest proceed according to the prescript of Practitioners,
always adding to the Medicaments some solution of Pearls; and in the
declination, some drops of Aurum Potabile, because this alone comforts Nature,
and by sweat does thoroughly expel the relics of the Disease.

Note. Beware least the use of Stupefactives be too long continued, and so the
Frenzy be converted to a Lethurgy: They must also be warily applied to such
as are much debilitated, especially outwardly, least the matter in the Head be
coagulated, which by reason of the imbecility of the Natural vigor, can by no
means be dissipated and resolved.

After the same manner the Paraphrensie and Dilirium are cured, (viz.) the
syptomes mitigated, and the Disease removed, which is the cause thereof.

Yet this must be noted, that if there be Creses, Presages and Symptoms, also
if the Rheum continue, no stupefactive Medicine must be administered, but only
two or three Doses of Laudanum Opiat.

The same Medicaments, the Method and Rule of Practitioners being observed, are
exhibited in Cure of Mania after the same manner; in which it is often
expedient, to give flowers of Antimony, and Antimony mixed with other
purgations. Also the Extract of black Hellebore prepared with its Correctories,
and mixed with other Purgatives.

The last refuge in this Disease, if it abate not by other Medicaments, is to
apply a Potential Cautery to the head, between the Coronale and Sagitacle
Suture, which must be left on, till so great an Erosion be made, that the bone
may appear: Then with a Trepan open the Cranium, keep it open for a month, and
the sick will be cured from the Mania: This done, heal the wound according to
Art.

Epilepsie in Children.
Epilepsie, and the like Diseases, which by reason of the vehemence and danger
of the fits is destructive, has a twofold Indication: The first which
respects the fits: The second the root of the Disease.

1. Aqua vitae Mulierum (alias Embryonate Balsom) one spoonful of it with three
or four drops of our Antepileptick spirit, given to a woman with child once
every month in the new of the Moon, from the fourth month to the birth,
preserves the Child from the Epilepsie. Omitting this, it will be more safe to
give the following powder.. The back bone of a Weesle not boiled, but raw, from
head to tail washed very clean, dried, and then reduced to powder:. Of this
powder and magistery of Coral and Pearls of each ij, mix them: Dose, as much as
will lie upon the point of a knife, taken in the Pap of an Apple.

2. Children may be preserved from the Epilepsie, or thence forward be freed,
so as in no succeeding Age they shall be troubled with the like passion, if
when they are newly born, before they have sucked milk or eaten food, there be
given to them, either ss, or j ij or iij of Oil of sweet Almonds mixed with
fine Sugar. After the taking of this they will rest quietly.

. The dung of a black Cow, while it is warm, put it in a new Earthen pot, and
Calcine it, of which give j or ss to the new born Infant; (this is a secret of
the Elector of Saxony) at length it will puke up abundance of phlegm and
impurities gathered in the Mothers Womb (especially if any of the Menstruum
happen to be introduced with the Spirit) which impurities are the causes of
many Diseases in Children, therefore named Epilepsies; which if not vomited out
as abovesaid, are expelled through the bowels downward. Lastly, when the Child
is first washed at the birth, wash it in a decoction of the green bark of
willows: Hereby the Children are not only preserved from the Epilepsie, but
from any other lingering consumptive Disease. It is a specific in inward
weaknesses of Children.

Antepileptick Spirit of Children (see Crollius) of which six eight or nine
drops with Epileptick water, flowers of Tilia, roots of Piony, water of
Swallows, Cherries, Lavender, also black Cherries, with Epileptick water of
Langium, exhibited both in the Fit and after, does wonderful expel the Diseases
of Children. It is more powerful if given at the beginning of the Fit.

Epilepsie in those of ripe Age.
After universal Vomatives and Catharticks;

1. Specificum purgans of Paracelsus, afterward other Specificks may be given,
such as these;

2. Epileptick of Crollius.

3. Antepileptick powder of Cinnabar of Antimony, which is thus.. Cinnabar of
Antimony, magistery of Coral and Pearl, of each a like quantity: Or thus,.
Native Cinnabar perlucid and splendid ss, powder it very finely upon a Marble,
add magistery of Coral and Pearl, of each ij; one leaf of Gold diligently
dried, and by grinding reduced to powder. Of this take from Gr. vij to xviij,
give it to drink in Sage-water, repeat the Dose often. See above of Sudorisicks.

Another Epileptick powder of great force.. Cinnabar Vngarick well watht and
cleansed lb ss, imbibe it with iv of Spirit of Vitriol, powder of Man's skull
that was never buried ss; Imbibe this with Spirit of Wine, leave it in a hot
place for fifteen days, afterward by Retort (...) it and keep it by it self,
and what remains apart. Then. Powder of Elke (...) j and ss, of red Myrrh ss,
dissolve these in Spirit of Salt, the solution separate from its feces and
keep. Afterward. Of Saffron ss, extract a Tincture with Spirit of Wine: All
these Liquors mix together, and in them imbibe the Cinnabar before prepared,
washed and pulverisate, and over gentle heat continue drying it, till all the
Liquors be imbibed, and the whole lest dry as powder Dose, from Gr. ij to iv
with rich Wine or Spirit of Wine, or Antepilestick water, before, in, and after
the Fit.

4. Spirit of Man's brain, which is thus made:. The brain of a young man under
the Age of twenty four years, sound, and of a good constitution, that has
perished by violent death. Gather it piece by piece, with all the Membranes,
Arteries, Veins and Nerves, with all the marrow of the bone, bruise these
together in a stone mortar, and in a Cucurbit, or rather a large capacious
glass, add of Cephalic waters, as of flowers of Tilia, Piony, Betony,
Cherries, and chiefly of Lavender, also add Diaphoretick in peracutis; with
these let the brain, etc. be covered four or five singers (some add of Spirit
of Wine, more then of the other simple waters) close the vessel hermetically,
and leave it in some convenient place, for one, two, three, etc. Years;
Afterward it must be distilled per Cohobia in a Balneo of dew, until almost
all the substance of the brain be drawn out with the Infusion; this water
separated from the Feces curiously keep. And from the Feces six times cohobated
and then calcined, extract a salt, which join with the Spirit before made, and
carefully preserve the whole. Dose, from j to iij in convenient vehicles.

Note. If in the beginning, by reason of defect, the simple mixture (or
Diaphoretick in peracutis) be not added; afterward the phlegm being gently
extracted in Balneo, add half so much of Mixtura simplex, and proceed as is
directed. Dose, as before, from j to iij.

5. Livers of Frogs, which are thus prepared; Get the Livers of forty green
water (not land) Frogs, while they are alive take them out, and on Colewort
leaves, on the under-side of the leaves, lay them one by one, so as they may
touch one another; afterward in new unglaz'd earthen pots with covers on them,
dry them with gentle heat, when dried carefully separate them from the leaves,
and reduce them to a fine powder; which powder divide into five equal parts,
and keep it: One part give the Patient in the morning fasting in in a small
draught of water, or appropriate spirit, when the Moon is entering Cancer; In
the Evening two hours after Supper give another part; and so consequently the
next day in the Morning the third part, and in the Evening the fourth part, and
the third day the last part in the morning.

This is to be observed, that two hours before and after the taking it, the
Patient must not eat nor drink. If the Patient (especially if somewhat Aged)
after the taking this Medicine do sweat in the Forehead or Temples, it is a
sign of Exquisite Operation. And if after the third, fourth, or fifth time of
taking it, either in a bed or hot-house, the sweat come forth freely all over
the body, there is great hope of very good success.

He must strive to keep himself from terror, anger, water, and sire, from
wine, and that he see not another Epileptick fall, for by the sight thereof,
the Disease which has for some time lain hid, or at present is asleep, will
return. Chiefly, he must carefully avoid all vehement motions of the mind, and
sly drunkenness as the Pestilence.

A due measure in meats and drinks must carefully be observed, and the six
unnatural things avoided, least thereby any thing be introduced that may
obstruct the Cure.

Note. 1. Only green Frogs, and not other, are to be taken, and them alive.

2. This powder is to be made in May, June and July, until mid- August; for at
any other time Frogs are unuseful.

3. When the Livers are dried so as they may be pulverisated, they are to be
diligently separated from the Colewort leaves, and afterward beaten in a
mortar.

4. This powder will not keep above a year, therefore if need be, it must be
prepared every year.

It can hardly be expressed how great Emolument comes from the Medicine simply.
The Cure is to be begun in June about the Solstice; and if the first year
answer not the end, reiterate the Cure another year.

Frederick the Fourth Palatine, who was Epileptick from the fifteenth to the
twenty sixth year of his Age, was by this Remedy restored.

5. An Amulet of the Elder-shrub, found in the Willow tree.

It is observable, that sometimes in Willows, especially in old ones, the
Eldershrub does grow; and this is often seen in Willows, when not far from them
Elders are planted for a hedge for a Garden, or other enclosure; in the fruit
whereof when ripe, the birds take great delight, chiefly the Mag-pie, who
scattering the seeds and his own excrement afterward upon some Willow (in which
are sometimes bred other Plants and Shrubs, as namely Amara dulcis, Vrtica and
Sklandine) does as it were primarily sow the matter from whence this shrub does
spring; Because the Mag-pye does himself labor in the Epilepsie, he makes this
Noble Periapton to cure the like Disease. The shrub may be gathered in any
month, but it is best in September or October, two days before Full Moon, when
the berries are ripe; these kept for use will continue in their virtue twelve
years; some of the smaller twigs will serve. The use is thus:

Cut one of the twigs into small short pieces, not slit, but whole; tie nine of
these in a knot, either with silk or thread, so tied hang it in one single
thread; Tie this about the neck as low as the Orifice of the Ventricle, that
the knot may touch it. Apply this knot after the exhibition of other Medicines,
to cleanse the body, and expel the dregs of the Disease; put it on what time
you please either before or after the Fit. The knot must be worn so long, till
of its own accord without any violence the thread be broken, and the knot is
seen to fall, which not the Patient himself, nor any other living must touch
with hands or feet, but with an iron fork or other convenient instrument, it
must be buried in the earth so deep, as neither man nor beast may come at it;
If he that had the Disease, or any other that never had it shall happen to
touch it, the Epilepsie does immediately invade him. With this Amulet have been
cured such as have labored under this Disease for a very long time.

After the Cure the Patient must diligently strive to preserve himself from all
the external causes of which we have spoken before, otherwise he will be again
infested.

Note. Those that are of ripe age may make themselves Canes of the greater
twiggs, through which during the time of the Cure, they may suck their drink.

7. Volatile Spirit of Vitriol, especially in those of ripe age: Of which see
my Notes on Crollius.

8. Epileptick Laudanum, of which in Opiology, and below in Apoplexy.

9. Roots of the Male Piony, or that which is black. The Feminine is of no use.
If it be hung about a child's neck that has the Epilepsie it asswageth the
Disease: The Root must be taken up in July in the decrease of the Moon, when
Sol is in Leo, and of a Sunday just at noon.

10. The Missletoe must be gathered between the two Lady days, (viz.) between
the 14th of August, and 9th of September: That which is cut off neatest the
Oak, is of the greater virtue.

11. An Antepileptick mixture made in the following manner:

. Spirit of Green Vitriol made of Vitriol and Boys Urine j, j, with water of
Piony root and flowers of Tilia, of each j; mix them. Of this mixture, in the
time of the sit, while the members are convulsive and contracted, give ss a
spoonful drop by drop; which being done, a little after the Diseased will
recollect his senses, then presently give him a little more, and also the third
time, and least the sit should return, the process must be repeated: Afterward
apply things comfortable to the brain, such are magistery of Coral, of Pearl,
of Man's skull, etc. These following Tablets are very profitable.. Magistery of
man's skull j (this must be first Calcined, afterward with water evaporated, and
the powder will be like Magistery) sixteen Piony seeds peeled, with Sugar
dissolved in Treacle water; according to Art make Tablets; of which one or two
may be given in the morning fasting, and in the evening long after meat.

When the Epileptick Fit is coming, to prevent it, so soon as ever the sick
perceives the signs of its coming, let him take one Pill of Antepileptick
Laudanum, or one Antepileptick Rotula; or in defect of these one drop or two of
Oil of Amber.

The Nostrills must be also anointed with Antapoplectick Balsom, or Balsom of
Amber.

The Fit being come, a Gag must be put into the mouth to keep it open, and so
as the tongue may not move; then by a forcible inward cry sneezing will be
provoked, which may be furthered with this following powder.. Root of white
Hellebore j, Castor and Euphorbium of each ss. Make a powder.

Also a suffumigation may be made with white Amber.

Members drawn crooked, must gently be reduced to straightness, by chafing them
with emollient Medicines.

The checks may be anointed with Oil of Amber, or Methridate, or Treacle,
dissolved in Epileptick water; but the Nostrills and Temples with Apoplectick
Balsom.

If it be suspected that the Disease arise from vicious humors collected in
the stomach, and exhaled to the head, it will be expedient to provoke vomiting
with Aqua bened. or white Vitriol dissolved in Piony water, in which powder of
Missletoe has been boiled. The Fit being come, if there be fear it will
speedily return, inject sharp Clysters to avert the sharp humors, least they
infest the brain.

Also Cuppinglasses with scarrification must be applied to the shoulders; and
if pain in the head be, a vein cut.

Which being done progression must be made to cut off the root of the Disease,
to which purpose the observation of Rules prescribed for good living is
exceeding profitable, and tends to an universal evacuation through hout the
body.

Sometimes it is necessary to mix with Purgatives Extract of Scammony, Aqua
bened. Extract of black Hellebore, and often times (the body being prepared) to
purge with Mercu. dulcis, Mercu. Vitae, and flowers of Antimony.

Then we must proceed to such things as purge the head, and by a certain
propriety yield relief, not neglecting those that dry and exceedingly
strengthen the head.

Antepileptick Tablets:. Root of Piony j, Magistery of Pearls and Coralls of
each j and ss; Magistery of Man's scull ss; Sugar dissolved in water of flowers
of Tilia a convenient quantity; Make Tablets: Give one or two in the morning
fasting, and in the evening long after meat.

Epileptick water.. Flowers of Lillies of the Valley two handfulls, infuse them
in a sufficient quantity of rich wine, let them stand in digestion ten days, or
longer if you please. Add flowers of Tilia fresh lb ss, of Piony iv; distill
them in Balneo till they be dry: In the distilled liquor again infuse root of
Piony j, white Dittany, Missletoe of each ss, Man's scull prepared ss, root of
bastard Pellitory ss, Castor ij, leaves of Rue one handful, flowers of
Staecados of Arabia, of Lavender, of each four parts, of flowers of Betony six
parts; Cubeba, Mace, of each ij, Cinnamon j, of prepared Squills iij: Digest
them again for fifteen days, then distill them by a Limbeck in Balneo; and
keep for use.

Clysters in Epilepsie and Balsome also; See the following Chap.

Apoplexy.
In Apoplexy of what kind soever, these things are famous:

1. Spirit of man's brain: of which in Epilepsie.

2. Spirit of Of the Arteries.
Arterious blood, the virtues of which are illustriously commended by Dr.
Graseccius Argentinensis in his book of Humane Life, lately set forth in
Germany in 4to 1615. The virtues and use of both are there set down: In
observing some part of his writings, I find Spirit of Arterious blood is called
by him Aqua bened. and the spirit of man's brain, is called Aqua-aurea.

Medicines Antapoplectick.
1. Mercu. Vitae in a just Dose exhibited, in such as be strong by often
vomiting purges the upper Region of the belly, and quickly after they come to
themselves, especially if an Epithema be made upon the Suture Coronale, with
pulverisate Amber, essencified with long Pepper in Aqua vitae or spirit of
wine, and sewed in a bagg longer then wide, with some drops of Oil of Amber
sprinkled upon it, and so applied to the Suture Coronale, with a good Ligature:
This also in such as be weak, where Mercu. vitae is not exhibited, will be very
profitable, especially if Clysters, at first gentle, afterward more strong, be
injected.

2. Sueezings are provoked especially with seed of Nigella and Seniores nigra,
that is, black Hellebore of Paracelsus, (of Musk and Amber.) Also seeds of
Darnel, but seeds of Nigella are better and safer. Or for Example thus:. Leaves
of Majoran ij, seeds of Nigella j, root of black Hellebore ij, the best Musk
ss, Amber Gr. vj; mix them and make a powder. Dose, the quantity of a Pea, it
must be given in a quill, and snuft up both nostrils strongly.

3. A fume of Partridge quills; also fume of Amber, or Oil of Amber, taken
often into the nostrills with a Partridge quill.

Note. In the Apoplexy wonderful excellent is that Balsom of Life, amongst
other most noble Balsoms and Aromatic Oils prepared by that Noble Chemist
John Eichtenacker. Dose, from Gr. ij to iv, in mixtura simplex with appropriate
water: See my Notes on Crollius.

Crollius his Apopleptick water of life does very much conduce to preservation:
Also his Apoplectick Balsom.

To preserve from, and cure in the Apoplexy, the Antapoplectick water of my
Composition is very beneficial: It is thus;

. Flowers of Lillies of the Valley, gathered in May at the Sunrising, wet and
dewy put them in a glass without any washing, yet take off the strings and
buds, and in rich Wine Malmsie, or other sweet Wine, digest them in the Sun,
the glass being exceedingly well closed; let it stand until Lavender be also
flowred, which flowers are blew.. Of these flowers diligently cleansed from
strings and stalks, and with equal weight join them with the flowers of
Lillies of the Valley, in the same glass, which firmly closed leave till the
month of September.

Then by a Limbeck distill it in Balneo, the spirituous water which first comes
off diligently keep, for it is very precious, and as well useful to preserve
from, as cure in the Apoplexy; that which is left is also of use, but not of
the virtue of the former, yet it is excellent to chafe the Limbs with.

From the Caput mortuum a salt may be extracted. This water will dure long, and
is of most fragrant smell. Dose ss a spoonful, or one spoonful, also one
spoonful and ss or two (respecting the Nature both of Disease and Patient) with
a drop or two of Oil of Amber upon an empty stomach.

Another Apoplectick water.. Flowers of Primeroses lb j, Lavender, Staecados of
Arabia, of each j, Tilia, Bugloss, of each j and ss, flowers of Rosemary,
Nymphaea, of each ss, root of Piony, Caryophyllato.
Cloves, of each x; Wormseed, Mace, Indian spike, of each iv, Florentine flower
de luce, Misletoe, of each j, Galangal, Cloves, of each vj, two Pome-Citrons
green, shavings of the wood Sassafras j and ss, leaves of Majoran, Mugwort, of
each one handful and ss, Rosemary one handful, seeds of Fennel, Mountain
Siler, Piony, Basilicon, of each iij. To these broken and bruised together in a
large capacious glass, add of Rosewater lb j, and of rich wine lb ij, close the
vessel well, and let them stand to digest for three days; then add juice of
Sage leaves fresh made by expression vj, Betony, Melissa, spirit of wine lb iv,
digest the whole again for three days, then distill it in Balneo by a Limbeck,
till it be dry; once cohobate it: Afterward rectify the water by it self in
ashes or Balneo, by distilling off three parts, the fourth part being left, put
into the neck of the Limbeck, Musk and Amber Gr. vj of each, wrapped in Or Cotton.
Bombace. In a glass very well stopped keep these for use.

With all these may be numbered Mixtura simplex, which if exhibited with
appropriate Apopleptick waters will powerfully provoke sweat.

Antepileptick Laudanum.
. Our Laudanum made of Sulphur of Vitriol j, Oil of Camphire ss, mix them, and
you have a most excellent Laudanum, useful as well for Curation in the Fit, as
out of it, being repeated often, after the universalls above mentioned.

The true Oil of Camphire.
. Of Camphire one part, Argilla prepared and dried vj parts, beat them together
until no part of the Camphire appear. Make up this mass into round balls,
which diligently dry in the shade, then distill it in sand by Retort luted,
with a receiver, on which there is some distilled rain water, and the Camphire
will come forth partly Oleaginous, and partly sublimate, which notwithstanding
will dissolve it self. To this distillation with water add of spirit of Wine
three parts, and distill it by a Limbeck with gentle fire: So the spirit of
wine will change the Camphire to a most thin Oil, which must be kept apart, the
spirit of wine being separated by a separatory or by Balneo.

Another way.
Dissolve Camphire in Antepileptick spirit of Vitriol and Boys urine with
gentle heat, and the Camphire will be elevated on the Superficies, like unto
Oil. This Oily matter take and dry with Terra Sigillata and a little vinegar
made up into round balls; distill these by Retort in sand, and the Spirit or
Oil of Camphire will come forth very quickly.

A decoction of Sage, Extract of the same, Carraway seed and Rocket seed, do
much help Apoplectick persons.

Also. Of Aqua vitae a sufficient quantity, Juniper berries two handfulls,
these when bruised macerate in the Aqua vitae for three days, then stir it, in
which when strained put Sage, Peneroyal and Creces, and j of Saffron; Give this
to the patient to drink, and he will presently recover his speech.

Apoplectick Balsom.
. Oil of Nutmegs made by Expression, Amber-greese, of each Gr. xvj, the best
Musk, Benzoin, Storax calamita, the best Laudanum, of each ss; distilled Oil of
Cloves sixteen drops, Lavender, Rue, Rosemary blossoms, Cinnamon, of each ss,
Amber six drops; these pulverisate, beat with the Oil of Nutmegs in a silver or
Tin pan with a pestle very well until they be united, and become one entire
body: Then the distilled Oils and the Balsom must be mixed leisurely, and in a
vessel well closed kept for use. It helps Apoplecticks, Epilepticks, and such
as are troubled with the Vertigo, if the fingers ends, temples and crown of the
head be anointed therewith; and for preservation it is convenient to use this
ointment twice or thrice a week at the least.

A Clyster for the Apoplexy, Epilepsie, Paralasy and Lethargy.

. Root of Sow-bread, Coloquintida, of each j and ss, Colts foot j, black
Hellebore prepared, seeds of wild Saffron, of each j; the lesser centaury ss
boil them in a sufficient quantity of water to lb j, strain it, and add of
honey Anthosate ij: If the Patient be strong, add j of Salt gems; make the
Clyster.

The Physician being about to cure the Apoplectick, must in Method.
the first place before all other things, consider, whether there be any sign
or hope of life, which being known he may forthwith apply himself to the Cure.

He must give order that the sick may be stirred, and his members well chafed,
and the crown of the head (the hair being first shaved off) and the nape of the
neck must be anointed with Balsom, or Oil of Amber. If the mouth be shut it
must presently be opened, and so kept, that the Palate may be anointed with
the said Balsom, or with Methridate or Trecle; the Nostrills and Temples with
Apoplectick Balsom.

To the head must often be applied a thin plate of Iron warm, or rather very
hot.

Through the mouth, if possible, must be presently given one spoonful of
Apoplectick water. If the Physician perceive too great abundance of blood, he
may open a vein in the Arm, but first a sharp Clyster must be injected.

Also some powder of Pellitory or Hellebore must be snuslt or blown up the
Nostrills through a Pipe or Quill.

To the Navel must be applied Unguent of Arthanita or Hellebore in form of a
Cataplasm; also Cuppinglasses by reason of Revulsion may be applied to the back
and loins.

A sharp Clyster must be injected; to which may be added ss of Crocus of
Metals, or j boiled in Aqua vitae, and with some apt decoction injected.

Then recourse must be had to convenient Vomitories, such as Aqua bened.
wherein it is to be noted, that it must be exhibited always in a double
proportion, by reason of the indisposedness of the natural vigor. In the mean
while, continue the exhibiting of the Apoplectick water, with the other
medicaments aforesaid.

Also Blisters may be raised in the Arms, legs, and Forehead; and sometimes to
the Prima Vertebra, an actual Cantery may be applied with good success.

The Sick hereby in some measure recovered, proceed in the Cure according to
the use of Practitioners.

Note. Clysters are not only convenient before the cutting of a Vein, but also
after; at first, by mollifying and allaying fervent heats with things proper to
the head, afterward by forcible expelling them, which if at first be not
removed, they must be repeated the oft^er, and be so much the more frequent as
the Disease is more strong. Platerus Tom. 1. Page 47.

The Physician therefore in exhibiting Clysters may thus proceed: At first give
this gentle Clyster following.

. Mallows, Herb Mercury, Sage, Rue, Peneroyal, of each one handful; Root of
the flower de Luce fresh iij; Bran, flowers of Camomil, Rosemary blossoms, of
each one part; Carraway seeds j; make a decoction, in which dissolve Electu.
bened. lavat. ij; Honey j; Oil of Bays, of Rue, of each j; Salt j: make a
Clyster.

A more strong Clyster, which after the first, or if the Evil be vehement, may
be presently given: It is thus,

. Root of the flower de Luce fresh, Solomons-seal, Cyclamen.
Sow-bread, of each j; Rue, Thyme, Sage, Bays, Peneroyal, Origan, Calamint,
Hysop, of each one handful; flowers of Staecados, Rosemary blossoms, of each
one part; Seeds of Cytron, Cumin, of each ij; Wild Saffron, Bay berries,
Juniper berries, of each ss; Agarick ij; make a decoction, in which dissolve
Hiera Coloquintida iij; Honey-Anthosate ij; Juice of the Herb Mercury, Beete,
of each j; Bulls-gall ss, Oil of Rue ij, of Castor ss, Salt melted j: make a
Clyster.

This following is most strong in Apoplexy.

. Root of flower de Luce, Pellitory, of each j, Aron ss, Hellebore j, Rue,
Sage, Thyme, flowers of the lesser Century, Cresses, of each one handful;
Seeds of Carraway ss, of Vrtica, Rue, of each j, Coloquintida ss, Rosemary
blossoms two parts; make a Decoction, in which dissolve Hiera Coloquintida ss,
Honey j, Oil of Rue iij, Castor, Euphorbium, of each j, Salt j; make a Clyster.

Paralusie.
In Paralasie, such things as are applied in Cure of the Apoplexy are also
useful: Here therefore Mercurius vitae, Clysters, and other purging
Medicaments, respecting the Nature of the Disease and constitution of the
Patient, may be very profitable.

In restoring lost speech, the Apoplectick water is of singular use, especially
if impregnated with a like quantity of Turtles blood warm. So Oyl^ Am^e
sprinkled drop by drop upon the tongue of the Paralytick perfectly restor^ the
speech. Such is water of Lillies of the Valley made with Wine. Also the Essence
of Castor extracted with spirit of Wine. Salt of Corals and Pearl, and also of
Amber, do wonderfully help.

First, to drive out sweat, which from the beginning is needful, (omitting
universalls before mentioned) of admirable use in the Paralysie is, the powder
or magistery of Cinnabar of Antimony, and magistery of Pearls and Corals, or
which see above in Sudorificks and Epilepsie. Dose, from Gr. viij to xij or
xvj. Sweat is best driven out in a Stove, as in that above described in
Diaphoreticks.

Among externalls the Essence of green leaves of Tobacco, made with Malmsie
Wine, (only by infusion without distillation) is worthy to be praised;
especially if presently after sweating, the members of the Paralytick be long
chafed with this Essence, they will easily be resolved and restored.

The method of curing the Paralysie for the most part is begun with cutting of
a vein, after the injecting of a sharp Clyster; but this is not done unless the
Age of the Patient, and habit of the body consent. Then progress should be made
to concoct and expel the matter, to which is needful distilled water of
Primroses, Sage, Melissa, or Extracts of the same, and Purgatives infused in
them, or extracted from them, with addition of two or four drops of Oil of
Tartar per Diliquium; and presently the reins of the back must be anointed
with Oil of Camomil alone.

More speedily and exactly to perform the Cure, proceed after this manner..
Extract of Seamony Gr. iij, flowers of glass of Antimony Gr. ij; these most
finely pulverisate mix with ij or iij of Conserve of Bugloss. Let the sick take
this in a morning cum Costodia.

If you would have it vomit, give some broth to provoke it; by this means the
sick will be purged upward and downward. The two following days let him take
some Apozeme or Cephalic opening syrup, with some drops of Spirit of Tartar,
or in defect thereof j of Tartar Vitriolate. With this said Medicine again
purge the Patient, which happily, by reason of its vomitory property, the sick
may abhor: Therefore instead of it, infusion of Agarick, with root of black
Hellebore pulverisate may be given, with Jalap root, and water of Primroses and
Melissa; or let him take a Dose of Extract of Panchymagogon.

And again for two days let him use the former Apozeme, or some magisterial
appropriate syrup. These Medicaments must be repeated to the 10th day. In the
mean while the back must be anointed with Oil of Camomil, with which may be
mixed a little Oil of Peter.

Then let the sick go into a Stove, and receive the vapor of this following
decoction poured upon burning Stones.
Coals, which provokes sweat exceed ing well.. Flowers of Sage, Elder, Bays,
Rosemary, Camomil, Melissa, Stoecados of Arabia; boil these in Wine Vinegar.
Let the sick abide in the Stove for one hour, or as long as his strength will
permit. Before he go out let him take ss of Mithridate, with three, four, or
five drops of Spirit of Tartar, or Methridate alone. After he is come forth,
let the sweat be well dried off with hot linen clothes, and he laid to rest in
bed for half an hour; let his back be anointed with Galbanet of Paracelsus,
which is thus made.. Galbanum lb ss, put it in a large Cucurbit, and pour upon
it Spirit of Turpentine lb j; digest them in a hot place for eight days,
afterward distill it by a Limbeck in a Cucurbit not too high, until it be dry,
which, if defired more fragrant and excellent, rectify with Aromaticks,
Nutmegs and Cassia. With this same Balsom all the Paralytick members must be
anointed.

The Unction being made, boil a root of the greater Wallwort, and apply it,
when boiled to a Pulp like a Cataplasm. The application of the Cataplasm, with
the Unction, may be used in the Evening, after the through chasing of the
affected parts with a cloth, and then moysten'd with some drops of Spirit of
Tartar; or the member chafed with clothes dipped in Spirit of Tartar. This being
done, then as abovesaid, anoint the members, and apply the Cataplasm.

In the mean time the sick should have for daily use Conserve of Rosemary
flowers, of flowers of Sage, Stoecados of Arabia, with Methridate, Extract or
powder of Castor, Confection of Anacardine with a little Solution of Pearls,
and Aurum Potabile. In which time slender Diet must be used, and a decoctiof
Guaiacum and Hydromel instead of drink.

If the Physician would resolve one particular member that needs, he may
restore it in the following manner.

. Tops of Origan; Oak leaves, Juniper berries, of each four handfulls, nine
Apples of the Firr tree, with common water boil these till they be thick; with
these Herbs foment the member till they be cold: Then the moisture being
diligently dried off, anoint with this following mixture.

. Spirit of Salt, Vitriol, and Turpentine, of each a like quantity, mix them
carefully, the Spirit of Turpentine must be put in drop by drop. Repeat this
anointing twice a day, and the member will be restored. Also the Patient
should often in a day take of these following Rotula's.

. Lillies of the Valley, flowers of Lavender, of each iv, white Sugar v, boil
these to perfection; then remove it from the fire, and add of rectified Amber
j, Extract of Sage ij, or Oil of the same ss, work them together with a Pestle,
and according to Art make Rotula's.

It is also very Commodious in the beginning of the Paralysie to make
Embrochation with abundance of Oil; also a Bath made of Milk and Oil only, or
of Milk mixed with water, or of Water and Oil mixed.

Also it is profitable in every Paralysie, for the provoking sweat, either in a
Bath or Bed, to exhibit this following powder.. Cinnabar of Antimony, gathered
in the neck of the Retort, in distillation of Butter of Antimony, what quantity
you will, reduce it to powder, and in a glass Cucurbit calcine it. Theu. Of
this Cinnabar thrice sublimate by it self one part. Magistery of Coral and
Pearls of each ss a part, Mans-bones burnt two parts; mix them. Dose, ss in
water of Senecio, or Cardu. bened. The Dose must be often repeated.

Paralysie with the Cholick.
For the Cure of this See, Thesibus meis Medico Chymicis disput. 1. Page 19. Of
which this is the sum; that the Cure must not be long in hand, for in process
of time the disease becomes incurable, which without such Elapse might
certainly be cured.

Vehement Purgatives which disquiet the diseased, must carefully be avoided.
The matter offending may be subdued with Extract of Esula, (Senior nigra) in a
just Dose. While the matter is daily expelling, (till the success answer the
desire) upon an empty stomach give Gr. xx or xxv of Spirit of Tartar; and every
third day provoke sweating.

A Decoction of Sassafras is very useful; for it helps the Stomach and
Intestines, whence comes the beginnings of Maladies.

Confortative Rotula's must also be daily given; the members affected, at first
chafed with a cloth, afterward moystned with Spirit of Tartar, then anointed
thrice a day with Paracelsus his Galbanet above described; after which a
Wallwort root boiled to a pulp in Fountain water, with a cloth must be applied
hot to the anointed members, in form of a Cataplasm. The rest commit to Nature.

Memory.
1. In restoring lost Memory, especially in the Aged, powder of Trithemius, so
called, will much help. See Ruland Cent. 5. Page 100.

. Mace, Cubeba, Cloves of each vj, leaves of Sena, Crystals of Tartar, Ginger,
Ground Pine, of each v, Root of Calamus Aromat. Gentian, Seeds of Cumin,
Mountain Silver, Anise, Ameos, Daucus, Wild Alexander, Spikenard of India, of
each ss, Magistery of Coral and Pearls of each ij; Reduce them to powder. Dose
j, which must be taken in the first month, morning and evening three hours
before meat, in Wine or other convenient Liquor. In the second month only in
the mornings. In the third month in the mornings thrice in a week. In the
fourth month twice in a week, and so forward, for certain months.

2. In comforting and restoring the Memory, of admirable use is Aqua
Magnanimitatis described in the second part of Conradinus His marrow of
Distillations. It is more powerful, if Species of Anacardine be extracted with
it; of which Essence Gr. iij, iv, v or vj, given once, twice, or thrice in a
week in Wine or Lavender water, are exceeding profitable.

Note. In Choleric persons, and such as are dry of Constitution, this water
must be circumspectly used, for it is a great dryer; therefore may much more
safely be used in Melancholy and Phlegmatic persons.

3. Famous is Liquor of Silver to this purpose, of which see above in the
Chapt. of Desipiensie.

Drousie Affects.
In Drousiness, Caro, Veternus, Comas, Watchings, Cataphora, Siphila stricta,
that is, night walking; also Incubus, dread, astonishment, with other Vices of
the brain, besides these already spoken of, Liquor of Silver above described is
most powerful, whose excellency in cases of this kind, cannot sufficiently be
commended.

Note. In cases of this kind Medicines that provoke sneezing are very
necessary; yea, oftentimes it is manifest, that sternutations are provocations
to the Cure of the Disease.

An Ointment of Oil of Castor with juice of Rue and Fennel, is very profitable.
Also. Juice of Parsley and of strong Vinegar a convenient quantity; with powder
of Castor make a Plaster, and the head being shaved, apply it thereto.

Watchings.
1. In immoderate watchings I use Lotions for the Feet, but chiefly this..
Leaves of Willow, Lettice, Nymphaea, Violets, of each one handful, Cammomil,
Betony, of each ss an handful, tops of white Poppy without seeds, five, six,
or seven; cut the tops very small, boil all in River water. In this decoction
first moisten the temples and hands, letting them dry of their own accord; then
wash the Feet per (...). It produces most sweet sleep, especially if used for
certain days together, in the evening before the sick go to bed.

2. Laudanum Opiat. much profits being inwardly taken in a Dose certain and
exquisite: See Opiology.

3. Epithema's are profitable for the head made of seeds of Rosemary, Anise,
Fennel and white Poppy boiled in water, and applied to the Forehead and Temples.

Lice of the Brain.
In Lice of the Brain.

1. Purgations of the brain, partly such as are commonly used ( Gr. v. of Pills
of Coccium) and partly by Specificks, as Specificum of Paracelsus.

2. Sternutatories often exhibited upon an empty stomach.

3. The Worms may be killed with Suffumigations of candles made with wax and
pulverisate Cinnabar. This fume must be made in a very close room, and the
worms will presently dye.

Note. In destroying Lice all over the body, and to keep the garments clean,
Rulands Girdle of Sapience is very useful, which is thus;. The black powder of
Mercury that remains in the bottom of Spirit of Wine, that has been used for
purification thereof, a convenient quantity, mix it with the pulp of of roasted
Apples, that it may be like an Ointment: Then take linen cloth, cut it in two
long stripes like a girdle, imbibe these in liquid Extract of Saffron, and dry
them. Upon these two spread the Ointment in form of a Plaster, sow them
together, those sides which are spread inward, and apply the Girdle to the
naked body about the Loins, which must be worn for some time.

Vertigo.
In Vertigo, after the use of Universals before mentioned, powder of Native
Cinnabar is specific, of which Quercetanus makes mention in Lib. Of Affects of
the head, about the end.

The dung of a Peacock, without any other preparation, save only dried to
powder, and exhibited mixed with Sugar. Dose ss, or j. It is said to Cure the
most inveterate Vertigo. In the same Book of Quercetanus.

Convulsion.
The same things are useful in this, as in the Epilepsie.

Jectigation.
1. This is moved first by Vomitories, such as Aqua bened. and Mercur. Vitae.

2. By comforting the stomach, chiefly with Phylosophical spirit of Vitriol.

3. For jectigated and weak members bathes are very useful made with Cephalic
Herbs (chiefly which Madder twice radicated) or a Sudatory made with spirit of
Wine, which are exceeding helpful.

Sometimes to comfort magistery of Coral and Pearls is exhibited. Also the
Bezoar-stone and Balsom of Life.

Catarrhs.
1. In all Catarrhs and Defluctions, not only to prevent them, but to preserve
the head from them, water of wild Betony is very useful, being distilled with
Wine, and every day one spoonful taken as long as need is: It is thus made;

. Wild Betony when the flower is ripe, gathered in the decrease of the Moon,
before Sun rise in the morning; cut them very small, and pour upon them rich
White wine, set it for some time in the Sun, after distill it by a Limbeck in
Balneo.

2. The following medicinable Wine is of singular use.. Root of Cloves vj, root
of Acorum iv, powder of Elder ss a handful, leaves of Majoran one handful,
Wine lb xvj; let it be used instead of ordinary drink.

3. A bag prepared with Amber and spirit of Wine, of which above in the Chap.
of Apoplexy. The use of this is of great moment in suffocative Catarrhs. Also
made with Ground Pine pulverisate, sprinkled with Oil of Amber.

4. The thin Catarrhs trickling down the inward parts, chiefly to the breast,
are happily prevented by Laudanum Opiat taken just at going to bed.

5. A most excellent Remedy in the Catarrh, is an Amulet made with the root of
Virgin Lungwort, which by reason of its own heat flourishes not when it is
gathered, therefore it is so called. It must be gathered of a Friday (some say
the last Friday in the decrease of the Moon is best) before the Sun be risen,
between the 15th of August and 8th of September, in the decrease of the Moon;
afterward dried in a shady place, being first cleansed; Part of which set in
Gold and hung about the neck, miraculously preserves the body from all kinds of
Catarrhs whatsoever.

It is not convenient for women, being worn it hinders Conception, which when
removed is again restored. See Dodoneus. The smaller the root, the better.

Suffocative Catarrh.
Among fluxions, which descend from the head to the lower parts, those which
fall upon the breast and heart are most dangerous, yea, sometimes they are so
vehement, that the sick falls in a swoon; of whom without delay great Care must
be taken. The Physician being called, must first inject a strong Clyster, after
which, by reason of abundance of blood a vein must be out: Then a Fume made in
the Patients Chambers sometimes of Mastick, Frankincense, and and Amber,
othertimes of Rose - vinegar, being sprinkled upon a fire hot stone.

The Head being shaved apply the following Plaster.

. Emplastr. contra rupt. j and ss, Gum Ammoniack ss, Mastick, Amber, of each j,
Myrtles ss; Mix these together, and make a round Plaster, which apply to the
Suture Coronale.

Anoint the Nostrills with Balsom of Amber, and order the sick may sit up in
his bed; then give him syrup of Aqua bened. and a little after, Vinegar of
Treacle or Squills distilled with the Florentine flower De Luce.. Vinegar of
Squills lb j, powder of the root of Florentine flower De Luce ij; distill them
in a Limbeck till they be dry, put a knot of the said root in the neck of the
Limbeck. Also. Bole-armenack washed in Rose Water ij; give this with syrup of
dry Roses, and ss of powder of Diatragacant cold.

The following Gargarism must also be used.

. Syrup of Poppy, of Diamorron, of each ij, Wine of Pomgranate ss, Water of
Plantane, of Scabious, of each j, mix them.

Then recourse must be had to Apozemes, Syrups, Magistery's and Electuaries to
digest the matter; which being digested must be purged out, as well by such
things as tend to universal evacuation of the whole body, as by those which
free the head from noxious humors. Such are Errhinis, Sternutatories,
Apophlegmatismes, Gargarisms. Among these the Roman Nigella is most famous,
being subtly powdered and snuft up the Nostrills from the Palm of the hand
with Majoran water; yea, this oft-times in every distillation of the head by an
occult fragrant property yields relief.

Things comforting the head, are Electuaries or Conserves of flowers of
Rosemary, Stoecades, Roses, or sweet powder of Diamosch, Oximel of Squills, and
Oil of Nutmegs mixed, or Rotula's made of the said Species, with Oil of Amber
and Sugar dissolved in water of Elder flowers, to which may be added; j or ij
of flowers of Sulphur.

To prevent the hasty Flux of humors these little balls following may be kept
in the mouth in the night, chiefly between the times of sleep.. Sp^kenard j,
Mastick ij, Sugar ij; with syrup of dry Roses make small balls like Lupines.

Outwardly may be applied to the head Bags or Caps, in which may be sewed or
quilted such things as corroborate the head, and dry the matter; A^ thus:

. Flowers of Melissa, Majoran, Betony, tops of Origan, of each ss a handful;
Nutmegs, Cloves, Benzoin, of each iij; Saffron, Mace, of each j and ss,
Frankincense, Mastick, of each iij, Red roses two parts; reduce them to a gross
powder; quilt them up in red silk, and make a Cap.

But if the sick refuse this medicament, rub his head on the fore part with
powder of Mastick, Frankincense, Amber, and Gallia moschata. Take off the
cloth that covers the head, perfume it often, and put it on again. Or.
Mastick, Olibanum, of each ij; Thyme, Benzoins, of each j, Amber ss, Tachamahac
enough to encorporate them. Make Trochus's for perfume.

The Nostrills must be anointed with Apoplectick Balsom; and here also
odoriferous Apples are good.

If by the aforesaid Medicaments the Catarrh be not removed, then raise
blisters in the fore part of the head (the hair being shaved off) break the
blisters, and keep them open for one or two days at length heal them up; not
neglecting in the mean time other Medicines tending to extirpation of the
Catarrh.

Some apply a hot plate of Iron, or potential Cautery, to the fore part of the
head, as far on the head as may be reached with open hand, by applying the end
of the thumb to the extremity of the Nose, from thence as far above the
forehead as the extremity of the middle finger will reach.

Affects of the Eyes Equinting.
Swinting newly taken (for that which is of long continuance is uncureable) in
Children may be corrected, if to the face be applied a visard bored full of
holes in the place of the eyes, that through them the Patient may dart forth
his visive rays: By the well placing them holes, and the rays conforming
themselves thereto, the eyes are reduced to a perfect sight: Accurately to
perform this, great care and diligence must be used.

Paralysie of the Eye.
Paralysie of the Eye seldom happens without a resolution of other parts; If it
be alone it is hardly curable; if in other parts also as in Hemiplexia, it may
be cured by the same means as are appointed in other Paralysie.

Imbecility and dimness of the sight.
1. For Imbecility and dimness of sight, and to comfort the visive spirits, and
rectify the brain and humors thereof, (omitting generals before named)
eyebright is wonderful efficacious if rightly prepared; Vulgarly it is used
infused in Wine, mixed with daily Food, in Conserves, and other forms: The
Essence of it Chymically extracted is more excellent. Dose, Gr. ij, iij, iv or
v. Also salt of the same by frequent Solutions and Coagulations brought to a
perfect purity, especially if the ashes with a like quantity of Sulphur from
the beginning shall be calcined without fire, that is, without running in flux
in the Crucible, and afterward mixed for use with Table Salt, is excellently
helpful in this Case. There may be also made a most excellent Arcanum of
Eyebright, for recovering lost sight. Dose, from Gr. ij to v; Hence it is
truly called Augentrost.

2. Also an efficacious water is made after this manner.

. Leaves of Eyebright, Rue, Vervein, Fennel, of each one handful; tops of
Rosemary, Sage, Rose flowers, of each one part, Juniper berries j, Cassia
Lignea ss, Lign. Aloes ss, seeds of Fennel ij, Mountain Siler j, Rue ss; Infuse
these with lb vj of Malmsie Wine, digest them for fifteen days, then distill
them: Of this ss a spoonful, or one spoonful taken in a morning fasting,
exceeding comforts the sight.

Externalls. 1. Ocular water made of white Vitriol in this manner.

. Of the Stone Sciffilis Siferstein broken to pieces lb ss, of clear fountain
water, or, which is better, rainwater lb iv, of white Vitriol j, vj at most.
Let them boil in an Earthen pot, and in boiling diligently take off the scum
very clean, afterward filter it, and in a vessel well closed keep it for use;
Every day, morning and evening drop some drops into the Eyes.

Also externally in the Adisease in the Chrystaline humor.
Glancoma, distilled water of Galls of Fishes, chiefly of the Pike-fish, is
wonderfully commended; See below in the Haw, Cloudines and Pterygium of the
Eyes.

Divulsion and ruption of the Ball of the Eye.
In divulsion and ruption of the Ball, also of the Cornea, the water which is
made of whites of Eggs, is of singular use. Also the water made of Crabs and
Selandine. See Crollius notes, etc.

Whiteness and Cloudiness.
In the white spot, and cloudiness of the eyes, beside things commonly used,
the fat of a Weesels liver (Germ. Quapen, Aalranpen) is famously efficatious;
wash it in Wine, and place it so in a glass, as it may neither touch the bottom
nor sides of the glass; close the glass exceeding well, and set it in the Sun
for some time, and the liver will almost all be converted to a yellow fatness,
which take and keep for use. The use is only external by anointing the
Eyelids, at going to bed. It will more strongly operate, if sometimes in food
be taken powder of the lesser Carduus of the Medows Heidetistel.

Swellings.
In swellings of the Eyes, water of white Vitriol is excellent.

Sores of the eyes.
In sores of the Eyes arising from Swellings.
Phlyctena's, the water of whites of Eggs is very good: See below of the Haw.

Carcinoma.
In Cancers of the Eyes nothing is better then powder of skins in the eggs that
included the Chickens, being only blown into the Eyes. Other things may be done
as in the Cancer.

Epiphora.
In dropping or inflammation of the Eyes, after purging the head and other
necessary aversions, a Periapton made of the simple root of Mallows is
excellent. The root must be gathered precisely when the Sun is in Scorpio, at
the rising of the Sun; it must be dug underneath so as the root may be first
bare, afterward pluck up the whole Plant; apply the root tied close to the nape
of the neck.

Opthalmia.
In inflammation I use to apply to the nape of the neck (with other such like)
flower of Rocket, sewed in a bag boiled in Wine; This I also apply hot to the
Region of the Eye. It wonderfully draws from the Eyes to the nape of the neck,
where it is convenient to raise blisters, and for some time keep them open,
which may be so kept with Colewort or Ivy leaves laid upon them: Afterward with
pulp of Quince seeds extracted with Plantane water, they may be cured.

The Eye must be somented with Breast milk, or Opium dissolved in Rosewater.
Afterward I use externally to apply to the Eye, a bag filled with Camomil
flowers.

In inflammation, and other Diseases of the Eyes, the water made of the blew
Flowers of Succory is a most rare secret; it is thus made: Gather the Flowers
of Succory when Sol enters Leo, put them fresh into a glass, and as much as you
may crowd them in, then stop the glass with a cork or bladder five times
doubled, and cover it well round about with kneaded dough, such as bread is
made off, that it may be three or four inches thick. Then set it in an Oven
like otherbread, but you must be careful to set it upon some little lath or
slelf in the Oven, that the glass be not broke, and for the stronger boiling of
it, leave it till the bread be drawn: Then if this Masle be well boiled, take
out the matter, and express it, and you shall find the flowers converted to a
red and oily water: This distill by a Limbeck in Balneo, (unless it be
distilled it will not keep) and twice a day, in the morning and at night going
to bed, only anoint the Eyelids externally in all affects of the eyes, as
White Spots, Hawes, Cloudiness, Pin and Webb, Dimness, yea, blindness it self,
by this Medicine miraculously are cured.

Pain of the Eyes.
In dolours of the Eyes, leaves of Tobacco may be applied; Opiat here must
externally be avoided, internally they may be given.

Imposthume of the Eyelids.
In Imposthume of the Eyelid, Barley chewed fasting is applied.

Falling down of the Eye.
In falling down of the Eye (as also of the fundament). Scarabes that breed in
horse-dung, mortify them in a glass well closed, and dry them in the Sun; make
a most fine powder, which keep for use. After the parts are mollified gently
sprinkle on some of the powder, and re-place the Eye dexterously: See below in
the falling of the Fundament.

Tears.
In tears,. Rindes of Pemgranate iij or ss; the stone Haematitis j, or j and
ss; boil the rinds in Rose Water, and strain them often, in which when
streined dissolve the stone, first grownd to powder on a Marble: This
Composition must be applied to the eyes in all sanguinary Fluxes. Some apply a
bag with Cammomil flowers: See Platerus.

Fistula of the Eyes.
For the Fistula of the Eye.. Sulphur vivae, most strong Vinegar, Alum, Salt,
of each j; of Sorrel root sharp and fresh ss; make an Unguent.

Wheals and blemishes of the Eyes.
For Phlyctena's, Wheals and Blemishes;. The Gall of Geese, Hens and Fishes,
add to them a little honey, make an Ointment, with which anoint the Eyes.

Haw, Cloudiness and Pterygium of the Eyes.
To the Haw, Cloudiness and Pterygium is happily applied the Specific of the
Pike-fish, thus made;. Of the Galls of the Pike-fish what quantity you please,
distill them in a Cucurbit to a thick substance, in the distilled liquor
dissolve some Camphire, and keep it for use. The remaining thick substance
extract with spirit of Wine, and again by distillation separate the spirit of
Wine from the Extract; Of which Extract and the water of Saturn, of each Gr. j.
dissolve in three or four drops of the former water, and with a feather morning
and evening supple the eye, and you will find good success.

Another water prepared with whites of Eggs, is very powerful, and of
excellent use to consolidate all kinds of wounds without any sear. Boil a
convenient number of Eggs till they be hard, then cut them every one just in
the middle, and take out the yolks of them all; then cut the whites of some of
these very small like to a pulp, with which fill up the Caverns of the other
Eggs, then joining the parts fitly together, tie them with thread, and hang
them precisely in the middle of a Cucurbit, so as the sides touch them not;
place this in Balneo and boil them, with the Cucurbit well stopped, and you will
see the whites that were cut, by little and little distill into a Liquor, which
must be very carefully gathered from the bottom of the Cucurbit, (for it will
be very little.) To all green wounds of the Eyes apply this often with a
feather.

Also have regard to other things which may defend the Eyes from external
inflammations. There is no doubt but all wounds of the Eyes though violently
impressed, may be cured without loss of the sight, if so be the solution appear
to continue, and the Chrystalline humor with the Membranes be not hurt.

Inflammation of the Eyes.
For Inflammation, pain and dropping of the Eyes.. Water of Roses, Eyebright,
Vervein, of each ss Tutia prepared j. Mother of Pearl most finely poudred ij.


Mix these; especially in the time of use mix them very well, and instill a
little into the Eye, also moysten rags with this mixture and apply outwardly.

In the beginning, if the Opthalmy arise from a hot cause, or from gross and
windy spirits, after evacuation by a Clyster or gentle purge, cut a vein, or
apply Cuppinglasses to the shoulders. The following day care must be taken
speedily to evacuate the body with Pills of Coccia, and the specific of the
Pike may here be used.

Also a Collyrium must be injected into the Eyes, made only of breast-milk
mixed with Plantane water, and a little Saffron, for this repells the humors
from the Eyes; but before the injecting this, it is convenient to wash the Eyes
with a decoction of Fenu-greek, or apply an Apple roasted in embers with a
little Fennel, in form of a Cataplasm. The Lotion and application of the
Cataplasm, and the before named Collyrium, must be repeated often. Then proceed
to other Collyriums and Opthalmicks.

If the Affect return by Intervalls, the Patient must be purged with sublimate
Mercury, sometimes with that which is sublimed with Sol. Then cut a vein, and
adhibit the following Opthalmicks.

Also to the hinder part of the head a Seton or Cautery must be applied, or an
Issue made in the Arm; for this mightily draws the humor from the head and
eyes, and preserves from Opthalmy.

But if the Hypochima appear at first ( viz. if the suffusion be strong and
fixed, it is cured only by the help of an Ocular Chyrurgion) unless the pain of
the head be great, a vein must not be cut, least the brain be too much cooled,
and the matter more violently fall down and overflow the eyes: But the matter
must rather be digested and expelled, the head and sight comforted, and great
care taken to prevent the ascent of vapors from the ventricle to the head;
therefore after meat Powders must be appointed, made of Consection of Fennel
seeds, and tops of Eyebright, or Tablets made of Oil of Fenn^ and Eyebright
water, or Extract of the same: And if necessity require, apply a Cautery to the
hinder part of the head, or raise blisters, which must be kept open at least
six Months.

Then use the following Collyriums, before the injecting of which, it will be
convenient to foment the Eyes with this following bag steeped in warm water.

. Faenugreek washed in cold water j and ss.

Seeds of Linum, ss.

Mallows, Althea, of each ij. Grind these small, and sew them up in a sine
linen bag.

Collyriums proper to be injected, are water of Honey of Eyebright,
Rorella-Selandine, Valerian, Fennel; the juice of the said Herbs by it self
well cleansed may be used, or mixed with a little Rose Water in breast milk:
With decoction of Faenugreek make a white Collyrium, adding Saffron and
prepared Tutia.

If Erosion, or a wound follow, and the Patient be astonished, or rather the
sight much darkened; this following Opthalmick admirably restores the sight
almost quite lost, and glutinates the wounds of the eyes in the space of twenty
four hours: It is thus;. Juice of the Flowers and Leaves of Selandine a good
quantity, digest it in Balneo that it may purge of its own accord, and all its
Impurities be precipited. Then in the month of June the Sun and Moon being in
Cancer,. Twenty Crabs of the River, cut off their Extremes, as hard feet, and
crusty tails, bruise them in a Mortar, that the juice may be expressed, which
when expressed mix with the aforesaid purified juice of Selandine, distill it
in Balneo, and keep it for use. At the same time. another living Crab whole, no
part of it cut off, put it in an Earthen pot, and dry it in an Oven till it be
fit to beat, then reduce it to a most fine powder, and exactly searse it. Of
this powder instill into the wound of the Eye a very small quantity, very
carefully through a quill, leaving it so for twenty four hours^ after which
time, often inject into the eyes the same water above named alone, without any
of the said powder, washing and purging out all its purulency, which at length
will appear to be little, or none at all, and the wished end will certainly
follow.

Redness of the Eyes.
For the heat and redness of the Eyes with pain,. Fresh butter nine times washed
in Rose Water ss, Turia prepared j, Camphire ss; mix these, and keep it for
use: Of this mixture put a little into the Eye.

For inflammation and redness in the Eyes, as also red pimples in the face,
dissolve Sugar of Saturn in an equal quantity of Eyebright and Rose Water,
adding a little Tutia prepared.

For dimness, redness, tears, and almost all Diseases of the Eyes, this
following Ophthalmick water of Crollius is excellent.

. White Wine not adulterated: Rose Water, of each ij. White Sugar Candied.
Purified Vitriol, of each iv.


Mix them. Afterward with this water, upon a stone grind a little Ginger till
it be thoroughly incorporated with the water, and perfectly dissolved; this
being done, filter it through brown paper. Then in two spoonfulls of Spirit of
Wine, dissolve j of Camphire first beaten to powder; mix the solution with the
former water and keep it for use, which is profitable in every Vice of the
Eyes. Dose, one or two drops often injected.

The skin of the Eye hurt by a str^ke.
Hyposphagma.
For Hyposphagina of the Eyes,. Tops of Hysop boiled in common water, and
applied hot in a cloth or bag to the Eyes. Also root of Solomon's Seal beaten
soft, and applied in form of a Cataplasm, to the Eye and round about. Some take
the blood of the wings of young Pigeons expressed, and put it warm into the Eye.

To take away the blood-shot, it is profitable when the Patient goes to bed, to
apply an Egg boiled hard and cut in the middle to the eye very warm, and this
kept on all night.

Affects of the Ears.
Inflammation of blood.
Phlegmone and Ulcer.
The internal Phlegmone of the Ears is cured winh Repellatives, but the Ulcer
with ripening medicaments.

Flux of the Ears.
In the perpetual flowing of filth from the Ears, Boys Urine distilled is
commended, some drops, not exceeding ten, being put into the Ears in a morning
fasting, and there kept for some time. Afterward by bowing down the head they
may be let out; this must be continued for some time.

In this Case purgations of the head are necessary, either with common
medicaments, or Pills in such cases usual, or else with Vegitable
Panchymagogon. Also Specificum purgans of Paracelsus; and a decoction of
Guaiacum instead of drink.

In Children, who by reason of abundance of moisture, are obnoxious to this
Disease, there needs no great have to effect the Cure; for oftentimes as they
increase in Age, the distemper decreases, till it be wholly gone: I had an
Example of this in the Daughter of Kaidius.

Worms in the Ears.
In Worms of the Ears, both to kill and expel them, as also in like manner of
the brain and nostrills, singularly useful is an ointment made of Caponsgrease
and Oil of Corylum, mixed with a very little precipitate Mercury or Mercur.
dulcis (but Gr. ij, least an Escara be made) and put into the Ears with Cotton
or Bombace.

Pains of the Ears.
In dolours of the Ears, leaves of Tobacco-green, or dry, if afterward
moystened, are wonderful profitable.

Ringing in the Ears.
For the Ringing in the Ears, Vapor of Wormwood and Vervein in milk is very
commodious. Thus,. Crude Wormwood one handful, boil it in Cowes ^lk, then
through a tunnel that may fitly close the mouth of the Pot that holds the
Concoction, let the vapor thereof ascend hot into the ear, afterward wipe and
cleanse the ear, and put into it some Cotton, that has layen for some time
before in Musk; for Musk is a friend to the head, chiefly in men, but in women
it is less safe to be used.

Sounding noise and hissing in the Ears.
In ringing, sounding, noise and hissing in the Ears, very profitable is bread
not too much baked, taken hot out of the Oven, and the under-crust steeped in
good Spirit of Wine, and applied hot to the Ear, that the vapor may be
received in; putting between the ear and the bread, a thick ring of wood, or
other such like, to prevent burning of the part.

Note. The cure must be continued till the grief be abated. Sternutatories,
with many things before mentioned, may here in this case be profitably used.

Hardness or difficulty of hearing.
In difficulty of hearing and fluctuation, if not by the former Medicines
cured, inject two or three drops of Oil of bitter Almonds, which retained for
some time let out; Oil of Juniper must not in this case be used.

After the use of other things, a Fomentation is beneficial, especially if made
with such things as corroborate the head; such are a decoction of Wormwood and
Verveine in milk, Hot bread with Spirit of Wine; or if the affect be little,
without Spirit of Wine, applied outwardly as aforesaid.

If there be no abatement.. A Radish root, of which make a small suppository
aptly shaped, and for certain days macerated in Spirit of Wine; afterward
overwarm Liquor put it into the Ear.

If this means help not, take the same suppository, macerate it in distilled
Oil of Fennel, and use it as before.

Oil of Carrawayes is often used, being instilled into the ear, and anointed
behind the ear.

Deafness.
In deafness and ringing in the ears, these things following are very useful,
as juice of Radish, fat of a Mole, fat of an Eale, Oil of bitter Almonds, fat
of a Serpent, the juice of a roasted Onion expressed and imbibed in Spirit of
Wine.

Also. a great red Onion, in the middle make a hole, which fill with Oil of
Rue, adding powder of Cypress, Bay berries, Anise, Cumin, of each j, Castor
pulverisate ss: Boil all these over a fire of coals, then express them, boil
them again, and express; put this in a glass, and morning and evening instill
some drops into the ears, stop them with Cotton that has layen in musk.

In deafness, not removed by the former medicaments, wonderful operative is
the essence of Man's gall extracted with Spirit of Wine (this dures long) and
applied with a Radish Suppository moystened in it.

The Gall of a Partridge by his innate property in this case is excellent, if
mixed with a like quantity of Oil of white Amber, and drop by drop injected
into the ear: Dose, three, four, or more drops. This must be repeated certain
times.

Imposthumation.
In Impostumation, fetid Oil of Guaiacum or Tartar is helpful; If there be
Ulceration, mollify the part, which being done, and the Ulcer broke, sprinkle
on some powder of Mint, and wash it often with Mint-water, applying some
convenient Plaster thereto, as Plaster of Diasulphur.

Affects of the Nostrills. A stinking Disease in the Nose.
Ozaena.
In Ozaena, and other stinking Ulcers, omitting what is before mentioned,
mundefying things are first necessary, afterward such as consolidate.

Such as mundesie are abstergent waters, as Alum water without Spirits,
distilled in an Earthen Cucurbit by a Limbeck in Sand; and Plantane water with
a little Merour. dulcis dissolved in it, and such like.

Excellent is the green water made with Arsenick, which with others, Platerus
applies to the Cure of this Disease: It is thus made;. Verdegrease j, Arsenick
j and ss; grind them together very well, and in iv of white Wine, boil it till
half be consumed; when it is cold, add of Rose Water and Nightshade, of each ij.

Hartmane's green water.
More excellent is another green water used by me, which not only in Ozaenaes,
but in all fetid Ulcers of the Nostrills, Palate, Uvula, Gums and Tongue, does
wonderfully help. It is thus made:. Honey of Roses ij. Sulphur Viv. Crude
Alum, Verdegrease, of each j. Album Graecum, Savine Leaves, of each ss Leaves
of Elder j. Leaves of St. John's Wort, Rosemary, Rue, Plantane, Sage, Peneroyal,
of each ss a handful.


Boil these in lb ij of Wine and Water, till it be wasted the quantity of an
inch; (in Ulcerations, of Children, water of Tobacco must be mixed with a like
quantity of water of Nightshade, otherwise it will be too sharp.) Note. The
Verdegrease must not be boiled with the other ingredients, but added at last
when the matter is cooled; then filter it, and keep it for use: One spoonful
of this must be warmed over a candle, and with a small pencil or feather dipped
therein, the ulcerated place touched or anointed.

In fetid Ulcers of the Palate, Jaws or Uvula this water must be applied with
Flax to the parts affected: It does not only cleanse, but also consolidates the
Ulcers of the Jaws and Palate arising from Lues-Venerea.

It is admirably efficacious in the Scurvy of the mouth; (it is commonly
applied with Bombace of Flax, least in the night, by reason of the Verdegrease
it should be swallowed.) For a Gargarism use a decoction of Betony and Honey in
common water, or a decoction of Savine in Wine is of great use.

There are other healing Medicaments besides the Green water, which powerfully
consolidate, chiefly in Ozaena's.

1. Most Excellent is that prescribed by Rondoletius in Lib. de Ozaenis.

. Pure Landanum, Hypocistis, Mastich, Myrrh, of each ij. Red Storax, Calamita,
Bark of Frankincense, Sandarach, Arsenick, of each ij. Rondoletius says iij,
though improperly.


With Turpentine make Trochus's, with which perfume the Chamber morning and
evening. It is very good also to made Candles with it, (red wax mixed therewith
is better by reason of the Cinnabar contained in it) and in a close place let
the sick take the fume proceeding from the lighted Candles.

2. A decoction of Myrrh and Olibanum, of each j and ss; in Wine and Vinegar,
of each lb ij, set for some time in infusion; and this often apply^d hot.

Burning sores of the Nostrills.
In burning sores of the Nostrills, the same things are efficacious, as are
used in other such like Maladies.

Menstruum Virgins is a specific, being dissolved in distilled Vinegar of
Roses, and applied hot in fiery sores, especially if at the same time sweat be
provoked.

Cancrous humors of the Nostrills.
Cancrous humors in the Nose are cured as other Cancers, only ulcerated
Cancers are here to be understood. Those which without pain or ulcerating
cannot be touched, are admirably healed with water of Arsenick made after this
manner.. White Arsenick, Salt Nitre purified, of each a sufficient quantity,
put them together in a small covered Pot, set them in the midst of an open
fire, that at length all may be dissolved: ( Note, the fume must studiously be
avoided, and therefore this operation must be made in some low close place)
when all is cold, the Arsenick will be most white. This operation must be
repeated the second and third time with a like quantity of Salt Nitre. Of this
Arsenick in a (cold) moist place make an Oil per Diliquium.

Dissolve as much of this Oil in water of Plantane or Peaches as will render it
savoury to the taste.

A preternatural Tumor.
Polypus.
Omitting what has been already mentioned; in preternatural Tumors of this
kind, most excellent are the suppositories made of Gentian roots, and moystned
with this following Unguent.. Of Goose grease what quantity you please, leaves
of Mallows, root of Althea, of each a sufficient quantity, boil them together,
and express them through a linen cloth, and make an Ointment.

Or,. Fresh butter, Capons grease, Oil Olive, of these what quantity you
please, add to them a little wax; make the unguent.

In either of these Ointments, add precipitate Mercury, or Arcanum Corallinum,
or else Gr. v of Mercu. vitae in ss of the Unguent, or more, (viz.) from ss to
j.

This Ointment being prepared, anoint the suppositories made of Gentian roots,
and put them up the Nostrills, if any cavity do yet remain; if not, then
anoint the propending Polypus often, and this continue till it be wholly
removed.

The stink of the Nostrills.
The constant stink of the Nostrills is dissicultly Cured; It arises from some
Imposthumation or putrefaction in the Sense of smelling it self, or in the
grissle of the Nose.

Smelling lost.
In lost smelling the Extract of Majoran is a specisick remedy, if taken (...)
days together, in the morning fasting, and long after Supper in the Evening;
Dose (...), or j; Also Balsom of Majoram made according to Art, and mixed with
the Extract, or by it self Gr. vj or viij in Wine often, or else the Oil of
Majoran, which may sometimes be taken (...) not exceeding Gr. iv.
not exceeding Gr. iv; this wholly takes away the defect.

Also sternutations are convenient, chiefly when the defect arises from
obstructions in the grissle of the Nose.

The distillation from the head to the Nose
Coryza.
In Coryza see as above in the Catarrh. Here also Gum anima, or Oil of the
same, made into a fume upon coals, is of singular use.

Also Tobacco sprinkled with some drops of Oil of Anise, and taken in the usual
manner.

Haemorthagta.
Constant bleeding at the Nose.
The bleeding of the Nostrills is helped with the green juice of Yarrow.
Milfoile expressed, (the powder is less efficacious;) also the Slender
slender leaves thereof (though not so forcible) gently bound with a Rowler to
the jugular veins. See P. Bierus in Chap. de Polipo.

To stop this Flux of blood many things may be applied.

1. The hairs growing under the belly of an Hare made into a same, or the
extremities of the tail burnt for fume. Xenia Paracelsi.

2. The powder of a dried Toad snuft up the Nostrills, or applied with clothes,
stops the bleeding at the Nose; or else whole and tied under the Armhole, is
alike efficacious.

3. Flowers of the lesser Con^lida Minor.
Bellis held for some time in the Patients hand stops the blood. These flowers
by a wonderful property dissolve and expel the coagulated putrified blood from
the veins, if taken inwardly in food, and also outwardly applied to the
extremities of the fingers under the nails.

4. Stalks of Melanthium held in the Patients hand, or born about him, have the
like Effect in stopping blood.

5. Laudanum Opiat. either inwardly taken, or outwardly put up the Nostrills in
little Pills.

6. A Silver Plate (or Dollar) strongly bound between the eyebrows presently
helps.

7. This Following Extract of Crocus Martis stops the blood, if four drops be
exhibited with Plantane water.. Of filings of Iron j; pour on by degrees from
iv to viij of Aqua Fortis; digest them all night in hot embers or sand, then
abstract the Aqua Fortis by a Limbeck till it be dry; upon this remaining
powder, pour on spirit of Wine till it cover the powder two fingers; digest the
whole until it begin to be red; then separate it from the feces, and in Baln.
or ashes distill it to the consistency of Oil.

A Hare taken in March and dried to powder, and the powder put into the Nose or
Wound, will stop the violent issue of blood.

Haemorragia Critica.
The Critical flowing of blood from the Nose, unless subdued by the abun^ of
strength, cannot be prevented; yet the Disease taken in its beginning (...) be
helped: Wherefore it is necessary the Physician betake himself to such things as
^vert the blood to other parts of the body; and if the symptoms allow, (...)
the external vein of the A^, not taking away too much blood at one tin^, out at
several times he may according to discretion, always allowing an hours respite
for increase of strength.

Great Cupping glasses must be applied to the Hypocondriack, and between the
shoulders. The Patient must avoid all sharp and hot things: He may drink Wine
of Pomgranates allayed with Aqua Chalybeata, and thick juice of red
Gooseberries; such things he may take between whiles: Also let him use cooling
syrups, as Quercetanus his syrup of Coralls, allayed with water of Succory,
Endive, Purselane and Nymphea, with a, j or ij of Salt Prunella added thereto.
Also water e Typhis Cervorum, Terra sigillata, Bole-armenack, with spices of
(...) Santalum-diatrion in form of a Conserve, or water of Mother wort with
Consection of Hyacinth, in form of a Bolus with Conserves.

Epithema's must be externally applied to the Liver, made of water of Endive,
Succory, Roses, Nymphea, with flowers of red Roses, Sanders, and Camphire added
thereto; also feeds of Pur^lane, Sorrel, Succory: and a little Vinegar. The
next morning purge the Sick with the infusion of Rubarb, with solutive syrup of
Roses, or of Succory with Rubarb.

Astringent and cooling Medicines must be applied to the Forchead and Temples.
First, make a Cataplasm with Bole-armenack, sanguis Dracon^s made up with the
white of an Egg; then put up a suppository of Gr. vj or x made with bread, or
make two Pills of Laudanum, and put them up each Nostril.

Else put into the Nostrills Asses or Swines dung dissolved in Vinegar of
Roses; this has been often proved by the odor alone to stop the blood: Some
mix it with water of Roses and Camphire, and sew it in a bag to smell to.

Linen clothes madefied in the water of Frog Spawn, wherein some Camphire and
Sugar of Saturn has been dissolved, must be applied to the neck upon the
jugular veins.

The same water may profitably be used in Epithema's to the Liver and
Testicles, which with linen clothes imbibed in Rose-vinegar, and Afterward
moystened.
madefied with the abovesaid water of Frog spawn may be applied: Yea, it is
very commodious to wash the Face and Nostrills with the said water, because it
coagulates the blood; also it may be profitably applied in all violent
Defluxions of blood in wounds. See Crollius in his Notes.

Diseases of the Face and Mouth. Redness of the Face.
In redness of the Face, respect must be had to the Liver, from the
intemperance of which, all preternatural redness is wont to proceed: Therefore
omitting what is before treated of, a root of Succory with the whole Plant,
being infused, and the infusion used for some time, corrects the Liver. The
same virtue is in other Plants.

Afterward proceed to things proper for the part affected; As. Of Mastich,
white Frankincense and Camphire, of each a like quantity, dissolve them with
Spirit of Wine, with which wash the Face morning and evening for two or three
months; and for certain months, once or twice a month make scarification in the
lower part of the Ear: Also for certain months the Face must be anointed with
the Unguent of Ceruse camphorate, and sometimes washed with a Lixivium made of
Coleworts burnt to ashes, and quickly after the redness will be removed; of
which see more in Weckers Antidotes.

Wheals of the Face.
In wheales of the Face the same things are good, but more excellent is the
Mensiruum (of a Maid or other young woman of a good constitution) dissolved in
hot water, with which, if for certain days in the evening at going to bed the
Face be washed, then of its own accord the parts affected will be dry, the
wheals fall off, and the Face recovering a new skin be free from redness.

For the removing wheals and morphew all over the Face, admirably efficacicious
is the Oil of Toads, which is made after this manner;. Three or four living
Toads (these are proper by reason of the signature of blemishes in Toads) boil
them for a whole hour in lb ij of Oil- Olive, then strain it: With this Oil
anoint the Face once a day for certain days, after a few days the wheals
will fall off, and the morphew be cured.

This Oil of all other is most powerfuly, therefore in this case, when other
things are of little use, recourse must be had to this.

Small Pox, Measels, or other spots.
In such like blemishes there is nothing better then to anoint the Face with
Oil of Bayberries often.

Blemishes by a stroke, as black and blew.
To blemishes of this kind, raw beef applied is very profitable; so likewise
thick brown paper applied with spittle will heal the part affected in few hours.

Pimples.
Pimples are happily cured with Oil of wax, mixed with a like quantity of Oil
of Tartar made per diliquium; the Pimples being anointed therewith.

Ring-worms and Tetters.
Ring-worms, Tetters, and other such like Diseases of the Face are cured after
the same manner.

Warts.
Warts of the Face are taken away, as in other parts of the Body.

Cramp.
Spasmus Cynicus.
The Cramp of the Face is cured as the common Cramp.

Paralysie of the Lips.
Paralysie of the Lips is cured as the other Paralysie; of which see above.

The clefts of the Lips.
In curing clefts of the Lips, very efficacious is the fatness that fryes out
of wooden spoons that have long been used, when held to a good fire; with this
fatness anoint the clefts, and they will be cured.

Benummedness of the Teeth.
In benummedness of the teeth, rub the nummed Teeth with Salt, or let the
Patient chew a woollen or hairy cloth.

Blackness of the Teeth.
To prevent the blackness of Teeth; eating of vinegar and meat or brothes very
hot, must carefully be avoided. Also the growing scurf, and impurities of the
Teeth are often removed by washing the mouth with salt water or wine after meat.

The blackness, and foul discolouration of the Teeth may commodiously be
removed after this manner.. Fountain water what quantity you will, add spirit
of Vitriol, or water or spirit of Alum, so as it be not too tart; with this
Lavament daily morning and evening rub the teeth very well with a woollen
cloth; then chafe them with Magistery of Corals, or the following powder..
Mandibles of the Pike-fish, white Coral, Burnt Hartshorn, burnt Abum, Root of
the flower de Luce, of each ss, Salt-gem j, mix these, and make a powder.


The blackness of tongue and teeth by eating Cherries or Myrtles is presently
removed, with the perfume of sulphurous Candles; but to prevent the noxious
fume, the jaws must be kept shut.

Looseness of the Teeth.
The mobility of the Teeth is perfectly cured by this Specisick.. Acorn^ j,
Galls ss, burnt Alum, Acaoia, of each ss, leaves of red Roses half (...)
handful; boil these with lb ij of red wine, till it be wasted an inch or more
then strain it, and keep for use. With this decoction daily wash the teeth
often, and they will be again fixed and immovable.

Toothache.
The Toothache arising from what cause soever, is by a certain Specific
propriety Cured with a Sorrel root, dried and applied to the aching Tooth. I
use to gather it in the Spring before it buds, which is best. The Burr root
(somewhat more slowly) will perform the fame; these take away the pain, and
extract the superfluous humor very much.

If the dolours proceed from distillations, a decoction of the greater Vrtica
(some mix it with a little grated Nutmeg, Sassron, and burnt Wine, with a like
quantity of Vinegar) taken very hot in the mouth, and kept for some time to the
part assected, does wonderfully extract the peccant humors: In the beginning
it seems to augment the pain, but a little after it mitigates and fully
removes. Of like virtue is a decoction of Guaicum made with wine and water. In
the same case (chiefly in distillations) a decoction of wild Betony is
excellent; or the mouth may profitably be gargled with both these decoctions.

Hollow aching Teeth.
In hollow Teeth that ache, or in the pains of Teeth without hollowness, Oil of
Cloves is of singular use, if in j of this ss of Camphire be dissolved; and of
this composition one or two drops taken, and with Cotton (that has lain among
Musk) be put into the hollowness, or otherwise applied to the aching tooth,
takes away all pain. Also Laudanum Opiat in Pills, either put into the
hollowness, or the teeth anointed therewith, or else dissolved with Unguent of
Alabaster ( Gr. j of Laudanum to j of the Unguent) and externally applied by
anointing. Also a Plaster of Mastich and Wax may here be used.

Worn or wasted Teeth.
Teeth corroded and wasted are often times dolorous, which are cured by a
suffumigation of Henbane, through a Pipe conveyed to the teeth.

Rotten Teeth.
Rotten teeth will more easily come forth, if you touch them often with your
fingers, first rubbed in the powder that is made of water Lizards bowelled and
calcined in an Oven. The Lizards are taken in April and May. Also if a tooth be
taken out of the jaw of a dead man, and the root thereof be often applied to
the rotten tooth, it will cause it to fall out in few days by piece-meals.

In the difficult breeding of teeth in Children, the jaws must often be
anointed with fresh butter, and they will more easily come forth.

But if by the former means they are not seen to come forth, and necessity
urge; (...) The blood warm from the comb of a Cock, and with your singer
anoint the Gums, once or twice at most, and the teeth without difficulty or
other accidents, will come forth in a short time.

Flesh growing about the Gums.
In flesh growing about the Gum, it is best to make incision with a proper
instrument; then let the mouth be gargled with a Gargarism of Myrrh and Salt.

Laxity, Putrefaction, and eating of the Gums.
In Laxity, Putrefaction, and Erosion of the Gums, Aquilegia by a certain
propriety yields relief; It may be compounded thus:. Powder of leaves of
Aquilegia, Sage, Mint, Crisp, Nutmegs, of each ss, burnt Alum j, Purified
honey iv; set the honey over the fire, boil it a little and scum it; then
while it is warm, pour on the aforesaid powders leisurely, mix it well, and
keep it for use: With this Ointment anoint the Gums twice a day; ( Note well,
a decoction of the tops of Madder in this case is also useful.) When the
Patient is ready to eat, let him wash his mouth with water of Prunella, or the
infusion of water Cresses in Wine, chiefly in the Scurvy.

Mundification of putrified Gums.
To cleanse the Gums when putrified, of excellent use is the green water by me
compounded, of which see above in the Affects of the Nostrills (viz.) in Ozaena.

Swelling of the Gums.
In swellings of the Gums without inflammation, a Gargarism of Prunella
prepared with Sage leaves and water Cresses is highly commended.

If inflammation be, make a Gargarism of distilled Tobacco water with Lapis
Prunella dissolved in it; (or Prunella water.)

Outwardly may be applied a Poultis of Wheat bread boiled in milk.

Distillation to the knot of the Jaw.
In distillation to the knot of the Jaw Bone, accompanied with immobility of
the part, a bag filled with powder of Tartar and common Salt, and externally
applied very hot, obstructs the distillations; the immobility it self is
removed by Oil of Rue and Earthworms, in which flowers of Camomil have been
boiled: Or if you please add Oil of Camomil to the former Oils, and the
affected place anoint hot.

Exulceration.
In Exulcerations, the first thing proper to obstruct is a decoction of Savory
in Wine, with which the mouth must be often washed.

2. A decoction of Bettony, chiefly if honey of Roses be added thereto.

Note. In contumacious Exulcerations, to these decoctions must be added a
little spirit of Vitriol, whereby they will the more forcibly resist.

In Ulcerations arising from Lues venerea, the green waters described above in
Ozena, dissolve every knot, more especially if in the first, instead of common
water be taken water of Arsmart, or if in the second, leaves of the Arsmart be
added to the other leaves.

Cure of the dolours of the Teeth.
Because the pains of the Teeth for the most part arise from the defluctions of
the head, therefore in the Cure thereof such things must be applied as inhibit
defluxions.

Therefore forthwith to the Temples must be applied a Plaster made of Gum
Elem. or Mastich, which before applied must be very well warmed.

Between the Shoulders must be applied great Cuppinglasses without
scarrification.

Then to repel the matter, and evacuate the Flux, great care must be taken;
therefore let the Patient take a decoction of ripe Galls boiled in vinegar,
keeping the vinegar in his mouth to the aching tooth half an hour, or an hour if
possibly he can.

Then proceed to Topics; Anodynes from a secret propriety remove the dolor.

But if the pain continue, and abate not with these Medicaments, but it appear
to Continue.
arise from some intemperance of the head or whole body, or through the
abundance of matter flowing to the head, and from thence descending to the
teeth; then not only to the head, but to the whole body, evacuating, pacifying
and confortative Medicines must be exhibited.

Among Topics that remove all pain, either by themselves or compounded, these
following are excellent:

Laudanum Opiat, of which Gr. iij, with two drops of spirit of Vitriol applied
to the aching tooth, together with one Pill inwardly taken, asswageth the pain:
Also a Plaster applied to the Temples, and if need be, Cuppinglasses.

Of like effect is the distilled Oil of Box, thus made.

. Saw-dust of Box, fill with it a glass Retort wanting a fourth part, set it in
ashes, and at first distill off the Oil and watery Liquor with a gentle fire,
increase it by degrees till it be vehement, then the Oil it self will come
forth. This Oil is more rightly distilled per discensum, or per vesicam. Of
this Oil of Box. Gr. iij mixed with Wine, if the affect proceed from a cold
defluxion, if from a hot, mixed with vinegar. Note. The sick must keep this
mixture in his mouth for some time, afterward put it out.

If the pain abate not, repeat it to the sixth time, then let him wash his
mouth with wine or vinegar, and the pain will away.

Also powder of Galls twelve times imbibed in the juice of Pellitory roots, and
dried with the ferment; of this make a little ball, which applied to the tooth,
gives present ease, fastens the other teeth, kills the worms breeding in the
concavities of them, and powerfully extracts all Defluxions of the Gums.

The last Remedy in every sharp dolor is to apply Vesicatories behind the Ear,
and to the nape of the Neck.

Outwardly the Jaws may be anointed with Oil of sweet Almonds; and if a
Tumor appear, apply a Plaster of Melolet. If inwardly in the mouth the pain
tend to imposthumation, make a Cataplasm with a Figg mixed with wheat flower;
when the imposthume breaks, dissolve honey of Roses in Plantain water, and let
the Patient wash his mouth therewith.

Affects of the Tongue and Cheeks. Ranula.
In Ranula, in the beginning a vein must be opened under the tongue. Some apply
a live Frog to the nape of the neck, but it answers not the end always.

Paralysie of the Tongue.
The Paralysie of the tongue (omitting the general cure of the Paralysie) is
cured by rubbing the tongue with Rocket-seed and Treacle; also with Oil of
Anise instilled upon the tongue; also with Balsom, or Oil of Cloves. The spirit
of black Cherries recovers lost speech most miraculously.

Lost Speech.
Lost Speech in Genere is cured as the Paralysie; in Specie (after the
universal purging of the head) is commended, First, water of Lillies of the
valley; Secondly, Antapoplectick water, of flowers of Lillies of the valley,
and of Lavendula, of which see above, of the Apoplexy. If with either of these
the blood of a Turtle be mixed ( viz. all the blood of a Turtle mixed with iij or
iv of the water) this mixture taken into the mouth, by its washing the tongue,
or by being long tempered in the mouth, does happily restore the voice.

Regard must always be had to the causes, by reason of the variety of which,
the preparations of medicaments must also vary.

Therefore we have not only directed in the universal suitable medicaments going
before, but to their proper place of application to the part affected, and also
to the neck, or other parts, as need requires, which is desired by
Practitioners. The stammering speech is difficultly cured.

The Taste depraved, lost and decayed.
The depraved bitter taste is corrected by the use of preserved Succory root;
also the Salt of Succory takes away the bitterness of the tongue: Also rubbing
the tongue with a root of Wormseed, or Gentian has the like effect.

If the Taste be lost or decayed; First, the veins under the tongue must be
bruised. Secondly, Then a Gargarism used that is good in the Quinsy of the
throat, and all other Diseases of the mouth; as this,. of the Garden Herb
Mallows one handful, flowers of red Roses, of Prunella, Bettony, Salt, of each
half a handful, root of Polypode of the Oak ij; boil these in lb iv of pure
water, and vj of wine vinegar, until a part be boiled away, then strein and
gently press it out.

Thirdly, Make the following mixture.. Spirit of Vitriol ss, Spirit of Wine ij,
of Honey j; make it up like an Ointment; with this Unguent, after the
exhibiting the abovesaid Gargarism, the tongue must be anointed, and the
decayed Taste will quickly be restored.

Tumor of the Jaws, etc.
In Tumor of the Jaws proceeding from a cold cause, external inunctions are
necessary with Oil of sweet Almonds, mixed with distilled Oil of Wax, ( viz. j
of Oil of Wax to j of Oil of Almonds.) Internally Gargarisms made with long
Pepper boiled in common water, and the mouth gargled therewith.

Inflammation of the Jaws.
In inflammation of the Jaws.

1. The Gargarism before mentioned (in the Chapt. of depraved and lost taste.

2. External inunctions, with Oil of sweet Almonds simple, without the addition
of Oil of Wax: Also a Cataplasm of wheat-bread with honey; this prevents
inflammation.

More efficacious then all this is Menstruum dissolved in vinegar and applied;
Horseradish leaves applied outwardly.

Imposthumation of the Jaws.
In imposthumations, putrefactions and exulcerations of the Jaws, the Gargarism
mentioned in the Chap. of lost taste, etc. is of singular use, for it both
cleanses and consolidates, chiefly if with the other ingredients be added
Plantain leaves. The use of this also in internal Ulcers is very profitable.

But in corrupt imposthumations, such things as will more forcibly cleanse must
be exhibited; as the second green water above mentioned; of which see above in
the Chap. of Ozaena.

After this, a decoction of Bettony with honey will easily consolidate the
(...).

Laxity of the Uvula.
In Laxity of the Uvula excellent is the Gargarisin aforesaid in the Chap. of
Lest Taste, etc. principally if the Herb Horse-tongue be added thereto (which by
reason of its Signature is proper.) Then make this powder.. Of long Pepper j,
juice of Acacia, root of Tormentil, of each ij; mix them and make a powder.

Of this powder, after the use of the aforesaid Gargarism, with some convenient
instrument, blow upon the Uvula, or pull the hairs of the hinder part of the
head forward, at the first gently, afterward strongly till they begin to crack.

Afterward put a little burnt Alum upon the Uvula, and the Laxity will be
abated. Also Rose seeds are useful.

But if these be not efficacious enough,. a new laid Egg, boil it till it be
hard, cut it in the middle long ways, and with a Ligature bind it to the
hinder part of the head for certain hours, till the Laxity be perfectly cured.

Inflammation of the Uvula.
Any Gargarism takes away the inflammation of the Uvula, if some salt Nitre
fixed be mixed therewith: So distilled water of Prunella, mixed with Lapis
Prunella, and used for a Gargarism cures the inflammation.

Note. Wonderful operative in this case is the compounded Gargarism before
described in the Chap. of Lost Taste, etc.

The Ulcers of Collumella, or at the mouth of the throat.
Simple Ulcers of this kind (without malignity) are easily cured, as also of
the tongue, palate and jaws.

Therefore after the use of convenient Gargarisms, a decoction of Bettony and
Honey with common water; also a decoction of Savory with wine, do perfectly
cure Ulcers of this kind.

Note. The drink must not be very sharp, but tempered with Sugar, which also
descending with the drink, takes away the putrefaction.

Sometimes in Ulcers more contumacious, spirit of Vitriol may be used with such
like waters or mundefying decoctions, (never alone) and so as it may scarsly be
perceived; this swiftly and powerfully cures, chiefly if applied, mixed with
Plantaine water.

Lastly, Confection of Mulberries, or rather the juice expressed, or salt of
Mulberries (a Proprietate) in these sharp humors are very commodious;
therefore by the Germans is called Maulbeer.

Putrefied and fetid Ulcers.
In Ulcers fetid and putrefied, besides these now spoken of, those green waters
above prescribed in the Chap. of Ozaema, must be used, which totally remove all
putrefaction and fetid exulceration, so as a perfect consolidation may easily
follow.

Having thus cured, use diligence that the Ulcers grow not again.

Ulcers of Lues-venerea.
In Ulcers arising from Lues-venerea, in what part soever of the mouth or jaws;
the Physician must first know the disease, the signs whereof are described
below in the Chap. of Lues Venerea, or the French sickness; then he must
descend to universals and particulars in that Disease, and so Ulcers beginning
to grow in such places, together with the Disease it self, he may easily
remove; if otherwise, Topics are to be used, at first gentle, as Gargarisms,
and the usual decoctions.

But if the Disease abate not by the use of these, then the green waters
described above in the Chap. of Ozaena, must be used and applied, only by
Touching.
supplying the affected part therewith, with a Pencil, and after washing it
with a Gargarism, so the Disease may easily be removed.

Yet above all these, of wonderful virtue is the red spirit of Mercury, for
expelling the universal Disease of Lues Venerea throughout the whole body; the
preparation and use of which is described below in the Chap. of Lues Venerea.

Quinsy.
The Quinsy in its beginning, or of continuance, chiefly if accompanied with a
Fever, is removed by Vomitories, such as Aqua bened. for so the inflammation
abates, and the Ulcers or Imposthumations are broken: But in the use of this,
regard must be had to the nature and strength of the Patient.

It Vomitories cannot be used, recourse must be had to Specificks, then which
nothing more safely, next to Vomitories, may be applied: Such are these.

1. That which is described by Paracelsus in his Treatise, de Pestilentia ad
Sterzingenses, and is thus:. Six or eight living Crabs ( Crabs do wonderfully
cool,) and three or four handfulls of the greater House-leek, beat these
together in a mortar, and press out the juice, with which the tongue and jaws
must be fomented, or tongue only rubbed therewith. Of this a very small
quantity ( viz. a few drops) in some convenient Liquor may be inwardly taken.

2. Is an experiment of Antonius Ausmans, Citizen of Augustanum, which is
thus:. Of the greater Houseleek a convenient quantity, bruise it in a mortar,
and press out the juice; of this juice. lb j, add of Salt Armoniack ss; leave
it in a moist place till the Salt be dissolved, then distill it by a Limbeck.
With this water hot and blood warm wash the tongue often; this is a most
approved Remedy: See Conradinus of Lues Venerea.

3. Is the Gargarism above mentioned in the Chap. of Lost Taste, etc.

Note. In this case some of the greater Houseleek must be added to the
ingredients.

If the throat cannot be gargled, the Gargarism must be injected through a
tunnel; after several Gargarisations. the skin of Lard two fingers broad, cut
it very small, and apply that side that is most lardy to the tongue, and for
some time keep it on; so the thin black skin of the tongue will resolve, and at
length remove, so as the cure of the Disease will quickly follow.

Externally to the neck a Plaster made of the nests of Swallows (entire with a
like quantity of Album Graecum) boiled in water of water Betony, must be
applied hot.

For drink dissolve Vitriol or Salt Prunella ( viz. j) in a convenient quantity
of Fountain water. Wine must not be given.

Such things help the Quinsy, in which nitrous salt Ammoniack lies hid; as the
dung of a white Dog that gnaws bones, well boiled in water, and given with
honey.

Shavings of a Boars tooth j, with Oil of sweet Almonds and Sugar.

Ashes of burnt Crabs.

Ashes of Swallows. The middle Comphry, Prunella, Cervicaria, Mint crisp.
Madder, Horse tongue.

The bastard Quinsy.
The bastard Quinsy in Children is cure with a Plaster, as aforesaid. The head
of a Viper cut off, and bung about the neck, is commended for an Amulet.. an
Owl whole, burn it with the feathers, and make a powder, a small part of which
taken into the throat, opens and breaks the Imposthume wonderfully.

Spirit of Salt Nitre, in allaying the instamination, and resolving the
imposthume, is very powerful. Of this ij and ss may be given in a draught of
fountain water hot; mix with the water spirit of Wine and spirit of Salt, of
each ss: See Crollius.

. Of Semper vive water, of Prunella water, of each. j, Salt Armoniack j; mix
these, and make a Gargarism.

The Crystal or Mineral Anodyne, as it is called, or Lapis Prunella (which, the
inflammation of the tongue, also the asperity of the jaws, and adjoining parts,
does principally mediate) is of singular virtue; ss, or a of this dissolved in
some appropriate water, and the mouth gargled therewith, does wonderfully help;
afterward a little of this mixed with Sugar, and swallowed, will be convenient:
Or if you think good,. Of Salt Prunella prepared after the common manner, what
quantity you please, add it to the same quantity of Candid or Crystalline
Sugar, or more, if you please; boil this with a sufficient quantity of Rose
water, until you find by a drop poured upon a tin plate, it has a convenient
consistency; then pour it into a lesser vessel, set it over the fire, and leave
it till it be as hard as a stone, then take it out, and break it into small
pieces, or reduce it to powder. Use this often.

The Affects of the Lights. Windy Lights.
Windy Lights, that are filled full of wind, so as they impede the natural
respiration, are restored by Essentials that quickly penetrate the part
affected.

The Balsom of Fennel described by Crollius is excellent. Also the Salt of
stalks of Carraway rightly calcined (that is, with Sulphur, as in the Salt of
Eyebright) and used with common Salt, both by preserving and curing delivers
from this disease.

j Of the root of Aaron pulverisate, is a Specific in cure of this Disease;
Also Foecula of Aaron j in appropriate water, with Syrup or Wine, and in Food;
for preservation daily may be used ss, or a and ss, but warily and seldom; j
may safely be taken.

Asthma, Difficulty in breathing.
Orthopnoea, Dispnaea.
Asthma, Orthopnoea and Dispnoea are easily cured with Vomitories, chiefly with
Aqua bened. Of the like virtue, (chiefly in gross humors obstructing the pipes
of the Lights) is the juice and also Foecula of the root of our Flower de Luce,
whereof ss at most (sometimes ij or iij) given in convenient Liquors, chiefly
in Malmsie Wine, expells the gross humor speedily.

Asthma's of long continuance are difficulty cured with either of these
Vomitories; therefore use these:

1. Flowers of Sulphur, or Sulphur viv. with Asa-dulcis in rere Eggs, (or add
to j of Sulphur viv. j or j of Benzoin; of this composition give j in a rere
Egg:) give this for certain days, and the Lights will be freed from gross
humors without detriment.

Of like force is milk of Sulphur, of which see Crollius his Notes.

Most excellent of all, are the most white Flowers of Sulphur, the preparation
of which, see in the Chemical exposition of Tenzelius.

2. An Astmatick purging powder, which is treated of by Ruland, Cent. 8. Cent.
6.

. Leaves of Carduus bened. Carthamus, of each ij, Long Pepper j, leaves of Sena
cleansed, root of Aaron dried, of each ij, Anise ss, Diagrydium ss, make a most
fine powder, which divide into twelve equal parts, and for six days together,
one part must be given in the morning fasting, the other part about the third
hour in the Evening, with white wine, broth, etc.

If the Disease shall prove more contumacious for some time after, that is, by
desisting certain days from taking the powder, the same must then be repeated
till the Disease decline.

Dose for one time almost ss, and Gr. ij.

In the Asthma, distilled water of Black berries, with juice of nuts, taken for
delight, does wonderfully resolve the Asthma.

Of greater virtue is the water made of the composition of white Sugar with
Radish stalks, being put between two dishes, and very well stirred over a fire
for some time; this must be used fresh, for it will not keep above two hours,
therefore is to be made as often as need requires. One spoonful must be given
morning and evening.

More of these affects may be seen below, of spitting blood.

Suffocative Catarrh.
The Cure of the Suffocative Catarrh is treated of above.

Stopping of the Breast.
The juice of Briony wonderfully dilates the diseased stoppage of the breast,
and exceeds all other things in this case: It is thus made,

. A thick root of Briony (the thicker the better) make a Cavity in it, take out
all the extremities of peth therein: The root so cut, stop with a convenient
stopple, and set it in a cold moist place, in May, June and July; in a few
hours the cavity of the root will be filled with water, which pour off, and put
on the stopple, set it in the same place again, repeat this so often as there
comes forth any juice, which will easily all come out: Of this water. vj or
viij, mix it with spirit of Vitriol, or Oil of Sulphur per Campane ss, and keep
it careful for Use: One spoonful of this Composition taken for several days,
does admirably remove the stoppage of the breast; also it expells all
impurities out of the Lights: therefore in the Asthma its use is most
profitable. It drives out all watery humors from the body, therefore very
useful in the Dropsy. This juice dures long being kept in a cold place, yet it
is best to make it yearly.

Instammation of the Lungs.
Inflammation of the Lungs is cured as the Pleurisy; Vomitories in the
beginning much help, afterward such things as cleanse the stomach, of which we
treat in the Pleurisy: for vomiting in this case Aqua bened. is principally
useful.

Imposthume of the Lungs.
To consume the Imposthume of the Lights, water of Valerian is commended, being
tempered with spirit of Vitriol, or Oil of Sulphur per Campane, to a grateful
sharpness, and daily drunk morning and evening; it insensibly resolves the
Tumor.

So Diaphoretick Antimony, or Flowers of fixed Antimony, being frequently taken,
viz. daily five or six times for certain days together; Dose ss: this every
inward Imposthume, in what part soever, does most powerfully, yet gently
resolve.

Hereditary Pthisick.
Hereditary Ptisick is difficultly cured, yea hardly ever; by reason of the
height of Radical impressions in the native constitution, derived from the
Parents, which admit of no cure; being patiently born, it may sometimes be
mitigated, otherwise it will be more violent, but never wholly by Medicine be
removed: But because very many distillations do both cause and accompany
Hereditary Pthisick, experience proves, that the Florentine flower de Luce.
Rheumatick root, mentioned in the Suffocative Catarrh, hung about the neck,
together with observation of a temperate order in diet, do much abate
Consumptive Diseases of this kind: Therefore let none despair of diminishing
Hereditary Pthisick, or at least of preventing its further growth^ more of this
may be seen below of Spitting blood.

Pthisick not Hereditary.
In beginnings of Pthisick from sharp distillations arising, how much
Vomitories, chiefly Aqua bened. yield relief, can hardly be expressed, if the
brain, as a commanding part, with its Specificks and Confortatives, be
diligently preserved in its vigor: Also respect must be had to the humors
that fall down upon the Lungs, that with Expectorating cleansing Medicines they
be repelled: That no Ulceration of the Lungs may arise, if risen be suppressed,
Vomitories much help to mundefie and remove all obstructions of the breast,
from whence the Pthisick takes its beginning: Therefore things cleansing are
absolutely necessary, as Hydromel, and expectorating Compositions. Also others,
which by daily use and practice of Authors may be added.

Expectoratives, and Lochocks with Flowers of Sulphur, Balsom of Fennel, and
others very many.

To Consolidate Ulcers of the Lights, Balsom of Sulphur is most excellent;.
Flowers of white Sulphur what quantity you will, sublime them once or twice
with Olibanum, Myrrh and Alloes, as Crollius teaches. These flowers extract
with Oil of Anise (or with Balsamic spirit of Turpentine) without boiling, and
it will be a most red Balsom; of which from Gr. vj to xx (increasing the Dose,
as need is) inwardly taken morning and evening in some pectoral decoction
(after the use of other cleansing expectorating Medicines) do wonderfully
restore ulcerated Lungs, and also such as are any way putrified, consolidating
and disposing Ulcers to a perfect Cure.

Adhesion of the Lights.
The cleaving together of the Lights is difficultly cured in ripe Age.

The Plurisie.
1. In the Pleurisy; in its beginning, or else the third or fifth day, before
all other things, I exhibit Aqua bened. to provoke vomiting, whereby the
influence and inflammation of the humor is resisted, and the breast it self
delivered from all impurities. Aqua bened. is given in a just Dose, with water
of Carduus Maria, or Rhaeados. Sometimes I consent to cut a vein, where the
Disease seems unresolvible, or extremity of pain in the head requires: And this
I do either before or after Vomiting.

2. Where, either Nature it self, or rather the Patients, abhor vomiting; the
cutting a vein precedes all other things, and this I do chiefly in the vein of
the heart; (in the Basilical vein on that side which is afflicted.) If by this
means the Fever and symptoms be not more remiss, I proceed to others more
appropriate, of which the first is thus;. Spirit of Salt Nitre, and spirit of
Wine, of each j, or ss, or ij at most; mix these with what quantity you please
of ^oppy or Rhaeados water blood warm ( viz. Gr. v, an, ij or iij) and if
possible dispose the Patient to sweat in bed. Note. The spirit of Wine is
corrected by the Spirit of Salt Nitre; moreover a very little Dose of this must
be given, otherwise all use hereof is hurtful.

3. Soon after I exhibit the Diaphoretick in peracutis j, with water of Cardu.
Maria, or Rhaeados.

4. In robustick strong Constitutions I give Oil of Linum from j to iij; after
all these I administer Expectoratives.

Note. The shavings of a Bores tooth given in appropriate vehicles, does
oft-times by a specific propriety cure the Plurisie; the magistery of the same
is better.

Outwardly to mitigate the pain and pricking, inunctions may be made of unguent
of Dialthea, Oil of sweet Almonds, and the like.

Also an Epithema made with a decoction of Honey and Milk boiled together, and
applied hot in a Hoggs bladder to the aching side, gives ease. Also Cataplasms
of Anodynes, which are variously used by Practicks.

Also a of the Heart or Bulls Pisle is specific, Joel. Page 25.

Likewise a decoction of Flowers of Poppy, Rhaeados, Valeriol. Lib. 5. Obs. 10.

In the Bastard Pleurisy the same things are commonly used, only spirit of
wine is not in this case used by me.

Externally in the Windy.
flatulent Plurisie wonderful efficacious is the powder of Cummine seeds
sprinkled upon a Colewort leaf, that has been before anointed with butter,
and applied to the part affected. This I used to my little Son Chrystopher.

In spitting of blood or filthy matter, chiefly in the Plurisie, care must be
taken to ripen the matter, afterward to draw forth all the blood and filthy
corruption, concerning which Practitioners have advised, as chiefly
Rondoletius, and B. Faventinus.

Indeed in this case Chemical Medicines seem to stagger, since that all things
both inwardly and outwardly are to be performed with moilifying gentle and
asswaging remedies. Nevertheless a decoction of Guaiacum with Pectorals
exhibited, profits much. It will be much more powerful, if Flowers of fixt^
Antimony be often drunk in the decoction of Guaiacum, ( viz. j of the Flowers)
and this continued not for certain days, but for several months; by which the
Imposthume will be both ripened, and also broke. Yet after this, least the
putrid corrupt matter be not thoroughly purged out, recourse must be had to such
things as may remove the dregs of corruption from the parts affected. Among
many this is commended;. Of distilled water of Barley ^ ij, Honey of Roses v,
root of Althea j, mix these, and let them boil until the third part be
consumed, this strained give the Patient. Dialthea.
Althea in this case is also very good:) This cleanses the Ulcer, conveys the
filth to the lower parts of the body, and by the spirits purifies the whole
body.

In the mean time the Patient must drink four or five times a day iij or iv of
the water of Ground Ivy sharpened with its own salt. Also the leaves of Ground
Ivy mixed with food do perfectly expel corruption. More excellently, if an
Arcanum be made of the ground Ivy, of which four or six drops exhibited in
proper water, will purify every part.

The flowing moisture of the breast is expelled with the juice of Briony,
described above in the stoppage of the breast.

Also ss at most of the juice of our Flower de Luce, purges by Vomiting. See
more below of Spitting blood.

Hoarseness.
Hoarseness proceeding from earnest crying, is cured with Rotula's of
Diatragacant cold, M^ystned.
anointed with Oil of Anise, being dissolved in the mouth by little and little
and swallowed.

Hoarsness arising from a cold cause, is taken away with hot wine tempered with
Sugar.

In hoarsness procured by distillation, which is most inveterate; excellent is
Lobelius his compounded syrup of water Cresses.

Cough.
Vomits procured with Aqua bened. cure the Cough newly taken; as also the
inveterate, especially if it be not perpetual; for by this the first region of
of the belly is freed from all impurities, the distillations obstructed, and
afterward if convenient pectorals be exhibited both inwardly and outwardly, the
Cough is finely dissipated.

Internalls are Lochocks of every kind, as Pectoral Syrups; things that purge
and comfort the breast if need be, and preserve the stomach with the Lights
from all elapse of humors.

Among things that expectorate, Oximel is commended, and vinegar of Squills,
with syrup of Jujube mixed with Hore-hound.

Confortatives are syrups of Sorrel, Hysop, Violets, Liquorish; with these may
be numbered Fernelius his syrup of Dialthea. Externals are Unguents.

Note. Preservation from the Cough is wonderful in Ziziphis, that is, those
great Grapes which the Germans call Eibeben. Macerate these in spirit of wine
till they swell very much, and one or two of these taken Morning and Evening
will preserve from the Cough.

Liquor of Sugar prepared in composition with Radish stalks, as described above
in the Chap. of Asthma, does mirably resolve from the Cough. Also the magistral
Oil of Sugar, as it is called, is made in this manner;. White Sugar candid,
pour upon it spirit of wine once corrected; leave this mixture in a still place
for certain hours, then set fire of the spirit of wine, and the Sugar with the
remaining Phlegm will be reduced to a thick liquor; which taken in inveterate
Coughs, cleanses the breast from impurity, and the windpipe with the Lungs
does comfortably strengthen, chiefly if some drops of the Extract or essence of
Saffron be added thereto: Also an Extraction of Elecampane by spirit of wine
mixed with Sugar, the spirit being burnt, leaves a most profitable liquor for
the Cough. To which may be added Rulands powder, mentioned in the Chap. of
Asthma.

Species of Diatragacant frigid given in Rotula's, cure the Coughs in Children
and Infants: Also the feet must be washed twice or thrice a day, especially at
going to bed, in hot beer, and afterward the soles of the feet anointed with
the fat of the Pike-fish. With these may be numbered flowers of Sulphur and milk
of Sulphur.

Inveterate Coughs arising from thin distillations, are cured with Laudanum
Opiat. which also in other Coughs is not unprofitable, being in due measure
exhibited; for hereby the stomach is freed from gross and tough Plegm without
detriment.

Spitting of Blood.
Spitting of blood, arising chiefly from the Lights, is cured with Henbaneseed,
mixed with other pectorals and astringents. See Platerus in Praxi and
Observations.

But if the blood come forth in abundance, astringents more strong are
necessary.

. Oil of Vitriol ss, Plantane water iij, mix these, make a potion: This
presently stops the flux of blood from the Lights, and the abundant vomiting of
blood. Or. Distilled water of the root of Vrtica j, Oil of Vitriol to a
convenient sharpness, make the mixture, and give it cold: This also happily
cures the vomiting of blood: See below of vomiting. Take care the throat be not
ulcerated.

In case the Fevers be high at the same time, it is a sign the blood is
putrefied in the body without the vessels.

In this case nothing is better then Aqua bened. drunk in a vehicle of Chervil
water: For this presently takes away the Fever and Inflammation (also a vein
may be cut) and frees the whole body from impurities. After these are
exhibited, although no sign of Fever appear, yet since that they may easily
return, it is needful to have recourse to such things as dissolve the
coagulated blood; such are these: The Essence of the blood of a buck Goat, the
blood of a Wolf, Magistery of Crab's-eyes, Mummy; also coals of Tily ( j or ij
in Chervil water or vinegar) Chervil given in food. In this case the powder
following is very profitable.. Coals of Tily, Crabs eyes, the herb Chervil, of
each a like quantity. Make a powder, Dose ij in vinegar.

So a Diaphoretick in peracutis, or mixtura simplex (or another Treacle water)
is of singular virtue in this case, it being inwardly taken it provokes sweat,
which is wonderful necessary, and some times must be procured by externalls.

Sheets moystned in red astringent wine, afterward wrung out, and wrapped about
the whole body in bed, do provoke sweating to admiration, and in this case do
wonderfully help, chiefly when the conquassation of the interior bowels is
feared.

Felix Wurzius in his Chyrurgery commends sublimate Mercury.

There are other powders described, proper in this case; see the Practicks.

All these things of which we have already spoken, resolve the coagulated blood
as well in the veins, as without the veins; first therefore, things
sudoriferous, after the use of solutives, will more easily effect the work, not
omitting the cutting of a vein.

The Extract, Arcanum or Essence of the lesser Bellis being inwardly taken, by
a certain innate propriety dissolves all the coagulated blood, and insensibly
by transpiration drives it out. Of the like virtue is Treacle water, and spirit
of Tartar.

As is declared to the Physician in the Asthma, first some purging Lenitive is
prescribed, for in the beginning strong Medicaments must be forborne; then the
matter must be digested with pectorall syrups, as of Horehound, Hysop,
Liquorish, of each j and ss, water of Coltsfoot, Betony, of each ij; let the
sick take two or three spoonfulls in the morning, and three hours after dinner.
Then purge with a Syrup or Apozeme thus made;. Root of black Hellebore
prepared, flowers of the Florentine flower de Luce, of each j and ss, Coltsfoot
the whole Plant, Lungwort speckled, of each ss a handful; Boil these in a
sufficient quantity of pectoral decoction, or etc. to lb j. In viij of this
pour on of Agarick, Electu. of Rubarb, of each ij and ss, Cinnamon ss; In the
remaining part boil ij of Sena leaves very gently, then boil this mixture
with a sufficient quantity of Sugar, or any pectoral syrup, to the consistency
of a syrup; in the end of the boiling add infusion of Agarick and Rubarb, and
make an Apozeme or liquid syrup, of which, if an Apozeme, give iv cum custodia;
If a syrup iij, which if it do not sufficiently move the belly, then. Root of
Mechoacanna, Agarick troch. of each j, Diagridium Gr. viij, Electu. Cinnamon Gr.
vj; make a most fine powder, give half or a third part of this several times
with the Doses above prescribed.

Commendable also are the Flowers of Benzoin, if mixed with the Flowers of
Sulphur. Also Paracelsus his Elixar Proprietatis, given from six to ten, or
twelve drops, with Hysop or Coltsfoot water.

Between every purgation let two days be omitted; in purging always use the
compounded syrup above said: If the sick be troubled with pain in the head, a
vein may be cut, yet take away the blood sparingly; the breast also may be
anointed with this following Unguent:. Unguent Resumpt. Dialthea, of each ss,
Oil of Scorpions j; make an Ointment: Or. Oil of sweet Almonds, fresh butter
washed, of each j, Ducks grease (or in defect thereof Oil of Cammomil) ss, Oil
of the flower de Luce, and Saffron, of each j, with a little wax; make an
Unguent, with which hot anoint the stomach morning and evening before meat, or
apply a Plaster of Diachulum.

Sometimes in the beginning may be exhibited Aqua bened. or infusion of flowers
of Antimony, that thereby the stomach may be well evacuated, and the region of
the breast disturbed with sickly matter, be released.

These things thus mentioned, let us proceed to such things as help
expectoration, not omitting those which by a certain propriety exterminate this
Disease, among which these are most famous; Flowers of Sulphur, Extract of
Elecampane, Oil of Anise, Milk of Sulphur, and Balsom of Sulphur.. Flowers of
Sulphur, j, Extract of Elecampane j, most white Sugar dissolved in Coltsfoot j
and ss, Oil of Anise three drops; make Rotula's.

j of the flowers of Sulphur, may be taken either by it self with an equal
part of Florentine flower de Luce, or with Species of Diatragacant frigid in a
rere Egg, or with the juice of Nuts, which is a singular remedy in this
Disease, being exhibited in form of an Electuary with a little spirit of wine
and sugar of Roses, that it may be fit to lick, with the fruit and water of
Black Berries, or what shall be most convenient: Or if the Extract be
unpleasant, instead thereof powder of flower de Luce root may be taken; or,.
Confection of flower de Luce j, Diatragacant ss, Balsom of Sulphur ss, Sugar
dissolved in water of Venus-hair, or Farfar ij; make Rotula's, moysten them
with Oil of Anise.

Milk of Sulphur may be given with Lochocks of Pine, of Fox Lungs, mixed with
white Bechia, Penidium, and Species of Diatragacant.

Chrystalls of Iron, and flowers of Benzoin are also profitable, and indeed
ought to be exhibited and mixed with the abovesaid Medicines and Pectoral
syrups.

Chrystalls of Iron are made in this manner.. Filings of Iron pure and fine,
pour upon them Oil of Sulphur per Campane drop by drop, it will presently wax
hot, and be as it were all dissolved, let it rest and cool, and in two nights
it will Chrystalize, which dissolve in common distilled water, and by filtring
separate from its feces; then the water being evaporated it will be reduced to
Chrystalls, that is to say, if the water be exhaled to a dryness; then set it
in a cold place, and it will again Chystalize, the remaining water as before
evaporate, and gather the Chrystalls as often as you can. Dose Gr. ij or iij.

Also it is profitable for the sick to take into the mouth a fume of Benzoin;
or Benzoin with a like quantity of flowers of Sulphur mixed for fume.

If this Disease arise from a thin and watery matter descending from the brain,
then those things mentioned in the preceding Chap. of Suffocative Catarrh, must
be conjoined with these Medicaments, observing such Rules as are used by
Practitioners.

By the same pectoral Remedies, the Phtisick may plainly be cured, of which
also above in Hereditary Phtisick; yet by reason of the present Fever,
moystening and cooling things must be added, and such as the sick may use for
ordinary drink, or as a pectoral decoction to drink of often in a day, and to
drink it always Warm.
hot, and as much, and as often as he can.

Also he may frequently take Rotula's, made of flowers of Sulphur, with Oil,
Balsom and Milk of Sulphur, with the essence of Honey, which is thus made; mix
Honey with clean sand till it be like a Mass, on which pour spirit of wine till
it be covered two fingers above; then distill it for five or six days, distill
the tinged spirit to the consistency of Honey.

Also let him daily keep in his mouth the following Opiat.. Conserve of Roses j
and ss, Sugar of Roses, Tabulate Penidium, white Bechia, of each ss, Species
Diatragacant frigid j and ss; mix these with syrup of Violets.

To the breast must always be kept a Plaster or Cataplasm, the part being
first anointed with appropriate ointment. To comfort the stomach Pineolates
may be made, with addition of solution of Pearls.

Also a regal paste may be made after this manner:

. Almonds, Ambrosi, Pine Nutts, of each iij, Sugar of Roses, Tabulat, of each
lb ss, Aniseeds, white Poppy, of each j and ss, Bombace, powder of Fox lungs j,
the flesh of Capons breast, or of a Partridge, diligently broke in a Mortar:
Mix these and make a paste, which cut in as small thin slices as you will, and
boil to a yellowness, according to Art.

Or,. The flesh of Tortoises, of Crabs, of each j, Pine-nuts macerated in
Rose Water ij, powder of Diamargarit, Diatragacant frigid, of each j, flowers
of Sulphur, root of flower de Luce, of each ss, Sugar dissolved in the water or
decoction of Venus-hair, a convenient quantity; make Pineolates.

After the matter is excellently well expectorated, a decoction of Herbs that
are powerful to consolidate, may profitably be used: As for Example,. Plantaine
the whole plant lb j, the greater Comfry, Bugloss, or the middle Comfry,
Prunella, Fennel, whole, of each iv, Ditany Cretic. iij and ss, Flowers of St.
John's Wort, Bugloss, Violets, of each iv, Cinnamon j and ss; make a decoction,
or put them in Goats milk till they be covered three fingers; then by a Limbeck
distill them till they be dry: Also with the same Herbs may be made Tablets
according to Art.

A distillation made of the Heart, Liver and Lights of a Calf, with addition of
certain Herbs, is by some greatly esteemed.

Efficacious also is Alchohol of Vipers, or animal Bezoar, which is thus made.
After the skins of Vipers are pulled off while they yet live, the inwards, head
and ^ayle throw away; the rest of the flesh, with the Heart and Liver, wash
first in common water, afterward in spirit of wine, and dry it gently in the
shade, or Baln. and reduce it to most fine powder. Of this powder take j, of
prepared Salt ij. Some use this powder with their meat instead of Table Salt.

The quintessence of Pearls also, four or six drops daily taken, is a principal
comfort to Phtisical persons, for it restores them to their pristine health,
and plainly expells the Disease, chiefly if some drops of Oil of Cinnamon be
mixed therewith.

In the Plurisie some commend that snivelly water that proceeds from the mouth
of the horses, after they have drunk of a pure cold fountain, and given to the
sick to drink, see more above in the Chap. of the Pleurisy.

Antepleuritick Tragaea. P. Salt Trunella (which is called the universal
Anodyne,) flowers of Poppy, Rhaeados pulverisate, of each ij, red Corals j^
Sugar of Violets ss, mix them; Dose ij with water of Poppy, Rhaead^s, or aqua
bened. It is a singular Remedy in the Pleurisy.

As in the Cure of every inflammation, so also of the Pleurisy, care must be
taken to inhibit its increase, evacuate the Flux, and assuage the vehemence of
pain: That therefore the growth may be prevented at first, as soon as the
Physician is called (yet it is often times necessary before he be called)
inject a Clyster, and cut a vein in the middle or inward part of the fide
affected, and if the afflux be great, apply Cuppinglasses to the arms and
thighs above the knees, and by reason of the urgency of the dolor make
fomentation with Anodyne and temperate things, as a decoction of Melilot,
Camomil, Fenugreek, in milk, or an equal part of wine and water: With this
decoction foment the side with a sponge, or, which is as good, fill a bladder
with hot milk, an supply it for three hours to the side affected. Then upon a
hot cloth spread Treacle (middle aged) with Species of Diamber sprinkled upon
it, and apply it hot.

Inwardly a Dose of Laudanum Opiat must be taken; Ordinarily let the Patient
drink this Julep.

. Water of Rhaeados vj or xij, syrup of Endive, of Violets, of each ij, Spirit
of Vitriol six drops.

Or,. Water of Poppy, wild Alexander, Alkakengy, of each lb j, syrup of Vine
roots lb ss, spirit of Vitriol ss. It expells Sweat and Urine, therefore it is
best, if the Patient can, to take it all in an hours space.

But in the mornings let him take syrup of Vine roots, of Succory, of Rubard,
of each iij, of Betony water iv; this must be taken in twenty six Doses.

The third day, if the pain in the head still remain, and the dolor be urgent,
again cut a vein, and if strength will permit purge the day following, with
infusion of Agarick and Rubarb, Electuary bened. Laxitive, or Electuary of Sena
leaves, or some magistrale syrup: Also Oximel may be used alone, and wine of
Squills; or thus. Of them j and ss, Syrup of Liquorish, Jujube, Hyssop, of each
iij, water of Farfar, Venus-hair, of each j and ss; this mixed with pectoral
decoction may be taken at pleasure, chiefly in the morning, and three hours
after dinner.

If an imposthume be perceived, all diligence must be used to drive it out if
possible; to break the swelling, among others, excellent is a Cataplasm made of
the Herb Kali, with white Lilly roots and Hog's Grease, which applied to the
side affected, does presently break the imposthume, whether it be inward or
outward.

Also Ivy-leaves mixed with food, do rightly expel corruption; yet more
excellently if an Arcanum be made of the same, of which Gr. iv or v exhibited
in appropriate water, will remove all affects of this kind.

Profitably also may Rotula's made with Flowers of Sulphur, Oil of Anise, and
Tragacant be prescribed.

Of singular use in this case are Sulphur of Vitriol, an Anodyne with Syrup of
Violets, water of Cardu. bened. Carduus Mariae and Rhaeados; for these by a
certain natural propriety, do contrary the Disease: Sometimes also may be given
j, or j and ss of the mixture of Salt-nitre, and a like quantity of Spirit of
wine: Also Spirit of Tartar is here very useful with water of Cardu. Mariae or
Rhaeados, with a little Syrup added, powder of Vrtica seeds j, with Syrup of
Violets, which the Patient may lick, and leisurely swallow.

It is to be noted, that all things the sick takes must be hot, or at least
bloodwarm; for cold things while swallowing affect the Lungs, condense the
Pores, and hinder Resolution. The breast must be anointed with the following
Unguent:. Oil of sweet Almonds, Camomil, of each ss, Saffron ss, Wax a
sufficient quantity; make the Unguent, which must be used after Fomentation.

The following Rotula's are also exceedingly commended;. Flowers of Sulphur x,
Red Myrrh j and ss,

Hepatick Aloes j, Saffron ss:

Make a powder, which may be given per se, from ss to j; or with a sufficient
quantity thereof make Rotula's to be taken at pleasure.

If by these the Disease abate not, recourse must be had to such things as make
an easy excretion of the spittle, wast, extenuate and consume the matter; or
if too thin, thicken it; dilate the passages of the breast, that the matter may
be drawn forth, and at length drive it out.

It will not be unprofitable sometimes to exhibit a Dose of Laxative Mercury.
The Composition of other Medicaments must be performed according to the use of
Practitioners.

Affects of the Heart: Ulcers and St. Anthonies fire.
Ulcers and fiery Sores of the heart are uncureable.

A swouning or lying for dead.
Lipothymia.
Lipothymy is Cured with Oil of white Amber, and the Balsom thereof, put up the
Nostrills or given to smell too. Also Balsom, Oil and Water of Cinnamon;
likewise Balsom of Rue and Cloves; these indeed are swiftly operative.

Amber and Musk do happily take away Lipothimy, especially in men. Also Vinegar
of Flowers of Tunica are in this case profitably applied, and Flowers of Rue
and Elder.

Spirit of Coralls is famous for the Cure of this Disease: See Crollius.

In Lypothimy of the Stomach.

1. Vomitories are useful.

2. Confortatives, as Oil of Wormseed, Wine and Extract of the same, Essence of
Melissa with spirit of wine, and some drops of Oil of Juniper; the Essence of
Melissa purges out the thick phlegm from the foldings of the Ventricle. See
also above in Affects of the Head.

Swouning.
In Swouning, use leaves and flowers of Melissa sewed in a bag, and afterward
sprinkled with spirit of wine, apply it hot to the right Pap. Water of Pearls.

. Of the four Cordial waters, of each ij, Manus Christi with or without Pearls
j, Magistery of Pearls ss, White Amber grownd to powder upon a Marble ij, Water
of Langium j: mix these, give half a spoonful.


Palpitation of the Heart.
In Palpitation of the heart, from what cause soever produced, memorable is the
Bezoar-stone, that which is genuine, not adulterated. Gr. ij or iij of this
being daily taken with Gr. v or vj of Magistery of Corals, and as much of the
Magistery of Pearls, remits the Disease. They may be exhibited in Cinnamon, or
other compound Cordial water.

Externally may be applied Unctions of Cordial Balsoms; Also Epithema's both
hot and cold.

Note. The inveterate Palpitation of the heart is wholly removed, by the Mummy
made of a found man, being often given in Cinnamon water; Crollius his Treacle
water; also the Camphorate Treacle water of Crollius, compounded with Mixtura
simplex. Likewise Liquor of Pearls prepared with spirit of Guaiacum, which if
inwardly taken is wonderful efficacious. Oil of Cinnamon used in Rotula's help
much.

Little worms in the Heart.
That there are little worms bred in the heart, or under the Capsula, is out of
doubt (this Disease being familiar with Virgins.) The malady is discovered; 1.
By pricking dolours of the heart. 2. By the voiding, or not voiding the
maw-worms. 3. By signs of the anguish, when there is a Convulsion.

Cordials either hot or cold, as also Specificks, in this Disease are of little
or no effect. Only the Bezoar-stone, being taken in the beginning, before
Convulsions happen, with Salt of Tansy or Cretic or vulgar Dittany, does
sometimes yield relief. Dose Gr. iv, v, vj to viij.

The Specific Cure is thus:

1. The Maw-worms must be expelled by Mercury exhibited in Conserve of Roses
after this manner.. Mercu. viv. purged j, temper it ( Mercury is not properly
mortified) or mortify it with fasting spittle, or juice of Lemmons; mix it
with ss of Conserve of Roses, adding Gr. ij of Benzoin pulverisate; or if the
crudeness of the Mercury be suspected, then only infuse j or ij of Benzoin in a
draught of cold water for one night, and give it without Mercury. This attracts
nothing from the water, but by its own odor helps the diseased. Or else give
to drink ij or iij of distilled water of Onions or Garlic, and the maw-worms
will certainly dye or be expelled.

2. The maw-worms being thus destroyed, if Convulsion, and return of the Fits
be, it is a most certain sign of worms in the heart: Therefore exhibit
Specific Extracts of Garlic, Horseradish and Watercresses; Dose j in broth
or Liquor wherein the Radishes have been before macerated; by this means the
Cure will speedily follow.

Note. In defect of the Extracts, one, two or three spoonfulls of the juice of
each of them may be sufficient. The salts of these Simples rightly prepared are
more excellent.

Poisons.
In preserving from, and cure of Poisons, diligently observe what is prescribed
by Crollius, for things more perfect are not given. Lichtenackers Balsom of
Life is a famous Antidote; Also my Mineral Solar-Bezoar.

In dolor of the heart, Bezoar and other things mentioned above in the Chap.
of Confortatives are of singular use.

Vices of the Paps.
Inflammation of the breasts are chiefly assuaged with external Epithema's. An
Epithema of Frankincense and Myrrh boiled with Vinegar and Wine, and applied
blood warm, takes away inflammations in their beginning; in more vehement
dolor Gr. ij, iij or iv of Laudanum Opiat must be added: So the prepared
Vernix of the Juniper tree being applied instead of a Plaster removes
inflammation, and prevents the Imposthume. Hemlock simple, bruised and applied,
abates inflammation arising from abundance of milk, and hinders imposthumation.

Internally in inflammations of this kind, the speckled eyes of a Peacocks
tail (by the signature of Paps) yield present help. Three or four of them
being diligently cut very small, and exhibited with Mint-water, give ease
presently.

Imposthumations are helped, 1. By things that discuss the matter. 2. By such
as ripen it. Ulcers are by nothing more easily cured then by Oil of Wallnuts
made by expression, thickened in a frying pan, and afterward gently applied with
Suppositories.

Most Excellent is Rulands Balsom of Sulphur thus made:

. Sulphur or flowers of Sulphur ij, Oil of Poppy by Expression lb j, good Wine
iij; macerate them eight days and nights with gentle heat, often stirring
them; afterward boil them with most soft fire till the wine be consumed,
during the boiling keep it always stirring: This filter or strein through a
cloth and keep for use: See Curat. 29. Cent. 1. of Rulands: Also a Plaster of
Diasulphur, thus:

. Oil of Sulphur iij, Wax ss, Scammony iij, Myrrh to the weight of them all:
Upon the Wax, Scammony and Oil, sprinkle the Myrrh most finely pulverisate by
little and little; this mixture boil with gentle heat, always stirring it
with a wooden spattle till it be well and thoroughly mixed. After half an hour
remove it from the fire, and dry it leisurely.

Cancers.
Cancers in Women's breasts for the most part follow the Obstruction of the
Menses, if from other procatartick causes they take their beginning, yet
oftentimes the Flowers stop, and the Disease is made worse. If already
ulcerated, it is best in this case to leave them untoucht; Auxiliaries are of
no force, but rather exasperate the Disease. It will be more safe, if either by
Nature or Medicine the Menses return, or be reduced to their pristine state. If
by Age, or otherwise by the evil digestion of the body, these be obstructed,
then by purging and cleansing Medicaments remove the defect.

Among such as mundefie excellent is Specificum purgans of Paracelsus; Also
Mercur. dulcas, and other things that expel Melancholy, both Chemical and
Vulgar. The ulcerated breast is most firmly cured.

1. By washing it with water of Soot, until an Eschara be made.

2. By applying Oil of fixed Arsenick tempered in Plantain water, until the
Ulcer be thoroughly cleansed, and the Eschara of its own accord, or with the
help of Ointment, be perfectly cured.

If the root of the Sore in the Cavities be full of hairs, pluck them out
prudently with convenient instruments.

Internally may be often exhibited Magistery of Crab's-eyes, in water of Ar^^^^
or Samphire.

The Ulcers after this manner cleansed, and the Cancers also mortified,
Cousolidatory Medicaments must be outwardly applied; such are the Oil and
balsom of Sulphur, and Plaster of the same.

But this renowned Cure is only in Cancrous Ulcers, or rather beginning to
cancerate. If there be inflammation in the skin, or if the Ulcer become fordid
and Cavernous, especially if it spread almost into the stomach, it is seldom or
never cured.

It is very convenient after the cleansing of Ulcers to sprinkle on them the
powder of the inward skins of Eggs which included the young. The superabundance
of milk is excellently remedied, and the curdling prevented with leaves of
Hemlock or Mint applied; much more happy would the operation be, if at the same
time, the Menses be also moved either by Nature or Art.

Pennel seeds often eaten increase milk, also the Fennel-root worn is of like
effect. The Crystal stone most finely pulverisate, of which ss or j, taken
inwardly once or twice in Fennel-water, by a certain propriety increases milk.

Chops of the Breasts are cured by the grease of Wooden spoons, of which above
in Clefts of the lips; Also Pomada of a Capon. The Cancer is a foul tumor, in
sight unequal, sometimes with pain. It takes its name from Crabs. This Vice is
in every part of Humane Body, both external and internal, which receive from
Nature a constant purgation; the parts weak and thin, greedily receive the
thick melancholy matter: of the melancholy humor is generated vehement
heats, which becoming more sharp produce ulceration.

There are different kinds of Cancers, some without Ulcers, others ulcerated.
The signs are tumors with great inflammation, waxing black without very great
heat, and the veins in the whole habit of the body swell, because the
unprofitable blood is attracted from the Center, therefore the veins are puffed
up.

The color of the Cancer is like ashes, livid and inclining to Purple, in
touch most hard, yet sometimes accompanied with dolorous prickings, chiefly
when in the Jaws or Breasts, but in some other parts it procures dolor, and in
some not.

The Cancer is diverse both as to place and matter; by reason of the matter
when the humors are mixed, viz. Melancholy and Choler together; by reason of
the place, when it is either in the Face, Lips, Nose, Forehead, Hands or
Fingers, as I have learned by experience; these parts are usually free from
pain; but if in the breast there is pricking dolours; in the secret part also
pain is wont to be.

Sometimes in the Lips, Nose, corners of the Eyes, Forehead, and in every part
of the Face are bred as it were Warts in form of Vetches, which afterward
dilate and increase like Mushrums, with lips brawny and turned inward, which
are wont to send forth blood or virulent matter. In the Forehead they dilate
themselves by violent corroding.

There is another kind or species which comes not at all to an Ulcer, but is a
tumor or hard swelling in the skin, livid, and never ulcerates, yet always
increases. Tumors of this kind are wont to grow in the Neck, Liver, Spleen,
Privities and Matrix, seldom in other parts of the body. I have seen none, only
at Padua in the Nose of one Woman.

If the first kind of this Distemper, ulcerate, continue, eat into, and
penetrate the bottom, send forth stinking corrupt matter, and procure
abominable pain almost insufferable.

That which has roots and veins swollen, and in the inward parts of the Breast
attracts the blood from the bottom is incurable: The other is cureable.

In Cure of the Cancer an order of Diet must be appointed, wherein carefully
must be avoiding such things as generate Melancholy juice; Ptisane, Barley,
Mallows, Herb Orage, Beet, and all things that generate good blood, and are
easy of digestion may be used. Drink may be thin, white wind not very old.

Evacuation must first be endeavored by taking away blood, as strength and age
will permit. The middle vein in the back may be cut, and especially means used
to provoke the Menses, afterward the peccant humor evacuated by suitable
medicaments.

Things purging are Epithymon, Sena, Polipode, Whey of milk, and compositions
of this kind, as Confection of Sena, Confection of Bugloss, and Pill of the
Azure-stone.

Afterward it will be necessary to repel or discuss the humor lurking in the
part, which, though very little, least unto it a greater abundance of matter
flow, some repercussive must be applied round about the affected, which being
done sprinkle upon it the Blessed Powder given to me by the Most High, for the
Utility of Mankind.

It behooves the Physician to observe this method; let him always with fasting
spittle apply Bombace. If the Cancer be ulcerated, the Ulcer being first wiped
clean from all filth and corrupt matter, let him take the powder and sprinkle
it all over the Sore, as fish are wont to be sprinkled with Flower before they
be fried, and with the aforesaid Bombace cover it and anoint it round about
with fasting spittle, that it may stick, when it sticks it will not fall off,
until together with it the roots be eradicated. This is wont at first laying
on to procure great dolor, when the sharp and corroding humor cannot be
purged out through the Ulcer (yea, although the tumor be great at that time,
the Medicament must neither be removed, nor any other put on, but must be
anointed round about with Oil of Roses, and left until it fall off of it
self;) when the sharp humor is purged by the Ulcer no more pain remains; this
must then be purged as other Ulcers. I always use incarnative, cleansing and
digestive powder, made only of Turpentine and yolks of Eggs, with Ointment of
Lithargy and Mumy, of which I hereafter describe the method of Preparation.

This must always be diligently minded, that if any part of the roots remain,
the powder must be again applied: Sometimes it happens that after the roots are
removed, one Cancer grows as it were from (or upon) another, as in the
King's Evil, then it behooves to reiterate the powder until all the Evils be
removed. Those Cancers are most difficult of Cure when they are in parts of the
inward breast, because their roots are between (or in) the parts of the stomach.

I have cured many Women, when the Cancer has been ulcerated, only with this
Plaster following; I took Ammoniack dissolved in Vinegar, and with it most
excellently purged the malignant juice of the Cancer, in such a manner as no
corrupted matter was attracted to the affected part, and have often repeated it
to a perfect Cure. I use to apply it certain days after Consolidation of the
Ulcer, and have happily cured not a few.

The way of preparing the Blessed Powder:
. Of the powder marked A ij Of the powder marked B j Of the powder marked C iij


When you are to use this reduce it to a fine impalpable powder upon a Porphiry
stone: it must be kept in a very close place that it receive no humidity; the
longer it is kept, the more precious it is. It is not good for use unless kept
one year at least.

A.. In June, July and August, roots of the greater Dragonwort (because at that
time the leaves are dry, and the root remains whole in the Earth) cut them into
many small pieces, and hang them in a windy place, when they are dry keep them
to be used in preparing the powder. When these roots cannot be had, instead of
them may be used the lesser Dragonwort which is called Aron, the greater is
better which is called Dracuntium.

B Sandarach by the Ancients vulgarly called white Arsenick, not that which is
bright like glass, nor that which is red, for these have in them a certain
malignity, but the white Calcinose Sandarach has not such a malignant quality,
it is prepared after this manner;. Of this what quantity you please, reduce it
to most fine powder, pour upon it Aqua vitae, and set it to digest in a hot
place, that the powder may receive its virtue, and cooperate with it; after
three days pour off the Aqua vitae that was before poured on, and pour on
fresh; do this every three days for fifteen days together. Mix it with water,
and it will be prepared.

C. Soot which is found in Chymnies (see above in the Chap. of Confortatives)
not that which is old nor sandy, but what has in it sufficient saltness; there
is some like to Spiders webs, which is not good; therefore in choosing the
Soot, the Operators skill is required, and that as above he may compound the
powder.

Incarnative cleansing powder.
. Olibanum, Sarcocolla, Mastich, Myrrh, Aloes, Mumy, Aristolochy of both kinds,
of each iij, Precipitate Mercury compounded with Aqua Calcinata j and ss. Make
a powder.

I use a Precipitate made with Amalgamated Sol. In Noble Persons this following
unguent;. Lithurgy of Gold iij, Mumy j and ss, pulverisate the subtilty, with
Oil and Vinegar of Roses, make the Unguent in a Lead mortar.

The Ointment I commonly use is thus;. Lithargy, pour Oil upon it, work them
together one quarter of an hour, then add vinegar of Roses, and so work it
together, afterward continue stirring and fermenting for three hours, and it
will be a most excellent Composition.

Affects of the Ventricle.
Inflammation of the mouth of the Ventricle, as also of the Ventricle it self,
is most speedily cured with Lapis Prunella, if j or ij be dissolved in a
sufficient quantity of Mint, Succory or Wormwood water, and by often sipping be
all drunk up. Of like effect, and indeed more certain is one drop or two of
Spirit of Saturn exhibited in the aforesaid waters; but not well, Note,

Frigida Saturno non been juncta Venus.

Ulcers of the Ventricle.
Ulcers of the Ventricle are difficultly cured, and therefore by the Providence
of Nature very seldom happen.

Stoppage of the stomach, or difficulty in swallowing.
In stoppage or difficulty of swallowing, the juice of Nutts is singularly
helpful, if in j of it, Gr. vj, viij or x, or ss at most of Salt Gem be
tempered, and this by degrees be leisurely swallowed, it takes away all this
difficulty, so as it apparently removes all obstructions, as well what are
occasioned without as within the Disease, that is, it removes both the Disease
and symptoms. If a hard Tumor cause this difficulty, a Plaster of Hemlock
(which is made of the juice of Hemlock, Oil of Camomil and Wax, of each a
sufficient quantity) must be applied outwardly to the Orifice of the Ventricle;
this must be used till the Tumor be dissolved, and then the tempered juice of
Nuts will remove the remaining difficulty. See Cardanus and William Fabricius.

Cardialgy, or pain at the heart.
Cardialgy in its beginning, or of Put little.
some continuance, may be cured by vomiting, if that may be procured: Therefore
a vomit provoked with Aqua bened. or Gilla of Theophrastus, does most easily
remove the pain.

The inveterate Cardialgy chiefly in the Aged is in time removed with syrup of
Camomil (vomits are not so safe for the Aged.) Better is an Arcanum of Camomil,
especially of the Roman Camomil, being daily exhibited in Mint water till the
Disease decline.

Outwardly may be applied Epithema's of such things as mollify and assuage the
pain, as Camomil, and Mallows.

Most excellent in this case is Thurnheuserus his Saphirick, Oil of Camomil
(which is made of flowers of Camomil, with a little Turpentine of Cypress
dissolved in water, and added thereto, and afterward distilled by a bladder)
given in water of Mint, Camomil, Elder-flowers, or in the water of the wild
Vruzella leaves. Dose, four, five or six drops.

Dilatation of the mouth of the Ventricle.
In Dilatation or gaping of the mouth of the Ventricle: After meat very
powerful are Confections of Anise, Fennel and Coriander; or before Meat,
Tablets of Diatrion-pipereon, Oil of Pepper is best; purging things in this
case are useless.

Externally Basil may be applied, rather worn in a bag about the Orifice.

The stink of the Ventricle.
In such like stinks, Amber suspended in wine, also Oil or Salt of Cinnamon, are
useful.

Intemperance of the Ventricle.
Intemperance of the Ventricle with humors, either from a cold or hot cause,
is corrected at first with gentle vomiting, for so the pondrous filth of the
Ventricle, and concomitant intemperance of this kind, it more easily
exterminates, then can be expelled by purging Medicaments through the inferior
parts.

Moreover the foldings of the Ventricle, stuffed up with abundance of humors,
are released, and afterward the inveterate intemperance is easily removed. If
no humor accompany the Distemper, it will not be absurd to abstain from vomits
(among which Aqua bened. is most excellent) or else if they can be endured, to
enjoin the use thereof; Yet more safely we shall proceed in using Laxative
Purges, such as Laxative powder of Sena, Extract of Mechoachanna, Vegetable
Panchymagogon, and Mercurius dulcis; after the use of these, Specific
Confortatives must be exhibited.

In intemperance arising from either a hot or cold cause, excellent is the acid
spirit of Vitriol, chiefly of Venus, of which see Crollius his Notes. This is
always to be understood, that Phylosophick spirit of Vitriol is more excellent
when exhibited in a proper Vehicle (two hours before meat without motion, or
one hour with motion;) If heat be prevalent, with the tincture of Roses, or
Extract of Century minor, (Note the Arcanum of this is better;) If cold
predominate, then with Extract of Calamus aromat. Wormseed, Wormwood wine, or
rather generous wine.

In the Aged, chiefly Phlegmatic, and such as are afflicted with the Catarrh,
the Essence of Melissa extracted with spirit of wine; also the Essence of
Peneroyal are very profitable: Either of these Essences may sometimes be
fortified (in the exhibition of one spoonful thereof) with some pieces of
Calomus aromat. candid, or with two or three drops of Oil of Juniper; for so
the Phegm is excellently resolved. Note. Some drops of the Phylosophick spirit
of Vitriol mixed with these Essences, renders them more efficacious.

The Ventricle thus corrected, all its symptoms, as Cardialgy, from consent of
the stomach, defects of the mind, Dilirium and Drowsy Evil, can neither abide
nor prevail.

The Ventricle is corrected most commodiously by Vomitories; the impurities
removed and Ventricle restored, all its Symptoms cease.

If by chance, after the Ventricle is comforted and corrected as aforesaid, any
of these accidents shall remain, recourse must be had to the proper Chapters
treating of these Diseases.

Loathing, and want of Appetite.
In loathing food and want of Appetite, the Phylosophick Spirit of Vitriol,
whose virtues cannot sufficiently be commended, yields relief. It must be
exhibited in convenient Vehicles, as water of Mint, of Sorrel, in wine and
broth; the nauceating food arises from the corrupted and benumbed vitriolate
juice in the bottom of the stomach, which is again excited by sharp things.

The loathing food externally is removed with an Epithema made of Malmsie wine,
and a like quantity of Vinegar, with a crust of bread sprinkled with powder of
Cloves, and applied hot to the Ventricle; this is done when imbecility of the
Ventricle also accompanies. Of like virtue is an ointment made of butter of
Goats milk, and Oil of Cloves mixed with it (which must be dropped upon the
butter) and the Ventricle anointed therewith, especially in Chronical
Distempers of this kind: See more below in the Chap. of Nauseousness.

Hungriness.
In Hungriness (this arises from defect of the vitriolated juice) the mouth of
the stomach is exceedingly pained; those things abovementioned and described
in passions of this kind, are here of principal use. If therefore other things
be consentaneous, a vomit speedily effects the Cure: For so the malignant
humors are dispersed, drawn out, and the stomach freed, from all impediments,
restored to its pristine state.

But if vomiting may not be moved, either through an extreme decay of strength,
or no signs can be perceived to persuade thereto, then recourse may most safely
be had to sharp vitriolate Medicines. As Phylosophical Spirit of Vitriol, in
wine of Pomegranates, syrup of Lemons, syrup of the sower juice of Citron, or
with Tincture of Roses; this must be drunk diverse times, even to the
declination of the Disease, and it perfectly cures.

Canine Appetite.
The Canine Appetite (the cause of this is green Choler, or vitriolated juice
in the stomach, therefore is not to be disturbed by vomiting, least by moving
the humor, the Choler follow, neither are vitriolate sharp juices to be
given, least the evil be increased) it is removed by the essence of Melissa
extracted with spirit of wine: Dose one spoonful mixed with some drops of Oil
of Carrawty. Yet such things are first to be used, as diminish the vitriolate
juice or Choler, and expel it by the inferior parts; Such are Extract of
Rubarh, and Mechoachanna, also vegetable Panchymagogon, all which are in this
case highly commended. The yolks of Eggs boiled hard and eaten often, by a
specific propriety cure this Disease.

Longing: or the immoderate desire of Women with Child.
In this Distemper water of Cinnamon and of Orange peels are very helpful, (in
Longing of Women with Child vomitories and purges Must not be used.
are of no use.) Also salt of Cinnamon, of Orange and Citron peels, with
Magistry of Coral and Pearls.

If the thing desired be denied, least the young be thereby injured, it is
convenient presently to give the woman with Child water of the white Vine buds,
or of Briony.

Malachia.
Of Malachia see below in the Chap. of Cachexy of Virgins.

Thirst.
In Thirst arising from what cause soever, especially in Fevers, Lapis
Prunella dissolved in cold fountain water, or a Julep of Roses is very
convenent. Also excellent is spirit of Vitriol, some drops in fountain water or
cooling Juleps (Spirit of Salt in the Dropsy only extinguishes thirst) also
the water of Alum distilled in Balneo asswages thirst and heat of every kind.

It is more wholesome for Travelers in the heat of Summer not to drink, though
oppressed with thirst, yet something to quench their thirst is very convenient,
to which purpose excellent is the shells of wood Prunellos chewed in the mouth,
which in Traveling may serve instead of drink.

So this following powder is very profitable to Itinerants chiefly in the
Summer, if the intemperate heat of the Liver be urgent.. Pepper, Anise, of each
j, Liquorish j, root of the Flower de Luce j, fine Sugar lb j; make a most fine
powder. So much of this may be taken as will May be taken up.
lie twice or thrice upon the point of a knife; mix it with pure fountain
water, brew it well together, and it will be a most pleasant drink, allaying
thirst, and corroborating the interior parts: Sometimes, chiefly in Fevers
Lapis, Prunella is added thereto.

Crudity of the Ventricle.
Crudity of the Ventricle, if age and strength permit, is taken away with a
vomitory of the distilled water of Nuts and Radish, with a little Aqua bened.
then such things as corroborate the stomach must be used both inwardly and
outwardly.

Internals are all sharp things, as Phylosophical Spirit of Vitriol mixed with
Conserve of Roses, Sorrel, Mint and such like. Also essence of Pennyroyal,
which in lost, flow or corrupted digestion yield relief; Oil of Mastich in
helping concoction is excellent, if two, three or four drops of it be exhibited
in convenient liquor, as wine, or other composition; Essence of Melissa much
helps the aged.

Note. In these Affects of the Ventricle, Balsom of Aloes j or ij, being taken
after Supper in the Evening, or after Midnight, does much strengthen the
stomach: Also Pills of the vulgar Aloes, chiefly when compounded with extract
of Myrrh.

Externally Inunctions help, Epethema's and Stomachal Sear-clothes, among which
famous is the Sear-cloth made of pure Laudanum, with a convenient quantity of
Wax mixed and made up in form of a Plaster. Also Mint, Wormwood and Pennyroyal,
sewed up in a bag and worn, is of like effect.

To help Crudities of the Ventricle, putrified Salt Ammoniack is highly
commended for an appropriate specific; also water and Balsom of the stomach,
Balsom of Fennel and Spirit of Wormwood profit much.

Purified Salt ammoniack.
. Salt ammoniack well dried and filings of Iron, of each lb j, mix them
diligently, and with a Cucurbit or Retort sublime them in sand, first with
gentle fire, afterward more stong, that what is pure may ascend to the neck of
the Cucurbit or Retort, leaving the feces and filings in the bottom; that which
is sublimate, again sublime by it self and keep it; then. Common Salt what
quantity you please, decripitate it in a Crucible till it flows: Of this. and
of the Salt ammoniack before sublimed, of each an equal part, grind them
together and sublime them; this do seven times, always removing the
Caput-mortuum, and adding to the sublimate a small quantity of the decripitate
Salt, and it will be a prepared specisick, of which Gr. iij or iv taken in
Wormwood wine, or in a decoction of Sassafras, and this drunk for certain days
together, so as sweatings may be moved by the use of the Medicament, does
perfectly cure the Ventricle.

Moreover the use of this is expedient in curing Fevers, of which see below in
the Specific Febrile.

Most excellent to free both the stomach and the whole body from all
impurities, is the Water or Balsom of the Ventricle; thus made,. Nutmegs,
Cloves, Cubeba, of each j ss, Cinnamon, Mace, Wormseed, Granes of Paradise, of
each an, Galangal iij, Long Pepper vj, flowers of Tunica, red Roses, Bugloss,
Mint, of each one handful; Herb Mint, Pennyroyal, Wormseed, of each one handful
and ss; these being beaten and well bruised together, add to them x of the
finest wheat bread, put them in a large Glass vessel, and pour on them The best
spirit of Wine.
Spirit of Wine, till they be covered two fingers, close the vessel, and set
them in infusion for eight days; then draw out of emulsion of sweet Almonds,
lb ss, mix it with the said infusion, and add iij of the best Honey; make
distillation in Baln. till it be dry: two spoonfulls of this water may be taken
for every imbecility of the stomach.

Balsom of Fennel.
. Extract of Fennel seeds (with Spirit of Wine) ij, white Wax, or Manna
Calabrina ss, Salt of Fennel j and ss, mix these over a gentle fire and make a
mass; add iij or iv of Oil of Fennel, mix this and keep for use. Dose from ss
to j with Mint or Rose Water.

If the abovelaid be deficient, ss in Pills of the following mass, may be taken
twice in a week an hour before dinner.. Aloes seven times washed in juice of
Roses and dried two part; Choice Rubarb and Mirabalanes Emblic. one part make a
mass.

Outwardly the Ventricle must be anointed with distilled Oil of Mastick, after
the Inunction apply Gallens Stomachal Sear-cloth, a Plaster for the Stomach,
or a Plaster of Mastich, or which is more excellent Tachamahach spread upon
leather instead of a Plaster.

It is profitable just after eating to give this powder.

. Cubeba ij and ss, Nutmegs iv, Cloves ss, Mace j, Calamus Aromat. ij, shavings
of Liquorice, ij, Confection of Carraway vj, of Fennel ss, Rotula's of Diatrion
Santal. Camph. Diarhodon, Abbaetis, of each ss: Make a gross powder, of which
the sick may take one pugil after meat.

Scucum Stomachale.
Oil of Wormwood ss, of Castor ij, of Mint ss, Oil of Mastich vj, Oil of
Juniper, of Nutmegs, of each j, of Cloves ss, of Wormseed Gr. iij; Anoint the
Precordia and cover it with leather.. Storax Calamita j and ss, Amber Greese
Gr. j, Oil of Mace, Mint, Wormwood, of each j, powder of Cloves, Mace, of each
j; dissolve the Gum, Storax Calamita, make a mass, spread it upon leather, sew
it in red silk, and according to Art make a Stomachal Scutum.

Inunctions are made with Oil of Wormwood, Mastich or Mint, for the richer sort
distilled Oils, for the poor they are prescribed, expressed or boiled.

But if, as very often, and almost always is, the Liver be hot, and there be
danger, while we mitigate one part we hurt another; we therefore inwardly only
apply hot medicaments to the stomach, and outwardly to the Liver cooling
Unguents, Epithema's and bags with Sanders, Trochets of Camphire, and such like.

Digestion Lost.
Lost digestion in Chronical Diseases, where for the most part the Concoction
of the Ventricle is wholly decayed, is in time restored, by Anology with the
essence of bread, and the Oil thereof; if also other things, as well inwardly
as outwardly be rightly administered: So the essence of flesh extracted by being
boiled alone in a close vessel without any addition of water, does gradually
resolve all nutriment, and recalls, as it were from banishment, the concoction
of the Ventricle to its pristine state.

The Oil or red Extract of Bread, by its signature represents blood, and this
seems not vain, for with all Edible things a sound man may be nauseated, except
only with bread, which of humane nutriment is the most powerful instrument; if
therefore Chymically reduced to a most pleasant essence, (Nature eagerly
receives things pleasantly essencified) and into Oil, which being received by
little drops leisurely is almost presently converted to a mass of blood for the
benefit of the second digestion: This preserves man long in health, and
restores digestion lost.

Belchings.
In Belchings also Wormwood-wine is commonly praised, so is the Arcanum of it;
also the Salt and spirit of Salt of Wormwood are more powerful. If belchings
stink, and be unsavory, chiefly if they smell like Verdegrease, the principal
help for this is to procure vomiting with Aqua bened. and water of Mint and
Anise, which casts out all the earthly filth from the stomach, and frees it
from its crudity: That belchings may afterward be less offensive, after
vomiting those things are of principal use, which we have described to be made
of Wormwood.

Windiness of the Ventricle.
The Cure of the wind of the stomach agrees with the Cure of Belchings: yet in
this case is commended the Essence of Coriander taken before meat: also Oil of
Cumine and Orange peels. Hypocrates says, the belly long filled with wind
threatens the Timpany.

The Inflation of the Ventricle.
In inflation of the stomach, not omitting things before mentioned, among which
is Balsom or Oil of Fennel, which given in few drops, do much help: So Oil of
Carawayes as well inwardly as outwardly yields relief, chiefly when Epithema's
made of Carminatives are outwardly applied.

Tumor of the Ventricle.
In Tumors of the Ventricle arising from windiness, or from any other emergent
cause; Diaphoretick Antimony, or the fixed flowers of white Antimony, given for
certain days often in Fennel water, by a certain specisick propriety do much
help; and the more when sweating is somewhat moved after the taking them. Of no
less virtue is Mixtura Simplex given once or twice in Wormwood wine.

Sighing or sobbing.
In symptomatical sighing some drops of Oil of Cumine inwardly given are
profitable.

Externally apply this Epithems, Ashes of Oak fill a dish with them, and imbibe
them with Malmsie Wine, spread a cloth over them that it may be hot, and apply
it often to the stomach, if need be imbibe the cloth: This is present remedy
for stoppings of the breast. Sobbing arising from repletion is cured with
vomiting.

Proper Remedies for sobbing are. The true Silesian Terra-sigillata, Bolo
Armenack, the true Oriental Bezoar-sione, a Plaster outwardly of a crust of
bread, Bayberries and the like.

Nauseousness,
In Nauseousness such things are prositable as are above described in the Chap.
of Loathing and want of Appotite.

This abhorrency of sood is soonest removed by eating of Wormseed, or the
Extract of the same, which by a certain propriety in all affects of the
Ventricle is of great use: The root of Wormseed is frequently used; also
vinegar of Wormseed in young and old do so much corroborate the distempered
stomach, as nothing more; therefore its use is approved and worthily commended,
since there is no fear of detriment to ensue.

In vomiting at Sea, the Composition of the Travelers Salt is high commended;
which is thus:. Salt Nitre, or Lapis Prunella (rather Salt Nitre fixed) Salt
fuse and Salt gems, of each ss, Galangal, Mace, Cubeba, of each j; mix them and
make a powder. Dose from Gr. four to eight, Chiefly upon an empty stomach, for
it comforts the stomach, helps digestion, and keeps from putrefaction.

Nauseousness after taking a medicine is stopped with a piece of bread toasted,
and sprinkled with powder of Cloves and Vinegar, and applied to the Mouth and
Nostrils: And also by biting of an Onion.

Vomiting.
Laudable vomiting is never to be hindered; for vomiting is often occasioned by
a refluxion of evil humors to the stomach, by excess in eating or drinking, by
the abundance of fat and unsavory meats, which, whilst they seek passage by
the superior parts, are not to be obstructed.

Others more vehement are not to be suffered, such as we have often seen by the
violent working of Medicines.

Enormous vomiting is stayed; 1. With ij of Mint-water taken once or twice; 2.
With a Plaster of Treacle applied to the stomach; 3. Crude juice of Quinces,
if one or two spoonfulls thereof be drunk, does miraculously stay vomiting; 4.
Vomiting is often cured by a vomit: if therefore vomiting continue, and be not
stayed by former means, Aqua. bened. is chiefly useful, which also comforts
the stomach; 5. Laudanum Opiat is famously powerful, where all other things
effect little; 6. With others may be numbered Extract of Wormseed, Wormwood,
Melissa, Mint, Pennyroyal; chiefly when an Epithema made of the decoction of
Wormwood, Mint and Hops, in water of water-betony or vinegar be applied to the
stomach. It is best that cruent vomiting be quickly restrained, otherwise by
the abundant streining of the spirits, fainting fits and mortal swounings
follow.

Excellent is the Restrictive abovementioned in the Chap. of spitting blood;
thus. distilled water of the greater Vrtica vj (you cannot have this prepared
in shops, therefore it must be diligently prepared and kept) to this put as
much Spirit or Oil of Vitriol as may make it sharp enough, being well mixed
give it to drink somewhat cool. After the drinking this Potion, apply to the
stomach a piece of bread toasted, sprinkled with powder of Cloves, and moystned
in Malmsie Wine and Vinegar: Or make a Poultis of the crum of Rye bread, red
astringent Wine and most strong Vinegar, apply it hot to the Ventricle and to
the Orisice thereof, repeat this Morning and Evening: By this means the cruent
vomiting will quickly cease.

Headache.
In present Headache, sometimes, if strength will bear, the opening the
Basilical vein must not be omitted.

If the clodded blood be gathered together in the Ventricle, and it be
presignified by black Excrements, and by the distention round about the
stomach, gentle Purgations must be given with ss of Rubarb, and j and ss of
Mechoacanna, entire by themselves, these exceedingly well gurge the stomach and
intestines, being gently astringent. Also for drink may be given red Wine, in
which roots of Vrtica major are infused. See above.

Choler.
In Choler the same things are forcible, as in vomiting, chiefly, Mint water,
Rose seeds, Magistery of Pearls and Coral, Tincture of Corals and Essence of
Emralds. If this be not powerful enough, take Dose j of Laudan. Opiat. and of
Sponge that is wont to grow under Willows Gr. iv in astringent waters or red
wine.

Dolor of the Ventricle.
Dolor of the Ventricle is removed with Saphirick Oil of Camomil, (of which
above in the Chap. of Cardialgy) in syrup of Dialthea or Conserve of Roses,
sower Dock Sorrel or Mint, some drops of the Oil being exhibited in them. The
same performs Oil of Mastich; or, if from a cold cause, Oil of Cinnamon, also
Oil of Wormseed.

Outwardly the stomach must be somented with flowers of Camomil fried and
applied often.

Note. If from the cause of these Medicaments little comfort follow, it is to
be suspected that some noxious matter still lies hid in the Ventricle, which
must be first expelled by vomiting, afterward the stomach must be strengthened
with the quantity of one or two Pills of the Tears.
Gum of Albanum.

Alittle worms in and bag.
Animalcula of the Ventricle.
The Animalcula's of the Ventricle, from what cause soever, are removed by the
above expressed in the Chap. of Worms in the heart; Of like virtue is the Arcanum
of Tansie and Coltsfoot: Also a vomit with Aquae bened.

The secret in this case is powder of the Secundine of a woman's first Child, of
which ss or ij, with the Extract of Treacle, or with Crollius his Treacle
water, or mixtura simplex being drunk, by some innate cause does wonderful
quickly kill the Animalcula's and Insects, which must afterward with a gentle
infusion of Sena leaves, Rubarb and Mechoacanna, be expelled through the bowels.

Spirit of Hartshorn also in this Affect profits much, chiefly when
essensified, that is, when fixed salt before extracted with convenient water,
and volatile salt rightly purified, are dissolved and united in this spirit.

Imbecility of the ventricle.
In imbecility of the Ventricle, before all other things it is necessary to
exhibit a vomitory of white Vitriol, or Extract of Hellebore, which if the sick
abhor, give a Dose of Mercury; this being done, the stomach must be
corroborated by medicaments both inwardly and outwardly, yet the evacuation
must be often repeated.

Among things vulgarly taken, these are chief; species of Electuary-aromdtick,
Rosate, Diar-hodon, Abbatis, Rose buds, exhibited with Conserve of Roses and
Mint, or in any other manner. Powder of Diagalangal, Species of Mint, of
Wormwood, Myrabolanes, preserved Nutmegs, Quercetanus his powder of Aron, and
other things used by Practitioners.

For ordinary drink Wormwood wine is prositable; it is necessary in the spring
time to prepare spirit of Wormwood, which may be mixed with drink according to
pleasure.

Also Cream of Tartar is often taken, sometimes spirit of Vitriol, or Aqua
vitae distilled from Malmsie or other rich wine, in lb ij of which, one handful
and ss of dried Peneroyal is macerated, and two spoonfulls of this given with
so many drops of Oil of Vitriol as may render it conveniently sharp; after the
taking of which, the sick must keep himself in a warm place, or exercise his
body, so as he may be warm ready to sweat.

Also it is sometimes convenient to give one spoonful of syrup of Canella or
Cloves prepared in the following manner:. Cinnamon (or Cloves) lb j and ss;
these grossly bruised put into a large vessel, pour upon them lb iij of Malmsie
or Falerne wine, let them stand three days in hot ashes, then gently boil
them and strain them; to this when streined put an equal part of white Sugar,
and according to Art make a syrup.

Affects of the Intestines. Obstruction.
1. Obstruction of the Intestines arising from Phlegm is dissolved by
Medicaments as well external as internal.

The vulgar internals are every where obvious in Authors; mirable is the
Essence of Melissa, if j of this with three drops of Oil or Spirit of Juniper,
mixed with Extract of Coloquintida and Scammony, of which see Crollius, or with
a Dose of Panchymagogon vegetable. For this presently dissolves the Phlegm,
which by purging must be exterminated. Extract of Agarick, with Cinnamon water,
or spirit of Wine.

Externalls are suppositories and Clysters, which are outwardly applied, that
they may draw out and purge the Phlegm from the intestines, and dissolve the
obstruction. Among suppositories laudable is that which is made of j of Honey,
and j of black Hellebore: This suppository is proper in Children. A Clyster is
made from j to j and ss of Crocus of mettalls, in lb j of Mercurial decoction,
and ij of Oil Olive or fresh Butter rightly applied: See Crollius. This is also
useful in the hardness of dregs in the bowels.

In Obstructions arising from hardened dregs, Clysters are useful. Also the
Caul with the Intestines of a Calf, boiled in the same manner as when prepared
for the Table. While it is hot with the broth it was boiled in, let the sick
receive the fume through a chair into his fundament, and a little after the
hardness will remove, and the Obstruction dissolve, which afterward with
internal immollient medicines must further be discharged.

Among immollient medicaments Cream of Tartar obtains the priority from j to j
and ss often exhibited in broths, one, two, three or four days.

In greatest Obstruction of the stomach. Of Feathers cut exceeding small one
Pugil, mix them in bread and make it up like Pills; also Oil of Wax in
mollifying Clysters from j to j; the Navel must be anointed with Civet. The
Gall of a Bull may also be added to Clysters, in imitation of Nature, which by
the Gall stirs up the expulsive faculty.

3. In Obstruction rising from Tumors, a Clyster specific thus made;. Of Milk
and Oil Olive together lb ss.

Astringency.
In Astringency arising from bursting, external immollients must be applied,
and Clysters injected.

Inflammation, Imposthume, Ulcer, Cancer.
Inflammation, Imposthume, Ulcer and Cancer, are Cured with Clysters, yet
hardly the Cancer.

Fistula.
Of the Fistula below in external Affects.

Cholick and Iliack Passion.
In every Chollick and Iliack passion rightly to perform the Cure (all strong
Catharticks must be forborne) always diligently look the stomach be clear,
which if Nature so keep it is well, if otherwise, then externals, (viz.)
Suppositories and Clysters (See my Disputation of the Cholick) and internal
mollifying Medicines must be used; such as the Mercurial Extract prepared with
spirit of Wine. Dose, from j to ij, with Extract of Sena exhibited in a just
Dose from Gr. x to j.

When the stomach is free, and the entrails are stetched out with winds, in its
beginning the Tincture of Orange peels extracted with spirit of Wine, does much
help. Dose, one spoonful. This Essence taken once or twice dissipates all the
windiness; but if not, j of Oil of sweet Almonds unto an must be exhibited in
Malmsie Wine: If by this also the swelling winds be not dispersed, instead of
the Oil of sweet Almonds, give j at most of Spirit of Turpentine, afterward
bind the belly exceeding hard with a swaddling band, and all the winds will be
dissipated.

Note. Also in the Chollick and windy Iliack, as in other distempers, the
stomach being free, the Specific Remedy (this was the last I used upon a
certain Questor) is a mixture of Spirit of Wine and Spirit of Salt, of each ss,
or ij, given in common water warm to provoke sweat; for so the thirsty spirits
of the Chollick are removed and resolved into vapors, so as the whole body by
the taking the medicament is also delivered from noxious humors, whereby this
destructive Disease may the better be subjected.

In Colic arising from glass-like Phlegm, very beneficial is Saphirick Oil of
Camomil, and of Wormseed, being often exhibited from three drops to j.

To expel the Phlegm, excellent is the Essences of Trochus of Alhandal
extracted with distilled Malmsie Wine: Also Rulands Golden spirit of Life, from
ss to j and ss at the most.

In Colic arising from corroding Phlegm; Extract of Rubarb, and Vegetable
Panchymagon do much help; for they expel the Phlegm, which though expelled,
nevertheless dolours may abide, therefore Malmsie wine with Oil of sweet
Almonds, after once or twice taking, restrains the acrimony of the remaining
Phlegm, and asswages the dolours.

Note well, in these and other such like cases sometimes Laudanum Opiat rightly
prepared and taken is mirably efficacious; yet the use of this, where the above
named Medicaments are at hand, must not rashly be undertaken, least it happen
the matter thereby be too strongly knit, which by the fresh increase of dolours
admits of no mitigation. In this case therefore the quiet of Nature it self
requires to abstain from Laudanum.

If the Colic be caused by a sharp humor, Mixtura simplex yields relief.

In the Colic arising from eruginose humors, or from winds included between
the Membranes, nothing is better then to give a Dose of the Compound spirit of
Salt Nitre and Spirit of Wine, for this presently helps.

In the Colic put a Loadstone upon the Navel, and the pain will presently
cease.

Although the Colic sometimes arise from Phlegmatic and sharp humors
flowing to the Intestines, from inflammations of the Intestines, and from hard
and long retained Excrements; yet nothing is more frequent, then that which
arises from Phlegm and winds; In all which it is to be Noted; 1. That the
stomach be always open. 2. That Medicaments be rather injected by Clyster,
then exhibited by the mouth, before the opening of the stomach.

That therefore the Obstruction of the stomach causing pains of the Colic may
be removed, a mollifying Laxative Clyster must be injected, either alone with a
decoction of the true Brancursine with Oil of Camomil and Dill, or with this
following, which has been proved alone powerful enough to assuage the pain..
Of Pease-broth iij, Extract of Esula j and ss; boil them together till the
Extract be dissolved, then add Linseed Oil iv, Salt-gems j, Common Salt j, or
ss, mix them, and inject it moderately hot.

The impurities of the belly being purged, and the dolor yet remaining
vehement, must be helped by mitigating and asswaging Anodines and Narcotick
Medicines.

Outwardly inuctions must be made with Oil of Camomil and Oil of sweet Almonds,
with some drops of distilled Oil of Dill or Phylosophical Oil; then bags must
be applied hot, filled with bran or Millet, or a Tile only heated very hot, and
wrapped in a linen cloth, and so applied. If the dolor urge, a plaster of
Laudanum either alone, or with other mixture may be applied.

The Navel must be anointed with Apoplectick Balsome, with which if Gr. j or
ij of Civet be mixed it will more powerfully and swiftly operate: Or Civet and
expressed Oil of Nutmegs made up into a Balsom.

Inwardly must be exhibited ss of Treacle not too old, with Laudanum Opiat Gr.
5, Extract of Castor Gr. iv, or powder of Castor ss; and this medicament is
given when there is no inflammation; if any be, then as soon as the Pills of
Laudanum are swallowed, it will be convenient to give to drink in white wine,
five or six drops of Oil of Saturn per diliquium, and to anoint the belly
with Balsom of Saturn, which is twofold, (viz.) One is good for all
inflammations which is made with two parts of Oil of Saturn per diliquium from
salt, and one part of oil of Roses, mixed together in a stone mortar: The other
is made with salt of Saturn, and spirit of Turpentine poured upon it in a
convenient glass till it be covered one finger, and let it stand so long in a
warm place till the salt be dissolved in the spirit of Turpentine, and tinged
with a red color: The tinged spirit must be distilled by a Retort at first
with gentle fire until the oil of Turpentine come forth, then change the
Receiver and increase the fire by degrees until it be a most strong fire, and
a most excellent oil will come forth, good in all Wounds, Ulcers, Cancers, and
Noli me tangere, which by often touching with Bombace it mitigates.

If after one hour the dolor abate not, give this following Potion;. Spirit of
Wine j, of Salt ss, or fifteen drops, Fountain water iij. The sick being well
covered with clothes must lie in a sweat for some time; or a Dose of Treacle
water may be given, or ss of spirit of Turpentine in Malmsie wine: Also if the
pain abate not, it is profitable to repeat the aforesaid Clyster, and to place
the sick in an emollient and Anodyne bath, such as we (...) in the Chap. of the
Stone.

If there be abundance of windiness, which is easily known by the (...)ring of
the Guts, Carminatives must be mixed with the Clysters, and inwardly taken, so
as with Treacle water or the Potion above described, some drops of distilled
Oil of Carrawayes, Anise or Fennel, be mixed.

Externally anoint the belly with Oil of Dill and Camomil, with which the
distilled Oils aforesaid must be mixed.

Great Cuppinglasses must be applied to the Navel, and in urgent dolours the
parts of the belly bound with a swaddling band.

Which being done, by reason of continued pain, or a return of the distemper
probably like to be, we must draw nigh to such things as respect the cause it
self; and if this arise from gross and vicious phlegm, as for the most part is
wont to be; this must first be expelled with gentle purgations, having respect
to the gross windiness which is always present in this Disease; wherefore we
always give a decoction, or distilled water of Anise, Fennel, Daucus with
infusion of Agarick, Mechoacanna, and Electuary of Dia^artamus; heed must be
taken not to exhibit Rubarb or Mirabulans, by reason of the astringent saculty
they possess, or Sena or Cassia by reason of their windy property, and and
those things we say must be injected, may also sometimes be mixed with those we
give by the mouth. The matter being purged out, with heating extenuating and
discussing Medicines, the Relics must be removed, as with Spirit of
Turpentine, Mithridate, Treacle, Treacle water, and spirit of Salt Nitre, by
which sweat is sometimes provoked. Profitable in this case are the flowing
Rotula's.. Species of Confection of Cumin, Species of Confection of Mint.
Aromat. Rosat' of each ss, Sugar dissolved in Fennel water iij, Cinnamon water
ij, Oil of Anise ss, Amber six drops; make Rotula's, of which let the sick take
one or two at pleasure.

If the Disease take its beginning from phlegmatic and sharp humors; these
must, presently after the opening the stomach, and application of Anodynes, be
dispersed and expelled by such things as resist phlegm, with a Clyster injected
made of lb j of Milk, in which iv or v of Mercurial Honey have been dissolved;
or instead of milk may be taken Barley water, in which Roses or Mallows have
been boiled with Diaprunes, or Diasebesten.

By the mouth is given, Salutive Diaprunes, Solutive Syrup of Roses, with
infusion of Rubarb, syrup also of Violets with variable infusion.

If the dolor arise from any inflammation of the Intestines, after the
ejection of the contracted filth, a vein must be cut, and cooling, mollifying
Clysters injected; or if the phlegm be suspected to increase, by the use of
Milk, in which cooling things are boiled, with addition of red Sugar, and Oil
of Violets.

Things given to be taken by the mouth must be cooling. If it rise from hard
and long contained filth, a mollifying Clyster being injected wonderfully
helps. A Bath of sweet water with emollient supplying Herbs, and afterward a
convevient strong and suitable Medicine exhibited to expel the loosened filth,
are very beneficial.

If these be not effectual the Intestines must be syringed, that the Contracted
filth may be separated from them, and presently a forcible Clyster injected,
with which should be mixed ss or j of Salt Gems.

In all the above cited causes, such things in exhibiting the aforesaid
Medicaments should always be added, as by a peculiar propriety contrary the
Disease: Such are the dried Intestines of a Wolf, j of which may be taken in
wine without other Comixture. Likewise the dung of a Wolf dried and bound to
the legs and breast; of like virtue is water of young Bullocks dung distilled
by a Limbeck.

Paralysie.
Paralysie, in which the Colic does sometimes lie hid, is cured by universal
purging Medicaments before mentioned in the Chap. of Paralysie. Where first
Spirit of Tartar is useful, and Rotula's there described, and the Oil and
Extract of Amber, Balsom of Galbanum and Turpentine, with a Cataplasm of the
Wallwort root.

Slow dejection of the belly.
In slowest dejection of the belly, from what cause soever proceeding, of
excellent virtue is the Essence of Salt of Tartar, extracted with spirit of
wine, and reduced to a Consistency, of which from two to six or eight drops,
must be exhibited certain days together in the Evening two hours after Supper,
in Wine or other Liquor, till the belly be soluble of its own accord. This I
have happily used in Hypocondriack Melancholy, even to the dejection of
natural strength, almost to a dysentery.

In dissolving stoppage of the small guts, give Crude Mercury from j to j;
fresh common Oil tempered with Sugar, so as the Patient know it not, resolves
the belly, and asswages dolours; what remains must by other purgations be
expelled.

Flux of the Intestines.
All Fluxes of the Intestines primarily depend upon the Ventricle; of wh^
therefore as a commanding part, care must be taken, that the Flux be not ^o
powerfully urgent, with respect to Headache and evil Digestion usually
concomitant. The Ventricle being corroborated, cessation of the Fluxes follow;
In Fluxes the foregoing Vomits must be used, and Epithema's applied (of which
see in the affects of the ventricle) afterward with Clysters the Intestines
cleansed and consolidated. Fluxes of the belly are threefold, Viz. Diarrhaea,
Lisentery and Dysentery.

In every Flux of the Belly very profitable is Crocus Martis, given thrice a
day; Dose for each time Gr. ten in juice of Sloes: Also this following;. The
Liver of a Wolf, Mithridate, of each j, Magistery of Corals, Bole-armenack,
Burnt-harts-horn, Mastich, of each ss, Water of Tormentil iv, Succory ij,
Conserve of Quinces j: mix them.


Diarrhaea and Dysentery Epidemical.
In Diarrhea and Dysentery Epidemical, after the use of vomitories, recourse
must be had to Antidotes.

Diarrhaea, because it rises from various causes, and is always the Effect of
another disease, diligence must be used to know from what cause it has its
beginning, and whether it be Critical, the custom of Nature, or Symptomaticall.
If from any external error it happen, or from any intemperance of the parts,
or from abundance of humor; all which, if the Physician rightly observe, it
will not be difficult for him to effect the Cure.

In general, it is to be Noted, that no such distemper is cured suddenly, or
can be speedily suppressed and restrained, unless by chance in P^isical and
Peripneumonick persous. The asswaging of this must always be begun with most
gentle and weak Medicaments, as by giving Confection of Quinces alone, or
Conserve of Quinces compounded. Outwardly the belly must be anointed with Oil
of Quinces, Mastich, Nard, Wormwood, Mint, and milk in which steel is quenched
maybe given the quantity of one Cupfull, to which may be added Terra sigillata
j; and this drunk in the morning fasting, and four hours before meat in the
Evening, helps much in all distempers of this kind: But if strength be decayed,
recourse must be had to things more strong, then to Clysters and Medicaments,
first cleansing, then astringent, as well external as internal, of which more
in the Chap. of Dysentery: Yet so as respect be always had to the parts
affected. In Externals it is to be noted, whether the outward Muscles be not
drawn together, for thereby the evil is increased. Constrictions of the Muscles
augments the Laxity, therefore it is best to rarifie the parts, that the
Medicine may penetrate the bowels, which is easily performed by addition of
vinegar in fomentations and cataplasms.

In every Flux of the belly it will be profitable to apply a Plaster of old
Treacle, and a like quantity of Terra Sigillata, to the Region of the belly. Of
great virtue also in every defluxion of the belly is syrup of dry Roses, syrup
of Myrtles, Gooseberries, Berber, and Quercetanus his syrup of Coralls, Burnt
Hartshorn, and the Intestines of a Hen, first washed in astringent water, then
dried in an Oven, and reduced to powder. The Lysentery by these Remedies is
scarcely cured, by reason of the Levity of the Intestines, which must be helped
by corroborating and heating the stomach and bowels. And sometimes it happens,
that from a Phlegmatic water the parts are made slippery, which must be
corrected with Expurgations.

It is also convenient in this case to apply a small Cuppinglasse to the
Stomach, that it may retain the food longer.

If the Distemper arise from a Flux of Phlegm to the bowels, or from any
external error, these altered and taken away the Disease is easily cured.

If the Flux be by reason of Obstructions in the Mesentery Veins, or imbecility
of the Liver, the cause must be removed with attractive medicaments. Chiefly
powerful in Flux of the Liver is Salt of Corals dissolved in Plantanewater from
j to ss, being often exhibited, not omitting other things necessary.

In Diarrhaea, some frequently use Rice boiled in flesh-broath or Milk.

Drink in this case is made with Coralls, burnt Hartshorn, Spodium, Tormentil,
Bistort, Nutmegs, Citron, Pomegranate, and red apples boiled in Galybeat-water.

Dysentery.
In Dysentery, other things necessary in cruent dejection being well observed,
Specificks by property yield Relief.

1. Essence or Tincture of Emralds, which is thus made:

. Small broken pieces of Emralds, bruise them (not in a mortar unless it be
Iron) upon a Porphery stone, and reduce them to most, fine powder, pour upon it
Boys Urine by simple distillation, and in a hot place Extract a Tincture; which
take off, pouring on fresh Menstruum; this do, still pouring on fresh Menstruum
till all the Tinctures be taken off. All the Tinctures gathered and fi^red,
remove the Menstruum by distillation, and reduce the remaining matter to
powder, which again Extract with spirit of Wine to a perfect green color; then
draw off the spirit of Wine to an equal Consistency, and the Essence or
Tincture of Emralds will remain in the bottom.

Of which from Gr. ij to viij or x, exhibited in water of Plantaine or
Tormentil, does miraculously expel all Dysenteries, and corroborates the
Ventricle.

Note. Spirit of Vitriol must not be given, especially if Ulceration be.

2. Essence of Crocus Martis described by Crollius.

3. j Of crude Alum given to drink in Plantaine water cures the Dysentery.

4. Tincture of Coralls, Gr. iv, v, or vj.

5. Laudanum Opiat, with other such like.

6. English Aurum Potabile; also powder of Sponge of the Willow. See above in
the Chap. of Choler.

In Dysentery, the cause, which is a Phlegmatic and burning humor, is removed
by infusion of Rubarb and Mirabalanes in water of Barley, the Rubarb being
strongly expressed. Repetitions must often be made with purgations, and such
things as are lightly astringent must be both inwardly and outwardly applied;
Chiefly such as follow.. Juice of Elder-berries what quantity you please, into
which put a piece of bread taken hot out of the Oven, that it may imbibe the
juice: Put this bread again into the Oven that it may be dry, then again imbibe
it with the aforesaid juice, and dry it as before; do this to the fifth time,
afterward-dry it, and reduce it to powder. Dose j several days together in the
mornings. Also alike efficacious are Nutmegs and Mirabalanes candied, taken in
some quantity, syrup of Gooseberries, Berber, etc. Crollius his Treacle
Plaster, and Terra Sigillata applied hot: Also a Clyster of Anodyne Decoction
of Camomil, Dill and Roses, must be injected, in which dissolve ss of Goats
Suet or j; dissolve the Suet first with the yolk of an Egg that it stick not.

If the Evil come to strength and increase, themost convenient Remedy, is at
first to make the following Clyster, which to take often will be absolutely
necessary: For if the matter be small, it is sometimes removed with repeating
the Clysters only; and the abovesaid purgation being exhibited, the Disease is
perfectly cured.

. Milk ustulate or Chalybeate lb j and ss, Honey of Roses iij, and two yol^ of
Eggs; make a Clyster. If Milk be wanting,. Water of Barley, in which leaves of
Camomil and Roses, of each two parts, are boiled: Or instead of the decoction
of Barley, a decoction of the heads of sheep (or Wethers) especially in urgent
dolours. Then hasten to the use of such Clysters as have both astringent and
cooling properties; such as this following:. Herb Knotgrass, Shepheards-purse,
Plantaine, of each one handful, tops of Longwort, Horse-tayle, of each ss a
handful. If you desire it more strong, add flowers of Pomegranate ss a handful,
Myrtles ij, seeds of plantane Purcelane, of each (...) ij, flowers of Roses two
parts. Boil these in a sufficient quantity of Barly^ to lb j or lb j and ss.
In the decoction dissolve Honey of Roses streined (...) ij, Sugar of Roses j;
make a Clyster, which must be often used, and sometimes exchanged with the
ashingent above prescribed.

Inwardly by the mouth may be exhibited astringent Syrups, Opiats, things
Candied and Conserves; Excellent is the Conserve of Wallwort root with Terra
Sigillata, and Salt of Corals. Of great use also after purging is a Dose of my
Laudanum Opiat, being often taken. For this in all Fluxes of the belly (the
matter being first evacuated) is given safely and with good success: Or else
this Cardiack potion following may be exhibited, which is thus;. New or middle
aged Treacle, Confection of Alkermes, of each ss, Trochus of Carabes, Terra
sigillata, of each ss to j, syrup of Gooseberries or Violets j; mix these: The
sick may take of this about the hour of sleep or afternoon.

. Confection of Alkermes, of Hyacinth, of each j, Trochus of Carabes j,
Plantaine water j, Syrup of Roses j and ss; make a Potion, Or a Bolus thus,.
Confection of Hyacinth j and ss,


Terra Sigillata, or Bole-armenack, or Trochus of Carabes j and ss; with Sugar
make a Bolus.

Outwardly anoint with Oil of Myrtles and Quinces, of each a like quantity
mixed: Or make a decoction of the following Herbs, with which foment the belly
and region of the Reins:

. Plantane, Knot-grass, of each four handfulls, leaves of Wallwort, Horse
tail, of each two handfulls,

Galls, Cypressmutts, Acorns, of each ij,

Flowers of Roses, Longwort, of each three parts:

Boil these in rain water and astringent wine, adding at the end of the
boiling a little vinegar: Or anoint the lower part of the belly with Vnguentum
Comitissae, or with Fernelius his Stiptick Unguent. Also apply a Plaster of
Mastick and Oil of Quinces, of each j, powder of Myrtles iij; solutions of
Pearls and Precious stones are here very profitable.

The Legs may be washed with this following Decoction: Unripe Galls, Nutts of
Cypress, of each j and ss, Root of Fearn-brake, Calcitrapa, of each ij, Leaves
of Plantane,


Longwort, of each one handful. Boil these in astringent Wine, and with the
Decoction wash the Legs Morning and Evening.

When the Body is sufficiently purged with the aforesaid Clysters, an Infusion
of Rhaeados may be given with Rubarb a little baked, Thus; Rubarb a little
baked j; Infuse it with Citron-Mirobalanes ss, Citrin Sanders ss;


With whey of milk or water of Endive, express them, and to the expression add
Rubarb Torrified j and ss, Syrup of Maiden hair j:


Let the sick take this in the morning fasting; then recourse must be had to
such things as plainly assuage the Flux, among which these following
medicaments are most famous:. Gum Arabic, and white Wax, of each ss, enclose
them in a Pear or Quince-Apple, of such a magnitude as may conveniently be
roasted in Embers, or before the fire, till it be very soft; give this Morning
and Evening as often as you see cause. Also it will not be discommodious to
exhibit the abovesaid bread imbibed in juice of Elder-berries, with red
astringent Wine, or with Wine of Pomegranates.

This is a certain Experiment. At the very time the exulceration is cleansed
and about to consolidate;. A Quince-apple, or other sharp juicy Apple, cut a
hole in the upper part of it, fill the Cavity with white Wax shaved, and Gr.
iij of Mastich, close the hole, and wrap it up in a course cloth, roast it in
Embers: This roasted Apple give one hour before meat, and it will operate
wonderfully.. Pulp of Quinces a sufficient quantity, with red Roses, and red
Wine Or essencified with steel.
Chalybeat, and apply it to the inferior part of the belly; this is a
principal Arcanum in this Affect.

Crocus of Iron, filings of Iron or Steel sprinkle first with Boys Urine, or
Aqua dulcis, imbibe it in several infusions of Tartarisate Vinegar, evaporate
the Vinegar, and its substance will remain, which must by strong Calcination be
reduced to a red impalpable powder, which with Rain and Rose Water wash and
afterward dry. Of this. ss, or a, in Disentery, Fluxes of blood and
obstructions, and in continual Fluxes of blood outwardly.

Of the same virtue is Oil of Crocus of Iron, prepared after this manner.
Crocus of Iron with Boys Urine make up into a Mass, which distill by Retort as
spirit of Vitriol is wont to be, and the Oil will come forth red and somewhat
thick, which for some days digest in dung, or circulate in ashes. In all
intrinsecal Diseases it is famously efficacious. They use the same as of the
Crocus.

Sulphur of Sol. This by its own fixed propriety, the Sulphur being
Microcosmically dissolved, is powerfully helpful.. Salt Nitre, and common Salt
what Half a pound and five Gr.
quantity you please, common Bolus lb v j; Distill an Oil according to Art, as
you distill Oil of common Salt. In this Oil dissove Sol before Calcined, with
the Amalgama and admixtion of flowers of Sulphur (as is described below.) Set
this pulverisate matter in ashes, in a convenient vessel, and pour upon it the
distilled Liquor till it be covered one finger or more, or to j of Sol add ss
of the aforesaid spirit of Salt. Separate the Tincture, pour on the spirit
often, and by distillation remove the Tincture, the Solution of Sol will remain
in the bottom red. Upon this pour Spirit of Wine, and Extract a Tincture
according to Art, the tinged Spirit distill to an oyliness; five or six drops of
this given in convenient Vehicles resists the Flux of the belly, and
corroborates the Ventricle.

Amalgama and Calcination of Sol.. One part of Sol, and six parts of
Argent-vive. Make an Amalgama according to Art, which put into a Crucible, and
evaporate all the Mercury. The remaining powder with the same Dose of new
Mercury Amalgamate, exhale the Mercury again: Repeat the same Amalgama; then
add two parts of flowers of Sulphur, keep it in the fire in a Crucible till all
the Sulphur be exhaled and burnt up; this labor must be repeated to the sixth
time.

It will not be unprofitable in this distemper to provoke sweat with Terra
sigillata, and the Bezoar stone.

Cuppinglasses applied to the Navel, and kept on, yield no small benefit.

Drink may be made with Barley-water, with Harts-horne boiled therein.

If the Dysentery be in the Superior intestines, for the most part it is
deadly, especially when the stomach is more prone to vomit then retain, and an
Hiccup be concomitant; yet the cure may be endeavored by the former Remedies
excepting Clysters, which ought to be either none, or very few. Milk may be
taken by the mouth with Honey or Sugar of Roses, by reason of their cleansing
property, and other necessary things above mentioned may be exhibited.

If by intemperate heat from the Liver, and Dysentery, sharp humors be
generated, foment the Liver with iv of Unguent of Sanders, Oil of Nymphaea,
Roses, of each j, of Camphire ss; this will alter the intemperance.

A provocation to stool when nothing is voided but a little blood.
Tenesmus.
In the Tenesmus externally useful is a decoction of Oak leaves with Bran in
Date-water, or water of water Bettony, and in Baggs by application used hot.

Mirable also in this case is a Clyster made of Mutton broth, with some drops
of Oil of Wax not exceeding j injected.

And inwardly by the mouth some drops of Oil of Mastich exhibited with water of
Mint, Plantane and Pennyroyal, do suddenly remove the Tenesmus: This is
grateful to the stomach, and no enemy to the Intestines. Moreover, it cures
Disentery's, but principally resists the Tenesmus.

Flux of the Liver, or Dysentery of the Liver.
1. In Flux or Dysentery of the Liver, neither Purgations nor Clysters help;
but astringents, such are of Rubarb from j, gradually increasing the Dose to j
and ss, exhibited in substance with Mirabalan's in Plantane water with syrup of
Quinces and with Honey. The same mixed with Sugar, and often given, wonderfully
helps. Of like virtue is Extract of Rubarb prepared with Spirit of Wine, of
which the Dose at first must be very small, (viz.) ss, which may be gradually
increased to j.

2. Things correcting the Liver must be diligently observed, the Root and Herb
of Succory alone infused in Wine and Drink once or twice with meat, and this
continued for some time helps the Economy of the Liver by a certain innate
propriety. The diet must be temperate. Then after the use of this, continue for
some time the use of the infusion of the root of Meadowsweet.

3. These things being taken and continued, let us proceed to astringents,
helping the Liver and internal parts.

Solution of Corals made in strong Vinegar, the Menstruum afterward removed by
distillation, the Corals will remain in form of Salt. This Salt of Corals
without any other preparation ( j in lb j of Plantane-water) the quantity of
one spoonful at first, or two or three afterward, being daily exhibited before
the Patient go to bed, and continued to the declination of the Disease, does
wonderfully stop the Flux, and by degrees restores the Natural strength.

Note, Sometimes in this case, chiefly after astringents or with them, English
Aurum Potabile powerfully helps astriction, and cures.

Purulent Excretion.
In purulent dolorous excretion, a Clyster of Milk, and a like quantity of Oil
Olive together, or fresh butter (a root of Wallwort also may be added) helps
much both to cleanse and consolidate. Yet it will better cleanse, if at first
in making the Clyster a little Honey be mixed. Nevertheless inward medicaments
that mollify and assuage the Disease are not to be neglected; See below in
Diseases of the Mesentery.

Maw Worms.
In expelling Maw-worms many things help, chiefly these;

1. Extract of Turbith and Rubarb prepared with spirit of Wine; vulgarly
Rotula's of Diaturbith with Rubarb are of like effect. Dose, in those of ripe
Age, from ss to a, in Children from j, ij or iij, etc. according to Age and
strength. This does not only kill the Worms, but also expells them out of the
body.

2. Essence of Peach bless.
flowers of Peaches extracted with spirit of wine. Dose Gr. v, vj, vij or viij;
or a syrup of them: The blossoms must be gathered, not such as fall off.

3. Oil of Sulphur per Campane from Gr. iv to ix; also Oil of Filbuds prepared
per Descensum in a decoction of j or ij, to one measure of water of burnt
Harts-born, or spirit of Hartshorn, extracted without fire.

4. Salt of Sulphur made of the Caput Mortuum after Oil of Sulphur per Campane;
or otherwise the sublimed flowers Gr. iij or iv in Milk or Wormwoodwater.

5. Water of Onions or Garlic, either per se, or with crude Mercury infused
for one night.

6. Most Excellent is Mercurius viv. either by it self crude from j to j
somewhat allayed, or first mortified with juice of Lemmons; (The Dose must be
small, because being mortified it remains the longer in the body;) afterward
mix it with Conserve of Roses, Asa dulcis, or the flowers of the same: The
Composition is thus;

. Mercur. viv. from ss to j, temper it with juice of Lemmons, with ss of
Conserve of Roses, flowers of Benzoin or Asa dulcis; mix them and make a Bolus.

Exceeding small worms, of kind of the Maw worms
Ascarides.
The Medicines already spoken of serve to expel the Ascarides, yet there is a
certain thin sowerish water that comes forth in the Confection of white flowers
of Antimony, which must be given in a decoction of burnt Hartshorn once or
twice.

Essensified Spirit of Hartshorn, of which above in the Chapt. of Animalcula's
of the Ventricle, kills and expells worms of every kind.

A Worm breeding in the belly.
Tinea.
The most powerful cause of worms in the belly is an obstruction in the Gysta.
bladder of the Gall. If by other Purgations these be not removed; then such
purging Medicaments only must be used as may expel the contracted such in the
Intestines, which both nourishes and entertains the aforesaid worms. After such
Purgations the belly must be anointed all over often with Laboring Osen.
Ox Galls, or with Ointment of Sow-bread: Then Mercur. viv. must be exhibited,
whose virtues in killing worms of this kind are miraculous. Lastly, to root
them out either all together, or to break them away by piecemeal, Laxative
Medicines must be used.

Vices of the Fundament.
Inflammation, Ulcer, Imposthume; Fistula, Exulceration. In external affects of
the Fundament, as Inflammation, Ulcer, Fistula, and more light Exulcerations,
we must proceed in the same manner, as we are wont to do in other like external
affects in all other parts.

Omitting other things, inflammations of the Fundament, by a certain propriety
are cured with a decoction of Agrimony, Mint, and Saracens Herb tempered with
water and Vinegar, and applied blood-warm.

To open, maturate and consolidate, excellent is Balsom of Sulphur with Oil of
Poppy: Of which above in the Chap. of Vices of the Paps.

A Cleft.
In clefts of the Fundament, the fatt of wooden spoons is useful, of which see
above in Clefts of the Lips.

Swellings, Warts, red Sores, Piles, etc. of the Fundament.
Swellings, Warts, Sores, Piles, etc. of every kind are presently and
insensibly removed with coals of Mice dung boiled in Wine and applied. The same
performs the long-shell fishes found nigh the shore in Rivers, calcined, boiled
and applied. So the Crocus of Metals, tempered with Fennel water, and in the
most fiery sores applied, first abates the pains, and then consumes the
swellings themselves.

Hidden Hemroides.
Moreover in dolours and hidden Hemroids exceeding painful, this is a
specific;. Black Flies breeding in sheeps dung what quantity you please, boil
them in Oil till they be dissolved, then apply it hot with Bombace to the
dolorous part, and repeat it often.

Also ashes of burnt Cork boiled with Capons greese, or Oil of Myrtles and
applied to the Fundament, resists most fervent dolours; the most immoderate
dolours that by this means are not assuaged are removed by Gr. j or ij of Opium
added to this decoction.

Unguent of Toad-fl^.
Linaria.. The Herb Linaria with its flowers one handful, bruise them, and
with a sufficient quantity of Hogsgrease make an Ointment, which being expressed
and a little cooled, mix with the yolk of an Egg, and with Bombace or Linen
apply it to the part affected. It resists dolours of this kind almost to a
miracle. This was made by Dr Wolfius my friend, which as a singular secret he
would not reveal to his most illustrious Prince Lodovicus the Elder, of Pious
Memory, Landgrave of Hassia, though this was often required by him, until he
had promised yearly to give him a fat Ox, which promise being made, he did not
only discover the Herb Linaria, but also by adding this ancient Versicle, he
manifested the difference between it and the Herb Esula, viz.

Esula Lactescat, sine lacte Linaria crescat.
Which when a certain Nobleman, viz. John Risodelius of Eschenbach, hereditary
Marshal of Hassia' perceived, he merrily turns the Versicle, thus;

Esula nil vobis, sed dat Linaria Taurum.

Deflux of Hemrodes.
In immoderate deflux of the Hemrodes, all things useful in stopping Fluxes of
blood are profitable. Yet these are commended:

1. Essence of Crocus of Iron, of which see Crollius; this must as long be
exhibited, as the Flux continues violent; otherwise by delaying time, and
deferring the Medicine, it is like never to be stopped.

2. By a certain propriety, of Excellent use is a Girdle made of the green
leaves of black Hellebore bruised, and tied about the naked body. The leaves
must be a little bruised, for so the hard veins in them will not be offensive,
sew these up in a swaddling band that they may be long and narrow like a Girdle.
This I have happily used. It is good in all immoderate Fluxes of the Menses,
and chiefly in the Flux of blood from the Arteries, when all other means have
been unsuccessful.

3. Powder of foreign Mummy, with a like quantity of Cork finely bruised,
which must be carefully applied to the Orifice of the veins of the Hemrodes;
this suddenly stops the blood.

Hemrodes stopped.
Hemrodes unseasonably stopped are opened with fig leaves, being often applied
green to the fundament, or the place rubbed with them.

So the juice of Onions mixed with Aloes, and applied by chafing the place with
a course cloth, opens the Hemrodes.

Pills of A Composition of sweet powders.
Alephangina taken once in a week.

Aloes given open the Hemrodes.

The Hemrodes suppressed are also opened with juice of Sow-bread, Aron and
Briony. A Plaster made of brick dust, O^ga.
Bulls-gall, and Staves-acre. An Ointment made of the peth of Coloquintida and
bitter Almonds. Also powder of Coloquintida baked with Honey.

Falling down of the Fundament.
In the falling down of the Fundament, first the intestine must be rightly
replaced, with application of mollifying decoctions: If the reposition be
hindered, either by a rumor or other accidental hardness, recourse must be had
to astringents both inward and outward.

Among internalls, a decoction of wild Prunella roots is commended, (almost all
roots open the belly by reason of the Mercurial juice they receive from the
Earth) the decoction being made in Beer or Water, and drunk often in a day for
some time, gently binds the belly, yet so as it is also somewhat soluble, which
in cases of this kind ought always so to be; otherwise by strong endeavor to
ease Nature the intestines fall again.

Externals are various, yet excellent is that which is made of an Oaken board
very well planed, heat hot to the fire and anointed with Mastich, and applied
to the Fundament, or sat upon as hot as can possibly be endured.

But if the intestine before put up, will by no Art or means remain or stick,
the only present Remedy is, as above described in the Falling down of the Eye;
Thus,. ashes of Flies breeding in sheeps dung, sprinkle them upon the fallen
intestine, and as well as you can put it up again, and it will no more fall,
especially if presently you have the Decoction of wild Prunella ready for use.

The use of Alum, by reason of its too great astringency, must be warily
voided, for it corrodes the parts and reins thereof.

The frequent croaking of the belly.
The frequent noise in the belly is cured as the windiness.

Incontinency of the Dung.
Incontinency of dung by the looseness of the muscle of the Fundament is cured
as other Paralysie, with respect to the weakness of the Ventricle.

Affects of the Liver.
Intemperance of the Liver.
In every intemperance of the Liver, Extract of Agrimony; also the root and
leaves do wonderfully help, chiefly when mixed with spirit of Vitriol to a
grateful sharpness.

Sowerish or spiritual waters in hot and dry intemperance of the Liver yield
relief; also in cold and dry distemperance if mixed with Extract of Centaury
minor, and Extract of Succory, and with their Salts mixed and exhibited. Also
spirit of Vitriol, or the Extract thereof, else if reduced to Arcanums, or at
least drunk in infusion, do wonderfully show their effects; chiefly if
thenceforth all necessary means be used, and convenient order of Food observed.

Among purging Medicaments Rubarb is prevalent, whose use is very profitable to
the Liver, to what manner of intemperance soever declining.

Putrefaction of the Liver.
Putrefaction of the Liver is uncurable; although Paracelsus his powder of
Alkah (which perhaps from the Mercury) is here supposed to be of some use. It
is better I should suspend my judgment, then falsely allege any thing.

Imbeeillity of the Liver.
Imbecility of the Liver is corrected and restored to its pristine state by
those temperate auxilliaries even now declared; Succory either by it self, or
prepared into a convenient Medicament. Things more strong must here be avoided,
viz. Vomitories and Purges.

Among Chymicalls the Essence of Mars chiefly when implanted with Malmsie Wine.
Thus,. Filings of Iron ( lb ss) heat them very hot, and extinguish them once or
twice in Malmsie ( lb iv) for so the vitriolate Essence of the Iron
communicates with the Malmsie; which afterward taken from ss to ij in broth, or
in the water or infusion of Succory, is a most pleasant auxiliary; it also
wonderfully resolves all old obstructions of the Liver. The sweetness of the
Iron easily communicates with the pleasantness of the Wine.

Cruent dejections of the Belly.
Cruent dejections of the Belly are cured by the same means, as is above
described in the Affects of the Intestines.

Tumors of the Feet.
In Tumors of the Feet, excellent are sowerish spirit of Vitriol, Herb Robert,
or Storks Bill bruised and applied. Also Herb Robert, a sear-cloth made of of
Wax two parts, of Goats suet one part, Oil of Roses part ss, let them stand
together for some time over a fire, and therein moysten a linen cloth, and
apply it hot.

Obstruction of the Liver.
Obstructions of the Liver, from what cause soever produced, are helped by the
Universals hereafter mentioned in Affects of the Reins, which also abate the
Tartar throughout the whole body (all obstructions of the Macrocosm) to which,
if those things commonly prescribed by Practitioners in obstructions of the
Liver be added, they may at least be useful for convenient Vehicles, whereby
the Medicines that resolve and expel the Tartar more swiftly operate, and the
work is rendered more efficacious: Therefore Infusions, Decoctions, Clysters,
Syrups, as well common as Magistrale, distilled waters, and many others, also
convenient applications outwardly, must not be neglected.

1. Rightly to remove all obstructions of the Liver, Mars or Iron is most
commended, the crude dust of which from ss to ss taken often inwardly (twice or
thrice a day) is wonderful prevalent in such like Affects.

The exquisite preparations of Iron are manifold; yet the more simple the
better; in simplicity Nature takes delight.

1. Wine of Iron described above in imbecility of the Liver is powerful in
this case, by its being the more simple, if exhibited in those convenient
Liquors also useful in the obstructions of the Liver; Or, if the Patients can
endure, taken in their daily meat and drink; the Dose at first small to prevent
nauseousness.

2. A Chachectick simple powder of Famous use in all internal obstructions; It
is thus made,. Steel prepared one part, Cassia Lignea three parts, most white
Sugar four parts; mix these, and make a powder. The Steel must be made into
thin leaves, which must so long be beaten upon an Anvel until it become like
dross, that it may be reduced to most fine powder; the Anvel first made very
clean round about. Give so much of this compounded powder as will lie upon the
point of a knife, thrice a day, viz. in the morning fasting, at three a clock
in the Afternoon, and at going to bed, from ss to a continue this till all
obstructions be removed; yea, keep to the use of this some weeks.

3. Essence of Iron is laudable, see the Imbecility of the Liver. Note, The
use of this is more safe in the end after other opening medicines, for it opens
and binds gently, chiefly when by the exhibition of other things the belly is
too vehemently provoked.

4. Spirit of Tartar, spiritually fortified with its own Salt, whose virtues
are wonderful: See Crollius in Universal Digestion.

5. Compounded water of Vitriol and Tartar quoted by Penotus in his Treatise of
Chemical Medicine. The composition is thus (this composition is somewhat
changed by me; I have happily used this in the Dropsy.). Vitriol Vngarick
calcined to a redness lb iv, Flints gathered out of Rivers excellently well
calcined lb v, Tartar Calcined to a whiteness lb j, mix them, and beat them to
a most fine powder, put them for some time in a moist place, that per diliquium
they may resolve somewhat into a liquor, afterward distill it thrice in sand,
reduce the Caput Mortuum every time to powder, and again pour on the distilled
liquor: Lastly, distill it by Retort in an open sire, first distill off the
Phlegm with gentle heat, afterward by degrees with more strong fire draw forth
the acid spirit. From the Caput Mortuum calcined extract a Salt, and with it,
the Phlegm being first removed, circulate or digest in Balneo the acid spirit;
then with Argilla make up the whole circulate into Pastills, put them in an
open fire, observing degrees of heat, provoke the Alkalisate spirit, as is wont
to be done by spirit of Tartar fortified with its proper Salt. Dose, from j to
ij in wine or other convenient liquor.

6. Phylosophical water or spirit of Wine Tartarisate (that is, which has
extracted an Essence from Tartar. The spirit of Wine has something of Phlegm,
by the benefit of which the Salts are removed: Tartar to a blewness must be
first calcined.)

These principal medicaments sometimes, do not only dissolve obstructions, but
also thoroughly purge them out; partly by reason of the disposition of the body,
and partly by reason of the medicament it self: So for the most part Iron
purges by the inferior parts; Likewise the Phylosophical Tartarisate water
moves the belly freely.

If therefore this kind of dejections of the belly, what means soever procured,
yield assistance in removing obstructions, it is well; if otherwise, and the
belly be disturbed, it indeed had been better if neither had happened.

If the too slow moving of the belly require stronger Medicaments; Extract of
Rubarb, and Extract of Pills of Ammoniack, ( alias Pills of Riverius;) thus,.
Gum Ammoniack dissolved in vinegar of Squills iij, species of Hiera-picra j and
ss, Crude Aloes iv, Myrrh j, Saffron Gr. vj; with syrup of Wormwood make a soft
mass, which with spirit of Wine Alkalisate (viz. Tartarisate) draw off in form
of an Extract. Dose, from ss, to j.

A Caution, although in cure of obstructions of the Liver many externalls, as
Clysters, Injunctions, Fomentations, Sear-clothes and Plasters may outwardly
be applied to the Region of the Liver; yet these are less necessary then the
internalls above mentioned, unless there happen hardness to be retained that
may be felt, then indeed it will be very proper to apply resolving externals,
as necessary auxiliaries.

In every obstruction two things must chiefly be minded, (viz.) that the
disease may be cured, and the cause contained taken away. This must be warily
done, so as the abundance of matter may be diminished, the thick broke and
extenuated, the tough phlegm dissolved, that which flows repelled and
evacuated, the windiness discust, and the part which either generates or feeds
the peccant humor, corrected.

Therefore if pain in the head be, a lenitive must first be exhibited, or some
usual suppressing evacuation, it is also convenient presently to open the
Basilical vein.

Afterward it is necessary to evacuate the abundant humor by purgation, which
must first be gentle, then we may proceed to such things as open the passages,
and respect the Liver: To which such medicaments as correct the intemperance
accompanying the obstruction of the Liver, must be added, with astringents
joined thereto, which may strengthen the inward parts and keep them sound.

First, Deopilative distilled water may be described; thus,. Root of Bitter
sweet.
Amara dulcis iij, tops of Hops, Succory, Liverwort, Bindeweed, Scabious,
Agrimony, of each two handfulls; infuse them for three days in as much whey as
will cover them three fingers above, then distill them; Mix iv of this water
with ij of the syrup of the five roots; give this several mornings, every two
or three days give a purgation, still continuing the use of this water by
intervals.

Also Tablets of Crocus of Iron may be made in this manner;

. Filings of steel and Sulphur, of each a like quantity, mix them, put it in a
Crucible in a gentle fire at first, then by degrees make it more strong, at
length make it most vehement, that the Sulphur may be all exhaled and consumed.
Again, mix the matter with an equal quantity of Sulphur, and as before exhale
and burn up, until the matter savor no more of the Sulphur. This matter
reduced to most fine powder, put into an Iron frying pan, pour upon it most
sharp vinegar, to cover the powder one finger, place it upon an open fire,
stirring the matter with a spattle till all the vinegar be exhaled: When it is
all exhaled, add other, and as before exhale; in the end, make the sire most
strong, that the whole matter may be red, which keep stirring for a little
time, and then remove it from the fire, cool it and reduce to most fine powder:
Of this j, with most fine Sugar dissolved in water of Agrimony ss ss, make
Tablets, to which in the end of the boiling add one drop or two of Oil of
Cloves.

Also Conserves made with roots of green Succory well washed and bruised very
small, or else the juice streined through a sieve, with a sufficient quantity
of Sugar. The same Roots Candied are profitable.

Excellent also in this case is Tincture of Coralls mixed with other
appropriates, or Quercetanus his Syrup of Coralls, which is the only remedy in
every kind of imbecility of the Liver; of great use also is Salt of Coralls
dissolved in Plantane water, from j to j and ss, and exhibited by course, which
by this means will be most excellent, in every flux of the Liver caused by
imbecility, if all things in order of diet and other appropriates be not
neglected.

Scirrhus of the Liver.
Rightly to cure the Scirrhus of the Liver, not too much inveterate, the above
mentioned medicaments in dissolving obstructions are sufficient. The Scirrhus
is a changing of the Mucilaginous Tartar into absolute Tartar.

But if the Scirrhus be more contumacious, then recourse must be had to
externalls, in which very beneficial is a plaster made of the juice of
Hemlock, (and Mandragora with Ammoniack.) See Cardanus, Heurnius, and Fabritius
Hildanus in Chyrurgical Observations.

This Plaster is dolorous before the ripening of the Tumor, yet it must be
left on and not renewed till the third day. I have happily used this in
Theichumannum J. C. Marpurg. After the use of this an emollient Clyster to
resolve the contracted filth must be injected.

Tumor of the Liver.
In Tumors of the Liver or Schirrus, violent purgations and such as too
hastily remove obstructions must be forborne. Vitriolate Tartar in a decoction
of Raisons with Cinnamon, or else, if the Tumor arise from crudity of blood,
with leaves of Agrimony added; or if from windiness, with Aniseed, Fennelseed
and Carrawayseed boiled together, is a special Remedy. Also Extract of Rubarb
often taken, or the infusion of it in water of Sorrel, Succory, Centaury minor
and Endive, and in due measure exhibited, resolves all crude Tumors.

In discussing windiness, external fomentations made of Carminatives are
useful: Also Unguents and Plasters do often help.

Tumor of the Muscles.
Tumors of the muscles of the belly seldom happen in the right Hypocondry. Yet
in this place, beside the above named, Externalls mightily help; as Oil of
bitter Almonds, of Dialthea, a plaster of Melilot, etc.

Instammation of the Liver.
Sharp purgations help not the inflammations of the Liver: But in vicious and
phlegmatic inflammations, a Vomit, exhibited in due proportion, if thereby
vomitings be procured, yields relief.

Letting blood only has very often cured the inflamed Liver.

If the inflammation be somewhat removed, or rather the matter causing it,
chiefly if dejections of the belly permit, it must be evacuated with some
gentle Clyster, or with Extract of Rubarb, or with the infusion of Rubarb in
Endive and Succory water.

Then things gently cooling must be applied. If neither Fever, nor
Inflammation, nor dolor of the inflamed Liver be at all abated; then Lapis
Prunella taken in a Julep made of things temperately cooling, and used instead
of drink, removes the Fever, Inflammation, and all putrefaction: Yet the drink
must be moderately taken, nor too much at once, nor too often. Other things (
viz. in Diet, Physic and Chyrurgery) must carefully be administered, that they
do not more hurt then good.

Imposthume of the Liver.
Imposthume of the Liver cannot be better cured then by preventing the
inflammation.

Ulcer of the Liver.
Ulcer of the Liver is uncureable.

Affects of the Bladder of the Gall. Obstructions of the bladder.
Obstruction howsoever happening in the bladder of the Gall, is taken away by
those medicaments commonly used to remove obstructions of the Liver: Of which
we have already sufficiently spoke in its own place.

Peculiar Remedies, or method of curing, we have none, yet according as need
requires, we follow the dictates of Reason and Experience.

But a specialty is, that compounded water of Vitriel and Tartar, or the
Aperitive Spirit of Penotus, in this case does much help.

Choler increased in the bladder of the Gall.
Choler increased in the bladder, must be gently removed by medicines purging
Choler, which being done, it must be expelled with Rubarb, Mechoachanna,
either prepared in form of an Extract, or given in the substance, or at least
by infusion; this is very powerful.

But if more grievous symptoms happen, they must first be particularly known,
then they may be cured.

Against every overflowing of Choler, whether it be without pain, or do
grievously afflict, the compounded spirit of common Salt and Salt nitre, (of
which in Crollius his Notes) being often drunk in convenient Liquors, is
exceedingly efficacious.

The Stone in the bag of the Gall.
The prevention of the Stone in the bag of the Gall consists in its apertion,
or, if already generated, in its occult resolution, by which the Tartar
throughout the whole body is impeded, or if gathered, insensibly resolved: But
this medicine depends only upon the Stone that is cut out of Man's body
afflicted with that Disease, and rightly prepared into its own Arcanum, which
is described below in the Chapter of the Stone.

Diseases of the Spleen.
Tumor of the Spleen.
The loose and large Tumor of the Spleen, if from the Vitriolate juice, which
is called the dregs of Melancholy, is cured with medicines properly resisting
Melancholy; Such are the Extract of Black Hellebore, Extract of Sena, and
other compounded Extracts, with the Essence of Epithymon, Polypode, Bindeweed,
Capers, and Hearts tongue.

But these dregs universally are expelled with Mercurius dulcis, which operates
almost to a miracle; Also Quercetanus his Panchymagogon, a just Dose of which
given in time of need is very beneficial, chiefly if sharpened with Mercur.
vitae to Gr. xvj, Gr. ij of Mercur. dulcis; the Mercur. vitae must by long
tempering be mixed, and afterward with the Extract of Black Hellebore made up
into Pills.

In this case these Pills are to be exhibited after midnight, repeat it the
second and third night, either giving the same Dose, or altering a little, as
reason and necessity shall require. In the cure of this, as also all other
affects of the Spleen, excellent are the roots of Fernebrake macerated in Wine,
which from a certain innate propriety cure the Affects of this part. Also in
daily food may be exhibited powder of Galiopsis or Archangel, which by reason
of the disposed propriety it has to Diseases of the Spleen, is used with all
good success: The Italians call it Milzatella.

Externally, if need be, this or the like Cataplasm may be applied:. Root of
Wild Cucumer, Briony, of each j, of Squill one Root, Root of White Lilly one,
Seeds of Mallows, Althea, Foenugreek, of each one part, Seeds of Linum two
parts, Flowers of Althea, Mallows, of Mercury, Pellitory of the wall, of each
one handful, Roots of White Beet ss a handful: Boil all these in water of
Water-Bettony, with a sixth part of Vinegar, and make a Cataplasm, or
Fomentation to apply to the Region of the Spleen. Here also might be numbered
Plasters commonly in use.

If the Tumor arise from windiness, Purgations must not be used; a Decoction
of Fearn-brake Root, with a little Sena, is sufficient, chiefly if Carminative
Seeds be added to the Decoction.

Outwardly are useful inunctions of Oil of Rue, Capers, White Lillies, with
powder of Seeds of Agnus Castus, Ceterach, rinds of Capers, mixed to a just
consistency.

But if the dolor more vehemently urge, Capers bruised and outwardly applied
in form of a Plaster, takes away the pain presently.

Obstructions of the Spleen.
In obstruction of the Spleen, the body must forthwith be comforted with the
following Syrup;. Root of Black Hellebore prepared j and ss, Herb Hart's-tongue
one handful, Bindeweed ss a handful, leaves of Sena, Alex. s. s. -- j and ss,
Galangal j and ss, Ginger j, Aniseeds, ss, peth of Wild Sassron ij, Epithymon
ss; infuse them in a sufficient quantity of aperitive decoction for one night,
in the morning boil them to viij, express and strein them. In this when
streined infuse of the Electuary of Rubarb iij, of Cinnamon j, adding of syrup
of the five Roots, and of Wormwood, of each a like quantity, mix these for
three Doses to be given three mornings together.

The left side must be anointed hot morning and evening with this following
Ointment.. Unguent of Agrippa j, Oil of Capers ss, of Bays j and ss; mix them.

If after the exhibiting the first Dose of the liquid syrup, the belly be not
somewhat soluble, add to the following Doses of this powder.. Species of
Diaturbith with Rubarb j, Diogrydium Gr. iij.

This being done, if strength and other things permit, cut the internal vein of
the left arm, and according to fullness draw out the blood; then for two days
use this following.. Of decoction of the greater aperitive iij, Oximel
Helleborate iij, syrup of Betony, of the five Roots, of each j and ss, water of
Fennel, of Cinnamon, of each iij, spirit of Vitriol ss, salt of Hart's-tongue j.
Mix these for four Doses, then make this Apozeme;. Root of Fennel, Wild
Alexander, of each ss, Coltsfoot, Sarsaparilla, of each iij, Herb Agrimony,
Ceterach, Bindeweed, Hart's-tongue, of each ss a handful, Seeds of Anise ss,
Fennel, Coriander prepared, of each j, flowers of Borrage, Bugloss, Betony, of
each two parts, Raysons j; boil these to ss j in a sufficient quantity of
common water; to this when streined add syrup of the five Roots ij, Succory
with Rubarb j and ss, Oximel Helleborate iij; make an Apozeme for five Doses.
In the time of taking them two hours before and after Supper may be added this
Electuary.. Conserve of Fumitory, Betony, Bugloss, of each j and ss,
Orange-peels Candied ss, Extract of Hart's-tongue, our Crocus martas, of each
iij, Crabs eyes prepared, salt of Coralls, of each j, Species arom. rosat.
burnt Hearts horn, of each j and ss, with syrup of Hearts tongue make the
Electuary; of which let the sick take the quantity of a Nutmeg or Chestnut.

Let the drink be Wine, or Barley water, Chalybeate; Thus,. Wine or Barley-water
ss vj, Iron, or Crocus Martis ss j, Cinnamon iij; let these stand in infusion
in hot ashes for eight nights in a vessel well closed, afterward strein it; of
this the sick may take at pleasure, or use wine or other drink, in which the
following are boiled or macerated, or which is better, sew them in a bag, and
put them in new Wine or Beer, that the drink may receive their virtue:. Root of
Polypode ij and ss, Herb Fumitory, Melissa, Bindeweed, of each three handfulls,
rinds of Caper root, Tamarisk, of each vj, leaves of Hearts tongue two
handfulls, or most white Tartar j; mix them: Also very beneficial is Extract of
Ox-spleen prepared, as below described in suppression of the Menses.

But if the Disease turn to a Scirrhus, to these medicaments may be added
Pills, thus prepared:

. Gum Ammoniack ij, dissolve it in vinegar, and strein it through a fine cloth,
add Aloes beaten small in juice of Roses ss, salt of Wormwood ij; incorporate
these together and make a mass, keeping it in leather moystened with Oil of
Anise; of which by intervalls,. From ij to j, make Pills.

Also the following water taken is profitable;

. Root of Horseradish ss iv, Polypode of the Oak ss j and ss, seeds of Fennel
j, Cardamum ij; cut the roots and bruise the rest: Infuse them in ss xv of old
Wine, let them stand in a hot place for three nights, the vessel being often
stirred; then add Watercresses, Burdock, Fumitory, of each ss ij; distilled
whey of milk ss j and ss, distill them by a Cucurbit with gentle fire: Dose, one
draught, either by it self, or with other syrup: Of like virtue is the juice of
Cresses, Burdock and Fumitory being beaten in a Mortar and so expressed, which
when clarified may be used alone, or mixed with others, or boiled to a syrup.

To the Region of the Spleen, where the Tumor is perceived, apply a Plaster
of Ammoniack dissolved in Vinegar of Squills, but first foment the place with
the following Decoction.

. Herb Hart's-tongue, Melilot, of each one handful and ss, Flowers of Camomil,
Dill, Gedista, of each one handful, Seeds of Fernebrake ss; boil these in a
sufficient quantity of white wine, water and vinegar, of each a like
proportion, until half be consumed; with this decoction foment the place
morning and evening with a sponge.

To comfort the Spleen, this following Electuary is very commodious; it is
called Electu. of Solenander.

. Of the greater Raisons ss ss, boil them in rich Wine to the consistency of a
Poultis, strein it through a sieve, and mix it with Conserve of Rosemary
blossoms ss j;

Rinds of Citron candied, powder of Cinnamon, of each j,

Species of Aromatic. rosat.

Confection of Pearls,

Confection of Cinnamon, of each ij,

Lign-Aloes-adorat. ss,

Oriental Crocus, or Essence of the same ss; mix them: the sick may take the
quantity of a Chestnut at pleasure. In meat Caper and Broom leaves pickled are
often used.

Also Confection of Capers in Tablets may be thus given;

. Confection of Capers and Crocus Martis, of each j,

Sugar dissolved in water of Hart's-tongue iv;

Make Tablets according to Art; of which let the sick take one in the morning,
and another three hours after dinner.

It will not be unprofitable also, to exhibit often Vitriolate Tartar, and
Cream of Tartar; likewise the spirit and tincture of the same. Instead of these
may be given Wine of Iron, Cachetick powder, and Tartarisate spirit of wine;
with application of Externals, without which these will be of little or no
effect; as chiefly a Plaster of Hemlock, of which see above. Vitriolate Tartar
obtains the priority, because gentle aperitives are first to be used, chiefly
in the inveterate Scirrhus.

A fomentation for the Hypochondries.
. Roots of Althaea ss ss, Briony, field Cucumer, of each iij: Parsley,
Wild-Alexander ij; rinds and root of Capers, of Tamarisks, of each j, leaves of
Ivy, of Elder, of each two handfulls, Ceterach one handful, seeds of Agnu^
Castus, of Southern-wood, of each ss, Flowers of Broom, Camomil, Melilot, of
each one part and ss; make a Decoction.

. Oil of Capers, of bitter Almonds, of each j and ss, of Tartar j, Gum of
Bdellium, of Ammoniack dissolved in vinegar of Squills, of each vj; with a
little wax make an Ointment.

Such things as dissolve obstructions of the Liver, do for the most part
dissolve the inveterate obstructions of the Spleen; chiefly the specificks
which are prepared of Iron; Spirit of Vitriol is in this case very beneficial:

Sowcrish.
Sharp things easily remove obstructions of this kind.

Scirrhus of the Spleen.
In dexterously removing the Scirrhus of the Spleen, chiefly when inveternted,
the speedy perfecting the cure is absolutely necessary: Therefore in applying
medicaments to resolve the Scirrhus, before all other, gentle and ^peritive
medicines must be used; as Vitriolated Tartar, instead of which may be used
wine of Iron, Chachectick powder also, and Tartarisate Spirit of Vitr^ which
does wonderfully help. The Tartarisate Spirit of Wine is likewise commended in
this case: But all these are of little or no effect, unless externals be also
joined as auxiliaries.

Wonderful efficacious is a Plaster made of the juice of Hemlock, and the
juice of Mandragora, especially if both of them be tempered with Ammoniack. The
juice of Mandragora dissolves Ivory, therefore used by Physicians among other
resolving medicaments: See above what is described in the Scirrhus of the Liver.

Inflammation, Imposthume and Ulcer of the Spleen.
Inflammation of the Spleen, Imposthume and Ulcer, are cured after the same
manner, as in Affects of the Liver.

Diseases of the Mesentery.
Obstruction and Inflammation of the Mesentery.
Grievous are the Obstructions and Inflammations of the Mesentery, which often
prove the Authors of great evils, yet are difficultly known, unless perceived
by Tumors about the Navel, in the Mesentery and Pancreon.
kernel under the Ventricle; therefore the exquisite diligence of the Physician
is in this case chiefly required.

The Disease being known, such medicaments ought to be applied, as in this case
seldom are, for what is usually administered, seems rather to exasperate the
grief, which indeed is no wonder, since the distemper is so little considered
by the Physicians, wherefore oftentimes from such like affects, the Iliack
passion is produced.

Therefore most worthy to be praised, is the famously learned Fernelius, who by
his singular industry, and ingenious dexterity, has discovered such things, as
in this place, may gently help the practical Physician.

The Disease being perfectly known, a Remedy as easily may be found. The whole
cure consists in resolving and emollient medicines.

Resolving, are those Lenitives made of Vitriolate Tartar, wine of Iron,
Gachectick powder, and sowerish things both Natural and Artificial: Artificial,
see Platerus in his Observations of Discoloration. For these do wonderfully
resolve all the contracted filth in the Mesentery and Pancreon.

But if in Tumors of the Mesentery, the slow dejection of the belly which is
usually concomitant, be not by these means removed, Tartarisate spirit of Wine
given drop by drop, makes the belly soluble. Emollient, are powerful externals;
if among these a Plaster of Hemlock be applied, the Cure will more readily be
affected; It is observable, that oftentimes, from the applying of this Plaster
dolours begin to arise, which is a most certain sign, that the putrid filth
contracted from the preceding inflammation is disturbed, and resolving into
imposthumation; it has been often seen, that by this means the corrupt matter
is rarefied and almost dissolved, then this Plaster must be removed, and a
Clyster injected.

Note, That in this case there is nothing better then to prescribe a temperate
order of diet, well observing what things weaken the stomach, and are
prejudicial to the whole body; by this means and applying often only simple
Clysters of Milk and Oil Olive or fresh butter, the belly is delivered from
those noxious pollutions, not removed by the more interior purgations, and at
length the cure happily follows.

After the Cure is perfected, it is convenient once or twice yearly, to use
Lenitive purgations, least the part again receiving those impurities, be made
apt to retain them and a more contumacious return of the Disease unavoidably
follow.

Symptoms of the Liver and Spleen.
The Jaundies simple.
In the simple Jaundies, things purging Choler are excellent. Extract of
Rubarb is chiefly commended.

But if Obstructions be strong, aperitives must not be neglected, such are
Vitriolate Tartar, Cream of Tartar, wine of Iron, etc. Also Mercurius Luteus
(of which see Crollius) made of sublimate Mercury dissolved, and with Oil of
Tartar precipitated by boiling in common water, this is an aperitive specific.
Of which from Gr. iij to v exhibited with Extract of Treacle, or with Treacle
it self, and if need be repeated to provoke swear, effectually cure the simple
Jaundies.

A Decoction of Strawberries with the smaller Raisons, made in fountain water,
by a certain propriety dissolves the Jaundies, especially in Children. The same
in those of riper Age does more powerfully assault the Disease, chiefly if
there be no Fever concomitant, when fortified with half a handful of Horehound
macerated in wine, or else in this Decoction. This must be drunk to the
declining of the Disease.

If the Jaundies be symptomatical and obstructions of the Liver commonly
accompany, remove the cause and those will also decline. Yet if these
concomitant obstructions continue strong, and the Liver be free from a
Schirrus, it is an unhappy token of the Dropsy; neither will the distemper
abate unless the Obstructions be happily removed. Yet seldom, almost never,
does the wished end follow, by reason of the wonderful intemperance of the
parts, and Patients liberty of diet.

Note, Those that drink pure wines, especially burnt, are not afflicted with
this Disease: But this is rather to be observed then imitated, least a greater
inconveniency follow. Hereto may be referred all the abovementioned in-removing
Obstructions, and the hereafter mentioned concerning the Dropsy following or
accompanying the Jaundies.

The black Jaundies.
The black Jaundies attended with Obstruction of the Spleen, cannot happily be
cured by any more certain or evident Auxiliaries, then are already proposed at
large in Obstructions of the Spleen.

For this discolouration as a symptomatical accident, is never rightly removed,
unless the fountain of evil be exhausted, and the Spleen, and also the Liver
be restored to their pristine constitution.

The matter therefore being so effected, that the causes of the distemper be
removed, the Cure does happily follow.

Hypocondriack Melancholy.
Hypocondriack melancholy beginning, or simple, is for the most part cured
with Rulands Aqua bened. for by exterminating the contracted filth out of the
stomach and neighboring parts, the cure is made more easy, which if not
expelled, to remove the Obstructions would be more difficult.

Also Aperitives may be applied, as Cream of Tartar, Vitriolate Tartar, wine of
Iron, Cachectick powder, either before or after vomiting: In directing either
of these the prudence of the Physician is required, on which depends the most
weighty part of the Cure; oftentimes success is lost, if he proceed not warily,
religiously, and cordially.

Next to Vomitories, in this Case things purging Choler and Melancholy are
very commodious, such are these, Laxative powder of Sena, Extract of Rubarb,
Mechoachanna, Panchymagogon of Crollius, Extract of black Hellebore, and
Mercurius dulcis, by which (if need be) evacuations are laudably effected: So
Extract of Pills of Ammoniack (of which above) is here also very beneficial.

To mitigate symptoms, which for the most part arise from distended windiness
in the Praecordia, piercing the Animal Spirits of the brain: Care must be taken
to strengthen those Noble parts, if these Obstructions continue, use Magistery
and Salt of Coral and Pearls, the Bezoar stone, tincture of Corals, Elixir
proprietatis, ( Note, this is singular) and Oil of Saffron; for these comfort
and strengthen the heart and brain.

In Hypocondriack Melancholy confirmed, if the above prescribed be not
sufficiently efficacious, yet they are to be used, and the Vomitories not
neglected.

Experience proves, that those Aperitives do sometimes profit and take away the
malignity of the humor; yet its return by intervalls, and fresh assaults
cannot be prevented, nor the Disease eradicated by such means only.

Therefore are appointed yearly the use of sowerish medicaments, which remove
some Obstructions causing the Disease, but the Malady it self do not wholly
take away. Of wonderful value are such things as in Cure of the confirmed
Hypocondriack Melancholy, not only yield relief, but also pluck up the Disease
by the root, and leave no remaining symptoms: Such are these.

1. The Phylosophical water, or Tartarisate spirit of wine, being daily
exhibited inconvenient liquor, at first in a very small Dose, from one, two,
three or four drops in a just Dose, to eight or twelve, daily increasing one
drop, (after the use of the above named more gentle and less efficacious
medicaments) does perfectly cure.

2. The same performs the Extract of Pills of Ammoniack above recited, of which
if daily be exhibited j (the Dose may be increased in certain days from Gr. j
to j) and this be continued for twelve or fourteen days, if need require; (it
must be taken two hours before Supper, and an hour after the taking, alittle
broth must be received) the desired success will certainly follow.

Note, From the use of these is often wont to happen, that in dissolving the
internal obstructions of the bowels, the belly is so disturbed, as that a Flux
almost to a dysentery is seen to follow; this then must carefully be helped
with the corroborating medicaments above mentioned, chiefly with the Tincture
of Corals and Elixir proprietatis. In the mean while regard must be had, that
the sick keep a temperate orderly course in diet, without which almost no Cure
can be happily effected.

In this Disease to cut a vein, especially the vein Salvatella, is very
beneficial.

Atrophia or Consumption.
The Consumption with sharp evacuations, and resolving Medicines, is not helped
but rather exasperated; if the interior pa^s, chiefly the stomach, be oppressed
with contracted impurities, only some gentle vomitory, as chiefly of Aqua
bened. must be prescribed, for the peculiar force of this is, that it not only
exterminates all the Droplie matter from the intestines, but also makes the
^omack apt for concoction. Whence after the use of Aqua bened. we see the
appetite strengthened and increased, although for some time it seemed to be
lost, yet is afterward perfectly restored.

Therefore this Auxiliary moderately used in the beginning of the Cure, does
much help.

Then mollifying Medicines are to be prescribed, yet so, as also the
obstructions of the bowels may be removed: Therefore Vitriolate Tartar with a
Decoction of Raisons, and moystning Syrups, such as Syrup of Violets,
Coltsfoot, Betony, being inwardly taken, dissolves the Obstructions.

Externalls in this case are laudable, for Children afflicted with this Disease.

1. A Bath made with a Decoction of heads and feet of sheep, by long boiling
them in running water, until the flesh easily come from the bones.

2. A Decoction of red Willow barks, in River water: These Bathes chiefly in
Children exceeding consumptive, resolve the Consumption laudably; if seven,
eight, or nine times they be bathed therein, and the bathes fresh prepared once
or twice.

After bathing the Reins of the back bones must be anointed with Oil Olive, or
other resumptive Unguent.

In Food, moystning meats and broths must be exhibited, seldom meats roasted.
An emulsion of Oil of sweet Almonds with Coltsfoot and Betonywater. The same
when mixed with seeds of white Poppy and Mellons is exceeding profitable.

In those of ripe Age, a Bath of Aqua dulcis, in which are boiled ashes of
Filberds, Mallows, Marsh-Mallowes.
Marsh Mallows, Pellitory of the wall, Beet, Lettice, and bones of sheep; this
often used resists the Consumption: with these Goats milk is profitable. Also
distilled water of Swines blood, and cooling and moystning Plants do
wonderfully help. The water is thus prepared;. Swines blood lb ij take out all
strings or veins from it, then add leaves of Betony, Coltsfoot, red Roses,
Mallows, of each one handful, leaves of Lettice ss a handful, seeds of
Mellons without the husks j, water of Coltsfoot ss ij, distill these by a
Limbeck in Balneo, afterward perfume it with Tablets-perlate of Manus Christi;
of this water let the sick drink often. Likewise breast-milk sucked from the
breast does admirably help.

Note, In those which from taking a Love-potion are afflicted with this
distemper, Mares milk being always drunk with a little Sugar is a most
excellent Remedy.

Desperate Consumption of the body nothing profited by other medicines, I have
sometimes cured in this manner.. Virgins-honey what quantity you please; with
this anoint a new unglazed earthen pot all over within; then place the pot in
a heap of stubble gathered by Pismires quite buried up to the neck, cover the
orifice of the Pot with a sieve that is indifferent wide, and so the Ants
running upon the sieve will fall into the Honey, and there stick; hereby no
chaff or other impurity will fall into the Pot. Having thus gathered a
convenient quantity of Pismires, pour upon them a sufficient quantity of spirit
of Wine, digest them in Balneo in a vessel well closed for a day or two; then
distill them in Balneo, at first with gentle hear, till all the spirit of Wine
be come forth, which removed, distill the reserve by boiling in Balneo, and keep
for use. One spoonful of this water exhibited with a piece of bread toasted
three or four times a week for several weeks together, does mirably restore the
consumptive body. In the mean while the whole body, or only the remote parts,
as hands, arms and legs, must sometimes be bathed with the same liquor.

But if the Cure be detarded, and follow not the use of these Remedies; then
proceed in the following manner; (this Magnetic Cure is also powerful in
Fevers:) See below in Aridura.. A new laid Egg, boil it in a new earthen
pipkin, with the Urine of the Consumptive person, so as the Urine cover the
Egg, let it boil till it be very hard, then take off the pipkin, and take out
the Egg, which with a wooden skewer strike full of holes all over, that the
yolk may be seen through the holes; afterward boil this Egg now full of holes,
in the same Urine, always turning the Egg till all the Urine is consumed:
Lastly, this thus prepared bury in an Ant-hill: And when the Egg shall be eaten
up and consumed by the Ants; by a wonderful sympathy the Consumption of the
body declines, and the pristine nutrication happily follows. But in the mean
time, the using the former liquor must not be neglected.

In the Consumption arising from little worms in the skin of Children, about
the musculous and fleshly parts, generated of bad nutriment. This following
without any other addition is an approved Cure.. Of Briony root j or ij, boil
this to the consistency of a Poultis in a Lixivium prepared with ashes of Oak;
with which, in Children laboring with this Disease, anoint the whole body, in
the morning before the Sun be hot, in some stove or warm place; then leave it
for some time, and the worms will come forth through the pores with black
heads. This being done, the whole Skin.
body must presently be shaved with a Barbars Razor; by this means the heads of
the worms will be cut off, and the cause of evil nourishment removed. But after
this, the same operation must be repeated once or twice, until it be certainly
known, that all the worms be destroyed; afterward bathe the Children sometimes
in the Baths above described, which are prepared either with heads and feet of
sheep, or red barks of Willows.

Cachexy.
Every Cachexy from what cause soever procured, is helped with resolving and
corroborating medicines.

Resolving, are such as open the interior bowels; for so the depraved
constitution of the whole body is corrected.

Opening medicaments are Vitriolate Tartar, Cream of Tartar, wine of Iron; and
sowerish things both Natural and Artificial: All which should be administered
according as need requires, and the Patients can endure.

Purgations, that among others, are in this place needful, are, Crollius his
Panchymagogon, Specificum purgans of Paracelsus, and Mercur. dulcis are here
chiefly commended; Extract of Esula and black Hellebore, in Phlegmatic and
Hypocondriack melancholy do much help.

Confortatives are taken from things more common, among which excellent is
Spirit of Vitriol in Conserve of Roses, Sorrel, flowers of Borrage, Bugloss and
Violets; also Magistry of Coralls, and Pearls, and all other Analeptick waters
commonly used.

Moreover, the most happy Auxiliary of every Cachexy is the Cachectick powder
above described; which sometimes alone, or at least when joined in use with
some of the above named Vomitories or Purges does sufficiently perform the
Cure. The use of this powder does oft-times move the belly, which disturbed
filth it is necessary to remove by all other convenient purgations: (viz.) so
as the corrupt matter contracted in the body, and by the use of the Cachectick
powder somewhat separated, be wholly exterminated.

In Virgins, for the most part defect of the Menses, is an accidental cause of
the Cachexy, whereby the Cure is the more slow.

In Women of ripe Age, the Cachectick powder is also wont to open the veins of
the womb, but sometimes the obstruction is so obstinate, that by it alone it
cannot be removed: therefore the usual time of the flowing of the Menses, must
rightly be observed, which is according to this vulgar Versicle. Luna veta
vetulas, juvenes nova Luna repurgat. especially if in time of the Cure, dolours
be felt about the loins, and lower part of the belly.

That therefore the Cure may more happily be effected, in the time of moving
the Menses, give the hereafter mentioned in the Suppression of the Menses. Such
are the distilled water of Garlic and Oil of Savine; also water of Coltsfoot,
Raddish and red Motherwort.

Note, If to the Cachectick powder be added an equal quantity of steel, and the
dung of young Geese prepared, and given in the former quantity, chiefly about
the time of moving the flowers, it happily removes both the paleness of
Virgins, and Obstruction of the Menses.

Most contumacious Obstructions of the Menses, are opened by a Lixivium of the
Feces or Dropsy part of Regulus of Antimony, prepared only by boiling in
common water, and poured upon hot Iron or Flints, that the vapor ascend
through a The Disea adsitting in a chair.
chair to the Natural parts: See below the suppression of the Menses. Herb
Mercury boiled in water, and applied to the privizies provokes the Menses.

To all these may rightly be added the cutting of the Ankle-vein, precisely at
the time of the flowing of the Menses. Diaphoratick Antimony fixed is also
powerful to expel the flowers, if its usual Dose be daily exhibited with some
drops of Essence of Myrrh, in water of red Motherwort. But all these things
must be disposed according to the prescript of Nature it self, and rules of Art.

Drossie.
The Dropsy confirmed is diffienltly cured, otherwise easily, notwithstanding
there are more noble medican (...) then are in common use, and a method of
using them, sound out, by which the most inveterate Dropsy may be cured.

In all kinds of the Dropsy, the Cure must first be endeavored with
Aperitives cleansing the b^lly, and not with Dtureticks, least by the use of
these, before the bowels be evacuated, the fifth of the belly be gathered on a
heap to the Reins, and thereby the Disease more difficult to cure.

Purgations in this case proper are;

1. Mercour. vitae, or flowers or butter of Antimony; the Dose at first Gr. iv
in extract of Hellebore or Coloquintida; afterward, if strength permit, they
may be increased to Gr. x or xij, and continued for certain days, chiefly in
the confirmed Dropsy, the well disposedness of the stomach in this case much
helps. This Medicine (in this distemper) does not at all procure vomiting, but
purges by the inferior parts.

Note, In the aged this purgation of Mercur. vitae, procures the falling down
of the fundament, which afterward is seldom helped, or at least difficultly
cured.

2. White flowers of Antimony in distilled Oil (as is described in Crollius his
Notes) and that Oil afterward beaten in cold water, and being well dulcified,
reduced to powder, and made up in Pills; this often exhibited expells the water
from between the skin by the inferior parts.

3. Crollius his compound Extract of Specin^k in Cure of the Dropsy.

4. Extract o^ Elatery made with spirit of Wine. Dose, from Gr. j to iij at
most.

After the use of these Universal Purgations, we must have recourse to gentle
Aperatives, and to (...) things as corroborate the interior parts; yet so as
Diu^ks may always be mixed therewith, partly in meats and drinks, partly also
with the gentle Aperitive Medicines.

Here the Cache^ck powder obtaines the priority, of which (...) j, or iv must
be macerated for a night in a decoction of the lesser Centaury, and then
strained and divided into two equal parts, and exhibited alone the two
following mornings; Of like virtue is the Essence of Albandal.

In the Dropsical humor between the skin and the belly, Extract of Esula is
commended. Also Draturbith with Rubarb, and Gum de^eru: These without delay
evacuate all the superfluous matter contained in the belly. Yet first Aperients
before named, and such as prepare the crude humor gathered to the Liver must
be used.

Timpany.
In the Timpany, simple Purgations are seldom successful (but rather augment
the evil) but compounded purging Mercurial Medicines, chiefly when there is a
watery humor gathered between the skin and the belly, dissipate both the wind
and water.

But there is a simple Specific in the Timpany, which is the liquor of flowers
of Longwort (the Arcanum of Longwort is also powerful, but here the liquor is
excellent, being prepared after the same manner as the liquor of Succory is
prepared, as is described in the Chap. of Opthalmy in affects of the Eyes) of
which j taken daily for some time, in a decoction of roots and seeds of Fennel,
expells the windiness.

That we may more happily proceed to the Cure, it is necessary to make a
fomentation for the belly after this manner:

. Boys Urine clean lb iv, Lapis Prunella iij, boil them together over a
gentle fire till a third part of the Urine be consumed; with this Urine hot
foment the parts affected, moreover chafe it very well with the hand (by this
means I restored a Widow of Marpurge, given over by all other Physicians:)
after the Cure is effected, viz. the waters expelled, and the Tumors as well
of other parts as of the belly it self plainly consumed; drying medicaments
must be applied, such are,

1. Essence of Crocus of Iron described by Crollius in the end of his Specific
for the Dropsy, in old Conserve of Roses, or else in juice of Wallwort
exhibited often.

2. Diacubeba of Paracelsus, which is thus made;

. Of Cubeba, that is, Myrtle berries dried, seeds of Basil, Cloves, of each ij
and ss, all the kinds of Sanders, Spodium, the four great cold seeds unhusked,
of each j, white Amber ij, seeds of Endive, Purcelane, and Lettice, of each ss:
Reduce all these to most fine powder, and with iv of Sugar dissolved in Succory
water, make an Electuary; to which must be added syrup of Pomgranates j and ss;
of this mixture from ij to an ss must be often exhibited.

3. Spirit of Guaiacum with juice of Wallwort taken to provoke sweat, this
happily dryes.

In the Timpany the Arcanum of Cumine and Carraways Phylosophically prepared is
very beneficial; after other more gentle purgations, to prevent exasperating
the evil, some drops of this must be exhibited with Sudorificks, and other
Specifical Medicines.

There are three kinds of the Dropsy.
Ascitis, that is a watery humor between the Rim of the belly and the bowels.

Timpany, that is a windy Tumor.

Anasarca, a Dropsy all over the body: Of these, most dangerous is the
Timpany, Ascites is less perilous then it, Anasarca is easier cured then the
rest.

In this Case is commended a Lixivium of ashes of Vine branches, and ashes of
the extremities of Juniper branches, made with white wine; to which may be
added Aromaticks and Sugar of the best (or most favoury) tastes, to render it
the more grateful. With this Lixivium I have known not a few delivered from the
Dropsy.

Also this preparation of Iron is convenient, thus; dissolve filings of Iron j,
in viij of Aqua fortis, power on the Aqua fortis by little and little very
leisurely, set it in digestion for one night, then abstract the Aqua fortis by
a Limbeck in sand, and you will have an and ss of most red Crocus; upon which,
being first dried with gentle heat, pour common spirit of wine into a body with
a blind head; set it to digest in sand, and the spirit of wine will wax red,
which cleansed from its feces, distill in Balneo to an Oyliness: This is very
profitable in drying up the Dropsy, and strengthening the inward parts. If
after the use of other mitigating medicaments, nine or ten drops of this be by
the Dropsical person drunk morning and evening in the simple decoction of
Juniper berries, the Disease thereby is easily removed and expelled.

Ascites.
In the Ascites, which is most common of all, the superfluous matter contained
in the belly must be evacuated without any delay. Yet first Aperients, and such
as prepare the crude Humors.
juice gathered to the Liver must be used: Therefore this decoction must
presently be made, which is thus;. Root of black Hellebore prepared, of
Mechochanna, of each j and ss, Galangal j, leaves of Sena, Alex. well cleansed,
of each j, Anniseeds, Fennclseeds, of each ss, Wild Sassron ss: Infuse these
for one night in a sufficient quantity of aperitive decoction; in the morning
boil this to viij, adding at the end of the boiling of Rubarb j and ss, of
Sugar ij, strain this. Make an Apozeme not clari^ed for three or four Doses,
adding to the last Dose, Species of Diaturbith with Rubarb ss, or a After three
Doses of the Apozeme, one Dose of Laxative Mercury or precipitate with Sol, may
be exhibited, with Extract of Coloquintida and Scammony, or j, or j of Extract
of Esula, often used by Rulandus in expelling this Disease; the preparation of
which see Crollius.

Hereunto also may be referred Rulands Golden spirit of Life, which is made with
spirit of Malmsie wine, by which the Tincture is extracted out of Trochus of
Alhandal, which must be exhibited according to the quantity of Trochus and
spirit of wine. Then may be exhibited for three days together this following
Diuretic;. Root of Wallwort ss, Fennel, Polipode, Wild Alexander, of each ij
and ss, roots of Flower de Luce one handful, prepared Hellebore, Mechoachanna,
of each ij, leaves of Sena j; the inward bark of Elder j and ss, Flowers of
Elder, of Broom, of each four parts, Flowers of Lavender two parts, seeds of
Fennel, of Daucus, of each j and ss, Ginger, Galangal, of each j and ss; Infuse
these in a sufficient quantity of water of Hedge Isop.
Gratiola and Elder Flowers for one night, in the morning boil them gently to
viij or there about, express them; then add syrup of Agrimony, of Bysantine, of
each ij, water of Cinnamon ss: If the belly be not soluble, then add according
to discretion Extract of Trochus of Alhandal, or the Golden spirit of Life, or
the juice of our Flower de Luce, Cresses, and of the green bark of Elder may be
added, viz. ss of the juice to iv of the said Apozeme; yea, if ij, or ij and ss
of the aforesaid juice be drunk with common water only, the watery humor will
powerfully be expelled.

Sometimes, least the sick purge too much, and strength decline, Cream of
Tartar may be exhibited, or Magistery of Tartar, or syrup of Agrimony, of rinds
of Citron and Oximel of Squills, allayed with water of Melissa, Fennel,
Agrimony, Parsley, Cinnamon.

Also the flowing Tablets;. Powder of Dialacca, Diacurcuma, of each ij, Sugar
dissolved in water of Alkakengy, Tincture of Iron ij, distilled Oil of Nutmegs;
make Tablets according to Art, of which let the sick take ij three hours before
and after drink.

Also this Electuary following may be used;. Juice of Elder iij, Mithridate ss;
Species of Diarrhodon, Abbatis, Solution of Pearls, Crabs eyes prepared, of
each j, Syrup of Agrimony a sufficient quantity, Spirit of V^l it ^s make an
El^duary, of which morning and evening let the Patient take the quantity of a
Filberd Nutt three hours before meat.

The belly also may be fomented with a Decoction made of Mint, Origan, of each
two handfulls, Flowers of Elder, of Melilot, of each three parts, Carraway
seeds j and (...), Bay berries iij, Goats dung to the weight of them all, boil
these in a Lixivium with common water; with this Decoction, or the Herbs
themselves hot, foment the swollen parts; after the fomentation apply a
plaster of Bay berries.

Then such things as by an occult propriety are powerful in every kind of the
Drepsien^st be applied.

1. Water of red Earth-wormes, the description whereof see my Notes to Crollius.

2. This following water,. Of Vitriol and Tartar, of each lb j, root of
Vincetox lb ss, Spirit of Wine one Pint; set them in infusion three days, then
distill them by a Limbeck in sand; to the distilled water add some drops of
Spirit of Vitriol to render it gratefully sharp. Give this three times a day
for several days together in one spoonful of the ^ction of Vincetox. It moves
Urine speedily, corrects the intemperances, and takes away all Obstru^ticts.

3. Powder of Toads: see Crollius.

4. Geese dung, see the same:

For drink, this following Julep may be used:

. Water of Wild alexander, Alkakengy, of each v, water of Elder flowers iij,
Spirit of Vitriol ss, or Lapis Prunella ss, fyrup of the five Roots ij and ss;
mix them: or Wormwood Wine Chalybrated, etc.

The Tumor thus removed, we come to such things as may discuss the relics,
and strengthen the affected part; of this kind are Treacle-water, a decoction
of Guaiacum Lign. Sarsaparilla, China, and Bathes made with Sulphur and Alum:
Or,. Juice of Elder ij, Salt of Card. bened. j, Syrup of C^d hened a convenient
quantity, make it up to the consistency of an Electuary, which let the sick
take at twice two several mornings together, and sweat either in bed or in a
Stove: Or else,. Root of Sarsaparilla, shavings of Cu^iacum, of each ss,
Sassafras ij; infuse them in a sufficient quantity of common water for twenty
four hours, afterward boil them to vj; to this when strained at syrup of
Cardus.
Card. bened. of Scabious, of each vj, Salt of Cardu. bened. Cinnamon water ij,
mix these for two Doses to be given before the going into the Stove; or a Dose
of Mineral Bezoar may be given, or of fixed Diaphoretick Antimony with Gr. jj of
the Bezoar stone.

The Liver is strengthened with Electuary of dross of Iron, Electuary of
Diamber; to ij of this add old Conserve of Red Roses j and ss, Crocus of Iron j.

If a Tumor of the legs be concomitant, which for the most part is, then make
a Lixivium of Coals of Oak, add to it the abovesaid Lixivium of Herbs made for
fomentation, boil it till half be consumed. In this Lixivium maddefit linen
clothes, and apply them hot to the legs.

Or, if some Tumor of the belly and legs be yet remaining, then take course
bread, boil it in wine, or moderate Vinegar, to the consistency of a Poultiss,
and spread it upon linen, and lay it upon the belly all over, leaving it so
for twenty four hours.

After the Tumor is assuaged remove it lower toward the knees, always as the
Tumor abates move it lower unto the feet.

But if by this means the Tumor abate not, or there be so great abundance that
it cannot be resolved, it will be most convenient to apply Potential Cauteries
to the legs four fingers below the knees; we have seen by this only Remedy the
Tumors of the legs and belly healed, which by others have been judged
uncureable.

Some apply leaves of A kind of Burr.
Bardana to the said affected parts, changing them often, which they say
contracts the water and consumes it.

If great thirst be, so as it cannot possibly be endured, then Spirit of Salt
in Pomegranate Wine may be exhibited, or Salt of Wormwood from Gr. iij to viij;
if the use of this be continued for some time, the thirst will no more be
inordinate.

An^sarcs.
Anasarcha.
In Anasarcha, because it is always attended with a Phlegmatic, tough and
crude Humor, unapt for evacuation; before the use of evacuating Medicines (yet
Lenitives may be first used) such as prepare, alter and digest the matter, are
to be used, among which are chiesly these; Syrup of Agrimony, of Wormwood and
compounded Oxymel, dissolved in water of Agrimony and Wormwood.

The Humor thus prepared, the evacuation must be made according to the above
said Rule, still interposing preparatives and digestives, and such as may
comfort the inward parts, chiefly the Stomach and Liver; therefore it will be
best to provoke vomiting with prepared Salt or Aqua bened. that so the
Ventricle may be freed from crude Humors; then proceed to such things as
provoke sweat and urine, among which is Jacob Weckers water so famously
commended in the Dropsy, and is thus.. Distilled liquors of Tartar, Gentian
Treacle water, made with simple water per V^sicam, of each j, Spirit of
Vitriol, Oil of Sulphur, of each Gr. x. Let the sick take from ij to ss at his
going into a Stove.

Also a principal secret in this Disease is Gratiola, which should always be
plentifully mixed with almost all medicaments for distempers of this kind. Of it
may also be made an Extract or Salt, of which may be compounded Hydropical
Pills; thus,. Extract of Gratiola, Mechoacanna, of each j, Salt of Gratiola Gr.
vj; make Pills, they purge by the belly and urine. If they purge not enough,
add Extract of Trochus of Alhandal made with spirit of Malmfie Wine, as often
as you see cause.

Some times also in this case scarrifications may be used in the feet, thighs
and hips.

In the Timpany, which has always a whey-like Humor concomitant with the
windiness, all those things above prescribed in Ascites are also profitable;
only these Carminatives may be added, as Cumin, Dill, Carraway, Fennel, Daucus.

Clysters in this Affect may be injected at the beginning the Cure, being made
of Carminative Decoctions with Oil of Dill and Rue.

The Ventricle being cold, as in this distemper always it is, must be altered
with hot appropriates, as Species of Diacumin, Dialacca, Diarrhodon Abbatis,
Diacurcuma in Tablets, with Oil of Cloves and Anise, or with Conserve of Mint,
Peneroyal and Treacle, of each a like quantity; beneficial also are syrup of
Canella, distilled Oil of Cloves and Mastich, Spirit of Wormwood, Cumine and
Carraways, some drops of these being drunk with Sudorificks.

But the heat of the Liver must be cooled by applying outwardly juice of
Endive, Succory, and Ointment of Roses; cooling appropriates must sometimes be
taken inwardly.

The Ventricle outwardly may be fortified with Oil of Nard and Mastick, applied
plaister-wise, or in a bag; of exceeding use, as well in this, as in other
cases, is Cream of Tartar, tincture of Tartar, Oil of Sulphur and Spirit of
Vitriol.

Great Cuppinglasses applied to the Navel, with much flame, as it were by a
charm, discuss the winds; witness Galen.

In other things proceed as in the Ascites.

Gum de Peru is commended as famous in expelling the Dropsy, being from Gr.
iij to viij or ss commodiously exhibited, as with Cream of Tartar, which serves
instead of an Excitement to other purging Medicines; adding Correctives, as
Species of Diamber, and Oil of Mace; (this may be exhibited in the Gout,
Cachexy, and other watery distempers.) Profitable also is juice of Elatery
instead of a spur, being exhibited with a ppropriate Pills. The following Pills
are likewise profitable;. Gum de Peru Gr. viij Powder of the root of Gelapium
ij and ss, Species of Diamber Gr. vj, with Oil of Cinnamon make Pills.

The sick may also be purged with Turbith alone; or make an Apozeme, thus;.
Leaves of Sena ij, Turbith ss, Hermodactills iij, Cinnamon, Ginger, of each j:
Infuse and boil these as is above described. Make an Apozeme.

If vapors arising from the resolved humors, reach the Diaphragma, and
occasion stoppages of the breast, this following Clyster must be injected;.
Flowers of Cammomil, Soldanella, the lesser Centaury, of each one handful,
S^eds of Wild Saffron, Bay berries, of each ss; make a Decoction, of which. lb
j, of Honey of Roses and Oil of Cammomil, of each iij; mix these and make a
Clyster.

Diet in the Dropsy. Bread made of very fine flower, which must be mixed with
the root of butchers-broom, first reduced to most fine powder; Also seeds of
Anise, Fennel and Carraway.

Wine, either of Cardu. bened. or Wormwood, with Butchers-Broom For Butchers
broom read Rusk.
Chalybeate, water of Elder flowers and Spirit of Elder.

Note, the drinking of sweet waters is prejudicial in the Dropsy. Wines with
Sulphur, Nitre and Turpentine, are profitable.

Bathes also are very convenient, wherein are boiled Wormwood, flowers of
Waltwort, Elder, Agrimony, Cammomil, with a little Nitre: See Observat. 25. of
Bartholomew Caprolius.

Vices of the Reins.
Inflammation of the Reins.
It behooves the Physician to deal very warily in Inflammation of the Reins;
for unless all things be prudently done, most grievous Diseases unhappily
follow: Therefore neither sharp purgations, nor unseasonable digestives, can in
this case be profitable.

Paracelsus calls the Inflammation of the Reins, the Fever of the Reins, which
is always wont to attend them.

The Cure consists both in inward and outward Medicaments.

Internalls, are such as by a certain propriety extinguish the inflammations of
the innate humidity; this performs Lapis Prunella, very quickly, for by it the
belly is freed, otherwise this business may be effected with a gentle Extract
of Mechoachanna, or with infusion of Ruharb. In this case sometimes we are
wont, and that happily, to exhibit a decoction of sweet Prunes with water of
Tartar, (viz. in which most pure Tartar is boiled.) Here also Clysters are not
incommodious.

Lapis Prunella dissolved only in Simple water opens the belly, and edulcorated
with Sugar removes the Inflammation. Venus is hurtful.

Externalls, are Unguents of Roses, Liquor of seeds of Poppy, Henbane,
Nightshade, or such like. Also Oil of bitter Almonds with Camphire dissolved in
it, and the affected part anointed therewith, does powerfully resist
inflammation: Likewise outwardly applied of great use is Unguent. Rosat.
Mesues, tempered with Oil of bitter Almonds and Scorpions. Venus must
altogether be avoided.

A secret in Inflammations of the Reins, is the crude juice of Crabs of the
River, bruised and expressed; and one spoonful of this exhibited once or twice in
broth or a decoction of Prunes; yet the above named Externalls must not be
neglected.

Obstruction of the Reins.
There is not any more certain and evident Deoppilative of the Reins, then is
made of Vitriol and Tartar: Therefore Vitriolate Tartar, also Specificum
Purgans of Paracelsus, dissolve all contracted filth, especially if the
Obstruction be green, and the matter be not congealed to gravel or stones. The
Cure of Obstructions beginning is one, but if of long continuance, it must be
otherwise effected. For this requires another Cure, of which we Treat in the
Chap. of Gravel in the Reins, properly so called.

Chrystals of Tartar are of like virtue, for they dissolve and expel
Obstructions, and the Tartar thereof.

But when indeed all Obstructions of the veins arise from the Tartar in the
body, whether they be green, or confirmed, it is best to apply a Specific, by
the force and innate propriety of which, all the Tartar in man's body may be
wonderfully removed, and so all Obstructions thoroughly expelled; and this
virtue chiefly is manifested in this affect of the Reins.

Which also is powerful in old Obstructions arising from contracted gravel
hardened to a stone; which it insensibly, and almost without pain daily breaks
away in a slimy thin substance by the Urine, and by little and little wholly
removes. This is called by Paracelsus Ludum humani prepared, which he
exceedingly commends, yet has not any where left its genuine preparation: That
which he left is thus;. Ludum, or the stone that is cut, or any other way
drawn, out of Man's body (one part; powder of Coals, chiefly of Beech, two
parts, mix them, when pulverisate) Calcine it in an open fire at first gently,
afterward reverberate it with strong fire, till it be plainly reduced to Salt.

Note, Here is another seeret way of Calcination, which hitherto I have
revealed to none.. Powder of Ludum humani one part, powder of Coals of Beech
two parts, mix them together; put this in an Earthen pot, covered with a Tile
or other convenient stopple, burn it in a potters furnace for twenty four
hours; and the spirit of the coals by the benefit of the fire will soften the
hardness of the stone, yet the coals themselves will not be consumed: Upon this
mixture pour boiling water, or boil it in hot water, and the powder of Ludum
will dissolve into water of an Orange color, which color arises from the
fetid Sulphur of the stone it self. If any part remain undissolved by this
solution; then dry it, and add fresh powder of Coals, and again Calcine it as
before. All the solutions by evaporating reduce to a Salt; join all these with
powder of coals, and again Calcine them: when Calcined dissolve it in boiling
water, so the most pure part after evaporation will be found converted into a
white Salt, which will easily Crystallize, if set for some time in a cold moist
place. Join this most excellent Salt with the best spirit of wine, and in a
Retort by distillation cohobate it much, till all the Salt with the Spirit be
wholly come over: Afterward in Balneo with gentle heat draw off the Spirit, and
the Oil of Ludum humani will remain in the bottom. Of which from three to six,
ten, or twelve drops exhibited certain times in convenient liquor, (but) once a
day, all the tartarous Obstructions of the body, (in the brain and tongue)
especially of the Reins, does happily resolve and expel the Tartar; also in
confirmed Tartar it is of excellent use.

Anointing externally with more common Unguents help to dissolve Obstructions
of the Reins: Also Plasters, Baths, Cataplasms, and such like are useful.

Memorable in this Case is Oil of Turpentine, mixed with living -- worms, and
the dolorous part anointed therewith.

Of the like virtue is a preparation of Crabs eyes; though somewhat inferior,
yet is very powerful.

After the above recited manner all stones may be reduced into their own Oils,
and so converted to Medicinal use.

This Specific of Ludum humani, is the only thing powerful to remove old
Obstructions, caused by the hard congealing of the contracted gravel, which it
insensibly, and almost without pain daily breaks away in a slimy thin
substance, which is carried out by the Urine, and by little and little wholly
removed. Hereto may be referred the Salt against the stone, cited by Crollius.

Paracelsus prepared an Arcanum of the hard prickly bunches growing upon
Eglantine (some call it the Dog-rose) the manner of which preparation is no
where extant. I prepare it thus; In the months of May and June, I gather a
great quantity of them, and cut them, taking out all the little worms, or other
insects growing in the Cavities, or hanging about them; by fermentation with
water and common ferment, I draw forth a spirit and a water per Vesicam. Of the
Caput mortuum converted to ashes I extract a Salt, which when purified I again
join with the spirit, and macerate it by digestion for some time, then I mix it
with Argilla, and in the fire of suppression, by distillation I draw forth more
spirit, together with the Salt; that which remains in the vessel, I express,
and the Express by Retort in Sand (with fire toward the end not too strong,
least it smell of the fire) I distill after the manner of an Arcanum, as other
Arcanums of Vegetables are made.

Dose of this from Gr. iij to xij, which often exhibited, and in convenient
Liquors, does insensibly expel the Stone. Otherwise, if powder of these bunches
be macerated in wine, and that given to drink (like other infusion streined)
and the use continued for some time, experience proves it is of like effect,
only somewhat more flow in operation.

In the total Obstruction of the Reins by the Stone, or else, if the passages)
as in Difficulty of Urine.
Ischuria and Gravel in the reins
Nephritis) and bladder, by the falling down of the Stones to the neck of the
bladder be wholly obstructed so, as no part of the Urine can come forth; most
excellent is the fresh Urine of an He-Goat, taken out with the bladder while he
yet lives, and one spoonful given to drink hot; and presently after the Caul
with the latestines of the Goat, applied to the belly, privities, and
Peritoneum: This does suddenly consume the Stone without prejudice to the
vessels, and the Patient is free.

Exulceration of the Reins.
Exulceration of the Reins is acknowledged Curable, if but of small
continuance, as well by Dogmatical as Hermetical Physicians.

But the inveterate exulceration is by the former universally proclaimed
uncurable; by the latter, from certain experience, it is not judged impossible
to effect the Cure.

In exulcerations of the Reins and bladder, the Plant Aloes well bruised and
mixed with milk, and given to the Patient to drink, with other things of like
effect, yield no small benefit to the sick, but are attended with very good
success; nay, Garzias affirms they do presently Cure.

Practitioners are wont in this case to exhibit Pills of Aloes, not without
benefit to the sick; this must be continued certain weeks. The Pills may be
prepared of Aloes with powder of earthworms and steel.

Some use Venice Turpentine j, which they dissolve with the yolk of an Egg, and
afterward exhibit it in broth made of Hens, first well tempered therewith.

In Observation, I have found from several Examples, that Mercurius dulcis is
in this case very profitable, if exhibited before other Medicines, (in a just
Dose, sometimes in a week, as twice or thrice, respecting the strength of the
Patient) it does not only cleanse the impurities of the whole body, but chiefly
of the Reins.

If in this case spirit of Mercurius dulcis be applied, no exulcerations can
continue. Spirit of Mercu. dulcis is thus:

. Crystaline Mercury sublimate (not Mercu. dulcis) what quantity you please,
grind it to an impalpable powder, in a conveniently large Cucurbit, pour on the
best spirit of Wine, abstract it by a Limbeck in ashes, pour on the distilled
Liquor again, and re-distil it, go on per Cohobiam so long as till you perceive
the distilled spirit of Wine, to pass the Limbeck like to a white Oil, which
gather in another Receiver. Upon the Caput Mortuum in the bottom of the
Cucurbit pour other fresh spirit of wine; proceed in like manner as before,
until all be come forth like white Oil or Spirit. This Spirit of Mercury in
exulcerations of the reins and bladder does wonderfully operate, if two or
three drops of this be daily exhibited once or twice in water of the roots of
Nymphea, Horsetayle, and Plantane.

The Consolidation is duly perfected, with Conserve of Roses two parts,
(simple, without mixture of Spirit of Vitriol, by reason of the exulceration)
seeds of St. John's Wort one part, mixed and exhibited in the quantity of a
Filberd Nut, for certain days at the end of the Cure, in the Evenings. By
this means also the most inveterate exulcerations are removed.

Nephritick Dolor.
In resisting dolours arising from gravel in the Reins, the cause must first be
removed; but if this be so powerful and strongly radicated, as it wholly refuse
mitigation, by a certain obliquation, means must be often tried, and in the
Return of the distemper.
Paroxysm it self, diligence used, that the pain may abate, and the gravel by
the proper passages descend into the bladder.

And then both emollient, resolving, and dolor asswaging remedies external
and internal may profitably be applied; and sometimes mediation made by
Anodynes, least too much pain create daily peril. These things therefore are
left to the wisdom of the Physician.

Whilst for the most part the contracted gravel, is wont to beget so great
torment, it would be worth while, to adhibit such things as may resolve the
gravel, especially if the dolours abate not, before greater torments be
increased, by removing it to its place through the strait passages, yet it is
not altogether safe to use such resolving medicaments, (emollient are always
first to be applied) unless you be certain of the mollifying and enlarging
the passages: But if the Disease be extreme, an extreme remedy must also be
applied; such as the specificks above mentioned, which are of great use in this
case, especially that laudable one of Goats Urine.

Nothing is more convenient in this affect, then to exhibit Mercurius dulcis in
a just Dose once or twice; for those who use these Mercurial Pills once a a
month, are seldom infested with Nephritick dolours: by this means the passages
are enlarged, and the gravel breaks away of its own accord.

If in the mean time, while these things are done, the Specific of
Ludumhumani, or of Crabs, be taken in its certain Dose (which does not only
exterminate the Stone of the Reins and Bladder, but also the Tartar of the
whole body) the Nephritick dolours are thence forward less to be feared.

Externally, Unguent of Roses, Mesues, etc.

The Stone of the Reins.
In Cure of the Stone, at first a gentle and wind-discussing Clyster must be
injected, least the wind and excrements contained in the Intestines compress
the Reins, and increase the dolours.

I call it wind, because these gravelly stones for the most part generate
abundance of winds, through the imbecility of the Ventricle.

But strong Clysters Diuretic, and also solutive Clysters must in the
beginning of the Cure be carefully avoided, because they stir the humors, the
humors troubled fall upon the Reins, and augment the pain.

Diuretics direct the watery humors to the Reins, whereby the dolor is also
increased.

Anoint the Reins with this following Oil:. Oil of Scorpions one part, of
Turpentine ss a part. Then apply this Plaster:. Of Galens cooling Plaster ij
and ss, Unguent of Roses Camphorate ij, Laudanum Opiat j and ss; spread it upon
leather, and therewith cover the Region of the Reins.

Inwardly let the sick take ij of Oil of sweet Almonds, in any broth, with Gr.
vj of Essence of Saffron, or ss of Saffron it self, that the passages may be
loosened.

These things thus done, if the Patient be afflicted with pain in the head, a
Vein may be cut, least the abundance of blood, by reason of the extention of
the dolor, flow to the affected part, and augment the pain.

Also a Dose of Laudanum Opiat may be given; and if the pain be vehement, of it
a Plaster made and applied to the Reins; Likewise a syrup of Mucilaginous
compositions with emulsion of the four great cold seeds may be inwardly taken;
then may be exhibited a Bolus of Cassia fresh drawn.

And if the dolor be not remitted, make this following Bath, in which the sick
may sit up to the arms.

. Roots of Mallows, Althea, of each ij, flowers of Camomil, Melilot, of each
four parts, Rest-harrow six parts, Fennel seeds viij, Lin seeds iv, Juniper
berries four handfulls: Boil these in a sufficient quantity of water for a
Bath, in which let the Patient sit one hour or two. After two hours let him
walk a little about the room, and again go into the Bath; while he is there,
give him Gr. vj of the Oy! of Crab's-eyes, which is thus prepared.

. Powder of Crabs v, Oil of Tartar made per deliquium vj; these mixed together
digest in Balneo, or Horse-dung, for fifteen days, afterward coagulate the
matter in a glass placed in sand, then reduce it to powder, extract the powder
with Spirit of Wine, repour on the Spirit of Wine, and by abstracting reduce
the matter into the form of a most thick Oil. Dose, from Gr. iv to vj in water
of Wild Alexander or Onious, with j and ss of mucilaginous syrup: Or if this
Oil be wanting,

. Of Crab's-eyes prepared, the best Troches of Alkakengy, of each of these
pulverisate ss, give it with the former fyrup: Also instead of a Cataplasm,
Cresses boiled in milk may be applied to the Region of the Reins.

Then have recourse to such things, as by a certain propriety expel the Stone,
not omitting the use of the Bath, wherein the Patient should sit as is
directed, nor other mittigating remedies; the dolours being somewhat assuaged,
use some gentle purgation, made of an Apozeme, or any other syrup.. Leaves of
Sena, Alexand. s. s. j, fruit of Alkakengy ss, choice Rubarb, Troches of
Agarick, of each j, Nutmegs ss; boil this in a sufficient quantity of common
water to vj; add to this when strained, syrup of the five Roots, of Succory
with Rubard, of each j and ss; make an Apozeme for two Doses.

Medicaments, which by a certain propriety contrary this Disease, are

1. Antinephritick water.. Root of Rest harrow lb j, cut it very small, and
macerate it in lb ij of rich Wine, for three days, then express and strein it;
in this when streined, macerate Roots of Wild Alexander, Eryngo, Pellitory of
the wall, Herb Herniaria, Sacifrage, the whole Plant, of each iv, Fruit of
Alkakengy, Juniper berries bruised, of each iij, Seeds of Fennel, Vrtica,
Melons, Grummel seed, of each ij; cut all these, and macerate in the above
decoction four days; then strongly express them, to the express add juice of
Purcelane lb ij, distill them by a Limbeck. Dose, two spoonfulls. This is used
as well for preservation, as for Cure of this Disease.

2. This following is commended, which some call Aqua Fuekererum.. Root of
Liquorish ij, Wild Alexander, Rest-harrow, Pimpernel, of each j and ss,
shavings of the wood Sassafras ij, Root of Enula j, leaves of Ground Ivy four
handfulls, Seeds of Fennel, Vrtica, of each vj, juice of Ground Ivy v, after
three days infusion distill it, and keep the water, with which may be added
syrup of Cloves or Canella for condiment; Dose, two spoonfulls; here is useful
the Oil of Crab's-eyes above described.

But that the Relics, and filth abiding in the reins and bladder may be
purged out, and those parts corroborated; let the sick take the Expression of
this following Nodellum macerated in Wine, drinking it several mornings: The
Nodellum is thus made.. Wood of Sassafras, Nephritick, of each j and ss, Root
of Polypode, Wild Alexander, of each ij, Ground-furrs, Pimpernel, Burnet, of
each ij and ss, Sperage, our Flower de Luce, of each ij, Florentine flower de
Luce ss, most white Turbith ij, Herb Rosemary, Strawberry leaves, Saxafrage,
Pimpernel, of each ss a handful, Flowers of Roses, Borage one part, Anniseeds,
seeds of Fennel, of Mountain Siler, of each ss, fruit of Alkakengy no vj,
choice Cinnamon, ss, Mace ij; bruise these, and tie them up in fine red linen:
Make a Nodellum by macerating it in lb j and ss of Wine for three days.

Also every other day the Sick may take j and ss of Turpentine, washed in water
of Alkakengy, and sometimes with the following syrup, or else in hot Wine with
ss of Spirit of Turpentine. Also he should have Tablets of Masterwort, to eat
in a morning at pleasure, on which may be instilled one, two or three drops of
distilled Oil of Nutmegs. A Syrup may be made of the two Roots iij, Julep ij,
water of Wild Alexander, of Alkakengy, of each j and ss; let the Sick take one
or two spoonfulls of this, with ss of Spirit of Turpentine.

If after the Potion of the abovesaid Nodellum the belly be not free, or after
the use of either the aforesaid Syrups, or with the purging Tablets to be taken
at pleasure, it be not gently purged.

The Nephritick wood, if the true could be got, being macerated, the quantity
of ss of it, in wine for seven days, and the wine drunk in a morning, the
Patient exercising himself by walking, or otherwise often after it; This does
marvelloufly, if continued, correct the disposedness of the Reins to breed
gravel, and comforts them very much, expelling the substance of the Stone
without molestation.

A famous Nephritick is prepared with those hard knobs which are wont to grow
in Eglantine, or the Dog-Rose, by the Germans it is called Schlaffopffel.
These little knobs cut in the middle, in which, in their center for the most
part are found little living worms, which being taken out, the preparation is
made of the knobs being cut and reduced to powder, after the manner of an
Extract, with Spirit of Wine: See more at large in my Notes to Crollius.

Affects of the Bladder.
Stone of the Bladder.
The Famous Lithontripticon of mill pedes, described in Crollius his Notes;
with which I have resolved a stone bigger then an Egg.

The method of healing the stone, is treated of by Mercatus, Tom. 3. l. 4. c.
10. besides all which this is exceeding profitable; viz. To purge out the crude
humors every year with Cassia and Turpentine.

After purgation to cut a vein, and after procuring of Urine, Evacuation may be
appointed for several months.

The administration of the aforementioned specific, is thus;

1. The Patient must be purged with some proper medicament that contraries the
Stone in the Reins and Bladder. In this case excellent is Specificum purgans of
Paracelsus: other sharp purgations are in this case of little use.

2.. Powder of Lopes from ss to iv, Spirit of Wine from j to ss, ( Choler is
abated by the Spirit of Wine) of red Vetches j, mix these: This mixture give
whose several mornings together upon an empty stomach; let not the Patient eat
in five hours after. Always so appoint that the sick before the receiving this
Specific, may take some emollient gentle Clyster, purging without Acrimony,
(unless the belly be soluble before.) The use of this Specific resists the
Fever; and thence forward throughout the whole course of the Cure, a
convenient diet with moystning meats must be used, least at any time the belly
be obstructed: From the beginning of the Cure, no wine must be given till the
sixteenth day.

Note, After the taking the Specific a preternatural Heat all over the body
follows. Also great thirst, and dolours are felt about the privities.

This medicament does forcibly invade the stone of the bladder, therefore all
hot things must carefully be avoided: Sometimes a little Lapis prunella in
water of Strawberries or Bean-slowers may be given. Also a Julep of those
waters with Syrup of Violets, and three or four drops of Spirit of Vitriol, may
be exhibited. The first days after taking these, the Urine will come forth
very thick, and but little; but after five days, and so forward to ten, eleven
and twelve days, etc. It will come forth more abundantly, the heat be
remitted, the dolours abated, and the whole substance of the Stone will,
resolving into exceeding small parts, be evacuated.

The Urine in the whole course of the Cure being saved, and after boiling
dried, thereby will be discovered the quantity of the Stone, if it be wrought
together, with solution of Tragacant or Water-glue.

Note, It is sometimes convenient in this Cure, to let the Patient rest a day
or two from taking the Medicines, for increase of strength, and so it may be
numbered with others more gentle.

This I have observed, that sometimes the medicament is injected by a Syrenge
to the bladder, and the sick presently placed in a Bath, and after bathing, the
breast and Perineum anointed with Oil of Scorpions, of bitter Almonds, Coneys
grease and Hent.
Capons-grease, of each j and ss, juice of Pelletory of the wall ij.

The Stone of the bladder, if before the beginning of the Cure, it be
confirmed, and already come to some magnitude, is scarcely cured any other way
then by cutting.

Yet the Cure may be endeavored by the abovesaid Remedies, chiefly in women,
in which the way is more large and strait.

Inflammation of the Bladder.
In inflammation of the Bladder the same things are powerful, as are used in
inflammation of the Reins: Salt of Gems mixed with a little Salt Nitre, are
useful in a Clyster, for inflammation of Bladder and Fundament.

Imposthume of the Bladder.
From Imposthumation of the Bladder few escape.

Exulceration of the Bladder.
Of Exulceration of the Bladder, as also of the Reins; See Platerus p. 86. part
3. Curat.

Here also may commodiously be used, the above mentioned in exulceration of the
Reins; as Spirit of Mercur. dulcis, then which nothing more readily cleanses
and consolidates.

Exulcerations of the passage of the Yard is cured with Mercur. dulcis injected
by a Syringe: See Pareus and Fabritius.

For mundification Wine may be used; mundifying Medicines must always precede
consolidating.

For consolidation;. The yellowish dung of a Hen what quantity you please, mix
it with fresh butter or pure Oil Olives, put this into cold water, the filthy
part will sink to the bottom, and an Oily liquor will swim on the top, which
by a small tunnel must be injected into the passage of the Yard.

Priapismus.
In Priapismus most excellent is the distilled Oil of Rue outwardly by
inunction, and inwardly some drops taken.

Extinct or weak virility.
The Extinct, or at least weak Virility is restored,

1. By the Essence of Ragwort.
Satyrion, (see Crollius) whose two wonderful virtues are declared, which may
be of great use sometimes instead of Confortatives in defects of this kind.

2. This following is attributed to Paracelsus.

. Castor, Galangal, Mace, Cloves, Anise, Long-pepper, Venetian Borax, of each
ij, leaves of Savory, root of Satyrion, Valerian, of each j, Boletus of
Hartshorn j and ss, flesh of the Sea- Crecodile, root of Aron, Cardamum, of
each ss; mix these, and reduce them to powder, which mix with Sugar dissolved
in Rosemary water, and make Tablets. Dose, from iij to vj: This more strongly
operates, if sometimes in a Stove the Navel and adjacent parts be anointed
with the distilled Oil of Mace; for Oil of Mace is admirable Confortative.

3. Excellent is Essence of Amber, extracted with Spirit of Roses, exhibited in
form of Pills: This is chiefly operative in the Aged. Dose, Gr. iij, iv or v.

4. Confection of Alkermes ss, Civet not sophisticated j, Amber-grease ij, Aqua
magnanimitatis ij; mix these, and cover it diligently to prevent evaporation;
of this mixture from ss, to a, give every other night in Cinnamon Water.

5. The secret parts of either Sex must be diligently washed with the simple
decoction of Aqualegia, and perfumed with the fume of the powder of a dead man's
tooth sprinkled upon burning coals. This helps in Sterility caused by
Enchantment: See more below of Sterility and Impotency.

Gonorrhaea.
In Gonorrhaea the following powder is commended:

. Leaves of Mint, Mummy, red Coralls, Agnus Castus, Carabes, of each j; mix
these, and make a powder, of which let the sick take a little with a rere Egg
in a morning fasting.

The flux of Seed is more powerfully resisted with powder of the bone of the
Fish Sepia; Dose ss with two of Conserve of Roses taken once, or twice, or
threetimes. Most excellent is Magistery of the same taken from Gr. vj to ss,
with old Conserve of Roses.

The Gonorrhaea, as well the inveterate as that of small continuance, and also
the malignant, is cured with white Antimony sixth, taken several times with
Plantane water.

Tincture of Coralls is admirable useful.

Virulent Gonorrhaea.
Of Virulent Gonorrhaea we treat hereafter in the Chap. of Lues Venerea, where
we primarily mention the red Spirit of Mercury.

It often happens, that the virulent Gonorrhaea discovers it self without any
testimony of infection; that is, when none other of the outward parts of the
body seem to be affected, only the disposition of the whole body bewrayes it,
and without any other notable symptom this evil may be hid.

Lying with Common Harlots increases this infection by suspicion of Contagion:
Although by this means Physicians themselves may be oft-times deceived, yet the
spontaneous or extorted confession of the Patient himself resolves the doubt.

In this case therefore, where there are no external signs of infection ( viz.
of Lues venerea) and the usual medicaments are not powerful enough; use must be
made of this Antidote.
Alexipharmacum, of Gum of Guaicum, the Extract of which made with Tartarisate
Spirit of Wine, and three or four drops often exhibited with water of Plantane,
Nymphea, and Horse-tayle, helps much: See the Practicks.

Sometimes in virulent Gonorrhaea the Testicles are inflamed with great tumor;
in that case most excellent is a Cataplasm of leaves of Rue and Wallwort boiled
and applied.

Ulcers of the yard.
In Ulcers of the Yard the same method of Cure is used as in Ulceration of the
Bladder.

A swelling within the Yard.
Caruncle of the Yard.
Of the Caruncle of the Yard see Pareus. Laudable is this case is the following
powder.. Mercur. dulcis ss, crude Antimony j, Tutia prepared ij; mix these, and
make a most fine powder. The use of this powder is with wax candles made of
Virgins-wax, with four or six linen threads in them covered with the wax. The
candles thus made must be wrapped about with thin slips of linen cloth, least
when the candles break the wax fall off, and that also thereby they may more
commodiously receive the the Unguent. Then with the powder, being first
tempered with Oil of Almonds, anoint one of the candles round about, and put
it up the passage of the Yard, as far as where the Caruncle is: When the sick
would make water pull it out, afterward put it up again, this continue for four
whole days.

This being done, inject this following by a tunnel:

. Whey of Goats milk vj, water of Plantane and Roses, of each iij, Ceruse vj,
most white Marble, Spodium pulverisate, Crystal, roch Alum, of each ss,
Camphire ss; reduce these to powder, and boil them with whey of milk, and
preserve for use.

Involuntary pissing.
Diabetes.
The Specific of Diabetes is placed in Iron. The Essence of Crocus of Iron
described by Crollius is here very profitable. More happily operates Tincture
of Emralds, of which above in the Chap. of Dysentery; nevertheless, Iron is not
only profitable inwardly but also outwardly. Purges, or Diaphoreticks in this
case are unprofitable. Of great use is a Bath prepared of water of water
Bettony, and a fomentation of Plantane water boiled with Chalybeate water; the
Region of the Reins and Bladder bathed, with each of these twice or thrice a
day, prevents the involuntary flux of Urine.

Moreover, Diet of drying meats boiled in Chalybeate water is here highly
commended.

Care must be taken that the sick drink not too much: Chalybeate water, or a
decoction of burnt Hartshorn (the last of these is more vehement hot, and
astringent, seldom provoking sweat, at most very little) do sufficiently quench
thirst; Also Plantane water, yet it must not be taken alone, nor always, but
mixed with other things.

Tincture of Coralls, and Salt of Coralls, are wonderfully efficacious in this
Disease.

Incontinency of Urine.
Incontinency of Urine from the Paralysie is cured by the same means, as other
particular Paralysies are cured; namely, by restoring the sinews to their
pristine state, which descend from the Loins to the Muscles at the neck of the
Bladder, of which we treat above.

Children, and also others of riper age, insensibly let go their water in
sleep, when there is laxity and softness of the Sphincter, a round ^uscle that
composseth the strait gut.
Sphincter, which is remedied by astringent Diet.

Specificks are: The throat of a Cock burnt and exhibited in astringent wine;
repeat the Dose. Also the bladder of a Goat dried in an Oven, and reduced to
powder; j of the powder taken in astringent wine, and the Dose repeated often;
with this I have cured many, but more excellent is the Cocks throat. Likewise a
fish found in the belly of a Pike, dried in an Oven and exhibited in the same
Dose often, by a Specific propriety removes the incontinency of Urine in
Children.

To help these, external baths and inunctions may be prepared of astringents. A
Bath may be thus made.

. Pomegranate flowers, rinds of Pomgranates, Galls, Myrtle-berries, Hypocistis,
Acacia, of each one handful, Spodium, red Roses, prepared Coriander, of each ss
a handful, Caput Mortuum of Vitriol lb ss; boil these in a sufficient quantity
of water of water Betony, till a third part be consumed. Let the Patient Bathe
twice a day morning and evening. An unguent may be thus, or the like.. Oil of
Myrtles, Quinces, Roses, of each j, powder of the red and white Sanders, of
each j, juice of the greater Semper-vive, Plantane, of each ss, with a small
quantity of wax; mix them and make an Ointment, with which after bathing, the
region of the Liver and Reins must be anointed.

Diuretics in the beginning must not be used.

Difficulty in making water.
In difficulty of Urine, to perform the Cure exactly, Diuretics must not be
given in the beginning, nor things too hasty or too flow in provoking Urine be
appointed: Therefore Externalls, as Bathes and Fomentations must precede.

Bathes (the belly being spontaneously free, or provoked by emollient Clysters)
are made of mollifying Herbs, as Mallows, Pellitory of the Wall, and Melilot.

Fomentations are made with decoction of Pellitory of the Wall, or Cheeserunnet
in wine; excellent is a decoction of Onions in wine, outwardly to the
Peritonium and region of the Bladder, applied often hot; by this means the
suppressed Urine is dissolved.

But if these means be not sufficiently powerful, internalls must also be
exhibited; as Peach kernels, four or five of them reduced to powder, and given
to drink in water of Vrtica, or Radish root, provoke Urine. Salt of the root of
Lupines, from ss, to j, exhibited in white wine provokes Urine; the juice of
one River Crab beaten, pressed and streined, and afterward drunk with white wine
presently causes Urine; also juice of Lemmons ij, and Sugar Candy, iv, with
water of Pellitory of the Wall, and Fennel, of each a convenient quantity, give
this for drink often, and it excites Urine.

If all these be unsuccessful, let the sick drink the Urine of a Goat warm (as
is above described) and presently apply the Caul and Intestines to his belly,
speedily after which, the retained Urine will come forth, and the Stone also
(if that cause the Obstruction) be expelled.

Stangury.
The grease of a Goat applied to the Navel easily removes the Strangury; also
some drops of Oil of Mastick chafed hot into the Navel, presently remove it. (
Laudanum must not be used here.) Salt of Acorns; likewise stalks of Beans and
Melons wonderfully resolve the Strangury; Dose ss: Three or four drops of oil
of wax exhibited in a decoction of red Vetches cures this distemper.

Heat of Urine.
Heat of Urine in the beginning arises from its own heat with a commixtion of
Choler; wherefore to prevent its increase, all acid, acrimonious and Diuretic
Medicines must in the beginning be forborne, and the body be forthwith purged
with Extract of Rubarb, Panchymagogon, or other Choller-resisting Medicine; the
body being purged give this following Mucilage for two days;. Seeds of Althea,
Mallows, Quinces, of each j, Gum Tragacant j, macerate these in a decoction of
root of Althea, seeds of white Poppy, and Alkakengy; make a Mucilage, of which
give one half with iij of the decoction; then exhibit j or vj of Cassia
extracted with Sugar, make it up in form of a Bolus; according to pleasure may
be added ij of Diaprunes, with white Thorneberries, after noon let him drink an
Emulsion of the four cold seeds, made with water of Sorrel or Nymphea; the next
morning let him swallow, in some convenient vehicle, ss of Turpentine, in the
Afternoon again drink the Emulsion. Then purge with this following Bolus..
Cassia fresh drawn vj Turpentine washed in water of Pellitory of the wall ij,
with Sugar make a Bolus, to which may be added Species of Diaturbith with
Rubarb, or only of the powder of Rubarb.

Then make this Julep.. Water of Purcelans, Sorrel, Nymphea, of each iv,
Succory v, Syrup of Violets ij and ss, Spirit of Vitriol ss; let the sick take
this twelve days together, in the morning fasting, and three hours after
dinner, or at least let him take five drops of Spirit of Vitriol in fountain
water several times.

Again, purge with Cassia and Turpentine. If the evil be obstinate, it is
convenient sometimes to purge with Rubarb in the substance, adding Citrin
Mizabalanes; thus,. Mirabal. Citrin. ij, macerate them in a decoction of
Raisons made with distilled water of Succory, Sage and Sorrel; let them stand
twelve hours, then express them, add powder of Rubarb j and ss, Syrup of Roses
dissolved j: Make a Potion.

Least the belly be astringent, diligence must be used, therefore emollient and
cooling Clysters must be injected, such as this, Electuary Catholicon j, Oil of
Violets iij.

If heat of the Liver be, outwardly may be applied an Epithema and Bagg, also
Unguents, and the following Decoction.. Shavings of Guaiacum ij, boil them
after infusion in a sufficient quantity of Simple.
common water to vj; to this when streined, add of Troches of Alkakengy
subtly powdered ss, let him take this three mornings; After noon give the
Spirit of Vitriol as before. If dolor of the bladder urge, inject warm milk
with a Syringe, or a Mucilage made of Fleabane seeds with water of Purcelane
and Plantane, of each ij. Also if the privy part be put into a vessel filled
with warm milk, the heat and great dolor will be mittigated, especially if
presently after a Cataplasm made with Pellitory of the wall, and Oil of
Scorpions, be applied, and the Perineum and lower part of the belly anointed
with Oil of Nymphea and Roses: if the dolor still continue make a Cataplasm
with a decoction of Mallows, Althea and Melilot.

Also, sometimes Spirit of Turpentine may be given, but rarely, least its
calidity be obnoxious; or else, which is better, make Pills of powder of
Rubarb, with a convenient quantity of Spirit of Turpentine. Dose ss.

Pissing Blood.
Pissing Blood, arising from broken and corroded Veins, either in the Reins or
Orifice of the bladder, is cured by the same means, as in other internal Fluxes
of blood are appointed, of which we have already spoken.

The Specific in this case, chiefly if the cruent pissing proceed from the
Stone, is the Arcanum of Agrimony and Cinque-foyle, from Gr. iv to viij, etc.
With this may be joined, (if ulceration of the parts be concomitant) those
remedies above described in Cure of Exulceration; among which, are the Tablets
commended by Platerus in cases of this kind, suitable Auxiliaries.

Sometimes in this case Chyrurgery may be helpful, yet it must be so moderated,
as that it may not hurt more then heal.

Moreover in sanguinary Urine, rising from the cause before named, (chiefly in
women, in whom this Affect is familiar) Tincture of Coralls is only prevalent;
by which in time the inveterate are also cured.

Tincture of Emralds is also profitable.

Voiding of strings in Urine.
In strings coming forth with Urine, that the evil may be removed, and the
Reins purged;. Spirit of Turpentine fresh made from Gr. iv to viij, in water or
Syrup of Althea; this exhibited for some time perfectly cures.

Diseases of the Testicles.
Inflammation of the Skin of the Cods.
Skin and Testicles.
Inflammation of the Cods and Testicles, is taken away as other Inflammations.

1. The first peculiar remedy is a decoction of Agrimony, with wine and
vinegar, and applied often to the part affected in form of a Cataplasm; Also
root of Cucumer asinin. boiled in vinegar and wine.

2. The Herb Paris green, bruised and applied, presently repells inflammation.

3.. Nymphea, Watercresses, of each two handfulls, boil them in vinegar of
Roses with wine, in the end of the boiling add a little Oil of Roses, and apply
it warm.

Also the Cataplasm mentioned in the Chap. of virulent Gonorrhaea.

Tumor of the Cods.
Tumors of the Cods, in like manner as all other Tumors, are happily discust
and cured; all things pertaining to the Cure being duly observed.

The belly must be open and always free; if a Fever be, care must be taken to
allay it; the Diet must be thin, cooling and moystning; wine must not be drunk.

Inveterate Tumor, hardened by evil cure of the inflammation. I have often
cured with a Cataplasm of Lettice root boiled with honey, to which sometimes I
add flower of Barley, Fenugreek, Linum, etc. I have also often added to the
decoction, Onions cut very small; by this means I cured Timplerus Philosophus.
After the often repeating this decoction, I anoint the affected part with
Balsome of Sulphur, and afterward apply a Plaster of Diasulphur, which I
continue for certain days.

If after this any part of the Tumor shall happen to remain, reiterate the
Cure, and continue it; and at length every tumor will away.

Bubonocele, Enterocele, and Epiplocele. Or, Burstings of the Belly.
In every kind of Rupture, a principal powerful Arcanum is Balsome of Salt Gem,
which is thus made;. Salt Gem lb ij, put it in a crucible, and make it flow in
the fire, afterward dissolve it in distilled rain water, filter it, and
coagulate often.

These Operations of Liquefaction, Solution, Filtration and Coagulation, must
be repeated so long, as till the Salt Gem be brought to the highest perfection;
which is known, when a small part of it held near a candle will begin to melt;
this keep in a glass well closed. Proceed in the Cure thus.

1. If need be, replace the propending parts, wash the place affected with most
sharp distilled vinegar, or with Spirit of wine, every day twice. After the
fomentations speedily anoint the place with the Arcanum of Salt Gem.

2. Inwardly exhibit for several days together in the mornings fasting, one
spoonful of Essence of the greater Comfrey, with two drops of Balsom of Salt
of Gems. From the beginning apply some convenient Ligature, or require the
Patient to rest in bed for eight days, lying upon his back altogether; this
being done in fourteen days or three weeks at farthest the sick will be very
well.

Note. If in Ruptures the Intestines and other propending parts, be difficultly
replaced, notwithstanding the use of emollient supplings and fomentations, that
thou may more happily perfect the Cure, not neglecting the former, proceed
thus:

After daily fomentations, give the Patient for three or four days together,
the heart of a Mole dried and reduced to powder, in water of Cinnamon. Every
day one heart must be given; the Moles taken in the month of May. This
performed you will see an happy effect.

Another.. The tender substance of Mushrums, of Nut trees gathered in the month
September, (these Mushrums if gathered in the right time will dure many years)
reduce it to very fine powder; mix the powder with a like quantity of
May-butter unsalted, and half so much flower of Lupines, and make an Unguent.
Mushrums of Nuts have the signature of the Rupture. These are found for the
most part in old Nut trees.

Note. The grease of a Vrchen.
Hedghog, if it can be had, is most excellent, (in defect of either of these,
Balsome of Sulphur may conveniently be used.) If need be, First replace the
Intestines, then make a proper A Tr^sse.
Ligature, to the swelling side of which apply the thin skin of the Caul of a
Swine, (viz.) so as the skin may only cover the rising part of the Ligature
which must precisely be placed to the part affected.

The hard place covered with the aforesaid skin must be anointed all over
daily with the quantity of three pease of the abovesaid Ointment, and the
Ligature again exactly placed.

Inwardly to perfect the Cure, give daily, or every other day in the morning ss
a spoonful of flower of Vetches with Fumitory water, and the Cure will quickly
be effected. In the mean while the Patient may walk a little, and exercise his
body moderately, only avoiding violent exercise.

Navel-burst.
The standing out of the Navel is common in Children, seldom in others of ripe
age; This is easily cured if the place be first fomented with a decoction of of
Vsnea and Prunella in red astringent wine; afterward a Cataplasm applied made
of Plantane and Lentils, or rather of the flower (or powder of them;) repeat
this often.

If the Rupture be of continuance, and in those of ripe age; after fomentations
of this kind, Unguent made of Mushrums growing upon Nut trees (as is above
described) outwardly applied with a convenient Ligature, and Essence of the
greater Comfrey inwardly taken with the Arcanum of Salt Gems, perfectly
performs the Cure.

Affects of the Womb.
Inflammation of the Womb.
A decoction of Wild Bettony prepared with Chalybeate water, and outwardly
applied with Spunges or by fomenting, does by a certain innate propriety resist
inflammation of the womb. The same is performed also by other medicines used in
external Inflammations, provided all things be in method and season duly
observed therein, otherwise an Imposthumation and Ulcer may unhappily follow.

Imposthumation of the Womb.
In Imposthumation of the womb, repeat those things which hitherto have been
often spoken of in other Imposthumations.

Imposthume and Ulcer of the Womb.
In imposthume and sordid Ulcer of the Womb, the Cure must be readily
endeavored, (delay is in this case dangerous:) See Rulands last Cure, Century
4. The like of which I once performed on a certain woman of Kirchamen, in whom
the bladder was affected.

Note. Exulceration of the womb is never Cured as Ulceration of the Reins and
Bladder, with Mercurius dulcis, or Spirit of Mercur. dulcis; for the effects of
these are not so proper in curing the Ulcers of the womb, as of the Reins and
Bladder.

Therefore in this Cure, warily proceed to the use of such medicaments, as may
externally penetrate the Orifice of the womb; first cleanse the Ulcer with
water, and then if a Pessary suppository anointed with Balsome of Tartar, be
put up, and other things also be rightly performed, the consolidation easily
follows.

Sores of the Womb.
In sores of the Womb nothing is more excellent then a decoction of tops of
Madder with Plantane water: See Platerus his Observations; with Balsome of
Sulphur the Cure will more happily be effected.

Schirrus of the Womb.
The Schirrus of the Womb rarely happens, which if at any time it do, is seldom
or never cured.

For resolving Medicines in this case cannot safely be applied, or if they be,
they cannot touch the whole region of the womb. Some things may indeed be done,
but with what felicity or success, time will declare.

Extermination of Mola.
the false Conception and Expulsion of the Young.
In exterminating the false Conception, and expulsing the young, there is not a
secret more happily given, then the powder of a Secundine, of which above in
the Chap. of Love-potions: The Doses are the same, ( Note, here the powder is
given by it self without Treacle) yet must be often repeated; if at first there
be no operation seen, then exhibit it in water of Gentian, Mugwort, Tinctures
of Madder, root of Vrtica, Peneroyal, etc. Sometimes in wine, chiefly Malmsie.
Always remember to add a little Cinnamon water.

I have perfectly effected this cure in many Gentlewomen, where unskilful
Physicians have judged them uncurable.

Wind of the Womb.
In windiness of the womb, the signs of which are perfecftly declared by
Fernelius, wonderful profitable is the Experiment made of a Nutmeg; thus,. a
whole sound Nutmeg, cut it in four parts; the woman being placed upon a
convenient Seat or Midwives stool, with her thighs spread, apply to the Orifice
of the womb some tunnel, or other proper instrument; more commodious is the
neck of a Glass Retort (by reason of its smoothness) which directly applied,
and as far as may be, put up into the womb, throw one part of the Nutmeg upon
burning coals, so as the fume may rightly ascend through the pipe into the
womb; this do once or twice, and if the wind break not away, repeat it the
third time, at length the contracted wind, with noise and motion of the whole
body, with a kind of violence will break away, and the woman be cured. By this
means I cured a young Woman of Benna. All other things tried, proved in vain.

Dropsy of the Matrix.
The Dropsy of the Matrix is difficultly cured with purging medicaments,
unless where the evil proceeds from the Liver and Spleen. Antimonial Pills are
primarily useful in this case, and also in Ascites. These Pills work not by the
superior parts.

Therefore these may be exhibited in the beginning of the Cure, chiefly when
signs of the vitiated bowels are obvious to the sight. But where this grief
proceeds from a continued distillation of a whey-like humor from the Vena
cava, these auxilliaries are not sufficient.

In the former cause of vitiated bowels, the Cachectick powder after the use
of the aforesaid Antimonial Pills, evacuates all obnoxious humors. Yet
diligent consideration must be used in applying other necessaries also.

If from a hidden distillation of the whey-like humor from the Vena cava, this
malady take its beginning: Primarily, that thou may be instructed in the
appropriate Specific (which no Physician may or ought to want) exhibit Vitriol
of Iron (it is called Hermaphrodite-Vitriol by Basilius-Valentinus) which is
also a principal Arcanum in all Affects of the Womb, chiefly in the inordinate
Flux of the Menses; of this Gr. j may be given, with Gr. ij of most white
Sugar, which must be continued daily for a month together. It may thus be
exhibited, (viz.). Vitriol one part, Sugar two parts, with Gr. v of appropriate
Melissa water, just at going to bed, or else Rotula's may be made with Magistry
of Coralls. By this means I happily cured the Illustrious Countess.

Msrisco.
Piles of the Womb.
Piles, and other such like distempers of the womb, are cured as is above
described in Affects of this kind in the fundament.

Suppression of the Menses.
The Menstrues stopped are causes of very great Evil; on the contrary, their
^inary natural flowing (...) from many Diseales; therefore this vice (...)
quickly be removed, least Nature accustomed to retain, refuse, to consent to
usual purgations.

The causes of suppressing the Menses are diligently to be sought out; which
being known, the evil by Common Auxiliaries is more easily removed.

The body for the most part abounds with evil humors, which therefore, before
all other means be used, must be delivered from impurities of this kind.

To this purpose profitable are Mercur. dulcis, Panchymagogon vegitable,
Extract of Sena, Mechoacanna, Rubarb; but more excellent is Specificum Purgans
of Paracelsus; and Extract of Black Hellebore also much helps, chiefly in the
stronger sort.

But if the Obstructions be evident, Vitriolate Tartar, and cream of Tartar,
are first to be used; then proceed to purgations, among which these following
are chief.

1. Essence of Crocus of Iron: See Crollius.

2. Wine of Iron, of which above in imbecility of the Liver.

3. Cachectick powder prepared with steel, of which above in obstruction of the
Liver.

4. Extract of Ox liver, of which below in Extract of Oxe-spleen: See in
Quercetanus his Pharmacopaea restitu^ta, of Decoctions Chap. 6.

5. Distilled water of Garlic, and Savine; which otherwise may be used as
vehicles, in which other Specificks may be taken.

6. Oil of Savine four or five drops given in the foregoing vehicle, moves the
Menses. Hereto may be added other usual decoctions. Also Fomentations,
infusions, Lotions for the feet, Phlebotomy, etc.

Note, All these things are little efficacious, unless the precise time of
flowing of the Menses be diligently observed, according to this precited
Versicle.

Luna vetus veteres; Juvenes nova Luna repurgat.
Although very often at the usual time, Nature it self discovers signs of
Natural purgation, which are pains in the Loins, Belly and Breast, yet without
the help of seasonable Remedies, the expelling of the Menstrues does not
follow. Also there is wont to attend this distemper, pains and weariness in the
legs and feet, difficulty of breathing, extension of the Hipochondries, pain
and grief of the head; all which must rightly be observed, otherwise the wished
end will seldom or never follow.

If after the use of Medicines duly exhibited, the Obstruction of the Menses be
not removed; it is most certainly evident, that the Vice impending is in the
womb it self, especially if all things properly applied still prove
unsuccessful; this to prevent and accelerare the Cure, use the following or
such like perfume.

. Scorias of Regulus of Antimony pulverisate, boil this in a Lixivium of ashes
of Beech, that a redness may be extracted, with four parts of which mix one
part Malmsie wine. Of this mixture, one, two or more spoonfully, throw upon
burning f^ts, or red hot iron, and let the Patient receive the fume into her
secret parts. This also, as all other things, must be done at the precise time
aforesaid, and then with prosperous success the Menses will certainly flow.

Other things moving the Flowers see above in the Chap. of Cachexy.

But if it happen also after the reiterating this persume the Menses do not at
all come down, and Nature again and again seem to contrary, yet in its own
time, it will be bettered.

The Cure of suppressed Menstrues must not be endeavored in Women that are
either barren, or find no detriment thereby, or in such as are with Child,
neither in such as in whom they did never flow, nor in those who are afflicted
with the Cachexy, or which evacuate much blood by the Nose or Hemrodes, in
which either the Cachexy must be amended, or strength restored, or the said
Flux suppressed, unless these be occasioned by obstruction of the Menses; if it
be so, the evil must be removed by Medicines that will expel the blood: But if
occasioned by the obstruction of the Vessels, by suppression of the blood in
them from whence they are wont to flow, the Cure must be endeavored a^ the
precise time, or a little before the Menses are wont to come down. This Cure
must be performed, first with Medicines resolving the matter in the passages,
afterward such as remove the obstruction it self are to be applied; As thus,.
Root of Fennel, Wild Alexander, Sperage, of each ss, Sarsaparilla iij, Herb
Agrimony, Hart^-tongue, Ceterach, Bindeweed, of each ss a handful, Aniseeds ij,
prepared Coriander j, flowers of Bugloss, Borrage, Betony, of each one part, of
the smaller Raisons j; boil these in a sufficient quantity of water to xij: To
this when strained add Syrup of the five roots ij, of Succory with Rubarb ij.
Mix these, and make an Apozeme for four Doses.

In the second Dose, if the first do not sufficiently move the belly, give
Species of Diaturbith with Rubarb from ss, to j; Or,. Pills Aureat. j, with Gr.
iv of D^agridin^. Make three small Pills to be swallowed with the Apozeme.

In the last Dose dissolve of Oximel essencified with the greater Hellebore j,
or use the said Apozeme Instead of a digestive only: And purge with
Diacarth^mus, Extract of Panchymagogon, Essencified Mercury, or such like. Or
make a Magistrale Syrup.

. Root of Polypode ss, black Hellebore prepared ij and ss, Mecoachanna ij,
leaves of Sena j and ss, Aniseeds j, Flowers of Bugloss iij, Calamus-aromat.
ss, Ginger j; Infuse these in a sufficient quantity of aperitive decoction for
one night, in the morning boil it to vj, express it, to which when streined,
add syrup of the five foots, Oxymel Helleborate, of each j and ss, syrup of
Juice of Bugloss ij, with a sufficient quantity of Sugar make a liquid fyrup
for four Doses.

Then it will be convenient for three days to exhibit ss of Vitriolate Tartar
dissolved in syrup of Mugwort with water of Peneroyal. Also to apply often in a
day a Cataplasm of ground Ivy made with wine, to the Region of the Spleen, and
to wash the feet with a decoction of Mugwort, Origan, Wild Betony, and
Coltsfoot.

Afterward let the Patient use Crocus of Iron in Tablets.

. Aperitive Crocus of Iron, or filings of steel, what quantity you please,
prepared after this manner.. Filings of Steel, moysten it in pure water, in
which a little Salt of Wormwood has been dissolved; leave it in a cold dry
place; when it is dry, grind it and imbibe it again; this do so often, till at
length it will resolve with gentle rubbing, as it were of its own accord, to a
dark yellowish powder; Of this,. j, of Sugar dissolved in Bugloss-water ss ss,
Oil of Cinnamon, Cloves or Amber ss; make Tablets, and let the weight of every
Tablet be vj. The Patient must take one in a morning, beginning the use of this
eight days before the usual time of the flowing of the Menses. Or make an
Electuary of Scorias of Iron, thus:. Filings of steel prepared, or Crocus of
Iron pulverisate ss, Cinnamon, Savine, of each ss, rinds of Tamarisk j, Species
Aromat. rosat. j and ss, Nuts condited iij, Honey of Roses or Anthosat. j and
ss, Sugar ij; mix these over a gentle fire, and make an Electuary, of which let
the Patient take the quantity of a Wallnut three hours before dinner.

Make this following Bath to be used at the exact time the Flowers are wont to
come down:. Herb Melissa, Origan, Rosemary, of each ss a handful, Mugwort three
handfulls, Savine ss a handful, Mallows, Althea, Wild-bittony, of each two
handfulls, Flowers of Camomal, St. John's Wort, Centaury minor, of each four
parts. Boil this in a sufficient quantity of water for a Bath, in which the
Patient must go early in the morning, and abide there one hour. The Herbs must
be sewed in two bags, on one of which let the Patient sit, with the other
foment the lower part of the belly.

The Vein Saphena of either foot must be opened, one on the second day at going
out of the Bath; the other the following day after the use of the Bath, as
aforesaid.

Most efficaciously also draw the Pessaries, described by Practicks at the
exact time of usual purgations, especially if at the same time a fume or vapor
of the said Herbs, be received by a tunnel into the privy part.

Profitable also are Cuppinglasses applied to the Perincum; let the drink be
Wine in which Cinnamon and filings of Steel are macerated, or in which flowers
of Borrage, Violets, Bugloss, and Herb Savine have been steeped.

Oftentimes this infusion has been found successful; thus made,. Filings of
Steel, Vinegar not distilled, of each j, boil them in an Iron pan till the
Vinegar be consumed, afterward grind it upon a Marble, and add powder of Cloves
j, then put it in a Glass, and upon it pour lb iv of Malmsie or Falernewine:
Set it in the Sun, or other warm place for eighteen days, stirring it every
night twice or thrice, ( Hippocras may be made with like infusion.) Of this
Wine give in the Defect, or in the inordinate Flux of the Menses, from ss to ij
according to pleasure; always observing the exact time so often already
mentioned; also an exact order in Diet must be prescribed.

In this case also exceeding profitable is the Extract of Ox-spleen, of which,
and the manner of exhibiting see above.

Extract of Ox-spleen.
. The Spleen of an Ox (not of a Bull) cut it in thin slices, macerate it for
certain days in Spirit of Wine Essencified with Myrrh, afterward dry it in the
Air, then with Spirit of Wine Extract an Essence, and by the reason of its
forcible sharpness, add some drops of Oil of Angelica. Dose ss in appropriate
water, at the same time the Menses are wont to flow, which is perceived by
pains in the Reins and Loins.

When the Flowers begin to come down, Venetian Boras may be given with four or
five drops of Essence of Crocus in water of Peneroyal or Cinnamon, or else with
Hippocras wine, or with ss of juice of Savine, or Savine alone boiled in Wine.

If from the accustomed Vice of the Womb a stoppage of the Menses again happen,
various medicines are used, but in this case, both to prevent and resolve such
Obstructions, it is expedient for several years after the Cure, to open a Vein
of the Arm four times, or twice a year, with respect to the constitution of the
Body, and also to apply Cuppinglasses with Scarification more often.

Spirit of Peneroyal with its own Salt is also in this case excellent.

Inordinate Flux of the Menses.
The inordinate Flux of the Menses, from what cause soever (excepting the
Headache) it take its beginning, is removed and corrected by such things as are
necessary and profitable in stopping the intemperate flowings of blood from the
Nostrills, (but that which proceeds from pain in the head is not corrected
without convenient Phlebotomies, as by cutting the superior veins of the Arm;
so by revulsion of the blood its passage by the inferior part is prevented.)

Excellent in this case are Laudanum Opiat, Essence of Crocus of Iron,
Magistery of Coralls and Pearls, also Salt of Coralls, Crollius his compounded
Frogspawn, the bones of a man strongly calcined, and other internal Medicines.

Externally stalks of Melanthum, and a dried Toad, do much help.

Although this Flux arise from various causes, yet none is more frequent then
that which proceeds from the Flux of pallid blood to that part, or from the
opening of the mouths of the Veins, per A fretting of the skin of the Ven 5.
(...), which seldom happens: But that which is caused by erosion from
corroding Medicines injected into the womb, or from Ulcers therein existant, is
Cured by Practitioners, with the Medicaments usually prescribed for such like
Affects: But if the former Fluxes be, by reason they much deject the Natural
strength, it will be very convenient, that the Physician, as soon as he is
called, for revulsion of the blood, do open a Vein in the Arm, and take away
the blood by intervals, or, if by contrary symptoms he see it not expedient to
cut a Vein, apply small Cuppinglasses to the Region of the Liver and Spleen.

Inwardly may be given syrup of Roses or Poppy allayed with Plantane water, or
a Syrup made of juice of Shepherds purse, or syrup of Coralls with juice of
Berber. Also Bole armenack prepared, from ss may be often exhibited with water
of Plantane or Shepheards-purse; or make an Opiat; Thus,. Old Conserve of Roses
ss, root of Bistort, or the greater Wallwort j, Troches of Carabes ij, Bole
armenack prepared iij, Salt of Coralls ss; with syrup of dry Roses make an
Opiat.

To stop the blood, Decoctions may also be made of root of Tormentil, of
Coriander, Flowers of Pomegranate, Galls, and such like.

But if these be not sufficiently efficacious, a Pessary may be made with Asses
or Swines d^g, with juice of Plantane, and the mucilaginous pulp of
Quinceseeds, or of Tragacant, or with Laudanum Opiat with a linen rag.

Inwardly such things must be exhibited as have power to thicken and cool the
blood.

Outwardly the Peritoneum must be anointed with the Countess's Oyntmeni, or
with this following;. Oil of Myrtles, of Quinces, of each j and ss, juice of
Shepherds purse or Plantane, of the greater Houseleeke, of each j; boil these
to the Consumption of the juices, then add powder of Bolearmenack, of Berber
seeds, of Myrtles, of each ij, of Roses ss, Wax a convenient quantity; make an
Unguent: Or, make a Cataplasm of Astringents boiled with common water and a
little Vinegar, as is above described in the Dysentery; or make it of
astringent cooling juices, with addition o^ B^lus, or Flower of Orobus or
Lupines.

To the Reins and Liver cooling Medicaments are to be applied, as a cooling
Searcloth of Santalum; Unguent of Roses Camphorate.

If Choleric blood abound in the body, and by its forcible retention augment
the Disease, the body must be gently purged with infusion of Rubarb, or
Myrabolanes, or solutive syrup of Roses, Electuary of juice of Roses, Extract
of Panchymagogon, or Extract of Rubarb alone.

These things are also efficacfious, where there is abundance of whey-like
humor mixed with the blood; but if a white Flux be, diligence must presently be
used to amend and meliorate the habit thereof, by such things as correct the
vices of the parts, generating the abundance of whey-like phlegm^tick humors,
not omitting the universal purgations above mentioned. Then such things as
respect the womb, both comfortable and astringent, must be applied; as first, a
Plaster externally to the Matrix.

Specificks there are in this case, which every inordinate Flux of the Menses
profitably help; As the crude yolk of an Egg dissolved in red wine, and for
certain days together drunk twice a day, stops the inordinate Flux: Tincture
of Coralls is in this case singularly excellent. Powder of a Turtle prepared
after the same manner, as Forestus teaches in Lib. 28. Observation 10. is
wonderful in restraining the Menses: But more excellent is the Salt that is
prepared of Coals of the Turtle, exhibited from Gr. iv to vj, in Plantane water
one spoonful, or with other compound; this is powerful in the Dysentery, and
all other Fluxes of the belly. So the skin of the feet of Geese dried and
exhibited presently stop the Flux. Dose from ij, to ss.

Externally in this case wonderful and singularly profitable is a Girdle made
of the true Hellebore sewed together, (viz.) the green leaves of Hellebore
somewhat bruised and sewed up in a swaddling band, and about the loins applied
to the naked body.

The too great Flux of blood after hard labor in Childbirth is stopped by the
same blood; some of it being presently dried in a small iron ladle over a fire,
and the weight of Gr. v or vj being mixed with the yolk of an Egg, and exhibited
presently removes the inordinacy. In the same case a composition of Frogsspawn
wonderfully helps.

Distillation of the Womb.
The daily dripping of the Womb is happily Cured with the Cachectick powder. Of
like virtue is the Specific of Iron, (of which above in the Dropsy of the
womb) which in the diuturnal Flux, chiefly in the aged (who are sometimes
liable to enormous fluxes of this kind) is the only remedy, if Gr. j be daily
exhibited in Plantane water or red wine, just before the Patient go to bed.

If any thing of Ulceration be, it must be remedied as is above described in
Ulcers of the womb.

Every kind of Flux of the Womb is in time cured, and the womb restored to its
pristine state, by Specific of Iron, ( Vitriol of Iron) always exhibited as
is prescribed above in the Dropsy of the womb.

Otherwise, in every Flux of the womb, the body must first be thoroughly purged,
chiefly with these, Specificum purgans, Vegetable Panchymagogon, Extract of
Mechoacanna, Rubarb and Sena. I have always with good success used this Powder
and Decoction following.

. Magistery of white Coralls, mother of Pearls, of each ij, burnt Hartshorn j
and ss, burnt Ivory, Terra Sigitlata, Seeds of White Poppy, of each j, Gum
arabic, Mastick, of each ss, Amber Citrin. ss, Laudanum Opiat Gr. viij; mix
these, and make a most fine powder, of which give morning and evening as much
as will lie upon the point of a knife in the following Decoction.

. Of the greater Plantane, Knot-grass, Tormentil, of each iij, root of Nymphea
ij; make a decoction in a sufficient quantity of wine.

Gonorrhaea in Women.
The simple Gonorrhaea in Women, is cured after the same manner as the like
distemper in men is cured.

In Lues Venerea, of which we hereafter treat, all these things are more amply
explained; by which means I cured six young Women in fourteen days.

Suffocation of the Matrix.
Suffocation of the womb, according to its degrees and evidency of Causes, is
well described by Fernelius, which also requires diligent consideration and
knowledge of the Disease. Distempers of this kind are difficultly known, and
their symptoms not easily discerned, by reason they are often intermixed with
Hypochondriack Melancholy, and the Iliack and Cardiac passions.

The Cure of all these symptoms consists either in removing the causes of
every kind, or else in preventing the returns of the Fits.

Therefore, because the venomous and pernicious vapors of the womb, generated
as it were of antecedent Causes, do most powerfully augment the obstruction,
the womb must be corrected, its impurities expelled, and diligence used thence
forward that it be not alike offended.

Exceeding profitable in this case are Expelling Suffociation.
Histerical Purgations; such as are of Fecula of Briony, or its Extract, (see
Quercetanus in Pharmacopea restituta) j or ij at most, in water of Cinnamon,
Mugwort and Motherwort; also Extract of Mechoacanna, Specificum purgans, Panchy
magogon vegitabile.

Infusions are of great use with mundifying Medicaments of this kind; such as
this:. Leaves of Sena j, root of Mechoacanna not putrified ss, root of Briony
ij, leaves of Mugwort, Motherwort, Germander, of each ss a handful, of the
Cordial flowers one part. These all cut and mixed tie together in a linen
cloth, infuse them in ss ij of wine; first heat the wine, then pour it upon the
Ingredients, and leave it in a cold place for a whole day. Of this infusion
give the quantity of vj, for certain days together twice a day, (viz.) in the
morning fasting, and about three a clock in the after noon, this continue till
all be drunk up: Then least symptoms of this kind should again return, it is
plainly proved, and by experience known, that the Specific of Vitriol of Iron
does excellently mitigate these, if after the foregoing purgation, this be
daily taken in the Evening before Supper in wine, or with water of Mugwort,
Motherwort, etc. or exhibited without them for two, three, or four weeks, or
till the Evil cease: See above in the Dropsy and Distillation of the womb.

There are many things which resist the Paroxisme, of which see the Practicks.

Likewise stinking fumigations applied to the Nostrills help much in this case,
such as these; a Fume of Partridge feathers, Man's hai^s, Flkes and Asses hoofs,
Sea-coals, Assa-foetida, Oil of Amber, of Tartar, of ^acum: Also Salt of ^in
described by Crollius, with which the Navel must be anointed hot, does
forcibly resist Suffocation; ss of Civet tempered with j of Oil of Nutmegs by
Expression, and in a linen cloth put up the secret part, does wonderfully help.

A Fume of Callis Equorum received into the womb through the neck of a Retort,
or by a tunnel, presently resists Suffocation. It is strange the womb should
bear this stinking fume, which otherwise is not to be endured.

Internally with good success may be exhibited these following:

1. Salt of Tin in some proper Histerical water.

2. Essence of Wallwort, or Dwarf^elder berries, of which from ss a spoonful
to one spoonful inwardly taken, does by little and little provoke sweating,
quiets the body, and resists the Paroxisme, and repells the resolyed vapors
throughout the body; this Essence is thus prepared:. Good store of the Dwarf
Elder-berries, dry them in the shade, fill with them when dry a large vessel
with a long neck half full, pour upon them Aqua vitae till they be covered four
fingers; add some drops of Spirit of Vitriol, and the vessel well closed set in
Balneo to digest five or six days, until the Aqua vitae be tinged in color
like a Rubie, which separate by inclination: Of this give ss a spoonful in the
return of the Fit, and it will suddenly help.

More excellent then all these is Specifick-suffocative-Laudanum, of which
Pessaries being made and put up, do, as soon as they begin to resolve,
powerfully draw forth the corrupted Seed, and dissipate all noxious vapors
from the womb.

To a woman afflicted with Suffocation, it is best speedily to apply a Fume of
Galbanum, Assa-faetida, or Partridge feathers; or else anoint the Nostrills
with Oil of the Agath stone, which is distilled after the manner of Oil of
Amber, but with somewhat more vehement fire: For Example, thus;. Of Salt of
Agath, and of the Agath-stone alike quantity, and in ashes at first with gentle
fire, afterward more strong, distill an Oil into the Receiver aptly placed,
which if you please may be rectified by a Limbeck, with addition of simple
water: Or, instead of Oil of Agath. Oil of Rue and Amber; with the said Oil and
Oil of Amber, the Navel and whole Belly must be anointed.

The Navel also may be anointed with Apoplectick Balsome, or a round plaster
(of the plaster for the Matrix) applied, in the middle of which some Grains of
Civet may be put. To the Groines near the privy part, apply dolorous
Cuppinglasses with much flame, and Ligatures to the Navel.

Also a Pessary made of linen, which anointed with Apoplectick Balsome, must
be put up the Genitals, and at the same time stinking Fumes applied to the
Nostrills.

Inwardly by the mouth may be exhibited a Dose of Laudanum for Suffocation of
the Matrix, made after this manner;. Of our Laudanum without Opium; ij; add
Extract of Lichenes, or Callorum Equorum ij; mix these diligently: ss of this
exhibited presently abates the Suffocation of the Matrix. Extract of Lichenes
is thus made.

. Of water of Melissa, with the above distilled waters in rectifying the Oils
of Amber and Agath, of each ij, with wine ss vj, distill this by Retort in
sand, at first with gentle heat, afterward more strong: the distilled water
separate from the Oil that comes forth with it. With this water and the
Lichenes before dried make digestion in Balneo, then ex^act it in form of an
Extract. This Extract may be given alone from Gr. (...) to viij; or
Treaclewater with ss, or j of pulverisate Extract or powder of Castor; or old
Treacle may be given alone; or ss of pulverisate Castor in water of Mugwort.

Or,. Extract of Castor made with Spirit of wine, Essence of Saffron, of each
ss, Salt of Pearls Gr. vj, Oil of Amber Gr. ij; mix these, and exhibit it in
water of Mugwort and Melissa.

Also Oil of Tin is highly commended in this case, the preparation of which see
Crollius his Note.

This Hysterical liquor put into the Navel presently resists Suffocation.
Internally one or two, or at most three drops exhibited, and the Dose repeated
often, in those of ripe Age largely opens the belly.

Ascent of the Womb.
Ascent of the Womb little differs from a gentle strangulation of the first
Degree; For the precordium is suppressed, dolours and difficulty of breathing,
and sometimes swounings follow.

Profitable and equally necessary to remove these symptoms are the Medicaments
above described in Suffocations.

Chiefly the Essence of Dwarf-elder-berries in this case yield relief. If you
would remove the cause of this grief, use those things which properly remove
Suffocations.

The falling down of the Womb.
In falling down of the womb repeat the above described in Cure of the fallen
Fundament: But this Cure by the Chyrurgical Operation is most powerfully
effected. The Patient must be placed on her back with her thighs spread and
lifted up, and her legs gathered up close to rest upon; then the fallen womb
must be fomented with Oil blood-warm, or unsalted butter, or else with a
decoction of Mallows, Cammomil, and other emollients; afterward sprinkle it
with some astringent powder, as of Acacia, Hypocistis, powder of burnt
Dactilus, or Mumy, or Galls most subtly powdered; this being done, take a
linen cloth first madefied in astringent wine, wrap it up together, let the
cloth when wrapped up answer the thickness of the part, so as it may conveniently
be put into it, with this accurately replace the fallen womb, and so without
dolor or violence it will fall into its proper place: But if the fallen womb,
or part thereof be putrified or corrupted, cut off what is corrupted, and this
may be done without fear of danger, since several Women have had the whole womb
taken out, yet lived many years after.

Convulsion of the Womb.
In Convulsion of the Womb, sometimes other Convulsive Medicaments may be
sufficient: Yet in Cure of this proceed in the same manner, as in Cure of
Suffocations.

A Specific in this Case is Essence of Dwarf-elder-berries: The Tincture of
the same may be given with four or eight drops of Antepileptick Spirit of
Vitriol: Also Tincture of Corals: with Bathes and Fomentations.

Sterility.
Barrenness in men from some hidden cause, placed in the parts appointed for
Generation, chiefly if Nature be conformable thereto, is dissicultly cured by
Medicine: See above of extinct Virility.

Other Vices of this kind, partly by observation of legitimate Diet, and partly
by Medicaments may be removed; of which Physicians treat and find by practice:
See Bayrus l. 25.

But if Sterility by procured by enchantment, it can hardly be removed, unless
the instruments of Sorcery be removed also; for in enchantment such instruments
are prepared.

We speak of some things hereafter in removing Impotency, but it often happens,
that Diabolical impressions of this kind are so very strong, as they cannot be
removed either by good or evil Art, (that is, by returning like for like,) yet
this I have seen more then once, that the water that falls beside the mouth of
the man while he is drinking a draught of cold water, being saved in a little
vessel, is of great use and benefit in this case, being drunk by the woman.

The same potion of water avails much in particular drynesses of the Members,
being often repeated, (viz.) for certain weeks upon an empty stomach;
Barrenness in women is also otherwise helped with Bathes made of Ants, and of
the heap they usually gather, prepared with river-water, used for sometime
fresh or new made.

There are many things helping conception used by Practitioners; but chiefly in
women Salt of Satyrion (in Men the Essence of the same) helps Conception, if ss
thereof be often exhibited just after the flowing of the Menstrues, either in
Malmsie wine, or in Aqua-vitae mulierum.

With this secret I have Cured many women very speedily, and with the Essence
of Ants removed the defect in men.

Abortion.
Magistery of Coralls and Pearls, if often exhibited with Aqua-vitae mulierum,
or water of Lillies of the Valley, hinder the untimely casting the young.
Tincture of Coralls dury and rightly prepared prevents Abortion, if taken twice
in a month for certain months by women with Child.

The juice of Crab of the River, or Crabfish.
Crab bruised and expressed and given in good wine once or twice in a month for
several months, by a certain propriety preserves infallibly from Abortive
birth, unless by external violence it be otherwise caused: So the Salt of River
Crabs rightly prepared, and macerated in a Decoction of Oil of sweet Almonds in
Malmsie wine, being inwardly taken does wonderfully preserve the young. Dose
Gr. iij, iv, v, etc. Wine must not be drunk, least Abortion be occasioned
thereby.

Difficulty of Birth.
In difficulty of Birth, as also of bringing away the after-burthen, among
other things excellent is the Specific of Secundines, of which above.

Also the Eyes of a Hare taken in March, (this is also good in the false
Conception) which must be diligently taken out, that they be not bruised, and
dried with Pepper in the hollowness from whence they were taken: One of which
with the Pepper must betyed to the Crown of the head, so as the Ball of the Eye
may touch the Crown of the head exactly, and it will hasten the birth as well
of the dead as living Child; this being done it must speedily be removed, least
it expel the womb also.

So Oil of Amber and Carrawayes, of each iij, iv, v, vj or vij drops exhibited
in wine accelerate the Birth.

Among the poorer sort I have often seen a draught of the Husbands Urine help
the difficult Birth.

Also Horse-dung in wine expressed and very well strained does presently help the
birth, and brings away the Secundine.

Impotency.
In Impotency, noble is the Essence of Satyrion, made by Crollius chiefly, if
to it be added essencified Amber, and English Aurum potabile: For Example,
Thus:. Liquor of Satyrion j, essencified Amber ij, Aurum potabile j; Give from
ss to j for one Dose. These and such like, if not sparingly administered, do
render the matter so strong, as the Spirit and Life also are sometimes
expelled; for too much of any thing is an Enemy to Nature.

Also Diatrion-pipereon-tabulat. is in this case helpful, if mixed with some
grains of Amber, and Oil of Cinnamon: See above of Extinct Virility.

The Gout.
The Gout or dolor of the Joints, is like a Mother of it self generating more
Daughters, which in Specie are Foot-gout, Hand-gout, and Hip-gout or Sciatica.

In the Gout there is sometimes universal dolor of all the joints, with
exceeding restlesness; in some, only particular dolours of external parts, as
of the hands, called Chirarga, of the feet, Podagra, of the Hips, Sciatica.

The universal Cure of all these consists in consuming or expelling the settled
Tartar throughout the whole body; of which Cure we mention above, in the
preparation of Ludum humani, whose faculties in expelling or consuming the
Tartar are admirable.

This only Cure is not to be instituted at any time, or promiscuously in
various subjects, unless all things first be well considered: This universal
Cure will not take away or expel the present Fit; nor easily cure these
Affects without other Medicaments: it behooves therefore before or after the
assaults (not in the Fit) (viz.) when the Disease is at rest, or as it were
asleep, to institute the Cure, and resolve the Tartar, with the principal
Medicaments before prescribed; for so all things will more happily succeed.

Preventionary Medicines of this kind must therefore be appointed; Stones of
Crabs prepared in form of a Medicament are in this case useful. Nature is
exceedingly corroborated by Magistery of Pearls, formerly prepared and
exhibited with admirable success by Riverius Medicus Regius: the preparation is
thus; Reduce Pearls into an impalpable powder, as they are otherwise wont to be
reduced, (vulgarly prepared Pearls) upon this in a glass, pour juice of Citron,
or of green Oranges, a sufficient quantity, that the composition may be like a
Paste: Leave it for some time, afterward with vinegar dissolve it; remove the
vinegar by inclination from the Feces, pour on other vinegar, and this do till
the Pearls be wholly dissolved: Mix the collected vinegar with a third part of
river waver, distill it by Retort in sand, at first with gentle fire, afterward
more strong. This when distilled, again pour upon the Caput mortuum that
remained after distillation, and dissolve it by course; then filtre it, and
evaporate it exceeding gently; so the Magistery of Pearls will remain: Of this
j at most given in wine upon an empty stomach powerfully refreshes Nature; and
so excites the natural vigor, as the foregoing Medicaments (viz.) Arcanum of
Ludum humani, and of Crabs) do happily operate.

It helps much to prevent and expel the Crudities, if any be, by vomitings
after the taking of it, in the morning they are easily removed, but if taken
after dinner it vomits more sickly.

If after the use of these, a return of the Fits of any of the kinds of Gout
be, which often is, where an ordinary course of life and diet is not observed;
such assaults must by requifite means be opposed or expelled. This is
absolutely necessary, that yearly at the time of Aequinoctials and Solftices,
(about these times the defluxions attending the Gout do increase) the body be
thoroughly cleansed, and especially an accurate orderly observation of Diet must
by no means be neglected; the headache, if any be, and evil digestion must be
removed with suitable Medicaments. This evacuation ought also to be appointed in
the beginning of the Disease, and as soon as the Patient perceive any signs of
its approach. The drink may be wine with Melissa and root of Caryophyllata
infused in it, for the first draught at meat; or Antipodagrick wine of
Paracelsus.. Root of Caryophyllata, Sweet Cans, or Galangal.
Acorum, of each lb ss, leaves of Majoran four handfulls, Flowers of Elder four
parts; infuse these in lb iij of wine, let them stand in Infusion eight days;
of this let the Sick take a draught morning and evening. With mans-Salt may be
mixed man's bones calcined, made into a Gelatina.
powder fit to eat with food, after the manner of a Galreda prepared of Cranium.

After mundifying the body, corroborating and diaphoretick Medicines must be
used. As the peculiar diaphoretick extraction of transparent Sol, of which see
Crollius; and my Antipodagrick Pills, (described by Rhaenanus in Tractatu Solis
e puteo emergentis) taken for certain days with the Arcanum of Coltsfoot. By
these every kind of Gout, if not knotted, may be cured; for by this means the
Fits seldom or never return; or if assaults do happen, occasioned by some
light external error, yet they are not grievous, nor do the dolours long
remain, nor are they insolent, but may easily be assuaged with external
Balsomes.

Amongst mundifying or purging medicaments may be reckoned Paracelsus his
Purging or resisting the Gous.
Arthritick powder described by Crollius; in which this must chiefly be noted,
in that description; for shavings of Mans-skull, must be appointed Mans-bones
burnt, (viz.) the bones of a young man lately buried; to the Chiragra bones of
the hands, but to Podagra bones of the feet. From this powder is risen that
which is called Caryocostine powder, in use by vulgar Physicians: But the true
powder abovesaid, securely and gently purges all defluxions of the Gout. More
happily excells the Essence of our vulgar black Hellebore, extracted only with
spirit of wine not perfectly rectified, of which one spoonful must be taken
morning and evening, five or six times, until the belly be spontaneously
soluble daily: For so by easy and gentle purgation, the impurities and
podagrical fluxions are commodiously enough expelled; this Essence of Hellebore
may be fortified with the Arcanum of a Flint, ( Note these noble Arcanums) or
with Arcanum of Coltsfoot, in due proportion mixed together with the Essence of
Hellebore. This Essence.
Arcanum is best when taken before the usual time of the return of Fits of the
Gout, as also the Arthritick powder, for so, before the body be invaded, and
while it is not at all afflicted, it will easily be delivered from subsequent
defluxions: And this will be so much the more powerful, if a temperate order of
diet be observed, and wine-majoranate infused with root of Caryophyllata and
flowers of Elder, be drunk at meat for the first draught.

Some most conveniently use a decoction of Lign-Sassafras, after these
purgations; and the more gross impurities which are wont to remain, they
finally exterminate with Laxative Mercury, or with Sol, or this following
Arthritick powder.

. Of Hermodactyles, Turbith, Diagridium, leaves of Sena, the bones of a young
man perished by violent death, calcined, if in Chiragra of the hands, if in
Podagra of the feet, Sugar candid, of each j; make a powder, Dose from j to ij.
Give this in the morning for three or four days with water of Arthritick-Ivy.

Then proceed to Confortatives, such as Magistery of Pearls of Riverius, and to
Diaphoreticks, as the transparent Extract of Sol, the preparation of which see
in the Notes of Mineral Bezoar.

Cauteries also in these affects are very profitable.

Note. If such as can bear vomiting, do in the times of Spring and Autumn,
before the eminent time of the Fits returning is wont to be, use Aqua bened. in
its legitimate Dose; they (if other things also correspond) are seldom or never
infested with podagrical assaults.

It is therefore best for every one by this or such like means to endeavor to
preserve himself from these dolourous assaults.

In Paroxysmes growing and grievously afflicting the joints, there is very
often need of mittigating medicaments both inwardly and outwardly.

Among internals Eaudauu^ Opiat obtains the priority, which has exceeding
powerful properties (see Quercetanus in his answer to Aubertus) for it resists
the dolours, induces sweet sleep, obstructs the defluxions, consumes the heats,
and strengthens the decayed spirits.

In other vulgar Medicines whatsoever, no such singular virtues can be expected.

Externalls are, 1. The first and second Podagrick Balsome made by Crollius,
instead of which may be used an Anodine Unguent, made also by him.

2. Spirit of Salt Ammoniack, which is thus made:

. Ammoniack sublimed, mix this when pulverisate with four parts of Coals,
distill it by a Limbeck in sand, and the spirit of Ammoniack will come forth,
which mixed in equal parts with spirit of wine, and with it the part affected
anointed (twice or thrice) with a small feather, presently restrains the
dolours. Some add a little Camphire to it, that it may be first dissolved in
the Spirits, then they use it for Ointment. The admirable benefit in the use of
this I have often found.

3. Antipodagrick water of Ruland, thus made:

. Flowers of Cammomil, Melilot, of each one handful, Mercury sublimate ij,
boil these in Simple water; of this water when strained mix an equal portion
with lb iv of Aqua mortua, (which is an Aqua fortis used by Goldsmiths in
separations) of fresh Aqua fortis ij, juice or decoction of Myrtles ij, or
enough to color it: use this as is described in Curations. This Aquamortua
will dure some years.

4. An Antipodagrick water, thus:. Sperm of Frogs gathered in March about the
new of the Moon lb iij, add the like weight of fresh Ox-dung, mix these
diligently, and leave it for one day, afterward distill it, and keep for use.
Apply this somewhat hot to the affected members, and presently the dolours will
abate; this more happily operates, if a little spirit of Vitriol or Cow Dung
with ij of Honey be added thereto; this may be used instead of a Cataplasm,
especially in the cold Podagra.

5. Oil of Peter, in which roots of Hellebore have been macerated, most
exc^ently and speedily resists podagrical dolours, that are without red and
vehement tumors; (some call this the Gout in the feet from a cold cause.) When
the Disease is somewhat mitigated, if necessity also require, the purging
medicaments above described ( Vomitories in this case are not necessary) are
very commodious, especially if the Arthritick powder be also used for certain
days in broth, or else taken in a just Dose ss in water of Ivy; this repells
impurities, and drives out all the Tartars from the body, and thereby prevents
returns of the Fits. I have often seen in this case Antimonial Pills, which
only purge downward, but once taken do much good. Of like virtue is the Arcanum
of Coralls described by Crollius. More excellent then all these is Specificum
purgans of Paracelsus, being often exhibited in urgent necessity. When all
these things are thus done, if any gross impurities shall as yet remain, these
must thenceforward, as the strength of the Patient will permit, by mundifying
Medicines be expelled: Also Diaphoreticks may commodiously be used: The
Diaphoreticks above named may properly be called Specificks, for they are so in
Genere, as well as Tincture of Antimony, and Antimonial-podagrical-pills, the
description whereof see Rhenanus in his Book Solis e puteo, etc. the last
Treatise, page 18, and 19.

The preparation of Tincture of Antimony, is thus:

. Minera of Antimony lb iij, iv or v, ( Minera of Vngarick is better) In defect
of Minera, crude Antimony may be used, grind it exceeding small, pour upon it
water of Calx-vive, by simple infusion ( viz. lb xv of water, Calx lb vj) the
water must be poured upon the Calx till it sink) by filtring separate it from
the Calx-viv. Set it for some time in the Sun in a vessel with a broad bottom,
often stirring of it daily till the sides and superficies begin to be red,
although no redness appear, yet enough Tincture may be extracted if the
infusion be made for six or seven days.

You will easily have a sign of Extraction (Extraction is to be made as long as
any tincture is remaining) if into a small part of this Infusion put into a
peculiar glass, some drops of vinegar be injected, it will immediately be
changed; (this is nothing else but Sulphur of Antimony) the water and tincture
of Antimony will be precipitated into an Orange-colour, (if infused in mixtura
simplex it will be precipitated to a whitish-colour, by reason of the spirit of
Vitriol.) This Extraction filtre, and by gentle boiling in a dish reduce it to
a red powder, which Extract with spirit of wine not very strong (not an Alchol)
to a yellowness like Extract of Sol; this by filtring cleanse from its Feces.

Stir it before it be used, for a settling like to fine powder will always be
precipitated. Dose Gr. v, vj, viij or x at most.

This Tincture of Antimony impregnated seven times with spirit of wine, distill
in a Limbeck per Cohobiam, afterward in a glass Retort in sand increase the
fire gradually, or with fire of suppression force it, and the sweet Oil of
Antimony will come forth in form of a deep red, with most splendid, beautiful
streaks. Afterward draw off the spirit of wine with gentle heat in Balneo, and
in the bottom will remain a most red Tincture of Antimony, exceeding
Confortative. Dose from Gr. j to iij at most: See Ragerius Bacchonius of sweet
Oil of Antimony.

Moreover the Tincture of Antimony (this put to a Candle in the night will
shine like a Carbuncle) either after the aforesaid manner gently Extracted, or
afterward by often Cohobating with spirit of wine, exalted to a most noble
Essence, external contractures in the joints caused by the Podagrical
malignity, does happily cure, especially where legitimate diet, and proper
mundifying Medicines be duly observed and used.

Note. In this case Antimonial Pills which only purge downward are exceeding
commendable.

If daily or every other day five or eight drops of the simple Tincture, or one
drop of the exalted Tincture, be exhibited in the morning in Diaphoretick in
peracutis, or mixtura simplex, and sweating provoked either in a Stove or Bed,
no Arthritick-contracture can long abide.

To the external Cure of the Gout contracted, yet not too inveterate, after the
use of the foregoing Medicaments, and the observation of orderly, temperate
diet, of which we have hitherto treated, external Auxiliaries are necessary,
such (I mean) as by penetration may resolve those hard knottinesses in the
joints, like so many compounded Diseases, not resolvable (or very difficultly)
by internal Medicines, and draw out from the joints whatsoever is heterogeneal.
Therefore where the knottinesses are not too inveterate, this plaster is
singularly commended, which does not only assuage the dolor, but by resolving
gently opens the skin, and extracts the hardened matter, or coagulated Sulphur.
The Plaster is thus made.

. Roman Vitriol, or Vngarick, Roch-allum, of each lb ss, Salt iv, calcine all
these together in an earthen dish, evaporate the Salt, until the Spirits also
begin to exhale, which perceived by the smell, presently remove it from the
fire, cool it, and reduce it to powder.. Of this and of Barley flower a like
quantity, mix it with Lees of Wine till it be like a Poultis, which, after the
usual manner spread upon a linen cloth indifferent thick, apply to the place
affected, and leave it on. When it is dry temper more with the Lees of Wine,
and continue applying it till first all the dolor be removed, and afterward
the hard knottiness also taken away: In the mean time by this means the skin is
oftentimes opened, without much dolor, especially if any Scurffs or Warts be
in the joints. And the skin broken is either of its own accorded closed, or by
the application of wax sometimes instead of the plaster, consolidated, and the
joints themselves rendered agile and moveable.

But if the distemper be too inveterate, and the contracted knottiness still
remain, by this external Cure mittigation of the pains may be hoped, but the
knotts themselves hardly removed, without addition of more powerful Chyrurgery:
Then therefore proceed after this manner.

. Mercury sublimate, white Arsenick, of each what quantity you please; mix them
with Aqua fortis, and make it like a Poultis; then apply to the affected place
a Plaster of Basilicon the greater, (or other defensive) let this Plaster
have a hole in it, upon which put the prescribed poultis, as Lint is wont to be
laid on, and presently upon it put another piece of the aforesaid Plaster, and
leave it on for sometime until the skin be well opened, and no tumor at all
be, and till an Escara be made; then by emollients remove the Escara, as with
fresh butter, or Oil of Roses; and apply some Specific attractive, which may
resolve all the coagulated Tartars, and extract them; sometimes also they of
themselves break away after the use of the abovesaid, and crumble away as
mortar falls from a wall. After the cessation of the Flux of humor, the place
must be consolidated with consolidating Medicaments, and vulgar Epuloticks.

An Attractive Plaster is thus made;. Lithargy, Lapis Calaminaris, Amber,
Magnet, of each ij; pulverisate all these very well, and boil them in lb ss of
Linseed Oil, then add of wax lb j, Turpentine lb ss, Vernix iv; boil these
till they be thick, then add the following Gums dissolved after the common
manner in vinegar, and the streined juice of Panax, Serapinum, Galbanum, (...),
Ammoniack, of each j and ss, boil them gently, and in the end (...) or powder
of Mastick, of Frankincense, of Hepatick-aloes, of each j; di^ently move these
with a spattle, then separate the dregs if any be, and make it up in rolls of
plaster, and keep them for the use aforesaid.

By this means, happily and speedily this unhappy distemper may be cured, if
all things hereto pertaining be legitimately and prudently performed.

In external Cure of the knottiness, mundefying and dolor asswaging Remedies
must be used, also sweats procured with the use of the above mentioned
Diaphoreticks.

And this is that genuine Cure, with which I may certainly affirm, that I have
perfectly cured twenty four noble and ignoble persons, inflicted with the Gout,
without the help of any other Remedy.

Species of the dolours of the Joints.
The dolours of the Joints includes within it self various Species, as Podagra,
Knes-Gout.
Gonogra, Chiragra, and pains in the parts of the Praecordia and the Sciatica,
Arthritis, which is universal all over the body, therefore properly so called;
the Cure of all which consists in mitigating the symptoms, and removing the
causes.

Podagra and Chiragra.
Podagra and Chiragra are most frequent, in the Cure of which this must
principally be minded, (viz.) That the body be clean, and exact order in diet
observed, also yearly at the times of the Aequinoctials and Solstices, when the
Arthritick fluxions are for the most part ready to assault, that the body be
well cleansed, by removing the Headache, if any be, and evil digestion of what
kind soever with suitable Medicines. Yea, this evacuation may, and also ought to
be appointed in the beginning of the Malady, as soon as any signs of its
beginning to approach shall be perceived by the sick.

As chiefly these; Extract of Coltsfoot, and Essence of black Hellebore made
according to Art, and reduced to the consistency of Honey, or made up into
Pills. Also Caryocostine Electuary made by Bauderonius, which ought always to
be taken before, or just at the time of the Podagrical Fits, four or five
times, still observing order of diet.

For drink, wine of Melissa infused with root of Caryophyllata, and drunk for
the first draught at meat, yet this must not too largely be drunk of: or
Antipodagrick-wine of Paracelsus, of which above in Arthritis.

With Table Salt man's bones calcined may be mixed to eat with meat.

Then Confortatives and Diuretics must be used. Among Confortatives, the chief
is Magistery of Pearls, of Riverius Physician to the King of France, of which
above. Very profitable in this case also are Cauteries and Issues.

Its profitable for prevention, and correcting the crudities, if any be, to use
vomitories in the morning, or long after dinner.

The Gout of the Feet or Hands not knotted is only cureable by these
Medicaments. But that which is knotted, besides these, requires an external
Cure, of which afterward.

If pain or return of the Fit be, the Sick is not to be disquieted with the
former Medicines, but rather give himself to rest for mitigating the dolor;
only care must be taken to remit the dolor, and to prevent affluxion of matter
to the part affected.

The dolor is assuaged by a Dose of Laudanum inwardly taken, yet it is best
first to inject a Clyster. If dolor in the head be, cut a vine.

Astringents outwardly may be applied a little above the affected part, as
astringent powder made with vinegar and whites of Eggs, or with astringent
water, as of Myrtles, Knotgrass and Acorns: Or, Cataplasms made of sower
fruits, as Quince-pears, sower Herbs, other Pears, Sloes, chiefly wild Sloes,
Services, to which may be added flower of Lentills, with powder of Pomegranate
flowers, of Galls, Roses, Bistort, or Bole-armenack alone may be applied with
milk and powder of Bistort-root in form of a Cataplasm.

Unto the affected part apply dolor restraining and asswaging medicaments.
Commonly and not without fruit is applied a Cataplasm made of white bread,
thus, lb j of white bread tempered with milk over a gentle fire, that it boil
not, bruise it, and reduce it to the consistency of a Cataplasm, adding lb ij
of whites of Eggs, and a little Saffron; apply it hot: Some only macerate bread
in warm milk and apply it, renewing the bread and application five times an
hour.

We have hitherto used raw Beef, of which we take a lean piece without any fat,
and tie it upon the affected part, changing it morning and evening; hereby the
dolor has happily been abated.

Podagrical Balsom.
. Vitriol calcined to a yellowness lb ij, Honey lb j, calcined Flints lb ss,
distill a Spirit by a Limbeck in sand, at first with gentle fire, afterward
more strong; this must be carefully done, for the matter will quickly boil.
Remove the Phlegm by distillation to the third time, what remains in the bottom
mix with Mastick, Olibanum, Myrrh, Mans-grease, Gum-ammoniack, juice of
Panacea, Bdellium, of each ij, distill this mixture once by Retort, with which
when distilled mix alike quantity of Spirit of wine, and keep it for use.

It will not be unprofitable also in this affect, to apply Spirit of Salt only
with fountain water, by double clothes moystned therein and used warm: Also Oil
of Tartar per deliquium made of Salt.

The knotted Gout is not always remedied by the ordinary external Cure,
requires other externalls, of which see more in my Annotations to Crollius,
which point thereto.

Leprosy.
Whether the Leprosy may be cured, is more then doubted by many; indeed the
Elephantiasie, that is, the Leprosy beginning, or but little spread, and
without scales, which for the most part are extant in the Superficies of the
body, or with them, is sometimes judged curable by Dogmatick Physicians, and
Examples or Observations testify the same.

But that the Leprosy, properly so called, and consirmed in all parts of the
body, may perfectly be cured, this they deny.

It is not lawful to accuse Nature of any kind of deficiency, which by divine
power ordained, has in her self, and mixed bodies, occult Arcanums, these
rightly known, and by preparation fitted for use; by the ingenious and proper
application of which, all Diseases incident to humane bodies, as far as they
are such, without some extreme be therein contained, we believe and ingeniously
profess to be cureable: See Forestus de Examine Lepros. Observe. 7. lib. 4. de
Curat. Chyrurgiae; see Jul. Pulmarius in the last Chap. of the Philosophic
stone: Also Basilius, Valentinus of Tincture, Chap. 6. Herebyit is manifest the
Leprosy may be cured, but how, vulgar prescriptions scarcely teach; nor are
the common Auxiliaries sufficient, although to the wise there is known, to be
hopeful and powerful virtues contained in them, and that in this case they may
do much good.

Aurum Potabile of Philosophers, That, either from some peculiar property in
that universal Medicine lying hid, or from the dissolved Sol it self, made by
the Menstruum of the world, does perfectly remove these and other simple
Diseases.

Tincture of Antimony above described in the Chap. of the Gout, chiefly that
which is exalted, and brought to a perfect spirituality, is very little
inferior to Aurum-potabile.

The true and genuine Tincture of Coralls is of like virtue; all and every of
these are profitable in Cure of the Leprosy.

All signs being observed, and from them the Disease it self perfectly known,
we should proceed with the abovesaid Medicaments, but if the chief of these,
(viz.) Phylosophick Gold be wanting, we thus, for method-sake, proceed:

1. Resolving and mundefying Medicines are necessary;

esolving, are all those which otherwise resolve the interior obstructions of
the Bowels ( viz. the Vitriolate Tartar) of which we have often spoken.

Mundefying, are Specificum purgans, Arcanum of Corals, Mercurius dulcis,
Antimonial Pills that only purge downward.

2. Specificks, among which excellent is the vulgar Viridellus, ( Vitriol) the
preparation of which is indeed none, but the whole Artifice consists in the
right exhibiting thereof. It is powerful in all Scabs. The body being cleansed
after this manner, proceed thus;. Of the said Viridellus ij, dissolve this in
lb x of wine, then strain it. Of this wine give half a Cyathum, a certains
measure.
small cupful often in a day with ordinary drink, either wine or beer, but wine
is best, because the Disease is cold, or a decoction of Lign. Sassafras, China,
or a decoction of Strawberries, or with common water; it always must be given
in drink; lb j of Viridellus is sufficient to effect the Cure, being
continually taken for three or four weeks.

Sometimes it may be convenient to provoke sweating (if at first sweating
difficultly come forth, then being caused by a Bathe of Spirit of wine, the
Scabs will freely fall away) with Diaphoretick in peracutis, or rather with
Tincture of Antimony, whereby you will see a perfect Cure. Sometimes also
purgations must be repeated with respect to the Disease and Patient.

Moreover there is a Specific of crude Viridellus not separated, nor
compounded of any other Medicinal Essence, which in this case is excellent. It
is not yet manifest, from what principle ( Vngarick green Vitriol has in it
very much Sulphur) or from what cause its excellent propriety proceeds.

It is most like from Sulphur, for Sulphur in Vitriol is of singular use, it is
very near the Nature of Sulphur of Antimony, of which the Tincture before
mentioned is prepared. If Sulphur of Vitriol be prepared Volatile or Embrionate
(see Quaest. 8. Thorem. in my Treatise of Opium) and as in the preparation of
Narcotick Sulphur of Vitriol, be by it self without any additament sublimed
(put in the Sulphur very leisurely) that it may be freed from the Feces,
afterward mixed with half so much pure Salt of Vitriol, and by Retort in fire
of suppression be at length distilled, it will come forth in a bright red Oil,
which if mixed with a little distilled vinegar, the powder will descend of a
Scarlet color, and the Spirit of Salt of Tartar mix it self with the vinegar;
this powder with cold water edulcorate, afterward extract it with spirit of
wine in a hot place, with the vessel very well closed; let it stand for eight
days, and at length the most sweet Essence of Sulphur of Vitriol will swim a
top like unto Oil, which also separate from the spirit of wine and keep. This
most pleasant Essence of Sulphur of Vitriol, is equivalent in virtue with
Tincture of Antimony, and is accompanied with wonderful Effects. Dose from Gr.
j to iv in water of Melissa; It expells the noxious humors of the body,
provokes Venery, rectifies the Womb, and repells its inordinate motion, and in
either Sex strengthens the Generative Seed. In water of Wild Alexander it is as
good; moreover the Dropsy it perfectly cures. The use of this Essence must be
continued for some time.

After the absolute Cure, roughness of the skin is often wont to remain; yet
after the noxious humors shall be totally expelled from the Center to the
circumference through insensible transpirations by the use of those noble
medicaments, at length all the scales and scabs will spontaneously fall off.
Alluminous astringent Salt will help.

Nevertheless, the more exterior hard scabs will still remain; these afterward
are mitigated and mollified by Bathes made of Emollient Herbs; but the most
perfect and absolute levigation of the skin is perfected by anointing after
bathing with Oil of Vipers or Land-snakes: The cast skin of a Viper or
Land-snake has the signature of this Disease.

This Cure is confirmed in three principal persons.

Another kind of Leprosy.
Elephantiasie.
If Elephantiasie be become habitual, because the substances of the parts are
hurt, and be as it were infected with a universal Caneer, it can by no means be
cured; but if it be but beginning, and not derived by propagation from Parents
to the Children, is it altogether curable.

Wherefore an order must be observed in diet, that moystning meats be eaten,
and the body presently purged with Choler resisting Medicaments, as Cassia,
Carthamus, Diasebesten, and others; and if The signs of the distemper allow.
thought fit a vein may be cut.

Then the humor must be digested with such Medicaments as hinder melancholy,
and are prescribed to remove obstructions of the Liver and Spleen. Afterward
such things as have power to expel these humors must be administered,
continuing always for three days the purging medicaments, for other three
days use some aperient preparing Apozeme, and again purge; this do so often
until the body be exceedingly well purged, and wholly freed from all manner of
evil digestion; often taking also Laxative Mercury, and Mercury with Sol. This
being done, we come to such things as correct the intemperance of the Liver,
viz. to cooling Hepaticks and appropriates. Then we proceed to those that
remove the cause of the evil, and expel the abundance of evil humors existant
in the Superficies of the body.

Among all which this following preparation of Vipers obtains the priority, of
which also above in the Chapter of Pthisick.. three or four Viper, pull off
their skins, throw away the intestines, reserve the heart, liver and head, put
them in a glazed earthen pot, which close on the top with its proper Covery,
only let there be a small hole in the middle of the Cover, that all the
humidity may be exhaled from them, and they dried fit to reduce to powder; or
the same may more commodiously be done in an Oven or in Sand. To ij or j of
this powder add root of Angelica ss, Valerian ss, adding two drops of Spirit of
Vitriol. After taking this let the sick sweat in bed.

To this may be added Trochus of Vipers from ss to j; also Quercetanus his
Saccharine preparation of Vipers, or else Animal-Bezoar.

Also often in a day let the Sick take Alcohol of Serpents, mixed with a like
quantity of Sugar. Opiates of it, with conserve of Roses, rinds of Citron, and
flowers of Nymphaea, to which may be added some drops of English Aurum
potabile, or Quercetanus his Celestial Mithredate may be often exhibited.

Drink may be emulsion of Melon-seeds, and seeds of Citrull, with a decoction
of Sarsaparilla, so as in lb ij of water lb ss of Sarsaparilla be boiled.

Also Vipers may be stifled in wine, and that wine drunk, as thus, put some
Vipers in a large glass, pour upon them spirit of wine, or burnt wine, and
leave them in it for eight days, then take them out. Of this wine, either by
it self, or mixed with others, the sick may take often in a day, chiefly morning
and evening; during the whole time of the Cure the sick must abstain from Salt.

Some perform the Cure after this manner; after universal and particular
evacuation, the whole body must be anointed with this following Ointment..
Clarified Turpentine j and ss, yolks of six Eggs, mix them; afterward add of
Ceruse most subtly pulverisate j and ss, pour on of vinegar ij and ss; make
an Unguent, with which anoint the whole body; if any thing remain cleaving to
the skin, wash the skin with milk; with this Ointment anoint the whole body
twice or thrice after the going into a dry Bath: After the former anointing in
Balneo, Cuppinglasses must be applied to the Arms, Shoulders, and above the
Knees: And with the following Ointment anoint the whole body one day, and the
next day with the foregoing Unguent, and so proceed till all the scabs and
scurf be removed, and the skin remain smooth and dry, and then more Oil of
Bays may be added to the following Ointment, and the body as before again
anointed: The Unguent is thus,. Root of Elecampane ij, Althea ij and ss,
Porke-fat lb j and ss, Lithargy of Gold, Mastick, Olibanum, Sarcocolla, Myrrh,
Hepatick-aloes, of each ij, Oil of Cammomil, Dill, Bays, of each ij,
Turpentine j, liquid Storax, Fresh-butter, of each iij, Mercury sublimate iij,
Wax a convenient quantity, and according to Art make an Ointment; afterward. of
this Unguent and Oil of Bays, of each iv, of Storax Calamita j; mix them, and
with this anoint the whole body; if it be not strong enough, more Oil of Bays
may be added at pleasure. If the Disease Tinea be also concomitant, pull the
hairs.

If the Disease have continued long, it is best for the two following years,
every Spring and Autumn to purge the body exceeding well, and if any thing
arise in any part of the body, to anoint that part with the latter Unguont
abovesaid.

Lues Venerea.
Lues Venerea (Brother Basilius Valentinus who lived in the time of Maximilian
the Emperor, calls it Die neuue Krieger Kranckheit) unless it most apparently
discover it self by little swellings and whelks in most parts of the body,
chiefly in the forehead, and obscene parts, especially by breakings out in the
thighs toward the knees, does very often lie hid, and although of no
continuance is scarcely rightly Cured, or if inveterate difficultly assuaged.

Therefore accurate judgment is in this case required, for the knowledge of the
distemper principally depends upon the confession of the Patient himself, (the
Physician in enquiring must be circumspectly wise, least the Patient evade a
real answer;) for beside those four manifest degrees distinguished by
Fernelius, there are more, which by reason of the community of symptoms with
those Diseases are scarcely perceivable: All and every of which contagious
copulation will declare, or the same committed with an infectious woman: If
therefore the Patient be guilty of this, and also the symptoms be common,
though this be unknown to the Physician, it will be best, that all things may
be rightly done, to proceed in the Cure, as if the Patient were infected with
Lues Venerea.

Constantly therefore observe this Rule.

1. If any one have pains in the thighs, shoulders and middle Ligaments, though
no other external signs be apparent, yet he may be judged infected.

2. If any be infected with Measels, Tetter, or Piles of the Fundament, and
have Whelks or Scabs in the skin of the body, about the neck or head, though no
dolor of the ligaments be, he by the general Rule may be censured with the
same censure.

3. If Tumors, Piles, and hidden Hemrodes possess the fundament, or obscene
parts, whether dolours of the joints be or be not, by the general Canon, from
the number of the infected with this Disease he cannot be excluded.

4. In a body otherwise most lively, if great misshapen Warts be, especially in
the hands; also if they appear in the lips and feet; if the Canon be observed,
he shall scarcely be judged free from infection.

5. If one be afflicted with Cambuca, or after Copulation the passage of the
Yard be obstructed with Tumors, with heat and inflammation, or if there be
ulceration of the Yard, or if he be afflicted with dolours of the joints and
head, or if not, yet he cannot but be numbered with the infected.

6. If one be troubled with Bubo's, and scabbiness about the privities, if he
be, or be not, afflicted with dolor of the joints, he can scarcely according
to the Rule be pronounced free from infection.

7. Although none of all these be, and the body appear wholly clear; yet if in
changes of the Moon, Air and Weather, the body be afflicted with dolours in the
extremities, as hands and feet; yea, also in the head, although the Patient
acknowledge his being but once guilty, he has the beginnings of this Disease
growing upon him.

From these signs and certain tokens of any infection much benefit may accrue;
of great benefit also would it be rightly to know the time of the Cure;
therefore the Disease new or lately contracted, from the inveterate of long
continuance should be distinguished rightly; for the former requires more short
and easy, the latter more long and Artificial Cure. The foundation and basis
of the Cure is placed in Mercury or Quicksilver duly and rightly prepared, in
the use of which there is need of proper Vehicles, which may be supplied with a
decoction of Guaiacum-wood, root of Sarsaparilla (the strings in the root
Sarsaparilla must not be thrown away, for they are of excellent virtue) root of
China, Lign-Sassafras, and shavings of Oak-wood, in these-cases is of excellent
use among the poor sort, sometimes better than Lignum-Sanctum.

Note. Water of Arsesmart, gathered the latter end of September, and the
beginning of October, and distilled, by a certain propriety much helps in this
case: See Platerus of foulness of the skin; also see the Marrow of
distillations of Syrups and Spirits.

The late taken Infection but of one years growth, must be cured after this
manner:

1. Exhibit Mercurius dulcis from Gr. xvj to xx or xxx, this continue for two
or three days, not increasing, but rather diminishing the Doses; afterward
Hydroticks may be used in the usual decoctions, if need be.

2. With Mercurius dulcis expel the impurities of the body, and then again have
recourse to Hydroticks.

Hydroticks are Spirit of Guaiacum, Mixtura simplex, Crollius his Treaclewater,
also Arcanum of Arsesmart. In Diet Salt, which is the Conserver of our Balsome;
evilly therefore do Physicians prohibit the use of common Salt, in those that
are afflicted with the French Sickness. In the heat of the day the sick may
walk in the Air.

But if the Disease be plainly inveterate, these light gentle Medicaments are
of little use, chiefly if the symptoms be urgent and very troublesome, and the
whole body assaulted on every side with the Disease it self.

Here Mercurial purgations are of principal use.

Sweatings may be provoked with Mercurials, but not unless fixed or prepared
into Spirits.

Among purging Medicaments, Crollius his sublimate Mercury obtains the
priority: Also the Arcanum of Coralls.

A Vomit is very necessary to loosen the spittle.

Note. In the inveterate Lues, although purgations are appointed only with
Mercury, yet they are not to be repeated once or twice and so left, but are to
be often reiterated for three or four days, continually increasing the Dose
daily from a lesser to a greater, so as from the exhibition thereof Spitting
out the matery noxious humor.
Salivation (in Salivations it sometimes happens the Sick are worst of all, but
the cause is occult; therefore the Physician ought to be honest) may either
spontaneously follow, or else further be provoked; this procured is as it were
a most certain sign of the future recovery, therefore not to be prevented, for
in it the Cure consists. This vidently observed and provoked, make a Mastick j,
and some Gr. from iij to viij of Mercur. dulcis sublimate, with Honey made up
into Pastills and chewed. The use of this must not be above eight hours.

Having this sign, thence forward omit purgations (but not before four days,
that in the first days Salivation may be moved,) and look to the excoriation
of the mouth, jaws and tongue, (Food easy to swallow should be eaten, as
nutritive bothes, sharp things must carefully be avoided) a Gargarisme made
only with Salt and common-water will be sufficient, with which the mouth must
be often washed hot for several hours; and so proceed.

Notwithstanding care must be taken least the flux of Salivation be too soon
restrained, ( Note, astringent Gargarismes mediate in Salivation) which is
hardly to be feared as long as the aforesaid Gargarisme is in continual use,
which rather helps then hinders that Flux. Least the spittle be swallowed in
sleep, put the knot of a handkerchif first moystned in brine between the teeth,
so as by the opening of the mouth, the filthy matter may have more liberal
passage. By the spontaneous cessation of which, if the more evident symptoms
also cease, the Cure indeed is thus far well performed; if otherwise, recourse
must either be had to the aforesaid mundefying Mercurial, and Salivation again
procured, or Diaphoreticks only (always Mercurial) may be used.

Merourial Diaphoreticks are two, (red spirit of Mercury, and spirit of
Mercurius simplex) the white and the red; either is made of sublimate Mercury,
but with diverse operations: One is of this kind,. Sublimate or Crystaline
Mercury most pure, one part, red Argilla three parts, pulverisate the Mercury
very fine, then mix it with the aforesaid earth, work them strongly together
with common water, so as they may incorporate and become one mass. Of this make
little balls not unlike such as are wont to be played with dry these diligently
in the shade, not in the Sun. Then in a glass Retort, (the Receiver need not be
very large, for the Spirit will be little, and not very strong) distill it in
sand, and with fire of suppression for two hours, with more strong fire force
it, (yet leisurely) and the excellent spirit of Mercury will come forth. In the
end some of the remaining Mercury will be sublimed, which at the end of the
operation gather, and mix it with fresh red earth; make it up into balls, and
dry it as before, and then by the usual distillation urge the spirit, repeat
the operation till all the sublimed Mercury be reduced to a liquor somewhat
sharp in taste, which preserve in a vessel well closed, and it will never loose
its strength.

The red spirit, or red Oil of Mercury, is thus prepared;. Of most pure
sublimed Quicksilver, what quantity you please, grind it upon a marble to an
impalpable powder, which with a like quantity of filings of Iron, put upon a
glass plate, set it in some cold moist place for certain weeks (in the months
of May, June and July) and it will be resolved into a yellow Oil, which
diligently gather. From the remaining Caput mortuum (from the Feces not
calcined) without fire (otherwise it will evaporate) extract a Salt. By the
benefit of common water extract a Salt both from the Iron and the Mercury,
which again coagulated join with the Oil, and the color will be converted like
Cold or Saffron, this coagulate. This Oil with its own Salt distill in a low
Cucurbit (the lower the better) in sand until the water ascend clear, which
being distilled off, augment the fire, and a redness will ascend into the
Limbeck like to Saffron, which may partly be gathered by a Receiver through the
neck of the Limbeck (this must not be too long) part thereof will stick in the
Limbeck like butter. Therefore urge the distillation with more strong fire,
until no more will ascend into the Limbeck. Cool the vessel, and take off the
Limbeck, and pour into the Cucurbit the Phlegm before distilled, so as if any
redness be lifted up to the sides of the Cucurbit, it may with that water be
washed off, and joined with what remains in the bottom; which being done put on
the Limbeck again, and repeat or renew the former distillation. As soon as the
Limbeck begins to wax hot by the subtle vapors ascending, that which was
contained in the Limbeck will by little and little dissolve and pass through
the neck into the Receiver exceeding red in color, which with acurate
diligence gather and join with the former red distilled Oil; when no more
redness can be distilled off, remove the Receiver, and in another gather the
Phlegm, as in the first distillation; this being done again increase the fire,
that the remaining redness may be gathered, which will partly again be
distili'd, and partly remain in the Limbeck: This must be provoked as often as
need is.

Either of these Diaphoreticks is of great use, chiefly the red, of which Gr. j
or ij in Treacle-water, Mixtura simplex, in spirit of Guaiacum, or with other
due vehicles exhibited, as Decoction of China, but especially in water of
Arsasmart, (if you please Tobacco water may be added) expells by sweating
whatsoever is noxious in the body, scarcely moveable by other Medicines: Whelks
readily fall off, the little Tumors are diminished, Dolours abated, and fetid
remaining Ulcers dried and consolidated.

But if they be more contumacious, with a gentle anointing outwardly with this
Oil, only by touching them with a feather, they are happily cured. This Oil is
also useful in high putrid and fistulous Ulcers, also in the head when very
much infected: For the affected parts being but once or twice touched with the
said Oil, and by some of it inwardly taken sweating provoked, a little after
they are most happily-cured.

There is no Lues so obstinate, but it gives place to these, where strength is,
to admit of sufficient sweating, which is always required.

The white spirit is of like virtue, only somewhat more remiss, yet by certain
continuation it overcomes the evil it self, and at length all symptoms are
mitigated.

By these therefore hitherto named, the most inveterate Lues Venerea may easily
be cured, if all other things rightly correspond, that thence forward the
Physician need not be much disturbed by the perilous appearance of symptoms,
since with diligent care the most dangerous may be removed.

Sometimes from the French Sickness evilly cured, there are certain Relics
remaining, which as the offspring of symptoms are very strongly fixed: Also
sometimes the Sick seek help of women Physicians, not of such as be slow and
ignorant, but of such as indeed be curious and diligent, wherein may some
necessaries be omitted, or error committed: Where it is so, there is need
either to Rolt^rote.
revoke the former method, or have recourse to another to supply the defect.

For oftentimes by the multitude, and frequency ^ (...) the Physician had need
be better instructed, partly that he may rightly, and partly that he may
honestly deceive the Patient, not after vulgar medicalments are found scarcely
enough efficacious, rashly to decline them, but in the using or refusing them,
circumspectly proceed: Since that for the most part the introducing a strange
Guest occasions disturbance, and that which should be mitigated is rather
augmented; Nature desires present Auxiliaries, chiefly where malignant fluxious
obstruct the method of mediating, or send forth new symptoms; as piercing
dolours, also Ulcers, chiefly of the jaws and neck; likewise tumors, and hard
contracted knottinesses, so strongly radicated, as if by Divine appointment
they were not to be removed. It sometimes happens after the Cure is instituted
again and again, yea, sometimes in the course of the Cure it self, that other
Auxiliaries are absolutely needful, of which we treat in order.

Dolor of the head in the inveterate Lues, is seldom or never perfectly
removed by Medicines. Likewise dolours of the joints after effecting the Cure
do very often return.

Yet there is also another Oil of Mercury in cases of this kind exceeding
profitable, it removes venereal fluxions from the head, and other inferior
parts; nevertheless externalls must also be applied.

Diaphoretick Oil of Mercury.
This said Oil of Mercury is thus made;. Most pure sublimate Mercury, what
quantity you please, reduce it to powder; and upon tin plates, (viz.) iron
plates tinned over, dissolve it per deliquium; distill the Solution with spirit
of wine so long, ( viz. by often cohobating) as until the spirit wax tart,
which keep for use. Dose from Gr. ij to vj, in decoctions or appropriate
vehicles.

Externalls are Plasters, such is that noble Magistral Vigonis of Frogs; of
which Platerus makes mention in his Lib. 3. of Observations, of Defaedation
page 679. This plaster must be applied to the head (the head being first
shaved) and worn till the dolours be removed; yet the plaster must be often
renewed, for by reason of the moisture it draws from the head it will quickly
be vitiated. The like plasters are in use by Practioners. These plasters in
dolours of the joints are also exceeding convenient.

Indeed the Bathes described by Ruland Cent. 10. Curat. 2. do in this case
yield some relief.

Moreover cavities of the jaws, with excoriation and loss of the Uvula, when
malignant Ulcers invade and reach close to the Nose it self, these cannot be
remedied but by perpetual and malignant fluxings with heat and great torture.

It is judged the Cure of these may be perfected sometimes by internal
medicaments, yet often after many internal remedies have been tried, they have
proved unsuccessful.

Here Gargarisms and other Ointments are highly commended. Most excellent is
the Gargarism described for affects of the mouth, which mundesies and dryes.

But if this neither effect any thing, the green water treated of in the same
place, being applied with a pencil or cotton to the jaws by touching and
moistning their Cavities, does wholly cleanse the exulceration, and egregiously
effects the Cure.

Sometimes they are so malignant, as by these they are not abated, chiefly if
they penetrate far, and come to the bones of the palate.

Most excellent is the Solution of Gold, after this manner:

. Of Salt fuse, purified Salt, and roch-Salt, of each j, add half a book of
Leaf-gold, grind them together prudently, imbibing them with some drops of
Spirit of Vitriol, and long grind them upon a Marble. Upon this mixture in a
small Cucurbit pour spirit of wine to cover it two fingers, leave it for some
time in ashes, the vessel being very well closed, afterward boil it a little
that the Salts may be dissolved, but the spirit will wax yellow. Then draw off
the Spirit of wine by a Limbeck, till it be dry. Pour on fresh spirit of wine,
and again digest it in ashes, and so the leaf-gold will be resolved by the
spirit of wine, and the Salts be left in the bottom. Repeat this extraction the
second and third time, until all the gold be plainly resolved and extracted.
Lastly, by distillation draw off the spirit of wine till the gold be dry, upon
which pour most pure spirit of Turpentine to cover one or two fingers; leave it
for eight days in a hot place, until all the gold be dissolved. With this
dissolved gold touch the affected place with cotton twice a day for some time,
(at first it seems to corrode, but by little and little it abates) and moreover
use Gargarisms, and you will see the desired cure quickly follow. The same
solution and extraction of gold is powerful in external Ulcers, not remedied by
other Medicines: ( Mercury has a famous incarnative force:) Of like virtue is
common Oil, in which red sublimate Mercury is transmuted by boiling, and the
Oil it self will at length become very black.

In Venereal Tumors, contracted hardness, and huge knottinesses of the bones,
and grievous dolours, for the most part more vehemently afflicting by night,
the plasters above mentioned are very powerful. Also that of Platerus Part 3.
Praxi. page 505 is of no small virtue. Yet most excellent is this following:.
Unguent. Aureum Officin. iij, Mercury sublimate j; mix these, and with a linuen
cloth apply it to the part for a day or two; but the knotted place must first
be washed with red wine, and so the knots will happily abate. Yet in very old
Tumors, and of long continuance, it must be longer continued, but not by
application in form of a plaster, but by anointing only twice or thrice a day
as long as need shall be.

The Dolours and Tumors being removed, supple the affected place with a cloth
anointed with unsalted butter, and wash it with wine; so the Tumor will not
only be removed, but all vicious humors extracted totally from the tumorous
member, and afterward tumors of this kind will seldom or never grow again, (if
the tumor abate not, it may be opened, expressed and cleansed.) I had an Example
of this in the arm of a most Noble Woman.

Foulness of the skin is manifold, (viz.) Welkes, little Bladders, Warts,
Sores, Scabs, Measels, Tetters, and other various and innumerable Species,
which receive their variety from the difference of Subjects.

For without controversy there is in the external habit of the body almost as
many Species of Lues Venerea to be found, as there are individualls; the venom
is so tempered with the humors of the body themselves, or rather with the
blood, that whatever variety of Salts domineer in the blood, or lie hid
therein, as many diversities also outwardly appear, flourishing like fruit,
directing themselves to Nature, and undermining her roots.

All these external vices of the skin, by internal Cures chiefly Mercurial, are
for the most part abated and healed; yet very often the contumacy of the
Disease is such, and so highly radicated, that by internal Medicaments, which
indeed may reach to the external parts, they cannot be removed, where the whole
evil is as it were transplanted and radicated in the habit of the body. That
therefore in these cases the diligence of the Physician may be manifest, He
must thus proceed:

1. Whelks, and other vices of the Face, are thus Cured.

. Quicksilver iv, Silver ij, dissolve these apart in Aqua fortis, afterward
join the solutions, and from the solutions distill a water by Retort or
Cucurbit in sand with strong fire. The Liquor drawn off, distill in Balneo,
until no more is seen to come forth, the remaining liquor keep for use. With
this liquor touch the Whelks, Warts, Bladders, etc. apart daily, or only once,
and at length they will wax black, and the Salts dye; leave them so (without
any other anointing) for four days, and the crusted skins will freely fall
off: if they fall not, anoint them with fresh butter, and this will presently
be effected: After this,. Sugar of Saturn dissolved in Rose Water, and with it
anoint the places, (with a small feather, before it be nine times used they
will be healed) where the Whelkes, etc. were, and they will quickly be Cured,
the blemishes and red spots also vanish.

2. Of like virtue is Oil of Verdegrease made per diliquium:

. Verdegrease one part, Salt Nitre two parts; mix them, and in a dish set fire
of it with a cole or paper, afterward what remains dissolve in a cold moist
place, or put it in a Hogs bladder; tie the bladder very close, and plunge it
in water, and so it will quickly be dissolved, (use this with Cotton.) The use
is the same with the former.

Scabs, Measels, Tetters, also clefts in the palms of the hands, and soles of
the feet, hardly exterminable by the preceding universal medicaments, may thus
be very well cured:. Hog's Grease what quantity you please, mix it with Oil of
Tartar made per diliquium, until the Unguent be pretty sharp, which by the
taste may be judged of: With this Unguent anoint the said parts morning and
evening.

But if by the use of this Ointment, little good be done, instead of the Oil of
Tartar, mix Oil of Vitriol with the Hog's Grease, and make it more sharp. If
this also be not sufficient,. Sublimate Mercury ss, in an earthen glased
vessel, boil it in lb j and ss of water of Arsesmart ( Plantane water is also
good) until the sublimate Mercury be plainly dissolved, then strain it, and
keep for use. With this solution daily anoint or touch the affected places,
and they will be Cured: See also of this water below.

Note, Mercury with spirit of wine (which by some Chemists is wont to be used)
must not be used to anoint with; A Coution.
for this Mercury inflames the blood, and carries it from the most remote parts
of the heart, whence spitting of blood, and other most grievous symptoms, and
at length the destruction of the Patient is also procured.

External Ulcers from Lues Venerea are most exquisitely cleansed with Oil-
Olive impregnated, as aforesaid, with the red spirit of sublimate Mercury;
instead of the Oil- Olive may be used Oil of Poppy expressed, which is as good or
better; or they may be mundefied with this Ointment.. The yolk of an Egg boiled
till it be hard, then take j of the best honey, moisten it gently in a pan over
the fire, and with a pestle mix the yolk diligently with the honey, beat it
well together till it come to the consistency of an Unguent of a dusk or dark
red color, which use: But if you would render the same more sharp, mix with it
carefully j, or ij of sublimate Mercury. This Ointment in putrified Ulcers, as
also in Fistula's arising from this Disease, is exceeding profitable and
powerfully cleansing; which notwithstanding must be continually used till all
the putrified parts be healed.

But if there be need of further cleansing, recourse must be had to the former
Medicaments. Vnguentum Aegyptiacum is vulgarly used, but with small success,
(by reason of the Verdegrease;) for it operates in these Ulcers rather by
corroding then separating: Moreover the Vnguentum Aegyptiacum infects the bones
with blackness, which by all means should diligently be avoided: But the
foregoing Unguents do not such things. Note, Where the bone is corrupted the
Cure is in vain, unless the filth be also expelled, either by the help of
Chyrurgery, or the use of Mercurial water.

After the Ulcers are well cleansed, consolidate them with the following
plaster, which is famous, and in other putrified Ulcers cleansed very
profitable. The same plaster cures Ulcers, that are not too deep. Moreover it
is a most excellent Epulotick and Incarnative. It is thus made;. The best
Lythargy pulverisate iv, Oil- Olive viij, boil them gently over the fire to a
brown color; which being done melt ij of wax in another small vessel, and pour
it when melted upon the Lythargy, stir it with a spoon, mix it diligently, and
make it up.

But if the Ulcers be very contumacious, as they are wont to be, this following
plaster may be used:

. Lithargy ij, Oil of Olives, of Linum, of each, iij, boil them to a
brownness, mix it with melted honey, and then add powder of Myrrh j, Lapis
Calaminaris, Tutia pulverisate, of each ij, (not prepared by Extinction) mix
these without fire, and keep for use. These indeed are profitable in drying and
healing Ulcers; yet it happens often that the French Ulcers are not perfectly
cured by Medicaments of this kind: In this Case most excellent is this
following Ointment.. Aloes-hepatick ij, Crocus of Iron ss, Frankincense ij,
Mummy j and ss, Honey j, Turpentine ss, the yolk of one Egg; mix these, and
beat them up to an Ointment, which apply to parts affected; after the use of
either of the aforesaid cleansing Unguents, this may be put with lint or
otherwise into the holes of Ulcers, or other noxious cavities.

Moreover in Lues Venerea Buboes are wont to appear about the Groines, chiefly
when bodies thus affected are also afflicted with malignant Fevers.

Although Buboes of this kind are symptoms of the Pestilential Fevers, for the
venom discharges it self by the inferior emunctuories to the ignoble place;
yet such as these, without the time and manner of infection, among Pestilential
signs and symptoms are not to be numbered; for they appear often in color of
blood, and indeed otherwise they seldom or never appear in the most grievous
venereal-sickness, as if by an occult property in the habit of the body, the
noxious, venomous humors were thrust out to the Groines, as strange Guests.

By this means therefore these kind of Tumors of Lues-venerea, are
distinguished from Tumors attending the Pest.

The way of Curing Buboes of this kind is most plain:

1. Ripen the Bubo with a plaster of Diaculon, (for there is always need of
ripening) or an Part of an Owl.
Owl moystned in vinegar, and applied to the Bubo, when it begins to swell
remove it, and apply another; continue applying the Owl or the plaster till
the Bubo be softened; then with a penknife open it, and express the corrupt
filth and blood. After this an Opodeldoh must be applied, which will not suffer
the Ulcer at all to close, till it be perfectly healed from the bottom.

Moreover in this very Cure, as in all other symptoms of Lues-venerea, no part
of the internal Cure must be at all omitted: For it is known that often in this
kind of Tumors of the Groine, the only repeating of the inward use of Mercury
(sublimed Merc. or Oil of Merc.) has in time removed them, so as by the
Mercurial operation internally the course of the evil is wholly exterminated.

The lately contracted Lues-venerea has a Chrystaline symptom, so called,
(viz.) a little transparent bladder growing upon the gland of the privy part,
whence it is so denominated.

If this be not exquisitely Cured with proper Remedies, it is mortal. It will
not abide a stroke, nor will it admit of consolidation, though Remedies
properly helpful in other venereal nlcerations be applied.

The Spirit of Tobacco is here only commended, nevertheless the internal Cure
must be also administered; so at length all things will most happily be
accomplished; where this bladder is first mortified (the bladder already
mortified, being but only touched with the spirit three or four times does
presently vanish) there touch it five times at most with the spirit of Tobacco,
and it will spontaneously fall off, and this must be done while the Patient
lies down; otherwise a very gentle touch of the spirit of Tobacco will cause
him to fall, (that is, it benums, and so causes the party to fall) See above of
the spirit of Tobacco.

By this method of Curing a Friend of mine confessed he gained 1000 Ducats of
Gold; I may say, and truly affirm, that in all my whole practice, no Cure had
more happy and prosperous success then this, which I now perfectly and heartily
deliver and communicate to you.

In the Cure of Lues-venerea various ways of curing are devised by sundry men.

Among vulgar ways this following is most approved:

1. Purge the body with some Apozeme or Opiat; vulgarly is only used Confection
of Hamech, with Electuary of Diacarthamus, or with iij and Gr. v of juice of
Roses in a common purging decoction.

2. After purgation, if great pain in the head be, a vein may be opened,
otherwise by no means.

3. Then make an Unguent of fresh Hogs grease, if it may be had, or of that
which has been long kept, if not rank or salted, the quantity of lb j or more,
and ij of Quicksilver or more in juice of Lemmons, or which is better,
mortified in Turpentine.

With this Unguent anoint the shanks and knees before a furnace, or other good
fire, and if the Disease be vehement, the back also.

4. Which being done provoke sweat leisurely, by enclosing the sick in some
enclosure proper for this Disease, to which about the feet must be put burning
coals, that he may sweat the better; it is convenient to do this in some hot or
well closed chamber, where no air may come in, that the evacuation may be
perfect. Anoint the Patient once a day for the first three days (viz.) in the
morning betimes; this may be continued four or five mornings; afterward use it
twice a day, that is to say, in the morning, and three hours after dinner:
Afterward again continue the anointing in the mornings only, until a
Solivation.
Ptyalisme, or spitting much, begin to appear, as soon as this appears forbear
anointing, yet not until you see the spittle flow out of the mouth in
abundance; then be sure to forbear anointing, and keep the Patient always in
Bed, or in a Stove, until the Ptyalisme cease; which if it continue above
eight or nine days, make a Gargarisme of astringents, as Mouse-ear,
Myrtleberries, Knotgrass, Pomegranate flowers, to which add a little
Aqua-mortua, with some honey of Roses, or Aqua-mortua alone allayed with a
decoction of Guaiacum, and the mouth washed therewith.

Also at that time the gums and whole mouth may be so inflamed, that the sick
can eat nothing, but a little bread first moystned in broth. As soon as the
Ptyalisme ceases, the teeth and gums must be washed, as aforesaid.

While these things are doing, drink may be wanted, which will be best to be
made of a decoction of Guaiacum, or the like.

Also during the whole time of the Cure, let the sick abstain from all salts,
and if possibly he can from common Salt.

As soon as the Flux ceases, let liquids be forborne, and boiled meats used; for
several days let him drink twice of a decoction of Guaiacum, or such like as
this.

. Shavings of Lignum Sanctum lb j, bark of the same iv, make an infusion in lb
xij of common water for twelve or twenty four hours; boil it till half or
three parts be consumed; of which when streined the sick may commodiously take
for each Dose iij or v. The remainder of the decoction in other lb xij of
common water boil a little. To this may be added a little Cinnamon, Liquorish
and Raisons. Let this second decoction be used instead of drink. The twice
taking the first decoction for provoking sweat, must be done in the morning,
and three hours after dinner always in a Bed or Stove after the taking it.

It is best, that every fifth or sixth day the body be purged, during the whole
time of the Cure, with Confection of Hamech, or Citron; Diacarthamus, or with
juice of Roses, if he be poor, but if rich, a Magistral Syrup or Apozeme may be
made.

Also from the beginning, for meat it may sometimes be convenient to eat
laxative fruits, as Prunes, Figs, boiled Appl^s, etc.

If dolor be in any part, apply to the dolorous part a plaster of Vigonis,
with Mercury, which with respect to the vehemence of the symptom may be
doubled, trebled, or fourfold.

If Ulcers be, gently anoint them with Aqua fortis, or, which is more
commodious, with Oil of Sulphur or Vitriol (...) But if the use of this be not
agreeable to the Cure; or the Patient, by reason of business, cannot
conveniently abide at home, use this following:. Root of common Galangal,
Succory, sower Sorrel, Scabious, Betony, Sarsaparilla, of each j, of the
greater Raisons x, Herb Succory, Scabious, Bittony, Ground Pine, Pimpernel, of
each one handful, Maidenhair ss a handful. Aniseeds, Seeds of Melons, of each
j and ss, Cordial flowers three parts; make a decoction with a
convenient-quantity of water; of this when strained. lb ij, in which boil
leaves of Oriental Bena, Seeds of Carthamus bruised, of each jj, Hormodactylls
j and ss, AgarichTrochesate, Epithymon, of each ss; in this when strained
dissolve solutive syrup of Roses iv, syrup of Violets iij, Honey of Roses
strained ij; make an Apozeme for eight Doses, in the mornings, or as shall be
judged most proper for operation: Or a decoction may be made with Sena leaves
only, and a like quantity of Hermodactylls, with half a part of the root of
Sarsaparilla, and a little Rosemary: Also the third day, before and after the
taking of the Apozeme, a small Pill of Turpentine may be swallowed of Gr. vj,
or more, according to the Constitution of the Patient. Mercury precipitated
with Aqua fortis and salt water; or Mercury precipitate with Sol, from Gr. iij
to v; or only the common red precipitate Mercury, by iterated ablution
edulcorated from all its Acrimony.

The Sick may take the Apozeme at four a clock in the morning, and abstain
from eating or drinking till nine or ten, or if possibly he can till noon;
Eight days after taking the Mercury, make the following decoction:. Root of
Sarsaparilla fresh lb ss, shavings of Lignum Sanctum iv, China not corrupted
ij; infuse these in lb x of water for twenty four hours, afterward boil it
till two parts be consumed: Of this when strained give the sick iv, with six
drops of the Oil of Sulphur, and let him sweat either in a Stove, or else in
Bed, in the morning betimes, or three hours after dinner; continue the use of
this ten days, if the Disease be not very inveterate, but if it so be, for
fifteen days.

Sometimes Mineral Bezoar may be given to provoke sweating more freely; this
sweating is best in a Stove, in which a hole must be left for his eyes and
nose, that he may be better breath; as soon as he comes into the Stove make a
suffumigation with Cinaber of Antimony, or in defect thereof, with common
Cinaber, in quantity j, and with red Storax Calamita vj ( Sulphur ss, Oil of
Lignum Sanctum j,) or with a little Turpentine make Trochus's: After he has
well sweated for one hour, let him go into a bed exceedingly well warmed, and
there for half an hour, or as long as strength will permit, continue sweating.
Then wipe off the sweat very well with hot clothes, and the Patient may go to
his usual business.

Also it will be expedient, that the sick wear a large plaster like a
Stomacher, chiefly if the Disease be inveterate, made of the Plaster of
Vigonis with Mercury, so as it may cover the parts of the precordia, and below
the stomach, almost to the bottom of the belly.

Drink must be a decoction made of the remaining Sudorifick decoction aforesaid
with Liquorish, Cinnamon, Raisons, etc. prepared as may be rendered savoury to
the Palate of the sick.

It is best that he sweat three hours afternoon, and early in the morning take
a draught of the said decoction, with j of Alcohol of Serpents, of which above
in the Chapters of Asthma, and of the Elephantiasy; every fifth day let him
purge with our Panchymagegon, to which may be added Gr. iv of sublimate
Mercury, or else he may purge only with Mercurius dulcis sublimate.

If he have Ulcers, knottinesses or erosions, boil Guaiacum until the
decoction be like thick milk; express it, and with the expression wash them
morning and evening, applying a plaster of Vigonis with Mercury double or
treble; or the Plasters aforesaid.

But if by these they be not removed, perfume them all with the above
prescribed Trochus's, and they will be cured; or mix the common red precipitate
Mercury with the Egyptian Unguent to purge the Ulcers: Or else wash them with
this subsequent Mercurial water, of which also above.

Mercurial water.
. Sublimate Mercury ss, beat it very small in a mortar, pour upon this of
Plantane water lb j and ss, dissolve it gently in Balneo, at length boil it a
little, and then by filtring separate it from the Feces; afterward pour it into
a tin pan that is very clean, and leave it for a very small time, and the pan
will become black therewith; this being done, pour the same water into another
clean tin pan, so as the former may be cleansed from its blackness; then when
as the other pan shall also be made black, pour the same water again into the
former pan. Repeat this often until the pans be no more blackned with the
water, but keep their usual brightness, which will be after the tenth or
twelfth time; Keep this water for use, which will be white of color, use it to
heal Ulcers arising from Lues Venerea, as well in the Mouth, as Yard; it is
useful also in curing other Ulcers; likewise in cleansing Cancers. But if you
desire it more strong, six times infusion in the pans will be sufficient, this
must be used by gently touching the Ulcers with a pencil.

Having proceeded thus far in the Cure, it is needful to appoint that the sick
keep himself warm, and go not into the cold air, during the time of the Cure.

If the Disease be but beginning, use the abovesaid Apozeme with sublimate
Mercury, as we prescribe; then use the abovesaid Sudorifick for several
mornings, yet without provocation of sweat, rather after taking it let the
Patient exercise himself, and use the second decoction before mentioned with
his meat instead of drink.

Also let him purge every fifth day, as above:

If the Gonorrhea be, it will be profitable to exhibit the green precipitate,
or Gum Guaiacum, after which may be given to drink Turpentine washed with water
of Violets, and beaten with the yolk of an Egg, and rendered potable with a
decoction of Sarsaparilla.

If decay of strength be, Pearls dissolved in the sharp Liquor of Guaiacum, and
the solution afterward from ss to j, often exhibited, is very profitable. The
distillation of the sharp Liquor of Guaiacum is after the manner of spirit of
Salt with a luted Retort in an open fire, (viz.) first a large capacious
Receiver must be applied, and with gentle fire a clear Liquor distilled; the
fire must be continued in the same consistency of heat six or eight hours, then
the spirits will begin to appear like clouds in the Receiver, which when
perceived, the fire must be increased, and so gradually continued till all the
spirits are come forth, which is, when no more cloudiness remains in the
Receiver, but it wax clear as at first. This distilled liquor pour upon fresh
shavings of the wood Guaiacum, make it up as it were a paste, and distill it by
a Cucurbit in Balneo till it be dry: The liquor thus distilled rectify, and at
first the phlegm will come forth unsavory; as soon as some sharp drops are
perceived to come forth, change the Receiver, and receive the sharp liquor
apart. With this dissolve pulverisate Pearls, as they are otherwise wont to be
dissolved in Vinegar.

The green Precipitate (by some called green Lacerta) is thus made; dissolve
iij of Mercury in vj of Aqua fortis, and again dissolve j of Copper in ij of
Aqua fortis; join the solutions, and in sand by Retort distill the Aqua fortis.
Toward the end urge the fire more vehemently, that the greatest part of the
Corrosive spirits may be removed; that which remains in the bottom grind upon
a marble, and with vinegar digest it in Ashes.
sand for six days; at length boil it, that the most powerful part of Mercury
may dissolve in the vinegar; the vinegar thus impregnated pour off, and with
gentle fire distill it to a dryness, then the green precipitate of Mercury will
remain in the bottom. This is a Specific in virulent Gonorrhea, and the
French sickness, exhibited from Gr. iv to viij in Conserve of Roses.

The Scurvy.
As Lues Venerea makes choice of the Liver as its proper seat, and from thence
universally infects the blood; so the Scurvy takes possession of the Spleen for
its peculiar habitation: See Reusnerus, Horstius, and Sennertus.

It seems neither of these Diseases was unknown to the Ancients, although by
degrees or accidents, they are since become more sharp, or more eminently
apparent.

This is very familiar to Or such as live by the Seaside.
Seafaring men, or such as are carried beyond the Seas; the antecedent causes
are vapourous salt spirits, devoid of their own Sulphur, elevated from the Sea
by the stars, but not digested, which Seamen and Passengers attract by
respiration and exspiration.

Spirits of this kind first infect the Lungs, then the Liver it self, and Vena
Porta, at length the tartarous dregs adhering to the Spleen and parts adjacent,
which parts, those impurities thus derived, do as it were by an homogeneal
conformity, of a saline principle, joyfully receive to themselves, which do not
only obstruct the substance of the Spleen, but also all veins and passages in
the same.

Hence follows Melancholy, Sadness, decay of strength, weariness of the
members, a change of the lively color to a livid paleness; a Leprous hardness
contracted in the skin, with small scales breaking out thin, dry, and very
hard. The Vertigo infects the head, sleep is diminished, that which is, is not
Natural, sometimes a slumbering is, but always accompanied with anxiety and
terror; Palpitation of the boart.
the heart beats, and leanness consumes the whole body; often in the beginning
the Gums begin to wither, with blemishes and blew spots encompassed round about
with whiteness like to Ulcerations, the teeth are loose, and jaws of evil
savor. In Men the Sperme is watery and thin, in Women the Menses stop, or
degenerate into a white flux; the muscles and flesh as it were consumed
inwardly contract a filth, and with subtle corroding humidity are affected. The
Economy of the Ventricle is either exceedingly diminished, or else unavoidably
injured.

The body outwardly, chiefly where the muscles are most firm, is infested with
blew spots, which soon vanish, and a little after appear elsewhere in the
skin; the feet have watery swellings, with stinking Ulcers.

Females may be afflicted with this Disease fifteen or twenty years, Males are
seldom troubled herewith more then seven or eight years.

When as in this Disease Obstructions of the interior Bowels, Liver and
Spleen are chiefly powerful, and the Mesentery veins hereby receive prejudice,
which usually is wont to happen, before any thing else be done, the
obstructions must be removed.

Vitriolate Tartar instead of a digestive taken either in broths or decoctions,
opens the first passages, and somewhat helps the secondary, which afterward are
happily cleared by Specificum purgans, if continually for certain days it be
drunk in Extract of Hellebore.

Note. Mercury must not in this case be used: For,

1. It ascends to the superior parts, and so augments the fluxions, whence the
symptoms are more powerfully manifest.

2. It here removes not Obstructions, as it does in Lues Venerea.

Antimoniats are in this place of singular use:

Specificks are, 1. Essence of Scurvy Grass and Beecabunga.

Arcanums of these are highly commended.

2. Elixir-proprietatis of Paracelsus.

3. True Tincture of Coralls.

Instead of all these with mirable efficacy Tincture of Luna is sometimes used,
especially where the head is weakened by A Disease that makes all things seem
round
Scotomy.

Happily therefore thou may effect the Cure of the Scurvy, though inveterate,
if after the use of mundefying Medicines, recourse be had to Specificks.

A decoction of China-root used for ordinary drink is very profitable; and also
for Vehicles when Specificks are administered. To the poorer sort a decoction of
Lignum Sanctum with Scurvy grass is very beneficial, to whom also Specificks
must not be denied.

Note. Most happily the whole business may be dispatched, if, after the use of
universalls, when Specificks are exhibited in the mornings; in the evenings
before the Patient go to bed, be used certain days together
Philosophick-water, or Sulphur or Tincture of Tartar ( Gr. j or ij at most)
which Tincture of Tartar is extracted with Spirit of wine (that is, Tartarisate
Spirit of wine:) See above in slowness of the belly, and my Notes to Crollius.

Falling out of the teeth, and ulceration of the Gums, is helped either
generally or particularly by this Cure, as is abovesaid. The approved green
water above described in the Chapter of Ozaena, is in this case properly
praised.

In Ulcers of the mouth water of Elecampane-root is of singular use. Also the
incoagulate water after the last extraction of Specificum purgans; Dose Gr. x:
Of which hereafter in the Gangreen.

After the body is well corrected blemishes spontaneously fall off, therefore
need no peculiar help.

Ulcers in the body, chiefly about the shanks, are cured in the same manner as
we have already spoken.

Tops of Madder infused in wine are convenient, the infusion being used to wash
the Ulcers, which, with the same in a decoction must afterward be fomented.

This Disease is often wont to return, especially in some constitutions, where
it lurks unespied and privily gets familiarity: But if the body be well
cleansed at the proper seasons of the year, and orderly diet, with legitimate
observation to avoid the six unnatural things, be appointed, it seldom or never
can manifest its cruelty. For the most part those whom it once thus invades, it
very seldom forsakes. Yet from this evident Cure it is hoped, and indeed
certainly known, that there is no Scurvy, how deformed so ever, but may (if
other things correspond) with an ingenious hand, and the right exhibition of
Specificks, be perfectly cured: to which the exquisite diligence and prudence
of the Physician, with a true desire to perform things rightly, is also
required.

The experience of this Cure is somewhat confirmed by the testimony of the
Noble West-Phalians, who still send me some tokens of their gratitude. So much
for the Scurvy, now follow Fevers, with their Cures.

Fevers.
In rightly Curing all Fevers, properly so called, this must principally be
minded, that the Cure be not rashly or disorderly performed.

For although Specificks are said to remove all peccant humors, in the Cure of
every Disease, yet these without method or judgment exhibited, are of little
or no virtue, for the settled impurities of the body by their innate power, do
wonderfully oppose the Specificks; yet as also in all other Diseases, so in
this, these are not to be neglected.

In this place all the evacuating Medicines above prescribed are of excellent
use, yet so as the temperature of the body, age, sex, and strength be well
considered.

Antimony is a purging Specific in all Fevers, except the Hectic; the
flowers of which rightly fitted and prepared expel all Feverish impurities
from the body: The flowers may be reduced to an Oil; which by precipitation may
be reduced to an Emetick powder, if the Basis of the precipitation be Simple
water; or into a powder only purging downward, if the Basis of the
precipitation be Oil of Tartar.

Note well, whether the Oil of Tartar after precipitation should long be left,
(with Crollius) or presently be removed. The latter is affirmed, otherwise
indeed the Antimony would be too much fixed.

Either of these powders in a just Dose legitimately exhibited in intermitted
and continual Fevers, mitigates them very much, chiefly if at first rightly
other medicaments be administered, it moves and expells the very root of evil
from the body.

Sometimes Obstructions most obstinate abide, in the Liver, Meseraick veins,
Spleen and Mesentery it self, also in the Reins, which move and propagate the
malignant humors, therefore they are diligently to be removed with one or
other of the aforesaid Evacuations, by often exhibitions.

In this case Digestives of Vitriolate Tartar, Cream of Tartar, Spirit of
Tartar, Spirit of Vitriol, Aperient Penotums, and Spirit of Salt, are of
excellent use; then which nothing can be more profitable, if administered in
convenient Vehicles, and such as are proper to remove obstructions.

The Obstructions thus resolved and moved, mundefying Medicaments more rightly
operate, and render the Cure of Fevers more prosperous.

There are also necessary Vomitories in this case, especially in Fevers of the
Ventricle, and Quotidians produced of Phlegm, wherein Aqua bened. often
exhibited is singularly profitable.

Likewise in Tertians Antimonial Emetick-pills prepared rightly to procure
vomiting; afterward by purgations the desired Cure happily follows.

Quotidian Fever.
In the Quotidian, from whence often the Hectic Fever proceeds, after
dissolving the Fits, excellent is Mixtura simplex to expel the relics of the
Disease from out the whole body.

The intermitted Fever.
In Fevers discontinued, in the beginning, not in the increase of the Disease,
while the evil as yet remains in the Ventricle, a purging Specific of glass of
Antimony is thus made.. Glass of Antimony prepared in due season, and
pulverisate ss, Sugar Candy iv, Wheat flower iv, Saffron j; boil them with
common water over a gentle fire to the consistency of a Poult is, care must be
taken that it burn not, but be almost as dry as bread; then make it up into
round balls, and keep it carefully: this will dure in its full virtue four
years, afterward it contracts filth, and begins to decay. Use it in Fevers of
this kind in the beginning of the Fit, as soon as any quaking in the joints
begins to be. Dose in those of ripe age j, In Women ij, in Children j, or ss:
See also below in the method of Curing Fevers.

Tertians intermitting.
There are Specificks very many, for Tertian intermitting Fevers, extant, both
simple and compounded.

The Simple are,

1. Water of Tobacco, of which one or two spoonfulls exhibited before the Fit
come, not omitting the aforementioned, does at length wholly prevent the Fit.

Note. This water in Fevers for the most part causes vomiting, which if given
in all other Diseases it seldom procures.

2. Root of Coltsfoot j or ij in Malmsie wine, (in the Quartane it is also
profitable) being taken six or seven hours before the Fit, vehemently provokes
sweat, and also vomiting is often procured thereby.

3. Crude Alum, of which j, or ss, given in water or decoction of the lesser
Centaury five hours before the coming of the Fit, provokes sweat, if possible.
This in the Quartane cannot sufficiently be commended.

4. Salt of Wormwood or Masterwort duly prepared, Dose ss at most, given in
water of the lesser Centaury, before the coming of the Fit.

5. Oil of black Pepper distilled per vesicam, (this is a famous Cordial,
cooling and sweet with grateful humidity) of which Gr. iij or v, given a little
before the Fit in water of Tobacco, or of the lesser Centaury, removes the
Fever.

6. Shel fishes prepared, as teaches Crollius, in Specificum Febrile.

7. Spirit of Salt Ammoniack; of which three drops unto six or seven given in
water of the lesser Centaury or Succory, five or six hours before the Fit,
provokes sweat exceedingly.

Compounds are,

1. Water of the Root of Masterwort, which is thus made;. Root of Masterwort,
and rich wine, of each a like quantity, digest these together in Balneo, in a
body with a blind head; afterward distill them by a Limbeck in sand; in the end
of the distillation, beware it smell not of the fire. Of this give the Patient
in the day he is free, and the next day three hours before the Fit, and so also
the third day, the quantity of one spoonful, that sweating may be moved, if
possible. After the use of this Specific the Fits seldom return.

2. Is Crollius his Composition of Oil of Vitriol, and Salt or Spirit of
Wormwood, given with Succory water?

3. Is the Compounded water of Pis^res, which is made after this manner;. Water
of Strawberries, of the lesser Centaury, of each lb ij, of Honey lb ij or iij,
mix them in a Cucurbit broke off at the neck, bury this in an Ant hill up to
the neck, leave it covered, and the Ants allured by the sweetness of the Honey
will rush by heaps into the vessel^. After you have gathered of these a
sufficient quantity, take out the vessel, stir them all very well together, and
and by a Limbeck in ashes, distill a water, which diligently keep. Dose, half a
spoonful at most, it must be given in the beginning of the Fit.

Note. This water (in Fevers only, as the water of Tobacco) does sometimes
provoke vomiting vehemently; therefore it is worth while diligently to consider
the Nature of the Patient, whether he be Fit to endure vomiting, o^ no; and
whether the sickly cause of the Fever may fitly be expelled by vomiting, and
also whether the strength of the Patient will permit.

For although this Specific does remove intermitting Fevers, yet if the
Patient have no disposition to vomiting, it were far better to leave it unused,
then rashly to cause detriment to ensue.

4. Salt of the lesser Centaury, after this manner Compounded:

. Salt of the lesser Centaury very well made j, Vitriolate Conserve of Roses,
of Violets, of each j; mix these. Of this mixture give ij twice a day,
especially two or three hours before the coming of the Fit, also in the evening
or morning after, according as the Fit happens; and so continue till the Fever
decline.

5. Mixtura simplex four or five hours before the Fit, also sometimes in the
well days.

Quartans.
The Quartane requires the same purgations, but here the Physician must warily
proceed.

For the Quartane does often deceive Practitioners, unless conveniently and
gently handled; whether it be newly taken, or of some continuance, or more
inveterate, it hardly ever is perfectly expelled.

Besides much is placed in the Nature of Quartanes, which do often delude
Medicaments, though with the greatest gentleness exhibited, and renders them
inefficacious.

Extract of Hellebore for purging, or else Antimonial Pills of which above)
only working downward, do most kindly expel the causes of this Feavir, chiefly
if but newly taken, or if after some months it be declining of its own accord.

Very often there are enormous obstructions of the Spleen, and left
Hypechondry, from the evil derived to the Vena Cava, whence dolours of the
back, loins, and the utmost end of Os sacrum, do for the most part follow.
Also often times the black Jaundies either precedes or follows, and other more
grievous symptoms render the Disease more vehement. If it be so apparent,
Medicines are chiefly necessary, which in this place are no other then we have
already treated of.

Note. Vomiting in the Quartane Fever is hardly profitable; for although it
may somewhat purge the first Region of the belly, and the parts adjacent be a
little cleansed from the Heterogeneal matter, yet it does not at all touch the
matter principally feeding the Fever: Therefore repetition of vomitings must
by no means be, one vomit is sufficient. Also Specificum purgans of Paracelsus,
although it do not wholly remove the Quartane, yet it is a famous Aperitive, if
some of it be mixed with other Digestives; Very often the same Specific
exhibited with a like quantity (or more) of Extract of Hellebore, does by
little and little consume the cause of the Fever, by often, but very gently,
opening the belly, then which indeed no other purge may more happily be given:
For this happily opens the Obstructions, makes the belly soluble, and also
expells the Fever. Extract of the Lazure stone, of which above in purging
Medicines.

But although, after the repeating these evacuations, by reason of the evils
more deeply radicated, the Fever be little or nothing abated; Nevertheless it
is convenient to go on still and proceed to other Specificks, (in the evening
before the exhibiting the Specific, the sick must abstain from Food,) which
are these.

1. Oil of Myrrh, of which from four to eight drops must be exhibited a little
before the Fit in some convenient Vehicle.

2. Juice of Watercresses with a like quantity of vinegar mixed, and if it can
be endured, a little common Oil added thereto; of which two or three
spoonfulls, with six or eight drops of Spirit of Salt of Wormwood (in defect
thereof Salt or Spirit of Wormwood) given a little before the Fit three or four
times, still continuing it in the time of the Fit, and although it do remain.

3. Powder of Serpents of Vipers, of which above in the Chap. of Asthma and
Elephantiasie, (of the flesh and backbone, not of the heart only) of which j,
or j and ss, given in some convenient Vehicle, before the ^it, four or five
times, continuing it in the time of the Fit, though it do remain.

Note. When in Quartane Fevers, not only in the height of them, but also in
their declination, there are most vehement dolours of the back, the cause of
which we have already spoken of. These symptoms are mediated thus; fill a bag
longer then broad with Barley, which boil in simple water till it break, apply
it hot to the Reins of the back all over, before the coming of the Fit, or
after it, if the dolours remain.

Hectic Fever.
In the Hectic Fever the same things almost are necessary which are above
prescribed in Ulceration of the Lungs; for this as an undevided Companion the
Hectic follows, which very often seems to require more of the Physicians help,
then the Disease it self.

Moystning and cooling Medicaments are here indeed not accidentally, but
essencially necessary: Salt of Pearls and Corals are very profitable.

Sweet Bathes sometimes used do much help in the habit of the body afflicted
with dry scurfs.

Asses milk (hot) in the Hectic chiefly (...).
after taking a Medicine that works on the body, does wonderfully restore.
There are also other things very many described by Physicians, which are here
very useful.

Compounded Fever.
The Compounded Fevers are cured after the same manner (...) other simple
Fevers, only the purgations must be more gentle.

Daily Fevers.
The simple Quotidian Fevers are principally resident in the Ventricle, their
Cure therefore is only effected with vomitings, which may be procured with Aqua
bened. or other Vomitories.

Then such things as corroborate the Ventricle, which are various, but chiefly
these following, comfort the stomach, Conserve of Sorrel, Roses, Mint, etc.
being tempered with Spirit of Vitriol, or other sowerish Mineralls.

The Relics may be removed by temperate and proper diet; also when the
Internalls are freed from gross and tough impurities, thoroughly to perfect the
Cure may be added as Auxiliaries Panchymagogon-vegitable, Specificum purgans,
and more especially Antimony, which only purges downward.

Malignant Fevers.
By Malignant Fevers we understand, all kind of Epidemical affects, which at
first strike the body with piercing cold, afterward with most vehement heat,
not without malignity from the air, or caused by intemperance in meats and
drinks; such are Petechial, Vngarick and Catarrhal Fevers: Also burning
Fevers, which hitherto have invaded and assaulted a great part of Europe.

In Cure of these a more happy method cannot be found then what is begun with
vomiting, and by necessary Mediums at length ended in Confortatives.

A Vomitery is Aqua bened. whose use is deservedly praised. Tcuching the
cutting of a Vein, by some greatly feared, it is often doubtful with us,
whether it may be necessary or no. The Headache speedily requires it, yet
oftentimes in Chollerick persons the cutting of a vein has been undiscreetly
done.

We therefore with Buland would so temper our selves in the use of Phleb^tomy,
as in urgent necessity, and when symptoms sufficiently manifest do require, we
would only prescribe it, and not at all vary from this safe Rule.

See the Treatise of Vngaricks of Martin Rulands Son: Also see Balthazar
Conradinus of the Vngarick Fever.

Distilled water of Harts-hornes that are fresh with the blood in them, is good
in all burning, malignant and epidemical Fevers,: See above in the Chap. of
Confortatives.

The method of curing Fevers.
The following method may be used in Curing Fevers: First, if the Feaves (...)
inject an emollient cooling Clyster, then open a Vein, either about four a
clock in the Afternoon, or else betimes in the morning, when the (...) a
Clyster has been injected.

(...) for certain days give a cooling Julep, thus,. Of a cooling decoction
iv, of Syrup of Violets, or Succory ij; mix these, and make a Julep, of which
the sick may drink at pleasure: Or,. Water of Endive, Succory, of each lb ss,
Roses iv, Salt-prunella ij, Syrup of Nymphea, or of Violets, or of the five
roots, of each j and ss; mix them: Or,. Shavings of Hentsthorn ji, boil them
in a sufficient quantity of water of Barley or Poppy.. Of this decoction lb ij,
Syrup of Colts foot, Horebound, Maidenhair, of each j, Spirit of Scordium
without any addition Gr. vrij, of Vitriol Gr. xi; mix these, and make a Potion,
which being taken, another may be prescribed, with which, after universal
Purgations, sometimes ss, or Gr. vj of Sugar of Saturn may be mixed.

The next day after the cutting of a Vein, give some aperient and laxative
Apozeme, or, which is also very commodious, purge with infusion of Bubarb, or
Extract of Pauchymagogon: Or, make a Magistrale Syrup that may be suitably
proper both to the Nature of the Patient, and also of the peccant humor.

Then for two days in the morning betimes, and at three a Clock in the
Afternoon, (or three hours after dinner) use some aperient laxative Apozeme;
the first day again purge, always respecting critical days; If the Fever
abate not, again open a Vein the eighth day, and according as need shall be,
draw forth the blood; always in the mean while continuing the Julep above
mentioned, to which also sometimes may be added some drops of Spirit of Vitriol
or Tartar, or else j of purified juice of Lemmons.

If strength decays, Confection of Alkermes may sometimes be given, or
Confection of Hyacinth with Syrup of Lemmons, and distilled water of Cordialum.

Also an Opiat may be thus made;. Conserve of Nymphea, Roses, Succory, of each
j, Salt of Pearls, Spirit of Vitriol ss, of which let the sick take at
pleasure: Likewise sometimes in the evenings, chiefly on Critical days, with
the said Confections may be given Gr. vj of the Bezoar-stone, or ss of water e
Tips of the Hartshorn.
Tiphis Cervorum. If the Patient abhor the said Julep, shavings of Hartshorn
may be boiled in Barley broth, which if you desire to have red like wine, add
root of Sorrel, or sower Dock according to pleasure; here it will not be
convenient to add Liquorish, but Raisons, Jujube, and of the root of Intybus,
leave it till it be cold.

Sometimes with great profit in Fevers of this kind sweat is provoked, either
with the Bezoar-stone, or with fixed Diaphoretick Antimony, or Mineral Bezoar.
After sweating, yea, in the very time of the sweat, a Julep of salt Prunella
may be given in abundance, or Spirit of Vitriol or Sulphur, with Barley water
tempered to a grateful sharpness.

If heat of the tongue be, it is profitable to extract a mucilagenousness from
Quince-seeds, or Seeds of Pomegranate Apples, or to dissolve salt Prunella in
water, and to appoint the Sick to hold such things in his mouth. Also he may
often eat Pomegranate Apples.

If there be great blackness of the tongue, it is convenient to open the veins
under the tongue.

If the Fever be intermitting, the same Medicaments may also profit, yet must
be varied according to the constitution of the matter and disease. If a
Quotidian be, in which for the most part the sick complains of the Ventricle,
this must be observed, that a vomitory be once or twice given, with the
infusion of flowers, or glass of Antimony, or white Vitriol; then without delay
purge with somewhat more strong Medicines, which as in others must always be
given so, as they may have done working before the access of the Fit; as for
Example, if the access be at nine a clock in the morning, then give the purge
at three a clock the same morning; so consequently at any other time.

In the end of the Fit, sweating, which for the most part is wont to be of its
own accord, strive to increase by wrapping the Patient very warm, and then give
him more largely of the above prescribed Julep. If he purge not, always an
hour before the Fit, let him take the said Julep with a double quantity of salt
Prunella added, as much as he will, at least vj, or if he abhor the Julep, make
an Emulsion. The next day after the first purgation, if strength permit, cut a
vein; if not, then the following day.

If by these Medicaments continued for some time, the Disease abate not, it is
profitable a little before the Fit come, or as soon as ever any coldness in the
joints begins to be perceived, to exhibit in those of ripe age ij, in Women j,
ss, in Children ss, or j of the following Pills, which do wonderfully expel
Feverish distempers. Of which also above in intermitting Fevers.

. Glass of Antimony made by it self, and most finely reduced to powder ss,
Sugar, Wheat flower, of each iv, Saffron j; boil these in common water over a
gentle fire to the consistency of a Poultis, very thick, beware it burn not,
but let it be almost as hard as bread, then make it up into little balls, etc.
Or give half a spoonful of the following Febrifugal water.

. Water of the lesser Centaury, of Strawberries, of each lb ij, Honey lb iv,
mix them in a Cucurbit, etc. The description of which see Crollius his Notes,
and elsewhere.

A Water useful in all Fevers.. Salt Nitre lb j, Sulphur, Salt Ammoniack, of
each ss, of the Salt and Sulphur make Lapis Prunella, in the end adding Salt
Ammoniack; of this stone. ij, of water of Cardu. Bened. iv, Oil of Sulphur ij;
mix these, and according to Art make water of Carduus bened. Of this water iv
may be often exhibited, in the evenings, in malignant Tertians, etc.

We also have known some Cured with Salt of Wormwood from ss, to ss, with six
drops of Spirit of Vitriol, water of Succory j, ij or iij, exhibited three
hours before the Fit, and the Patient laid to sweat in bed; or a Dose of spirit
of Tartar may be given, or Salt-Ammoniack prepared as is above described in
imbecility of the Ventricle, from Gr. vj to viij, in water of the lesser
Centaury, or a decoction of Succory three hours before the Fit, and the Patient
laid to sweat; this provoking sweat largely Cures the distemper. The same Dose
must be iterated, if the first or second time be not sufficient.

Of much virtue also is Crollius his Frebrile Specific of Shel-fishes; Dose
from j to ij in a draught of wine.

In all the said Fevers, the use of Epithema's by application to the Heart,
Liver and Testicles must not be neglected, of which see the Practicks.

This is to be noted, that in all intermitting Diuturnal Fevers, recourse may
safely be had to Antimonial and Mercurial Medicines, that so the cause of such
evils lurking in any internal part, chiefly in the Mesentery, may be purged
out, which, unless by the use of the foregoing medicaments, will hardly ever be
rightly expelled, save only by length of time.

In the Quartane, at first may be made a liquid Magistrale syrup, of Aperients,
and such as purge Melancholy and the Spleen, of which the Sick may take
several days together one Dose, excepting the days of the Fits; or an
Aperient Laxative Apozeme may be made, of which the Patient may take two Doses
several days (viz.) one in the morning betimes, and the other three hours
before Supper. Also a plaster of Gum-Ammoniack must always be applied to the
Spleen after universal evacuations.

The Obstructions being removed, to accelerate the Cure, Antimonials are
necessary, by which, if the evil be not removed, it is convenient two days
together to give Mineral Bezoar, and after the taking to provoke sweat in Bed.

Before the Fit, when signs of its coming appear, Gr. vj or viij of Oil of
Cloves, in some Conserve or Syrup, is very profitable; or one spoonful of the
expressed juice of the lesser House-leek may be given in wine; or infusion of
Coltsfoot, or else a Vomitory.

Pestilence.
Preservatives found out and prescribed by Physicians are very many, but how
certain, and how far empowered to preserve from the Pestilence, is sufficiently
manifest, since the preserved, and others not having preservatives, are alike
assaulted.

Sometimes, chiefly where there is no disposition of the body it self to
attract the venom, they may in such bodies preserve; but whenever any spark
of Sulphur in us is depraved, and the Mercury of the Microcosme weakened, very
rarely then can we escape being tainted with venomous influences.

The continual use of Rubarb, as also of Wormseed, has preserved many from
infection of the Pestilence, but not all.

The same likewise may be judged of other things; for the most precious things
could not preserve all, though they were beneficial to some.

Yet there are some things in which a singular virtue is placed, both to defend
and preserve: See the Idea Leimodea of John Henneman Reysingk.

1. The Specific Elixir pestilential of Crollius, is of very great force, of
which see Crollius.

Hereto may be referred Diaphoretick solar Antimony; also Sol transparent, and
Panacaea of Sulphur of Antimony, and Mineral Bezoar prescribed in Crollius his
Notes. Likewise the Duke of Saxonies powder, the preparation of which see
Parmacopaea Augustana, and Animal Bezoar.

2. Spirit of Wine Camphorate, or Pestilential water by me described, which is
thus made:. Of the best spirit of Wine lb j, choice Camphire in the summer time
vij and j, in the winter x and ij; mix these, the Camphire being first cut very
small, and it will dissolve presently without fire, hang in the vessel ss of
Oriental Saffron tied in a bag, and the spirit of wine will be of a golden
color. Keep this water in a large glass well stopped, not full, but let a fifth
or sixth part be void, and use it in the time of necessity, according to the
German prescript set forth 1623 in that most direful Pestilence.

Of like virtue is compounded Oil of Camphire, made of Oil of Cloves and Salt
of Wormwood, which is by me annexed at the end of Tyrocinium, where are other
necessary things also in this case very commodious.

Another Elixir,. Bole-armenack, Terra Sigillata, Solomons-seal, Elecampane,
Tormentil, Pimpernel, Angellica, Masterwort, Seeds of Rocket, of each ss,
Cloves, Lignum Aloes, Cinnamon, of each j, red Sanders j, the best Treacle ss;
Upon these when pulverisate pour the quantity of one measure of spirit of wine;
distill it by a Cucurbit in Balneo: Dose, half a spoonful; if used instead of
other medicaments for preservation, the Patient not eating in two hours after
the taking of it: But if used in the Cure of the Pest, one spoonful must be
given, and the sick laid to sweat in bed; this must be continued as long as
strength will bear; and repeat the Dose eight times in eight hours, till no
anxiety of the heart do remain.

A Cordial Unguent.. Malmsie-wine j, juice of Citron j and ss, juice of Sage
expressed ss, Vinegar of Treacle, Oil of sweet Almonds, of each ij, distilled Oil
of Juniper ss, the best Mithridate, Treacle Androma, of each j; these beat
together, set in a glass vessel over hot sand, without boiling, till the juices
be dissolved in the wine and the vinegar: To this when streined add Oil of
Scorpions j, and a little wax; work these diligently together over a gentle
fire, and with it join Oil of sweet Almonds j, of Citron j, of our Pestilential
Extract j and ss, Civet ss: Make up all these in form of an Ointment.

Pestilential Extract.
. Root of Angelica, Masterwort, Wormseed, Elecampane, Valerean, Vincetox, of
each ss, Tormentil, Dittany-cretic. Sentrana, Butter-bur, Devils-bit,
Pimpernel, of each j, Seeds of Love-age iij, Seeds of Angelica, Melissa, of
each ij, Citron j, Juniper berries two handfulls, tops of Bettony, Melissa,
Scordium, Scabious, Card. Bened. of each one handful and half, flowers of St.
John's Wort, Lungwort, of each one handful: Break these a little together, and
infuse them in a sufficient quantity of Spirit of wine, in a hot place, the
vessel being very well closed; afterward according to Art make an Extract.

3. A famous Preservative prepared of most white Sugar Candied, and Spirit of
Salt dulcefied with spirit of wine, which is thus made:. Of white Sugar Candy
pulverisate iv, imbibe it with the aforesaid spirit of Salt, (spirit of salt is
edulcorated thus:. Spirit of Wine, and spirit of Salt, of each a like quantity,
distill them three or four times, when inseparably united, it will be sweet)
make it in form of an Electuary; Dose ss always given upon an empty stomach;
this exterminates all putrefaction, and preserves the Ventricle and interior
bowels in an excellent disposition.

Hereto may be referred the Diaphoreticks we have spoken of from the beginning:
For they are both helpful in the Cure of, and preservation from the Pestilence.

There are some who ascribe much to Amulets and Periaptons, and indeed not
without reason; See Crollius his Notes, and my Treatise of the Pestilence,
where you may find very many prescriptions of this kind.

In Cure of the Pest some commend salt prepared of Vine-twigs, after the usual
manner (they must be burnt, and afterward by sulphur, etc.) only more often (
viz. nine or ten times) rectified, that is, dissolved and coagulated; of this
give j in wine, or other Pestilential water, if possible at the beginning of
the infection, or a little after.

This is not rare, yet is commended above other things.

Some after three or four hours exhibit ss or j of the common Colubrine
Antidote, to provoke sweat. (This Antidote without salt is of no force.)

The virtues of this are greatly commended, nay, it is affirmed, that there is
no Pest, how formidable soever, but may be expelled by this Antidote, or at
least thrust out to the Emunctuory places; chiefly if after due operation
Confortatives be adhibited.

Moreover to Imposthumes, or Pestilential Ulcers, either arising of their own
accord, or thrust out from the Center to the circumference by Medicines
inwardly taken, ripening Medicaments must be applied, partly dissipating or
extracting, and partly resolving, after which such as consolidate.

Discussing Remedies are many and various, which nevertheless ought prudently
and cautiously to be administered, least the venom outwardly expelled, be
thereby inwardly driven, and so the Disease become implacable: see the
Practicks.

Toads dried and pricked through the head, (for they do not attract the venom
by the body) and applied to the Pestilential Tumors, (or to the belly) the
skin remaining whole, they do so powerfully attract the venom, that although
they be very hard at first, yet they will become plain as before the tumors
were, howsoever at first they are wont to swell as if they would break; before
the application they may be steeped in vinegar. This must be repeated as often
as need is: see Paracelsus of the Pestilence ad Sterzingenses.

So the Pestilential Elixir of Crollius applied by anointing to the Tumors
insensibly extracts and dissipates the venom.

Of like virtue is the Liquor that remains, after the making Extract of
Treacle, if applied to the swellings: Also Extract of Sulphur, made with spirit
(Oil) of Juniper, and the tumors anointed therewith is very beneficial, only
the stinking smell thereof may be offensive.

Resolving or ripening medicaments are also various; but this is (...) to be
minded, that ripening moist Cataplasms in Pestilential Tumors are of little or
no use, and less benefit, for indeed they are applied hot, but because they are
also suddenly cooled, the evil thereby rather descends, and precipitate^ more
deeply; therefore are by all means to be avoided.

A more convenient way is thus; Anoint the affected part with Oil or Butter of
Antimony the breadth of a groat just about the top of the knot, leave it till
the place be dry; afterward apply this resolving Unguent, that it may break the
Sore:. Oil of Linum, Cammomil, of each ij, Saffron j, the yolks of two Eggs,
mix these, and make an Unguent. Of this Unguent apply a little hot, repeat it
often, and in a short space the Ulcer will break: Which must be cleansed with
the compounded mundefying Ointment, described above in the Chap. of
Lues-venerea, and afterward consolidated with a healing Plaster or Opodeldoch.

Note, Pestilential Sores that are open must not be too hastily healed up, viz.
not until all the venom from the root be expelled, if otherwise, great danger
will ensue: Therefore after mundification use the following Plaster;. Wax lb
j, white Rosin iv, Turpentine of Larix j, Oil of Toads, Scorpions, of each ij,
liquid Storax vj, juice of Selandine expressed iv, round Aristolochy ss,
Gum-ammoniack dissolved and thickened in vinegar j and ss, Myrrh, Sarcocolla, of
each j. Make a Plaster.

Oil of Toads is thus made;. Oil Olive lb ss, boil it in a pan, afterward.
Eight Toads, prick them with a skewer, and hang them up till they be dry, and
throw them into the boiling Oil, let them remain therein a little time;
afterward cool it, strein it and keep for use.

There is also another Plaster breaking Pestilential Tumors, made after this
manner.

. Of the Magnet ss, Turpentine, Oil of Scorpions, of each j. Mastick, Amber,
red Myrrh, Sarcocolla, Gum-ammoniack, prepared Cantharides, of each ij, Rosin
iv, Wax lb j, mix these and make a Plaster, which spread upon Leather and
applied to the Ulcer, first ripens it, afterward breaks it; when broke it must
be cleansed with other Ointments, and after cleansing healed; we therefore now
come to consolidation.

An Apodeldoch very easy of preparation, yet not of less virtue then that of
Crollius or Wurtzianus, is thus made;. Galbanum, Opopanax, of each ij,
Ammoniack Bdellium, of each j; macerate these eight or fourteen days in
Vinegar, the longer the better; afterward strein and thicken them to the
thickness of Honey: Then. Lithargy pulverisate lb j, boil it in lb ij of Oil
Olive, with gentle, not vehement fire, always stirring it with a spartle,
until it have a red or dusty color: Remove it from the fire, and add (a little
after) lb j of melted Wax, stir it till it be well incorporated with the Oil,
then add the aforesaid thickened Gums, and mix them diligently; when all are
very well mixed over a soft fire, add iv of Oil of Bays, and again exquisitely
mix them; this being done remove it from the fire, and add the following
powders:. Crocus of Iron, Mummy, Magnet, Magistery of red and white Coralls, of
each ss, Lapis Calaminaris, red Myrrh, Masculine Frankincense, Mastick, round
Aristolochy, of each ij; Reduce all these to a most subtle powder, which
leisurely mix with the aforesaid. This thus performed, lastly, add j of Balsome
of Amber, that is, what comes forth last in distillation of Oil of Amber; and
again mix it over a soft fire; then before it be quite cold, make it up in
rolls with Oil of St. John's Wort.

Carbuncles, or other Pestilential Sores, are diligently to be handled. There
is an exquisite method; thus:

1. Draw a perfect right Sapphire, round about the circle of the Carbuncle (the
Sapphire buried in the Earth in twenty four hours by circumrotation recovers its
virtue) until by often encompassing the Carbuncle, the circle seem to be black.

2. This being done anoint the top of the Sore with butter of Antimony, then
anoint it with the resolving Unguent aforesaid, and a little after the
Carbuncle will all fall off. After this use a Magnetic attractive Plaster, or
else the compounded cleansing Ointment, and at length the Opodeldoch, that the
place may be healed.

There is another Magnetic Plaster of singular use in the Pestilence, the
most powerful ingredient or basis whereof is Arsenical Magnet, artificially
prepared after this manner:. Crude Antimony, yellow Sulphur, white Arsenick, of
each ij; reduce these to a most fine powder, put this in a Phial or other
convenient glass, and cover it in sand, under which make a moderate fire, till
all be melted together, which may be known by dipping in an iron rod or
spatula: if the matter stick to it, and be of a dark red color like
Turpentine, cool the vessel, and take out the matter, which will be hard like
pitch. This Arsenical magnet is no more venomous; but may safely without any
danger be exhibited; moreover a Potential Cautery is in this case excellently
useful, which operates without any inflammation or dolorous corrosion. The use
of it in the Pest, is like a Periapton hanged about the neck. Here may be
applied the forenamed Plaster, which is thus:. Turpentine of Larix and Wax, of
each ss, Gum of Sarapinum, Galbanum, Arsenick magnet, of each iij, Oil of Amber
ij, Earth of Vitriol very well washed j: Dissolve the Gums first in Vinegar of
Squills, strain the Solution through a linen cloth, and express it, thicken it
by boiling until the Vinegar be consumed, and the Gums return to their former
consistency: Then melt the Wax and Turpentine apart, and work them together
without fire, till they be thick like Ointment; This being done, add the
purified Gums, and the Arsenical powder, with the Earth of Vitriol, and Oil of
Amber; (the Earth of Vitriol is thus made:. Vitriol, sublime it with Sal
Ammoniack, until the three Principles, (viz.) Salt, Sulphur and Mercury be
removed, then will remain (an Earth, which must be often washed with Aqua
dulcis;) lastly, with Oil of Scorpions make it up in Rolls, and keep for use.

This Plaster applied after the usual manner to Pestilential Ulcers or
Carbuncles, breaks them, and powerfully like a Lodestone attracts the venom,
not suffering the opened Sore to consolidate, till all veneriosity be perfectly
extracted.

If need be of further cleansing, use the often before mentioned cleansing, and
as occasion is, consolidating Medicines: See the Anatomy of Vitriol Angel. Sal.
Also Wurtzius his Plaster.

The Plaster, which is otherwise called my Domestic Plaster, is thus made;.
Scammony, Wax, of each iv, Larix Turpentine j; melt them over a gentle fire,
then add Vnguentum populeon ij, diligently mix them: To which add powder of
Amber, Frankincense, Mastick, Myrrh, Aloes, of each j; root of Ditany, Gentian,
round Aristolochy, of each ij, burnt Alum ss, Salt vj, Camphire j; mix these
perfectly according to Art, and make it up in Rolls. Its use is in Carbuncles,
and inflamed and corrupted breasts; it extracts the heat and removes the
Tumor, by maturating what is corrupted. It is very beneficial in all Ulcers
and Clefts whatsoever. In scorched wounds' or such as take their beginning from
burns, it is profitably helpful. Wounds by pricks or cuts without putrefaction
it perfectly cures; hinders excressency of flesh, augmenting it where need is;
also old Ulcers, first cleansed, are cured by this Plaster: Which has
hitherto got no other name, because its powerful virtue, has only been
privately experimented.

If a malignant Fever and Pest be both at one time, it is convenient first to
cut a vein, yet unless the Physician be called at the beginning of the
distemper, ( viz) as soon as the Patient is assaulted, to appoint cutting of a
vein may not be necessary, but it will be more expedient to have recourse to
such things as may speedily resist the malignity, among which Mineral Bezoar is
most excellent, after the taking of which in the Pestilence, the venom is
presently forced to the Externalls, appearing after the first or second sweat,
in Buboes, Blanes, or Carbuncles: This must be repeated every hour six hours
together.

It is very convenient here to make a Julep of Cardu. bened. water with
Saltprunella, Syrup of Lemmons, or juice of Citron.

In other things the Physician may proceed according to Prescripts of
Practitioners.

Rotula's of Balsom of Sulphur are profitable in preserving from, and Cure of
the Pestilence. Also Opiats may be made of old Conserve of Scordium, or with
Germane Treacle (which is made with Juniper Berries boiled in simple water till
they be soft, afterward bruised and expressed, and the expressed juice reduced to
the form of an Extract,) with liquor of Tipe.
Typhus of Hartshorn, or the Bezoar-stone, Lachryma Cervi, Vnicorns-horn, and
Terra Sigillata, Hartshorn, which also by it self may be given to provoke
sweat, with Aurum potabile, Salt or solution of Pearls, of which with addition
of Confection of Alkermes, Tablets may be made for the sick to eat of,
sometimes.

Cure of Externalls. Scabs.
In perfect curing Scabs of every kind the cleansing of the blood is
principally needful: For in the evil affected blood abounding with salt,
vitriolate aluminous astringent impurities, this so great an evil is closely
settled between the skin and the flesh.

The Cure therefore must be effected with mundefying medicines, as
Mercurdulcis, Mercur. vitae, Arcanum of Coralls, Extract of Panchymagogon, and
such like.

If Obstructions are found to be in the body, and they before purgations be
exhibited, care must be taken to remove them first, without which, the
inveterate Scabbiness will scarcely be abated. Afterward the blood being
cleansed and Obstructions removed, correctives may more happily be introduced,
and so the desired Cure follow.

To this purpose Magistery and Tincture of Coralls are highly commended;
Flowers of fixed white Antimony given in a decoction or spirit of Guaiacum, take
away the contumacious Scabbiness accompanied with troublesome Itchings. By this
means I restored a Student in Physic, and a certain Bohemian.

Sometimes in this case Stoves, and Unguents are required; also Bathes, see the
Practicks.

Aqua-mortua, which is made after Solution and Precipitation of Silver in
Aquafortis, remaining in the bottom like green juice, by simple anointing,
after the use of Universals before mentioned, perfectly cures Scabs in the
hands or feet; Mercur. dulcis dissolved by gentle boiling in distilled water of
Oranges, so as to lb j of water there be ss of Mercury, performs the same. Of
like virtue is Gold dissolved in Aqua Regis, and again reduced to a Calx, that
is, revoked by distillation, and at length extracted with spirit of Turpentine
till it become like Oil, or an Oyl-like mass; with this the Scabs being
anointed are presently removed.

The Volatile Scab.
There is a kind of Scab, which Fallopius calls Volatile, by reason of its
sudden dispersing it self all over the skin of the body: For oftentimes it has
been seen, that this Evil has in one night spread it self all over the body,
as it were by flying, taking possession of all parts.

Physicians say there is a usual spreading of blood on the Superficies of the
body, as in St. Antonies fire, without any Scab. Nevertheless this Volatick
Scab, can never be cured as that other spreading of blood is cured. This Evil
has been often seen, even to death it self, obstinately to reject all
Medicines.

In this case indeed all necessary things ought to be done, (viz.) by purging
and sweating; but when the Evil is thrust out to the circumference of the body,
it admits of hardly any external Cure. This most excellent secret has often
effected the Cure.. The blood (fresh) that falls from the womb in the birth,
with the whole Secundine or part thereof, and wash the whole part affected
therewith; this seldom or never needs be repeated twice, for the Volatick Scab
is hereby mortified, and presently falls off.

After this manner, and by this only secret, I have cured very many persons
infected with this dangerous Scab.

Unctions here are of no use.

Cynones.
These kind of Evils are removed with a decoction of Sulphur, and a like
quantity of Tartar made with simple water, and the place affected bathed
therewith. Also Balsome of Sulphur.

Bunches.
Bunches without incision are easily cured, if the Patient drink often out of
the skull of a dead man.

Of like virtue is ashes of Spunges thus made; Page 377.
. Of Spunges vj, of stones or gravel that is found in Spunges iv; Calcine the
Spunges in an Earthen pot covered, till they be fit to reduce to powder. Of
this give every day j in wine two hours before meat. By this means I cured an
Earls Son of nine years of age. Also certain Virgins of this City, concerning
whom Physicians, otherwise in this kind excellent, have despared, happily werd
Cured by me.

King's Evil.
These Evils Latent are perfectly cured, if coals of a Mole be daily exhibited
in wine or other appropriate decoction. I call that latent which is not yet
ulcerated.

They are more speedily removed being anointed with Oil of Milk, (this is made
per Vesicam, of putrified Milk) and afterward if the remaining Caput Mortuum
after the distillation of the Milk, be mixed with the distilled Oil, and reduced
to the consistency of a Plaster, and applied to the part affected, it more
powerfully effects the Cure.

But if Ulcerated they are most happily cured by ashes of Salamander sprinkled
upon them, being first powdered, the Salamander must be burnt in an earthen pot
by fire of circulation; but in the Calcining beware of the perilous fume
thereof. The coals of a Mole may be inwardly taken, notwithstanding outward
applications. Dose ss, Gr. vj, viij and xij.

Contraction of the Members.
Contracting of the Members may arise from various causes; The chiefest cause
is constriction of the A yellowish water growing in the joints.
Synony of the Nerves and Ligaments, which in themselves are as it were
deprived of their wonted agility, from whence contractings of the joints and
members are introduced: This is difficultly removed by vulgar medicaments.
Relief in extremities of this kind is sometimes found in the use of Natural hot
Bathes, by the force and power they obtain from Minerals spiritually powerful
in such waters.

Indeed this kind of help is useful in common practice, but if the same be
deficient, or the Diseased be far remote from such Bathes; there are other
things which may most commodiously be used, from whence oftentimes the Cure is
more happily affected at home.

The body must be cleansed with kindly purgations; such are these: Extract of
Hellebore, Rubarb, Mechoacanna, Panchymagogon vegitable; also among Minerals,
famous is the Specific purge of Antimonial Pills purging both ways, or those
that only purge downwards.

Note. Mercurial Medicines cannot here be profitably used; nor Coloquintida or
Elateries: For by their substantial humidities, they are of little or no effect.

If Obstructions in the body be strong, which indeed are wont both to precede
and follow Contractures, these must be removed with Medicines properly
resolving Obstructions, both vulgar and Chemical.

Then the whole habit of the body must be reduced to a temperate equality of
necessary moisture: To which purpose Bathes prepared of emollient and moystning
Herbs are very convenient.

Note. In lean bodies Stoves do much more hurt then good; moreover in every
Bathing, some of the Tincture of Antimony should be given in a just Dose, with
convenient vehicles, as water of Lillies of the valley, that also in the time
of Bathing, sweat may be somewhat provoked, to flow from the habit of the body.

Also by this means the spirit of life has more free access to the extremities
of the members, whereby the cause of Contracture is removed.

Having mentioned these, we now come to external medicaments, among many
others, this following is principally excellent, and is thus:. Roots of
Angelica lb v, which well bruised boil with wine in a convenient vessel
diligently closed, until the roots come to a mucilaginous substance, which
express, and after boil it gently till half be consumed; then. Of excellent
Rhenish or Spanish wine lb iv, in which dissolve of the best Saffron
pulverisate iij; heat the wine over coals leisurely in a convenient vessel, and
put in of Venice-sope the best that can be got, cut very small lb j, keep it
continually stirring till the Soap be plainly dissolved; which being done, add
Oil of Turpentine and Juniper, of each ss a part, mix them diligently, and by
further boiling join them with the mucilaginous substance of Angelica roots,
until the whole be reduced to a just Consistency. With this Unguent anoint
the whole body, and especially in those places where the contracture more
strongly abides; this do always after going out of the Bath: Every other day
repeat both the use of the Bath and Unction, until it be done nine times: By
this means the Nerves and Ligaments are loosned, and the Patient restored to
his pristine vigor.

This Cure is more happily and speedily effected, if with the Tincture of
Antimony before bathing three or four drops of distilled Oil of Angelica be
exhibited.

Note. Galbanum must not be given unless the body be very strong, and not lean.

In Contractures Mercurial, Unctions are profitable, also the Hartmanes Stove.
Stove above prescribed with spirit of wine (a Bath made with the decoction of
Pulse) together with Balsom of life exhibited in Treacle water, mixtura
simplex, or Tincture of Antimony given to provoke sweat; afterward a Magnetic
plaster may profitably be applied.

To drive out the venom, Balsom of life with the Magnetic Plaster are
singularly useful, especially where the venom lies hid in the center of the
body: See above in the Chap. of Love-potions.

By this means I cured an Earls Daughter.

Dryness of the Members.
In particular dryness, after the use of Universalls before mentioned, if
necessity urge, there are specificks both internal and external. It cannot be
denied, but that fomentations (of Willowes) Unctions and Plasters prescribed
by Authors, and confirmed by use, do much help in this case.

Internals are, 1.. Virgins honey a sufficient quantity, with this anoint the
inside of an Earthen pot, and place it in an Ant-heap up to the neck, lay over
the top a sieve that is not very close, and so the Ants allured by the
sweetness of the honey will fall through the holes of the sieve, without other
filth; when you have thus gathered a sufficient quantity of them, pour upon
them good spirit of wine, digest them in Balneo a day or two, afterward distill
them, at first with gentle Fire, that the spirit of wine may come forth, then
increase the Fire, that the water of the Ants and honey may come forth
together, which keep for use. Of this water give one spoonful three days
together in the mornings fasting: sometimes in the evenings half a spoonful may
be given with a piece of bread toasted: But the withered dry Member chafe often
with the spirit of wine first drawn off: See above in the Chap. of Consumption.

2. Very powerful in restoring the dry Member, is, the River water, which in
watering great Horses, is wont to fly out of their mouths after they have
drunk, if it be diligently saved and given to drink morning and evening.

An extreme is Arcanum of sweet Alum, of which Wurtzius makes mention, Cap.
23. H. 3. which is thus explained; boil (that is, Calcine) Alum to a thick
consistency in an Earthen pot, that the Phlegm may evaporate. This, when
beaten, distill by Retort, that the spirit which is like Aqua fortis, may come
forth. The Caput Mortuum taken out and beaten, will become a soft tender earth,
of which Wurtzius speaks, dissolve this earth in water bloodwarm; in the
solution the dead earth will remain in the bottom, filter it, and afterward
boil it. Also filter the Alum, and when coagulated join it with Common Salt,
and proceed further as the Author himself teaches. See its use also in the said
place.

Also another extreme in dryness of this kind, is Oil of Vitriol, Amber or
Turpentine: Also Man's grease with a like quantity of Oil of Vitriol (red or
strong Oil which is made of blew Vitriol) mixed together leisurely with Oil of
Amber, or other of the abovesaid Oils.

The parched place must first be chafed with more sharp clothes; afterward
anointed, and that often.

Note. Members more dry must always be chafed with clothes very hot, or else
with Fox skins.

Laxation.
Members out of joint must first be rightly set.

2. A decoction of Cammomil flowers must be applied with a blew cloth; also
flowers of St. John's Wort and Longwort, added to the Decoction.

3. The part anointed with Oil of Wax.

Tumors.
In watery Tumors excellent is Goats dung with water Fabrorum, or which is
better, boiled with its proper Urine, and applied.

In hot Tumors which are called Preternatural Tumors.
(...), Epithema's generally profit, such are these.

1. Water of Frog-spawn, in which a little Myrrh is boiled.

2. A strong Lixivium boiled till it wax white, mixed with Linseed Oil, in
three or four hours it helps in the A kind of St. Anthonies fire.
Herpes, with which Children are often inflicted.

3. A plaster of Watercresses bruised.

Note. If Tumors of this kind often happen, such things as cleanse and abate
the superabundance of blood must not be neglected.

Phypella.
In Phypella's, fetid Oil of Tartar or Guaiacum is very useful. This Tumor is
called a Or wa^kernel.
Bile, because it is preternatural, and grows in the Groins, and where Kernels
are wont to be. Concerning Oedema, see Platerus.

Buboes.
Of Buboes above in the Chap. of the Pestilence. Here is commended Balsom of
Tartar, of which Ruland Cent. 1. Also a plaster of Diasulphur, in the
following Curation.

Carbuncle.
Of the Carbuncle see above in the Chap. of the Pestilence; hereto may be
referred the plaster of Arsenical Magnet, of which a little before.

A push rising by night.
Epinyctis and Fellons.
In Epinyctis and Fellons the same things are useful, only beware that you open
it with no kind of Iron (chiefly in time of the Pestilence) for, for the most
part, death follows; these are of a duskish, dark color, the worst of all
pushes, so called, because they break out in the night.

Terminthus.
Tumors of this kind are sometimes like to Ulcerated Herpes, they may be
anointed with Oil of Nuts expressed and thickened, of which above: Also Balsome
of Diasulphur. They are Tumors, in the top (...) a black Whelk appears.

A disease arising from Rheum in the head.
Hydrocephalum.
In the Hydrocephalum, Snails with their (...) in form of a plaster applied to
the head, and left (...) own accord, does wonderfully help: See Fabritius Hild^
(...) Observations, Cent. 3.

Timpany, and windy swelling in the Cods.
Of the Timpany, and windy swelling of the Cods: See above.

Windy Tumor of the skin.
In windy Tumors of the skin apply Cuppinglasses with scarification: Also
Carminative seeds, the root of Wall^ort fresh, bruised and applied instead of a
plaster, admirably disperses all windiness.

Schirrus.
Of the Schirrus chiefly in the inward parts we have already spoken. When they
outwardly appear, Cataplasmes of Briony roots, also Goats dung and urine do
much help.

Note. A plaster of Hemlock, of which above, is not here at all profitable.

The Gangrene.
Of the Gangrene, see Rulands Curation the last Cent. 10. Here Balsome of
Sulphur, and a plaster of Diasulphur applied to the part affected. By this
means I cured the Ganglion of the Yard in a Consul of Bremen: See also below in
the Gangrene, and Sphacelus beginning.

A swelling called Bronchocele.
Bronchocele is a Tumor of the Nerves in Ligamentous parts growing of flesh,
it is cured with Balsome of Sulphur, and a plaster of Diasulphur.

Cancer.
Of the Cancer see above (the hidden Caneer is described) it is called Cancer
of the breasts.

Running Ulcers.
In running Ulcers of excellent use is common Oil impregnated with Mercur.
dulcis sublimate, of which above.

Also Balsome of Sulphur, and a plaster of Diasulphur, but the Ulcers must
first be cleansed. See the cleansing medicaments above in Lues-venerea.

An excressence of flesh.
Sarcoma.
Sarcomaes are cured, as the Polipus, of which above.

A crooked swelling vein.
Varix.
These swellings (familiar to women with Child, whence by the Germans called
Kinds Adern) are thus cured;. May butter, or in defect thereof Oil of Roses
one part; the expressed juice of bruised Crabs two parts; Mix them, and boil
them to the consistency of an Unguent, (or boil them gently) afterward apply
this alone to the part affected. It stinks exceedingly.

Aneurisma.
For Aneurisma's,. Ashes of Figs ss, Wax an, Turpentine ij; mix these and make
a Plaster, spread it and apply it often. Balsom of Sulphur may be mixed
therewith, and sometimes may be added purified Earth of Vitriol.

St. Anthonies fire.
St. Anthonies fire newly taken, what part soever it invades, requires moderate
discussing externalls. Menstruous blood dissolved in Rose vinegar, and applied
hot, presently dissolves it, especially if sweating be also moved with simple
or compounded, Solar or Lunar Bezoar, in water of Senecio: Also Mixtura simplex
in the same Vehicle.

Likewise a decoction of Myrrh, and Olibanum in wine and vinegar, and applied
hot, presently dissolves it.

Leaves of Horseradish, with the hard veins in them bruised, applied somewhat
hot, represses the heat of the blood.

Some familiarly use water of Frog-spawn, to extinguish St. Anthonies fire, but
oftentimes with evil success; For it is too cold, that is, it has in it self
Mercury conjoined with a certain Saturnine property. It indeed is repercussive,
but a manifest cause of subsequent grievous symptoms; for sometimes the veiny
and nervous parts are mortified thereby: Yet a little of it mixed with the
decoction of Myrrh and Olibanum may more laudably be appointed.

Linen stockings imbibed in water of Frog-spawn and again dried, and worn (the
matter being first rightly prepared) abates and preserves the legs and feet
from St. Anthonies fire.

In these fires ulcerated, for the Cure of them see Ruland Cent. 1 Curat. 43.
This Cure I have happily used in several young Women, (water Cresses only.) In
St. Anthonies fire Phlegmonous Curat. 61. Cent. 9.

Phlyctaena. A swelling with blisters like wild fire.

In Phlyctaena's, or the persons so afflicted, when they fix in fleshy parts;
among restrictive healing Medicines, there is nothing better then an Epithema
made of the strong Lixivium of Beech ashes, and a like quantity of Linseed Oil,
exceedingly well mixed, and afterward the affected part bathed hot therewith, by
application of linen clothes, and this repeated often. If a little Oil of
Nutmegs be added, the Cure will more perfectly follow.

These are bladders, like bubbles rising in boiling water, having in them a
yellow liquor.

Herpes Winding or running crooked.
Miliaris.
The Miliar Herpes, as also the true Herpes, is mitigated with water of
Calx-vive applied hot to the parts affected; it more strongly operates, if
sweet Alum or Sugar of Saturn, be dissolved in it before application.

It is best in this case to have especial regard to the cleansing of the body;
for this Malady is very often the cause of evil digestion in men, and
obstruction of the Menses in Women.

Therefore care must be taken to prevent either.

Sweat is very necessary after due performance of all other things, whereby the
subsequent Cure is rendered easy: But if ulcerations of the flesh and skin be,
or if they lie hid, and the evil be thereby more contumacious, recourse must be
had to mundifying Remedies above prescribed.

Here is chiefly commended cream of Calx vive mixed with other cleansing
Medicines, and applied.

A decoction of Arsesmart.
Arsesmart, so leaves of Madder boiled in water and wine, do not only mundefie,
but also cure the Herpes, especially of the Legs.

Saturnine unguent of Lithargy of Gold and Oil Olive, mixed without fire by
continual beating in a lead Mortar, does admirably help.

Balsome of Sulphur effects the Cure.

Ring-worm and Tetter beginning.
Ring-worms and Tetters beginning, especially such as are in the Face and Neck,
are taken away, by anointing with fasting spittle rubbed upon them; but if
more contumacious, and further spread in the skin, then after general cleansing
Medicaments, others also must be added.

The water which by distillation is drawn from Oil of Tartar per diliquium
dissolved with crude Mercury (in a fourfold proportion, that is, to lb j of Oil
of Tartar, put iv of Mercury, distill it in a Retort, the Mercury first comes
off, so the water is not Corrosive;) Cures all Tetters and Ring-worms, yea,
though most contumacious.

So Oil of Tartar made per diliquium, with a like quantity of Oil of Wax
diligently mixed, both cleanses and cures Ring-worms.

Itching.
For the Itch,. Of Galens cooling ointment j, of Populeon ss, of Opium Gr. iij
or iv; dissolve the Opium in Oil of sweet Almonds, afterward mix them, and
anoint the parts.

Scurviness, or the wild Scab.
Although this Scurvy seem diverse from other Scabs, yet they are generated
from one and the same cause; they either always come together, or one follows
the other; therefore what difference there is, does certainly seem to depend
upon too much of either Parent, it indeed cannot proceed from a sound
constitution: Therefore it should be diligently inquired whether sooner or
later it was generated, or came to be manifest in the body.

The loathsome Scurvy is almost the Greek-Scurvy, not much differing from the
Leprosy of the Greeks.

This may be cured with Viridellus prepared as above described.

I judge, and not without Experience, that he that can cure this Scurviness,
may also cure the Scab, almost of what kind soever.

See above, what are described in the Chap. of the Leprosy.

Ulcers, Dandref, and running sores of the Head.
Ulcers, Dandref, and other running Sores of the head, either confirmed, or by
application of improper Medicaments exasperated, mundefying internal Medicines
dispose them to a fitness for admitting of Cure, but there is no cleansing
Remedy so happy as inwardly to remove the cause, and outwardly also the evil it
self. It is not always profitable to cure running Sores of this kind,
especially in Children, since it is very often manifest, that from thence much
more danger and detriment does arise, then health or tranquillity is procured
thereby.

Some endeavor to eradicate these evils by pitched Caps mixed with Arsenick,
but these are plainly hurtful.

After the use of internalls above described, this most excellent Cure is
effected by two things.

1. Is the Urine of a Boar taken out with the bladder it self, and the Boars
brains added thereto, with which when diligently prepared, foment the head for
some time in a Chimney, that the Patient may the better endure the fume, and
with the remaining marrow anoint the ulcerated head; by repeating this certain
times the evil is taken away, and the head perfectly cured.

2. Is Balsome of Sulphur, which this and the like ulcerations, does speedily
and fafely remove.

Warts.
The water that issues out at the end of arms or other pieces of Oak trees
chopped off with a hatchet, takes away Warts of what kind soever.

Corns.
Corns that are cut may be washed with Dogs urine, afterward a plaster of red
Wax applied (the operation will be better, if a little Mercury dulcis be added)
then that they may be cured, a little Salt Lard must be worn upon the affected
place.

In plucking up Corns by the roots, this following is highly commended by
Ruland as a principal secret.

. Oil of Sulphur per Campane ss, Corrosive Salt of the Crystal stone ij, seeds
of Henbane j, Opium j; grind these, and mix them.

Or,. The blood of an Eele, and anoint the affected place.

Hard fleshy tumors.
In these hard fleshy swellings, after the frequent use of Bathings, it is best
to cut them with a knife. Potential Cauteries are of no use in this case.

Spots.
These spots and blemishes, of which Fernelius, if it be defired to cure them
more happily, the body must first be cleansed from depraved humors, afterward
externalls applied; of which are many in use by Practitioners.

The fat of the fish Thymalus and Oil of Canes, take away the Spots, by
anointing.

Man's blood with an equal part of breast milk distilled together, takes away
all blemishes.

Pimples.
Pimples are removed with distilled water of the spotted leaves of Satyrion
gathered in the New Moon, with which the skin must be diligently washed in
Autumn, to prevent their return in the spring.

So Salt of ashes of old Coleworts dissolved in the same water is a present
Remedy.

Black and blew spots.
Black and blew spots are best removed by application of raw flesh.

The Gangrene and Sphacelus beginning.
The Gangrene or Sphacelus in its beginning, is prevented from spreading; 1. By
a strong Lixivium, in which Scordium, roots of Scorzonera and Vincetox are
boiled, and the affected place fomented with the same Lixivium applied hot. 2.
Spirit of wine Camphorate, that is, in iij, of which j of Camphire is
dissolved; with this alone or joined with other appropriates, wash the affected
place; then this there is nothing more excellent to prevent putrefaction of the
part: See Fabritius Hildanus his Observations.

4. Butter of Antimony, with which the part already affected and putrefied must
be anointed, and as it were marked therewith, that it may more happily be
separated from the living part, and the parts admit of no further putrefaction;
it is observable, and plainly to be discerned, that after the corrupted part is
encompassed with the butter by anointing, if other things be conveniently and
rightly performed, the putrefaction passes not that circle. The dead part must
be separated, if one entire part, by the Chyrurgions help, or else by
mundefying Unguents, that the dead parts may not corrupt the living.

To this purpose excellent is Oil Olive, but more excellent is Oil of Poppy
made by expression, if in iij of either Oils, ss of sublimate Mercury, or
Mineral Turpith be dissolved until the Oil be tinged with a red color. This
Oil does not only perfectly cleanse all fetid ulcerations, but also admirably
separates the gangrened parts from the living, removes what is putrefied, but
what is found it touches not.

Ulcers.
Of Ulcers see above what is there described. In Ulcers of every kind, first
such things as cleanse, then such as may take away the corrupt matter, and at
length consolidating Medicines are required.

Mundefying Medicaments are above spoken of, Balsome of Sulphur, and a plaster
of Diasulphur excellently consolidate Ulcers, of which also above.

Fistulaes.
Fistulaes are cured partly by external, and partly by internal Medicines.

Internal are vulnerary potions, touching which Authors advise, chiefly
Wurtzius in the proper Chap. Treatise 4.

Note. The Fistula is difficultly cured, if in the mouth it lie hid, and the
mouth be infected with blackness, or other corrupt filth: Therefore the mouth
must either be scraped, or with convenient Medicaments purged. Mercur. dulcis
dissolved in Plantane water takes away the blackness by anointing.

Healing Medicines may be taken from the abundance of consolidating Remedies
above prescribed.

Salt of Sol extracted from the Caput mortuum, is also a famous cleanser, if
after washing of the Fistulaes it be applied, especially if first dissolved in
the juice of river Crabs, and with Tents, or other spungy instruments put into
the cavities of the Fistula's.

Moreover to consolidate Fistula's, especially of the Gums, after the perished
teeth are taken out, for without their taking out, no cure can be effected,
most excellent is the liquor, which remains uncoagulated after the Specificuns
purgans of Paracelsus is the third or fourth time extracted. Of this some drops
often put into the Fistula's, or with Tents applied, effects the Cure in a
short time.

Wounds.
Cure of wounds rightly appertain to Chyrurgery, for they, and also Ulcers,
require manual operation.

In cure of these Felix Wortzius Chyrurgion, has famously performed much,
whose works are extant and worthy of the greatest commendation.

Paracelsus the most Eminent Chyrurgion, seems perfectly to perform the whole
work, in evidently describing all things necessary in Chyrurgy. Whose
Chyrurgical writings are of singular use, especially that small manual once
compendiously copied out at Basil by Vitus Amerbachius, and not hitherto
Printed.

The same Authors excellently advise, touching all symptoms and accidents,
which very often happen in all kinds of Wounds, which chiefly how to Remedy
Felix Wortzius excellently teaches in his third Chyrurgical Treatise.

There are Vulnerary Balsomes, also Potions very profitable to consolidate
wounds, of which Authors do also advise.

Famous is the vulnerary Balsome of Felix Wurtzius, which is every where
commended, and is indeed of greater virtue then is usually described; these two
following principal properties it has, that (if all other things be
legitimately performed) it exquisitely Cures the wound, and that in a very
short time.

The vulnerary Balsome is thus made:
. Galbanum, Ammoniack, Bdellium, of each ss, macerate them three days in
vinegar, then strain the Liquor, and after the usual manner thicken it to the
consistency of Honey: Afterward. of fine red Myrrh, of the best Mastick, of
each ss, Olibanum j; to these when finely pulverisate, add of Larix Turpentine,
Oil Olive, of each ij; boil them together over a most gentle Fire, stirring
them continually, until the latter Gums be well melted, then again add j of Oil
Olive, and with gentle heat boil it; and so go on, always adding j of the Oil
Olive, until a whole pound be so used, keeping it always stirring: This being
done, mix the Gums before dissolved in vinegar, and afterward streined and
thickened, by continual stirring in like manner; and as before by ounces pour in
Oil Olive, until another pound of the Oil be added, and then the Balsome will
contract a yellowish color.

But if you desire the same Balsome should be green, add j of Verdegrease
pulverisate, and leave it in the Sun for a month and more; the Feces will by
little and little precipitate the bottom, from which, what is pure must be
separated, and in clean vessels kept for use.

Use.
Green wounds made either with Cuts or Pricks are by this balsome suddenly
cured, if only a small part thereof be moderately hot, (viz.) as hot as the
Patient can well endure, put into the wound, yet so as the whole cavity of the
wound be exactly filled; for otherwise the Superior parts will be healed up,
and the inferior remain raw, whereby bad symptoms will arise: But if with the
wound a vein be also cut, it must be bound up carefully, and the Balsome
infused; this continued for four days at least, if the legature be aptly
placed, the wound will be perfectly cured.

Some do sometimes in these cases use (not the aforesaid Balsome) a
conglutinating powder, which is made of River Crabs; Thus,. Crabs whole, while
they are alive, and fresh taken out of the River, in the month of June, when
the Moon is in the sign Cancer, (at that time their shells are render) put them
in an earthen pot, and dry them in an Oven, but so as they may neither burn,
nor touch the fire, but be fit by drying to be reduced to powder easily. This
powder put into wounds, yea, though very deep, but with this caution, that all
the cavities be perfectly filled; otherwise where the powder touches not the
bottom, the wound in the top will indeed be consolidated, but its generating
corruption in the bottom cannot be hindered: This therefore must always be
diligently minded, otherwise wounds newly healed must be again lanced.

Another Balsome of excellent use in wounds, is thus made;

. As much ear-wax as can be got, add it to Oil of Wallnuts made by expression,
boil them together, until with gentle heat, the Oil be somewhat thick like a
Balsome.

The use of this is wonderful in most speedy curing all wounds, for it
excellently consolidates, and perfectly frees from putrefaction.

Here may be reckoned Rulands Balsome of Sulphur, and plaster of Diasulphur,
whose laudable virtues are evident.

Fractures, Laxation and Dislocation of bones.
In Fractures, Laxations and Dislocations of bones, rightly to effect the Cure,
practical Chyrurgions may be advised with thereabout.

Osteocolla inwardly taken is admirably efficacious in the elder sort, but in
the young it is not so: See Fabritius Hildanus his Observations.

Yet this inconveniency may certainly be avoided by a dexterous preparation of
an Arcanum or Magistery (phylosophically calcined) of the stone it self, that
may be equally assistant both to the aged and also to the young, this
experience proves.

But hitherto very few or no observations of a universal Magistery helpful in
fractures or dislocations are extant, or else what is manifest has in it
little certainty.

FINIS.
Courteous Reader.
FOr your benefit, and the more exact understanding of the precedent Works. I
have first compyled a particular Table of Diseases comprised in the foregoing
Book of Practical Chemistry. and have inserted the Remedies of the same Book in
the general Table of Remedies following, which I call general, because in it
are specified the Remedies, and Preparations of Royal, and Practical Chemistry.
The reason why I have not added a Table of Diseases to Royal Chemistry, is
this: the Author of it only intended Preparations of Remedies, and briefly
names the Diseases for which they were proper, for illustrating, and proving
the efficacy of his Preparations. In both Tables you have the Sum of both the
foregoing Volumnes of Royal, and Practical Chemistry.

A particular Table or Catalogue of Diseases comprised in the Practical
Chemistry, of Doctor Hartmannus.
DISEASES of the HEAD.
Pains of the Head Page. 20. Hemicrania ibid. Talking idly in Sickness Page.
21. Insany, Mania, and Melancholy Page. 22, 23. Hydrophobia Page. 23. Love
Potions, or the danger coming thereby Page. 24. Phrensy Page. 24, 25. Epilepsy
in Children Page. 26. Epilepsy in those of ripe Age Page. 26, 27, 28, 29, 30.
Apoplexy Page. 30, 31, 32. Palsy Page. 33, 34. Palsy with the cholick Page. 35.
Memory defective Page. 36. Drousy affects ibid. Watchings ibid. Lite of the
Brain Page. 37. Vertigo ibid. Convulsion ibid. Jectigation ibid. Catarrh Page.
38. Suffocative Catarrh Page. 38, 39.
AFFECTS of the EYES.
Squinting Page. 39. Palsy of the Eye. ibid. Imbecellity, and dimnesse of Sight
Page. 39, 40. Ruption of the Ball of the Eye Page. 40. Whiteness and Cloudiness
ibid. Swellings ibid. Sores of the Eyes ibid. Carcinoma's ibid. Epiphora, or
dropping of the Eyes Page. 40. Inflammation Page. 41. Pain of the Eyes ibid.
Impostume of the Eyelids ibid. Fistula of the Eyes ibid. Wheales and blemishes
ibid. Haw, Cloudines, and Pterygium Page. 42. Inflammation, Pain, and Dropping
Page. 42, 43. Redness of the Eyes Page. 43. Hyposphagma Page. 44.
AFFECTS of the EARS.
Inflammation and Ulcers Page. 44. Fluxes of the Ears ibid. Worms in the Ears
ibid. Pains of the Ears. ibid. Ringing, Noise, and Hissing Page. 44, 45.
Difficulty of Hearing Page. 45. Deafness Page. 45.

AFFECTS of the Nose.
Ozoena Page. 46, 47. Burning Sores of the Nostrils Page. 47. Cancrous Humors
ibid. The Polypus ibid. Smelling Lost Page. 48. Coryza, or a distillation from
the head to the Nose ibid. Constant bleading at the Nose ibid. Hamorrhagia
Critica ibid.
DISEASES of the FACE.
Redness Page. 49. Wheals Page. 50. Small Pocks, Measils, etc. Page. 50.
Blemishes, etc. ibid. Pimples ibid. Ringwarme, Tetter, etc. ibid. Clefs of the
Lips. ibid.
AFFECTS of the TEETH.
Benummednesse Page. 50. Blackness of the Teeth ibid. Looseness of the Teeth
Page. 51. The Tooth ach Page. 51. Hollow aching Teeth Page. 51. Worn, or wasted
Teeth Page. 51. Rotten Teeth Page. 51 Flesh growing about the Gums Page. 52
Laxity, and putrefaction of the Gums ibid. Swelling of the Gums ibid. A
distillation to the knot of the Jaw ibid. Fxulceration ibid. Dolours of the
Teeth Page. 53.
AFFECTS of the TONGUE, and Cheeks, etc.
Ranula Page. 53. Palsy of the Tongue ibid. Lost Speech Page. 54. Taste lost,
and depraved ibid. Tumor of the Jaws ibid. Inflammation of the Jaws ibid.
Imposthumation ibid. Laxity of Uvula Page. 55. Inflammation of the Uvula ibid.
Ulcers of the Columella ibid. Putrid, and fetit Ulcers ibid. Ulcers of Lues
Venerea Page. 55, 56. Quinsy Page. 56. Bastard Quinsy Page. 57.
AFFECTS of the LIGHTS.
Windy Lights Page. 57. Asthma, Orthopnoea, and Dispnoea ibid. Stopping of the
Breast Page. 58. Inflammation of the Lungs ibid. Imposthume of the Lungs ibid.
Hereditary Ptysick Page. 59. Ptysick not hereditary Page. 59. The Plurisy Page.
59, 60. Hoarsnesse Page. 61. Cough ibid. Spitting blood ibid.
AFFECTS of the HEART.
Ulcers, and St. Anthony's Fire Page. 66. Lipothymy ibid. Swouning ibid.
Palpitation of the Heart Page. 67. Little Worms in the Heart ibid. Poisons
Page. 67. Dolor of the Heart Page. 68. VICES of the Paps ibid. CANCERS ibid.
CARDIALGY, or Pain of the Heart Page. 72.
DISEASES of the VENTRICLE.
Ulcers of the Stomach Page. 72. Stopage of the Stomach Page. 72. Dilatation of
the Mouth of the Stomach ibid. Stink of the Ventricle ibid. Intemperance of the
Ventricle ibid. Loathing, and want of Apperite Page. 73. Hungrinesse Page. 73.
Canine Appetite Page. 74. Longing, or the immoderate desire of Women with Child
ibid. Thirst ibid. Crudity of the Ventricle Page. 75, 76. Digestion lost Page.
76. Belchings Page. 77. Windiness of the Stomach ibid. Inflation of the
Ventricle ibid. Tumor of the Ventricle ibid. Sighing, or Sobbing ibid.
Nauseousnes. ibid. Vomiting Page. 78. Clotted Blood ibid. Choler ibid. Dolor
of the Ventricle Page. 79. Animalcula of the Ventricle Page. 79. Imbecility of
the Ventricle ibid.
DISEASES of the INTESTINES.
Obstruction Page. 80. Cholick, and Iliack passion Page. 81. Palsy Page. 84.
Slow dejection of the Belly ibid. Flux of the Intestines ibid. Diarrhaea, and
Dysentery Epidemical ibid. Dysentery Page. 85. Tenesinus Page. 89. Dysentery of
the Liver ibid. Purulent Excretion ibid. Maw-wormes Page. 90. Ascaredes Page.
90. Tinea Page. 90.
VICES of the FUNDAMENT.
Inflammation Page. 91. Clefs Page. 91. Swellings, Warts Page. 91. Red Sores,
Piles Page. 91. Hidden Hemroides Page. 91. Deflux of the Hemrodes Page. 92.
Hemrodes Stopped ibid. Falling Down of the Fundament ibid. Frequent croaking of
the belly Page. 93. Incontinency of the Dung ibid.
AFFECTS of the LIVER.
Intemperance, of the Liver Page. 93. Putrefaction of the Liver Page. 93.
Imbecility of the Liver Page. 93. Cruent dejections of the belly ibid Tumors of
the Feet ibid Obstruction of the Liver Page. 94, 95. Schirrus of the Liver
Page. 96. Tumor of the Liver Page. 96. Inflammation of the Liver Page. 97.
Imposthume of the Liver Page. 97. Ulcer of the Liver Page. 97. Obstruction of
the bladder of the Gall. ibid. Choler increased in the same bladder ibid. The
Stone in the Bag of the Gall. Page. 98.
DISEASES of the SPLEEN.
Tumor of the Spleen Page. 98. Obstruction of the Spleen Page. 98. Schirrus of
the Spleen. Page. 101. Inflammation of the Spleen. Page. 101. Imposthume of the
Spleen. Page. 101. Ulcer. of the Spleen. Page. 101. DISEASES of the Mesentery
ibid.
SYMPTOMS and the Liver, and Spleen.
Jaundies simple Page. 102. Black Jaundies Page. 103. Hypochondriack-Melancholy
ibid. Atrophia, or Consumption Page. 104. Cachexy Page. 106.
DROPSY, and its Species.
Dropsy in general. Page. 107. Timpany ibid. Ascites Page. 109. Anasarcha.
Page. 111
VICES of the REINS.
Inflammation Page. 112 Obstruction Page. 113. Exulceration of the Reins Page.
115. Nephritick Dolor Page. 116. Stone of the Reins Page. 116.
AFFECTS of the BLADDER, etc.
Stone of the Bladder Page. 118. Inflammation of the Bladder. Page. ^^^
Imposthume of the bladder Page. ^^^ Exulceration of the bladder Page. ^^^ The
Priapismus Page. ^^^ Extinct, or weak Virility Page. ^^^ Gonorrhaea Page. ^^^
Virulent Gonorrhaea Page. ^^^ Caruncle of the yard Page. ^^^ Diabetes Page. ^^^
Incontinency of Urine Page. ^^^ Difficulty in making Water Page. ^^^ Strangury
ibid. Heat of Urine ibid. Pissing blood Page. 124. Voyding strings in Urine.
Page. 125.
DISEASES of the TESTICLES.
Inflammation of the Scrotum, etc. Page. 125. Tumor of the Cods. ibid.
Bubonocele, Enterocele, and Epilocele, or Burstings of the Beily. ibid.
NAVEL-BURST. Page. 126.
AFFECTS of the WOMB.
Inflammation of the Womb. Page. 127. Impostumation of the Womb. Page. 127.
Ulceration of the Womb. Page. 127. Sores of the Womb. Page. 127. Schirrhus. of
the Womb. Page. 127. False conception ibid. Difficulty in the Birth ibid. Wind
of the Womb Page. 128. Dropsy of the Matrix ibid. Suppression of the Menses
Page. 129. Inordinate flux of the Menses Page. 132. Distillation of the Womb
Page. 133 Gonorrhaea in Women Page. 134. Suffocation of the Matrix Page. 134.
Ascent of the Womb. Page. 136 Falling down of the Womb. Page. 136. Convulsion
of the Womb. Page. 136 Sterility Page. ^^^ Abortion. Page. ^^^ Difficulty of
Birth Page. ^^^ Impotency. Page. ^^^
The GOUT with its Species.
The Gout in general Page. 138 Podagra and Chiragra Page. ^^^ LEPROSY Page. ^^^
ELEPHANTIASIS Page. ^^^ LUES VENEREA Page. ^^^ The SCURVY. Page. ^^^
FEVERS.
Quotidians Page. 162 Intermitted Fevers Page. 162 Tertians Page. 163
Intermitting Tertians ibid. Quartane Fevers Page. 164 Hectic Fevers Page.
165 Compounded Fevers Page. 165 Malignant Fevers Page. 166 The Pestilency.
Page. 168
EXTERNAL AFFECTS.
Scabs Page. 174 The Volatile scab Page. 173 Cynones Page. 173 Bunches Page.
173 Kings evils, or like Scurffick affects Page. 175 Contractions of the
members ibid. Dryness, or with redness of the members Page. 176 Laxation Page.
177 Tumors ibid. Biles ibid. Bubo's ibid. Carbuncle Page. 178 Pushes, and
Fellons ibid. Terminthus ibid. Hydrocephalum ibid. External Schirrus ibid.
Gangrene ibid. A swelling called Bronchochele ibid. Running Ulcers Page. 179
Sarcoma's Page. 179 Varixes Page. 179 Aneurisma Page. 179 St. Antony's Fire
Page. 179 Phlyctena's Page. 179 Herpes Milians Page. 180 Ringworm and Tetter
ibid. Itching ibid. Scurviness, or the wild scab ibid. Ulcers, Dandref, and
running sores of the head Page. 181 Corns ibid. Hard fleshy Tumorsib. Spots, or
blemishes ib. Pimples Page. 182 Gangrene, and Spacelus beginning ibid. Ulcers
ib. Fistulas ib. Wounds Page. 183 Fractures, Laxation and dislocation of bones.
Page. 184

A general Table of Remedies, and Preparations, comprised in the two precedent
Volumes of Royal and Practical Chemistry.
Crollius. Hartman. A. Agarick Trochiscated 4 Alkermes extracted 15, 23
Ambergreise 86 13 Amulets Of the Elder shrub 28 For the Catarrh 38 For the Eyes
40 Of Quicksilver 135 170 Of Arsenick 136 170 Of Virgins Lungwort 38
Constellate 176 An Alexipharmacon 178 Animal Bezour, or Alcohol of Vipers 158,
160 64 Antidote 170 Antepileptick For Children 99 26, 28 A Powder 99 26, 28
Confection of Paracelsus 101 Spirit of Vitriol. 99 Anodyne Specific of
Paracelsus 88 Sulpher of Vitriol 89 Oil for the Toothache 109 Unguent. 142
Antipleuretick Tragaea. 65 Antipodagrick Wine of Paracelsus 139 Pills of the
Author ibid. Water of Ruland 140 Another water 140 Angeli Salae. 12 2
Apoplectick Water of Life 30 Another water 31 Another water of Life. 102 Aqua
Benedict of Ruland 103 Benedict of Hartma^ 13 Fuekororum 117 Mortua 173, 174
Vitae 12 Regis 115 Aqua vita aromat 34 Aqua Magnanimitatis 36 Arcanum
Corallinum 25, 26, 27 6 Of Carduus bened. 10 Of Eyebright 108 40 Of Eglantine
knobs 114 Of Cumin 148 Of Prunella 165 Of Paracelsus 156, 157 Of Tansie, etc.
79 Of Tartar 37 Of Pearls 74 Of Wormwood 147 Of Valerian 108 Arthritick Powder
140 139 Another powder 140 Arsenical Magnet 139 Ashes Of Flies breeding in
Sheeps-dung 92 Of a Mole 175 Of a Salamander ibid. Astmatick purging powder 58
Asses Milk 165 Asses Blood. 22 Aurum potabile English of Franc. Antonins 15
Another 16 Another 116, 117 Another 120 Another, Sophisticate 82 Another 170
Aurum vitae 22 The Azure, or Lazure-stone. 23 B Balsom Apoplectick 105 19, 31,
82 Embrionate 26 For the Gout 140 For the same, another 141 For wounds 160 183
Another 184 Of Fennel 85 76 Of Maj^ran 48 Of Civet, and Oil of Nutmegs 82 Of
Saltgem 125 Of Saturn 82 Of Sulphur 59, 63, 127 Of Sulphur, Ruland 68 Of Saint
John-wort 161 For the Ventricle 75 Balsoms why made thick 85 Balls of glass of
Antimony 40 Baths Of the Heads and Feet of Sheep 104 Of Aqua dulcis ibid. Of
Ants, or Pismires 137 For the Stone of the Reins 117 For incontinency of Urine
122 For members contracted 57 Baths and Stoves artificial 175, 176 Blessed
powder 175, 176 Blood 71 Of Man and Breast milk 181 Of an Eale 181 Of a Mole
171 Bezoar Stone 10, 67, 103 Box-leaves 22 Butter of Antimony 9 Buttery
Magistery of Coruls 77 C. Cathartick Vegetables 3 Minerals 16 6 Cataplasme For
the Scrotum 125 Of a Lettice-root 125 In affects of the Spleen 98 Carbos of
Paracelsus 94, 96 Cautery, when needful 25 Cautions In exhibiting Aqua
benedict. 14 Of Mercury and Antimony 24 Of Antimony, and Turbith 38 Of Antimony
40 In exhibiting Oil of Vitriol 123, 124 Cinnabar of Antimony 9, 10, 34, 35
Choler-expelling Medicaments 146 Cephalic Pills of Laudanum 18 Clyster for the
Apoplexy, etc. 32 Colliriums for the Eyes 42, 43 Composition of
Pomgranate-rindes, etc. 41 Confection of Alkermes 120 Confortatives 72
Constellate Fly 152 Cosmeticks Of Mercury 171 Of Bulls-galls 172 Of Crabs 172
Of Talk 173 Cordial 111, 170 Countesses Ointment 132 Crocus Of Metals 12 80, 91
Of Iron, aperitive 130 Crystals Of Tartar 7, 8 1, 80, 102, 113 Of Salt, sweet
as Sugar 56 Of Iron 63 Cristaline Salts of Vegetables 154 Cucumer Asinin: 125
D. Decoction Of Capers 5 Of Agrimony, and Saracens Mint 91 Of Straw-berrys, and
Raisons 102 Of Red-willow-bark 104 Of Aquilegia 120 Of Guaracum 147 124, 157,
161 Of Usnea, and Prunella 126 Of Mother of Thime 127 Of the Tops of Madder
ibid. Of China Root 161 Of Camomil Flowers 177 Of Elecampane 58 Of Sarsaparilla
147 Of consolidating Herbs 64 For the Ascites 109 For the Lues 157 For the
Pleurisy 60 For the Womb 134 Diacubeba of Paracelsus 108 Diaphoretick Antimony
59 9, 58 77 In peracutis, or Mixtura simplex 70 10, 23, 31 Precipitate Mercury
24 31 Precipirate of Native Cinnabar 179 Diet in the Dropsy 112 Diuretrick
Julep 11 Oximel 12 D^atrion piperion 138 Double Antimonial Pills 36 Digestives
5 1 Digestive to comfort the Brain 23 Drinking out of a dead Mans-skull 174
Duke of Saxonys Powder 169 Dung Of a Black Cow 100 26 Of a Wolf 84 Of a
Peacock 37 Of Asses, or Swine 49 Of an Horse 138 Of Geese 148 110 Dung of a
Patridge 155 Dysenterical Powder 149 E. Electuary 38 24 Of Antimony 4 Of
Linnamon 4 Of Laudanum 91 Of Sena Leaves 4 Of Solenander 100 Of Scorias of Iron
131 For the Ascites 109 Elixir Proprietatis of Paracelsus 83 12, 23, 63, 103,
160 Uterine 125 Pestilential 130 Embrochation 35 Epithema Of Frankincense and
Mirth 68 Of Gamarris 20 Of Honey, and Milk 60 Of Wormseed 20 Epileptick
Medicament 100 Essence Of Crocus Martis 151 86, 92, 108, 122, 129 Of Melissa 66
Of Emralds 150 83, 84, 85, 124 Of Pearls 13 Of Saff^on 23 Essence Of Amber 120
Of Ants 137 Of Iron 93 Of Salt of Tartar 35 Of Satyrion 152, 153 120, 137, 138
Of Peach Flowers 9^ Of Walwort 135, 136 Expectoratives 59 Experiment Of
Antonius Ausman 56 In the Disentery 88 Extract Of Bullocks-Liver 127 129 Of
Castor 136 Of Coloquintida 4 Of Crocus Mattis 151 48 Of Elatery 107 Of Gum
Gua^m 121 Of Gum Laudanum 18, 23 Of Licheness 91 135 Of Majoran 48 Of Meccachan
45 4, 103 Of Root of black Hellebore 4, 103 Of Ox-spleen 127 131 Of Scammony 4
Of Sena ibid. Of the Lesser Spurge 147, 148 4 Of Raburb 4, 103 Eyebright 39
Eye of an Hare 137 F. Fatt of the Fish Thymalus 181 Fatt of Wooden-Spoons 50,
69, 91 Flowers Of Antimony 33, 35 8, 18, 23 Of Butter of Antimony 31 Of
Diaphoretick Antimony 59 10 Of Sulpher, Natural 131 Of Sulpher, Artifical 132
Of St. John's Wort 160 Flower of Vetches 126 Feathers cut small 80 Flints 79 11
Fernelius his Stiptick Unguent 87 Fomentation For the Hypochondryes 100, 101,
For the Dysentery 151 Frog-Spawn 171 Fume, Of Callis Equorum 135 Of Galbanum
ibid. Of Assa faetida, etc. ibid. Of Hairs growing under the Belly of an Hare
48 G. Galls Of a Bull 80 Of a Patridge 45 Of the Pike-fish 42 Galbanet of
Paracelsus 34 Gargarisme For the Throat 54 Another 57 Galreda, or Gelatina 101
Gilla of Paracelsus 9 1 Glass Of Antimony 39 2, 162 Of Antimony without Boras
ibid. Of Mercury 33 Gold Transparent 71 Philosophically described 113 Gratiola
111 Grease of a Goat 123 Green Juice of Silver 21 Green Water Of Arsenich 46 Of
Dr. Hartman 46 Green Precipitate 24 159 Gum de Peru 3, 5 Gum Guttemaw 3, 5 Gum
of Antimony 7 H. Hartshorn Prepared 10 Impregnated with the Essence of Saturn
63 Hermaphroditick Vitriol 124 128 Herb Mercury 106 Herb Paris 125 Heart of a
Mole 126 Hedg-hogs-grease 126 Head of a Serpent 130 Honey distilled 8 Hydropick
Purgations 146, 147 Hydroticks 149 Hysterical Purgations 134 Laudanum 91 Powder
of Lichenes 126 Singular Water 128 I. Jacob Weckers Water 111 Incarnative
precipitate Mercury 24 Incarnative powder 71 Infusion of Glass of Antimony 13
Internals for the Head 18, 19. Intestines of a Wolf 84 Jovial Bezoar 65
Injection for the yard 122 Juice of Mulberrys 55 Juleps In spitting blood 65 In
heat of Urine 124 K. Kali, its use 14 Kali-Vinegar 62 Korndorferus his Solar 74
Diaphoretick 74 L. Laudanum Opiate 89 16, 86 Without Opium ibid. 17 Suffocative
91 31 Epileptick 90 ibid. Mineral 28 Mercurial 28 Of Paracelsus 86 Lapis
Prun^lla 113 Laxative A^e 6 R^ysons 6 (...) Of Mercury 7 Of (...) of Antimony 7
Of Powder of Diasena 3, 103 L^ptors Of Gems, and Flints 79 Of Jacy^th 14 Of
Crys^al 146 Of Mercury, and Luna 153 Of S^ape 143 Of Tin 128 Leave^ of Bardana
111 (...), or Elchtenackers Balsome 67 (...) 145 118 (...) Of Frogs 100 27 Of a
Wee^^l 40 Long Shells of Shel-Fishes 128, 129 91, 103 Lixivium of Scorias of
Antimony 129 Lunar Bezoar 64 Ludum humani, of Paracelsus 144, 146 113 M.
Magistery Of Pearls and Corals 12, 137 Of Pea^s, of Reverius 138, 140
Magestrale Method of the Arcanum of Vegetables 52 Magistrate Syrup 130
Mag^trale ^g^s of Frogs 152 Mans-b^^es ^a^cined 143 Man^-grease 177 Magnetic
Cure with a new-layd Egg 105 Medicines In the Asthma 57 For Vomiting 78 In the
Stone of the Bladder 119 Medicinal Stone 165 Another 167 Another 167 Martial
Bezoar 65 Mercurial Bezoar 66 Mineral Bezoar 63 158 Mercurial Water 168 ibid.
Mercurius dulcis 29, 30 6, 18, 103 Mercurius Vitae 18, 30, 107 Mercury with Sol
8 Mercury Gryseus 23 Mercury precipitate 18, 21 Precipitate perse 29, 30
Precipitate with Sol 21 how purged 20 Menstruum of a Virgin 137 50 Milk of
Sulphur 110 63 Milk ustulate, or Calybeate 86 M^eilage in Heat of Urine 123
Mushrums Of Beech 152 126 Of Nut-trees 152 126 N. Narcotick Sulpher 88 37
Nephritick Water 117 Nephritick Wood 118 Nephritick of Eglantine 145 ibid.
Nymphaea, or the Water-Lilly 24 O. Observations In preparing Vitriolate Tartar
6 In Cathartick^ 16 In Spirit, or Oil of Salt 53, 54 In preparing Laudanum 87
In bait against the Stone 144 In the Veneral Lues 148 Odonsicks 94 Opthalmicks
106 44 An Owl moystned in Vinegar 155 Oils by expression Of Nutmegs 58, 95,
105 4, 5, 25 Of Wallnuts. 152 Oils per diliquium Of Antimony 6 Of Tartar 7 144
Of Verdegrease 154 Oils distilled Of Sulphur per Campan 2^ 5, 90 Of Soot 13 Of
Salt 53 Of Campher 31 Of Salt, sweet 56 Of Cinnamon 81 65 Of Cassia Lignea ibid.
Of Vitriol 99 Of Amber 102 66 Of Liquor of Crystal 146 Of Box 109 53 Of Toads
50 Of Bayberrys 50 Of Nutmegs 96 Of Black pepper 163 Of Myrrh ibid. Of fixed
Arsenick 68 Of Mercury 150 Of Milk 175 Of Peter 141 Of Tin 136 Ointments Of
Alabaster 18, 20 Of Aquilegia 52 Of Oil of Castor 36 Of the Gall of Geese, and
Hens 41 For the Reins 116 Sympathetick 18, 20 Ox-galls 90 P. Panchymagogous
Vegitable 4, 18 Or Isaac Holland 41 Another 43 103 Another 44 Another 45
Panacea of Sulpher of Antimony 71 9 Panacea of Anwaldinus 18 Another Panacea 17
8 Penotum how made 11 Palegme of Vitriol 10 Philosophic Spirit of Vitriol 32,
99 18, 32 Purging Spirit of Vitriol 42 Pectoral Syrups 62 Pills of Ruffus 25
Poriapton of Mallows Root 40 Preparation Of Precious Stones 79 Of Flints ibid.
Of white Amber 104 Plasters Of Arsenical Magnet 139 Of Dia Sulphur 68, 178 Of
Hemlock 77, 96, 10 For the Gout 142 Another ibid. For the Lues 155 Magnetic
170 For the Pest ibid. Domestic of the Author 172 For the Dysentery 149
Sticktich 161, 162 Oppodeldoch of Paracel. 164 Pearls dissolved in Liquor of
Guaiacum 159 Peruvianus his Balsome 106 Pessany for the Womb 127 Preservative
170 Podagrick Remedies 142, 143 Potions in spitting blood 62 Pouders Of the
Backbone of a Weesel 100 Of Coloquintida 92 Of Foreign Mummy ibid. Of the bone
of the Fish Sepia 121 Of Onisks 145 Of native Cinnabar 37 Of Scarabus 41 Of
Water Lizards 51 For the Eyes 42 For the Gonorrhaea 121 For the Caruncle of the
yard ibid. For the Teeth 50, 51 For the Stone 145 For the Woomb 126 133, 134,
Powder of Licheness compound. 136 Of Touds 110 Potable silver 21 Q. Quercetanus
his Powder of native Cinnabar 37 Panchymagogon 29 98 Syrup of Corals 96
Quicksilver 90 Quintess^nce of Pearls 75 R. Raw-flesh 182 Regal Paste 64
Regulus of Antimony 9 Remedies for Sobbing 77 Restrictive 78 Rheumatick Root 59
Rosin of Scammony 5 Rondoletius his Medicament 46, 47 Rotula's of Diatragacant
61 Rotulas for spitting blood 66 Roots Of the Male Peony 29 Of Succory 89 Of
Sorrel 109 51 Of Asarrabacca 163 Rulands Girdle of Sapience 20 37 Golden Spirit
of Life 4, 109 Extract of Esula Root 148 Secret for corns. 181 S. Silvations
25 156 Salts Of Amber 53, 103 11 Of Herbs 49 Of Corals 76, 151 Of Pearls 72 12
Of Frogs and Toads 148 Of Saturn 168 Of Satyrion 137 Of Sulphur 90 Of Tin 127
Ammoniack purefied 129 75 Against the Stone 143 Saphirick Oil of Camomil 72,
79, 81 Saphirick Cure of Carbuncles 172 S^agdine Vitriol 124 Scammony prepared
46 4, 5 Another way ibid. Saturnine Bezoar 65 Scheunemannus his Bezoardick 64
Secundine, how used 24, 137 Sleep the Arcatium of Medicine 17 Sedium Stomachale
76 Specificks For the Head 20 Others for the same 97 18 For all the seven
Members 96 Specificum purgans 48 18, 23, 26, 29 Specific Cure of Maw-wormes 67
Specificks Of Goats Urine 115, 116 Of the Pike Fish 42 Of Paracelsus, for the
Quinsy 56 Venereal 154 For bitings of Mad Dogs 165 S^yles with their skells 178
S^ar Bezoar 61, 64 Solution Of Corals 89 Of Gold 152 Of Sublimate Mercury 154
Spirit Of Arterious blood 30 Of Hartshorn essencified 79, 90 Of Corals 66 Of
Ammoniack 140 Of Mans-brain 27, 30 Of Mercurius dulcis 115, 120, 127 Of Mercury
simple 150 Of Salt 53 11 Of Salt compounded 55 Of Saltnitre 57 Of Saturn 154
71 Of Soot 13 Of Tartar 66 84 Of Tartar Alcholisate 10 Of Tartar compounded 68
Of Vitriol 70, 97, 99 3, 29 Of Urine 119 (...) Of Urine ibid. (...) Suff^gation
of Candles 37 Sugar of Saturn with Eyebright 43 Sulphur of Gold 151 88 Sulphur
of Tartar 69 12 Sulphur of Vitriol 33, 89 S^machical Oil of Vitriol 122 Syrups
Of Pearls 1^ For the Spleen 99 T. Tablets Antepileptick 30 Of Crocus of Iron 96
For the Ascites 19 For the Spleen 1^ Tinctures Of Gold 37 Of Corals 78 86, 1^3,
137 Another 79 Of Mummy 155 Of Antimony 141 Of Tartar 12^ Tartar Vitriolate 6,
7 Treacle Of Mummy 155 Water 134 11 Vinegar ibid. Toads dried 170 Tobacco
Leaves 41, 44 T^^^ of a Cook 122 (...) of (...) 4, 8^ (...) Stone 10 (...) 22,
26 (...) Salt 78 Thur^scrus his Saphirick 72 Trial of (...) of Mercury 18
Turbith Mineral 17 Type of corporeal Aurum Potabile 21 V. (...) 9 1 (...) Of
Green nuts Pl^ (...) Of Asarabacca Leaves ibid. A Water (...) Of Conradinus 5
(...) Vitriol 10 (...) Syrup (...) Vapor Of Wormwood 47 Of verveine 47
Venereal Bezoar 65 Vesicatorys 19 Viridellus 451 Vipers stifled in Wine 147
Vitriol of Copper and Iron 122 Volatile Spirit of Vitriol 98 29 Vinegar of
Turpentine 80 14 Unguents Of Linaria 91 Of Mushrums 126 Unguentum Aureum 153
Unguentum Aegiptiacum 154 Urine Of the Husband 138 Of a Boar 181 Of a Dog 181
W. Waters Of Arsenich 47 Of Arsmart 149 Of Briony root 58 Of Calx vive 180 Of
Crabs, and Selandine 107 40, 43 Of Earthworms 148 Of Elecampane Root 129 161
Of Garlic, or Onions 90 Of lillys of the Valley 102 31, 137 Of Frog-spawn 177
Of Peach Kernels 11 Of Pismires 105 Of Pismires compounded 163 Of Pearls 67 Of
Soot 68 Of Succory Flowers 41 Of Tobacco 163 Of Verveine 19, 20 Of Vitrial, and
Tartar 94, 97 Of White Vitriol 40 Of Wormseed 20 For the Apoplexy 31 For the
Eyes 108 40, 41, 42 Another for the Eyes 109 Against Scabs, and Fistula's 30
For the Alcites 110 Hysterical 128 For the Spleen 100 For the Tooth ach 109
Wine Congulated, etc. 73 Wine of Iron 93, 94, 102, 129 Wormwood Wine 77 X.
Xenia of Paracelsus 48 Y. Yellow Precipitate 24 Yolke of an Egg dissolved in
Wine 133 Z. Zenextons Of Paracelsus 135 For the Richi, and Noble 136 Other
Zenextons 137 Arsenical 138 Mercurial 138 Zenith of Young Maidens 136 Zwingerus
in the Hypochondriack 23


