ANALPSIS, OR Saint PETER'S BONDS abide: FOR RHETORIC Works no RELEASE, Is
evidenced in A serious and sober consideration of Dr. John Gauden's sense and
solution of the Solemn League and Covenant, SO FAR As it relates to the
Government of the Church by Episcopacy.

By ZECH. CROFTON.

Josh. 9. 19. We have sworn unto them by the Lord God of Israel; now
therefore we may not touch them.

London, Printed for Ralph Smith, at the Bible in Cornhill, near the Royal
Exchange. 1660.

TO THE HONORED Sir LAWRENCE BROMFEILD, Knight, and Colonel in LONDON.
Honored Sir,
YOU have been pleased (in order to composure of our unhappy differences) to
suggest unto a grave and learned Divine, a considerable case of conscience
Relating to Church Discipline, (viz.) The consistency of Episcopacy with the
Solemn League and Covenant, and you have thereby produced his Resolution unto
the loosing of Saint Peter's Bonds, as he is pleased to Entitle it: You may Sir,
remember, it is Solomon's experienced Rule, It is a snare (or stumbling stone)
to devour holy things, Pro. 20. 2^.
and after vows to make enquiry: (How to keep or retract them (says Mercer)
for that, indeed, many times, the Resolution proves more entangling than the
Obligation; I wish that this were not found the unhappy fate of Dr. Gawden his
sense and solution of the Covenant in point of Episcopacy.

Truly Sir, according to that little skill that I have in things of this
nature, this Resolution to your enquiry is so sadly shipwrackt on the
uncertainty of the object, in advertency of expression and imbecility of
answer and Argument, those three Rocks that lay-way conscience-satisfaction;
that it cannot arrive at its desired haven; but notwithstanding its Angelical
voice will leave Saint Peter as fast fettered as it found him: If Sir, I may do
it without offense, I would make bold to discover it that some other attempt
for Saint Peter's rescue may be undertaken.

First, Uncertain proposal of the object.
Sir, there is not a greater danger to be shunned by a Casuist, than a mistake,
or uncertain proposal of the object, or Ratio formalis of the obligation
scrupled and to be discharged, whereby the scrupulous conscience does easily
start from the most pinching Conclusions that are put upon it; and herein Sir,
if I mistake not, the Dr. is very unhappy; for he propounds the object, or
Ratio formalis of the Covenant, under the general term Episcopacy; the which he
well knows, is owned as an appellation common to all, and every the
Governors of the Church, Acts 20. 28.
who are in Scripture denominated Bishops, and by good demonstration Bishop and
Presbyter have been asserted to be synominous titles of Church Officers, and
are found to have been so used in the Primitive times of the Church, and
Writings of the Fathers; The true sense of Episcopacy consistent with the
Covenant.
and in this sense the Episcopacy* which he supposes to be the object of the
Covenant, intends only the Government of the Church by the Ministers and
Officers thereof, who may, and must in their several Assemblies (ordinis causa)
have a President or Moderator to Regulate and dispose all things which belong
to order; as in all policy to the Chair belongs; and if this be it he means
by his Episcopacy, Primitive, Regular, Reformed, and paternal Episcopacy: which
I could easily imagine when I observe the Emphasis of his universal discretive
All Episcopacy, page 9. and elsewhere oftenmentioned, and that in an
opposition* to some Episcopacy abjured and fit to be extirpated; and that it is
explained by the adjuncts, Reformed and Regulated as it ought to be, as page 8.
and opposed to an Episcopacy the confessed Subject of abusive excesses and
defects not only in the execution of its authority, through the faults, and
infirmities of some Bishops, and their instruments; who possibly were not so
worthy and good; or not so wise, and discreet, as became Christian Bishops, and
Ecclesiastical Governors of Christ's Church; but also in the very inconveniency
of its constitution and Customs in England. p. 10. In both which he confesses,
page 21. there needs an honest and ingenuous Reformation of Episcopacy,
beyond the former excessive, or defective constitution, or execution of it: And
more particularly by that Explication which is annexed in page 14. The
efficacious conjunction of it with Presbytery according to the Reduction of
the most reverend Primate of Armagh, and the considerations of the Lord Verulam
offered to King James: if I say this be the Episcopacy he means; I humbly
conceive in his Book he does sudare de nugis, labor to little purpose; for so
far is any intelligent Covenanter from looking on their looking back, to the
Primitive, Catholic, and Universal government, of this, or any other ancient
Churches; to endanger the turning of them into Pillars of Apostasy, as Lots
wife was into a Pillar of Salt, that they judge an arrival at it, to be their
Zoar in their escape from Sodom; and hereof he might have assured himself by
what page 22. he professes himself to know to have been the sense of the
Learned men in the late Assemby of Divines, and by Mr. Marshal's Declaration
that the Covenant was levelled at the Despoticum Tyrannicum Regimen; there are
no Covenanters that know any thing of the true nature of Presbytery, but they
will embrace this Episcopacy as not only consistent with, but the very
complement of the Covenant as to that point and Article; and will confess this
is not only the honest, but literal and complexive meaning of it, and with him
will condemn them for rigid Bigots and virulent spirits, to be slighted, not
striven with, who conceive themselves bound against such a Primitive, Reformed,
and Regular Episcopacy under such a reduction as I conceive would prove the
formal corruption of the Episcopacy covenanted against, and I hope he will
find few, very few such Covenanters in England.

But if Sir, by Episcopacy he mean (as I must confess I am jealous he does)
that frame and fabric by which the man of sin was made manifest, did advance
himself in the Temple of God, The vulgar and late acceptance of Episcopacy
repugnant to the Covenant.
above (not only all his fellow Ministers or Bishops) but even Magistrates, all
that were called God; which was, by his appearance and exaltation, innovated
into, and obtruded on the Churches of God in these Nations, on the fall of the
Monks of Bangor, and was so exercised, that Anselm (whom Laud succeeded, as in
place, so in property, and almost power) did appear papa alterius mundi;
wherein Bishops as a species or kind of Ministers different and distinct from
Presbyters; and so Superior to them, not only in point of Order, but Office and
Authority, together with all that Hierarchy by which it was executed; all which
his terms do too plainly suggest when he speaks of the Episcopacy which England
sometimes had; was lately desproyed, the legal Episcopacy, pa. 19 an Episcopacy
wherein the Bishops are distinct from Presbyters, page 21. arrogate unto
themselves the sole power of Ordaining Ministers, and to be the chief
Conservators, Cisterns, and Conduits of Ecclesiastical authority, and
Ministerial power. page 12. who have not only Precedence and Order, but
paternal authority; page 18. and that not only over people, but their Pastors;
who are by this antithesis fraternal with them, and so fillial to the paternal
power of the Bishops; and make up the paternal, fraternal, and filial unity of
Bishops, Presbyters, and people, pa. 5. Nay, in opposition to whom the ordinary
Minister or Presbyter, is divested of all power, and degraded of all dignity
among the people; and the Bishop, as dignified above him, so distinguished from
him by his Lawn sleeves, which is plainly suggested when he tells us, The
people of England are not to be governed by their equals and inferiors, because
they are in black Coats. page 17. All these expressions, with many of the like
nature, do seem to set up and point out such an Episcopacy, as is not Primitive
and Regular: And I say, if this be the meaning of his Episcopacy, as the word
(in the vulgar acceptance by the too long appropriation of it to such an
unjust and Antichristian frame of Government) may be understood: Truly Sir,
then I must be free to tell him the sense and very Letter of the Covenant is
clear against it, and binds the taker in terminis to the extirpation of
Prelacy, that is to say, the Government by Archbishops, Bishops, their
Chancellors, and Commissaries, Deans, Deans and Chapters, Archdeacons, and all
other Ecclesiastical Officers depending on that Hierarchy: So that it is the
thing, not its abuse; the subject, not its adjuncts; the Fabric, not its
defects and excesses, is covenanted against, nor will the Covenant be
accomplished, or the conscience be satisfied by the removal of the pride,
presumption, dullness, covetousness, and tyranny of Bishops, whilst the
pre-eminence, prerogative, paternal power, and juridical authority, assumed by
them as distinct from and above all other Ministers of the Gospel, as the only
immediate Successors of the Apostles, and enforced by their High Commission
and starchamher with other imperial Courts, Officers, and proceedings are
continued and established; nor must he think by his Sophistical comparison, to
deceive and delude the conscience, telling us, page 17, 18. That, they that
Covenanted against Popery, cannot think they did abjure, or must abhor all
those saving truths, and duties of Christianity; which are mixed with Popery;
for whatsoever is formal popery, though it be an English Mass or Altar, that,
all that, though only that, must be abhorred; and I conceive it yet remains to
be proved that the paternal authority of Episcopacy is a saving truth or
Christian duty, or not of the formality of prelacy, and that government
covenanted against. It is no hard case of conscience to resolve whether a man
may use the good and substantial materials of a destroyed Fabric; but I
conceive it an high fallacy, from thence to impose the very form resolved
against.

You see Sir at what uncertainty we are left, whilst the object of the
obligation is propounded under a general term, whose proper, primitive, and
genuine signification, suggests one thing, and the vulgar and long-used
acceptance suggests another: and our resolution is darkened by the multitude of
expressions, concluding sometimes one, and sometimes the other thing; which of
these shall a conscientious Covenanter embrace? You cannot Sir but know, the
work of a Casuist, is, to be full, and clear in the discovery of the Ratio
formalis, thing or matter; concerning which the conscience conceives it self
obliged; and that it is a great unhappiness in an Interpreter, and much greater
in a Casuist, to resolve obscura per obscuriora.

But, Sir, that I may testify my willingness to understand him, and cement,
what in me lies, the sad differences in the Church: Shall I entreat you, will
please to provoke the Dr. and his Anti-covenant brethren, such as seem to
advance and promote an Episcopacy scrupled by Covenanters; to speak out and
clearly to declare, whether they will admit the removal of the Government by
Archbishops, and that late Hierarchy; which he concludes, page 18 is dead, and
must rise in another quality; and (according to what is suggested in the
Reduction by him urged) consent to the establishment of Congregational,
Classical, Provincial, and National Assemb^ies, o^ Synods of Church Officers;
Presbytarial Episcopacy admitted.
Communi concilio Presbyteror^m, to debate and determine the affairs of the
Church, and exercise all Acts of discipline and Ecclesiastic power: In each of
which if there be Ignatius his Angel, Tertullian his Summus sacerdos, or
Armagh's Bishop or Super-intendent, for order-sake to call Assemblies, propound
questions, gather suffrages, require Order and composure in audience, and
debate, pronounce sentence, and sign Decrees, and to be fixed in that place,
enjoying all the dignities thereto belonging, and to be distinguished by some
special denomination from his Chorepiscopi or Colleagues; they shall not only
enjoy my consent (who I hope make conscience of the Covenant) but also
endeavor (which I think will not much need) that all the Covenanted Ministers
may join with them in a Petition to His Majesty, that by a Synod (by His
Majesty's Authority) called, it may be speedily consulted and concluded on;
under which I doubt not but the Peace of the Church will be preserved, and
power, truth, and godliness promoted.

But if nothing will serve them but Bishops, distinct in Office from
Presbyters, and exercising over them a paternal authority; appropriating to
themselves the power of ordaining Ministers, Domineering Prelacy refused
and the succession to the Apostles, and the Jurisdiction before noted; we must
entreat him to produce those clear, pregnant, and constant beams of right
reason, and true Religion, which shines in the brightness and stability of
Divine and Humane Laws; which may be the pillars of this truth, firm supports
of duty, sure bounds of obedience, and safe repose of conscience in this point;
greatly darkened by the many disputes of Bishops and Presbyters; Papists and
Protestants; nay, by the positive assertions of both Papists and Protestant
Divines, and determinations of Schoolmen, who have concluded Bishops and
Presbyters to be Ministers ejusdem ordinis, equal in Office and authority, and
in this very case of government; all which his very Reduction proposed does not
obscurely suggest. Sir, the conscience is by him confessed, to be more tender,
than to be deluded with Sophistry, or silenced by a pretense of Regulation and
Moderation, which intends no other, save a Reduction of Episcopacy to its
pristine and corrupt estate, not unto Presbytery.

Thus Sir I have noted the first Rock, and the Doctor's unhappy dashing against
it; which must needs render ineffectual, whatever he after writes.

The inadvertency of his expressions will appear no less evident, Inadvertency
of expression.
than his ambiguous state of the Scruple, and its resolution; if we either
observe its fierceness or falsehood: The fierceness of it is much manifested in
those multiplied invectives uttered against the Covenant and authority which
did enjoin it; and persons who did compose it; in these and the like
intemperate terms, a stratagem of State, a flag of Faction, an engine framed of
purpose to batter down Episcopacy, Fierce expressions.
p. 13. Covenanting complements, and Reformings of bungling Reformers, page 24.
The petty composition of a few politic men, Subjects, not Princes, and very
mean Subjects too, some of them, either as Lawyers or Ministers, a great part
of whom, I and others well know to be no very great Clerks, or Statesmen,
fitter for a Country cure, than to contrive Solemn Leagues and Covenants;
whose heads, rather than their hearts; and their State correspondencies, more
than their consciences brought forth the Covenant, pa. 11. The effect of
Scottish importunities, English compliances, and Presbyterian insolences, page
5. brought forth by the Midwifery of Tumults, and Armies, engaged and enraged
parties, and factions; whose wrath and policy were not probable to work the
righteousness of God; evil Angels turning our waters into blood, page 6, 7.
These and many the like Railing, Taunring, and Intemperate terms, much below
the expected sobriety of a so publicly professed healer; yet as an evidence of
his fury, he falsely charge the Covenant with most sad and unblest effects,
and to have been the cause of all the havocks in Church and State,
improsperities, disorders, False charge.
confusions, contempts, wars, spoils, bloodshed, upon all estates, and
degrees, contempt of Religion, and neglect of Sacraments, page 7. One of the
great rocks for the King's shipwreck, no less than the Churches and States; and
that it was watered with the King's blood. page 8. I cannot but wonder to find
Dr. Gawden thus audacter calumniare! for can any considerate Reader, or
competent observer of the transactions of our Nations in these last years,
read these reproachful speeches, and not conclude them a most positive and
public calumny? Let the Covenant it self be considered, and can it, by reason
of any tendency in it self, be charged to be the proper cause of such
prodigious effects? Is it not the most fervent profession of piety toward God,
Loyalty to the King, and Justice toward men, that can be made? Is it not the
most firm tie to Religion that can be fastened? and the fullest security of all
kind of Interests, the prerogative of the King, the privileges of Parliament,
and Liberty of the Subject, which can be given? can any thing but ill will
represent to the world such unblest effects as the natural products of it? and
if some persons engaged in it, have engaged in and acted such horrid impieties,
inhumane and barbarous actions, under the false cry of the Covenant, shall a
man of justice, charge the bastard-brood of such profaneness, to be the
natural issue of so Solemn and Sacred an Oath!

But Sir, will not an observation of the time, when these sad and unblest
effects fell upon us, acquit the Covenant from being in the least accessory
unto the production of them? If my observation fail me not, and I be not
mistaken in my account, the throwing stools at the heads of the Bishops in
Scotland, Confusion before the Covenant.
the pulling down the Star Chamber and High Commission Courts (those grand
supports of Prelatical power) the taking away the Bishops Votes and Session in
Parliament: The preparations against Scotland, (by Bishop Pierce his Bellum
Episcopale) the tumults about Lambeth, the imprisonment of the Bishops in the
Tower, the tumults about Whitehall and Westminster, with his late Majesty's
departure from the two Houses, the setting up his Majesty's Standard, the
alarums of War, with many battles and bloodshed; the violence of the vulgar
against the Liturgy, Crosses, and Altars, with all that confusion and disorder
which attended our first unhappy differences, are of some years date before the
Covenant was imposed; or so much as devised, or digested; all which were not
only begun, but carried to some considerable progress before it had its being;
how then could these be the black shadows of its appearing and prevailing in
England?

Some have observed, that from the time of the taking of the Covenant, success
fell on the side of the Parliament, and things did thenceforward grow into a
tendency to peace, and rested not until it effected the Resolves that His
Majesty's Concessions were satisfactory and sufficient ground of peace: And
here let it be noted that it was so far from being watered with the King's
blood, that when the debate (relating to His Majesty) engaged the Contests in
the House, which run the Armies on those high insolences against the
Parliament, as to pull out violently 120. Members, who in conscience of the
Covenant, did pursue and struggle for His Majesty's Restitution with honor and
happiness: Covenant contest against the King's death.
And the Covenant was by that perfidious pack openly declared useless, an
Almanac out of date, and violated with the highest impiety imaginable, to make
way to that execrable murder of His most Sacred Majesty: Nay Sir, can the
clamours of the Covenant which were so loud in Press and Pulpit, by the
Ministers of London in their Representation to the Armies at Saint Albans
(before they perpetrated their horrid designs) in their public Vindication
Printed with their names subscribed, witnessing to the World the inconsistency
of that Barbarous proceeding with the Solemn League and Covenant, be so far out
of the Doctor's remembrance, as to charge the Covenant (so Eminently approved
the pillar of witness against it) to have been the Rock of the King's
shipwreck, and watered with his blood: Your Casuist was willing to have all the
world to know Reprinting his own protest against it.
his innocence as to that inhumane wickedness; methinks Sir, he should not
quite overlook others no less innocent than himself.

Moreover Sir, many that are no Rigid Bigots, or virulent spirits, The more
likely cause of our late confusions.
and have considered the concurrence of affairs in this Church and Kingdom,
think, that without breach of charity or sobriety, they may conclude the
arrogance of Prelates, the alterations of publi^k worship, the innovated
Ceremonies and Superstitions, the Oath (with its etcaetera) binding to
Canonical obedience, the excommunications, banishments, stigmatizing,
Confiscations, imprisonments, and high Commission-Censures against pious
Non-conformists, with the silencing and suspending painful, powerful, and pious
Preachers, with the Arbitrary, Illegal imposition of the new Service Book in
Scotland, look much more like the natural parent, and proper cause of our late
Confusions, Commotions, War, and Bloodshed, then does the Solemn League and
Covenant; but I intend not to retort or recriminate.

I shall Sir, leave wise men to judge, how unlikely a course it is, by such
unadvised expressions, to satisfy conscience; which is so tender and tickle,
that all offenses should be avoided; passion is not only a perturbation to the
mind, but also a prejudice to the understanding of what is propounded; the
answer had need be clear, and arguments convincing, that follow such
provocations unto prejudice; which would make a sober (much more a scrupulous)
conscience turn aside and read no further; when conscience is so tender that
reason is ready to pinch it into passion, how little need is there to provoke
it by Railings and reflection of just miscarriages? (much less unjust calumnies)
Though Ironies and Satyrs may become Orators in reproof; they beseem not
Casuists in the resolution of conscience-doubts.

But I proceed to consider his answer and Arguments, The imbecility of his
answer and arguments the third Rock of conscience-resolution.
purposing, by Gods grace, to yield to the power of Reason that is in them,
though they come under so great disadvantages as have been noted.

His Answer is as himself suggesteth, double, indirect, and direct.

His first Answer is indirect, an oblique stroke at the whole body of the
Covenant, His indirect answer considered.
which work, how prudently it is undertaken, considering the universal
obligation of the Covenant on all men from His Sacred Majesty, to the meanest
Subject, let wise men judge? and how proper to him; who (if my information
fail not) is himself engaged in it. It is indeed a notable piece of policy
under pretense of Reconciling the Covenant in one Article to Episcopacy, to
invalidate the whole, and expose it to vulgar contempt; but if it be sinful,
let it go: His Rhetoric is Angelical, but let us try the strength of his
Reasons, unto the loosing of St. Peter's bonds.

The main strength of what he does suggest against the Covenant, The general
scope of his arguments.
lies in the miscarried Circumstances which do relate unto the imposing, and
taking of it; (viz.) its defect in point if imposing power; the terror and
tumults with which it was enforced; the policy and humor from whence it did
arise; and the novel^y or unacquaintednesse of it as to our English Laws and
Constitutions, or the like: Unto all which I shall only desire the Dr. on
serious and second thoughts, to give a candid, clear, rational, and Scriptural
resolve, to this general case of conscience; (viz.) if an Oath, Vow, or
Covenant, containing in it matter good and lawful (though not necessary and
positive duty) be imposed by fraud (as was that of the Gibeonites) or force,
and factions, Army, and tumults (as that of Zedekiah to Nebuchadnezzar) without
any formal authority, other than a man's or peoples own voluntary Act and
submission, which is new unto, and unacquainted with the Laws and Constitutions
accustomed in the place, and to the people, be by reason of any, or all these
miscarried Circumstances, void and null? I am much mistaken if he cross not the
common resolution of Divines and Casuists, if he conclude the affirmative; but
let us consider his suggestions singly, and so we shall best try their strength.

And his first onset begins with an I might shrewdly batter the Covenant,
First argument, the Covenants defectiveness as to authority. page 6.
and so he assaults it with that, which (I must consess) is indeed a battering
Ram; and being admitted, will endanger to beat down all that has been done in
this Kingdom since 1641. arraigning, censuring, and condemning all the
proceedings of the two Houses of Parliament; in which, I shall leave his
prudence and discretion to be judged, by such, as are sensible, how far His
Majesty's Honor, the Kingdoms satisfaction, and establishment in the desired
peace, is endangered by so much as a dispute thereof: But the strength of it
lies in this, the def^ctiveness of (and so the invalidity of the Covenant) as
to any lawful, constant, or complete authority; capable to bind the Sub^ects,
and people of England, in any Court of Con^cience or Judicature, in which,
nothing can have any permanent bond, or tie in Law, except Gods Word; as the
vow of a servant, son, daughter or wife, etc.

This I must confess is a fierce assault, and specious argument; yet methinks I
find a Covenanter fortified against its force, by the Wool-sacks of these
considerations.

First, Answer to it.
The The two Houses of Parliament (and those two had more than ordinary power)
are coordinate, and sharers in the Legislation of England; and so a constant,
lawful authority: It is Sir, worth you observation, how warily in p. 18. your
Casuist binds the King, to protect and preserve his Episcopacy, but bars His
change of it, without the counsel and desire of the two Houses whom he judges
Propitious to it.

Secondly. This Covenant was ordered by the Parliament during their Session:
And although I will not determine, that an Order or Ordinance of one, or both
Houses, can have the force, and permanent tie of a law (which yet among us will
admit a dispute by the ablest Lawyers, and many purchasers will plead for with
vigor) yet I think, it will not be ordinarily denied, that it may lay the
Subjects under a permanent bond; and I conceive, these are terms very
different; that is a bond on Conscience, which is not a Law and Tie in
Judicature: Orders of Parliament, directing an Act presently to be executed,
will not I hope be denied obedience; or the execution be voided by the
after-dissolution of it, especially where it is in its own nature permanent and
abiding. An Oath is in it self, natura Rei, a permanent bond; once laid it ever
binds; a Parliament are a power sufficiently complete to impose and enjoin it;
if they see cause to bring a College or Corporation under any special Oath, by
an Order during their Session, I hope no Englishman will question their
Authority; nor Divine deny the Obligation of the Oath; nor the one or other
determine this tie to be discharged, when the Parliament is dissolved.

Thirdly, The supposed defect has been since supplied; and His Majesty's
consent or assent fully expressed, by His swearing the same Solemn League, and
by Oath promising His Royal assent to all Acts and Ordinances enjoining the
same; and by His Royal Declaration of the 16 th of August, 1650. declaring His
full persuasion of the justice and equity of every the Heads and Articles of
the Solemn League and Covenant; and so far, justifying the taking of it by His
Subjects, that He graciously professes to know no friends but the friends of
the Covenant; and no enemies but the enemies of the Covenant: Hereby, whatever
defect was in the first imposing of it, is fully made up to fasten it on the
people now it is taken; so that by reason of this subsequent Act, I may say* if
by Moses he will be judged, to Moses he shall go; and admitting his parallel
(which some doubt, will not in this case square) if the Father, Master,
Husband, in the day that he hears the vow of the Wife, Child, or Servant, and
hold his peace, (contradict it not) much more if He justify, allow, and
commendit, as His most Sacred Majesty, has done, on most serious and
deliberate though in a most public and solemn Declaration, it shall stand,
and be established.

But Sir, suppose the Dr. can pull down this defense, and manage his battery,
so as to make a breach on the Covenant; yet before he enter, I must sound a
parlee with him; and desire him to tell us whether the quod fieri non debuit,
factum valet, pleaded to defend the wanton Baptism of Children, and hasty
Baptism of Women, be not more really pleadable in our case: To make the worst
of it, a tumultuous Assembly convene, and come before us with sword and
Scepter, and say they are a Parliament, and have lawful, constant, and complete
authority, to command us; and therefore will put an Oath and Covenant upon us;
and silly, inconsiderate we, are not so well skilled in politics, or
acquainted with the constitutions of our Country, to detect their fallacy, but
think all authority is within those walls, and obedience must be yielded to
what is there commanded, and so we are beguiled into the Oath; May we thence
cry out A Cheat? and so cast off the Covenant? and conclude it cannot bind? I
doubt such Doctrine embraced, will expose us to a three years Famine.

His first battery was so fiercely made, that it recoileth with a more than
ordinary Rumor; and makes him enforce it, pa. 6. with an I might Echo (as
indeed he has, for I find no certain sound in what he says) the violence and
noise of those times in which it was hatched in England, and brought forth by
the midwifry of tumults, and Armies, of engaged, yea, enraged parties and
factions; All which, it is well known, was not so great or loud, but that the
Lords and Commons in Parliament, the Commissioners of the Kirk and Kingdom of
Scotland, Violence of times.
with an Assembly of Grave and Learned Divines, did after Solemn Humiliation,
and seeking God, serious consultation, and sober debates, digest and determine
the Covenant; and both matter and form does bespeak it to have been no rash or
preposterous product of fancy: But suppose the worst; will the violence of the
times, put a nullity and non-obligation on the Oath? how comes the sentence to
be so severe against Zedekiah? He has despised the Oath, and broken the
Covenant, he shall not escape, Ezekiel. 17. 18. Was not this Oath extorted by
Armies without, and tumults within? and yet is it so austerely binding?
whatever Turks, Papists, or Politicians say, shall a Christian and Protestant
suggest a nullity of the Oath, because of the violence of the times in which it
was taken?

His next suggestion is a sound no less uncertain; he says he might urge the
novelty and partiality of the Covenant as to the English Laws and Genius: His
third indirect answer to the Covenant.
That he might, and might when he has urged it, explain it; for the matter of
it is neither new, nor partial; it has been often heard, and endeavored in
England; in the very point of Episcopacy, the removal of Englands Hierarchy
has been sued for from Wi^ness Dr. White's Epistle to Lawde before his
Treatise of the Sabbath.
Queen Elizabeth's time, downward unto this day: and the Covenant secures all
Interests without partiality; his surmise of foreign influence, inv^ntion, and
obtrusion, calls for proof; and then it will but little relieve him; for an
Oath enforced by foreign Con^uest, or couzenage; new to the Nation, and
contrary to its Laws, binds the conscience; and the supposed contrariety of the
Law, is of no force to them, who conclude a power in the Parliament to put a
period to those Laws; and a Solemn Oath or Covenant sworn by the Legislators,
and by them put on the people, seem to be the most full discharge of all
seeming-contrary Laws that can be imagined; especially when the Royal assent is
publicly given to it. His fourth suggestion in his indirect answer


He proceeds, It might seem odious, to reflect upon the Covenant, as to the
effects, and unblest consequences, which like black shadows, have attended its
appearing and prevailing in England; what havocks improsperities, etc. as
before we have noted: This Reflection I confess, cannot but seem odious; but
not to the Covenant, unless these sad effects, and unblest consequences, be
found to attend it, as its proper brood and natural issue, not accidental
sequels; produced by its genuine tendency to them, not by wicked men's
reluctance to order and piety, or perfidy as to what they had covenanted; but
the odium will of its own accord reflect on him who is a Covenanter, and yet
exposes his Solemn League and Covenant to vulgar scorn and contempt; who is a
man of justice and sobriety, and yet calumniateth the Covenant with those sad
effects which had their being and progress before the Covenant it self. Sure he
dreams, that sees the shadow, before the substance is in being; and who is a
Divine detesting the plea of success as the Judge or Rule of any cause, and yet
makes it the measure of the Solemn League and Covenant.

Nor can his next suggestion be considered unto the increase of his credit; 5th
Suggestion in his indirect answer. p. 7.
in which he tells us, He will not insist on the bafflings of the Covenant,
before it was adult or many years old; how it was soon made a Nehushtan, and
reduced to nothing, by counter and cross engagements after it had served as one
of the great Rocks for the King's shipwreck, and been watered with the King's
blood, etc.

Truly Sir, had I been at your Doctors elbow when he wrote this, I would have
advised him to have been so far from insisting, that he should not have
inserted this, which he calls Baffling of the Covenant: For Sir, will not every
one cry shame, that shall hear him say the Covenant was one of the great Rocks
which shipwrackt the King? and the Covenant was watered with the King's blood?
Who can consider the King's reluctance to the Covenant was not so much as
inserted into His charge, nor once taken notice of by Bradshaw, amongst those
many reasons by him produced, to justify that most execrable Sentence
pronounced against Him? Who observes the Resolves of the Parliament, that His
Majesty's Concessions (though He refused the Covenant) were satisfactory? and
that until the faithful Covenanters were pulled out of the House by military
violence, and the Band of the Covenant broken by the raging lusts of some proud
perjured Apostates, there neither was nor could be the least proceeding against
His Most Sacred Majesty, and yet conclude Him shipwrackt by the Covenant?
because some that had taken the Covenant did perpetrate that wickedness, will
any Rules of Justice or Religion charge it on the Covenant? because the
Covenant was violated by force, suppressed by power, and slighted by policy,
was it therefore vacated? when? by whom? or with what Arguments of Right
reason, or Religion, was it ever bafled? was not its vigor made visible by the
London Ministers Representation and Vindication? and its bond on conscience
made legible by the Lancashire and Cheshire plea for Non-subscribers? and the
testimonies of the Ministers in the several Counties of England, published with
their names subscribed, and indeed Imprinted by the invasion and divastation of
Scotland? the Sequestrations and Sufferings even unto imprisonment and death of
many in England, pursuing His Majesty's restitution on the account of the
Covenant? How can the Doctor confess, Doubtless the sense of the Covenant has
lately quickened many men's consciences in their allegiance to the King, so as to
bring Him (as David) home with infinite joy and triumph, page 25. and yet here
complain that it was so easily vacated in point of its express Loyalty for the
King's preservation? If it were ever vacated, when, or how was it renewed and
reinforced? If I may speak it without vanity, had not the firm bond of the
Covenant vigorously contended in the point of Loyalty, against the violent
powers which bare it down, His late Majesty's Martyrdom had not broken forth
with such luster; not His now Majesty (whom God long preserve) been restored to
that estate of Honor in which we now enjoy Him; so that the Antecedent of this
suggested Argument will be most positively denied.

But if we should admit it, I cannot but wonder to hear a Divine say and
infer upon it; If it were so easily vacated in point of Loyalty, I do not
see, how it can be so binding against Episcopacy: I think it to be no good
Logic, and worse Divinity, from some men's evasion, and violation, to infer a
vacation and non-obligation; or from a vacation of it in one point, to infer
its non-obligation as to others; sin, indeed is apt, but it must not be allowed
to engender sin; by Gods grace gradual violation shall not effect in me a total
rejection of the Covenant.

His sixth suggestion seems indeed to be of more force than the former (viz.
6th Suggestion in his indirect answer. p. 8.
) The Covenant (if so interpreted) must needs grate sore upon, and pierce to
the quick those former lawful Oaths, which had prepossessed the souls and
consciences of most of us in England; not only of Subjects, as those of
Allegiance and Supremacy, besides that of Ministerial, Canonical obedience to
our lawful Superiors, but even the conscience of the late King, as bound by
his Coronation Oath, etc. From which Oaths, as we know no absolution, so
neither can there be any superfetation of such a contradictory vow and Covenant
without apparent perjury: To all which I offer to consideration, That the
dissatisfaction of His late Majesty of Blessed Memory, (and in nothing more
blessed, than in the conscience He made of the Oath of God upon Him, and the
charge He has left His now glorious Majesty, That if God brought Him to His
own Right on hard conditions, He should be careful to perform what He should
promise) that is now beyond dispute; and His Majesty that now is, not only free
from those Fetters which restrained His Royal Father, but also is engaged in
the same League and Covenant, and this supposed contradiction cast out of
doors; and as to the contradiction of the Covenant to the Oaths of Allegiance
and Supremacy, non constat, it appears not; nor would it ever (as it has
done) have quickened the hearts of some, to suffer for, and to struggle under
their Loyalty, until His Majesty's Honorable Restitution, if it were so
repugnant to them: Let its contradiction in this point be noted, and we shall
speak to it: and as to that of Canonical obedience to our lawful Superiors, its
contradiction is suggested with an If it be so interpreted; Let the
interpretation be cleared, before the contradiction be concluded and argued;
for if that Oath did bind an obedience to Bishops as invested with paternal
authority, and as a distinct and superior order of Ministry, and its
unexplained etcaetera included more; a grating upon, and piercing to the quick
this Oath, was no other but duty; and then the Argument is of no more force,
save to speak the fretting of their spirits, who foolishly swear they know not
what, and now desire to maintain it, more for fancy, than conscience; for it is
not yet proved that such are lawful superiors in Church or State,

His seventh Answer or Argument, is ab incommodo, the inconvenience (which must
be very great and visible if it discharge an Oath) And here he tells us, It
must needs run us upon a great Rock of not only Novelty but Schism, etc. unto
which I desire Sir, you will please to observe

1. The loss we are at by the uncertainty of the object; he urges this
Argument with his universal discretive, all Episcopal order and government. We
must Sir, have a clear Notion of Episcopal Order and Government, before we can
with care shun the Schism; nor is it explained to us by the general terms of
Practice and Judgment of the Catholic Church in all ages and places till of
later days; for we know, that superiority and paternal power over other
Bishops and Ministers did too soon appear, and too universally spread after the
Apostles days, unto the advancement of the man of sin, though it prevailed not
without great reluctance, and its removal has been aimed at and endeavored by
the Reformation.

Again, must we take it for granted, that conformity is essential to communion
with the Church? and agreement in discipline unavoidally necessary to union?
Certai^ly if so, we must make the very form of Discipline an Article of our
Creed: And truly Sir, the jus divinum, or Apostolical institution of the form
he seems to plead for, lies too much in the dark for such a conclusion; and
therefore the most himself tells us of, it is, That it looks like an immediate
institution of Christ, preceptive and explicit, or tacit and exemplary, page
13. but he knows not whether; yet well knows, simile non est idem; and
therefore he here calls it but an ancient tradition and universal observation;
and then the 34 th Article of the Church of England secureth us from this Rock
of Schism, whilst it teaches us, 39 Articles of Religion in the Convocation,
held 1562.
It is not necessary that traditions be in all places one and utterly alike,
etc. In Politics (we well know) different forms of Administration are
consistent with union in the same Kingdom, and Communion in the same
Government; It is no strange thing to see Corporations in England governed by
their twelve Jurors, without a Mayor and Court of Aldermen, but it would be
thought very strange from thence to charge them with sedition! and it must be a
jus divinum, and immediate institution, not Apostolical tradition, or Universal
observation, must bar us from the privileges, any more than the dictated
properties common to all policy.

Moreover Sir, if this form of Discipline (which he notes some few Reformed
Churches of later days want, though they do not contemn, but approve and
venerate in others) be so necessary a Nerve, that the abjuration and exclusion
of it runs us on such a Rock of Schism, I see not how those Churches (though
their want be through necessity of times, and distress of affairs, put upon
them) can be owned in the union of the Catholic Church; for essentials unto
union must not only be reverenced in others, but enjoyed by themselves.

It is Sir, worth enquiry, what he means by the Catholic Church; for besides
the vulgar appropriation of it to Rome, and affection our late Prelates had to
that term, his Note That the abolishing of Episcopacy, is no small wall of
partition newly set up to keep all Papists from due Reformation, makes me
jealous the Cassandrian accommodation is yet in the Bishops intention and
endeavor; upon which they would not put that reproach, scandal, scruple, or
affront, as to be without Bishops of paternal authority; but if so, happy is
that Church whose Reformation carries them furthest off Romes Superstition, in
discipline, and worship, as well as doctrine.

His eighth Answer or Suggestion is a Rhetorical swada, and insinuating plea,
which has wholly lost its force by the uncertainty of the object: If
conscience be erroneous, we shall easily grant that it is equal, and ingenuous,
Loyal, and Religious, to red^ce and confine it; Erroneous conscience must be
rectified.
which yet must not, and will not be straiter than the proper and genuine sense
of the Covenant will admit; but as for that extravagant, disloyal, unlawful,
enormous, and Schismatical sense, against which he declaimes, in which it could
neither be lawfully taken, nor honestly kept; it must be determined by an
Explication of his All Episcopacy, and full demonstration of a sense so
qualified, before there can be any more strength in his Rhetoric, than in his
Reasons: I must Sir, be free to tell him, the Covenant does expressly bind
against the Fabric, and very form of the late Hierarchy in England, not its
abuses, exccesses, or defects only: though not against the use of any thing
which was good, and fit to be used in the succeeding form to be established;
nor do I understand it to be such an unreasonable and irreligious (Ametrie)
transport for men to Covenant against all the right use of things that are good
(but not necessary) because of the abuse incident to them, as he does suggest,
though the Covenant is not guilty of such obligation: But more of this in his
direct Answer.

Having assaulted the Covenant with his fierce battery, and alarummed it with
his frightful Echoes, The Covenant authority proved; not only pretended by
examples in the old Testament.
he proceeds to level to the ground all those fair, but fallacious pretenses
(as he deems them) drawn to fortify the Covenant from Scriptures examples,
wherein the Jews sometimes solemnly renewed Covenant with God, etc. And the
main and only Morterpiece he lets fly, is, That it was that express Covenant
which God himself had first made with them in Horeb and Mount Sinai, punctually
prescribed by God to Moses, and by Moses (as their Supreme Governor or King)
imposed upon them; this they sometime renewed after they had broken it by their
Apostasy to false and strange gods: Unto the enforcement whereof, we must
desire the Doctor to demonstrate, That the Law of Moses or Covenant in Horeb
was not only the Rule and Dictate of what matter they should Covenant, but the
express Covenant which was, or did consist in the exact recital, and Repetition
of that Law of the ten Commandments, as the very form thereof; so as that they
never varied or altered it, according to their special defections, in the
particular points of their l^ves; and that this was the formal Covenant between
God and the people in the times of Joshuah, and before Isreal's defection on
from God; or that this was the Covenant between God, the people, and King, and
between the people and their King, in the days of Jehoiadah: Or that this was
the express Covenant made in the point of the Sabbath, and the putting away
strange wives in the times of Nehemiah. These several occasions, and special
obligations, do bespeak them to have been Covenants, conformed as to the matter
of them, to some part of the ten Commandments; but as to their form and
manner of expression, to have been squared by themselves.

But whatever was the matter or form of their Covenanting, I imagine it will
not be denied, that the taking or renewal thereof was their own political Act,
done by their own will and power at the time, and on the occasion their own
condition did require and dictate; and so our Covenant (warranred for matter by
the Word of God) is by their example justified, to have been a pious and
prudent action within our own power to perform; though for the form of it, it
be not any Divine dictate, or Sovereign prescription, yet better to be
esteemed, than the petty composition of a few politic men: Nor is there any
strength in that; we were not Apostatized to false and strange gods; unless he
will affirm no defection short of Apostasy from the true, to false gods, is a
sufficient ground or occasion on which to renew Covenant; which I think neither
right reason or Religion will allow; shall not gradual defections be
restrained, and total Apostasy be superseded by a seasonable Solemn League and
Covenant? Surely then Joshuah was too preposterous, in working Israel into
Covenant with God, on a jealousy or rational conjecture of their future
Apostasy; and had England no need to Covenant, when they were posting in
doctrine, especially in worship and discipline, to Romes Superstition and
Tyranny? Can any man consider the corruptions continued in England since the
Reformation, and so defended, that nothing but a sovereign Remedy could remove
them? nay, the very Retrogradations of the Reformation, by a return of many
expelled Rites, and Prelatical power, and say, because she yet owned the true
God, she had no need to Covenant? If covenanting be an Act within man's own
power and choice; and defection from God and his ways inchoated or suspected
be a just ground and occasion, Englands covenanting is fully fortified by
Scripture and Reason, and the pretenses thereof no way found fallacious.

His last Suggestion in his indirect Answer is of no force; for admit that
there is no precept or pattern for such a Covenant in all the New Testament
(which directs us as Christians, and leaves us to the D^ctates of Nature, and
discoveries of the Old Testament, in more public and political Acts which
concern us as a Kingdom, or Church National) or in the succeeding ages of the
Church: Will it therefore follow, that such covenanting is sinful? the
Primitive Churches never were of such extent in the enjoyment of such power,
under such public defections, and in such capacity of covenanting as we have
been. Must we enquire what has been done in the Christian Churches, to do that
and no more, without regard to what may be done, the condition of the Church
requiring it? may not the very Ligue de Saint in France, and Oath et caetera in
England, though sinful in their matter, be good Spurs and Directions in
Christian-policy? May not the same means used to corroborate impiety, be
lawfully and prudentially used to strengthen true Religion and Reformation? Why
may not Popish policy teach Protestants to combine by Covenant, as Protestant
piety and prudence did dictate to them a Confirmation in Religion by
Chatechising? Courses common to men are not to be condemned, because used by
wicked men to wicked ends.

None Sir, do deny the Covenant made in Baptism to be the only new evangelical
Covenant to all Christians, broken by wilful and presumptuous sins, and renewed
by repentance, and the participation of the Lords Supper: But it seems unto me
a strange transport of so grave and serious a Divine, to oppose it unto the
Solemn League and Covenant (that piece of policy, rather than piety, Baptismal
Covenant, no bar to the Solemn League and Covenant.
as he is pleased to term it) The inconsistency of them I must confess is not
to me visible; sure I am Baptismal Vows are no bar, but may be provocations to
Solemn covenanting to and with God; Let the matter of this Covenant be exactly
scanned, and if it be in any one Article found repugnant to, or different from
the Covenant made in Baptism, we will renounce the whole: I hope it will not be
denied, that Baptized Nations and Churches may (in their public and politic
capacities) renew and amplify that Covenant which was made in Baptism: And
truly Sir, the Solemn League and Covenant seems to me so little to differ from
our Baptismal Covenant, that it is no hard matter to resolve it into those
three grand Heads we are (instructed) were promised in our names when we were
Baptized; and then all the difference will be in this; the Baptismal Covenant
was personal and private; this public and politic. But I pray let us note
his specification of the difference he suggesteth, and the Reasons of this
inconsistency he urges; which he supposes to be a (...), crying out How
vastly different from this Sacred covenant this late piece of policy, more than
piety is; and how little the true Covenant of a Christian binds him by his
Baptism or Repentance, or the Eucharist against all Episcopal government, I
leave all sober-minded Christians to judge. Truly Sir, his universal particle
All, may make something look like a vast difference, if we could but understand
the species he would pitch upon, as excepted by his discretive term; but the
uncertainty of the object is that we cannot but stumble at in all the
conclusions of his suggested answers: Methinks such an outcry of vast
difference should have been warranted by a clear antithesis; Opposites cannot
appear but by their opposition; and yet he specifies no one Article different
from our Baptismal Covenant; but sophistically evades with an How little do
Baptismerepentance, or the Eucharist, bind against all Episcopal government:
These may Sir, very little bind against it, and yet the Covenant and they be
at no vast difference; for the question is not, how little the true Covenant in
them agitated binds against all Episcopal government; but how much it binds to
any? He is the first Divine I have found to plead our Baptism as the bond of
Canonical obedience, and defense of Episcopacy; I never did imagine Discipline
and order to be the express positive condition of Baptism, and the
Christian-Covenant thereby made qua Christian, the only new Evangelical
Covenant; but especially this species of it, Episcopacy. I hope his jus divinum
will be made as clear as the Doctrine of the Trinity, whilst it is and must be
owned as the absolute condition of Baptism, and nerve of union with the
Church: Yet Sir, give me leave to tell the Doctor, if the late Hierarchy or
Episcopacy of England (which he seems to advance as the late honor of the
Ministry, and encouragement of Learning and Religion) be (as on an easy
discussion it may be) found to be of the pomps and vanities of this wicked
world; we are not only a little, but very much bound against it; for our
Godfathers and Godmothers did promise in our behalf, That we should forsake
them, as the Devil and all his works; and then he may well imagine, all
sober-minded Christians must judge, there is a vast difference between Baptism
and such Episcopacy, and that he is acted with a strong zeal that will by our
Baptism bind unto it, who yet declared it to be but a tradition and universal
observation.

But he adds a reason to enforce it, and that is, Since both the power of
ordaining Ministers, and by them to consecrate and celebrate both Sacraments,
Of the power of ordination by Bishops.
was ever derived from, and by Bishops of the Church, as the chief
Conservaters, Cisterns, and Conduits of all Ecclesiastical authority, and
Ministerial power, from the very Apostles the first Bishops of the Church, Acts
1, etc. But Sir, is it determined and agreed on without controversy, that the
power of ordination was ever derived by and from Bishops (in his sense,
paternal Bishops) above, and distinct from Presbyters? that so it must be
concluded No ordination by Bishops, no Minister, no consecration or celebration
of either Sacrament? and so where these Conservators, Conduits, Cisterns, were
never laid, or have been any way cut off, Ecclesiastical authority and
Ministerial power never came, or is removed and quite gone; for without doubt
this water must run in its own Pipes: Were it not for that subordination and
dependence of ordinary Ministers, Shepherds, and Rulers unto and upon the
Angels, Presidents, and chief Fathers of his Episcopal authority; he at after
notes, I should by his adjunct Chief, have conceived that he would grant, Some
small Pipes had run from the Apostles times in union with Christ our chief
Bishop, and drived Ecclesiastical authority and Ministerial power in the
vacancy of his Bishops: which, if he deny, the Church of Rome will triumph in
his Episcopal union with her; but the Reformed Churches can give him little
thanks for this Church annihilating Notion.

Again is it clear that Episcopal and Apostolical Ministry is idem ordo, the
same kind, distinct from that of Pastors and Teachers? it must be imagined so
to be, whilst Bishops only as Bishops, lay so much claim to the immediate
succession of the Apostles: That the Apostles had an Episcopacy, we cannot
deny, for we read of it in Acts 1. 20. Nor I think can it be reasonably denied
that the feeding-Ruling Elders at Ephesus were Bishops; for so Saint Paul
called them, as consecrated by the Holy Ghost. Acts 20. 28. and immediate
successors to the Apostles; yet it is not evident that they were all Angels,
Presidents, and chief Fathers; and such as set Timothy over them as their
Bishop, must needs deny them so to have been; and then Sir, some that wanted
this paternal authority, must be confessed Cisterns of Ministerial power, and
Ecclesiastical authority, and immediate successors to the Apostles: and so the
Bond of Baptism binds to Gospel Ministers, as the explicit and preceptive
institution of Christ; whilst Episcopal order can claim no more but tradition;
and that very disputable; the Prelatical Divines of our Nation would not be
thus tied to the observation of the Lords day; nor I to the observation of
Easter; yet both these (especially the first) look as like an immediate
institution of Christ, preceptive and explicit, or tacit and exemplary, as
any order or kind of Episcopacy he suggesteth to be upheld by the bond of
baptism.

As to what the Doctor adds concerning the signal and intolerable injuries
offered to the persons of such excellent Bishops as England lately had, and
still may have, and the abatement of the honor of this whole Church and its
Ministry, etc. I wish it may be considered, That the Covenant is not levelled
against any Real Excellency in the Bishops, but an unwarrantable greatness,
power, and authority, assumed by them, or attributed to them; which conferred
an unfitting honor on the Church, and then the exclusion of it is no injury;
and the mighty abatement thereof is a positive duty: I cannot think but that
learning, and the due honor of the Church, may and will be best encouraged by
the vailing of that pompous, worldly state, and wicked superiority her
Governors had obtained; the Churches perspicuity seems not to me so necessary,
that it must needs shine in Lawn Sleeves, and succession of Bishops of paternal
authority over their brethren; nor know I to what Churches, save those of Rome
(who make the Succession of their Bishops the sole and singular Note of the
true Church) a Supersedeas of such Episcopal order (how ancient or venerable
soever it be deemed) can be so scandalous as is suggested; I am sure few of the
Reformed Churches see cause so to judge it; and then Sir, we find little force
in this his complicated Answer.

Thus Sir, I have made bold to consider the Doctors indirect answer and
arguments, wherein he endeavors to shake and subvert the whole fabric of
the Solemn League and Covenant, and in them (to my judgment) there is so
little strength of Reason, or true Religion, that it affords but a poor ground
for his insulting and triumphant discharge in page 13. These things being thus
premised, are sufficient (as I conceive) to abate the Edge and Rigor of the
Covenant, and to ravel that cabel and bond of Religious obligation: For Sir,
notwithstanding his supposal (asserted) in good earnest there is neither Law of
God or man requiring, imposing, or comprobating any such Covenant: The
Boanergesses will find cause to thunder out terror against Covenant Breaking,
lest Rhetorical flourishes without strength of Reasons, should release the
consciences of the vulgar from the power of religious bonds.

It may be Sir, we shall find more strength in the Doctors downright strokes,
His direct answer.
than in his back-blows: His batteries in his indirect answers attempted, have
bespoken his purpose to break in sunder the Sacred bond of the Covenant: His
power to effect it in point of Episcopacy, must appear in his direct Answer:
wherein (we thank him) he looks on the Covenant in the softest sense that can
be made, as it is a voluntary vow, or Religious bond, which private men
spontaneously took upon themselves, etc. But yet he suggesteth it was taken by
very few, not one fourth part of the Nation now living; and those few made to
take it by the terrors of prison, plunder, sequestration, and the like wracks:
Unto which (before we observe his particular reconciling Answers, relating to
the special point of Episcopacy) I propound to consideration, that

The paucity of Covenantets will not discharge its obligation; be there never
so few, I hope those few may be free in asserting, and must be faithful in
adhering to the Covenant; in which their confidence may be the greater, for
that His most Sacred Majesty comes in to make up the number.

But if the Doctor saw with my eyes, he would not suppose the number to be so
small; if all Tables were as legible as those of the Lords and Commons, I
believe their number would be found many more than the fourth part of the
Nation. But can any considerable observer take notice the Covenant was imposed
on, and submitted unto, by all sorts and degrees of men, in all Counties,
Cities, and Towns tendered (and since testified by their public subscriptions)
by the most Ministers in the several Counties, unto their individual
Congregations; and that under the success of War, which usually extends a
Covenant unto all who come under its influence, and yet (without the supposal
of a very great mortality) imagine, not the fourth part of the Nation to have
taken the Covenant? The Doctor sure judges by such with whom he converseth;
and I easily believe they are not a fourth part of the Nation; yet methinks he
himself being to be reckoned into the number, might well conjecture them to be
more.

But again Sir, the capacity of the Covenanters, is more considerable than the
number; and will make it a question well worth consideration, Whether it be not
obligatory to the whole Nation? When I consider the Lords and Commons in
Parliament assembled, and under that notion and capacity swearing the Covenant,
as the collective body of the Nation, though not near a fourth part in number,
I am apt to think it looks very like a National Obligation: For I know not how
they can take pardons, if they may not make promises in our names; especially
when the assent of His Most Sacred Majesty is made so legible by His Royal
Subjection to the same Solemn League and Covenant. I am much mistaken if the
Oath of Zedekiah and the Princes (without popular delegates) did not bind the
people of Israel: I hope the Doctor will be more wary, than to plunge the
whole Kingdom into perjury: That there was any such Logic as Prisons,
Plunder, and Sequestrations, to enforce the Covenant, I am not well-pleased; I
hope he had more fortitude than to suffer his Reason and Religion to be so
captivated; he knows the will cannot be compelled; and I imagine he will not
make extortion by force, any more than fraud absolve the Obligation, and
warrant the recession or violation of an Oath; he knows that Nature and
Scripture do teach the contrary, whatever was Cicero's affection to him, he
knows wherein he commends Pomponius the Tribune as to his extorted Oath; nor
will a Casuist deny, Juramentum metu extorium, to bind; greater force can
besiege none to the making of an Oath; nor greater fury from God follow any for
breaking the oath so forced, than that which befell Zedekiah to the King of
Babylon.

But let us see by what strength of Reason he works out release from this
voluntary vow, that we may be also freemen; and it is produced by several
suggestions; where of

The first is a clear sophism or charm to vulgar conception; Words in oaths do
bind.
They are not (says he) the bare words of the Covenant, which as charms, can
bind any man's conscience to, or against any thing: It is very true; for they
may be historically read, or repeated by such who are not capable of, or
concerned in the obligation: But Sir, if (as in our case) the words be uttered
as expressions of the mind, and declarations of the purpose and resolve of the
heart to engage God and men to expectation of performance, I hope they then
bind; and that, not only because the matter is just, true, and good, but also
because declared: Is not engagement of expectation in others unto the
Obligation of our selves the end of speech in Promises and Oaths? whence else
is that Caution of Casuists, That the words of an oath be plain, and clear,
and commonly used and understood, that the fallacy thereof may fall? I wonder
at the Doctors Antithesis of words unto the Reason, Justice, Truth, Religion,
and Duty, which we deny not morally and really to oblige men either by Gods
generalor particular precepts: but yet I cannot believe them to be as Iron or
Adamantine bands to choose good and do it; to hate evil and eschew it, long
before the Withs and Cords of man's combining or tying are put upon them by
themselves or others: This sounds in my ears like new Divinity, and morality
too; oh the folly of Nations, who confide more in the Withs and Cords of words,
promises, Covenants, than in the Iron and Adamantine bonds of Truth, Justice,
and Duty! I must confess, I was so foolish, as to fancy my self bound to an
Act, because good, just, true, duty; but much faster bound, because promised or
sworn; and I have known many men boggle at an Oath or Promise, and fear to
break it, who would make no bones of Reason, Truth, Justice, Duty, but snap
them in sunder like a single tie; and methinks the Scripture places a great
deal of firength in the words of a Vow or Oath, Deuteronomy. 23. 23. That which is
gone out of thy lips thou shall keep and perform; as thou have vowed it
willingly unto the Lord thy God; for thou have spoken it with thy mouth: And
sure there was most Adamantine strength in the words of Jephtah, which put him
into that agony, and constrained that Outcry, I have opened my mouth unto the
Lord, and cannot go back! Judges 11. 35. If Oaths and Promises are but withs
and cords, I marvel at the course and customs of Nations to lay them each on
other as the only grounds of confidence; and I much more wonder, men's faith
should be more fixed in Gods promises than properties; and God, though under
the Iron bonds of his own mercy, justice, truth, yet, for assurance-sake,
should bring himself under the withs and cords of Promise and Oath, and then
tell us by two immutable things wherein it is impossible Gods should ly; we
should have strong consolation, Heb. 6. 18.

His second suggestion is to me no less strange than the first, Every man's oath
binds by his own imagination.
(viz.) Nor can any such Covenant bind any man in any conscienti us bond,
merely by the power of a man's own imagination: I am sure it can never bind
him by the power of another man's imagination: Oaths ought to be in words
significant, whose sense may be obvious to every common capacity; shuffling and
shifting the sense, and signification of an Oath, is the snare and perplexity
of conscience, policy of Hell, and Sophistry of the Devil: Men must be careful
to understand every Religious tie, and bond; and not list to conceive by
prejudice and presumption; yet if his own imagination be not that which must
guide and bind him, I am mistaken; I expect men to see with their own eyes,
and be saved by their own faith; and did ever conceive discourse,
interpretation, instruction, and argumentation, to intend, not a Magisterial
imposition, but information of the mind, which might engender a right
imagination for men to follow. I know not Sir, what your Casuist may make of an
erroneous conscience, but Dr. Ames has taught us Conscientia quamvis errans,
semper ligat; and ille peccat qui aegit contra conscientiam; an erroneous
conscience does always bind, so that he sins who acts contrary thereunto;
which cannot be, unless the Covenant bind by the power of a man's own
imagination.

His third Answer I do confess is drawn with some considerable strength; Oaths
bind not to the injury of another
for no Covenant can bind us to the injury of another right, liberty, power,
or lawful authority, private or public; except such as are sui juris,
involved in himself, and so per accidens are hindered, and hurt in and by them,
which I believe he understands: for Sir, it loses its strength in the
assumption; for it appears not that the xtirpation of Prelacy as it is
expressed in the Covenant, does take away the liberty* power, and lawful
authority of King, Bishops, or Parliament; himself tells us, the Covenant was
levelled against the despoticum tyrannicum Regimem; and I have before noted,
that it is the unwarrantable pomp and power, and unlawful authority, and
superiority of the Bishops above other Ministers, which is excluded, and to be
extirpated by the Covenant, untell the Object is agreed on, the force of this
Argument may well fall.

Yet give me leave to tell the Doctor, it is worth his enquiry, whether the
power of the King for restitution, and of the Bishops for execution and
administration of Episcopacie (lately acted in England, and now endeavored to
be restored) be not fully, and actually, by a just, lawful, and complete
Authority, abolished and taken away by the statute of 17 Caroli, repealing that
whole branch of the statute primo Elizabethae, which authorized the
jurisdiction of Episcopacy; and barreth his most sacred Majesty from giving
Commissions thereunto, and forbidding all Ranks and Orders Ecclesiastical from
acting upon any such Commission, in any matter or thing whatsoever: Sir, most
men think that this power was lawful, and the Hierarchy of England was sui
juris too, and within the power of King, Lords, and Commons; and this discharge
of Episcopacy to have been no injury, and to have been acted long before the
Covenant did exist; and so the Covenant was but an enforcement of this Law; and
then Sir, if there be a Parliament which may look upon Bishops and Episcopacy
with a more propitious eye, than those who beheld it through the Presbyterian
spectacles, it will be worth enquiry, whether the Covenant (as is before noted)
be not a National Covenant, and binds not the Parliament from propounding,
and praying, and his most sacred Majesty from assenting unto the
re-establishment thereof? and so whether the present actings of some Bishops
and Deans be not without Legal and just authority; and the imposing or
endeavoring to return that (by Statute) abolished, and (by Covenant) excluded
Fabrik, be not a transgression of the Law, and plunging the Nation into
perjury? which how consistent it is with the honor of King or Kingdom, let
wise men judge.

The Doctors fourth, fifth, and eighth Suggestions do relate unto the good of
Episcopacie; concerning which, he supposes a good, which I must confess I am
not clear to admit; as for that good in this, which is common to all
Governments (viz.) the Principles and proportions of Order, The good nesse of
Eplscopacy denied.
Subordination, and Government, we shall not deny it, only conceive it is not
here pleadable; for, it may he continued in the Government which shall be
established; but as to that of good in it, by Scriptural Precepts and Patterns
in the Jewish Church, Apostolic constitution, and Primitive use of
Ecclesiastical custom, and holy men's general approbation, and universal
imitation, it is under dispute, and not yet obvious, and so not of force to
conclude for it; and as to Englands experience of the much good done by it,
since the Reformation, it is very obscure, whilst the best of benefit
imaginable to have been reaped by it, has been to preserve the Reformation in
the state and degree in which King Edward the sixth, and Queen Elizabeth left
it; for wherein has Episcopacie promoted it? nay rather wherein has not
Episcopacie (by its silencing and suspending zealous Ministers,
excommunicating, imprisoning, banishing, and stigmatizing pious Christians, for
no fault at all save endeavonring it) retarded the progress and perfection of
the Reformation? nay, has not Episcopacie (by its turning our Chancels into
railes insancta sanctorums, our Communion-tables into adored Altars, our glass
windows into popish pictures, and changing our common and est ablished Liturgy
into a more complete conformity to the Popish Mass Book for form of
administration, Order of worship, Rites and Ceremonies) brought the Reformation
into a most palpable and apparent Retrogradation? and has not then your Doctor
cause to tell us it were extreme folly, and madness, profaneness, and
blasphemy to cry it down as evil, and engage in Covenant against it as such?
truly Sir, to all his supposed good whereby it is so beneficial (in his eye) to
the being complete, and regular being of any Church, and none more than
England, I shall only oppose that one evil, for which (were there in it no
more) it deserves to be decried, and extirpated by the Covenant, and that
evil I find so inherent to Episcopacy, that this very moderate man cannot
divide them, (viz.) the not only degrading all ordinary Pastors and Ministers
in the sight of the people (making their Ministry greatly ineffectual) but
also divesting them of all authority, and superiority over the people,
preferring the people to, and above them, as their equals and superiousr;
whereby all their administrations whilst in black Coats, are represented to be
mere Cyphors, to which the Bishops Lawn sleeves must be the only figure
significant: Sir, can it be less than duty, to extirpate that which does
engross to its self, and so enervate in others, all Gospel Ministry? if Cephas
and Apollo be not Ministers of Jesus Christ, as well as Paul the Apostle, I see
no cause to chide the Corinthians for their Schism; but passing his
Hypothesis, let us try the strength of his Propositions by which he would bind
the Covenanter to his Episcopacy, and they sound very strangely in my ears.

1. A Covenant can bind no man in conscience against any thing that is in its
nature good, or not Morally evil, for this were to bind a man's self and others
beyond Gods eternal righteousness; this is unto me a lesson of new Divinity;
Oaths may bind against good indiffe. ent.
for Sir, be pleased to note, that the good he speaks of is natural, not moral,
much less Theological good; it is a good which is not in it self necessary, but
may be necessary in its time and place; so that it is a plain Adiaphoron, a
thing indifferent: that to bind men to what is morally evil, is a Covenant of
hell, I can easily be convinced; but, that to bind them against what is allowed
of God as good and lawful (but not duty necessary until circumstanced with
time and place) should be so, is sure but one Doctors opinion. I did ever
conceive Adiaphorous to be subject to the Magistrates command, and a man's own
Covenant, and so distinct from Divine prescription; the eating of flesh is in
its nature good, and not morally evil; the Apostle is apt to Covenant with a
weak brother never to eat flesh; is this to bind himself beyond Gods eternal
bonds of righteousness, or in a Covenant with hell? I mistake such Casuists as
I have read, if they conclude not the contrary.

2. No man may vow or Covenant, much less keep any such Covenant as he has
taken intentionally against the evil, corruption or abuse of any thing, Oaths
against evil hindering the use of some good, do bind.
so as to involve the good and usefulness of it, and to condemn that to
destruction and extirpation. Truly Sir, I must confess not only judicial (such
as is his instance of the Jndge of all the earth in his righteous destribution
toward Sodom, and so impertinent to his case) but also rational, and Religious
discrimination of objects is good, and necessary, but that a Covenant involving
good and usefulness, whilst it is intended against evil and abuse, is
therefore void, and not to be kept, I cannot believe: I have read, Juramentum
non esse illicitum aut obligandi vim non amittere praecise ab hoc, Sanderson de
juramen to praelect. 3. Sect. 12.
quod videtur esse impeditivum majeris boni, an oath is not therefore void,
because it hinders a greater (that is, more than simple) good: I shall
willingly wish men may not be so transported as to swear against a good when it
can be separated from the evil; nor yet to discharge the Oath, because the good
(which might have been divided) is involved: It is a man's duty to distinguish
between the Superstructures of men, and foundation of Christ and his Apostles
(of which order his Episcopacy does not yet appear:) And it is a man's liberty
to restrain himself from the thing that is in its own nature good and useful,
when attended with plain and positive, nay, accidental evil. I knew a man
passing through an old rotten house, got a knock on his pate, and in his
passion, swear he would pull it down and burn it every stick; his workmen
advised him to use some of the materials good and useful in his new Fabric;
the good man is conscious of his Oath (though rash and unadvised) Will the
Doctor please to resolve his conscience? Or again, Hezekiah observes the brazen
serpent (the sometimes means, and now Memorial of Isreal's remedy, and type of
the Redeemer) abused to Idolatry, swears he will destroy it, and accordingly
executes his Oath: Suppose it at that time (as it had its good) to be as useful
as before, it will puzzle me to charge him with iniquity for so doing.

Thirdly, No man can in conscience be bound by any such Covenant against that
which may upon second thoughts and after-view, He that swears to his own
hurt, is bound.
and better information, appear to be good and useful to him; he is here bound
not to keep his Coveuant in the latitude of his mistakes and presumptions, nor
to act according to his prejudices and former supposals; but rather to retract
his rashness and unadvisednesse in taking it at first, and to act according to
his present evidence of what is true, just, good, lawful, and useful even in
Episcopacy, etc. Truly Sir, this is to me such strange divinity, that I cannot
but wonder D. D. should be attendant on the assertor of it; I am sure if it be
admitted, one reason produced by no mean Casuist to defend the Obligation of an
Oath extorted by fear, Sander. de Juram. Lect. 4. Sect 15.
must fall to the ground, Elegit id quod tunc visum est sibi melius, he chose
that which he then conceived to be the best; but according to our Casuist, he
might on an after-view discern hurtful, and so retract: How happy and cheering
would such a resolution as this have been unto Jephtah in his anguish and
outcry, I have opened my mouth unto the Lord, and cannot go back! Why man, can
you not on second thoughts and an afterview see the goodness and usefulness of
your daughter? Retract the rashness and unadvisednesse of thy vow; and act
according to thy present evidence; Nay, how advantageous had this resolution
been to Israel, when Joshuah and the Princes preserved the Gibeonites to be
pricks in the eyes, and thorns in the side of Israel? To what end do they
plead, We have sworn unto them by the Lord, now therefore we may not touch
them? Why, must they needs act to the latitude of their presumptions and
mistakes? could they not on second thoughts and an after-view discover their
craft, and discern them to be of the people commanded by God to be destroyed,
dangerous to disturb their peace, and divert them from their Religion? How sad
was the fate of the sons of Saul in the want of such a solution as this which
might have saved them all from hanging? for the Scripture witnesses, That Saul
slew the Gibeonites in his zeal to the children of Israel and Judah, 2 Samuel
21. 2. Without doubt on second thoughts and an after-view of the good which
might ensue on the violation of that Covenant caught by fraud, I hope our
Prelates will take care in the next Impression of the Common Prayer Book, to
make the words in Psalm 15. ver. 5. conform to Psalm 105. verse. 28. it is but
the expunction of a Negative particle, and for disobedient, we read obedient;
and for repents not, we read repents; and so the Character of a man for
heaven shall be conform to our Casuists resolution and Scripture-Text, He that
swears to his own hurt, and repents: I cannot but commend the correction of
this verse to the Drs. care; for as it is now read, it is not only different
from the Original, but also dissonant to his doctrine whilst it is read in the
Old CommonPrayer-Book, He that swears to his neighbor, and disappointeth him
not, though it were to his own hindrance.

Thus Sir, I have tried the strength of the Drs. Arguments; and find in them
very little force to rectify conscience, release St. Peter, and reconcile the
Covenant with Episcopacy. Truly Sir, were Episcopacy in it self never so good,
yet it must appear necessary before it break through the bond of the Covenant:
It is now indeed high time to learn righteousness and wisdom; the which works
not more in any thing, than a conscientious cleaving to the Covenant, and
paying the vows made to God in the day of affliction: I freely consent with
him, that the cautious and conscientious covenanter take a calmer view, and
exacter measure than perhaps he did at the first. But methinks he should not
leave them to rules of so great latitude, that will not only discharge the
Covenant, but all Sacred Religiousties: What Oaths can bind, if words are of no
force, or but withs and cords? his own imagination of no influence? no good may
be excluded or involved? and second thoughts discovering usefulness will
discharge it? where shall be the certainty of humane contracts or force of
Religious bonds, if these principles be admitted? who shall ever scruple to
make, or care to keep a Covenant, if other men's interpretations must direct it,
and our own retraction on sense of rashness, may discharge it? If Sir, these
propositions be the Doctors props for Episcopacy, it will appear too profane
for pious men to meddle with.

Sir, I doubt not but he and all men shall find every conscientious Covenanter
enjoy the comfort of his accomplished oath, when in his place he has
seasonably advised, humbly petitioned, and lawfully endeavored, to remove
Englands old Hierarchy; and to restore such an Episcopacy, to be exercised by
the Officers of the Church in Common, and good order, as is ne^^st the
Scripture, primitive practice and persuasion of sober, grave, pious, and
learn^^ men, such as was the late Primate of Armagh; but if either His Most
Sacred Majesty, or any other in authority fail in the exercise of their
capacity (as he seems to hope) to effect the ends of the Covenant, I hope it
shall be no offense to mourn for their iniquity, and the iniquity of the Land*
nor will it be inconsistent to that humble submission, active or passive, I
confess we all owe unto His Most Sacred Majesty: whatever shall be the
establishment in the Church (though never so corrupt, yet) whilst consistent
with salvation, though it may occasion to me suffering, and a suspense of my
Ministry, by Gods grace it shall not effect in me, or such on whom I have an
influence, Schism from the Church, or Resistance of His Majesty's just Right
and Authority; for whom as I have not suffered the least, so if God should so
far leave Him (which God forbid) I am ready, by Him, to suffer the utmost, in
adherence to the Solemn League and Covenant, until it be discovered a band of
iniquity, a snare and gin for schism and sedition to act by to the dishonor
of God, and reproach of Reformed Religion: Yet I cannot but most heartily pray
for the honest and ingenuous Reformation of Episcopacy beyond the former
defective or excessive Constitution or execution of it, which I doubt not will
effect the corruption and extirpation covenanted.

I confess every conscientious Covenanter owes this Justice and duty

1. To God, to approve, love, desire, and use what is good, not being within
his own power, and excluded by his oath or covenant; may, and must, are things
very different.

2. To obey the King as chief Governor of Church and State, enjoining things
lawful and honest (so not covenanted against) though not the very best.

3. To pity the Bishops and Fathers of the Church, who have been there too
injurious, or injuriously used, and pull down all proud Prelates and paternal
authority over Presbyters, which abuse their brethren, and debase their
Ministry, because in a black Coat.

4. To encourage Ministers, and endeavor the rescue of them from dividing
factions and popular insolences which have befaln them for want of the King,
and Ecclesiastical order, but may be enjoyed without a Bishop advanced in power
above his Brethren.

5. Love to the Church, in endeavoring its unity, peace, and prosperity in the
ruin of Prelacy and establishment of an Episcopacy and oversight duly
constituted and carefully executed.

6. Care to his own soul, inward and eternal peace, not to be couzened by
glosses, courted by Rhetorical flourishes, nor cudgelled out of his Covenant by
most bitter sufferings, but to cleave unto it with care, constancy, and
diligence, and take heed of all sophistical solutions, and subtle
reconciliations, which endeavor to baffle the Covenant, and break in pieces
the very power of all Religious bonds.

Sir, Knowing how under and dclicate a thing Conscience is, yet fearing it
might be baftled and deluded by Sophistry and scovered; I have presumed to
surveigh your Doctors Solution of the Covenant, and give an account of my
apprehensions of it; Covenant Breaking is so direful a God-provoking sin, that
I tremble to think of Englands least tendencie to it; whatever men fancy to
themselves of the Covenant being the Rock of his late Majesty's shipwrark, it
is visible that the violation of it has been the destru^^ion of our late
Ilsurpers, who laid i aside that* they might leap into their Chair o^ State:
and it cannot be denied to have been the chief and only means of his Majesty's
most just and honorable Restitution; and an adherencie to it (I doubt not)
will prove the establishment of his Royal Throne; I cannot therefore but be
grieved to find contempt poured on the Covenant, not only by the vulgar, but
such whose rank and gravity should make them more sensible of the weight and
worth of an Oath.

When Sir your Doctors Solution came first into my hands, the Speech of Julian
Cardinal of Saint Angelo concerning the League of uladislaus King of Hungary
with Amurath the Turk, came into my memory; and one observation seems too much
alike unto it (I pray you pardon the comparison) the pretended principle of the
one was Zeal for the Church, History of the Turks, p. 290, 291 292.
and love of Religion, and so of the other; the scope of the one was to
discharge the Oath, and so of the other: the method of the one was to absolve
by color and pretense of binding under the Oath; so of the other: the
Arguments of the one were defect of authority from Gods Vicar on earth, consent
of Confederates, contrariety to former Covenants, exclusion of greater good,
exposal to reproach and scandal, rashness and unadvisednesse in making, and
the like; and such are the arguments of the other: the one was by a man of
eminency; and esteem, and engaged in the same Oath; so is the other* such is
Sir the agreement in every point, that it would much better have become a
Jesuit or Popish Cardinal than a Protestant Doctor. I cannot but pray they may
not agree in their intended end, the breach of the Covenant; lest God make them
agree in the miserable effect, the loss of the Christian Cause, ruin of King
and people, and their perpetual infamy.

I shall Sir trouble you no longer, save to tell you this answer was dispatched
in two days; and had waited on you much sooner, but that I hoped some more
eminent and able pen would have pleaded the Cause of the Covenant, and matched
the Doctor suitably to himself; such as it is you now have it; I desire it may
be weighed in the balance of Reason and Religion, without respect unto the
person; who by his meannesse and many calumnies (which yet he wears as his
crown) is obnoxious to no little prejudice; but if he prove a Tailors Goose,
hot and heavy, but blind and dark, will be contented to wear the Cap: whilst
resolved to approve himself no less zealous in the Religious than he has
appeared in the Political or Civil part of the Solemn League and Covenant; and
make it his care to give God the things that are Gods, as Caesar the things
that are Caesar's.

July 8 th.1660. SIR, Farewell, be faithful.

