A DECLARATION OF HIS HIGHNESS THE LORD PROTECTOR For a Day of Public
THANKSGIVING, With An ORDER OF HIS HIGHNESS COUNCIL in SCOTLAND For the
Government thereof, For a Day of Public THANKSGIVING IN SCOTLAND.

Edinburgh, Printed by Christopher Higgins, in Hearts Close, over against the
Trone-Church, Anno Dom. 1658.

A DECLARATION OF His Highness the LORD PROTECTOR, for a Day of Public
Thanksgiving.
WE being conscious of the mercy of those Dispensations, which have come very
thick upon Us within the space of five months last past, cannot but think Our
Self obliged to call for a Day of Thanksgiving in these Nations; which, that it
might be the more seriously and spiritually performed, We have thought it meet
to make a brief Remembrance, and as it were in a Glass, to represent the state
of Our Affairs, as they stood much about the beginning of the time before
mentioned, and summarily to rehearse those things, which GOD has wrought for
Us within that time; that so all such as fear GOD, and are wise to observe
these things, and thereby understanding the loving kindness of the LORD, may
have their hearts and mouths filled with His Praise.

It is well known that the last Parliament did, by Adjournment, meet the
Twentieth day of January last past, and that these Nations had very good hopes,
by those Preparations made in their former Sitting, that We should have gone on
upon those Foundations, to an happy Settlement: But those hopes were soon
dashed, through the intemperance of some men's spirits; Notwithstanding it was
thoroughly represented, that the old Enemy had a design of an immediate
Invasion, with an Army consisting of Papists and Atheists, upon the account of
Charles Stuart, in conjunction with the King of Spain, in whose Councels it was
agreed more advisable to give Us work in England, rather than that We should
assist the French, to engage them in their own Country. It being also at the
same time most visible, that diverse of the inferior sort of people (set on by
men of the same-spirit with them before hinted at) and naturally fluctuating,
were inclined to dangerous Commotions, seeing the Disputes were more readily
taken up and improved, then the putting in execution, and prosecuting the
Agreements before made; and that the Army seemed to have some unsettlement in
it self, partly arising from the beforementioned disappointment; partly, from
the great wants which were upon them, and fears of being necessitated to take
Free Quarter upon the People (then which, nothing could be more abhorrent to
them) the Trade of the Nation, and Our Honor at Sea ready to be hazarded and
lost for want of due Supplies, We being forced to keep Our Men of War out at
Sea, not having Money to pay Our Mariners when they came in. In the mean time
Our Neighbors every where preparing greater Fleets then usual, and even they
in Flanders themselves, having made ready a Fleet of above Twenty Men of War at
Ostend, for the transporting of Charles Stuart, and his Spanish Forces to
invade Us. In order whereunto, diverse of Our Garrisons were by Bribes
endeavored to be gained, for receiving the said invading Army, and
Insurrections designed and laid in several Counties by the Malignant Party, to
rise in assistance of the said Invasion, accompanied also with that desperate
design of firing the City of London, and seizing upon the Treasure that could
be found there; which wicked Plot was managed by many Colonels, and other chief
Officers, who were to head this Tragical Action: All which has been made
evident, as well by clear proofs against, as by the confessions of diverse of
the persons engaged therein: some of which have already suffered the pains of
Death; and further Examinations touching others are still going on, that all
the world may see that these things have not been matters of invention or
surmise, but real and demonstrable truths, and things, that as they heighten
greatly the danger, so also the recital of them tends to Our end in making this
Narrative, which is the magnifying of the good hand of God toward Us in Our
deliverance.

And lastly, (which did not the least afflict Us) We had cause deeply to
apprehend, that the Lords hand was upon Us in that Epidemical sickness, which
was so long continued upon the Nation, and lay sore upon the City of London,
and in the mavelous unseasonablenesse of the Spring, threatening Us even with
a deprivation of the fruits of the earth, and consequently with a sore famine.

That this has been the danger hanging over the head of these Nations, no
honest or ingenuous man can deny. And therefore let Us now consider in what
State and Condition We are, and what the Lord by His own Arm and for His own
Names sake, has wrought for us.

It is very true, We are not yet settled, but it has fared with Us as with the
burning Bush, though We have for these five Months last past, and longer too,
been in a burning condition, yet We are not consumed. We yet live in the
enjoyment of a sweet Peace, to praise the Lord in hope of better things: We are
not yet weltring in blood. It appears, that as God was in the midst of the
Bush, so He has been in the midst of Us, and therefore We are not consumed. He
disappointeth the Invasion, by giving Us timely notice of the Enemies
Preparations, and of the place thereof; by means of which Our Ships were laid
to break their design. He discovered to Us their attempts to gain Our
Sea-garrisons into their hands, and disappointed them. He revealed the
Conspiracies in the Counties in order to Insurrections, and prevented them. He
brought to light also the bloody and hellish Design for the destruction of the
City of London by Fire and Sword, and has brought the guilty persons under
judgment for the same.

He has given our Soldiery a spirit of union, of honesty and integrity, so
that, notwithstanding the great temptations of want upon them, and the
contrivements to divide them, to the praise of God We speak it, they retain
that good old Spirit that has carried them through all their difficulties.
Those that have had too much distemper upon them, through murmuring and
discontents, are We hope (at least some of them) sensible of the evil thereof,
and instead thereof does Counties and Cities have testified a very contrary
spirit, a spirit owning mercies, blessing the Lord for them, and thirsting
after the continuance of them, and for a just settlement. As for that sore
Visitation, how has the Lord, upon the prayers of His poor People, ceased
that? and it is not without remark, that the two weeks Bills of Mortality,
immediately after the Fast upon that occasion, were brought to the half of what
they were the week before, and did amount not to more discernably then in the
healthiest times. And as to the evils threatened by the unseasonablenesse of the
Spring, the Lord has so contradicted our fears, that We are all of us to be
convinced by sense, that the hopes of greater plenty has been seldom seen upon
the face of the Earth.

And lastly, in that place where the Enemy laid all his designs from whence to
invade Us, and to give Us trouble, and had brought it to that pass for the
heightning of their confidence both there and here, that they were ready even
to triumph, as having as good as obtained their wishes, even there has the
great God abased them, and brought them low in a signal victory gained by the
French and Us over them: In which success the French themselves have owned
much to the honor of the English Nation, not without admiration, observing
that the English on Our part should behave themselves with so much valor and
undaunted resolution, and the English on Charles Stuarts part more cowardly then
any in the Spanish Army. The Lord also has in the same place given Us a
Port-Town, not the worst in Flanders, which We beg we may make use of to the
glory of God, and the good of the Christian cause. These things being thus, how
could We forbear, for the honor of God, to give you a remembrance of them? And
how can you and We forbear the returning of our humblest and heartiest thanks
to the Lord? How can We refrain any longer from breaking forth into the high
praises of Our God, for He is good, for His mercy endures for ever? Let the
redeemed of the Lord say so; Let Israel now say so, Let them now that fear the
Lord say, that His mercy endures for ever. And when We have with our mouths
and with our hearts thus blessed God, let Us like a People blessed by Him, keep
in our hearts a thankful remembrance of these, and all other Our mercies,
giving glory to God and Christ through the Spirit, seeking the Peace and the
Truth for evermore.

We have therefore thought fit to appoint Wednesday the one and twentieth day
of July instant to be a day of Public Thanksgiving unto the Lord for these
great and eminent mercies, to be observed in all places within England, Wales
and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, and do Command and require all Ministers and
Pastors to give notice thereof in their Congregations on the Lord's Day next
before the said Day of Thanksgiving, and that upon the said Day of Thanksgiving
they do read this Declaration in their respective Congregations: And we do
hereby prohibit the keeping of all Fairs and Markets upon the day aforesaid.

Given at White Hall this third day of July, 1658.
BY HIS HIGHNESS COUNCIL IN SCOTLAND, For the Government thereof.
HIs Highness Council here having received the foregoing Declaration of His
Highness the Lord Protector, for a Day of Public Thanksgiving, with a Letter
from his Highness and the Council, recommending it to his Highness Council
here to do the like in Scotland, upon such a convenient day as they should
think fit; And his Highness Council here being very sensible of the Lord's
Mercies toward these Nations, diverse of which are expressed in the said
Declaration; and considering that the whole Commonwealth being concerned in the
Mercies the LORD has vouchsafed, are therefore obliged to join in the return
of Praises.

They have therefore thought fit to appoint Thursday the Twenty ninth of July
instant, to be observed in the Burgh of Edinburgh, and Shire thereof, as a Day
of Public Thanksgiving; And that throughout all the other Shires and Burghs
in Scotland, Thursday the Nineteenth day of August next, be observed as a Day
of Thanksgiving unto the Lord, for these great and eminent Mercies: And the
said Council do hereby recommend it to the Presbyteries, and Ministers and
Pastors within the Burgh of Edinburgh, and Shire thereof, to give notice of the
said Day of Thanksgiving appointed for those Places, in their Congregations, on
the next Lord's Day: And, in like manner, do recommend it to the other
Presbyteries, Ministers and Pastors, to give notice of the said Day of
Thanksgiving appointed for those places, in their respective Congregations, on
the Lord's Day next before the said Nineteenth of August; And that all the said
Ministers and Pastors do on those Days of their respective Public
Thanksgivings, read the said Declaration of His Highness, together with this
Order, in their respective Congregations. And the said Council do hereby
prohibit the keeping of all Fairs and Markets within the Burgh of Edinburgh and
Shire thereof, As likewise all Traders and VVork-men from trading or laboring
on the said Day of Thanksgiving for those places; And also they do hereby
prohibit the keeping of all Fairs and Markets in the other Shires and Burghs,
and all trading and bodily labor there on the said Nineteenth of August next;
And do require the Sheriffs and Justices of his Highness Peace in the
respective Shires, and the Magistrates of the Burghs respectively to cause this
Prohibition of Fairs and Markets, Trade and bodily Labor on the Public
Thanksgiving Day to be duly observed.

Given at Edinburgh the One and twentieth day of July, One thousand six hundred
fifty and eight. Signed in the Name, and by Order of the Council. GEORGE MONCK.


